Columella of Husbandry (De Re Rustica)
======================================
Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella — Of Husbandry, in twelve books, translated into English (London, 1745), public domain. The earliest complete English rendering of Columella's great Roman agricultural treatise. Scan via Internet Archive.

I


1


This  project  is  made  possible  by  a  grant  from  the  Institute  of  Museum  and  Library  Services  as  administered  by  the  Pennsylvania  Department  of  Education  through  the  Office  of  Commonwealth  Libraries


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

.  jugg*  >  k  4

I  N

TWELVE  BOOKS:

AN  D  H  I  S

B  O  O  K

CONCERNING

T  R  EE  S.

Tranflated  into  Englifh ,  with  feveral  Illuftrations  from
Pliny,  Cato,  Varro,  Palladius,  and  other
antient  and  modern  AUTHORS.


Ecclefiaftes,  Chap.  V.  Ver.  9.  The  Profit  of  the  Earth  is  for  All  •,  the  King  himfelf  is
ferved  by  the  Field.

Ecclefiafticus,  Chap.  VII.  Ver.  15.  Hate  not  Husbandry ,  which  the  Moji  High  hath
ordained.


Virg.  Georg.  Lib.  I,  Pater  ipfe  colendt

Hand  facilem  ejfe  viam  voluit ,  primufque  per  artem
Movit  agros,  cur  is  acuens  mort  alia  cor  da.


L  0  AT  D  0  N :

Printed  for  A,  Millar,  oppofite  to  Catharine-ftreet  in  the  Strand,

M.DCC.XLV.


P


SO

7X3  ft-


j


1:  I


V  J


...


f


O  .»  .


;  k  \


;  .  ,  . . .  i  *-•


«V  !


V


y  -  i

V  •


h,-.~-br  L.&  ’  p  :  /


’p

*  V^.


-  x


...  J--  .  ..


-


p

\  -  .  VI


trn


THE


PREFACE.


THE  Art  of  Hufbandry  is  fo  neceffary  for  the  fupport  of  human
life,  and  the  comfortable  fubfiftence  and  happinefs  of  man¬
kind  have  fo  great  a  dependence  upon  it,  that  the  wifeft  Men
in  all  ages  have  afcribed  its  original  to  God,  as  the  Inventor
and  Ordainer  of  it :  and  the  wifeft  and  moft  civilized  Nations,  who
have  beft  underftood  their  true  intereft,  have  always  endeavoured  to
promote  and  improve  it ;  and  have  never  failed  to  acknowledge,  and
honour,  as  public  Benefadtors,  all  fuch  as  contributed  any  thing  fo¬
rwards  the  fame.  In  antient  times,  nothing  was  more  honourable
•  than  Pafturage  and  Tillage  ;  for  even  Princes  themfelves  did  not  then
think  them  unworthy  of  their  ftudy  and  application.

Without  entering  into  any  detail  of  the  gradual  progrefs  this
Art  feems  to  have  made  in  the  different  ages  of  the  world,  it  may
be  fufficient  to  obferve,  that,  in  proportion  as  either  private  Families,
or  Nations  of  Men,  fixed  themfelves  in  fettled  habitations,  and  applied
themfelves  to  this  neceffary  Art,  they  accordingly  profpered,  and  in-
creafed  in  number  and  power ;  and  that  fuch  as  applied  themfelves
the  moft  affiduoufly  to  all  the  different  branches  thereof,  always  made
the  greateft  figure  in  the  world.


The  Greeks  applied  themfelves  very  early  to  this  ftudy,  and  feem
to  have  been  great  Proficients  in  it  s  to  which,  no  doubt,  the  precepts
of  their  wifeft  Men,  who  delighted  therein,  contributed  very  much.
Hejiod ,  the  moft  antient  of  their  Poets,  who  lived  above  two  centuries
before  the  foundation  of  Rome,  inftrudted  not  only  the  Men  of  his
own  times,  but  alfo  fucceeding  generations ;  and  many  of  his  precepts
of  Hufbandry  have  been  preserved  to  this  very  day.  Many  other

A  2  learned


J


80953


r


iv  a  PREFAG  E.

learned  Men  alfo  amongd  them  improved  the  knowledge  and  repu¬
tation  of  this  Art  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  it  was  very  early  edeemed  a
moft  honourable  employment,  even  not  below  Royal  Majefly  itfelf.
Thus  we  fee,  that  Homer ,  that  Prince  of  Poets,  who  knew  the  dig¬
nity,  decency,  importance,  and  value  of  things  more  than  any  Man,
in  his  beautiful  defcription  of  Achilles’*  lhield,  contrived  and  curioufly
wrought  by  Vulcan  himfelf,  reprefents  the  King  (landing  in  a  furrow,
with  his  royal  fceptre  in  his  hand,  over-feeing  the  Reapers  cutting  down
the  ripe  corns,  and  greatly  rejoicing  in  the  fruit  of  his  labours,  and  his
fervants  preparing  a  dinner  for  them  under  an  oak.  And,  no  doubt,
in  after-times,  that  Art  was  brought  by  them  to  much  greater  per¬
fection  ;  for  that  inquifitive  people  borrowed  knowledge  of  all  their
neighbours,  and  their  wifed  Men  travelled  in  quell  thereof,  into  all
thole  countries  where  they  had  any  expectation  to  find  it.

The  Greeks ,  by  their  intercourfe  and  communication  with  Italy,
tranfmitted  their  knowledge  and  improvements  into  fome  parts  of  that
delightful  country  :  neverthelefs  it  is  very  probable,  that,  for  feveral
centuries  after  the  foundation  of  Rome,  this  Art  made  but  very  little
progrefs  among  the  Romans ;  nor  were  they  much  acquainted  with
that  regular  Culture  praClifed  in  Greece,  Afia ,  and  other  Eallern  coun¬
tries  ;  but,  in  procefs  of  time,  as  they  extended  their  dominions,  and
became  acquainted  with  the  neighbouring  nations,  their  knowledge  in
this  Art  increafed  ;  and  that  wife  and  difcerning  people  difcovered  the
great  and  manifold  advantages  of  Agriculture  ;  its  natural  tendency,
not  only  to  lecure  againft  the  calamities  of  famine,  to  which  they  had
fometimes  been  expofed,  but  to  prevent  dillempers,  increafe  the  number
of  their  people,  harden  their  bodies,  and  make  them  more  robud,  and
able  to  endure  the  fatigues  of  a  military  life,  when  the  fervice  and
intereft  of  their  country  (hould  require  it ;  fo  that  their  greatefl  Men,
their  Generals,  Senators,  and  graved  Philofophers,  did  all  they  could
to  encourage  and  promote  it,  not  only  by  precept,  but  by  their  own
example :  and  though,  during  the  hurry  and  confufions  of  war,  it
met  with  great  interruption,  and  advanced  but  (lowly,  and  they  could
not  carry  it  to  that  degree  of  perfection  they  defired  ;  yet  we  fee,
that,  in  the  midd  of  their  triumphs,  after  they  had  fubdued  a  rival
Republic,  they  feem  to  have  ferioufiy  confidered  the  necefiity  of  pro¬
moting  it  more  effectually  :  And  their  Senate,  that  augud  afiTembly  of
difintereded  Patriots,  always  intent  upon  promoting  the  public  good,
and  far  from  thinking  that  they  wanted  no  further  indruction,  ordered
the  twenty-eight  books  of  Mago ,  a  Carthaginian  General,  which  he

had


V


■  Toe  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.

had  written  upon  this  fubjeCt,  to  be  tran  dated  into  Latin ;  and,  in
this  work,  fome  Meq  of  the  greateff  quality  had  a  principal  hand.
And  by  this  decree  it  appears,  that  the  Romans  were  fenfible,  that,  in
point  of  Hufbandry,  the  Carthaginians  had  greatly  the  advantage  of
them  ;  which  both  Varro  and  Columella  feem  alfo  to  acknowledge,
by  calling  Mago  the  Parent  of  Hujbandry.

The  Romans ,  by  extending  their  empire  over  all  Greece  and  Afia,
and  opening  a  free  communication  with  all  thofe  countries  where  Huf-
bandry  feems  firft  to  have  flourifhed,  made  great  improvements  in  this
Art,  and  carried  it  to  great  perfection  ;  and,  as  they  extended  their
conquefls  northward  and  weftward,  they  carried  it  along  with  them  ;
and,  at  length,  introduced  it  into  this  ifland,  where,  at  their  firft
arrival,  they,  no  doubt,  found  it  but  very  rude  and  imperfeCt.

What  contributed  mod  to  the  propagation  of  this  ufeful  Art,  was
the  great  number  of  books,  both  in  Greek  and  Latin ,  written  upon
this  fubjeCt  by  Authors  not  only  eminent  for  learning,  but  of  exalted
ftation  and  quality  ;  fome  of  which  have  been  preferved  to  this  day  :
and,  as  none  of  them  have  treated  of  it  fo  copioufly,  in  all  its  differ¬
ent  branches,  as  Columella ,  who  feems  to  have  made  it  the  ftudy  and
the  bufinefs  of  his  whole  life,  and  to  have  perufed  all  the  Authors  that
went  before  him,  there  is  realon  to  think,  that  a  tranflation  of  this
-polite  Author  into  Englifh  will  be  looked  upon  rather  as  a  work  of
fome  ufe  and  advantage,  than  of  mere  curiofity  and  amufement  j
efpecially  if  it  be  confidered,  that  he  has  given  us  not  only  a  com¬
plete  fyifem  of  the  Roman  Hufbandry,  but  alfo  a  diftinCt  account
of  the  private  ceconomy  of  that  wife  and  prudent  people  ;  for,  by
the  many  wife  precepts  and  directions  he  gives,  relating  to  this  lad:,
we  may  eafily  obferve,  what  was  their  method  in  the  management
and  government  of  their  Families  •  which,  if  carefully  imitated,
as  far  as  different  circumftances  will  allow,  might,  even  at  this  prefent
time,  contribute  greatly  to  the  intereft  and  regular  government  of  the
greateft  Families.  Or  even  fuppofe  no  further  advantage  were  to  be
expeCted  from  fuch  a  performance,  but  the  gratification  of  our  curio¬
fity,  which  certainly  is  not  the  cafe ;  yet,  even  in  this  light,  it  is
hoped,  it  will  not  be  unacceptable  to  fuch  as  are  not  well  acquainted
with  the  original,  and  cannot  otherwife  have  the  fatisfaCtion  they  may
innocently  defire  ;  for,  in  matters  of  far  lefs  importance  than  moll  of
the  things  here  treated  of,  the  politeft  Nations  in  Europe  have  always
received  kindly  every  attempt  to  make  them  acquainted  with  what¬
ever  had  any  relation  to  that  great  people  j  efpecially  this  Nation,  in

which


vi  The  PREFACE.

which  has  been  fo  long  preferved  that  noble,  generous,  free,  inde¬
pendent,  and  public  fpirit,  which  was  once  the  glory  of  that  Re¬
public,  before  luxury,  covetoufnefs,  and  ambition,  had  corrupted
Mens  hearts.

In  Italy,  France,  and  Germany,  attempts  have  been  made  to  tranf-
late  this  celebrated  Author  into  their  refpe&ive  languages ;  whether
any  fuch  attempt  has  been  made  in  this  kingdom,  I  know  not :  fome
bits  and  feraps,  here-and-there,  I  have  indeed  feen  in  Englijh ;  how
much  mangled,  mifreprefented,  and  mifunderdood,  in  many  indances,
is  obvious  enough  to  fuch  as  are  judges,  and  will  be  at  the  pains  to
confider  them.  To  vindicate  fo  polite  an  Author  from  any  injudice
of  this  nature,  to  perpetuate  his  memory,  and  make  him  more  known
and  ufeful  to  the  world,  are  motives  fufficient  enough  to  juftify  an
attempt  to  give  a  full  and  jud  Tranflation.  Whether  thefe,  or  any  other
motives,  have  determined  me  to  undertake  this  work,  I  believe  nobody
will  think  it  worth  their  while  to  inquire.  If  I  fhould  fay,  it  was  a
defire  to  profit  and  pleafe  the  public,  it  would  be  received  with
deferved  contempt,  as  the  common  pretence  of  the  mod  frivolous  un¬
dertakings :  tho’,  perhaps,  good-nature  may  be  apt  to  think,  that
my  not  having  levied  contributions  by  fubferiptions,  but  printed  it  at
my  own  expence,  is  a  drong  prefumption  of  the  truth  of  fuch  an
after  tion.  What  mod  concerns  the  Purchafer  or  Reader,  if  any
vouchfafe  to  be  fuch,  is  to  know,  whether  the  work  be  tolerably
well  done  :  this  is  humbly  fubmitted  to  the  judgment  of  fuch  as  un-
derdand  the  original  :  overfights,  and  midakes  in  fmall  matters,
notwithdanding  all  the  care  taken  to  avoid  them,  probably  there  are
many  ;  but  as  to  capital  errors,  in  perverting  the  fenfe  of  the  Author,
in  things  edential,  and  of  greater  importance,  it  is  hoped  there  are
few.  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  his  meaning  in  as  plain  and  intel¬
ligible  words  as  I  could,  without  adding  or  diminifhing ;  and  have
been  fcrupuloudy  careful  only  to  tranfiate,  and  not  to  make  a  com¬
mentary,  fo  that  to  fome,  it  is  probable,  the  Tranflation  may  appear
rather  to  be  too  literal.  I  have  been  obliged  to  retain  many  original
words  which  cannot  be  rendered  without  a  long  circumlocution,
there  being  no  words  in  our  language  exactly  anfwering  to  them  ;
and  as  thefe  words  often  recur,  the  fame  circumlocutions  would  have
been  a  blemifh  in  the  Trandation :  I  therefore  thought  it  better  to  give
an  explication  of  them  apart  by  themfelves,  to  which  the  Reader  may
have  recourfe,  till  they  become  familiar  to  him.  Thus,  for  indance,
jugerum  was  a  common  meafure  of  land  amongd  the  Romans,  as  an

Acre


The  P  R  E  FACE.  vii

Acre  is  amongft  us ;  but  if  it  were  tranflated  by  Acre ,  as  is  commonly
done,  it  would  give  the  Reader  a  falfe  notion  of  the  thing,  becaufe
the  Englifh  Acre  is  above  one  third  larger  than  the  Roman  jugerum.
Thus  all  their  meafures  of  capacity,  both  liquid  and  dry,  as  culeus ,
amphora ,  urnd,  modius,  congius, fextarius,  hemina ,  cyathus ,  ligula^  &c.
cannot  be  rendered  by  any  names  of  meafures  in  common  ufe  amongft
us ;  for  none  of  them,  from  the  greateft  to  the  fmalleft,  do  exadtly
correfpond  :  therefore  it  was  neceffary  to  retain  them,  and  the  Reader
may  eafily  fatisfy  himfelf,  by  turning  to  the  fhort  account  I  have  given
of  them.

As  the  whole  of  this  Tranflation  ftands  in  need  of  indulgence,  fo
no  part  of  it  ought  more  humbly  to  deprecate  the  feverity  of  the
Critic,  than  that  of  the  citations  from  Virgil ,  and  of  the  Tenth
Book,  which  is  all  in  Hexameter  verfe.  It  would  not  have  given
any  great  fatisfadion  to  have  tranflated  them  into  profe :  therefore,  that
the  whole  might  bear  fome  refemblance  to  the  original,  I  have  endea¬
voured  to  render  them  into  blank  verfe  :  but,  as  this  is  a  province  I
am  but  very  little  acquainted  .with,  I  hope  the  defeats  of  this  perform¬
ance  will  be  overlooked ;  feeing  I  have  only  endeavoured  to  exprefs
the  meaning  of  the  Author,  without  any  pretended  ornamental  addi¬
tions  of  my  own,  confining  myfelf  to  his  own  thoughts,  and  rarely
adding  an  epithet  to  fill  up  a  line,  but  what  naturally  belongs  to  the
fubjed,  and  is  included  in  the  text.

As  to  the  explanatory  Notes  which  I  have  added  to  the  Tranflation,
I  know  very  well,  that  fome  of  them  will  be  regarded  by  many  as
mere  puerilities,  and  little  accounted  of  by  fuch  as  are  of  a  more  deli¬
cate  tafle  :  but  it  ought  to  be  confidered,  that  this  Tranflation  is  not
at  all  defigned  for  fuch  as  can  readily  make  ufe  of  the  original,  and
are  acquainted  with  claffical  learning :  to  fuch,  no  doubt,  both  the
Tranflation  and  the  Notes  will  be  but  very  infipid,  and  of  no  ufe  at
all  j  but  to  fuch  as  are  not  of  this  character,  yet  have  a  defire  to  know
fomething  of  the  Roman  Hufbandry,  and  domeflic  Oeconomy,  it  is
hoped  the  Notes  will  not  be  altogether  ufelefs  and  unacceptable  :  for,
as  the  Author  frequently  makes  mention  both  of  perfons,  places,  and
things,  which  probably  they  have  little  or  no  notion  of,  it  is  reafon-
able  to  fuppofe,  that  a  brief  account  of  them,  will  not  be  altogether
difagreeable,  fince  nothing  more  is  intended,  than,  by  thefe  fhort  and
impeded  hints,  to  make  the  Tranflation  more  intelligible  and  agree¬
able  to  them.  I  have  fometimes  alfo  taken  notice  of  fome  different

1  readings.


viii  'The  PREFACE.

readings,  and  doubtful  phrafes  and  words,  in  order  to  give  occafion
to  fome  judicious  perfon,  who  may  caff  an  eye  upon  them,  to  make
l'ome  attempt  to  rectify  them.

I  was  not  unacquainted  with  the  difficulty  of  tranflating  this  Au¬
thor,  fo  as  to  give  any  tolerable  fatisfaCtion  either  to  myfelf  or  others,
and  even  with  the  impoffibility  of  rendering  into  Englifh  many  things
mentioned  by  him,  and  of  finding  proper  words  in  the  vaft  variety  of
things  which  he  treats  of ;  and  that  learned  Men  are  not  at  all  agreed
about  the  Engli/h  names  of  feveral  herbs,  trees,  fhrubs,  fifhes,
fowls,  &c.  which  exaCtly  anfwer  to  their  Greek  and  Latin  names :
but,  as  this  is  no  hindrance  at  all  to  the  right  undemanding  of  the
moft  eflential  things,  and  of  the  general  rules  and  directions,  and  other
things  of  the  greateft  importance,  both  in  Hufbandry  and  Oeconomy,
I  cannot  think  but  it  is  better  to  have  a  Tranflation,  with  fome  im¬
perfections  of  no  great  importance,  than  to  have  no  Tranflation  at  all.
In  the  names  of  herbs,  trees,  fhrubs,  &c.  I  have  followed  fome  of
our  belt  Authors,  particularly  the  ingenious  Mr.  Miller ,  whofe  know¬
ledge  in  thefe  things  is  well  known  to  the  world  :  and,  in  the  propor¬
tion  that  the  Roman  meafures,  both  of  length  and  capacity,  bear  to
the  Englijh ,  and  in  fome  other  things,  I  could  not  follow  a  fafer
guide  than  the  learned  Dr.  Arbuthnct.  In  the  great  variety  of  dif¬
ferent  readings  of  the  Text,  I  have  chofen  what  I  thought  the  moft
probable  ;  but,  for  the  moft  part,  I  have  followed  that  excellent  edi¬
tion  publifhed  by  the  learned  Gefnerus,  Profeffor  of  Eloquence  and
Poetry  at  Ottinghen ,  whofe  vaft  labour,  and  judicious  obfervations,
have  greatly  contributed  to  make  not  only  Columella ,  but  the  other
Roman  writers  upon  Hufbandry,  more  intelligible,  and  to  reftore  them
to  their  original  purity.

As  to  Columella  himfelf,  we  can  know  very  little  of  him,  but  what
we  gather  from  his  own  words  in  this  Treatife  :  Pliny  indeed,  and
Palladius ,  often  mention  him  ;  and  Vegetius ,  who,  in  his  Treatife  of
Farriery,  frequently  borrows- from  him,  commends  his  flowing  elo¬
quence";  yet  they  give  us  no  further  account  of  him.  It  feems  evident
enough,  that  he  was  [a  Spaniard ;  for  lib.  viii.  cap.  16.  he  intimates,
that  he  was  a  Citizen  of  the  municipal  city  of  Cadiz ,  Jicjiro  Gadiurn
tminicipio.  He  feveral  times  makes  mention  of  his  uncle  Marcus  Co¬
lumella ,  as  a  perfon  of  great  note  and  diftinCtion,  and  as  having  an
eftate  in  the  Province  of  Baetica  :  probably  he  was  born  of  Roman

parents ;


The  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  h

Parents;  for,  no  doubt,  many  Romans  fettled  in  that  delightful
country.

It  does  not  appear  at  what  time  he  removed  to  Rome ;  but  there
is  fome  reafon  to  think,  that  it  was  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius ,  if  not
before;  for  he  fays  in  his  Third  Book,  that  he  had  pofl'efied  lands
many  years  in  the  Territory  of  Ardea ,  and  that  he  wrote  his  Eleventh
Book  at  the  defire  of  one  Claudius  Auguftalis ,  a  young  man  of  fome
learning  and  diftin&ion.  That  this  Claudius  is  the  fame  who  was
afterwards  Emperor,  cannot  indeed  be  affirmed  for  certain  ;  yet  it  is
not  altogether  improbable  :  for  Tacitus  tells  us,  that  Tiberius  made
him  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Priefts,  which  he  had  inftituted  in
honour  of  Auguftus :  and  I  know  no  reafon  why  he  may  not  be  the
perfon  mentioned  by  our  Author,  who,  probably,  would  neither  have
been  influenced  by  him  to  write  the  faid  Book,  nor  would  he  have
given  him  fo  honourably  a  character,  if  he  had  not  been  of  fuperior
rank  ;  and  the  character  given  is,  according  to  Suetonius,  applicable
to  Claudius  in  his  younger  years.  He  fpeaks  of  Cornelius  Celj'us  and
Julius  Atticus ,  as  Men  of  his  own  time;  and  it  is  certain  the  firfl
flourifhed  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius.  He  feveral  times  makes  mention
of  Julius  Grcecinus ,  without  any  intimation  of  the  hard  fate  of  that
good  Man,  who  was  put  to  death  by  the  Emperor  Caligula ;  fo  that
there  is  fome  reafon  to  think,  that  he  was  living  when  Columella
wrote.  If  what  is  above  faid  be  true,  then  he  wrote  a  part  of  this
Treatife  in  the  reigns  of  Tiberius  and  Caligula.

I  n  his  Third  Book  he  mentions  Annceus  Seneca  as  then  living,  and
commends  him  for  his  great  learning ;  but  fays  nothing  of  his  being
advanced  to  the  dignity  of  a  Senator,  nor  of  his  being  entrufied  by
Claudius  with  the  education  of  Nero  his  adopted  Son  and  Succeffor ;
which,  probably,  he  would  have  taken  fome  notice  of,  if  Seneca  had
been  then  promoted  to  thefe  dignities :  fo  that  it  is  reafonable  to
think,  that  he  wrote  this  Book,  at  leafr,  fome  time  before  this  hap¬
pened  ;  probably  in  the  firft  years  of  the  reign  of  Claudius ,  who,  in
the  feventh  or  eighth  year  thereof,  adopted  Nero,  and  committed  him
to  the  care  of  Seneca ,  the  faid  Nero  being  then  eleven  or  twelve  years
of  age;  and  Claudius  dying  five  or  fix  years  after,  Nero  fucceeded,
being  only  feventeen  years  old,  according  to  Suetonius ,  and,  as  Eufe-
bius  fays,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  yy.  at  which  time,  it  is  probable.
Columella  had  finifhed  his  whole  work.  There  is  only  one  thing

a  which


X


7*he  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.

which  may  give  reafon  to  think,  that  it  was  fome  time  after  this  be¬
fore  he  finilhed  it;  viz.  in  his  Firft  Book,  cap.  7.  he  makes  mention-
of  L.  Volufus ,  a  very  old  rich  Man,  of  Confular  dignity  ;  and  his
words  feem  to  intimate,  that  he  was  then  dead.  But  'Tacitus  fays,
that  this  Volufus  died  aged  ninety- ieven,  in  the  809th  year  of  Rome ,
which  was  the  56th  year  of  our  Lord.  If  Columellas  words  muft  be
fo  under  Food  as  to  fignify,  that  Volufus  was  dead  when  he  fpoke  of
him,  then  we  muft  conclude,  that  it  was  fome  time  after  this  be¬
fore  he  publifhed  his  work;  but  it  was  in  Senecas  life-time,  who
was  put  to  death  by  Nero ,  Anno  Domini  6y„  Notwithftanding  all
that  has  been  1a  Fd,  the  precife  time,  either  of  his  writing  or  publiih-
ing  it,  cannot  be  determined.  I  doubt  not  he  employed  many  years-
about  it,  and  wrote  fome  parts  of  it  in  all  the  reigns  above-men¬
tioned  ;  and  that  he  did  not  write  all  the  Books  in  the  order  they  are
now  placed,  feveral  of  them  having  no.dependence  on  the  foregoing ;
and  that  a  great  part  of.  the  Firft  Book,  being  a  Preface  to  the  whole,
was  written,  laft  of  all.  However,  it  is  evident  enough,  that  he  wrote
in  Rome ,  or  in  fome  part  of  Latium ,  by  his  manner  of  expreftion
fometimes  in  mentioning  thefe  places.

This  Treadle  of  Flufbandry  con  fills  of  Twelve  Books,  in  which
he  has  touched  upon  fuch  a  vail  variety  of  things,  and  explained  all
the  different  branches  of  the  Art  with  fuch  perfpieuity,  and  deli¬
vered  his  precepts- with  fo  great  judgment,  as  fhow  him  to  have  been
perfectly  mailer  of  his  fubjebt ;  and,  throughout  the  whole,  there  are
lo  many  evidences  of  his  having  been  fo  well  acquainted  with  all  the
different  parts  of  learning  ;  and  that  he  had  fo  carefully  examined  all
the  Authors,  both  Greek  and  Latin >  that  had  treated  of  the  fame-
fubjeft  before  his  own  time  ;  and  that  to  his- theory  he  had  added  his
own  experience  ;  as  give  us  abundant  reafon  to  think,  that  no  Man
could  ever  have  been  better  qualified  to  undertake  fuch  a  work:  fo
that  the  character  he  gives  to  Marcus  Columella ,  his  uncle,  may  very
7 u ft  1  v  be  applied  to  himlelf,  Vir  acris  ingenii ,  &  omnibus  dijciplinis
ufru&uS)  illufrifcjue  Agricola  ;  having,  to  all  his  other  opportuni¬
ties  of  improvement  in  knowledge  and  experience,  added  that  of  tra-
\*elling  into  foreign  countries;  for  he  tells  us,  that  he  had  been  in
Syria  and  Cilicia ;  and  it  is  not  probable,  that  a  Man  of  his  character
would  pafs  by  Greece  without  vifiting  it.  All  thefe  Twelve  Books  he
infcribes  to  one  Publius  Silvitius ,  of  whom  he  gives  us  no  particular,
account  j  only  iniinuates,  that,  at  his  defire.  and.  requefl,  he  had

undertaken


The  PREFACE.  x\

Undertaken  and  carried  on  the  faid  work.  We  may  rfcafonably  think,
that  this  Silvinus  was  a  perfon  of  fome  confiderable  note  and  diflinc-
tion,  by  the  refpe&ful  manner  in  which  he  always  addreffes  himfelf
to  him  ;  and,  as  Columella  mentions  fome  lands  that  they  both  had
amongft  the  Ceretani ,  a  people  in  Spain,  it  is  not  improbable,  that
he  alfo  was  a  Spaniard.

Besides  thefe  Twelve  Books,  infcribed  to  Silvinus ,  there  is  a
Book  concerning  Trees,  wherein  there  is  no  mention  made  of  him.
Th  is  Angle  Book  appears  to  be  a  part  of  a  former  Effay  of  Columella's
upon  Hufbandry  ;  for,  in  the  very  beginning,  there  is  mention  made
of  a  preceding  Book  concerning  the  Culture  of  Lands.  What  feems
moft  probable  is,  that  Columella  having  at  firft  written  more  briefly
upon  this  fubjedt,  it  was  fo  well  received,  that,  at  the  prefling  defire
of  his  friends,  he  inlarged  it,  and  put  it  into  a  new  form,  as  we
have  it  now,  in  Twelve  Books ;  which  being  a  complete  Syftem  of
Hufbandry,  his  firft  Effay  came  to  be  lefs  ufed,  as  being  lefs  perfect,
and  afterwards  a  part  of  it  was  loft  :  this  fome  Tranfcribers,  and  the
firft  Editors,  not  having  confidered,  placed  it  as  the  Third  Book  of
his  Hufbandry  ;  which  confounded  the  order  of  the  whole,  as  has
been  more  fully  taken  notice  of  in  the  Note  annexed  to  this  Angle
Book.

COLUMELLA  wrote  upon  feveral  other  fubje&s  befides  Huf¬
bandry.  He  tells  us,  lib.  xi.  cap.  i.  that  he  had  written  againft
Aftrologers  ;  not  thofe  who  only  obferved  the  motions  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  and  made  conjectures  of  what  probably  might,  or  commonly
did,  happen  before,  or  after,  or  at  the  riling  and  letting  of  certain
Stars  ;  but  fuch  as  he  calls  Chaldceans,  who  vainly  pretended  to  fore-
tel,  with  certainty,  what  alterations  would  happen  in  the  air  and
weather,  upon  fuch  and  fuch  days,  &c.  He  alfo  had  formed  a  defign
to  write  of  the  Lu  ft  rations  and  Sacrifices  in  ufe  among  the  Antients,
for  preferving  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  &c.  But,  whether  he  ever
finifhed  this  work,  is  very  uncertain  ;  and  I  do  not  find,  that  any
other  thing,  befides  his  Hufbandry,  has  been  preferved  to  our  days.
He  was  a  great  admirer  of  Virgil ,  and  cites  him  upon  many  occa-
fions  j  but  feldom  without  fome  epithet  or  other,  exprefiive  of  the
great  veneration  and  regard  he  had  for  him,  and  of  the  deference  lie
paid  to  his  judgment.  He  feems  not  only  to  have  been  a  great  lover
of  Poetry,  but  alfo  no  mean  Poet  himfelf;  of  which  he  has  given

a  2  fufticient


xii  Th  PREFACE.

fufficient  evidence  in  his  Tenth  Book,  which,  he  fays,  he  wrote  in
verfe,  not  only  to  gratify  Sihinus ,  but  alfo  in  obedience  to  Virgil ,
who  recommended  that  fubject  to  the  care  of  fome  future  Poet :  and,
confidering  the  nature  and  difficulty  thereof,  he  has  fucceeded  very
well.  He  has  not,  indeed,  greatly  embelliffied  his  Poem  with  many
new  poetical  conceits  of  his  own,  but  he  has  introduced  into  it  feveral
old  fabulous  ftories,  and  applied  them  dextroufly  enough  to  his  own
purpofe  :  but,  as  his  bufinefs  was  rather  to  inftrudl  than  to  amufe,  it
is  rather  an  advantage  than  a  blemiffi  to  it,  that  it  confifts  more  of
brief  defcriptions,  and  of  plain  directions  and  precepts,  than  of  fic¬
tions  ;  his  expreffion,  for  the  mod  part,  being  both  poetical,  natural,
and  agreeable  enough.

PI  is  fiyle,  in  the  opinion  of  all  good  judges,  is  exceeding  polite
and  elegant :  and  though  the  fubjeCt  he  treats  of,  and  the  perfons  for
whofe  ufe  he  principally  wrote,  did  not  allow  any  great  difplay  of
eloquence  ;  yet,  upon  all  occafions,  he  has  fo  eafy  and  natural  a  way
of  expreffing  himfelf;  and,  in  different  places,  ufes  fuch  a  vaft  va¬
riety  of  words  and  phrafes  to  exprefs  one  and  the  fame  thing  (which
by  no  means  darken,  but  greatly  illuftrate  the  fubjedt)  j  and  in  the
beginning  and  conclufion  of  feveral  of  his  Books,  and  in  fome  other
places  of  his  work,  he  has  given  fuch  remarkable  infiances  of  his
eloquence,  that  he  may  very  juftly  be  reckoned  amongft  the  mod
polite  Roman  writers  j  and,  if  he  had  applied  himfelf  to  that  fiudy,
he  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  ranked  among  the  mod  eloquent
Orators.

He  fometimes  feems  to  recommend  to  Hufbandmen  fome  practices,
which  feem  rather  to  be  mere  fuperfiitious  cuftoms,  than  to  have  any
foundation  in  Nature  :  but,  as  fuch  things  frequently  occur  in  the
beft  Roman  Authors,  and  as  the  manner  in  which  he  mentions  them
fhows  that  he  laid  no  firefs  upon  them,  but  rather  reported  them  as
things  in  common  practice  ;  tnefe  fmall  deformities  ought  not  to  make
any  abatement  of  our  value  and  efieem:  for  it  muftbe  faid,  that  there
are  few  antient  Authors  fo  much  exempted  from  fuperfiitious  and
groundless  prejudices  as  Columella ,  who  feems  to  have  been  a  declared
enemy  to  that  fort  of  Men,  who  contributed  molt  to  efiablifh  and
cherith  them,  3


It


The  PREFACE.


Jan

It  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  no  part  of  his  work  he  has  given
us  the  leaft  intimation,  under  whofe  adminiftration  public  affairs
then  were,  nor  under  whofe  Confulfhip  he  lived  when  he  wrote  any
part  of  it ;  nor  does  he  make  the  leaft  reflection  upon  the  ftate  of
public  affairs ;  which  fhows  his  extreme  caution,  and  the  difficulty
of  the  times  he  lived  in  :  but  he  has  not  ufed  fo  much  referve  with
refpeCt  to  the  temper  and  difpofition,  and  the  moral  character,  of  the
generality  of  mankind  at  the  time  he  wrote  ;  for  he  tells  us  very
plainly,  that  the  antient  frugality,  parfimony,  temperance,  moder¬
ation,  and  induftry,  were  no  more  in  fafhion,  yea,  in  a  great  meafure,
extinCt  and  gone  j  and  that  unbounded  luxury,  ambition,  covetouf-
nefs,  intemperance,  and  idlenefs,  had  fucceeded  in  their  room  •  that
open  robberies  and  depredations  were  carried  on,  even  in  the  place  of
juftice  itfelf,  by  calumniating  and  accuflng  the  innocent  rich  Man,
in  order  to  get  poffefiion  of  his  eflate  :  that  the  eloquent  tongue,  for¬
merly  employed  in  defence  of  the  innocent  and  oppreffed,  was  be¬
come  mercenary  and  venal,  and  exerted  itfelf  in  the  defence  and
fupport  of  the  guilty :  that  Men  of  eftates,  who  formerly  refided
much  in  the  country,  governed  their  own  families,  and  managed
their  own  affairs,  had  committed  the  management  of  all  to  Bailiffs
and  Stewards,  and  had,  in  a  great  meafure,  deferted  the  country,  and
lived  in  town,  abandoning  themfelves  wholly  to  the  pleafures  and
diverlions  of  the  fame  :  that  their  Wives,  not,  as  formerly,  ftriving  to
excel  in  all  parts  of  Houfwifry,  and  taking  upon  themfelves  the
whole  burden  of  domeftic  affairs  within-doors,  were  become  fo
delicate,  and  fuch  lovers  of  the  town,  that  they  could  not  endure  to
pafs  a  few  weeks  in  the  country,  and  thought  it  greatly  below
themfelves  to  caft  their  eyes  upon  the  inftruments  of  Hufbandry  j
that,  inftead  of  manufacturing  wool  and  flax  at  home  for  their  own
and  their  family’s  ufe,  as  the  celebrated  Roman  Matrons  were  for¬
merly  wont  to  do,  they  could  not  endure  home-made  clothes,  but,
by  flattering  careffes,  obtained  of  their  Hufbands  fuch  as  were  more
coftly  ;  to  purchafe  which,  they  often  expended  almoft  their  whole
yearly  income  :  that  Men,  by  their  diffolute  and  intemperate  living,
and  perverting  the  natural  order  of  things,  by  turning  night  into  day,
and  day  into  night,  had  fo  diflipated  and  wafted  their  natural  ftrength,
and  their  bodies  were  fo  enervated,  that  they  were  almoft  dead  while
alive,  and  death  feemed  to  make  no  great  alteration  upon  them,  fo
that  they  foon  became  ufelefs  both  to  themfelves,  and  to  their  country:

that


xiv  The  PREFACE,

that  many  chofe  rather,  by  fervile  attendance,  vain  expectations,  and
fruitlefs  felicitations,  to  confume  their  time,  and  their  fubftance,
than,  by  carefully  improving  and  cultivating  their  paternal  inheritw
ance,  raife  for  themfelves  a  comfortable  and  honourable  fubfiftence
and  revenue,  free  from  all  abjedt  and  (lavifh  dependency.  This
fhameful  degeneracy  from  the  virtue  of  their  Anceftors,  and  general
corruption  of  manners,  at  length  proved  fatal  to  the  Roman  ftate.$
and,  generally  fpeaking,  the  fame  caufes  produce  the  fame  effe&s.


the


THE


CONTENTS.


Book  F  i  r  s  t.

Chap.  I.  y^V  F  the  Rules  which  they  who  would  live  in  the  Country
f  J  and  apply  themj elves  to  Hufbandry,  ought  to  follow.

^  II.  Of  the  mojl  approved  Situation  and  Qualities  of
Land.

HI.  Of  fuch  Things  as  are  principally  to  be  conjidered ,  in  view¬
ing  and  examining  Land  before  it  be.  bought.

IV.  Of  the  WholfomeneJ's  of  Countries.

V.  Of  Water.

VI.  Of  the  P  oft  ion  and  Difpoftion  of  a  Mdnor-houfe.

VII.  Of  the  Offices  of  a  Mafter  of  a  Family.

VIII.  Of  Cattle ,  and  of  Herdfmen  and  Shepherds ,  and  fuch  as
have  the  Overfight  of  Cattle.

IX.  Of  what  Size ,  and  Plight  of  Body,  the  Slaves  mufi  be,  which
are  to  be  affigned  to  every  particular  Work.

Book  Second.

Chap.  I.  That  the  Earth  neither  grows  old ,  nor  wears  cut,  if  it  be
dunged.

II.  Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  Land.

HI.  Qf  the  Care  that  is  to  be  taken  of  Oxen  when  they  are
unyoked.

IV.  Of  the  Time  of  the  Tear  when,  and  how  Lands  mufi  be
plowed.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  V.  Of  the  Marnier  of  dunging  lean ,  thin  Land ,

VI.  Of  the  federal  Sorts  oj Seeds.

VI  I.  Of  the  federal  Sorts  of  Pnlfe.

VIII.  Of  the  proper  Lime  for  Sowing.

IX.  How  many  Modii  of  Seed  a  Jugerum  of  Land  requires  and
of  the  Cure  of  Seeds.

X.  Of  the  proper  Soil  for  every  Kind  of  Pulfe.

XI.  Of  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Fodder ,  of  Medic  or  Lucern ,  Vetches
or  Lares,  Mifcelline ,  Oats,  Fenugreek ,  the  bitter  Vetch,  and
the  Chichpeafe.

XII.  After  what  Manner ,  and  with  what  Number  of  Labourers
each  Sort  of  Corn  and  Pulfe  may  be  cultivated.

XIII.  How  many  Day-Labourers  may  be  afiigned  to  every  Sort  of
Land,  in  Proportion  to  the  Extent  of  it,  and  to  the  Manner
of  cultivating  it.

XIV.  What  Sorts  of  Pulfe  are  hurtful  to  Lands,  and  what  are
of  Benefit  to  them.

XV.  Of  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Dung.

XVI.  At  what  Limes  Lands  mufi  be  dunged.

XVII.  After  what  Manner  arable  Lands  may  be  reduced  into
Meadows.

XVIII.  After  what  Manner  Meadows,  when  they  are  made,  mufi
be  cultivated.

XIX.  After  what  Manner  Hay  ought  to  be  managed,  when  it  is
cut  down  ;  and  how  it  ought  to  be  laid  up.

XX.  Of  making  and  putting  a  Lhrefking- floor  into  due  Order.

XXI.  Of  reaping  Corns ,  and  of  threfioing  them.

XXII.  What  Lhings  an  Hufbandman  may  lawfully  do  upon  Holi -
days,  and  what  not.


Book  Third.

Chap.  I.  What  Kind  of  Vine  may  be  proper  for  every  Soil,  and  fiuit -
able  to  the  State  of  the  Climate.

II.  What  Vines  mufi  be  planted  for  Food  in  Lands  near  the
City.

III.  Lhat  there  is  nothing  of  greater  Advantage ,  and  more  ex¬
pedient  for  Hufbandmen,  than  to  cultivate  Vineyards.

IV.  What  Lhings  he  ought  to  obferve ,  who  plants  Vineyards.


Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  V.  In  what  Sort  of  Ground,  and  after  what  Manner  a  Nur -
fery  of  Vines  mufi  be  planted .

VI.  What  Sort  of  Shoot  or  Cutting  muft  be  chofen ,  and  from  what
Parts  of  the  Vine  it  mujl ,  be  gathered.

VII.  How  you  may  know  and  difcover  the  Fruitfulnefs  of  a
Vine.

VIII.  What  (Quality  you  are  principally  to  have  regard  to ,  in
Ground  that  you  define  for  Vineyards.

IX.  How  you  may  make  Aminean  Vines  fruitful.

X.  From  what  Part  of  the  Vine  the  Plants  mufl  be  chofen.

XI.  What  (Qualities  you  mufi  have  regard  to  in  that  Ground  which
you  define  for  Vineyards.

XII.  Of  fuch  Things  as  Julius  Grascinus  delivered  to  us,  concern -
ing  Land  proper  for  Vineyards.

XIII.  After  what  Manner  the  Earth  ought  to  be  pafinated.

XIV.  How  many  Ways  a  Vine  may  be  planted^  either  in  Italy,  or
in  the  Provinces.

XV.  That  it  is  better  to  plant  in  pafinated  Ground ,  than  in
Trenches  or  Furrows  made  in  fallow  Ground,  or  in  that  which
is  newly  broken  up.

XVI.  What  Meajure  or  Quantity  of  pafinated  Ground  may  be
fuficient  for  Vineyards.

XVII.  After  what  Manner,  and  at  what  Time  a  Vine  is  to  be
planted.

XVIII.  What  Things  one  ought  to  obferve  who  plants  a  Vine.

XIX.  How  long  the  Cutting  ought  to  be.

XX.  How  many  Kinds  of  Vines  are  to  be  planted.

XXI.  Whether  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Vines  are  to  be  planted  in
difinli  Divifons ,  feparately  by  themfelves.

Book  Fourth.

Chap.  I.  That  Trenches  of  Two  Feet  are  not  deep  enough  for  Vine-
plants ,  contrary  to  the  Opinion  of  Atticus  and  Celfus.

II.  That  the  Branches  of  one  Quickfet  ought  not  to  clothe  Two
Props ,  but  every  fngle  Plant  muf  have  its  own  Prop  afigned
to  it.

III.  That  a  Vineyard  newly  planted  will fpeedily  decay  and  per  if,
if  it  is  not  fupported  by  great  and  afiduous  Culture,


b


Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  IV.  That  the  Vine  ought  to  be  laid  flat  in  the  Trench  >  and  after
bending  it  back  from  the  Bottom  of  the  fame ,  and  raijing  it  up
ftraight ,  it  ought  to  be  applied  to  a  Reed.

V.  After  the  Vines  are  planted ,  'ice  nnjl  dig  the  Ground  every
Month ,  and  take  care  that  Weeds  do  not  fpring  up  in  it ;  and
the  Quickjets  muft  be  reduced  to  one  Jingle  Branch  of  Firm -
wood.

VI.  That  fuperfuous  Leaves  and  Twigs  ought  to  be  cut  off  from
fuickjets  and  Cuttings.

VII.  That  then  is  the  due  Seafon  for  pampinating,  when  the  Twigs
can  be  Jlruck  of  with  the  Finger.

VIII.  That  a  Vineyard  muji  be  ablaqueated  in  the  Autumn.

IX.  After  what  Manner  an  ablapieated  Vine  muji  be  pruned.

X.  Of  the  bejl  Time  Jor  pruning.

XI.  HuW  a  Cutting  ought  to  be  cut  and  lopped.

XII.  After  what  Manner  a  Vineyard  mu  ft  be  propped  ■,  and  oj'
the  Jingle  Frame  for  Vines.

XIII.  After  what  Manner  a  Vine  is  to  be  tied.

XIV.  Cuttings  muft  be  put  upon  a  Frame ,  and  how  high  the  fingle
Frame  or  Rail  muji  be  rai fed.

XV.  After  what  Manner  a  Vineyard  muji  be  recruited  3  and  how
Layers  are  to  be  made.

XVI.  At  what  Time  a  Quickfet  muft  be  tranfplanted.

XVII.  After  what  Manner  a  Frame  muji  be  made  with  Reeds.

XVIII.  Of  dividing  a  Vineyard  into  fmall  Orchards.

XIX. '  Of  the  Fofition  of  a  Frame , '  and  how  far  it  muji  be  raifed
above  the  Ground.

XX.  0/  the  Bufinefs  of  binding  Vines.

XXI.  Of  the  Way  and  Manner  of  pruning  a  young  Vineyard.

XXII.  After  what  Manner  old  Vineyards  are  to  be  reft or ed.

XXIII.  After  what  Manner  Vineyards  muft  be  pruned .

XXIV.  Offuch  Things  as  a  good  Vine- dr  eft er  ought  to  avoid  or
purfue  in  a  well-conftituted  Vineyard.

XXV.  Of  the  Figure  of  the  Bill  or  Pruning-knife.

XXVI.  Of  the  Care  of  propping  a  Vineyard ,  and  putting  it  upon
Frames.

XXVII.  What  Things  a  good  Vine-dreffer  ought  to  avoid  or
purfue  in  a  Vineyard  already  confituted ,  and  put  into  good
Order.

KXVIII.  How  a  Vineyard  ought  to  be pampinated ;  and  how  many
Diggings  are  neceffary  for  J'uffciently  cultivating  it.

Chap,


The  C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S.  .

Chap.  XXIX.  Of  ingrafting  Vines,  and  preferring  the  Jngraftments .

XXX.  Of  Directions  relating  to  Props  for  Vines ,  and  toOfiers,
and  Willow-groves.

XXXI.  Of  Broom.

XXXII.  Of  Ground  planted  with  Reeds.

XXXIII.  Of  Chef  nut-trees,  and  Chefnut-groves.-

Book  Fifth.

Chap.  I.  After  what  Manner  you  ought  to  meafure  the  given  Forms  of
Lands .

II.  Of  the  feveral  Forms  of  Lands ,  and  of  their  Dimen fions.

III.  How  many  Plants  a  Jugerum  of  Land  may  receive ,  when
they  are  fet  at  the  Difance  of  Three  Feet ,  and  from  that  to
the  Difance  of  Ten  Feet  from  each  other .

IV.  Of  the  Culture  of  provincial  Vineyards.

V.  A  Repetition  of  thoje  Things  which  have  been  mentioned  by
their  feveral  Kinds.

VI.  Of  making  Groves  and  Plantations  of  Elms.

VII.  Of  Gallic  Plantations  of  Trees  for  fupporting  Vines.

VIII.  Of  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Olive-trees.

IX.  Of  making  Nurferies  for  Olive-yards.

X.  Of  potniferous  Trees.

XI.  Of  Ingrafting  of  Trees.

XII.  Of  the  Cytilus  or  Shrub-trefoil.

Book  Sixth.


Chap.  I.  Of  buying  Oxen ,  and  of  their  Shape  and  Make.

II.  Of  breaking  of  Oxen.

III.  Of  the  Care  that  is  requifite  in  buying  of  Oxen ,  and  of  the
Food  that  is  proper  for  them.

IV.  Of  the  Difeafes  of  Oxen,  and  of  their  Remedies.

V.  Of  fuch  Things  as  bring  the  Plague  upon  Cattle ,  and  what
Remedies  are  to  be  applied.

VI.  Of  Remedies  to  be  applied  to  Oxen  that  are  difordered  with
Indigeftion.

VII.  With  what  Remedies  the  Pain  of  the  Belly ,  and  of  the  lu¬
te fines  of  Cattle ,  may  be  quieted.

b  z  Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  VIII.  Of  a  difempered  Growth  or  Swelling  of  the  Tongue.

IX.  Of  the  Fever  of  Oxen.

X.  Of  the  Cough  of  Oxen.

XI.  Of  Remedies  for  an  Impojlume.

XII.  Of  the  Remedy  to  be  applied  to  an  Ox  that  is  lame.

XIII.  Of  Remedies  for  curing  the  Scab,  and  the  Bite  of  a  mad
Dog,  or  a  Wolf ;  and  alfo  jor  curing  FLidebinding.

XIV.  Of  Remedies  for  ulcerated  Lungs,  and  Swelling  of  the
Palate  and  Neck.

XV.  Of  curing  their  Paferns  or  Hoofs  when  they  are  hurt.

XVI.  Of  Remedies  for  their  fprained  Shoulders,  and  broken  Horns.

XVII.  Of  Remedies  againft  the  Bitings  of  Serpents ,  and  other
noxious  Animals.

XVIII.  Of  Remedies  to  be  given  them  when  they  have  fw allowed
an  Horfeleech  with  their  Water.

XIX.  Of  a  Machine  in  which  Cattle  are  Jhut  up  when  their  Sores
are  drejfed.

XX.  Of  the  Form  and  Shape  of  a  Bull.

XXI.  Of  the  Form  or  Shape  of  a  Cow.

XXII.  Of  reviewing  and  picking  the  Cattle  every  Tear.

XXIII.  Of  making  Inclofures  and  Stables.

XXIV.  Of  the  Age  fit  for  a  Bull  to  couple  with  the  Female,

XXV.  Of  Remedies  for  Worms  in  Calves.

XXVI.  Of  cafirating  Calves.

XXVII.  Of  Horfes.

XXVIII.  Of  the  Age  of  a  Stallion.

XXIX.  Of  the  Temper,  Difpofition,  and  Form  of  an  Horfe.

XXX.  Of  the  Care  of  Horfes ,  and  of  Medicines  proper  for
them.

XXXI.  Of  Remedies  for  a  Cough.

XXXII.  Of  Remedies  for  Hurts  by  interfering ,  and  for  the  Scab.
XXXIII.  Of  Remedies  againfi  Flies,  and  for  Pains  in  the  Eyes.
XXXIV.  Of  Remedies  for  Nauf eating  of  their  Food ,  and  a  pefti -
lential  Falling  away  of  their  Flejh.

XXXV.  Of  Madnejs  incident  to  Mares.

XXXVI.  Of  Mules.

XXXVII.  Of  refraining  the  Cruelty  of  a  Stallion  mad  upon  gra¬
tifying  his  Lufi.

XXXVIII.  OJ  Medicines  for  curing  Mules.

Book

%


The  CONTENTS*


Book  Seventh.

Chap.  I.  Of  thefmall  He-afs.

II.  Of  buying  and  managing  of  Sheep.

III.  Of  chufng  Rams.

IV.  Of  covered  Sheep.

V.  Of  Remedies  for  Sheep-Cattle.

VI.  Of  Goat-Cattle.

VII.  Of  Medicines  for  Goats.

VIII.  Of  the  Method  of  making  Cheefe.

IX.  Of  Swine ,  and  Medicines  proper  for  them.

X.  Of  Medicines  proper  for  Swine.

XI.  Of  Caft rating  of  Swine.

XII.  Of  Dogs.

XIII.  Of  Difeafes  incident  to  Dogs ,  and  of  the  Way  of  curing
them .


Book  Eighth.

Chap.  I.  Of  Pafturing  in  and  about  the  Manor-houfe.

II.  Of  the  feveral  Kinds  of  common  Roultry-yard  Hens  and  Cocks,
proper  to  be  provided  and  brought  up.

III.  Of  the  right  Contrivance  and  making  of  an  Hen-houfe.

IV.  Of  Food  proper  for  Hens.

V.  Of  preferving  the  Eggs,  and  fetting  them  under  the  Hens.

VI.  Of  Eggs.

VII.  Of  fattening  and  cramming  of  Hens.

VIII.  Of  cramming  of  Wood-Pigeons ,  or  Ring-Doves ,  or  tame
Pigeons ,  that  breed  in  little  Cells  about  the  Houfe ,  and  of
making  Pigeon-houfes .

IX.  Of  the  bringing  up  of  Turtle-Doves.

X.  Of  the  bringing  up  of  Thrujhes.

XI.  Of  the  bringing  up  of  Peacocks.

XII.  Of  the  bringing  up  of  Numidian  and  Rufiic  Hens.

XIII.  Of  Fowls,  which  the  Greeks  call  d/uLcpiQix  (amphibious),
and  the  Latins  duplicis  vitae  ( of  a  double  Life').

XIV.  Of  the  bringing  up  of  Qeefe,  and  making  a  Goofe-pen  for
■keeping  and  feeding  them .


Chap,


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  XV.  Of  Ducks,  Denis,  and  the  like.

XVI. ,  Of  Fiji: -ponds,  and  of  feeding  of  Fifes.

XVII.  Of  the  Situation  .of  a  Fijh-pond.


Book  Ninth.

Chap.  I.  Of  making  Parks ,  and  fhutting  up  wild  Cattle  in  them.

II.  Of  Bees.

III.  Of  the  federal  Kinds  of  Bees ,  and  which  of  them  is  the
befl.

IV.  Of  the  Failures  proper  for  Bees,  and  what  Sort  of  Situation
the  fame  ought  to  have.

V.  Of  chujing  Seats  for  Bees.

VI.  Of  fuch  Sorts  of  Bee-hives  as  ought  to  be  approved.

VII.  After  what  Manner  the  Hives  muf  be  placed.

VIII.  Of  pur  chafing  Bees ,  and  how  wild  Swarms  may  be  taken.

IX.  After  what  Manner  our  own  Country-Bees  ought  to  be  ob-
ferved ,  and  put  up  in  Hives.

X.  Of  the  Form  and  Make  of  the  King  of  the  Bees.

XI.  How  the  Smallnefs  of  the  Number  of  the  Bees  may  be  reme¬
died.

XII.  Of  putting  up  a  Swarm  of  Bees  into  their  Hive,  and
hindering  them  from  making  their  Efcape.

XIII.  Of  Remedies  for  Bees  labouring  under  any  Difemper.

XIV.  Of  that  which  the  Bees  do  at  all  Dimes ,  and  what  the
Perfon  that  has  the  Care  of  them  ought  to  do.

XV.  Of  the  Making  of  Honey ,  and  of  the  Dime  when  the  Hives
ought  to  be  eaft rated.

XVI.  Of  the  Making  of  Wax.

Book  Tenth.

Of  the  Culture  of  Gardens,  in  Verfe.


Book  Eleventh.

Chap.  I.  What  Dhings  ought  to  be  done  within  the  Manor-houfe  bv  a
Man  advanced  to,  and  intrujled  with  the  Office  of  a  Bailiff'.

4  Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  II.  TV  hat  miff  be  done  every  Month ,  by  accommodating- all  Sorts
oj  Work  to  the  Times  and  SeaJ'ons.

III.  Of  the  Culture  of  Gardens ,  and  of  Garden-herbs ,  in  Profe.

Bo  O  K  T  W  E  L  F  T  H.

Chap.  I.  Of  the  Care  that  the  Bailiff's  Wife  ought  to  take  of  the
Houfkol d- affair  s ,  and  of  the  Precepts  Jhe  ought  to  obferve.

II.  Aft  er  what  Manner  Jhe  ought  to  manage  the  Provffons ,  or
the  Store-houfes .

III.  Of  the  Diftribution  of  the  Implements  of  Hufbandry ,  and
the  Houjhold-jurniture.

IV.  What  Kinds  oj  Veffels  jhe  ought  to  prepare  for  Jalting  and
pickling  Provffons ,  and  for  ConJ'erves.

V.  How  Vinegar  may  be  made  oj  fat  Wine.

VI.  How ffrong  Brine  or  Pickle  may  be  made.

VII.  What  Herbs  may  be  pickled  throughout  the  Four  Seafons  of
the  Tear ,  and  after  what  Manner.

VIII.  How  Oxygal ,  or  four  Milk  may  be  made.

IX.  Of  pickling  of  Lettuce.

X.  OJ  prej'erving  of  Onions ,  Pears  and  Apples ,  and  all  Fruits
oj  the  Apple-kind.

XL  Of  the  Compofition  of  a  fweet  Water ,  which  they  life  for  the
prej’erving  of  Fruit.

XII.  Of  the  Way  to  make  Mead.

XIII.  Of  preferving  Cheeje ,  and  pickling  certain  Herbs.

XIV.  Of  drying  Apples  and  Pears  in  the  Sun.

XV.  Of  dry  Figs.

XVI.  Of  making  dried  Raffns ,  or  Raffns  of  the  Sun ,  and  pre¬
ferving  Sorb-apples.

XVII.  Of  making  Vinegar  of  Figs..

XVIII.  Of  Juch  Things  as  muff  be  prepared  for  the  Vintage.

XIX.  Of  J'everal  Compofftions  for  prej'erving  and  firengthening
Wt ine.

XX.  Of  boiling  Muff  into  one  Half  or  one  Third  of  the  fir  ft
Quantity.

XXI.  Of  Rob  of  Grapes,  or  Muff  boiled  in  to  a  third  Part  of  its
firff  Quantity ,  put  to  Wine ,  to  preferve  it  till  it  become  old.


Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  XXII.  Another  Medicament  oj  liquid  Pitch  [or  Tar)  wherewith
you  may  prefervc  Wine.

XXIII.  Of  Pitch ,  which  the  Savoyards  ufe  for  preferring  of
pitched  Wine.

XXIV.  Of  Nemeturian  Pitch.

XXV.  Of  fait  Water  and  flrong  Brine  for  preferring  Wines.

XXVI.  Of  Remedies  for  Wine  that  grows  four.

XXVII.  Of  making  fweet  Wine.

XXVIII.  Of  other  wholfome  Sorts  of  PreJ'erres.

XXIX.  After  what  Manner  Muft  may  be  kept  always  fweet ,  as
if  it  were  new.

XXX.  Of  the  bejl  Way  of  curing  Wine ,  and  of  Remedies  for
Wine  that  is  upon  the  Decay.

XXXI.  Of  Remedies  in  cafe  any  living  Creature  fall  into  the
Muft ,  and  perifh  in  it.

XXXII.  Of  Ho  re  hound-wine.

XXXIII.  Of  Squil-wine.

XXXIV.  Of  Squil-vinegar.

XXXV.  How  you  muft  make  Wormwood-wine ,  Hyffop-wine ,
Southernwood-  and  other  Sorts  of  Wine.

XXXVI.  Of  Muft  of  the  loft  Prefjing ,  or  fqueezed  Muft.
XIXXVII.  To  make  Wine  like  to  Greek  Wine.

XXXVIII.  How  you  may  make  Myrtle-wine.

XXXIX.  After  what  Manner  Wine  may  be  made  of  Grapes  dried
in  the  Sun.

XL.  How  the  beft  fnall  thin  Wine  may  be  made.

XLI.  How  to  make  the  beft  Honey-wine.

XLII.  Of  preferving  Cheefe.

XLIII.  After  what  Manner  potted  Grapes  may  be  put  up  and
kept.

XLIV.  After  what  Manner  Pomegranates  may  be  preferved.
XLV.  How  Globe-apples ,  or  Pome-paradiJ'es ,  Honey-apples ,  Sefiian
Apple s,  and  other  Kinds  may  be  preferved.

XLVI.  Of  pickling  of  Elecampane.

XLVII.  Of  pickling  of  Olives.

XLVIII.  Of  the  Way  to  pickle  black  Olives.

XLIX.  How  a  Marmelade  of  Olives  may  be  made .

L.  After  what  Manner  Oil  may  be  made.

LI.  Of  Gleucine  Oil.

LII.  After  what  Manner  you  may  make  Oil  for  Ointments.

LIII.  Of  falting  of  Swines  Flefh.


Chap.


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  LIV.  After  what  Manner  you  may  pickle  Turneps  and  Navews .
LV.  How  you  may  make  Mujlard.

L VI.  After  what  Manner  you  may  preferve  and  pickle  tht  Alif
fander -  and  Skirret-Roots.

LVII.  How  to  make  up  a  Pallet  of  eafy  and  quick  Digefion ,  or,
as  others  will  have  it ,  a  Sallet  or  Sawce  with  a  Mixture  of
Garum  and  Vinegar .


The  BOOK  concerning  TREES.

Chap.  I.  Of  a  Nurfery  of  Vines.

II.  What  Sorts  of  Plants  or  Shoots  you  ought  to  gather ,  and
when.

III.  After  what  Manner  you  may  choofe  your  Shoots ;  and  of  the
Quality  and  Condition  of  the  Ground.

IV.  Of  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Vineyards.

V.  After  what  Manner  Vines  ought  to  be  cultivated .

VI.  Of  cutting  and  propagating  an  old  Vineyard.

VII.  Of  propagating  Vines.

VIII.  Of  Ingraftments  from  Fruit-bearing  Vines ,  in  order  to
make  Vines  fruitful.

IX.  How  a  Clujler  of  Grapes  may  have  Berries  of  feveral  Kinds.

X.  How  you  may  prune  the  Vines ,  after  you  have  gathered  the
Grapes.

XI.  Of  pampinating  a  Vineyard \  or  pulling  off  its  fuperfuous
Shoots  and  Leaves.

XII.  Of  digging  of  Vineyards.

XIII.  To  preferve  the  Vines  from  being  hurt  by  Mildew.

XIV.  To  prevent  the  Ants  from  climbing  up  upon  Trees.

XV.  How  to  prevent  Ants  and  Vine-fretters  from  vexing  the
Vine.

XVI.  Of  Plantations  of  Trees  for  fupporting  Vines .

XVII.  Of  Olive-yards.

XVIII.  Of  conftituting  an  Orchard.

XIX.  Of  making  Trenches.

XX.  How  you  may  choofe  the  Plants  for  an  Orchard ..

XXI.  When  the  Fig-tree  mufi  be  planted.

XXII.  Of  planting  Nuts.

XXIII..  Of  planting  the  Pomegranate

c  Chapv


The  CONTENTS.

Chap.  XXIV.  Of  the  Pear-tree.

XXV.  Of  planting  Apples.

XXVI.  Of  ingrafting  Trees.

XXVII.  That  Cyons  of  all  Kinds  may  be  graffed  upon  all  Sorts  of
Trees  whatfoever.

XXVIII.  Of  the'  Cythifus,  or  Shrub-trefoil .

XXIX.  Of  the  Willow-tree^  of  Broom ,  and  of  the  Reed .

XXX.  Of  the  Violet ,  and  the  Rofe .


z


A  Brief


A  Brief  E  x  pli  cat  ion  of  a  few  Original  Words  retained

in  this  Tranflation.


cpt  Ugerumi  a  fuperficial  meafure  of  land  among  the  Romans ,  confifting  of

~T  Engl.  Feet.  Der.

**  28800  Roman  feet,  which  make  27849,60.  See  a  further

account  of  it  lib.  v.  cap.  1 .

Modius ,  a  dry  meafure  of  capacity,  which  contained  a  little  more  than  a  Win-
chefier  peck.  See  it  further  explained  page  64.

Ligula  fignified  at  firft  a  fpoon,  but  was  afterwards  ufed  as  a  meafure,  and  is
the  fmalleft  mentioned  by  Columella ,  and  very  little  more  than  the
48th  part  of  a  pint.

Cyathus ,  a  meafure  of  liquid  things  :  it  contained  4  ligula ,  and  was  a  little
more  than  the  1 2th  part  of  a  pint.

Hemina  contained  24  ligula,  or  fix  cyatbi ,  and  was  a  little  more  than  half  &
pint.

Sextarius ,  a  meafure  both  of  liquid  and  dry  things :  it  contained  two  hemina,
1 2  cyathi,  or  48  ligula:  it  made  a  little  more  than  a  wine-pint -j
and  it  was  fo  called,  becaufe  it  was  the  fixth  part  of  the  congius.

Urna ,  a  meafure  of  liquid  things,  which  contained  24  fextarii ,  and  amounted,
in  Englijh  meafure,  to  3  gallons  4  \  pints,  and  a  fmall  fraction
more.

Amphora ,  contained  2  or  48  fextarii ,  amounting,  in  Englijh  meafure,

to  7  gallons,  one  pint,  and  a  fmall  fraction  of  a  pint :  it  was  alfo  a
meafure  of  liquid  things.

'Culleus  or  culeus ,  the  greateft  meafure  of  liquid  things  among  the  Romans :  it
contained  20  amphora ,  in  Englijh  meafure  143  gallons,  3  pints,  and
a  fmall  fra&ion.  See  a  more  diftinct  account  of  thefe  larger  mea-
fures  in  page  1 18.

Sejlertius ,  a  Roman  coin,  of  the  value  of  two  ajfes  and  a  half  j  four  of  them
made  a  denarius ,  which,  by  the  belt  judges,  is  computed  to  be
worth  7  J.  Englijh  money.  See  a  further  account  of  it  in
page  1 19.

To  ablaqtieate ,  is  to  dig  found  a  vine,  or  any  other  tree,  in  order  to  lay  its
roots  bare,  and  expofe  them  to  the  Sun,  Wind,  and  Rain,  and  to
cutoff  the  fuperfluous  foots,  &c.  See  page  168.

To  pampinate,  is  to  flrike  off  the  fuperfluous  fhoots  and  twigs  of  vines,  in
order  to  make  them  more  able  to  nourifh  their  fruit,  £dV.  See
page  1 96.

To  farcle,  or  farculate ,  is  to  move  the  furface  of  the  ground  hardened  by  the
Sun,  fsfr.  in  order  to  make  it  imbibe  the  Rain,  and  admit  the
warmth  of  the  Sun,  that  lo  what  grows  upon  it  may  thrive  .the

better.


'


*  *  ...  .

-  ■  «.  -J  ->r  . . u  -...fl  A

»'r  *t  ]  •  •  •  •  ,  .  »  rt

•  «.• .  .  J ...  t


:v.  r.  rr  :  i  : .  £  :/ IK

.  ■


.  .  3  .c.)f  o.  '  k .  i.'  .

•  *  •  *  •  *  •  *  -  v^' .  i*

:.m  r  -j:.-  '  -

^  .  fe*


'•/  >  “  •  '  f  o

>  .  *■


?k'  i-.*


-  •.


;*  i  ••  ri  :a-  ;  :  t  O

•j  :  ■

i  .  '  •  ' •  • .

.


*  •  ''  .  ;Y  |f;;  ;  -

:  .  ’  '  .6  i!  ,?*•>  ’  •  -•


v  .


•  -  ■  ......


’  *•

•

.  -  .  '  ■  •n

:  -

.

.

?  .  ■

«  ,

'

L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA


O  F

HUSBANDRY.


BOOK  FIRST.


The  PREFACE.  To  Publius  Silvinus.

I  frequently  hear  the  principal  men  of  our  city  blaming,  fometimes
the  unfruitfulnefs  of  the  ground,  at  other  times  the  intemperatenefs
of  the  weather,  as  hurtful  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth  for  many
ages  now  paft  :  fome  alfo  I  hear  mitigating,  in  fome  meafure,
as  it  were,  the  forefaid  complaints,  becaufe  they  are  of  opinion,
that  the  ground,  being,  by  its  overmuch  fruitfulnefs  during  the  for¬
mer  part  of  its  duration,  become  barren,  and  worn  out  of  heart,  is
not  now  able,  with  its  wonted  bounty,  to  afford  fuftenance  to  mor¬
tals.  Which  caufes,  Publius  Silvinus ,  I  am  fully  perfuaded,  are  very
remote  from  the  truth  ;  becaufe  it  is  neither  lawful  to  think,  that  the
nature  of  the  ground,  which  that  original  Former  and  Father  of  the
univerfe  endowed  with  perpetual  fecundity,  is  affedted  with  barren-
nefs,  as  with  a  certain  difeafe  ;  nor  does  it  become  a  wife  man  to  be¬
lieve,  that  the  earth,  which,  having  a  divine  and  everlafting  youth
beftawed  upon  it,  is  called  the  common  parent  of  all  things,  becaufe
it  has  always  brought  forth,  and  will  henceforth  bring  forth,  all  things
whatfoever,  is  grown  old,  like  a  woman.

B  (i)  Nor,


2  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

(i)  Nor,  after  all,  do  I  think,  that  thefe  things  befal  us  from  the
diftemperature  of  the  weather  3  but  rather  from  our  own  fault,  who
commit  our  Hufbandry  to  the  very  worft  of  our  fervants,  as  a  criminal
to  a  public  executioner,  which  all  the  belt  of  our  anceftors  were  wont
to  treat  with  the  greateft  gentlenefs  :  and  I  cannot  enough  wonder,
why  they,  who  defire  to  learn  eloquence,  are  fo  nice  in  their  choice
of  an  orator,  whofe  eloquence  they  may  imitate  ;  and  they,  who
fearch  after  the  knowledge  of  lurveying  or  menfuration,  and  of
numbers,  look  out  for  a  matter  of  the  art  they  delight  in  •  and  they,
who  are  defirous  of  fome  fkill  in  dancing  and  mufic,  are  exceeding
fcrupulous  in  their  choice  of  one  to  modulate  their  voice,  and  teach
them  to  fing  agreeably  ;  and  no  lefs  of  a  dancing-mafter,  to  regulate
the  geftures  and  motions  of  their  body  ;  alfo  they,  who  have  a  mind
to  build,  fend  for  architects,  mafons,  and  carpenters  ;  and  they,
who  refolve  to  fend  fhips  to  fea,  fend  for  fkilful  pilots  ;  they,  who
make  preparations  for  war,  call  for  men,  who  underftand  the  art
of  war,  and  are  acquainted  with  military  affairs  ;  and,  not  to  men¬
tion  every  particular,  in  that  ffudy  which  every  one  refolves  to  pro-
fecute,  he  makes  ufe  of  the  wifeft  and  abieft  director  he  can  find  ;
finally,  every  one  fends  for  a  perfon  from  the  fociety  and  affembly
of  the  wife,  to  form  his  mind,  and  inftrudt  him  in  the  precepts  of
virtue  :  but  Hufnandry  alone,  which,  without  all  doubt,  is  next  to,
and,  as  it  were,  near  akin  to  wifdom,  is  in  want  of  both  mafters  and
fcholars.  For  hitherto  I  have  not  only  heard,  that  there  are,  but  I
myfelf  have  feen,  fchools  of  profeffors  of  Rhetoric,  and,  as  I  have
already  faid,  of  Geometry,  and  of  Mufic  ;  or,  which  is  more  to  be
wondered  at,  academies  for  the  moft  contemptible  vices,  for  deli¬
cately  dreffmg  and  feafoning  of  victuals,  for  contriving  and  making
up  dainty  and  coffly  dithes  for  promoting  gluttony  and  luxury  and
I  have  alfo  feen  head-dreffers  and  hair-trimmers;  but,  of  Agriculture,

I  have  never  known  any  that  profeffed  themfelves  either  teachers  or
ffudents.

For,  even  fuppofe  the  city  fhould  want  profeffors  of  the  forefaid
arts,  neverthelefs  the  commonwealth  might  be  in  a  very  flourifhing
condition,  as  in  antient  times  j  for,  of  old,  cities  were  happy  enough,
and  will  hereafter  ffill  be  fo,  without  ludicrous  arts,  yea,  even  without

(1)  P liny,  in  his  Natural  Hijlory ,  lib.  i3.  cap.  2.  fays,  that  the  caufe  of  the  former
plenty  was,  that  the  ground  was  at  firft  cultivated  by  the  hands  of  Generals,  Confuls,
Tribunes,  and  Senators;  but  afterwards  by  Slaves,  Criminals,  and  Malefactors,  who  bore
upon  their  bodies  the  marks  of  their  infamy,  and  did  not  cultivate  it  fo  carefully  as  thofe
men  of  honour  and  virtue  did.


advocates


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  3

advocates  alfo  (2)  :  but  without  Hulbandmen,  it  is  manifeft,  that
mortals  can  neither  fubfift,  nor  be  maintained.  For  which  reafon,
what  is  come  to  pafs,  is  the  more  like  a  prodigy,  that  a  thing  fo  necef-
fary  and  convenient  for  our  bodies,  and  the  advantages  of  life,  fhould,
to  this  very  time,  of  all  things  whatfoever,  have  had  the  lead:  con-
fummation  j  and  that  this  perfectly  innocent  way  of  enlarging  and
preferving  one’s  patrimony  fhould  be  defpifed.  For  thofe  other
different,  and,  as  it  were,  repugnant  ways  of  doing  this,  are  contrary
and  difagreeable  to  juftice  •  unlefs  we  think  it  more  agreeable  to  equity
to  have  acquired  booty  by  a  military  profeffion,  which  brings  us  nothing
without  blood  and  daughter,  and  the  ruin  and  deftrudtion  of  others.
Or,  to  fuch  as  hate  war,  can  the  hazard,  uncertainty,  and  danger
of  the  fea,  and  of  trade,  be  more  delireable  ?  That  Man,  a  terref-
trial  animal,  breaking  through  the  boundary  and  law  of  nature,
and  expofing  himfelf  to  the  rage  of  the  winds  and  fea,  fhould  dare
to  commit  himfelf  to  the  waves,  and,  after  the  manner  of  the  fowls
of  the  air,  always  a  ftranger  upon  a  far  diftant  and  foreign  fhore,  wan¬
der  over  the  unknown  world  ?  Or  is  ufury,  which  is  odious,  even  to
thofe  whom  it  feems  to  relieve,  more  to  be  approved  ?  Or  is,  forfooth,
that  canine  fludy  and  employment,  as  the  antients  called  it,  of  fnarling,
and  barking  at,  and  flanderoufly  accufing  every  man  of  the  greateft
fubftance  ;  and  that  open  robbery  of  pleading  againft  the  innocent,
and  for  the  guilty,  which  was  negletled  and  defpifed  by  our  ance-
ftors,  but  even  permitted  and  allowed  of  by  us  within  the  walls,  and

(2)  Caufidicus,  an  appellation  not  very  honourable  amongft  the  Roman*.  Quintilian,
in  his  Injlitutions,  lib.  2.  avoiding  hai  fher  terms,  calls  him  vocem  mercenariam ,  inutilem
litium  advocatum ,  a  mercenary  tongue,  a  promoter  of  law-fuits,  a  wrangling  advocate.
Our  author  feems  to  have  had  men  of  this  character  in  great  contempt,  who  employed
their  eloquence  either  in  pleading  for  the  notorioufly  wicked,  or  againft  innocent  per-
fons.  If  the  word  Caufidic  were  as  well  known  as  the  word  Advocate ,  it  would  be
more  expreffive  of  the  thing.

In  our  author’s  days,  the  Romans  had  loft  their  liberty,  and  were  under  a  very  tyran¬
nical  government ;  and,  no  doubt,  many  of  them,  being  greatly  diflatisfied  with  their
prefent  ftate,  by  their  murmurings,  and  otherwife,.  made  themfelves  obnoxious  to  the
difpleafure  and  refentment  of  their  oppreffors,  who,  by  profcriptions,  endeavoured  to
deitroy  all  they  fufpe&ed  to  be  their  enemies }  and  many  of  the  orators  of  thofe  days
became  informers  and  accufers  ;  and,  it  feems,  always  pitched  upon  the  richeft,  with  a
view  to  a  (hare  of  the  plunder.  It  is  this  canine  eloquence,  as  they  called  it,  which
our  author  cenlures  :  eloquence  employed  in  defence  of  innocence,  and  againft  the
guilty,  in  fupport  of  truth  againft  falfhood  and  calumny,  and  efpecially  in  directing
the  public  counfels,  appealing  popular  commotions,  and  correcting  public  errors,  is  a
divine  endowment ;  in  all  ages  had  in  the  greateft  reputation  by  the  wifeft  nations,
and  juftly  promoted  to  the  greateft  honours  :  otherwife  it  is  a  very  dangerous  talent,
efpecially  in  countries  where  haranguing  and  pleading  at  the  bar  is  much  in  ufe,  if  the
judges  are  not  very  ftiarp-fighted,  to  difcern  true  reafon  from  fophiftry.


4  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

in  the  very  Forum  itfelf  (3),  more  excellent  and  honourable?  Or,
fhould  I  reckon  more  honelt  and  honourable,  the  moft  deceitful,  lying,
and  beggarly  hawking  of  a  mercenary  levee-haunter,  who  is  con-
flantly  flying  about  from  the  threlhold  of  one  great  man  in  power
to  that  of  another,  and  guefling,  by  the  report  of  others,  whether
his  patron  is  awake,  or  not  ?  Nor,  indeed,  do  the  fervants  vouchfafe
to  anfwer  him,  when  he  afks  what  is  a  doing  within-doors  :  or,
fhould  I  think  it  more  fortunate,  after  having  met  with  a  repulfe
from  the  porter  with  his  chains  upon  him,  to  loiter  and  hang  about
the  ungrateful  and  hateful  doors,  oft-times  till  it  be  late  at  night,
and,  by  a  moll  mean  and  pitiful  fervitude  and  attendance,  purchafe
with  difgrace  the  honour  of  the  Fafces  (4),  or  a  government,  or  a
command  in  the  army  or  navy,  and,  after  all,  fquander  away  one’s
own  patrimony  ?  For  honour  is  not  bellowed,  .as  a  reward,  upon
dilinterefled  fervice  and  attendance,  but  upon  fuch  as  make  prefents,
and  give  bribes.

Now,  if  all  good  men  ought  to  avoid  thefe  very  things,  and  others
like  to  them,  there  is  ftill  remaining,  as  I  faid,  one  way  of  increaling
one’s  fubllance,  worthy  of  a  freeman,  and  a  gentleman  ;  which  arifes
from  Hulbandry,  of  which  if  the  precepts  were  put  in  practice,  fup-
pofe  it  were  but  imprudently,  by  fuch  as  have  not  been  inflrudted  in  it,
provided  never thelefs  they  were  poflelTors  and  proprietors  of  the  lands,
which  they  cultivate,  as  was  the  antient  cuftom,  rural  affairs  would
fuffer  lefs  damage  ;  for  the  indullry  and  diligence  of  the  mailers,
would,  in  many  things,  compenfate  the  lofs  occafioned  by  ignorance  ;
and  they,  whofe  own  interell  lay  at  flake,  would  not  appear  to  be  all
their  life-time  willingly  ignorant  of  their  own  bufinefs  ;  but  thereby
becoming  more  delirous  of  learning,  would  attain  to  a  thorough  know¬
ledge  of  Hulbandry.

Now  we  difdain,  and  think  it  below  us,  to  live  upon,  and  cultivate
our  own  lands  ourfelves,  and  look  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  no  moment,
to  make  choice  of  a  man  of  the  bell  fenfe  and  fkill  we  can  find,  for
our  Bailiff ;  or,  if  he  be  ignorant,  at  leall,  of  a  man  of  vigour,  vigi¬
lance,  and  activity,  that  he  may  learn  the  more  fpeedily  what  he  is
ignorant  of.  But,  whether  he  be  a  rich  man  that  purchafes  a  piece
of  ground,  he  picks,  out  of  his  crew  of  footmen  and  chairmen,  one
that  is  the  feeblell,  and  the  moft  worn  out  with  years,  and  banifhes

(3)  Forum  fignifies  the  building,  or  place,  where  public  courts  of  juftice  were  held  }
and  matters  of  judgment  pleaded  and  decided  j  or  the  court  of  juftice  itfelf.

(4)  Fafces  were  the  public  enfigns  of  magiftracy  among  the  Romans-)  being  a  bundle
of  rods,  with  an  ax,  tied  together,  and  carried  before  the.magiftrate.


him


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  $

him  into  the  country  :  whereas  that  bufinefs  requires,  not  only  know¬
ledge,  but  green  age,  and  ftrength  of  body,  to  bear  labour  and  fatigue  :
or  if  he  be  matter  of  a  middling  eftate,  he  commands  one  of  his  hire¬
lings,  who  now  refufes  to  pay  that  daily  tribute  of  fervice  required  of
him,  and  cannot  thereby  increafe  his  income,  to  be  director  and  over-
feer,  who  is  ignorant  of  the  bufinefs  he  is  to  have  the  overfight
of  (5).  Which  things  when  I  obferve,  frequently  confidering  and
revolving  in  my  mind,  with  how  bale  and  fhameful  an  agreement  and
confent  rural  difcipline  is  deferted,  and  worn  out  of  ufe,  I  am  in
dread,  left  it  fhould  be  accounted  villainous,  and,  in  fome  meafure,
fhameful  and  dilhonourable,  for  free-born  men.  But  when,  by  the
records  and  writings  of  many  authors,  I  am  put  in  mind,  that  our
worthy  anceftors  looked  upon  it  as  their  glory,  to  take  care  of  their
rural  affairs,  and  to  employ  themfelves  in  Hufbandry,  from  which  (6)
Quintus  Cincinnatus  came,  and  refcued  the  befieged  Conful  and  his
army,  being  called  from  the  plough  to  the  Didlatorfhip  j  and  again,
having  laid  down  the  Fafces ,  which,  when  a  Conqueror ,  he  more
haftily  furrendered,  than  he  had  a  (Turned  them  when  he  was  made
General ,  he  returned  to  the  fame  tteers,  and  his  fmall  manor  of  four
jugera  of  land,  left  him  by  his  anceftors  (7)  :  and  CaiusFabricius  alfo,

and

(5)  Ex  mercenariis,  aliquem  jam  recufantem ,  quotidianum  illud  tribu turn ,  there  feems  to
be  fomething  wanting  in  this  fentence,  to  make  it  more  intelligible,  which  I  cannot  pre¬
tend  to  fupply  :  the  intention  of  it  muft  either  be  what  I  have  expreffed,  or  perhaps  it
may  fignify,  that  one  of  the  hired  fervants,  who  refufes  to  ferve  for  common  wages,  is
promoted  to  the  office  of  a  Bailiff.

(6)  Quintus  Cincinnatus  was  made  Dictator  during  the  Confulfhip  of  L.  Minutius
Carbetus,  and  C.  Nautius  Rutilius  IK.  Anno  296.  from  the  building  of  Rome.  The  mef-
fenger  from  the  Senate  found  him  ploughing  his  four  jugera  of  land,  which  he  had  in
the  Vatican,  and  which,  from  him,  were  called  the  Quintian  Meadows.  It  is  faid,  he  was
naked,  and  all  covered  over  with  fweat  and  dull.  The  occafion  of  his  being  chofen
Dictator,  was,  becaufe  the  Conful  Mmutius ,  and  his  army,  were  befieged  in  their  camp
by  the  enemy,  and  were  in  danger  of  being  made  prifoners  of  war.  This  ftory  is
elegantly  told  by  Livy ,  dec.  1.  lib.  3,  who  fays,  it  is  worth  their  while  to  hear  it,  who
defpife  all  human  things,  in  comparifon  of  riches  ;  and  think,  that  there  can  be  no
place,  either  for  great  honour,  or  for  valour  and  virtue,  but  where  there  is  great  affluence
of  riches.

(7)  Columella  calls  thefe  four  jugera  of  land,  his  pradiolum  avitum,  as  if  they  came  to
him  from  his  anceftors }  which  is  contrary  to  what  Fejlus  fays,  viz.  That  the  Q uintian  Mea¬
dows  were  fo  called,  from  Quintus  Cincinnatus,  becaufe ,  after  his  Son  was  condemned ,  he
fold  all  that  he  had,  and  purchafed  four  jugera  of  land  beyond  the  Tyber.  They  made
near  two  Englijh  acres  and  a  half.

The  jugerum,  which  many  of  our  Englijh  tranflators  render  Acre,  was  much  fmaller
than  the  Englifb  acre  ;  and  it  only  impoles  upon  the  reader,  and  gives  him  a  falfe
idea  of  this  meafure,  to  tranflate  it  thus  ',  fo  that  I  think  it  better  to  retain  the  original
word,  and  give  an  explication  of  it  in  a  note,  than,  by  tranflating  it  Acre,  convey  a  falfe
jaotion  to  the  mind  of  the  reader.


The


6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

and  Curius  Dentatus  (8)  ;  the  one,  after  having  driven  Pyrrhus  (9)
out  of  the  confines  of  Italy  ;  and  the  other,  after  he  had  fubdued  the
Sabines,  did  no  lefs  induftrioufiy  cultivate,  than  they  had  bravely
gained  with  their  fwords,  their  dividend  of  feven  jugera  oflandaman,
which  they  received  of  the  land  they  had  taken  from  the  enemy.

And  that  I  may  not  now  unfeafonably  make  mention  of  them  one  by
one,  when  I  behold  fo  many  other  renowned  and  memorable  Captains  of
the  Roman  nation,  who  were  always  in  great  reputation  for  this  two¬
fold  fludy  ;  either  of  defending,  or  of  cultivating,  their  paternal  or
acquired  eflates  ;  I  perceive,  that  the  antient  cuftom,  manners,
and  manly  life  of  our  anceftors,  are  difagreeable  to  our  luxury,
and  voluptuous  delicacy.  For  (as  Marcus  Varro  (10)  formerly  com¬
plained  in  our  grandfathers  times)  all  we,  who  are  majlers  of  fa¬
milies ,  having  abandoned  the  priming-hook ,  and  the  plough ,  have,  in
a  fneaking  manner ,  crept  within  the  walls ;  and  rather  move  our  hands
in  the  Circus  (11)  and  Theatres ,  than  in  our  corn  fields  and  vine¬
yards  :  and  with  aftonilhment  we  admire  the  poftures  of  effeminate
wretches  ;  becaufe,  by  their  woman-like  motions,  they  counterfeit

The  Roman  jugerum ,  as  our  author  informs  us,  confided  of  28,800  fquare  feet,
whereas  the  Englijh  acre  confifts  of  43,560  fquare  feet,  which  is  about  a  Roman  jugerum
and  a  half  ;  and,  according  to  the  neareft  computation,  the  jugerum  confifts  of  2  roods,  18
fquare  poles ,  250,05  fquare  feet  j  and  the  proportion  it  bears  to  the  acre ,  is  very  near  as
10  to  1 6  j  and  the  Roman  foot,  according  to  the  Englifh  ftandard,  is  11,604  inches.

(8)  Curius  Dentatus,  an.  urb.  479.  conquered  Pyrrhus ,  and  drove  him  out  of  Italy,
and  triumphed  over  him.  Plin.  Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  8.  cap.  16.  Floras,  de  Bello  Tarentino
defcribes  this  war,  vidlory,  and  triumph,  very  elegantly;  and,  lib.  1.  cap.  18.  fays,  that,
Curius  preferred  his  own  earthen  ware  to  all  the  gold  of  the  Samnites  ;  and  that  Fa~
bricius  rejected  the  offers  of  Pyrrhus ,  who  would  have  made  him  Partner  in  the
Government,  if  he  would  have  betrayed  his  country.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  had  but
one  faltfeller,  and  the  bottom  of  it  was  of  wood.

Fabricius,  when  Cenfor,  removed  Ruffinus,  a  man  of  confular  dignity,  from  the
Senate,  becaufe  he  had  ten  pounds  of  plate,  judging  it  great  luxury  ;  and  forbid  the
moft  warlike  Generals  to  have  more  filver  plate  than  one  goblet,  and  a  faltfeller.  In
thofedays,  the  Generals  baggage  coft  the  public  very  little,  and  was  no  great  incumbrance
to  the  army.  Plin.  Nat.  FUJI.  lib.  23.  cap.  12.  Val.  Max.  lib.  4.  cap.  3.  The  feven
jugera  thefe  two  Generals  poflefled,  amounted  to  4  |  Englijb  acres.

(9)  Pyrrhus,  King  of  Epirus ,  was  called  by  the  Tarentinians  to  their  afliftance  againft
the  Romans  :  he  fought  with  them  feveral  times  very  fuccefsfully,  and  reduced  them  to
very  great  danger.

(10)  Marcus  Terentius  Varro  has  thefe  words  in  his  fecond  book  of  Husbandry  :  he
was  a  famous  philofopher  and  hiftorian,  and  reckoned  the  moft  learned  man  among  the
Romans.  Befides  his  books  de  Re  Rujlica ,  et  de  Lingua  Latina ,  which  are  ftill  extant,  he
wrote  forty-one  books  of  Antiquities,  and  feveral  other  tracts  mentioned  by  feveral
authors.  He  lived  a  few  years  before  Cicero.

( 1 1)  The  Circo's  were  places  fet  apart  by  the  Romans ,  for  the  celebration  of  feveral
forts  of  games,  generally  of  an  oblong  figure,  walled  round,  with  ranges  of  feats  for  the
conYeniency  of  the  fpedtators.

a  fex


Chap.  I.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  7

a  fex  which  nature  has  denied  to  men  ;  and  deceive  the  eyes  of
the  fpectators.  Then,  prefen tly  after,  that  we  may  come  in  good
plight  to  public  places  of  riot  and  debauchery,  we  confume  and
dry  up  our  daily  crudities  in  bagnio’s  ;  and,  by  fweating  out  the
moifture  of  our  bodies,  we  endeavour  to  procure  an  appetite  for
drinking;  and  fpend  the  nights  in  libidinous  gratifications  anddrunken-
nefs,  and  the  days  in  gaming,  or  lleeping  ;  and  account  ourfelves
happy,  becaufe  we  neither  fee  the  riling  nor  the  fetting  of  the  fun.
Therefore  the  confequence  of  this  idle  and  llothful  way  of  living  is  bad
health  :  for  thus  the  bodies  of  young  men  are  fo  unbraced,  relaxed,
and  enfeebled,  that  death  will  not  feem  to  make  any  alteration  or
change  in  them.

But,  verily,  that  true  and  genuine  progeny  of  Romulus ,  being  con-
ftantly  exercifed  in,  and  inured  to  hunting,  and  no  lefs  to  country
bufinefs  and  labour,  excelled  in,  and  were  highly  efteemed  for  their
exceeding  great  ftrength  and  firmnefs  of  body  ;  and,  when  the  fervice
of  their  country  required  it,  in  time  of  war,  they  eafily  fupported
the  fatigues  of  a  military  life,  being  hardened  by  their  laborious  exer-
cifes  in  times  of  peace ;  and  they  always  preferred  the  country  com¬
monalty,  to  that  of  the  city.  For,  as  they,  who  ftill  kept  within
the  inclofures  of  the  manor-houfe,  were  accounted  more  llothful
and  faint-hearted,  than  thofe  who  laboured  the  ground  without
doors ;  fo  they  who  fauntered,  and  fpent  their  time  idly  within  the
walls,  under  the  lhade  of  the  city,  were  looked  upon  as  more  lazy
and  unacftive,  than  thofe  who  cultivated  the  fields,  and  managed
bufinefs  relating  to  Hulbandry.  It  is  alfo  evident,  that  their  ninth-
day  Fairs  or  Markets  (12),  where  they  afiembled  themfelves  together,
were  eftablilhed,  and  kept  up,  for  this  very  purpofe,  that  city  affairs
might  be  tranfa&ed  every  ninth  day  only,  and  rural  affairs  on  the
other  days.  For,  in  thofe  times,  as  we  faid  before,  the  people  of
quality,  and  principal  men  of  the  city,  lived  in  the  country,  upon
their  own  lands  ;  and  when  their  advice  about  public  affairs  was
wanted,  they  were  fent  for  from  their  villas,  to  attend  the  Senate  j
from  which  thing,  they  who  were  fent  to  fummon  them  were
called  viatores{  13) ;  and  while  this  cuftom  was  obferved,  and  kept  up,

(12)  There  was  a  Fair  or  Market  at  "Rome  every  ninth  day,  for  the  country  people  to
meet  and  fell  their  goods,  and  tranfad:  other  bufinefs  in  town  ;  fo  that  their  Nandina
were  not  idle  days,  but  appointed  for  bufinefs.

(13)  Viatores :  It  Teems  by  their  firft  infticution  they  were  to  be  Tent  by  the  Senate  to  the
country,  to  fummon  fuch  as  lived  there,  to  attend  the  public  fervice,  and  to  conduct
them  to  town :  afterwards  they  were  a  fort  of  Beadles,  or  Sergeants,  who  went  before  the
Tribunes  of  the  people,  and  fome  other  officers  of  lefTer  dignity.

4  by


8  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

by  a  moft  perfevering  defire  of  cultivating  their  lands,  thofe  antient
Sabines  (14),  who  became  citizens  of  Rome  ;  and  our  old  Roman  an-
ceftors,  tho’  expofed  on  every  hand  to  fire  and  fword,  and  to  have
their  corns,  and  other  fruits  of  the  ground,  wafted  by  hoftile  incur-
fions,  notwithftanding,  laid  up  greater  {tore  of  them,  than  we,  who,
by  the  permiflion  of  a  long-continued  peace,  have  had  it  in  our
power  to  inlarge  and  improve  our  Hufbandry.

Therefore  things  are  now  come  to  fuch  a  pafs,  that  in  this  La-
tium  (iy)  and  country  where  Saturn  lived,  where  the  gods  taught
their  own  children  the  art  of  cultivating  the  ground  ;  even  there
we  let,  by  public  auction  (16),  the  importation  of  corn  from  our  pro¬
vinces  beyond  fea,  that  we  may  not  be  expofed  to  a  famine  and
we  lay  in  our  ftores  of  fruits  and  wines  from  the  Cyclad  ifiands  (17),
and  from  the  regions  of  Bcetica  (18)  and  Gaul.  Nor  is  it  any  wonder,
feeing  the  vulgar  opinion  is  now  publicly  entertained  and  eftablifhed,
that  Hufbandry  is  a  fordid  employment  j  and  that  it  is  a  bufinels

(14)  The  Sabines  were  a  people  of  Italy ,  not  far  from  Rome  ;  they  occupied  the
country  thac  lies  be  ween  Umbria ,  Hetruria,  and  Latium  ;  between  the  rivers  Anieny
Tiber,  Nar ,  and  Velino  :  A  great  part  of  that  country  ftill  retains  its  antient  name.
By  a  peace  concluded  with  the  Romans ,  the  two  people  became  united,  and  many  of
the  chief  Sabine  families  removed  to  Rome.

(15)  Latium ,  a  country  of  Italy ,  a  great  part  of  it  now  called  Campagna  di  Roma  :
here  Saturn  retired,  and  concealed  himfelf,  when  he  was  driven  out  of  Crete ,  by  his
fon  Jupiter.  And  here,  probably,  Saturn  afterwards  reigned,  as  in  fome  other  conti¬
guous  parts,  which  from  him  were  called  Terra  Saturnia.

(16)  Locamus  ad  bajlam.  A  fpear  was  a  fign  and  badge  of  power  and  authority
amongft  the  antients,  and  ufed  upon  feveral  occafions  j  and  at  all  auctions  public
and  private,  it  was  fet  up  to  fignify,  that  they  were  done  by  a  lawful  com  million.
Ad  hajlam  &  fub  hafta  vendere ,  locare ,  fignify  the  fame  thing.  When  Rome  became
exceeding  populous,  they  were  obliged  to  import  corn  and  wine  from  foreign  parts  ;
and  tho’  at  firif,  probably,  it  was  imported  at  the  public  charge,  yet,  afterwards,  when
the  public  advantage  was  not  fo  much  regarded,  as  the  railing  of  money  for  fupporting
the  power  of  the  Emperors,  certain  undertakers  paid  a  certain  fum  for  liberty  to  import
it,  and  fell  it  at  a  certain  price,  as  may  be  gathered  from  Suetonius  and  others.  The
provinces  commonly  paid  a  certain  quantify  of  corn,  among  other  things,  as  a  tribute,
viz.  the  tenth  part  of  their  crop  and  fometimes  they  were  obliged  to  fur^ifh  a
certain  quantity  of  corn,  at  fuch  a  price  as  the  Government  thought  fit  :  all  this  was  to
be  brought  to  Rome  at  a  great  expence,  for  which  there  would  not  have  been  a  very
great  demand,  if  they  had  cultivared  their  lands  as  they  did  formerly.

(17)  Cyclades ,  ifiands  in  the  JEgean  fea,  fo  called,  as  Pliny  fays  in  his  Hat.  Hi/l.
lib.  4.  cap.  i2.  from  their  lying  round  Delos  in  a  circular  figure  :  they  are,  according
to  him,  fifty  in  number  :  He  there  gives  an  account  of  their  extent,  and  diftances  from
each  other  :  they  are  now  called  the  Ifiands  of  the  Archipelago.

(18)  Bcetica ,  a  part  of  Spain ,  containing  Andalufa ,  and  a  great  part  of  Grenada  :
it  is  the  fertilefb  part  of  all  Spain  :  it  has  its  name  from  the  river  Bcetis,  which  runs
thro’  the  middle  of  it.  Pliny  fiys,  that  it  excelled  all  other  countries  in  the  richnefs
of  its  foil,  goodnefs  of  its  culture,  and  in  a  certain  gaiety  and  agreeablenefs  peculiar
to  i  f. If.  This  river  is  now  called  the  Guadalquivir.

which


Of  HUSBANDRY.  9

which  does  not  want  the  inftrudtion  of  a  mailer.  But  as  for  myfelf,
when  I  confider  and  review,  either  the  greatnefs  of  the  whole  thing,
refembling  fome  vaftly  extended  body  j  or  the  number  of  its  parts,
as  fo  many  members  in  particular;’!  am  afraid,  left  my  laft  day
fhould  furprife  me,  before  I  can  acquaint  myfelf  with  the  whole  of
rural  difcipline.

For  he  that  would  profefs  himfelf  to  be  perfect  in  this  fcience,
muft  be  exceedingly  well,  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  things  ;
muft  not  be  ignorant  of  the  feveral  latitudes  of  the  world  ;  that  he
may  be  fure  of  what  is  agreeable,  or  what  is  repugnant,  to  every
climate  ;  that  he  may  perfectly  remember  the  time  of  the  riling
and  fetting  of  the  ftars,  that  he  may  not  begin  his  works  when
winds  and  rains  are  coming  upon  him,  and  fo  fruftrate  his  labour.
Let  him  confider  the  temperature  and  conftitution  of  the  weather,
and  of  the  prefent  year  ;  for  neither  do  they,  as  it  were  by  a  fettled
law,  always  wear  the  fame  drefs  ;  nor  does  the  Summer  or  Winter
come  every  year  with  the  fame  countenance  :  nor  is  the  Spring  always
rainy,  nor  the  Autumn  moift  :  which  I  cannot  believe  any  man  can
know  beforehand,  without  an  enlightened  mind,  and  without  the  moft
excellent  arts  and  fciences.

Now  very  few  have  the  talent  to  difcern  the  great  variety  itfelf
of  the  ground,  and  the  nature  and  difpofition  of  every  foil,  what
each  of  them  may  promife  or  deny  us.  Yea,  when  has  any  one
man  whatfoever  had  the  opportunity  to  contemplate  all  the  parts  of
this  art,  fo  as  throughly  to  underftand  the  ufe,  advantage,  and
management  of  all  forts  of  corns,  and  of  tillage,  and  the  various  and
different  forts  of  earth,  moft  unlike  to  one  another  ?  of  which,  fome
deceive  us  by  their  colour,  fome  by  their  quality  :  and,  in  fome
countries,  the  black  earth,  which  they  call  brown,  or  dufky,  deferves
to  be  commended  ;  in  others,  that  which  is  fat,  and  red-coloured,
anfwers  better  :  in  fome  countries,  as  in  Numidia  in  Africa ,  the  rotten
fands  furpafs,  in  fruitfulnefs,  the  ftrongeft  foil  whatfoever  ;  in  Afia
zn&MyJia  (19),  thick  glutinous  earth  produces  the  greateft  abundance
of  any.  And  in  thefe  very  forts,  who  is  it  that  knows  throughly
what  a  hilly  fituation  may  refufe,  and  by  his  reafon  finds  out  alfo
what  a  low  plain  fituation,  what  land  that  is  cultivated,  what  woody
land,  what  moift  and  grafly  land,  what  dry  and  dirty,  will  either

(19)  MjJia,  a  country  in  Leffer  Afia,  extending  moftly  weftward,  towards  the  Hel-
lefpont.  It  was  divided  formerly  into  the  Lefler  and  Greater.  Both  parts  are  now
called  Natolia,  fubjedt  to  the  Turks.


c


yield


IO  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

yield  or  refufe  ?  And  who  is  it  that  throughly  knows  every  thing
that  is  requifite  in  planting  and  prelerving  trees  and  vineyards,  of
which  there  are  innumerable  kinds  ;  and  in  purchasing,  breeding,
and  keeping  all  forts  of  cattle ;  Cnee  we  have  alfo  taken  in  this  as  a
part  of  Husbandry  ;  whereas  the  Grader's  knowledge  and  Skill  is
diilindt  and  feparate  from  the  art  of  Husbandry  ?  Nor  is  this  paSloral
knowledge  of  one  fort  only  ;  for  horle- cattle  requires  a  way  of
management  very  different  from  that  of  herds  of  oxen  ;  and  Sheep-
cattle  different  from  thefe  ;  and  even  in  this  kind  itlelf,  the  Ta-
rentinian  (20),  requires  a  different  method  from  that  which  has
coarfe  and  hairy  wool.  The  goat-kind  requires  a  different  treat¬
ment,  and  in  this  kind  itfelf,  that  which  wants  horns,  and  is  thin
of  hair,  is  treated  otherwife  than  that  which  has  horns,  and  rough-
briftly  hair,  fuch  as  we  fee  in  Cilicia  (21).

Moreover,  the  buCnefs  of  a  hog-  or  pig-feeder  is  different  from
that  of  a  fwineherd,  and  they  have  different  ways  of  feeding  :  nor
do  the  fmooth-coated  fwine,  that  have  no  hair  upon  them,  and  fuch
as  are  thick  of  hair,  require  the  fame  climate,  or  delight  in  the
fame  Slate  of  weather  ;  nor  are  they  to  be  managed  and  brought  up
after  the  fame  manner.  But  not  to  infiSl  any  more  at  prefent  upon
the  different  forts  of  cattle,  under  which  denomination,  and  as  a
part  of  which,  the  management  of  poultry,  and  of  bees,  is  placed  ;
and  what  man  has  extended  his  fludy  fo  far,  as  to  know,  befides
the  things  I  have  already  reckoned  up,  the  fo  many  different  forts
of  ingraftings  j  the  fo  many  different  ways  of  pruning  ;  and  to  put
in  pradlice  the  culture  of  fo  many  different  forts  of  apple-trees,  and
of  pot-herbs,  and  of  fo  many  different  forts  of  Cg-trees,  fo  as  to
bellow  his  care  upon  Roferies  alfo,  when  even  greater  things  are  neg¬
lected  by  mofi  people  ?  altho’  even  thefe  things  have  now  begun  to
bring  in  no  fmall  revenue  to  many.  For  meadow-lands,  willow-
grounds,  brooms  and  reeds,  tho’  they  require  but  fmall  care  and
induftry,  yet  they  always  require  fome.

(20)  Tarentum ,  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  antiently  a  very  famous  city,  commodioufly
fituated  in  the  entry  to  the  Adriatic.  Floras  fays  it  was  built  by  the  Lacedemo-
nians  j  it  was  once  the  head  of  all  Calabria ,  Apulia ,  and  "Lucania  :  it  was  fo  powerful
as  to  make  war  with  the  Romans,  with  the  affiftance  of  Pyrrhus ,  and  many  other
people,  ar  firft  with  great  fuccefs  j  but  at  length  was  intirely  defeated  and  fubdued.

(21)  Cilicia ,  a  very  well-known  country  in  AJla  Minor,  bordering  on  Syria  on  the
eaft,  Pamphylia  on  the  weft,  mount  Taurus  on  the  north,  and  the  Cilician  fea  on  the
fouth.  It  is  now  called  Caramania ,  and  fubjeci  to  the  Turks.


After


Of  HUSBANDRY.  i,

After  this  enumeration  of  fo  many  and  various  things,  I  am  not
ignorant,  that  if,  from  fuch  as  concern  themfelves  with  affairs  of
Hufbandry,  I  fhall  require  all  the  qualifications  of  the  Hufbandman
we  feek  for  and  defcribe,  fuch  as  learn,  will  go  on  very  llowly  in
their  fludies ;  who,  being  terrified  thro’  defpair  of  ever  attaining  to
a  fcience  of  fo  vafi  an  extent  and  variety,  will  not  attempt  what
they  have  no  hopes  of  being  able  to  obtain.  Neverthelefs,  as  Marcus
Tullius  has  already  faid  very  rightly,  in  his  book  de  Oratore  (22),  That
it  is  Jit ,  that  they  who  have  an  earnefi  dejre  diligently  to  fearch
after ,  and  put  together ,  things  the  mofl  ufeful  to  mankind ,  and  after
they  have  carefully  weighed  and  confidered  them,  to  publijh  them  to
the  world ,  Jhould  try  all  things.  Nor,  if  either  that  flrength  and
excellency  of  genius,  or  the  furniture,  help,  and  affiflance  of  the
celebrated  arts  be  wanting,  ought  we  prefently  to  fink  into  idlenefs
and  floth,  but  profecute  with  perleverance  what  we  have  prudently-
hoped  for.  For  affedting  to  be  at  the  very  top  of  our  profeffion,  it  will
be  honour  enough  for  us,  if  we  be  feen  in  the  fecond  rank.  Did  not  the
Latian  mufes  receive  not  Accius  (23)  and  Virgil  only  (24,),  into  the
mofl  fecret  receffes  of  their  temple,  but  bellowed  the  facred  feats  alfo
upon  them  that  were  next  to  them  ;  and  even  upon  them  that  were  far
from  being  next  to  them  ?  Neither  did  Cicero  s  eloquence  (25),  which,
like  lightning,  bore  down  every  thing  in  its  way,  deter  Brutus  and
Ccelius ,  PollioiMeJJ'alai  and  Catullus  (26),  from  profecuting  the  fame

(2,2)  Our  author  expreffes  the  fenfe,  not  the  very  words,  of  Tully,  cap.  1.  de  Or  at.

(23)  Accius ,  a  famous  tragedian  j  he  flourifhed  in  the  615th  year  of  Rome.  Quintilian,
lib.  10.  fays,  that  he  and  Pacuvius  were  in  the  higheft  reputation,  for  the  gravity  of
their  fentences,  the  weight  of  their  words,  and  authority  of  their  perfonages.

(24)  Virgil,  of  all  poets,  either  among  the  Greeks  or  Romans,  defervedly  reckoned  next
to  Homer  himfelf.  He  was  in  great  favour  with  Augujlus,  who  faved  his  divine  JEneid,
as  he  called  it,  from  the  flames ;  he  having  at  his  death  defired  it  might  be  burnt.  Plmy
calls  him  Lux  doffrinarum  altera,  alluding  to  Homer ,  whom  he  calls  Rons  ingeniorum.

(25)  Cicero,  thegreateft  matter  of  eloquence,  that  ever  Rome  produced  j  juftly  admired
in  his  own  time,  and  in  ail  ages  ever  fince  ;  and  mutt  always  be,  as  long  as  men  have
any  tafte  for  learning.  He  was  called,  not  only  the  Father  of  Roman  eloquence,  but
the  Father  of  his  country,  the  great  afiertor  of  its  liberty,  which  he  had  often  faved,
and  at  laft  died  a  vidtim  to  it,  having  been  murdered  by  order  of  Marc  Antony ,  whofe
ufurpations  he  had  courageoufly  withftood.  He  is  fo  well  known,  and  his  charadter  fo
well  defcribed  by  many  authors,  and  efpecially  his  life  fo  elegantly  written  by  the  learned
Dr.  Middleton ,  thst  it  is  fuperfluous  to  fay  any  thing  here  of  fo  great  a  man.

(26)  Brutus,  &C.  Thefe  were  five  famous  orators,  cotemporary  with  Tully.  Brutus
was  one  of  the  confpirators  againft  Julius  Cafar,  and,  with  CaJJius,  endeavoured  to  reftore
the  republic.  We  have  an  oration  of  Cicero's,  for  this  Ccelius.  Afmius  Pollio  wrote  an
hiftory  of  the  civil  wars,  Horat.  lib.  2.  Ode  1.  Frifcian  quotes  his  annals  in  feveral
places.  Suetonius  in  Aug.  often  mentions  him.  Virgil  infcribed  an  eclogue  to  him.
We  have  a  letter  of  his  to  Tully ,  lib.  10.  ad  f am.

C  2  fludy.


2


12  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book I.

ftudy.  For  neither  did  the  renowned  Cicero  himfelf,  by  being  terri¬
fied  with  Demofihenes  (27)  and  Plato's  (28)  thunder,  give  over  his
purfuit  :  nor  did  the  divine  Homer  (29),  the  father  of  eloquence,
with  his  mighty  floods  of  eloquence,  extinguifh  the  deflres  and  ftudies
of  them  that  came  after  him.  Do  we  fee,  that  thofe  artifts  of  lefler
reputation  indeed,  who,  for  many  ages  paft,  were  admirers  of  Proto -
genes  (30),  Apelles  (31) ,  and  Parrhafius  (32),  did  abandon  and  give
over  their  labour  ?  Nor  were  Bryaxis  (33),  Lyfippus  (34),  Praxite -
les  (3  y)^  or  Polycletus,  of  the  following  age,  fo  aftonifhed  at  the  beauty
of  Jupiter  Olympius,  and  of  Minerva ,  by  Phidias  (36),  that  they  had
not  the  courage  to  try  what  they  could  perform,  or  what  length  they
could  come  themfelves.  But,  in  every  kind  of  fcience,  they  who  excel

(27)  Demofihenes,  a  famous  orator  of  Athens 3  he  was  a  hearer  of  Plato.  Quintilian
fays  of  him,  Pene  lex  ipfe  dicendi  fuit,  The  law  or  ftandard  of  eloquence.

(28)  Plato ,  a  renowned  philosopher,  and  a  very  eloquent  orator  of  Athens ,  fcholar  to
Socrates.  He  was  not  content  with  the  knowledge  he  acquired  in  his  own  country,  but
travelled  into  Egypt,  to  acquaint  himfelf  with  the  learning  of  the  priefts  of  that  coun¬
try  j  and  into  Italy ,  to  converfe  with  the  Pythagorean  philofophers.  He  flourifhed  in
the  98th  Olympiad.  His  life  is  written  by  Marcilius  Ficinus.

(29)  Homer ,  the  prince  of  poets,  and  Pons  ingeniorum,  as  Pliny  fhles  him,  lived  about
2.700  years  ago.  Pliny ,  Hiji.  Nat.  hh.-j.  cap.  16.  fays,  that  he  lived  about  1000  years
before  he  wrote,  which  was  in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Vefpafan.  It  feems,  his  admirers
placed  him  among  their  gods  :  for  we  read  of  a  temple  he  had  at  Smyrna  :  and  our
author  calls  him,  Deus  itle  Maonius.  They  fay,  his  father’s  name  was  Macon.,  from
which  he  is  fometimes  called  Mceonius.

(30)  Protogenes ,  a  famous  painter  He  lived  in  Rhodes,  was  cotemporary  with  Apelles,
and  yielded  to  none  but  him.

(31)  Apelles ,  the  prince  of  painters,  lived  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who
would  be  painted  by  none  but  him.  He  was  of  the  Ifland  of  Coos ,  and  flourifhed  in
the  112th  Olympiad.

(32)  Parrhafius,  as  Alhenceus  fays,  lib.  12.  was  born  at  Ephefus.  The  Athenians  made
him  free  of  their  city.  Pliny  is  very  copious  in  the  defcription  and  commendation  of
their  beft  pieces,  which  were  moftly  purchafed  in  Greece,  and  brought  to  Rome.

(33)  Bryaxis,  a  famous  Athenian  flatuary,  as  Paujanias  fays,  lib.  1.  Attic.  He  was
employed  by  Artemifa ,  in  building  a  tomb  or  monument  to  the  memory  of  her  husband
Maufolus,  king  of  Carta,  who  died  about  the  106th  Olympiad.  This  tomb  was  reckoned
the  mofb  perfect  of  its  kind  in  the  whole  world.

(34)  Lyfippus ,  a  famous  eDgraver  and  ftatuary,  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,
who,  as  he  would  not  fufrer  any  to  paint  him  but  Apelles ,  fo  none  to  engrave  him  but
Lyfippus.  Pl'my ,  HiJl.  Nat.  lib.  34.  cap.  7.  fays,  he  finifhed  1500  pieces,  all  fo  artfully
wrought,  that  any  one  of  them  might  have  made  him  famous.  He  was  a  Sicyonian ,
and  flourifhed  in  the  114th  Olympiad.

(35)  Praxiteles  and  Euphranor ,  both  flourifhed  in  the  104th  Olympiad  ;and  Polycletus
the  Sicyonian,  in  the  87th  Olympiad,  according  to  Pliny.

(36)  Phidias,  a  famous  fculptor.  He  flourifhed  in  the  84th  Olympiad,  about  the  300th

year  of  Rome.  He  made  a  ftatue  of  Jupiter  Olympius,  of  ivory  and  gold,  which  none
ever  attempted  to  emulate  and  one  of  Minerva ,  which,  for  its  exquifite  workmanfhip,
was  called  The  Beauty ,  or  k«aaiY».  Plin.  lib.  34.  cap.  8.


are


0/  HUSBANDRY,  13

are  admired  and  reverenced,  and  they  who  are  of  a  lower  clafs  meet
with  their  deferved  praife.  5Tis  the  very  cafe  here  :  What,  fuppofe  the
perfon,  whom  we  defire  to  make  a  complete  Hulbandman  of,  has  not
attained  to  the  perfection  of  his  art,  nor  to  the  fagacity  and  knowledge
of  Democritus  (37),  or  Pythagoras  (38),  in  univerfal  nature  ;  or  to
the  forefight  of  Meton  (39),  or  Eudoxus  (40),  from  their  knowledge
of  the  motions  of  the  ftars  and  winds  ;  nor  to  the  learning  of  Chi¬
ron  (41)  and  Melampus  (42),  in  the  management  of  cattle  ;  nor  to  the
prudence  and  fkill  of  Triptolemus  (43)  and  Arifieus  (44),  in  tilling
and  cultivating  the  ground  ?  Neverthelefs,  he  will  have  made  great
proficiency,  if  he  be  equal  to  our.  Tremellius s ,  Saferna's ,  and  Sto¬
ic’s  (45')  :  for  Agriculture  is  capable  of  being  managed,  neither  with
too  much  delicacy  and  nicenefs  •,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  in  a  grofs
and  bungling  manner  :  - for  that  is  far  from  being  true,  which  moll:


(37)  Democritus  a  famous  philofopher  of  Abdera,  a  city  of  Thracia.  He  travelled  over
a  great  part  of  the  world  in  quell:  of  knowledge  ;  he  was  a  hearer  of  Socrates ,  and  a
patient  of  Hippocrates ,  who  declared  he  was  of  a  found  mind,  when  his  friends  imagined
he  was  mad.  He  wrote  of  husbandry,  and  flourifhed  in  the  80th  Olympiad.  Diogenes
Laertius  gives  an  account  of  his  life  and  writings.

(38)  Pythagoras ,  a  very  famous  philofopher  of  Samos.  After  he  had  travelled  into  Chal¬
dea  and  Egypt ,  he  came  into  Italy ,  and  taught  philofophy  in  that  parr  of  it  called  Magna
Gracia ,  where  he  had  a  vaft  number  of  fcholars,  who  made  a  great  figure  afterwards  in
the  world.  He  was  a  man  of  fuch  excellent  morals,  that  he  contributed  much  to
reform  that,  and  other  countries,  from  their  favage  and  wicked  difpofition  and  manners.
Diogenes  Laertius  fays,  that  he  flourilhed  in  the  60th  Olympiad.

(39)  Meton ,  a  very  antient  philofopher  he  firft  publilhed  at  Athens  his  ivviAJ'aiA'fselJla,
or  cycle  of  the  moon,  of  19  years.  See  Diodor.  Siculus ,  lib.  12.  and  Petavii  Uranologia.

(40)  Eudoxus ,  a  very  famous  aftronomer  of  Cnidus.  He  flourilhed  in  the  96th  Olym¬
piad,  and  was  a  hearer  of  Plato.  Laertius  gives  an  account  of  his  writings.

(41)  Chiron ,  a  famous  aftronomer  and  phyfician,  of Thejfaly  :  JEfculapius  was  his  fcholar.
Pindar.  Pyth.  Ode  3.  He  was  tutor  to  Achilles,  and  the  inventor  of  phyfic.

(42)  Melampus ,  a  famous  diviner  and  phyfician  of  Argos.  Homer,  Statius ,  and  others
celebrate  him.  Pliny  frequently  mentions  him,  and  fays,  lib.  27.  cap.  5.  that  one  kind
of  Ellebore  is  from  him  called  Melampodion.

(43)  Triptolemus ,  the  inventor  of  the  plough,  and  of  Husbandry,  according  to  Servius,  •

Virg.  Georg,  lib.  1.  cap.  163.  He  was  the  fon  of  Celeus,  who  reigned  in  Eleufin  in
Attica.  Ceres  taught  him  the  art  of  Husbandry.  Vide  Hyg.  Fab.

(44)  Arifieus,  by  Pliny  and  Diodorus,  is  faid  to  be  the  inventor  of  honey  and  oil.

Vide  Jufi.  lib.  14.

(45)  Tremellius,  father  and  fon,  Saferna,  Stolo,  famous  Husbandmen,  or  writers  upon
Husbandry,  many  years  befor eColumella.  Their  writings  are  loft,  but  what  was  valuable  in
them  we  have  in  our  author.

This  Stolo,  probably,  is  the  fame,  who,  having  made'  a  law,  that  no  citizen  Ihould

purchafe  above  500  jugera  of  land,  was  condemned  by  his  own  law,  having  pur-

chafed  500  jugera  in  his  fon’s  name,  Val.  Max.  lib.  8.  cap.  6.  Varro  de  re  rufiica,  lib.  1.
cap.  2.  Perhaps  he  is  the  fame,  who  firft  invented  pampination,  or  cutting  off  the
fuckers  and  other  fuperfluous  branches  of  vines,  <&c.  and  was  therefore  called  Licinius
Stolo.  Stolo  fignifies  a  fucker.


i+  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

people  have  believed,  that  Hulbandry  is  exceeding  eafy,  and  requires
no  great  penetration  or  fharpnefs  of  wit.  There  is  no  occafion,  at
prefent,  to  difeourfe  more  of  it  in  general,  forafmuch  as  I  am  re-
folved  to  explain  it,  in  all  its  parts,  in  fome  didinCt  books,  fepa-
rately  ;  which  I  (hall  profecute  each  in  its  own  order,  after  I  (hall  have
fpoken  fird  of  fuch  things,  as  I  think  do  principally  belong  to  the
whole  difeipline  in  general.


CHAP.  I.

Of  the  Rules  which  they ,  who  would  live  in  the  Country ,  and
apply  the?nf elves  to  Hufbandiy ,  ought  to  follow .

LE  T  him,  who  applies  himfelf  to  the  dudy  of  Hulbandry,  know,
that  thofe  principal  things  following,  and  of  the  greated  import¬
ance,  mud  be  called  to  his  aflidance  :  Prudence  and  knowledge  of  his  bu-
fmefs  j  ability  to  fpend  and  lay  out  money  upon  it ;  and  a  willingnefs  to  att.
For,  after  all,  as  Tremellius  fays,  He  will  have  the  bed  cultivated  lands,
who  both  knows  how  to  cultivate  them,  is  able  to  do  it,  and  has  alfo  a
willing  mind.  For,  neither  knowing  nor  willing  can  be  of  any  ufe  to  any
perfon  whatfoever,  without  thofe  expences  which  the  bufinefs  requires :
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  a  willingnefs  to  do ,  and  to  lay  out  money ,
be  of  any  advantage,  without  art ;  for  ’tis  the  principal  point  in  all
bufinefs,  to  know  what  mujl  be  done ,  efpecially  in  Hufbandry  ;  in  which
the  will ,  and  the  ability  to  fupport  the  expences,  without  knowledge,
frequently  bring  lodes  upon  the  landlords  ;  fince  works,  imprudently
done,  render  all  expences  ineffectual.  Wherefore  a  diligent  mader
of  a  family,  who  has  it  at  heart  to  follow  a  fure  method  of  increafing
his  fubdance,  by  the  culture  of  his  land,  ought,  above  all  things,  to
be  careful  to  advife  with,  and  confult  the  wifed  Hufbandmen  of  his
own  time,  upon  every  thing  j  and  fearch  diligently  the  hidories  and
writings  of  the  antients  j  and  to  condder  the  opinions,  precepts,  and
directions  of  every  one  of  them  j  and  examine  whether  all  the  things,
which  the  antients  have  left  us,  upon  record,  are  agreeable  to  the
Hulbandry  of  this  prefent  time  j  or  if  fome  things  are  not  difagreeable
to  it.

For  I  have  found,  that,  formerly,  many  memorable  authors  were  fully
perfuaded,  that  by  the  long  continuance  of  things  in  the  fame  date,  the
quality  and  conditution  of  the  heavens,  and  of  the  air,  are  changed  j

and


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  15

and  that  Hipparchus  (i),  the  wifeft  profeffor  of  agronomy  among
them,  has  left  it  us  in  writing,  that  the  time  would  come,  when  the
poles  of  the  world  fhould  be  moved  out  of  their  place  ;  and  Saferna ,
no  contemptible  author  of  Hufbandry,  feems  to  have  believed  this  alfo.
For  in  that  book  of  Hufbandry  which  he  wrote,  and  left  behind  him,
he  brings  this  argument  to  prove,  that  the  conflitution  of  the  heaven
is  altered  j  viz.  that  thofe  countries  wherein  formerly  no  plants,
either  of  vines  or  of  olives,  which  they  fet  in  the  ground,  could  be
preferved,  becaufe  of  the  continual  violence  and  feverity  of  the  win¬
ter,  have  now  plentiful  vintages,  and  abound  both  in  wine  and  in
oil  ;  the  former  cold  being  now  much  abated,  and  the  weather
become  mild  and  warm.  But  whether  this  reafon  be  true  or  falfe,
let  us  yield  it  to  agronomical  learning.  But  as  to  the  other  precepts
and  rules  of  Hufbandry,  we  muft  not  diflemble  with  the  Hufbandman,
nor  conceal,  from  him,  that  whereas  the  Carthaginian  writers  from
Africa  have  delivered  to  us  very  many  things  relating  to  the  fame,
yet  our  Hufbandmen  find  fault  with  many  things  they  have  written  ^
and  fihew  us,  that  they  are  falfe.  As  Tremellius ,  for  example,  who,
complaining  of  this  very  thing,  notwithflanding,  excufes  it,  becaufe
the  foil,  air,  and  climate,  of  Italy  and  Africa ,  being  of  a  dif¬
ferent  nature,  cannot  produce  the  fame  increafe,  or  yield  the  fame
plenty.

But  whatever  thofe  things  be,  which,  becaufe  of  the  rural  difci-
pline  of  our  times,  are  not  agreeable  to  the  opinion  or  practice  of  the
antients,  they  ought  not  to  deter  the  learner  from  reading.  For,
with  the  antients,  there  are  many  more  things  which  deferve  to  be
commended  and  approved  by  us,  than  to  be  rejected.  Moreover,
there  is  a  great  multitude  of  Greeks ,  who  lay  down  rules  and  precepts
for  Hufbandry  ;  of  whom  the  chief,  that  moft  celebrated  poet,  Hefiod
the  Boeotian  (2)  has  contributed  not  a  little  to  our  profefiion.  After¬
wards,  Democritus  the  Ahderite ,  Xenophon  (3)  a  follower  of  Socrates ,

(1)  Hipparchus ,  a  very  famous  aftronomer,  of  Nice,  in  Bithynia.  He  flourifhed  in  the
154th  Olympiad.  Bliny  fays,  lib.  2.  cap.  13.  that  he  lived  abouc  two  hundred  years  before
his  time.

(2)  Hefiod,  a  very  antient  poet.  Some  fay  he  was  of  Cuma  in  JEolis ,  and  afterwards
removed  to  Afcra  a  city  in  Boeotia ,  and  hence  called  the  Afcrean  Bard.  Some  fay,
he  lived  before  Homer  ;  others  fay,  after.  Vide  Auh  Gell.  lib.  17.  cap.  21.  Pliny  fays,
his  book  of  H  usbandry  was  loft  in  his  time,  and  that  he  was  the  firft  who  gave  precepts
upon  that  fubjecft.

(3)  Xenophon ,  a  great  admirer  and  follower  of  Socrates,  as  we  fee,  by  his  Memorabilia
Sncratis ,  among  his  other  works.  He  was  both  a  great  Captain,  and  a  great  Philofopher.  His
life  is  written  by  Laertius.  He  was  in  great  reputation  in  the  95th  Olympiad.

Architas


1 6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

Architas  (4)  the  'Tarentinian,  and  thofe  two  Peripatetics,  the  mafter
and  the  fcholar,  Arijlotle  and  Pheophrajlus  (5),  who  all  fprung  from
the  fountains  of  wifdom,  gave  further  afliftance  to  it.

The  Sicilians  alfo  have  profecuted  this  bufinefs  with  no  ordinary
care,  Hieron  ( 6 ),  and  E picharmus  his  fcholar  (7),  Philometor ,  and
At  talus  (8).  Athens  alfo  has  produced  a  great  number  of  writers,  of
which  the  mod  approved  authors  are  Chcereas ,  Arifiandros ,  Amphilo -
chus,  Euphron  j  Chrefius  the  fon  of  Euphron ,  not,  as  many  think,
the  Amphipolitan ,  who  himfelf  is  alfo  efteemed  an  excellent  Hufband-
man,  but  he,  who  was  a  native  of  Attica.

The.Iflands  alfo  greatly  cultivated  this  ftudy,  and  had  it  in  great
eftimation  ;  as  witnefs  Epigenes  of  Rhodes ,  Agathocles  of  Scio,  Eua-
gon  and  Anaxipolis  of  Phafus.  Menander  and  Diodorus  alfo,  who
were  of  the  fame  country  with  Bias ,  one  of  the  feven  wife  men,  laid
claim,  among  the  firft,  to  the  knowledge  of  Agriculture.  Nor  did
Bacchius  and  Mnajfeas  of  Milejium,  Antigonus  of  Cyme  (9),  Apollo¬
nius  of  Pergamus  (10),  Dion  of  Colophon ,  Hegejias  of  Marogna  (li),
yield  to  thefe.  For,  indeed,  Diophanes  the  Bithynian  (12)  abridged,
and  reduced  into  fix  books,  the  intire  works  of  Dionyjius  of  Utica ,
who,  in  many  volumes,  had,  in  a  very  diffufe  manner,  interpreted

(4)  Architas ,  a  great  "Pythagorean  philofopher,  of  Tarentum.  He  taught  Plato  Geome¬
try,  who  was  born  in  the  4th  year  of  the  88th  Olympiad.

(5)  Arijlotle  and  Theophraftus ,  two  well-known  philofophers  :  The  firft  was  a  hearer  of
Plato ,  when  eighteen  years  of  age,  in  the  hundred  and  fifth  Olympiad.  The  fecond  flou-
rifhed  in  the  hundred  and  fourteenth  Olympiad,  and  had  his  name  from  his  divine  elo¬
quence,  a  divinitate  locpuendi ,  as  Cicero  fays.

(6)  Hiero ,  or  Hieron ,  was  King  of  Sicily,  a  Prince  of  very  great  note :  he  reigned  at
Syracufe  in  the  feventy-fifth  Olympiad.  See  Val.  Max.  lib.  viii.  c.  13.  Pindar  dedicates
fome  of  his  odes  to  him.

(7)  Epicharmus  was  of  Syracufe,  a  great  philofopher,  and  a  poet,  called  Siculus  vates
by  Horace ,  lib.  ii.  ep.  1.  a  hearer  of  Pythagoras ,  he  wrote  carefully  of  medicines  proper
for  cattle,  fays  our  author,  lib.x.

(8)  Philometor  and  Attains.  Our  author  makes  them  Sicilians ,  and  two  diftindt  perfons  ;
but  Varro ,  lib.  i.  c.  1.  feems  to  fay,  that  Philometor  was  only  the  furname  of  Attalus ,  he
being  fo  called  from  his  dutifulnefs  to  his  mother.  We  read  of  one  Attalus,  King  of
Pergamus,  who  had  the  honour  of  being  called  amicus  populi  Romani,  the  friend  of  the
Roman  people,  to  whom  he  left  his  Kingdom.  Probably  he  is  the  fame  ;  for  he  wrote
feveral  curious  pieces ,  fome  of  which,  probably,  were  upon  Husbandry.

(9)  Antigonus  was  of  Cyme  in  JEolis ,  therefore  called  Cymaus.

(10)  Apollonius  Per gamenus.  The  fcholiaft  upon  Nicander  quotes  him.

(11)  Hegejias  of  Maronea ,  or  Marogna,  as  it  is  now  called,  a  city  in  Thrace ,  Vitru¬
vius,  lib.  viii.  c.  4.  as  having,  with  infinite  ftudy  and  care,  explained  the  properties  of
pi  ces,  and  the  virtues  of  waters.

(12)  Diophanes  ;  Varro  calls  him  a  Nicean,  from  Nice,  a  city  in  Bitbynia.  He  dedicated
bis  Abridgment  of  Dionyfius  of  Utica  to  King  Deiotarus,  Varro ,  lib.  i.  c.  1.  Suidas  fays,
that  Apnius  Pollio  epitomized  them  alfo  in  four  books.  .

Mago


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  17

Mago  the  Carthaginian ,  and  other,  notwithstanding  more  obfcure
authors,  whofe  countries  we  have  not  been  informed  of,  have  contri¬
buted  fomething  to  our  Study  :  They  are  thofe  following :  Andr'o-
tion ,  MJchrion ,  Arijlomenes ,  Athenagoras ,  Crates,  Dadis ,  Dionyjius ,
Euphyton,  Euphorion  (13).  Nor  with  lefs  fidelity  have  Lyjimachus
and  Cleohulus ,  Menejiratus ,  Pleutiphanes ,  Perfis ,  Pheophilus ,  to  the
utmoft  of  their  power,  brought  in  tribute  to  us.

And  that  we  may  now  at  length  beftow  the  freedom  of  the  city  of
Row?  upon  Husbandry,  (for  as  yet,  by  thefe  authors,  fhe  was  only  of
the  Greek  nation)  let  us  now  make  mention  of  the  famous  Marcus
Cato  the  Cenfor  (14),  who  taught  her  firSfc  to  fpeak  Latin ;  after  him,
of  the  two  Sajernas  (if),  the  father  and  Son,  who  instructed  her  more
carefully  ;  and,  next,  of  Scrofa  Premellius  (16),  who  made  it  eloquent ;
and  of  Marcus  Terentius  (17),  who  exactly  poliShed  and  perfected
her  ;  and  afterwards,  of  Virgil ,  who  made  her  alfo  mighty  and  power¬
ful  in  verfe.  Nor,  laStly,  let  us  think  it  below  us,  to  make  mention
of  PLyginus  (18),  who  was,  as  it  were,  a  Pedagogue  to  her.  Never-

thelefs,

(13)  An  dr  ot  ion,  &c.  Varro  fays  of  all  thefe,  that  he  had  not  found  what  country  they
were  of :  io  it  is  needlefs  to  trouble  the  reader  any  farther  about  them,  feeing  nothing
certain  can  be  faid  of  them,  moft  of  their  writings  being  now  loft  :  only  we  may  ob-
ferve  how  numerous  the  writings  upon  this  fubjedt  were,  and  how  praifeworthy  it  was
of  old  reckoned,  to  have  contributed  never  fo  little  ro  the  improvement  of  it.

(14)  Cato  the  Cenfor,  a  man  of  great  reputation  for  learning  and  wifdom.  Pliny ,  in  his
Nat.  Hifi.  fays,  he  was  famous  for  his  triumph  and  cenforfhip,  but  much  more  for  his
learning,  and  the  p  ecepts  he  gave  to  mankind  concerning  every  thing  that  might  be  the
objedt  of  their  defire,  efpecially  agriculture,  being,  by  the  confeffion  of  the  age  he  lived
in,  the  beft  Husbandman ;  and  that  there  was  nobody  that  pretended  to  equal  him.  He
was  called  Cenforius ,  for  the  remarkable  feverity  wherewith  he  exercifedhis  office  of  Cen¬
for.  His  whole  life  was  a  cenfure  of  the  follies  and  faults  of  his  fellow-citizens.  He  died,
as  Pliny  fays,  the  very  year  when  Carthage  and  Corinth  were  taken,  in  the  106th  year  of
Pome.  Pliny  wrore  about  two  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  him.  He  was  an  excellent
general,  an  excellent  orator,  and  an  excellent  fenator.  See  his  charadter  elegantly  deferibed
by  Liv.  Dec.  4.  Lib.  ix.  His  book  of  husbandry  is  ftill  extant.

(15)  Sa/erna,  father  and  Ton.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  were  the  moft  antient,  and  the  moft
celebrated  Husbandmen  after  Cato.  Marcus  Terentius  Varro  frequently  quotes  them.  They
were  of  the  Hoflilian  family.

(16)  Tremellius  Scrofa  was  cotemporary  with  Varro,  lib.  i.  c.  i.  who  fays  of  him,  Cut  hate
at  as  defert  rerum  omnium  rujlicarum  palmam,  All  owned  his  fuperior  knowledge  in  Huf-
bandry.  He  was  a  General  alfo,  and  commanded  an  army  upon  the  Rhine.

(17)  Marcus  Terentius  Varro,  much  celebrated  by  Tally ,  Plhiy ,  and  others,  as  the  moft
learned  man  amongft  the  Romans.  Beiides  his  books  de  re  rufica,  and  de  lingua  Latina ,
which,  though  incorredt,  are  ftill  extant,  he  wrote  many  books  of  antiquities,  and  of
feveral  other  fubjedts,  which  are  all  loft  :  He  was. born  about  the  fix  hundred  and  thirty-
fevenrh  year  of  Rome,  was  cotemporary  with  Pompey,  Cafar ,  &c.

(18)  Caius  Julius  Hyginus  was  a  native  of  Spain,  and  the  Emperor  Augufus's  freedman,
and  keeper  of  his  library;  a  great  intimate  of  Ovid  the  poet.  Some  fay  he  was  of  Alex¬
andria ,  and  brought  by  Cafar  to  Rome  after  the  taking  of  that  city.  He  wrote  feveral

D  •  books.


1 8  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

thelefs,  above  all,  let  11s  pay  the  greatett  veneration  and  refpe<ft  to
Mcigo  the  Carthaginian  (19),  the  father  of  Hufbandry.  For  thofe
twenty-eight  memorable  volumes  of  his  were,  by  a  decree  of  the
fenate,  tranflated  into  the  Latin  tongue.  Neverthelefs,  men  of  our  own
times,  Cornelius  Celfus  ( 20),  and  Julius  Atticus  (21),  have  defervedno
lefs  Commendation.  For  Cornelius  comprifed  the  whole  body  of  this
art  in  five  books,  and  Julius  Atticus  publifhed  one  fingle  book,  of
one  fpecies  of  culture  relating  to  vines  3  whofe  difciple,  as  it  were,  Ju¬
lius  Grcecinus  (22),  took  care,  that  two  volumes  of  the  like  precepts,
concerning  vineyards,  which  he  had  compofed  in  a  more  facetious  and
learned  ftyle,  fhould  be  tranfinitted  to  poiterity.

Thefe,  therefore,  O  Publius  Silvinus ,  call  to  council,  and  advife
with  them,  before  you  make  any  contrad:  with  Huibandry.  Neverthe¬
lefs,  be  not  of  fuch  a  diipofition  of  mind,  as  to  think,  that,  by  their
opinions,  you  will  obtain  the  whole  of  the  thing  you  defire  :  for  the
records,  or  memorials,  which  fuch  writers  have  left,  rather  inttrudt,
than  make  an  artill.  In  arts,  ufe  and  experience  are  matters,  and  bear
the  fway :  nor  is  there  any  art  whatfoever,  where  one  may  not  learn
by  committing  miftakes.  For,  when  any  thing,  by  wrong  manage¬
ment,  has  turned  out  unfuccefsfully,  we  avoid  that  which  has  formerly
deceived  us :  and  the  in  (fractions  of  a  teacher  caft  a  light  upon  the  right
way.  Therefore,  the  rules  and  precepts  we  lay  down,  do  not  promife
to  bring  this  fcience  to  perfection,  but  to  lend  it  a  helping  hand  *  nor

books,  which  are  loft  j  his  aflronomicum  pieticum  is  (till  extant.  Qur  author  commends
him  highly  in  feveral  places,  particularly  in  his  ninth  book,  cap.  2.

(19)  Mago,  whom  our  author  calls  the  Parent  of  Husbandry,  wrote  twenty-eight  books
on  this  fubjech  in  the  Carthaginian  language.  Dionyfius  of  Utica  transited  them  into
Greek ,  and  lent  them  to  the  praetor  Sextilius.  He  was  a  great  captain ;  and  the  Roman
fenate,  after  the  raking  of  Carthage ,  paid  fo  great  honour  to  him,  that  they  ordered  his
books  to  be  tranflated  into  Latin,  and  committed  the  work  to  fuch  as  were  moft  skil¬
ful  in  the  Carthaginian  language,  Pliny ,  Nat.  Hift.  lib.  xviii.  c.  4  Where  he  fays,  that
among  foreign  nations  it  was  reputed  a  princely  employment,  to  deliver  precep;s  con¬
cerning  the  cultivation  of  the  ground,  as  Hieron ,  Archelaus ,  Xenophon ,  Mago ,  and  fevc-
ral  others  did.

(20)  Cornelius  Celfus  flourifhed  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius.  He  was  called  the
Latin  Hippocrates  for  his  great  learning  in  phyfic.  His  books  on  that  fubjedf,  ftill  extant,
fufficiently  evidence  his  great  ability  in  that  learned  profeflion.  Quintilian  fays,  lib.  xii.
c.  ir.  that  he  not  only  gave  precepts  of  eloquence  and  hiftory,  but  alfo  of  the  art  of
war  and  husbandry.

(21)  Julius  Atticus  was  cotemporary  with  Columella.

(22)  Julius  Gr  mein  us  was  father  to  Julius  Agricola,  whofe  life  we  have,  written  by  Taci¬
tus.  He  was  of  the  fenatorian  order,-  remarkable  for  his  ftudy  of  eloquence  and  wifdom,-
2nd,  by  his  virtues,  drew  upon  hrmfelf  the  indignation  of  Caligula.  Seneca  de  beneficiis,
lib.  ii.  c.  2\.  has  a  very  remarkable  expreffion  :  cc  Julius  Gr acinus,  an  excellent  perfon,  whom
“  Caligula  flew  for  this  veryreafon,  becaufe  he  was  a  better- man  than  it  was  expedient  for
“  a  tyrant  any  one  fhould  be.  ”

will


Chap.  II.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  ig

will  any  perfon,  purely  by  having  read  over  the  rules  we  have  pre-
fcribed,  become  an  adept  in  Agriculture,  unlefs  he  have  both  a  willing
mind,  and  a  heavy  purfe  to  put  them  in  practice  :  wherefore  we  pro-
mife,  that  they  will  be  as  helps  only  to  fuch  as  ftudy  this  art  j  but  will
be  of  no  ufe  by  themfelves,  but  in  conjunction  with  other  things.  Nor,
indeed,  will  either  thefe  afliftances,  as  we  laid  before,  nor  conftant
labour,  the  experience  of  the  Bailiff,  nor  plenty  of  money,  and  a  heart
to  lay  it  out,  have  fo  powerful  an  influence,  as  the  mafter’s  own  pre¬
fence  alone  ;  for  unlefs  he  himfelf  come  often,  when  lead:  looked  for,
while  bufinefs  is  doing,  as  in  an  army,  when  the  general  is  abfent,
all  bufinefs  is  at  a  Hand,  and  duty  is  neglected.  And  I  verily  believe,
that  Mago  the  Carthaginian  pointed  out  this  to  us,  by  beginning  his
writings  with  fuch  fentences  as  thofe :  “  Whoever  has  a  mind  to  pur-
“  chafe  land,  let  him  fell  his  houfe,  left  he  rather  chufe  to  live  in  his
4t  houfe  in  town,  than  in  that  in  the  country.  He,  who  takes  greater
“  delight  in  his  houfe  in  town,  will  have  no  occafion  for  a  manor  in
u  the  country.”  Which  precept,  if  it  could  be  obferved  in  thefe
times,  I  would  by  no  means  change.

Now,  forafmuch  as  civil  ambition  often  calls  moft  of  us  from  the
country,  and  oftener  detains  us,  when  we  are  called  from  it  j  confe-
quently  I  think,  that  an  eftate  near  the  city  is  moft  commodious,  that
fo  a  man,  how  bufy  foever  he  may  be,  may  be  able  to  make  an  ex-
curfton  every  day,  after  the  public  bufinefs  is  over.  For  they,  who
purchafe  lands  at  a  diftance  from  town,  not  to  fpeak  of  thofe  be-
yond-fea,  yield  up  their  eftates  to  their  fervants,  as  if  they  were  their
heirs ;  and,  which  is  worfe,  they  do  it  in  their  own  life-time  :  for
certain  it  is,  that  they  are  not  only  corrupted  and  debauched  by  their
matters  being  at  fo  great  a  diftance  from  them  j  but,  being  once  cor¬
rupted,  expecting  that,  after  the  flagitious  actions  they  have  committed,
others  will  be  fent  in  their  room,  they  apply  themfelves  more  to  plun¬
dering  and  rapine,  than  to  Hufbandry.


CHAP.  II.

Of  the  mofl  approved  Jituation  and  qualities  of  land.

THerefore  I  am  of  opinion,  that  land  ought  to  be  purchafed  near
the  city ,  where  the  owner  may  frequently  come,  and  alfo  give
out,  that  he  will  come  oftener  than  he  really  intends.  For,  under  this

D  2  apprehenflon.


20  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  I.

apprehenfion,  the  Bailiff  and  the  fervants  will  be  in  their  duty ;  but,
whenever  he  has  an  opportunity,  let  him  flay  in  the  country,  and  not
pafs  the  time  he  ftays  there  in  idlenefs  and  eafe,  and  lolling  in  the  (hade,
or  keeping  within-doors.  For  it  becomes  a  diligent  matter  of  a  family,
frequently  to  go  round  every  corner  and  inch  of  his  own  land,  and  at
all  times  of  the  year,  that  he  may  the  more  wifely  conttder  the  nature
of  the  foil,  either  in  the  boughs  and  leaves  of  trees,  or  in  the  grafs  and
herbs,  or  in  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  when  they  are  come  to  maturity ;
and  not  be  ignorant  of  what  is  right  and  proper  to  be  done  in  it :  for  that
is  an  old  faying,  and  of  Cato ,  'That  that  land  is  fcurvily  ufed ,  whofe
owner  does  not  teach  nor  direbl  what  mufl  be  done ,  but  hears  his  Bai¬
liff'  (i).  Wherefore,  let  it  be  the  chief  care  of  one,  who  either  pof-
feffes  lands  of  inheritance  from  his  anceftors,  or  who  is  about  to  pur-
chafe  them,  to  know,  what  kind  of  ground  is  moft  approved  of,  that
he  may  either  be  without  what  is  unprofitable,  or  purchafe  that  which
deferves  to  be  commended.  And,  if  fortune  fha.ll  favour  and  aflift  our
-defires,  we  will  have  land  in  a  wholfome  air,  a  fertile  and  rich  foil,
partly  champain,  and  partly  on  little  hills,  gently  declining  to  the  eatt,
or  to  the  fouth ;  with  fome  parts  of  the  ground  cultivated,  and  other
parts  woody  and  rough  ;  nor  far  from  the  fea,  or  a  navigable  river,  by
which  the  fruits  of  it  may  be  exported,  and  all  forts  of  commodities
imported.

Let  the  champain  part,  divided  into  meadows,  and  arable  lands,
willow-  and  reed-groves,  lie  below  the  houfe.  Let  fome  of  the  hills
be  void  of  trees,  that  they  may  ferve  for  corn  only,  which  never-
t’nelefs  thrives  better  in  moderately  dry  and  fat  champain  lands,
than  on  high  and  tteep  places.  Therefore  the  higher  corn-lands  alfo
ought  to  have  fome  level  parts,  and  be  of  a  gentle  and  eafy  defcent,
and  as  like  a  champain  fituation,  as  poflible.  Then,  let  other  of  the
hills  be  cloaihed  with  olive-yards  and  vineyards,  and  copfes  for  pro¬
ducing  props  for  fupporting  vines,  and  afford  wood  and  ftone,  if  ne-
cefiity  forces  you  to  build  ;  as  well  as  pafture  for  cattle  :  and  let  fprings
of  conftantly-running  water  fend  down  rivulets  into  the  meadows,  and
gardens,  and  willow-groves :  nor  let  there  be  wanting  flocks  and
herds  of  great  and  fmall  cattle,  and  other  forts  of  four-footed  beads,
feeding  upon  both  the  cultivated  ground,  and  the  thickets.  But  this
fituation,  which  we  defire,  is  difficult  and  rare  to  be  found,  and  falls  to
the  (hare  of  very  few.  That  fituation  is  next  to  it,  which  has  mod;

(i)  This  antient  faying  is  not  in  Cato  in  fo  many  words,  as  we  now  have  him  j  only
let  not  the  Bailiff  think  hhnje/f  vtiffer  than  his  Majter.


Of


Chap. III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  21

of  thefe  qualities :  and  that  is  tolerable,  which  has  not  a  very  few  of
-then*.


CHAP.  III.

Of  fuch  things  as  are  principally  to  he  confidered \  in  viewing
and  examining  Land \  before  it  be  bought.

I  )  Orcius  Cato  (i),  indeed,  was  of  opinion,  that  there  were  two
r  things  chiefly  to  be  confidered,  in  examining  and  purchafing  of
land,  the  wholfomenefs  of  the  air ,  and  the  fruitfulnefs  of  the  place  j
of  which  if  either  the  one  or  the  other  fhould  be  wanting,  and  not-
withftanding  any  one  fhould  have  a  mind  to  dwell  there,  he  muft
have  loft  his  fenfes,  and  ought  to  be  conveyed  to  his  kinsfolk,  to  take
care  of  him .  For  no  man  in  his  fenfes  ought  to  lay  out  money  in
cultivating  a  barren  foil  ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  the  owner  of  a
peftilentious,  though  very  fertile  and  fat  land,  live  to  partake  of  the
fruits  thereof;  for,  where  one  muft  lay  his  account  to  be  expofed  to
certain  danger,  there,  not  only  the  reaping  the  fruits,  but  the  life  alfo
of  Hufbandmen,  is  dubious ;  or  rather,  death  is  more  certain  than  get¬
ting  money.

After  thefe  two  principal  things,  he  farther  added  thofe  following,
as  no  lefs  neceflary  to  be  examined  and  confidered  ;  viz.  the  road ,
the  water ,  and  the  neighbourhood.  A  convenient  road  contributes-
much  to  the  advantage  of  lands.  The  firft  advantage,  which  is  the
greateft  of  all,  is  the  owner’s  own  prefence,  who  will  come  there  the
more  willingly,  if  he  is  not  afraid  of  being  plagued  with  the  badnefs
of  the  road.  The  next  is,  the  conveniency  for  importation  and  export¬
ation  of  all  forts  of  utenfils  ;  which  thing  increafes  the  value  of  fuch
fruits  of  the  ground  as  we  lay  up  in  ftore,  and  leflens  the  charge  of  the
things  we  bring  home  :  for  they  may  be  carried,  with  lefs  expence,
to  places,  where  one  may  come  without  much  trouble  or  fatigue,

(1)  Porcius  Cato  has  not  thefe  very  words,  but  the  fubfhnce  of  them  ;  and  thofe  words,
ad  cognatos  <&  gentiles  deducendum ,  are  taken  out  of  Varro ,  and  are  agreeable  to  the  law
of  the  Twelve  Tables,  which  deprived  prodigals  arid  madmen  of  the  management  of  their
eftates;  and  by  them  the  antients  fignified,  that  a  man  was  mad,  or  had  loft  his  fenfes.
Th eEoman  lawyers  fay,  that  the  agnati  were  relations  by  the  father’s  fide,  and  that  the
gentiles  were  thofe  of  both  father  and  mother;  and  to  them  the  commiffion  of  lunacy,  as
we  term  it,  was  granted.


Nor


22  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  L

Nor  is  it  of  fmall  advantage  to  be  carried  cheap,  if  you  make  ufe
of  hired  horfes  when  you  travel,  which  is  more  expedient,  than  tc^keep
horfes  of  your  own.  The  fervants  alfo,  who  are  to  follow  the  mafter
of  the  family,  will  not  with  reludtancy  begin  their  journey  on  foot.

As  to  the  goodnefs  of  the  water,  that  is  a  thing  fo  manifeft  to  every
body,  that  there  is  no  occaflon  to  inlarge  upon  it;  for  who  can  have
any  doubt,  but  that  that  water  is  to  be  accounted  the  beft,  and  the
moft  approved,  without  which  none  of  us  can  prolong  his  life,  either
in  health,  or  in  ficknefs  ?  As  to  the  conveniency  and  advantage  of  a  good
neighbour,  this  is,  indeed,  what  we  cannot  have  any  certainty  of.
Sometimes  death ,  and  divers  other  caufes,  common  to  him  and  us
change  him  :  and  therefore  fome  people  rejedt  Cato's  opinion,  who
neverthelefs  feem  to  be  mightily  miftaken.  For,  as  it  becomes  a  wife
man,  with  great  courage  and  refolution,  to  fupport  accidental  misfor¬
tunes,  fo  it  is  adting  like  a  madman,  for  one  to  make  a  bad  fortune
for  himfelf ;  which  that  man  does,  who,  with  his  own  money,  pur-
chafes  a  wicked  neighbour,  fince,  from  the  very  cradle,  if  he  be  de¬
fended  of  free-born  parents,  he  might  have  heard,  that  No  man  would
lofe  his  ox,  if  neighbours  were  not  naught  (2);  which  is  fpoken  not
only  of  an  ox,  but  alfo  of  every  other  part  of  oureftate  :  fo  that  many
have  rather  chofen  to  be  without  dwelling-houfes,  and  have  fled  from
their  own  habitations,  becaufe  of  the  injuries  of  their  neighbours :
unlefs  we  think,  that  it  was  for  fome  other  reafon,  that  whole  nations
have  abandoned  their  native  foil,  and  gone  to  a  different  part  of  the
world,  I  mean  the  Achceans  (3),  the  Hiberians  (4),  the  Albanians  (y),
as  did  alfo  the  Sicilians  (6)  ;  and,  that  I  may  touch  upon  our  own
original,  the  Pelafgians  (7),  the  Aborigines  (8),  the  Arca¬
dians  ;


(2)  This  line  is  taken  out  of  Hefiod.

(3)  Tbofe  Achteans  here  mentioned  feem  to  be  a  people  of  that  -name,  who,  ’Pliny,
lib.  vi.  fays,  inhabited  the  utmoft  or  eaftmoft  parts  of  the  Euxine  fea,  whom  our  author
fuppofes  to  have  fled  out  of  Greece,  becaufe  they  were  oppreffed  by  their  neighbours,  and
ftill  retained  the  name  of  their  country.

(4)  Hiberi,  a  people  of  Afia ,  who  are  fuppofed  to  have  left  their  native  country,  and
to  have  come  into  Spain,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  Hiberia.  It  is  commonly  writ
Iberia.

(5)  The  Aibani  were  alfo  a  people  of  A  fa,  and  contiguous  to  the  Iberi.

(6)  The  Siculi  were  a  people  of  Latium,  who  went  over  to  Sicily ,  fettled  there,  and
gave  their  name  to  that  ifland.

(7)  Pclafgi,  a  people  of  Greece,  who  of  old  came  into  Italy,  and  fettled  in  Umbria,
and  other  places.  Pliny  fays,  they  fettled  alfo  in  old  Latium.

(8)  Aborigines  were  alfo  originally  of  Greece.  They  came  over,  and  fettled  in  Latium.
Aurelius  ViStor  fay s,  they  were  called  Aorigines ,  a  Greek  name,  from  their  inhabiting  the
tops  of  mountains.  Others  fay,  they  were  called  Aberrtgines ,  wanderers  or  vagabonds  ;
and;  by  changing  one  letter;  and  leaving  out  another,  they  were  afterwards  called  Abori¬
gines.


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  23

dians  (9) ;  than  becaufe  they  could  not  endure  their  wicked  neigh¬
bours.

And,  that  I  may  not  fpeak  of  public  calamities  only,  hiftory  has
given  us  an  account  of  fome  private  perfons  alfo,  both  in  the  coun¬
tries  of  Greece ,  and  in  this  very  Italy  itlelf,  who  were  deteftable
neighbours:  unlefs  that  the  famous  Autolycus  (10)  could  be  a  tolera¬
ble  neighbour  to  any  one ;  or  that  Cacus  (11),  who  inhabited  mount
Aventine  brought  any  joy  to  his  neighbours,  that  dwelt  upon  mount
Palatine  (12).  I  rather  chufe  to  make  mention  of  things  that  are
pafl,  than  of  the  prefent,,  that  I  may  not  name  my  own  neighbour,
who  does  neither  fuffer  a  tree  of  any  confiderable  length  to  hand  upon
our  ground,  nor  a  nurfery,  without  hurting  it,  nor  any  thing  of  a
flake  or  prop  to  fland  tied  to  a  vine,  nor  even  the  cattle  to  go  out  to
pafture,  unlefs  there  be  one  to  watch  them ;  fo  that  it  was  with  very
good  reafon,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  that  Marcus  Porcius  thought,  that
fuch  a  pell  ought,  by  all  means,  to  be  avoided,  and,  among  the  firft
things,  forewarned  him,  that  was  determined  to  be  an  huibandman,
not  to  come  near  to  it  of  his  own  accord*

To  the  other  precepts  we  add  that  which  one  of  the  feven  wife
men  delivered  to  poflerity  for  ever :  A  meafure  is  bejl :  that  a  mea-
fure ,  a  due  proportion,  or  bounds ,  ought  to  be  obferved  and  kept  in
all  things.  And  let  that  be  underflood  as  fpoken,  not  only  to  thofe,
who  are  going  about  other  bufinefs,  but  to  thofe  alfo,  who  are  about
purchafing  land  j  that  they  would  not  buy  what  is  of  a  greater  extent,
than  the  calculation  they  have  made  of  things  will  bear.  For,  to
this,  has  a  reference,  and  is  applicable,  that  excellent  and  famous
fen  ten  ce  of  our  own  poet  (13);  Commend  large  fields,  but  cultivate
what’s  fimall  5  which  antient  precept,  handed  down  to  us,  that  moil
learned  man,  in  my  opinion,  pointed  at,  and  expreffed  it  in  verfe;  for,
it  is  a  faying  worthy  of  the  Carthaginians ,  a  mofl  acute  people,  that
the  land  ought  to  be  weaker  than  the  Hufibandman  j  for  lince,  of  necef-

gines.  They,  with  other  ftrange  people,  were  the  root,  as  Fliny  fays,  from  whence  the
Roman  people  fprang.

(<)(  The  Arcadians,  a  people  of  Feloponnefus ,  fent  alfo  colonies  into  Italy,  fome  of
which  fettled  in  Latium.

(10)  Autolycus ,  a  famous  robber,  frequently  mentioned  by  Homer,  as  grandfather  of
XJiyffes,  by  his  mother.

(11)  Cams,  a  famous  cow-ftealer,  who  dwelt  on  mount  Aventine.  He  ftole  Hercules’s
cattle,  as  he  paffed  that  way,  for  which  he  knocked  out  his  brains,  Livy,  dec.  i.  lib.  i.
Virgil,  in  his  JEneid,  lib.  vui.  gives  a  beautiful  defcripticn  of  him,  and  makes  him  a  great
monfter.

(12)  Two  of  the  feven  hills  on  which  the  city  of  Rome  is  built.

(13)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  412.


2+  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I

fity,  he  muft  wreftle  with  it,  if  the  ground  prevail,  the  owner  muft  be
cr allied  to  pieces :  nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  that  land  of  a  large
extent,  not  rightly  cultivated,  will  yield  lefs,  than  that  of  a  narrow
extent,  exceedingly  well  cultivated.  Wherefore,  after  the  expullion
of  the  Kings,  thole  feven  jugera,  which  Licinius  (14.)  the  Tribune  of  the
people,  diflributed  to  each  man,  yielded  a  greater  revenue  to  the  an-
tients,  than  our  largeft  fields,  which  lie  fallow,  do  now.  Indeed,  Cu¬
rias  Dentatus  (15),  whom  we  mentioned  a  little  before,  having,  by  his
luccefsful  conduit,  obtained  a  victory,  when  the  people,  as  a  reward
of  his  excellent  valour,  bellowed  fifty  jugera  of  land  upon  him,  thought,
that  it  was  a  greater  eftate,  than  was  fuitable,  either  to  one  that  had
been  Conful,  or  that  had  had  the  honour  of  a  triumph  :  and,  having
refufed  this  public  reward  bellowed  upon  him  by  the  people,  he  con¬
tented  himfelf  with  the  fame  proportion  the  common  people  enjoyed.

Afterwards  alfo,  when  our  victories,  and  the  utter  deftruftion  of  our
enemies,  had  laid  defolate,  and  fubdued,  a  vaft  extent  of  land  ;  yet  it
was  criminal  in  a  Senator  to  have  above  fifty  jugera  (16)  in  his  own  pof-
feflion  :  and  Caius  Licinius  (17)  was  condemned  by  his  own  law,  be-
caul'e  he  had  by  an  immoderate  defire  of  inlarging  his  eftate,  exceeded
that  meafure  which  he  had  fettled  and  promulgated  during  his  magi-
flracy,  having  brought  in  a  bill  for  that  purpofe,  when  he  was  Tribune
of  the  people,  and  paffed  it  into  a  law  :  and  this  was  done,  not  more
becaufe  it  was  a  fymptom  of  pride  and  ambition,  to  take  up  and  oc¬
cupy  fo  much  place,  than  becaufe  it  was  infamous  and  difhonourable,
that  a  Roman  citizen  fhould,  by  poffeffing,  in  a  new  and  unprecedented
manner,  more  ground  than  his  patrimony  enabled  him  to  cultivate,
abandon  thofe  lands,  which  the  enemy,  by  running  away,  had  laid

(14)  Liciniana  jugera.  Varro ,  lib.  i.  cap.  2,  fays,  that  this  diftribution  was  made  three
hundred  and  fixey-five  years  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings,  which  was  in  the  year  of
the  city  244.  fo  that  this  dividend  of  land  was  made  in  the  609th  year  from  the  building
of  Home.  We  read  alfo  of  a  diftribution  of  feven  jugera  per  man,  made  by  a  decree  of
the  fenate,  after  the  conqueft  of  Veii ,  Tit.  Liv.  dec.  1.  lib.  5.

(15)  Curius  Dentatus  was  created  Conful,  for  the  firft  time,  in  the  year  of  the  city  463.
He  refufed  the  prefent  the  people  offered  him ;  and,  as  Pliny ,  in  his  Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  8.
cap.  3.  fays,  in  a  fpeech  he  made,  affirmed,  that  he  was  a  pernicious  citizen,  that  could  not
be  content  with  feven  jugera  of  land  \  which  was  the  quantity  allowed  to  the  common
people,  after  an  end  was  put  to  monarchical  government.

(16)  Columella  fays,  that  the  quantity  of  land  allowed  by  the  Licinian  law,  was  only  fifty
jugera  j  but  he  mull  be  corredted  by  Varroy  lib.  1.  c.  3.  Livy ,  Dec.  1.  lib.  7.  and  P/in.
Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  18.  c.  3.  who  all  have  five  hundred  jugera.

(17)  Caius  Licinius  Stolo  was  Tribune  of  the  people  in  the  year  of  the  city  387.  To
elude  the  law,  which  he  himfelf  had  made,  he  emancipated  his  ion  ;  and,  as  has  been  faid,
put  50 o  jugera  in  his  name,  over-and-above  what  he  poffefled  and  held  in  his  own  name.
He  was  accufed  by  Popilius  Lanas  the  Conful,  condemned,  and  feverely  fined.  Val.  Max.
lib.  8.  cap.  6.  Liv.  Dec.  1.  lib.  7.

y  walle,


Chap.  IV.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  25

wafte,  and  left  without  inhabitant.  Therefore,  as  in  all  other  things,
fo  alfo  in  purchafing  lands,  a  meafure  muft  be  obferved  :  for  fo  much
ought  we  to  endeavour  to  obtain,  as  is  necelfary  to  make  it  appear,  that
we  have  bought  what  we  ourfelves  might  enjoy,  not  wherewithal  we  might
be  burdened  ;  and  to  take  away  the  enjoyment  of  them  from  others,
after  the  manner  of  thofe  over-mighty  men,  who  poffefs  the  bounds  of
whole  nations,  which  they  are  not  indeed  able  to  go  round  on  horfe-
back,  but  leave  them  to  be  trampled  upon  by  cattle,  and  wafted  and  de-
ftroyed  by  wild  beafts,  or  keep  them  occupied  by  citizens  that  are  indebted
to  them  (18),  and  their  chained  Haves,  where  they  are  both  confined,
and  put  to  hard  labour.  But  every  man's  own  moderate  defire,  capa¬
city,  and  eftate,  will  be  a  meafure  to  him.  Nor  indeed  is  it  enough,
as  I  faid  before,  to  be  determined  to  have  lands  in  your  pofieflion,  if
you  are  not  able  to  cultivate  them.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  Wholfomenefs  of  Countries .

THE  precept  given  us  by  Cafo  (i),  comes  next  to  be  confidered,
which  Cato  is  alfo  faid  to  have  made  ufe  of ;  <viz.  That  they
who  are  about  to  make  a  purchafe,  ought  often  to  review  the  land
they  have  a  mind  to  purchafe.  For,  at  firft  view,  it  neither  difcovers
its  faults,  nor  its  hidden  good  qualities,  which  afterwards  more  eafily
fhew  themfelves  to  fuch  as  confider,  and  look  over  it  again  and  again.
Alfo  our  Anceftors  have  left  us  a  formula,  as  it  were,  of  infpedtion
and  examination  of  land  that  is  fat  and  fertile  j  of  the  quality  of  which
we  fihall  fpeak  in  its  own  place,  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  feveral

(18)  It  was  a  cuftomamongft  the  "Romans,  to  have  their  creditors  delivered  up  to  them;
whom  they  kept  in  cuftody,  and  obliged  them  to  hard  labour ;  and  lent  them  to  their
eftates  in  the  country,  to  cultivate  the  ground,  and  improve  their  lands,  as  they  did  many
of  their  Haves.  And  this  reftraint  and  confinement  of  fellow- citizens  for  debt,  the  Roman:
called  nexus  civium,  which  frequently  occafioned  many  complaints  and  difturbances  in
the  ftate,  from  the  cruelty  and  hard-heartednefs  of  creditors :  neverthelefs,  it  muft  cer¬
tainly  be  much  more  eligible,  to  be  put  to  labour  the  ground,  in  a  wholfome  air,  with
food  and  raiment,  than  to  ftarve  and  rot  in  a  ftinking  prifon.

(1)  Cafonianum  praceptum.  Who  this  C<efo  was,  I  find  not.  There  were  feveral  great
men  of  this  name,  about  the  year  of  the  city  275,  and  afterwards.  Some  of  them,  no
doubt,  were  men  of  knowledge  in  Husbandry,  and  their  precepts  preferved  to  pofterity.
Cato  has  the  fame  precept  in  a  few  words  equivalent :  Think  it  not  enough  once  on!)'  to  go
round  the  land  you  defign  to  buy,  lib .  i.  cap.  3.

E


kinds


26  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  I

kinds  of  land  (2).  Neverthelefs,  in  general,  that  which  I  have,  as  it
were,  to  teftify,  and  frequently  to  declare  and  publifh  to  all  the  world*
is,  what  that  moft  renowned  Captain,  Marcus  Attilius  Regulus  (3),  in
the  firfl  Carthaginian  war,  is  reported  to  have  faid,  That  as  we  muft
not  purchafe  land,  even  fuppofe  of  the  fruitfulleft  foil,  if  it  be  un-
wholfome  ;  fo  neither  muft  we  purchafe  what  is  barren,  though  it  be
never  fowholfome.  Which  advice  Attilius  gave  with  greater  authority
to  the  Hufbandmen  of  his  own  time,  as  he  had  acquired  fkill  by  expe¬
rience.  For  hiftories  tell  us,  that  he  dwelt  in  Pupinia  (4),  where  the
land  is  both  peftilentious,  poor,  and  unfruitful.  Wherefore,  as  it  is
the  part  of  a  wife  man,  not  to  purchafe  every-where  ;  nor  to  be  de¬
ceived,  either  with  the  allurements  of  its  fruitfulnefs,  nor  with  the
neatnefs,  compaCtnefs,  or  delightfulnefs  of  the  place  ;  fo  it  is  the  part
of  a  truly  induftrious  matter  of  a  family,  to  make  fruitful  and  profit-,
able,  whatever  he  has  either  purchafed,  or  otherwife  got  into  his  pof-
fiefiion.  For  our  anceftors  both  prefcribed,  and  left  upon  record,  many,
remedies  for  an  unwholfome  air,  whereby  its  infectious  deftruCtive
influence  might  be  allayed  j  and,  in  lean  and  barren  land,  the  pru¬
dence  and  diligence  of  the  Hufbandman  may  overcome  the  barren-
nefs  of  the  foil.  Thefe  things  we  fhall  certainly  be  able  to  accomplifh,
if  we  will  believe,  and  receive,  as  from  an  Oracle,  what  the  true#
Poet  ever  lived  fays  (y) :

“  Take  care  to  learn  before,  and  to  obferve,

“  The  winds,  and  changing  temper  of  the  air,

“  The  foil,  and  native  genius  of  each  place,

“  What  fruits  it  bears,  and  what  it  will  refufe.  ”

Neverthelefs,  let  U9  not  content  ourfelves  with  the  authority  of  Huf-
bandmen,  either  of  former,  or  of  the  prefent  time,  and  overlook  crr
negleCt  our  own  examples,  and  the  new  experiments  we  fhall  have
made  ;  which,  tho’  in  fome  particulars  it  is  detrimental,  yet,  upon  the
whole,  becomes  gainful  to  us  ;  becaufe  there  is  no  land  that  is  culti¬
vated,  but  yields  fome  profit :  at  the  fame  time,  by  attempting  and
making  trials,  the  proprietor  of  the  land  gains  this  point,  that  it  is

(2)  Lib.  ii.  cap.  2.

(3)  Marcus  Attilius  Regulus  was  Conful  in  the  year  of  the  city  459.

(4)  Pupinia ,  a  place  in  Latium,  near  Tufculum ,  of  which  Varro  gives  a  frightful  account

lib.  i.  cap.  9.  “  In  it  were  to  be  feen,  neither  tall  trees,  nor  fruitful  vines,  nor  the  Mari-

“  fig-tree,  nor  thick  ftraw  ;  and  that  moft  of  the  trees  and  meadows  were  withered

and  dried  up,  and  overgrown  with  mols.  ”

(5)  Virgil  Georg,  lib.  L  42.

gra.


Chap.  IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  27

gradually  formed,  and  brought  to  the  beft  ftate  and  condition  it  is  ca¬
pable  of,  and  to  yield  all  that  it  poffibly  can.  This  thing  alfo  improves
and  makes  the  moft  fertile  lands  turn  to  greater  advantage  :  therefore
we  muft  never  ceafe  to  make  variety  of  experiments.  Alfo  we  muft
be  more  daring,  and  hazard  more,  in  a  rich  fat  foil,  becaufe  the  effed:
will  neither  fruftrate  our  labour,  nor  our  expences.

But  as  it  is  of  great  imporrance,  what  kind  of  ground,  and  after
what  manner  we  cultivate;  fo  alfo,  after  what  manner  the  manor-houfe
is  built,  and  how  advantageoufly  it  is  fituated  and  difpofed  :  for  hiftory
informs  us,  that  many  have  greatly  erred  in  this  point,  as  thofe  moft:
excellent  men,  Lucius  Lucullus  (6),  and  Quintus  Sceevola  (7) ;  of  which,
the  one  built  a  greater,'  and  the  other  a  fmaller  villa  than  the  extent
of  their  land  required,  both  which  extremes  are  hurtful  to  a  man’s
eftate.  For  we  are  not  only  at  greater  charges  in  building  large  and
wide  houfes,  but  alfo  it  cofts  more  to  keep  them  in  repair  :  and
when  they  are  fmaller  than  the  ground  requires,  the  fruits  of  it  perifh
and  decay.  For  both  moift  and  dry  things,  which  the  earth  produces,
are  eafily  fpoiled,  if  either  there  are  no  houfes  at  all  to  bring  them  into  ;
or  if,  by  being  too  ftreight,  they  are  inconvenient.  For  a  mafter  of  a
family,  in  proportion  to  his  eftate,  ought  to  have  as  good  and  conve¬
nient  an  habitation  as  poflible,  that  he  may  the  more  willingly  both
come  into  the  country,  and  alfo  live  in  it.

It  will  alfo  be  more  agreeable  to  the  man,  if  his  wife  alfo  accompany
ihim  :  and  as  her  fex,  fo  alfo  is  her  mind  more  delicate  ;  wherefore
fhe  muft  be  allured  and  engaged  with  fomething  pleafant  and  agree¬
able,  to  ftay  the  more  patiently  with  her  hufband.  Therefore,  let  the
Hufbandman  build  elegantly  ;  neverthelefs,  let  him  not  be  a  Builder ;
and  let  him  take  in  fuch  an  area  for  his  building,  that,  as  Cato  (8)  fays,
neither  the  villa  may  feek  for  land,  nor  the  land  feek  for  a  villa.  We
fliall  now  explain  what  manner  of  fttuation  the  whole  of  it  muft  have.
The  building  which  you  begin,  as  it  ought  to  be  placed  in  a  wholfome
region,  fo  alfo  in  the  wholfomeft  part  of  the  country.  For  the  fur-

(6)  L.  Lucullus ,  a  very  famous  Roman  General,  who  conquered  MithriAates ,  Kin®  of
Tontus ,  and  drove  him  into  Armenia.  He  undertook  thac  war  anno  urb.  cond.  680.
After  he  returned  with  immenfe  riches,  he  gave  himfelf  up  intirely  to  luxury,  magnificent
buildings,  &c.  He  exceeded  all  the  Romans  in  ftarues,  pictures,  villas,  <&c.  He  was  at
immenfe  charge  in  making  fifh-ponds  at  Raite,  near  Naples.  His  land  could  fcarcely  con¬
tain  his  buildings.  On  the  contrary,  Quintus  Scavola  had  fo  fmall  a  villa ,  that  he  had  not
where  to  beftow  the  fruits  of  his  land.

(7)  QMucius  Scavola  was  famous  for  his  knowledge  in  the  civil  law,  and  for  his  elo¬
quence;  mentioned  by  Cicero,  lib.  ii.  de  Or  at.  He  was  killed  by  Marius,  in  the  civil  wars.
There  was  one  of  this  nameConful,  an.  urb.  659.

(8)  CatOj  lib.  i.  cap.  3.

E  2


roundinor

o


28  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  T.

rounding  air,  when  it  is  corrupted,  brings  very  many  caufes  of  hurt
and  offence  to  our  bodies.  There  are  fome  places,  which  are  not  very
hot  about  the  time  of  the  fummer  folftice ;  but,  in  the  colds  of  winter,
have  a  dreadful  appearance,  and  are  intolerably  cold,  as  they  fay  of
Thebez  in  Bceotia  (9).  There  are  other  places,  which  are  warm  in
winter,  but  burning  hot  in  fummer,  as  they  affirm  is  the  cafe  of  Chal¬
ets  in  Euboea  (10).  Let  therefore  a  temperate  air  be  fought  for,  which
is  neither  exceffively  hot,  nor  cold ;  which  fort  of  air  commonly  the
middle  of  a  hill  enjoys,  becaufe  neither  being  depreffed,  is  it  torpid
with  the  hoar-frofts  in  winter,  or  torrid  with  hot  vapours  in  fummer ;
nor  being  elevated  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  does  it  rage,  at  all
times  of  the  year,  with  the  motions  of  the  winds,  and  with  rains,
when  below  they  are  very  gentle.  This  fituation  therefore  upon  the
middle  of  a  hill  is  the  bell ;  provided  neverthelefs,  that  the  place  fweli
out,  and  be  prominent  a  little,  left  a  torrent,  formed  by  the  fhowers,
when  it  flows  from  the  top  of  the  hill,  fhake  or  pluck  up  the  foun¬
dations.


CHAP.  V.


Of  Water .


AND  let  there  be  either  within  the  manor-houfe  a  fpring  that
never  dries  up,  or  let  it  be  brought  into  it  from  without.  Let
wood  for  fire,  and  forrage,  be  near  at  hand.  If  running-water  can¬
not  be  had,  let  well-water  be  fought  for  hard-by,  which  may  neither
lie  too  deep,  and  be  difficult  to  draw,  nor  be  of  a  bitter  or  brackifh
tafle.  But  if  thefe  alfo  fail  you,  and  the  fmall  hopes  of  fpring-water
force  you,  let  large  citterns,  after  all,  be  provided  for  men,  and  ponds
for  cattle,  for  gathering  and  keeping  rain-water,  which  is  the  moft
proper  and  fuitable  to  the  health  of  the  body ;  and  this  you  may  have
exceeding  good,  if  you  convey  it,  in  earthen  pipes,  into  a  covered


(9)  Bceotia ,  a  country  in  Greece-,  bordering  upon  Attica ,  of  a  foggy  unwholfome  air,
but  good  for  cattle.  The  inhabitants  were,  by  the  antients,  reckoned  dull  and  ftupid.
The  chief  city  of  it  veasThebes,  now  called  Stibes ,  and  a  fmall  village.  Bceotia  borders  upon
Doris ,  Phocis ,  Attica ,  and  Corinthus ,  now  called  Stramulipa ,  and  fubjedt  to  the  Turks.

(10)  Euboea ,  an  ifland  eaft  of  Achaia  in  Greece ,  now  called  Negroponte ,  feparated  from
Achaia  by  a  narrow  fea  ( Euripus ).  Its  chief  city  is  Chalets.  They  fay  it  is  about  130
miles  long,  and  30  broad.  It  was  long  fubjedt  to  the  Venetians ;  but  now  in  the  hands
of  the  Turks.  The  Euripus  is  now  called  the  Streight  of  Negropont3  and  is  fo  narrow,  that
Euboea  is  joined  to  Achaia  by  a  bridge.

cittern.


Chap.  V.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  29

ciftern.  Next  to  this  is  running-watep,  which  has  its  fource  upon  the
mountains,  provided  it  tumbles  down  headlong  over  the  rocks,  as  at
Guarcenum  (  j  )  in  Campania .  Well-water  is  the  third,  either  that
which  is  found  upon  riling  ground,  or  not  in  the  lowed:  part  of  the
valley.  The  word  of  all  is  marlh-water,  which  creeps  and  Hides  along
with  a  dow  motion.  That  which  always  dagnates  in  a  marlh,  is  pedi-
lent ;  neverthelefs  this  lame  water,  tho’  of  a  hurtful  nature,  yet,  in
winter,  being  foftened  and  allayed  by  the  diowers  of  rain,  abates  of  its
bad  quality :  from  which  we  underdand,  that  rain-water  is  exceeding
wholfome,  becaufe  it  alfo  purges  out  the  pernicious  quality  of  poifonous
water  (2) :  but  this  we  have  faid  to  be  the' mod  approved  for  drinking.
But  rivulets,  that  have  a  drong  current,  and  a  fall,  contribute  very
much  to  moderate  the  heats,  and  to  the  delightfulnefs  of  places,  which,
if  the  dtuation  of  the  place  will  allow  it,  whatever  quality  they  may
have,  provided  they  be  fweet,  ought,  by  all  means,  in  my  opinion,  to
be  brought  into  the  villa.

But  if  the  river  be  at  a  greater  didance  from  the  hills,  and  if  the
wholfomenefs  of  the  place,  and  the  higher  lituation  of  its  banks,  Ihall
allow  you  to  place  your  houfe  upon  the  current,  neverthelefs  you  mud
take  care,  that  it  have  the  river  rather  behind  than  before  it  j  and  that
the  front  of  the  building  be  turned  from  the  troublefome  and  hurtful
winds  peculiar  to  that  country,  and  turned  towards  thofe  that  are  mod
friendly  j  for  mod  rivers  are  covered  and  hid  from  you  with  hot  mids
in  dimmer,  and  with  cold  mids  in  winter,  which,  unlefs  they  be  car¬
ried  off  by  the  greater  force  of  the  winds  that  blow  upon  them,  prove
dedrudtive  both  to  men  and  cattle.  But,  as  I  faid,  in  fuch  places  as
are  whohome,  it  is  bed  to  turn  the  front  of  the  manor-houfe  towards
the  ead  or  fouth  ;  and,  in  fuch  as  are  un wholfome,  towards  the  north.
And  a  villa  looks  always  tightly  to  the  fea,  when  it  is  beat  upon  and

(1)  Guarcenum  in  Campania.  There  is  no  mention  of  this  place  by  Pliny  t  or  any  other
author  I  have  feen.  Probably  there  is  an  addition  or  tranfpofition  of  one  or  two  letters.
Pliny  mentions  feveral  times  Mom  Gaurus^  and  vinum  Gauranum  in  Campania.  This
mountain  lies  near  to  Baia  or  Puzzuolo;  and,  on  the  fide  of  the  hill  looking  towards  thefc
places,  there  is  excellent  wine ;  fo  that  our  author  perhaps  means  Tome  town  that  flood
near  this  hill,  and  took  its  name  from  it.

(2)  Rain-water,  by  mofl  authors,  is  accounted  the  wholfomefl.  Vitruvius  fays,  that
the  lighteft  and  mofl  fubtile  particles  are  extracted  from  all  the  fountains,  and  carried  up
into  the  air,  by  the  conflant  motion  of  which,  it  is  agitated,  flrained,  and  liquefied ;  and
then  it  falls  to  the  earth.  Hippocrates ,  Galen ,  See.  commend  it,  becaufe  it  is  light,  fweet,
clear,  and  thin.  Some  authors  fay,  that  fummer  rain-water,  which  falls  in  time  of  thun¬
der,  is  better  than  that  of  common  fhowers;  and  that  water  of  melted  fnow  or  ice  is  the
worft  of  any.  Cornelius  Celfus  ranks  them  thus,  with  refpedt  to  their  weight;  rain-water,
fpring-water,  river-water, ;  well-water ;  next  to  thefe,  that  of  fnow  and  ice;  that  of  a  lake
is  weightier,  and  of  a  marlh  is  heaviefl  of  all.

fprinkled


2


3o  L.  J.  M.COLUMELLA  Book I.

fprinkled  with  the  waves  thereof,  but  never  from  the  bank,  or  when  it
is  a  little  removed  from  the  fhore:  for  it  is  better  to  have  fled  back  to
a  great  than  to  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  fea;  for  the  intermediate
diftances  are  of  a  grofler  air.  Nor  indeed  muft  there  be  a  marlh  near
the  buildings,  nor  a  public  highway  adjoining :  for  the  former  always
throws  up  noxious  and  poifonous  fleams  during  the  heats,  and  breeds
animals  armed  with  mifchievous  flings,  which  fly  upon  us  in  exceeding
thick  fwarms ;  as  alfo  fends  forth,  from  the  mud  and  fermented  dirt,
envenomed  pefts  of  water-fnakes  and  ferpents,  deprived  of  the  moifture
they  enjoyed  in  winter;  whereby  hidden  difeafes  are  often  contracted,
the  caufes  of  which,  even  the  phyflcians  themfelves  cannot  thoroughly
underfland :  and  alfo,  at  all  times  of  the  year,  the  dampnefs  and  moi-
fture  rots  and  fp.oils  the  implements  of  hufbandry,  houlfiold  furniture,
and  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  that  are  either  laid  up  in  ftore,  or  not  as
yet  brought  into  the  houfe.  And  the  latter  is  a  burden  to  your  eftate,
by  the  plunderings  of  travellers  that  pafs  by,  and  the  conftant  enter¬
tainment  of  thofe  that  come  to  lodge  with  you.

Wherefore  I  advife  you  to  avoid  thefe  inconveniencies,  and  to  build
a  manor-houfe  neither  by  the  highway,  nor  in  a  peftilential  place,  but
at  a  great  ,  diftance  from  them,  and  upon  a  higher  fituation  ;  and  that
the  front  of  it  be  directed  to  the  riftng  of  the  fun  at  the  time  of  the
equinox  ;  for  this  kind  of  fituation  keeps  an  equal  balance,  and  a  well-
adjufted  medium  between  the  winter  and  fummer  winds.  And  the
more  declining  towards  the  eaft  the  ground  is,  on  which  the  building
ftands,  the  more  freely  will  it  receive  the  cool  pafiing  breezes  in  fum¬
mer,  and  be  lefs  incommoded  or  hurt  with  ftorms  in  winter,  and  fo  be
thawed  with  the  riling  fun,  that  the  frozen  dews  may  melt :  for  that
ground  is  reckoned  almoft  peftilential,  which  is  not  within  the  reach
of  the  fun,  and  not  expofed  to  breezes  warmed  with  the  fame  ;  which
if  it  want,  there  is  no  other  thing  of  any  efficacy  to  dry  up  and  wipe  off
the  noCturnal  hoar-frofts,  and  any  fort  of  ruft,  mildew,  or  filth,  that
fixes  upon  it.  And  thefe  things  are  not  only  deftrudtive  to  men,  but
alfo  to  all  forts  of  cattle,  and  to  every  green  thing  whatfoever,  and  to
their  fruits.

But  wholoever  has  a  mind  to  build  upon  a  Hoping  area,  let  him
always  begin  at  the  lower  part ;  becaufe  when  the  foundations  are
begun  from  the  more  deprefied  place,  they  will  not  only  eafily  fupport
their  own  fuperftruCture,  but  alfo  ferve  as  a  butteridge  and  under¬
propping  againft  fuch  things,  as  fhall  afterwards  be  applied  to  the  upper
part,  if  peradventure  he  has  a  fancy  to  inlarge  the  villa :  for  the  build¬
ings  that  have  been  raifed  before  from  the  lower  part,  will  powerfully

refill


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  31

refill  and  bear  up  againft  thofe  that,  being  placed  above  them,  fhall
lean  and  reft  upon  them.  But,  if  the  uppermoft  part  of  the  riling
ground,  being  made  the  foundation,  fhall  have  received  the  weight  of
its  own  fuperftrudture,  whatever  you  join  to  it  afterwards  from  the
lower  part,  will  become  full  of  clifts  and  chinks ;  for  a  new  building,
when  it  is  built  and  joined  to  an  old,  and  that  which  is  frelh  to  what
is  full  of  chinks,  it,  as  it  were,  ftruggling  againft  the  weighty  load
that  preffes  upon  it,  gives  way  ;  and  that,  which  was  firft  built,  will
prefs  upon  that  which  gives  way,  and,  being  gradually  weighed  down,
will  be  pulled  down  headlong  with  its  own  weight.  Therefore  this
fault,  in  the  way  of  .buildingj  muft  be  avoided  when  the  foundations
are  firft  laid  (3).  -


CHAP.  VI,

Of  the  P option  and  Difpoftion  of  a  Manor-houfe .

ALSO  let  the  meafure,  fize  and  number,  of  the  feveral  parts  of
the  villa  be  proportioned  to  the  whole  inclofure  ( 1 ),  and  let  it
be  divided  into  three  parts ;  one  for  the  ufe  of  the  city,  another  for
the  ruftics,  and  a  third  for  the  fruits  of  the  ground.  Again,  let  that
for  the  city  be  diftributed  in  fuch  a  manner  into  fummer  and  winter
apartments,  that  the  bedchambers  for  winter  may  look  towards  the
fun-rifing  in  the  middle  of  winter;  the  dining-rooms  to  the  fun-fetting
at  the  time  of  the  equinox.  Again,  let  the  fummer  bedchambers  be
fo  contrived,  as  to  receive,  the  fun  at  noon  at  the  time  of  the  equi-

(3)  The  laft  fentence  of  this,  fifth  chapter  is  fomewhat  perplexed  ;  and,  as  V rfinus  fays,
it  feems  neceflary  to  change  furgenti  into  urgent! ,  in  order  to  make  it  tolerable  fenfe,
which  I  with  were  juftified  by  fome  good  manufcript.

(1)  Whole  inclofure  ( univerfo  confepto)  fignifies  the  whole  ground  taken  in  and  inclofed
to  build  the  villa  upon.  Thefe  villas,  among  the  Roman?,  while  their  antient  fimplicity
lafted,  were  but  very  mean  buildings,  fimple  accommodations  for  their  fervants,  and
receptacles  for  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  and  a  fmall  apartment  for  the  matter  and  miftrefs1
of  the  family,  &c.  But,  as  their  riches  and  luxury  increafed,  they  became  much  more
magnificent;  and  a  fumptuous  and  magnificent  villa  feems  to  have  been  the  darling  plea-
fure,  even  of  the  wifeft  and  mod  moderate  among  them :  fo  that  they  fefem  to  have
expended  more  upon  their  houfes  in  the  country,  than  they  did  upon  thofe  in  the  city.
And  even  private  citizens,  when  Rome  was,  in  a  manner,  miftrefs  of  the  world,  feem  to
have  exceeded  moft  of  our  modern  princes  in  the  circumference,  architecture,  magnifi¬
cence,  and  conveniencies  of  their  villas.  And  when  thofe  of  private  perfons  were  fo
ftately,  what  muft  thofe  of  more  eminent  ftation  have  been,  as  that  of  Maecenas ,  Lucullus ,
Cicero,  &c.  ?  As  for  thofe  of  the  Cafars ,  &c.  fo  frequently  mentioned  by  antient  authors,
they  were,  no  doubt,  beyond  what  we  can  imagine.


32  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  I.

nox  (2) ;  but  let  the  dining-rooms  of  that  feafon  look  to  the  fun-riling
in  winter.  Let  the  bathing-places  be  turned  towards  the  fun-fetting
in  fummer,  that  they  may  be  well  lighted  in  the  afternoon,  and  till
the  evening.  Let  the  places  for  walking  in  be  fo  fituate,  with  refped
to  the  fouth,  that  they  may  receive  much  fun  in  winter,  and  very
little  in  fummer.

But,  in  the  ruftic  part,  there  fhall  be  placed  a  large  and  lofty  kitchen,
that  the  timber-work  may  not  be  expofed  to  the  danger  of  fire,  and
that  all  the  fervants  belonging  to  the  family  may  ftay  in  it  conveniently
at  all  times  of  the  year.  Cells  for  fuch  fervants  as  are  not  in  bonds  (3 ),
will  be  befl  contrived,  when  they  are  made  to  look  to  the  fouth,  fo  as
to  receive  the  fun  at  the  time  of  the  equinox  -y  and,  for  fuch  as  are
in  chains,  a  mod:  wholfome  fubterraneous  prifon-workhoufe  ( 4 ),
receiving  its  light  from  very  many  narrow  windows,  and  fo  high
from  the  ground,  that  one  may  not  be  able  to  touch  them  with  his
hand  (5).

Such

(2)  Speftet  meridiem  aquinoilialem.  As  the  meridian  of  a  place  is)  the  fame  through¬
out  the  whole  year,  and,  when  the  fun  comes  to  that  line,  it  is  ftill  the  fame  with  refpeCfc
to  the  houfe  ;  yet,  as  the  fun  rifes  higher  and  higher  upon  that  line,  till  it  comes  to  the
folftice,  fo  here  the  author  muft  mean,  that  the  bedchambers  be  fo  contrived,  as  to  receive
the  fun  when  it  comes  to  the  meridian  at  the  time  of  the  equinox.

(3)  Servis  folutis.  The  Romans  fuffered  fuch  of  their  flaves  as  they  had  confidence  in,
and  were  not  apprehenfive  of  their  running  away,  to  be  without  chains  ;  but  fuch  of
them  as  they  feared  might  make  their  efcape,  they  kept  in  chains,  and  fhut  them  up  at
night :  others  of  them  were  put  in  chains  for  crimes,  and  kept  prifoners  as  long  as  they
thought  proper.

(4)  Ergajiulum ,  among  the  Romans ,  was  a  fubterraneous  building  belonging  to  every
confiderable  villa.  It  properly  fignifies  a  workhoufe;  but  it  was  made  ufe  of  as  a  prifon,
wherein  they  confined  their  flaves  at  night,  that  they  might  not  make  their  efcape;  and
therein  they  fliut  up,  and  kept  to  hard  labour,  fuch  of  their  flaves  as  were  guilty  of  any
misbehaviour.  Thefe  private  prifons  foon  became  great  grievances,  and  great  complaints
were  brought  againft  them  in  Augufius  and  Tiberius's  time,  not  only  becaufe  of  the  great
cruelty  of  mafters,  but  becaufe  Roman  citizens  and  ftrangers  were  unlawfully  fhut  up  and
detained  in  them ;  for  which  reafon  thefe  private  prifons  were  intirely  fupprefled  by  Adrian^
and  other  fucceeding  Emperors.

(5)  Varro,  l.  i.  c.  n,  12.  gives  the  following  directions  relating  to  the  building  of  a
villa :  c  A  villa  muft  be  built  proportionable  to  the  land  belonging  to  it,  that  there  may  be
4  room  for  laying  up  the  fruits  thereof  in  their  feveral  ftorehoufes,  which  muft  be  contrived
4  according  to  the  quantity  of  each  fort  of  fruit.  If  your  land  abound  in  wine,  your  wine-
c  cellars  muft  be  the  larger ;  if  in  corn,  your  barns.  You  muft  efpecially  take  care,  that
4  there  be  water  within  the  inclofure  of  the  villa ;  if  not,  as  near  as.  poffible.  The  firft
c  thing  is  to  have  it  fpringing  up  within  the  villa  ;  the  next  is  to  have  it  conftantly  running
4  into  it.  If  there  be  no  living-water,  cilterns  muft  be  made  within  doors  for  men,  and
4  ponds  in  the  open  air  for  cattle.  You  muft  take  care  efpecially  to  place  your  villa  at  the
4  bottom  of  a  hill  covered  with  wood,  where  there  may  be  wide  paftures ;  and  that  it  be
4  expofed  to  the  moft  wholfome  winds  that  fhall  blow  in  that  country.  That  which  is
4  placed  toward  the  rifing  of  the  fun  at  the  time  of  the  equinox,  is  the  moft  convenient,

f  becaufe


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  33

Such  ftables  muft  be  made  for  the  cattle,  as  cannot  be  incommoded
either  with  the  heat  or  the  cold.  Let  there  be  double  ox-ftalls  for
cattle  broken  for  labour,  one  for  fummer,  and  one  for  winter.  But
for  other  forts  of  cattle,  which,  it  is  proper,  fhould  be  within  the
manor-houfe,  let  there  be  places,  partly  covered,  partly  in  the  open
air,  furrounded  with  high  walls,  that,  in  the  one,  they  may  take  their
reft  during  winter,  and  in  the  other  in  the  fummer-time,  without  being
expofed  to  the  fury  of  wild  beafts.  But  let  all  the  ftables  be  fo  ordered,
that  no  water  may  run  into  them  ;  and  that  all  the  moifture  that  is
formed  and  gathered  therein,  may  Aide  out  as  quickly  as  poftible,  that
neither  the  foundations  of  the  walls,  nor  the  cattles  hoofs,  may  be  rot¬
ted  and  fpoiled.  The  ftalls  for  the  oxen  muft  be  ten,  or  at  leaft  nine,
feet  broad.  This  meafure  will  be  fufficient  both  for  the  cattle  to  lie
down  in,  and  for  him  that  yoketh  them,  and  driveth  the  plough  or  the
wain,  to  go  round  them,  and  do  what  offices  are  proper  to  be  done  to
them  while  unyoked.  It  is  not  proper,  that  the  mangers  be  placed
higher,  than  that  an  ox  or  an  horfe  may  be  able  to  feed  ftanding  with¬
out  inconveniency.

Let  there  be  an  habitation  made  for  the  Bailiff*  hard-by  the  gate,
that  he  may  have  a  view  of  them  that  go  out  and  come  in ;  and  one
for  the  Steward  (6)  above  the  gate,  for  the  fame  reafons ;  neverthelefs
let  him  be  near  to,  and  have  his  eye  upon,  the  Bailiff  (7) :  and  let  them

both

£  becaufe  in  fummer  it  has  the  fhade,  in  winter  the  fun.  If  you  are  forced  to  build  hard-
‘  by  a  river,  take  care  you  do  not  place  your  villa  fronting  to  it,  becaufe,  in  winter,  it
£  will  be  vehemently  cold;  and,  in  fummer,  not  wholfome.  You  muft  alfo  advert,  if  there
£  be  any  marfhy  places  near  it,  both  for  the  reafons  before-mentioned,  and  becaufe  they
£  dry  up;  and  certain  fmall  animals  breed  therein,  which  the  eyes  cannot  perceive;  and
£  they  come  through  the  air,  and  enter  into  the  body  by  the  mouth  and  noftrils,  and  occa¬
sion  dangerous  diftempers.  And  care  muft  be  taken,  that  the  villa  look  not  towards  thofe
£  parts,  from  whence  unwholfome  grievous  winds  ufe  to  blow ;  and  that  you  place  it  not
£  in  a  hollow  valley,  but  rather  build  upon  an  eminence;  for,  where  there  is  a  thorough
£  air,  if  any  thing  noxious  is  brought  in,  it  is  more  eafily  difcuffed.  Moreover,  that  which
£  is  illuftrated  by  the  fun  the  whole  day,  is  more  wholfome;  becaufe  the  little  beafts,  if
4  any  breed  near  it,  and  are  brought  into  it,  are  either  blown  out  of  it  again,  or  foon  perifh
£  by  the  drinefs  of  the  place.  Sudden  fhowers  and  torrents,  or  rapid  rivers,  are  dangerous
£  to  thofe, who  have  houfes  in  low  and  hollow  places;  and  the  fudden  incurftons  of  bands
£  of  thieves  and  robbers,  becaufe  they  can  fpbre  eafily  furprife  thofe  who  are  not  aware  of
£  them.  From  thefe  inconveniencies  the  higher  places  are  fafeft.’

(6)  Procurator ,  no  doubt,  is  the  Steward ;  and,  according  to  our  author,  he  is  to  have
a  watchful  eye  over  the  Bailiff,  and  confequently  a  fuperior  officer ;  tho’  Popma  fays  he
is  focius  villici,  <&  omnibus  rebus  adminifier.  He  kept  the  family  accounts,  and  thofe  of
the  whole  eftate.  The  name  is  applicable  to  a  great  many  different  things,  of  which  a
man  may  have  the  overfight  committed  to  him.

(7)  Villicus  properly  was  an  officer,  who  had  the  direction  of  cultivating  the  ground,
and  employing  the  fervants  for  that  purpofe,  according  to  their  feveral  capacities;  and  to
iee  that  they  did  their  bufinefs,  had  their  victuals,  cloaths,  &c.  duly  given  them.  He  was

F  an


ft


34  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

both  have  a  magazine  hard-by,  where  all  the  implements  of  Hufbandry
may  be  laid  up.  Let  cells  be  placed  for  the  Herdfmen  and  Shepherds
hard-by  their  own  cattle,  that  they  may  have  the  conveniency  of  rally¬
ing  out  eafily  at  any  time  to  take  care  of  them.  Neverthelefs  they
ought  all  to  lodge  as  near  to  one  another  as  poffible,  that  fo  the  dili¬
gence  and  care  of  the  Bailiff  may  not  be  too  much  extended,  when  he
goes  round  all  the  different  parts ;  and  that  they  may  be  witneffes
among  themfelves  of  each  other's  diligence  or  negligence.

As  to  that  part  appropriated  for  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  it  is  divided
into  an  oil-cellar,  a  place  for  the  wine  and  oil-preffes,  a  wine-cellar,  a
place  for  boiling  muff  (8),  hay-lofts,  ftraw  and  chaff-lofts,  ftorehoufes,
and  barns,  that  fuch  of  them  as  are  even  with  the  ground  may  be  ufed
for  keeping  of  moiff  things,  as  wine  and  oil  for  the  market ;  but  that
fuch  things  as  are  dry  may  be  gathered  together,  and  laid  up  in  lofts,
as  all  forts  of  corn,  hay,  leaves,  ffraw,  chaff,  and  all  the  other  forts  of
forrage.  But  let  the  granaries,  as  I  faid,  be  acceffible  only  by  ladders;
and  let  them  receive  air  from  the  north  by  very  fmall  windows ;  for
that  quarter  of  the  heavens  is  the  coldeff,  and  the  leaft  moiff  of  any  ;
both  which  contribute  much  to  the  prefervation  of  corn  laid  up  in  gra®
naries.  There  is  the  fame  reafon  for  the  wine-cellar's  being  placed  in
the  lower  part  of  the  houfe,  which  ought  to  be  at  a  great  diftance  from
the  baths,  oven,  dunghil,  and  other  naftineffes,  which  fend  forth  a
ffinking  fmell ;  nor  ought  it  to  be  at  a  leffer  diffance  from  cifterns,
cafcades,  or  fpouts  of  water,  from  which  there  is  a  moifture-attradted,
which  corrupts  and  fpoils  the  wine.

Nor  does  it  efcape  me,  that  there  are  fome  who  think,  that  a  barn,
covered  with  an  arched  roof,  is  the  beft  place  for  laying  up  corn  in,
the  ground  or  earthen  floor  of  which,  before  it  is  paved,  or  any  other
flooring  laid  upon  it,  being  dug  up,  and  moiftened  with  frefh  lees  of
oil,  and  not  with  what  has  fait  in  it,  is  beat  clofe  together  with  ram¬
mers,  like  Signinian  work  (<?).  Then,  after  it  is  fully  dry,  they  cover

an  officer  of  great  truft  among  the  Romans ,  efpecially  thole  who  applied  themfelves  to
agriculture.  He  had  the  overlight  and  care  of  the  whole  villa.

(8)  Defrutarium  was  the  place  where  they  Jb°*^e<d  their  muft,  in  order  to  reduce  it  to
one  third,  or  an  half,  cf  the  firft  quantity.  The  firft  they  called  defrutum ,  the  fecond
fapa,  according  to  our  author,  lib.  xii.  c.  21.  Of  this  muft,  boiled  in  to  a  certain  quan¬
tity,  or  rob  of  grapes,  as  I  fometimes  call  it,  the  antients  made  great  account:  they  mixed
it  with  their  wines,  in  order  to  preferve  and  keep  them  from  fpoiling;  they  preferred
their  fruits  with  it,  and,  as  may  be  feen  in  this  author,  applied  it  to  feveral  ufes.

(9)  Signia ,  a  town  in  Latium.  The  inhabitants  were  called  Signini.  They,  it  feems,
contrived  a  plaifter  or  flooring  made  with  bruifed  tiles,  or  fheards  of  earthen  vefiels,  and
lime,  tempered  together.  With  this  compofition  they  made  very  durable  floors,  &c.
and  this  they  called  opus  Signinum.  See  Ylin.  vat.  hifl.  lib  ',  xxxv.  cap.  12.

it


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  35

it  over,  in  like  manner,  with  floorings  made  of  bruifed  tiles,  which,
inftead  of  water,  have  been  tempered  and  wrought  with  lees  of  oil,
mixed  with  lime  and  fand,  and  which,  with  great  force,  are  beaten
down  with  rammers,  and  fmoothed  ;  and  all  the  joinings  of  the  walls
and  the  floors  are  buttoned  with  bolfterings  made  of  bruifed  brick  or
tile:  for,  as  buildings  commonly  crack  and  fall  into  chinks  in  thefe  parts,
they  afford  holes  and  lurking-places  for  fubterraneous  animals.  But
the  granaries  are  alfo  diftinguifhed  with  partitions  or  corn-bings,  that
every  fort  of  pulfe  may  be  placed  feparately  by  itfelf.  The  walls  are
plaiftered  with  clay  well  wrought  with  lees  of  oil,  with  which,  inftead
of  ftraw,  are  mixed  the  dry  leaves  of  the  wild  olive  ;  or,  if  thefe  can¬
not  be  had,  thofe  of  the  olive-tree.  Then,  when  the  forefaid  plaifter
is  dried,  it  is  fprinkled  over  again  with  the  lees  of  oil  j  and,  after  it  is
dried,  the  corn  is  brought  in.  This  feems  to  be  the  moft  proper  of
any  thing  for  preferving  corn,  or  any  other  fruits  of  the  earth  whatfo-
ever,  that  are  laid  up  in  ftore,  from  receiving  hurt  from  wevils,  and
fuch-like  animals,  which,  unlefs  they  be  carefully  laid  up,  are  quickly
confumed  by  them.

But  this  kind  of  barn,  which  I  have  deferibed,  unlefs  it  be  fttuated
in  a  dry  part  of  the  manor-houfe,  corrupts,  with  mouldinefs  and  damp-
nefs,  even  the  ftrongeft  grain  whatfoever.  And,  if  there  be  no  moi-
fture  there,  corns  may  be  alfo  kept  in  pits  under-ground,  as  in  certain
provinces  beyond  fea,  where  the  ground,  being  dug  up  after  the  man¬
ner  of  wells,  which  they  vdXjiros  (io),  receives  the  fruits  which  itfelf
produced.  But  we,  in  our  regions,  which  fuperabound  in  moifture,
rather  approve  of  fuch  a  barn  as  is  raifed  high  above-ground,  and  of  this
careful  way  of  making  the  floors  and  the  walls  of  it ;  for,  as  I  faid
before,  the  floors  and  fides  of  the  barns,  being  thus  fecured,  hinder
the  wevil  to  get  in.  Many  think,  that,  when  this  kind  of  deftrubtive
peft  gets  into  the  tom,  it  may  be  thrown  out,  or  checked,  if  the  corns
that  are  gnawn,  be  winnowed  in  the  barn,  and,  as  it  were,  cooled  and
refreftied.  But  this  is  intirely  falfe  ;  for,  by  i'o  doing,  thole  animals
are  not  thrown  out,  but  are  mixed  with  the  whole  heaps  of  corn ;

(xo)  Sirot,  in  Greek  ezi pxf,  fubterraneous  granaries,  or  caves  for  holding  corn,  or  holes
dug  in  the  ground.  Some  think  it  is  originally  a  Perjian  word.  Varro ,  lib.  i.  e.  57.  fays,
that  they  were  in  ufe  in  Cappadocia  zndTbrace-,  and  char  they  made  ule  formerly  of  fuch
repofitories  for  their  grain  in  fome  parts  of  Spain ,  and  about  Carthage  •  that  they  covered
their  bottoms  with  chaff  and  ftraw,  and  took  great  care,  that  no  mcifture  ihould  get  into
them,  or  the  air  reach  them,  except  when  they  brought  them  out  for  life;  for,  where
no  air  comes,  the  wevil  does  not  breed.  Wheat,  he  lays,  iaid  up  in  this  manner,  will
keep  even  forty  years  without  fpoiling;  and  millet  a  hundred.  He  adds,  that,  when  they
©pen  them,  they  muft  ftay  lome  time  before  they  go  down  into  them,  fer  fear  they  be
ftifled.  -  ~

*  •  F  2  which*


3  6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.

which,  if  they  continue  as  they  are,  without  being  moved,  only  fuffcr
damage  in  the  upper  parts,  becaufe  the  v/evil  never  breeds  below  the
fpace  of  an  hand-breadth ;  for  it  is  much  better  to  expofe  that  only
which  is  already  fpoiled,  than  the  whole,  to  danger :  for,  when  you
have  occafion  to  ufe  it,  it  is  eafy,  after  you  have  taken  away  that  which
is  damaged,  to  make  ufe  of  that  which  is  lower,  and  altogether  found.
But  tho’  I  may  feem  to  have  mentioned  thefe  things  out  of  their  proper
place,  yet  I  have  not  done  it  unleafonably.

The  oil  and  wine-prefles,  and  the  oil-cellars  efpecially,  ought  to  be
warm,  becaufe  every  kind  of  liquor  is  more  eafily  diflolved  or  kept
fluid  with  a  gentle  heat,  and  is  more  bound  up  and  congealed  with  cold.
Oil,  if  it  freezes,  which  feldom  happens,  will  grow  mufty,  and  cor¬
rupt.  But  as  natural  heat  is  wanted,  which  is  procured  by  the  fitua-
tion  and  the  climate,  fo  there  is  no  occafion  for  fire,  or  the  flame  of  a
candle,  becaufe  the  tafte  of  the  oil  is  fpoiled  by  fmoke  and  foot :  for
which  reafon  the  oil-prefs  ought  to  receive  light  from  the  fouth  quarter,
that  fo  we  may  be  under  no  neceflity  of  making  ufe  either  of  a  fire  or  a
lamp,  when  the  olive-berries  are  prefled.

Let  the  caldron-room,  where  your  fodden  wine,  or  rob  of  grapes,
is  made,  be  neither  narrow  nor  dark,  that  fo  the  fervant,  who  has  the
charge  of  boiling  it  down  to  a  certain  quantity,  may  go  about  his  bufi-
nefs  without  inconveniency.  The  fmoke-room  alfo,  wherein  wood,
that  has  not  been  long  cut,  may  be  fpeedily  dried,  may  be  made  in  the
ruftic  part  of  the  manor-houfe,  joining  to  the  ruflic  baths ;  for  thefe
are  alfo  neceflary  for  the  fervants  to  bathe  in,  but  only  upon  holydays  j
for  the  frequent  ufe  of  them  is,  by  no  means,  proper  for  {Lengthening
the  body.

Repofitories  or  ftorehoufes  for  wine  will  be  rightly  placed  above
thofe  places,  from  whence,  for  the  moft  part,  fmoke  arifes  ^  for  wines
grow  old  more  quickly,  and  attain  to  early  maturity,  by  an  uninter¬
rupted  communication  of  fmoke  to  them  :  for  which  reafon  there  ought
alfo  to  be  another  loft,  whither  they  may  be  removed,  left,  on  the
other  hand,  they  be  tainted  with  too  much  fumigation.  As  to  what
relates  to  the  fituation  of  the  manor-houfe,  and  the  difpofition  of  the
feveral  parts  thereof,  enough  has  been  faid.

Moreover,  it  is  neceflary,  that  thofe  things  alfo  be  about  a  manor-
houfe  ;  an  oven  and  a  mill>  of  fuch  bignefs  as  the  number  of  the  future
inhabitants  {hall  require  ;  two  ponds  at  leaf!,  the  one  for  the  fervice  of
cattle,  and  for  geefe ;  the  other  in  which  we  may  fleep  lupines,  wil¬
lows,  rods,  and  other  things,  which  are  proper  for  our  occafions.  Let
there  be  alfo  two  dunghils,  one  which  may  receive  new  off-fcourings

and


Chap.  VII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  37

and  filth,  and  keep  them  a  whole  year  ;  and  a  fecond,  from  which  the
old  may  be  carried.  But  let  both  of  them  have  their  bottoms  fome-
what  (helving,  with  a  gentle  defcent,  in  the  manner  of  ponds,  both
well  built  and  paved,  that  they  may  not  let  the  moidure  pafs  through  ;
for  it  is  of  great  importance,  that  the  dung  retain  its  drength  by  the  juice
of  it  not  being  dried  up  ;  and  that  it  be  continually  foaked  in  liquor,
that  fo,  if  there  be  any  feeds  of  thorns  or  grades  thrown  into  it,  with
draw  or  chaff,  they  may  perifh,  and,  when  carried  out  into  the  fields,
not  fill  the  corns  with  weeds.  Wherefore  fkilful  Hufbandmen,  what¬
ever  fweepings  they  carry  out  of  the  folds  or  (fables,  they  put  hurdles
made  of  rods  upon  them,  and  cover  them,  and  don’t  fuffer  them  to  dry
with  the  winds,  or  be  burnt  up  with  the  violent  heat  of  the  fun.

The  thre(hing-floor,  if  it  can  be  conveniently  done,  muff  be  fo
placed,  that  the  Mafter,  or  the  Steward  at  lead,  may  look  down  from
his  apartment  into  it.  That  is  the  bed  which  is  paved  with  flint,  be-
caufe  the  corns  are  both  quickly  beaten  out,  when  the  ground  does  net
yield  to  the  beating  and  thumpings  of  the  hoofs  of  the  cattle,  and  of  the
threfhing-indruments ;  and  alfo  when  the  fame  are  winnowed,  they
are  cleaner,  and  without  dones  and  (mall  clods  of  earth,  which  com¬
monly  a  threfhing-floor,  made  of  earth,  throws  up  during  the  threfh-
ing.  And  there  ought  to  be  a  fhed  built  adjoining  to  the  threfhing-
floor,  efpeeially  in  Italy ,  becaufe  of  the  incondancy  of  the  weather,
into  which  the  corn,  that  is  half-threfhed,  may  be  carried,  and  (heltered,
if  a  fudden  (hower  fliould  unexpectedly  happen:  for,  in  fome  countries
beyond-fea,  where  there  is  no  rain  in  fummer,  there  is  no  occafion  for
this.  The  orchards  and  gardens  mud  be  inclofed  or  walled  round,  and
be  near  at  hand,  and  in  that  part,  into  which  all  the  dung  and  dirt  of
the  poultry-yard  and  bagnios,  and  the  rotten  lees  fqueezed  out  of  the
olive -berries,  may  flow ;  for  both  the  pot-herb  and  the  tree  is  made
glad  and  thrives  with  this  kind  of  nouridiment.


CHAP.  VII.

Of  the  Offices  of  a  Mafter  of  a  Family^

AFTER  the  owner  has  got  into  his  pofleflion  all  thefe  things,
either  ready  prepared  to  his  hand,  or  has  put  them  into  this
order  and  condition  himfelf,  as  in  all  other  things,  fo  principally  with
refpeCl  to  men,  his  own  chief  care  is  requifite  ;  and  thefe  are  either

farmers,,


38  L,  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  .Book  l

farmers  (i),  or  fervants  loofe  or  kept  in  chains.  Let  him  treat  his
farmers  with  civility,  and  lhew  himfelf  eafy  and  gentle  towards  them,
and  more  greedily  exact  their  work  than  their  payments  from  them ;
bccaufe  this  is  both  lefs  offenfive  to  them,  and,  upon  the  whole,  is  of
greater  advantage  ;  for,  where  land  is  carefully  cultivated,  for  the
mod  part,  it  brings  gain,  and  never  any  lofs  (except  when  ftorms  and
tempefts  (  2),  or  the  outrageous  violence  of  robbers,  furprife  them) ;  there¬
fore  the  farmer  dares  not  demand  an  abatement.

But  neither  ought  the  landlord  to  be  tenacious  of  his  own  right  in
every  thing  to  which  he  has  bound  his  tenant  ;  fuch  as  in  exacting  pun¬
ctual  payment  upon  the  very  days  the  money  becomes  due,  and  wood
and  other  additional  duties,  over  and  above  his  rent,  the  care  of  which
brings  greater  trouble  than  expences  to  peafants.  Nor  indeed  muft
we  exaCt  all  that  the  law  allows ;  for  the  antients  thought,  that  the
rigour  of  the  law  was  the  great  eft  opprefjmi  and  vexation  :  nor,  on  the
other  hand,  mud  we  intirely  give  up  our  claim  and  right,  becaufeeven
the  belt  of  debtors,  as  Alphius  the  ufurer  (3)  is  reported  to  have  faid
very  truly,  become  bad,  by  not  being  called  upon  to  make  their  pay¬
ments.  And  I  myfelf  have  heard  Lucius  Volufius  (4),  an  antient  man,
who  was  Conful  in  our  memory,  and  a  very  rich  man,  affirm,  that
that  landlord’s  eftate  was.  the  mod  happy,  which  had  tenants  that  were
natives  of  it,  and,  by  a  long  familiarity,  even  from  their  .very  cradles,
always  retained  them,  as  if  they  had  been  born  upon  their  own  pater¬
nal  inheritance.  And  indeed  it  is  my  opinion,  that  frequent  letting  of
the  ground  is  a  bad  thing;  but  that  neverthelefs  a  farmer  that  lives  in
town  is  the  word,  who  chufes  rather  to  cultivate  land  by  his  fervants,

(4)  The  Romans  frequently  lett  their  lands  to  freemen,  who  either  paid  them  in  kind,
or  in  money,  fo  much  yearly;  or  they  gave  them  a  certain  allowance  for  their  labour,
and  the  landlord  bad  the  remainder.  Sometimes  they  cultivated  them  by  their  flaves,
under  the  care  and  direction  of.a  Bailiff,  as  has  been  already  mentioned.

(2)  Unufual  ftormy  tempeftuous  weather  was,  by  the  Romans^  called  vis  major  cccli.
The  Greeks  called  it  vea  fJia v,  whereby  they  fignified,  that  ftorms  of  wind,  hail,  lightning,
<&c.  which  prove  defirudiive  to  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  are  calamities  fent  by  Heaven
for  the  punifhment  of  mortals.  And  it  may  be  remarked,  as  an  intfance  of  the  equity
of  their  laws,  that,  in  the  opinion  of  their  greateft  lawyers,  when  the  fruits  of  the  earth
were  thereby  more  hurt  than  the  teo.ant  was  able  to  bear,  he  was  not  to  fuftain  the  lofs ;
non  de'oet  conduttori  effe  daninofa,  leg.  19.  digefi.  tit.  2.  locati  covduEli.  The  landlord,  I
fuppofe,  not  only  , loll, his  rent  for  that  year,  but  alfo  maintained  his  tenant,  if  all  was
fwept  away,  as  frequently  happens  in  thofe  countries.

(3)  Alpbius ,  a  famous  ufurer,  whom  Horace  mentions  in  his  fecond  epode;  a  man  who
upderQood  his  qwn.intereft  mighty  well,  and  how  to  place  his  money  to  the  beft  advan¬
tage.

^4)  j Lucius  Volupus  -Saturmnus  was  Conful  in  the  year  of  the  city  808.  He  is  called
Quintus  Volupus  in  the  F afti.  He  is  feveral  times  mentioned  by  Tliny,  particularly  lib.  vii.
o,  14,  &  c.  48.  as  havi/ig  lived  to  a  .very  ,  great  age.


Chap.- VII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  39

than  by  himfelf.  Saferna  ufed  to  fay,  that,  from  fuch  a  man  as  this,
indead  of  your  rent,  you  have  commonly  a  law-fuit :  for  which  reafon
we  mud;  be  at  fome  pains  to  retain  people  that  live  condantly  in  the
country  for  our  farmers,  and  fuch  as  may  continue  with  us,  when
either  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  cultivate  our  land  ourfelves,  or  that  it
is  not  expedient  to  do  it  by  our  fervants  3  which  neverthelefs  does  not
happen  but  in  thofe  regions,  which  are  uninhabited  and  defolate,  by
reafon  of  the  badnefs  of  the  air,  and  the  barrennefs  of  the  foil.  But
when  the  air  is  tolerably  wholfome,  and  the  land  tolerably  good,  it
never  happens,  that  every  man’s  own  care  does  not  bring  him  in  more
from  his  land,  than  that  of  a  farmer;  nor  does  it  ever  happen,  even
fuppofe  you  commit  it  to  a  Bailiff,  unlefs  either  the  greateft  negligence
or  rapacioufnefs  of  the  fervant  intervene  ;  both  which  crimes,  there  is
no  manner  of  doubt,  are,  for  the  mod;  part,  either  committed  or  che-
rifhed  by  the  mailer’s  fault,  feeing  he  has  it  in  his  power  to  beware
either  not  to  fet  fuch  a  perfon  over  his  affairs,  or  to  take  care  to  remove -
him  after  he  has  appointed  him.

Neverthelefs,  in  lands  that  lie  at  a  great  didance,  to  which  a  mader'
of  a  family  cannot  eafily  make  excurflons,  it  is  more  tolerable  to  have
any  kind  of  land  in  the  hands  of  farmers,  that  are  freemen,  than  of
Bailiffs,  that  are  Oaves,  but  efpecially  corn-land,  which  a  farmer  can¬
not  at  all  dedroy,  and  turn  topfy-turvy,  (as  he  may  do  vineyards,  and
plantations  of  trees  for  fupporting  vines)  and  which  fervants  do  great
mifchief  to,  who  lett  out  your  oxen  to  hire,  and  feed  both  them  and
the  other  cattle  very  forrily  •  nor  do  they  carefully  plow  the  ground  j
and  charge  to  your  account  much  more  feed  fown,  than  what  they
have  really  fown.  But  neither  do  they  aflid  what  they  have  committed
to  the  earth,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  that  it  may  yield  a  good  increafe.
And,  when  they  have  brought  it  into  the  threfhing-door,  while  they
are  threflnng  it,  they  daily  leffen  it,  either  by  their  knavifh  tricks  or
negligence  j  for  they  both  deal  it  themfelves,  and  negleft  to  keep  it
fafely  from  other  thieves.  Neither  do  they  faithfully  bring  to  their
account  what  they  have  laid  up  in  dore.  So  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  both
the  agent  and  the  other  fervants  are  tranfgreffors,  and  the  land  is
often  defamed  and  decried.  Wherefore  I  am  of  opinion,  that  a  manor
of  this  kind  ought  to  be  lett,  if,  as  I  faid,  it  mud  be  deprived  of  the
prefence  of  the  landlord.


CHAP.


4o


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  I.


CHAP.  VIII.

(i)  Of  Cattle ,  and  of  Herdfmen  and  Shepherds ,  and  fuch  as

have  the  Overfght  of  Cattle.

The  next  care  is  concerning  fervants,  what  office  or  bufinefs  it
may  be  proper  to  fet  fuch  and  fuch  of  them  over,  and  to  what
works  to  deftinate  each  of  them  :  therefore  I  premonifh,  that  we  take
care  not  to  inftitute  and  appoint  a  Bailiff  out  of  that  kind  of  fervants,
who  have  pleafed  with  their  body  ;  nor  indeed  of  that  order,  who  have
exercifed  any  city-trades,  or  delicate  crafts.  This  kind  of  flaves  is
fiuggifh  and  fleepy,  accuftomed  to  eafe  and  idlenefs,  fports  and  divert¬
ing  fights  in  the  Campus  Martius ,  the  Circus ,  and  the  Theatres  ■,  to
dice,  tipling-houfes,  and  common  ftews  ;  and  they  never  ceafe  to  dream
of  the  fame  follies,  which  when  they  have  transferred  into  Hufbandry,
the  mafter  does  not  fuftain  fo  much  lofs  in  the  fervant  himfelf,  as  he
does  in  his  whole  affairs.

One  muff  be  chofen,  who  is  hardened  to  rural  labour  and  bufinefs
from  his  infancy,  and  is  well  known  by  trials  of  his  capacity.  Never-
thelefs,  if  you  have  no  fuch  perfon  as  this,  let  one  of  thofe  be  fet  over
your  affairs,  who  have  undergone  a  laborious  fervitude;  and  he  muff  be
of  fuch  an  age  as  to  be  paft  the  prime  of  his  youth,  but  not  as  yet  upon
the  borders  of  old  age ;  left  the  firfi  lefien  his  authority  to  command,
feeing  thofe  that  are  more  advanced  in  years  think  it  below  them  to
obey  a  ftrippling  ;  and  left  the  fecond  fuccumb  under  the  weight  of  a
moft  laborious  employment.  Let  him  be  therefore  of  a  middle  age,  of
firm  ftrength,  fkilful  in  rural  affairs,  or  at  leaft  a  perfon  of  the  greateft
diligence  and  care,  that  he  may  learn  the  more  quickly  :  for  it  is  not
the  way  to  forward  our  bufinefs,  that  one  fhould  command,  and  an¬
other  teach ;  for  he  is,  by  no  means,  capable  of  exadling  and  feeing
work  rightly  done  and  finifhed,  who  learns,  from  one  that  is  fubject
to  him,  what,  and  in  what  manner  it  muft  be  done.

Alfo  one  that  is  illiterate,  provided  he  have  a  very  tenacious  memory,
may  do  the  bufinefs  conveniently  enough.  Cornelius  Celfusi ays,  that
a  Bailiff  of  this  ftamp  oftener  brings  money  to  his  mafter,  than  his
book  j  becaufe,  not  knowing  letters,  he  may  be  lefs  able  to  forge,

(i)  The  title  of  this  chapter  is  very  improper,  there  being  no  mention  therein  either  of
cattle,  or  of  thofe  that  take  care  of  them;  but  only  of  the  Bailiff  and  his  office,  and  the
care  and  attention  that  a  . mafter  of  a  family  ought  to  bellow,  both  upon  him  and  his  other

fervants,

contrive,


Chap. VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  41

contrive,  and  frame  accounts  by  himfelf,  or  may  be  afraid  to  do  it  by
another,  becaufe  he  will  be  privy  to  his  villainy.  But  whatever  he  be
who  is  your  Bailiff^  you  muft  aflign  him  one  of  your  women  for  a
mate  to  live  with  him,  that  (he  may  reftrain  him,  and  yet  be  a  help
to  him  in  fome  things.

The  fame  orders  muft  be  given  to  the  Steward  or  Agent,  that  he
may  not  have  any  intimate  correfpondence  with  any  of  the  domeftics,
and  much  lefs  with  a  ftranger.  Neverthelefs,  if  he  (hall  know  any
one  of  them  to  be  active  and  forward  in  managing  and  difpatching  bu-
(inefs,  let  him  condefcend  to  admit  him  fometimes  to  his  table,  upon
an  holiday,  as  a  mark  of  his  refpedt.  Let  him  offer  no  facrifices  but
by  the  order  and  direction  of  his  mafter.  He  (hall  not  admit  into  the
houfe  any  diviners  or  cunning-women ;  both  which  kinds  of  perfons,
with  their  vain  fuperftition,  drive  ignorant  and  unexperienced  minds
to  expences,  and  afterwards  to  flagitious  pra&ices.  Neither  (hall  he
know  any  thing  of  the  city,  or  of  any  fairs  or  public  markets,  unlefs  it
be  in  order  to  buy  or  fell  any  thing  belonging  to  himfelf ;  for  a  Bailiff,
as  Cato  fays  (2),  ought  not  to  be  a  walker  or  rambler,  nor  to  go  out  of
his  bounds,  unlefs  it  be  in  order  to  learn  fomething  relating  to  Agricul¬
ture  j  and  this  is  to  be  allowed,  if  it  be  fo  near  at  hand,  as  he  may  be
able  to  come  foon  back  again.  Let  him  not  fuffer  any  foot-paths,  or
new  boundaries  or  land-marks,  to  be  made  in  the  land ;  neither  let  him
entertain  any  gueft,  unlefs  he  be  hisrnafter’s  friend,  or  intimate  acquaint¬
ance  and  relation.

As  the  Bailiff  muft  be  reftrained  from  thefe  things,  fo  he  muft  be
exhorted  to  take  care  of  all  the  implements  of  Hulbandry,  and  iron
tools,  and  that  of  them  he  lay  up  well  repaired,  and  keep  in  fafe  cu-
ftody,  double  of  what  the  number  of  the  fervants  requires,  that  there
may  be  no  occafion  to  borrow  from  neighbours  ;  becaufe  there  is  more
loft  in  the  fervants  day’s  work,  than  is  fpent  in  the  price  of  things  of
this  fort.  Let  him  keep  all  the  fervants  neat,  and  rather  ufefully  than
delicately  cloathed,  and  carefully  fecured  from  the  wind,  cold,  and  rain;
all  which  are  provided  againft,  and  kept  off,  with  leather-coats  with
(leeves,  coats  made  up  of  many  patches,  and  fhort  frocks  with  cowls.
If  this  be  done,  no  day  is  fo  infupportable,  wherein  fomething  may
not  be  done  in  the  open  air.

Let  him  not  only  be  a  (kilful  artift,  with  refpedt  to  every  thing  re¬
lating  to  Hulbandry,  but  alfo  be  furnifhed  with  the  virtues  of  the  mind,
as  much  as  his  fervile  difpofltion  and  temper  of  mind  does  admit,  that


(2)  Cato,  v.  2.

G


lie


42  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  I.

he  may  neither  govern  with  remifnefs,  nor  with  cruelty.  Let  him
always  cherifh  Tome  of  thofe  that  are  good  ;  neverthelefs  let  him  alfo
fpare  thofe  that  are  not  fo  good  as  they  ought  to  be,  fo  that  they  may
rather  fear  his  feverity,  than  deteft  and  abhor  his  cruelty.  This  point
he  may  gain,  if  he  will  rather  chuie  carefully  to  keep  thofe  that  are
under  his  command  from  committing  faults,  than,  by  his  own  negli¬
gence,  lay  himfelf  under  a  neceffity  of  punifhing  delinquents.  And
there  cannot  be  a  fro?iger  guard  fet  even  upon  the  wickedeft  man  liv¬
ing,  than  a  rigorous  exacting  of  his  work.  Let  the  Bailiff  always  make
his  appearance,  and  fhew  himfelf,  that  the  daily  talks  may  be  performed ;
for  fo  both  the  overfeers  and  directors  of  fuch  and  fuch  particular  works
will  carefully  execute  their  offices ;  and  the  reft  of  the  fervants,  after
they  are  fatigued  with  their  work,  will  rather  fet  their  mind  upon  reft:
and  fleep,  than  upon  pleafure  and  paftime.

Now,  I  wifh  that  thofe  antient,  but  excellent  cuftoms,  which  are
now  become  obfolete,  could  be  brought  again  into  ufe  :  Let  him  not
make  ufe  of  the  fervice  of  any  of  his  fellow-fervants,  but  in  affairs  be¬
longing  to  his  mafer.  Let  him  not  eat  but  in  the  fght  of  all  the  fer-
vants ,  nor  any  other  thing  but  what  is  given  to  the  rejl  ;  for  thus  he
will  take  care,  that  both  the  bread  be  well  baked,  and  the  other  things
be  wholfomely  prepared.  Let  him  not  fuff er  any  body  to  go  without  the
bounds ,  unlefs  he  be  fent  by  himfelf  ;  but  neither  let  him  fend  them  him¬
felf]  unlefs  when  great  yiecefity  obliges  him .  Neither  let  him  carry  on
any  bufnefs  or  commerce  of  his  own ,  or  employ  his  mafers  money  in  buy¬
ing  either  animals ,  or  any  other  things ,  in  order  to  fell  again  j  for  this
trafficking  diverts  the  Bailiff  from  the  care  of  his  mafer s  affairs ,  and
never  fuffers  him  to  balance  accounts  with  him,  and  to  pay  him  to  the
full  j  but,  when  he  is  required  to  pay  the  money,  inftead  of  the  money,
he  (hews  the  goods.

Neverthelefs,  upon  the  whole,  this  one  thing,  above  all  others,
muft  be  required  of  him ;  viz.  that  he  do  not  think  himfelf  to  know
any  thing  whatfoever,  which  he  is  ignorant  of;  but  that  he  always
feek  to  learn  what  he  does  not  know  :  for,  when  it  profits  much  to  do
any  thing  fkilfully,  then  it  hurts  more  to  have  done  it  amifs.  For  there
is  one  thing,  and  that  only,  which  bears  fway,  and  is  the  turning  point
in  Hufbandry  ;  viz.  to  do,  once  for  all,  whatever  the  method  and  man¬
ner  of  the  Culture  requires  ;  for  whenever  the  imprudence  or  negle<ft  is
rectified,  the  thing  itfelf  has  already  fuftained  damage  ;  nor  does  it
afterwards  yield  fuch  abundant  increafe,  as  both  to  reftore  itfelf  fo  far
as  it  is  loft,  and  to  recover  and  make  up  the  gain  you  might  have  got
by  it  in  times  part.


4


As


Chap.  VIII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  43

As  to  the  other  fervants,  thofe  following  precepts  muft,  for  the  moll
part,  be  obferved ;  and  I  don’t  repent,  that  I  myfelf  have  kept  them
carefully  j  viz.  that  I  would  oftener,  and  with  greater  familiarity,  fpeak
to  rural  than  to  town  fervants,  provided  they  had  behaved  themfelves
tolerably  well ;  and  when  I  underftood,  that  their  conftant  labour  was
alleviated  by  the  mailer’s  gentle  behaviour  and  affability,  I  would  fome-
times  alfo  jell  and  be  merry  with  them,  and  allow  them  greater  liberty
to  have  their  jells.  This  alfo  I  often  do :  I  deliberate  and  advife  with
them  concerning  any  new  works,  as  with  perfons  that  have  more  fkill,
that  thereby  I  may  know  what  fort  of  genius,  and  what  flock  of  pru¬
dence,  every  one  of  them  has.  Then,  I  alfo  obferve,  that  they  fet
about  that  work  more  willingly,  which  they  have  been  confulted  about,
and  which,  they  think,  has  been  undertaken  by  their  advice.

Now,  it  is  the  ufual  practice  of  all  people  that  are  circumfpedt,  and
they  never  fail,  to  revie  wthe  Haves  that  are  confined  in  the  work-
houle ;  to  examine  very  narrowly,  if  they  are  carefully  chained,  and
whether  the  places  of  their  confinement  are  Hrong  and  fecure  enough  j
or  whether  or  not  the  Bailiff  has  bound  any  pcrfon  without  the  mailer’s
knowledge,  or  put  him  under  clofer  confinement :  for  the  Bailiff  ought
to  be  exceeding  careful  of  thofe  two  things ;  viz.  that  whomfoever  the
mailer  of  the  family  has  inflicted  this  punifhment  upon,  he  (the  Bailiff)
Ihould  never  releale  him  from  his  fetters,  but  by  his  permiflion  ;  and
whomfoever  he  has  put  in  bonds  by  his  own  authority,  he  Ihould  not
loofe  him,  before  the  mailer  knows  it.  And  the  mailer  of  a  family*
ought  to  inquire  fo  much  the  more  narrowly  about  this  kind  of  fervants,
left  they  be  injurioufly  treated,  either  as  to  their  apparel,  or  any  other
thing  allowed  them  $  inafmuch  as  they,  being  fubjedt  to  more  perfons,
as  Bailiffs,  Directors,  and  Overfeers  of  the  works,  and  Keepers  of  the
prifon  and  workhoufe,  are  more  liable  to  fuffer  injuries ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  are  more  to  be  dreaded,  when  they  are  hurt  either  by
cruelty  or  avarice.  Therefore  let  a  diligent  mailer  inquire  both  of
themfelves,  and  alfo  of  the  other  fervants  that  are  not  in  bonds,  who
are  moll  to  be  credited,  whether  they  receive  all  their  juft  dues,  accord¬
ing  to  his  appointment ;  and  let  him  examine  into  the  goodnefs  of  the
bread  and  drink,  by  tailing  them  himfelf,  and  review  and  examine
into  their  cloathing,  mittens,  and  fhoes ;  and  let  him  often  give  them
liberty  and  opportunity  to  complain  of  thofe,  who  either  ufe  them  bar-
baroully,  or  cheat  and  deceive  them.  We  indeed  are  as  careful  to  do
juftice  to,  and  avenge  thofe,  who  complain  with  any  appearance  of
juftice,  as  to  corredt  and  punifh  thofe,  whoraife  feditions  and  uproars
among  the  fervants,  and  calumniate  their  Overfeers  and  Directors  ;

G  2  and,


44.  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  T.

and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  beftow  rewards  upon  thofe,  who  behave
themfelves  with  activity  and  diligence.

To  women  alfo,  who  have  been  more  fruitful  than  ordinary,  who,
for  a  certain  number  of  children,  ought  to  be  honoured  and  refpedted,
we  have  fometimes  given  reft  from  labour,  and  alfo  their  liberty,  when
they  had  educated  and  brought  up  many  fons ;  for  fhe,  that  had  three
fons,  was  exempted  from  labour;  and  fhe,  that  had  more,  obtained
her  liberty  alfo.  For  this  juftice  and  care  of  a  mafter  of  a  family  con¬
tributes  much  to  increafe  his  eftate.

But,  whenever  the  mafter  of  a  family  returns  from  the  city,  let  him'
remember  to  pay  his  devotion  to  his  houfhold  gods-  Then,  if  it  be  a>
proper  time,  and  early  in  the  day,  let  him  prefently,  if -otherwife,  the:
next  day,  carefully  viftt  and  furvey  his  bounds,  and  review  all  the:
parts  of  his  land,  and  confider,  whether  his  abfence  has  not  occafioned
fome  relaxation  in  the  difcipline  and  watch  ;  whether  any  tree,  whether
any  vine,  whether  any  fruits  of  the  ground,  are  out  of  their  place,  and
gone.  Then  let  him  alfo  mufter  all  his  fervants,  and  number  his  cattle,
and  look  over  all  the  tools  belonging  to  the  ground,  and  his  houfhold-
furniture.  All  which  things  if  he  purpofe  and  refolve  to  do  for  many
years,  when  old  age  fhall  come  upon  him,  he  fhall  enjoy  the  advan —
tages  of  a  regular  and  well-ordered  difcipline  j  nor  fhall  he  ever  be  fa  -
decrepit  or  worn  out  with  years,  as  to  be  defpifed  by  his  fervants.  _


C  H  A  p:  IX.

Of  what  Size  and  Plight  of  Body  the  Slaves  mufi  he ,  which
are  to  he  affigned  to  every  'particular  Work .

WE  muft  alfo  tell  you,  to  what  bufinefs  or  works  we  think  every
particular  habit  of  body  and  mind  proper  to  be  appointed.  The
fedulous  and  moft  frugal  you  muft  make  Overfeers  and  Maftersof  your
works;  for  both  thefe  qualities  contribute  more  to  this  bufinefs,  than,
either  ftature  or  ftrength  of  body ;  becaufe  this  employment  and  fer-
vice  is  an  office  of  diligent  watchfulnefs,  and  of  art.  The  genius  or
difpofition  of  the  mind,  tho’  neceflary  in  a  Herdfman,  or  in  one  that
labours  with  oxen,  neverthelefs  is  not  enough,  unlefs  the  hugenefs  of
his  voice,  and  the  bulk  of  his  body,  make  him  formidable  to  the  cattle.
But  let  clemency  moderate  his  ftrength,  becaufe  he  ought  to  be  more

terrible


Chap.  IX.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  45

terrible  than  cruel,  that  the  oxen,  not  being  worn  out  and  confumed
with  the  vexation  of  labour,  and  blows  at  the  fame  time,  may  both
be  obedient  to  his  commands,  and  hold  out  for  more  years.  But  what
the  offices  of  Mailers  and  Overfeers  of  the  works,  and  thofe  of  Herdf-
men,  and  Labourers  with  oxen,  are,  I  fhall  treat  of  again  in  their
own  place.  It  fuffices  at  prefent  to  have  taken  notice,  that,  in  thefe,
tallnefs  and  ftrength  of  body  is  of  very  great  importance,  but,  in  thofe,
of  none  at  all  j  for,  as  I  faid,  we  ffiould  make  the  tailed:  of  our  fervants
Ploughmen,  both  for  what  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  alfo  becaufe
there  is  no  work  in  Hufbandry,  wherewith  a  tall  man  is  lefs  fatigued,
becaufe,  in  plowing,  he  leans  almoft  eredt  upon  the  plough-tail.

A  fervant  for  low  labour  and  drudgery  may  be  of  any  iize,  provided
he  be  fit  for  enduring  labour.  Vineyards  don’t  fo  much  require  tall
men,  as  fuch  as  are  broad  and  brawny,  and  have  long  arms ;  for  this
make  of  body  is  more  convenient  for  digging,  pruning,  and  other  parts
of  culture  relating  to  them-.

Agriculture  does  not  require  fobfiety  and  moderation  fo  much  in  this
particular  bufinefs  of  vine-dreffing,  as  in  other  parts  of  it  j  becaufe  a
vine-drefifer  ought  to  do  his  work  both  in  the  company  of  many  others,
and  alfo  under  the  eye  of  a  monitor/  And,  for  the  moft  part,  wicked
fellows  are  of  a  more  quick  and  adlive  fpirit,  which  the  nature  and
quality  of  this  work  requires  j  for  it  requires  not  only  one  that  is  robufl,
but  one- that  is  quick,  adtive,  and  dextrous  to  attend  upon  it:  there¬
fore  vineyards  are  commonly  cultivated  by  flaves  kept  in  chains.  Ne-
verthelefs  there ds  nothing  that  a  fober  man,  of  the  fame  nimblenefs  and
adtivity,'  wilh  not  do  better  than  a  rogue.  I  have  inferted  this^  that  no¬
body  may  think^  that  I  entertain  any  fuch  opinion,  as  to  chufe  to  culti¬
vate  the  ground  rather  by  malefadlors,  than  by  innocent  men.  But  this
is  what  I  think,  that  the  bufinefs  of  fervants  ffiould  not  be  confounded;,
fo  that  all  of  them  ffiould  be  put  upon  doing  all  things  j  for  that  is  not
at  all  for  the  intereft  of  the  Huffiandman,  either  becaufe  not  any  one  of
them  believes,  that  any  particular  work  does  properly  belong  to  him  j  or
becaufe,  when  he  has  done  his  utmod  endeavours,  he  believes,  that  he
does  not  promote  his  own  proper  bufinefs,  but  that  which  is  common  to
all ;  therefore  he  flackens  his  hand,  and  very  much  withdraws  himfelf
from  the  labour:-  nor  yet  can  a  fault,  which  is  done  by  many,  be  found,
out  to  be  done  by  any  particular  man;  for  which  reafon  the  Plough¬
men  mull  be  feparated  from  the  Vine-dreflers,  and  the  Vine-dreflers
from  the  Ploughmen,,  and  thefe  from  the  Drudges.

The  clafles  alfo,  into  which  you  rank  your  fervants,  mull  be  made
not  to  confift  of  more  than  ten  men,  which  the  antients  called  decuries ,

and


Z


46  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &c.  Book.  I.

and  did  mod  approve  of,  becaufe  this  determinate  number  might  be
mod  conveniently  watched  over,  and  obferved,  while  they  were  doing
their  work,  and  their  multitude  not  confound  the  diligence  of  their
M  onitor,  who  leads  the  way.  Therefore,  if  the  land  be  of  a  confider-
ab^e  breadth,  the  clafles  mud  be  led  forth  to  different  quarters,  and  the
work  fo  divided,  that  they  may  neither  be  by  ones  nor  by  twos ;  be¬
caufe,  when  they  are  difperfed,  they  are  not  eafily  watched  over,  and
kept  to  their  bufinefs.  Neverthelefs  there  ought  not  to  be  above  ten
together,  led,  on  the  other  hand,  when  there  is  too  great  a  number
together,  each  individual  may  think,  that  the  work  does  not  belong  to
him.  This  way  of  ordering  and  difpofing  them  not  only  raifes  emula¬
tion,  but  difcovers  the  flothful  alfo  j  for  whild  every  one  is  driving  to
forward  the  work,  then  the  punifhment  of  loiterers  is  juft,  and  feems
inflicted  without  murmuring  or  complaint.  But  while  we  are  giving
precepts  and  directions  to  the  future  Huftiandman  concerning  fuch  things
as  he  mud  chiefly  loo  k  after  and  take  care  of  before-hand,  viz.  the
wholfomenefs,  the  road,  the  neighbourhood,  the  water,  the  fituation  of
the  manor-houfe,  the  extent  of  the  ground,  the  feveral  forts  of  tenants
and  fervants,  the  diftribution  of  the  feveral  offices  and  works,  by  thele
we  come  now,  in  due  time,  to  the  culture  of  the  ground  itfelf;  of
which  we  fhall  prefently  difcourfe  at  great  length  in  the  following
book.


L.  JUNIUS


[47]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y-

BOOK  SECOND.


CHAP.  I.

•,Vn  .. ;.  \  . :  vf;  .7

That  the  Earth  neither  grows  old \  nor  wears  out ,  if  it  he


YOU  afk'me,  Publius  Sjlvinus,  what  I  don’t  refufe  to  inform
you  of  without  delay;  Why,  in  the  very  beginning  of  the
firft  book,  I  immediately  confuted  the  opinion  of  almofl  all
the  antients,  who  have  fpoken  of  Hufbandry ;  and  rejected,
as  falfe  and  erroneous  (i),  their  judgment,  who  think,  that  the  earth,
being  wearied  and  worn  out  by  a  long-continued  cultivation,  and
become  barren  by  the  filth,  naftinefs,  and  mouldinefs  it  has  contracted,
in. a  long  fucceflion  of  years  already  paft,  is  now  become  old?  I  am
not  ignorant,  that  you  have  a  great  veneration  for  the  authority,  both
of  other  illuftrious  writers,  and  efpecially  for  that  of  Tremellius ;  who,
after  having,  in  an  elegant  and  learned  manner,  written  and  published
very  many  precepts  of  Hufbandry,  being  certainly  carried  away  and
allured  by  too  great  a  regard  for  the  antients,  who  treat  of  the  like  fub-
jeCt,  did,  without  any  foundation,  believe,  that  the  earth ,  the  parent
of  all  things ,  like  the  female  fex,  being  now  fpent  and  worn  out  with

(i)  Pliny  alfo,  in  his  natural  hifiory ,  confutes  the  opinion  of  thofe,  who  think,  that
the  earth  is  become  old,  and  left  fruitful  than  formerly ;  and  charges  its  unfruitfulneft  upon
its  want  of  due  cultivation,  lib.  xvii.  c.  <.  and  in  other  places,  .

old


dunged *


48  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  II.

old  age,  was  become  unfit  for  the  produdlion  of  fruits.  Which  thing
I  myfelf  would  alfo  acknowledge,  if  fhe  produced  no  fruits  at  all :  for  a
woman  is  then  reckoned  to  be  arrived  at' barren  old  age,  not  when  lhe
ceafes  to  bring  two  or  three  children  at  a  birth,  but  when  lhe  is  neither
able  to  conceive  or  bring  forth  at  all.  Therefore,  after  the  days  of  her
youth  are  paft  and  gone,  tho’  a  long  life  ftill  remains,  yet  bearing  of
children,  which  is  denied  to  years,  is  not  reflored  to  her  :  but,  on  the
contrary,  when  the  earth  is  abandoned,  and  left  deflituteof  men,  either
by  their  own  choice,  or  by  fome  accident,  yet,  when  they  return  to  it
again,  and  cultivate  it,  it  pays  the  Hufbandman  with  a  very  large  ufury
for  the  time  it  ceafed.  Therefore  the  earth’s  old  age  is  not  the  caufe
of  jhe  fmall  quantity  of  her  fruit,  feeing  that,  when  once  old  age  has
invaded  and  come  upon  her,  fhe  has  no  regrefs,  no  way  to  recover  her-
felf,  to  take  heart,  and  grow  young  again.

Nor  indeed  does  the  wearinefs  and  faintnefs  of  the  ground  diminifh
the  fruit  that  is  due  to  the  Hufbandman  j  for  it  does  not  become  a  wife
naan  to  be  induced  to  believe,  that,  as  in  men  wearinefs  follows  upon,
and  is  occafionedby,  too  violent  exercife  of  the  body,  or  the  weight  of
fome  burden,  fo  it  is  with  land,  by  ‘its  being  tolled  and  tumbled  by
frequent  cultivation.  Why  is  it  therefore,  fay  you,  that  Tremellius
pofitively  affirms,  that  woodlands,  which  were  never  tilled,  when  they
are  firft  cultivated,  bring  forth  abundantly ;  but,  foon  afterwards,  they
don’t  thus  pay  the  labour  of  the  Hufbandman?  He  fees,  no  doubt,  what
comes  to  pafsj  but  why,  it  is  fo,  he  does  not  throughly  underffand.
For  land,  which  has  lain  long  uncultivated,  and  which,  from  being
all  covered  over  with  wood,  has  been  lately  reduced  into  corn-land,
ought  not  therefore  to  be  reckoned  the  more  fruitful,  becaufe  it  has  lain
untilled,  and  is  younger  j  but  becaufe,  being  fattened,  as  it  were,  with
the  more  plentiful  nourifhment,  which  it  received  from  the  leaves  and
herbs,  which  it  naturally  produced,  during  the  courfe  of  many  years,
it  has  flrength  enough  to  bring  forth,  educate,  and  bring  to  perfedtion,
the  fruits  that  grow  upon  it.  But  when  the  roots  of  the  herbs,  which
are  torn  up  and  broken  with  fpades  and  ploughs,  and  the  woods  which
are  cut  down  with  the  ax,  have  left  off  nourifhing  their  mother  with
their  leaves,  and  when  fuch  leaves  as  fell  down  from  fhrubs  and  trees  in
the  autumn,  and  lay  upon  her,  are,  prefently  after,  turned  over  with
the  fock,  and  mixed  with  the  lower  ground,  which,  for  the  mofl  part,
is  leaner,  and  afterwards  confumed,  it  follows,  that  the  ground,  being
deprived  of  its  former  nourifhment,  grows  lean.

It  is  not  therefore  from  wearinefs,  as  very  many  have  believed,  nor
from  old  age,  but  indeed  from  our  own  flothfulnefs,  that  our  cultivated

lands


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  49

lands  don’t  fo  bountifully  anfwer  our  expectation  as  formerly ;  for  we
might  receive  a  greater  product,  if  the  earth  were  refreshed  and  che-
riflied  with  frequent,  feafonable,  and  moderate  ftercoration  :  of  the  cul¬
ture  of  which  we  {hall  now  difcourfe,  as  we  promifed  in  the  firft  book.


CHAP.  II.

Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  Land.

THEY  who  had  the  greatefl  fkill  and  experience  in  Hufbandry,
O  Silvanus ,  have  faid.  That  there  are  three  kinds  of  land  (i),
champain ,  hilly ,  and  mountainous.  They  approved  moft  of  a  champain ,
lituated  not  upon  a  perfectly  equal  and  even  plain,  nor  exactly  upon  a
level,  but  fomewhat  declining  ;  of  a  hill  riling  gently,  and  by  degrees;
and  of  a  mountain  not  lofty  and  rugged,  but  covered  with  plenty  of  wood
and  grafs.  And  to  each  of  thefe  kinds  they  affign  fix  different  fpecies
of  land ;  viz.  that  of  a  fat  or  lean,  loofe  or  denfe,  moift  or  dry  foil ;
which  qualities,  compounded  and  mixed  alternately  with  one  another,
make  very  many  varieties  of  land.  To  enumerate  them,  is  not  the  bu-
finefs  of  the  ingenious  Hufbandman ;  nor  indeed  is  it  the  bulinefs  of
any  art  to  wander  over  all  the  different  fpecies,  which  are  innumerable ;
but  to  begin  with  generals,  which  can  be  eafily  joined  together  by  the
thoughts  of  the  mind,  and  brought  within  the  compafs  of  words.

Therefore  we  muft  have  recourfe  to  certain  conjunctions,  as  it  were,
of  qualities,  that  are  unlike  or  contrary  to  one  another,  which  the  Greeks
call  av'CyyicLs  evxvIioluTcoy)  and  we  fhall  tolerably  well  call  the  matching

(1)  Varrot  lib.  i.  cap.  6.  defcribes  the  conveniencies  and  inconveniencies  of  thefe  three
different  fituations  of  land :  4  In  champain  lands,  he  fays,  the  heat  is  greater,  as  in  Apuliay
4  where  it  is  very  grievous.  Lands  that  are  mountainous,  as  thofe  of  Vefuvius ,  are  lighter,
4  and  fo  more  wholfome.  They  who  cultivate  low  lands,  fuffer  greater  inconveniency
4  in  fummer  ;  but  high  lands  more  in  winter.  Low  grounds  are  both  Town  and  reaped
4  earlier  in  the  fpring,  than  thofe  that  are  high.  Some  things  grow  taller  and  ftronger  upon
4  mountains,  becaufe  of  the  cold,  as  firs  and  oaks,  &c.  Other  things  thrive  belt  below,

4  becaule  it  is  warmer,  as  the  almond-tree ,  and  the  Marijcan  fig-tree.  Corn-lands  are  molt
4  efteemed  upon  plains ;  vineyards  upon  little  hills ;  and  woods  upon  mountains.  They
4  who  inhabit  champains,  are  belt  accommodated  in  winter,  becaufe  then  the  meadows
4  have  plenty  of  grafs,  and  trees  can  then  be  tolerably  well  pruned.  On  the  contrary,  it
4  is  more  convenient  living  upon  mountains  in  fummer,  becaufe  then  there  is  plenty  of
*  forrage  there,  when  all  things  are  withered  and  burnt  up  below ;  and  the  culture  of  trees
4  is  more  commodioully  performed,  becaufe  there  the  air  is  colder.  A  champain,  which
4  tends  or  declines  equably  towards  one  part,  is  better  than  that,  which  lies  exadtly  upon
*  a  level/  With  feveral  other  obfervations  too  tedious  to  mention.

H


9t


5o  L.  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

or  joining  together  of  difcordant  things .  And  we  muft  al fo  inform  you,
that,  of  all  the  things  which  the  earth  brings  forth,  there  are  more  of
them  which  thrive  better  upon  a  champain,  than  upon  a  hill,  and  in  a
fat  foil,  than  in  a  lean.  As  to  things  growing  in  foils  naturally  dry,  or
well  watered,  we  don’t  find  out,  which  of  them  exceed  in  number,  fee¬
ing  it  is  certain,  that  fuch  as  delight  in  dry  places  are  almod  infinite,  as
are  alfo  thofe  that  delight  in  moid ;  but  there  is  not  any  one  of  them,
that  does  not  grow  up  better  in  loofe  and  open  ground,  than  in  that
which  is  clofe  and  denfe  ;  which  our  countryman  Virgil  alfo,  after  he
had  reckoned  up  the  other  commendable  qualities  of  fruitful  land,
added  (2),

*  A  loofe  and  crumbling  foil ;  for,  with  the  plough,

‘  We  If  rive  to  make  it  fuch.’

For  to  cultivate  is  no  other  thing  but  to  open,  and  loofen,  and  fer¬
ment  the  earth  ;  therefore  the  fame  land,  which  is  both  fat,  and  loofe,
and  crumbling,  yields  the  greated  profits,  becaufe,  at  the  time  that  it
yields  the  moft,  it  requires  the  leaf!;,  and  what  it  requires  is  done  with
very  little  labour  and  expence.  Therefore  fuch  a  foil  may  very  julldy
be  laid  to  be  the  very  bed  of  any.

Then,  next  to  this,  is  th  z  fatty-thick  denfe  foil ,  which  rewards,  with
great  increafe,  the  charges  and  labour  of  the  farmer.  A  place  that  is
well  watered  is  reckoned  in  the  third  rank,  becaufe  it  can  yield  fruit
without  any  charge.  Cato,  who  preferred  the  produd  of  meadows  to
all  other  produces  of  lands  whatfoever,  called  this  the  beft.  But  we  are
now  lpeaking  of  moving  and  agitating  the  earth,  and  not  of  letting  it
lie  frill .

There  is  no  kind  reckoned  worfe,  than  that  which  is  dry,  and  like-
wife  denfe  and  lean  ;  becaufe  it  is  both  cultivated  with  difficulty,  and,
when  it  is  cultivated,  it  does  not  fo  much  indeed  as  thank  you  :  nor  does
it  turn  to  good  account,  when  you  turn  it  to  meadows  or  padures.
Therefore  this  land,  whether  it  be  tilled,  or  lies  fallow,  will  always
give  the  Hufoandman  reafon  to  wifli  he  had  never  meddled  with  it,
and  is  to  be  avoided  as  if  it  were  peffilential ;  for  this  brings  forth  death ,
but  that ,  famine ,  death's  mod:  frightful  and  cruel  companion,  if  we
give  credit  to  the  Grecian  mules,  which  cry  aloud  (3),

‘  With  famine  to  confume  and  pine  away,

‘  And  flowly  die  at  lad,  what  wo  fo  great  ?  ’

(2)  Vug.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  204.

(tf  Aiy-Z  V  cifliro'/  vif.fi?  ^


But


Chap.  II.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  5r

Bat  now  we  fhall  rather  take  into  confideration  that  kind  of  land
which  is  more  fruitful,  which  mull  be  confidered  under  two  different
views  j  viz.  as  cultivated,  and  as  covered  with  wood.  We  fhall  firft
fpeak  of  reducing  woodlands  into  the  form  of  arable  ground  ;  becaufe
clearing  of  land  is  of  an  older  date  than  the  cultivating  of  it.  Let  us
therefore  confider  a  place  that  is  not  cultivated,  whether  it  be  dry  or
moift,  full  of  wood  and  trees,  or  rugged  and  craggy,  and  full  of  {tones ;
whether  it  be  covered  with  rufhes  or  with  grafs,  and  encumbered  with
fern-plots,  and  nurferies  of  other  fhrubs.  If  it  be  wet,  let  the  abun¬
dance  of  moifture  be  firft  drained  and  dried  up  by  ditches.  Of  thefe
we  have  known  two  forts,  blind  or  hidden ,  and  open.  In  thick  and
chalky  grounds  they  are  left  open  ;  but,  where  the  ground  is  more  loofe,
fome  of  them  are  made  open,  and  others  of  them  are  alfo  fhut  up  and
covered;  fo  that  the  gaping  mouths  of  fuch  of  them  as  are  blind  may
empty  themfelves  into  thofe  that  are  open.  But  it  will  be  proper,  that
the  open  ones  be  wider  towards  the  upper  part,  and  Hoping  and  narrow
towards  the  bottom,  like  ridge-tiles  inverted;  for  fuch  of  them,  whofe
fides  are  perpendicular,  are  prefently  fpoiled  with  the  water,  and  filled
up  with  the  falling  down  of  the  ground  that  lies  uppermoft.

Moreover,  thefe  blind  works  ought  to  be  made  by  finking  furrows
three  feet  deep,  which,  after  they  are  half-filled  with  ftones  and  bare
gravel,  are  made  even,  by  throwing  upon  them  the  earth  that  you  dig¬
ged  out  of  them  ;  but,  if  you  have  neither  ftones  nor  gravel,  you  mult
make,  as  it  were,  a  rope  of  fprays  tied  together,  of  fuch  a  thicknefs,
as  the  bottom  of  the  narrow  ditch  may  receive  it  when  it  is  prefted  to¬
gether,  and,  as  it  were,  exactly  fitted  to  it.  Then  it  muft  be  ftretched
all  along  the  bottom ;  and,  after  treading  cyprefs  or  pine-boughs  upon  it,
or,  if  thefe  cannot  be  had,  any  other  boughs,  let  it  be  covered  with  earth,
having  placed  at  the  head  and  mouth  of  the  ditch  two  great  ftones  only,
inftead  of  pillars,  and  one  fingle  ftone  above  thefe,  after  the  manner  of
little  bridges,  that  this  kind  of  ftrinfture  may  fupport  the  bank,  that  it
may  not  be  {hut  up,  and  the  water  hindered  either  to  run  into  it,  or  out
of  it.

There  are  two  ways  of  managing  tradls  of  land  that  are  covered  with
wood,  fhrubs,  and  bufhes,  either  by  extirpating  the  trees  by  the  very
roots,  and  removing  them  ;  or,  if  they  be  thin,  by  cutting  them  down,
and  fetting  them  on  fire,  and  plowing  up  the  ground.  But  it  is  eafy  to
clear  ftony  ground,  by  picking  up  the  ftones  ;  and,  if  there  be  a  great
number  of  them,  fome  parts  of  the  ground  muft  be  taken  up  with  build¬
ing  them  into  certain  piles,  that  fo  the  other  places  may  be  clear  of  them ;
or  the  ftones  muft  be  buried  in  furrows  dug  very  deep :  which  never-

H  2  thelefs


52  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  II.

thelefs  is  only  to  be  done,  in  cafe  the  low  wages  of  the  labourers  engage
you  to  do  it.

The  deftrudtion  of  bulrufhes  and  grafs  is  trenchings  and  of  fern,
frequently  plucking  them  up  by  the  roots,  which  may  be  done  even
with  the  plough ;  for,  when  they  are  often  pulled  up,  within  the  fpace
of  two  years  they  die,  and  the  more  fpeedily  alfo,  if,  at  the  fame  time,
you  dung,  and  low  with  lupines  or  beans,  that,  with  fome  return  and
profit,  you  may  cure  the  diftemper  of  the  ground ;  for  it  is  certain,  that
fern  is  the  molt  ealily  killed  by  fowing  and  dunging :  but,  if  you  cut
it  with  a  weeding-hook,  as  it  grows  up  from  time  to  time,  which  isbufi-
nefs  for  a  very  boy,  its  livelinefs  is  deltroyed  within  the  forefaid  time.

But  now,  after  the  method  of  clearing  rough  uncultivated  land,  fol¬
lows  the  care  of  lands,  that  are  newly  broken  up  and  cultivated ;  of
which  I  fhall  prefently  declare  my  opinion,  after  I  lhall  have  given  fuch
precepts  and  directions  to  fuch  as  dehre  to  inform  themfelves  of  the  na¬
ture  of  corn-lands,  as  mult  be  frit  learned.

I  remember,  that  very  many  of  the  antients,  who  have  written  of
Hufbandry,  have  declared,  that  the  peculiar  fweetnefs  of  the  ground,
the  abundance  oj  herbs  and  trees ,  and  the  fruit ,  they  produced,  and  its
black  or  afhy  colour ,  were,  as  it  were,  acknowledged  uncontefted  and
undoubted  ligns  of  land  that  was  fat,  and  would  bear  corns  in  abun-
ance.  As  to  the  reft,  I  am  doubtful ;  but,  as  to  the  colour ,  I  cannot
enough  admire,  that  both  other  writers,  and  alfo  Cornelius  Celjus ,  a
man  not  only  well  acquainted  with  Hufbandry,  but  alfo  with  univerfal
nature,  fhould  have  been  fo  much  miftaken,  both  in  their  judgment,
and  alfo  in  their  eye-fight,  that  fo  many  marfhes,  and  fo  many  fields
alfo  full  of  falt-pits,  which,  for  the  moft  part,  are  of  the  forefaid  colours,
did  not  occur  to  them  :  for  we  lcarcely  fee  a  place,  which  is  not  either
of  a  black  or  afhy  colour,  provided  it  contain  any  water  that  moves
flowly ;  unlefs  I  myfelf  perhaps  am  deceived  in  this,  that  I  don’t  think,
that  exceeding  good  corn  can  grow  or  thrive  well  either  in  a  marfhy  or
flimy,  or  in  a  bitter  and  cufy  foil,  or  in  plains  lying  upon  the  fea-fide,
which  are  full  of  falt-pits.  But  this  error  of  the  antients  is  too  mani-
feft  to  want  to  be  confuted  by  many  arguments.

The  colour  therefore  is  no  certain  authority,  nor  fure  evidence,  of  the
goodnefs  of  arable  lands;  and  therefore  corn-land ,  that  is,  rich  fat  landy
mu  ft  rather  be  judged  of  by  other  qualities;  for  as  the  ftrongeft  cattle
have  different  and  almoft  innumerable  colours,  fo  alfo  the  ftrongeft
lands  have  a  great  number  and  variety  of  them.  Therefore  as  we  muft
take  care,  that  the  ground,  which  we  mark  out  by  its  colour  for  culti¬
vating,  be  fat,  yet  this  is  but  of  very  little  importance  by  itfelf,  if  k

want


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  53

want  fweetnefs ;  both  which  we  may  inform  ourfelves  of  in  a  manner
expeditious  enough  :  for  you  fprinkle  a  very  little  water  upon  a  clod  of
it,  and  knead  it  with  your  hand;  and  if  it  be  glutinous,  and  if,  when
prefled  with  the  gentleft  touch,  it  flicks  to  your  fingers,  and,  as  Virgil
fays  (4),

‘  When  handled,  clammy  grows,  and  flicks,  like  pitch,

*  Fall  to  the  fingers;’

And  if,  when  the  fame  is  thrown  againfl  the  ground,  it  does  not  crum¬
ble,  and  fall  into  final!  bits,  this  tells  us,  that,  in  luch  matter,  there  is
a  natural  inherent  juice  and  fatnefs ;  but  alfo,  if  after  having  thrown
the  earth  out  of  fome  trenches,  you  would  replace  and  put  it  up  very
clofe,  and  tread  it  down  again,  when,  with  fome  kind  of  ferment,  as
it  were,  there  is  more  than  enough  of  it  for  filling  up  the  trench,  it  will
be  a  certain  figny  that  it  is  fat ;  and  when  there  is  not  enough,  but  fome-
what  wanting,  we  may  be  fure,  that  it  is  poor  and  lean  ;  and,  when
it  exacftly  fills  them,  that  it  is  middling  :  tho’  thefe  things  I  have  now
mentioned  may  poflibly  feem  not  to  be  fo  true  figns,  as  if  the  earth
were  fome  what  of  a  blackifh  colour,  which  is  beft  tried  and  approved
by  the  inereafe  of  the  fruits  it  produces.

We  fhall  alfo  know  it  by  its  tafle,  if  out  of  that  part  of  the  land,
which  difpleafes  us  moft,  there  be  clods  dug,  and  foaked  in  an  earthen
vefl'el,  and  thoroughly  mixed  with  fweet  water,  and  carefully  flrained,
in  the  manner  of  dreggy  wine, and  then  carefully  examined  by  the  tafle  ;
for  whatever  tafte  the  water  fhall  have,,  which  it  has  derived  from  the
clods,  fuch  we  fhall  fay  the  ground  has.

But,  befides  this  experiment,  there  are  many  things,  which  may
fhew,  that  the  earth  is  both  fweet,  and  fit  for  corn,  as  the  rujl.\  the  reedy
grafs ,  the  dwarf-elder ,  br amble -bufres ,  wild  plum-trees ,  and  many
other  things,  which  are  alfo  known  to  them  that  fearch  for  water,  and
are  not  nourifhed  but  by  the  fweet  veins  of  the  earth.  Nor  muft  we
be  contented  with  the  appearance  of  the  furface  of  the  earth,  but  care¬
fully  fearch  to  find  out  the  quality  of  the  matter  that  lies  below,  whe¬
ther  it  be  earthy,  or  not.  But  it  will  be  fuffieient  for  corns,  if  the
ground  below  be  equally  good  two  feet  deep.  The  depth  of  four  feet
is  abundantly  enough  for  trees.

When  we  have  thus  carefully  examined  and  made  experiments  upon
thefe  things,  we  muft  prepare  the  land  for  fowing  the  feed.  And  the
land  yields  no  fmall  inereafe,  if  it  be  carefully  and  fkilfully  manured-:

(4)  y/r&-  Gecr^.  lib.  i.  250,


where-


54-  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book II.

wherefore  almoft  all  the  mod  antient  writers  have  written  of,  and  de-
fcribed,  the  form  or  method  of  this  work,  which  Hulbandmen  might
follow  as  maxims ,  and  as  a  law,  in  tilling  their  lands.

It  is  therefore  proper,  that,  when  the  oxen  are  at  work,  they  be
yoked  clofe  to  one  another,  that  they  may  go  the  more  gracefully,
with  a  lofty  air,  and  their  heads  elate  >  and  that  their  necks  may  be
the  lefs  weakened,  and  the  yoke  be  fitted  to,  and  fit  the  better  upon,
their  necks  (y);  for  this  way  of  yoking  is  mod  approved:  for  that
which  is  in  uie  in  fome  provinces,  of  fadening  the  yoke  to  their  horns,
is  reje(5ted  almod  bv  all,  who  have  written  any  precepts  or  directions
for  Hidbandmen.  Nor  is  it  without  reafon ;  for  the  cattle  can  exert
themlelves,  and  ufe  greater  efforts,  with  their  necks  and  breads,  than
with  their  horns ;  and,  by  this  method,  they  tug  and  drain  with  the
whole  bulk  and  weight  of  their  body  ;  but,  by  that,  they  are  put  to
great  torment,  by  pulling  back  their  heads,  and  turning  their  faces  ex¬
actly  upward  j  and,  with  a  very  light  plough-diare,  they  fcarcely  wound
the  uppermod  part  of  the  earth:  and  therefore  they  till  the  ground
with  fmaller  ploughs,  which  are  not  drong  enough  to  rip  up  the  fallow
grounds  or  lay-lands  (6),  which  are  plowed  very  deep ;  and,  when
they  are  thus  plowed,  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  every  green  thing  that
grows  upon  them  :  for,  when  corn-lands  are  throughly  plowed  with  a
deep  furrow,  both  the  corns  and  the  fruits  of  trees  grow  the  larger,  and
they  yield  a  greater  increafe.  Therefore  I  differ  from  Celfus ,  who,
fearing  the  expence,  which  is  greater  in  oxen  of  a  larger  fize,  advifes
to  manure  the  land  with  fmall  plough-fhares  and  coulters,  that  fo  it
may  be  performed  with  oxen  of  a  fmaller  fize  •  not  knowing,  that  there
is  a  greater  revenue  from  the  great  plenty  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground,
than  the  charges  of  purchafing  greater  cattle  can  amount  to,  efpecially
in  Italy,  where  the  land,  being  planted  with  trees  for  fupporting  of
vines,  and  with  olives,  requires  to  be  opened  and  tilled  deeper,  that

(5)  It  feems  the  difpute  about  placing  the  yoke  upon  oxen,  whether  it  be  belt  to  fix  it
upon  their  head  or  their  neck,  is  not  yet  determined,  feeing,  in  different  parts  of  Italy,
at  prefent,  they  ufe  it  both  ways,  tho’  what  our  author  fays  againft  fixing  it  to  their  horns
ieems  very  reafonable ;  and  one  may  eafily  obferve,  that  oxen  labour  more  when  they
draw  with  their  heads,  than  with  their  necks.  It  feems,  in  Epirus  they  faftened  them  to
their  horns;  for  Callimachus  calls  the  oxen  xspatAxsjf,  becaufe,  fays  the  fcholiaft,  they
draw  the  plough  with  their  horns.

( 6 )  Novalia ,  ntyvalium ,  or  novaUs  ager ,  which  I  tranflate  fallow-grounds  or  lay-lands,
properly  fignifies  land  that  has  never  before  been  tilled  or  cultivated.  Pliny  indeed  calls
fometimes  vovalis  ager ,  that  which  was  Town  every  other  year ;  he  alfo  calls  by  the  fame
name  land.,  from  off  which  old  wood  has  been  cut.  But  moft  authors  mean,  by  ager
no-ja'is ,  land  which  refts  one  year,  and  is  Town  the  other.  Ifdorus  fays,  that  it  both  figni-
•fies  land  tilled  for  the  firft  time,  and  alfo  that  which  refts  every  other  year,  in  order  to
renew  its  ftrength.


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  55

fo  the  uppermoft  roots  of  the  vines  and  olives  may  be  cut  with  the
plough-fhare  ;  which,  if  they  remain  in  the  ground,  are  hurtful  to  the
fruits  of  it ;  and  that  the  lower  roots,  when  the  ground  is  throughly
manured,  and  plowed  very  deep,  may  more  eafily  receive  nourifhment
from  the  moifture.

Neverthelefs  that  method  of  Celfus  s  may  be  very  proper  and  fit  for
Numidia  and  Egypt ,  where,  for  the  mo  ft  part,  the  ground,  being  void
of  trees,  is  fown  with  corns  ;  and  it  is  fufficient,  that  this  fort  of  land,
which  is  of  a  light,  loofe,  and  crumbling  mould,  with  fat  fands,  as  it
were,  loofe  afhes,  be  moved  with  the  lighteft  plough-fhare.  But  the
ploughman,  who  governs  the  oxen,  muft  walk  upon  the  plowed  ground,
and,  at  every  other  turning,  hold  the  plough  obliquely,  and,  by  turns,
to  furrow  with  a  ftrait  and  full  plough,  fo  as  not  to  leave  in  any  place
the  ground  unplowed  and  unmoved,  which  is  what  Hufbandmen  call  a
balk.

When  the  oxen  come  to  a  tree,  he  muft  keep  them  in  ftrongly,  and
make  them  ftep  flowly,  left  the  plough-fhare,  being  driven  with  greater
force  againft  the  root,  give  a  fhock  to  their  necks,  or  left  the  ox  ftrike
with  great  violence  with  his  horn  againft  the  flock  of  the  tree,  or  lightly
touch  the  trunk  with  the  extremity  of  the  yoke,  or  break  off  a  branch.
Let  him  rather  terrify  them  with  his  voice,  than  with  blows ;  and  let
ftrokes  be  the  laft  remedies  when  they  refufe  their  work.  Let  him  ne¬
ver  provoke  a  fleer  with  the  goad;  for  it  makes  him  pull  back,  and
gives  him  a  cuftom  of  kicking.  Neverthelefs  let  him  fometimes  put
him  in  mind  with  his  whip.  Neither  let  him  ftop  half-way  before  he
come  to  the  turning  ;  but  let  him  give  them  a  little  reft  at  the  end  of
the  furrow,  that  fo  the  ox,  in  hopes  of  refting,  may,  with  greater  agi¬
lity,  pull  the  whole  length.  But  to  draw  a  longer  furrow  than  one
hundred  and  twenty  feet,  is  hurtful  to  the  cattle  ;  for,  when  it  exceeds
this  meafure,  they  are  fatigued  more  than  they  ought  to  be.

When  they  are  come  to  the  turning,  let  him  pufh  the  yoke  forward,
and  hold  in  the  oxen,  that  their  necks  may  cool,  which  quickly  con  trad!
a  burning  heat  (unlefs  they  are  conftantly  cooled);  and  from  this  arifes
a  fwelling,  and  then  ulcers.  Let  the  Ploughman  make  no  lefs  ufe  of  a
chip-ax  than  of  the  plough-fhare;  and  let  him  fearch  after,  and  dig  up,
all  the  broken  ftumps  and  uppermoft  roots,  wherewith  land,  planted
with  trees  for  ftipporiing  vines,  is- always  peftered  and  embarafted.


C  H  A  P,


56


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IL


CHAP.  III.

Of  the  Care  that  is  to  be  taken  of  Oxen ,  when  they  are  unyoked .

AS  Toon  as  the  Ploughman  has  unyoked  the  oxen  from  their  work,
let  him  rub  them  down  while  they  are  girt,  and  prefs  their  back
itrongly  with  his  hands,  and  pull  their  fkin  once  and  again,  and  not
fuffer  it  to  thick  faft  to  their  body  ;  for  this  kind  of  difeafe  is  very  hurt¬
ful  to  oxen.  Let  him  rub  their  necks  ftrongly,  and  pour  pure  wine
into  their  jaws,  if  they  be  extremely  hot.  It  is  enough  to  give  two
t extar  ii  to  each  of  them.  But  it  is  not  proper  to  ty  the  oxen  to  their
cribs,  till  they  have  left  off  fweating  and  panting.  Then,  when  it  is
due  time  to  feed  them,  it  is  not  proper  to  give  them  much  food,  nor
their  whole  portion,  but  in  parts,  and  little  by  little;  which  when  they
have  eaten  up,  they  muft  be  led  out  to  water,  and  inticed  to  drink  by
whiffling,  that  they  may  drink  the  more  willingly  :  and,  when  they
are  brought  back,  they  muff  be  fatiated  with  a  larger  allowance  of  fod¬
der.  What  has  hitherto  been  faid  of  the  office  of  a  Ploughman,  who
has  oxen  under  his  care,  is  fufficient.  Our  next  bufinefs  is  to  give  di¬
rections  alfo  about  the  proper  feafons  for  manuring  all  forts  of  corn-
Jands.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  fime  of  the  Tear  when ,  and  how  Latids  muft  be  plowed.

FAT  champain  lands,  which  contain  water  the  longeft,  muft  be
tilled,  for  the  firft  time,  when  the  feafon  of  the  year  begins  to
grow  warm,  after  they  have  brought  forth  all  their  herbs,  and  their
feeds  are  not  yet  come  to  maturity  ;  but  they  muft  be  plowed  with  fo
numerous,  thick,  and  clofe  furrows,  that  it  may  fcarcely  be  difcerned
which  way'  the  Plough-fhare  was  drawn :  for  thus  all  the  roots  of  the
herbs  are  tom  up,  and  killed.  But  let  ( i)  fallow-land  be  fo  reduced  into

(i)  Vervaflum  feems  to  fignify  the  very  fame  as  ager  novalis ,  land  newly  broken  upt
or  fallow-land,  and  as  our  author  in  this  4th  chapter,  no  doubt,  underftands  it,  when  he
orders  it  to  be  plowed  feveral  times  over,  that  it  may  be  reduced  into  duft;  and  he  oppofes
it  to  ager  refiibilis ,  which  was  plowed  and  fown  every  year.  The  firft,  he  fays,  requires
double  the  labour  that  the  fecond  does.  Tliny  fays  indeed,  that  it  is  called  vervaftum,
<from  the  time  of  the  year  it  is  plowed  in,  quafi  vere  atfum,  i.  e.  aratum.

f  duff,


Chap.  IV.  O/HUSBANDRY.  57

duft,  by  plowing  it  over  and  over  again,  that,  when  we  fow  it,  it  may
require  very  little  or  no  harrowing  at  all ;  for  the  antient  Romans  faid,
that  that  land  was  ill  manured ,  which  wanted  harrowing  after  the  feed
was fown.  The  Hufbandman  ought  frequently  to  examine  and  try,
whether  it  be  rightly  plowed  or  not;  and  not  only  with  his  eyes,  which
are  often  deceived,  the  balks  lying  hid  with  the  earth  fpread  upon  them,
but  let  him  examine  it  alfo  by  feeling  it,  which  is  lefs  liable  to  deceit,
when  a  firm  and  ffiff  pole  is  applied  to,  and  put  through,  the  crofs  fur¬
rows.  If  it  has  penetrated  equally,  and  without  meeting  with  any  refift-
ance,  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  whole  ground  fo  far  has  been  moved ;  but,
if  any  harder  part  has  refilled  it  as  it  palled,  it  is  a  demon  fixation,  that
the  fallow-ground  is  not  yet  plowed  up.  When  the  ploughmen  fee
this  frequently  done,  they  dare  not  be  guilty  of  making  balks :  there¬
fore  wet  champain  lands  ought  to  be  tilled  after  the  13  th  of  April.
When  they  have  been  tilled  about  this  time,  you  mull:  let  the  days  about
the  time  of  the  foldice  intervene,  which  is  about  the  23d  or  the  24th
of  J  une-y  and  then  they  muft  be  plowed  a  fecond  time,  and  then  a  third
time  about  the  beginning  of  September  ;  for  all  that  have  Ikill  in  Huf-
bandry  agree,  that,  from  the  fummer  folflice  till  that  time,  it  is  not
proper  to  plow,  unlefs  the  earth  be  throughly  wet  with  fudden  and
unexpected  {bowers,  like  winter-rains,  as  it  fometimes  happens.  And,
when  this  really  happens,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder,  why  fallow-lands,
that  have  been  plowed  in  the  fpring,  may  not  be  manured  in  the
month  of  July.

But  whenever  land  is  plowed,  we  mult  obferve  never  to  touch  it
when  it  is  miry  and  dirty,  nor  when  it  is  half- wet  with  fmall  Ihowers  j
which  fort  of  land  peafants  call  various  or  fpeckled,  and  carious  (2) :
and  it  is  fuch,  when,  after  long  droughts,  a  light  rain  has  only  wet  the
upper  part  of  the  clods,  but  has  not  reached  to  the  under  part.  For  fuch
corn -lands  as  are  plowed  when  full  of  flime  and  dirt,  are  not  in  a  con¬
dition  to  be  handled  the  whole  year  after  j  and,  in  feed-time,  are  nei¬
ther  fit  for  {owing  nor  harrowing  :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  fuch  as  are
plowed  when  they  are  various  or  fpeckled,  continue  barren  for  three

(2)  Terra  v oris  <&  c.ariofa.  Cato  fays,  Bevjare  you  fir  fpeckled  and  carious  land  either
•with  cart  or  cattle.  Pliny ,  in  his  vat.  kifl.  explains  this  lliorc  expreffion  very  degan  ly  and
tally  thu,; :  What,  fays  he,  can  he  meant  by  this  (hart  pkrafe ,  carious  ground,  which  Cato
ferns  to  he  fo  much  afraid  of  as  to  forbid  us  almof  to  tread  upon  it  l  Let  us  compare  it
with  the  rottennefs  of  woody  and  we  fhall  find  in  it  thofe  de  fells,  which  he  fo  much  abhors ,
dry,  fijlulous,  or  Jpongy ,  rufly,  rugged ,  hoary,  eaten,  con  fumed,  and  full  of  holes ,  like  a  pumice-
fione.  Cato  faid  more  in  one  wo>d ,  than  can  be  exprcffed  by  the  mofi  copious  language  \
for  hereby  are  fgnifed  certain  imperfellions  cf  the  foil,  proceeding  not  from  old  age ,  which
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  earth ,  but  from  its  own  nature',  and  therefore  it  is  weak  and
unfruitful,  and  unfit  for  every  thing.

I  whole


58  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

whole  years.  Therefore,  in  lands  that  mull;  be  plowed,  let  us  chiefly
follow  a  middle  temperament,  that  they  may  neither  want  juice,  nor
abound  in  moifture  ;  becaufe  too  much  moifture,  as  I  faid,  makes  them
llimy  and  miry,  and  fuch  as  are  dried  up  with  droughts  cannot  be
rightly  managed  ;  for,  either  by  the  hardnefs  of  the  ground,  the  plough¬
share  is  rejected  and  thrown  out,  or,  if  it  has  penetrated  in  any  part,  it
does  not  cleave  the  ground  into  fmall  clods,  but  pulls  it  up  in  great  turfs;
which  lying  in  the  way,  the  land  is  fo  entangled,  that  it  cannot  be  fo
rightly  plowed  a  fecond  time  as  it  ought  to  be  j  becaufe,  by  the  weight
of  thefe  turfs,  the  plough-fhare  is  thruft  out  of  the  furrow,  as  if  fome
folid  thing,  funk  deep  into  the  earth,  did  ftand  in  its  way;  whereby
it  comes  to  pafs,  that  balks  are  alfo  made  when  it  is  plowed  a  fecond
time ;  and  the  oxen  are  very  much  hurt  by  the  ruggednefs  and  griev-
oufnefs  of  the  work.

Moreover  we  may  here  add,  that  all  ground  whatfoever,  tho’  exceed¬
ing  rich,  neverthelefs  has  its  lower  part  poorer  and  hungrier  :  and  when
great  fods  are  raifed,  they  pull  up  the  poor  ground ;  whereby  it  comes
to  pafs,  that  the  more  unfruitful  matter,  being  mixed  with  that  which
is  fatter,  makes  the  crop  of  corn  the  lefs  plentiful ;  alfo  the  expences  of
the  Hufbandman  are  much  heightened  by  the  flow  progrefs  that  his
work  makes :  for  the  ufual  talks  cannot  be  performed  when  the  ground
is  become  hard.  Therefore,  in  drought,  I  advife,  that  what  is  already
plowed  be  plowed  a  fecond  time  ;  and  that  rain  be  expedted  and  waited
for,  which,  by  moiftening  the  earth,  may  make  its  culture  eafy  to  us.
But  a  jugerum  of  fuch  land  is  dilpatched  by  one  labourer  in  four  days  ;
for  it  is  eafily  tilled  at  firft  with  two  days  labour,  and  plowed  a  fecond
time  with  one,  and  a  third  time  with  three  fourths  of  a  day ;  and,  with
the  fourth  part  of  a  days  labour,  it  is  fown,  and  reduced  into  ridges.
Hulbandmen  call  them  ridges ,  when  the  ground  is  fo  plowed,  as  that
the  accumulated  part  between  two  furrows,  at  fome  tolerable  diftance
the  one  from  the  other,  may  afford  a  dry  feat  for  the  corns.

Hilly  ground,  where  the  foil  is  fat,  muft  be  tilled,  for  the  firft  time,
in  the  month  of  March ,  after  the  trimeftrian  fowing  (3  )  is  finifhed  j
but  prefently  in  February ,  if  the  warmnefs  of  the  climate,  and  the  dri-
nefs  of  the  country,  advife  you  to  it.  Then  they  muft  be  plowed  a
fecond  time  from  the  middle  of  April  till  the  folftice;  and  for  the  third
time  in  the  month  of  September,  about  the  equinox.  And  a  jugerum  of
fuch  land  is  throughly  cultivated  with  the  fame  number  of  days  labour

(3)  Trimefirian  fowing  is  of  that  fort  of  wheat,  or  other  grain,  which  grows  up,  ripens,
and  is  cut  down  about  three  months  after  it  is  fown.  It  is  Town  in  the  fpring,  where  frofts
and  fnows  begin  very  early.  This  kind  of  wheat  is  common  among  the  Alpx.


as


Chap.  V.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  59

as  wet  and  oufy  champain  lands.  But,  in  plowing,  it  mull  efpecially  be
obferved,  that  the  furrow  be  always  drawn  crofs  the  hill ;  for,  by  this
method,  the  difficulty  ariling  from  the  acclivity  of  the  ground  is  fur-
mounted  and  broken,  and  the  labour  both  of  men  and  cattle  is  moll
commodioully  lelfened.  Neverthelefs,  as  often  as  we  plow  it  a  fecond
time,  the  furrow  mull  be  drawn  oblique,  fometimes  a  little  toward  the
higher,  and  fometimes  toward  the  lower  parts  of  the  hill ;  fo  that  we
may  plow  it  the  fecond  time  toward  both  parts,  and  not  labour  the
ground  always  in  the  fame  track.

Let  poor  lean  land,  which  lies  upon  a  level,  and  abounds  in  water,
be  firll  tilled  about  the  latter  end  of  the  month  of  Auguji ,  and  then
plowed  a  fecond  time  in  September ,  and  made  ready  for  lowing  about
the  equinox.  But  this  kind  of  ground  is  more  expeditioully  laboured
than  any  other  ;  and  therefore  fewer  days  labour  are  bellowed  upon  it :
for  three  are  fufficient  for  one  jugerum.  Alfo  llender,  meagre,  riling
ground  mull  not  be  plowed  in  fummer,  but  about  the  firll  of  Septem¬
ber  >  becaufe,  if  it  is  cut  up  before  that  time,  it  becomes  barren,  and
lofes  its  juice,  and  is  burnt  up  with  the  fummer  fun,  and  has  no  llrength
remaining  in  it :  therefore  it  is  bell  to  till  it,  for  the  firll  time,  between
the  firll  and  the  thirteenth  day  of  September,  and  foon  afterward  to  plow
it  a  fecond  time,  that  it  may  be  in  a  condition  to  be  fown  when  the  firll
rains  fall  about  the  time  of  the  equinox.  Nor  in  fuch  land  mull  the
feed  be  fown  on  the  ridges,  but  in  the  furrows.


CHAP.  V.

w  <m

Of  the  manner  of  dunging  lean  thin  Land.

NEVERTHELESS  it  will  be  proper  to  dung  lean  thin  land  before
we  plow  it  a  fecond  time  ;  for,  by  this  kind  of  nourilhment,  as
it  were,  it  gathers  llrength.  In  champain  lands  the  heaps  of  dung  mull
be  laid  thinner,  and  on  hills  thicker,  and  they  mull  be  about  five  modii
each  ;  and,  upon  a  plain,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  leave  an  interval  of  eight
feet  between  them  every  way ;  but,  upon  declining  ground,  two  feet
lefs.  But  we  are  of  opinion,  that  this  Ihould  be  done  when  the  moon
is  declining  ;  for  this  thing  frees  the  corns  from  weeds.  But  &  jugerum
of  land,  which  is  dunged  thicker,  requires  twenty-four  loads  (i),  and

that


(1)  Vehes  fiercoris ,  a  load  of  dang,  Columella  fays,  contains  eighty  modii^  lib.  xi.  cap.  2.
Each  modius  contained  fixteen  fextarii ,  and  a  fextarius  isfuppoftd  co  contain  twenty  ounces

I  2  of


60  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  II.

that  which  is  thinner  eighteen.  It  is  proper,  that  the  dung,  after  it  is
fpread,  be  prefently  plowed  in,  and  covered  with  earth,  that  it  may
not  lofe  its  ftrength  by  the  exhalation  of  the  fun;  and  that  the  ground,
being  mixed  with  it,  may  grow  fat  with  the  forefaid  nourifhment :
therefore,  when  the  heaps  of  dung  are  laid  in  order  upon  the  land,  a
greater  number  of  them  ought  not  to  be  fcattered,  than  the  ploughmen
are  able  to  plow  down  and  put  under  ground  the  fame  day.


CHAP  VI.

Of  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Seeds.

FORASMUCH  as  we  have  taught  you  to  prepare  the  earth  for  the
feed-time,  we  fhall  now  treat  of  the  feveral  forts  of  feeds.  The
chief  and  the  moft  profitable  corns  for  men  are  common  wheat  (i),  and

bearded

of  rain-water ;  fo  that  a  modius  contained  about  three  hundred  and  twenty  ounces,  or
twenty-fix  Roman  pounds  eight  ounces  of  rain-water:  by  wh;ch  computation  we  rnav  judge
of  the  capacity  of  a  modius ,  wherewith  they  meafured  their  dung.  The  learned  Dr.  Ar-
buthnot ,  who  has  carefully  examined  the  Roman  meafures,  both  liquid  and  dry,  fays,  that
the  7nodius  was  equal  to  i  peck  7  folid  inches  and  parts  of  an  inch,  or  in  ocher  word-,
1.0141  peck  Engliflo  meafure.

(1)  Triticum ,  common  bare  wheat,  which  has  very  little  husk  upon  it,  was,  according
to  Varro,  a  name  given  formerly  to  ail  forts  of  grain  beaten  or  bruifed  out  of  ears  by  tri¬
turation  or  thrcfhing  ;  but  afterwards  it  was  given  to  a  peculiar  fpecies  of  grain,  of  which
there  are  many  forts,  which  take  their  name  from  the  places  where  they  grow ;  as  Afri¬
can,  Pontic ,  AJfyrian ,  Thracian ,  Egyptian,  Sicilian,  Sec.  which  differ  from  one  another  in
colour,  bignefs,  an4  other  properties,  too  tedious  to  relate.  One  fort  has  its  ears  without
beards,  and  is  either  of  winter  or  fummer.  Another  fort  is  armed  with  long  beard;,  and
grows  up  fometimes  with  cne,  fometimes  with  more  ears.  Of  thefe  the  grains  are  of  dif¬
ferent  forts :  fome  of  them  are  white,  fome  reddifh,  Tome  round,  others  oblong,  fome  large,
others  fraall.  Some  forts  are  early  ripe,  others  late  in  ripening;  fome  yield  a  great  increafe,
fome  are  hungry,  and  yield  little ;  fome  put  forth  a  great  ear,  others  a  fmail.  One  fort
flays  long  in  the  hole  ( folliculo ) ;  another  frees  itfelf  very  focn  ouc  of  ic.  Some  have  a
fmail  ftaik  or  ftraw ;  others  have  a  thick  one,  as  the  African.  Some  are  cloached  with
few  coats,  fome  wrh  many,  as  the  Thracian.  Some  grains  put  forth  only  one  ftalk,  fome  .
many  ftalks.  Some  require  more,  fome  lefs  rime  to  bring  them  to  maturity.  For  which
reafon  fome  are  called  trimeftrian,  fome  bimefirian ;  and  they  fay,  that,  in  Euboea ,  there
is  a  fort,  which  may  be  brought  to  perfedlion  in  forty  days;  but  moft  of  thefe  forts,
which  ripen  in  a  fhort  time,  are  light,  unfruitful,  and  yield  very  little,  tho’  they  are  fweet
and  agreeable  to  the  tafte,  and  of  eaiy  digeftion.  Theophrafus  adds,  that  the  wheat  of
Pontus  was  the  lighted,  and  the  Sicilian  the  heavieft,  of  any  brought  into  Greece  ,•  but
fays,  that  that  of  Bceotia  was  heavier ;  and  that  the  athletre  could  not  eat  fo  much  of  it
as  of  that  of  Attica.  The  caufe  of  all  thefe  differences,  he  fays,  is  in  the  climate,  and
the  foil.  Pliny,  hift.  7iat.  lib.  xviii.  c.  7.  prefers  the  ltalia7i  wheat  to  all  ihtfe;  and  fays,
that  none  is  to  be  compared  to  it  in  whitenefs  and  weight,  by  which  it  is  moft  diftin-
guiftied ;  and  that  foreign  wheat  was  only  to  be  compared  to  that,  which  grows  in  moun-

4  ta  incus


Chap.  VI.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  61

bearded  wheat  (2).  We  have  known  feveral  kinds  of  common  wheat ;
but  of  thefe  we  muff  chiefly  fow  what  is  called  the  red  wheat ,  becaufe
it  excels  both  in  weight,  and  in  brightnefs.  The  white  wheat  mail  be
placed  in  the  fecond  rank,  of  which  the  bed:  fort  in  bread  is  deficient
in  weight.  The  trimefirian  fhall  be  the  third,  which  Hufbandmen  are
mighty  glad  to  make  ufe  of  ;  for  when,  by  reafon  of  great  rains,  or  any
other  caufe,  the  early  fowing  has  been  omitted,  they  have  recourfe  to
this  for  their  relief  (It  is  a  kind  of  white  (3)  wheat).  The  other  forts
of  wheat  are  altogether  fuperfluous,  unlefs  any  man  has  a  mind  to  in¬
dulge  a  manifold  variety,  and  a  vain-glorious  fancy.  But,  of  bearded
wheat,  we  have  commonly  feen  four  forts  in  ufe;  viz.  that  which  is  call¬
ed  Clufinian  (4),  of  a  fhining,  bright,  white  colour ;  a  bearded  wheat,

tainous  places  in  Italy.  And  that  this  was  the  common  opinion  of  Greece  above  140
years  before  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great ,  he  proves  from  Sophocles’s  Triptolemus,
where  he  calls  Italy  for  tunat  am  frumento  candido}  fortunate  fo”  its  white  corn;  and  he
fays,  that,  in  fome  parts  ot  Italy-,  one  plant  has  been  fcen  to. bear  twenty-four  ears;  and
•  that,  in  fome  places,  the  laud  is  fo  fruitful,  that  one  modius  has  produced  a  hundred.  He
fays,  that  of, all  foreign  wheat  the  Boeotian  was  the  bed,  next  that  of  Sicily,  and  then  the
African.  TheThracian  was  the  rhird  for  weight,  next  the  Syrian,  and  then  the  Egyptian  ;
and  that  the  lighted:  wheat  brought  to  Rome  was  that  of  Gaul,  and  of  the  Cherfone/us ,  not
exceeding  20  pounds  the  modius,  which  amounted  to  240  Roman  ounces,  i.  e.  18  pounds
2\  ounces  Troy  weight,  the  English  peck  ;  that  the  Sardum  wheat  (I  fuppofe  he  means  Sardi¬
nian)  weighed  half  a  pound  more  ;  the  Alexandrian  and  Sicilian  modius  weighed  20  pounds
10  ounces;  the  Boeotian  21  pounds;  the  African  21  pounds  9  ounces,  all  Roman  w'eight,
weighing  only  the  pure  grain.  According  to  the  weight  of  the  wheat  was  the  quantity  of
bread  made  out  of  ic;  and  that  it  is  a  fettled  thing,  that  a  modius  of  any  wheat  whatfoever,
made  into  ammunition-bread;  weighs  always  one  third  more  than  the  grain  ;  and  that  that
is  the  beft  corn,  which  takes  a  covgius ,  or  ten  pound  weight,  of  water  to  knead  ic.

(2)  Adoreum  far.  Columella  fometimes  mentions  thefe  two  words  conjundtly,  fome-
tirnes  feparately  ;  and,  when  feparately,  he  ufes  them  as  lynonymous.  Authors  do  not
agree  what  particular  fort  of  corn  this  far  fignifies;  but  it  appears  p<obab!e,  that  it  was  a
kind  of  husked  bearded  wheat.  The  antients  called  it  adoreum ,  becaufe  they  ufed  it  in
l'omefacted  ceremonies.  Our  author  affigns  this  as  a  difference  between  the  adoreum  and
the  triticum,  that  the  firft  has  a  firm  and  durable  busk,  and  will  bear  moifture  a  long  time,
without  fuftaining  any  hurt ;  and,  cap.  9.  of  this  book,  he  fays,  that  a  jugerum  of  land  requires
almoft  double  the  quantity  of  adoreum  more  than  it  does  of  triticum.

(3)  Siligo.  Pliny  fays,  that  this  is  the  moll  delicious  and  the  daintieft  of  any  fort  of
wheat,  exceeding  white,  but  without  much  fubftance  or  ftrength,  only  proper  for  moiffc
rradts  of  land,  fuch  as  thofe  of  Italy,  and  fome  parts  of  Gaul ;  that  it  never  ripens  equally;
and  that  there  is  no  fort  of  corn  that  fuffers  delay  lefs,  becaufe  it  is  fo  tender,  that  fuch
ears  of  it  as  are  ripe  prefently  fhed  their  grains ;  but,  in  the  ftalk,  it  is  in  lefs  danger  than
any  other  corn ;  for  it  holds  its  ear  always  upright,  and  does  not  contain  the  dews,  which
oecafion  blafting  and  mildew.

(4)  Far  Clufinum,  ftrong  bearded  wheat,  which  grew  about  Clufum ,  a  very  antient  town
in  Tufcany,  now  called  chiuf.  It  was  one  of  the  firft  Tufcan  colonies,  and  the  feat  of  king
Porfenna,  who  fided  with  Taryubiius  Superbus  againft  the  Romans.  It  is  about  twenty  miles
from  Peruggia ,  and  ten  from  the  lake  Trafmenus.  It  is  very  little  inhabited  now,  becaufe
of  the  badnefs  of  the  air.  Pliny  fays,  that  he  has  known  a  modius  of  this  fort  of  corn
weigh  twenty-fix  pounds.


which


62


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II


which  is  called  venuciilum  (5).  One  fort  of  it  is  of  a  firy  red  colour,
and  another  fort  of  it  is  white  •  but  they  are  both  heavier  than  th eC/«-
Jinian.  The  trimeflrian  feed ,  or  that  of  three  months  growth,  which
is  called  halicafirum  (6) ;  and  this  is  the  chief  both  for  its  weight  and
goodnefs.  But  thefe  forts,  both  of  ordinary  common  wheat,  and  of
bearded  wheat,  muft,  for  this  reafon,  be  kept  by  Hulb  dmen,  becaufe
it  rarely  happens,  that  any  land  is  fo  fituated,  that  we  c  content  our-
felves  with  one  fort  of  feed,  fome  part  of  it  happening,  ntrary  to  our
expedition,  to  be  either  wet  or  dry.  But  common  or  try  wheat
thrives  bed  in  a  dry  place;  and  bearded  wheat  is  lefs  infefted  o)  moifture.


CHAP,  VII.


Of  the  feveral  Sorts  of  Pulfe


S  there  are  very  many  forts  of  pulfe  or  legumes,  the  mod  accept¬


able,  and  thofe  which  we  fee  men  make  mod  ufe  of,  are  beans.


lentils ,  peafe ,  kidney-beans ,  tares,  kemp-J'eed ,  millet ,  panic ,  fefatn,  lu¬
pins,  linfeed  alfo,  and  barley,  becaufe  ptifan  is  made  of  it.  Alio  the
bed  of  fodder  for  catde  are  clover-grafs,  fenugreek,  and  vetches.  Then
next  to  thefe  are  chichlings  and  bitter  vetches,  and  forrage  which  is  of
barley  (1).  But  we  (hall  fird  treat  of  thofe  which  are  fown  upon  our


own


(5)  It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  what  the  author  means  by  far  s senuculum .  In  the
xith  book,  cap.  2.  fie  calls  it  far  vernaculum,  true  Italian  bearded  whear  He  makes
mention  of  a  vitis  wnncula  or  venicula ,  which  fome  cal!  venuncula,  from  Venufa  a  town
in  Apulia.  But  it  is  ftrange,  that  it  is  not  rather  called  far  Venufinum ,  if  he  meant  corn
growing  near  this  place.  No  doubt  he  intended  to  expreis  a  kind  of  wheat  peculiar  to
fome  place  or  other,  not  eafy  now  to  determine.

(6)  Trimejirian  feed,  called  ha/icafiru?n  I  don’t  find  in  Pliny,  or  any  other  au'hor  in
my  hands,  why  this  feed  of  three  months  growth  is  called  halicafirum.  Perhaps  it  may  be
fo  called,  becaufe  of  this  fort  of  wheat  they  made  that  gruel  or  fapping-ffufF  they  called
alica ,  and  that  it  ought  to  be  written  alicafiruvi ,  withou:  any  afpiracion.  They  made  this
alica  of  zeia,  which  is  the  fame  with  far.  which  I  fuppofe  to  be  bearded  and  husked
wheat.  Pliny,  lib.  xviii.  cap  5.  mentions  alica  as  a  fort  of  grain  proper  to  be  fown  in  the
fpring;  and,  both  in  that  place,  and  lib.  xxii .feti.  \6.  edit.  Parij.  by  Har dentin,  he  takes  it
for  that  fort  of  grain,  of  which  they  made  the  gruel  they  called  ahea ;  which  word  feems
to  fignify  both  that  liquor,  and  the  wheat  of  which  it  was  made;  and  it  feems  to  be  fo
taken  by  Cato ,  cap.  76.

(1)  Parr  ago  feems  to  be  derived  from  far.  Pefius  fays,  that  fodder  for  cattle,  of  feve¬
ral  forts  of  corn,  cut  for  that  purpofe,  was  fo  called,  as  wheat,  barley,  tares,  <&c.  Pro¬
bably  this  fort  of  food  was  called  farrago,  becaufe  the  far,  or  husked  bearded  wheat,  was
the  chief  ingredienc  in  this  mixture  of  icveral  forts  of  green  corn.  Sometimes  it  is  called


4


ocymum


Chap.  VIII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  63

own  account,  being  mindful  of  that  moft  antient  precept,  which  advifes
us  to  fow  laft  in  cold  places,  fooner  in  warm,  and  fooneft  of  all  in  fuch
as  are  hot.  But  now  we  fhall  give  directions,  as  if  it  were  for  a  tem¬
perate  climate.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  the  proper  Time  for  fowing.

OUR  poet  is  of  opinion,  that  bearded  wheat,  as  alfo  other  com¬
mon  wheat,  ought  not  to  be  fown  before  the  pleiades  (i)  fet;
which  very  thing  he  exprefies  in  numbers  thus :

|  .

(2)  £  If  for  rich  crops  of  wheat,  and  ftrong  bread-corn,

4  Thou  plow’ft  the  ground,  if  corn’s  thy  only  care,  .

*  Firft  let  king  Atlas  daughters  hide  their  heads
*  At  dawning  of  the  morning.’

They  are  hid  from  our  fight  the  thirty-firft  day  after  the  autumnal  equi¬
nox,  which  falls  almoft  upon  the  23d  of  September ;  by  which  we
ought  to  underftand,  that  the  wheat  feed-time  confifts  of  forty-fix
days  j  viz.  from  the  fetting  of  the  pleiades ,  which  happens  before  the
24th  of  Oftober,  to  the  time  when  the  days  are  at  the  (hortefi:  j  for  fo
prudent  Hulbandmen  obferve  it  as  a  rule,  neither  to  plow,  nor  to  prune
a  vine,  nor  a  tree,  for  fifteen  days  before  the  fhorteft  day  falls  out,  nor
for  as  many  days  after  it  is  paft.  We  alfo  are  in  no  manner  of  doubt,
but  this  is  the  proper  feafon  for  fowing  our  feed  in  land  that  is  tempe¬
rate,  and  not  all  moifl: ;  but  in  places  that  are  oufy,  and  meagre  or  cold,

ocymum  or  ocimum ,  as  Varro  fays,  lib.  i.  cap.  31.  becaufe  it  grows  up  quickly.  But  pro¬
bably  ocymum  fignifi.es  a  mixture  of  green  bean-ftalks,  fitches,  tares,  and  fuch-like,  as  bear-
pods.  But  farrago  properly  fignifies  a  mixture  of  wheat,  barley,  and  fuch  forts  of  corn  as
bear  ears,  and  not  pods.  Both  Columella  and  Pliny  fay,  it  may  be  made  of  green  barley
alone.  The  word,  which  originally  fignified  a  mixture  of  feveral  forts,  was  afterwards  ufed
to  exprels  one  fort  j  'viz.  farrago  ex  hordeo,  forrage  of  green  barley.  Probably  from  this
word  comes  the  Trench  word  fourage,  and  the  Evglijh  word  forrage.

(1)  Pleiades  are  the  feven  ftars  in  the  neck  of  the  conftellation  or  fign  taurus  (the
bull).  They  were  called  by  the  Romans  vergili#,  becaufe  they  rife  in  the  fpring,  about
the  time  of  the  equinox.  The  Greeks  called  them  pleiades ,  from  -taUi,  to  fail,  becaufe
their  rifing  pointed  out  the  proper  time  for  failing  in  thofe  days.  The  poets  feign  them
to  have  been  daughters  of  Atlas  king  of  Mauritania ,  a  great  altronomer  j  and  that,  being
placed  in  the  heavens,  they  were  called  At  Untides.

(2)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  i.  219.


or


64  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

or  in  fuch  only  as  are  not  expofed  to  the  fun,  for  the  mod:  part,  it  is
proper  to  fow  about  the  i ft  of  Oblober  (3),

i  While  th’  earth  s  dry  date  and  pendent  clouds  permit ;  ’

that  fo  the  roots  of  the  corns  may  grow  drong,  before  they  be-infeded
with  winter-fhowers,  frods,  or  hoar-frods.

But  fuppofe  the  feed  be  fown  in  due  time,  yet  care  mud  be  taken  to
make  wide  didances  between  the  ridges,  and  frequent  water-furrows,
which  fome  call  drains  or  gutters,  and  fo  convey  all  the  water  out  of
the  corn-lands  into  drains.  Nor  am  I  ignorant,  that  fome  an tient  au¬
thors  have  directed,  that  lands  fhould  not  be  fowed  till  the  earth  be
throughly  wet  with  rains,  which,  I  don’t  doubt,  is  for  the  advantage
of  the  Huffiandman,  if  they  come  in  due  time ;  but  if,  as  it  falls  out
fometimes,  the  rains  come  late,  it  is  right  to  commit  the  feed  to  the
ground,  tho’  it  be  thirdy  ;  and  this  is  alfo  pradafed  in  fome  provinces,
where  the  conditution  of  the  climate  is  fuch  :  for  feed  cad  into  a  dry
place,  and  harrowed  in,  does  not  rot,  more  than  if  it  were  laid  up  in  a
barn ;  and,  when  a  fhower  comes,  what  has  been  fown  many  days  be¬
fore  rifes  up  in  one  day.

Tremellius  indeed  affirms,  that  feeds  fown  before  it  has  rained  plen¬
tifully,  are  confumed  by  the  fowls  and  ants,  where  the  land  is  much
dried  by  abundance  of  fair  weather  in  dimmer;  and  this  we  have  often
found,  and  dill  find,  to  be  true.  Neverthelefs  bearded  wheat  is  more
fit  to  be  fown  in  this  fort  of  land,  than  common  wheat,  becaufe  it  has
a  hufk  wherein  it  is  contained,  which  is  firm  and  durable  againd  moi-
dure  of  any  long  continuance.


CHAP.  IX.

How  ?nany  Modii  of  Seed  a  Jugerum  of  Land  requires ;  a?id

of  the  Cure  of  Seeds.

A  'Jugerum  (1)  of  fat  land  requires,  for  the  mod  part,  four  mo¬
dii  (2)  of  ordinary  common  wheat;  but,  of  middling  land,  five.
If  the  foil  is  fertile,  it  requires  nine  modii  of  bearded  wheat ;  if  it  is

middling,

(3)  lr,r?  Georg  lib.  i.  214.

Ci)  The  iwgervm  was  'he  moft  common  meafure  of  land  amongd  the  Romans.  It  con¬
tained  28  800  'Roman  fquare  feet;  and,  compared  with  the  Evglifb  acre,  which  contains
43  <;C>:>  fquare  fee:,  is  very  near  as  10  to  16,  as  has  been  iaid  already.

(2)  The  modius  was  the  larged  common  meafure  of  capacity  for  things  dry  mentioned

by


Chap.  IX.  O/HUSBANDR  Y.  65

middling,  it  requires  ten :  for  altho’  authors  are  not  fully  agreed  about
the  quantity,  yet  our  own  experience  has  taught  us,  that  this  quantity
feems  to  be  what  is  moll  proper.  But,  if  any  one  refufes  to  conform
to  this,  let  him  follow  the  precepts  of  thofe,  who  dired:  him  to  fovv
upon  every  jugerum  of  very  fertile  champain  land  five  modii  of  common
wheat,  and  eight  of  red  bearded  wheat}  and  they  are  of  opinion,  that
feed  mull  be  allowed  to  middling  lands  in  this  proportion.

We  are  not  indeed  of  opinion,  that  the  quantity  we  have  before
mentioned  ought  always  to  be  obferved  }  for  either  the  flate  and  condi-

by  our  author.  One  may  have  very  nearly  an  exadt  idea  of  the  fiz,e  of  it,  by  comparing
it  with  mealures  of  capacity  for  things  liquid,  whofe  capacities  are  very  exadtly  adjufted.

Rhemnus  Fannius  fays,  it  was  the  third  part  of  the  amphora  or  quadrantal ,  which  was  a
meafure  of  a  cubic  form,  the  dimenfions  of  the  infide  of  which  was  a  foot  every  way}
and  it  was  kept  in  the  Capitol  for  a  ftandard,  and  contained  80  pounds  of  rain-water}  fo
confequently  the  modius  contained  26  pounds  8  ounces  of  rain-water.

The  fame  i Rhemnus  Fannius  fays,  that  it  contained  16  fextarii.  The  fextarius  was  the
fixth  part  of  the  congius^  and  from  this  it  had  its  name.  It  is  clear  from  feveral  authors,
that  the  congius ,  which  was  the  eighth  part  of  the  amphora ,  contained  10  pounds  of  rain¬
water :  fo  the  fextarius  contained  20  ounces}  and  confequently  the  modius  contained  26
pounds  8  ounces,  which  come  to  about  24.  pounds  Troy  weight :  fo  that,  if  a  veffel  were
made,  containing  this  weight  of  clear  rain-water,  it  would  flaew  the  capacity  of  the  two*
dins  pretty  exadtly.

There  is  another  way  of  gueffing  at  the  capacity  of  the  modius ,  which  may  be  gathered
from  Pliny ,  lib.  xviii.  cap.  7.  where,  comparing  different  forts  of  wheat,  he  fays,  that  a
modius  of  Gallic  an  wheat  weighed  about  20  Roman  pounds,  which  is  in  Englijb  Troy  weight
18  pounds  2  ounces  and  a  half}  that  a  modius  of  Alexandrian  and  Sicilian  wheat  weighed
20  pounds  10  ounces,  which  make  18  pounds  8  ounces  Troy  weight}  with  feveral  other
forts  not  needful  to  be  mentioned  :  fo  that,  if  a  veffel  were  made,  containing  fuch  a
weight  of  the  beft  and  hardeft  wheat,  it  muft  come  very  near  the  Roman  modius.  But  the
exadt  way  to  determine  the  capacity  of  it,  is  to  confider  it  as  the  third  part  of  the  amphora.
The  learned  Dr.  Arbuthnot  makes  it  a  little  more  than  one  peck  Winchefler  meafure.

Here  it  may  be  neceffary  to  obferve,  how  carefully  the  author  adjufts  the  quantity  of
feed  of  different  forts  of  grain  to  be  Town  on  the  jugerum ,  varying  it  according  to  the  qua¬
lity  of  the  ground }  and,  by  obferving  the  proportion  the  jugerum  bears  to  the  Englifi  acre,
which,  as  has  been  often  faid,  is  near  as  10  to  16,  we  may  know  the  quantity,  which,  ac¬
cording  to  this  author,  ought  to  be  Town  in  an  acre  of  ground.  We  (hall  mention  a  fe\y
inftances :

5  Modii  of  wheat  ------

6  Modii  of  barley  of  two  rows  of  grains

6  Modii  of  beans  -  -  -  -  -  -

3  Modii  of  peafe  ------

Which  in  Engli(b  meafure  is

Bulh.  Pecks.

2  of  Wheat

2  1  £  Barley

2  1  f  Beans

1  off  Peafe

From  the  forefaid  quantities  and  proportions  one  may  eafily  know  the  proportions  of
the  other  forts  of  feed  of  different  grains  mentioned  in  this  chapter.

K  tion


1


per  acre.


}


to  the  jugerum.


66  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

tion  of  the  place,  or  of  the  feafon  of  the  year,  or  of  the  climate,  makes
an  alteration  in  it.  The  condition  of  the  place  makes  it  vary ,  when  we
fow  the  corn  either  in  plains  or  upon  hills  j  and  thefe  either  fat,  or  mid¬
dling,  or  lean.  The  date  of  the  time  or  feafon  varies  it,  when  we  fow  our
feeds  in  autumn,  or  when  the  winter  is  near  at  hand  ;  for  the  former
part  of  the  feed-time  allows  us  to  fow  thinner,  but  the  latter  part  re¬
quires  it  to  be  thicker.  The  date  and  condition  of  the  climate  or  wea¬
ther  makes  it  to  vary,  when  it  is  either  rainy  or  dry  •  for  that  (/.  e.  the
rainy)  requires  the  fame  as  the  former  part  of  the  feed-time,  and  this
(/.  e.  the  dry)  as  the  latter  part  of  it.  But  all  forts  of  corn  thrive  beft
in  open,  wide,  champain  land,  declining  and  doping  towards  the  fun,
and  expofed  to  the  heat  of  the  fame,  and  of  a  loofe  open  foil  j  for  hilly
ground,  tho’  it  may  yield  fomewhat  dronger  wheat,  yet  not  in  fo  great
quantity.  Thick,  chalky,  and  oufy  ground  nourishes  the  white  winter
wheat,  and  the  husky,  red,  bearded  wheat,  tolerably  well.

Barley  does  not  bear  with  any  place,  but  what  is  open,  loofe,  and
dry  ;  and  thofe  require  the  very  riche  d  land,  and  that  which  reds  and
is  agitated  or  laboured  by  turns  every  other  year :  this,  viz.  barley,
requires  no  mediocrity  ;  for  it  is  thrown  either  into  the  fatted;  or  the
leaned:  ground.  Thofe,  if,  after  continual  fhowers,  if  necedity  re¬
quires,  you  fcatter  them  upon  ground  that  is  yet  dimy  and  wet,  will
fupport  the  injury :  this,  if  you  commit  it  to  miry  ground,  intirely
dies.  But  if  the  land  is  tolerably  chalky  and  oufy,  but  not  to  a  very
great  degree,  there  will  be  occadon  for  a  little  more  of  the  common
wheat,  and  of  the  white  winter  wheat,  for  feed,  than  dve  modii ,  as  I
faid  before.  But  if  the  place  be  dry,  and  loofe,  and  open,  and  the  fame
be  either  fat,  or  thin,  and  lean,  four  modii  will  be  necedary  (3).  For
lean  ground,  for  a  contrary  reafon,  requires  the  fame  quantity  of  feed  j
for,  unlefs  it  be  fown  very  thin,  it  brings  an  empty  fmall  ear :  but
when,  from  one  grain  of  feed,  many  dalks  fhoot  out,  tho’  the  feed  be
thin  fown,  yet  the  corn  will  grow  up  very  thick.

Among  other  things  alfo,  we  ought  not  to  be  ignorant,  that  land,
planted  with  trees  for  fupporting  vines,  requires  a  dfth  part  more  feed,
than  that  which  is  open,  and  free  from  trees.  And  we  are  dill  fpeak-
ing  of  the  autumnal  fowing  j  for  we  reckon  this  the  principal  and  the
bed.

(3)  When  the  ground  is  fat,  commonly  feveral  ftalks  grow  up  from  one  grain;  and
the  reafon  he  gives,  why  no  more  of  this  feed  is  to  be  fown  upon  lean  ground,  is,  becaufe,
if  a  greater  quantity  were  fown,  it  would  not  have  ftrength  enough  to  nourifti  all  the
dalks.


But


Chap.  IX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  67

But  there  is  another  or  fecond  Towing,  when  necefiity  forces.  Huf-
bandmen  call  it  the  trimeftrian  / owing  (4.).  This  is  pradtifed  to  very-
good  purpofe  in  very  cold  and  fnowy  places,  where  the  fummer  is  wet,
and  without  great  heats ;  but,  in  other  places,  it  very  rarely  anfwers :
which  trimeftrian  fowing,  neverthelefs,  it  will  be  proper  to  difpatch
and  finifh  very  quickly,  and,  without  fail,  before  the  Equinox.  But,
if  the  condition  of  the  lands,  and  of  the  weather,  will  allow  it,  the
fooner  we  fow,  the  better  it  will  grow,  and  the  more  increafe  we  {hall
have  ;  for  there  is  no  feed  by  nature  trimeftrian,  as  fome  have  believed,
becaufe  the  fame  feed,  fown  in  winter,  anfwers  better.  But  neverthe¬
lefs  there  are  fome  feeds  better  than  others,  which  endure  the  heats  of
the  fpring,  as  white  wheats  and  Galatian  barley  (y),  and  that  kind  of
husked  bearded  wheat,  which  they  call  halicajlrum ,  and  the  grain  of
the  Marifcan  bean  :  for,  in  temperate  climates,  the  other  corns  ought
always  to  be  fown  before  winter.

But  fometimes  the  earth  ufes  to  vomit  up  a  fait  and  bitter  oufinefs,
which,  with  its  continually  flowing  noxious  moifture,  fpoils  and  de-
ftroys  the  ftanding-corn,  tho’  they  be  almoft  ripe,  and  makes  broad

(4)  Trimeftrian  feed  is  a  fort  of  wheat,  which  they  fow  in  the  fpring,  and  which  grows
up  and  comes  to  perfe&ion  in  three  months.  Columella  fays,  that  there  is  no  feed  natu¬
rally  trimeftrian.  Pliny  contradicts  this,  lib.  xviii.  and  fays,  that  there  are  fome  feeds  or
forts  of  wheat,  which  ripen  not  only  in  three,  but  in  two  months.  But,  as  father  Har-
douin  fays  very  juftly.  Columella  does  not  deny,  that  there  is  fuch  a  feed  ;  but  only  fays,  that
it  is  not  different  from  that,  which,  if  fown  in  autumn,  comes  up  better,  and  produces
more.

(5)  Ordeum  Galaticum.  Palladius  calls  this  fort  of  barley  grave  &  candiditm ,  heavy  and
white ;  and  advifes  to  fow  it  in  cold  places  about  the  firft  of  March ,  but  in  very  warm
places  about  the  t^th  of  January.  Probably  it  was  a  corn  brought  from  Galatia ,  a  pro¬
vince  of  the  Lejfer  Afia>  and  from  thence  had  its  name.  This,  and  the  Phrygian  barley,
were  much  commended  for  their  whitenefs,  and  yielding  much  meal.  Pliny  fays,  that
fome  ears  had  two  rows  of  grains,  fome  more,  even  as  far  as  fix;  and  that  there  were
fome  differences  in  the  grains  themfelves,  fome  longer,  fome  fhorter,  fome  rounder,  fome
whiter,  fome  blacker,  and  fome  of  fomewhat  of  a  purple  colour;  that  the  whiter  fort  was
the  leaft  able  to  fupport  tempeftuous  weather;  that  barley  was  the  tendereft  of  all  corns,
and  was  not  fit  to  be  fown  but  in  loofe  and  dry  ground.  That  which  approaches  to  a  purple
colour  is  reckoned  to  yield  more  meal,  and  is  more  able  to  refill  all  the  changes  of  the
weather.  See  Theophraft.  hift.  plant,  and  Plin.  lib.  xviii.  c.  7.

Ordeum  cantherinum ,  horfe-barley.  Cantherius  fignifies  a  gelding.  Probably  this  fort
of  barley  is  fo  called,  becaufe  it  is  good  for  horfes,  as  Columella  Teems  to  infinuate.  But
Matthiolus  upon  Diofcorides ,  c.  79.  p.  521.  thinks  it  is  fo  called,  quia  folliculo  caftratunt
enafcitur ;  by  which,  no  doubt,  he  underftood,  that  it  came  out  of  its  hofe  free  from
husks,  or  much  cleaner  than  other  forts  of  barley  ;  for  Pliny  makes  ufe  of  this  word  caftrarey
in  feveral  places,  for  cleanfing  and  freeing  the  wheat  from  its  husks,  as  caftrata  ftligo ,  &c.
And  Matthiolus  adds,  that  it  grows  chiefly  in  France ;  and  that  they  call  it  there  clean  bar¬
ley,  ordeum  mundum ,  becaufe  it  falls  from  its  husks  of  its  own  accord  ;  whereas  the  other
forts  are,  with  difficulty,  feparated  from  it :  that  the  whiteft  fort  of  barley  is  the  beft,
which  is  plump,  weighty,  and  is  eafily  boiled :  and  that  the  Galatian  is  the  whiteft  and
heavieft  of  any,  and  has  two  rows  of  grains.

K  2  plots


68  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IL

plots  of  ground  intirely  bare,  without  fo  much  as  one  ftalk  from  all  the
feed  that  was  fown  upon  it.  It  is  proper,  that  marks  fhould  be  fet  upon
thefe  bare  plots,  that,  at  a  proper  time,  we  may  cure  difeafes  of  this
kind ;  for  where  either  this  oulinefs,  or  any  other  peft,  intirely  kills
the  corn,  there  we  ought  to  fpread  pigeons  dung,  or  if  this  cannot  be
had,  cyprefs-leaves,  and  then  plow  them  into  the  ground.  But  the
principal  remedy  of  all  is,  to  make  a  deep  furrow,  and  thereby  drain
and  convey  from  thence  all  the  moifture;  otherwife  the  forefaid  reme¬
dies  will  be  ufelefs,  and  have  no  effedt.

Some  cover  the  feed-balket  with  the  fkin  of  an  Hyena  (6),  and  fo  fow
the  feeds  out  of  it,  after  they  have  remained  in  it  a  little  time,  not
doubting,  but  what  is  fown  in  this  manner  will  grow  up,  and  come  to
perfection.  Some  fubterraneous  pelts  alfo  kill  the  corns  after  they  are
fully  grown  up,  by  confuming  their  roots.  To  prevent  this,  they  ufe,
as  a  remedy,  the  juice  of  an  herb,  mixed  with  water,  which  ruftics
call  Houjleek  (7)  ;  for  they  fow  the  feeds,  after  fteeping  them  one  night
in  this  medicament.  Some  people  fqueeze  out  the  juice  of  a  ferpentine
cucumber  (8),  and  bruife  the  root  of  it,  and  dilute  the  fame  with  water;
and  after  having,  in  the  fame  manner,  foaked  the  feeds  therein,  com¬
mit  them  to  the  earth.  Others,  when  the  corn  begins  to  be  infefted,
fprinkle  the  furrows  with  this  fame  water,  or  with  unfalted  lees  of
oil  (9),  and  fo  remove  the  noxious  animals.

I  have


( 6 )  Hyena.  This  is  a  baaft  refembling  a  wolf,  with  a  mane,  like  a  horfe’s,  reaching  ail
along  its  back.  See  Ariflotle  de  hifloria  an'tmalium ,  and  JElian's  varia  hifloria.  Pliny ,  in
bis  viiiih  book,  cap.  30.  gives  a  particular  account  of  it,  and  relates  many  particulars  con¬
cerning  it,  which  probably  few  people  will  believe  till  they  fee  them.  There  are  many
of  them  in  Phrygia ;  but  they  are  more  numerous  in  Africa ;  and  they,  who  want  to  hear
many  ftrange  things  of  them,  may  confute  the  forementioned  authors.

(7)  Sedan/,  in  Greek  called  cLiifuov,  becaufe  it  lives  always,  houfleek,  or  ay  green,
grows  upon  tiles  or  boards,  but  bed  upon  thatched  houfes.  Our  author,  lib.  xi.  fays,  'hat
certain  of  the  antients,  as  Democritus ,  &cc.  direct  all  feeds  to  be  medicated  with  the  juice
of  this  herb,  and  to  ufe  the  fame  as  a  remedy  again  ft  little  beads,  which  deftroy  the  roots
of  the  corn  j  and  that  he  found  this  to  be  true  by  experience.  Pliny  fays  the  fame,  lib.
xviii.  c.  17.

(3)  Cucumeris  anguinei ,  Terpentine  cucumber.  In  fome  countries  there  is  a  fort  of  cu¬
cumber,  which  grows  long,  and  fomewhat  winding  like  a  ferpent.  Lobelias  calls  it  cucu~
mis  fiexuofus ,  the  winding  cucumber,  (o  called,  no  doubt,  from  the  fhape  of  its  fruit.
It  is  alfo  called  by  the  Latins  cucumis  fylveflris ,  erratic  us,  and  afininus,  as  Pliny  fays  j  and
of  the  infpiffaced  juice  of  this  they  make  what  they  call  elaterium ,  in  officinal  preparations,
humor  codettas,  in  foie  fccatus,  &  in  paflillos  firm  at  us.

(p)  Amurca  infulfa,  unfalted  lees  of  oil.  Varro,  de  re  ruftica ,  lib.  i.  cap.  6x.  calls  it
humor  aquatilis  ex  o'ea  expreffus ,  and  humor  aquatilis  &  retrimentum.  ft  is  the  watery
juice  which  flows  out  of  the  olive-berries,  when  they  are  firft  fquee7.ed  in  the  prefs,  and
comes  before  the  oil.  He  calls  it  retrimentum ,  the  refufe  and  off  fcouring  of  it;  and,
tho’we  call  it  dregs,  yet  it  is  really  different  from  the  fediment  in  the  bottom  of  oil -

-  veffels,


Chap.  IX.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  69

I  have  this  further  direction  to  give,  that,  when  the  corns  are  cut
down,  and  brought  into  the  threfhing-floor,  we  fhould  even  then  think
of  making  provifion  of  feed  for  the  future  feed-time ;  for  this  is  what
Celfus  fays,  where  the  corn  and  crop  is  but  fmall,  we  muft  pick  out  all
the  belt  ears  of  corn,  and  of  them  lay  up  our  feed  feparately  by  itfelf.
On  the  other  hand,  when  we  {hall  have  a  more  plentiful  harveft  than
ordinary,  and  a  larger  grain,  whatever  part  of  it  we  threfli  out,  muft
be  cleanfed  with  the  fieve;  and  that  part  of  it,  which,  becaufe  of  its
bulk  and  weight,  fubfides,  and  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  fieve,  muft
always  be  referved  for  feed  ;  for  this  is  of  very  great  advantage,  becaufe,
unlefs  fuch  care  be  taken,  corns  degenerate,  tho’  more  quickly  indeed
in  moift  places,  yet  they  do  fo  alfo  in  fuch  as  are  dry.  Nor  is  there
any  doubt,  but  that,  from  a  ftrong  feed,  there  may  be  produced  that
which  is  not  ftrong  ;  but  that,  which  at  firft  grew  up  fmall,  it  is  ma»
nifeft,  can  never  receive  ftrength,  and  grow  large :  therefore  Virgil ,
as  of  other  things,  fo  of  this  particular  concerning  feeds,  has  reafoned
excellently,  and  exprefled  himfelf  in  this  manner  :

(10)  1  I’ve  feen  the  largeft  feeds,  tho’  view’d  with  care,

‘  Degenerate,  unlefs  th’  induftrious  hand
‘  Did  yearly  cull  the  largeft.  Thus  all  things,

4  By  fatal  doom,  grow  worfe,  and,  by  degrees,

‘  Decay,  forcd  back  to  their  primevous  ftate.’

But,  if  we  take  a  grain  of  wheat  of  a  bright  red  colour,  and  cleave
it  in  two,  we  don’t  doubt  but  it  is  found,  if  it  have  the  fame  colour  in¬
wardly  ;  but  that  which  is  whitifh  on  the  outfide,  and  inwardly  appears
very  white,  ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  light,  and  without  any  fub-
ftance.  Nor  let  the  white  wheat  deceive  us,  as  if  Hufoandmen  were  to

veffels,  which  the  word  dregs  commonly  fignifies.  The  2ntient  Husbandmen  made  great
account  of  this  amurca,  and  ufed  it  many  different  ways,  as  may  be  feen  in  our  author.
They  put  it  up-in  veffels  as  carefully  as  they  did  oil  or  -wine;  they  ufed  to  boil  it  in  two-
thirds;  and,  after  it  was  cold,  hey  put  it  up  in  veffels;  they  uied  to  moiflen  and  feafon
all  their  oil-veffels  with  it,  that  they  might  not  .drink  up  the  oil;  they  prepared  their  threfh-
ing- floors  with  it,  in  order  to  drive  away  the  ants,  and  to  keep  them  from  chapping;  as
alfo  their  barn-floors,  and-the  plastering  of  their  walls  and  granaries,  they  fpnnkled  with
it;  as  alfo  their  wardrobes,  to  prefer ve  their  cloatbs  from  moths,  and  other  noxious  ani¬
mals;  they  fp": ikied  all  their  feeds  with  it;  and  with  ic  they  cured  their  difeafed  cattle,
and  trees  alfo ;  they  applied  it  o  ulcers  in  the  mouth  ;  they  anointed  with  it  their  bridles
and  fhoes,  and  other  things  made  of  leather, 'and  of  brafs  alfo,  to  preferve  them  from  ruff,
and  to  give  them  a  fine  colour;  .7  alfo  anointed  wih  ical!  their  wooden  houfhold  fur¬
niture,  and  earthen' veffels,  wherein  they  kept  their  figs,  &c.  All  which,  with  feveral
other  ufes  to  which  they  applied  it,  may  be  feen  in  this  elegant  ruftic  writer.

(10)  Virgil.  Georg,  lij.  i,  197.


take;


7o  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  .  Book  II.

take  any  great  pleafure  in  it ;  for  it  is  but  common  wheat  degenerated,
and  tho’  it  excels  it  in  whitenefs,  yet  it  is  far  inferior  to  it  in  weight.
But,  in  a  climate  of  a  wet  conftitution,  it  grows  up  very  well,  and
brings  a  good  increafe  ;  and  therefore  is  fitted;  for  fuch  places  as  are  well
moiftened  with  frequent  rains.  Nor  yet  need  we  go  far  to  feek  it,  or
beat  great  pains  to  find  it;  for  all  common  wheat  whatfoever,  after  the
third  lowing  upon  oufy  ground,  changes  into  white  wheat.

The  next  in  ufe  to  thefe  corns,  is  that  fort  of  barley,  which  the  coun¬
try-people  call  barley  of  fix  rows.  Some  alfo  call  it  horfe-barley ,  be-
caufe  it  both  nourilhes  other  animals,  which  are  kept  in  the  country,
better  than  common  wheat,  and  is  more  wholfome  nourifhment  for
man ,  than  bad  wheat ;  nor  is  there  any  other  thing,  which,  in  times
of  fcarcity,  better  fupplies  our  wants,  and  is  a  greater  relief  to  us,  than
it.  It  is  fown  in  dry  and  loofe  ground,  and  in  that  which  is  either  very
ftrong,  or  thin  and  lean,  becaufe  it  is  evident,  that  land  grows  lean  and
barren  by  bearing  crops  of  it ;  for  which  reafon  it  is  committed  either
to  the  fatted:  land,  whofe  excefiive  flrength  it  cannot  hurt,  or  to  that
which  is  lean,  to  which  no  other  thing  is  committed.  If  it  be  commit¬
ted  to  fat  ground,  it  ought  to  be  fown,  after  it  has  been  twice  plowed,
almod:  in  the  middle  of  the  feed-time,  after  the  Equinox  :  if  to  poor
{lender  ground,  it  ought  to  be  fown  earlier.  Five  modii  of  feed  will
take  up  one  jugerum  of  ground  ;  and,  after  it  is  a  little  ripe,  it  ought
to  be  cut  down  more  quickly  than  any  other  corn  ;  for,  being  of  a  brittle
Falk,  and  its  grain  covered  with  no  chaff,  it  quickly  fiieds  j  and,  for
the  fame  reafons,  it  is  more  eafily  threfhed  than  other  corns.  But,  after
you  have  removed  the  crop  it  has  produced,  it  is  bed:  to  let  the  ground
lie  fallow  for  one  year  ;  if  not,  to  fatiate  it  with  dung,  and  drive  out  all
the  poifon  that  yet  remains  in  the  earth.

There  is  alfo  another  kind  of  barley,  which  fome  call  Galatian ,  others
barley  of  two  rows.  It  is  of  an  extraordinary  whitenefs  and  weight;  fo
that,  when  mixed  with  wheat,  it  makes  excellent  food  for  a  family.  It
is  fown  in  the  very  fatted:,  but  cold  places,  about  the  month  of  March.
Neverthelefs  it  anfwers  better,  if  the  clemency  of  the  winter  allows  it,
when  it  is  fown  about  the  1 3th  of  January .  A  jugerum  of  land  requires
fix  modii  of  it.

Panic  alfo  and  millet  ( 1 1)  mud:  be  ranked  among  corns,  tho’  I  have
already  affigned  them  a  place,  and  ranked  them  with  legumes  or  pulfe  j

for,

fix)  Milium  bears  leaves  like  thofe  of  a  reed,  with  a  ftalk  two  cubits  long,  thick,  and
jointed,  and  wooly,  wich  a  vaft  many  roots,  with  panicles  hanging  down  from  the  top  of
ir,  in  which  there  are  a  vaft  many  grains,  fomewhat  roundifh,  folid,  fmooth,  of  a  yellowifh
colour,  covered  with  a  thin  coat.  Fejlus  fays  it  is  called  milium  a  milliari  fumma,  as  if  it

confifted


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  71

for,  in  many  countries,  the  Peafants  are  fupported  with  vi&uals  made
of  them.  They  require  a  light,  loofe,  open  ground.  They  not  only
grow  very  well,  and  bring  a  good  increafe,  in  gravelly,  but  all'o  in  fandy
ground,  provided  the  climate  be  moift,  or  the  ground  be  well  watered  j
for  they  greatly  dread  that  which  is  dry  and  chalky.  They  cannot  be
fown  before  the  fpring,  becaufe  they  thrive  be  ft,  and  rejoice  moft,  in
warm  weather.  Neverthelefs  they  are  very  fafely  committed  to  the
earth  in  the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  March.  Nor  do  they  burden
the  Hulbandman’s  accounts  with  great  expences ;  for,  with  four  fextarii
of  them,  they  fill  a  jugerum  of  land.  Neverthelefs  they  require  fre¬
quent  farcling  or  hoeing,  and  weeding,  that  they  may  be  freed  from
weeds.  After  they  have  put  forth  their  ears,  before  the  feeds  open  and
gape  with  the  great  heats,  they  gather  them  by  hand,  and  hang  them  up
in  the  fun ;  and,  after  they  are  well  dried,  they  lay  them  up  very  clofej
and,  being  laid  up  in  this  manner,  they  keep  longer  without  fpoiling,
than  other  corns.  Bread  is  made  of  millet,  which,  before  it  grows
cold,  may  be  eaten  without  any  diflike.  Panic,  bruifed  in  a  mortar,
and  freed  from  bran,  and  millet  alfo,  in  any  time  of  fcarcity,  make  a
foop  not  at  all  to  be  difliked,  efpecially  with  milk.


CHAP.  X.

Of  the  proper  Soil  for  every  kind  of  Pulfe,

FORASMUCH  as  we  have  now  given  abundance  of  precepts  re^
lating  to  corns,  let  us  next  difcourfe  of  the  feveral  forts  of  pulfe.
Lupines  (i)  are  firft  to  be  confidered,  becaufe  they  require  leaft  labour,

and

confided  of  a  thoufand  grains.  Pliny  fays,  that  the  locks  of  the  millet,  which  contain  the
grains,  hang  and  bend  downward,  like  fringes  or  hair,  loofe  and  incompact.  To  this  day
they  make  bread  of  it  in  Italy ,  which,  when  hot,  is  very  agreeable.

Panicum  is  alfo  ranked  among  the  corns.  It  is  altogether  like  millet  in  its  leaf,  root,
and  dalk ;  but  differs  from  it  in  its  panicles,  which  are  a  foot  long,  turning  down  towards
the  earth,  not  feparated  or  divided,  but  compacted  into  thick  clutters,  confiding  of  hairy
or  bridly  grains.  Pliny  fays  it  is  called  panicum ,  from  its  panicles,  with  their  tops  bending
downward  in  a  languiflhing  manner.  It  putteth  forth  its  fruit  grape-wife  in  bunches,  with¬
out  any  divifions  or  partitions,  no  otherwife  defended  but  by  fmall  skins  or  membranes.
The  dalk  groweth  fmaller  and  fmaller  by  degrees,  almod  as  hard  as  wood.  Some  fay  it
is  called  panicum,  quajl  panis  vicium ,  quod  vice  panis  fungatur,  becaufe  it  ferves  indead  of
bread,  and  men  live  upon  it  chiefly  when  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  wheat.

(1)  Lupinus  or  lupinum.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  fow  it  prefently  ex  arvo ,  as  foon  as  it
comes  off  the  ground.  Our  author  fays  fiatim  ex  area  \  by  which  they  mean,  that  it  may
be  fown  prefently  after  it  is  gathered  in.  It  is  fown  not  only  for  food,  but  alfo  for  dung¬
ing


a


72  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

and  are  bought  exceeding  cheap,  and,  of  all  things  that  are  fown,  do
mod;  good  to  land ;  for  they  furnifh  the  bed  dung  for  emaciated  vine¬
yards,  and  for  corn-lands  alfo,  and  they  thrive  well  even  in  barren
ground,  and,  when  laid  up  in  the  granary,  will  lad  an  age.  When
boiled  and  macerated,  they  nourifh  oxen  exceeding  well  during  the
winter;  and  they  very  feafonably  repulfe  famine  alfo,  if  men  are  fur-
priled  with  a  fcarcity  of  corn,  and  a  dearth.  They  fow  it  prefently
out  of  the  threfhing-floor  ;  and,  of  all  kinds  of  pulfe,  thefe  only  require
no  red  in  the  barn;  and,  either  in  the  month  of  September  before  the
Equinox,  or  prefently  after  the  fird  of  Oftober,  you  may  throw  them
upon  unplowed  fallow-lands ;  and,  how  flightly  foever  you  cover  them
with  earth,  they  bear  with  the  Hufbandman’s  negligence,  without  re¬
ceiving  any  damage.  Never thelefs  they  require  warm  weather  in  au¬
tumn,  that  they  may  take  root  quickly ;  for,  if  they  have  not  gathered
drength  before  winter,  they  differ  very  much  by  the  colds.  What
remains  of  your  feed,  you  will  lay  up  bed  in  a  loft  where  the  fmoke
comes,  becaufe,  if  any  moidure  reaches  them,  they  breed  worms,  and,
as  foon  as  they  have  confumed  the  little  mouths  or  buds  of  the  lupines,
the  remaining  part  cannot  fpring  up.  They,  as  I  faid,  love  poor  lean
land,  and  efpecially  red  land,  like  oker  ;  for  they  greatly  dread  chalk,
and  don’t  come  forth  at  all  in  flimy  or  miry  ground.  Ten  tnodii  of
them  take  up  one  jugerum  of  land.

After  thefe,  it  will  be  proper  to  commit  the  kidney-bean  (2)  to  the
earth,  either  in  land  that  has  lain  fallow,  or  better  in  land  that  is  fat,

ing  land.  It  receives  no  hurt  from  peftiferous  plants  growing  near  it;  for  it  deftroys  all
other  noxious  weeds  whatfoever.  Pliny  advifes  to  gather  them  after  it  has  rained,  becaufe,
when  they  are  gathered  very  dry,  they  fhed,  and  fly  from  the  reapers.  Crejcentio,  a  Flo¬
rentine  writer  upon  Husbandry  both  in  Latin  and  Italian ,  fays,  that  they  fow  them  at
different  times,  according  to  the  ufe  they  make  of  them.  If  for  dung,  they  fow  them
early  in  Augujl ;  after  they  are  grown  up,  they  cut  them  hard  by  the  ground,  throw  them
into  the  furrow,  fow  corn  upon  them,  and  then  plow  the  land  over  them  ;  and  they  fuf-
fice  for  dung  not  only  for  one  year,  but  you  may,  the  next  year,  fow  corn  upon  the  fame
land  without  dunging  it.  He  adds,  that  they  may  be  fown  among  panic  after  the  fecond
hoeing;  and,  after  the  panic  is  taken  away,  they  may  ftand  to  fatten  the  ground.  It  is
beft  to  fow  them  in  October  and  November  for  a  crop  of  feed.  They  muft  neither  be
weeded  nor  hoed;  for  they  themfelves,  as  has  been  faid,  deftroy  all  weeds,  and,  having
but  one  root,  the  hoe  deftroys  them.

(2)  Fhafeolus,  a  kidney-bean.  The  grains  refemble  the  kidneys  of  four-footed  beafts.
They  are  very  frequent  in  Italy ,  both  in  gardens,  and  in  the  open  fields.  Matthiolus ,
who  defer ibes  the  different  kinds  of  them,  diftinguifhed  by  their  different  colours,  white,
reddifh,  fpotted,  <&c.  fays,  that  the  grains  of  the  white  are  lefs  than  the  others,  and  are
fown  in  the  fields  as  other  pulfe;  but  the  other  forts  are  fown  in  gardens,  and  other  places,
where  they  want  fhades ;  for,  befides  yielding  fruit  in  due  time,  they  fhelter  from  the
fun;  for,  with  their  tendrils,  they  climb  up  upon  cottages,  lodges,  penthoufes,  palifades,
rails,  &c.  and  fpread  like  a  vine,  or  any  other  fpreading  vegetable.


4


and


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  73

and  is  plowed  and  fown  every  year.  A  jugerum  of  land  requires  no
more  than  four  modii  of  it.

The  fame  method  is  to  be  obferved  with  refpedt  to  peafe  (3),  which
neverthelefs  require  an  eafy,  loofe,  open  ground,  and  a  warm  place,  and
a  climate  where  it  frequently  rains.  We  may  fow  a  jugerum  of  land
with  the  fame  quantity  of  thefe  as  of  kidney-beans,  or  a  modius  lefs  in
the  very  beginning  of  the  feed-time  after  the  autumnal  equinox.

The  fatted  place,  or  that  which  is  well  dunged,  is  fet  apart  for  the
bean  (4),  and  if  there  be  any  old  fallow-ground,  of  a  low  fituation,
which  receives  moifture  from  an  higher  part.  Neverthelefs  we  will
firff  fow  the  feeds,  then  till  the  ground,  and,  after  it  is  tilled,  reduce  it
into  ridges,  and  harrow  it,  that  they  may  be  covered  with  a  larger  quan¬
tity  of  earth,  and  lie  deeper ;  for  this  is  a  very  great  advantage,  that,
when  the  feeds  fpring  up,  their  roots  may  be  funk  very  deep  in  the
ground.  But,  if  we  mud  make  ufe  of  land  that  bore  a  crop  of  corn
this  very  lad  year,  after  we  have  cut  down  the  dubble,  we  will  lay
twenty-four  loads  of  dung  upon  one  jugerum ,  and  fpread  it ;  and  like-
wife  when  we  throw  the  feeds  upon  unplowed  ground,  we  will  plow
it  in,  and,  after  reducing  it  into  ridges,  harrow  it  j  tho’  there  are  fome
who  deny,  that  beans  ought  to  be  harrowed  in  cold  places,  becaufe  the
clods,  which  dand  up  above  the  ground,  fhelter  them,  while  they  are
yet  young  and  tender,  from  the  frods,  and  afford  them  fome  warmth,
when  pinched  with  cold.

There  are  fome  alfo  who  may  think,  that  beans  fupply  the  place  of
dung ;  which  I  fo  interpret,  as  to  think,  that  the  ground  does  not  grow
fat  by  fowing  them  upon  it  j  but  that  they  confume  the  drength  of  the

(3)  Pifum.  Matthiolus  fays,  that  the  pea  has  its  name  from  Pifa,  the  place  where  for¬
merly  they  grew  very  plentifully.  It  may  feem  fuperfluous  to  give  any  defcription  of  a
thing  fo  well  known ;  but,  as  many  people  caft  their  eyes  upon  this,  and  other  beautiful
vegetables,  without  forming  any  diftind  idea  of  them,  it  may  not  be  amifs  to  bid  them
obferve,  that  the  pea  grows  up  with  a  fiftulous  branched  ftalk,  with  many  tendrils  or  clafpers
fhooting  forth  from  their  tops,  with  numerous  longifh,  thick,  and  flattiih  leaves,  with  a
cylinder-like  pod,  with  a  round  and  white  feed.  Ic  puts  forth  a  flower  or  bloflom  in  the
form  of  a  butterfly,  about  the  nevil  or  middle  of  a  purple  colour,  fometimes  wholly  white,
with  a  weak  root.  The  grains  lie  clofe  upon  one  another  in  the  pods.  There  are  feve-
ral  forts  of  them,  which  differ  in  colour,  bignefs,  <&c.  Husbandmen  commonly  fee  branches
of  trees  among  the  greater  fort  to  fupport  them.  The  fame  author  fays,  that,  in  their
whole  fubftance,  they  have  a  certain  fimilitude  to  beans,  but  differ  in  two  things  3  viz.
that  they  are  not  fo  flatulent,  nor  have  they  any  detergent  faculty ;  therefore  they  do  not
pafs  fo  quickly  as  beans.

(4)  Faba,  the  bean,  is  the  greateft  of  all  legumes.  Some  fow  it  for  fattening  the  land,
and,  when  it  begins  to  bloflom,  they  plow  it  down ;  for,  being  a  very  juicy  plant,  when
it  rots  under  ground,  it  fattens  it  very  much.  The  greater  it  is,  the  more  it  is  ftretched
out  into  length  j  the  lefler,  the  rounder  it  is.  tFor  the  molt  part,  there  are  only  three  in  a
r°d,  five  at  the  moft,  and  that  very  rarely.

V  L  earth


74-  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

earth  lefs  than  other  feeds :  for  I  am  fully  perfuaded,  that  the  land
which  did  bear  nothing,  is  fitter  for  corns,  than  that  which  bore  this
hufk  the  preceding  year.  Four  modii  of  beans,  as  'Tremellius  thinks,
and,  as  we  think,  fix  modii,  will  take  up  on z  jugerum  of  land,  if  the
foil  be  fat ;  if  it  be  middling,  they  will  take  up  a  little  more.  And  they
can  neither  endure  a  place  that  is  lean,  nor  that  which  is  foggy  ;  never-
thelefs  they  often  anl'wer  very  well  in  thick  clofe  ground.  A  part  of
them  ought  to  be  lown  in  the  middle  of  the  feed-time,  and  a  part  in  the
latter  end,  which  is  called  the J'eptimontial J'owing (5).  The  early  fovv-
ing  is  more  frequently  the  belt  j  fometimes  neverthelefs  the  late  is
better.

It  is  not  very  right  to  fow  them  after  the  winter  folflice,  and  worft
of  all  in  the  fpring,  tho’  there  is  alfo  a  trimeftrian  bean,  which  grows
up  and  ripens  in  three  months  time,  which  is  fown  in  the  month  of
February ;  and  of  this  a  fifth  part  more  feed  is  requifite,  than  of  that
which  is  fown  early  j  but  it  makes  very  fmall  ftraw,  and  not  many
pods  :  therefore  I  hear  old  Hufbandmen  commonly  fay,  that  they  would
rather  have  the  ftraw  of  the  early-fown  bean,  than  the  whole  produce
of  the  trimeftrian  fowing.  But,  whatever  time  of  the  year  it  fhall  be
fown  in,  care  muft  be  taken,  that  the  quantity  we  allot  for  feed  be  only
fown  upon  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  moon,  if  neverthelefs,  upon  that
day,  fhe  fhall  not  run  over  and  pafs  the  diredt  rays  of  the  fun,  which
the  Greeks  call  (6)  >  if  not  fo,  then  let  it  be  fown  upon  the

14th  day,  while  the  light  is  yet  upon  the  increafe,  tho5  we  fhould  not
be  able  to  cover  all  the  feed  prefently ;  for  it  will  fuffer  no  manner  of
hurt  from  the  night  dews,  or  from  any  other  caufes,  provided  it  be
defended  from  the  cattle  and  the  fowls.  But  the  antient  Hufbandmen,
and  alfo  Virgil  himfelf,  were  of  opinion,  that  it  fhould  be  fleeped  be¬
fore-hand  in  lees  of  oil,  or  in  nitre,  and  fo  be  fown,

(7)  ‘  That,  in  the  bean’s  fallacious  (hell,  the  grain
‘  Might  bigger  grow,  when  o’er  a  mod’rate  fire
*  The  moiften’d  feed  is  warm’d,  but  foon  remov’d.’

(5)  The  feptimontial  fowing  was  about  the  time  they  celebrated  the  feaft  they  called
feptimontium ,  which  was  in  the  month  of  December,  a  little  before  the  faturnalia.  This
feaft  was  infticuted,  as  fome  think,  in  remembrance  of  the  feventh  hill  being  taken  within
the  inclofures  of,  and  added  to,  the  city,  at  which  time  they  offered  their  Sacrifices  upon
feveral,  if  not  all,  of  the  feven  hills ;  and  then  the  Romans  fent  gifts  to  one  another.  It
was  celebrated,  not  in  a  polite,  but  ruftic  manner,  as  is  ufual  among  villagers  and  moun¬
taineers,  probably  in  remembrance  of  their  primitive  fimplicity.

(6)  ' A7r'oKfx<ri(.  When  the  moon  paffes  over  the  rays  of  the  fun  diametrically  oppofite
to  her,  it  is  called  d7r'oK^<ri{  rilf  2sAh m  arrofxu,  i.e..repello,  repulfo,as  if  the  moon  were
driven,  as  it  were,  from  the  fun,  when  ihe  begins  to  grow  old  or  decreafe.

(7)  VtrgiL  Georg,  lib.  i.  ipy.


Chap.  X.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  75

We  have  alfo  found  by  experience,  that  the  bean,  being  cured  after
this  manner,  when  brought  to  maturity,  was  not  fo  much  infefted  by
the  wevil.

Alfo  what  we  are  going  to  fay  further,  we  lay  it  down  as  a  precept
from  our  own  experience;  viz.  at  the  change  of  the  moon,  pull  your
beans  before  day-light.  Then,  when  they  are  fully  dried  in  the  threfh¬
ing-floor,  before  it  be  full-moon,  beat  them  out  of  their  pods,  and,
after  they  are  cooled,  bring  them  into  the  granary.  When  they  are  laid
up  in  this  manner,  they  (hall  fuffer  no  damage  from  the  wevil.  And
this,  of  all  other  forts  of  pulfe  whatfoever,  can  be  the  mod  expeditioufly
threfhed  without  horfes,  and  cleanfed  without  wind,  in  the  following
manner:  Let  a  fmall  number  of  bundles  be  placed  loofe  at  one  extremity
of  the  threfhing-floor,  the  which  let  three  or  four  men  move  forward
with  their  feet  the  whole  length  of  the  threfhing-floor,  exadlly  through
the  middle  of  it,  and  beat  the  fame  with  flicks  or  little  forks.  Then,
when  they  are  come  to  the  other  extremity  of  the  threfhing-floor,  let
them  gather  the  ftalks  into  heaps ;  for  the  feeds,  that  are  beaten  out, will
lie  upon  the  threfhing-floor,  and  upon  them  the  reft  of  the  bundles  will
be  beaten  out  by  degrees  in  the  fame  manner;  and  the  hardeft  chaff
will  be  removed  and  feparated  by  the  beaters  ;  but  the  fmall,  which
falls  with  the  beans  from  the  pods,  and  fettles  with  them  upon  the
threfhing-floor,  will  be  fevered  from  them  after  another  manner  :  for
when  the  heap,  confifting  of  grain  and  chaff  mixed  together,  fhall  be
thrown  together  into  one  place,  let  it  be  thrown  by  little  and  little,
with  fans,  to  another  place  at  a  good  diflance,  by  doing  which,  the
chaff,  which  is  lighter,  will  fall  on  this  fide ;  the  beans,  which  will
be  thrown  farther,  will  come  pure  and  clean  to  the  place  whither  the
winnower  fhall  throw  them.

It  is  proper,  that  the  lentil  be  fown  in  the  middle  of  the  feed- time,
when  the  moon  is  in  herincreafe,  till  her  twelfth  day,  in  a  thin,  lean,
loofe  foil,  or  in  a  fat  and  dry  place  efpecially  ;  for,  in  the  flower,  it  is
eafily  corrupted  with  luxuriance,  or  over-ranknefs  and  moifture.  And,
that  it  may  come  forth  the  fooner,  and  grow  big,  they  ought  to  be
throughly  mixed  with  dry  dung,  and  fcattered,  after  they  have  refted
fo  four  or  five  days.

We  obferve  two  different  times  for  fowing  them ;  the  one  early,
about  the  middle  of  the  feed-time;  the  other  later,  in  the  month  of
February.  A  little  more  than  a  modius  of  them  will  fuffice  for  fowing
a  jugerum  of  land.  And,  that  they  may  not  be  delfroyed  by  the  wevils,
(for  they  eat  them  even  when  they  are  in  the  pods)  care  mult  be  taken,
that,  after  they  are  threfhed  out,  they  be  put  into  water,  and  that,  the

L  2  .  firm


76  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book II.

firm  and  found  be  feparated  from  that  which  is  empty,  which  prefently
fwims  above.  Then  let  them  be  dried  in  the  fun,  and  fprinkled  with
the  root  of  Jilphium  (8),  bruifed  with  vinegar,  and  let  them  be  well
rubbed  j  and  fo,  after  they  are  dried  in  the  fun  a  fecond  time,  and  then
cooled,  let  them  be  laid  up,  if  there  be  a  greater  quantity  of  them,  in
a  barn,  if  a  lefifer  quantity,  in  oil  jars,  or  any  other  vefiels,  wherein
falt-fifh  or  flefh  have  been  kept;  which  being  filled  therewith,  when
they  are  prefently  covered  with  plaifter,  whenever  we  fhall  bring  them
forth  to  ufe,  we  fhall  find  the  lentils  found.  They  may  alfo,  without
being  cured  after  this  manner,  be  preferved  very  well,  if  they  be  mixed
with  afhes.

Linfeed  (9)  muft  not  be  fown,  unlefs  it  brings  a  great  increafe,  in
that  country  where  you  cultivate  it,  and  the  price  it  bears  invites  you ;

for,

(8)  Silphium.  Columella  fays,  lib.  vi.  cap.  17.  that  the  root,  which  the  Greeks  call
/ ilphium ,  was  commonly  called  laferpitiurn  in  his  time.  Pliny  fays,  that  it  was  found  in  the
province  of  Cyrene-,  that  they  called  the  juice  of  itlafer ;  that  it  was  of  mighty  efteem  in  phy-
fic,  and  fold  for  its  weight  in  filver;  but  that,  for  many  years,  it  had  not  been  found  there,
becaufe  all  the  ftalks  of  it,  as  foon  as  they  fprout  up,  were  eaten  by  the  cattle  conftantly
kept  upon  thefe  lands  by  thofe  who  farmed  them  of  the  public ;  that  formerly  the  inha¬
bitants  did  not  fuffer  cattle  to  come  where  it  grew.  He  fays,  that  it  only  grew  wild,  and
did  not  bear  with  culture;  that  it  had  a  large  thick  root,  a  ferulaceous  ftalk,  leaves  very
like  thofe  of  parfley ;  that  the  feed  of  it,  from  its  flatnefs,  [planitie)  was  called  its  leaf ;
that  the  leaves  of  it  were  of  a  golden  colour,  and  were  inftead  of  its  feed;  and  that  they
fell  at  the  riling  of  the  dog-ftar,  and  from  thefe  the  laferpitium  fprung ;  that  both  the  root
and  the  ftalk  were  perfected  in  one  year ;  that  they  took  the  juice  of  it  two  ways,  viz.
from  its  ftalk,  and  from  its  root;  that  the  firft  was  far  inferior  to  the  fecond,  and  foon
fpoiled.  Pliny  gives  a  large  account  of  this  herb,  nat.  hiff.  lib.  xix.  c.  3.  of  its  feveral  forts,
and  the  ufes  to  which  it  was  applied,  and  of  the  ways  of  adulterating  it;  that  the  genuine
fort  is  of  a  moderately  red  colour,  and,  when  broken,  white  on  the  infide,  and  prefently
afterwards  becomes  tranfparent ;  that  a  drop  or  bit  of  it  prefently  diffolves  in  water  or
fpittle;  that  it  is  fomewhat  like  myrrh  (<rp.u pvt£uv) ;  that  the  true  flpbium  was  become  fo
rare,  that,  in  his  memory,  only  one  ftalk  of  it  had  been  found,  which  had  been  fent  to
Nero ,  which  he  valued  fo  much,  that  he  kept  it,  with  his  gold  and  lilver,  in  his  treafure,
and  produced  it  as  a  great  curiofity  (the  words  are,  he  brought  it  out  of  his  treajure  with
his  gold  and  fiver ) ;  that  it  was  fo  kept  by  the  Cyrenians ,  that  it  could  not  be  exported,
but  by  ftealth.  The  curious  may  compare  the  defcription  that  Pliny ,  Tkeophrafus ,  and
Galen ,  give  of  the  [ilphium  or  laferpitium  of  their  days,  and  fee  if  it  agrees  with  what  they
call  now  by  that  name.  It  is  ftrange,  that  our  author  fhould  recommend  the  ufe  of  the
root  of  this  herb  for  preferving  lentils,  feeing  it  was  fo  rare  to  be  found  ;  but  probably
the  herb,  which  they  commonly  called  laferpitium ,  was  not  the  genuine  f/pbium.

(9)  Linxm ,  flax.  This  is  fo  ufeful  a  vegetable  to  mankind,  that,  next  to  corn  that  fuf-
tains  them,  there  is  not  any  thing  in  nature  of  greater  benefit  to  them.  Pliny,  in  his
natural  hifory ,  fays,  it  is  fown  in  gravelly  places,  in  land  once  plowed ;  that  nothing
makes  greater  hafte ;  for  it  is  fown  in  the  fpring,  and  pulled  in  fummer.  He  mentions
many  nations,  who,  in  his  time,  made  a  traffick  of  flax,  and  manufactured  it :  Egypt  par¬
ticularly  was  famous  for  it,  and  carried  it  into  Arabia  and  India ;  and,  even  in  his  time,
this  manufacture  was  common  throughout  all  Gaul ;  and  he  fays,  that  the  enemies  of  the
Homan  empire,  who  lived  beyond  the  Rhine,  were  very-dextrous  at  it ;  and  that  their  wo¬
mens  molt  beautiful  garments  were  made  of  flax:  fo  that,  in  his  days,  this  ufeful  manu¬
facture


Chap.  X.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  77

for,  above  all  other  feeds,  it  is  hurtful  to  lands :  therefore  it  requires
the  fatteft  place,  and  moderately  moift.  It  is  fown  from  the  firft  of
October  till  the  riling  of  aquila  (io)  (the  eagle),  which  is  on  the  7th  of
December.  A  jugerum  of  land  is  fown  with  eight  modii  of  it.  Some
think  it  proper,  that  the  feed  be  committed  exceeding  thick  to  lean
ground,  that  the  flax  may  come  up  fmall  and  fine  ;  and  they  fay,  that,
if  it  be  fown  in  rich  llrong  land,  in  the  month  of  February ,  ten  modii
of  it  mull  be  thrown  upon  one jugerum.

Sefamum  (11),  which  is  well  watered,  mull  be  fown  earlier;  but
fuch  as  is  fown  in  land  which  wants  moifture,  mull  be  fown  from  the
autumnal  equinox  to  the  1  y th  of  Odlober.  For  the  moll  part,  it  requires
that  crumbling,  loofe,  rotten  ground,  which  the  Campanians  call  black
mould.  Neverthelefs  it  does  not  thrive  worfe  in  fat  lands  alfo,  and  in
ground  gathered  together  from  different  places.  And  the  fame  quan¬
tity  of  this  feed  is  fown  upon  a  jugerum  of  ground,  as  of  millet  and
panic,  and  fometimes  alfo  two  fextarii  more.  But  I  myfelf  indeed  have
feen  this  feed  fown  in  the  months  of  "June  and  July  in  the  countries  of
Syria  and  Cilicia ,  and  reaped  in  autumn,  after  it  was  fully  ripe.

Chichlings,  which  are  like  to  peafe,  ought  to  be  fown  in  the  month
of  January  or  February ,  in  rich  fertile  ground,  and  in  moift  weather.
Neverthelefs,  in  fome  parts  of  Italy ,  they  fow  them  before  the  firft  of
November.  Three  modii  of  them  fill  a  jugerum  of  ground.  Nor  is  there
any  fort  of  pulfe  which  does  lefs  hurt  to  land ;  but  it  very  feldom  an-
fwers,  becaufe,  in  the  blolfom,  it  can  neither  bear  droughts,  nor  fouth
winds ;  both  which  inconveniencies  happen  commonly  at  that  time  of
the  year,  when  it  begins  to  call:  its  blofloms.

What  they  call  the  ram-chich-pea  (12),  and  that  other  fort,  which

they

fadture  Teems  to  have  extended  overall  the  Roman  empire,  and  much  farther.  The  ufe,
both  of  the  husk,  and  of  its  feed,  Teems  to  have  been  known  many  ages  before  in  the
eaftern  parts  of  the  world,  efpecially  in  Egypt-,  where  the  fineft  linen  in  the  whole  world
was  made  long  before  the  Roman  empire  made  any  figure  in  the  world.  The  Teed
of  it  affords  an  oil  of  very  great  ufe,  not  only  in  phyfic,  and  many  different  trades,  but
for  burning  alfo,  being  more  durable  in  lamps  than  oil- olive.

(10)  Aquila ,  the  eagle,  a  conftellation  of  the  northern  hemifphere,  commonly  joined
with  Antinous.

(11)  Sefamum.  Pliny  fays,  that  it  came  firft  from  India,  where  they  make  great  quan¬
tities  of  oil  of  it,  not  only  for  lamps,  but  alfo  for  eating.  Tkeophraftus  fays,  that  it  has
a  ftalk  like  millet,  but  thicker  and  higher,  with  red  leaves,  and  grafs-coloured  flowers ;
and  that  its  feed  is  ftiut  up  in  feed-veffels,  like  poppy-feed.  And  Pliny  fays,  that  it  has  a
ferulaceous  ftalk,  a  leaf  of  the  colour  of  blood;  and  that  the  colour  of  the  Teed  is  white
Theophrafl.  lib.  viii.  fays,  that,  of  all  feeds,  it  is  the  moft  troublefome  to  the  ground,  and
emaciates  it  moft.

(12)  Cicer ,  a  chich-pea.  The  Greeks  call  it  Iptprrd-os.  Pliny  fays,  that  it  has  a  certain
faltifh  juice  or  liquor  peculiar  to  itfelf ;  which,  Theophrafus  lays,  if  too  much  rain  waflr

5  ~  away.


78  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  II.

they  call  ihePimic  or  red  chich-pea ,  can  be  fown  all  the  month  of March
in  a  moift  climate,  and  in  the  fertileft  ground  ;  for  it  alfo  hurts  the
earth  :  and  therefore  the  wifeft  Hufbandmen  difapprove  of  it.  Never-
thelel’s,  if  it  is  to  be  fown,  it  muff  be  deeped  the  day  before,  that  it
may  fpring  out  the  fooner.  Three  modii  are  fufficient  for  one  juge-
rum.

Hemp  (13)  requires  fat,  well-dunged,  and  well- watered  ground,  or
that  which  is  flat,  moilf,  and  manured  very  deep.  They  fow  fix  grains
of  this  feed  upon  a  foot  fquare,  about  the  time  that  Artdurus  ( 1 4)  rifes,
which  is  toward  the  latter  end  of  February ,  about  the  24th  or  ifth
day.  Nor  will  it  be  amifs  to  fow  it  at  any  time  till  the  vernal  Equinox,
if  the  conflitution  of  the  climate,  or  the  weather,  be  rainy.

After  theie  forts  of  pulfe,  we  muff  take  navews  and  turneps  into  con-
fideration  ;  for  both  of  them  fill  the  bellies  of  ruflics.  Neverthelefs
turneps  (15)  are  more  ufeful,  becaufe  they  both  yield  a  greater  increafe,

and

away,  ir  rots,  and  is  deftroyed  by  the  worms.  There  are  feveral  forts  of  it,  as  Pliny  fays,
which  differ  in  bulk,  figure,  colour,  and  tafte.  There  is  one  fort  of  it  arietino  capiti  fimile ,
like  a  ram’s  head,  which  Columella  ciWs  cicer  arietinum,  zndTheopbraJlus  y.pui  Ip'ifiivdor  and
of  th;s  Pliny  fays  there  is  both  a  black  and  a  white  fort.  There  is  another  fort,  which  they
called  cicer  cotumbinum ,  becaufe  perhaps  they  fed  doves  with  it.  This  they  called  alfo
cuer  Venereum ,  becaufe  they  ufea  it  in  Venus's  vigils.  It  was  white,  round,  fmooth,  and
fmaller  than  the  ram-chich-pea,  as  Pliny  fays.

Cicercula ,  a  cbicbling.  It  is  a  diminutive  of  cicer ,  a  fmaller  fort  of  chich-pea,  fhaped
like  a  pea.  Pliny  fays,  that  that  is  the  fweeteft  which  is  the  likeft  the  bitter  vetch  ;  and
that  the  black  and  red  is  firmer  than  the  white.  '

(13)  Cannabis-,  hemp.  Pliny  fays,  the  thicker  it  is  fown,  the  fmaller  it  is;  therefore  our
au  hor  advifes  to  fer  fix  grains  upon  a  foot  fquare  of  ground.  When  its  feed  is  ripe,  they
ftrip  it  off  its  ftalk  about  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  dry  it  in  the  fun,  or  wind,  or  in
the  fmoke.  The  hemp  itfelf  is  gathered  after  the  vintage ;  fo  that,  it  feems,  they  gathered
the  feed  before  they  pulled  the  ftalks.  There  are  two  forts  of  ir,  the  male  and  the  female.
The  male  pours  forth  more  branches  from  its  ftalk,  making  the  appearance  of  a  little  tree.
The  female  has  much  fmaller  ftalks,  and  not  branched  as.  the  other.  Both  male  and  female
have  leaves  like  the  afh-tree,  but  fmaller,  and  gradually  ferrated.  They  are  larger  and
blacker  in  the  male  ;  and  five  or  fix  of  them  come  forth  of  one  pedicle.  The  feed  grows
only  upon  the  male,  of  an  afh-colour,  the  marrow  of  which  is  fweet  and  white.  The
hemp  that  grows  in  Italy  is  reckoned  very  good,  efpecially  that  of  the  territory  of  Bologna.

(14)  Ar&urus ,  a  fixed  ftar  of  the  firft  magnitude,  fo  called  aora  th s  cv^y.i  atpy.Tv,
becaufe,  Servius  fays,  it  is  placed  after  the  tail  of  the  Greater  Bear.  It  is  in  the  conftella-
tion.  Arclcphylax  or  Bootes.

(15)  Rapum ,  a  turnep.  Pliny  fays,  that,  if  due  order  were  to  be  obferved,  turneps
ought  to  be  confidered  next  to  corn,  or  at  leaft  beans,  fince  nothing  is  of  more  ufe;  for
they  grow  for  all  animals:  four-footed  beafts  delight  in  their  leaves ;  and  men  are  as  well
pleafed  with  their  tender  leaves  in  their  feafon,  as  with  fprouts;  and  they  are  a  great  relief
when  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  com,  and  often  prevent  a  famine.  He  fays,  that,  after  corn
and  wine,  they  are  the  fruit,  which  the  people,  that  live  beyond  the  Po,  have  moft  in  re-
queft.  They  may  be  fown  where  almoft  nothing  elfe  can  be  fown.  They  are  nouriftied
by  the  frofts,  and  fogs,  and  colds;  and  there  are  fome  of  them  of  a  wonderful  bignefs.
Pliny  fays,  he  had  feen  fome  that  weighed  40  pounds ;  and  fome  authors  affirm  they

have


Chap.  X.  O/HUSBANDRY.  79

and  they  are  food  not  only  for  man,  but  for  oxen  alfo,  efpecially  in
Gaul ,  where  this  kind  of  root  affords  nourifhment  for  the  fore-
faid  cattle  during  the  winter.  Both  of  them  require  a  rotten,  crum¬
bling,  loofe  foil,  and  don’t  grow  in  thick  clofe  ground  ;  but  turneps
thrive  bed:  in  open  plains,  and  moift  lands.  The  navew  (16)  loves
land  that  is  Shelving  and  dry,  and  which  comes  nearer  to  that  which  is
lean  and  poor,  therefore  grows  better  in  gravelly  and  fandy  lands  j  and
the  quality  of  the  place  changes  the  feeds  of  both  the  one  and  the  other :
for,  in  a  different  foil,  in  two  years  time,  turneps  are  changed  into  na-
vews,  and  navews  affume  the  likenefs  of  turneps.  In  grounds  that  are
well  watered,  it  is  right  to  fow  them  both  after  the  fummer  folflicej
but  in  dry,  in  the  latter  end  of  the  month  of  Augijl ,  or  in  the  begin¬
ning  of  September.  They  require  ground  that  is  well  manured  over  and
over  again,  either  with  the  plough  or  the  fpade,  and  fatiated  with  plenty
of  dung  j  for  this  is  of  great  importance,  not  only  becaule  they  come
forth  better,  and  bring  a  greater  increafe,  but  becaufe,  after  a  plentiful
crop  of  them,  ground,  thus  managed,  bears  excellent  corn.  There  muft
not  be  more  than  four  J'extarii  of  turnep-feed  fown  upon  one  jugerum
of  land  ;  and  a  fourth  part  more  of  navew-feed  muft  be  fcattered  upon
a  jugerum  of  land,  becaufe  it  does  not  fpread  and  inlarge  itfelf  into  a
broad  belly,  but  ftrikes  its  flender  root  downward.  And  thefe  things,
we  are  of  opinion,  ought  to  be  fown  for  the  ufe  of  men,  and  thofe  that
follow  next  for  the  ufe  of  cattle.

have  feen  fome  of  a  much  greater  bulk :  fo  that  it  is  not  a  little  wonderful,  that,  of  fo
fmall  a  feed,  there  fhould  grow,  in  three  months  time,  fo  great  a  root.  It  is  common
to  fee,  among  the  Alps-,  fome  of  them  weigh  30  pounds.  The  turneps  about  Nurfia ,  a
town  of  the  Sabines ,  were  in  greateft  efteem  in  our  author’s  days.  The  next  are  thofe
of  mount  Algido  in  th eTufculan  land,  next  to  mount  Albano ,  about  15  miles  from  Rome.
The  Amiternia n  navews,  which  are  of  the  fame  nature  with  turneps,  rejoice  equally  in
cold  weather.  Matthiolus  fays,  that  in  Infubria  (viz.  the  ftate  of  Milan,  and  fome  ad¬
jacent  countries)  they  fow  their  turneps  and  navews  as  foon  as  the  corns  are  taken  off  their
lands  in  June  and  July  3  and,  in  the  month  of  Ottober,  when  the  root  is  grown  to  its
utmoft  file,  they  pull  it  up.  In  Greek  the  turnep  is  called  yoyyv\n,  from  the  round  form
of  its  root.

(16)  The  napus ,  navew,  is  by  fome  thought  to  be  what  the  Greeks  called  j3si nor  but
authors  differ  about  it.  And  indeed  if  the  Greeks  called  this  root  by  this  name  from
(Jaw,  which  fignifies  a  little  hill,  or  round  rifing  ground,  it  muft  be  different  from  the
napus,  which,  our  author  fays,  was  not  round.


CHAP.


8o


Book  II.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA


CHAR  XI.

Of  the  fever al  Sorts  of  Fodder ,  of  Medic ,  V etches,  or  Tares ,
Mif cel  line ,  CL/.r,  Fenugreek ,  the  bitter  Vetch ,  //6s

Chich-peafe  (i),

THERE  are  many  forts  of  fodder,  as  medic,  vetches,  mifcelline
or  barley-fodder,  alio  fenugreek  (2)  and  oats,  as  alfo  the  bitter
vetch,  and  the  chich-pea.  As  for  the  reft,  we  don’t  think  it  worth
our  while  to  enumerate  them,  and  much  lefs  to  fowthem.  Neverthe-
iefs  we  except  the  cythijus  (fhrub-clover)  of  which  we  (hall  fpeak  in
thofe  books  we  have  written  of  the  feveral  kinds  of  fprigs  or  plants  of
trees.  But,  of  all  thofe  that  pleafe  us,  the  herb  medic  (3)  is  the  choi-

ceft,

fi)  Gefneru /,  in  hts  notes  upon  our  author,  thinks,  that  the  conftru&ion  in  the  begin¬
ning  of  this  chapter  confirms  his  opinion,  that  the  prefent  divifion  we  have  of  this  author
into  chapters  was  not  made  by  Columella  himfelf;  otherwife  he  would  have  begun  this
chapter  in  a  different  manner :  and  his  opinion  Teems  very  well  founded ;  for  there  are
about  ten  accufadves  without  any  verb  to  govern  them,  except  you  bring  it  from  the  laft:
fentence  of  the  foregoing  chapter,  which  is  not  very  common  ;  whereas,  if  there  were  no
new  chapter,  the  conftrudlion  would  be  natural  enough ;  and  either  fome  word  is  want¬
ing,  or  the  author  intended  it  as  the  continuation  of  the  fame  fentence:  fo  that  I  have
tranflated  them  as  if  they  were  all  nominatives,  and  added  the  fubftantive  verb.

(2)  Farrago  has  been  before  explained.  P liny  fays,  that  it  was  alfo  made  of  the  cleanfings
or  refufe  of  the  husked  bearded  wheat,  and  fometimes  it  had  fitches  mixed  with  it.

(3)  Medica ,  medic.  Father  Hardouin  fays,  it  is  now  called  great  trefoil ,  or  Burgundy
hay,  or  luzem ,  more  commonly  faintfoin.  Plbiy  calls  it  a  foreign  herb  from  Greece ,  and
fays,  that  it  was  brought  thither  by  th e  Medes,  during  the  Perpan  war,  in  the  time  of  Da¬
rius ;  and  that  it  is  of  fo  great  value,  that  it  deferves  to  be  defcribed  aroongft  the  firft;
for,  from  once  fowing,  it  will  laft  thirty  years.  Our  author  fays,  only  ten,  and  from  him
Palladius.  It  has  a  jointed  ftalk  and  leaves,  like  trefoil ;  the  higher  it  grows,  the  narrower
are  the  leaves :  that  the  ground  where  it  is  fown  muft  be  freed  from  ftones,  and  well
manured  in  autumn,  then  afterwards  plowed,  then  harrowed  twice  or  thrice,  five  days
intervening,  and  then  dunged.  It  requires  juicy  land,  or  muft  be  well  watered.  It  muft
be  fown  in  May.  All  the  ground  muft  be  covered  thick  with  feed;  and  all  the  weeds,
that  grow  amongft  it,  muft  be  plucked  up.  There  muft  be  twenty  modii  of  feed  to  a  juge-
rum  of  land.  If  the  ground  be  moift  or  weedy,  it  foon  degenerates  into  meadow  ground  :
fo,  when  it  is  an  inch  high,  it  ought  to  be  cleared  of  herbs,  rather  by  hand  than  with  a
farcle.  They  cut  it  when  it  begins  to  bloflom,  and  as  often  as  it  bloffoms  anew,  which
it  does  fix  times  a  year,  at  leaft  four.  It  ought  not  to  be  fuffered  to  ripen  into  feed,  be-
caufe  the  fodder  of  it  is  more  ufeful,  till  it  be  three  years  old,  and  then  it  ought  to  be  cut
clofe  to  the  ground.  Thus  the  other  herbs  perifh,  while  it  fuffers  nothing,  becaufe  of
the  deepnefs  of  its  roots.  Mattbiolus  fays,  that  tho’  this  medic  was  formerly  fown  for
fodder  in  all  parts  of  Italy,  and  was  known  to  every  body,  yet,  in  his  time,  he  fcarcely
found  any  who  ever  had  feen  it,  fo  far  were  they  from  fowing  it.  They  fay,  that  it
abounds  in  Spain ;  and  Ruellius  fays,  it  grows  in  France ,  and  is  there  called  the  greater
trefoil  or  faintfoin.  From  a  long,  fmall,  woody  root  come  forth  feveral  little  ftalks,  a

cubit


Chap.  XI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  81

ceft,  becaufe,  when  it  is  once  fown,  it  lafts  ten  years ;  and  it  can  bear
to  be  cut  down  four  times,  and  fometimes  alfo  fix  times,  in  a  year,
becaufe  it  dungs  the  land ;  and  all  emaciated  cattle  whatfoever  grow  fat
with  it,  becaufe  it  is  a  remedy  for  fick  cattle ;  and  a  jugerum  of  it  is
abundantly  fufiicient  for  three  horfes  the  whole  year.  It  is  fown  as  vve
fhall  hereafter  diredt.

About  the  beginning  of  October,  cut  up  the  place  wherein  you  de-
fign  to  fow  medic  the  next  fpring  ;  and  let  it  lie  all  winter  to  rot  and
grow  crumbly.  Then,  about  the  firft  of  February ,  plow  it  carefully
a  fecond  time,  and  carry  all  the  ftones  out  of  it,  and  break  all  the  clods.
Afterwards,  about  the  month  of  March ,  plow  it  a  third  time,  and  har¬
row  it.  When  you  have  thus  manured  the  ground,  make  it,  in  the
manner  of  a  garden,  into  beds  or  divifions  ten  feet  broad,  and  fifty  feet
long,  that  fo  it  may  be  fupplied  with  water  by  foot-paths,  and  that
there  may  be  an  open  accefs  for  the  weeders  on  both  fides.  Then
throw  old  dung  upon  it ;  and  fo,  in  the  latter  end  of  Aprils  fow  it  in
fuch  a  proportion,  that  each  cyathus  of  feed  may  take  up  a  place  ten
feet  long,  and  five  broad.  After  you  have  done  this,  let  the  feeds,
that  are  thrown  into  the  ground,  be  prefently  covered  with  earth  with
wooden  rakes  for  this  is  a  great  advantage  to  them,  becaufe  they  are
very  quickly  burnt  up  with  the  fun.  After  the  fowing,  the  place  ought
not  to  be  touched  with  an  iron  tool,  and,  as  I  faid,  it  muff  be  raked
with  wooden  rakes,  and  weeded  from  time  to  time,  left  any  other  kind
of  herb  deftroy  the  feeble  medic.  You  muff  cut  the  firft  crop  of  it
fomewhat  later,  after  it  has  put  forth  fome  part  of  its  feeds.  After¬
wards,  you  are  at  liberty  to  cut  it  down  as  tender  and  young  as  you
pleafe,  after  it  is  fprung  up,  and  to  give  it  to  horfes  j  but,  at  firft,  you
muft  give  it  them  more  fparingly,  till  they  be  accuftomed  to  it,  left  the
novelty  of  the  fodder  be  hurtful  to  them ;  for  it  blows  them  up,  and
creates  much  blood :  but  water  it  very  often  after  you  have  cut  it.  Then,
after  a  few  days,  when  it  fhall  begin  to  fprout,  weed  out  of  it  all  herbs
of  a  different  kind.  When  cultivated  in  this  manner,  it  may  be  cut
down  fix  times  in  a  year  ;  and  it  will  laft  ten  years.

cubit  long,  round,  green,  weak,  and,  for  the  mod  part,  lying  on  the  ground,  about  which
grow  leaves  in  the  form  of  trefoil,  firft  broader,  then  lefter,  oblong,  and  ferrated  all  round.
The  flowers  or  blofloms  come  forth  in  the  form  of  trefoils ,  in  the  wings  of  the  leaves,
and  form,  as  it  were,  a  fpike,  of  a  blue  colour,  to  which  fucceed  pods  refembling  the  fhell
of  a  fnail,  but  narrower,  and  twifted  like  a  ram’s  horn,  contracted  into  two  or  three
windings,  which  contain  a  minute,  oblong,  and  yeliowifh  feed.  It  varies  in  its  flowers,
which  are  blue,  violet,  purple-blue,  and  blackifh,  <&c.  They  fow  it  in  Spain  for  hay,  and
cut  it  down  every  month  in  fummer.  Thus  far  Fliny,  and  Matthiolus  on  Diofcoridcs.

M


But


82  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

But  there  are  two  times  for  fowing vetches  (4);  the  firif  lowing  is  for
fodder,  when,  about  the  time  of  the  autumnal  Equinox,  we  fow  feven
modii  of  it  upon  one  jugerum.  The  fecond  fowing  is  in  the  month  of
[ January ,  or  even  later,  when  we  throw  fix  modii  of  it  upon  a  juge-
rum ,  for  producing  of  feed.  Both  thefe  fowings  may  be  made  in  un¬
plowed  land,  but  better  in  that  which  is  tilled.  And  this  kind  of  feed
efpecially  does  not  love  dews  when  it  is  fown ;  therefore  it  mull  be
fcattered  after  the  fecond  or  third  hour  of  the  day,  when  all  the  moi-
fture  is  dried  up  by  the  fun,  or  the  wind :  and  no  more  of  it  ought  to
be  thrown  into  the  ground,  than  can  be  covered  the  fame  day  ;  for,  if
the  night  come  upon  us  before  it  be  put  under-ground, the  leaftmoifture
fpoils  it.  We  mult  obferve  not  to  commit  it  to  the  earth  before  the
twenty-fifth  day  of  the  moon  ;  otherwife  we  commonly  find,  that  the
fnail  hurts  it  after  it  is  fown.

It  is  proper  to  fow  mifcelleny,  or  barley-fodder,  in  a  place  that  is
plowed  and  fown  every  year,  and  exceedingly  well  dunged,  and  which
has  had  a  fecond  furrow.  It  turns  out  bell,  when  ten  modii  of  horfe-
barley  are  fown  upon  one  jugerum  of  land  about  the  time  of  the  autum¬
nal  Equinox,  but  when  the  rains  are  impendent,  that  l'o,  being  fown,
and  watered  with  Ihowers,  it  may  come  forth  quickly,  and  take  root,
and  become  firong,  before  the  violence  of  the  winter ;  for,  in  cold
weather,  when  other  forts  of  fodder  fail  11s,  this,  when  it  is  cut,  is  the
belt  fodder  we  can  give  to  oxen  and  other  cattle  •  and,  if  you  fhall  think
fit  to  let  them  feed  upon  it,  and  eat  it  down  frequently,  while  it
is  growing,  it  fufficeth  till  the  month  of  May.  But,  if  you  have  a
mind  to  reap  fome  feed  of  it  alfo,  the  cattle  mull  be  driven  away,  and
kept  from  it,  after  the  firffc  of  March  and  it  mull  be  defended  from
all  harm,  that  it  may  be  fit  for  producing  a  good  crop  of  grain.

The  lame  method  is  to  be  obferved  with  refpedt  to  fowing  of  oats,
which,  being  fown  in  autumn,  are  partly  cut  for  hay  or  fodder,  while
they  are  yet  green,  and  partly  kept  for  feed.  Fenugreek  (y),  which

Peafants

(4)  Ervum-,  cpo^of,  bitter  vetch.  It  is  a  plant  with  many  (prays,  full  of  leaves,  lying
upon  the  ground,  its  ftalks  and  branches  twilling  and  folding  themfelves  with  one  another.
Its  leaves  are  fmall,  fomewhat  longifh,  lefs  than  thofe  of  the  lentil,  many  of  them  com¬
ing  forth  of  one  pedicle,  riling  out  of  it  on  each  fide  at  fmall  diftances,  and  one  leaf  by
itfelf  on  the  top.  It  has  fmall  flowers,  inclining  fomewhat  to  purple,  and  fometimes  to
white.  It  bears  a  husk  almoft  like  the  pea,  but  Shorter  and  flenderer,  in  which  is  inclofed
a  round  feed,  the  husk  preffed  in  clofe  betwixn  each  grain.  Ic  is  of.two  forts,  white  and
red.  Some  fay  it  is  called  opo£5sr  a-jo  IgiTrjz&cu  vxo  ruv  ft':**,  becaufe  oxen  feed  on  ic,
and  are  fattened  thereby.

I5)  Fee  nun  Gracum,  fenugreek.  This  feed  produces  a  plant  like  trefoil.  It  has  its
leaves  all  ferrated,  or  jagged  round,  fmall  ftalks,  feveral-of  them  coming  forth  from  one
root,  with  fmall  white  flowers,  from  which  ccme  forth  fmall  crooked  pods,  like  horns,


Chap.  XI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  83

Peafants  call  Jiliqua  (the  hufk),  has  two  feafons  for  fowlng,  of  which
the  firft  is  in  the  month  of  September  (when  it  is  fown  for  fodder)  about
the  time  of  the  Equinox,  the  fame  days  on  which  they  fow  vetches.
The  fecond  is  on  the  laft  day  of  January,  or  on  the  firft  of  February ,
when  it  is  fown  for  a  crop  of  feed.  But,  in  order  to  the  firft,  we  fow
feven  z nodii,  and  to  the  laft  fix,  upon  one  jugerum  of  ground.  Both
thefe  fowings  are  madenot  incommodioufly  on  land  before  it  is  plowed;
and  care  muft  be  taken  to  plow  it  very  clofe,  but  not  deep ;  for,  if  its
feed  is  buried  deeper  than  four  fingers,  it  does  not  come  forth  eafily  :
for  which  reafon  fome  people,  before  they  fow  it,  till  the  ground  with
the  fmalleft  ploughs,  and  fo  throw  the  feeds  upon  it,  and,  with  rakes,
cover  them  over  with  earth.

But  the  bitter  vetch  rejoices  and  thrives  mightily  in  a  lean,  but  not
in  a  moift  place,  becaufe,  for  the  moft  part,  it  rotteth,  and  is  fpoiled
with  luxuriancy.  It  may  alfo  be  fown  in  autumn,  and  equally  well
after  the  middle  of  winter,  in  the  latter  end  of  January ,  or  during  the
whole  month  of  February ,  provided  it  be  before  the  firft  of  March ;
which  whole  month  Hufbandmen  deny  to  be  fuitable  and  agreeable  to
this  fort  of  pulfe,  becaufe,  when  it  is  fown  at  this  time,  it  is  hurtful
to  cattle,  and  efpecially  to  oxen,  which  it  makes  reftive  and  headftrong,
when  they  feed  upon  it,  and  eat  it  as  fodder.  They  fow  five  modii,  of
it  upon  a  jugerum.

In  that  part  of  Spain  they  call  Bcetica ,  they  give  bruifed  chich-peafe
to  oxen,  inftead  of  bitter  vetches ;  which,  after  they  have  fplit  and
broken  them  flightly  with  the  fufpended  milftone,  they  fteep  a  little
in  water,  till  they  grow  clammy,  and  fo  mix  them  with  chaff  and
bruifed  ftraw,  and  give  them  to  the  cattle.  But  twelve  pounds  of  bit¬
ter  vetches,  and  fixteen  pounds  of  chich-peafe,  fatisfy  one  yoke  of
oxen.  This  fame  is  neither  unferviceable  nor  unpleafant  to  men.  In
tafte  the  chich-pea  differs  nothing  from  the  chichling.  It  is  only  known
and  diftinguifhed  by  the  colour;  for  the  colour  is  more  obfolete  or
faded,  and  nearer  to  black.  They  fow  them  either  after  a  firft  or
fecond  plowing,  in  the  month  of  March,  according  as  the  richnefs  of
the  foil  requires,  becaufe  four  modii  of  the  fame,  and  fometimes  three,
and  fometimes  alfo  two  and  a  half,  take  up  a  jugerum  of  land.

in  which  is  inclofed  a  yellowifh  fat  feed,  of  a  difagreeable  fmell.  It  is  fown  in  fat  ground
in  February  and  March  in  warm  tracts  of  ground.  From  the  form  of  its  pod,  it  is  called
by  the  Greeks  fix/dpac  and  yr/icys.  Fimy  calls  it  filica  and  JUicia ;  and  fays,  that  the
earth  muft  only  be  fcarified  when  it  is  fown,  the  furrow  not  deeper  than  four  inches;

.  and  the  worfe  it  is  handled,  fo  much  the  better  does  ic  thrive :  a  very  rare  thing,  that
negligence  ihould  be  profitable  to  any  thing  whatfoever !

M2  chap.

1  —  —


84


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book II.

CHAP.  XII.

After  what  Manner,  and  with  what  Number  of  Labourers ,
each  Sort  of  Corn  and  Pulfe  may  be  cultivated.

FORASMUCH  as  we  have  fully  treated  of  the  time  when  every
thing  muft  be  fown,  now  we  (hall  (hew  after  what  manner,  and
with  what  number  of  labourers,  each  of  the  things  we  have  mentioned,
muft  be  cultivated.  After  we  have  finifhed  our  lowing,  our  next  care
is  of  farcling  (1),  concerning  which  authors  are  not  agreed.  Some
deny  that  it  'is  of  any  fervice,  becaufe  the  roots  of  the  corn  are  laid  open
and  uncovered  with  the  farcle,  fome  of  them  alfo  are  cut,  and,  if  the
colds  come  upon  them,  and  furprife  them,  after  farcling,  the  corns  are
killed  by  the  froft ;  but  that  it  is  better  to  cleanfe  and  weed  them  in
due  time.  Neverthelefs  there  are  many  who  are  of  opinion,  that  they
fhould  be  farcied;  but  that  it  ought  not  to  be  done  at  random,  either
after  the  fame  manner,  or  at  the  fame  time  every-wherej  for,  in  lands
that  are  dry,  and  expofed  to  the  fun,  as  foon  as  the  corns  can  bear  far¬
cling,  they  ought  to  be  covered  with  the  earth,  after  it  has  been  tho¬
roughly  ftirred,  that  fo  they  may  be  able  to  fprout,  and  put  forth  their
ftem ;  which  very  thing  muft  be  done  before  winter,  and  then  it  muft
be  done  a  fecond  time  after  the  winter  is  paft  ;  but  that,  in  cold  and
marfhy  places,  the  corns  ought  to  be  farcied,  for  the  moft  part,  after
the  winter  is  over,  but  not  covered  with  earth,  but  the  earth  throughly
ftirred  with  even,  plain,  fmooth  farcling.  Neverthelefs  we  find,  that,
in  many  countries,  winter  farcling  is  very  proper,  only  indeed  where
the  drinefs  of  the  climate,  and  the  gentle  warmth  of  the  weather,  allow
it.  But  neither  are  we  of  opinion,  that  that  ought  to  be  done  every¬
where,  but  that  we  muft  conform  to  the  cuftom  of  the  inhabitants

(1)  Sarculatio  five  farritio.  I  have  feen  thefe  two  words  fometimes  tranflated  weeding
or  raking-,  but  it  is  a  very  different  work,  and  may  be  performed  where  there  are  no
weeds.  Sarculare  is  to  open  the  furface  of  the  earth,  hardened  by  the  feverity  of  the  win¬
ter,  that  fo  it  may  admit  the  frefh  heat  of  the  fun.  Pliny  gives  this  explication  of  the  word  ;
and  this  hardened  ftate  of  the  furface  of  the  ground  he  calls  foli  trifitiam,  as  if,  by  the
colds,  the  earth  was  made  fad  and  depreffed,  from  which  it  is  relieved  and  made  glad,  as
it  were,  by  the  admiffion  of  the  warmth  of  the  fun.  I  tranflate  it  moftly  by  a  word  which
is  not  fo  common  (viz.  to  farcle);  but  which,  if  commonly  ufed,  would  better  exprefs
this  ailion,  than  to  bee,  which  is  more  than  moving  the  furface  only,  if  f  miftake  not,*
for  thereby  the  earth  is  gathered  and  heaped  up  about  the  plant,  which  is  not  the  mean¬
ing  of  the  word  Jarculare ;  for  our  author,  when  he  orders  this  to  be  done,  always  adds
to  ;he  plain  farcling  agger  are  terram ,  or  terra  obruere}&: c.  which  fhews,that  farculare  does
not  exprefs  fo  much.


Chap.  XII.  O/HUSBANDRY,  Ss

for  countries  have  their  own  peculiar  gifts  and  advantages  bellowed  by
nature,  as  Egypt  and  Africa ,  where  the  Hufbandman  does  not  touch
the  corns,  after  he  has  fown  them,  till  the  harveft ;  becaufe  the  confli-
tution  of  the  climate,  and  the  goodnefs  of  the  earth,  are  fuch,  that
fcarcely  any  herb  comes  up  but  from  feed  fown,  either  becaufe  fhowers
are  rare,  or  becaufe  the  quality  of  the  ground  does  thus  yield  itfelf  to
them  who  cultivate  it.

But,  in  thofe  places  where  farcling  is  requifite,  the  corns  that  grow
upon  the  ground  muft  not  be  touched  before  they  have  intirely  covered
the  furrows,  even  tho’  the  Hate  of  the  weather  allows  it.  It  will  be
right  to  farcle  common  wheat,  and  hulked  bearded  wheat,  when
they  have  begun  to  have  four  fibres  or  leaves  (2)  ;  and  barley,  when  it
has  five ;  beans,  and  other  forts  of  pulfe,  when  they  appear  four  inches
above  ground.  Neverthelefs  lupins  are  excepted,  farcling  being  hurt¬
ful  to  this  feed,  becaufe  it  has  but  one  root,  which  if  it  be  either  cut
with  the  iron  tool,  or  wounded,  the  whole  llalk  dies :  and,  tho’  this
were  not  the  cafe,  yet  this  culture  would  be  fuperfluous,  feeing  this
thing  alone  is  fo  far  from  being  annoyed  with  weeds,  that  itfelf  dellroys
weeds.  But  other  growing  corns,  which  may  be  ftirred  even  when
they  are  wet,  yet  it  is  better  to  farcle  them  when  they  are  dry ;  for,
when  they  are  managed  after  this  manner,  they  are  not  annoyed  with
blalling  and  mildew.  But  barley,  unlefs  it  be  exceeding  dry,  ought
not  to  be  touched.

Many  indeed  think,  that  beans  ought  not  to  be  hoed,  becaufe,  being
pulled  up,  and  gathered  by  hand,  they  may  both  be  feparated  from
fuch  other  things  as  ought  to  be  rooted  up  by  the  weeder,  and  alfo  the
grafs  and  herbs,  which  are  grown  up  among  them,  may  be  referved  for
hay.  Cornelius  Celfus  alfo  is  of  this  opinion,  who,  among  the  other
advantages  and  good  qualities  of  pulfe,  reckons  this  alfo ;  viz.  that,
after  you  have  gathered  the  beans,  you  may,  from  the  fame  place,  cut
a  crop  of  hay.  But  it  feems  to  me  a  fign  of  a  very  bad  Hufbandman
to  allow  weeds  to  come  up  with  any  thing  whatfoever  that  he  has  fown >
for,  if  weeding  be  given  over  and  negledted,  it  will  diminifh  very  much
the  increafe  of  all  forts  of  corn  and  grain  whatfoever  :  for  it  is  not  a l
all  the  part  of  a  prudent  Hufbandman  to  apply  himfelf  more  to  procure
fodder  for  cattle,  than  food  for  men,  efpecially  confidering,  that  that
may  be  obtained  by  the  culture  of  meadows.  And  I  am  fo  much  of

(2)  Pofiquam  caperit  ejfe  qmtuor  fbrarum.  Father  Hardouin ,  in  his  notes  on  Pliny's
nat.  hip.  takes  thefe  words  to  fignify  after  the  roots  begin  to  have  four  f  bres-y.  but  Pal/a~
dius.,  who,  in  moll  places,  follows  this  author,  underftands  them  of  the  leaves  or  blades
which  the  ft  era  putteth  forth,  triticum  &  far  farritur  quatuor  foliorumy  lib.  ii.  tit.  9.

the


86  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

the  opinion,  that  beans  are  to  be  farcied,  that,  I  think,  they  ought  to
be  thrice  farcied ;  for,  when  they  are  thus  cultivated,  we  find,  that
they  not  oily  multiply  their  fruit,  but  that  a  very  fmall  portion  of
their  fub (lance  runs  into  the  hufks ;  and  that  a  fnodius  of  them,  when
fhaled  and  cleanfed,  will  fill  the  inodius  almoft  as  full  as  when  they
were  intire ;  and  that  the  meafurc  is  fcarcely  diminifhed  by  ftripping
them  of  their  pods :  and,  in  general,  as  we  have  already  faid,  winter
farcling  is  a  very  great  help,  and  a  vaft  advantage,  when  the  weather  is
fair  and  dry,  after  the  middle  of  winter  is  paft,  in  the  month  of  cjanu-
ary ,  if  there  be  no  frofls.  Moreover,  it  ought  to  be  fo  done,  that  the
roots  of  the  corns  may  not  be  hurt,  but  rather  that  they  be  intirely  co¬
vered,  and  the  earth  raifed  and  heaped  upon  them,  that  the  ftalk  may
fpread  itfelf  farther  upon  the  ground  (3).  It  will  be  of  great  ufe  and
advantage  to  have  done  this  at  the  fir  ft  farcling,  but,  at  the  fecond,  it
will  be  hurtful ;  for,  when  the  corn  has  given  over  pullulating,  if  you
cover  it  with  earth,  it  will  rot :  therefore  nothing  more  ought  to  be
done  in  farcling  it  a  fecond  time,  but  to  ftir  and  move  the  ground
equally.  And  this  muft  be  done  immediately  after  the  vernal  Equinox
is  paft,  within  twenty  days,  before  the  corn  begins  to  knot  j  for,  when
it  is  farcied  later,  it  is  fpoiled  by  the  enfuing  fummer  droughts  and
heats.

To  farcling  we  muft  fubjoin  weeding  (4) ;  and  we  muft  take  care
not  to  touch  the  corn  when  it  is  in  the  bloffom,  but  either  before,  or
prefently  after  it  has  caft  its  flower :  for  all  kinds  of  com  and  barley,
and,  in  a  word,  whatever  does  not  fpring  of  a  double  feed  (5),  fends
forth  the  ear  from  the  third  to  the  fourth  knot ;  and,  after  it  has  put
it  all  forth,  in  eight  days  it  cafts  its  bloffom,  and  then  continues  to  grow
larger  for  forty  days,  in  which,  after  the  flower,  it  comes  to  maturity.
Again,  fuch  as  fpring  of  a  double  feed,  as  the  bean,  the  pea,  the  lentil,
bloffom  forty  days,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  continue  to  grow  larger.

(3)  Ut  latius  fe  burnt  f rut  ex  dijfundat ,  chat  the  ftalk  may  diffufe  or  fpread  itfelf  the
wider  upon  the  ground.  Perhaps  the  aurhor  alfo  means,  that,  the  earth  being  gathered  to¬
gether,  and  heaped  upon  the  corns,  not  only  its  ftalk  may  fpread  its  blade,  but  that  its
root  alfo  may  diffufe  itfelf  the  wider.

(4.)  Runcatio,  weeding,  fees  the  roots  of  the  corn  at  liberty,  when  it  is  jointed,  by  pluck¬
ing  up  the  ufelefs  weeds,  and  feparates  and  fevereth  it  from  the  green  turf,  and  common
grafs,  and  other  weeds,  that  choak  it.

(5)  Duplicis  feminis.  By  double  feed  here  Tome  underftand,  that,  when  the  feed  of  the
bean,  peafe,  has  been,  for  fome  time,  committed  to  the  ground,  it  divides  itfelf  into
two  diftinft  lobes,  between  which  the  germ  or  bud,  which  hitherto  had  lurked  therein,
unfolds  itfelf,  and  comes  forth  j  fo  that,  afterwards,  the  lobes  on  each  fide  ftick  to  the
plant  like  two  leaves.  It  is  certain,  that  wheat  and  barley,  &c.  when  their  feeds  begin  to
bud  in  the  e2rch,  have  a  different  appearance  from  beans,  peafe,  &c.  and  do  not  feparate
and  divide  chemfelyes  after  the  fame  manner.

CHAP.


Chap.  Xltt  Of  HUSBANDRY.


87


CHAP.  XIII.

How  many  Day-labourers  may  be  affgned  to  every  Sort  of
Land ,  in  Proportion  to  the  Extent  of  it>  and  to  the  Man¬
ner  of  cultivating  it .

AND  that  we  may  now  reckon  up  with  how  many  days  labour
the  feeds  we  have  committed  to  the  earth  may  be  brought  to  the
threfhing-floor  ;  four  or  five  modii  of  common  wheat  take  up  four
days  labour  of  the  Ploughman,  one  of  the  Harrower,  two  of  the  Hoer
or  Sarcler,  for  the  firft  time,  and  one  when  they  are  farcied  a  fecond
time,  one  of  the  Weeder,  and  of  the  Reaper  one  and  an  half ;  the  fum
of  the  whole,  ten  days  labour  and  one  half :  five  modii  of  white  winter
wheat  require  as  many.  Nine  or  ten  modii  of fefamum  require  the  fame
number  of  days  labour  as  five  modii  of  common  wheat.

Five  modii  of  barley  require  three  days  labour  of  the  Ploughman,
one  day’s  labour  to  harrow  it,  one  and  a  half  to  farcle  it,  and  one  to
reap  it  ^  in  all  fix  days  labour  and  one  half.  Four  or  fix  modii  of  beans,
in  old  fallow-ground,  take  up  two  days  labour  of  the  Ploughman,  and,
in  land  that  has  been  plowed  and  fown  the  fame  year,  one  day’s  labour.
They  are  harrowed  with  one  day’s  labour  and  an  half  j  hoed  with  one
day’s  labour  and  an  half ;  hoed  a  fecond  time  with  one,  and  a  third  time
with  one ;  and  they  are  reaped  with  one  day’s  labour.  The  fum  of  all
the  days  labour  is  feven  or  eight.

Six  or  feven  modii  of  tares,  in  old  fallow-ground,  require  two  days
labour  of  Ploughmen,  and,  in  that  which  bears  a  crop  every  year,  one
day’s  labour.  Alfo  they  are  harrowed  with  one  day’s  labour,  and  cut
down  with  one  ;  in  the  whole,  three  or  four  days  labour.  Five  modii
of  bitter  vetches  are  fown  with  the  fame  number  of  days  labour,  and
harrowed  with  one  ;  alfo  they  are  farcied,  weeded,  and  cut  down,  with
one  day’s  labour  each.  They  all  together  take  up  fix  days  labour.  Six
or  feven  modii  of  fenugreek  are  put  under-ground  with  the  fame  num¬
ber  of  days  labour,  and  are  reaped  with  one.  Four  modii  of  kidney-
beam  are  put  under-ground  with  the  like  number  of  days  labour,  are
harrowed  with  one,  and  cut  down  with  one.  Four  modii  of  chicklings
require  three  days  labour  of  the  Ploughmen  ;  they  are  harrowed  with
one  day’s  labour,  weeded  with  one,  and  pulled  up  with  one.  The  whole
amounts  to  fix  days  labour.  A  modius  and  an  half  of  leiitils  require  the
fame  number  of  days  labour  -}  they  are  harrowed  with  one,  farcied  with

two.

•  •  k  !  S  .  r  *


1


88  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

two,  weeded  with  one,  and  pulled  up  with  one  day’s  labour  ;  eight
days  labour  in  the  whole.

Ten  modii  of  lupins  are  put  under-ground  with  one  day’s  labour,
harrowed  with  one,  and  reaped  with  one.  Four  fextarii  of  millet,
and  as  many  of  panic ,  take  up  four  days  labour  of  the  Ploughmen  ;
they  are  harrowed  with  three,  and  farcied  with  three  days  labour.  It
is  uncertain  with  how  many  days  labour  they  are  pulled.  Three  mo¬
dii  of  chich-peafe  are  fown  with  the  fame  number  of  days  labour;  they
are  harrowed  with  two,  farcied  with  one,  weeded  with  one,  and  pulled
with  three  days  labour;  in  the  whole,  ten  days  labour.  Eight  or  ten
modii  of  linfeed  are  fown  with  four  yoke  of  oxen  ;  they  are  harrowed
with  three  days  labour,  weeded  with  one,  and  pulled  with  three  days
labour.  The  whole  amounts  to  eleven  days  labour.

Six  fextarii  of  fefamum  are  cultivated  with  three  yoke  of  oxen,  fo
far  as  tilling  the  ground  for  them;  they  are  harrowed  with  four  days
labour,  farcied  with  four,  and  farcied  a  fecond  time  with  two,  and
reaped  with  two ;  in  the  whole,  fifteen  days  labour.  Hemp  is  fown  as
we  have  already  taught ;  but  it  is  uncertain  how  great  expence  and  care
it  requires.  But  medic  is  put  under-ground,  not  with  the  plough,  but,
as  I  faid,  with  fmall  wooden  rakes.  A  jugerum  of  its  land  is  harrowed
with  two  days  labour,  farcied  with  one,  and  reaped  with  one.

By  this  fum  total  of  days  labour  we  colledt,  that  two  hundred  jugera
of  land  may  be  manured  with  two  yoke  of  oxen,  as  many  Ploughmen,
and  fix  common  labourers,  provided  it  be  free  from  trees ;  but,  if  it
be  planted  with  trees  for  fupporting  vines,  Saferna  affirms,  that  the
fame  quantity  may  be  well  enough  cultivated  with  the  addition  of  three
men  more  :  which  computation  teaches  us,  that  one  yoke  of  oxen
may  fuffice  for  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  modii  of  wheat,  and  as
many  of  pulfe ;  fo  that  the  whole  autumnal  fowing  may  amount  to
two  hundred  and  fifty  modii ;  and,  after  this,  nevertheless,  there  may¬
be  feventy-five  modii  of  trimeftrian  feed  fown.  And  this  is  made  out
thus :  The  feeds,  which  are  fown  in  twenty-five  jugera  of  land,  after
four  times  plowing  ( i ),  require  one  hundred  and  fifteen  days  labour  of
Ploughmen  ;  for  this  quantity  of  land,  tho’  exceeding  hard,  is  tilled
with  fifty  days  labour,  it  is  plowed  a  fecond  time  with  twenty-five,
and  plowed  a  third  time,  and  fown,  with  forty  days  labour.  The  fe«
veral  forts  of  pulfe  employ  and  take  up  fixty  days  labour,  that  is,  two
months.  Forty-five  days  alfo  are  computed  for  rainy  weather  and

( i)  Semina  qua  quarto  fulco  feruntur.  By  feeds  fown  in  the  fourth  furrow  is  meant  fown
•upon  land  plowed  four  times  over;  fo  likewife  fown  in  one,  fecond  or  third  furrow,  fig-
iiifies  once,  twice,  or  thrice  plowing.

§  holU


Chap.  XIV.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  89

holidays,  in  which  they  don’t  plow.  Alfo,  when  the  feed-time  is  over,
we  reckon  thirty  days,  in  which  they  reft  from  their  labour  :  fo  they
amount  in  the  whole  to  eight  months  and  ten  days.  Neverthelefs,  over
and  above,  there  are  three  months  and  twenty-five  days  of  the  year
remaining,  which  we  may  fpend  either  in  fovving  trimejlrian feed ,  or
in  carrying  of  hay,  and  fodder,  and  all  forts  of  dung,  and  other  things
meceflary  for  our  ufe.


CHAP.  XIV.

What  Sorts  of  Pulfe  are  hurtful  to  Lands ,  and  what  are  of

of 'Benefit  to  the?n.

BUT  the  fame  Saferna  thinks,  that,  by  fome  of  the  feeds  which  I
have  mentioned,  lands  are  dunged  and  helped  j  and  that,  on  the
contrary,  by  others  they  are  burnt  up  and  emaciated ;  and  that  they
are  dunged  with  lupins,  beans,  tares,  bitter  vetches,  the  lentil,  chichling,
and  peafe.  As  to  lupins,  I  am  in  no  doubt,  nor  yet  as  to  the  tare,  when
fown  for  fodder,  provided  that  the  plough  follow  it  immediately  after
it  is  cut  down  green,  and  that  the  Plough-fhare  tear  up,  and  cover  with
earth,  what  the  fickle  has  left,  before  it  withers  j  for  this  fupplies  the
place  of  dung.  But  if,  after  the  fodder  is  cut  down,  the  roots  of  it,  that
are  left,  fhall  wither  in  the  ground,  they  will  take  away  all  the  juice  of
it,  and  confume  the  ftrength  of  the  earth  j  and  it  is  likely,  that  this  is
the  cafe  with  beans  alfo,  and  the  other  forts  of  pulfe,  wherewith  the
earth  feems  to  be  fattened  :  fo  that,  unlefs  it  be  ripped  up  as  foon  as  the
crop  you  have  of  them  is  taken  away,  they  will  be  of  no  benefit  at  all  to
corns  that  are  fown  in  that  place  afterwards.  And  fremellius  fays  alfo,
that  of  all  forts  of  pulfe  that  are  pulled  by  hand,  the  poifon  of  chich-
peafe  and  flax  does  moft  hurt  to  the  ground  ;  the  one,  becaufe  it  is  of  a
faline,  and  the  other,  becaufe  it  is  of  an  exceeding  hot  nature  ;  which
Virgil  alfo  intimates,  by  faying  (i),

c  A  crop  of  fax,  and  oafs ,  and  poppies  foak’d
c  In  Lethe's  drowfy  ftream,  burns  up  the  ground.’

Nor  is  there  any  doubt,  but  the  land  is  annoyed  and  worfted,  both
by  thefe  feeds,  as  alfo  by  millet  and  panic ;  but  there  is  one  prefent

(1)  Vir g.  Georg,  lib.  i.  77.

N


medicine


9°


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.


medicine  and  fovereign  cure  for  all  ground  that  is  worn  Out  by  crops  of
the  forefaid  legumes,  viz.  that  you  help  and  relieve  it  with  dung,  and,
by  this  fort  of  nourifhment,  as  it  were,  repair  and  reftore  its  exhaufled
flrength ;  and  that  not  only  for  the  advantage  of  feeds,  which  are  com¬
mitted  to  furrows  made  with  the  plough,  but  alfo  for  the  benefit  of
trees  and  fhrubs,  which  thrive  much  better  with  this  fort  of  nourifh¬
ment.  Wherefore,  if  it  is,  as  it  feems  to  me,  exceeding  profitable  to
Hufbandmen,  I  think  it  proper  to  difcourfe  of  it  more  carefully,  con-
fidering,  that  tho’  this  thing  has  not  been  intirely  negledted  by  antient
authors,  yet  they  have  treated  of  it  but  very  fuperficially.


CHAP.  XV.

Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  Dung  (i).

THERE  are  three  principal  forts  of  dung;  that  produced  by
fowls,  that  by  men,  and  that  by  cattle.  Of  fowls  that  is  reckoned
the  beft,  which  is  brought  out  of  pigeon-houfes.  Next  to  it  is  that
which  hens  and  other  poultry  breed,  excepting  neverthelefs  fuch  as  live
in  fens  and  marfhes,  and  fwimming  fowls,  as  that  of  ducks  and  geefe  ;
for  that  is  alfo  hurtful.  Neverthelefs  we  approve  moft  of  pigeons  dung,
becaufe  we  find,  that  it  ferments  the  earth,  when  it  is  moderately
fcattered  upon  it.

The  fecond  is  that  which  men  make,  if  it  be  mixed  with  the  other
filth  and  fweepings  of  the  manor-houfe ;  for  it  is  naturally  very  hot
by  itfelf,  and  therefore  burns  up  the  ground.  Neverthelefs  human
urine,  which  you  have  let  grow  old  for  fix  months,  is  fitter  for  {hoots

(i)  Moft  of  the  ruftic  writers,  both  Greek  and  Latm-,  agree  in  their  notions  about
dung ;  and,  if  they  feem  to  differ  at  any  time,  it  is  only  when  they  fpeak  of  the  different
application  of  it :  fo,  when  they  feem  to  differ  from  our  author,  it  is  becaufe  they  fpeak
of  applying  it  to  trees,  and  he  to  corn-lands,  &c.

Varro  fays,  that  pigeons  dung  is  the  beft  of  any,  becaufe  it  is  exceeding  hot,  and  fer¬
ments  the  earth  ;  and  he  difapproves  of  that  of  water-fowl,  as  geefe,  ducks,  &c.  as  other
antient  authors  alfo  do,  becaufe  of  its  too  great  humidity.  Pigeons  dung  is  not  to  be
fpread  upon  land  thick  like  other  dung,  but  to  be  fcattered  very  thin.  Some  mix  it  with
the  feed,  and  fo  fow  it.  They  who  lett  their  aviaries,  often  referved  the  dung,  and  con-
fequently  lett  them  much  cheaper.

Varro  places  the  dung  of  goats,  fheep,  and  affes,  in  the  third  rank;  but  Columella  places
that  of  affes  before  that  of  goats  and  fheep,  for  a  very  good  reafon,  becaufe  thefe  animals
chew  their  food  better.  Varro  feems  not  to  approve  of  horfe-dung  for  corn-lands;  but
fays,  that  all  dung  of  horfes  and  other  cattle  is  beft  for  meadows,  becaufe  it  breeds  many
herbs.


and


Chap.  XV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  9i

and  young  trees.  If  you  apply  it  to  vines,  or  to  apple-bearing  tree?,
there  is  nothing  that  contributes  more  to  make  them  bear  abundance  of
fruit;  nor  does  this  thing  only  produce  a  greater  increafe,  but  it  alfo
improves  both  the  tafte  and  the  flavour  of  the  wine,  and  of  the  apples.

Old  lees  of  oil  alfo,  which  have  no  fait  in  them,  mixed  with  this,
may  very  properly  be  made  ufe  of  for  watering  fruit-bearing  trees,  and
efpecially  olives ;  for  lees  alfo  applied  by  themfelves  are  of  great  benefit
to  them  j  but  both  the  one  and  the  other  is  to  be  ufed  chiefly  during
the  winter,  and  even  in  the  fpring,  before  the  fummer  heats,  while  the
roots  of  the  vines  and  the  trees  don’t  lie  open  and  bare.

The  dung  of  cattle  obtains  the  third  place,  and  in  it  alfo  there  is  fome
difference  ;  for  that  which  the  afs  makes  is  reckoned  the  beft,  becaufe
that  animal  eats  very  ilowly,  and  therefore  digefts  more  eafily,  and
yields  a  dung  that  is  well  prepared,  and  fit  for  the  land  immediately.
After  thefe  we  have  mentioned  is  fheeps  dung,  and  next  to  it  that  of
goats,  and  then  that  of  horfes,  and  other  large  cattle  of  all  forts.  Hogs
dung  is  reckoned  the  worft  of  all.  Yea,  afhes  alfo,  and  foot,  have  been
of  great  benefit  to  things  that  are  either  planted  or  fown  ;  and  the  ttalks
of  lupins,  cut  down,  flrengthen  as  much  as  the  befl:  of  dung.

Nor  am  I  ignorant,  that  there  is  a  certain  kind  of  land,  and  fome
places  in  the  country,  wherein  neither  cattle  nor  fowls  can  be  kept;
yet  it  is  a  fign  of  a  flothful  Hufbandman,  even  in  fuch  a  place  as  that,
to  be  deftitute  of  dung  :  for  he  may  amafs  and  put  together  any  kind
of  leaves,  and  collections  of  any  other  things,  out  of  thickets  and  high¬
ways  ;  he  may  cut  down  ferns,  without  doing  any  injury  to  his  neigh¬
bour;  yea,  he  may  even  do  him  fervice  by  it,  and  mix  them  throughly
with  the  dirt  and  fweepings  of  the  court-yard ;  he  may  fink  a  pit,  fuch
as  we  directed  to  be  made  in  our  firft  book,  for  laying  up  dung  in,  and
gather  into  it,  in  one  heap,  afhes  and  dirt  of  the  kennels,  finks,  and
common  fewers,  .ftraw,  and  Hubble,  and  the  other  things  that  are
fwept  out  of  the  houfe.

But,  in  the  middle  of  this  fame  place,  it  is  proper  to  fatten  fome  oak-
wood  ;  for  this  will  hinder  mifchievous  hurtful  ferpents  to  lurk  in  the
dung.  Thefe  things  mutt  be  done  where  the  land  is  dettitute  of  cattle ;
for  where  there  are  flocks  and  herds  of  four-footed  beafls  abiding  for
ordinary,  there  are  fome  things,  which  ought  to  be  cleaned  every  day,
as  the  kitchen  and  the  dairy ;  and  fome  things  on  rainy  days,  as  the  cow-
houfes,  the  ox-ttalls,  and  the  fheep-folds.  But,  if  you  have  only  corn-
land,  there  is  no  occafion  to  keep  the  feveral  forts  of  dung  feparate.
But,  if  the  ground  is  laid  out  and  prepared  for  plantations  of  young
trees,  and  for  corns,  and  alfo  for  meadows,  the  dung  mutt  be  laid  up

*  N  2  feparately,


92  L.  J.  M*  C  O  L  U  ME  L  L  A  Book  II)

feparately,  according  to  its  kind,  as  that  of  goats  and  of  fowls.  Then
the  other  forts  muft  be  all  gathered  into  the  hollow  place  before-men¬
tioned,  and  glutted  with  continual  moifture,  that  fo  the  feeds  of  the
herbs,  that  are  mixed  with  the  flalks,  and  the  ftraw  and  ftubble,  and
other  things,  may  rot.  Then,  in  the  fummer- months,  the  whole
dunghil  muft  be  throughly  mixed  and  fhuffled  with  fpades,  in  the  fame
manner  as  if  you  repaginated  it,  that  it  may  rot  the  more  eafily,  and
be  fit  for  corn-lands.  And  I  think,  that  thofe  Hufbandmen  are  not
very  diligent,  with  whom  each  of  the  lefier  cattle,  in  thirty  days,  makes
lefs  than  one  load  of  dung  (2),  and  their  greater  cattle  alfo  lefs  than  ten
loads  each,  and  each  of  the  men  as  many,  who  may  draw  together  and
amafs  into  one  place,  not  only  the  filth  which  comes  out  of  their  own
bodies,  but  all  the  dirt  that  the  houfe  and  the  court-yard  daily  produce.

I  have  this  further  precept  alfo  to  add,  that  all  kind  of  dung.  laid  up
in  due  time,  which  has  refted  one  whole  year,  is  the  moll  ufeful  for
corn ;  for  it  both  has  its  ftrength  as  yet  intire,  and  does  not  breed  weeds;
but  fo  much  the  older  it  is,  the  lefs  good  it  does,  becaufe  it  has  lefs
ftrength :  therefore  the  very  frefheft  dung  ought  to  be  thrown  upon
meadows,  becaufe  it  produces  more  herbs.  And  it  is  expedient,  that
this  be  done  in  the  month  of  February,  during  the  increafe  of  the
moon;,  for  even  this,  alfo  contributes  fomewhat  to  a  good  crop  of  hay.
What  further  ufe  is  to  be  made  of  dung,  and  after  what  manner  it  ought
to  be  ufed  with  refpedt  to  every  thing,  we  fhall  explain,  when  we
come  to  treat  of  every  particular  thing  by  itfelfi


CHAP.  XVI.

At  .  what  Times  Lands  muji  be  dunged,

IN  the  mean  time,  whoever  has  a  mind  to  prepare  lands  for  corns,  if
he  is  refolved  to  fow  his  feed  in  autumn,  let  him  lay  fmall  heaps  of
dung  in  due  order  upon  it,  in  the  month  pf  September ;  but,  if  he  de-
figns  to  fow  in  the  fpring,  let  him  lay  his  dung  at  any  time  in  winter,
while  the  moon  is  decreafing,  fo  that  a  jugerum  of  plain  level  land
may  hold  twelve  loads  of  dung,  and  a  jugerum  of  that  which  is  hilly
and  fhelving  twenty-four  loads;  and,  as  I.faid  a  little  before,  let  him
not  fpread  the  heaps  till  he  is  going  to  fow.  Neverthelefs,  if  any  thing

(2)  Vehes  Jlercoris.  Their  load  of  dung  contained  80  modi') ,  lib.  xi.  2.  which  amounts
to  about  20  buihels  and  alrooft  2  pecks.

has


Chap.  XVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  93

has  hindered  him  from  laying  the  dung  upon  the  land  in  due  time,  the
next  method  to  be  taken  is,  to  fcatter  all  over  the  corns  before  you!
farcle  them,  as  if  you  were  fowing  feed,  the  duft  of  the  dung  of  the
poultry-coops  and  aviaries ;  but,  if  you  have  not  this,  you  mull  throw
goats  dung  with  your  hand,  and  then,  with  hoes,  mix  it  throughly
with  the  earth.  This  makes  corns  thrive  exceedingly.

Nor  mu  ft  the  Hufbandman  be  ignorant,  that  as  land,  which  is  not
dunged,  grows  cold,  fo  that,  which  is  too  much  dunged,  is  burnt  up;
and  that  it  is  more  for  the  advantage  of  the  Hufbandman  to  d&  this
rather  frequently  than  immoderately.'  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but
watery  land  requires  a  greater  plenty,  and  that  which  is  dry  a  leffer
quantity  offt;  theone,  becaufe,  being  chilled  with  continual  moifture,
it  is  thawed  by  applying  this  to  it;  the  other,  becaufe,  being  Warm  of
itfelf,  and,  by  reafon  of  the  droughts,  whenit  has-  affumed  a  largef
quantity  of  it,  is  intirely  parched  :  for  which  reafon  fuch  kind  of  huff
muft  neither  be  given  it  too  fparingly,  nor  yet  in  too  great  plenty.  If
neverthelefs  you  are  provided  with  no  kind  of  dung,  it  will  be  of  great
advantage  to  it  to  do,  what  I  remember  Marcus  Columella  my  uncle,  a
mod  learned  and  diligent  Hufbandman,  was  frequently  wont  to  do;

' viz .  to  throw  chalk  or  marie  upon  fuch  places  as  abound  in  gravel ;
and  to.  lay  gravel  upon  fuch  as  are  chalky,  and  too  denfe  and  ftiff:  and
thus  he  not  only  raifed  great  plenty  of  excellent  corn,  but  alfo  made
moft  beautiful  vineyards;  for  this  fame  moft  ikilfulHufbandman  denied,
that  dung  ought  to  be  applied  to  vines,  becaufe  it  would  fpoil  the  tafte
of  the  wine;  and  thought,  that  fluff  gathered  together  out  of  thickets,
and  from  among  briars  and  thorns,  or,  in  a  word,  any  other  fort  of
earth  fetched  from  any  other  place,  and  carried  to  them,  was  much
better  for  making  a  plentiful  vintage.

But  now  indeed  I  am  of  opinion,  that  fuppofing  the  Hufbandman
were  deflitute  of  all  thefe  things,  yet  certainly  the  moft  expeditious  and
ready  affiftance  of  lupins  can  never  be  wanting  to  him,  which,  when
'he  fcatters  them  upon  poor  land  about  the  thirteenth  of  September ,  and
plows  them  in,  and  then,  in  due  time,  cuts  them  do“vVn,  either  with
the  plough-fhare,  or  the  fpade,  will  have  as  good  effedt  as  the  beft  and
ftrongeft  dunging  whatfoever.  But,  in  gravelly  lands,  lupins  muft  he
cut  down  after  they  have  put  forth  their  fecond  flower ;  and,  in  lands
which  are  full  of  red  earth,  after,  the  third  flower.  There  they  are
turned  up  while  they  are  young  and  tender,  that  they  may  quickly  rot ;
and  here  when  they  are  grown  ftronger,  that  they  may  bear  up  and
keep  the  more  folid  and  ftiff  clods  of  earth  the  longer  fufpended,  that

thefej


94  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  II.

thefe,  being  heated  and  dried  up  with  the  fummer  funs,  may  be  opened,
and  refolved  into  duft.


CHAP.  XVII.

After  what  manner  arable  Lands  may  be  reduced  into

Meadows .

AND  thefe  things  the  plower  may  be  able  to  effectuate,  if  he  not
only  makes  provffion  of  the  feveral  forts  of  fodder  I  have  men¬
tioned,  but  alfo  of  a  great  plenty  of  hay,  that  he  may  better  fupport
and  maintain  his  oxen,  without  which  it  is  difficult  to  labour  the  ground
conveniently  and  to  advantage :  and  therefore  the  culture  of  the  mea¬
dow,  to  which  the  antient  Romans  gave  the  precedence  in  agriculture,
is  alfo  neceffary  for  him.  Alfo  they  gave  it  its  nam zpratum  (  j),  from
its  being  prefently  ready,  and  becaufe  it  did  not  require  much  labour.
Marcus  Porcius  (2)  did  alfo  make  mention  of  thofe  farther  advantages;
viz.  that  it  would  not  be  afflicted  with  ftormy  tempeftuous  weather  as
other  parts  of  the  farm;  and,  ftanding  in  need  of  very  little  expence,
would  yield  a  very  good  income  every  year,  and  that  not  of  one  parti¬
cular  fort  only,  becaufe  it  would  yield,  no  lefs  in  pafturage,  than  in  hay:
therefore  we  take  two  kinds  of  it  into  confideration,  of  which  the  firft
is  naturally  dry,  and  the  other  well  watered.

In  a  rich  and  fat  champain  land,  a  conftantly  running  rivulet  is  not
wanted ;  and  the  hay,  which  grows  naturally  in  a  juicy  foil,  is  reckoned
better  than  that  which  is  forced  by  conftant  watering,  which  neverthe-
lefs  is  very  neceffary,  if  the  leannefs  of  the  ground  requires  it ;  for  a
meadow  may  be  made  both  in  ftiff  and  denfe  land,  and  alfo  in  that
which  is  loofe  and  open,  tho5  it  be  poor,  if  we  have  the  conveniency  of
watering  it.  And  it  neither  ought  to  be  a  plain  of  a  hollow  fituation,

(1)  Fratum ,  quafi paratum,  always  ready  at  hand,  or  becaufe  it  was,  as  it  were,  a  cer¬
tain  yearly  income,  that  could  be  moft  depended  on.

(2)  Marcus  Porcius  Cato,  in  his  firfl:  book,  places  the  meadow  in  the  fitch  place  only;
fo  that,  by  his  fetting  fuch  a  value  upon  meadow  and  pafturage,  and  yet  not  placing  them
in  the  firft  place,  we  may  obferve,  that,  when  he  enumerates  the  things,  which  one  who
purchases  a  manor  ought  principally  to  have  in  his  eye,  he  does  not  rank  them  according
to  the  value  he  fet  upon  the  things  themfelves ;  otherwife  he  would  not  have  placed  his
willow-groves  before  the  olive-yard  or  the  corn-field.  Tally,  in  his  iid  book  de  officiis,  and
Columeila,  in  his  preface  to  his  vich  book,  feem  to  fay,  that  he  gave  the  preference  to  pa¬
sturing  of  cattle;  and  yet,  as  is  faid,  in  his  own  book, -he  places  it  in  the  fifth  place;  fo
that,  it  feems,  he  had  no  regard  to  the  value  of  things  in  ranking  them.


nor


Chap.  XVIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  95

non  upon  a  very  deep  hill ;  not  the  former,  left  it  contain  too  long  the
water  that  gathers  in  it;  nor  the  latter,  left  it  pour  it  off  headlong  in
an  inftant.  Neverthelefs  land  that  (helves  gently,  if  it  is  either  fat,  or
well  watered,  may  be  reduced  into  meadow  ;  but  fuch  a  level  ground
is  moft  approved,  which,  having  a  very  fmall  gentle  defcent,  does  not
fuffer  the  fhowers,  nor  the  rivulets  that  flow  into  it,  to  abide  long  in
it ;  or,  if  any  water  comes  upon  it,  it  creeps  off  (lowly  :  therefore,  if
in  any  part  it  be  low  and  marfhy,  and  the  water  ftagnates  upon  it,
it  muft  be  carried  off  by  furrows;  for  either  great  abundance,  or  fear-
city  of  water,  is  equally  pernicious  to  grafs  of  all  forts.

C  H  A  P.  XVIII.

After  what  manner  Meadows ,  when  they  are  mader  muji  he

cultivated.

BUT  the  culture  of  meadows  is  more  a  bufinefs  of  care,  than  of
labour.  The  firft  and  principal  thing  is,  that  we  don’t  fuffer
plants  with  ftrong  roots,  or  thorns,  and  herbs  that  grow  up  to  a  greater
lize,  to  remain  in  them ;  and  that  we  extirpate  fome  of  them  during
the  autumn,  and  before  winter,  fuch  as  bramble-bujkes, Jhrubs ,  rujhes ;
and  pluck  up  others  of  them  in  the  fpring,  as  endive  and  thorns ,
that  grow  up  about  the  time  of  the  folftice  ;  and  that  we  neither  allow
a  hog  to  feed  therein,  becaufe,  with  its  fnout,  it  digs  up  and  raifes  the
turf,  nor  larger  cattle,  unlefs  when  the  ground  is  exceeding  dry,  be¬
caufe  they  fink  their  hoofs  into  it,  and  bruife  and  cut  the  roots  of  the
herbs.  Moreover,  in  the  next  place,  the  leaner  and  pendent  places  muft
be  aflifted  and  refreftied  with  dung  in  the  month  of  February ,  during
the  increafe  of  the  moon.  All  the  ftones,  and  if  there  be  any  other
things,  that  lie  in  the  way  of  the  fithe,  ought  to  be  gathered  together,
and  carried  to  a  great  diftance  out*bf  the  ground,  and  the  meadows  fhut
up,  and  left  to  grow,  either  fooner  or  later,  according  to  the  nature  of
the  places.

There  are  alfo  fome  meadows  all  covered  over  with  naftinefs,  for
want  of  draining,  and  other  neceffary  culture,  and  with  old  or  coarfe
thick  mofs,  which  Hulbandmen  ufe  to  cure,  by  throwing  feeds  front
the  hay-loft,  or  laying  dung  upon  them,  neither  of  which  will  be  of  fo
much  benefit  to  it  as  laying  afhes  very  often  upon  it.  This  thing  kills
the  mofs.  Neverthelefs  thefe  remedies  are  fomewhat  too  flow ;  whereas
1  the


-96  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  -Book II,

the  mod  efficacious  is,  to  plow  up  the  place  afreffi  ;  but  this  we  ought
to  do,  in  cafe  we  have  entered  into  the  poffeffion  of  meadows  already
made  to  our  hand;  but,  if  we  mud  either  make  new  ones,  or  reftore
thofe  that  are  old,  (for  there  are  many  of  them,  as  I  faid,  which,  thro’
negligence,  fail  and  decay,  and  become  barren)  it  is  expedient  fome-
times  to  plow  them  up,  even  to  fow  corn  upon  them,  hecaufe  fuch
land,  after  lying  long  idle,  brings  a  plentiful  crop  of  corn.

Therefore,  having  plowed  up  in  fummer  the  place  we  have  deftin-
ated  for  a  meadow,  and  manured  it  over  and  over  again,  - during  the
autumn  we  will  fow  it  with  turneps,  or  navews,  or  even  with  beans;
then  the  following  year  vyith  corn.  The  third  year  we  will  plow  it
carefully,  and  inti  rely  root  out  all  the  ftronger  herbs,  bramble-bufhes,
and  trees,  that  ftand  here-and-thereinour  way,  unlefs  that  the  advan¬
tage  we  reap  by  the  trees,  that  are  planted  there,  hinders  us  to  do  this.
Then  we  will  fow  tares  upon  it,  mixt  with  feeds  of  hay;  then,  with
hoes  and  rakes,  we  will  open  arid  break  all  the  clods;  and  level  it,  by
drawing  a  hurdle  or  harrow  over  it ;  and  diffipate  all  the  hillocks,  which,
for  the  moil  part,  the  harrows  make  at  the  turnings  j  fo  that  the  mow¬
er 's  fi the  may  no- where 'ftrike  againft  any  thing.

But  it  is  not  proper  to  cut  down  thefe  tares  before  they  be  fully  ripe,
and  have  dropped  ibrne  of  their  feeds  upon  the  ground  that  lies  under
them.  Then  we  mull  bring  in  the  mower  and  the  hay-maker,  and,
after  the  grafs  is  cut  down,  bind  it  up  in  bundles,  and  carry  it  out  of
the  ground.  Then  we  mu  ft  water  the  place,  if  we  have  the  conveni-
ency  of  water,  provided  the  earth  be  denfe,  and  clofer  than  ordinary  :
for,  where-the  ground  is  open  and  loofe,  it  is  not  expedient  to  convey
a  great  quantity  of  water  into  it,  before  the  mould  is  condenfed,  and
bound  together  with  the  herbs ;  becaufe  the  force  of  the  waters  waffies
away  the  earth,  and,  by  uncovering  the  roots  of  the  grafs,  does  not
fuffer -it  to  grow  up:  for  this  reafon  indeed  we  ought  not  to  put  cattle
into  meadows  that  are  yet  young  and  tender,  and  fubfiding,  but,  with
the  ftthe,  cut  down  the  grafs  when  it  fprings  up;  for,  as  I  have  already
faid,  the  cattle  faften  their  hoofs  into  the  foft  ground,  and,  bruifing
and  breaking  the  roots  of  the  herbs  in  two,  hinder  them  to  fpread  gra¬
dually,  and  condenfate  it.  Neverthelefs,  the  fecond  year  we  will  allow
fmaller  cattle  to  be  admitted,  after  the  hay  harveft  is  over,  provided  the
drynefs  and  condition  of  the  place  will  fuffer  it.  Then  the  third  year,
when  the  meadow  is  become  more  hard  and  folid,  it  may  receive  greater
cattle  alfo.

But,  upon  the  whole,  care  muft  be  taken,  that,  at  the  time  when
the  weftern  winds  begin  to  blow,  about  the  thirteenth  of  the  month  of

February ,


Chap.  XIX*  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  97

February ,  the  grounds  that  are  leaner,  and  lie  higher,  be  dunged,  and
that  there  be  hay-feeds  mixed  with  the  dung  ;  fora  higher  riling  ground
yields  nourilhment  alfo  to  thofe  grounds  which  lie  below  it,  when  a
fhower  coming  fuddenly  upon  it,  or  a  rivulet  carried  through  it,  or
water  conveyed  into  it  by  hand,  draws  the  juice  of  the  dung  along  with
itfelf  into  the  lower  part  j  and  therefore  prudent  Hulbandmen,  even  in
plowed  lands,  commonly  lay  more  dung  upon  a  hill  than  a  valley,  be-
caufe,  as  I  faid,  the  rains  always  carry  the  fatter  matter  down  to  the
lower  grounds.


CHAP.  XIX.

After  what  manner  Hay  ought  to  be  managed ,  when  it  is  cut
down ;  and  how  it  ought  to  be  laid  up.

BU  T  it  is  bell  to  cut  down  hay  before  it  begins  to  wither  ;  for  you
gather  a  larger  quantity  of  it,  and  it  affords  a  more  agreeable  food
to  cattle.  But  there  is  a  meafure  to  be  obferved  in  drying  it,  that  it  be
put  together  neither  over-dry,  nor  yet  too  green  ;  for,  in  the  firft  cafe,
it  is  not  a  whit  better  than  ftraw,  if  it  has  loll  its  juice  ;  and,  in  the
other,  it  rots  in  the  loft,  if  it  retains  too  much  of  it :  and  often,  after
it  is  grown  hot,  it  breeds  fire,  and  fets  all  in  a  flame.  Sometimes  alfo,
when  we  have  cut  down  our  hay,  a  Ihower  furprifes  us.  But,. if  it  be
throughly  wet,  it  is  to  no  purpofe  to  move  it  while  it  is  wet ;  and  it
will  be  better,  if  we  fuffer  the  uppermolt  part  of  it  to  dry  with  the  fun.
Then  we  will  afterwards  turn  it,  and,  when  it  is  dried  on  both  fides,
we  will  bring  it  clofe  together  into  cocks,  and  fo  bind  it  up  in  bundles :
nor  will  we,  upon  any  account,  delay  to  bring  it  under  a  roof :  or,  if
we  cannot  conveniently  either  carry  the  hay  into  the  manor-houfe,  or
bind  it  up  in  bundles  or  truffes,  it  will  certainly  be  proper  to  build  it  up
in  ricks,  whatever  part  of  it  lhall  be  dried  in  the  manner  it  ought  to  be,
and  to  form  them  into  very  narrow  lharp  points;  for  thus  the  hay  is
commodioufly  preferved  from  rains ;  and,  tho’  there  fhould  be  none,
yet  it  is  not  amifs  to  make  the  forefaid  ricks,  that  fo,  if  there  be  any
moillure  in  the  herbs,  it  may  fweat  out/and  be  dried  up  in  the  Hacks:
for  which  reafon  prudent  Hulbandmen,  tho’  they  have  already  brought
it  under  a  roof,  don’t  prefently  How  it,  and  put  it  up  in  mows,  before
that  they  fuffer  it  to  heat,  and  concoct  itfelf,  and  then  grow  cool,  after

O  having


98  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

having  thrown  it  loofely  together  for  a  few  days.  But  now,  after  the
hay-making,  follows  the  care  of  the  harvefl.


CHAP.  XX.

Of  making  and  putting  a  lOhreJhing-floor  into  due  Order.

LET  the  threfhing- floor  alfo,  if  it  be  of  earth,  and  not  paved,  that
it  may  be  fit  for  threfhing  upon,  be  firfl  pared,  then  delved,  and
fmeared  over  with  lees  of  oil,  which  have  never  been  falted,  and  chaff,
throughly  mixed  together}  for  this  preferves  the  corns  from  being  plun¬
dered  by  mice  and  ants.  Then  let  it  be  levelled,  and  beaten  clofe  with
rammers,  or  with  a  mill-ftone}  and  let  chaff  be  again  thrown  upon  it,
and  trodden  into  it }  and  fo  let  it  be  left  to  be  dried  by  the  fun.

Neverthelefs  there  are  fome,  who  rather  order  a  certain  quantity  of
the  beans,  that  grow  at  a  fmall  diflance,  to  be  threfhed  }  and,  after
they  have  cut  down  and  gathered  the  beans,  they  fmooth  and  prepare
the  place  for  a  threfhing-floor :  for,  while  the  cattle  tread  out  the  pulfe,
they  alfo  bruife  the  herbs  and  weeds  with  their  hoofs }  and  fo  the  place
grows  bare  and  fmooth,  and  becomes  a  threfhing-floor  fit  for  threfhing
any  thing  whatfoever  upon.


CHAP.  XXI.

Of  reaping  Corns ,  and  of  threfhmg  them .

BU  T,  as  foon  as  the  corn  is  ripe,  let  it  be  cut  down,  before  it  be
parched  with  the  heats  of  the  fummer-fun,  which  are  exceeding
great  about  the  time  that  the  Dog-ftar  rifes }  for  delaying  is  prejudicial
to  them,  and  occafions  great  damage  :  firft,  becaufe  it  gives  the  com
as  a  prey  to  fowls,  and  other  animals;  next,  becaufe  the  grain,  and
even  the  ears  themfelves,  quickly  fall  down  from  the  withered  flalks
and  beards.  But,  if  ftorms  of  winds,  or  whirlwinds,  fhould  furprife
us,  the  greater  part  of  it  falls  to  the  ground :  for  which  reafons,  no
further  delays  ought  to  be  made,  but,  when  the  corns  are  all  over
equally  yellow,  before  the  grains  be  intirely  hardened,  when  they  have
contracted  a  reddifh  colour,  you  muft  begin  to  reap,  that  fo  the  corns
may  rather  grow  big  in  the  threfhing-floor,  and  in  the  flacks,  than  upon


Chap.  XXI.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  99

the  corn-fields ;  for  ’tis  certain,  if  they  be  cut  down  in  due  time,  they
afterwards  grow  fomewhat  bigger.  And  there  are  feveral  ways  of  reap¬
ing  corn  :  many  cut  the  ftraw  by  the  middle  with  fmall  cradle-fithes  ( i ),
or  with  fickles ;  and  thefe  are  either  made  with  a  beak,  or  dented.
Many  gather  the  ears  themfelves  with  forked  irons  (2),  others  with
ripples  or  combs  (3);  and  this  is  very  eafy  where  the  corn  is  thin,  but
mod;  difficult  where  it  is  thick.  But  if  the  corn,  with  a  part  of  the
ftraw,  is  cut  down  with  fickles,  it  is  prefen tly  put  together  in  a  heap,
or  carried  under  a  filed ;  and,  being  fcorched  from  time  to  time  with
the  fun,  as  opportunity  offers,  it  is  threfhed.  But,  if  only  the  ears  of
the  corn  are  cut  off,  they  may  be  carried  into  the  barn,  and  then,  in
winter,  beaten  out  either  with  ffcaffs  or  flails,  or  bruifed  out  with  cattle.

But,  if  you  have  the  conveniency  of  threfhing  the  corn  in  a  threfh-
ing-floor,  there  is  no  manner  of  doubt,  but  that  bufinefs  may  be  better

(1)  Our  author  mentions  four  different  forts  of  reaping  inftruments,  of  which  he  gives
no  fuch  particular  defcription,  as  to  make  us  exactly  underftand  their  figure.  Th e  falces
were  of  different  frzes,  according  cothe  ufes  to  which  they  were  applied  ;  and  falx  feems
to  fignify  both  a  ft  he  and  a  fickle.  It  is  probable  they  bore  a  great  refemblance  to  thofe
ftill  in  ufe,  tho’  the  fickles  feem  not  to  have  been  fhaped  fo  much  like  a  crefcent  as  moft
of  the  modern  ones  are.  Ic  is  not  eafy  to  tell  what  our  author  means  by  falces  verriculatar,
or  what  analogy  there  can  be  between  falx  and  verriculum,  which  properly  fignifies  a  drag
or  fweep-net ;  and  therefore  it  is  very  probable,  that  the  true  reading  is  vericulata,  which
is  as  naturally  formed  from  I'ericulum ,  the  diminutive  of  veru,  as  ge?iiculatus  from  genicu-
lum ,  the  diminutive  of  genu,  and  fome  other  words  of  the  like  formation.  If  fo,  then
thefe  falces  vericulata  did  certainly  refemble  what  they  call  cradle- fithes,  which  are  much
in  ufe  in  Kent,  and  other  places ;  and  as  thefe  are  framed  of  one  or  mote  long  fmall  pieces
of  wood,  fhaped  and  pointed  at  one  end  like  a  fmall  fpit  ( vericulum ),  which  being  fo  fixed
in  a  fmall  frame  of  wood,  which  rifes  out  of  the  lower  end  of  the  handle,  near  where  it
is  joined  to  the  fuhe,  as  to  run  parallel  to  the  fithe,  and  placed  at  a  fmall  diftance  the  one
little  fpit  above  the  other,  they  ferve  to  fupport  the  ftalks  of  corn  when  cut  with  the  fithe,
and  keep  them  from  falling  backward  towards  the  ftanding  corn,  till,  by  the  fving  of
the  fithe,  they  are  thrown  off  towards  the  left-hand,  where  they  lie  in  due  order  out  of
the  way  of  the  mower.  It  is  not  at  all  improbable,  but  this  inftrument,  as  mod  other
things  relating  to  Husbandry,  might  originally  come  from  the  'Romans ;  and  that  thofe
falces  vericulata,  mentioned  by  our  author,  might  have  been  framed  very  near  after  the
fame  manner,  but  of  a  much  fmaller  fize,  if  they  were  ufed  in  Italy,  where  Pliny  fays,
fenifex  dextra  una  manu  fecat ;  but  here  he  infinuates,  that  they  managed  the  fithe  with
both  hands  in  other  countries.  The  fickles  he  diftinguifhes  into  two  forts,  fome  with
teeth,  others  beaked ;  both  which  forts  are  ftill  in  ufe.

(2)  The  third  inftrument  for  reaping  was  the  merga ,  by  Pliny  called  merges,  which  no
doubt  took  its  name,  as  F efttts  fays,  from  fowls,  which  dive  into  the  water,  and  rife  up
again  in  a  different  place;  for,  as  thefe  dive  in  purfuit  of  the  fifh,  fo  the  reapers  plunge
this  fmall  forked  inftrument  into  the  corn,  that  they  may  lift  up  handfuls  of  it.

(3)  The  fourth  reaping  tool  was  the  pefien,  a  comb  or  heckle.  Pliny  fays,  that  the
ears  of  corn  were  cut  away  with  this  hand-heckle  or  comb  put  under  them,  juft  as  they
do  with  mens  hairs  when  they  poll  them ;  and  he  feems  to  insinuate,  that,  when  the  ftraw
was  cut  in  the  middle,  the  ears  were  ftripped  off  inter  duas  mergites ,  between  two  forked
inftruments.  They  rpade  ufe  of  thefe  forked  inftruments  both  to  gather  the  ears,  and  to
throw  the  corn  into  heaps.

O  2


done


100


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

done  with  horfes,  than  with  oxen  ;  and,  if  you  have  but  few  pairs  or
yokes  of  them,  you  may  make  ufe  of  the  cart  or  dray  made  of  rough
boards,  or  of  a  dead  (4)5  both  which  very  eafily  bruife  the  ftraw :
but  it  is  better  to  beat  out  the  ears  themfelves  with  cudgels  or  flails,  and
to  cleanfe  them  with  fins ;  but,  when  the  corns  are  mixed  with  chaff,
let  them  be  feparated  with  the  wind.  The  weft  wind,  which  blows
gently  and  equally  in  the  fummer  months,  is  reckoned  excellent  for  this
purpol'e  :  neverthelefs  to  wait  for  it  is  a  figu  of  a  flow  dilatory  Hufband-
man  ;  for,  while  we  are  waiting  for  it,  a  hard  winter  overtakes  us :
therefore,  after  the  corns  are  threflied,  they  muft  be  laid  in  heaps  upon
the  threfliing-floor  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  they  may  be  winnowed  with
any  breeze.  But  if,  for  many  days,  the  wind  is  ftlent  on  every  fide,
let  them  be  clean  fed  with  fans,  left,  after  the  winds  have  been  excef-
fively  dull,  a  vaft  ftorm  deftroy,  and  render  ufelefs,  the  labour  of  the
whole  year.  Then  the  pure  corns,  if  they  are  laid  up  for  years,  ought
to  be  winnowed  a  fecond  time  ;  for,  the  cleaner  they  are,  the  lefs  will
they  be  eaten  up,  and  deftroyed  by  wevils.  But,  if  they  be  defigned
for  ufe  immediately,  it  is  to  no  purpofe  to  cleanfe  them  a  fecond  time ;
it  is  fuflicient  to  cool  them  in  the  fhade,  and  fo  bring  them  into  the
garner.  Alfo  no  other  care  is  to  be  taken  of  legumes,  than  of  other
forts  of  corn;  for  thofe  like  wife  are  either  for  prefen  t  confumption,  or
are  laid  up  in  ftore.  And  this  reaping  and  gathering  in  of  the  harveft
is  the  fupreme  and  ultimate  advantage  and  gain,  which  the  plower  pro-
pofed  to  himfelf,  when  he  committed  the  feeds  to  the  earth.

(4)  Traha  was  a  kind  of  dray  made  of  boards  full  of  teeth,  with  fmall  wheels,  which
was  drawn  over  the  threfhing-floor,  in  order  to  beat  the  corn  out  of  the  ears.

Tribulum ,  or  tribula ,  was  a  plank  ftuck  full  of  fmall  flint-ftones  or  iron,  upon  which
they  placed  a  great  weight,  and  drew  it  with  horfes  over  the  corn,  which  they  had  placed
regularly  upon  the  threfhing- floor.  Sometimes  the  driver  fat  upon  it,  and  drove  the  oxerv
or  horfes  backward  and  forward,  and,  partly  by  the  feet  of  the  oxen  and  horfes,  partly
by  the  weight  and  friction  of  the  machine,  the  grains  were  foon  feparated  from  the  ears ;
and  the  llraw  was  drawn  by  the  teeth  ftuck  in  the  planks,  and  by  the  fmall  wheels,  to
the  ends  of  the  threfhing-floor.  This  was  the  way  of  threfhing  in  the  eaftern  countries,
as  alfo  among  the  Romans^  Varro ,  lib.  i.  cap.  52.  See  alfo  the  prophet  Ifaiah-,  chap,  xxviii.
ver.  26.  wherein  there  is  mention  made  of  the  different  ways  of  threfhing.  It  was  the
cuftom  in  thofe  days  to  threfh  their  corns  in  the  fields,  as  thoy  do  at  prefent  in  many  hoc
dry  countries,  as  foon  as  they  are  cut  down.


CHAP.


Chap.  XXII.


Of  HUSBANDRY.
CHAP.  XXII.


IOI


What  Things  a  Hufband?nan  may  lawfully  do  upon  Holidays ,

and  what  not.

BU  T  forafmuch  as  our  ancestors  thought  it  highly  reafonable  to
give  as  ftri£t  an  account  of  their  idle  and  fpare  time,  as  of  their
time  for  bufinefs ;  we  alfo  think  it  proper  to  admonifh  Hufbandmen
what  things  they  ought,  or  ought  not  to  do,  upon  holidays ;  for  there
are  certain  things,  which,  as  the  poet  fays  (i),

‘  Both  civil  and  religious  laws  allow
‘  On  feftivals.  No  facred  laws  forbid
*  To  drain  our  lands,  or  waters  to  difpenfe,

4  Or  with  a  hedge  our  corn-fields  to  furround  j
*  For  birds  hid  fnares  to  lay  ;  to  burn  up  briars ;

4  And  bleating  flocks  in  healthful  ftreams  to  plunge/

Tho’  the  Pontiffs  (2)  deny,  that  we  ought  to  make  hedges  round  our
corn-fields  on  holidays,  they  alfo  forbid  us  to  wafh  our  fheep  upon  the
account  of  the  wool,  but  only  by  way  of  phyfic.  Virgil  has  inflruded
us  upon  what  confiderations  it  may  be  lawful  to  wafh  a  flock  in  a  river
upon  holidays ;  and  therefore  added,  in  healthful f  reams  to  plunge ;  for
there  are  difeafes,  upon  the  account  of  which,  it  may  be  of  great  advan¬
tage  to  bathe  the  cattle.

But  the  cuftoms  and  rites  of  our  anceftors  allow  alfo  thofe  things  to  be
done  on  holidays  j  viz.  to  bray  husked  and  bearded  wheat  in  a  mortar  »

( 1 )  Virgil.  Georg,  lib.  i.  268.

( 2)  Fontifices.  The  Pontiffs  were  a  college  of  priefts  firft  inftituted  by  Nutria,  who  chofe
them  out  of  the  fcnators.  They  were,  at  firft,  only  four  in  number,  but  afterwards  increafed
to  eight,  and  then  by  Sylla  to  fifteen.  Their  office  was  to  give  judgment  in  all  religious
eaufes,  and  to  infpeA  the  manners  of  the  inferior  priefts,  and  punifh  them  when  they  faw
occafion  ;  to  prefcribe  rules  for  public  worfhip  ;  to  regulate  the  feftivals,  facrifices,  and  all
other  things  relating  to  religion.  The  mafterfhip  or  headfhip  of  this  college  was  one  of  the
moft  honourable  offices  in  the  commonwealth  j  and  Numa  invefted  himfelf  therewith.
Julius  Ciefar ,  Augujlus ,  and  moft  of  the  fucceeding  Emperors,  exercifed  this  office;  and
no  wonder,  confidering  the  great  dignity  and  power  annexed  to  it,  he  being  looked  upon
as  the  fovereign  judge  and  arbitrator  in  all  things  both  divine  and  human.  The  college  had
power  to  inftitute  new  religious  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  were  confulted  by  the  people
upon  all  religious  occafions.  See  Dionyfius  HalicarvaJJeus ,  and  Cicero ,  in  his  oration  for  his
own  houfe.  The  head  of  the  college  was  called  gontifex  tnaximusj  not  from  his  age  or  pre¬
cedency!  but  from  his  power  and  authority.

to


102


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  II.

to  cut  torches ;  to  make  t allow- c andle s ;  to  cultivate  a  hired  vineyard ,  or
which  we  have  undertaken  to  drefs  at  a  certain  price ;  to  purge  and
clean fe  Jijh-ponds ,  ponds ,  old  ditches ;  to  mow  meadows  a J'econd  time ;
to  Jpread  dung ;  to  lay  up  and  Jlow  hay  in  the  hay -lofts  ;  /o  gather  the
fruits  of  an  olive-yard,  which  we  have  hired,  or  undertaken  to  manage
at  a  certain  price  ;  to  Jpread  apples ,  pears,  and  Jigs ;  to  7nake  cheeje-,  to
bring  home  trees,  either  upon  our  fhoulders ,  or  upon  a  pack-mule,  in  order
to  plant  them:  but  we  are  not  allowed  to  carry  them  with  one  that  is
yoked  in  a  cart  or  a  waggon,  nor  to  fow  or  plant  any  thing,  that  we
have  brought  home,  nor  to  open  the  ground,  nor  to  prune  or  lop  trees;
but  you  mnft  not  fo  much  as  do  any  thing  relating  to  fowing,  unlefs
you  have  firft  facrificed  a  puppy  ;  nor  cut  hay,  nor  make  it  up  in  truffes,
nor  carry  it  home  :  nor  is  it  lawful,  according  to  the  religious  fyftems
of  the  Pontiffs,  to  gather  the  vintage  upon  holidays,  nor  fhear  your
iheep,  till  vou  have  firft  offered  a  puppy  in  facrifice.

It  is  lawful  alfo  to  make  rob  of  grapes,  or  fodden  wine,  by  boiling
the  mu  ft  in  to  one  third  of  the  firft  quantity,  and  to  mix  it  with  the
wine  (3).  It  is  alfo  lawful  to  gather  grapes  and  olives  for  preferving.
But  it  is  not  lawful  to  cloathe  the  flieep  with  fkins.  Whatever  you  do  in
your  garden,  relating  to  pot-herbs,  is  allowed;  and,  upon  public  holi¬
days,  it  is  not  lawful  to  bury  a  dead  man.  Marcus  Porcius  Cato  (4)  faid,
that  there  were  no  days  of  vacation  for  mules,  horfes,  and  affes.  The
lame  author  allows  us  to  yoke  oxen,  in  order  to  bring  home  wood  and
corn.  We  read  in  the  books  of  the  Pontiffs,  that,  only  upon  fuch  holi¬
days  as  were  obferved  in  private  families  on  the  tenth  day  after  the  death
of  any  perfon  (5),  it  is  not  lawful  to  yoke  mules;  but,  on  other  holidays,
it  is  allowed.

I  am  perfuaded,  that,  in  this  place,  fome  perfons,  after  I  have  reckon¬
ed  up  the  folemn  feafts,  will  defire  to  know  the  cuftom  obferved  by  the
antients  in  their  luftrations  which  they  made,  and  facrifices  which  they

(3)  Defrutum.  I  believe  this  word  might  properly  enough  be  rendered  rob  of  grapes,
if  any  fore  of  rob  be  made  without  fugar.  However,  the  thing  is  this:  The  antient  Romans
ufed  to  take  a  certain  quantity  of  their  beft  and  Tweeted  muft,  and  boil  it  in  to  a  certain
qusn'ity.  What  they  boiled  in  to  one  half  of  the  firft  quantity,  they  called  Japa  ;  and  that
which  they  boiled  in  to  one  third,  they  called  defrutum.  With  it  they  mixed  and  boiled
feveral  ingredient'-'.  This  defrutum  or  fapa  they  applied  to  fevera!  ufes,  but  chiefly  they  ufed
it  for  preferving  their  wines,  fruits,  <& c.  They  thought,  that  a  certain  quantity  contributed
much  to  preferve  their  wines  from  fpoiling.  They  alfo  made  ufe  of  them  for  curing  ail¬
ments  both  of  men  and  cattle,  as  wefhallfee  in  the  fequel  of  this  work.

(4)  Cato,  cap.  138.

(5)  Terics  denicales.  Thefe  were  holidays  kept  by  private  perfons  upon  the  tenth  day  after
the  death  of  any  perfon  in  the  family.  They  fanfied,  that  the  houfe  was  polluted  by  the
dead  body,  and  they  were  wont  to  make  ufe  of  certain  religious  ri^es  and  ceremonies  to
purge  the  fame.

offered


Chap.  XXII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  103

offered  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth  (6) ;  nor  do  I  refufe  to  be  at  the  trou¬
ble  of  inftrudting  them  in  thefe  things :  but  I  put  it  off  to  the  book  I
defign  to  compofe,  after  I  have  done  writing  upon  the  whole  art  of
Husbandry.  In  the  mean  time  I  fhall  put  an  end  to  the  prefen t  argu¬
ment,  and,  in  the  next  book,  fhall  give  an  account  of  what  antient  au¬
thors  have  written  concerning  vineyards,  and  plantations  of  trees  for
fupporting  vines,  and  what  I  myfelf  have  fince  found  out  by  my  own
experience.

(6)  It  was  the  cuftom  of  the  Romani,  at  certain  times  of  the  year,  to  lead  facrifices
round  their  fields  with  great  ceremony  and  attendance,  and  afterwards  to  offer  them  up
to  Ceres,  or  fome  other  of  their  gods,  with  prayers,  that  they  would  preferve  the  fruits  of
the  ground  from  thunder,  lightning,  ftorms,  mildew,  and  all  other  plagues  and  misfortunes
whatfoever.  Private  perfons  ufed  always  to  luftrate  their  lands ;  and  a  part  of  their  prayer
to  their  gods  was,  that  they  would  avert  all  peftilence,  barrennefs,  <&c.  and  profper  the
culture  of  their  lands,  & c.  Our  author  defigned  to  write  upon  this  fubjed  ,•  whether  he
did  fo,  or  nor,  I  know  not.  If  he  did,  I  fuppofe  nothing  of  it  is  come  to  our  times.


L.  JUNIUS


t  104  ]


L.JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  THIRD.


CHAP.  I.

What  Kind  of  Vine  may  be  proper  for  every  Soil ,  and  fuit -
able  to  the  State  of  the  Climate.

THUS  far  of  tillage ,  as  faith  thatmofl  excellent  poet  (i)  j  for
nothing  hinders  us,  Publius  Silvinus ,  who  are  going  to  fpeak
nf  the  fame  things,  aufpicioufly  to  begin  with  the  firfl  words
of  that  moft  renowned  poem.  The  care  of  trees  follows,
which  is  even  the  greateft  part  of  Hufbandry.  There  are  divers  fpecies
of  them,  and  of  very  different  appearances ;  for  there  are  feveral  forts
of  them,  which  (as  the  fame  author  (2)  tells  us)  come  of  their  own  ac¬
cord,  no  man  compels.  Many  of  them  alfo,  after  being  planted  with  our
own  hand,  grow  up.  But  fuch  of  them,  as  are  not  produced  by  human
x  afiiftance,  are  wild  and  favage,  and  bear  apples  or  feeds  agreeable  to  their
feveral  natures.  But  fuch  of  them,  as  have  labour  bellowed  upon  them,
are  fitted;  for  producing  fruit  proper  for  food.

We  muff  therefore  fpeak  firft  of  that  kind,  which  affords  us  nourish¬
ment;  and  it  is  divided  into  three  different  forts :  for,  from  a  fprig,  or
fhoot,  or  cutting,  there  proceeds  either  a  tree,  as  the  olive  ;  or  a  fhrub,
as  the  champain />£/;«  (3) ;  or  a  certain  third  thing,  which  I  cannot  pro-

(i)  Georg,  lib.  i.  i.

(2)  I'irg.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  10.

(3)  Palma  catrpejlris ,  a  champain  palm.  Pliny ,  in  his  nat.  bijt.  lib.  xiii.  c.  4.  mentions  a
fore  of  a  palm-tree,  that  does  not  exceed  a  flarub.

f  perly


Chap.  I.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &c.  105

perly  call  either  a  tree  or  a  fhrub,  as  is  the  •vine  (4).  This,  with  very-
good  reafon,  we  prefer  to  all  other  ftems  whatfoever,  not  only  for  the

fweetnefs

(4)  All  the  antient  ruftic  authors  agree,  that  there  is  Co  great  a  variety  in  vines,  that
it  would  be  both  vain  and  unprofitable  to  attempt  to  enumerate  or  defcribe  the  different
forts  of  this  ufeful  and  delightful  little  tree;  fo  that  they  have  only  taken  notice  of  fome
of  the  moil  commendable,  which  they  have  ranked  into  a  few  clafles,  according  to
their  feveral  characters.  Pliny  has  indeed  mentioned  a  great  many  in  his  natural  hifiory ;
but  Virgil  thought  it  enough  to  give  a  place  in  his  admirable  poem  only  to  fifteen  of
them.  Our  author  has  ranked  them  in  three  claffes,  and  has  mentioned  about  fifteen  of
the  firft  note,  about  twelve  of  the  fecond,  and  feven  or  eight  of  the  third  note;  but,  of
fome  of  the  fame  clafs  and  name,  he  makes  different  forts,  which  have  fome  peculiarity
or  other  to  diftinguifh  them  from  each  other,  though  they  may  feem  to  be  the  fame  to
a  fuperficial  obferver.  He  alfo  mentions  a  few,  to  which  he  has  afligned  no  clafs.  Of. all
the  different  forts,  there  are  not  many,  which  thefe  authors  have  fo  particularly  defcribed,
as  to  enable  even  a  curious  obferver  to  diftinguifh  and  know  them  at  prefent ;  for  many
of  them  they  juft  name,  with  the  character  of  being  fruitful,  early  or  late  ripe,  thriving
in  fuch  and  fuch  a  foil  and  weather,  &c.  without  giving  any  particular  defcription  of  their
wood,  leaves,  flower,  fruit,  &c.  as  are  neceifary  to  make  them  eafy  to  be  known  to  after¬
ages.  Some  of  their  names  indeed  denote  fome  effential  character,  which  diftinguifh  them
from  all  others;  but  thefe  are  but  few.  Many  of  them  bear  the  names  of  the  places
where  they  were  firft  known  to  grow,  or  did  mod  abound,  or  of  the  perfons  who  firft
brought  them  into  Italy-,  and  cultivated  them ;  but,  as  they  have  now  loft  their  names,
there  is  but  little  knowledge  can  be  gathered  from  moft  of  them.  And  it  is  remarkable,
that,  even  in  Italy  itfelf,  where  all  thefe  vines  were  cultivated  in  great  abundance  in  our
author’s  days,  and  where,  no  doubt,  many  of  them  ftill  fubfift,  yet  very  few,  if  any,  re¬
tain  their  antient  names ;  fo  that  the  language  of  the  Romans  has  not  fuffered  a  greater
change  in  any  part  of  it,  than  in  the  names  of  vines;  fo  that  it  is  not  now  eafy  to  deter¬
mine  to  which  of  the  vines  now  growing  the  antient  names  belong.  A  few  of  them  in¬
deed  are  fo  exaCfly  defcribed  by  Pliny  and  this  author,  that  one  cannot  miftake,  though
they  are  now  called  by  different  names.

It  is  probable,  that  thofe  vines,  which  are  not  particularly  defcribed,  were  fo  well  known,
that  it  was  fufficient  only  to  name  them,  and  nothing  more  was  needful  but  to  relate  fome  of
their  particular  qualities:  and  the  chief  detign  of  Columella  feems  to  have  been  to  point  out
to  the  Husbandman,  which  of  them  were  fitteft  for  his  purpofe,  and  which  not,  and  the
manner  of  their  cultivation  ;  and  fuch  of  them,  as  he  has  more  accurately  defcribed,  feem
not  to  have  been  fo  generally  well  known,  and  were  cultivated  only  in  few  places,  where
the  foil  was  moft  agreeable  to  their  nature.

From  the  elegant  defcription  he  has  given  us  of  many,  if  not  of  all,  the  moft  commend¬
able  forts,  we  have  an  opportunity  to  obferve  and  admire  the  beautiful  and  furprifing  variety,
that  there  is  in  this  one  fmall  tree  or  fhrub,  whatever  we  pleafe  to  call  it ;  which  is  io
great,  that  I  know  not  if  there  be  the  like  in  any  other  tree  or  fhrub  whatfoever :  for  tho’
all  the  various  forts  agree  in  many  effential  things,  which  diftinguifh  them  from  all  other
trees  or  fhrubs  whatfoever,  and  from  which  they  all  have  the  general  appellation  or  name
of  vines,  yet  each  of  them  has  fome  remarkable  character,  which  confines  them  to  a  cer¬
tain  fort,  and  diftinguifhes  them  from  all  others.  Thus  we  fee,  that  our  author  tdls  us,
that  fome  are  exceeding  fruitful;  others  produce  tolerably  well;  others  little  or  nothing;
fome  are  afraid  of  fogs,  frofts,  hoar-frofts,  others  not ;  fome  are  early  ripe,  others  ripen
late;  fome  lofe  all  their  fruit  in  the  bloflom,  others  caft  their  blofloms  exceeding  well;
fome  are  brittle,  and  eafily  broken  by  the  winds ;  others  of  them  are  fo  ftrong  and  tough,
that  they  fuffer  nothing  from  them;  fome  of  them  dread  rains,  others  are  afraid  of  dry
weather ;  fome  of  them  have  frequent  joints  and  knots,  others  but  few,  and  diftant  from
each  other ;  fome  have  long  and  thick  branches  and  flioots,  others  have  them  fmall,  and
few  of  them;  fome  of  them  have  a  large  pith,  others  have  it  very  fmall;  fome  of  them

P  have


1 06  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  113.

fweetnefs  of  its  fruit,  but  alfo  for  that  facility,  wherewith  it  anfwers
the  pains  that  mortals  beftow  upon  it,  almoft  in  every  country,  and  in
every  latitude  of  the  world,  except  in  the  frozen  or  the  torrid  zones ;
and  it  grows  as  happily  in  plains  as  upon  hills,  and  thrives  as  well  in
denfe  thick  ground,  as  in  that  which  is  loofe  and  open;  and  often  alfo
in  land  that  is  poor,  as  in  that  which  is  fat;  and  in  a  dry  foil,  as  well  as
in  that  which  is  naturally  moift ;  and  it  alone  does  bed;  endure  both  the
one  and  the  other  intemperature  of  weather,  either  under  a  cold,  or  un¬
der  a  fcorching  hot  or  flormy  climate.

Neverthelefs  it  is  of  great  importance  what  kind,  or  what  quality
and  habit  the  vine  is  of,  which  you  refolve  to  cultivate,  according  to  the
flate  and  condition  of  the  country :  for  neither  is  the  culture  the  fame
in  every  climate  and  foil,  nor  is  this  ftem  of  one  and  the  fame  kind  ;
and  which  of  them  all  is  the  chief,  it  is  not  eafy  to  tell,  fince  expe¬
rience  teaches,  that  every  country  has  its  own,  which  is  more  or  lefs
proper  for  it.  Neverthelefs  a  prudent  Hufbandman  will  eafily  find
out,  that  that  kind  of  vine  is  proper  for  a  plain,  which  endures  fogs  and
hoar-frofts,  without  receiving  any  hurt;  and  for  a  hill,  that  which  can
bear  drought  and  winds.  To  a  fat  and  fertile  land,  he  will  give  a  fmall
flender  vine,  and  which  is  not  naturally  too  fruitful ;  to  lean  ground,
he  will  give  a  vine  that  bears  great  plenty  of  fruit ;  to  denfe  and  thick
land,  one  that  fihoots  out  vehemently,  and  puts  forth  abundance  of
hard  wood  and  leaves;  to  a  loofe,  open,  and  rich  foil,  one  that  is  thin
of  fprays  and  twigs.  He  will  know,  that  a  vine  of  a  tender  fruit,  ana
of  a  grape  of  a  larger  fize,  is  not  rightly  committed  to  a  moifl  place,
but  one  of  a  callous,  narrow,  flender  fruit,  and  full  of  grape-ftones ;  and
that,  to  a  dry  place  alfo,  plants  of  a  different  nature  are  rightly  appro¬
priated.

But,  befides  thefe  things,  the  proprietor  of  the  place  will  not  be  igno¬
rant,  that  the  quality  of  the  climate,  hot  or  cold,  dry  or  dewy,  fubjedt
to  hail  and  wind,  or  calm,  ferene,  or  foggy,  is  of  much  greater  influ¬
ence  than  any  other  thing  :  and  to  a  climate  of  a  cold  or  foggy  confii-
tution  lie  will  adapt  two  forts  of  vines,  either  fuch  as  are  early  ripe,.

have  their  leaves  cut  very  deep,  others  but  very  little  cut,  and  in  a  different  manner,  and
others  of  them  are  not  cut  at  all,  but  intirely  round;  fome  bear  white,  Tome  red,  others
black  grapes,  and  the  bunches  and  grains  of  different  fiz.es  and  fhapes;  fome  have  berries
very  callous,  fome  Toft,  fome  hard  ;  fome  of  them  have  them  very  beautiful  and  bright,
and  others  dark;  fome  fweet,  others  acid  ;  fome  produce  durable  wines,  others  that  which
foon  corrupts :  with  many  other  varieties  too  tedious  to  relate.

Pliny ,  in  his  natural  hijlory ,  fays,  that  the  antients  reckoned  vines  gmongfl:  trees ;  and
that  there  was  a  ftatue  of  Jupiter  in  a  town  of  Tufcany  made  of  a  vine.  He  mentions  alfo
a  temple  of  Juno ,  fupported  by  pillars  made  of  vines;  but  he  (uppofes  they  were  wild
vines;  and  that  no  wood  is  fo  durable.  ■  "  ...

whofe


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  107

whofe  fruit  comes  to  maturity  before  winter,  or  thofeof  a  firm  and
hard  grape,  whofe  clufters  caft  their  bloffoms  fin  the  midft  of  the  fogs,
and  afterwards  ripen  and  grow  mellow  with  the  hoar-frofts  and  frofts,
as  other  grapes  do  with  the  heats.  Alfo  in  a  climate  of  a  windy  and  tu¬
multuous  conftitution,  he  will,  with  confidence,  commit  to  the  ground
fuch  as  take  firm  hold  of  it,  and  bear  hard  grapes.  Again,  to  a  warm
climate  he  will  entruft  fuch  as  are  more  tender,  and  abound  in  fruit.  To
a  dry  he  will  deftinate  fuch  as  rot  with  rains  and  continual  dews ;  to  a
dewy,  fuch  as  fuffer  by  droughts ;  to  a  climate  fubjeft  to  hail,  fuch  as
grow  with  hard  and  broad  leaves,  that  they  may  protedt  the  fruit  the
better  ;  for  there  is  no  fort  of  vine  that  a  calm  and  ferene  climate  does
not  admit,  but  moft  commodioufly  that,  whofe  bunches,  or  fingle  grains,
quickly  fall  off.

But  if  a  place  for  vineyards,  and  the  ftate  of  the  climate,  were  to  be
chofen  according  to  your  wifh,  as  Celfus  judges  very  truly,  that  ground
or  foil  is  the  beft,  which  is  neither  too  denfe,  nor  too  loofe  and  open,
neverthelefs  approaches  more  to  that  which  is  loofe ;  neither  poor  nor
exceeding  rich,  but  which  is  next  to  that  which  is  very  fruitful  3  neither
champain  nor  fteep,  neverthelefs  like  to  a  rifing  high  ground  ;  neither
dry  nor  naturally  wet,  neverthelefs  moderately  moiftened  with  dew  5
which  does  not  flow  with  fprings,  either  upon  the  furface,  or  deep  below
ground,  but  that  it  convey  to,  and  fupply  the  roots  of  the  vines  with
the  neighbouring  moifture  j  and  that  that  be  neither  bitter  nor  faltifh,
left  it  corrupt  the  tafte  of  the  wine,  and  check  the  growth  of  every
green  thing  with  a  certain  rough  fcabby  ruft,  as  it  were,  if  fo  be  we  be¬
lieve  Virgil ,  who  fays  (f),

4  A  fait  and  bitter"  land  in  all  its  fruits
‘  Unhappy  proves ;  nor  can  the  lab’ring  plough
*  Its  rugged  nature  tame,  and  make  it  mild.

4  There  Bacchus'  favourite  plant,  the  fruitful  vine,

4  Does  lofe  its  kind,  and  apple-trees  their  names.5

Moreover,  as  I  faid  before,  a  vineyard  neither  requires  a  cold  icy  cli¬
mate,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  one  that  is  fcorching  hot  j  neverthelefs
it  rejoices  and  thrives  better  in  a  warm  than  in  a  cold  climate,  and  is
offended  and  fuffers  more  hurt  by  rains,  than  by  fair  weather,  and  is  more
friendly  to  a  dry  foil,  than  to  that  which  is  too  much  expofed  to  rain.
It  rejoices  in  gentle  and  moderate  palling  gales,  and  is  liable  to  fuffer  by


(5)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  238,

P  2


tempeftuous


108  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III,

tempeftuous  ftormy  weather.  And  this  is  the  quality  both  of  the  cli¬
mate  and  foil,  which  is  the  mod;  to  be  approved.


CHAP.  II.

What  Vines  mufl  he  planted  for  Food  in  Lands  ?2ear  the  City .

THE  vine  is  planted  either  for  food  to  eat,  or  for  a  liquor  to  drink.

It  is  not  expedient  to  institute  vineyards  for  food,  unlefs  when
the  land  is  fo  contiguous  to  the  city,  that  it  may  turn  to  as  good  account
to  fell  the  fruit  thereof  to  fuch  as  buy  it  before  we  bring  it  into  our
ftorehoufe,  as  we  do  apples  ( i )  j  and,  when  this  is  the  cafe,  the  early
ripe  vines,  and  fuch  as  bear  firm  and  hard  grapes,  with  thick  tough
fkins,  and  then  the  purple-coloured,  and  the  Butnafi  (2)  and  date¬
like  grapes  (3),  and  the  Rhodian ,  Libyan  (4),  and  the  Ceraunian  (f)
alfo,  ought  efpecially  to  be  planted  ;  and  not  only  fuch  as  can  be  com¬
mended  for  their  excellent  tafte,  but  alfo  for  their  beautiful  appearance,,
as  the  coronary  (6),  the  three-fee  t-long  (7),  the  uncial  (8),  and  the

(1)  Veluti  prom  urn.  Some  editions  have  pomttm,  and  I  have  tranflared  it  accordingly  ;  and
the  meaning  is,  that  it  is  expedient  to  plant  vineyards  for  food,  if  we  can  as  eafily  fell  our
grapes  to  huckfters  and  others,  as  we  do  our  apples,  pears,  &c.  Other  copies  have  promum.
If  this  is  the  true  reading,  then  the  meaning  of  the  author  is,  that  it  is  not  expedient,  unlefs
we  can  fell  the  fruit  thereof  as  eafily  before  we  bring  it  into  our  ftorehoufes,  as  we  do  our
other  fruits,  when  we  bring  them  out  of  the  fame;  and  then promus  is  an  adjedtive  in  this
place,  and  fruttus  promus  will  fignify  fruit  laid  up  in  (lore,  and  afterwards  brought  forth
for  ufe,  or  to  fell,  &c.

(2)  Bumafii  are  vines  which  produce  clufters  of  grapes,  like  cows  udders  or  dugs.  Varroy
lib.  ii.  c.  5.  calls  this  fort  of  grape  uvam  bumammam.  B»,  added  to  any  word,  increafes-
the  fignification  of  it ;  and,  as  this  author  fays,  moft  part  of  great  things  are  exprefled
by  the  addition  of  this  word,  which  is  owing  to  the  great  value  they  antiently  put
upon  this  ufeful  animal :  and  this  fort  of  vine  was  probably  fo  called,  from  the  clufters
of  grapes  refembling  a  cow’s  udder  and  dugs,  both  in  their  bulk  and  ftiape.  Some  think,
that  the  berries  were  round  and  fwelling,  and  therefore  fo  called.

(3)  DaftyU,  date-like  grapes,  Ihapedlike  a  date,  or  fmall  and  long  like  the  finger.  The
Trench  call  them  raifins  au  long  grain.

(4)  Rhodia  &  Libyca  vises.  Thefe  vines  have  their  names  from  the  countries  whence
they  were  brought  into  Italy.

(5)  Ceraunice.  lfidorus  fays  they  are  fo  called  from  their  firy  colour.

(6)  Stephanita ,  from  tsTipewos,  a  crown.  Pliny  fays  they  are  fo  called,  becaufe  they  natu¬
rally  grow  fomewhat  like  crowns  or  chaplets  of  flowers,  the  leaves  running  between  the
berries,  as  if  they  were  artificially  mixed,  and  made  into  coronets ;  fo  that  they  cannot  be
fo  called  from  the  vine  itfelf  being  twifted  and  formed  into  the  figure  of  a  crown.  Thefe
grapes  were  alfo  called  forenfes ,  market-grapes,  becaufe  they  come  foon,  are  faleable  for
their  beauty,  and  eafy  to  be  carried.  The  Trench  call  them  foirars?  which,  as  father  Har-
douin  fays,  feems  to  be  the  old  name  ftill  retained.

(7)  Tripedanea  vites ,  three  feet  long,  fo  called  from  the  length  of  their  ftock,  according
to  Pliny.

(8)  Unriari by  Pliny  called  unciales ,  from  the  weight  of  their  berries.


quince-


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  xog

quince-vines  (9)  j  as  alfo  thofe  vines,  whole  grapes  are  put  up  in  veflels,
and  are  durable,  and  can  be  kept  during  the  whole  winter,  as  the  Vena-
culan  (10),  as  the  Numijian  ( 1 1 ),  which  have  been  lately  found  by  ex¬
perience  to  be  exceeding  proper  for  thefe  ules.

But,  when  wine  is  what  we  have  principally  in  view,  we  make  choice
of  a  vine,  which  is  flrong  and  mighty  both  in  fruit  and  in  firm  wood,
becaufe  the  one  contributes  very  much  to  the  income  of  the  Hufband-
man,  and  the  other  to  the  durablenefs  of  the  flock ;  but  then  that  is
the  chief  and  the  choiceft,  if  it  neither  promifes  too  quickly,  and  cafls
its  flower  alfo  very  early  in  the  beginning  of  the  feafon,  nor  ripens  and
grows  mellow  too  flowly,  and  alfo  eaflly  repels  and  flands  out  againft
hoar-frofts,  fogs,  and  blafting,  and  neither  rots  with  fhowers,  nor
fhrivels  and  decays  with  droughts.

Let  us  make  choice  of  fuch  a  vine  as  this,  fuppofe  it  be  but  indiffer¬
ently  fruitful,  provided  the  place  has  the  reputation  of  producing  wines
of  a  noble  and  precious  tafte  and  flavour ;  for,  if  they  be  of  a  paltry  and
bafe  tafte,  and  little  accounted  of,  it  is  an  advantage  to  plant  there  every
fort  of  vine,  that  bears  the  moll  fruit,  that,  by  the  vafl:  increafe  and
quantity  of  the  fruit,  our  revenue  and  yearly  income  may  be  augmented..
But  whatever  conflitution  or  quality  the  lands  may  be  of,  commonly
champain  lands  produce  the  greater  quantity  of  wine  j  and  fuch  as  are
hilly,  that  which  is  more  delicious.  Neverthelefs  thefe  places  themfelves,
in  a  moderate  ffcate  of  the  climate,  bring  a  more  plentiful  vintage,  when
they  decline  towards  the  north  j  but  the  wines  are  more  generous,
when  they  lie  towards  the  fouth.

Nor  is  there  any  doubt,  but  fuch  is  the  nature  of  fome  vines,  that,
according  to  the  fituation  of  places,  they  either  excel,  or  are  excelled,
in  the  goodnefs  of  their  wine.  Amine  an  A  nee  alone  (12),  a  too  cold

date

(9)  Cjdonitz  vites ,  quince-vines,  whofe  fruit  had  fomewhat  of  the  tafte  of  quinces.

(10)  Venucula  vitis.  Pliny  calls  it  venicula.  Horace  makes  mention  of  the  grapes  of  this
vine  as  proper  to  be  put  up  in  pots,/*r.  ii.  4,  71.  Some  think,  that  this  word  is  formed
of  ve ,  augendi  particular  and  nucleus ,  as  if  it  iignified  grapes  with  big  kernels.

Pliny,  lib.  xiv.  2.  gives  no  particular  defcription  of  this  vine ;  only  fays,  that  it  is  called
by  different  names  in  different  places.  Thofe  names  fignify  very  little  to  explain  any  qua¬
lity  peculiar  to  it.  He  adds,  that  they  caft  their  bloffoms  very  well,  and  are  proper  to  be
put  up  in  jars.  Some  think,  that  they  are  what  the  Venetians  call  now  marzetnina.  Pliny
feems  to  fay,  that,  at  Tarracina ,  they  took  it  for  the  Numipan,  which  follows  here.

(u)  Humipan <e  vites.  Pliny  does  not  feem  to  make  them  to  differ  much  from  the
Venuculan ,  fays,  that  they  have  no  peculiar  ftrength  in  themfelves,  but  derive  all  from  the
foil,  according  to  the  ftrength  and  goodnefs  of  which  they  change  their  qualities.

(12)  Amininete  vites.  Some  write  it  only  with  one  m.  Macrobius,  fat.  lib.  ii.  c.  id.  fays,
that  they  had  their  name  from  the  country  where  they  grew,  which,  he  fays,  was  where
now  Palernum  is  ,  but  father  Hardouin  corrects  this,  and  fays,  it  ought  to  be  ubi  nunc
Sqlentum  efi  ,  viz.  the  Salentine  land,  where  antiently  was  the  Regio  Peucetia ,  Pint,  hijt .

vat.


I  10


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IIL

fhite  of  the  climate  excepted,  are  reported  to  furpafs  all  others  in  flavour
and  tafte,  tho’  they  may  degenerate,  and,  when  compared  with  one
another,  yield  wine  of  a  more  or  lefs  exquifite  tafte.  Thefe,  tho’  they
all  bear  the  fame  name,  yet  are  not  all  of  the  fame  fort,  nor  have  the
fame  appearance.  We  have  known  two  of  them  that  are  Afters,  of  which
the  leffer  cafts  its  bloflom  fooner  and  better,  and  is  fit  both  for  the  tree
and  the  frame.  Upon  the  tree  it  requires  fat  ground,  and,  on  the  frame,
middling  :  and  it  far  furpafles  the  greater,  becaufe  it  endures  rains  and
winds  with  greater  fortitude  ;  for  the  greater  is  quickly  fpoiled  in  the
bloftom,  and  more  upon  frames,  than  on  trees.  Therefore  it  is  not  fit
for  vineyards,  and  fcarcely  alfo  for  a  place  where  it  is  fupported  by  trees,
unle'fs  it  be  in  very  fat  and  oufy  ground  ;  for  neither  does  it  thrive  and
enjoy  good  health  in  ordinary  and  indifferent  ground,  and  much  lefs  in
that  which  is  poor.  It  is  known  by  its  great  number  of  long  branches
of  firm  wood,  and  by  the  largenefs  of  its  leaves,  clufters,  and  grapes.  It
is  alfo  thinner  of  joints;  and  the  leffer  excels  it  in  the  large  quantity  of
its  fruits ;  but  this  is  not  inferior  to  it  in  tafte  and  flavour :  and  both  thefe
are  indeed  Aminean  vines.

But  there  are  two  other  vines,  that  refemble  one  another,  which  are
called  the  twin- Amine  ans,  becaufe  they  put  forth  double  clufters.  They
■yield  a  rougher  harfher  wine,  but  equally  lafting.  The  leffer  of  thefe  is
exceeding  well  knowa,  becaufe  it  covers  the  moft  famous  hills  of Vefuvius
and  Sorrento  in  Campania.  It  is  chearful  amongft  the  fummer  gales  of
the  weft  wind ;  but  is  afflicted  with  fouth  winds ;  therefore,  in  the  other
parts  of  Italy,  it  is  not  fo  fit  for  vineyards  as  for  plantations  of  trees  made
for  the  fupport  of  vines ;  whereas,  in  the  forefaid  countries,  the  frame
moft  commodioufly  fupports  its  firm  woody  branches,  and  its  fruit,
which  it  produces  not  unlike  that  of  the  leffer  fijler- Aminean,  except
that  its  clufters  are  double,  as  the  greater  twin- Aminean  produces  alfo
fruit  like  to  the  greater  fifler- Aminean ;  which  leffer  twin-Aminean  is

siat.  lib.  iii.  fed.  1 6.  and  a  part  of  this  country  was  called  Aminea.  It  Teems  they  were
firflr  brought  from  this  country  to  other  parts  of  Italy ;  but  they  were  chiefly  cultivated
on  mount  Vefuvius ,  a  famous  hill  near  Naples,  once  very  remarkable  for  its  noble  wines ;
but  now,  in  a  great  meafure,  deftroyed,  and  made  unfit  for  cultivation,  by  the  frequent
•eruptions  of  the  vulcano  upon  the  top  of  it ;  as  alfo  about  Sorrento,  an  antient  city  about
1 8  or  20  miles  diftant  from  Naples.  The  hills  about  it  are  much  celebrated,  both  in  for¬
mer  and  later  times,  for  the  excellent  wine  they  produce.  There  are  feveral  other  reafons
afllgned,  why  thefe  vines  are  fo  called ;  but  feem  to  have  very  little  foundation.  Pliny
mentions  five  different  forts  of  them.  Our  author,  who  gives  a  very  diftindt  account  cf
them,  mentions  a  fixth  fort,  which  he  magnifies  very  much.  Servius  gives  but  a  poor
reafon  why  they  are  called  Aminean ,  viz.  quafi  [me  minio ,  i.  e.  rubore ,  becaufe  their  wine
is  white ;  which  is  true  of  many  other  vines  befides  thefe,  and  Pliny  makes  mention  of  a
•black  Aminean.


better


Chap.  II.  Gf  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  i 1  r

better  than  the  greater  in  this  refpedt,  that  it  is  more  fruitful  in  an  in¬
different  foil ;  for  we  have  already  faid,  that  that  does  not  anfwer  but
in  very  fat  ground.

Some  approve  mofl  of  the  woolly- Amine  an  vine,  which  does  not
therefore  aflume  this  name,  becaufe  it  only,  of  all  other  Aminean-v ines,
grows  white  or  hoary,  with  a  cotton  or  down  upon  it,  but  becaufe  this
el’pecially  has  more  of  it  than  the  others.  It  yields  indeed  good  wine,
but  lighter  than  thofe  others  above-mentioned.  It  puts  forth  alfo  a  great
quantity  of  firm  wood,  and  therefore  cads  its  bloffoms  but  very  indiffer¬
ently,  becaufe  of  the  thicknefs  of  its  branches  and  leaves ;  and  the  fame
quickly  rots  after  the  fruit  is  ripe.

Over  and  above  the  number  we  have  mentioned,  there  is  an  Aminean
vine,  which  is  reckoned  fingular,  not  unlike  to  the  greater  fijler- Ami¬
nean,  but  to  be  preferred  to  it;  firft,  for  the  make  and  beautiful  appear¬
ance  of  its  dock,  and  (hoots,  and  leaves ;  but  fomewhat  inferior  to  it  in
the  flavour  and  tafte  of  its  wine,  tho’  notwithftanding  it  is  mofl;  gene¬
rous.  Next,  it  is  preferable  alfo  upon  the  account  of  its  own  peculiar
qualities ;  for  it  is  both  more  fertile,  and  calls  its  bloffom  better,  and
bears  thick,  clofe,  and  whitifh  clufters,  and  of  a  plumper  and  more
fwelling  grape.  It  does  not  degenerate  in  thin  poor  land,  and  therefore
it  is  numbered  among  the  mofl; 'fruitful  vines.

The  Nomentan  vines  (13)  follow  next  after  the  Aminean  in  the
noblenefs  of  their  wine ;  but,  in  fruitfulnefs,  they  even  come  before,  or
have  the  precedency;  becaufe,  as  they  have  a  numerous  conception,  fo,
what  they  have  once  brought  forth,  they  preferve  and  maintain  exceed-
ins  well.  But  of  thefe  alfo  the  lefler  is  the  more  fertile;  and  the  leaf  of
it  is  more  fparingly  cut,  and  its  wood  is  not  fo  red  as  that  of  the  Aini-
nean ,  from  which  colour  they  are  called  rubellian.  The  fame  are  alfo
called  dreggy  vines,  becaufe  they  bring  more  dregs  than  other  vines  do.
Neverthelefs  they  make  up  this  difadvantage  by  the  multitude  of  clufters,
which  they  produce  even  upon  a  frame,  but  better  upon  a  tree.  They
fuffer  valiantly  both  winds  and  fhowers,  and  quickly  caft  their  bloffoms,
and  therefore  ripen  the  fooner,  bearing  with  every  inconveniency,  except
heat ;  for,  becaufe  they  have  clufters  with  fmall  berries,  and  hard  (kins,
they  fhrink  with  violent  heats.  They  rejoice  mofl;  in  fat  land,  becaufe
it  is  able  to  give  fruitfulnefs  to  vines  that  are  naturally  fma.ll  and  (len¬
der.

(13)  Nomentaute  vites ,  vines  growing  about  Nomentum ,  formerly  a  city  belonging  to
the  Sabines ,  now  a  village  about  ten  miles  from  Rome,  upon  the  river  Anieti  or  Teverone.
Pliny,  who  ranks  them  next  to  the  Aminean,  fays,  that  their  firm  hard  wood  was  red ;  for
which  reafon  they  were  by  fome  called  rubella,  red  vines..

Eugeni  an


it 2  L.  J,  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

Eugcnian  vines  (14)  bear,  without  any  inconveniencv,  with  2  cold
and  dewy  foil  and  climate,  feeing  they  grow  on  mount  Albano  ;  for  they
fcarcely  anfwer  their  name  after  they  have  changed  their  place.  This  is
alfo  the  cafe  with  Allobrogian  vines  (if),  the  delicioufnefs  of  whofe
wine  is  changed  with  the  country.

The  three  Apian  (16)  vines  are  commended  alfo  for  their  great  and
excellent  qualities.  They  are  all  fertile,  and  fit  enough  for  both  the
frame  and  the  trees  j  yet  the  one  with  bare  leaves  is  more  generous;
for  the  two  that  are  woolly,  tho’  they  are  alike  in  the  make  and  fhape
of  their  branches,  leaves,  and  (boots,  yet  they  are  unlike  and  different
in  the  quality  of  the  liquor  that  flows  from  them  ;  for  one  of  them  is
flower  in  receiving  the  carioufnefs  of  antiquity.  In  a  fat  foil  they  are
exceeding  fertile,  and  in  an  indifferent  alfo,  they  are  fruitful,  and  their
fruit  is  early  ripe  ;  therefore  they  are  very  proper  for  cold  places.  They
yield  a  fweet  wine  j  but  they  are  not  good  for  the  head,  nerves,  and
veins.  Unlefs  they  be  gathered  in  due  time,  they  become  a  prey  to  the
rains,  winds,  and  bees;  and,  becaufe  the  bees  prey  upon  them,  and  plun¬
der  them,  they  are  furnamed  from  them.

And  thefe  are  the  vines,  which  are  moft  celebrated  for  their  precious
tafte.  Neverthelefs  vines  of  the  fecond  note  may  be  commended  alfo
for  their  increafe  and  fruitfulnefs,  fuch  as  the  Bituric  (17)  and  the
Bafilic  (18),  the  leffer  of  which  the  Spaniards  call  cocolubis.  Both  of

them

(14)  Eugenia  vites,  a  Greek  name,  importing  the  noblenefs  and  generoufnefs  of  the
vine  they  produce.  When  tranfplanted,  they  lofe  their  quality,  as  is  the  cafe  of  many  others,
which  leave  their  excellency  behind  them,  and  never  carry  >t  elfewhere.  Thefe  vines  fiou-
rifhed  on  mount  Albano ,  near  the  antient  city  Alba  in  Latium,  whither  they  were  brought
from  the  Taorminan  hills  in  Sicily.,  as  Pliny  fays.

(15)  Vites  Allobrogica.  The  Allobrogians  were  a  people  that  inhabited  the  country  that
lies  between  the  lake  of  Geneva ,  the  Rhone ,  and  the  Alps,  comprehending  all  Savoy  on  this
fide  mount  Senis ,  and  a  part  of  Daupbiny.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  throve  in  cold  places,  ripened
with  the  frofts,  and  were  of  a  black  colour.

(16)  Apian#  vites ,  id  called  from  the  liking  that  bees  have  to  them  ;  for  they  feed  gree¬
dily  upon  them.  Our  author  mentions  three  forts  of  them,  of  one  of  which,  he  fays,  tar-
dius  recipit  cariem  anti  quit  atis ;  which,  I  believe,  is  applicable  not  to  the  vine,  but  to  the
wine.  By  this  carioufnefs  of  antiquity,  the  antients  meant  a  certain  agreeablenefs  of  tafte  and
flavour,  which  certain  wines  contracted  bv  long-keeping,  Pliny,  lib.  xv.  c.  2.  Blanda  inve-
terati  viui  caries  ad  fervandum  invitat.  Thefe  wines  were  at  firft  fweet,  but  contracted
an  agreeable  roughnefs  by  long-keeping.  Hardouin  fays,  that  this  grape  is  now  called  uva
rr.nfcatella,  becaufe  the  flies  attack  it  with  their  darts.

(17)  Vitis  Biturica ,  fo  called  from  the  country  where  they  grow  about  Bourges  in  Berry
in  France.  Father  Hardouin  thinks,  that  they  comprehend  alfo  fuch  as  grow  about  Bourdeaux,
and  in  Gafcony.

(18)  Bafdica  vitis  feems  to  have  its  name  from  its  ftately  appearance.

Our  author  makes  two  forts  of  this  vine,  the  leffer  and  the  greater;  and  Pliny  alfo  fays,
that,  in  Spain,  there  are  two  forts  of  them  ;  that  it  is  thin  of  clufters,  and  endures  the  vio¬
lent  heats,  and  the  fouth  winds;  that  one  fort  bears  an  oblong  berry,  the  other  a  round

1  one;


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  n3

them  are  next  to  the  very  heft  of  all  ;  for  their  wine  bears  with  long-
keeping,  and,  by  years,  it  arrives  to  fome  degree  of  goodnefs.  Now,
tnefe  indeed  excel  all  the  other  vines  I  have  before  mentioned  in  fruit-
fulnefs,  as  alio  in  their  patience,  becaufe  they  endure  mod:  courageoufly
both  whirlwinds  and  fhowers,  and  flow  very  well ;  nor  do  they  fail  in
lean  ground.  They  bear  the  colds  better  than  they  do  rains,  and  rains
better  than  droughts ;  neverthelefs  they  are  not  grieved  and  made  fad
with  the  heats.

Next  to  thefe  the  Vifula  and  the  lefler  Argitis  (19)  thrive  and  re¬
joice  in  land  that  is  but  indifferent}  for,  in  that  which  is  fat,  by  their
too  great  ftrength,  they  become  luxuriant;  and,  in  that  which  is  lean,
they  come  up  fmall,  and  empty  of  fruit.  They  are  more  friendly  to  the
frame,  than  to  trees.  But  the  Argitis  is  even  fertile  upon  high  trees,
and  over-abounds  in  a  vafl:  quantity  of  firm  wood,  and  cluflers  of  grapes.
The  Vifula  is  fitter  for  the  lowed:  dories  of  the  frame.  It  puts  forth
but  fliort  hard  wood,  and  a  broad  leaf,  by  the  largenefs  of  which  it  de¬
fends  its  fruits  exceeding  well  againft  the  hail ;  which  neverthelefs  fall
to  the  ground,  if  they  be  not  gathered  as  foon  as  they  are  ripe.  They
rot  alfo  with  too  much  moidure  before  they  fall  off.

There  are  alfo  the  He  ho  Ice  (20),  which  fome  call  various  or  parti¬
coloured.  They  are  neither  purple-coloured,  nor  black,  and  are  fo  called
(if  I  am  not  midaken)  from  their  carnation-colour.  That  which  is  more
of  the  black  is  preferable  for  the  abundance  of  its  wine  ;  but  the  other,
that  is  nearer  to  a  purple  colour,  is  more  precious  and  valuable  for  its
<tafle.  The  colour  of  the  berries  does  not  appear  equal  to  the  eye  neither
in  the  one  nor  the  other.  Both  of  them  yield  more  or  lefs  white  mud:
every  other  year  by  turns.  They  clothe  a  tree  bed:,  but  a  frame  alfo

one;  and  that  they  gather  them  the  laft  of  all;  the  fvveeter  the  wine  of  the  lefifer  is,  the
better  it  is;  that  the  fweer,  with  age,  becomes  rough,  and  the  rough  becomes  fweet;  that
they  produce  fruit  in  great  abundance;  but  are  hurtful  to  the  head,  tho’  of  great  benefit  to
the  biadder.  According  to  fome  authors,  there  is  great  plenty  of  this  fort  of  vine  in  the
kingdom  of  Granada  in  Spain.

(19)  Vifula  and  the  lefler  Argitis.  Pliny  gives  us  no  reafon  why  vitis  Vifula  is  fo  called ;
only  fays,  that  it  is  very  humourfome  and  whimfical  in  chufing  its  foil,  can  neither  bear
continued  heat  nor  cold;  that  it  rots  in  a  fat,  and'  does  not  grow  at  all  in  a  lean  ground  ;
but  delicately  feeks  a  middle  temperature,  and  therefore  is  very  familiar  to  the  Sabinian.
hills.  He  fays,  that  its  grape  is.  indecora  z-fu,  ugly  to  the  eye,  but  pleafant  to  the  tafte.  lx
would  be  ft  retching  Etymology  too  far  to  fay,  it  is  fo  called,  becaufe  it  is  ugly  to  look  up¬
on.  Argitis  feems  to  be  fo  called  from  its  white  colour,  and  probably  or'  its  wood  and
leaves.  I  do  not  find  it  under  this  name  in  Pliny.  Hardouin  thinks-,  that  the  lefier  Vifula  is
by  Columella  called  Argitis ;  bur,  according  to  the  account  he  gives  of  it,  he  feems  to
mean  a  different  vine,  making  two  foris  of  the  Argitis,  and  not  calling  the  Idler  Vifula
Argitis ,  as  he  thinks.  Pliny  feems  to  make  two  forts  of  the  Vifula,  the  idler  and  the
'greater,  as  Columella  does  of  the  Argitis.

(20)  Hehele,  fo  called  from  their  remarkable  colour,  as  P liny  alfo  fays,  which  is  a
middle  between  purple  and  black,  which,  in  Latin,  is  'called  kvl-jus.  They  are  alio  called
■variance,  their  berries  feeming  to  change  their  colour.

tolerably


1 1 4  ,  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

tolerably  well.  They  are  aifo  fruitful  in  an  indifferent  foil,  as  the  Pre-
dan  vines  (21),  the  leffer  and  the  greater;  but  the  fe  are  more  com¬
mended  for  the  generoufnefs  of  their  wine ;  and  they  fhoot  out  into
much  wood,,  and  abound  in  boughs  and  leaves,  and  they  foon  ripen.

The  Albuelis  (22)  (as  Celfus  fays)  is  more  profitable  upon  a  hill,  than
upon  a  plain ;  upon  a  tree,  than  upon  a  frame  ;  upon  the  top  of  a  tree,
than  upon  the  lower  part  of  it.  It  both  bears  plenty  of  grapes,  and
abounds  in  firm  wood.  For  thofe  fmallGrc^  vines,  as  the Mareotic (23),

' Thafian  (24),  Pfythian  (25),  Sopbortian  (26),  tho’  they  have  a  tolerable
good  taffe,  yet,  in  our  climates,  they  yield  but  little  wine,  from  the  thin-
nefs  of  their  clufters,  and  the  fmallnefs  of  their  berries.  Neverthelefs
the  black  Inerticula  (the  fluggifh  vine),  which  fome  Greeks  call  Arne-
thyfion  (27),  may  be  placed,  as  it  were,  in  the  fecond  tribe,  becaufe  it
both  yields  a  good  wine,  and  is  harmlefs ;  from  which  alfo  it  took  its
name,  becaufe  it  is  reckoned  dull,  and  not  to  have  fpirit  enough  to  affedt
the  nerves,  tho’  it  is  not  dull  and  flat  to  the  taffe.

Celfus  makes  a  third  clafs  of  thofe  that  are  commended  for  their  fruit¬
ful  nefs  only;  as  the  three  Hclvenadan  vines  (28),  of  which  the  two

larger

(2t)  Pretia:  or  precis  vites.  Columella  kerns' to  infinuate,  that  they  are  fo  called  from  the
precioufnefs  of  their  wines.  Pliny  fays,  that  their  grapes  are  very  proper  to  be  put  up  and
kept  in  jars;  and  that  they  have  abundance  of  hard  wood,  and  a  leaf  like  parfley,  /.  e.
their  leaves  are  cut  very  deep.  Hardouin  fays,  they  are  like  thofe  the  Burgundians  call  rai-
fms  fendans.  Servius  fays,  they  were  called,  precis,  quaji  pracoquce,  becaufe  they  ripen
before  others.

(22)  albuelis  vitis.  Neither  Pliny ,  Columella ,  nor  Ijldorus ,  tell  us  why  it  is  Co  called;
whether  from  its  colour  or  place,  I  know  not.

(2^)  Mareotides-)  Mareotis ,  a  country  in  Egypt.  There  is  a  lake  there  of  the  fame  name.
Thefe  vines  have  their  name  from  the  place  where  they  firft  grew,  and  probably  were
thence  tranfported  into  Greece ,  and  from  Greece  into  Italy ;  which  may  be  the  reafon  why
Columella  ranks  them  among  the  fmall  Greek  vines.

(24)  Thafi<£  vites.  Thefe  vines  have  their  name  from  the  iGand  Thafus ,  by  fome  called
Thaffos  and  Thajfus.  It  lies  in  the  JEgean  fea,  not  far  from  Lemnos ,  of  old,  as  Pliny  fays,
Called  Aeria  or  JEthria ,  now  Tkafo.

(25)  Pjythia  vites.  I  don’t  find  in  Pliny ,  or  any  other  author  I  have  looked  into,  why
they  were  Co  called.  Virgil  mentions  them,  and  fays,  that  their  grapes  were  bell  for  drying
in  the  fun,  and  afterwards  making  wine  of  them  ;  which,  I  fuppofe,  he  means,  when  he
(ays,  pa/fb  pfythia  utilior.  Servius ,  and  other  commentators  I  have  feen,  skip  over  it.  Jen-
fon's  edition  of  Columella  has  Pythia;  vites.

(26)  Sophortice  vites.  It  is  doubtful  whether  it  ought  to  be  thus  read,  or  Sophrotire.  Pliny
fays  nothing  of  them  under  this  name.  There  is  a  fmall  iGand  in  the  JEgean  fea  they  call
Sophonia ;  fo  that  perhaps  it  ought  to  be  Sophon'ue  vites .

(27)  Inerticula  nigra.  The  Greeks  call  it  dpX' 3‘vrot',  from  the  little  effedi  that  its  wine
has  to  make  one  drunk.  Pliny  fays,  that  there  is  more  reafon  to  call  it  the  fober  vine ;  and
that  its  wine  is  commendable  when  it  is  very  old.

(28)  Helvenaca  vites.  Pliny  calls  them  likewife  Helvicas  vites ,  ager  Helviorum ,  the
Vivarais  in  France.  The  town  is  called  Vtviers  upon  the  Rhone.  Pliny  fpeaks  of  Alba  Hel-
via ;  and  Cafa->  ’n  his  feventh  book,  fays,  that  mount  Gehenna  feparates  the  Arvernif rom
the  Helvii ;  fo  that  the  Helvenian  vines  were  fuch  as  were  originally  of  the  country  of  the

Helviii.


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  115

larger  are,  by  no  means,  efteemed  equal  to  the  leffer,  either  in  the  good-
nefs  or  abundance  of  their  mutt.  One  of  thefe,  which  the  inhabitants
of  Gaul  call  Emarcum,  yields  an  indifferent  wine  ;  the  other,  which
they  call  the  long,  as  alfo  the  greedy  vine,  yields  a  fordid  paltry  wine,
and  not  in  fo  great  quantity,  as  from  the  number  of  its  clufters  of  grapes
our  firft  hopes  promife  us.  The  lead:  and  bed:  of  the  three  is  mod:  eafily
known  by  its  leaf ;  for,  of  all  other  vines  whatfoever,  it  bears  the
rounded: ;  and  is  commendable,  becaufe  it  patiently  endures  droughts
far  beyond  any  others,  and  bears  colds,  provided  neverthelefs  they  be
without  rains  j  and  becaufe, Jn  fome  places  alfo,  its  wine  is  poured  into
vedels,  in  order  to  be  kept  for  years,  till  it  be  very  old  ;  and  efpecially
becaufe  it  alone,  by  its  fruitfulnefs,  recommends  and  gives  reputation
alfo  to  the  leaned:  ground.

But  the  Spiotiian  vine  (29)  is  very  bountiful  and  liberal  of  its  mud:,
and  is  rather  fertile  in  the  largenefs,  than  in  the  number  of  its  cluflers,
as  the  olive-like  vine  (30),  the  Murgentine  (3  1),  which  is  the  fame  with
the  Pompeian ,  the  Numijian  ;  as  the  Venuculan  (32),  which  is  the  fame
with  the  Scirpula  and  Sticula ;  the  black  Fregellan  (33),  the  Meri-
£an  (34),  the  Rhcetian  (3  5),  and  the  greater  Arcelacan ,  which,  of  all

Hehii.  Our  author  makes  three  forts  of  them,  one  of  which  the  inhabitants  called  emar-
cium,  perhaps  from  its  being  apt  to  fade  and  wither.  It  is  diftioguifhed  by  the  rouudnds
of  its  leaf.

(29)  Spionia  vitis.  Pliny  fays,  fome  call  it  fpinea,  probably  from  its  having  leaves,  or
fome  other  things,  prickly,  or  like  to  thorns,  about  it.  He  fays,  that  it  thrives  beft  in  a
moift,  rainy,  and  foggy  country  ;  and  for  this  reafon  it  is  peculiar  to  the  country  of  Ravenna.

(30)  Oleaginea  vitis.  Pliny  fays,  that  this  vine  is  fo  called,  from  the  refemblance  it  bears
to  the  olive.

(51)  Murgentina  vitis ,  from  the  city  M argentum  in  Sicily.  Ager  Murgentinvs  is  men¬
tioned  by  Tully,  in  his  oration  againft  Verres.  Columella  feems  to  make  it  the  fame  with
the  vitis  Pompeiana ,  fo  called  from  Pompeii ,  a  town  in  Campania ,  at  the  mouth  of  the
river  Sarno.  It  was  once  a  municipal  town,  but  now  ruinous.

(3 a)  Vitis  venucula.  Sometimes  it  is  called  venuncula  ;  others  read  it  venicula.  It  is  to
called,  becaufe  its  berries  are  diftinguiflied  and  marked  with  veins  and  lines,  and  chandled,
as  it  were.  It  is  alfo  called  flicula ,  a  from  the  regular  manner  wherewith  it  is  thus

marked.  It  is  by  Pliny  alfo  called  Jcripula,  Jcirtula1  and  fcribula ,  all  which  cannot  be  true
readings  j  but  the  name  feems  to  import,  that  the  grains  or  berries  have  fomething,  as  it
were,  written  upon  them.

(33)  pTegellanie  vites,  from  Fregella,  once  a  famous  town  and  coionv  in  Latium.  Sonic
authors  fay,  it  is  now  called  Monte  Corvo.

(34)  Vitis  meric  a.  In  Pliny  it  is  with  a  diphthongue.  In  fome  manufcriprs  it  is  metica.
Why  fo  called,  is  ve'y  uncertain.  Pliny  fays,  it  is  exceeding  firm  sgninf.t  rain,  and  all  kind
of  weather.  It  bears  black  grapes,  and  its  wine  grows  red,  when  it  is  long  kept.

(35)  Rh<etica  vitis ,  from  the  country  where  they  originally  grew.  Rhcetia  comprehends
the  country  of  the  Grifons ,  Tyrol,  &c.  They  cultivated  them  much  in  the  V lifeline,  and
upon  the  river  Addua.  Pliny  fays,  that  there  was  a  vine  of  this.name,  which  grew  below
*he  Alps,  upon  the  fea-coafts,  towards  Genoa,  which  produced  very  bad  wine;  that  the
grapes  had  very  thin  skins,  and  but  one  kernel ;  that  they  were  very  different  from  the
•other  Rhcetian  vines  firil- mentioned.

0^2  t  be


1 1 6  L.  J.M,  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

the  vines  we  have  known,  abounds  mod  in  grapes.  By  many  it  is  falfly
thought  to  be  the  Argitis .  For  thofe  others,  which  have  lately
coine  to  my  knowledge,  I  mean  the  arbour  or  gallery-vine,  the  Irti-
ola  ( 36),  and  Fenola  vines,  I  would  not,  for  certain,  affirm  in  what
clafs  they  ought  to  be  reckoned  •  becaufe,  tho’  I  know,  that  they  are
fruitful  enough,  neverthelefs  1  have  not  been  able,  as  yet,  to  judge  of
the  goodnefs  of  the  wine  they  produce.

We  find  alio,  that  there  is  one  early-ripe  vine,  which,  before  this-
time,  we  knew  nothing  of,  and  which,  in  the  Greek  language,  we  find,
is  ufually  called  Dracontion  (3 7),  which,  for  its  fruitfulnefs  and  delici-
©ufnefs,  may  be  compared  to  the  Arcelacan ,  Biturican ,  and  Bajilican
vines ,  and,  for  the  generoufnefs  of  its  wine,  to  the  Amine  an.  More¬
over,  there  are  many  other  forts  of  vines,  of  which  we  can  neither  tell
the  number,  nor  the  names,  with  any  certainty  to  be  depended  upon  j
for,  as  the  poet  fays  (38),

*  It  ferves  no  end  their  numbers  to  defcribe.

4  The  man,  that’s  fond  of  this  laborious  talk,

V  With  equal  eale,  may  learn  how  many  fands,

*  By  weflern  winds,  are  tofs’d  in  Libyan  plains/

Fecanfe  all  countries  whatfoever,  and  almofl  all  particular  parts  of  coun¬
tries,  have  their  own  peculiar  kinds  of  vines,  which  they  name  accord¬
ing  to  their  own  cuftoin  and  language.  Some  flocks  alfo  have  changed
their  names  with  their  places;  fome  of  them  alfo,  by  changing  their
places,  have  departed  from  their  peculiar  quality;  fo  that  they  cannot
be  known  and  difcerned  from  one  another.  Therefore,  in  this  Italy  itfelf,
not  to  fay  in  the  fo  widely  extended  globe  of  the  whole  earth,  they
vary  their  names.  Neighbouring  nations  alfo  difagree  in  their  names,
and  give  them  different  appellations;  wherefore  it  is  the  part  of  a  pru¬
dent  mailer  not  to  take  up  the  ftudent’s  time  with  hawking  after  a  no¬
menclature  of  this  kind,  which  they  can  never  make  themfelves  mafters
of,  but,  upon  the  whole,  to  lay  down  that  as  a  precept,  which  both
Celfus  fays,  and  before  him  Marcus  Cato ,  that  no  fort  of  vine  ought  to
be  planted,  but  that  which  is  approved  by  fame ;  and  none  to  be  kept

(3 6)  Irtiola  vitis.  Vliny  Lys,  that  this  vine  abounds  in  Umbria ,  and  about  Ancona;  but
why  it  is  fo  called,  no  reafon  is  given  by  any  of  the  ruftic  writers,  which  is  the  cafe  with
refpedt  to  feveral  others  here  mentioned ;  and  it  fignihes  nothing  to  indulge  one’s  tancy,
when  it  gives  no  light  to  the  thing.

(37)  Dracontion,  probably  fo  called  from  the  twilling  and  winding  of  its  branches)  and
the  colour  and  appearance  of  its  bark,  refembling  a  dragon.

(38)  Virg.  Georg.  lib.  ii.  103.


Chap.  IIL  Of  HUSBANDRY.  117

for  a  long  time,  unlefs  it  be  approved  by  experiment ;  and  Julius
'Greecinus  fays,  that,  where  many  advantages  of  the  country  fhall  in¬
vite  us  to  plant  a  noble  vine,  we  will  inquire  and  look  out  for  one  that
is  generous.  Where  there  is  nothing  at  all,  or  not  much,  that  may  en¬
courage  and  allure  us,  we  will  rather  purfue  and  fearch  after  fruitful-
nefs,  which,  in  the  fame  proportion,  is  not  fo  much  excelled  by  the
price,  as  it  does  excel  by  its  abundance.  But,  concerning  this  opinion,
tho’  I  myfelf,  a  little  before,  was  of  the  fame  mind,  nevertheless  what
my  fecret  judgment  is,  upon  clofer  confideration,  I  fhall  prefently  tell
in  its  proper  place ;  for  I  am  refolved  to  teach  after  what  manner  vine¬
yards  may  be  conilituted  equally  fruitful,  and  productive  alfo  at  the
lame  time  of  a  precious  liquor.


C  H  A  P.  III.

’That  there  is  nothing  of  greater  Advantage,  and  more  expedient'
'  for  Hnfhandmen ,  than  to  cultivate  Vineyards .

NOW,  before  I  come  to  difcourfe  of  the  planting  of  vines,  I  don’t
think  it  improper  to  lay,  as  a  certain  foundation  for  our  future
difputation,  that  we  have  before  throughly  weighed,  and  wifely  confi-
dered,  whether  the  culture  of  vineyards  will  enrich  a  matter  of  a  family;
for  it  is  almoft  to  no  purpofe  to  give  directions  about  planting  them,
while  that  which  is  the  chief  point,  and  firft  to  be  confidered,  is  not
yet  granted ;  viz.  whether  or  not  we  ought  to  have  any  vines  at  all  ?
And  this  very  many  people  are  in  fo  great  doubt  of,  that  many  avoid
it,  and  are  much  afraid  of  employing  their  land  in  this  manner,  and
think,  that  an  eflate  in  meadows,  pafturage,  or  copfes,  is  more  to  be
defired  and  wifhed  for ;  for,  as  to  lands  planted  with  trees  for  fupport-
ing  vines,  there  has  been  alfo  no  fmall  difpute  among  authors,  SaJenia
difliking  and  rejecting  this  kind  of  land,  and  T re?nellins  greatly  approv¬
ing  of  the  fame.  But  we  fhall  take  this  opinion  alfo  into  confideration
in  its  own  place.

In  the  mean  time  they,  who  ftudy  agriculture,  muft  be  taught  this
in  the  firft  place,  that  the  income  of  vineyards  is  the  moft  plentiful  and
abundant  of  any;  and,  that  I  may  take  no  notice  of  the  happy  condition
of  lands  in  antient  times,  of  which  both  Marcus  Cato  long  ago,  and  after¬
wards


1 1 8  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

wards  Terentius  Varro  (i),  have  given  us  an  account,  that  each  jugerum
of  vineyards  did  yield  fix  hundred  urns  of  wine  (2) ;  and  Varro  pofi-
tiyely  affirms  this  in  his  firtt  book  of  Hufbandry  3  and  that  this  did  not
ufe  to  happen  in  one  region  only,  but  was  the  ufual  quantity,  that  both
the  Faventine  land,  and  alfo  that  part  of  Gallia  CiJ'alpina ,  now  called
Picenum,  did  produce  :  yes,  marry,  thefe  things  were  for  thole  times !
But,  at  this  prefent  time,  the  Nomentan  region  (3)  is  very  much  cele¬
brated  by  fame,  and  is  in  very  great  reputation,  and  efpecially  that  part
of  it,  which  Seneca ,  a  perfon  of  an  excellent  genius  and  learning,  does
pofiefs,  upon  whofe  eftate  it  is  certainly  known,  that  each  jugerum  of
his  vineyards  have,  for  the  moll  part,  yielded  eight  cullei  (4) :  for  the
things  that  happened  in  our  Ceretanian  vineyards  (y)  fieem  fomewhat
ftrange  and  extraordinary,  and  have  fomething  of  a  prodigy,  that,  in
your  land,  a  certain  vine  ffiould  exceed  the  number  of  two  thoufand
clutters  of  grapes  j  and,  with  me,  eighty  ttocks,  planted  not  two  years
before,  fhould  produce  fo  much  as  feven  cullei  and  that  the  beft  vine¬
yards  Ihould  yield  an  hundred  ampborce  lb)  per  jugerum,  when  mea-

(1)  Varro  fays,  lib.  i.  c.  2.  that  Cato ,  in  his  libro  originum ,  gave  this  account  of  the  vaft
.produce  of  vineyards ■,  and  that  this  did  not  happen  in  one  place  only,  but  was  common
in  the  Faventine  land,  or  the  twritory  of  F aventia,  a  town  upon  the  JEmilian  road,  about
20  miles  from  Ravenna,  now  called  Faenza  ;  as  alfo  in  Picenum ,  a  part  of  Gallia  Cifalpina ,
now  called  Marca  <£ Ancona,  and  fubjedl  to  the  Pope.

(2)  Six  hundred  urns,  which  make  300  amphora,  or  15  cullei ,  amount  in  EngliJJo  wine-
meafure  to  2150  gallons,  or  35  hoofheads  eight  gallons  and  a  fmall  fraction  more.  The

gall,  pints,  fol.  inc.  dec.

•urn  contained  3  4^  5,33.  Our  author  feems  fcarcely  to  believe  this  vaft  produce  j  and
fays,  that  it  was  only  for  thofe  antient  times,  and  fo  pafles  to  what  he  knew  himfelf.

(3)  Moment  ana  regio,  the  territory  of  Momentum ,  a  town  in  Sabina ,  upon  the  river
Anien  or  Tiverone ,  about  20  miles  fiom  Rome.  It  is  now  a  village.  Here  Seneca,  rhe  fa¬
mous  moral  philosopher,  W'ell  known  by  his  writings  ftill  extant,  had  an  eftate.  He  was
tutor  to  the  emperor  Nero,  who,  for  fome  time  after  his  acceffion  to  the  empire,  was  very
fond  of  him,  and  beftowed  great  riches  upon  him ;  but,  as  tyrants  cannot  long  endure
good  men,  he  added  this  wickednefs  to  his  other  monftrous  crimes,  that  he  put  him  to
death.  Ic  is  probable  our  author  wrote  this  book,  before  Seneca  was  entrufted  with  the
education  of  Nero.

(4)  Cutleus  or  atleus  was  the  greateft  meafure  of  liquid  things  among  the  Romans.  It  con-

gall.  pints.  M.inc.dtx.

rained  20  amphora ,  or  40  urns,  and,  in  Engliflo  wine-meafure,  contained  143  3  11,095

fo  that  8  cullei  make  1147  gallons,  or  18  hogfheads  and  13  gallons,  and  7  cullei  contained
1003  gallons  pints,  or  15  hogfheads  58  gallons  and  pints,  or  there. bout.

(5)  Ceretanian  vineyards.  The  Ceret&ni  were  a  people  of  HiJ'pania  Citerior.  The  wine
that  grew  in  their  country  was  in  great  requeft,  and  mentioned  by  fcveral  authors.  Colu¬
mella  muft  here  mean  either  the  vineyards  which  he  bad  in  that  country,  or  probably
vineyards  which  he  had  planted  in  Italy  with  vines  brought  from  thence,  to  which  he  gave
the  name  of  the  country  from  whence  he  brought  the  vines.

>6)  Amphora ,  from  the  Greek  word  cquj/? spsuf,  or,  by  a  fyncope,  dfn^ofivc.  Tt  is  fo
called  from  its  two  handles  for  carriage.  It  contained  2  urns  or  8  congii,  in  Ewgliflo  wine-

gall.  pint,  fol  inc.  dec.

meafure  7  1  10.66  fo  that  ico  amphora  contained  yv;  gallons,  or  11  hogftieads  24

gallons,  or  thereabouts.

dows,


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  119

dows,  padurages,  and  woods,  feem  to  do  mighty  well  for,  and  to  turn
to  very  good  account  to,  the  owner,  if  they  bring  him  in  a  hundred fef“
tertii  (7)  on  each  jugerum  ;  for  we  can  fcarcely  remember  when  corns,
in  the  greated  part  of  Italy  indeed,  have  anfwered  with  a  fourth  part
of  this.

Why  then  is  this  thing  in  fo  great  difreputation  ?  Grcecinus  favs,
that  it  is  not  from  its  own  fault,  but  from  mens ;  fird,  becaufe  nobody
gives  diligence  in  examining  and  trying  the  plants  ;  and  therefore  mod
part  of  men  plant  vineyards  of  the  word  kind.  Then  they  don’t  cherilli
and  nourifh  them,  after  they  are  planted,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  they
may  grow  drong,  and  fhoot  up,  before  they  are  parched  and  burnt  up
with  the  heat ;  but  if  peradventure  they  grow  up,  they  cultivate  them
negligently.  Now,  from  the  very  beginning,  they  think,  that  it  is  of  no
importance  what  place  they  plant ;  yea,  they  even  pick  out  the  very
word  part  of  their  lands,  as  if  that  ground,  which  can  bear  no  other
thing,  were  only  the  fitted:  for  this  dem ;  but  they  don’t  even  fo  much
as  throughly  underdand  the  way  of  fetting  them,  nor  put  it  in  practice
when  they  do  underdand  it:  alfo  they  feldom  prepare,  and  lay  up  be¬
forehand,  a  portion  or  dowry,  that  is,  the  necefiary  furniture  and  im¬
plements  for  vineyards ;  whereas  this  thing,  if  neglected,  exhauds  many
days  labour,  and  always  empties  the  mader  of  the  family’s  coffers.

Mod:  people  indeed  are  mighty  intent  upon  having  as  much  fruit  for
the  prefent  as  is  pofiiblc,  and  make  no  provifion  for  the  time  to  come  5
but,  as  if  they  lived  altogether  from  hand  to  mouth,  and  only  had  regard
for  the  prefent  time,  they  fo  force  the  vines,  and  load  them  with  fa
many  fruit-bearing  branches,  that  they  have  no  regard  for  the  intered  of
their  poderity.  After  having  been  guilty  of  all,  or  at  lead:  of  mod,  of
thefe  things,  they  will  rather  do  any  thing  than  eonfefs  their  own  fault;
and  they  complain,  that  the  vineyards  don’t  anfwer  their  expectation,
which  they  themfelves  have  dedroyed,  either  through  covetoufnefs,
ignorance,  or  negligence.  But  if  there  be  any,  who,  when  they  have
added  diligence  to  knowledge,  cannot  indeed  (as  I  reckon)  receive  forty
or  thirty,  yet,  as  Grcecinus  fays,  who  makes  the  lowed  computation,

(7)  The  "Roman  fejfertius  was  a  filver  coin,  equal  in  value  to  27  ajfes,  and  is  fo  called
from  femifiertlus ,  i.  e.  2  ajfes  and  the  half  of  the  third.  It  was  equal  to  the  fourth  part  of
the  denarius,  as  is  clear  from  the  beft  claflical  authors;  Which  I  need  not  mention.  The
denarius ,  which  was  the  chief  filver-coin  among  the  Romans,  weighed  about  62  grains,
and  is,  by  the  beft  judges-,  computed  to  be  worth  j  d.  £  Englijb ,  allowing  8  Englifb  grains
to  the  filver-peny ;  fo  that,  according  to  this  valuation,  100  fejiertii  amount  to  1 6  s.  1  d  %  .
which  was  the  common  or  ordinary  yearly  rent  of  &  jugerum  of  pafture,  meadow,  or  copf?
land.

if


120  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

if  they  (hall  receive  twenty  amphora  (8)  of  each  jugerum,  they  will
eafily,  in  the  increafe  of  their  eftate,  furpafs  thofe  who  hug,  and  are
mighty  fond  of  their  hay  and  their  pot-herbs:  nor  is  he  miftaken  in  this,
becaufe,  as  a  good  reafoner,  and  a  diligent  accountant,  after  he  had
made  his  calculation,  he  faw,  that  this  kind  of  Hulbandry  conduced
mod  to  improve  his  eftate.

For  let  us  fuppole  the  largeft  expences  that  vineyards  may  require,
neverthelefs  feven  jugcra  (9)  don’t  require  above  the  labour  of  one  Vine-
dreffer j  which  the  vulgar  indeed  value  at  a  very  low  price,  and  think,
that  even  a  malefador,  expofed  to  public  fale,  may  be  purchafed  for  that
purpofej  but  I,  who  difient  from  the  opinion  of  very  many  people,
think,  that  an  excellent  Vine-drelTer,  purchafed  at  an  high  price,  is  one
of  the  fird:  and  principal  things,  and  of  the  greateft  advantage  ;  and,
fuppofe  he  be  bought  for  fix,  or  rather  for  eight  thoufand J'ejlertii  (10),
when  I  reckon  that  the  ground  itfelf,  confiding  of  feven  jugera,  is
purchafed  for  jud  fo  many  thoufand  j'ejlertii,  viz.  feven  thoufand  (11)5
and  that  the  vineyards,  with  their  dowry,  that  is,  with  dakes  or  props,
and  willows,  are  planted  for  two  thoufand  fejiertii per  jugerum  (12)5

then

gall,  pints  roods,  fq.  poles  fq.  feet  dec.

(8)  20  amphora  per  jugerum  amount  to  143  3^  upon  2  i3  250.05  Englijb  mea-  .
fure.

C9)  7  jugera  make  4I-  acres.

(10)  8000  feflertii,  the  price  of  an  excellent  Vine-drefTer,  make  in  Engliflj  money
64  /.  1 1  s.  8  d.

(ix)  The  price  of  the  land  proper  for  vineyards  is  computed  by  our  author  at  1000
fefterti/  per  jugerum,  which,  for  the  whole  feven  jugera,  amounted  to  7000  feftertii ,  which,
according  to  the  value  of  thefeftertius  before-mentioned,  make  in  Englifb  money  5 6  l  10  s.

2!  d.  fo  ihat  a  jugerum  of  fuch  kind  of  land  being  worth  8  /.  1  s.  5^  d.  an  Englijb  acre,
according  to  this  rate,  was  worth  about  13  /.  1  r.  id.  the  'Roman  jugerum  being  to  the
Engliflj  acre  near  as  10  to  16.  as  has  been  often  faid.  Here  i'  may  be  proper  to  obferve,
that  tolidem  millibus ,  in  the  text,  do  not  refer  to  the  8000  fejiertii  paid  for  the  Vine-drelTer,
but  to  the  laft-mentioned  number,  Jeptem  jugerum  ;  and  fignify  the  fame  thing,  as  if  the
author  had  faid,  that  he  counred  the  land  at  1000  feflertii  per  jugerum  ■,  fo  that,  there  being
7  jugera  h^re  mentioned,  his  meaning  by  totidem  miltibus  is,  that  he  computed  the  land
at  7000  fejiertii.  This  is  manifeft  by  adding  the  feveral  funis  together,  which,  the  text
lays,  amount  to  29,000  feflertii ;  whereas,  if  thefe  two  words  referred  to  the  8000  feflertii
paid  for  the  Vine-drelTer,  they  would,  with  the  14,000  feflertii  ex  pended  upon  planting  the
7  jugera,  amount  to  30,000  feflertii.  The  not  adverting  to  this  has  been  the  occafion  of  a
rm flake  made  by  a  very  worthy  and  learned  gentleman,  in  his  differ  cations  on  antient  coins,
weights,  meafures,  &c.  p.  155.  chap.  viii.  Of  the  price  of  lands  among  the  Romans  j  where,
from  this  place  of  Columella ,  he  makes  a  wrong  calculation  of  the  vakte  of  a  jugerum  of
land  at  that  cime  among  the  Romans,  and  of  an  E?;gH(lj  acre  of  land  after  the  lame  rate.
This  miflake  any  perfon  would  eafily  fall  into,  who  did  not  carefully  attend  to  what  fol¬
lows  after  thefe  two  words,  and  omit  to  add  the  different  fums  there  mentioned  together.

(12)  2ooo  feflertii,  i.  e.  1 61.  2  s.  11  d.  computed  to  be  the  expence  of  planting  one
jugerum  of  vineyard,  which  amount  to  14,000  feflertii  for  the  whole  7  jugera  ;  add  to  this
fum  the  price  of  the  Vine-drefTer,  viz.  8000  feftertii,  and  the  price  of  the  7  jugera  of
land,  viz.  7000  feflertii,  the  whole  amounts  to  29,00 v feftertii  principal  money  laid  o«c  for
4  pur-


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  121

then  the  price  of  all  thefe,  added  together,  amounts  to  twenty-nine
thoufand  :  add  to  this  fum  the  intereft  at  fix  per  cent,  per  an -

num  for  two  years,  when  the  vineyards,  being,  as  it  were,  in  their  in¬
fancy,  bear  no  fruit,  which  amounts  to  three  thoufand  four  hundred
and  eighty  fefiertii \  the  whole  principal  and  intereft  amount  to  thirty-
two  thoufand  four  hundred  and  eighty  fejiertii ;  which  fum  if  a  Huf-
bandman  would  make  his  vineyards,  as  it  were,  debtors  for,  in  the
fame  manner  as  an  ufurer  does  with  his  debtors,  fo  as  the  owner  may
have  the  forefaid  intereft  of  fix  per  cent,  per  annum ,  he  ought  to  receive
yearly  one  thoufand  nine  hundred  and  fifty  fejiertii  (13).  By  which
computation  neverthelefs  the  yearly  income  of  the  feven  jugera ,  even
according  to  the  opinion  of  Grcecinus ,  exceeds,  or  is  much  better  than,
the  intereft  of  thirty-two  thoufand  four  hundred  and  eighty  fefiertii  j
for,  fuppofe  the  vineyards  were  of  the  very  worft  fort,  yet,  if  they  be
cultivated,  each  jugerum  will  certainly  produce  a  culleus  of  wine  (14);
and  fuppofe  the  forty  urns  may  be  fold  for  three  hundred  fefiertii,
which  is  the  loweft  price  wine  can  be  fuppofed  to  be  fold  at,  neverthe¬
lefs  the  feven  cullei  make  up  the  fum  of  two  thoufand  and  one  hundred
Jefiertii  ( 1  y).  Moreover,  this  fum  exceeds  the  intereft  of  fix  per  cent .
and  this  calculation,  which  we  have  made,  comprehends  Grcecinufi s
computation.  But  we  are  of  opinion,  that  thofe  vineyards  ought  to  be
extirpated,  which  yield  lefs  than  three  cullei  of  wine  the  jugerum  (16) ;
and  yet  we  have  made  our  computation,  fo  as  if  there  were  no  quick-
fets  to  be  taken  up  out  of  the  paftinated  ground,  when  that  very  article

purchafing  and  planting  7  jugera  of  vineyard.  This,  in  E?iglifi}  money,  comes  to  234  /.
2*.  3 2  4

The  intereft  of  29,000  fefiertii  for  two  years,  at  fix  per  ce?it.  is  3480  fefiertii,  which,
added  to  the  principal,  make  32,480  fefiertii ,  or,  in  Englifb  money,  about  262/.  3  r.  6 d.
which  is  the  whole  charge  of  purchafing  and  planting  the  7  jugera  of  land,  and  the  two
years  intereft  before  it  is  fuppofed  to  anfwer.

(13)  The  intereft  of  32,480  fefiertii  at  6 per  cent,  is  1948^  fefiertii ,•  but  the  text,  in  the
copies  I  have  feen,  has  1950.  Probably  the  author  was  willing  to  exprefs  an  even  lum,
without  a  fraction,  or  elfe  there  is  an  error  in  the  copies.  This  intereft  amounts,  in  Englifb
money,  to  about  15  /.  14  r.  10  d.

(14)  Singula  jugera,  &c.  The  author  fays,  that  vineyards  of  the  worft  kind,  if  culti¬
vated,  would  produce  per  jugerum  a  culleus  of  wine,  i.  e.  about  f  of  an  Englifb  acre  would

gall,  pints,  fol.  inc,  dec.

produce  143  3  11.09s,  or  2  bogfheads  17  gallons  and  3  pints,  with  the  fraddion,  which,
the  author  fays,  when  fold  at  the  lowed  price,  will  bring  300  fefiertii,  or  2/.  8  s.  5^  d.
At  this  rate  a  gallon  comes  to  about  4^.  but  this  is  fuppofed  to  be  both  of  the  worft
vineyards,  and  of  the  world  wine,  and  confequently  the  loweft  price  that  wine  could  then
be  fuppofed  to  be  fold  at.

(15)  The  7  cullei  make  up  the  fum  of  2100  fefiertii,  or  16  l.  1  <js.  o^d.

(16)  Three  cullei  of  wine  the  jugerum,  i.  e.  430  gallons  and  2  pints.  Our  au'hor  fays,
fuch  vineyards,  which  did  not  yield  this  quantity,  ought  to  be  extirpated,  ;.  e.  which  did
not  yield  10  hogfheads  and  20  gallons  an  EttglilJ]  acre.

R


alone


122


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

alone  may,  by  the  price  it  bears,  free  the  ground  of  all  expences  what-
foever,  provided  it  be  not  provincial,  but  Italian  land.

Nor  ought  this  to  remain  a  doubt  with  any  perfon,  after  he  has
looked  into,  and  confidered,  both  our  computation  and  that  of  Julius
Atticus  ;  for  we,  at  this  prefent  time,  fet  twenty  thoufand  fhoots  or
cuttings  amongft  the  rows  of  vines  upon  one  jugerum  of  vineyard ;  he
plants  four  thoufand  lefs.  But,  fuppofe  his  way  to  be  the  bell:,  yet  there
is  no  place,  even  tho’  it  be  ever  fo  bad,  which  will  not  yield  a  greater
profit  than  the  charges  it  has  had  bellowed  upon  it.  But  let  us  fuppofe,
that,  by  the  careleffhefs  of  the  Vine-drefier,  fix  thoufand  of  the  plants
fhould  perilh,  yet  the  remaining  ten  thoufand  any  farmer  of  vine¬
yards  (17)  will  willingly  purchafe  for  three  thoufand  JeJlertii  ( 1 8),  and
gain  by  them  :  which  fum  exceeds,  by  its  third  part,  the  two  thoufand
fejlertii ,  which,  we  faid  before,  was  the  charge  that  the  planting  of  a
jugerum  of  vineyard  amounts  to,  altho’  we,  by  our  care,  have  now
brought  things  to  fuch  an  improvement,  that  the  Rulfics  purchafe  of
me  quickfets  very  chearfully  at  fix  hundred  JeJlertii  a  thoufand.  But
another  perfon  will  fcarcely  be  able  to  come  this  length  ;  for  nobody
will  eafily  believe,  that  there  is  fo  great  abundance  of  wine  upon  our
fmall  parcel  of  land,  as  you,  Silvinus ,  very  well  know.  I  have  there¬
fore  fixed  the  quickfets  at  an  ordinary  and  common  price,  that  they
who,  through  ignorance,  are  afraid  to  meddle  with  this  part  of  Hus¬
bandry,  may  be  brought  over  to  my  opinion,  without  any  one  perfon
difienting  from  it;  therefore  either  the  advantage  we  fhall  make  of  our
paftinated  ground,  or  the  hope  we  have  of  future  vintages,  ought  to  en¬
courage  us  to  plant  vineyards :  and,  feeing  we  have  proved,  that  it
is  confiftent  with  reafon  to  plant  them,  we  fhall  now  give  precepts  and
directions  for  inftituting  them,  and  putting  them  into  due  order  (20).

CHAP.

(17)  Redemptor.  This  word  is  applied  by  authors  to  many  different  things.  Fefus  fays,
that  antiencly  redemptores  were  fuch  as  undertook  to  do  or  furnifh  any  thing  for  the  pub¬
lic,  and,  after  performance,  were  to  receive  a  fum  of  money.  Afterwards  the  word  came
to  be  ufed  for  any  perfon,  who  hired  the  ufe  of  any  thing,  and  was  obliged  to  pav  a  cer¬
tain  fum  of  money,  or  fome  other  confederation,  for  the  fame.  In  this  place  ic  muft  fignify
a  farmer  of  a  vineyard,  who  commonly  paid  the  half  of  the  fruit  thereof.

(18)  10,000  vine-plants  fold  for  3000  fejlertii ,  in  Englif}  money  24/.  4 s.  4}  d.

(19)  600  fejlertii ,  the  price  of  1000  quickfets  or  vine-plants,  i.  e.  4/.  16  s.  10% d.  Eng¬
lif}  money.

(20)  At  the  end  of  this  chapter  it  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  Columella  makes
ufe  of  numu s,  nttmus  fefiertius,  and  fejlertius ,  as  equivalent  terms  denoting  the  fame  fum.

It  may  likcwife  be  of  fome  ufe  to  obferve  his  manner  of  expreffing  the  rate  of  the
intereft  of  money  at  the  time  he  wrote;  and,  in  order  to  underftand  his  expreffion,  we
muft  know,  that,  among  the  Romans,  the  higheft  legal  intereft  was  one  per  cent,  a  month,
or  twelve  per  cent,  a  year;  and  that  it  was  the  cuftom  to  pay  this  one  per  cent,  on  the
calends  of  every  month,  from  which  came  the  phrafe  trifes  calends.  And,  as  this  one  per

tens.


Chap.  IV.


123


Of  HUSBANDRY.

CHAP.  IV.

What  ’Things  he  ought  to  obferve ,  who  plants  Vineyards.

WHOEVER  has  the  making  of  vineyards  much  at  heart,  let
him  beware,  above  all  things,  of  chufing  to  entruft  them  rather
to  the  care  of  another  perfon,  than  to  his  own  j  nor  let  him  purchafe
any  quickfets,  but  let  him  plant  at  home  fhoots  and  cuttings  of  the
moft  approved  kind,  and  make  a  nurfery  of  vines,  out  of  which  he
may  cloath  his  lands  with  vineyards ;  for  fuch  ftrange  plants,  as  are
tranfplanted  from  a  different  quarter,  are  not  fo  familiar  to  our  foil,  as
thofe  that  are  natives  of  it,  and  brought  up  in  it ;  therefore,  as  if  they
were  of  a  foreign  extraction,  they  greatly  dread  a  change  of  climate  and
fituation  :  but  neither  can  they  give  us  any  certain  evidence,  that  they
are  of  the  generous  kind,  feeing  it  is  uncertain,  whether  he  who  planted
them  did  fet  that  fort  of  fhoot,  which  had  been  carefully  examined,
tried  and  approved  :  wherefore  the  fpace  of  two  years  muft  not  at  all
be  thought  long,  within  which  time  plants  come  fuch  a  length,  as  duly
to  anfwer  our  expectation,  feeing,  as  I  faid,  it  will  always  turn  to  good
account  to  have  fet  a  Item  of  an  excellent  kind.

Then,  after  thefe  things,  let  him  remember  to  be  very  exaCl  in  chuf¬
ing  a  place  for  the  vineyards,  which  when  he  is  come  to  a  final  refolu-
tion  about,  let  him  know,  that  he  muft  give  the  greateft  diligence  to
paftinate  it  as  it  ought  to  be  ;  which  when  he  has  throughly  done,  let

tent.  was  the  hundredth  part  of  the  principal,  it  was  therefore  called  eentefima  ufura j  and
tho’  it  was  not  contrary  to  law  to  take  fo  great  intereft,  yet  it  was,  for  the  moft  part,  ac¬
counted  opprefjion  :  fo  that  it  was  common  enough  to  take  fix  or  eight  per  cent,  more  or
lefs,  according  as  the  borrower  had  credit,  and  could  find  a  reafonable  lender.  However,
the  ufura  eentefima  was  the  integer,  which  authors  had  in  view,  when  they  mentioned  the
quantum  of  intereft.  It  is  alfo  further  neceffary  to  know,  that,  in  order  to  exprefs  any  inte¬
ger  they  made  ufe  of  the  name  of  a  brafs  coin  they  called  as ,  which  confifted  of  twelve
ounces  or  divifions,  each  of  which  had  a  different  appellation  ,•  fo,  to  exprefs  any  part  of
the  integer,  they  gave  it  the  name  of  that  part  or  divifion  of  the  as ,  which  correfponded
to  it.  Thus,  to  exprefs  the  whole  eentefima  ufura ,  they  faid  affes  ufura ;  and  to  exprefs  a
part,  they  faid  triens  ufura ,  quadrans  ufura,  &c.  through  ail  the  divifions  of  it.  Thus
Columella ,  in  this  chapter,  to  exprefs  %  per  cent,  a  month,  and  fix  per  cent,  a  year,  calls  it
femijfs  ufurarum.  And,  that  this  is  his  meaning,  we  may  eafily  fee,  by  calculating  the
feveral  fums  mentioned  in  the  text fo,  according  to  this  analogy,  he  would  have  faid
triens  ufurarum  to  exprefs  four  per  cent,  a  year,  and  7  per  cent,  a  month ;  quadrans  ufura¬
rum,  three  per  cent,  per  annum ,  and  i per  cent,  a  month ;  dodrans  ufurarum ,  nine  per  cent.
a  year,  and  £  per  cent,  a  month  j  and  fo  of  all  the  reft  of  the  divifions  of  the  as,  corre-
fponding  to  the  eentefima  ufura.  Some  authors  indeed  have  expreffed  this  matter  differ¬
ently  j  but  they  muft  mean  the  fame  thing.

R  2


him,


124  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

him,  with  no  lefs  care,  plant  the  vine  ;  and,  after  he  has  planted  it,  let
him  apply  himfelf  to  the  culture  of  it  with  the  greateft  fedulity  ;  for
this  is  the  chief  and  principal  point,  as  it  were,  in  all  expences,  becaufe
it  confills  in  this,  whether  a  mafler  of  a  family  has  adted  better  or  worfe
in  committing  his  money  to  the  earth,  than  if  he  fhould  finger  it  in
idlenefs,  and  not  employ  it  at  all.  Therefore  I  fhall  now  profecute,  in
their  order,  each  of  thefe  things  I  have  propofed.


CHAP.  V.

In  what  fort  of  Ground,  and  after  what  manner,  a  Nurfery  of

Vines  mufi  be  ?nade.

A  Nurfery  of  vines  muft  not  be  made  either  in  hungry  ground,  nor
in  that  which  is  oufy  5  neverthelefs  the  land  muft  be  juicy,  and
rather  middling  than  fat,  altho’  all  authors  almoft  have  deftinated  the
richeft  and  fruitfulleft  place  for  this  purpofe,  which  I  don’t  at  all  think
is  for  the  Hufbandman’s  advantage  j  for  the  ftems  being  fet  in  a  ftrong
ground,  tho’  they  quickly  ftrike  root,  and  (hoot  up,  yet,  when  they  are
become  quickfets,  if  they  be  tranfplanted  into  a  worfe  foil,  they  fhrink
and  wither,  and  cannot  grow  up  to  their  full  ftature  ;  for  it  is  the  part
of  a  prudent  Hufbandman  to  tranfplant  rather  from  a  worfe  to  a  better,
than  from  a  better  to  a  worfe  foil :  for  which  reafon,  in  the  choice  of
a  place,  mediocrity  is  moft  approved,  becaufe  it  is  placed  in  the  confines
of,  or  in  the  middle  between,  good  and  bad ;  for  whether  aecellity  fhall
afterwards  require  us  to  commit  thefe  plants,  when  they  are  fit  to  be
removed,  to  a  hungry  foil,  they  will  not  feel  any  great  difference  when
they  are  tranfplanted  from  indifferent  ground  to  that  which  is  poor ;
or  whether  it  be  a  richer  land,  which  is  to  be  planted  therewith,  they
will  improve  and  grow  up  much  fafter  with  plenty  and  abundance  of
nourijhment.

Moreover,  it  is  not  at  all  for  our  intereft,  or  agreeable  to  reafon,  to
make  a  nurfery  of  vines  in  a  very  thin  poor  foil,  becaufe  the  greater  part
of  the  fhoots  or  cuttings  perifhes,  and  what  remains  becomes  llowly  fit
for  tran (planting:  therefore  a  middling  and  moderately  dry  land  is  fitted:
for  a  nurfery  of  vines  j  and  it  ought  firft  to  be  broken  up  and  fubdued
with  the  double-hoe  or  trenching-fpade,  which  is  the  depth  of  the  pafti-

nation,,


Chap.  VI.  •  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  125

nation,  when  the  ground  is  turned  up  to  two  feet  and  an  half  (i).  Then,
having  left  fpaces  of  three  feet,  by  which  the  plants  may  be  cultivated,
you  muft  plant  fix  hundred  (hoots  or  cuttings  in  each  row,  confiding  of
two  hundred  and  forty  feet.  This  number  makes  up  all  together  twenty-
four  thoufand  plants  upon  the  whole  jugerum.  But  the  careful  examin¬
ation  and  choice  of  the  (hoots  or  cuttings  precedes  this  care  j  for,  as  I
have  now  often  told  you,  it  is  the  foundation,  as  it  were,  of  the  fore-
faid  affair,  to  fet  the  mod  approved  kind  of  them.


CHAP.  VI.

What  Sort  of  Shoot  or  Cutting  muft  be  chofen ,  and  from  what
Parts  of  the  Vine  it  muft  be  gathered.

BUT  the  choice  mud  be  made  with  a  twofold  regard  j  for  it  is
not  enough,  that  the  mother,  from  which  the  plants  are  fought,
be  fruitful ;  but  greater  fubtilty  of  reafon  mud  be  ufed,  that  they  may
be  taken  from  thofe  parts  of  her  body,  which  are  both  genital,  and  the
mod  fertil :  for  a  vine,  whofe  offspring  we  are  defirous  to  fet  apart  for
bearing  fruit,  ought  not  to  be  edeemed  for  this  reafon  only,  becaufe  it
produces  very  many  cluders  of  grapes  ;  for  this  may  happen  from  the
vadnefs  of  its  trunk,  and  the  great  number  of  its  fruit-bearing  bran¬
ches  ( 1 ) :  neverthelefs  I  would  not  call  that  a  fertile  vine,  where  fingle
cluders  are  feen  upon  each  fpray  or  twig,  but  if,  upon  every  young
twig  of  the  prefent  year,  a  greater  number  of  bunches  hangs  down  j  if,
from  each  eye  upon  its  very  many  firm  branches,  it  germinates  with
fruit ;  if,  ladly,  it  puts  forth  from  its  hard  part  alfo  a  twig  with  fome
cluders  upon  it ;  if  alfo  it  is  pregnant  with  the  fruit  of  the  nephews,

(1)  B ipalium,  a  tool  they  made  ufe  of  for  trenching  ground.  Pliny  calls  it  b'tdens  terms
pedes  bipalio  alto ,  which  muft  fignify,  that  the  iron  part  of  it  was  3  feet  deep.  Father
Hardouin  fays,  that  bipalium  was  the  iron  part  of  the  bidens ,  wherewith  the  earth  was  dig¬
ged.  Columella ,  I  reckon,  means  a  bipalium  of  2  feet,  or  2%-  The  firft  was  called  bipaliutn
non  altum  j  the  fecond  bipalium  altum ,  which  may  fignify  a  trenching-fpade  or  mattock  2
or  2 £  feet  deep.

(1)  Palmites  are  the  young  branches  or  fprays  of  vines,  which  fhoot  forth  from  the  vine,
like  fingers  from  the  hand ;  and,  as  has  been  already  faid,  they  are  called  palmites ,  from
their  refembling  the  human  hand.  There  are  two  forts  of  them,  one  which  grows  out  of
the  firm  hard  wood  of  the  vine,  and,  for  the  moft  part,  bears  only  leaves  the  firft  year,
and  is  called  pampinarius  j  the  other  is  that  which  fprings  out  of  a  branch  of  one  year  old,
and,  becaufe  it  prefently  brings  forth  fruit,  is  called  frufiuarius .


or


126  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  III.

or  fecondary  fhoots  (2).  This  vine,  without  doubt,  being  fruitful,  ought
to  be  dedinated  for  fhoots  to  be  gathered  from  it.

But  a  malleolus  (3)  or  mallet-Jhoot  is  a  young  vine-branch  or  tendril
growing  out  of  a  rod  of  the  former  year,  taking  its  furname  from  its
likenefs  to  the  thing  by  which  it  is.  called,  becaufe,  in  that  part  which
is  cut  off  from  the  old  branch,  it  is  prominent  on  each  fide,  and  has  the
appearance  of,  or  refembles  a  mallet.  We  are  of  opinion,  that  this  fhould
be  gathered  from  the  fruitfulleft  ftem  every  time  the  vineyards  are
pruned,  and  be  carefully  covered  over  with  earth  in  a  place  moderately
moift,  but  not  oufy,  leaving  three  or  four  eyes  ffanding  out  above¬
ground  ;  provided  neverthelefs,  that  this  be  always  a  principal  point  with
us,  to  examine  and  take  due  care,  that  the  vine,  from  which  it  is  taken,
be  not  liable  to  uncertainty,  with  refpedt  to  the  event  of  its  bloffom ;
that  its  berry  does  not  with  difficulty  grow  big  •  that  it  neither  brings
early  ripe  fruit,  nor  that  which  is  too  late  in  coming  to  maturity  ;  for
the  former  is  infefled  by  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  the  latter  by  flormy
weather.

Moreover,  we  cannot  have  any  certain  proof  of  fuch  a  kind  of  vine
by  one  vintage  j  for  even  a  vine  that  is  naturally  unfruitful  may,  for

(2)  Nepotes  are  twigs  or  (mall  fprays  growing  out  of  a  fpray  or  twig  of  the  fame  year.
I  call  them  fecondary  fhoots.  Columella ,  lib.  iv.  cap.  24.  fays,  ipfos  palmites  quos  vindem'ug
praparamus ,  claviculis  ac  nepotibus  privandos  cenjeo  ;  he  ordered  the  fruit-bearing  branches,
which  were  prepared  for  the  vintage,  to  be  bereaved  of  their  tendrils  and  nephews,  or
fecondary  fhoots,  and  quicquid  a  tenero  procefjit  ficut  repos  parcius  detondetur  ;  fo  that
n epos  fignifies  a  twig,  that  grows  out  of  a  twig  of  the  fame  year,  which,  with  refpedt  to
the  branch  of  which  it  is  the  iffue,  is,  as  it  were,  the  grandchild;  for  there  is  in  the
vine  what  our  author  calls  durum ,  i.  e.  the  firm  hard  wood,  become  fo  by  time;  and  there
is  the  tenerum ,  which  is  a  twig  or  young  branch,  which  is,  as  yet,  but  foft  and  fpongy,
and  has  not  had  time  to  harden;  fo  that,  I  think,  the  learned  father  Hardouin  miftakes
Pliny,  lib.  xvii.  cap.  21.  when  he  fays,  that  nepotes  are  virgee  quas  vitis  ciet  e  radicibus  aut
caudicis  lateribus ,  rods  which  the  vine  putteth  forth  out  of  her  roots,  and  the  fides  of  her
trunk ;  for  thefe,  I  think,  are  always  called  J lolones.

(3)  Malleolus.  Our  writers  upon  gardening,  I  fee,  retain  this  word,  as  they  do  many
other  original  words,  both  Greek  and  Latin ,  which  may  be  neceffary  perhaps  in  the  names
of  trees,  plants,  &c.  where  their  own  language  furnifhes  them  no  words;  but,  when  this  is
carried  too  far,  very  few  people  can  read  their  books  with  that  pleafure,  which  otberwife  they
would  have;  fo  that  it  is  to  bewifhed,  that  thefe  ingenious  gentlemen  would  fometimes  make
ufe  of  circumlocutions  in  exprefling  things,  that  fo  more  people  might  profit  by  their  learned
writings.  It  would  beeafy  to  draw  up  a  catalogue  of  words,  which  they  ufe,  which  frighten
Englijh  readers,  who  underftand  neither  Greek  nor  Latin.  The  ingenious  Mr.  Millar  has
indeed,  in  a  great  meafure,  remedied  this  inconveniency  in  his  moft  ufeful  dictionary,  by
an  alphabetical  catalogue  of  thofe  hard  words,  with  their  explanations,  which,  in  time,
may  make  them  as  familiar  to  the  reader,  as  other  EngliJJo  words;  and  the  learned  Dr.
Martin  has  followed  the  fame  method  in  his  firft  ledture  of  his  courfe  of  botany.

I  have  tranflared  malleolus  a  mallet-fhoot  or  cutting,  as  our  author  explains  it.  It  is  a
cutting  taken  off  the  branch,  with  a  bit  of  the  old  wood  on  each  fide  of  it,  which  makes
it  referable  a  mallet;  but  cuttings,  which  were  not  of  this  form,  and  had  nothing  of  the
old  wood  adhering  to  them,  notwithftanding  ftill  retained  the  old  name.

once,


Chap.  VII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  ray

once,  bring  forth  abundantly,  either  from  the  great  plenty  of  the  year,
or  from  fome  other  caufes  j  but,  when  a  vine  has  once  eftablifhed  its
reputation,  fo  as  to  be  depended  upon  by  the  merit,  as  it  were,  of  the
fervice  of  a  great  many  years,  there  is  no  further  doubt  to  be  made  of
its  fruitfulnefs.  Neverthelefs  fuch  an  inquiry  is  not  to  be  extended  above
the  term  of  four  years ;  for  that  time  commonly,  wherein  the  fun  re¬
turns  to  the  fame  part  of  the  Zodiac  through  the  fame  numbers  by
which  it  began  its  courfe,  difcovers  the  generous  qualities  of  all  green
things  whatsoever  j  which  periodical  courfe  of  one  thoufand  four  hun¬
dred  and  fixty-one  whole  days  they,  who  apply  themfelves  to  the  ftudy
of  celeftial  things,  call  a.Trox.a.rd.^a.tnVi  or  the  reftitution  of  things  to  their
former  ftate  (4).

CHAP.  VII,

How  you  may  know  and  dif cover  the  Fruitfulnefs  of  a  Vine .

But  i  am  perfuaded,  Publius  Silvinus ,  that  you  are  long  ago  ta¬
citly  inquiring  what  kind  this  fruitful  vine,  which  we  fo  accu¬
rately  defcribe,  may  be  of,  and  whether  or  not  one  of  thofe,  which
are  not  commonly  efteemed  the  moft  fertile,  is  not  pointed  at  5  for
very  many  people  extol  and  praife  the  Bituric ;  many  the  Spionian  j
fome  the  Bajilic  and  fome  the  Arcelacan  or  arbour-vine.  We  alfo  do
not  unjuftly  deprive  thefe  forts  of  vines  of  our  commendation ;  for  they
yield  a  vaft  quantity  of  wine :  but  we  have  refolved  to  teach  you  to
plant  fuch  vineyards,  as  may  bring  no  lefs  plenty  of  fruit,  than  thofe
forts  already  mentioned,  and  of  as  precious  a  tafte  as  that  of  the  Ami-
nean ,  or,  at  leaft,  not  far  from  that  tafte.

I  know,  that  almoft  all  Huibandmen  differ  from  us  in  their  opinion
upon  this  point,  which,  with  refpedt  to  Aminean  vines,  is  become  inve¬
terate,  and  now  has  prevailed  a  long  time,  as  if  they  laboured  under  a

(4)  “A To;caTaV«M7?  fignifies  the  reftitution  of  any  thing  into  its  former  ftate  or  form. '
Columella ,  no  doubt,  means,  by  this  word,  the  Julian  year  of  3 65  days  and  fix  hours,  four
times  repeated,  which  make  1461  days.  This  word  is  alfo  applied  to  the  annual  revolution
or  return  of  a  heavenly  body  to  the  fame  fign;  as  for  example,  from  Aries  through  the
12  figns  to  Aries  again.  It  is  alfo  made  ufe  of  to  fignity  what  they  call  the  Dionyfian
period ,  which  is,  by  multiplying  the  cycle  of  the  fun  of  28  years  with  the  cycle  of  the
moon  of  19,  which  produces  532  years  ;  which  being  finifhed,  it  was  believed,  that  the
new-moons  and  full-moons  returned  to  the  fame  day  of  the  year,  and  of  the  week;  and
this  was  called  converfio  aims  magni.  But  what  influence  the  revolution  of  four  years  can
have  upon  trees,  plants,  and  other  green  things,  our  author  does  not  explain.


natural


128  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

natural  and  innate  fteriiiiy  ;  for  which  reafon,  it  is  more  neceftary,  that
the  method,  which  we  have  recalled,  and  brought  back  from  long  dif-
ufe  and  negleCt,  and  which,  being  condemned  by  the  (lothfulnefs,  and
no  lefs  by  the  imprudence  of  Hulbandmen,  and,  as  it  were,  kept  in
obfcurity  by  the  darknefs  of  ignorance,  has  not  been  fairly  reprefented,
nor  fet  in  a  true  light,  fhould  be  fupported  and  eftablifhed  by  very  many
examples :  wherefore  it  is  not  improper  to  turn  our  thoughts  firft  to¬
wards  thofe  things,  which  feem  proper  to  correct  this  public  error.


CHAP.  VIII.

What  Quality  you  are  principally  to  have  regard  to,  in  Ground
that  you  deft  mate for  Vineyards.

THEREFORE,  Publius  Silvinus ,  if,  with  the  eyes  of  our  mind,  as
it  were,  we  would  more  intently  contemplate  Nature ,  the  former
of  all  things,  we  fhould  find,  that  fhe  has  eftablifhed  the  like  law  of
fecundity  for  every  green  thing,  as  for  men,  and  other  living  creatures;
and  that  fhe  has  not  beftowed  peculiar  gifts  and  advantages  upon  fome
nations  and  countries,  fo  as  wholly  to  deny  the  like  endowments  to
others.  To  fome  nations  fhe  has  given  the  advantage  of  propagating  a
numerous  offspring,  as  to  the  Egyptians  and  Africans ,  with  whom  it
is  a  very  common  and  ordinary  thing  almoft  every  year  to  have  two
children  at  a  birth  ;  and  of  Italian  extraction  alfo,  floe  has  been  pleafed
to  endow  with  exceeding  great  fruitfulnefs  fome  Albanian  ladies  of  the
Curiatian  family  (i),  who  were  mothers  of  three  children  at  a  birth.
She  has  graced  Germany  with  armies  of  exceeding  tall  men ;  but  has
not  wholly  deprived  other  nations  of  men  of  excellent  ftature  ;  for  both
Marcus  "Tullius  Cicero  is  a  witnefs,  that  Ncevius  Pollio  (2),  a  Roman
citizen,  was  a  foot  taller  than  the  tailed:  man  whatfoever,  and  lately
we  ourfelves  might  have  feen,  in  the  apparatus  for  the  pompous  cele¬
bration  of  the  Circenfian  games,  a  man  of  the  yewijh  nation,  who  was
taller  than  the  tailed:  German .

(1)  Alb  an  as  Curiatia  familia.  Dionyjius  HalicarnaJJeus  gives  an  account  of  two  daugh¬
ters  of  an  Alba?:ian  gentleman  being  married,  one  into  the  family  of  the  Curiatii  of  Albano ,
the  other  into  the  family  of  the  Horatii  at  Rome ;  and  that  they  both  had  three  children  at
one  birth.  The  Egyptians,  Pliny  fays,  are  alfo  thus  fruitful,  which  he  attributes  to  their
drinking  of  the  water  of  the  Nile,  which  he  call sfetifer  Nilus ;  of  which  Solinus  fays,  cap.  1.
that  it  not  only  makes  the  land  fruitful,  but  alfo  the  woman’s  womb.

(2)  Ncevius  Pollio.  Tally  wrote  a  book  de  admirandis,  which  Pliny  mentions  in  his
thir cy-firft  book  of  natural  bijlory.  Ic  is  probable  he  mentioned  this  giant  in  that  book.

I  pafs


Chap.  VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  129

I  pafs  now  to  cattle:  Mevania  (3)  is  famous  and  remarkable  for  herds
of  tall  cattle,  and  Liguria  (4)  for  fmall ;  but,  in  Mevania ,  fometimes
there  is  feen  a  low  ox,  and  in  Liguria  a  bull  of  an  eminent  flature.
India  is  reported  to  be  wonderful  for  the  vad  bulk  of  its  wild  beads ;
neverthelefs  who  will  deny,  that,  in  this  land,  there  are  bred  terrible
beads  of  equal  hugenefs  ?  dnce  we  may  obferve,  that  there  are  elephants
brought  forth  within  our  walls.

I  return  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth  of  feveral  kinds :  they  fay,  that
Myfia  (5-)  and  Libya  abound  in  large  crops  of  com  ;  nor  are  the  lands  of
Apulia  and  Campania  (6)  inferior  to  them  in  plentiful  crops ;  that  Tmo-
lus  (7)  and  Corycus  (8)  are  reckoned  famous  for  the  faffron-flower,  and
'Judaea  and  Arabia  for  their  precious  odours.  But  neither  is  our  city
deditute  of  the  forefaid  dems,  forafmuch  as  we  fee  at  one  time  caffia
putting  forth  its  leaves,  and  thriving  in  many  parts  of  the  town  ;  at
another  time  the  frankincenfe-plant,  and  the  gardens  blodoming  with
myrrh  and  faffron.  Certainly,  by  thefe  examples,  we  are  given  to
underdand,  that  Italy  is  mod  obfequious  to  the  indudry  of  mortals,  it
having  learned  to  bear  whatever  grows  in  any  other  part  almod  of  the
whole  earth,  when  Hufbandmen  have  applied  due  diligence  and  care :
for  which  reafon  we  are  in  lefs  doubt  about  that  fruit,  which,  being,  as
it  were,  originally  a  native  of  the  country,  is  natural,  familiar,  and  pe¬
culiarly  adapted  to  this  foil ;  for  there  is  no  doubt,  but  the  vines  of  the
MaJJican ,  Surrentinian ,  Albaniany  and  Ccecuban  lands  are,  for  the
noblenefs  of  their  wine,  the  chief  and  the  mod;  excellent  of  all  thofe
that  the  earth  fudains.

(})  Mevania,  now  called  Bevagna ,  a  city  in  Umbria  in  Italy.  It  was  the  country  of
Propertius  the  poet,  who  celebrates  the  tauriferi  campi  Mevania:.

(4)  Liguria  comprehended  all  that  country  now  called  La  Riviera  di  Genoa ,  which
extends  a  great  many  miles  upon  that  part  of  the  Mediterranean  fea  called  Mare  Ligufti-
curn.  It  comprehended  alfo  a  great  part  of  Gallia  Cifalpina ,  between  the  Apennines  to  the
fourh  and  eaft,  the  Cottian  Alps  to  the  weft,  and  the  river  Po  to  the  north,  comprehending
Montferrat ,  a  great  part  of  Piedmont ,  and  a  part  of  the  duchy  of  Milan.

(5)  Myfia ,  a  country  of  the  Lejfer  A  fa,  now  called  Natalia,  fubjed  to  the  Turks.

(6)  Campania,  a  moft  beautiful  and  fruitful  country  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples ,  now
called  Terra  di  Lavoro.

Apulia,  now  called  Puglia,  a  province  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples.

(7)  Tmolus,  a  mountain  in  Phrygia  in  Lefer  Afia,  upon  the  confines  of  Lydia,  famous
for  faffron,  of  which  both  Virgil  and  Ovid  make  mention.

(8)  Corycus,  a  city  of  Cilicia ,  by  fome  called  Corcur  and  Curcho j  as  alfo  a  mountain  in
that  country  famous  for  faffron.  Some  fay,  that  the  faffron  has  its  name  from  the  moun¬
tain  ;  others  from  the  city.  It  is  much  celebrated  by  Uiojcorides ,  Galen ,  Pliny ,  and  others.


s


CHAP,


13°


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.


CHAP.  IX.

How  you  may  make  Aminean  Vines  fruitful.

IN  thefe  perhaps fruitfulnefs  is  wanting;  bat  this  may  be  promoted
by  the  induftry  of  him  that  cultivates  them :  for  if,  as  I  faid  a  little
before,  Nature ,  the  moft  bountiful  parent  of  all  things,  has  enriched
every  particular  nation  and  country  with  peculiar  gifts,  yet  lb  as  not
wholly  to  deprive  others  of  the  like  endowments,  why  fhould  we  doubt,
that  fhe  has  obferved  the  forefaid  law  alfo  in  vines  ?  That  altho’  floe  has
thought  fit,  that  fome  kind  of  them  fhould  be  particularly  fruitful
above  all  others,  as  the  Bituric  and  the  Bafilic ,  yet  floe  has  not  made
the  Aminean  kind  fo  barren,  that,  of  many  thoufands  of  them,  there
fhould  not  be  found  a  very  few  fruitful  ones,  as  thefe  Albanian  fifiers
among  the  Italian  ladies.

But  as  this  is  very  likely,  fo  alfo  experience  has  taught  us,  that  it  is
true ;  forafmuch  as  in  the  Ardeatine  land(i),  which  we  ourfelves  have
had  in  our  pofieliion  for  thefe  many  years,  as  alfo  in  the  Carjeolian  (2)
and  Albanian  lands,  we  have  had  Aminean  vines  of  this  character ;  very
few  indeed,  but  fo  fertile,  that,  upon  a  frame,  each  of  them  yielded
three  urns  (3) ;  and,  in  arbours,  they  amounted  to  ten  amphora  of  wine
each  (4).  Nor  ought  this  fruitfulnefs  in  Aminean  vines  to  feem  incre¬
dible  ;  for  how  could  Terentius  Varro ,  and,  before  his  time,  Marcus
Cato ,  affirm,  that  each  jugerum  of  vineyards  yielded  to  the  antient
Hufbandmen  fix  hundred  urns  of  wine,  if  Aminean  vines  were  defi¬
cient  in  fruitfulnefs,  they  being,  for  the  moft  part,  the  only  vines,
which  the  antients  were  acquainted  with  ?  unlefs  we  think,  that  the
vines  which  they  cultivated  were  of  the  Bituric  or  Bafilic  kind,  which,
being  lately  brought  from  very  diftant  countries,  are  juft  now  come  to
our  knowledge ;  whereas,  at  this  prefent  time,  we  reckon  the  Aminean
vineyards  to  be  the  moft  antient.

(1)  Ardea ,  formerly  a  famous  town  of  Lat-um,  between  Oftia  and  Antium ,  now  intirely
ruinous.  It  was  more  antient  than  Rome,  and  the  metropolis  of  the  Rutili.

(2)  Carfeoti  and  Carfeola ,  a  colony  and  town  in  Latium ,  near  to  the  Lacus  Fuci?;us  in
the  Pope’s  dominions.  It  was  anciently  a  town  of  the  JE^ui,  now  called  Arfob.

(l)  Three  urns,  i.  e.  10  gallons  6  pints.

(4)  Ten  amphora,  i.  e.  71  gallons  3  pints.  This  feems  to  be  too  great  a  quantity;  for
it  is  not  probable,  that  a  vine’s  growing  in  the  form  of  an  arbour,  and  its  branches  ex¬
panded,  and  extended  to  a  great  length,  Oaould  make  ic  fo  much  more  fruitful  than  thac
which  grows  upon  che  jugum  or  frame ;  fo  thac  it  is  probable,  as  the  learned  Gefiierus  fays,
thac  there  is  an  error  in  che  text;  and  that  it  was,  at  firfb,  fenas  or  bbius ,  and  not  denas,  as
we  have  ic  now.  Errors,  in  numbers,  ealily  creep  into  books.


If


Chap.  IX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  131

If  any  man  therefore  would,  for  feveral  vintages,  obferve  and  mark
fuch  Aminean  vines,  as  I  told  you  I  had  in  my  pofTeflion  a  little  while
ago,  that,  from  them,  he  might  chufe  the  molt  fertil  cuttings,  he  might
raife  vineyards  equally  generous  and  abundant  in  fruit ;  for  there  is  no
manner  of  doubt,  but  it  was  the  will  and  pleafure  of  Nature  itfelf,  that
the  offspring  fhould  be  like  to  the  mother.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  fhep-
herd  alfo,  in  the  bucolics ,  fays  (5),

<  I’ve  known  the  puppy,  and  the  wanton  kid,

4  Each  like  its  dam  grow  up/

And  hence  it  is,  that  they,  who  are  fond  of  contending  for  the  mahery
in  the  facred  games,  keep,  with  great  diligence  and  care,  the  breed  of
the  fwiftefl  horfes,  and  conceive  hopes  of  future  victories  from  the  off-
fpring,  which  has  been  propagated  of  a  generous  lfud.  Let  us  alfo,  for
the  like  reafon  as  they  in  chufing  the  breed  of  the  Olympian  mares,
found  all  our  hopes  of  future  vintages  in  chufing  the  feeds  of  the  moft
fruitful  Aminean  vines.

Nor  is  there  any  reafon,  that  the  tedioufnefs  of  the  time  fhould  deter
any  perfon  ;  for,  whatever  delay  there  is,  it  is  taken  up  in  examining
and  making  a  trial  of  the  fhoot  or  cyon.  But,  when  once  the  fruitful-
nefs  of  the  vine  has  been  fufficiently  proved,  it  is  very  quickly  raifed  to
a  very  great  number  by  engraftments.  Of  this  thing,  you,  Publius  Sil-
vinus ,  can  give  evidence  for  us,  feeing  you  will  very  well  remember,
that  I  completely  finifhed  the  planting  of  two  jugera  of  vineyard  in  lefs
than  two  years  time,  by  making  engraftments  from  one  early  ripe  vine
belonging  to  you  in  your  Ceretanian  eflate.  What  number  of  vines
therefore  do  you  think  might  be  planted  within  the  like  fpace  of  time
from  the  cuttings  and  fhoots  of  two  jugera ,  when  thefe  two  jugera
themfelves  are  the  offspring  of  one  vine  ?

Wherefore,  if,  as  I  faid,  we  would  bellow  labour  and  care,  we  fhall
eafily,  by  the  forefaid  method,  form  as  fruitful  vineyards  of  the  Ami¬
nean  t  as  of  the  Bituric  and  Bajilic  kinds :  only  it  will  be  of  great  im¬
portance,  that,  in  tranfplanting  the  plants,  we  obferve  and  keep  the  like
flate  and  conflitution  of  the  climate,  and  alfo  the  quality,  fituation,
and  difpofition  of  the  place,  and  of  the  vine  itfelf ;  becaufe,  for  the
mofl  part,  a  cutting  or  cyon  degenerates,  if  either  the  fituation,  or  the
quality  of  the  land,  or  of  the  air,  be  repugnant  to  it ;  or  alfo,  if  it  be
brought  from  a  tree,  and  put  upon  a  frame.


(5)  Virg.  eel.  i.  23.

S  2


Therefore


132  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

Therefore  we  muft  tranfplant  from  cold  to  cold,  from  hot  to  the  like
ftate,  and  from  vineyards  into  vineyards.  Neverthelefsan  Aminean  hem,
when  removed  from  a  cold  hate,  can  better  bear  that  which  is  hot,  than
from  a  warm  fituation,  that  which  is  cold  ;  becaufe  every  kind  of  vine,
but  efpecially  that  before-mentioned,  is  naturally  more  delighted  with
warmth,  than  with  cold.

But  the  quality  of  the  foil  alfo  helps  very  much,  that  it  be  removed
from  that  which  is  lean  or  indifferent,  to  that  which  is  better  ;  for  that
which  has  been  accuftomed  to  a  fat  foil  can  by  no  means  endure  a  lean
ground,  unlefs  you  dung  it  often  :  and  thefe  are  the  precepts  we  have
given  you  in  general  concerning  the  care  that  is  to  be  taken  in  the  choice
of  mallet-fhoots  or  cuttings.  Now  we  come  to  give  you  particular  direc¬
tions,  that  they  may  be  choien,  not  only  from  the  fruitfulleft  vine,  but
alfo  from  that  part  of  the  vine,  which  bears  the  greateft  plenty  of  fruit.


CHAP.  X.

From  what  Part  of  the  Vine  the  Pla?its  mufi  be  chofen.

BUT  the  moft  fertil  plants  are  not,  as  antient  authors  have  taught
us,  the  extreme  part  of  it,  which  they  call  the  head  of  the  vine,
that  is,  the  utmoft,  and  the  moft  produced  or  longeft  rod  of  it;  for  in
this  alfo  Hufbandmen  are  deceived  :  but  the  caufe  of  this  error  is  the
firft  beautiful  appearance  and  number  of  the  clufters,  which,  for  the
moft  part,  is  feen  upon  the  longeft  and  moft  produced  branch;  which
thing  ought  not  to  deceive  us,  for  it  happens  not  from  the  natural,
innate  fertility  of  the  fruit-bearing  branch,  but  from  the  conveniency
and  advantage  of  the  place,  becaufe  all  the  moifture  and  nourifhment,
which  the  ground  difpenfes,  paftes  quickly  through  the  other  parts  of
the  trunk,  till  it  comes  to  the  laft  ;  for  the  whole  nourifhment  of  any
green  thing,  as  if  it  were  a  certain  foul,  is,  by  its  natural  fpirit,  drawn
to  the  top,  through  the  marrow  of  the  trunk,  as  through  a  liphon,
which  mechanics  call  a  diabetes  (i)  ;  to  which  place  when  it  is  come,  it
ftops  there,  and  is  confumed  :  and  hence  it  is,  that,  either  in  the  head

(l)  Diabetes  is  a  Greek  word,  which  comes  from  a  Greek  verb,  which  fignifies  to  pajs
through.  It  is  an  incurvated  inftrumenr,  or  crooked  glafs  tube,  for  drawing  liquor  out  oF  a
veiTel,  and  is  fo  called  from  the  liquor  pafling  quickly  through  it.  In  alluGon  to  this,  thac
difeafe  of  the  body,  wherein  whatever  one  drinks  does  fuddenly  flow  through  the  veflfels,
and  pafs  by  urine,  is  called  by  this  name ;  becaufe  the  moifture  of  the  body  does  not  ftop
any-where,  but  paftes  from  place  to  place,  juft  as  water  does  through  a  fiphon.


Chap.  X.  O/HUSBANDRY.  133

of  the  vine,  or  in  the  fhank,  next  to  the  roots,  are  found  the  firm
wood-branches,  that  fhoot  forth  the  moil;  vehemently  ;  but  thofe  fhoots,
which  are  produced  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,  are  approved
by  them  for  two  reafons,  becaufe  they  are  without  any  offspring,
or  are  empty  of  fruit,  and  alfo  becaufe  they  are  nourifhed  by  the  frefih,
pure,  and  unmixed  juice  next  to  the  earth  ;  and  thofe  others  are  rec¬
koned  fertil  and  firm,  becaufe  they  creep  forth  out  of  the  tender  part
of  the  vine,  and  whatever  nouriihment,  as  I  faid  above,  comes  to  them,
is  not  divided,  and  difperfed  to  other  parts.  The  fhoots  that  fprout  out
of  the  middle  of  the  vine  are  the  leaned:,  becaufe  the  moifture  pafles
quickly  by  them,  and  is  partly  intercepted  on  this  fide  of  them,  and
drawn  from  them  on  the  other  :  therefore  neither  the  uppermoft  or
higheft  rod,  nor  the  lowed:,  ought  to  be  reckoned  fruitful,  altho’  it
may  bring  forth  much  fruit ;  forafmuch  as  it  is  forced  to  bear  much
fruit,  by  the  exceeding  fruitfulnefs  of  the  place  it  grows  upon  :  but
that  branch  ought  to  be  reckoned  fruitful,  which,  being  fituated  in  the
middle  of  the  vine,  even  tho’  it  be  in  an  inconvenient  place,  yet  does
not  fail  to  bear,  but  fhews  its  benignity  by  a  numerous  offspring.  When
this  branch  is  tranfplanted,  it  very  rarely  degenerates,  when,  from  a
worfe  ftate  and  condition,  it  pafles  to,  and  obtains  a  better;  for  whe¬
ther  it  be  let  in  paftinated  ground,  or  grafted  upon  a  flock,  it  is  fa-
tiated  with  more  plentiful  nouriihment  than  formerly,  when  it  was  in
a  poor  and  needy  ftate.

Therefore  we  will  carefully  obferve  to  chufe  and  gather  our  plants
from  the  fore-mentioned  places,  which  Ru flics  call  the  (boulder-parts
of  the  vine,  neverthelefs  fuch  as  we  fluall  have  obferved  to  have  brought
forth  fome  fruit  before;  for,  if  they  be  intirely  deftitute  of  fruit,  we
are  of  opinion,  that  the  mod:  commendable  part  of  the  vine  will  con¬
tribute  nothing  to  the  fruitfulnefs  of  the  cutting.

Wherefore  the  opinion  of  thofe  Hufbandmen  is  exceeding  erroneous,
who  believe,  that  it  is  of  very  little  moment  and  importance  what  num¬
ber  of  clufters  a  fpray  may  have,  provided  it  be  gathered  from  a  fruitful'
vine,  and  is  not  fprung  out  of  the  hard  flock,  which  they  call  a  flock-
branch.  But  this  opinion,  which  has  its  rife  from  their  ignorance,  or
their  not  knowing  the  plants  that  ought  to  be  chofen,  does  firft  make
fuch  vineyards  as  are  but  indifferently  fruitful,  and  afterwards  alfo  fuch.
as  are  too  barren :  for  who  is  it  now,  that,  in  fo  long  a  courfe  of  years,
has  ever  given  the  Hulbandman,  when  he  was  gathering  his  cuttings,
fuch  precepts  as  I  have  mentioned  a  little  before?  yea,  who  is  it,  that
does  not  pick  out  for  this  bufinefs  the  mod:  imprudent  fervant-  he  has,
and  one  that  is  not  able  to  do  any  other  thing  ?  Therefore,  from  this

cuftonx.


134  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  III.

cudom,  fuch  as  are  the  mod  unfkilful  and  imprudent,  and  the  mod
infirm  alio,  come  to  undertake  a  bufinefs  the  mod  necedary  of  any ;
for,  as  I  faid  before,  every  fellow  that  is  the  mod  ufelefs,  and  who
cannot  endure  any  other  labour,  is  put  to  this  bufinefs.  Morever,  this
perfon  alfo,  if  he  has  any  knowledge  or  ikill  to  chufe  the  cuttings,  yet,
becaufe  of  his  infirmities,  either  didembles  or  conceals  it,  or  lays  it  afide,
and  does  not  make  ufe  of  it;  and,  that  he  may  complete  the  number,
which  the  Bailiff  has  injoined  him,  manages  nothing  with  due  care,  does
nothing  confcientiouily  :  and  there  is  only  one  thing  that  he  has  in  view,
and  propofes  to  himfelf ;  viz.  to  finifh  the  talk  that  has  been  fet  him,
when,  notwithdanding  that  he  may  both  know,  and  alfo  execute  what
he  knows,  this  one  precept  only  has  he  received  from  his  maders,  viz.
that  he  take  care  not  to  pull  off  and  difplant  the  dock-fhoot  j  but  all
the  red  he  may  throw  into  his  number  of  plants.

But  we,  having  at  fird  followed  reafon  as  our  guide,  and  now  alfo
a  long  time’s  experience,  make  choice  of  no  other  plant,  nor  look  upon
any  as  fruitful,  but  that  which  has  brought  forth  fruit  in  the  genital
part  of  the  vine ;  for  that  indeed  which  has  come  forth  in  a  thriving
condition,  and  is  grown  up,  and  become  drong,  in  a  barren  place,  with¬
out  any  fruit,  makes  a  deceitful  fhew  and  appearance  of  fruitfulnefs,
but  poffeffes  no  generative  power.  Reafon  teaches  us,  that  this  is  un¬
doubtedly  true,  if  fo  be  that,  as  in  our  bodies  every  member  has  its
peculiar  offices,  fo  all  the  parts  of  fruit-bearing  dems  have  their  proper
offices  alfo..  We  fee,  that  men  have  a  foul  breathed  into  them,  which,
like  a  Charioteer  or  aPilot,  conducts  anddirefts  their  members;  and  they
have  fenfes  implanted  in  them,  in  order  to  difcern  thofe  things,  which
are  difcernable  and  found  out  by  feeling,  by  the  fade,  by  the  nodrils,  by
the  ears,  and  by  the  eyes ;  that  the  feet  are  adapted  for  walking,  the
arms  for  embracing :  and,  that  our  difcourfe  may  not,  in  an  unufual
manner,  wander  over  all  the  various  viciditudes  and  changes  of  minidra-
tions  our  fenfes  are  employed  in,  the  ears  are  able  to  do  nothing  which
properly  belongs  to  the  eyes ;  nor  the  eyes  what  belongs  to  the  ears :
nor  indeed  is  the  power  of  procreation  bedowed  upon  the  hands  or  the
feet ;  but  the  Father  of  the  univerfe  has  covered  and  hid  in  the  belly,
that  which  it  was  his  will  and  pleafure  ffiould  be  unknown  to  men,  that
the  eternal  Former  of  all  things ,  who  is  endued  with  divine  reafon,
might,  as  it  were,  in  certain  fecret  recedes  of  the  body,  hiddenly  and  in
fecret,  mingle  thofe  facred  elements  of  fpirit  with  terredrial  principles,
and  curioudy  make  and  fafhion  this  fpecies  of  a  living  and  animated
machine.  By  this  law  he  procreated  cattle,  young  trees,  and  fprigs ;  by


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  135

this  law  he  formed  and  fafhioned  the  feveral  kinds  of  vines,  for  which
this  felf-fame  mother  and  parent  did  firft  lay  their  roots,  as  certain  foun¬
dations  upon  which  they  might  Hand,  as  it  were,  upon  feet :  then,  upon
thefe,  he  placed  the  trunk,  as  a  certain  flatureand  fize  of  body  and  ha¬
bit  :  afterwards  he  diffufed  them,  or  made  them  to  fpread  with  branches,
as  it  were  with  arms  j  and  then  he  drew  forth  their  fhoots  and  twigs,
as  it  were  hands :  and  upon  fome  of  them  he  bellowed  fruit,  and  others
he  cloathed  with  leaves  only,  to  protect  and  defend  their  offspring.  If
from  thefe  therefore,  as  I  have  already  faid,  wefhall  chufe  not  the  very
genital  members  themfelves,  which  are  pregnant  and  great  with  young,
but,  as  it  were,  their  coverings,  and  little  fhadows  for  fheltering  them,
which  are  intirely  deflitute  of  fruit,  we  fhall  certainly  labour  for  a
fhadow,  and  not  for  a  vintage.

What  is  it  therefore  that  we  would  be  at,  may  you  fay  ?  Why  is  a
young  branch  or  fhoot,  tho’  fprung,  not  out  of  the  hard,  but  out  of  the
tender  part  of  the  vine,  condemned  neverthelefs  by  us,  if  it  be  deflitute
of  offspring,  as  if  it  would  be  barren  alfo  in  time  to  come  ?  for  juft  now
our  reafoning  inferred,  that  every  part  of  the  body  had  its  peculiar  office
affigned  to  it ;  viz.  that  which  is  fujtable  and  agreeable  to  it ;  fo  that
the  power  of  fecundity  may  be  inherent  in  a  fhoot  alfo,  which  is  fprung
out  of  an  opportune  place,  tho’  in  the  mean  time  it  may  ceafe  from
producing  any  fruit.'  I  would  not  deny,  that  I  warmly  infilled  to  argue
from  this  very  thing  ;  but  this  I  chiefly  infill  upon,  and  maintain,  that
a  branch,  tho’  it  be  fprung  out  of  the  fruit-bearing-  part  of  the  vine,
has  by  no  means  the  power  of  fecundity,  if  it  has  not  itfelf  already
brought  forth  fruit.  Nor  is  this  contrary  to  that  opinion;  for  it  is  ma-
nifeft,  that  there  are  fome  men,  who  cannot  procreate,  tho’  the  number
of  all  their  members  be  complete  and  perfect ;  fo  that  it  need  not  feem
incredible,  if  a  rod,  which,  growing  in  a  genital  place,  wants  fruit,  will
alfo  produce  no  offspring  in  time  to  come.

Therefore,  that  I  may  return  to  the  ufual  way  of  fpeaking  among
Hufbandmen,  thofe  fhoots  or  twigs,  which  produce  nothing  at  all,  they
call  Eunuchs ;  which  they  would  not  do,  unlefs  they  fufpedled  them
incapable  of  producing  fruit  :  which  very  appellation  itfelf  fuggefled  a
reafon  to  me  for  not  chufing  mallet-fhoots  or  cuttings,  tho’  fprung  out
of  an  approved  or  commendable  part  of  the  vine,  if  they  had  not  pro¬
duced  any  fruit,  altho’  I  know,  that  even  thefe  are  not  intirely  affected
with  barrennefs ;  for  I  confefs,  that  flock-fhoots  alfo,  tho’  they  have
crept  forth  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,  acquire  fecundity  during
the  following  year ;  and  therefore  they  are  referved  and  fet  apart  for

fit  or  t


136  L.  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

fhort  cuts  (2),  that  they  may  bring  forth  fruit.  Eut  we  End,  that  this
kind  of  fruit  is  not  owing  fo  much  to  the  fhort  cut  itfelf,  as  to  the
bounty  of  the  mother-vine  ;  for,  becaufe  it  hicks  to  and  abides  in  its
own  hock,  which  is  naturally  fertile,  and  partaking  as  yet  of  the  ma¬
ternal  nourifhment,  in  conjunction  with  the  other  fruitful  plants,  which
the  has  brought  forth,  and  being  brought  up,  and  nourifhed,  as  it  were,
at  its  nurfe’s  breads,  it  learns,  by  little  and  little  with  them,  to  bring
forth  fruit.  But  that  plant,  which  is  forcibly  fnatched  from  its  hock
before  its  due  time,  and  while  under-age,  not  having  attained  to  that
maturity  which  nature  has  determined,  and  is  either  fet  in  the  ground,
or  ingrafted  into  a  hock  cut  for  thatpurpofe,  juft  like  puerile  age,  which
is  indeed  neither  fit  for  coition  nor  conception,  it  either  lofes  intirely  its
generative  power,  or  certainly  diminiflies  and  leflens  it.

Wherefore  I  judge  it  abfolutely  neceflary,  that,  in  chufing  of  plants,
we  take  care  to  gather,  from  the  fruitfulleft  part  of  the  vine,  thofe
fruit-bearing  flioots,  which,  by  bearing  plenty  of  fruit  already,  promife
fecundity  for  the  time  to  come  :  nor  let  us  content  ourfelves  with  Angle
cluhers,  but  let  us  approve  thofe  mod,  which,  we  fee,  have  the  mod
numerous  offspring.  Shall  we  not  commend  that  fhepherd,  who  propa¬
gates  an  offspring  from  that  mother,  which  brought  forth  twins?  and
a  goat-herd,  who  preferves  and  fets  apart  for  breeding  the  young  of  thofe
cattle,  which  are  commended  for  bringing  three  at  a  birth?  for  it  is
certainly  true,  that  the  offspring  will  almoft  conftantly  anfwer  to  the
fecundity  of  their  parents.  And  let  us  follow  this  very  method  in  vines,
fo  much  the  rather,  becaufe  we  may  find  by  experience,  that  plants  or
feeds,  tho’  carefully  tried  and  approved,  yet  fometimes,  from  a  certain
natural  malignity,  degenerate ;  and  this  the  poet  inculcates  upon  us,  as
if  we  were  deaf  to  the  truth,  by  faying,

4  (3)  I’ve  feen  fome  plants,  in  chufing  which,  much  time
4  And  labour  were  beftow’d,  which  ne’erthelefs
*  Did  foon  degenerate,  unlefs,  with  care,

4  Man’s  fkilful  hand  did  yearly  cull  the  beft  :

4  Thus  all  things  quickly,  by  a  fatal  doom,

4  Decay,  and,  backward  forc’d,  to  ruin  tend.'


(2)  Refex,  from  refecare ,  to  pare  or  cut,  is  a  young  branch  or  flioo:  fprung  out  of  the
hard  part  of  the  vine,  cut  off  very  fliort,  and  near  to  the  hard  wood,  with  one  or  two
eyes  left  upon  it,  in  order  to  fhoot  up  and  recruit  the  vine.  I  have  called  it  a  Jbort  cut ,
which  exprefles  the  thing,  tho’  not  a  term  of  art  perhaps.

(3)  Virg.georg.  lib.  i.  192.


Which


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  137

Which  muft  be  underftood  to  be  faid,  not  only  of  the  feeds  of  all  forts
of  pulfe,  but  of  every  thing  that  is  the  fubjedt  of  agriculture.

If  now  we  have  found,  by  long  obfervation,  as  certainly  we  have,
that  that  cutting  or  mallet-fhoot,  which  had  brought  forth  four  clufters,
did  fo  degenerate  when  it  was  cut  off  from  the  vine,  and  fet  in  the
earth,  that  fometimes  it  brought  one,  and  fometimes  alfo  two  clufters
lefs  than  before  :  but  how  much  do  we  think  thofe  will  come  fhort,
which,  upon  the  mother-vine,  have  brought  two,  or  oftener  one  clufler,
when  even  thofe,  which  are  the  mold  fertile,  often  dread  tranfplanta-
tion  ?  Therefore  I  willingly  confefs,  that  I  rather  demonflrate  the  rea-
fonablenefs  of  this  method,  than  pretend  that  I  am  the  inventor  of  it,
left  any  body  fhould  think,  that  our  anceftors  are  unjuftly  deprived  of
their  deferved  praife;  for  there  is  no  doubt  but  they  were  of  this  very
opinion,  altho’  we  have  no  account  of  it  in  any  other  writing,  except
thefe  verfes  of  Virgil ,  which  we  have  quoted :  and  yet  here  there  may
be  only  directions  given  relating  to  the  feeds  of  pulfe  j  for  why  did  they
rejedt  either  the  rod,  which  fprung  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,
or  the  fmall  end  or  arrow-part  (4)  cut  off  from  the  fruitful  mallet-
fhoot,  which  they  had  approved,  if  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  matter  of
no  moment  or  importance,  from  what  place  the  plants  were  gathered  ?
Now,  becaufe  they  did  not  doubt,  but  the  power  of  fecundity  was  in¬
herent  in  fome  particular  members,  as  it  were,  therefore  they  very
wifely  condemned  the  fhoot  that  fprings  out  of  the  ftock,  and  the  fmall
end,  or  arrow-part  of  a  fhoot,  as  ufelefs,  and  unfit  to  be  fet  in  the
ground.  But,  if  it  be  fo,  there  is  not  the  leaft  doubt  but  they  alfo  dis¬
approved  much  more  of  that  young  branch,  which,  tho’  fprung  out  of
a  fruit-bearing  part,  had  not  itfelf  brought  forth  any  fruit  j  for,  if  they
were  of  opinion,  that  the  arrow,  that  is  to  fay,  the  uppermoft  part  of
a  cutting  or  mallet-fhoot  ought  to  be  found  fault  with  and  rejected,
when  the  fame  was  a  part  of  a  fruit-bearing  fhoot,  does  not  reafon
itfelf  declare,  how  much  more  they  would  have  aifapproved  of  a  rod,
if  it  were  barren,  tho’  it  fprung  out  of  the  beft  part  of  the  vine  ?  unlefs
they  did  believe,  (which  is  abfurd)  that  that  which  had  been  naught
when  growing  upon  the  mother,  would  become  fruitful  when  it  was
tranfplanted,  and  cut  off  from  its  ftock,  and  deprived  of  the  maternal
nourifhment.  Perhaps  more  has  been  laid  upon  thefe  things,  than  the

(4)  Sagitta.  The  pointed,  or  fliarp  taper  end,  or  uppermoft  part  of  a  fhoot,  by  our
author,  Pliny-,  and  others,  is  called  the  Arrow  ;  the  reafon  of  which,  our  author  fays,  is
either  becaufe  it  has,  as  it  were,  mounted,  or  fprung  up,  or  ftarted  out  further  from  its
mother  or,  becaufe,  being  fmall,  and  pointed  at  the  top,  it  has  the  refemblance  of  the
foreiaid  weapon.  Vide  lib.  4.  cap.  17.


T


caufe


138  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELL  A  Book  III.

caule  of  truth  required,  yet  not  fo  much  as  the  perverfely  midaken  and
inveterate  opinion  of  Rudies  made  necedary.


CHAP.  XI.

TV t hat  Qualities  you  mufi  have  Regard  to  in  that  Ground \
which  you  dejimate  for  Vineyards.

NOW  I  return  to  what  remains  of  the  plan  I  laid  down  for  my
difcourfe.  The  bufinefs  of  paginating  the  ground  follows  the
care  of  chufing  the  cuttings,  if  neverthelefs  you  are  fird  fully  fatisfied
as  to  the  quality  of  the  foil ;  for  there  is  no  doubt,  but  this  contributes
very  much  both  to  thegoodnefs  and  thequantity  of  the  fruit.  And,  before
we  take  this  into  confideration,  we  think,  that  it  is  a  thing,  which  has
been  long  agreed  upon,  and  admits  of  no  difpute,  that  that  land,  which
has  never  been  tilled,  if  we  have  any  fuch,  ought  rather  to  be  chofen,
than  that  where  there  has  been  corn,  or  where  trees  have  been  planted;
for,  as  to  old  vineyards,  which  have  lain  long  wade  and  out  of  ufe,  it
is  agreed  by  all  authors,  that  they  are  the  word  of  any,  if  we  would
replant  them,  becaufe  both  the  lower  ground  is  embarafled  and  in-
tangled  with  roots,  which  are  wrought  into  it  like  net-work,  and  has
not  as  yet  loft  that  poifon,  and  that  carioufnefs  of  antiquity  or  old-age,
whereby  the  earth  being  blunted  and  weakened,  as  it  were  with  cer¬
tain  poifons,  grows  faint  and  benumbed.  For  which  reafon,  wood¬
land  ought  chiefly  to  be  chofen,  which,  tho’  it  be  embarafled  with
nurferies,  or  plots  of  fhrubs,  and  with  trees,  yet  is  eafily  cleared  ;  be¬
caufe  whatever  things  grow  up  naturally  of  their  own  accord,  do  not
ftrike  their  roots  exactly  downwards,  nor  yet  very  deep  in  the  earth  ;
but  they  fpread  and  extend  themfelves  upon  its  furface,  which  being
cut  with  an  ax,  and  extirpated,  the  little  that  remains  in  the  lower
ground,  may  be  digged  out  with  fpades  or  mattocks,  and  gathered
together,  and  built  up  in  piles,  in  order  to  ferment  and  rot.

If,  neverthelefs,  you  have  no  rough  untilled  land,  the  next  to  it  is
ploughed  land,  void  of  trees  :  but  if  this  alfo  be  wanting,  they  defli-
nate  for  Vineyards  land  that  has  trees  planted  very  thin  upon  it ;  or  land
where  olive-trees  have  been  planted,  which  have  never  been  matched
with  Vines.

The  lad  fliift  of  all  is,  the  repairing  and  refloring  of  an  old  worn-
out  decay’d  Vineyard  ;  for,  if  necedity  forces  us  to  do  this,  whatever

remainders


Chap. XI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  x39

remainders  of  a  Vine  there  may  be  in  it,  ought  to  be  rooted  out  in  the
firh  place  *.  then  all  the  ground  ought  to  be  dunged  with  dry  dung  ;
or,  if  this  is  not  to  be  had,  with  the  frelheh  of  another  kind  j  and  fo
to  be  turned  up,  and  all  the  roots  mod  carefully  dug  up,  and  laid  upon
the  furface,  and  burnt.  Then  the  paginated  ground  mu  ft  be  covered,
either  with  plenty  of  old  dung,  becaufe  it  does  not  breed  weeds,  or
with  earth  brought  from  the  briar-hedges  and  thickets.  But  where
the  pure  lay-lands,  which  have  never  been  tilled,  are  free  from  trees,
before  we  pahinate  the  ground,  we  mud  confider,  whether  it  be  proper
for  fhoots  and  cuttings  :  and  this  is  very  eafily  known,  by  the  hems
that  come  up  of  their  own  accord  :  nor  is  there  any  ground  fo  long
dehitute  of  numbers  of  young  fprigs,  as  not  to  produce  fome  fhoots  or
cuttings,  fuch  as  wild  pear-trees  and  plum-trees,  or  at  lead  bramble-
bufhes  j  for,  though  thefe  are  kinds  of  thorns,  never thelefs  they  are
wont  to  rife  up  flrong,  and  in  a  thriving  condition,  and  pregnant  and
full  of  fruit.  Therefore,  if  we  don’t  fee,  that  they  are  Ihrivelled  and
parched,  nor  rough  and  fcabby  ;  but  fmooth,  fleek,  and  fair,  tall  and
fruitful  •  then  we  fhall  underhand,  that  the  ground  is  naturally  proper
for  cuttings,  or  young  fhoots.

But  this,  in  general,  with  refpedt  to  that  foil  which  is  chiefly  proper
for  Vineyards  :  but,  as  I  told  you  before,  we  muh  particularly  con-
fider,  if  the  ground  is  eafy,  and  tolerably  loofe,  which  we  faid  was
commonly  called  Black  Earth  j  not  becaufe  this  is  the  only  ground  for
Vineyards,  but  becaufe  it  is  the  fitteh  of  any  other  for  that  purpofe  :
for,  what  Hufbandman,  of  tolerable  capacity,  does  not  know,  that
even  the  hardeh  fand-or  gravel-hone,  or  black  hate,  as  foon  as  they
are  broken  and  thrown  into  a  heap  upon  the  furface  of  the  ground,  will
rot,  open,  and  grow  foft  by  hormy  weather,  or  froh,  and  likewife  by
the  fummer-heats  ;  and  that,  during  the  fummer,  they  refrefh  and
cool  the  roots  of  the  Vines  exceedingly,  and  retain  their  juice  ?  Which
things  are  exceeding  proper  for  nourilhing  the  cutting,  or  young  plant :
and  that,  for  the  very  fame  reafon,  loofe  gravel,  and  land  that  is  full
of  fmall  pebbles,  and  moveable  hones,  is  approved  j  provided,  never-
thelefs,  thefe  things  be  mixed  with  fat  mould  ;  for  the  fame  are  very
much  difapproved  in  that  which  is  poor  and  hungry.

The  flint-hone  alfo  (according  to  my  opinion)  upon  which  a  mode¬
rate  quantity  of  earth  is  placed,  is  very  friendly  to  Vineyards  j  becaufe,
being  cold,  and  very  retentive  of  moihure,  it  does  not  fuffer  the  roots
to  be  thirhy,  during  the  riling  of  the  Dog-har.  Hyginus ,  indeed,  who
followed  Tremellius,  afferts,  that  the  bottoms  of  mountains,  efpeciafly
fuch  as  receive  the  earth  which  is  walked  down  from  their  tops  ;  or
even  valleys  and  lands  which  have  been  formed,  or  have  had  confider-

T  2  able


1 4°  L.  J.  M.  COLU  MELLA  Book  III.

able  additions  made  to  them,  by  the  continual  current,  or  inundations
of  rivers,  are  very  proper  for  Vineyards  3  and  I  do  not  difient  from
him.  Chalky  ground  is  reckoned  very  good  for  a  Vine  3  for  chalk
by  itfelf,  which  potters  make  ufe  of,  and  which  fome  call  Potters.
Earth ,  or  white  Clay,  is  exceeding  unfriendly  to  it  :  hungry  coarfe
land  is  no  lefs  hurtful  to  it  >  and,  as  'Julius  Atticus  fays,  whatever
parches  and  dries  up  the  cutting  or  lprig  3  but  that  foil  is  either  oufy,
or  fait,  or  bitter  alio,  or  thirfly  and  exceeding  dry.

Neverthelefs,  the  antients  approved  of  black  and  reddifh  fhining  fand,
which  is  mixed  with  moift  earth  :  for  they  faid,  that  land  which  is  full
of  black  dates,  unlefs  you  affifted  it  with  dung,  makes  the  Vines  poor
and  lean.  Ruddle  alfo,  as  the  fame  Atticus  fays,  is  very  hurtful  to
them,  and  is  very  unfavourable  to  the  roots,  which  have  difficulty  to
take  hold  of  it.  But  the  fame  nouriffies  the  Vine,  when  it  has  once
taken  hold  of  it  5  but  it  is  more  difficult  when  you  work  it,  becaufe
you  cannot  dig  it  either  when  it  is  wet,  becaufe  it  is  exceeding  gluti¬
nous  3  nor  when  it  is  exceeding  dry,  becaufe  it  is  ftiff  and  hard  beyond
all  meafure.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  fuch  things  as  Julius  Grascinus  delivered  to  us,  concernmg

Land  proper  for  Vineyards.

BUT  that  we  may  not  now  wander  over  the  feveral  forts  of  land,
which  are  infinite,  it  will  not  be  unfeafonable  to  mention,  and
put  you  in  mind  of,  that  written  Formula ,  as  it  were,  of  Julius  Grceci-
nus  3  to  which  is  annexed  the  definition  or  defeription  of  land  proper
for  Vineyards.  For  thus  faith  this  fame  Greecinus,  That  any  land
whatfoever  is  either  hot  or  cold,  moift  or  dry,  thin  and  rare,  or  denfe  3
light,  or  heavy  3  fat,  or  lean  :  but  that  a  Vine  can  neither  endure  a  hot
foil,  becaufe  it  burns  it  up  3  nor  a  very  cold  one,  becaufe  it  does  not
fufifer  the  aftonied  roots,  as  it  were,  benumbed  and  frozen  with  the  ex-
ceffive  cold,  to  move  and  extend  themfelves  3  nor  can  it  endure  that
which  is  moift,  becaufe  when  the  Vines  difclofe  and  fhew  themfelves,
they,  by  a  moderate  heat,  attract  from  the  earth  a  greater  quantity  of
moifture  than  is  proper  for  them,  which  putrefies  and  rots  the  plants
that  are  fet  in  it.  On  the  other  hand,  he fays ,  that  too  great  drinefs  deprives
the  plants  of  their  natural  nouriffiment,  and  either  kills  them  intirely,
or  makes  them  fcabby,  and  parches  and  burns  them  up  :  that  very

thick


Chap.  XII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  141

thick  and  denfe  ground  does  not  lip  up  the  rains,  that  the  wind  cannot
eafilyddow  through  it ;  and  that,  it  is  very  eafily  broken  through,  and
affords  chinks,  by  which  the  fun  penetrates  to  the  roots  of  the  dems  ;
and  that  the  fame  alfo  compreffes  and  drangles  the  plants,  which  are,  as
it  were,  draightened  and  (hut  up  within  too  narrow  bounds ;  that  that
which  is  rare  or  thin  gives  paffage  to  the  Ihowers,  beyond  all  meafure,
which  pafs  into  it  as  through  a  tunnel  j  and  that  it  is  intirely  dried  up
and  withered  with  the  fun  and  wind  :  that  heavy  earth  can  fcarcely  be
fubdued  and  brought  under  by  any  culture ;  and  that  that  which  is  light
can  fcarcely  be  kept  in  heart  by  any  :  that  the  fatted  and  riched  ground
labours  under  a  very  great  difadvantage  from  its  luxuriancy  ;  and  that
which  is.  lean  and  poor,  is  didreded  with  hunger  and  fading.

There  is  need,  fays  he,  of  great  temperament  among  fo  very  dif¬
ferent  inequalities,  which  is  alfo  very  requidte  in  our  own  bodies,  the
good  health  of  which  confids  in  a  certain  deady  regular  adjudment,
by  weight  and  meafure,  as  it  were,  of  hot  and  cold,  moid  and  dry,
thick  and  thin.  Neverthelefs,  fays  he,  this  temperament  in  the  ground
dedinated  for  Vineyards  ought  not  to  be  weighed  in  a  perfectly,  even
balance  ;  but  it  ought  to  lean  fomewhat  toward  the  one  dde,  that  fo
the  earth  may  be  rather  hotter  than  colder,  drier  than  moider,  thinner
than  thicker  j  and  if  there  be  any  other  things  like  to  thefe,  to  which
he  who  plants  Vineyards  may  turn  his  contemplations.  All  which  things
are  of  greater  advantage,  when  the  conditution  of  the  climate  alfo  con¬
curs  with  them.  And  what  quarter  of  the  heavens  Vineyards  ought  to
look  to,  is  a  very  old  difpute,  Saferna  approving  mod  of  the  ridng  of
the  fun,  next  to  that  the  fouth,  and  then  the  wed  ;  Tremellius  Scrofa
being  of  opinion,  that  a  foutherly  pofition  is  the  bed  of  any  ;  Virgil
exprefly  rejecting  the  wed  thus  :

(1)  c  Nor  let  thy  Vineyards  bend  towards  the  fun,

4  When  letting.  ’

Democritus  and  Mago  commending  the  northern  quarter  of  the  heaven,
becaufe  they  think  that  Vineyards  expofed  to  it  become  the  mod
fruitful,  which  neverthelefs  may  be  inferior  to  others  in  the  goodnefs
of  their  wine.  It  feems  bed  to  us  to  give  directions  in  general,  that,  in
cold  places,  Vineyards  be  expofed  to  the  fouth  quarter ;  and,  in  warm,
that  they  be  turned  to  the  ead  j  provided  neverthelefs,  that  they  be  not
infeded  with  the  fouth  and  ead  winds,  as  the  maritime  coads  of  Bcetica


ars.


(i)  Virg,  Georg,  lib  z.  298.


142  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

arq.  But,  if  the  countries  be  liable  to  the  forefaid  winds,  it  will  be
better  to  expofe  them  to  the  north  or  welt  winds.  For,  in  exceeding
hot  provinces,  as  in  Egypt  and  Numidia ,  it  will  be  better  to  expofe
them  directly  to  the  north.  Having  carefully  examined  and  conlidered
all  thefe  things,  we  dial l  then,  at  length,  undertake  the  bufinefs  of  pa¬
ginating  the  ground.


;  C  FI  A  P.  XIII.

After  what  manner  the  Earth  ought  to  he  paginated .

BU  T  the  method  of  doing  this  mult  be  delivered  and  defcribed
both  to  future  Hufbandmen  of  Italian  extraction,  and  alfo  to
thole  who  are  born  in  the  Provinces ;  becaufe,  in  very  diftant  and  remote
countries,  this  way  of  turning  up,  manuring,  and  fubduing  the  earth,
is  not  at  all  praCtifed  ;  but,  for  the  molt  part,  vines  are  planted,  either
in  trenches,  or  in  furrows.  Vines  are  placed  in  trenches  in  this  man¬
ner  :  they  whofe  cultom  it  is  to  fet  their  vines  in  trenches,  after  they
have  digged  out  the  earth,  and  made  a  hollow  for  almolt  three  feet  in
length,  and  two  in  depth,  as  much  as  the  breadth  of  the  iron  tool
allows,  lay  the  cuttings  flat  on  each  fide,  along  the  fides  of  the  trenches ;
and,  having  bended  them,  they  raife  them  up  at  the  oppolite  ends  of
the  trenches ;  and,  allowing  them  to  appear  with  two  eyes  above  the
ground,  they  replace  the  earth,  and  make  all  level :  this  they  continue
to  do  in  the  fame  line,  leaving  intervals  or  baulks  of  the  fame  number
of  feet,  till  they  dnidi  the  row  :  then  leaving  a  fpace,  according  as
every  one  is  accuftomed  to  cultivate  his  vineyard,  either  with  the  plough,
or  with  the  fpade  or  mattock,  they  advance  and  carry  on  another
row.  And  if  the  earth  is'  only  turned  up  by  a  digger,  the  lead;  distance
between  each  row  is  five  feet,and  feven  the  greated:  j  but  if  they  turn
it  up  with  oxen  and  the  plough,  the  lead:  diftance  is  feven  feet,  and  ten
is  large  enough.

Neverthelefs,  fome  dilpofe  and  fet  every  vine  at  the  didance  of  ten
feet,  in  the  form  of  a  Quincmix  (i),  that  fo  they  may  till  the  ground
with  tranfverfe  and  adverle  furrows,  in  the  manner  of  lay  land,  or  fal¬
low


( i)  In  Quincuncem.  Trees  were  faid  to  be  planted  in  form  of  the  Quincunx,  when  they
were  fo  placed)  as  to  reprefent  the  figure  ufed  among  the  Romans  for  the  number  five,  viz.
V.  This  difpofi:ion  of  trees,  in  a  triangular  manner,  was  in  great  efteem  among  the  Ro-

rnaiis.


Chap. XIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  143

low  ground.  This  kind  of  vineyard  is  not  for  the  advantage  of  the
Hufbandman,  unlefs  where,  in  very  rich  ground,  the  vine  rites  up  to  a
great  height,  and  is  of  a  large  growth.  But  they  who  dread  the  expences
of  paginating  the  ground,  and  yet  ftudy  in  fome  meafure  to  imitate
Pagination,  and  make  trenches,  omitting  equal  fpaces  by  turns,  draw
ftraight  furrows,  of  the  breadth  of  fix  feet,  and  dig  them,  and  make
trenches  three  feet  deep,  and  fo  place  the  vine  or  the  cutting  in  due  or¬
der,  by  the  fides  of  the  trenches.

Some,  with  more  covetoufnefs,  make  a  furrow  two  feet  and  nine
digits  deep,  and  five  feet  broad  ;  then  they  leave  thrice  as  much  ground
unmoved,  and  fo  dig  the  following  furrow  j  which  when  they  have
done  throughout  the  whole  place  defigned  for  the  vineyards,  in  the
fides  of  the  furrows  they  eredt  quickfets,  or  young  vine-branches,  cut
off  from  the  vine,  as  frefh  as  poflibly  they  can,  planting  at  the  fame  time,
among  the  regular  plants,  that  compofe  the  row,  very  many  cuttings,
which,  after  they  fhall  have  taken  root,  and  are  grown  ftrong,  they
may  propagate  in  tranfverfe  trenches  in  the  crude  ground,  which  they
before  paffed  over  without  moving  it,  and  fo  regularly  form  their  vine¬
yards  into  rows  at  equal  diftances  from  one  another.  But  thefe  different
ways  of  planting  vineyards  mull  either  be  admitted  or  rejected,  accord¬
ing  to  the  nature  and  goodnefs  of  every  country.

Now  I  propofe  to  defcribe  and  teach  you  the  method  of  Paftinating
or  Trenching  the  land.  And  firft  of  all,  out  of  every  place  we  fhall
have  deflinated  for  vineyards,  whether  it  be  planted  with  trees  for  fup-
porting  the  vines,  or  be  woodland,  every  fhrub  and  tree  muff:  be  rooted
up,  and  taken  out  of  the  way,  that  they  may  be  no  hindrance  after-

1 nans,  and  much  recommended  by  their  ruftic  writers.  It  is  well  enough  reprefented  by
the  policion  of  the  cinque  upon  a  die,  and  are  placed  in  the  following  manner :

******

*****

******

*****

*******

*****

******

As  there  is  frequent  mention,  in  this  and  the  following  chapters,  of  the  Homan  foot,  it
may  be  neceffary  to  tell  the  reader,  that  it  is  computed  by  Dr.  Arbuthnot  to  amount  only

Inch.  Dec.  '

to  1 1,604.  j  or,  which  is  the  fame  thing,  the  Homan  foor,  compared  with  the  Englijb  foot
by  Mr.  Greaves ,  is  reckoned  to  contain  967  of  fuch  parts  as  the  Englijb  foot  contains
1000  ;  which  is  to  be  underftood  of  that  on  the  monument  of  CoJJutius  in  Home.,  which,
for  very  good  reafons,  is,  by  thefe  learned  gentlemen,  reckoned  to  be  the  true,  antienr,  Ho¬
man  foot.

wards

I


141-  L.  j.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III,

wards  to  the  digger,  and  that  the  ground  that  is  already  paginated  may
not  be  prefled  down  by  the  weights  that  lie  upon  it,  and  be  trodden
down  by  the  going  in  of  thofe  who  carry  out  the  trunks  and  branches  of
the  trees.  Nor  is  it,  indeed,  of  fmall  importance,  that  the  paftinated
ground  be  kept  very  loofe  and  fufpended,  and,  if  it  can  be  done,  pre-
i'crved  from  the  print  of  a  foot  upon  it;  that  fo  the  ground,  being  equally
moved,  may  gently  yield,  and  give  way,  to  the  roots  of  the  young  plant,
whatever  part  they  fhall  creep  and  extend  themfelves  to  ;  and  that  it
may  not  by  its  hardnefs  reverberate,  and  oppofe  their  growth,  but  re¬
ceive  them,  as  it  were,  into  its  tender  and  nurling  bofom,  and  give
admittance  to  the  celeftial  fhowers,  and  difpenfe  them  for  nourifhing
the  plants,  and  confpire  with  all  its  parts  to  educate  the  new  offspring.

Achampain  even  place  muff  be  digged  two  feet  and  a  half  deep,  and
a  riling  ground  three  ;  but  a  hill  fomewhat  fteeper  mull  be  turned  up
at  leaft  four  feet  ;  becaufe  when  the  ground  is  drawn  down  from  an
higher  part  to  a  lower,  there  is  fcarcely  fuch  a  quantity  of  earth  thrown
up  to  be  of  fuch  a  depth  as  is  neceflary  in  Paftination,  unlefs  you  raife
the  bank  much  higher  than  you  would  do  upon  a  plain.  Moreover,  I
am  not  pleafed  with  planting  a  vine  in  low  valleys  lefs  than  two  feet
deep  ;  for  it  is  better  not  to  plant  it,  than  to  fufpend  it  upon  the  fur-
face  of  the  ground  ;  except,  neverthelefs,  when  a  fpring,  which  forms
a  marfh,  comes  in  your  way  (as  in  the  land  about  Ravenna),  and  hin¬
ders  you  from  digging  deeper  than  a  foot  and  a  half.

But  you  muft  at  firft  begin  the  forefaid  work,  not,  as  moll  part  of
Hufbandmen  do,  at  this  prefent  time,  by  deepening  the  furrow  by  little
and  little,  and  fo  by  a  fecond  and  third  gradation,  to  come  at  length  to
the  depth  you  defigned  the  paftinated  ground  fhould  be  of ;  but  at  the
very  firft,  having  placed  your  line  equally,  you  muft  carry  on  a  conti¬
nued  trench,  without  any  break  or  interruption,  with  its  fides  exactly
perpendicular,  and  place  the  earth  you  have  moved,  in  due  order  be¬
hind  your  back,  and  carry  it  down  fo  far,  till  it  exactly  anfwer  to  the
meafure  of  the  depth  given  :  then  the  line  muft:  be  equally  moved
throughout  the  whole  fpace  of  the  gradation  :  and  you  muft  fo  order
matters,  that  it  be  made  of  the  fame  breadth  at  the  bottom,  as  it  was
begun  at  the  top.

But  there  is  need  of  a  fkilful  and  vigilant  overfeer  of  the  work,  who
may  command  the  bank  to  be  raifed,  and  the  furrow  to  be  emptied,
and  the  whole  fpace  of  crude  ground,  that  is  not  yet  moved,  to  be
thrown  up,  and  joined  with  that  which  is  already  thrown  out  of  the
trench,  as  I  directed  in  the  preceding  book,  when  I  defcribed  the  way
of  tilling  the  ground,  by  giving  this  caution,  that  no  baulks  fhould  be

omitted,


Chap, XIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


*45


omitted,  or  left  ariy-where,  nor  any  hard  part  of  the  ground  covered  or
hid  with  the  uppermoft  clods  thrown  upon  it.

Bat,  in  order  to  exatft  the  doing  of  this  work  as  it  ought  to  be  done,
our  anceftors  devifed  a  certain  machine,  as  it  were ;  they  contrived  and
formed  a  rule  or  fquare,  or  ftrait  piece  of  wood,  from  the  middle  of
which  a  fmall  rod  jutted  out,  commenfurate  to  that  depth  to  which
it  was  neceflary  the  furrow  fhould  be  depreffed,  reaching  from  the  bot¬
tom  to  the  uppermoft  part  of  the  bank.  This  kind  of  meafure  ruftics  call
Ciconia  (a  Stork)  (2)  :  But  this  alfo  is  liable  to  fraud,  becaufe  there  is
a  great  difference  which  way  you  place  it,  whether  inclining,  or  perpen¬
dicular.  We  have  therefore  added  fome  parts  to  this  machine,  which
may  be  effectual  to  put  an  end  to  all  ftrife  .and  difpute  between  con¬
tending  parties.  For  we  have  joined  together,  croftwile,  in  the  form  of
the  Greek  letter  X,  two  rules,  of  fuch  a  width  as  the  trencher  deiigns
to  make  his  furrows  ;  and  fo  have  fattened  that  antient  Ciconia  to  the
middle  part  where  the  rules  are  joined,  that  fo,  being  made,  and  fixed
exactly  perpendicular,  it  might  reft  upon  it,  as  upon  a  bafe,  to  fupport
it.  Then  upon  the  fmall  rod,  which  is  in  the  middle  of  the  tranfverle
rule,  we  have  planted  a  carpenter’s  plummet.  The  inftrument  thus
framed,  when  put  down  into  the  trench,  puts  an  end  to  all  difpute
between  the  mafter  and  the  undertaker  of  the  work,  without  injury  to
either  party.  For  the  ftar,  which  we  faid  refembled'the  Greek  letter,
does  at  the  fame  time  meafure  the  ground  of  the  bottom  of  the  trench,
and  likewife  exactly  try  its  level  ;  becaufe,  whether  it  flopes,  or  whe¬
ther  it  is  exactly  upon  a  level,  it  is  found  out  by  the  pofition  of  this
machine  :  for  the  plummet  that  is  placed  upon  the  fore-mentioned  fmall
rod,  fhews  both  the  one  and  the  other,  and  does  not  differ  the  over-
feer  of  the  work  to  be  deceived.  The  work  being  thus  exactly  mea-
fured,  and  reduced  to  a  level,  proceeds  always,  and  is  carried  on  in  fuch  a
manner,  as  to  bring  it  to  the  fimilitude  of  ground  that  is  fallowed  :
and  as  much  fpace  is  taken  up  by  the  line  formed  by  the  earth  which
is  thrown  out  of  the  trench,  as  the  faid  trench,  out  of  which  it  is  dug,

has


(2)  Ciconia ,  an  inftrument  contrived  for  meafuring  the  depth  and  width  of  the  trenches,
when  they  trenched  the  ground.  They  called  it  by  this  name,  probably,  becaufe  one
part  of  it  reprefented  the  bill  of  a  ftork.  They  called  a  certain  machine,  wherewith  they
drew  water,  by  this  name  alfo,  thoTometimes  authors  call  it  tollenovem.  Ic  is  thus  defended
by  Vegetius  de  re  milt  art ,  lib.  4.  21.  Trabes  in  t  err  am  praialte  defixa ,  cut  in  fummo  vertice
a  ia  tranfverfa  trabes  longior ,  dimenfa  medietate  conneffitur,  i.  e.  a  piece  of  timber  fattened
deep  in  the  ground,  upon  the  top  of  which  another  tranfverfe  piece,  longer  than  it,  is  joined
with  it,  and  exactly  poifed  in  the  middle.  It  is  called  a  Swipe  Ifidonts  fays,  that  this  ma¬
chine  was  called  Ciconia ,  becaufe  it  imitates  a  ftork  raking  and  falling  her  bill  when  file

U  crunks.


146  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Booklll.

has  length  and  breadth  j  and  this  way  and  method  of  preparing  the
ground  is  moil  approved.

i

crunks.  The  figure  of  this  machine  for  meafuring  the  trenches,  as  it  was  made  at  firft,
and  alfo  with  the  improvement  made  by  Columella ,  you  have  here  below.  There  is  in
fome  old  editions  an  imperfect  delineation  of  it ;  but  whether  originally  by  the  author,  is
uncertain  :  but  he  defcribes  it  fo  exactly,  that  one  cannot  miftake  it.


e  f  h,  the  antient  Ciconia.
e  f,  the  tranfverfe  rule,
c  hy  the  fmall  rod  joined  to  it.


9  h  and  b  g,  the  two  rules  decuflated,  or
joined  together  in  the  foi  m  of  the  Greek  let¬
ter  X.

g  iy  the  breadth  of  the  furrow.

e

chy\  the  depth  of  the  fame.

f*S

c,  the  middle  part,  where  the  two  rules  are
joined  and  fixed  to  each  other.

d  c,  the  carpenter’s  plummet.

g  h  iy  the  rays  of  the  ftar,  which  equally  mea-
fure  the  bottom  of  the  trench.


CHAP.


Chap.  XIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


*4/

CHAP.  XIV.

How  many  ways  a  Vine  may  be  planted \  either  in  Italy,  or

in  the  Provinces .

NOW  follows  the  bufinefs  of  planting  the  vine, which  is  feafonably
fet  in  the  ground,  either  in  the  fpring,  or  in  autumn  ;  better  in
the  fpring,  if  the  conftitution  of  the  climate  be  either  rainy  or  cold,  or
the  land  either  fat,  or  a  champain  and  oufy  plain  :  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  belt  to  plant  it  in  autumn,  if  the  quality  of  the  air  be  dry,  or  hot ;
if  it  be  a  poor  and  dry  plain  ;  or  if  it  be  a  lean  and  fteep  hill.  There
are  almoft  forty  days  proper  for  planting  in  the  fpring,  from  the  13  th
of  February  till  the  Equinox  ;  and  in  autumn,  from  the  1  yth  of  Octo¬
ber,  to  the  firft  of  December.

But  there  are  two  different  ways  of  planting,  either  with  the  cutting,
or  with  the  quickfet,  both  which  are  in  ufe  with  Hufbandmen  j  and,
in  the  provinces,  they  rather  make  ufe  of  the  cutting  ;  for  they  neither
care  for,  nor  apply  themfelves  to  make  nurferies ;  nor  are  they  ac¬
quainted  with  the  way  of  making  quickfets.  This  way  of  planting
with  cuttings,  the  moft  part  of  the  vine-dreffers  in  Italy  have,  with
very  good  reafon,  difapproved  and  rejetted  ;  becaufe  the  quickfet  is  far
preferable  to  it,  and  excels  it  in  many  qualities.  For  it  is  lefs  liable  to
perifh,  inafmuch  as  by  reafon  of  its  firmnefs  and  foundnefs  it  more  eafily
fupports  both  heat  and  cold,  and  other  forts  of  weather  j  and  then  it
grows  up,  and  comes  to  perfection  fooner ;  from  which  it  comes  to  pafs,
that  it  is  more  quickly  in  a  condition  to  bring  forth  fruit  j  as  alfo,  there
is  no  doubt  but,  being  often  tranfplanted  *  (1),  neverthelefs,  in  loofe

and  yielding  eafy  ground,  a  cutting  can  be  immediately  planted  in  the
room  of  a  quickfet.  But  that  which  is  thick,  clofe,  and  heavy,  does
certainly  require  a  vine.

*  (1)  There  is  a  blank  here  in  all  the  old  editions:  there  feems  only  to  be  one  or  two  words
wanting,  to  fhew  the  benefit  a  quickfet  receives,  by  being  tranfplanred  ■>  but,  without  the
afliftance  of  fome  manufcript,  I  cannot  fee  how  they  can  be  fupplied.


u  2


CHAP.


148


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.


CHAP.  XV.

'That  it  is  better  to  plant  in  paginated  Ground ,  than  in
Trenches  or  Furrows  ?nade  in  fallow  Ground \  or  in  that
which  is  newly  broken  up.

A  Vine,  therefore,  is  planted  with  g'reateft  advantage  in  paftinated
ground,  that  has  been  well  cleanfed,  harrowed,  and  levelled,  omit¬
ting  five  feet  between  the  rows,  in  ground  that  is  lean  j  but  fix  feet
in  that  which  is  middling  :  but  in  that  which  is  fat,  there  muft  be
fpaces  of  feven  feet  allowed,  that  fo  larger  intervals  may  be  vacant,  all
along  which  the  frequent  and  prolix  firm  boughs  may  be  diffufed.

This  difpofition  and  laying  out  the  dimenfions  of  vineyards  in  the  form
of  the  Quincunx  is  performed  in  a  mod;  expeditious  manner  :  for  you
flitch  to  a  line  a  bit  of  purple  cloth,  or  any  other  confpicuous  colour,
at  the  diftance  of  fo  many  feet,  as  you  defign  the  rows  of  the  vines
fhould  be  diflant  from  one  another  j  which  line,  marked  after  this
manner,  you  flretch  along  the  paftinated  ground,  and  hard  by  each  bit
of  purple  cloth  you  fallen  a  reed  in  the  ground,  and  fo  the  rows  are
directed  and  laid  out  at  equal  diflances  from  one  another.  And,  after
this  is  done,  the  digger  follows,  and,  leaving  fpaces  by  turns  all  along
the  row,  from  one  reed  to  another,  digs  a  trench,  no  lefs  than  two
feet  and  a  half  deep,  in  fuch  places  as  are  level  and  plain  j  in  riling
ground,  two  feet  and  three  fourths  of  a  foot  ;  but,  in  fuch  places  as
are  very  fteep,  even  three  feet.  The  trenches  being  depreflfed  to  this
depth,  the  quickfets  are  fet  into  them  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  every
one  of  them  may  be  laid  flat  the  contrary  w?ay  to  one  another  from  the
middle  of  the  trench,  and  their  tops  eredted  juft  by  the  reeds  at  the
oppoftte  ends  of  the  trench.

But  the  firft  thing  incumbent  upon  the  planter  to  do  is,  to  remove
his  plant  carefully  out  of  the  nurfery,  both  found  and  intire,  and  tranf-
plant  it  as  frefh  as  pofiible,  and,  if  it  can  be  done,  the  very  moment
when  he  has  a  mind  to  plant  it  j  and  then  to  prune  it  all  over  as  a  veteran
vine,  and  reduce  it  to  one  very  ftrong  firm-wood  branch,  and  fmooth
its  knots  and  fears  j  and  alfo,  if  any  of  its  roots  have  received  any  injury,
(which  he  ought,  above  all  thirrgs,  carefully  to  avoid,  when  he  takes
them  out  of  the  ground)  to  cut  them  off;  and  then,  bending  it,  to  fet
it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  the  roots  of  two  vines  may  not  interweave  with
one  another.  For  this  may  be  eaflly  avoided  by  regularly  placing  a


Chap.  XV.  O/HUSBANDRY.  149

few  dones  all  along  the  bottom,  hard  by  the  different  (ides  of  the
trenches,  which  may  not  exceed  five  pounds  weight  each  :  thefe,  as
Mago  informs  us,  keep  off  the  waters  in  winter,  and  the  heats  in  fum-
mer,  from  the  roots  of  the  vines.  Virgil  is  of  the  fame  mind  with  him,,
and  dire&s  us  thus  to  defend  and  fortify  the  young  plants :

r  (1)  The  fpungy  pumice-done,  and  rugged  (hells,

‘  Hide  with  them  under  ground.  ’

And,  a  little  after  :

«  -  Now  fome  there  are,

‘  Who  prefs  them  down  with  ftones,  or  with  the  weight
4  Of  bulky  (hells  j  thefe,  from  th’  o’erflowing  rains,
c  A  fure  defence,  and,  from  the  fcorching  heat,

4  When  flaming  Dog-ftar  cleaves  the  parched  ground,

*  Which,  fpent  with  third,  gapes  for  refrefhing  rain.  ’

And  the  fame  Carthaginian  author  proves,  that  the  hulks  of  grapes;
and  grape-dones,  mixed  with  dung,  put  into  the  trench  with  the  plants,,
quicken  and  drengthen  them  ;  and  that  they  call  forth,  and  draw  out,
their  new  little  roots  ;  and  that  this,  during  the  cold  and  moid  winter,
communicates  a  feafonable  warmth  to  the  trenches,  and,  in  dimmer,
miniders  nourifhment  and  moidure  to  the  green  plants.  But,  if  the
ground,  to  which  you  have  committed  the  vine,  appears  to  be  poor,
he  is  of  opinion,  that  fat  mould  fhould  be  brought  from  a  greater  di¬
dance,  and  put  into  the  trenches.  Whether  this  be  [expedient,  or
not,  the  increafe  or  yearly  produce  of  the  country,  the  price  that  the
fruits  of  it  yield,  and  the  wages  of  labourers,  will  teach  us.

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  335.


CHAP.


I50


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.


CHAR  XVI.

IVhat  Meafure  or  Quantity  of  paftinated  Ground  may  he

J'ujficient  for  Vineyards  (i).

THE  paftinated  ground  is  proper  for  planting,  when  it  is  a  little
moift  j  neverthelefs,  it  is  better  to  commit  the  plant  to  it  when
it  is  dry,  than  when  it  is  miry  and  dirty  ;  and,  when  the  plant  is  fo
long  as  to  ftand  feveral  joints  above  the  brim  or  uppermoft  part  of  the
trench,  that  part  of  the  top,  which  rifes  above  the  trench,  is  cut  off,
only  two  eyes  of  it  being  left  above-ground,  and  the  trench  filled  up,
by  throwing  the  earth  into  it.  Then,  after  the  paftinated  ground  is
levelled,  the  cutting  muft  be  planted  among  the  vines  that  grow  in  the
rows  ;  and  it  will  be  fufficient  to  fet  it  all  along  one  line,  in  the  middle
fpace  which  is  vacant  between  the  vines.  For  thus  both  the  fhoot
itfelf  will  grow  and  gather  ftrength  the  better,  and  there  will  be  left  a
moderate  fpace  of  free  and  open  ground  for  drefting  the  regular  plants
as  they  ftand  in  their  feveral  rows.  Then,  in  the  fame  line  wherein
the  quickfet  fhall  occupy  and  ftand  in  its  own  rank,  fome  cuttings  alfo
muft  be  planted,  as  prefidiaries  for  the  regular  vines,  out  of  whofe  num¬
ber  one  may  be  propagated  and  brought  into  the  place  of  a  vine  that  is
dead.  Five  cuttings  muft  be  fet  upon  the  fpace  of  one  foot  (2),  and

(1)'  This  paragraph  is  not  fo  clear  and  diftinctas  mod  others,  and  great  attention  is  requi-
fite  in -reading  the  original,  where  lome  words  feem  to  be  wanting,  to  make  the  fenfe  com¬
plete.  The  author  fays,  that  the  paftinated  ground  being  laid  out  into  feveral  rows,  the
quickfets  muft  be  planted  upon  the  faid  rows,  at  fuch  and  fuch  diftances  from  each  other.
The  vines,  being  thus  fet  in  their  feveral  rows,  are  called  Vites  ordinari £  :  between  the
feveral  rows  of  regular  vines,  he  diredts  a  certain  number  of  cuttings  to  be  planted,  exadtly
in  the  middle  between  the  rows  ;  and  fays,  that  even  in  the  fame  line  wherein  the  quick¬
fets  are  planted,  and  occupy  their  own  rank,  muft  fome  cuttings  be  fet  as  prefidiaries  to
the  regular  vines,  i.e.  when  the  regular  vines  perifh,  thefe  may  be  commodioufly  brought
to  fupply  their  places  j  this  is  what  is  meant  by  prafidii  caufa  j  and  in  other  places,  they
are  called  malleoli  prajldiarii.  Lib.iv.  c.  iy.

(2)  Quitzq;  malleoli  pangend't  funt  per  jpatium  pedis ,  ijq j  per,  &C.  The  author,  con¬
trary  to  his  ufual  method,  feems  in  thefe  words  to  have  exprefted  his  meaning  very  con-
cifely,  leaving  it  to  the  reader  to  find  it  out  from  what  he  had  faid  before.  In  the  pre¬
ceding  chapter  he  had  faid,  that  in  middling  land  there  muft  be  fix  feet  between  the  rows.
Now,  in  a  jugerum  of  ground  there  are  240  feet  in  length,  and  120  in  breadth  :  fo  there
will  be  40  intervals  lengthwife,  and  20  in  the  breadth  j  which,  multiplied  ioto  one  another,
make  800  intervals,  or  vacant  fpaces.  To  each  interval  allow  five  feet  to  plant  cuttings
up  an,  and  half  a  foot  diftance  from  each  vine,  there  will  be  twenty-five  cuttings  in  every
interval;  which,  multiplied  by  800,  make  20000  ;  and  this  is  the  number  of  cuttings
Columella  directs  to  plant  on  each  jugerum  of  paftinated  ground.


f


this


Chap.  XVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  151

this  foot  is  taken  from  the  very  middle  of  the  fpace  between  the  rows,
that  they  may  be  equally  diflant  from  the  vines  on  both  fides.  Julius
Atticus  thinks,  that  fixteen  thoufand  cuttings  are  abundantly  fufficient
for  this  kind  of  planting.  Neverthelefs,  we  plant  more  by  four  thou¬
fand  ;  becaufe  a  great  part  of  them  perifhes  thro’  the  negligence  of  the
vine-dreffers  j  and  the  reft,  that  thrive,  grow  thin  by  the  death  of  the
regular  plants,  whofe  places  they  are  taken  to  fupply.


CHAP.  XVII.

uifter  what  Manner ,  and  at  what  Time^  a  Vine  is  to  be  planted.

THERE  has  been  no  very  fmall  difpute  among  authors  about  the
planting  of  (hoots.  Some  were  of  opinion,  that  the  whole  rod,
as  it  was  pulled  off  from  the  mother,  was  proper  for  planting  ;  and,
having  divided  it  into  parts  of  five,  or  even  fix  eyes  each,  they  com¬
mitted  the  feveral  cuttings  to  the  earth  :  which  I  don’t  at  all  approve  j
and  I  rather  agree  with  thofe  authors,  who  denied,  that  the  upper  firm-
wood  branch  is  fit  for  bearing  fruit,  and  only  approveed  of  that  part
which  is  joined  with  the  old  fpray.  But  they  intirely  rejected  the  arrow.
Ruflics  call  the  utmoft  or  lafl  part  of  the  fhoot,  the  Arrow,  either  be¬
caufe  it  has  removed  itfelf,  and  departed  to  a  greater  diftance  from  its
mother,  and  has,  as  it  were,  darted  or  leapt  out  from  her ;  or  becaufe,
being  attenuated  and  pointed  at  the  top,  it  bears  the  refemblance  of
the  forefaid  weapon.  Therefore  the  wifefl  Hufbandmen  have  denied,
that  that  part  fhould  be  planted.  Neverthelefs,  they  have  not  given
us  any  realon  of  their  opinion,  which  they,  who  had  great  underftanding
in  Hufbandry,  could  have  readily  done,  it  being  almoft  obvious  and  ma-
nifeft  before  their  eyes.  For  every  fruitful  branch  of  a  vine  is  exuberant,
or  abounds  moil  in  fruit,  below  the  fifth  or  fixth  eye ;  and  in  the  remain¬
ing  part,  tho’  exceeding  long,  it  either  bears,  no  fruit  at  all,  or  (hews
us  fome  very  fmall  cluflers.  For  which  reafon,  the  top  of  the  fhoot
was,  by  the  antients,  very  juflly  blamed  for  its  barrennefs  :  and  they
fo  planted  the  mallet-fhoot,  that  fome  part  of  the  old  branch  did  flick
to  the  young  one.  But  experience  has  condemned  the  planting  of  it  in
this  manner.  For,  whatever  part  of  the  old  wood  was  left,  did  quickly
rot  with  the  moiflure,  after  it  was  fet  and  covered  with  earth,  and,  by
its  own  diflemper  killed  the  tender  roots  that  were  next  to  it,  and
fcarcely  as  yet  creeping  out ;  and,  when  this  happened,  the  upper  part


152  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

of  the  plant  dried  up  and  decayed  :  afterwards  'Julius  Atticus ,  and
Cornelius  Celfus ,  the  moft  celebrated  authors  of  our  age,  following  the
example  and  directions  of  the  Safernas ,  father  and  fon,  did  cut  off
whatever  remained  of  the  old  branch  exactly  by  the  joint  where  the
young  (hoot  grows  out  of  it,  and  fo  fet  into  the  ground  the  fpray  with
its  own  fmall  head.


CHAP.  XVIII.

TVhat  things  one  ought  to  ohferve ,  who  plants  a  Vine.

BUT  Julius  Atticus  fet  the  forefaid  plant  in  the  earth,  with  its
head  twifted  and  bended,  that  it  might  not  fly  off  from  the  dibble.
Huibandmen  call  the  forked  iron  tool  wherewith  they  fet  their  plants
Pajlinum  (a  Dibble) ;  and  hence  it  was,  that  old  vineyards,  which  were
digged  a  fecond  time,  were  faid  to  be  repajlinated.  For  this  was  the
proper  appellation  of  a  vineyard,  that  was  reflored  or  trenched,  and
replanted  a  fecond  time  (i).  Now,  cuftom,  unacquainted  with  anti¬
quity,  calls  all  ground  whatfoever,  that  is  moved  and  prepared  for  vine¬
yards,  Repajlinated.  But  let  us  return  to  what  we  propofed.

Julius  Atticus ’s  way  of  planting,  which  allows  of  twifting  and
writhing  the  head  of  the  fhoot,  is,  in  my  opinion,  intirely  wrong  j
and  there  are  more  reafons  than  one  for  avoiding  this  practice  :  firft,
bccaufe  there  is  no  ftem  whatfoever,  which,  being  vexed  and  broken
before  it  is  planted,  comes  up  and  thrives  better,  than  that  which  is  fet
in  the  ground  found  and  intire,  without  fuffering  any  injury.  More¬
over,  whatever  thing  is  put  into  the  earth  crooked,  bended,  and  look¬
ing  upwards,  when  at  a  proper  feafon  it  is  taken  out  of  the  ground,  it
relifts  the  efforts  of  the  digger,  as  if  it  were  a  hook  j  and,  like  a  crook
faftened  in  the  ground,  breaks,  before  it  can  be  pulled  out.  For  the
wood  is  brittle  in  that  part  which  contracted  a  blemifh  when  it  was

(i)  Reflibilis  vinea,  reflibile  vinetum,  is  a  vineyard  trenched  a-new,  and  replanted,  or
the  vines  that  were  decayed,  reftored  by  cutting  diem,  or  hying  them  in  order  to  recover
them ;  reflibilis ,  a  reflit uendo-,  by’the  Greens  called  'JctAi/xpvhs,  Buc  reflibilis  ager  was  land
that  was  fown  every  year  without  intermillion,  or  at  lead  two  years  immediately  follow¬
ing,  with  bearded  or  husked  wheat,  which  they  who  let  their  farms  provided  againft,  be-
caufe  it  impoverifhed  the  land  :  on  the  conraary,  land  that  reded  every  other  year,  in
order  to  recover  its  ftrength,  was  called  novalis ,  a  novando,  tho’,  properly,  ager  novalis
figmfies  land  that  was  never  tilled  nor  cultivated  before.  And  Pliny  himfelf  calls  land,  from
off  which  old  wood  was  cut,  ager  novalis.

4


twifted


Chap.  XVIII.  O/HUSBANDRY,  153

twifted  and  bended  at  the  time  it  was  planted.  For  which  reafon  it
lofes  the  greateft  part  of  its  roots,  which  are  broken  off  it.

But,  to  pafs  over  thefe  inconveniencies,  I  cannot,  indeed,  diffembie
that  which  is  exceeding  hurtful  ;  for,  a  little  before,  when  I  was
fpeaking  of  the  uppermoft  part  of  the  fhoot,  which  I  faid  was  called
the  arrow,  I  obferved,  that  the  greateft  part  of  the  fruit  commonly
grows  within  the  fifth  and  fixth  eye,  which  are  next  to  the  old  branch.
Therefore  he  who  twifts  the  fhoot,  deftroys  this  fruitful  part  j  be-
caufe  both  that  part  which  is  doubled  contains  three  or  four  eyes,  and
the  remaining  two  or  three  eyes,  that  would  produce  fruit,  are  intirely
put  under-ground,  and  thofe  that  are  hid  under-ground  don’t  produce
branches,  but  roots.  So  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  what  we  would  have
avoided,  in  planting  nurferies  of  willows,  we  put  in  practice  in  planting
this  kind  of  cutting,  which  it  is  neceffary  to  make  the  longer,  if  we
will  plant  it  twifted.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  the  eyes  next  to
the  top,  which  are  unfruitful,  are  left  in  it ;  from  which  iprout  fprigs
which  are  either  barren,  or  certainly  fuch  as  bear  lefs  fruit,  which
Ruftics  call  T wigs  with  fmgle  clufiers.  What  !  Is  it  not  of  great  im¬
portance,  that  a  cutting,  which  is  fet  in  the  ground,  fhould  quickly
clofe  up,  and  form  a  fear  in  that  part  where  it  was  cut  off  from  its  mo¬
ther  ?  For,  if  this  is  not  done,  too  much  moifture  is  drawn  thro’  the
open  pith  of  the  vine,  as  it  were  thro’  a  pipe,  and  the  fame  makes  the
flock  hollow  :  and  hence  it  is,  that  ants,  and  other  animals,  which  con-
fume  the  legs  of  vines,  are  provided  with  places  to  lurk  in.  But  this
is  what  happens  to  plants  that  are  twifted  :  for,  when  their  lower  parts
are  broken,  by  taking  them  out  of  the  ground,  they  are  replanted  with
their  pith  open  and  expofed  j  and  when  the  waters,  and  the  forefaid
animals,  creep  into  them,  they  quickly  decay,  and  grow  old.  Wherefore
it  is  the  beft  way  to  plant  the  cutting  ftraight,  the  head  of  which,  when
it  is  put  into  the  fork  of  the  dibble,  is  eafily  kept  faft  in  the  narrow
jaws  of  the  iron  tool,  and  thruft  down  into  the  earth  j  and  that  cutting
which  is  fet  after  this  manner,  will  fooner  take  root,  and  grow  up  :  for
it  equally  fends  forth  roots  from  its  head,  where  it  was  cut  off  from  the
mother  j  which,  when  they  grow  out  of  it,  form  a  fear  upon  it :  and
befides  that,  the  wound  itfelf,  looking  downwards,  does  not  receive
fo  much  moifture  as  that,  which,  being  bowed  back,  and  turned  up¬
wards,  tranfmits  thro’  its  pith,  as  it  were  thro’  a  tunnel,  all  the  rain
that  falls  upon  it.

CHAP.


X


154-  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  III.

CHAP.  XIX.

How  long  the  Cutting  ought  to  he.

WHAT  length  a  cutting  ought  to  be  of,  is  not  very  certain  ;  for,
if  either  it  have  frequent  eyes,  it  muff  be  made  the  fhorter  ;
or,  if  it  have  them  but  thin,  it  muft  be  made  the  longer.  Neverche-
lels,  it  ought  not  to  be  more  than  a  foot,  nor  lefs  than  three  fourths  of
a  foot  long,  left  this,  being  juft  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth,  fhould
fuffer  by  drought  in  the  time  of  fummer ;  and  left  that,  being  fet  deeper,
fhould,  after  it  is  grown  up,  be  with  great  difficulty  pulled  out  of  the
ground.  But  thefe  things  with  refpedt  to  the  length  of  a  cutting  in
even  flat  ground.  But  in  hoping  hilly  grounds,  where  the  earth  tum¬
bles  down,  a  cutting  may  be  fet  one  foot  and  a  palm,  or  four  digits
long.  In  low-fituated  and  oufy  plains,  we  plant  a  cutting  alfo  with
three  eyes,  which  is  a  little  lefs  than  nine  fingers,  but  certainly  longer
than  half  a  foot.  And  this  is  not  called  a  cutting  with  three  gems  or
buds,  merely  becaufe  it  has  three  eyes,  feeing  commonly  it  is  full  of
eyes  about  the  wound,  where  it  was  cut  off  from  its  mother  ;  but  be¬
caufe,  befides  thefe,  of  which  it  has  many  in  the  head  itfelf,  it  has
moreover  three  joints,  and  the  like  number  of  buds.

Of  this  alfo,  above  all  other  things,  I  would  forewarn  him  that
plants  either  cuttings  or  quickfets,  viz.  that  he  avoid  immoderate  wind
and  fun,  left  the  plants  wither,  and  dry  up;  both  which  are  very  eafily
avoided,  by  throwing  a  garment,  or  any  fort  of  thick  covering,  over
them.  Neverthelefs,  it  is  better  to  choofe  for  our  planting  a  perfectly
calm  day,  or  at  leaft  when  it  only  breathes  a  gentle  breeze.  For  the  fun
is  eafily  kept  off  by  any  thing  that  affords  a  fhade.  But,  before  we  put
an  end  to  our  difcourfe,  we  muft  fay  fomething  upon  a  point  we  have
not  as  yet  touched  upon ;  viz.  whether  we  ought  to  have  vines  of  feve-
ral  kinds,  and  thefe  feparate  and  diftincfb  from  one  another  under  their
feveral  forts,  or  confufed  and  huddled  together,  one  with  another.  We
ffiall  difcourfe  firft  of  that  which  we  firft  propofed.


CHAP.


Chap.  XX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


*55


C  FI  A  P.  XX.

How  many  hinds  of  Vines  are  to  he  planted.

THerefore  it  is  the  part  of  a  prudent  Hufbandman,  to  plant  that
vine  which  he  has  chiefly  approved  j  and  always  to  increafe
the  number  as  much  as  he  poffibly  can,  no  other  dem  of  any  other
character  intervening.  But  a  provident  man  ought  alfo  to  fet  different
forts.  For  the  year  is  never  fo  mild  and  temperate,  as  not  to  annoy,
with  fome  inconveniency,  fome  kind  of  vine  or  other.  For,  if  either
it  be  dry,  that  kind  which  thrives  bed  with  moidure,  is  grieved  and
difheartened  j  or,  if  it  be  rainy,  then  that  which  delights  in  drought  j
or,  if  it  be  cold  and  frody,  then  that  which  cannot  endure  blading
cold  :  or,  if  it  be  exceeding  hot,  then  that  which  does  not  endure  heat,
languifhes.  But,  not  to  infid  now  upon  a  thoufand  injuries  of  different
forts  of  weather,  there  is  always  fomething  which  may  offend  and
hurt  vineyards.  Therefore,  if  we  plant  but  one  kind,  when  that  hap¬
pens  which  is  hurtful  to  it,  we  fhall  be  deprived  of  the  whole  vintage.
For  he  will  have  no  referve,  no  relief,  who  has  not  dems  of  divers
forts.  But  if  we  make  vineyards  of  various  kinds,  fome  of  them  will
efcape  without  receiving  injury,  which  may  bring  forth  fruit.  Never-
thelefs,  this  reafon  ought  not  to  force  us  to  feek  after  many  varieties  of
vines  j  but  what  we  fhall  have  difcovered  to  be  an  excellent  kind,  let
us  make  that  as  numerous  as  we  are  able ;  then  that  which  is  next  to
the  firft,  and  afterwards  that  which  is  of  the  third,  and  even  that
which  is  of  the  fourth  note  alfo.  So  far  let  us  be  content  with  a  cer¬
tain  Quaternion ,  as  it  were,  of  chofen  vines.  For  it  is  fufficient  with
the  experiment  of  four,  or,  at  mod,  five,  kinds  of  vines,  to  wait  the
fortune  of  the  vintage.

As  to  the  fecond  thing,  which  I  jud  now  propofed,  I  am  in  no
manner  of  doubt,  but  vines  ought  to  be  forted  and  difpofed  into  their
particular  places  and  divifions,  according  to  their  kinds  ;  and  didin-
guiihed  by  foot-paths,  and  lines  and  boundaries,  from  one  quarter  to
to  another :  not  that  I  myfelf  have  been  able  to  obtain  of  my  own  fer-
vants,  or  intimate  friends  and  acquaintance,  that  any  of  them  fhould
put  this  in  executions  before  I  did  it  myfelf,  how  much  foever  they
might  approve  of  the  thing.  For,  of  all  rural  bufinefs,  this  is  the  mod
difficult,  becaufe  it  requires  the  greated  diligence  both  ,in  chufing  and
gathering  the  plants,  and  difcriminating  them,  and  difcerning  the

X  2  fmalled


156  L.  J.  M.  C  O  LU  M  E  L  L  A  Book  III

fmalled  difference  in  them  ;  in  which  there  is  need,  for  the  mod:  part,
of  the  greated  dexterity,  prudence,  and  difcretion.  But  fometimes
(as  that  divine  author  Plato  fays)  the  beauty  and  comelinefs  of  the  thing
attracts  us,  and  engages  ns  to  purfue  even  after  thofe  things,  which,
becaufe  of  the  infirmity  and  frailty  of  our  common  mortal  nature,  we
cannot  obtain.  This  thing,  neverthelefs,  with  no  great  difficulty,  we
fhall  be  able  to  accomplilh,  if  we  are  not  too  far  advanced  in  years,  and
if  our  knowledge  and  edate  correfpond  with  our  defire  ;  altho’  it  is
neceffary  to  perfevere  for  no  fmall  part  of  our  life,  in  order  to  judge  of,
difcern  the  difference,  and  make  a  trial  for  fome  years  of  any  consider¬
able  number.  For  every  time  of  the  year  does  not  allow  us  to  pafs  a
judgment  upon  this  matter.  For  vines  which,  becaufe  of  the  fimilitude
of  their  colour,  dock,  or  ffioots,  cannot  be  known  from  one  another,  are
very  didindtly  known  and  difcovered  by  their  ripe  fruit,  and  by  their
leaves.  That  any  other  perfon,  befides  the  mader  of  the  family,  can
life  this  diligence  and  application,  I  will  not  affirm.  For  it  is  adting
the  part  of  a  carelefs,  flothful  perfon,  to  commit  it  to  the  care  of  the
bailiff,  or  even  of  the  vine-dreffer,  feeing  very  few  Hufbandmen  have
as  yet  been  able  to  attain  to  what  is  infinitely  more  eafy,  viz.  to  be
intirely  free  from  dems  that  produce  black  wine,  tho’  the  colour  of  the
grapes  may  be  difcerned  by  every  the  mod  dupid  and  imprudent  perfon
whatfoever.


CHAP.  XXI.

Whether  the  fever  al  kinds  of  Vmes  are  to  he  planted  in  difinSl
Divifions ,  feparately  by  themfelves .

NEverthelefs,  there  is  one  method  of  effectuating  very  quickly
what  we  propofed,  which  prefen ts  itfelf  to  me  ;  that,  if  the
vineyards  are  of  an  old  danding,  we  fhould  engraft  each  dividon  thereof
with  grafts  that  are  didinguidied  and  feparated  into  their  feveral  kinds,
each  fort  having  its  proper  dividon  allotted  to  it.  Thus  I  don’t  in  the
lead  doubt  but  in  a  few  years  wre  fhall  gather  many  thoufand  cuttings
from  the  vines  we  dtall  have  engrafted,  and  diall  plant  in  feveral  quar¬
ters  and  dividons  the  plants  thus  didinguifhed  from  one  another.

Moreover,  the  advantage  of  doing  this  thing  may  engage  us  upon
many  accounts  :  and  that  I  may  begin  with  thofe  of  lefs  importance,
in  the  drd  place,  in  every  tranfadtion  and  employment  of  life,  not.

only


Chap.  XXI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  157

only  in  Flufbandry,  but  in  every  art  and  fcience  whatfoever,  a  prudent
man  is  much  more  delighted  with  fuch  things  as  are  diftinguifhed  and
ranged  into  their  feveral  kinds,  than  with  fuch  as  are  thrown  down,  as  it
were,  at  random  here-and-there,  and  confounded  in  one  common  heap.

And,  in  the  next  place,  that  if  any  one  having  even  the  greateft
averfion  to  a  rural  life,  and  the  moft  difaffedted  to  Hufbandry,  fhould
come  into  your  grounds  when  planted  regularly,  and  in  due  feafon,  he
may  with  the  greateft  pleafure  admire  the  bounty  of  nature,  when  on
that  fide  the  Bituric  vines  richly  laden  with  fruit,  and  on  this  fide  the
Heholce ,  that  are  equal  to  thefe,  anfwer  to  one  another  j  when  on  that
hand  the  Arcelacan ,  and  on  the  other  the  Spionian  or  Bafilican  vines
meet  together,  and  fuit  with  one  another,  whereby  the  kind  and  nurfing
earth,  rejoicing  and  glad  at  the  return  of  the  feafon  of  the  year,  (as  at
a  certain  everlafling  child-bearing)  ftretches  out  her  breafts  diftended
with  new  wine..  In  the  midft  of  all  which,  whilft  Bacchus  cherifhes
the  pregnant  vine-branches,  either  of  the  white  or  yellow,  or  of  the
bright  ruddy  kind,  or  of  that  which  glitters  with  the  brightnefs  of  the
purple,  Autumnus  appears  every-where  in  great  luftre,  loaden  with
party-colour’d  apples.-

But  tho’  thefe  things  yield  very  great  delight ;  neverthelefs,  the  ad¬
vantage  is  greater  than  the  pleafure.  For,  the  more  beautiful  appear¬
ance  any  mafier  of  a  family’s  eftate  makes,  the  more  willingly  does  he
come  down  to  take  a  view  of  it  j  and  what  the  poet  fays  of  a  facred:
Deity  (1),

‘  Where-e’er  the  God  turn’d  his  majeflic  head,.’

may  be  truly  faid  of  him;  for,  where-ever  the  mafier  is  frequently
prefent,  and  cafts  his  eyes,  there  the  fruit  abounds  to  a  greater  degree..
But  I  omit  what  may  accidentally  happen  to  vines  that  are  not  ranked
according  to  their  feveral  kinds.  I  fhall  profecute  thofe  things  which
are  the  mod  remarkable.

Seems  of  a  different  character  neither  caft  their  bloffom  alike,  nor
come  to  maturity  at  the  fame  time.  For  which  reafon,  he  who  has
not  his  vineyards  made  into  feveral  divifions,  according  to  the  feveral
forts  of  vines,  muft  of  neceflity  fuffer  one  of  thefe  inconveniencies  j
either  he  muft  gather  his  late  fruit  with  that  which  is  early  ripe,  which
thing  prefently  is  the  caufe  of  acidity  ;  or,  if  he  wait  till  his  late  fruit
comes  to  maturity,  he  may  lofe  his  early-ripe  vintage,  which,  being


(1)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  ii.  $77.


for


I5B  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  III.

for  the  moll  part,  expofed  to  the  pillage  of  the  fowls  of  the  air  .  1
haraffed  by  the  winds  and  rains,  decays,  and  comes  to  nothing  :  but,
if  he  defires  to  gather  the  fruit  of  each  kind  at  different  intervals  of  time,
in  the  firfl  place  he  is  under  a  necefiity  of  undergoing  the  hazard  of
the  grape-gatherers  difcretion  ;  for  he  cannot  afiign  an  overfeer  to  each
of  them,  to  have  his  eye  upon  them,  and  to  give  them  orders,  that  the
bitter  unripe  grapes  be  not  gathered  with  the  ripe.  Moreover,  of  fuch
vines  alfo  as  are  come  to  maturity,  they  being  of  a  different  character,
the  tafle  of  the  better  is  fpoiled  by  that  which  is  worfe,  and,  the  tafle
of  many  being  confounded  into  one,  the  wine  will  not  bear  keeping  till
it  be  old  :  and  therefore  necefiity  forces  the  Hufbandman  prefently  to
fell  his  wine  when  it  is  new^  whereas,  if  the  felling  of  it  could  be  de¬
ferred,  either  for  a  year,  or  at  leafl  till  the  fummer,  it  would  make  a
great  addition  to  the  price  of  it.

Nov/  this  leparating  the  feveral  forts  of  vines  into  divifions  by  them-
felves,  has  a  very  great  conveniency,  that  the  vine-dreffer  can  more  eafily
give  to  each  particular  fort  the  pruning  which  is  moft  fuitable  to  it,
inafmuch  as  he  knows  what  character  the  divifion  which  he  is  pruning
bears  :  and  this  is  a  thing  very  difficult  to  be  obferved  in  vineyards,  which
are-planted  promifcuoufiy  with  vines  of  different  forts ;  becaufe  the greatefi:
part  of  the  bufinefs  of  pruning  is  done  at  that  time  when  vines  bear  no
leaves  whereby  they  can  be  dillinguifhed.  But  it  is  of  much  import¬
ance,  whether  the  vine-dreffer  preferves  and  fets  apart  for  fruit  more
or  fewer  firm  branches,  according  to  the  nature  of  every  fiem,  or  whe¬
ther  he  encourages  and  puts  a  vine  forward  by  leaving  long  verges  upon
it,  or  curbs  and  reftrains  it  by  pruning  it  very  near  :  yea,  it  is  of  great
importance  alfo  what  quarter  of  the  heavens  every  kind  of  vineyard
looks  to.  For  every  fort  of  vine  does  not  delight  and  rejoice  in  a  hot
fituation  j  nor,  on  the  contrary,  in  one  that  is  cold  :  but  young  vines
have  their  peculiar  property,  fo  that  fome  of  them  thrive  mightily
towards  the  fouth  pole,  becaufe  they  are  deflroyed  by  extreme  cold  ;
others  of  them  love  the  north,  becaufe  they  lofe  heart,  when  they  are
expofed  to  the  heat :  fome  of  them  rejoice  in  a  middle  flate,  in  the  tem¬
perament  of  the  eafl  or  weft.

Fie  who  feparates  the  feveral  forts  into  divifions  by  themfelves,  has
a  due  regard  to  thefe  differences,  according  to  the  fituation  and  pofition
of  places.  He  alfo  obtains  this  further  advantage,  which  is  not  incon-
fiderable,  that  thereby  he  leffens  both  the  labour  and  expences  of  the
vintage  :  for,  both  fuch  grapes  as  begin  to  grow  ripe,  are  gathered  in
due  time,  and  fuch  as  are  not  yet  fully  ripe,  are  deferred  to  another
time  without  any  lofs.  Nor  does  the  early  and  late  fruit,  gathered  at


Chap. XXI.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  159

the  fame  time,  hurry  the  vintage,  and  force  him  to  hire  labourers  at
any  rate.  Now  this  alfo  is  of  very  great  advantage,  to  be  able  to  pre-
ferve  the  true  and  genuine  tafte  of  each  kind,  whether  it  be  the  Bajili-
can ,  Biturican ,  or  Spionian ,  without  any  mixture,  and  lay  it  up  fepa-
rately  by  itfelf :  which  kinds,  when  they  are  thus  managed,  and  put
up  into  veffels,  becaufe  nothing  of  a  different  nature,  which  may  be
repugnant  to  them,  is  intermixed  with  them,  are  ennobled  by  being
kept  till  they  are  old(i)  ;  for,  after  fifteen  years,  or  a  few  more,  nothing
ignoble  can  be  perceived  in  their  tafte,  becaufe  almoft  all  wines  what¬
soever,  after  that  time,  obtain  this  quality,  that  they  acquire  goodnefs
by  their  cldnefs  :  wherefore,  as  we  propofed  to  fhew,  the  difpofing
and  feparating  the  vines  according  to  their  kinds,  is  of  the  greatefl  ad¬
vantage  ;  which,  neverthelefs,  if  you  cannot  accomplifh,  the  next
method  to  be  taken  is,  that  you  don’t  plant  any  other  vines  of  a  different
character,  but  fuch  as  referable  one  another  in  tafte,  and  yield  fruit
which  comes  to  maturity  at  the  fame  time.  Now  (if  you  have  any
care  or  defire  for  the  apple-kind)  you  may  fet  the  tops  of  fig-trees,
pear-trees,  and  apple-trees,  at  the  ends  of  the  feveral  rows,  in  that  part
of  the  vineyard  which  lies  towards  the  north,  that  fo,  when  they  grow
up,  they  may  not  overfhadow  it  j  and,  after  the  fpace  of  two  years  is  paft,
you  may  engraft  them  ;  or,  if  they  are  of  a  generous  kind,  you  may
tranfplant  them  when  they  are  full-grown.  Thefe  are  the  things  I
had  to  fay,  concerning  the  planting  of  vineyards.  The  chief  and  prin¬
cipal  part  is  ftill  behind,  that  we  give  directions  concerning  cultivating
them,  of  which  we  fhall  difcourfe  at  large  in  the  following  Book.

(1)  Per  pot  us  tamen  nobilitantur.  It  is  plain,  that  either  thefe  words  are  erroneous,  or
fome  word.'  are  wanting  ,•  and  XJrfnus  has  probably  hit  upon  them,  at  leaft  his  amendment
makes  the  fentence  uniform  and  intelligible.  Per  vetuflatem  nobilitantur ,  or,  psrpetuitate
vobilit  antur  y  and  makes  them  agreeable  to  what  the  author  fays,  lib.  iii.  2.  Ad  bonitatem  ali~
quam  per  annos  venit  ,•  and  lib.  iv-  20.  Non  folum  ad  fpecieni  plurimum  refert3  fed  ad  firm,*
tatem  perpetuitatemque.

t


L.  yUNIUS


[  *6o  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  FOURTH.


CHAP.  I.

‘That  Trenches  of  two  Feet  are  not  deep  enough  for  Vine-plants^
contrary  to  the  Opinion  of  Atticus  and  Celfus.

YOU  fay,  Publius  Sihinus ,  that,  after  you  had  read  over  to  feve-
ral  perlons,  that  delight  in  husbandry,  the  book  which  I  have
written  about  planting  of  vineyards,  there  were  found  fome  of  them,
who,  tho’  thev  commended  the  reft  of  my  precepts,  yet  found  fault
with  two  of  them,  becaufe  I  had  given  my  opinion  for  making  too  deep
trenches  for  vine-plants,  by  adding  three-fourths  of  a  foot  over  and
above  the  depth  of  two  feet,  which  Celfus  and  Atticus  had  determined;
and  that  I  had  not  done  very  prudently  in  aligning  one  quickfet  to
each  pole,  when  thele  fame  authors  allowed  them,  with  lefs  charge,
to  cloathe  two  props  next  to  one  another  upon  the  fame  row,  with  two
boughs  of  the  fame  vine,  divided  and  parted  from  each  other:  both
-which  objections  are  founded  rather  upon  an  uncertain  fuppofition,
than  upon  any  true  judgment.

But,  (that  I  may  refute  firft  that  which  I  ftrft  propofed)  if  we  will
content  ourfelves  with  a  trench  of  two  feet,  why  are  we  of  fucn  an
opinion  as  to  paftinate  the  ground  deeper  than  two  feet,  fince  we  are
refolved  to  plant  the  vine  fo  fhallow  ?  Somebody  will  fay,  We  do  it,
that  the  lower  ground,  which  lies  under  the  vine,  may  be  foft  and
yielding,  that  it  may  not,  by  its  hardnefs,  ftop  and  repel  the  young
fmall  roots,  that  gradually  creep  into  it.  Indeed  this  point  may  be

i  -  gained


Chap. I.  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &C.  161

gained  alfo,  if  the  ground  be  moved  with  the  two  foot  mattock  or
fpade,  and  the  plants  be  deprefled  into  the  trenched  ground,  which  is
fermented,  more  than  two  feet  and  an  half  (i) ;  for  always,  upon  a  plain,
the  earth,  that  is  thrown  up  loofely  out  of  the  trench,  is  more  bulky
aud  fwelled,  than  the  fame  gradation,  quantity  or  extent  of  crude
earth  anfwering  to  it,  that  has  not  been  moved  :  nor  indeed  do  plants,
when  they  are  fet,  require  a  deep  bed  of  earth  to  be  made  under  them ;
but  it  is  fufficient  to  put  half  a  foot  of  loofe  earth  under  the  vines  when
they  are  planted,  which  may  receive  the  gradual  growth  of  the  green
plants,  as  it  were,  into  its  hofpitable,  and  even  maternal  bofom.

Let  us  take  an  inftance  of  this  matter  from  ground  where  trees  are
planted  for  fupporting  vines,  where,  when  we  have  digged  the  trenches,
we  lay  a  very  little  quantity  of  duft  under  the  quickfet  :  therefore  the
truer  reafon  for  our  paginating  the  ground  deeper  is,  becaufe  in  vine¬
yards,  where  the  vines  are  laid  upon  frames,  they  grow  up  the  better,
the  deeper  the  trenches  are  they  are  planted  in:  for,  trenches  two  feet
deep  can  fcarcely  be  approved  even  by  Hufbandmen  that  live  in  the
provinces,  where  the  vine,  being  of  a  low  ftature,  is,  for  the  moft
part,  checked,  and  kept  near  to  the  earth  ;  whereas  that,  which  is  defti-
nated  for  a  frame,  mud  be  eftablifhed  upon  a  deeper  foundation  ;  and
if  fo  be  it  climbs  up  higher,  it  requires  more  earth,  and  more  afliftance  ;
and  therefore,  when  they  are  to  be  wedded  to  trees,  nobody  prepares  a
trench  lefs  than  two  feet  deep  for  the  vines.

But  thofe  principal  advantages  of  Shallow  planting,  viz.  that  thofe
plants,  which  are  not  wearied  by  being  prefixed  down  by  a  great  weight
of  earth,  do  both  grow  up  quickly  to  their  full  feature,  and  become
ftrong,  and  fuch  as  are  gently  fufpended  become  more  fruitful,  contri¬
bute  very  little  to  what  the  Hufbandman  defires  and  aims  at ;  for  both
thefe  reafons  of  Julius  Atticus  are  confuted  by  the  example  of  the
method  of  planting  vines,  in  order  to  couple  them  with  trees,  which
makes  the  vine  both  fironger  and  fruitfuller ;  which  it  would  not  do,  if
the  plants  fuffered  any  injury  by  being,  funk  deeper  into  the  earth.
What !  does  not  paftinated  ground,  when  it  is  loofe,  and  newly  thrown

(i)  Our  author  dircfted  vines 'to  be  planted  in  trenches  made  two  feet  and  an  half  deep
in  trenched  ground.  To  this  ic  was  olje£ted,  That  rhe  vine  was  fet  too  deep.  Columella
asks,  Why  we  trench  the  ground  fo  deep,  if  we  fet  the  vines  fo  fhdlow,  and  do  not  plant
them  as  deep  as  we  trench  ?  They  who  made  this  objection,  and  blamed  him,  anfwered,
That  this  was  done,  that  the  earth  below  them  might  be  (oft,  and  that  t.he  fmall  roots
might  creep  gently  into  it.  Columella  anfwers,  That  this  may  alfo  happen,  if  the  earth  be
moved  with  the  two  foot  fpade,  and  the  plants  be  fet  in  trenches  more  than  two  feet  and
an  half  deep;  becaufe  the  earth,  when  trenched,  and  thrown  up  to  a  certain  height,  does
iermeRt  and  fwdl,  io  chat  theie  is  place  enough  for  the  roots  to  extend  chemfelves  in.

Y  up,


162  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IV.

up,  fwell  as  if  leaven  were  put  into  it  ?  and  then,  before  any  confider-
able  time  pafles,  it  is  condenfed,  and  fubfides,  and  forfakes  the  roots  of
the  vines,  leaving  them  fwimming,  as  it  were,  upon  the  furface  cf  the
ground  ?  But  this  does  not  happen  fo  readily  to  our  way  of  planting,
which  fets  the  vine  deeper  into  the  earth.  As  to  their  faying,  That  the
plants  fuffer  by  cold,  when  they  are  deep  in  the  ground,  this  alfo  we
don’t  deny  >  but  it  is  not  the  depth  of  two  feet  and  three-fourths  of  a
foot  that  can  produce  this  effect,  efpecially  confidering,  that,  as  I  faid
a  little  before,  notwith  (landing  vines,  which  are  to  be  coupled  with
trees,  are  fet  deeper  in  the  earth,  yet  they  efcape  the  forefaid  incon-
veniency.


CHAP.  II.

That  the  Branches  of  one  ^uichfet  ought  not  to  cloathe  two
Props  ;  but  every  fingle  Pla?it  muft  have  its  own  Prop
ajfigned  to  it.

THAT  other  pretence,  viz.  their  being  of  opinion,  that  two  props
are,  with  lefs  expence,  married  to  the  young  (hoots  of  one  plant,
is  falfe ;  for,  if  either  the  head  itfelf  (hould  die,  two  props  are  reduced
to  a  (late  of  widowhood,  and  prefently  as  many  quickfets  muft  be  fub-
ftituted  in  the  room  of  that  which  is  dead,  which,  by  their  number,
bring  a  further  charge  and  burden  upon  the  Hufbandman  j  or,  fuppofe
it  lives,  and,  as  it  often  happens,  (hould  either  turn  out  to  be  of  the
black  kind,  or  to  be  not  very  fruitful,  then  the  fruit  fails,  or  is  naught,
not  in  one  prop  only,  but  in  more  alfo.  And  even  they  who  have  more
(kill  than  ordinary  in  Hufbandry,  think,  that  a  vine,  tho’  it  be  of  the
generous  kind,  when  it  is  divided  in  this  manner  into  two  props,  will
become  lefs  fruitful,  becaufe  the  roots  will  interweave  under  ground,
and  form  a  hurdle  ;  and  therefore  the  felf-fame  Atticus  diredts  us  to
propagate  and  renew  old  vineyards  rather  by  layers,  than  by  laying  the
whole  vines  flat  in  the  ground  j  becaufe  layers  eafily  ftrike  root  prefently,
fo  that  each  vine  leans  upon,  and  is,  as  it  were,  fupported  by,  its  own
Foundation  :  but  that,  which  has  its  whole  body  laid  flat,  when  it  has,
with  its  roots  running  crofs  every  way,  wrought  the  lower  part  of  the
ground  like  a  lettice  or  net-work,  forms  a  hurdle,  and  it  is  vexed  and
tormented  by  its  many  roots  being  watled  into  one  another  ;  and  fails
and  decays  in  the  very  fame  manner  as  if  it  had  been  overburdened  with

branches:


Chap. III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  163

branches :  wherefore,  on  all  accounts,  I  would  rather  chufe  to  run  the
hazard  of  putting  two  plants  into  the  earth,  than  one  only;  and  not  to
purfue  that  as  an  advantage,  which,  every  way  confidered,  may  bring
a  much  greater  lofs.  But  now  the  argument  of  the  preceding  book  calls
upon  us  to  perform  what  we  promifed  we  would  begin  the  following
book  with.


CHAP.  III.

! That  a  Vineyard,  newly  planted,  will fpeedily  decay  and  per  ip,
if  it  is  not  fupported  by  great  and  ajfiduous  Culture .

IN  all  expenfive  undertakings  whatfoever,  as  Grczcinus  fays,  moft
men  begin  new  works  with  greater  courage  and  refolution,  than
they  maintain  and  fupport  them  with,  after  they  have  finifhed  them  ;
for  Come  men,  as  he  fays,  build  houfes  from  the  very  foundation,  and,
after  they  have  finifhed  the  building,  don’t  provide  proper  furniture  for
them.  Some  are  exceedingly  aCtive  in  building  of  fhips,  and,  after
they  have  built  them,  they  neither  rig  nor  man  them  as  they  ought  to
do.  Some  men  are  conftantly  employed  in  buying  of  cattle,  others  in
purchafing  Haves ;  but  they  are  under  no  manner  of  concern  about
keeping  and  preferving  them.  Many  alfo,  by  their  levity,  undo  and
deftroy  the  favours  they  have  beftowed  upon  their  friends.  And,  that
we  may  not,  Silvinus ,  wonder  at  thefe  things,  there  are  fome  men,
who,  with  great  covetoufnefs  and  parfimony,  educate  their  children,
which,  by  marriage,  prayers,  and  vows,  they  earneftly  fought  for ;  nor
do  they  cultivate  either  their  mind,  or  their  body,  with  any  kind  of  difci-
pline,  exercife,  or  any  improvement  whatfoever.

What  is  to  be  inferred  from  thefe  things?  It  is  this,  that,  for  the
moft  part,  Hufbandmen  alfo  are  guilty  of  the  fame  kind  of  fault,  who,
upon  various  pretences,  abandon  vineyards,  which  they  have  beautifully
planted,  before  ever  they  grow  up  to  any  perfection.  Some  avoid  a
yearly  expence,  and  think,  that  this  is  the  firft  and  the  fureft  income,
to  be  at  no  expences  at  all;  as  if  they  were  under  an  abfolute  neceftity
to  make  vineyards,  which  they  might  prefently,  through  covetoufnefs,
throw  up  and  abandon.  Some  think  it  a  fine  thing  to  have  rather  fpa-
cious  than  well-cultivated  vineyards  in  their  pofleftion.  I  have  even
known  many  who  are  fully  perfuaded,  that  land  ought  ftill  to  be  culti¬
vated,  whether  it  be  by  good  or  bad  methods.

Y  2


But


164  L.  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

But  my  opinion  is,  that  as  no  kind  of  land  vvhatfoever  can  be  fruitful,
unlefs  it  be  diligently,  carefully,  and  fkilfully  manured,  fo  more  efpe-
cially  vineyards.  For  a  vine  is  a  delicate,  tender,  and  weak  thing,
and  can  by  no  means  bear  with  hard  ufage  ;  and,  for  the  mod:  part,  it
is  confumed  by  too  much  labour,  and  bearing  too  great  plenty  of  fruit;
and,  if  you  don’t  re  drain  it  within  due  bounds,  it  perifhes  by  its  own
fruitfulnefs.  But  when  it  has,  in  fome  meafure,  drengthened  and  hard¬
ened  itfelf,  and  attained,  as  it  were,  to  the  drength  of  youth-hood,  it  can
bear  up  under  neglect.  But  a  young  vineyard,  while  it  is  growing  up,
unlefs  it  receive  all  due  care  and  attendance,  is  reduced  into  the  poored
and  mod  darving  condition,  and  pines  and  wades  away  in  fuch  a  man¬
ner,  that  it  can  never  afterwards,  by  any  expences  whatfoever,  be
recovered  and  reftored.  Therefore  the  foundations,  as  it  were,  mud
be  laid  with  the  greated  care,  and  from  the  hrd  day  of  planting  it,
it  mud  be  formed  with  the  dime  care  as  the  members  of  infants  are  ;
which  unlefs  we  do,  all  our  expences  will  be  laid  out  to  no  purpofe ;
nor  can  the  proper  leafon  of  any  thing  be  recalled,  when  once  we  let
it  pafs.  Believe  me,  Silvinus ,  upon  my  own  experience,  that  a  vine¬
yard  well  planted,  and  of  a  good  kind,  and  under  the  care  of  a  good
Hulbandman,  did  never  fail  to  requite,  with  ufury,  all  the  expences
and  pains  bedowed  upon  it.

And  this  the  fame  Grczcinus  makes  clear  to  us,  not  only  by  reafon,
but  by  an  example  alfo,  in  that  book  which  he  wrote  of  vineyards  ;
where  he  tells,  that  he  ufed  frequently  to  hear  from  his  own  father,
that  one  Pavidius  Veterenfis ,  his  own  neighbour,  had  two  daughters,
ana  a  piece  of  land  planted  with  vines ;  of  which  he  gave  a  third  part
as  a  portion  to  his  daughter  when  fhe  married ;  and,  this  notwithdand-
ing,  he  ufed  to  gather  an  equal  quantity  of  fruit  out  of  the  two  thirds  of
the  fame  land  ;  and  that  afterwards  he  gave  his  fecond  daughter  in  mar¬
riage,  with  the  half  of  the  land  that  remained  ;  nor  did  he  thereby  dif¬
fer  any  diminution  of  his  former  income.  What  inference  does  he  draw
from  this  ?  It  mud  certainly  be  this,  that  that  third  part  of  his  farm
was  afterwards  better  cultivated,  than  the  whole  of  it  had  been  for¬
merly.


CHAP.


Chap.  IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


165


CHAP.  IV.

/

That  the  Vine  ought  to  he  laid  flat  in  the  Trench  ;  and,  after
bending  it  back  from  the  Bottom  of  the  fame ,  and  raifeng  it
up  flraight ,  it  ought  to  be  applied  to  a  Reed.

WHerefore,  Publius  Silvinus ,  let  us  plant  vineyards  with  great
courage  and  refolution,  and  cultivate  them  with  greater  appli¬
cation  j  of  the  planting  of  which,  that  is  the  moft  commodious  method
which  we  have  delivered  in  the  preceding  book  ;  viz.  that  a  trench
being  made  in  the  paftinated  ground,  the  vine  be  laid  flat  from  the
middle  part  of  the  furrow  almoft,  and  that  the  firm-woody  part  of  it
be  raifed  up  ftraight  from  the  bottom,  and  applied  to  a  reed.  For  this,
efpecially,  muft  be  obferved,  that  the  trench  be  not  like  a  conduit,  or
trough  >  but  that  the  fronts,  or  ends  of  it,  be  raifed,  as  it  were,  exa&ly
perpendicular,  and  with  diftindt  regular  angles.  For  a  vine  that  is  laid
down  flat,  and  then  fet  in  a  leaning  pofture,  in  a  trough,  as  it  were,  is
afterwards  liable  to  be  wounded  when  it  is  ablaqueated :  for,  while  the
digger  is  intent  upon  digging,  ftrengthening,  and  railing  the  circum¬
ference  of  the  ablaqueation,  for  the  moft:  part,  he  wounds  the  vine  that
grows  obliquely,  and  fometimes  cuts  it  quite  thro’.

Therefore  we  muft  remember  to  raife  the  fprig  ftraight  up  from  the
bottom  of  the  trench,  and  apply  it  to  its  prop,  and  fo  bring  it  to  the
uppermoft  part  or  top  of  it.  Then  we  are  to  proceed  in  the  other
things  as  we  directed  in  the  preceding  book  :  and  then,  after  leaving
two  eyes  ftanding  above  ground,  to  level  the  trench.  Then,  having
planted  cuttings  between  the  rows,  we  muft,  by  frequently  digging  it,
loofen  the  paftinated  ground,  and  reduce  it  into  duft.  For  thus  the
cuttings,  quickfets,  and  other  plants  which  we  have  fet  in  it,  will  take
root,  thrive,  and  grow  ftrong,  if  the  foft  and  tender  ground  convey
moifture  to  them,  and  no  weeds  creep  in  among  them,  nor  the  hard-
nefs  of  the  ground  prefs  and  fqueeze  the  plants  while  they  are  young
and  tender,  as  if  they  were  bound  faft  with  fetters.


#


CHAP,


i66


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.


CHAP.  V.

After  the  Vines  are  planted ,  we  7nujl  dig  the  ground  every
Month ,  and  take  care ,  that  JVeeds  dont  fpring  up  in  it  ;
and  the  ^uickfets  ?nuft  be  reduced  to  one  Jingle  Branch  of
Firm-wood.

BUT,  to  confefs  the  truth,  the  number  of  times  that  the  ground
ought  to  be  turned  up  with  hoes,  is  not  to  be  determined,  feeing  it
is  agreed,  that  the  oftener  it  is  digged,  the  more  benefit  it  will  receive.
But,  becaufe  it  is  proper  to  fet  due  bounds  to  expences,  moft  people
think  it  fufficient  to  dig  new  vineyards  every  thirtieth  day  from  the  firft
of  March  to  the  firft  of  Oftober  ;  and  to  extirpate  all  forts  of  herbs,
efpecially  grafs,  which,  unlefs  they  be  picked  out  by  hand,  and  thrown
upon  the  furface  of  the  earth,  if  the  lead:  part  of  them  be  covered  with
earth,  they  revive,  and  fo  burn  up  the  vine-plants,  that  they  become
fcabby,  fhrivelled,  and  rufty.


CHAP.  VI.

Tdhat  fuperjluous  Leaves  and  Twigs  ought  to  be  cut  off  fro?n

Quickfets  and  Cuttings.

MOreover,  whether  we  have  planted  our  vineyards  with  cuttings,
or  with  quickfets,  it  is  beft  to  form  them  in  fuch  a  manner
from  the  beginning,  that  all  fuperfluities  may  be  plucked  off  them,  by
frequent  pampination  and  that  we  differ  them  not  to  communicate
their  ftrength,  and  all  their  nourifhment,  to  more  than  one  firm-wood
branch.  Neverthelefs,  at  firfi,  two  young  branches  are  fet  apart  for
growth,  that  one  of  them  may  be  for  a  referve,  if,  peradventure,  the
other  fhould  decay  and  fail.  Then  when  the  rods  are  a  little  hardened,
all  that  are  of  an  inferior  quality  are  pulled  off :  and  that  thofe  which
are  left  may  not  be  fliaken  off  by  fiormy  winds,  it  will  be  proper  to
follow  them,  as  they  grow  up,  with  a  foft,  flack  band,  till  they  take
fall  hold  of  their  props  with  their  tendrils,  as  it  were  with  hands.


4


But,


Chap.  VII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  167

But,  if  want  of  labourers  hinder  us  to  bellow  fo  much  labour  upon
the  cutting,  which,  we  are  of  opinion,  ought  itfelf  to  be  freed  from  all
its  luxuriant  twigs  and  leaves  j  yet,  certainly,  it  ought  to  be  done  to
vines  that  are  regularly  planted  in  rows,  that  they  may  not  be  ema¬
ciated  by  too  many  rods  upon  them,  unlefs  we  are  making  a  provifion
of  layers  for  the  time  to  come,  in  order  to  propagate  the  vine  :  but
that  they  may  minifter  nourifhment  only  to  one  firm-wood  branch
each,  whofe  growth  we  ought  to  encourage,  by  applying  a  longer  prop
to  them,  by  which  they  may  creep  up  to  fiich  a  height,  as  to  mount
above  the  frame  you  make  for  the  following  year,  and  be  bended,  in
order  to  bear  fruit.  When  they  are  grown  up  to  this  height,  their
tops  mull  be  broken,  that  fo  they  may  rather  grow  in  thicknefs  and
flrength,  than  be  attenuated,  by  (hooting  out  into  a  fuperfluous  length.

Neverthelefs,  we  will  pull  off  all  the  fuperfluous  leaves  and  twigs
from  this  very  branch,  which  we  fet  apart  for  firm- wood,  as  far  as
three  feet  and  a  half  from  the  bottom,  and  we  will  often  pull  off  all
the  nephews,  or  fecondary  (hoots,  that  fpring  out  of  it  within  that  fpaee.
Then,  whatever  (hall  fprout  out  of  it  above  that,  muft  be  left  un¬
touched  :  for  it  is  more  proper,  that  the  upper  part  be  lopped  o(F  the
next  autumn  with  the  pruning-knife,  than  be  pampinated  in  the  fum-
mer-time  ;  becaufe  from  that  place  from  whence  you  have  taken  away
the  nephew,  or  fecondary  twig,  it  prefently  pours  forth  another  ;  and,
after  this  is  fprung  out,  there  is  no  eye  left  in  the  firm  branch  itfelf,
which  may  fprout  out  with  fruit  the  following  year.


CHAP.  VII.

'That  then  is  the  due  Seafon  for  F  ampinating,  when  the  Twigs
can  be  ftruck  ojf  with  the  Finger.

BUT  that  is  the  proper  feafon  for  cutting  off  fuperfluous  twigs  and
leaves,  when  the  young  (hoots  are  fo  tender,  that  they  may  be
ftruck  off  with  a  flight  touch  of  the  finger  ;  for,  if  they  are  hardened
to  a  greater  degree,  they  muft  either  be  pulled  off  with  greater  effort,
or  lopped  with  the  pruning-knife,  both  which  are  to  be  avoided ;  the
one  becaufe  it  tears  the  mother  (if  you  endeavour  to  pull  it  off  by  force) ;
and  the  other,  becaufe  it  wounds  her,  which  is  very  hurtful  to  be  done
in  a  green  ftem,  as  yet  not  grown  up  to  maturity.  For  the  gath  does
not  ftop  exa&ly  in  the  very  place  where  the  edge  of  the  knife  made

the


1 68  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

the  impreffion,  and  left  its  mark  ;  but,  in  the  fummer  heats,  a  wound
deeply  impreffed  with  the  knife,  fpreads  to  a  greater  breadth,  and  wi¬
thers,  and  dries  up,  fo  that  it  kills  no  fmall  part  of  the  mother’s  body
itfelf  ■,  and  therefore,  if  it  be  abfolutely  neceflary  to  apply  the  knife  to
young  branches  which  are  already  grown  hard,  they  mud  be  cut  off  at  a
little  diflance  from  the  mother,  and  left  as  flumps  or  fhort-cut  branches,
which  may  receive  the  injury  of  the  heat,  fo  far  as  the  place  where  the
young  twigs  fprout  out  of  her  fide ;  for  the  violence  of  the  heat  does
not  creep  further.

The  fame  method  mufl  be  obferved  in  pulling  the  fuperfluous  leaves
and  twigs  off  the  cuttings,  and  in  humouring  and  affifling  the  firm-wood
to  grow  out  in  length,  if  we  have  a  mind  to  ufe  it  when  it  is  one  year
old,  which  I  have  often  done.  But  if  we  are  certainly  refolved  to  cut
it,  that  we  may  ufe  it  rather  when  it  is  two  years  old,  after  you  have
reduced  it  to  one  young  branch,  and  the  cutting  itfelf  exceeds  a  foot  in
length,  it  will  be  proper  to  lop  off  the  top  of  it,  that  it  may  grow  more
firm  towards  the  neck,  and  become  the  flronger.  And  this  is  the  lirft
culture  of  plants,  after  they  are  fe


C  H  A  P.  VIII.

That  a  Vineya7'd  mujl  be  ablaqueated  in  the  Autumn.

THEN  the  time  following  (as  Celfus  and  Atticus,  whom  our  age  has
mofl  approved,  with  rel'pedl  toHufbandry,  have  declared)  requires
amoreextenfive  care.  For,  after  the  fifteenth  of  Ottober,  before  the  colds
come  upon  us,  the  vine  mufl  be  ablaqueated  ( i ) ;  which  work  lays  open
and  fhews  the  hidden  fmall  roots,  which  it  put  forth  lafl  fummer,
and  the  prudent  Hufbandman  cuts  them  off  with  the  knife.  For,  if


(i)  Ablaqueatio-,  abJnqucare.  This  original  word  is  rerained  by  fome,  and  if  it  was  com¬
monly  underftood,  would  be  more  commodious  than  a  long  circumlocution.  It  (ignifies,
to  dig  round  the  root  of  a  vine,  or  any  other  tree,  in  order  to  lay  their  roots  bare,  and
expofe  them  to  the  air  and  wind,  and  with  the  earth  to  make,  all  round  the  vine,  a  kind  of
repofuory,  or  bafon,  for  the  water  j  and  to  take  away  the  uppermoft  fuperfluous  roots,
and  thereby  the  earth  is  provoked  to  imbibe  the  fun  and  thefhowers.  It  contributes  very
much  to  their  growth,  and  is  otherwife  of  very  great  benefit  to  them  ;  fo  that  theoftener
the  tree  is  ablaqueated,  the  better  does  it  thrive,  if  the  nature  of  the  place,  and  other  circnm-
ftances,  permit.  Authors  do  not  agree  about  the  Etymology  of  the  word  :  the  moft  pro¬
bable  opinion  is,  that  it  is  formed  from  lacus,  the  pool,  or  pond,  made  round  the  tree,  by
digging  out  the  earth,  and  difeovering  the  roots.


he


Chap.  VIII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  169

he  fuffer  them  to  grow  ftrong,  the  roots  that  lie  lower  will  decay  ;
and  the  event  is,  that  the  vine  ftretches  out  her  roots  upon  the  furfacc
of  the  ground,  which  are  both  infefted  with  the  cold,  and  fcorched  to
a  greater  degree  with  the  heats,  and  fo  force  their  mother  to  fuffer  a
vehement  thirft  at  the  riling  of  the  Dog-ftar.  Wherefore,  when  you
have  ablaqueated  the  vine,  whatever  has  fprouted  out  of  it  within  a  foot
and  an  half  muff  be  cut  away.

But  the  method  of  amputation  in  this  is  not  the  fame  as  was  directed
with  the  upper  part  of  the  vine :  for  the  wound  muft  not  be  fmoothed,
and  the  knife  muft  by  no  means  be  applied  to  the  mother  herfelf ;  be-
caufe  if  you  cut  off  the  root  hard  by  the  ftock,  either  more  roots  will
fpring  out  of  the  Tear,  or  the  winter  rain,  which  ftagnates  and  forms
a  pool  in  the  fmall  hollows  that  are  made  round  the  tree,  when  it  is
ablaqueated,  will,  by  its  freezing  in  the  middle  of  winter,  chill  and  gall
the  new  wounds,  and  penetrate  to  the  very  pith.  To  prevent  this,  it
will  be  proper  to  keep  at  the  diftance  of  about  one  finger’s-breadth  from
the  trunk,  and  fo  cut  away  all  the  fmall  roots  ;  which,  being  taken
away  after  this  manner,  fprout  out  no  more,  and  defend  the  trunk
from  further  injury.

This  work  being  finifhed,  if  the  winter  be  mild  in  that  region,  the
vine  muft  be  left  open  ;  but,  if  a  harder  winter  forbids  to  do  this,  the
forefaid  cavities,  or  little  ponds,  muft  be  filled  up,  and  levelled,  before
the  thirteenth  of  December.  But  alfo,  if  you  have  any  fufpicion,  that  the
colds  of  that  country  will  be  exceflive,  before  you  cover  the  vine  with
earth,  you  muft  lay  fome  quantity  of  dung  to  its  roots,  or,  if  it  be  more
convenient,  pigeons  dung  j  or  you  muft  pour  upon  them  fix  J'extarii  of
old  urine,  prepared  for  that  purpofe  :  but  you  muft  ablaqueate  the
vine,  every  autumn,  for  the  firft  five  years,  till  it  grow  ftrong.  But,
when  the  ftock  is  full-grown,  the  labour  of  this  work  muft  be  inter¬
mitted  almoft  for  three  years :  for  the  legs  of  the  vines  are  lefs  hurt
with  the  iron,  and  the  young  fmall  roots  don’t  fpring  out  of  it  fo
quickly,  now  the  ftock  is  become  old.


Z


C  H  A  P.


170


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  BookIV.


CHAP.  IX.

After  what  manner  an  ahlaqueated  Vine  is  to  he  pruned.

THEN,  after  the  ablaqueation,  follows  the  pruning,  which  is
to  be  performed  in  fuch  a  manner,  that,  according  to  the  di¬
rection  of  antient  authors,  the  vine  may  be  reduced  to  one  fmall  rod,
and  that  it  be  cut  fo  as  to  leave  two  eyes  next  to  the  earth  ;  which
pruning  mull  not  be  performed  juft  by  the  joint,  left  the  eye  be  put  in
fear  ;  but  the  wound  is  made  with  the  knife  obliquely,  almoft  in  the
middle  of  the  fpace  between  the  knots,  left  the  fear,  if  it  were  made
exaCtly  croflways,  fhould  contain  the  rain  that  falls  upon  it ;  but  neither
muft  it  decline  towards  that  part  where  the  bud  is,  but  towards  the
back  part,  that  fo  the  cut  being  made  Hoping,  it  may  let  its  tears  fall
rather  upon  the  ground  than  upon  the  bud :  for  the  moifture  that  flows
down  blinds  the  eye,  and  fuffers  it  not  to  put  forth  its  buds.


CHAP.  X.

Of  the  bejl  Time  for  pruning.

THERE  are  twofeafons  for  pruning;  but  that  of  the  fpring  (as Mago
fays)  is  the  beft,  before  the  cutting  begins  to  fprout,  and  put  forth
its  buds;  becaufe,  being  full  of  juice,  it  does  not  relift  the  pruning-knife,
but  receives  an  eafy,  fmooth,  and  equal  wound.  CelJ'us  and  Atticus
were  of  the  fame  mind  with  him.  But  we  are  of  opinion,  that  plants
ought  neither  to  be  kept  too  much  under,  by  pruning  them  too  near,
unlefs  they  be  very  weak ;  nor  be  cut  by  any  means  in  the  fpring  of
the  year.  But,  indeed,  the  firft  year  they  are  planted,  they  muft  be
aflifted  by  frequent  diggings,  every  month,  while  they  have  leaves  upon
them  ;  and  by  frequently  pulling  off  their  fuperfluous  leaves  and  twigs,
that  they  may  gather  ftrength,  and  not  minifter  nourilhment  to  more
than  one  firm-wcod  branch.  And,  after  they  have  educated  this,  we
are  of  opinion,  that,  either  in  the  autumn,  or  in  the  fpring,  if  it  be
more  convenient,  every  thing  that  is  fuperfluous  upon  them  fhould  be
pared  away ;  and  that  they  be  freed  from  the  nephews,  or  fecondary
twigs,  which  the  vine-drefler  had  omitted  in  their  upper  part,  and  fo
be  placed  upon  the  frame.  For  that  vine  is  fmooth  and  ftraight,  with-
f  out


Chap. XI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  171

Out  a  fear,  which,  with  the  rod  of  the  firll  year,  has  railed  itfelf  above
the  frame,  which  happens  but  very  feldom,  and  with  few  Hulband-
men.  Therefore  the  forefaid  authors  gave  it  as  their  judgment,  to  cut
off  the  firll  fruits  of  the  vine.  But  neither,  indeed,  is  pruning  in  the
fpring  of  the  year  bed:  in  all  countries.  But  where  plaees  are  expofed
to  the  fun,  and  the  winters  are  mild,  pruning  in  autumn  is  bell,  and
moll  natural ;  at  which  time,  trees,  by  a  certain  divine  and  eternal  law,
drop  both  their  fruit  and  their  leaves.


CHAP.  Xf.

How  a  Cutting  ought  to  be  cut  and  lopped.

IT  is  my  opinion  you  fhould  do  this,  whether  you  have  planted  a
quickfet,  or  a  cutting  :  for  experience  has  condemned  that  antient
opinion,  that  cuttings  of  one  year  old  ought  not  to  be  touched  with  the
knife,  becaufe  they  dread  an  edge-tool,  j  which  Virgil  (i)  and  Saferna ,
the  Stolos  and  the  Catos  (2),  were  afraid  of  without  any  foundation  ;
who  not  only  erred  in  this,  that  they  fuffered  the  firll  years  capilla-
ments  of  plants  to  remain  untouched  j  but  that  after  the  Ipace  of  three
years,  when  the  quickfet  was  to  be  cut,  they  cut  away  all  the  upper
part  of  it  to  the  very  ground,  juft  by  the  joint  itfelf,  that  fo  it  might
pullulate  out  of  the  hard  wood.  But  ufe,  the  mailer  of  arts,  has  taught
us  to  form  and  regulate  the  growth  of  cuttings  of  the  firll  year,  and
not  to  fuffer  the  vine,  growing  luxuriant  with  fuperfluous  leaves  and
twigs,  to  wax  wild ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  to  rellrain  and  curb
it  fo  much  as  the  antients  directed,  fo  as  to  cut  off  all  the  upper  part
of  it ;  for  this  is  exceeding  hurtful  to  it  :  firll,  becaufe  moll  of  the
plants,  after  you  have  cut  them  as  low  as  the  ground,  (having  received,
as  it  were,  an  intolerable  wound)  perilh,  and  lome  of  them  alfo,  which
have  been  fo  llubborn  as  to  live,  put  forth  wood-branches,  that  are  not
fo  fruitful  as  otherwife  they  would  have  been  ;  feeing  it  is  allowed  by
every-body,  that  Ihoots  which  fprout  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,
are  very  often  dellitute  of  fruit  :  a  middle  way  therefore  mull  be  fol¬
lowed,  viz  that  we  neither  cut  the  cutting  clofe  to  the  ground,  nor,  on
the  other  hand,  provoke  or  encourage  it  to  fhoot  out  into  firm- wood,

(x)  Virg.  Georg.  lib.  ii.  362,  36$*

(2)  Cato  de  re  ruflica ,  lib.  xxxiii.  2.


172  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV,

to  a  greater  length  than  is  requifite;  but,  having  remarked  the  thumb  (3  )
of  the  former  year,  we  may  leave,  above  the  very  place  where  the
old  fpray  was  joined  to  it,  one  or  two  eyes  from  which  it  may  ger¬
minate.


CHAP.  XII.

After  what  manner  a  Vineyard  mufl  be  propped ,  and  of  the

fingle  Frame  for  Vines.

NOW,  after  the  pruning,  follows  the  care  of  propping  a  vineyard  j
but  this  year  does  not  as  yet  require  a  very  ftrong  prop  or  flake.
For  I  have  obferved,  that,  for  the  moft  part,  a  tender  young  vine  refts
better  upon  a  fmall  prop,  than  upon  a  very  high  ftrong  pole.  There¬
fore  we  will  either  apply  two  old  reeds  (left  young  ones  ftrike  root)
to  each  vine ;  or,  if  the  condition  of  the  country  permits  it,  fet  old
fpear-ftaves  into  the  ground,  to  which  may  be  faftened  fingle  tranfverfe
poles  toward  the  lower  part  of  the  row  j  which  kind  of  rail  or  frame
Ruftics  call  Canterius  (a  Horfe)  :  it  is  of  very  great  advantage,  that
there  be  fomething  which  the  tendril,  creeping  forth,  may  prefently
take  hold  of,  a  little  below  the  bending  of  the  vine  j  and  rather  fpread
itlelf  on  each  hand  on  the  tranfverfe  poles,  than  grow  upwards  towards
the  higher  part  of  a  frame ;  and  that,  leaning  upon  the  rail,  it  may  more
eafily  bear  up  againft  the  winds.  It  will  be  proper,  that  this  frame  be
not  railed  fo  high  as  four  feet,  till  fuch  time  as  the  vine  ftrengthens
itfelf.


CHAP.  XIII.

After  what  manner  a  Vine  is  to  be  tied.

NEXT  after  the  propping  follows  the  binder,  whofe  bufinefs  is  to
raife  the  vine  ftraight  up  to  the  frame  j.  and,  whether  it  be  fet
juft  by  the  prop,  as  fome  authors  would  have  it  j  he  that  binds  it  ought

(3)  Pollex.  The  antient  Husbandmen,  when  they  cut  off  any  fpray  growing  out  of  the
fide  of  a  branch  of  a  vine,  and  left  a  fmall  ftump  remaining,  not  cutting  it  clofe  to  the  branch,
called  that  ftump  a  Thumb,  from  the  refemblance  it  bore  to  the  thumb  of  one’s  hand.


to


Chap.  XIV.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  173

to  beware  of  thinking,  that  he  fhould  follow  the  bending  of  the  (lake
in  binding  the  firm-wood  branch  to  it  (if,  peradventure,  it  be  crooked) ;
for  this  makes  the  vine  crooked  ;  or,  whether  there  be  a  fpace  left
between  the  vine  and  the  prop,  (as  feemed  beft  to  Atticus ,  and  fome
other  Hufbandmen,  and  which  I  am  not  ill  pleafed  with)  the  reed  mu  ft
be  joined  ftraight  to  the  plant,  and  fo  by  feveral  bindings  it  muft  be
brought  up  to  the  frame.  It  is  of  great  importance  what  kind  of  bind¬
ings  the  plants  are  bound  with  :  for,  while  the  vine  is  young  and  ten¬
der,  it  muft  be  bound  with  the  fofteft  that  can  be  found  ;  for,  if  you
bind  them  with  wickers,  either  of  willow  or  elm,  as  the  vine  grow  s
thicker,  it  cuts  itfelf.  Therefore  broom  is  beft  for  this  purpofe,  or
bulrufhes  cut  in  marfihes,  or  long  grafs  that  grows  in  pools  of  ftanding
water.  Neverthelefs,  the  leaves  of  reeds  alfo,  dried  in  the  fhade,  are
not  at  all  bad  for  this  ufe.


CHAP.  XIV.

Cuttings  muft  be  put  upon  a  Frame ,  and  how  high  the  fingle
Frame ,  or  Rail ,  muft  be  raifed.

^  UT  the  like  care  muft  be  taken  of  cuttings  alfo,  that  they  be  put
j  upon  the  frame,  after  they  are  pruned  to  one  or  two  eyes,  either
in  autumn,  or  in  the  fpring,  before  they  put  forth  their  buds.  The
rail,  or  horfe,  as  I  faid,  muft  not  be  raifed  fo  high  above  the  earth,
as  it  is  for  vines  that  grow  in  rows  :  nor  ought  it  to  be  more  than  one
foot  high,  that  fo  there  may  be  fomething  to  which  the  yet  tender  and
young  branches  may  bind  themfelves  with  their  tendrils,  that  they  may
not  be  rooted  up  by  the  winds.  Then  follows  the  digger,  who  is  fre¬
quently  to  turn  up  with  hoes  the  furface  of  the  ground  equally,  and  by
little  and  little  at  a  time.

We  approve  moft  of  this  even  plain  digging  ;  for  that  which  in
Spain  they  call  the  winter-digging,  when  the  earth  is  drawn  from  the
vines,  and  brought  into  the  middle  (paces  between  the  rows,  feems  fuper-
fluous  to  us,  becaufe  the  autumnal  ablaqueation  has  immediately  pre¬
ceded,  which  has  laid  bare  the  uppermoft  fmall  roots,  and  reached  to
thofe  that  are  undermoft,  and  transmitted  the  winter-fhowers.  But  the
number  of  diggings  ought  either  to  be  the  fame  with  that  of  the  firft
year,  or  lefs  by  one  i  for  certainly  the  ground  muft  be  frequently  ftirred,.

tilt


i  .74  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

till  inch  time  as  the  vines,  by  their  growth,  overfhadow  it,  and  don’t
ftiffer  the  weeds  to  grow  under  them.

This  year,  the  fuperfluous  twigs  and  leaves  muft  be  pulled  off,  in  tke
very  fame  manner  as  they  were  the  firft  year.  .  For  the  puerile  age,  as
it  were,  of  the  plants,  muft  as  yet  be  kept  under  due  reftraint,  and
not  more  than  one  rod  of  the  plant  be  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit  j  and
fo  much  the  more  indeed,  becaufe  its  tender  age  cannot  endure  to  be
burdened  both  with  offspring,  or  fruit,  and  with  firm- wood  branches.


CHAP.  XV.

After  what  manner  a  Vineyard  muft  be  recruited ,  and  how

Layers  are  to  be  made.

BUT  when  the  vineyard,  of  one  year  and  an  half  old,  is  brought
the  length  of  the  vintage,  after  the  fruit  is  taken  away,  it  muft
be  fupplied  and  filled  up  with  new  plants  (i)  j  and  the  prefidiary  cut¬
tings  (2),  which  were  fet  for  that  purpofe,  muft  be  propagated  :  or,
if  we  have  none  of  thefe,  a  layer  muft  be  drawn  from  a  vine  growing
in  the  row,  to  another  ftake.  For  it  is  of  very  great  importance,  that
every  prop  be  cloathed  by  ftill  planting  a  new  vine  in  the  room  of  that
which  is  dead  ;  and  not  to  be  afterwards  recruiting  our  vineyard,  when
we  ought  to  be  reaping  the  fruit  thereof.

There  is  a  kind  of  layer  (3)  when  the  vine  is  bended  above  the  earth
hard  by  the  prop,  and,  being  put  under-ground,  is,  by  a  deep  trench,
carried  to  the  prop  ;  then  from  the  arch  which  it  forms,  it  puts  forth
vehemently  a  firm- wood  branch  (4),  which,  being  prefently  applied  to

its

(1)  Vine  a  frequent  anda.  The  meaning  of  this  phrafe  is,  that  when  any  of  the  regular
vines  of  a  vineyard,  i.  e.  fuch  of  them  as  grow  in  the  rows,  happen  to  die,  their  places
mull:  be  fupplied  with  other  vines  from  other  places  ;  for  this  purpofe,  the  author  directs
to  plant  cuttings  between  the  vines,  in  order  to  have  a  fupply  always  ready  at  hand,  when
they  are  wanted.

(2)  Malleolus  prafJiarius  is  a  cutting  fet  between  the  vines  that  grow  in  rows  in  a  vine¬
yard,  in  order  to  fupply  their  place,  if  they  fhould  happen  to  die.

(3)  Mergus,  a  layer.  This  has  its  name  from  fowls,  that  dive  into  the  water.  The  vine
is  bended  into  the  earth,  and  carried  under-ground  a  little  way,  and  then  raifed  up  again  3
and  fo  refembles  thofe  fowls  which  dive  under  water,  and  rife  up  again  at  fome  diftance
from  the  place  where  they  firft  plunged  into  it.

(4)  Turn  ex  arcu  'vehement er  citat  materiam.  Citare ,  a  word  frequently  ufed  by  our  author,
to  exprefs  a  vine’s  putting  forth  its  buds,  leaves,  fruit,  or  roots,  as  it  were  fummoning  them

to


Chap.  XVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  175

its  own  prop,  is  called  up  to  the  frame.  Then  the  following  year  an
incifion  is  made  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  curvature,  as  far  as  the  pith,
left  the  rod,  which  is  propagated,  attradd  the  whole  ftrength  of  its  mother ;
and  that  it  may  learn,  by  little  and  little,  to  be  nourished  by  its  own
roots.  Then,  when  it  is  two  years  old,  it  is  chopped  off  hard  by  the
young  branch,  which,  from  the  bow  or  arch,  is  fet  apart  for  growth  ;
and  that  which  is  newly  cut  off  from  its  mother,  is  prefently  digged
deep  all  round ;  and,  a  fmall  trench  being  made,  you  muft  cut  it  clofe
by  the  very  bottom  of  the  trench,  and  cover  it  over  with  earth,  that  it
may  ftrike  its  roots  downwards,  and  not  fprout  out  towards  the  furface
of  the  earth,  after  it  has  been  negligently  cut  too  near  the  fame.  But
there  is  no  time  fitter  for  making  the  amputation  of  this  layer,  than
from  the  fifteenth  of  October  to  the  thirteenth  of  November ,  that  fo  it
may  confirm  and  fix  its  roots  in  the  winter-months.  For,  if  we  do
this  in  the  fpring,  when  the  vine-branches  begin  to  put  forth  their  buds*
being  fuddenly  deprived  of  maternal  nourifhment,  it  falls  into  a  languish¬
ing  condition.


CHAP.  XVI.

At  what  time  a  ^uickfet  muft  be  tranfplanted.

THE  fame  method  muft  be  obferved  in  tranfplanting  a  cutting  :

for,  in  the  fecond  autumn,  if  the  quality  of  the  climate,  and  of
the  place,  allows  it,  it  is  moft  conveniently  taken  out  of  the  ground
after  the  fifteenth  of  October ,  and  planted.  But  if  fome  hurtful  qua¬
lity,  either  of  the  earth,  or  of  the  air,  be  repugnant,  then  the  time  for
reihoving  it  is  delayed  till  next  fpring.  Nor  muft  it  be  left  longer  in
the  vineyards,  left  it  confume  the  ftrength  of  the  ground,  and  annoy
the  plants  that  grow  in  the  rows,  which,  the  fooner  they  are  freed  from
the  company  and  partnership  of  the  quickfets,  fo  much  the  more  eafiiy
do  they  grow,  and  gather  ftrength.  But,  in  a  nurferv,  yot^ may  keep
a  vine  very  Safely  three,  yea,  four  years,  when  you  have  cut  or  pruned
it  very  near,  becaufe  the  vintage  is  not  what  you  have  in  view.

to  (hew  themfelves.  The  meaning  of  this  fentence  is,  that  whenever  a  vine  is  bended,  and
kid  in  the  ground,  it  vigorously  putteth  forth  a  fhoot  at  the  bow,  or  arched  part,  which
wilt  grow  up  to  be  a  firm-wood  branch ;  for,  in  the  language  of  ruftic  wri  ers,  Materia-
Signifies,  when  they  are  fpeaking  of  vines,  the  woody  part,  or  a  Snoot,  which  in  time  will-
grow  up,  and  become  firm-wood.


When


176  L,  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  Book  IV'

When  a  vineyard  has  been  planted  above  thirty  months,  that  is,  in
the  third  autufrm,  it  muft  prefently  be  fupported  with  ftronger  and
higher  props :  and  this  muft  not  be  done  juft  as  you  lift,  or  at  random ;
for,  whether  you  fix  the  prop  near  to  the  ftock,  yet  you  muft  keep  at
the  diftance  of  one  foot  from  it,  left  it  either  prefs  upon,  or  wound
the  root,  and  that  the  digger  may  dig  round  the  plants  on  every  fide.
And  this  prop  muft  be  lb  placed,  that  it  may  receive  the  violence,
both  of  the  colds,  and  of  the  north  winds,  and  protect  the  vine  ;  or,
whether  you  fix  it  in  the  middle  of  the  fpace  between  two  rows,  you
muft  either  dig  a  hole  for  it,  and  fo  fink  it  into  the  ground,  or  you
muft  firft  bore  the  ground  with  a  fmall  ftake,  and  then  drive  the  prop
deeper  into  the  earth,  that  it  may  more  eafily  fupport  both  the  frame,
and  the  fruit.  For,  the  nearer  the  pale  is  placed  to  the  ftock  of  the
vine,  the  more  firm  and  fteady  it  will  be,  fuppofe  it  be  but  (lightly
faftened  in  the  ground ;  for,  being  near  to  the  vine,  it  mutually  fupports,
and  is  fupported.

Then,  upon  the  fupporting  props,  you  muft  bind  very  firm  and  ftrong
frames  ;  and  thefe  muft  be  made  either  with  willow-poles,  er  with
reeds  put,  as  it  were,  into  bundles,  to  give  them  fufticient  ftiffnefs,  fo
that  they  may  not  yield,  nor  fink  down  with  the  weight  of  the  fruit.
For  now  two  firm-wood  branches  muft  be  preferved  upon  each  plant,
and  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit ;  unlefs,  notwithstanding,  the  flendernefs
of  any  vine  (ball  require  a  clofer  pruning,  of  which  only  one  fruit¬
bearing  branch  muft  be  left,  with  very  few  eyes  upon  the  fame.


CHAP.  XVII.

After  what  manner  a  Frame  muji  be  ??iade  with  Reeds .

A  Frame  made  of  poles  is  the  firmed:,  and  requires  lefs  labour.

Reeds  require  more  labourers  to  put  them  together,  becaufe  they
are  both  tied  in  more  places ;  and  they  muft  be  bound  with  their  tops
turned  to  one  another,  that  the  whole  frame  may  be  equally  thick  j
for.,  if  the  tops  are  laid  all  one  way,  the  weaknefs  of  that  part,  being
prefted  down  with  the  weight,  lets  the  fruit  fall  to  the  ground,  when  it
js  juft  ripe,  and  expofes  it  to  dogs  and  wild  beafts.  But,  when  a  frame
is -orderly  made  of  reeds  put  into  bundles,  with  their  tops  turned  alter¬
nately  to  each  other,  it  will  be  fit  for  ufe  alinoft  for  the  fpace  of  five
years.


Nor


Chap. XVII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  i77

Nor  is  the  method  of  pruning,  or  of  any  other  part  of  Culture,  differ¬
ent  from  what  it  was  the  firft  two  years ;  for,  in  autumn,  the  roots  of
the  vines  muft  be  carefully  laid  open,  and  no  lefs  care  taken  to  apply
new  vines  by  layers  to  the  vacant  props;  for  this  work  muft  never  be
intermitted,  but  let  it  be  renewed  every  year :  for  indeed  fuch  things  as
are  planted  by  us  cannot  be  immortal;  neverthelefs  we  thus  ufe  our  en¬
deavours  to  make  them  eternal,  by  fubftituting  new  plants  in  the  room
of  fuch  as  are  dead;  nor  do  we  fuffer  the  whole  generation  to  be  reduced
to  utter  deftruftion  by  the  negledt  of  many  years.  Moreover,  we  muft
beftow  frequent  diggings  upon  them,  tho’  we  may  with-hold  one  dig¬
ging  from  the  Culture  we  beftowed  upon  them  the  firft  year.  The
luperfluous  leaves  and  twigs  muft  be  often  plucked  off ;  nor  is  it  enough
to  do  this  to  the  vine  once  and  again  the  whole  fummer :  but  efpecially
all  thofe  things,  which  fprout  out  below  the  head  of  the  ftock,  muft  be
fhaken  off.  Alfo,  if  each  eye  upon  the  frame  fhould  fend  forth  two
young  fhoots,  tho’  they  fhew  us  great  plenty  of  fruit,  yet  one  of  the
fmall  fruit-bearing  branches  muft  be  pulled  off,  that  the  firm-wood
branch,  which  remains,  may  thrive  the  better,  have  the  better  heart,
rear  itfelf  the  more  chearfully,  and  educate  the  fruit  that  remains  the
better.

After  the  one-and-fortieth  month,  when  the  vintage  is  finifhed,  the
pruning  muft  be  fo  managed,  that  the  vine  may  be  fpread  and  divided
into  the  form  of  a  ftar,  by  fetting  apart  feveral  rods  or  long  fhoots  for
bearing  fruit.  But  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  the  Pruner  to  reftrain  and  keep  in
the  vine  almoft  within  the  fpace  of  one  foot  round  the  frame,  that  what¬
ever  tender  thing  is  fent  forth  from  the  head  of  the  vine  all  ^Jong  its
arms,  may  be  encouraged  and  helped  forward,  and,  after  bending  it
over  the  frame,  be  precipitated  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  not  to  touch  the
earth.

But  a  due  meafure  muft  be  obferved,  in  proportion  to  the  ftrength
of  the  ftock,  left  more  fruit-bearing  branches  be  fet  apart  for  bearing
fruit,  than  the  vine  is  able  to  minifter  fufEcient  nourifhment  to.  But
ordinarily  the  forefaid  age,  in  a  rich  ground,  where  the  ftock  thrives
very  well,  requires  and  allows  of  three  firm-wood  branches,  feldom
f#ur,  which  the  Binder  ought  to  feparate  and  divide  into  as  many  dif¬
ferent  parts ;  for  it  is  to  no  purpofe  that  the  frame  be  decuflated  and
made  into  the  form  of  a  ftar,  and  be  fpread  wide  and  divided,  unlefs
the  fruit-bearing  branches  of  the  vine  be  fpread  and  joined  to  it  in  the
like  manner :  which  form  neverthelefs  all  Hufbandmen  have  not  ap¬
proved  of ;  for  many  have  contented  themlelves  with  extending  the  vine
in  one  line.  But  a  vine  is  more  ftable,  and  abler  to  bear  the  burden  both

A  a  of


178  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

of  the  young  branches  and  fprays,  and  of  the  fruit,  which,  being  bound
on  both  tides  to  the  frame,  is,  by  an  equal  counterpoife,  kept  faft  as
with  to  many  anchors ;  as  alfo  a  vine,  that  is  fupported  on  every  fide,
diffufes  and  lpreads  abroad  firm-wood  branches  by  more  arms,  and
opens  and  difplays  them  more  eafily,  than  that  which,  upon  a  fingle
’  rail,  is  crouded  with  very  many  fruit-bearing  branches.

Neverthelefs,  if  a  vine  is  not  fpread  out  to  a  great  breadth,  and  does
not  bear  very  much  fruit,  and  has  neither  a  foggy  nor  a  ftormy  climate,
it  may  be  latisfied  with  one  tingle  frame;  for,  where  rain6  and  ftorms
come  with  great  force  and  violence,  where  the  vine  is  weakened  by
frequent  rains,  and  where  it  hangs,  as  it  were,  upon  exceeding  fteep
hills,  and  requires  very  many  defences  and  fafeguards,  there  it  muft
be  fortified  and  fupported  all  round,  as  it  were,  with  a  fquare  battalion.
But,  in  warm  and  drier  places,  the  frame  muft  be  ftretched  out  on
every  fide,  that  fo  the  fhoots,  creeping  forth  on  all  fides,  may  be  joined,
and,  being  laid  clofe,  and  compacted  together,  in  the  manner  of  an
arched  roof,  may  overfhadow  the  thrifty  earth.  On  the  contrary,  in
cold  and  frofty  countries,  the  vines  muft  be  ranged  in  fingle  rows  in
one  line  ;  for  thus  both  the  ground  is  more  eafily  warmed  by  the  fun,
and  the  fruit  is  throughly  ripened,  and  wholfome  air  will  have  the  more
eal'y  accefs  to  it,  and  pafs  through  it  the  more  freely.  The  Diggers
alfo  handle  and  move  their  hoes  and  fpades  more  freely  and  eafily ;  and
the  Keepers  have  a  better  and  more  thorough  view  of  the  fruit ;  and
the  Vintager  gathers  it  more  commodioufly.


CHAP.  XVIII.

Of  dividing  a  Vineyard  into  fmall  Orchards .

BUT,  when  you  fhall  think  it  proper  to  put  your  vineyard  into
regular  divifions,  let  one  hundred  vines  be  diftinguifhed  by  foot¬
paths  into  orchards  apart  by  themfelves ;  or  (as  fome  perfons  think
proper)  let  the  whole  compafs  or  extent  of  your  vineyard  be  divided
into  divifions  of  half  a  jugerum  each  ;  which  diftindtion,  befides  that
conveniency,  that  it  affords  more  fun  and  wind  to  the  vines,  it  alfo
gives  more  eafy  admittance  both  to  the  eyes  and  feet  of  the  Proprietor,
things  extremely  falutary  to  vineyards,  and  affords  us  a  certain  rule  to
go  by  in  eftimating  and  exadting  that  proportion  of  labour  we  expedt

from


Ghap.XIX.  Of  HUSB  ANDRY.  179

from  our  labourers  and  fervants ;  for  we  cannot  be  deceived,  when  the
jugera  are  thrown  into  equal  divifions  and  intervals.

Moreover,  this  very  diftribution  into  fmall  orchards,  the  fmaller  the
modules  or  proportions  are,  into  which  it  is  cut,  the  more  it  leftens,  as
it  were,  the  fatigue,  and  at  the  fame  time  encourages  fuch  as  are  doing
the  work  to  difpatch  it  quickly;  for  commonly  the  vajinefs  of  the
preffing  work  incumbent  upon  them  difheartens  them,  and  weakens
their  courage.  It  is  alfo  fome  advantage  to  know  the  ftrength  of  your
vineyards,  and  how  much  fruit  every  part  produces,  that  we  may
rightly  judge  which  parts  we  muft  bellow  more  or  lefs  culture  upon.
Alfo  thefe  paths  will  give  convenient  room  to  the  Grape-gatherers,  and
to  thofe  who  repair  the  frames  and  props,  by  which  alfo  either  the  fruits,
or  materials  for  fupporting  the  vines,  may  be  carried.


CHAP.  XIX.

Of  the  P  oft  ion  of  a  Frame ,  and  how  far  it  muft  be  raifed

above  the  Ground.

AS  to  the  pofition  of  a  frame  (i),  how  far  it  muft  be  raifed  from
the  ground,  it  is  fufficient  to  fay  this,  that  the  lowed:  muft  be
four  feet  high,  and  the  higheft  feven ;  which  laft  neverthelefs  is  to  be
avoided  in  young  plants  :  for  vineyards  ought  not  to  be  conftituted  after
this  manner  at  firft  ;  but  the  vine  muft  be  gradually  carried  to  this
height  after  a  long  fucceffion  of  years.  But  the  moifter  the  foil  and  the
climate  are,  and  the  calmer  the  winds,  fo  much  the  higher  muft  the

(1)  Jugum.  As  mod  vines  have  not  ftiffnefs  enough  to  ftand  upright  of  them  ft  Ives,
therefore  they  muft  be  fupported  by  props,  which,  being  fixed  in  the  ground,  and  the  vines
faftened  to  them,  not  only  keep  them  from  falling,. but  preferve  them  from  being  broken
by  ftormy  winds.  When  the  vine,  after  it  is  grown  up  to  a  certain  height,  begins  to  ex¬
tend  its  arms,  and  fpread  ltfelf,  then  they  make  frames  or  yokes  (juga)  to  lay  them  upon,
and  fupport  them.  Thefe  they  make  by  fixing  two  poles  or  flakes  in  the  ground,  at  a
certain  diftance  from  each  other,  and  alfo  from  the  vine,  according  to  the  length  of  its
boughs.  To  the  top  of  the  two  ere£t  poles  they  apply  atranfverfe  one,  which  they  fatten
to  them  at  each  end.  This  they  call  a  jugum,  which  is  commonly  made  higher  titan  the
head  of  the  vine  (They  call  the  head  of  the  vhie  that  part,  from  which  the  arms  or  boughs
ififue  and  extend  tbemfelves).  Upon  this  frame  they  place  the  arms-,  and,  when  the  vine
is  ftrong,  and  puts  forth  boughs  in  abundance,  they  divide  it  into  four  quarters,  to  each
of  which  they  apply  a  frame,  forming  it  like  a  ftar,  or  the  letter  X ;  and  this  they  call
decu [fating  the  vine-,  decujfare ,  vel  in  for  mam  decujjis  redigere.  They  might  add  one  frame
after  another,  if  they  had  a  mind  to  extend  the  vine  farther;  but  this  was  not  ufually
done.

A  a  2


frame


1 80  L.  J.  M,  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

frame  be  raifed  ;  for  the  thriving  condition  of  vines  allows  them  to
ramble,  and  lpread,  and  ftretch  themfelves  to  a  greater  height ;  and  the
fruit,  which  is  removed  to  a  good  diftance  from  the  earth,  is  lefs  liable
to  rot;  and  by  this  method  only  the  winds  blow  freely  through  them,
and  quickly  dry  up  the  fogs,  and  peftilentious  dew, and  contribute  much
to  their  calling  their  bloffoms  duly,  and  to  the  goodnefs  of  the  wine.
On  the  other  hand,  poor  land,  that  lies  on  the  fide  of  a  hill,  and  is
parched  with  the  fcorching  heat,  or  that  which  is  obnoxious  to  vehe¬
ment  ftorms,  requires  a  lower  frame.  But,  if  all  things  fall  out  ac¬
cording  to  your  wilh,  and  are  agreeable  to  your  defire,  the  true  and
right  height  of  a  vine  is  five  feet;  neverthelefs  there  is  no  doubt,  but
the  higher  the  frames  are,  which  the  vines  rife  up  to,  of  fo  much  the
better  tafte  is  the  muft  which  they  yield.


CHAP.  XX.

Of  the  Bufinefs  of  hind ing  Vines.

AFTER  the  vineyard  is  propped,  and  put  upon  frames,  follows
the  work  of  the  Binder,  whofe  principal  concern  ought  to  be,
to  keep  the  flock  of  the  vine  ftraight,  and  not  to  make  it  follow  the
bending  of  the  ilake,  left  the  crookednefs  of  the  prop  fhould  form  the
vine  after  its  own  fimilitude.  This  contributes  very  much  not  only  to
its  beautiful  appearance,  but  alfo  to  its  fruitfulnefs,  firmnefs,  and
perpetuity  ;  for  a  ftraight  flock  contains  a  pith  like  to  itfelf,  through
which,  as  by  a  certain  way  or  paflage,  without  winding  or  impedi¬
ment,  the  nourifhment,  which  the  mother  earth  fupplies  it  with,  paffes
the  more  eafily,  and  reaches  to  the  very  top ;  but  fuch  as  are  crooked
and  diftorted  are  not  equally  accefiible  to  the  terreflrial  moiflure  (i),
the  knots  hindering,  and  the  bending  itfelf,  as  fo  many  rugged  un¬
even  places,  retarding  its  incurfion  ;  wherefore,  when  the  vine  is  drawn
up  ftraight  to  the  very  top  of  the  flake,  it  is  bound  faft  to  it  with  a
band,  that  fo,  when  it  is  burdened  with  fruit,  it  may  not  fink  down*
and  be  bended  and  crookened.  Then,  from  that  place,  where  that  which
is  next  to  the  frame  is  tied  to  it,  its  arms  are  difpofed  and  diftributed

(i)  Vinea  curva  &  diftorta  non  aquajiter  alliduntur.  Our  author,  who  borrows  words
and  phrafes  from  a  vaft  many  different  things,  and  applies  them  to  the  fubje<5t  he  is  fpeak-
mg  of,  had,  no  doubt,  in  his  view  here  the  motion  of  waters  towards  the  fhore,  and  their
dadiing  upon  them  ;  and  thereby  expreffestbe  morion  of  the  juice  of  the  vine  towards  its
branches,  which,  he  fays,  cannot  have  equal  accefs  to  them  when  the  vine  is  diftorted.

i  into


Chap.  XXI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  181

into  different  parts,  and  the  fmall  fruit-bearing  branches,  which  are
placed  upon  the  frame,  are,  with  a  band,  bended  downward :  therefore
that,  which  hangs  down  from  the  frame,  is  replenifhed  with  fruit.
Moreover,  the  bending  or  curvature  puts  forth  a  firm-wood  branch
hard  by  the  band.

Some  fpread  out  upon  the  frame  that  part  which  we  precipitate,  and,
by  tying  it  in  feveral  places  with  willows,  keep  it  within  bounds ;  which
I  don’t  at  all  think  are  to  be  approved  :  for  neither  rains,  nor  hoar-frofts,.
nor  hail,  do  lo  much  hurt  to  the  dependent  fruit-bearing  branches,  as
to  thofe  that  are  bound,  and  expofed  and  laid  open,  as  it  were,  to  the
ftormy  weather.  Neverthelefs  the  fame  fruit-bearing  branches  ought
to  be  tied  faff,  before  their  fruits  become  mellow,  while  the  grapes  are
yet  of  different  colours,  and  bitter,  that  they  may  be  lefs  expofed  to  rot
with  the  dews,  and  to  be  deftroyed  by  the  winds  and  wild  beafts.  All
along  the  main  broad  way,  that  runs  crofs  the  vineyard  from  eaft  to
weft,  and  alfo  the  fmaller  paths,  the  fruit-bearing  branches  of  the  vines
muff  be  bended  inwards,  that  they  may  not  be  hurt  by  the  incurfions
of  thofe,  that  pafs  by.  And  this  is  certainly  the  way  to  bring  a  vine  to
the  frame,  when  it  is  of  fufficient  age  and  growth  for  the  fame  ;  for
that,  which  is  either  infirm  or  fhort,  muff  be  cut  to  two  eyes,  that  fo
it  may,  with  more  fpeed,  put  forth  firm-wood  branches  in  abundance^
which  may  quickly  mount  up  to  the  frame.


CHAP.  XXL

Of  the  Way  and  Manner  of  pruning  a  young  Vineyard.

THERE  is  no  other  pruning  requifite  for  a  vineyard  of  five  years
old,  but  that  it  be  formed  and  reduced  to  a  right  fhape,  in  the
manner  we  have  already  directed,  and  that  it  may  not  fpread  and  extend
itfelf  overmuch  ;  but  that  the  head  of  the  flock  be  almoft  the  fpace  of
a  foot  lower  than  the  frame,  and  that,  with  its  four  arms,  which  fome
call  its  old  hardened  wood,  it  be  divided  into  as  many  parts.  It  will
be  enough,  that  one  fingle  fruit-bearing  branch  upon  each  of  thefe  arms
be  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit,  till  the  vines  are  of  a  fufficient  ffrength.
Then,  fome  years  afterward,  when  they  have  attained,  as  it  were,  to
their  juvenile  age,  it  is  uncertain  how  many  fruit-bearing  branches
ought  to  be  left  upon  them ;  for  a  rich  fertile  foil  requires  more,  and.
that  which  is  poor  and  lean  fewer:,  for  certain  it  is,  that  a  luxuriant

vine,


182  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IV.

vine,  nnlefs  it  be  retrained  and  checked  with  fruit,  cads  its  bloffomi
very  indifferently,  and  exhaufts  and  wades  itfelf  in  wood  and  leaves.
On  the  other  hand,  that  which  is  weak,  when  it  is  burdened  with
fruit,  is  afflicted  thereby.  Therefore,  in  fat  earth,  you  may,  if  you
will,  join  two  rods  to  each  arm;  neverthelefs  you  mud  not  burden  it
with  a  greater  number,  than  that  one  vine  may  ferve  or  convey  nou-
rifhmentto  eight  fruit-bearing  branches,  unlefs  its  too  great  fruitfulnefs
lhall  require  more;  for  a  vine,  extended  with  firm-wood  branches  be¬
yond  this  meafure  and  proportion ,  has  rather  the  appearance  of  a  long-
extended  arbour,  than  of  a  vine.

Nor  ought  we  ever  to  differ  the  arms  to  become  fuller  or  larger  than
the  dock ;  but,  whenever  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  fet  apart  for
growth  young  rods  or  fhoots  growing  out  of  their  fides,  we  mud  con-
dan  tly  cut  away  the  uppermod  old  hardened  boughs,  led  they  exceed
the  frame  :  but  let  the  vine  be  always  renewed  with  young  fruit-bear¬
ing  branches,  which,  if  they  are  grown  out  to  a  futficient  length,  may  be
put  upon  the  frame.  But,  if  any  one  of  them  be  either  broken  to  fhivers,
or  not  of  a  due  length,  and  it  occupy  a  proper  place,  from  whence  the
vine  ought  to  be  renewed  the  following  year,  let  it  be  clipped  into  a
thumb ,  which  l'ome  call  a  keeper,  others  a  jhort-cut  or  flump,  and  fome
the  prefidiary  branch ,  or  the  branch  oj  defence ,  or  referve  ( i )  *  that
is,  a  fprig  of  two  or  three  eyes,  from  w.hich,  whenever  fructiferous
firm-wood  branches  are  come  forth,  whatever  part  of  the  old  arm
is  above  them,  is  lopped  oft;  and  fo  the  vine  begins  to  pullulate,  and
fprings  up  again  out  of  the  young  branch.  And  this  way  of  managing
well-indituted  vineyards  mud  be  perpetually  obferved.


CHAP.  XXII.

After  what  manner  old  Vineyards  are  to  be  rejlored.

BUT,  if  we  fhall  come  to  the  pofleffion  of  vineyards  formed  after  a
different  manner  ;  and  if,  by  being  negledted  for  many  years,
they  are  come  up  above  the  frame ;  it  mud  be  confidered  what  length

(’ll  Cuftos ,  refex, prafidiarhis,  are  names  given  to  the  young  branches  of  vines  when  cut,
and  they  are  taken  eicher  from  the  figure  or  appearance  they  made  upon  the  bough  after
they  were  cut,  or  from  the  ufe  they  were  applied  to ;  as  for  example,  a  young  branch  cut
pretty  near,  and  Handing  out  a  little  from  the  bough,  refembling  the  thumb,  was  called  a
thumb  ( pollex) ;  another  fet  apart  to  fupply  the  place  of  that  which  was  next  to  it,  in  cafe
it  lliould  die,  was  called  cuflos ,  or  prafidiarius ;  or  it  was  cherifhed  and  put  forward,  in
order  to  become  an  arm  or  bough  of  the  vine,  when  the  old  one  was  taken  away.

i


the


Chap.  XXII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  183

the  old  hardened  boughs  are  of,  which  exceed  the  forefaid  meafure  ;
for,  if  they  be  two  feet  long,  or  a  little  more,  the  whole  vineyard  may
yet  be  reduced  into  due  bounds,  and  put  under  the  frame,  provided  the
flake  or  prop,  which  fupports  it,  is  adjoining  to  the  flock  of  the  vine  ;
for  the  flake  is  removed  to  a  greater  diflance  from  the  vine,  and  fixed
exadtly  in  the  middle  fpace  between  the  two  old  hardened  boughs ;
then  the  vine  is  brought  acrofs  to  the  prop,  and  fo  brought  under  the
frame.  But,  if  its  old  hardened  boughs  have  grown  to  a  greater  length,
and  have  crept  forth  as  far  as  the  fourth,  or  even  the  fifth  prop,  they
may  be  rellored  at  a  greater  expence  by  layers ;  for  a  vineyard,  renewed
and  propagated  by  thefe,  comes  forward  very  quickly ;  and  this  is  what
pleafed  us  mofl.

Neverthelefs,  if  the  outfide  of  the  flock  is  grown  old  and  confumed,
it  requires  greater  labour  and  pains ;  but,  if  it  be  flrong  and  found,  it
requires  lefs :  for,  being  ablaqueated  in  the  winter-time,  it  is  fatiated
with  dung,  and  pruned  very  near ;  and  it  is  wounded  with  the  fharp
point  of  an  iron  tool  in  the  greenefi  part  of  the  bark,  between  the  third
and  fourth  foot  from  the  ground.  Then  the  earth  is  throughly  mixed
by  frequent  diggings,  that  the  vine  may  be  incited  and  put  forward  to
pour  forth  young  fhoots  or  branches  in  abundance,  and  efpecially  from
that  part  where  it  is  wounded.  But,  for  the  mofl  part,  a  bud  comes
forth  out  of  the  fear,  which,  if  it  flarts  out  to  a  greater  length,  is
preferved  and  fet  apart  for  a  rod ;  but,  if  it  is  fhorter,  it  is  fet  apart
to  be  cut  into  a  thumb  ;  but,  if  it  be  very  fmall,  it  is  left  for  a  knob  ( i ).
This  may  be  made  of  any,  even  the  very  lead  capillament  ;  for  when
a  fmall  fhoot,  with  one  or  two  leaves,  has  crept  forth  out  of  the  hard
part  of  the  vine,  provided  it  comes  to  maturity  the  following  fpring,  if
it  be  neither  clofe  pruned,  nor  pared  away,  it  puts  forth  firm-wood
branches  with  great  vehemence ;  which,  after  it  is  grown  ilrong,  and
has  made,  as  it  were,  an  atm  of  the  vine,  you  may  then,  if  you  pleafe,
cut  away  that  part  of  the  old  hardened  bough,  which  has  extended
itfelf,  and  wandered  beyond  its  bounds,  and  fo  bring  the  remaining
part  of  it  under  the  frame  or  yoke.

Many,  from  a  defire  to  fave  time,  chop  off  all  the  flocks  of  fuch
vines  above  the  fourth  foot,  fearing  no  manner  of  inconveniency  from
cutting  them  in  this  manner;  becaufe  commonly  the  nature  of  mofl
part  of  flems  does  fo  accommodate  itfelf  to  us,  that  they  repullulate,  and


(1)  Furuncufot,  a  knob  or  knur.  It  is  a  fmall  fwelling  of  that  part  of  the  vine  which
has  been  wounded;  or  ic  is  a  bump  or  boJ]e ,  which  a  vine  forms  in  that  part  where  it  is
to  put  forth  a  bud.  The  name  is  taken  from  a  pimple,  fmall  fwelling,  or  bump  in  the
body.

fprout


184  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

fprout  out  again,  hard  by  the  fear,  with  new  fhoots  and  leaves.  Eut
indeed  this  method  does  not  at  all  pleafe  us ;  for  certain  it  is,  that  a
larger  wound,  unlefs  it  have  ftrong,  thriving,  hard  wood  placed  above
it,  by  which  it  may  clofe  and  grow  up  again,  is  parched  by  the  hot
fleams  and  vapours,  and  heat  of  the  fun  ;  then,  prefently  afterwards,
it  rots  with  the  dews  and  rains.

Neverthelefs,  when  a  vine  muft  certainly  be  cut  down,  it  is  proper
firfl  to  ablaqueate  it,  and  then  to  make  the  amputation  a  little  below
the  ground,  that  the  earth,  being  thrown  upon  it,  may  defend  it  from
the  violence  of  the  fun,  and  give  free  pafiage  to  the  young  Herns,  that
break  forth  from  the  roots,  which  may  either  be  married  to  their  own
props,  that  properly  belong  to  them  ;  or,  if  there  are  any  props  in  their
neighbourhood  that  are  widowers,  they  may,  by  means  of  layers,  cloathe
them  again.  But  thefe  things  muft  be  done  in  this  manner,  if  the
vines  are  planted  deep,  and  have  not  their  roots  lying  loofe,  and  decay¬
ing  upon  the  furface  of  the  ground,  and  if  they  be  of  a  good  kind;  for
otherwife  all  labour  is  beftowed  upon  them  in  vain,  becaufe  fuch  as
are  bafe  and  ignoble  will  retain  their  former  difpofition,  even  when  they
are  repaired  and  renewed.  But  fuch  as  can  fcarcely  adhere  to  the  fur-
face  of  the  earth,  will  utterly  decay,  before  they  recover  ftrength :
therefore  the  firft  fort  of  vineyard  muft  be  ingrafted  with  fruitful
grafts ;  but  the  other  muff  be  intirely  extirpated,  and  replanted,  pro¬
vided  the  goodnefs  of  the  foil  gives  you  encouragement ;  but  if,  thro’
the  badnefs  of  the  foil,  the  vineyard  is  decayed,  and  grown  old,  we  are
of  opinion,  that  it  muft  by  no  means  be  reftored.

Moreover,  the  faults  and  bad  qualities  of  a  place,  which  bring  vine¬
yards  to  the  very  brink  of  deftrudtion,  are  leannefs  and  barrcnnefs,falt
and  bitter  earth ,  oujinefs,  a  Jleep-hanging  rugged  high  Jituation ,  one  that
is  too  gloomy  and  dark,  and  not  expofed  to  the  fun >J'andy  valleys ,  alfo
fandy  gravel-ftones,  and  gravel  that  is  over-much  hungry ,  and  alfo  gra¬
vel  that  is  bare  and  naked,  and  deflitute  of  earth,  and  if  there  be  any
other  like  property,  which  does  not  nourifh  a  vine  :  but,  if  the  place
be  free  from  all  thefe  inconveniencies,  and  others  like  to  them,  an  old
vineyard  may  be  reftored  and  repaired  in  the  manner  we  directed  in  the
preceding  book.  Again,  thofe  vineyards,  that  are  of  a  bad  kind,  which,
altho’  they  are  very  ftrong,  are,  through  barrennefs,  deflitute  of  fruit,
are,  as  we  have  faid,  corrected  and  mended  by  making  ingraftments,
of  which  we  fhall  difeourfe  in  its  proper  place,  when  we  come  to  handle
that  part  of  our  fubjedt


CHAP.


Chap. XXIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

CHAP.  XXIII.


After  what  manner  Vineyards  muft  he  primed.

NOW,  becaufe  we  feem  to  have  faid  very  little  of  the  pruning
of  vineyards,  we  fhall  the  more  carefully  profecute  the  moft  ne-
cefiary  part  of  the  work  we  have  propofed.  We  are  of  opinion  there¬
fore,  if  the  mildnefs,  temperatenefs,  and  clemency  of  the  weather,  in
that  country  where  they  dwell,  will  allow  it,  to  begin  the  pruning
after  the  vintage  is  finifhed,  about  the  fifteenth  of  October ;  provided
neverthelefs,  that  the  rains,  which  fall  about  the  time  of  the  Equinox,
are  over,  and  the  fprays,  that  are  to  be  cut  off,  are  come  to  their  due
maturity ;  for  a  drought  makes  the  pruning  later.

But,  if  the  cold  and  frofty  Hate  of  the  weather  gives  us  notice  of,
and  prefages,  a  rough  boifterous  winter,  we  will  defer  this  bufinefs  till
the  thirteenth  of  February ;  and  we  are  at  liberty  to  do  this,  if  we  have
a  fmall  extent  of  ground  in  our  pofleflion  \  but  where  the  vaft  extent
of  our  lands  does  not  allow  us  to  chufe  our  time,  it  will  be  proper  to
prune  the  ftrongeft  and  moft  thriving  part  of  our  vineyard  during  the
colds,  and  the  pooreft  and  leaned:  in  the  fpring,  or  in  autumn  j  and
even  when  the  days  are  fhorteft,  we  may  prune  fuch  vines  as  are  oppo-
fite  to  the  fouth  pole ;  but  thofe  that  are  expofed  to  the  north,  in  the
fpring,  and  in  autumn  :  nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  the  nature  of  thefe
little  trees  is  fuch,  that  the  more  early  they  are  lopped,  fo  much  the
more  wood,  and  the  later,  fo  much  the  more  fruit  they  produce.


CHAP.  XXIV.

Of  fuch  Things  as  a  good  Vine-drejfer  ought  to  avoid  or  pur-
fue  in  a  well-conftituted  Vineyard.

WHenfoever  therefore  a  Vine-dreffer  fhall  go  about  this  work,  let
him  principally  obferve  three  things :  firft,  to  contribute  all
he  can  towards  plenty  of  fruit.  Next,  let  him  chufe  the  moft  thriving
firm-wood  branches  from  among  the  reft  for  the  enfuing  year.  As  alfo,
let  him  order  matters  fo,  as  to  procure  as  long  a  duration  for  the  dock
as  poflibly  he  can  j  for  which  foever  of  thefe  is  neglected,  it  occafions
great  dofs  to  the  owner,

‘  Bb


But


1 86  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

Bat  the  vine,  when  it  is  divided  into  four  parts,  looks  towards  as
many  different  regions  of  the  heavens ;  which  quarters,  inafmuch  as
they  have  qualities  contrary  to  one  another,  require  a  different  method
of  ordering  and  difpofing  of  the  vine,  according  to  the  nature  of  their
feveral  conffitutions  :  therefore  thofe  arms  of  the  vine,  that  are  expofed
to  the  north,  ought  to  receive  very  few  wounds,  efpecially  if  they  be
pruned  when  the  colds  are  now  coming  on,  whereby  the  places,  where
they  have  been  cut,  will  be  chilled,  and  much  hurt :  therefore  one  firm-
wood  branch  only  next  to  the  frame,  and  one  keeper  below  it,  muff  be
fet  apart  for  growth,  which  may  afterwards  renew  the  vine  for  one
year.  But,  on  the  contrary,  towards  the  fouth,  let  more  fruit-bearing
branches  be  preferved  and  fet  apart  for  growth,  which  may  cover  and
fhade  their  mother,  labouring  with  the  fcorching  fummer-heats,  and
not  fuffer  the  fruit  to  parch  and  wither  before  it  comes  to  maturity.
There  is  fcarcely  indeed  any  great  difference  in  pruning  with  refpedt  to
the  eaff  and  weft,  becaufe  the  vine  receives  the  fun  an  equal  number  of
hours  towards  both  quarters.  The  meafure  therefore,  with  refpedt  to
firm-wood  branches,  fhall  be  that  which  the  richnefs  and  goodnefs  of
the  ground,  and  the  thriving  condition  of  the  ftem  itfelf,  fhall  pre-
icribe.

Thefe  things  muff  be  obferved  in  general  j  but  thofe  which  follow,
require  particular  confideration,  and  muff  be  particularly  obferved.
For,  that  I  may  begin  at  the  lower  part  of  the  vine,  as  at  certain  foun¬
dations,  as  it  were,  the  earth  round  the  leg  of  the  vine  muff  always  be
removed  from  it  with  the  hatchet ;  and  if  any  offspring,  which  Rufiics
call  Suckers ,  adhere  to  the  roots  of  it,  they  muff  be  carefully  pulled
up,  and  it  muff  be  fmoothed  with  the  knife,  that  it  may  refufe  admit¬
tance  to  the  winter-rains  :  for  it  is  better  to  pull  out  the  offspring,  that
repullulates  out  of  the  wound,  than  to  leave  a  knotty  and  rugged  cut.
For,  by  that  way,  it  foon  clofes  and  forms  a  fear ;  and  by  this  it  is
made  hollow,  and  rots.

Then  having  taken  a  thorough  care  of  the  feet,  as  it  were,  of  the
vines,  the  legs  themfelves,  and  trunks,  muff  be  carefully  viewed  all
round,  and  examined,  that  neither  any  young  branch  fprung  out  of
the  ffock,  or  any  knob  like  a  wart,  be  left  upon  them  ;  unlefs  it  hap¬
pens,  that  a  vine  caff  upon  a  frame  fhall  require  to  be  repaired  and
renewed  from  the  lower  ]5art.  But,  if  that  part  of  the  ffock  which  is
cut,  be  withered  with  the  heat  of  the  fun  ;  or  if  the  vine  be  hollowed
by  the  rains,  or  by  hurtful  animals,  which  creep  into  it  thro’  the  pith ;
it  will  be  proper  to  take  intirely  away,  with  the  hatchet,  whatever  part
of  it  is  dead  :  and  then,  that  it  be  pared  to  the  very  quick  with  the

'  pruning-


Chap.  XXIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  187

pruning-knife,  that  it  may  form  a  fear  from  the  green  part  of  the  hock.
Nor  is  it  a  difficult  thing,  foon  after  you  have  fmoothed  the  wounds,
to  daub  them  over  with  earth,  which  you  have  firft  moiftened  with
lees  of  oil.  For  this  fort  of  daubing  hinders  the  worms,  that  gnaw
the  wood,  and  the  ants,  to  enter;  and  alfo  keeps  off  the  fun,  and  the
rains.  Thefe  things  make  it  clofe  its  wounds  the  iooner,  and  preferve
the  fruit  green  (i).  Alfo  the  dry  bark,  which  is  cloven,  and  hangs
down  all  along  the  uppermoft  parts  of  the  trunk,  muft  be  pulled  off  as
far  as  its  body  ;  becaufe  the  vine,  when  it  is  freed,  as  it  were,  from
all  filth  and  naftinefs,  thrives  the  better,  and  grows  flrong,  and  brings
iefs  dregs  with  its  wine.

Moreover,  the  mofs  alfo,  which,  like  fetters,  compreffes  the  legs  of
the  vines  that  are  bound  therewith,  and  macerates  them  with  its
mouldinefs  and  naftinefs,  occafioned  by  the  moifture  which  refts  in  it,
muft  be  feraped  and  pared  off  with  the  iron.  And  thefe  are  the  things
which  muft  be  carefully  obferved  with  refpetft  to  the  lower  part  of  the
vine.  Let  us  next  give  fuch  directions  alfo,  as  muft  be  obferved  with
refpeCt  to  its  head.

The  wounds  which  the  vine  receives  in  its  hard  wood,  ought  to  be
made  oblique  and  round  ;  for  they  recover  their  health,  and  grow
ftrong  the  fooner  ;  and  as  long  as  they  have  not  formed  a  fear,  they
pour  off  the  water  more  commodioufly  :  tranfverfe  wounds  both  receive,
and  contain  more  moifture.  Let  the  Vine-dreffer  efpecially  avoid  this
fault.  Let  him  cut  off  all  fprays  that  are  broad  (2),  old,  ill-fhaped,
crooked,  and  that  look  downward  j  and  preferve,  and  fet  apart  for
growth,  and  for  bearing  fruit,  the  young,  fruitful,  and  ftraight  ones ;
let  him  preferve  the  tender  and  green  arms,  and  cut  away,  with  the
pruning-hook,  fuch  as  are  dry  and  old  :  let  him  pare,  or  cut  off,  the
one-year  old  nails  (3)  of  the  keepers.  When  he  has  raifed  his  vine
almoft  four  feet  above  the  earth,  let  him  divide  and  difpofe  it  regu-

■ ■  .  .  •  larfy

(1)  Coalejcit  celerius,  &  fruSium  widens  confervat.  Some  think,  that  truncum  ought  to
be  put  inftead  of  fruftum,  becuufe  the  author  is  only  fpeaking  of  the  trunk  of  the  vine  :
but  all  the  editions  ha  vefruffum.  Perhaps  the  author  was  of  opinion,  that  the  things  men¬
tioned  in  the  text  contribute  to  keep  the  fruit  green,  and  hinder  ic  from  drying  up  and  wi¬
thering.

(2)  Sarmenta  lata.  It  is  not  eafy  to  determine  what  the  author  means  by  broad  fprayr,
if  not  fuch  as  rather  fpread  into  thicknefs,  than  grow  out  tapering.  Some  from  their  own
conjecture,  and  not  from  any  good  authority,  read  lata  inftead  of  lata.

(3)  Ungues  cufiodum  anvotinos.  It  has  been  already  explained  what  our  author  means  by
cuflodes  (keepers).  Herehefpeaks  of  ungues  cuftodumfhe  nails  of  the  keepers.  To  understand
this  expreffion,  it  muft  be  remembered,  that  a  fprigor  young  branch  cut  off  from  a  branch
within  a  fmall  diftance  from  the  place  out  of  which  it  grows,  refembles  a  thumb ;  and  is  lb

B  b  2  called


1 88  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

larly  into  four  arms,  and  let  each  of  them  look  towards,  and  correfpond
to  a  part  of,  the  frame,  which  is  decuffated,  or  made  in  the  form  of
the  letter  X:  then  let  him  leave,  upon  each  arm,  one  rod  for  growth,
and  bearing  fruit,  if  the  vine  be  more  flender  and  lean  ;  or  two,  if  it
be  fuller  grown ;  and  having  placed  them  upon  the  frame,  let  him  pre¬
cipitate  them  (4).  But  we  mull  remember,  never  to  fuffer  two  or  more
firm-wood  branches  to  be  upon  one  line,  and  in  one  fide  of  the  arm  :
for  that  annoys  the  vine  very  much,  when  every  part  of  the  arm  does
not  equally  partake  of  the  labour  and  pain  in  its  turn,  and  difpenfe
an  equal  portion  of  juice  to  its  offspring;  but  is  fucked  and  drained  of
its  moiflure  on  one  fide  only  :  whereby  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  that  vein,
whofe  intire  moiflure  is  taken  away  from  it,  dries  up  and  withers,  as
if  it  were  flruck  with  lightning.

Alfo  there  is  what  is  called  the  Chop-branch  (f),  which  ufes  to  creep
out  exactly  in  the  middle  of  a  forked  bough;  and  therefore  Ruflics  can
it  by  the  aforefaid  name  ;  becaufe,  fpringing  out  between  two  arms,
where  the  vine  divides  itfelf,  it  blocks  up  its  chops,  as  it  were,  and
bereaves  both  the  old  hardened  boughs  of  their  nourifhment ;  therefore
they  cut  it  off  carefully  as  a  rival,  and  fned  it,  before  it  becomes  flrong.
If,  neverthelefs,  it  has  prevailed  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  have  weakened
one  of  the  arms,  the  weakefl  muft  be  taken  away,  and  the  chop-branch
itfelf  left  to  grow  in  its  room.  For,  when  the  arm  is  cut  off,  the  mo¬
ther  conveys  flrength  to  both  parts  equally.  Therefore  let  him  con¬
stitute  and  fix  the  head  of  the  vine  one  foot  below  the  frame,  from
whence  the  four  arms,  as  I  faid,  may  fpread  themfelves,  by  which  the
vine  may  be  renewed  yearly,  by  cutting  off  the  old  fruit-bearing  branches,
and  leaving  the  young  ones  to  grow  and  bear  fruit  in  their  Read,  of
which  the  choice  muff  be  made  very  fkilfully.  For,  where  there  is
great  plenty  of  firm-wood  branches,  thePruner  ought  to  obferve  care¬
fully,  that  he  neither  leave  thofe  that  are  next  to  the  hard- wood,  that
is,  from  the  flock,  and  the  head  of  the  vine  ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand.


called  by  our  author.  He  diredts  it  to  be  cut  obliquely,  or  fhnting,  which  gives  the  extre¬
mity  of  it  the  fhape  of  the  nail  of  the  thumb ;  and,  as  this  cut  is  made  above  the  bud,
when  this  (hoots  forth,  that  part  which  is  called  the  vail,  withers,  and  grows  dry:  therefore
the  author  orders  all  fuch  as  are  of  a  year  old,  to  be  pared  away.  A  cut  exadHy  crofs  the
wood  is  called  plaga  tranfverfa ;  and  one  that  is  flanting,  is  called  obliqua.

(4)  Prascipitare  vitis  flagellum ,  to  precipitate  a  rod,  fignifies,  to  hang  it  down  over  the
frame  ;  which  poficion  contributes  more  to  the  plenty  and  goodnefs  of  the  fruit,  than  laying
it  wholly  upon,  and  binding  it  to,  the  frame.

(y)  Palmes  foe aneus.  The  author  explains  this  very  diftindfcly  himfelf :  I  have  tranflated
it,  the  Chops  Branch.  It  grows  in  the  middle,  between  the  two  arms  of  the  vine,  as  Balia
Hkewife  lays  in  Feb.  12.  2.


thofe


Chap. XXIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  189

thofe  towards  the  extremities.  For  thofe  contribute  very  little  to  the
vintage,  as  they  yield  but  little  fruit,  being,  indeed,  like  branches,
that  grow  out  of  the  flock :  and  thefe  exhauil  the  vine,  becaufe  tljey
load  her  with  too  much  fruit,  and  extend  themfelves  as  far  as  the  fecond
or  third  flake,  which  we  have  already  faid  is  intirely  wrong.  Where¬
fore  it  will  be  mofl  convenient  to  fet  apart  for  fruit  thofe  branches
that  grow  out  of  the  middle  of  the  arms,  which  may  neither  fruflrate
our  hopes  of  a  vintage,  nor  emaciate  their  own  flem.

Some  men  with  more  greedinefs  force  as  much  fruit  as  poffible,  •  by
fetting  apart  for  fruit  both  the  middle  and  the  extreme  rods,  and  alfo
by  cutting  the  fprig,  that  grows  next  to  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,  into
a  keeper -y  which  I  don’t  at  all  think  ought  to  be  done,  unlefs  the  flrength
of  the  foil,  and  the  flock,  will  allow  of  it.  For  they  array  themfelves
fo  with  grapes,  that  they  can  never  ripen,  unlefs  the  ground  be  ex¬
ceeding  good,  and  the  flock  itfelf  in  a  thriving  condition.  The  fubfi-
diary  branch,  or  Branch  of  Referve ,  which  is  the  fame  with  the  keeper  ^
ought  not  to  be  cut  into  a  thumb ,  when  the  branches,  from  which  the
next  fruits  are  expedted,  are  fituated  in  a  proper  and  fit  place.  For,
when  you  have  bound  them,  and  bended  them  fo  as  to  make  them
look  downward  towards  the  earth,  you  will  make  them  put  forth  firm-
wood  branches  below  the  bindings.  But  if  the  vine  has  flarted  out  from
the  head,  to  a  greater  length  than  the  cuflom  of  Hufbandmen  allows,
and  has  crept  with  its  arms  over  to  the  penthoufes  formed  by  the  vines  upon
the  other  frames,  we  will  leave  a  ftrong  keeper ,  and  the  greatefl  we
can  find,  hard  by  the  flock,  of  two  or  three  joints,  from  which,  as  from
a  thumb ,  a  firm- wood  branch  ipringingup,  may  be  formed  into  an  arm
the  next  year,  that  the  vine,  being  thus  cut  and  renewed,  may  be  con¬
tained  within  the  frame.

But,  in  fetting  apart  a  keeper ,  and  putting  it  forward  for  growth,
thefe  following  things  mufl  be  chiefly  obferved.  Firfl,  that  the  cut  or
wound  don’t  look  upward  to  the  heavens,  but  rather  downward  to  the
earth  :  for  thus  it  both  protects  itfelf  from  the  frofls,  and  is  fhaded  from
the  fun.  Secondly,  that  the  cut  be  not  made  pointed,  like  to  a  dart,
but  like  to  the  fmall  nail  of  one’s  finger  ;  for  that  dies  more  quickly,
and  the  dead  part  fpreads  farther:  but  this  is  only  put  in  fear,  and  that
butflowly,  and  to  no  great  extent  (6).  There  is  alfo  a  thing,  which  I

obferve

(6)  Reformidat  tarde  &  anguftius.  The  meaning  Of  thefe  two  lines  is  this :  The  author
diredts  the  Pruner  to  cut  the  keeper ,  or  prefidiary  branch,  like  the  nail  of  one’s  linger,  and  not
pointed  like  a  dart ;  becaufe,  when  the  cut  is  fharp,  pointed,  and  long,  a  great  part  of  it
dies,  and  death  fpreads  itfelf  further  $  whereas,  when  the  cut  is  made  in  the  form  of  the  nail

of


ICO  L.J.M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

obfervc  is  praiftifed,  and  is  exceedingly  wrong,  which  ought  efpecially
to  be  avoided  ;  for,  while  they  have  great  regard  to  the  graceful  appear¬
ance  of  the  vine,  they  cut  the  fpray  hard  by  the  joint,  that  the  keeper
may  be  the  fhorter,  and  like  to  the  thumb  of  one’s  hand.  But  this  is
very  hurtful,  becaufe  the  gem,  being  placed  hard  by  the  wound,  la¬
bours  or  1'ufFers  by  the  frofts  and  colds,  and  afterwards  by  the  heat  alfo.
It  is  bed,  therefore,  to  clip  the  fubfidiary  branch,  or  branch  of  referve,
alinoft  in  the  middle  of  the  fpace  between  the  two  joints,  and  to  make
the  cut  fhelving  downwards  behind  the  gem,  left  it  let  its  tears  fall
upon  it,  (as  we  have  already  faid)  and  fo  blind  the  eye  when  it  is  bud¬
ding.  But,  if  we  are  not  provided  with  a  Jkort-cut  branch ,  we  muft
look  about  for  a  knob,  which,  though  it  be  not  extremely  near,  and
refemble  a  wart,  may  put  forth  a  wood-branch  the  next  fpring,  which
we  may  appropriate  either  for  an  arm,  or  for  a  fruit-bearing  branch.
If  even  this  cannot  be  found,  the  vine  muft  be  wounded  with  the  iron,
and  exulcerated  in  that  part  where  we  are  defirous  to  make  a  young
branch  to  come  forth.

Now  I  am,  indeed,  very  much  of  the  opinion,  that  the  fruit-beariug
branches  themfelves  ought  to  be  freed  from  tendrils  and  nephews.  But,
in  cutting  thefe  away,  a  different  method  muft  be  obferved  from  that
which  we  obferve  with  refpedt  to  thofe  which  grow  out  of  the  ftock :
for,  whatever  it  is  that  jutteth  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,  muft  be
fned  off,  and  fcraped  away,  by  applying  the  pruning-knife  more  ftrongly
and  clofer  to  it,  that  it  may  the  more  fpeedily  form  a  fear.  On  the
contrary,  whatever  fprouts  out  of  the  tender  part,  as  the  nephew  does,
is  cut  off  more  fparingly  ;  becaufe,  for  the  moft  part,  it  has  a  gem
hard  by  its  fide,  joined  with  it,  of  which  very  great  care  muft  be
taken,  left  it  be  ftruck  off  with  the  pruning-knife.  For,  if  you  fned
it  very  near,  with  the  pruning-knife  applied  very  clofe  to  it,  it  is  either
wholly  taken  away,  or  is  fore  wounded  :  for  which  reafon,  the  fruit-
beari?ig  branch ,  which  afterwards  it  will  put  forth  when  it  germinates,
is  weak,  and  will  bear  lefs  fruit  ;  as  alfo  it  is  more  liable  to  be  hurt  by
the  winds :  doubtlefs,  becaufe  it  creeped  out  of  the  fear  in  a  weak  con¬
dition.

But  it  is  difficult  to  determine  exa&ly  the  length  of  the  firm-wood
branch  itfelf,  which  we  are  to  fet  apart  for  growth.  Neverthelefs,
moft  people  cherifh  and  call  it  forth  to  fuch  a  length,  that  when

of  a  finger,  the  part  does  not  die,  but  is  only  put  in  fear :  and  this  reaches  no  great  way,
and  but  {lowly \  i.  e.  it  languiflies  a  little,  but  recovers  itfelf  again.  Thefe  are  beautiful
expreffions  in  the  original,  but,  I  fear,  will  have  but  little  grace  in  an  En&lijb  tranflation.

•

it


2


Chap. XXIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  191

it  is  bended,  and  precipitated  all  along  the  frame,  it  may  not  touch  the
earth.  We  are  of  opinion,  that  thefe  following  things  ought  to  be
confidered  with  greater  attention  :  Firft,  the  habit  and  conftitution  of
the  vine  j  for,  if  it  be  ftrong,  it  will  fuftain  larger  firm-wood  branches.
Next,  we  mult  confider  thefatnefsof  the  foil  alfo ;  for,unlefs  it  have  this
quality, we  fhall  quickly  killeven  the  ftrongeft  and  moft  thriving  vine  what-
foever,  when  it  is  emaciated  by  longer  rods  than  is  proper.  But  long  fruit¬
bearing  branches  are  valued  and  efteemed,  not  for  their  length,  but  for  the
number  of  eyes  which  they  have.  For,  where  the  fpaces  between  the
joints  are  greater,  we  may,  if  we  pleafe,  lengthen  out  the  firm-wood
branch  fo  far,  till  it  almoft  touch  the  ground  ;  for  it  will  put  forth  but
few  young  twigs  and  leaves :  but  where  the  joints  are  thick,  and  ftand
near  to  one  another,  and  the  eyes  are  frequent,  tho’  the  fpray  be  but
fhort,  yet  it  will  flourith,  and  grow  ftrong,  with  many  fruit-bearing
twigs,  and  produce  a  moft  numerous  offspring.  Wherefore  it  is  necef-
fary  to  fet  bounds  to  a  vine  of  this. kind  efpecially,  that  it  may  not  be
burdened  with  fruit-bearing  branches  of  too  great  a  length  ;  and  that
the  Vine-drefler  confider,  whether  the  laft  year’s  vintage  was  great,  or
fmall  ;  for  the  vines  muft  be  fpared  after  great  plenty  of  fruit,  and
therefore  muft  be  pruned  very  near  j  but,  after  producing  but  a  fmall
quantity,  they  muft  be  put  upon  exerting  themfelves.

Over-and-above  what  has  been  faid,  we  alfo  give  this  direction,  that
this  work  be  done  with  hard  iron  tools,  and  the  thinneft  and  fharpeft
that  can  be  found  ;  for  a  blunt,  dull,  and  foft  pruning-knife  is  a  hin¬
drance  to  the  Pruner,  and  therefore  does  lefs  work,  and  occafions  more
labour  to  the  Vine-drefler.  For,  whether  the  edge  be  laid,  which  hap-  -
pens  to  a  foft  iron  tool  j  or  whether  it  penetrates  more  flowly,  as  is
the  cafe  with  one  that  is  blunt  and  thick  j  he  is  obliged  to  put-to  more
ftrength  :  as  alfo  rugged  and  uneven  wounds  tear  the  vine  ;  and  the
bufinefs  is  tranfacfted  not  by  one  blow,  but  by  often  repeated  ftrokes,
whereby,  for  the  moft  part,  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  that  which  ought  to
have  been  cut,  is  broken,  and  fo  the  vine,  being  thus  butchered  and
made  rugged,  rots  with  the  rains,  and  its  wounds  are  not  healed  up.
Wherefore,  the  Vine-drefler  muft  be  earneftly  admonifhed  to  lengthen
the  edge  of  his  iron  tool,  and  make  it  as  like  a  razor  as  he  poflibly  can.
Neither  let  him  be  ignorant  what  part  of  the  bill  he  muft  ufe,  in  every
thing  :  for  I  have  known  very  many,  who  have  laid  vineyards  wafte,
through  their  want  of  knowledge  in  this  particular.


C  H  A  P.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.


192


CHAP.  XXV.

Of  the  Figure  of  the  Bill,  or  Pru?iing-knife  (1).

BUT  the  fhape  of  the  bill,  or  pruning-hook  for  vines,  is  fo  contrived,
that  the  part  next  to  the  haft,  which  bears  a  ftraight  edge,  is
called  the  Knije ,  becaufe  of  its  likenefs  to  it.  That  part  which  is
bended  is  called  the  Sinus ,  or  Hollow  j  and  that  part  which  runs  out
from  the  bending,  is  called  the  Paring-  or  Scraping-edge  3  then  that  part
which  is  crooked  is  called  the  Beak,  or  Bill.  The  figure  of  an  half-
moon,  which  is  placed  above  this,  is  called  the  Ax,  or  Hatchet ;  and
its  creft,  as  it  were,  which  jetteth  or  fticketh  out  from  it,  is  called  its
Point,  or  Spike.

Every  one  of  thefe  parts  performs  its  own  peculiar  office,  provided
the  Vine-drefler  be  fkilful :  for,  when  he  wants  to  cut  any  thing  over-
againft  him  with  a  gentle  touch  of  his  hand,  he  ufes  the  knife ;  but
when  he  is  obliged  to  draw  it  back,  he  makes  ufe  of  the  hollow  part.
When  he  is  to  fmooth  any  thing,  he  ufes  the  fcraping-or  paring-edge :
or,  to  hollow  it,  he  ufes  the  beak.  When  he  muft  cut  it  with  a  ftroke,
he  does  it  with  the  hatchet  3  or,  when  he  wants  to  clear  and  remove
any  dirt  out  of  any  ftrait  and  narrow  place,  he  ufes  the  point.

But  the  greateft  part  of  the  work  in  a  vineyard  muft  be  done,  not  with
hacking  and  chopping,  but  by  drawing  the  pruning-knife  leifurely  and
gently  towards  you.  For  that  wound  which  is  thus  made,  is  fmoothed
all  at  once  with  one  impreffion.  For  the  Pruner  firft  applies  the  iron,
and  fo  cuts  what  he  defigned  and  marked  out.  But  he  who  falls  upon
the  vine  by  fetching  his  ftrokes,  if  he  mifles  his  aim,  (which  often  hap¬
pens)  he  wounds  the  tree  with  feveral  ftrokes.  Therefore,  that  pruning
is  faler,  and  more  profitable,  which,  as  I  faid  before,  is  performed  by


(1)  4,  the  haft.  6,  the  knife,  c,  th sfittus,  d ,  the  fcraper.  e}  the  beak,  or  bill,  f,
the  hatchet,  g ,  the  point,  or  fpike.

gently


Chap.  XXVI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  193

gently  drawing  the  pruning-knife  towards  you,  and  not  by  ftriking
with  it.


CHAP.  XXVI.

Of  the  Care  of  propping  a  Vineyard^and putting  it  upon  Frames.

AFTER  thefe  things  are  finifhed,  follows  (as  we  have  already
faidj  the  care  of  propping  the  vineyard,  and  putting  it  upon
frames  ;  for  eftablifhing  of  which,  the  broad  lath  or  ftake  is  better
than  the  round  pole,  and  that  muft  not  be  of  any  fort,  that  comes
firft  to  hand  ;  for  the  chief  and  beft  for  this  purpofe  is  the  olive-tree,
the  oak,  or  the  cork-tree,  cloven  with  wedges,  or  any  other  ftrong  wood
like  to  thefe.  The  round  prop  obtains  the  next  place  ;  and  that  which
is  made  of  juniper,  laurel,  and  the  cyprefs-tree,  is  mod  approved.  Alfo
wild  or  foreft  pine-trees  are  very  proper  for  this  purpofe  j  and  the  ufe
of  the  elder-tree  is  alfo  approved.  Neverthelefs,  thefe  or  the  like  props
muft  be  mended  and  adjufted  afrefh,  after  the  pruning  ;  and  fuch  parts
of  them  as  are  rotten,  muft  be  cut  away  j  and  others  of  them,  which
have  any  foundnefs  in  them,  muft  be  turned :  others  of  them,  which
are  either  carious,  or  fhorter  than  they  ought  to  be,  muft  be  removed,
and  fuch  as  are  fit  for  the  purpofe  put  in  their  room.  Thofe  that  are
lying  upon  the  ground  muft  be  fet  up,  and  fuch  of  them  as  ftoop  muft
be  fet  upright.  If  the  frame  does  not  ftand  in  need  of  any  new  repa¬
ration,  let  frefh  bindings  be  put  upon  it.  But  if  it  fhall  feem  to  want
repairing,  before  ever  the  vine  be  applied  to  the  prop,  let  it  be  faftened
together  with’poles  or  reeds  j  and  then  afterwards  (as  we  directed  with
refpedt  to  the  new  vineyard)  let  us  bind  the  vine  with  the  ftake  that
fupports  it,  juft  by  its  head,  and  below  its  arms  ;  and  this  muft  not  be
done  every  year  in  the  fame  place,  left  the  band  cut  it,  and  ftrangle  the
flock.

Then  we  will  place  the  arms  into  four  divifions,  in  form  of  a  ftar,
and  bind  the  tender  fruit-bearing  twigs  or  branches  upon  the  frame,
not  forcing  them  contrary  to  their  nature  ;  but  each  of  them  muft  be
gently  bended,  according  as  it  will  yield  and  obey,  left  it  be  broken  by
bending  it,  or  left  the  gems  or  eyes,  that  are  now  fwelling,  be  rub¬
bed  off.  And  where  two  firm-wood  branches  are  extended  over  one
part  of  the  frame,  let  a  middle  ftake  intervene  •  and  let  the  branches
run  directly  out  from  them  ftraight  along  the  ftielvings  or  pents  of  the

C  c  frames.


194  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IV.

frames,  and  with  their  tops  look  towards  the  earth,  as  if  they  were  lay¬
ers  :  and,  that  this  may  be  done  fkilfully,  let  the  binder  remember  not
to  twift  the  young  vine-branch,  but  only  to  bend  it  gently,  and  tie  it ;
and  that  every  firm-wood  branch  which  can  be  prefently  precipitated,
be  placed  upon  the  frame,  that  it  may  rather  hang  down  leaning  upon
the  pole,  than  hang  down  from  the  binding.  For  I  have  often  remarked,
that  Ruftics,  thro’  imprudence,  put  a  fruit-bearing  branch  under  the
frame,  and  bind  it  to  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  hangs  under  it  only
by  the  willow  ;  which  vine  breaks  and  falls  down,  when  it  receives  the
weight  of  the  fhoots,  and  of  the  grapes.


CHAP.  XXVII.

What  Things  a  good  Vine-dr ejfer  ought  to  avoid  or  purfue  in
a  Vineyard  already  confiituted ,  and  put  into  good  Order .

OUR  vineyards  being  thus. put  into  good  order,  we  will  then  make
hafte  to  cleanfe  them,  and  free  them  from  fprays,  and  broken
pieces  of  reeds  ;  which  neverthelefs  mull  be  gathered  when  the  ground
is  dry,  left  the  earth,  being  trodden  upon  when  it  is  miry,  fhould  oc-
cafion  greater  labour  to  the  Digger,  who  muft  prefently  be  brought  in,
and  fet  to  work,  while  the  vines  are  yet  filent ;  for,  if  you  fend  in  the
Digger  when  the  branches  of  the  vines  begin  to  fprout,  and  put  forth
their  buds,  you  will  fhake  off  a  great  part  of  your  vintage :  therefore
vineyards  muft  be  digged  as  deep  as  may  be  during  the  interval  between
the  winter  and  the  fpring,  before  they  begin  to  put  forth  their  buds,  that
they  may  pullulate  the  more  joyfully  and  chearfully ;  and,  when  thefe
have  arrayed  themfelves  with  leaves,  and  clufters  of  grapes,  bounds  muft
be  fet  to  the  tender  fhoots,  before  they  grow  to  their  full  length.  And
the  fame  Vine-dreffer,  who  before  made  ufe  of  the  iron  tool,  fhall  now
fhake  them  off  with  his  hand,  and  check  and  keep  the  fhadows  within
due  bounds,  and  beat  off  the  fuperfluous  twigs  and  leaves  ;  for  it  is  of
very  great  importance  not  to  do  this  unfkilfully,  feeing  fhredding  oft
the  fuperfluous  fhoots  and  leaves  is  of  greater  advantage  to  vines,  than
pruning  them;  for,  tho’  this  is  a  great  help  to  them,  yet  it  wounds  and
mangles  them;  that  cures  them  more  gently,  and  without  a  wound,
and  contributes  to  make  the  next  year’s  pruning  more  expeditious :  as
alfo  it  faves  the  vine  from  a  vaft  many  fears,  which  it  would  otherwife
have,  becaufe  that,  out  of  which  any  tender  or  green  thing  has  been

pulled,


Chap. XXVII.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  195

pulled,  does  quickly  clofe  and  heal  up.  Moreover,  the  firm-wood
branches,  which  have  fruit,  thrive  better,  and  grow  ftrong  j  and  the
grapes,  being  more  commodioufly  balked,  are  throughly  ripened.

Wherefore  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  a  prudent  and  very  fkilful  Vine-dref-
fer  to  confider,  and  carefully  to  look,  in  what  places  he  ought  to  fet
apart  firm-wood  branches  for  the  year,  and  not  only  to  pull  off  the  vine
fuch  branches  as  have  no  eyes  or  buds,  but  alfo  thofe  that  are  fertile,  if
they  fhoot  forth  in  number  beyond  all  bounds  j  forafmuch  as  it  happens,
that  certain  eyes  bud  out  with,  and  put  forth,  three  fruit-bearing  twigs,
of  which  two  muft  be  pulled  away,  that  they  may  the  more  commodi¬
oufly  educate  one  fingle  pupil  each  :  for  it  is  the  part  of  a  wife  Hufband-
man  to  confider  and  difcern,  whether  a  vine  has  not  arrayed  herfelf
with  a  greater  quantity  of  fruit,  than  fhe  is  able  to  bear  and  go  through
with  the  full  time.  Therefore  he  ought  to  pluck  off  not  only  the  fuper-
fluous  leaves  and  twigs,  which  indeed  muft  always  be  done,  but  fome-
times  to  beat  off  her  fome  part  of  her  offspring,  that  fo  he  may  lighten
and  eafe  the  vine,  overburdened  with  her  own  fruitfulnefs.  And  this
an  induftrious  careful  perfon,  employed  to  pull  off  the  fuperfluous  twigs
and  leaves,  will  do  for  feveral  reafons,  altho’  there  fhould  be  no  more
fruit  than  what  may  be  in  a  condition  to  come  to  maturity  j  for,  if  the
vine  has  been  wearied  with  an  abundant  product  for  feveral  preceding
years  without  intermiflion,  it  will  be  equal  and  juft,  that  it  fhould  reft,
and  refrefh  and  recover  itfelf ;  and  fo  the  good  and  advantage  of  the
future  firm- wood  branches  muft  be  confulted :  for  it  is  a  bufinefs  pro¬
per  for  any  perfon  whatfoever,  even  fuppofe  he  were  a  boy,  to  break
off  the  tops  of  the  rods,  in  order  to  check  their  luxuriancy  ;  or  to  take
out  of  the  way  the  fhoots,  that  rife  out  of  the  hard  part,  or  out  of  the
ftock  of  the  vine,  unlefs  it  be  neceffary  to  preferve  one  or  two  of  them
for  reftoring  and  repairing  her  ;  as  alfo  to  pluck  off  every  green  thing,
that  fprouts  out  of  her  head  between  her  arms,  and  to  cut  off  all  thofe
barren  branches,  which  fpring  out  of  the  arms  themfelves,  and  feize
upon  the  mother’s  nourifhment,  and  employ  and  weary  her  to  no
purpofe.


C  c  2


CHAP.


196


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book IV.


CHAP.  XXVIII.

How  a  Vineyard  ought  to  be  pampinated\  and  how  many
Diggings  are  necejfary  for  fufficiently  cultivating  it .

BUT  the  time  for  pampinating  or  pulling  off  the  fuperfluous  twigs
and  leaves  (1)  muft  efpecially  be  chofen,  before  the  vine  fhews
her  flower ;  but  afterwards  you  may  refume  and  return  to  the  fame
work  again  :  therefore,  in  the  intermediate  days,  during  that  fpace  of
time  wherein  the  berries  are  formed,  they  deny  us  accefs  into  vineyards,
becaufe  it  is  not  expedient  to  move  the  fruit  while  it  is  in  the  bloflom ;
but,  when  it  is  paft  its  puerile  ftate,  and  grown  up  to  its  juvenile  age,
as  it  were,  or  come  to  its  full  growth,  it  is  proper  to  rebind  it,  and  to
ftrip  it  of  all  its  leaves,  and  alfo  to  plump  it  by  frequent  diggings;  for,
by  frequent  pulverations  (2),  it  becomes  more  plentiful,  and  grows  into
better  plight.

Nor  do  I  deny,  that  moll  mafters  of  Hufbandry  before  me  were
content  with  three  diggings;  of  whom  Grcecinus  is  one,  who  expreffes
himfelf  thus:  It  may  fee?n  fujficient  to  dig  a  conJHtuted  vineyard  thrice,
Celfus  alfo  and  Atticus  agree,  that  there  are  three  natural  motions  in  a
vine,  or  rather  in  every  tree  or  fprig  whatfoever;  one,  whereby  it  may
germinate  ;  another,  whereby  it  may  bloflom  ;  and  a  third,  whereby  it
may  ripen  :  therefore  they  think,  that  thefe  motions  are  excited  by
diggings ;  for  nature  does  not  fufficiently  effedtuate  what  fhe  defires,
unlefs  you  afiifl:  her  with  labour  and  ftudy.  And  this  is  the  care  that
is  to  be  taken  in  cultivating  vineyards,  which  the  vintage  puts  an  end  to.


(1)  Pampivation  is  pulling  off  the  fuperfluous  (hoots  and  leaves  of  vines,  a  word  not
ufed  by  our  gardeners,  fo  far  as  1  have  obferved,  tho’  they  have  adopted  feveral  other  Latin
words  not  fo  difficult  as  this  to  be  expreffed  by  an  Engh Jb  word ;  for  this  cannot  be  fully
expreffed  without  ufing  feveral  words.  Pampinus  is  a  young  (hoot,  that  groweth  out  of
the  branch  of  a  vine,  and  from  it  is  formed pampmare.  This  is  a  work  mightily  recom¬
mended  by  all  ruftic  writers,  as  very  beneficial  to  vines.

(2)  Pulverat  'to  is  digging  the  ground  all  round  the  vine  when  it  is  dry,  and  raffing  the
duft  fo  as  to  cover  the  grapes  with  it.  This,  our  author  fays  in  his  book  of  trees,  cap.  12.
is  of  great  benefic  to  them,  becaufe  it  defends  andpreferves  them  from  the  fun,  and  from
fogs.


CHAP.


197


Chap.  XXIX-  Of  HUSBANDRY.

CHAP.  XXIX.

Of  ingraftmg  Vines ,  and  preferving  the  Ingraftments.

I  Return,  now  to  that  part  of  my  argument,  where  I  engaged  to  give
directions  about  ingrafting  of  vines,  and  preferving  the  ingraftments.
Julius  Atticus  has  told  us,  that  the  time  of  ingrafting  is  from  the  firft
of  November  to  the  firft  of  June ,  till  which  time,  he  affirms,  that  a
cyon  may  be  kept  without  germinating;  and  by  this  we  ought  to  under-
Hand,  that  no  time  of  the  year  is  to  be  excepted,  if  we  can  be  mafters
of  a  lpray  or  graft,  that  is  filent  (i).  I  might  grant  indeed,  that  that
might  be  done  in  other  kinds  of  trees,  which  have  a  firmer  and  more
juicy  bark.  But,  with  refpeCt  to  vines,  it  is  contrary  to  my  honeft  and
faithful  way  of  acting  to  diffemble,  that  it  is  too  rafh  and  unadvifed  to
allow  Hufbandmen  to  ingraft  them  during  fo  many  months ;  not  that  I
am  ignorant,  that  fometimes  a  vine,  ingrafted  about  the  middle  of  win¬
ter,  takes  hold.  But  we  ought  to  teach  learners,  not  what  may  acci¬
dentally  happen  in  one  or  two  experiments,  but  what,,  in  a  certain  regu¬
lar  way,  under  certain  circumftances,  may,  for  the  moft  part,  fucceedj..
for,  if  the  experiment  is  to  be  made  only  upon  a  fmall  number,  in
which  greater  care  is  a  cure  for  their  raffinefs,  fo  far  I  can  give  my  con-
fent.  But  when  the  vaftnefs  of  the  work  does  alfo  extend  and  inlarge
the  care  of  the  moft  diligent  Hufbandmen,  we  ought  to  remove  all
manner  of  fcruple.

For  there  is  a  contradiction  in  what  Atticus  direCts :  for  he  denies,
that  it  is  right  to  prune  a  vineyard  in  the  middle  of  winter,  which,  tho’
it  does  lefs  hurt  to  the  vine,  neverthelefs,  for  very  good  reafons,  is  for¬
bidden  to  be  done,  becaufe,  in  great  colds,  all  forts  of  flioots  whatfoever
are  chilled  and  benumbed  with  the  cold;  nor,  by  reafon  of  the  cold,,
give  they  any  motion  to  the  bark,  fo  that  it  may  clofe  and  heal  up
with  the  wound  :  and  the  fame  Atticus  does  not  forbid  to  ingraft  at  the
very  fame  time,  which  he  then  direCts  to  be  done,  both  by  chopping  off
the  head  of  the  whole  vine,  and  making  a  cleft  in  the  very  fame  part  where
the  cut  is  made.  Therefore  the  truer  way  of  ingrafting  is  after  the
winter  is  paft,  now  when  the  days  are  warm,  when  the  vines  naturally
move  both  their  buds  and  their  bark,  and  when  there  is  no  cold  wea-

(i)  Sarmentum  filens.  This  a  phrafe  commonly  ufed  by  our  author,  THny,  and  other
ruftic  writers,  to  denote  a  branch  or  fpray  of  a  tree,  or  of  any  plant,  that  has  not  as  yet
begun  to  put  forth  its  buds.

4  thee


198  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IV.

ther  approaching  which  may  chill  and  dry  up,  either  the  cyon  that  is
ingrafted,  or  the  wound  that  is  made  by  the  cleft.  Neverthelefs,  I
would  allow  fuch  as  are  in  great  hafte,  to  ingraft  a  vine  in  autumn  •
becaufe  the  quality  of  the  air  at  that  time  is  not  unlike  to  that  of  the
fpring.

But  what  time  foever  any  perfon  fhall  fix  upon  to  ingraft  in,  let  him
know,  that  there  is  no  other  care  to  be  taken  in  trying  and  examining
the  cyons,  than  what  is  delivered  in  the  preceding  book,  where  we
gave  directions  about  choofing  of  cuttings.  After  he  has  pulled  off  the
vine  fuch  cyons  as  are  generous  and  fruitful,  and  the  ripeft  that  he  can
find  ;  let  him  alfo  choofe  a  warm  day,  calm  and  free  from  wind  :  then
let  him  look  out  for  a  cyon  that  is  round,  and  of  a  firm  body,  but  not
of  a  fpungy  pith,  with  frequent  eyes  or  gems  alfo,  and  fhort  joints  or
diltances  between  the  knots.  For  it  is  of  great  importance,  that  the
cyon,  which  is  ingrafted,  be  not  long  j  and  alfo,  that  there  be  many
eyes  in  it,  from  which  it  may  put  forth  its  buds.  Therefore,  if  the
diftances  between  the  knots  be  long,  it  is  neceflary  to  cut  the  cyon  to
one,  or  at  moft  to  two  eyes,  left  we  make  it  of  a  greater  length  than
to  be  able  to  endure  both  ftorms,  and  winds,  and  fhowers,  without
being  moved.  But  a  vine  is  ingrafted,  either  when  it  is  cut,  or  when
it  is  bored  through  with  an  augre,  without  cutting  it.  But  that  in¬
grafting  is  more  frequently  pradtifed,  and  is  known  almoft  to  all  Huf-
bandmen  ;  this  is  rarer,  and  pradtifed  but  by  few.  I  fhall  therefore
difcourfe  of  that  firft,  which  is  more  in  ufe.

For  the  moft  part,  the  vine  is  cut  above  the  earth  ;  fometimes,  never¬
thelefs,  below  it  alfo,  in  the  place  where  it  is  moft  folid,  and  moft
without  knots.  When  it  is  ingrafted  even  with  the  earth,  the  graft  is
covered  with  earth  to  the  very  top  :  but  when  it  is  higher  above  the
earth,  the  clift  is  carefully  daubed  over  with  well- wrought  clay,  and
bound  up  after  it  has  had  mofs  placed  upon  it,  which  may  defend  it
both  from  the  heats  and  the  rains.  The  cyon  is  fo  ftiaped,  that,  being
not  unlike  to  a  pen  made  of  a  reed,  it  may  exadlly  anfwer  to,  and  fill
up  the  cleft,  under  which  it  is  requifite  there  fhould  be  a  knot  in
the  vine,  which  may,  as  it  were,  bind  up  that  cleft,  and  not  fuffer
the  chink  to  proceed  further.  Tho’  this  knot  be  four  digits  diftant
from  the  place  where  the  cut  is  made  •  yet  it  will  be  proper  to  bind
it  faft,  before  the  vine  be  cloven,  left  when  a  way  is  made  with  the
knife  for  the  graft,  the  wound  fhould  gape  more  than  is  fitting.  But  the
graft  ought  not  to  be  fmoothed  more  than  three  digits,  and  that  it  may
be  equally  fmooth  on  that  fide  where  it  is  pared.  And  this  paring  is  car¬
ried  fo  far,  that  it  may  touch  the  pith  on  one  fide,  and  be  fcraped  a  little

2  further


Chap.  XXIX.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  i99

farther  than  the  bark  on  the  other  fide,  and  the  cyon  formed  into  the
fhape  of  a  wedge  j  fo  that  it  may  be  fharp  on  the  lower  part ;  and  be  thin¬
ner  on  the  one  fide,  and  thicker  on  the  other  j  and  that,  being  put  into
the  deft  by  the  thinner  fide,  it  may  be  clofely  faftened  on  that  fide  where
it  is  thickeft,  and  may  touch  the  cleft  on  both  fides.  For,  unlefs  the
bark  of  the  one  be  applied  fo  clofe  to  the  bark  of  the  other,  that  the
light  cannot  fhine  thro’  it  in  any  place,  it  cannot  coalefce.

There  are  more  kinds  of  bands  for  graffing  than  one  :  fome  bind  it
faff  with  willows  j  fome  wrap  the  cleft  round  with  the  rind  of  a
tree  j  very  many  bind  it  with  a  bulrufh,  which  is  the  fitted:  for  this
purpofe.  For  the  willow,  when  it  is  dried,  penetrates  and  cuts  the
bark.  For  which  reafon,  we  approve  more  of  fofter  bindings,  which,
after  they  are  bound  round  the  flock,  are  made  ftraiter  and  clofer,  by
driving  in  fmall  wedges  made  of  reeds.  But  the  principal  thing  to  be  ob-
ferved  is,  that,  before  all  this,  the  vine  be  ablaqueated,  and  the  uppermoft
roots  and  fuckers  cut  away  j  and  that,  after  all,  the  flock  be  covered  over
with  earth ;  and,  after  it  has  taken  hold  of  the  graff,  it  again  requires
another  care.  For  it  mull  be  very  often  pampinated,  when  it  puts
forth  its  buds  ;  and  the  fuckers,  which  creep  out  of  the  roots  and  fides
of  it,  mull  be  frequently  pulled  off.  Alfo  that  which  fhoots  out  of
the  place  where  the  ingraftment  was  made,  muft  be  carefully  bound
up,  left  the  cyon,  being  moved  with  the  wind,  fhould  be  weakened,  or
the  tender  fhoot  be  pulled  away  by  the  root j  \yhich,  when  it  is  grown
to  any  confiderable  length,  muft  be  bereaved  of  all  its  nephews,  unlefs,
by  reafon  of  the  penury  and  baldnefs  of  the  place,  it  be  fet  apart  and
referved  for  layers.  Then  autumn  applies  the  pruning-knife  to  the
young  branches  that  are  come  to  maturity,  and  fit  for  it.  But  this
method  of  pruning  is  carefully  obferved  in  vines  that  are  grafted,  that
where  there  is  no  occafion  for  referving  a  layer,  one  fhoot  be  called  up
to  the  frame  ;  and  the  other  be  fo  cut,  that  the  wound  be  made  even
with  the  flock ;  neverthelefs,  that  it  be  fo  made,  that  nothing  be  pared
off  from  the  hard  wood.  The  fuperfluous  leaves  and  twigs  muft  be
pulled  off  it  no  otherwife  than  you  do  off  a  young  quickfet  :  and  we
muft  fo  prune  it,  as  to  be  very  fparing  in  commanding  it  (2),  and  put¬
ting  it  upon  exerting  itfelf  till  the  fourth  year,  till  fuch  time  as  the
wound  of  the  flock  clofes  up,  and  forms  a  fear.  And  this  is  the  order
and  method  to  be  obferved  in  Cleft-graffing.

(2)  Imperare  viti ,  commanding  the  vine,  i.  e.  fetting  apart  many  fruit-bearing  branches,
and  putting  it  forward  to  produce  much  wood  and  fruit }  the  contrary  to  which  is  prune-
ing  it  very  near,  and  hindering  it  to  exhauft  itfelf.


But,


200  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

Bat,  in  that  which  is  performed  by  terebration,  you  muft  firft  mark
out  the  fruitfulleft  vine  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  from  which  you  may
draw  to  you  a  young  branch  (as  a  twig  ftill  adhering  to  the  mother)
and  put  it  thro’  the  hole.  For  this  is  the  fafer  and  furer  way  of  ingraft¬
ing,  becaufe,  tho’  it  does  not  take  hold  the  next  fpring,  yet,  certainly,
the  following  fpring,  when  it  is  grown  bigger,  it  is  forced  to  unite
with  the  other ;  and  prefently  afterwards  you  cut  it  off  from  its  mother,
and  fo  chop  off  the  upper  part  of  the  vine,  that  is  ingrafted,  hard  by
the  place  where  it  received  the  cyon.  But  if  you  have  not  the  con-
veniency  of  this  fort  of  cyon  growing  upon  its  mother,  then  you  make
choice  of  a  fpray  or  fhoot,  plucked  as  frelh  from  off  the  vine  as  pof-
fible  ;  and,  after  you  have  pared  it  all  round  fo  gently,  that  the  bark
only  may  be  pulled  off  it,  you  fit  it  to  the  hole,  and  fo  you  daub  the  vine,
i vhofe  top  you  have  cut  off,  all  round  with  clay,  that  the  intire  ftock
may  ferve,  or  ?ninijter  nourijhment  to,  a  vine  of  a  different  kind ;  which,
indeed,  is  not  done  in  a  graff,  which  ftill  adheres  to  its  mother,  and  is
nourifhed  by  the  mother’s  bread  till  it  grows  into  the  other  vine.

But  the  iron  tool,  wherewith  our  anceftors  perforated  the  vine,  is
intirely  different  from  that,  which  I  myfelf  have  found  by  experience
to  be  fitter  fot  that  purpofe.  For  the  old  augre,  which  antient  Huf-
bandmen  were  only  acquainted  with,  did  make  a  kind  of  faw-duft,  or
filings,  and  it  galled  and  burned  that  part  which  it  perforated.  More¬
over,  the  burnt  part  did  feldom  revive,  and  recover  itfelf,  and  coalefce
with  the  former  ;  nor  did  the  cyon,  that  was  ingrafted  upon  it,  take
hold  of  it  :  as  alfo  the  faw-duft,  or  filings,  was  never  taken  out  fo  in¬
tirely,  that  fome  of  it  did  not  remain  in  the  hole.  Moreover,  this  by
its  intervention  hindered  the  body  of  the  cyon  to  be  applied  clofe  to
the  body  of  the  vine.  We,  having  contrived  what  we  call  the  Gallic
Gimlet,  for  this  kind  of  ingraftment,  find  it  much  more  proper  and
ufeful  ;  for  it  makes  a  hollow  in  the  ftock,  fo  as  not  to  burn  the  hole  ;
becaufe  it  does  not  make,  as  it  were,  a  faw-duft,  or  filings,  but  {hav¬
ings  ;  which  being  taken  out,  a  fmooth  wound  is  left,  which  may  more
eafily  touch,  on  every  fide,  the  cyon  which  is  leated  in  it,  when  no¬
thing  of  that  flock,  which  the  antient  augre  raifed,  intervenes.  There¬
fore  take  care  to  have  your  ingraftment  of  vines  finifhed  about  the  ver¬
nal  iEquinox.  In  barren  and  dry  places,  graff  the  black  vine;  in  fuch
as  are  moift,  the  white  :  neither  is  there  any  jieceftity  of  propagating,
if  fo  be  that  the  ftock  is  of  fo  middling  a  thicknefs,  that  the  growth  of
the  cyon,  which  is  ingrafted  into  it,  can  cover  the  wound  or  cut  that  is
made  in  it  ;  except,  neverthelefs,  that  the  vacant  place  of  the  head  of
a.  vine  that  is  dead,  requires  another  vine.  When  this  is  the  cafe,  one

J  of


201


Chap.  XXX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

of  the  cyons  is  turned  down  for  a  layer,  the  other  is  carried  up  to  the
frame,  and  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit.  Nor  will  it  be  ufelefs  to  edu¬
cate  fuch  {hoots  as  grow  out  of  the  arched  part  of  the  vine,  which  you
have  put  down  for  a  layer  j  which  {hoots  you  may  afterwards  either
make  layers  of,  if  it  be  proper,  or  leave  them  for  fruit  (3).


CHAP.  XXX.


Of  DireBiotts  relating  to  Props  for  Vines ,  and  to  OJiers ,  and

Willow- groves.

FOrafmuch  as  we  have  already  difcourfed  of  fuch  things  as  we
thought  might  be  ufefully  delivered  as  precepts  and  directions  for
conftituting  and  cultivating  vineyards  ;  a  method  muft  now  be  laid
down,  for  making  provifion  of  props,  frames,  and  oners  :  for  thefe
things  are  provided  beforehand,  as  certain  dowries  or  portions  for  vine¬
yards.  Which  things  if  the  Hufbandman  be  deftitute  of,  he  has
no  motive. or  encouragement  to  make  vineyards,  feeing  all  the  things
that  are  neceffary,  muft  be  fought  for  at  a  diftance  from  his  own
ground :  and  not  only  the  price  that  he  pays  when  he  purchafes  them,
(as  Atticus  fays)  is  a  burden  in  the  accounts  of  the  charges  of  his  vine¬
yard  i  but  alfo  the  procuring  fuch  things  is  exceeding  troublefome.
For  they  muft  be  carried  and  brought  together  in  winter,  which  is  a
very  inconvenient  time  for  it.  Wherefore  provifion  muft  be  firft  made  of
willow- roots,  and  grounds  planted  with  reeds,  common  woods,  or  woods
planted  on  purpofe  with  chefnut-trees.  One  fingle  jugcrum  of  willow-
ground  (as  Atticus  thinks)  may  fuftice  for  binding  twenty-five  jugera
of  vineyard  :  a  fmg\e  jugerum  of  ground,  planted  with  reeds,  is  fuffi-
cient  for  furnifhing  frames  for  twenty  jugera  :  and  a  jugerum  planted


(3)  Ic  is  evident,  as  Gefnerus  obferves,  that  this  laft  paragraph  is  im perfect,  and  things
not  fo  dearly  expreffed  as  is  ufual  with  this  author.  But  his  meaning  Teems  very  obvious:
his  defign  is  to  teach  when  it  is  neceffary  to  infert  two  cyons  into  the  defc  of  a  vine.  Fie
fays,  it  is  not  neceffary  when  the  ftock  is  of  fuch  a  moderate  thicknefs,  that,  by  the  growth
of  one  graft,  it  may  fill  up,  and  foon  coalefce.  On  the  other  hand,  he  fays,  it  is  neceffary
to  ingraft  two  cyons  into  one  ftock,  when  it  is  larger  than  to  be  able  to  coalefce  with  one
cyon  only  j  or  when,  in  its  neighbourhood,  the  head  of  fome  vine  is  dead,  and  it  is  ne¬
ceffary  to  fupply  it  with  a  layer.  It  is  obvious  to  any  who  confiders  it,  that  this  muft  be
the  fenfe  of  the  author,  tho’  the  firft  part  of  the  fentence,  neque  eft  ulla  propagandi  neceft-
fttas ,  be  very  ambiguous ;  and  perhaps  he  mean-,  that,  when  a  vine  can  be  rightly  ingrafted,
there  is  no  necqffity  of  propagating  by  layers,  which  requires  more  labour.


D  d


with


202  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

with  chefnut-trees  is  enough  for  propping  as  many  jugera ,  as  a  jugerutn
planted  with  reeds  can  furnifh  frames  for.

Land  that  is  either  well  watered,  or  oufy,  nourishes  the  willow  ex¬
ceedingly  well ;  neverthelefs,  that  which  is  level  and  fat,  is  not  at  all
improper  for  it.  And  it  ought  to  be  turned  up  with  the  fpade  two  feet
and  a  half  deep  (for  fo  the  antients  direft) ;  nor  is  it  of  any  importance
what  kind  of  willow  you  plant,  provided  it  be  exceeding  tough  and
flexible.  Neverthelefs  they  think,  that  there  are  three  principal  kinds
of  the  Willow ;  the  Greek ,  the  Gallic ,  and  the  Sabinian ,  which  mod
people  call  the  Amerine.  The  Greek  is  of  a  yellow  colour  -y  the  Gallic
of  a  rufty  purple  colour,  and  of  a  very  fmall  with  or  rod  ;  the  Amerine
willow  bears  a  (lender,  bright,  reddifh-coloured  rod  :  and  of  thefe  you
either  plant  the  tops,  or  fet  them  in  cuttings.  The  topmoft  rods  of  a
moderate  thicknefs,  which  neverthelefs  don’t  exceed  the  thicknefs  of  a
hoop  for  a  veffel  of  two  feet  circumference,  are  very  proper  for  fetting,
if  they  be  put  down  fo  deep  into  the  ground,  as  to  be  even  with  it.
Cuttings  a  foot  and  a  half  long,  being  immerfed  into  the  ground,  are
covered  over  therewith  but  a  very  little :  a  place  that  is  well  watered
requires  wider  fpaces  between  them,  and  thofe  of  fix  feet,  in  the  quin¬
cunx  order,  do  very  well :  a  place  that  is  naturally  dry  requires  fmaller
diftances  between  each,  but  fo,  that  they  who  cultivate  them,  may
have  eafy  accefs  to  them.  It  is  fufHcient,  that  the  diftances  between  the
rows  be  five  feet  ;  but  that,  neverthelefs,  in  the  very  line  where  they
are  planted,  there  be  empty  fpaces  of  two  feet  left  between  each  plant,
the  vacant  fpaces  and  the  plants  fucceeding  each  other  alternately.  The
proper  time  for  fetting  them  is  before  they  bud,  while  the  rods  are
iilent,  which  it  is  proper  to  pull  off  the  trees  when  they  are  dry  :  for,
if  you  cut  them  off  when  the  dew  is  upon  them,  they  thrive  and  come
forward  but  very  indifferently.  Therefore,  in  pruning  the  willow,  we
avoid  rainy  days.  The  firft  three  years,  willow-grounds  muft  be  fre¬
quently  digged,  as  you  do  new  vineyards :  afterwards,  when  they  are
grown  ftrong,  they  are  content  with  three  diggings ;  when  they  are  cul¬
tivated  in  a  different  manner,  they  quickly  decay.  For,  tho’  great  care
be  taken,  yet  very  many  willows  perifh.  In  the  place  of  which  others
ought  to  be  propagated  by  layers  from  thofe  that  grow  near  at  hand,
by  bending  their  tops,  and  putting  them  under-ground,  whereby  what¬
ever  is  perifhed  may  be  replaced.  Then  let  the  layer,  when  it  is  a  year
old,  be  cut  off  from  its  flock,  that  it  may  be  nourifhed  by  it«  own
roots.


CHAP.


203


Chap.  XXXII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

CHAP.  XXXI.

Of  Broom.

VERY  dry  places,  which  don’t  admit  of  that  kind  of  fprig-nur-
feries,  require  broom.  As  a  band  made  of  this  is  ftrong  enough,
fo  alfo  it  is  exceeding  tough.  You  fow  the  feed  of  it,  which,  when  it
is  grown  up,  you  either  tranfplant  it  when  a  quickfet  of  two  years  old  ;
or,  being  left  to  grow  where  it  was  fown ,  after  it  is  paft  that  age,  it
may  be  cut  down  every  year  hard-by  the  ground,  after  the  manner  of
com.  Other  forts  of  bindings,  fuch  as  thofe  made  of  bramble,  require
more  pains ;  but  neverthelefs  very  neceffary,  when  there  is  a  fcarcity
cf  them.  The  willow,  for  poles,  requires  almoft  the  fame  land  as  that
for  withs.  Neverthelefs  it  comes  up,  and  thrives  better,  in  land,  that
is  well  watered;  and  it  is  fet  in  cuttings;  and,  when  it  has  germinated,
it  is  fo  formed  as  to  grow  up  into  one  pole.  You  muft  frequently  dig
round  it,  and  root  out  the  weeds,  and  pull  off  its  fuperfluous  leaves
and  twigs,  no  lefs  than  you  do  thofe  of  a  vine,  that  it  may  be  called
forth,  and  made  to  fhoot  forth,  rather  into  length  of  branches,  than
into  breadth.  When  thus  cultivated,  you  cut  it  at  fartheft  the  fourth
year  ;  for  that,  which  is  prepared  for  bands,  may  be  cut,  when  it  is
one  year  old,  about  two  feet  and  a  half  from  the  ground,  that  it  may
fprout  out  of  the  trunk,  and  be  divided  into  arms  or  boughs,  like  alow
vine.  Neverthelefs,  if  the  land  be  drier  than  ordinary,  it  muft  be  cut
when  it  is  two  years  old.


CHAP.  XXXII.

Of  Ground  planted  with  Reeds.

%

THE  reed  does  not  require  ground  that  is  paginated  fo  deep;  ne¬
verthelefs  it  thrives  better  when  it  is  fet  in  ground  that  is  turned
up  with  the  fpade  two  feet  deep :  and,  forafmuch  as  it  is  exceeding
lively,  it  does  not  refufe  any  place  whatfoever.  It  thrives  better  when
it  is  fet  in  loofe  ground,  than  in  that  which  is  thick  ;  in  moift,  than
in  that  which  is  dry ;  in  valleys,  than  upon  hills  or  riling  grounds ;  and
it  is  planted  more  commodioufly  upon  the  banks  of  rivers,  in  borders
-and  thickets,  than  in  the  middle  of  lands.  The  bulb  of  the  root  of  it

D  d  2  is


204  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

is  planted  ;  they  alfo  fet  cuttings  of  the  cane  ;  and  it  is  as  common  to
lay  the  whole  body  of  it  flat  in  the  ground.  The  bulb,  being  put  under
ground,  with  vacant  fpaces  of  three  feet  between  each,  yields  a  full-
grown  pole  in  lefs  time  than  a  year.  The  cutting,  and  the  whole  reed
laid  flat,  comes  later  to  maturity  than  the  forefaid  time;  but  whether
you  fet  it  in  cuttings  of  two  feet  and  a  half,  or  the  whole  reeds  be  laid
flat,  their  tops  muft  appear  above-ground ;  for,  if  they  be  wholly  put
under-ground,  they  rot  intirely.  But  the  culture  of  grounds,  planted
with  reeds,  is  not  different  the  firfl:  three  years  from  that  of  other
grounds  before-mentioned.  When  it  is  become  old,  it  mud  be  trenched
again  :  and  this  is  its  old  age  ;  when  either  it  becomes  dry  and  withered,
and  is  overgrown  with  mofs  and  naftinefs,  by  being  neglected  for  many
years;  or  when  it  is  fo  crouded  with  reeds,  and  they  grow  fo  clofe
together,  that  they  grow  up  flender,  and  like  fmall  canes.  But  that
ought  to  be  digged  again  anew,  and  this  may  be  cut  down  here-and-
there,  and  thinned  ;  which  work  Hufbandmen  call  cajlrating :  which
way  of  cutting  neverthelefs  of  a  reed-plot  is  atfting  at  random,  and  in
the  dark,  becaufe  it  does  not  appear  by  the  ground,  w'hat  ought  either
to  be  taken  away,  or  left.  Neverthelefs  it  can  better  bear  w'ith  being
caftrated  before  the  reed  is  cut  down  ;  inafmuch  as  the  fmall  canes
point  out,  as  it  were,  and  fhew  what  ought  to  be  rooted  out.  The
time  of  repaginating,  and  of  fetting  them,  is,  before  the  eyes  of  the
reeds  fhoot  forth.  Then  the  time  for  cutting  them  is  after  the  middle
of  winter  is  pafl:  ;  for  it  always  continues  to  grow  till  that  time,  and
then  it  receives  a  check,  when  it  grows  ftiff  with  the  winter-cold.  A
reed-plot  mufl  be  digged  as  often  as  a  vineyard;  but  its  leannefs  may
be  relieved  with  afhes,  or  other  dung :  for  which  reafon  moft  people
fet  it  on  fire  after  it  is  cut  down.


CHAP.  XXXIII.

Of  Chej  nut-trees,  and  Chef  nut- groves.

THE  chefnut-tree  is  next  to  the  oaks  called  rohora  (i),  and  there¬
fore  very  proper  for  eftablifhing  and  firmly  fupporting  vineyards;
for  its  nut,  being  planted  in  paftinated  ground,  ftarts  up,  and  fhews

itfelf

(i)  Robur ,  an  oak.  There  are  feveral  forts  of  oaks,  differing  from  one  another  either
in  their  growth  and  ftature,  figure  of  their  leaves,  bignefc  and  fhape,  hardnefs  and  colour
of  their  fruit,  and  feveral  other  qualities,  which  I  need  not  mention.  Authors  differ  very

much


Chap.  XXXIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  205

itfelf  quickly,  and,  after  the  fpace  of  five  years,  being  cut  down,  it
recovers  itfelf,  and  grows  up  again  in  the  manner  of  a  willow-grove,
and,  being  made  into  a  flake,  it  lafts  almoft  till  another  cutting.  It
requires  a  black  and  loofe  earth  j  it  does  not  diflike  a  moift  coarfe  fand,
nor  the  broken,  crumbling,  fandy  gravel-ftone  •  it  rejoices,  and  thrives
exceeding  well,  upon  a  hill  or  rifing  ground,  (heltered  from  the  fun,
and  expofed  to  the  north  ;  it  is  afraid  of  a  clofe  thick  foil,  and  of  that
which  is  full  of  red-okre.  It  is  planted,  from  the  month  of  November
during  the  whole  winter,  in  dry  ground,  and  which  has  been  trenched
two  feet  and  a  half  deep.  The  nuts  are  fet  in  a  row,  and  at  the  diftance
of  half  a  foot ;  but  the  rows  are  feparated  by  fpaces  of  five  feet  from
each  other.  The  chefnut  is  committed  to  furrows  funk  three-fourths
of  a  foot  deep  j  and,  when  the  fame  are  fet  with  nuts,  before  they  are
filled  up  with  earth,  and  levelled,  Ihort  reeds  are  fet  up  at  the  fide  of
the  chefnuts,  that,  by  thefe  marks  and  indications  of  the  place  where
they  are  planted,  they  may  be  digged  and  weeded  with  the  greater  cau¬
tion.  As  foon  as  the  plants  are  grown  up  to  have  a  ftem  (2),  they  muft

be

much  about  their  feveral  kinds  and  names.  Pliny  fays,  that,  in  Germany ,  there  were  vaft
woods  of  the  robur ;  and  feems  to  think,  that  it  is  the  fame  with  what  the  Greeks  call
J'fvV,  from  which,  he  fays,  the  druids ,  a  kind  of  magi  among  the  Gauls,  took  their  name,
they  taking  great  delight  in  groves  of  this  kind  of  tree,  and  performing  no  religious  cere¬
mony  without  the  leaves  thereof.  Pliny-,  who,  no  doubt,  was  well  acquainted  with  this
tree,  fays,  that  it  bears  a  fmall  acorn  }  befides  which,  it  produces  feveral  other  things,  viz.
both  black  and  white  galls,  and  a  fruit  refembling  mulberries,  excepting  that  they  are  dry
and  hard,  in  which  there  is  inclofed  a  fruit  like  the  kernel  of  an  olive.  Likewife  it  pro¬
duces  fmall  balls  or  pills,  which  have  a  kind  of  flax  within  them  very  fit  for  lamps ;  as  alfo
another  fort  of  pill  or  ball,  with  hair  upon  it,  which,  in  the  fpring,  yields  a  juice,  which
taftes  like  honey  ;  as  alfo  that  it  breeds,  in  the  hollows  between  the  boughs  and  the  trunk,
certain  fmall  pills,  which  ftick  clofe  to  the  wood,  without  any  pedicles,  which,  toward
their  navel,  are  whitifh ;  but,  over  the  other  parts,  are  fpeckled  with  black  fpots,  only  in
the  middle  they  are  of  a  fcarlet  red  colour.  Thefe,  and  feveral  other  peculiarities,  which
he  mentions  at  large,  lib.  xvi.  cap.  8.  are  fufficient  to  diftinguifh  this  from  other  forts  of
oaks.  Father  Hardouin  is  very  pofitive,  that  the  robur  is  the  c fyiif  iy^'ict  of  Theophrafius  •
and  that  it  has  no  name  in  the  French  language.

Quercus  is  another  fort  of  oak  frequently  mentioned  by  our  author.  Pliny  fays,  that  it '
bears  both  the  beft  and  the  largeft  acorns ;  that  of  the  female  is  fofter  and  fweeter  than  that
of  the  male,  which  is  thicker  and  clofer }  that  it  has  the  ftrongeft  and  mod  durable  wood,
not  being  fo  fubjedt  to  rot,  full  of  boughs,  and  has  a  taller  and  thicker  trunk,  than  the
other  forts  of  oaks.  It  feems,  that  even  of  the  quercus  itfelf  there  are  different  forts.  Pliny
mentions  the  quercus  latifolia ,  the  broad-leav’d  oak  j  which,  father  Hardouin  fays,  is  always

freen  in  the  country  of  Anjou  in  France ;  and  they  call  it  le  grand  ckefne ,  the  great  oak.
le  is  very  pofitive,  that  the  quercus  is  the  tptiyoc  of  Theophrafius.

( 2 )  Simulate  femina  fiillaverint.  It  is  not  eafy  to  determine  what  the  author  means  by
this  fentence.  Gefnerus  fays,  that  there  is  fome  reafon  to  think  it  ought  ro  be  fiilaverint ,
from  plus  a  ftem  or  ftalk,  a sgemmare  from  gemma ,  and  germinate  from  germen ,  &c.  i.  e.
as  foon  as  the  feeds  are  fprung  up,  and  have  formed  a  ftile  or  ftalk,  they  may  be  pulled
up,  and  tranfplanted.  Bat  as  all  manufcripts  and  editions  have  fiillaverint ,  perhaps  the

author


206  L.  J,  M,  COLUMEtL  A,  &c.  Book  IV.

be  plucked  up  here-and-there;  alfo  they  may  be  tranfplanted  when  they
are  two  years  old;  and  there  rauft  be  two  feet  of  empty  ground  left
between  each,  without  any  of  the  little  trees  upon  it,  left  their  being
too  thick  and  clofe  upon  one  another  emaciate  the  plants.  But  the  feed
is  planted  thicker,  becaufe  of  various  accidents ;  for  fometimes  the  nut,
before  ever  it  fprings  out  of  the  earth,  either  withers  or  dries  up  intirely
with  droughts,  or  rots  with  too  much  water.  Sometimes  it  is  infefted
by  fubterraneous  animals,  fuch  as  mice  and  moles :  for  which  reafons
young  chefnut-groves  often  grow  bald,  and  wax  thin  ;  and,  when  they
are  to  be  replaced,  and  made  thicker,  it  is  better,  if  it  can  be  done  con¬
veniently,  that  a  pole,  growing  hard-by,  be  bended  in  the  manner  of  a
layer,  and  propagated,  than  to  take  it  out  of  the  ground,  and  replant  it ;
for  that  germinates  vehemently,  and  fhoots  forth  vigoroufly,  as  having
never  been  moved  out  of  its  own  feat ;  but  this,  which  is  taken  up  by
the  root,  and  planted  again,  is  in  terror  for  two  years  afterward :  for
which  reafon  it  is  found  to  be  more  convenient  to  raife  woods  of  this  fort
from  nuts,  than  from  quickfets.

The  fpaces  of  ground  above-mentioned  of  this  kind  of  planting  will
receive  two  thoufand  eight  hundred  and  eighty  heads  of  chefnut-trees ;
according  to  which  number,  (as  Atticus  fays)  every  (ingle  j  age  rum  will
eafily  yield  twelve  thoufand  props  or  (lakes ;  for  the  cuttings,  that  are
cut  off  neareft  the  ftem,  will,  when  cloven,  for  the  moft  part,  furnifti
us  with  four  (lakes ;  and  then  the  fecond  cuttings  of  the  fame  tree  will
yield  two ;  which  kind  of  cleft  prop  lads  longer  than  the  round  pole.
The  culture  of  digging  and  fetting  is  the  fame  as  that  of  the  vineyard.
It  ought  to  be  pruned  when  it  is  two  years  old,  and  alfo  when  three
years ;  for,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  it  mud  twice  feel  the  edge
of  the  knife,  that  it  may  be  incited  and  put  forward  to  (hoot  forth  in
length.

The  oak-tree  alfo  may  be  planted  in  the  fame  manner ;  but  it  is  cut
down  two  years  later  than  the  chefnut-tree  :  and,  becaufe  of  this,  reafon
requires,  that  we  fhould  rather  gain  time,  unlefs  mountains,  that  are
gravelly,  and  full  of  thickets,  and  thofe  kinds  of  earth,  which  we  have
already  mentioned,  (hall  require  the  acorn,  rather  than  the  chefnut.
Thefe  things  concerning  Italian  vineyards,  and  the  furniture  and  im¬
plements  of  vineyards  in  general,  have  I,  at  full  length,  and  not  unpro-
fitably,  fo  far  as  I  can  iudge,  dilcourfed  of.  I  (hall  by-and-by  give  an
account  how  the  provincial  Hulbandmen  cultivate  their  vineyards,  and
of  the  culture  and  management  of  trees  planted  for  fupporting  vines,
both  in  our  own  country,  and  in  Gaul .


author  means  that,  as  foon  as  the  feeds  have  put  forth  their  (talks  or  ftems,  and  that  the
young  fnoots  fprout  out  from  them,  fo  that  the  rain  drops  from  them,  then  they  are  fic  for
tranfplanung.

L.  JUNIUS


[  207]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  FIFTH.


CHAR  L

YOU  faid,  Silvinus ,  that,  in  the  former  books,  which  I  had
written  to  you  concerning  conftituting  and  cultivating  vine¬
yards,  there  were  fome  things  wanting,  which  they,  who
applied  themfelves  to  the  fludy  of  rural  affairs,  did  mightily
wifh  for  ; '  nor  do  I  deny,  that  I  have  paffed  over  fome  things,  tho’  I
have  carefully  inquired  and  examined  what  both  the  Hufbandmen  of  our  •

own  age,  and  alfo  the  antients,  have  delivered  to  the  records  of  learn¬
ing.  But,  when  I  undertook  to  teach  publicly  the  precepts  of  Huf-  -  ,
bandry,  if  I  miftake  not,  I  did  not  confidently  fay,  that  I  would  treat
of  all,  but  of  the  mofl  part  of  thofe  things,  which  the  vaft  extent  of
that  fcience  comprehended  ;  for  that  could  never  fall  within  the  com-
pafs  of  one  man’s  knowledge  and  fkill :  neither  is  there  any  difcipline  or
art  whatfoever,  that  has  been  confummated,  or  brought  to  perfection,
by  the  genius  and  capacity  of  one  fingle  man.  Wherefore,  as  one  that
traces  and  fearches  for  wild  beafts  in  a  great  wood,  (hews  himfelf  to  be
a  good  hunter,  if  he  catches  very  many  of  them,  nor  was  it  ever  charged
as  a  fault  upon  any  man,  that  he  did  not  catch  them  all;  fo  it  is  abun¬
dantly  enough  for  us  to  have  treated  of  moft  things  belonging  to  fo
diffufe  a  fubjeCt  as  we  have  undertaken  ;  forafmuch  as  the  things,
which  are  wanting,  and  are  required,  as  if  they  were  omitted  by  us,
do  not  properly  belong  to  our  profeffion,  as  very  lately,  when  our  friend

4  M,


20  8  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IV.

M.  Trebellius  required  of  me  a  method  for  meafuring  of  lands,  he  gave
it  as  his  opinion,  that  it  had  fo  near  a  relation  to,  and  was  fo  connected
with  one’s  fiubjeCt,  who  demonstrated  after  what  manner  we  Should
paginate  land,  that  we  ought  to  give  directions  alfo  how  to  meafure  it  j
which,  I  Said,  was  not  the  bufinefs  of  an  Hufbandman,  but  of  a  fur-
veyor  or  meafurer,  efpecially  when  architects,  who  muft  needs  know
the  way  and  method  of  meafuring,  don’t  indeed  vouchfafe  to  compre¬
hend  the  dimenfion  of  buildings  when  they  are  finished,  and  which
they  themfelves  have  difpofed,  and  put  into  due  order;  but  they  think,
that  one  thing  belongs  to,  and  is  fuitable  to  their  profeffion,  and  another
to  theirs,  who  meafure  things  already  built,  and  who,  by  making  a
calculation,  compute  the  amount  of  the  work,  that  is  completely
finifhed  :  whereby  I  am  of  opinion,  that  our  art  ought  the  more  to  be
excufed,  if  it  proceeds  only  fo  far,  as  to  tell  after  what  method  every
thing  muft  be  performed,  but  not  the  quantum  of  what  it  has  done.

But  becaufe  you  alfo,  Silvinus ,  in  a  familiar  manner,  defire,  that  we
Should  give  you  rules  and  directions  for  meafuring,  I’ll  comply  with
your  defire,  upon  this  condition,  that  you  make  no  doubt,  that  this  is
rather  the  bufinefs  of  Geometers,  than  of  Hufbandmen  ;  and  that  you
will  pardon  any  error  or  miftake  I  may  fall  into  in  a  thing  I  don’t  pre¬
tend  to  have  a  perfeCt  knowledge  of.  But  to  return  to  my  fubjeCt :
The  quantity  or  extent  of  every  area  is  known  by  a  foot-meafure,
which  confifts  of  xvi  digits  (1)3  a  foot  multiplied  proceeds  to  paces,  and
afius  or  furlongs,  and  clima's ,  and  jugera ,  and  Jladia ,  and  centurice ;
afterwards  alfo  into  greater  fpaces.  Apace  (pajfus)  contains  v  feet  (2).
The  Smallest  atius  (as  M.  Varro  fays)  has  iv  feet  in  breadth,  and  in
length  exx  (3).  A  clima  is  lx  feet  every  way  (4.).  A  fquare  attus  is

termi¬
ni)  The  (mailed:  meafiire  of  length  mentioned  by  our  author  is  digitus  latus,  or  tranf-
• verfus ,  a  digit  or  finger’s  breadth,  which  is  properly  *  of  an  inch,  and  is  equal  to  four
grains  of  barley  laid  breadthwife,  fo  as  to  touch  one  another.  This,  he  fays,  was  the  fix-
teenth  part  of  a  foot;  and  the  Roman  foot,  as  has  been  faid  before,  according  to  the

inch  dec.

Englifl}  ftandard,  is  11,6043  and  of  this  foot-meafure  they  compounded  feveral  others
here  mentioned  by  our  author,  to  all  which  they  gave  their  peculiar  names,  which,  when
mentioned,  raifed  in  the  mind  the  idea  of  a  certain  number  of  feet,  as  pajfus-,  attus,  clima ,
Jugerum ,  &c.  to  which,  I  believe,  very  few  nations  at  prefent  have,  in  their  own  language,
names  of  meafures,  that  exactly  correfpond.  The  foot  was  the  fmalleft  land-meafure.

(2)  The  pajjus ,  a  pace,  contained  five  feet;  and  we  are  told,  that  it  was  fo  called  a
pajjis  pedibus ,  from  the  feet  extended  in  walking.

(3)  Attus,  as  Pliny  tells  us,  lib.  xviii.  c.  3.  is  the  length  of  a  furrow,  as  far  as  a  plough
goes  before  it  turns;  and  is  properly  tranflated,  in  Englijh ,  a  furlong;  and,  as  a  determinate
meafure,  is  120  feet  They  had  their  aft  us  minimus,  and  their  attus  quadratus.  Our  au¬
thor,  from  Varro ,  tells  us,  that  the  attus  minimus  had  120  feet  in  length,  and  four  in
breadth  (which  words  are  not  in  the  copies  of  Varro  which  we  now  have;  and  he  makes

no


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  209

terminated  by  cxx  feet  on  every  fide  (f).  This  fquare-affus  doubled
makes  a  jugerum ;  and  from  the  two  fquare-attus  joined  the  one  to  the
other,  it  took  the  name  of  jugerum  (6).  But  the  Rallies  of  the  pro¬
vince  of  Bcetica  call  this  fquare-attus,  Acnua  (7)  j  and  thefe  fame  call  a
breadth  of  xxx  feet,  and  a  length  of  clxxx,  pcrca  (8).  But  the  Gauls
call  a  fpace  of  c  feet  in  areas  in  a  city,  and  a  fpace  of  cl  feet  in  areas
in  the  open  fields,  candetum ;  which  the  plowers  call  cadetum  (9) :  they
call  alfo  half  a  jugerum  Arpennis  (10).  Therefore  (as  I  laid)  two  actus
make  &  jugerum  of  ccxl  feet  in  length,  and  cxx  in  breadth  ;  both  which
fums,  multiplied  into  one  another,  make  twenty-eight  thoufand  and
eight  hundred  fquare  feet.  Then  a  Jiadiu?n  (n)  contains  exxv  paces,

that

no  mention  of  this  attus  in  the  ioth  chap,  of  his  firft  book,  where  he  treats  of  the  mea-
lures  of  land).  The  fquare  feet  in  this  alius  minimus  are  only  480 ;  lo  that  fome  late  au¬
thors  mull  be  mfftaken,  who  make  it  the  fixth  part  of  the  jugerum ,  ( jugeri  fextaxs)  viz.
4800  fquare  feet.

(4)  The  efima  had  60  feet  every  way,  i.  e.  3 600  fquare  feet,  and  was  the  fefcuncia  of
the  jugerum,  i.e.  A  parts  of  it,  and  or,  withrefpedt  to  the  number  of  lcruples  in  the
jugerum ,  is  parts  of  it.

(5)  The  ait  us  quadrat  us,  or  fquare  furlong,  being  120  feet  every  way,  was  equal  to
the  half  of  the jugerum,  and  contained  14400  fquare  feet.

(6)  Two  alius  quadrati,  joined  together,  made  a  jugerum,  which,  as  our  author  fays,
from  this  junction,  took  the  name  of  jugerum.  This  fhews,  that  it  is  a  miftake  to  fay,
that  this  meafure  was  called  jugerum ,  becaufe  it  contained  as  much  land  as  a  yoke  of  oxen
can  plow  in  one  day:,  for  we  learn  from  Varro,  lib.  i.  cap.  2.  that  fuch  a  quantity  as  this
was  called  jugum,  which  was  a  certain  meafure  they  ufed  in  fome  parts  of  Spain ;  in  Hi-
fpania  ulteriore  metiuntur  jugis,  jugum  vacant ;  quod  juntti  boves  uno  die  exar are  pojflunt.  A
wrong  reading  in  Pliny's  nat.  hifl.  lib.  xviii.  cap.  3.  gave  occafion  to  this  notion;  and
father  Hardouin  has,  from  this  place  of  Varro,  very  judicioully  corrected  it,  and  changed
jugerum  into  jugum’,  and  the  place  itfelf  fhews  the  correction  to  be  juft,  becaufe  Pliny
afterwards  tells  us  what  conftitutes  the  jugerum,  and  fpeaks  of  it  as  a  thing  he  had  not
mentioned  before.  The  two  attus  quadrati ,  joined,  make  240  feet  in  length,  and  120
in  breadth,  the  fquare  of  which  is  28800,  the  number  of  fquare  feet  in  a  jugerum.

(7)  Acnua.  Our  author  fays,  that  the  Husbandmen  in  Bcetica  called  the  attus  qu&-
dratus  by  this  name;  fo  that  he  feems  to  make  it  a  Spanijh  word;  but  Varro  makes  it  a
Latin  word.  It  has  fo  many  different  readings,  that  it  is  difficult  to  fay  which  is  the  true
one.  Probably  it  might  have  been  in  Spain  a  corruption  of  the  word  attus.

(8)  Porca,  a  certain  meafure  ufed  in  Bcetica ,  confifting  of  180  feet  in  length,  and  30
in  breadth.  Porca  commonly  fignifies  the  ridge  or  raifed  part  of  plowed  land,  as  lira
fignifies  the  furrow,  or  depreffed  part.  Probably  in  plowing  that  delightful  country  they
threw  the  land  into  ridges  of  that  dimenfion.

(9)  Candetum.  IJidorus  feems  to  think,  that  this  is  only  a  corruption  of  the  word  center
turn ,  a  meafure  of  100  feet.

(10)  Arpennis  or  arepennis.  This,  our  author  fays,  is  a  Gallic  word;  and  probably
from  it  comes  the  French  word  arpent :  but  the  number  of  feet  in  it  does  not  anfwer
either  to  thofe  of  the  jugerum ,  or  of  the  half  of  the  jugerum.

(11)  The  fladium  is  originally  a  Greek  meafure.  Some  fay  it  was  the  length  of  the  race-
ground  at  Pifa  in  Elis ,  where  the  Olympic  games  were  celebrated,  and  was  600  feet  long,
it  came  to  be  in  ufe  among  the  Romans.  But  both  Columella  and  Pliny  fay,  that  a  fladium
was  62 5  Roman  feet ;  fo  that  either  the  Greek  foot  was  longer  than  the  Roman ,  or  it  may

E  e  be


210  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book V.

that  is,  dcxxv  feet,  which,  multiplied  by  eight,  make  a  thoufand  paces,
which  amount  to  five  thoufand  feet.  We  now  call  (as  the  fame  Varro
fays)  an  extent  of  two  hundred  jugera  a  centuria  (12) ;  but  formerly
it  was  called  a  century ,  from  one  hundred  jugera  ;  but  afterwards,
being  doubled,  it  retained  the  name,  as  the  tribes  ( tribus )  were  at  firft
fo  called  from  the  people’s  being  divided  into  three  parts,  which,  being
now  multiplied,  neverthelefs  retain  their  antient  name.  Thefe  things
it  was  proper  briefly  to  premife,  as  not  foreign  to  our  purpofe,  nor  re¬
mote  from  the  calculation  we  are  going  to  deliver.

Now  let  us  come  to  the  purpofe.  We  have  not  laid  down  all  the
parts  of  a  jugerum ,  but  only  thofe  that  fall  into  the  efiimation  of  work
done.  Lor  it  was  needlefs  to  infill:  upon  the  fmaller  parts,  for  which
no  confideration  or  reward  is  paid  down  :  therefore  (as  we  faid)  a  ju¬
gerum  (13)  contains  twenty-eight  thoufand  and  eight  hundred  fquare
feet ;  which  feet  make,  or  anfwer  to,  cclxxxviii  fcruples.  But,  that
I  may  begin  with  the  leaft  part ;  that  is,  with  half  a  fcruple.  The  five
hundred  feventy-and-fixth  part  of  a  jugerum  makes  fifty  feet  j  that  is,

half

be  true  what  Tome  authors  fay,  that  the  Jladium  was  marked  out  by  Hercules  himfelf,  and
meafured  by  the  length  of  his  own  foot,  which,  in  proportion  to  his  ftature,  was  longer
than  that  in  common  ufe.  It  was  the  eighth  part  of  the  Roman  mile  which  confided  of
5000  feet.

(12)  Centuria.  This  is  the  largeft  meafure  of  land  mentioned  by  Columella ,  which,  at  firft,
was  fo  called,  becaufe  it  confined  of  100  jugera.  When  Romulus  diftributed  WO  jugera
a  man  to  the  people,  it  feems,  for  diftindlion-fake,  they  threw  an  hundred  of  thefe  fmall
parcels  of  land  together,  and  called  them  Centuria ,  every  man  having  his  own  particular
portion  afligned  him,  which  was  called  Haredium ,  becaufe  it  went  to  his  Heir  ;  fo  that
100  of  thefe  fmall  inheritances  made  200  jugera.

(13)  In  order  to  underftand  the  account  Columella  gives  of  the  divifionsof  the  jugerum ,
it  is  neceffary  to  know,  that  the  Romans  ufed  to  call  any  integer,  which  came  under  con¬
fideration,  by  the  name  of  as,  which  was  a  great  brafs  coin,  which  at  firft  weighed  12
ounces  j  and,  to  exprefs  any  part  of  the  integer,  they  called  it  by  the  name  of  the  divifion
of  the  as,  which  correfponded  to  it :  thus,  to  exprefs  a  man’s  inheriting  the  whole  eftate,
they  faid  he  was  Hares  ex  ajje  3  or  the  half  of  it,  Hares  ex  femiffe,  and  fo  forth,  thro’  all
the  divifions  of  the  as,  which,  conGfting  of  12  ounces,  was  divided  into  12  parts,  each  of
which  had  its  own  particular  name  ;  thus  was  called  uncia  ;  \Jextans ,  or  two  ounces  ;
f  was  called  triens ,  or  four  ounces 3  £  quadrans ,  or  three  ounces;  and  f*  they  called  quin¬
cunx,  or  five  ounces ;  the  half  of  the  as  they  called  femis ,  or  fix  ounces ;  ? *  they  called
feptunx ,  or  feven  ounces f  they  called  bes,  or  eight  ounces ;  ^  they  called  dodravs ,  or
nine  ounces ;  if  they  called  dextans  ;  and  jz  they  called  deunx.

And  when  they  had  occafion  to  mention  any  fmaller  divifions  of  an  integer,  they  gave  it
the  name  of  a  divifion  of  the  uncia,  of  which  there  v^ere  fcveral  divifions.  I  fhall  only
mention  fuch  of  them  as  Columella  makes  ufe  of.  And  firft  they  divided  it  into  two  femi-
uncia’s ;  fo  that,  with  refpedt  to  the  as,  or  integer,  the  femujscia  was  z The  next  divifion
was  into  four  ficilici,  or  quarters  of  an  ounce,  fo  called,  from  its  cutting  the  half  ounce,
which  was  z8  the  integer.  Another  divifion  of  the  uncia  was  into  fix  fextula ,  each
Jextula  being  5  of  the  uncia,  and  rt  of  the  as,  or  integer.  The  laft  divifion  of  the  uncia,

which


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  2ri

half  a  fcruple  of  a  jugerum.  The  two  hundred  eighty-and-eighth  part
of  a  jugerum  makes  a  hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  a  fcruple  of  a  jugerum .
The  hundred  forty-and-fourth  part  makes  cc  feet  ;  that  is,  two  Tem¬
ples.  The  two-and-feventieth  part  makes  cccc  feet ;  that  is,  the  fixth
part  of  the  ounce,  wherein  there  are  four  fcruples.  The  forty-eighth
part  of  2l  jugerum  makes  dc  feet ;  that  is,  the  fourth  part  of  an  ounce,
wherein  are  lix  fcruples.  The  twenty-fourth  part  makes  one  thoufand
two  hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  half  an  ounce ,  in  which  are  xii  fcruples.
The  twelfth  part  makes  two  thoufand  four  hundred  feet  j  that  is,  one
ounce ,  in  which  are  xxim  fcruples.  The  fixth  part  makes  four  thou¬
fand  and  eight  hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  two  ounces ,  in  which  are  xlviii
fcruples.  The  fourth  part  makes  feven  thoufand  and  two  hundred  feet ;
that  is,  three  ounces ,  in  which  are  lxxii  fcruples.  The  third  part
makes  nine  thoufand  and  fix  hundred  feet ;  that  is,  four  ounces ,  in
which  are  xcrvi  fcruples.  The  third  part,  and  one  twelfth  part  of  a  ju¬
gerum,  makej  twelve  thoufand  feet  ;  that  is,  five  ounces ,  in  which  are
exx  fcruples.  The  half  of  a  jugerum  makes  fourteen  thoufand  and  four
hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  fix  ounces,  in  which  are  cxliiii  fcruples.  The
half,  and  one  twelfth  part,  make  fixteen  thoufand  and  eight  hundred
feet ;  that  is,  feven  ounces ,  in  which  are  clxviii  fcruples.  Two  third
parts  make  nineteen  thoufand  and  two  hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  eight
ounces ,  in  which  are  cxcn  fcruples.  Three  fourth  parts  make  twenty-
one  thoufand  and  fix  hundred  feet ;  that  is,  nine  ounces ,  in  which  are
ccxvi  fcruples.  The  half,  and  one  third,  of  a  jugerum  make  twenty-
four  thoufand  feet  ;  that  is,  ten  ounces ,  in  which  are  ccxl  fcruples.
Two  thirds,  and  one  fourth  part,  make  twenty-fix  thoufand  and  four

hundred

which  our  author  takes  notice  of,  is  into  24  fcrjpula ,  or  fcriptula ,  which  the  Greek ;  call
yef-W*]*.  According  to  this  divifion  of  the  uncia ,  a  fcruple  is  2|8  of  the  as,  or  integer.
Columella,  in  his  diviiions  of  the  jugerum,  goes  as  low  as  the  halt  of  the  fcruple,  which
he  calls  dimidium  fcrupulum,  and  is  of  the  as  or  jugerum.

I  know  there  are  other  divifions  of  the  uncia  mentitjned  by  other  authors,  viz.  into  8
drachms,  each  of  which  contained  3  fcruples;  and  into  3  duello; ,  each  of  which  contained
8  fcrupula  ;  and  into  7  denarii.  Our  author  once  only  fpeaks  of  a  thing  being  of  the  weight
of  the  denarius,  but  does  not  tell  what  proportion  it  bare  to  the  uncia.  But  Ylin.  Nat.
Hi  ft.  lib.  xxxiii.  cap.  9.  fays,  that  their  juft  weight  was  84  in  a  pound,  which  is  7  in  the
ounce.

From  what  is  faid,  one  may  eafily  underftand  all  that  our  author  fays  of  the  jugerum ,
confidered  as  an  integer  divided  into  a  certain  number  of  parts,  to  each  of  which  he  gives
the  name  of  the  divifion  of  the  as  correfpcnding  to  it,  as  halt  a  fcruple ,  a  fcruple,  flcilicus ,
fextula,  uncia,  femuncia ,  See. ;  and  this  gives  light  to  any  other  Roman  author  uiing  the
fame  method  of  exprefling  the  part  of  any  integer.

What  has  been  faid  is  more  diftintftly  expofed  to  the  eye  in  the  following  table,  which
begins  with  the  fmalleft  or  loweft  divifions  of  the  jugerum  confidered  as  an  integer,'  exadly


212  L.  J.  M.  COLUME  LLA  Book  V.

hundred  feet  ;  that  is,  eleven  ounces ,  in  which  are  cclxiiii  fcruples.
A  jugerum  makes  twenty-eight  thoufand  and  eight  hundred  feet :  this
is  the  as,  or  the  integer,  in  which  there  are  cclxxxviii  J'cruples.  But
if  the  compafs  of  a jugerum  did  always  fo  quadrate,  and  had,  in  taking
the  meafure  of  it,  ccxl  feet  in  length,  and  cxx  in  breadth,  the  calcu¬
lation  of  it  would  be  very  expeditious.  But,  becaufe  different  forms  of
lands  come  under  confideration,  we  fhall  fubioin  examples  or  figures  of
every  kind,  which  we  may  ufe  as  formula’s  for  our  direction.

in  the  fame  manner  as  Columella  himfelf  confidered  it,  who  begins  with  half  a  fcruple,
and  riles  gradually  till  he  coroes  to  the  integer.

The  federal  Parts  and  Divifwns  of  the  Jugerum  mentioned  by  Columella,  <vnth  the  Number
of  Roman  and  Englifh  J'quare  Feet  each  Part  and  Divifion  contained .


The  Reman  Names  of

Scruples

Parts.

Reman

Eng/i/b  fquarc-

the  Divifions  of  the

fquare  feet

Feet  Decimah.

Jugerum.

Dimidi  um  Scru- 1

1

pulum,  J

z

<  76

5°

4^35

Scrupulum,

I

2lS8

IOO

96,70

Duo  Scrupula,

2

1

200

193,4°

Sextula,

4

1

V  2

4OO

386,80

Sicilicus,

6

1

38

600

580,20

Semuncia,

12

1

2*

1200

1 160,40

Uncia,

H

1

I  2

24OO

2320,80

Sextans,

48

1

%

4800

4641,60

Quadrans,

72

1

*

7200

6962,40

Triens,

96

JL

i

9600

9283,20

Quincunx,

120

1

1  2

12000

11604.

Semis,

J44

1

2

I44OO

13924,80

Septunx,

168

1

2  2

l6800

16245,60

Bes,

192

X

5

I92OO

I  8566,40

Dodrans,

216

l

21600

20887,20

Dextans,

240

b

24OOO

23208.

Deunx,

264

H

264OO

25528,80

Jugerum,

288

28800

27849,60

CHAP.

k---


213


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

*  L  i  1  '  v.

CHAP.  II.


Of  the  fever  al  Forms  of  Lands ,  and  of  their  Dimenfions  (i).


ALL  land  is  either  fquare,  or  long,  or  fhaped  like  a  wedge,  or  tri¬
angular,  or  round,  or  exhibits  the  form  of  a  femicircle,  or  of
an  arch  of  a  circle,  and  fometimes  alfo  of  feveral  angles.  The  mea-
furing  of  a  fquare  is  very  eafy ;  for,  feeing  it  is  of  the  like  number  of
feet  on  all  (ides,  two  (ides  are  multiplied  into  one  another  j  and  what
fum  arifes  from  the  multiplication,  that  we  call  the  number  of  fquare
feet  contained  in  it.  As,  if  a  place  were  an  hundred  feet  every  way,  we
multiply  one  hundred  into  a  hundred,  and  they  make  ten  thoufand  :
therefore  we  will  fay,  that  that  place  has  ten  thoufand  fquare  feet,  which
make  a  third  part,  and  a  two-and-feventieth  part  of  a  jugerwn  accord¬
ing  to  which  proportion,  we  muft  make  the  computation  and  payment
of  any  work  done.


The  form  of  land


100

100  00

JOO


§  that  is  fquare.


But  if  it  be  longer  than  it  is  broad,  as  for  example,  let  the  form  of
the  jugerum  have  ccxl  feet  in  length,  and  cxx  in  breadth,  as  I  faid  a
little  before ;  you  (hall  multiply  the  feet  in  breadth  with  the  feet  in
length  thus  :  one  hundred  and  twenty  times  two  hundred  and  forty
amount  to  twenty-eight  thoufand  and  eight  hundred.  We  fhall  fay,
that  a  jugerum  of  land  contains  fo  many  feet  fquare.  You  fhall  pro-


(i)  In  the  old  editions  of  this  author,  thefe  different  figures  of  land,  as  here  placed,  are
not  to  be  found  j  only  the  Roman  numeral  letters,  correfponding  to  each,  are  fo  placed,
as  in  fome  meafure  to  reprefent  each  figure  immediately  treated  of,  and  they  are  printed
as  a  part  of  the  text :  but  whether  the  author  defigned  any  figures  at  firft,  is  very  uncer¬
tain  ;  yet  it  feems  probable,  becaufe  the  letters  anfwering  to  the  fame  were  found  in  the
manufcripts,  according  to  which  the  firft  editions  were  exactly  printed.

The  laft  figures,  which  reprefent  the  different  diftances  to  be  obferved  in  planting  trees
fignify  "very  little,  becaufe,  for  want  of  room,  they  cannot  be  made  to  anfwer  in  number
to  the  feveral  diftances  mentioned  by  the  author  :  notwichftanding  I  have  added  a  few  of
them,  becaufe  they  are  printed  in  fome  of  the  beft  editions  j  and  they  ferve  to  illuftrate
the  thing  a  little,  if  any  one  will  obferve  the  proportions  of  the  .numbers.


cted


214  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V.

ceed  in  like  manner  with  all  lands  whofe  length  is  greater  than  their
breadth.


The  form  of  a


o


24-0

28600

240


**jugerumoi\m&.


But  if  the  land  be  in  the  form  of  a  wedge,  fuppofe  it  be  one  hundred
feet  long,  and  twenty  feet  broad  on  one  part ;  and  on  the  other,  ten  feet :
.then  we  will  add  together  the  two  breadths,  and  both  fums  will  make
thirty  feet.  The  half  of  this  fum  is  fifteen,  by  multiplying  which
with  the  length,  we  will  make  one  thoufand  five  hundred  feet.  We
fhall  therefore  fay,  that  in  this  wedge,  thefe  are  the  fquare  feet  which
will  make  one  half  ounce  and  three  fcruples,  that  is,  4*  part,  and  ^-4-
parts  of  a  jugerum.


the  fhape  of  a  wedge.


But  if  you  are  to  meafure  a  triangle  with  three  equal  fides,  you
fhall  follow  this  method.  Let  the  land  be  triangular,  of  three  hundred
feet  every  way  :  multiply  this  number  into  itfelf,  it  will  make  ninety
thoufand  feet  :  take  the  third  part  of  this  fum,  viz.  thirty  thoufand.
Take  alfo  the  tenth  part,  viz.  nine  thoufand.  Add  both  fums  together,
they  make  thirty-nine  thoufand.  Well  fay,  that  this  is  the  fum  of
the  fquare  feet  in  this  triangle ;  which  meafure  makes  one  jugerum ,
and  one  third  of  a  jugerum ,  and  the  forty-eighth  part  of  a  jugerum.


The  form  of  equilateral


3°°

But  if  the  triangular  land  have  unequal  fides,  as  in  the  figure  fubjoined,
which  has  a  right  angle, the  computation  (hall  be  ordered  and  made  in  a
different  manner.  Let  the  line  of  the  one  fide,  which  makes  the  right
angle,  be  fifty  feet  j  and  of  the  other,  one  hundred  feet.  Multiply
5  thele


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  215

thefe  two  fums  into  one  another.  Fifty  times  one  hundred  make  five
thoufand  ;  the  half  of  thefe  make  two  thoufand  five  hundred,  which
part  makes  an  ounce  and  a  fcruple,  or  ~~  part,  and  -jf-g-  part  of  a  juge¬
rum .


The  figure  of  a  triangular  field,  with  one  right  angle.


If  the  land  {hall  be  round,  fo  as  to  have  the  apppearance  of  a  circle,
take  the  feet  thus :  Let  there  be  a  round  area,  whofe  diameter  contains
lxx  feet.  Multiply  this  into  itfelf ;  feventy  times  feventy  make  four
thoufand  nine  hundred :  multiply  this  fum  by  eleven,  they  make  fifty-
three  thoufand  nine  hundred  feet.  I  fubftradt  the  fourteenth  part  of
this  fum,  viz.  three  thoufand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  Thefe,  I
fay,  are  the  fquare  feet  in  this  circle,  which  make  an  ounce  and  an
half,  and  2  ~  fcruples  of  a  jugerum.


If  the  land  be  femicircular,  whofe  bafis  has  cxl  feet,  and  the
breadth  of  the  curvature  lxx  feet,  you  muft  multiply  the  breadth
with  the  bafis  :  feventy  times  one  hundred  and  forty  make  nine  thou¬
fand  and  eight  hundred  :  thefe  multiplied  by  eleven  make  one  hundred
and  feven  thoufand  and  eight  hundred.  The  fourteenth  part  of  this
fum  makes  feven  thoufand  and  feven  hundred.  We  (hall  fay,  that  thefe
are  the  number  of  feet  in  this  femicircle,  which  make  three  ounces  and
five  fcruples,  i.  e.  \  part,  and  parts  of  a  jugerum.


140


Bat,


216  L.J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

But,  if  it  be  lefs  than  a  femicircle,  we  will  meafure  the  arch  after
this  manner  :  Let  there  be  an  arch,  whole  bafis  contains  xvi  feet,
and  the  breadth  mi  feet.  I  add  the  breadth  to  the  bafe  :  both  make
xx  feet.  Thefe  I  multiply  by  four,  and  they  make  lxxx  feet  :  the
half  of  thefe  is  xl.  Alfo  the  half  of  fixteen  feet,  which  make  the
bafis,  is  viii  :  thefe  vm,  multiplied  into  themfelves,  make  lxiv  :  from
thefe  I  take  a  fourteeenth  part,  which  makes  mi  feet,  and  a  little
more.  This  you  (hall  add  to  forty  :  both  furns  make  xliiii.  I
fay,  that  thefe  are  the  fquare  feet  in  that  arch,  which  make  half  a
fcruple,  i,  e.  -rr~s  part  of  a  jugerum ,  lefs  a  twenty-fifth  part  of  a  fcruple.


-  ^

/

/  44

4  \

/

\

\

/

\

l6


If  the  land  has  fix  angles,  it  is  reduced  into  fquare  feet  thus :  Let
there  be  an  hexagon,  with  lines  of  xxx  feet  every  way.  I  multiply
one  fide  into  itfelf  ;  thirty  times  thirty  make  dcccc.  Of  this  fum  I
take  a  third  part,  ccc,  and  a  tenth  part  of  the  fame,  xc,  which  make
cccxc.  This  muft  be  multiplied  by  fix,  becaufe  there  are  fix  fides,
which,  being  reduced  to  one  fum,  make  two  thoufand  three  hundred
and  forty.  Therefore  we  (hall  fay,  that  there  are  fo  many  fquare
feet  therein.  Therefore  it  will  be  an  ounce  of  a  jugerum ,  lefs  half  a
fcruple,  and  the  tenth  part  of  a  fcruple.


CHAP.


Chap.  III.


Of  HUSBANDRY.
CHAP.  III.


217


How  many  Plants  a  Jugerum  of  Land  may  receive ,  when
they  are  fet  at  the  Diflance  of  "Three  Feet ,  and  from  that
to  the  Diftance  of  Ten  Feet  from  each  other .

HAVING  therefore  attained  to  a  right  perception  of  thefe  fir  ft
principles,  as  it  were,  of  foch-like  computation,  we  fhall,  with¬
out  any  difficulty,  enter  upon  the  meafuring  of  lands,  of  which  it  is
both  tedious  and  difficult  to  profecute  and  treat  of  all  the  different  forts.
I  fhall  alfo  now  add  to  thefe  I  have  already  propofed  two  different  for¬
mulas  or  methods,  which  Hufbandmen  frequently  make  ufe  of  in  the
difpofition  and  fetting  of  their  plants.  Let  there  be  a  field  one  thou-
fand  two  hundred  feet  long,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  broad :
in  it  the  vines  muft  be  fo  difpofed,  that  five  feet  be  left  between  the
rows.  I  afk,  how  many  plants  there  fhall  be  occafion  for,  when  fpaces
of  five  feet  are  required  between  the  plants  ?  I  take  a  fifth  part  of  the
length,  which  makes  ccxl,  and  a  fifth  part  of  the  breadth,  which
makes  xxiiii.  To  both  thefe  fums  I  always  add  one,  which  make  the
outmoft  rows,  which  they  call  the  angular  rows  :  therefore  one  fum  is
two  hundred  and  forty-one,  and  the  other  twenty-five.  Multiply  thefe
fums  thus:  Twenty-five  times  two  hundred  and  forty-one  make  fix
thoufand  and  twenty-five.  You  fhall  fay,  that  juft  fo  many  plants  will
be  wanted.


*  *
m  *
*  *


Hi  Hi

Hi  *

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  *

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  *


Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi


Hi  Hi

Hi  Hi


Hi  *

Hi  Hi


Likewife,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  fet  them  at  the  diftance  of  fix  feet
the  one  from  the  other,  you  fhall  fubtradl  the  fixth  part  of  the  length
©f  one  thoufand  two  hundred,  which  make  cc;  and  the  fixth  part  of
cxx,  the  breadth,  which  makes  xx.  To  each  of  thefe  fums  you  fhall
add  one,  which  I  called  the  angular  rows ;  they  make  cci  and  xxi.
You  fhall  multiply  thefe  fums  into  one  another,  viz.  twenty-one  times
two  hundred  and  one  and  fo  you  fhall  make  four  thoufand  two  hun-

F  f  -dred


2 1 8  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  Book  V.

dred  and  twenty-one.  You  (hall  fay,  that  there  will  be  occafion  for  the
like  number  of  plants.

***********

***********

***********

***********

In  like  manner,  if  you  would  plant  them  at  the  diflance  of  feven
feet,  you  fhall  take  the  feventh  part  of  the  length  and  breadth,  and
add  one  for  the  angular  rows,  in  the  fame  manner,  and  in  the  fame
order,  you  fhall  complete  and  make  up  the  full  number  of  plants.
Laftly,  at  how  many  feet  diflance  foever  you  fhall  judge  proper  to
make  the  rows,  you  fhall  take  fuch  a  part  of  the  length  and  breadth,
and  add  the  forefaid  units  for  the  corner  ranks.

Seeing  thefe  things  are  fo,  it  follows,  that  a  jugerum  of  land,  which
has  ccxLfeet  in  length,  and  cxxin  breadth,  may  receive,  at  the  diflance
of  three  feet,  (for  we  think,  that  this  is  the  leaft  diflance  that  we  ought
to  make  in  planting  vines)  in  length  lxxxi,  and  in  breadth,  at  the
diflance  of  five  feet,  xxv  plants ;  which  numbers,  being  multiplied  into
one  another,  make  two  thoufand  and  twenty-five  plants.

Or,  if  the  vineyard  be  planted  at  the  diflance  of  four  feet  every  way
between  each  plant,  the  row  will  have  lxi  plants  in  length,  and  xxxi
in  breadth ;  which  numbers  make  one  thoufand  eight  hundred  and
ninety-one  vines  in  a  jugerum.

Or,  if  the  vineyard  be  fo  laid  out,  as  to  have  the  diflance  of  four
feet  between  the  vines  in  the  length,  and  of  five  feet  in  the  breadth,
the  row  will  have  lxi  plants  in  length,  and  xxv  in  breadth.  But,  if
they  be  planted  at  the  diflance  of  five  feet  the  one  from  the  other,  the
row  will  contain  xlix  plants  lengthways,  and  xxv  plants  in  breadth ;
which  two  numbers,  multiplied  into  one  another,  make  one  thoufand
two  hundred  and  twenty-five.

But,  if  you  fhall  think  fit  to  lay  out  the  fame  place  in  rows  of  vines
at  the  diflance  of  fix  feet,  there  is  no  doubt  but  xli  vines  mufl  be
affigned  to  the  length,  and  xxi  to  the  breadth  ;  which,  being  multi¬
plied  into  one  another,  make  dccclxi.  But,  if  the  vineyard  mufl  be
laid  out  into  diflances  of  feven  feet,  the  row  in  length  will  receive
thirty-five  heads,  and  in  breadth  xviii  ;  which  numbers,  multiplied
into  one  another,  make  dcxxx.  We  fhall  fay,  that  juft  fo  manf^plants
mufl  be  prepared.  But,  if  the  vineyard  fhould  be  planted  at  the
diflance  of  eight  feet,  the  row  in  length  will  receive  xxxi  plants,  and

in


Chap. IV.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  2ig

in  breadth  xvi ;  which  numbers,  multiplied  into  one  another,  make
ccccxcvx.  But,  if  at  the  didance  of  nine  feet,  the  row  in  length  will
receive  twenty-feven  plants,  and  in  breadth  fourteen :  thefe  numbers,
multiplied  into  one  another,  make  ccclxxviii.  But,  if  at  the  didance
of  ten  feet,  the  row  in  length  will  receive  xxv  plants,  and  in  breadth
xiii  :  thefe  numbers,  multiplied  into  one  another,  make  cccxxv.

And,  that  our  difcourfe  on  this  fubjedt  may  not  proceed  in  infinitum ,
we  may  fet  our  plants  in  the  fame  proportion,  according  as  every  one
fhall  be  pleafed  with  wider  fpaces.  Let  what  we  have  faid  of  the  mea-
fures  of  lands,  and  of  the  numbers  of  plants,  fuffice.  Now  I  return  to
the  order  I  propofed.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  Culture  of  provincial  Vineyards .

I  Have  found,  that  there  are  feveral  kinds  of  provincial  vines ;  but
of  thofe  that  I  myfelf  have  known,  fuch  as  hand  by  themfelves,
with  a  fhorter  leg  or  dock,  like  little  trees,  without  any  prop  to  fupport
them,  are  mod:  approved.  Next  are  thofe,  which,  leaning  upon  props,
are  placed  upon  fingle  frames.  Thefe  the  Peafants  call  under-propped  or
horfed  vines  (i).  And  then  fuch  as,  being  fenced  all  round  with  reeds
£ xed  in  the  ground,  and  their  firm-wood  branches  tied  to  the  feveral
reeds  that  fupport  them,  are  bended  all  round  into  an  orbicular  form.
Thefe  fome  call  palifaded  vines.  Vines,  that  lie  flat  upon  the  ground,
are  in  lead  edeem,  which,  being,  as  it  were,  prefently  projected  from
the  dem  when  it  fprings  out  of  the  earth,  are  fpread  and  dretched  out
at  their  full  length  upon  the  ground.

The  way  and  method  of  planting  all  thefe  is  almod  the  fame ;  for
the  plants  are  fet  either  in  a  trench,  or  in  a  furrow,  becaufe  the  Hufband-
men  in  foreign  nations  are  unacquainted  with  padinating  the  ground  ;
which  indeed  is  almod  fuperfluous,  and  of  no  ufe,  in  thofe  places,

(i)  Canteriatas  mites.  Vines,  fupported  by  fing'e  frames  or  yokes,  were  fo  called  by  the
Peafants.  Canterius  or  cantherius  iignifies  a  gelding;  and  the  word  was  frequently  made
ufe  of  by  th  e  Romans  to  fignify  any  thing  that  fupported  another,  as  the  word  horfe  in  Engl  ip
is  applied  to  feveral  things  in  the  fame  fenfe.  Our  author  fays,  lib.  iv.  c.  12.  that,  to  each
vine,  he  applied  two  reeds,  or  fattened  old  -fpear-ftaves  hard  by  them,  to  which  he  app:ied
one  tranfverfe  pole  towards  the  lower  pu  t  of  the  row,  upon  which  the  vine  might  fpread  itfelf
rather  in  breadth  than  in  length  and  height ;  and  thefe  kinds  of  (ingle  frames  they  called  a 111-
terii  ( horfes ),  to  diftinguifh  them  from  th ejuga  or  double  frames.

F  f  2


where


220  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

where  the  foil  is  loofe  and  open,  and  crumbles  into  duft  of  itfelf :  for
this  we  imitate  in  plowing ,  as  Virgil  (2)  fays,  which  we  do  alfo  in  pafti-
nating  the  ground.  Therefore  the  people  of  Campania ,  tho’  they  might
take  example  from  us,  who  live  very  near  them,  don’t  follow  this  me¬
thod  of  working  the  ground,  becauife  the  eafinefs  of  that  foil  requires
lefs  labour ;  but  where-ever  a  clofer  and  thicker  land  in  the  provinces
obliges  the  Hufbandman  to  a  greater  expence,  what  we  effectuate  by
paftinating,  he  obtains  by  making  a  furrow,  that  he  may  fet  his  plants
in  ground  that  is  more  loofened  and  opened.


CHAP.  V.

A  Repetition  of  thofe  Things ,  which  have  been  mentioned  by

their  feveral  Kinds.

BUT,  that  I  may  difcourfe  particularly  of  each  of  thofe  kinds  of
vines  I  have  propofed,  I  fhall  refume  the  order  before-men¬
tioned.  The  vine,  which  ftands  by  its  own  ftrength,  without  a  prop,
where  the  earth  is  more  loofe  and  open,  muft  be  planted  in  a  fofs  or
trench  ;  but,  when  it  is  denfer  and  clofer,  in  a  furrow.  But  it  will  be
a  very  great  advantage,  if,  in  temperate  places,  where  the  fummer  is
not  exceeding  hot,  both  the  trenches  and  the  furrows  be  made  a  year
before  the  vineyards  are  planted.  Neverthelefs  the  goodnefs  of  the  foil
muft  be  carefully  inquired  into  ;  for,  if  the  plants  be  fet  in  hungry  and
poor  land,  the  trench  or  furrow  muft  be  made  about  the  very  time  of
planting  them.  If  they  are  made  a  year  before,  it  is  abundantly  enough
if  the  trench  be  digged  three  feet  both  in  length  and  in  depth  ;  never¬
thelefs  it  muft  be  two  feet  in  breadth.  Or,  if  we  defign  to  leave  fpaces
of  four  feet  between  the  rows,  we  reckon  it  more  convenient  to  allow
the  fame  meafure  to  the  trenches  on  every  fide ;  neverthelefs  not  to
fink  them  more  than  three  feet  deep.  But  the  plants  muft  be  applied
to  the  four  corners,  after  fmall  earth  has  been  put  under  them,  and  fo
the  trenches  muft  be  filled  up.

But,  as  to  the  fpaces  between  the  rows,  we  have  only  this  direction
to  give,  that  Hufbandmen  fhould  underftand,  that,  if  they  defign  to
cultivate  their  vineyards  with  the  plough,  they  muft  leave  wider  fpaces
between  the  rows;  or,  if  they  defign  to  cultivate  them  with  hoes  or


(2)  Virg.  georg*  ii.  184.


fpades.


221


Chap.  V.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.

fpades,  they  mull  leave  them  narrower :  but  they  mud  neither  be
wider  than  ten  feet,  nor  narrower  than  four.  Neverthelefs  many  lay
out  the  rows  fo  as  to  leave  all  along  the  ftraight  line  two  feet,  or,  as  is
commonly  done,  three  feet  between  the  plants.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  they  make  the  tranfverfe  fpaces  wider,  through  which  either
the  Digger  or  the  Plower  may  freely  pafs.

But  the  care  of  planting  ought  not  to  be  different  from  what  I  directed
in  the  third  book.  Neverthelefs  Mago  the  Carthaginian  adds  one  things
to  this  fort  of  planting,  viz.  that  the  plants  be  fo  fet,  that  the  whole
trench  may  not  be  immediately  filled  up  with  earth ;  but  that  the  fol¬
lowing  two  years  almoft  the  one  half  of  it  be  gradually  filled  up;  for
thus,  he  thinks,  the  vine  will  be  forced  to  flrike  its  roots  downward.
I  fhall  not  deny,  but  this  may  be  done  with  advantage  in  dry  places  ;
but  where  either  the  country  is  oufy  and  wet,  or  the  conflitution  of  the
climate  is  rainy,  I  am  of  opinion  it  ought  not  at  all  to  be  done ;  for  too
much  moifture,  remaining  in  the  trenches,  that  are  half  filled  up,  kills
the  plants,  before  they  recover  flrength  :  wherefore  I  think  it  more  ad¬
vantageous,  that  the  trenches  be  filled  up  again  after  the  plants  are  fet
in  them  ;  but  that,  after  they  have  taken  root,  they  ought  to  be  care¬
fully  ablaqueated  to  a  confiderable  depth  prefently  after  the  autumnal
Equinox ;  and,  after  cutting  away  the  fmall  roots,  if  they  have  put
forth  any  towards  the  furface  of  the  ground,  to  be  filled  up  again  after
a  few  days ;  for  thus  both  thofe  inconveniencies  will  be  avoided,  thst
neither  their  roots  will  be  drawn  up  to  the  upper  part,  nor  the  plants,
which  are  not  very  ftrong,  be  vexed  with  immoderate  rains.  But,  where
they  are  already  grown  ftrong,  there  is  no  doubt  but  they  receive  great
benefit  from  rain-water :  therefore,  in  places  where  the  clemency  of  the
winter  allows  it,  it  will  be  proper  to  leave  the  vines  uncovered,  and  to
keep  them  ablaqueated  the  whole  winter.

But,  concerning  the  quality  of  vine-plants,  authors  are  not  agreed
among  themfelves.  Some  of  them  think  it  befl,  that  a  vineyard  be
planted  at  the  very  firft  with  cuttings ;  others,  with  quickfets.  Con¬
cerning  which  thing,  I  have  already  declared  what  I  think,  in  the  pre¬
ceding  books.  Neverthelefs  I  now  add  this  farther,  that  there  are  fome
lands,  in  which  plants,  that  are  tranfplanted,  do  not  anfwer  equally
well  as  thofe,  which  have  not  been  moved  ;  but  that  that  happens  very
rarely.  Therefore  we  muft  obferve,  and  diligently  endeavour  to  find
*  out,

*  Whatev’ry  foil  will  bear,  and  what  refufe  (i).’

(i)  Virg.  georg.  i.  53.


Therefore


222  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

Therefore  it  is  proper,  when  the  plant  is  fet  in  the  ground,  whether
it  be  a  cutting  or  a  quickfet,  to  form  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  the  vine
may  ftand  without  a  prop.  But  this  cannot  be  done  prefently  ;  for,
unlefs  you  apply  a  fupport  to  the  vine  while  it  is  tender  and  infirm,  the
young  branch,  creeping  forth,  will  bend  towards,  and  lean  upon,  the
earth.  Therefore  a  reed  is  tied  to  the  plant  when  it  is  firft  fet,  which
may  defend,  as  it  were,  its  infancy,  and  educate  it,  and  carry  it  up  to
fuch  a  ftature  as  the  Hufbandman  allows.  Moreover,  that  ought  not  to
be  very  high  ;  for  you  muff  check  it,  and  keep  it  under,  even  fo  far  as
one  foot  and  an  half.  Afterwards,  when  it  gets  ftrength,  and  is  now  able
to  ftand  without  help,  it  grows  up  to  its  perfect  ftate,  by  the  growth
either  of  its  head,  or  of  its  arms  ;  for  of  this  culture  alfo  there  are  two
forts :  home  approve  more  of  vines  cut  clofe  to  the  head ;  others  of  thofe
that  have  arms.

It  is  proper,  that  they,  who  take  pleafure  to  trim  and  form  the  vine
into  arms,  fhould  preferve  whatever  fprouts  forth  hard  by  the  fear,
where  the  young  vine  has  had  its  upper  part  cut  off,  and  divide  it  into
four  arms  of  the  length  of  one  foot,  l'o  that  each  of  them  may  look  to
a  different  quarter  of  the  heavens.  But  thefe  arms  are  not  prefently  to
be  put  upon  fhooting  forth  in  length  the  firft:  year,  left  the  vine  be
burdened  during  its  weak  and  flender  condition  ;  but  they  are  drawn
out  to  the  forefaid  length  by  a  great  many  prunings.  Then  there  muff
be  left,  as  it  were,  certain  horns  flicking  out  of  the  arms,  and  fo  the
whole  vine  be  diffufed  into  a  circular  form  on  every  fide.  But  the
method  of  pruning  is  the  fame  as  in  vines  that  grow  upon  frames }  ne-
verthelefs  it  differs  in  one  thing,  that,  inftead  of  longer  firm-wood
branches,  there  are  left  thumbs  of  four  or  five  eyes  :  but  for  keepers
there  are  made  fhort-cut  branches  of  two  eyes.

Then,  in  that  fort  of  vine,  which,  we  faid,  was  formed  into  a  head,
the  fpray  is  pulled  off  clofe  by  the  body  of  its  mother,  one  or  two  eyes
only  being  left,  which  adhere  to  the  ftock  itfelf ;  and  this  can  be  fafely
done  in  places  that  are  well  watered,  or  that  are  very  fat,  when  the
ftrength  of  the  earth  is  able  to  afford  both  fruit  and  firm-wood.  But
they,  who  have  their  vineyards  formed  after  this  manner,  cultivate
them  chiefly  with  ploughs  j  and  they  follow  this  method  of  pulling
off  the  arms  from  the  vines,  becaufe  the  heads  themfelves,  having
nothing  flicking  out  of  them,  are  neither  obnoxious  to  the  plough,  nor
to  the  oxen  ;  for,  in  fuch  vines  as  have  arms,  it  happens,  for  the  moft
part,  that  their  fmall  branches  are  broken  either  with  the  legs  or  horns
of  the  oxen,  and  often  alfo  with  the  tail  of  the  plough,  while  the  dili¬
gent  plowman  endeavours  lightly  to  touch  or  graze  upon  the  rows  with


Chap. V.  0/  HUSBANDRY,  .  223

the  plough-fhare,  and  to  cultivate  that  very  part,  which  lies  next  to
the  vines.  And  this  indeed  is  the  culture  that  is  bellowed  either  upon
vines  with  arms,  or  upon  thofe  that  are  cut  clofe  to  the  head,  before
they  put  forth  their  buds.  Then,  after  they  have  put  forth  their  buds,
the  Digger  follows  the  Ploughman,  and,  with  hoes,  breaks  up  and
manures  thofe  parts,  which  he  could  not  reach.

Prefently  after  the  vine  has  put  forth  its  firm- wood  branches,  follows
the  perfon  who  lops  off  all  the  luxuriant  parts,  and  clears  it  of  all  the
fuperfluous  young  branches,  and  fets  apart  for  growth  fuch  as  are  fruit¬
ful,  which,  after  they  are  hardened  and  become  firm,  are  bound  up
in  the  manner  of  a  crown.  This  is  done  for  two  reafons;  one,  left  the
young  branches,  being  left  at  liberty  to  run  out  in  length,  fhould  creep
and  fhoot  out,  fo  as  to  become  luxuriant,  and  con  fume  all  the  nourifh-
ment  of  the  vines  the  other  is,  that  the  vine,  being  bound  up,  may
give  free  accefs  again  to  the  Ploughman  and  the  Digger,  when  they
cultivate  it.  But  this  fhall  be  the  manner  of  pampinating  or  pulling  off
its  fuperfluous  leaves  and  twigs,  that,  in  places  not  expofed  to  the  fun,
and  that  are  moifl  and  cold,  the  vine  be  flripped  naked  in  fummer,
and  that  the  leaves  be  plucked  off  its  branches,  that  the  fruit  may  come
to  maturity,  and  that  it  may  not  rot,  by  becoming  mouldy  with  too
much  moiflure  ;  but,  in  places  that  are  dry  and  warm,  and  expofed  to
the  fun,  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  cluflers  of  grapes  be  covered  with
the  fhoots  and  leaves  ;  and,  if  the  vine  be  but  thin  of  fhoots  and  leaves,
that  the  fruit  be  fecured  and  defended  with  branches  and  leaves  brought
to  them  from  other  places  for  that  purpofe,  and  fometimes  with  flraw.
Indeed  M.  Columella ,  my  uncle,  a  man  learned  in  all  the  illuflrious  arts
and  fciences,  and  the  mofl  diligent  Hufbandman  in  the  province  of
Beetica,  did,  about  the  riling  of  the  Dog-flar,  make  fhades  for  his  vines
with  palm-mats,  becaufe,  for  the  mofl  part,  during  the  time  of  the
faid  flar,  certain  parts  of  that  country  are  fo  infefled  with  the  eafl
wind,  which  the  inhabitants  call  Vulturnus  (2),  that,  unlefs  the  vines
be  overfhadowed  with  coverings,  the  fruit  will  be  burnt  up,  as  it  were,
with  a  firy  vapour.

And  this  is  the  culture  both  of  the  vine  that  is  cut  clofe  to  the  head,
and  of  that  which  has  arms ;  for  that,  which  is  placed  upon  one  Angle
frame,  or  which  is  reduced  into  a  circular  form,  by  having  its  Arm-
wood  branches,  which  are  fet  apart  for  growth  and  for  fruit,  bound  to
props  of  reeds  fet  round  it,  requires  almofl  the  fame  care,  as  that  upoa

(2)  Vulturnus.  The  fouth-eaft  wind  was  fo  called  by  the  Romans,  as  fome  fay,  from  a
mountain  of  that  name  i n  Apulia,  or  from  a  town  of  the  fame  name,  which  lay  eaft  from
Rome.

the


224  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

the  double  frame.  Neverthelefs  I  have  obferved,  that  fome  perfons
have  taken  long  fruit-bearing  branches  of  fuch  vines  as  are  palifaded,
or  furrounded  and  fupported  with  reeds,  efpecially  of  the  Elvenacian
kind,  and  put  them  under  ground  near  the  furface,  as  if  they  were  lay¬
ers  ;  and  then  raifed  them  up  again,  and  fixed  them  to  the  reeds,  and  fet
them  apart  for  bearing  fruit.  Thefe  our  Hufbandmen  call  mergos  (divers
or  offlets)  (3 ).  The  Gauls  call  them  candofoccos  (4) ;  and  they  put  them
under-ground  for  one  fingle  reafonv  becaufe  they  think,  that  the  earth
gives  more  nourifhment  to  the  fruit-bearing  rods :  therefore,  after  the
vintage,  they  cut  them  off,  and  remove  them  from  the  ftem  as  ufelefs
fprays.  But  we  direct,  that  thefe  very  rods,  when  they  are  cut  off
from  the  mother-vine,  be  planted  for  quickfets,  if  there  be  vacant
places  any-where  in  the  rows,  by  the  death  of  any  of  the  vines,  or  if
any  perfon  have  a  mind  to  inftitute  a  new  vineyard  ;  becaufe  the  parts
of  the  branches,  which  were  put  under-ground,  have  certainly  a  fufii-
cient  number  of  roots,  which,  being  fet  in  trenches,  will  prefen tly  take
hold.

That  other  culture  of  the  vine,  that  lies  flat  upon  the  ground,  remains
yet  to  be  fpoken  to,  which  ought  not  to  be  put  in  practice,  but  where
the  conftitution  of  the  climate  is  exceeding  ftormy  and  boifterous  5  for
it  both  occafions  hard  and  difficult  labour  to  the  Hufbandman,  nor  does
it  ever  yield  wine  of  a  generous  tafte.  But  where  the  condition  of  the
country  admits  only  of  this  culture,  the  cutting  is  fet  in  trenches  two
feet  deep,  which,  after  it  fhoots,  and  has  put  forth  its  buds,  is  reduced
to  one  firm-wood  branch ;  and  this  is  kept  under  and  retrained  to  two
eyes  the  firftyear.  Then,  the  following  year,  when  it  has  put  forth
young  fruit-bearing  branches  in  abundance,  one  of  them  is  fet  apart
for  bearing  fruit,  and  the  reft  are  ftruck  off ;  but  that  which  is  fet


(3)  Mergus  is  a  name  given  to  fome  fea-birds,  which  dive  into  the  water,  and  rife  up
again  at  fome  diftance  from  the  place  where  they  plunged ;  for  which  reafon,  branches  of
vines,  which  are  bended  downwards  from  the  mother-vine,  and  fet  into  the  ground,  and
their  tops  raifed  up  again  at  fome  diftance,  are  called  mergi ,  or  divers.  There  is  a  difference
between  this  and  what  they  call  propago ,  which  properly  fignifies  a  layer ,  and  is  bended
downwards  from  the  mother  in  the  fame  manner ;  for  this  is  in  order  to  propagate  the  vine  ;
but  that  is  put  under-ground  to  contribute  to  the  increafe  of  the  fruit,  and  is  of  no  further
ufe,  as  we  learn  from  the  text.

(4)  Candofoccos.  Whether  this  word  is  compofed  of  Candidas  and  fuccus,  is  not  certain.
Perhaps  the  juice  of  the  grapes  of  this  fort  of  vine  was  whiter  than  that  of  others.  It  feems
to  be  a  provincial  word,  not  pure  Latin.  The  branches  of  thefe  very  low  vines  were
bended,  and  put  under-ground,  and  then  the  tops  of  them  were  eredted,  and  joined  to  the
reed,  in  order  to  produce  fruit.  The  vine-dreflers  thought,  that  the  curvature  drew  nourifh¬
ment  from  the  earth,  and  fo  had  a  double  portion  of  nourifhment,  both  from  its  own  ftock,
and  alfo  from  the  earth;  and  then,  after  it  had  produced  its  fruit,  they  cut  it  off  as  an  ufe-
lefs  fpray.


apart


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  225

apart  for  fruit,  after  it  has  brought  forth  its  fruit,  is  pruned  to  fuch  a
length,  that,  when  lying  upon  the  ground,  it  may  not  reach  beyond
the  vacant  fpace  between  the  rows.  Nor  is  there  any  great  difference
in  the  pruning  of  a  vine  that  lies  upon  the  ground,  and  of  that  which
ftands  upright,  except  that  the  firm-wood  branches  of  the  vine,  which
lies  upon  the  ground,  which  are  referved  and  fet  apart  for  growth,  and
bearing  of  fruit,  ought  to  be  fhorter ;  and  the  fhort  cuts  alfo  ought  to
be  left  fhorter,  in  the  manner  of  knobs.  But,  after  pruning,  which
indeed  muft  always  be  done  in  autumn  in  a  vineyard  of  this  fort,  let
the  whole  vine  be  turned  over  into  the  other  vacant  middle  fpace  be¬
tween  the  rows ;  and  fo  that  part,  which  it  took  up  before,  is  either
delved  or  plowed  j  and,  after  it  is  completely  cultivated,  it  receives  the
fame  vine,  that  the  other  part  may  be  cultivated  alfo.  Authors  are
little  agreed  about  pampinating  or  pulling  off  the  fuperfluous  twigs  and
leaves  of  fuch  a  vineyard.  Some  deny  that  the  vine  ought  to  be  made
bare,  that  it  may  hide  and  protedt  its  fruit  the  better  againil  the  injury
of  the  winds  and  wild  beads.  Others  are  of  opinion,  that  it  ought  to  be
pampinated  more  fparingly,  that  both  the  vine  may  not  be  wholly  bur¬
dened  with  fuperfluous  leaves,  and  yet  may  be  able  to  cover  and  protedl
its  fruit:  which  method  appears  more  proper  and  commodious  to  me  alfo.


CHAP.  VI.

Of  mahng  Groves  and  Plantations  of  Elms.

BUT  we  have  faid  enough  of  vineyards  at  prefent.  Now  we  mud
give  directions  concerning  trees.  Whoever  fhall  have  a  mind  to
have  a  thick  and  profitable  plantation  of  trees  for  fupporting  vines  (i),

regularly

(1)  Arbufium.  It  was  formerly,  and  is  Bill  the  cuftom  in  many  parts  of  Italy  to  plan:
trees  in  the  fields  for  fupporting  vines ;  and,  by  this  means,  the  vines  are  carried  up  to  a
great  height,  and  fo  produce  a  vaft  quantity  of  fruit.  This  kind  of  plantation  the  ruftic
writers  call  arbufium ,  which  cannot  be  rendered  by  any  one  Englifh  word  I  know,  fo  as  to
raife  in  the  mind  the  whole  idea  they  intended  to  exprefs  by  it.  There  was  the  arbufium
Italicvm ,  which  confifted  of  tall  trees  ;  and  the  arbufium  Gallicum ,  of  low  or  dwarf  trees ;
both  which  our  author  defcribes  with  great  elegancy,  and  gives  directions  how  to  manage
both  the  tree,  and  the  vine  which  is  married  to  it;  and,  in  molt  of  his  defcriptions,  makes
ufe  of  fo  many  figures  of  fpeech,  varying  his  expreffions  fo  frequently,  and  embellifhing
the  whole  with  borrowed  words  and  phrafes,  chat  it  would  appear  ftrange  to  exprefs  always
literally  what  he  fays  in  any  modern  language;  fo  that  it  is  not  very  eafy,  without  ufing
more  words  than  one  would  cbufe,  to  exprefs  his  meaning  fully  and  diftin&ly.  Both  in
this  chapter,  and  in  many  other  places,  he  makes  ufe  of  a  variety  of  word%  which  properly

G  g  belong


226  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V.

regularly  difpofed  at  equal  diftances  the  one  tree  from  the  other,  muft
take  care,  that  it  don’t  grow  thin  by  the  trees  decaying  and  dying  ;  and
let  him  remove  the  very  firft  that  is  afflidted  either  with  old  age  or  boi-
fterous  weather,  and  fubftitute  a  new  plant  in  its  room ;  and  this  he
may  eafily  obtain,  if  he  have  a  nurfery  of  elms  ready  at  hand.  How,
and  in  what  manner,  and  of  what  kind  of  trees,  it  muft  be  made,  I
fhall  not  grudge  the  trouble  to  give  directions  each  in  its  order.

It  is  agreed,  that  there  are  two  forts  of  elms,  the  Gallic ,  and  that
which  is  a  native  of  our  own  country  ;  that  is  called  the  Atinian  (2),
and  this  our  own  Italian  elm.  Tremellius  Scrofa  was  miftaken,  when  he
thought,  that  the  Atinian  elm  did  not  bear  feed ;  for,  without  doubt,
it  produces  it  but  very  thin,  and  in  a  very  fmall  quantity,  and  there¬
fore  feems  barren  to  moft  people,  the  feeds  lurking  among  the  leaves,
which  it  puts  forth  at  its  firft  budding:  therefore  nobody  now  plants  it
from  the  feed,  but  from  the  fhoots,  which  fprout  out  of  the  root  or
flock  of  the  tree.  But  this  elm  thrives  much  better,  and  is  much  taller,
than  our  Italian  elm  ;  and  yields  a  fweeter  leaf,  and  more  agreeable  to
oxen ;  which  if  you  feed  cattle  conftantly  with,  and  afterwards  begin
to  give  them  leaves  of  that  other  kind,  it  makes  the  oxen  naufeate  their
food.  Therefore,  if  it  can  be  done,  we  will  plant  all  our  land  with
this  one  kind  of  the  Atinian  elm  ;  but,  if  this  cannot  be  done,  we  will
take  care,  in  laying  out  our  rows,  to  plant  an  equal  number  of  our  own

belong  to  other  things,  as  pes  vitis,  the  foot  or  root  of  the  vine;  crus  vitis,  the  leg  or
trunk;  bnachia,  the  arms  or  boughs;  caput  vitisy  the  head  of  the  vine:  fo  he  calls  that  pare
where  it  begins  firft  to  fpread  and  extend  itfelf.  The  Vine-dreffers  commonly  form  it  as
they  pleafe;  for,  when  the  top  of  a  young  vine  is  amputated,  it  fends  forth  feveral  fhoots,
two  or  more  of  which  the  Vine-dreffer  chufes,  and  fets  apart  for  growth,  in  order  to  pro¬
duce  fruit.  The  larger  branches  or  boughs  are  called  the  arms  of  the  vine.  Out  of  thefe
fpring  other  branches,  which,  becaufe  of  the  feveral  fmall  twigs  which  fhoo:  out  of  their
Tides,  refembling  fo  many  fingers  of  a  man’s  hand,  are  called  palmites.  Thefe  I  cali/r«/r-
bearing  branches ,  becaufe  on  thefe  more  immediately  the  fruit  of  the  vine  grows ;  for  out
of  them  fpring  the  twigs,  or  young  fhoots,  upon  which  the  grapes  grow.  Thefe  palmites
are  cut  longer  or  fhorter,  as  the  Vine-dreffer  pleafes,  referving  more  or  fewer  eyes  upon
them,  according  to  the  ftrengrh  of  the  vine.  We  muft  obferve,  that,  at  pruning,  the  wood
or  fpray,  upon  which  the  laft  year’s  fruit  grew,  is  always  cut  away;  for  the  twig,  which
immediately  bears  the  fruit,  is  ftill  of  the  fame  year’s  growth.  The  branches  (palmites )  of
the  vine,  as  alfo  the  fhoots  that  grow  out  of  the  different  parts  of  it,  have  different  appella¬
tions,  according  to  their  figure,  or  the  ufe  they  are  applied  to,  or  the  place  of  the  vine
where  they  grow.  Sometimes  they  are  called  cufiodes ,  keepers;  (ometimes prafidiari:  or
fubfidiariij  branches  of  referve,  or  fubfidiary  branches ;  fometimes  polhces,  from  the  figure
they  make  when  they  are  cut  not  too  clofe,  but  at  a  certain  diftance  from  the  part  out  of
v/hich  they  grow,  refembling  the  thumb  of  one’s  hand  ;  fometimes  they  are  called  refecety
which  may  be  tranflated  fhort-cut  fhoots,  as  has  been  obferved  in  another  place.

(2)  Atinia  ulmusy  die  Atinian  elm,  fo  Called  from  Atina ,  a  town  in  Gallia  Cijpadana ,
that  part  of  Gaul  which  lay  on  the  fouth  fide  of  the  Pa,  of  which  Pliny  fpeaks,  vat.  hijl.
hb.  hi.  c.  19.

Italian 3


Chap. VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  227

Italian,  and  of  Atinian  elms  alternately:  fo  we  fhall  always  make  life
of  mixt  leaves ;  and  the  cattle,  being  allured  by  this  fealoning,  as  it
were,  will  more  eagerly  eat  up  that  due  quantity  of  food,  which  is
allotted  them.

But  the  poplar-tree  feems  to  nourifh  the  vine  moft  of  any;  next  to
that,  the  elm  ;  and,  after  that,  the  alh-tree  alfo.  The  poplar-tree  (3)
is  rejected  by  moft  people,  becaufe  it  yields  a  thin  leaf,  and  not  proper
for  cattle.  The  alh-tree,  which  is  moft  acceptable  to  goats  and  fheep,
and  not  ufelefs  for  oxen,  is  rightly  planted  in  rough,  rugged,  and  moun¬
tainous  places,  where  the  elm  thrives  but  indifferently.  The  elm  is
preferred  by  moft  people,  becaufe  it  both  fuffers  the  vine  without  any
inconveniency  to  it,  and  yields  a  moft  agreeable  fodder  for  oxen,  and
comes  up  and  thrives  very  well  in  various  kinds  of  foils.  Therefore  let
him,  who  has  a  mind  to  plant  a  great  number  of  trees  for  fupporting
vines,  prepare  nurferies  of  elms  and  afhes  in  that  manner  I  have  here¬
after  defcribed ;  for  poplars  are  better  planted  at  firft  in  tops,  in  the
ground  you  defigfi  they  fhould  grow  in :  therefore  we  will  paftinate  the
earth  with  the  hoe  or  trenching-fpade,  which  is  two  feet  deep,  where
the  foil  is  fat,  and  moderately  moift  ;  and,  after  it  has  been  carefully
harrowed,  and  all  the  clods  broken,  form  it  into  even  beds  or  divifions
in  the  fpring-time.  Then  we  will  throw  the  feed  upon  the  beds,  which
will  now  be  of  a  reddilh  colour,  and  lltall  have  lain  expofed  to  the  fun
for  feveral  days,  yet  fo  as  ftill  to  retain  fome  moifture  and  clamminefs
in  it ;  and  we  will  cover  the  beds  thick  all  over  with  the  feeds,  and  fo,
with  a  fieve,  lift  loofe  crumbling  earth  two  inches  deep  upon  them,  and
water  them  moderately,  and  cover  the  beds  with  ftraw,  left  the  fowls
gnaw  the  tops  of  the  plants  when  they  are  coming  forth,  and  appearing
above-ground.  Then,  after  the  plants  have  creeped  forth,  we  will
gather  up  the  ftraw,  and  pluck  up  the  weeds  with  our  hands ;  and  this
muft  be  done  gently  and  carefully,  left  the  fmall  roots  of  the  elms,
which  are  as  yet  tender  and  fhort,  be  plucked  up  with  them.

As  for  the  beds  themfelves,  we  muft,  by  all  means,  make  them  fo
narrow,  that  they,  who  are  about  to  weed  them,  may  ealily  reach  to

(3)  Opulus.  Authors  cannot  agree  about  this  tree,  fome  doubting  whether  there  is  any
fuch  tree  at  prefent  as  the  author  here  means;  and  they  cannot  fix  upon  a  modern  name
for  it.  But  as  Pliny  feveral  times  mentions  the  populus  as  proper,  among  other  trees,  for
fupporting  vines,  without  mentioning  the  opulus ,  I  think  it  more  reafonable  to  transfer
populus  from  Pliny  to  Columella ,  than  to  pretend  to  correct  Pliny  by  Columella ,  efpecially
confidering,  that,  at  prefent,  the  poplar-tree  is  ufed  about  Bologna ,  and  many  other  places
on  the  fouth  of  the  Po,  for  fupporting  vines.  Accordingly  I  have  taken  the  liberty  always
to  tranflate  it  a  poplar- tree,  tho’  the  text  has  always  opulus.  A  fingle  letter  might  eafily  be
cut  off  from  the  beginning  of  the  word,  and  the  other  word  become  the  common  reading.

G  g  2  thi


228  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V.

the  middle  of  them  with  their  hand  ;  for,  if  they  be  broader,  fuch  of
the  plants  themfelves,  as  fhall  be  trodden  down,  will  fuffer  damage.
Then,  in  the  fummer,  before  the  fun  rifes,  or  towards  the  evening,
the  nurferies  ought  rather  to  be  fprinkled  than  watered ;  and,  when  the
plants  are  about  three  feet  high,  they  ought  to  be  tranfplanted  into
another  nurfery  ;  and,  that  they  may  not  ftrike  their  roots  too  deep,
(which  afterwards  occafions  great  labour  in  taking  them  out  of  the
ground  again,  when  we  have  a  mind  to  tranfplant  them  into  another
nurfery)  we  muft  dig  the  trenches,  not  of  the  largeft  fize,  at  the  diftance
of  one  foot  and  an  half  the  one  from  the  other.  Then  the  roots  muft:
be  twifted  into  a  knot,  if  they  be  fhort,  or,  if  they  be  longer,  into  a
circle,  in  the  manner  of  a  crown  ;  and,  after  they  are  fmeared  over
with  cow’s  dung,  be  fet  into  the  little  trenches,  and  the  ground  care¬
fully  trodden  down  all  round  them.  The  plants  alfo,  that  are  gathered
and  taken  from  the  roots  and  flocks  of  the  tree,  may  be  fet  in  the  fame
manner ;  which  muft:  of  neceflity  be  done  in  the  Atinian  elm,  which
is  not  raifed  from  the  feed.  But  this  elm  is  better  planted  in  autumn
than  in  the  fpring  :  and  its  fmall  branches  muft:  be  wreathed  or  twifted
by  little  and  little  with  the  hand,  becaufe  the  firft  two  years  it  greatly
dreads  the  ftroke  of  an  iron  tool.  At  length,  the  third  year,  it  muft:
be  lopped  bare  with  a  fharp  pruning-knife.  And  now,  when  it  is  fit
for  being  tranfplanted,  the  proper  feafon  for  planting  it  is  from  that
time  of  autumn,  when  the  earth  fhall  have  been  throughly  moiftened
with  fhowers,  till  the  fpring  of  the  year,  before  the  root  of  the  elin
be  in  danger  of  having  its  bark  pulled  off  in  taking  it  out  of  the  ground.
Therefore,  in  loofe  earth,  the  trenches  muft  be  made  three  feet  every
way;  but,  in  that  which  is  denfe,  furrows  of  the  fame  depth  muft:  be
prepared  for  receiving  the  trees.  But  then,  in  a  dewy  and  foggy  foil,
the  elms  muft  be  fo  planted,  that  their  branches  may  be  directed  towards
the  eaft  and  the  weft,  that  the  middle  of  the  trees,  to  which  the  vine  is
applied  and  fattened, and  upon  which  it  leans,  may  receive  the  more  fun.

But,  if  we  have  corn  alfo  in  our  view,  and  provide  for  it  accordingly,
let  the  trees  be  difpofed  and  fet  within  forty  feet  of  each  other,  in  a
fertile  and  rich  foil ;  and,  in  that  which  is  poor  and  lean,  within  twenty
feet.  Then  afterwards,  when  they  begin  to  grow  up  to  their  full  fea¬
ture,  they  muft:  be  formed  with  the  pruning-knife,  and  laid  out  into
ftories  or  divijions ;  for  by  this  name  Hufbandmen  call  the  prominent
branches  and  trunks,  and  they  either  lop  them  clofer,  and  reftrain  them
within  narrower  bounds,  with  the  knife,  or  let  them  (hoot  out  to  a
greater  length,  that  the  vines  may  be  fpread  the  wider,  and  lie  more
diffufe  upon  them.  This  is  belt  in  a  fat  foil,  and  that  in  a  (lender  and
poor  one.  Let  not  the  ftories  be  lefs  than  three  feet  diftant  from  each

5  olheL


Chap.  VI.  O/HUSBANDRY.  229

other,  and  let  them  be  fo  formed,  that  the  upper  branch  be  not  in  the
fame  line  with  the  lower  j  for  the  lower  branch  will  rub  againfl,  and
bruife  the  fruit-bearing  vine-branch,  which  is  let  down  from  that,  when
it  is  budding,  and  will  Itrike  off  its  fruit.

But,  whatever  tree  you  (hall  plant,  you  muft  not  prune  it  the  next
two  years.  Then  afterwards,  if  the  elm  receives  but  very  little  growth,
the  top  of  it  mufl  be  lopped  off  in  the  fpring-time,  before  it  lets  fall
or  cafts  its  bark,  hard  by  the  fmall  branch,  which  fhall  appear  to  be  the
fairefl ;  but  this  neverthelefs  muft  be  fo  done,  that  you  may  leave  above
it  a  flump  upon  the  trunk  three-fourths  of  a  foot  long,  to  which  the
faid  branch  may  be  bended,  applied,  and  bound  faff,  and  fo,  being
turned  upwards,  may  afford  a  top  to  the  tree.  Then,  after  one  year,
the  flump  mufl  be  cut  off,  and  the  place  fmoothed.  But,  if  the  tree
have  no  fmall  branch  fit  for  this  purpofe,  it  will  be  enough,  that  nine
feet  from  the  earth  be  left  of  it,  and  that  the  upper  part  be  lopped  off,
that  fo  the  young  rods  which  it  fhall  put  forth,  may  be  fecure  from  the
injury  of  the  cattle.  But,  if  it  can  be  done,  the  tree  mufl  be  cut  thro’
with  one  flroke  ;  but,  if  that  cannot  be  done,  it  mufl  be  cut  off  with
a  faw,  and  the  wound  fmoothed  with  a  pruning-knife  ;  and  this  wound
mufl  be  covered  with  clay  mixt  with  draw,  that  it  may  not  be  annoyed
by  the  fun  or  rains.  After  one  or  two  years,  when  the  fmall  branches,
which  are  fprung  out  of  it,  fhall  have  got  flrength,  and  thrive  as  they
ought  to  do,  it  will  be  proper,  that  thofe  which  are  fuperfluous  be
lopped  off,  and  that  thofe,  that  are  fit  for  your  purpofe,.  be  put  upon
growing  in  a  regular  manner  in  the  row.

Whatever  elm  fhall  have  thriven  and  come  well  forward  from  the
time  it  was  fet,  its  uppermofl  branches  ought  to  be  freed  from  knots
with-  a  pruning-knife ;  but,  if  the  fmall  branches  be  flrong,  let  them
be  fo  lopped  off  with  the  iron  tool,  that  you  may  leave  a  fmall  flump
flicking  out  from  the  flock.  Then,  after  the  tree  is  waxen  flrong,
whatever  can  be  touched  with  the  pruning-hoc^k,  mufl  be  lopped  off,
and  fmoothed  fo  far,  as  that  the  wound  or  cut  may  not  be  applied  to
the  body  of  the  mother.  But  it  will  be  proper  to  fhape  a  young  elm
in  this  manner  :  In  a  fat  place,  eight  feet  from  the  earth  mufl  be  left
of  it  without  a  branch,  or,  in  meagre  land,  feven  feet.  Then,  above
the  faid  fpace,  the  tree  mufl  be  divided  into  three  parts  in  its  whole  cir¬
cumference  •  and  let  the  fmall  branches,  which  mufl  be  fet  apart  for
growth  on  the  three  fides,  one  to  each  fide,  be  afiigned  to  the  firfl
llory.  Then,  three  feet  above  that,  other  branches  mufl  be  taken,  and
fet  apart  for  growth  ;  but  fo,  that  they  may  not  be  placed  in  the  fame
line  with  thofe  of  the  former  fiery  :  and  in  the  fame  manner  mufl  the
tree  be  regularly  adjufted  to  the  very  top.  And,  in  lopping  the  tree,  care

mud


230  L,  J,  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

rnufl  be  taken,  that  neither  the  thumbs,  which  are  left  of  the  rods
which  are  lopped  of F,  be  made  longer  than  they  ought  to  be,  nor,  on
the  other  hand,  that  they  be  fo  fmoothed,  as  that  the  trunk  itfelf  be
hurt,  or  have  its  bark  peeled  off;  for  that  elm  rejoices  but  very  little,
which  is  {flipped  bare  to  the  very  body  :  and  we  rnufl  avoid  making
two  wounds  into  one,  feeing  the  bark  will  not  eafily  clofe  upon,  and
grow  over,  fuch  a  fear.  But  this  tree  requires  perpetual  culture,  not
only  carefully  to  difpofe  and  put  into  due  order  the  things  before-men¬
tioned,  but  alfo  to  dig  round  the  flock,  and  every  other  year  either  to
cut  off  with  the  knife,  or  bind  fall  .up,  and  reflrain,  every  twig  or  leaf,
that  fliall  fprout  out  of  it,  left  its  fhadow,  vying  with  that  of  the  vine,
fhould  hurt  it.  Then,  when  the  tree  is  arrived  at  a  confiderable  age,  it
mu  ft  be  wounded  near  where  a  branch  grows  out  of  it,  fo  that  there  may
be  a  hole  made  in  it  to  the  very  pith,  whereby  there  may  be  an  outlet
to  the  water,  which  it  has  gathered  in  the  upper  part.

It  is  proper  alfo  to  plant  the  vine,  before  the  tree  prevails  and  grows
altogether  too  ftrong  for  it;  but,  if  you  marry  a  tender  young  elm,  it
will  endure  a  young  vine ;  but,  if  you  apply  an  old  vine  to  it,  it  will  kill  its
Jiufband  :  fo  it  is  proper,  that  the  trees  and  vines  be  equal  to  each  other
in  age  and  ftrength.  But,  in  order  to  marry  or  couple  the  tree  and  the
vine  together,  there  ought  to  be  a  trench  made  for  the  quickfet  two  feet
broad,  and  as  many  feet  deep,  in  light  earth ;  but,  in  heavy  ground,
two  feet  and  three-fourths  of  a  foot,  and  fix,  or  at  leaft  five  feet  long :
but  let  this  be  no  lefs  than  the  fpace  of  one  foot  and  an  half  diftant  from
the  tree ;  for,  if  you  join  it  to  the  roots  of  the  elm,  the  vine  will  ftrike
root  but  very  indifferently,  and,  when  it  has  taken  hold,  it  will  be  op-
prefted  by  the  growth  of  the  tree.  Make  this  trench  in  the  autumn,  if
your  bufinefs  will  permit,  that  it  may  be  macerated  with  the  rains  and
frofts.  Then,  about  the  vernal  Equinox,  two  vines  rnufl  be  fet  in  the
trenches  at  the  diftance  of  one  foot  from  each  other,  that  they  may
cloathe  the  elm  the  more  quickly ;  and  you  rnufl  take  care,  that  they
be  not  planted  either  when  the  north  winds  blow,  or  when  they  are  wet
with  dew,  but  when  they  are  dry.

I  order  this  particularly  to  be  obferved,  not  only  in  planting  vines,
but  elms  alfo,  and  other  trees ;  and  that,  when  they  are  taken  out  of
the  nurfery,  one  part  of  them  be  marked  with  ruddle  :  which  may
put  us  in  mind  not  to  place  the  trees  otherwife,  than  in  the  manner
they  flood  in  the  nurferies ;  for  it  is  of  very  great  importance,  that
they  look  to  that  part  of  the  heavens,  to  which  they  have  been  accu-
ftomed  from  their  infancy.  But,  in  places  expofed  to  the  fun,  where
the  llate  of  the  climate  is  neither  very  cold,  nor  too  rainy,  both  trees


Chap. VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  23r

and  vines  are  better  planted  in  autumn,  after  the  Equinox  ;  but  thefe
muft  be  fo  planted,  that  we  may  lay  under  them,  to  the  depth  of  half
a  foot,  the  uppermoft  earth,  which  has  been  well  broken  and  fubdued
with  the  plough,  and  fpread  and  open  all  their  roots,  and  dung  them
after  they  are  fet,  as  I  am  of  opinion.  If  not  fo,  let  us  cover  them  with
well-wrought  earth,  and  tread  it  down  round  the  flock  of  the  plant.
The  vines  muft  be  fet  in  the  farthermoft  part  of  the  trench,  and  their
firm-wood  (4)  ft  retched  along  the  trench,  and  eredted  to  the  tree,  and
fenced  with  rails  againft  the  injuries  of  cattle.  But,  in  very  hot  places,
the  plants  muft  be  applied  to  the  tree  upon  the  north  fide  of  it ;  in  cold
places,  upon  the  fouth  fide ;  in  a  temperate  ftate  of  the  climate,  either
upon  the  eaft  or  weft  fide,  that  they  may  not  endure  the  fun,  or  the
ihade,  the  whole  day.

Then  Celfus  is  of  opinion,  that,  the  next  pruning-time,  it  is  better
to  forbear  to  make  ufe  of  the  pruning-knife ;  but  that  the  young  branches
or  (hoots  themfelves  be  twifted  and  wrapped  round  the  tree,  in  the
manner  of  a  crown,  that  the  part,  that  is  bended,  may  put  forth  firm-
wood  branches,  of  which,  the  following  year,  we  may  make  the
ftrongeft  the  head  of  the  vine.  But  long  experience  has  taught  me,
that  it  is  much  better  to  apply  the  pruning-knife  to  vines  the  very  firft
feafon  for  pruning,  and  not  to  fuffer  them  to  grow  bu(hy  and  wild
with  fuperfluous  fprays.  But  I  am  alfo  of  opinion,  that  that  firm -wood
branch,  which  (hall  be  fet  apart  for  growth,  be  curbed  with  the  prun¬
ing-knife  as  far  as  the  fecond  or  third  eye,  that  fo  it  may  put  forth  the
ftronger  fruit-bearing  branches,  which,  as  foon  as  they  have  reached  to,
and  taken  hold  of  the  firft  (lory  of  the  tree,  (hall,  the  next  pruning,  be
regularly  diftributed  among  all  the  branches  of  it  1  otherwife  they  lhall
be  raifed  up  to  the  uppermoft  (lory,  always  leaving  one  firm-wood
branch,  which,  being  applied  to  the  trunk,  may  look  towards  the  top
of  the  tree.

And  now  a  certain  law  is  impofed  by  Hulbandmen  upon  the  vine,
when  it  is  conftituted  and  fet  in  its  place :  moft  of  them  croud  the  lower
ftories  of  the  tree  with  firm-wood  branches,  having  only  in  view  a
greater  plenty  of  fruit,  and  a  more  eafy  way  of  cultivating  it.  But  they,
who  have  the  goodnefs  of  the  wine  chiefly  at  heart,  advance  and  raife

(4.)  Materia.  The  hard  firm-wood'/  part  of  the  vine  is  fo  called.  Sometimes  it  figni-
fies  any  (hoot  referved  and  fee  apart  for  growth,  in  order  to  form  either  an  arm,  or  any
tefler  hard  branch,  of  the  vine ;  and  it  is  op.pofed  to  thofe  tender  fhoots,  which  are  cue
away  in  pruning,  and  are  but  of  a  ihort  duration.  The  materia  is  commonly  the  arm,
bough,  or  hardened  part  of  the  vine,  which  puts  forth  the  fmaller  branches  they  call  pal-
mites.  The  author  orders  all  the  old  fmall  branches,  on  which  the  fruit  of  the  lad  year
did  hang,  to  be  cut  off,  and  young  ones  to  be  fubftituted  in  their  place.


the


2;  2  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

the  vine  to  the  uppermoft:  parts  of  the  treee.  As  every  firm- wood  branch
Hull  offer  itlell,  fo  they  extend  it  to  every  branch  of  the  tree  that  is
liigheff,  that  the  uppermoll  part  of  the  vine  may  follow  the  uppermoft
part  of  the  tree ;  that  is,  that  the  two  extreme  fruit-bearing  branches
be  applied  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  which  may  look  towards  the  top
thereof ;  and,  according  as  every  branch  of  it  has  gathered  ftrength,  it
may  take  the  burden  of  the  vine  upon  itfelf.  Upon  branches  of  the
tree,  that  are  fuller  and  thicker,  let  more  fruit-bearing  branches  of  the
vine  be  impofed,  the  one  feparate  from  the  other,  and  fewer  upon  thofe
that  are  llenderer ;  and  let  the  young  tender  vine  be  tied  to  the  tree
with  three  different  bindings ;  with  one  in  the  leg  of  the  vine  towards
the  lower  part  of  the  tree,  at  the  diftance  of  four  feet  from  the  earth ;
with  a  fecond,  which  takes  hold  of  the  vine  by  its  uppermoft  part ;  and
a  third,  which  embraces  the  middle  of  the  vine.  The  lowermoft  bind¬
ing  mull  not  be  put  upon  it,  when  it  impairs  the  ftrength  of  the  vine;
neverthelefs  fometimes  it  is  reckoned  neceftary  (5),  when  either  the
tree  has  all  its  branches  lopped  off,  or  when  the  vine,  growing  too
ftrong,  fpreads  itfelf  beyond  its  bounds,  and  is  growing  luxuriant.

What  is  further  neceftary  with  refpeft  to  pruning,  is  as  follows;  that
the  old  fruit-bearing  branches,  upon  which  the  laft  year’s  fruit  did  hang,
be  all  cut  off,  and  taken  away,  and  new  ones  fet  apart  for  Bearing  fruit
in  the  room  of  thofe  that  are  lopped  off,  after  you  have  pared  away
every-where  round  them  the  tendrils  and  nephews  that  have  fprung  out
of  them ;  and,  if  the  vine  be  in  a  very  thriving  condition,  let  the  ut-
moff  fruit-bearing  branches  rather  be  precipitated  (6)  over  the  tops  of
the  branches  of  the  elm  ;  if  the  vine  be  ftender,  thofe  that  are  next  to
the  ffock ;  if  it  be  middling,  then  let  thofe  that  are  in  the  middle  be
precipitated ;  becaufe  the  uppermoft:  branch  of  the  vine  brings  moll
fruit ;  that  which  is  next  to  the  ffock,  does  leaft  exhauft  and  extenu¬
ate  the  vine.

(5)  Torus  imus  necejfarius.  There  is  a  great  variety  in  the  readings  of  this  fentence,  which
it  is  needlefs  ro  repeat.  The  corre&ion  made  by  Gejnerus  feems  the  raoft  probable,  viz.
torum  imurn  impom  non  opertet ,  quoniam  vires  viti  admit,  inter dum  tamen  necejfarius ;  but
the  meaning  of  the  author  is  fo  evident,  that  there  needs  no  alteration  of  his  words,  except
warranted  by  good  authority.  His  meaning  is,  that  the  lowermoft  binding  is  to  be  put  upon
it,  when  it  is  in  order  to  leften  the  ftrength  of  the  vine ;  which  is  neceftary  when  it  grows  too
luxuriant,  or  when  the  tree  is  fo  lopped,  that  it  has  no  branches  to  fupport  the  vine-

(6)  Pracipitare  palmitem.  To  precipitate  a  young  fruit-bearing  branch,  fignifies  to  twift
or  writhe  it  gently,  and  turn  it  downwards,  and  bind  it  to  the  hard  part  of  the  vine.  This
Cato  adviies  againft,  cap.  32.  caveto  ne  vitem  pracipites ;  but  our  author  advifes  to  do  it,
when  the  vine  is  grown  higher  than  the  tree  that  fupportsit,  and  only  in  the  extreme  branches;
and  fays,  that,  when  ic  is  precipitated,  tho’  it  draws  lefs  nourifhment  from  the  vine,  yet  it
fuperabounds  in  fruit.  Sometimes  thefe  precipitated  branches  were  tied  to  the  tree  in  the
hard  part,  and  then  they  muft  altnoft  wholly  hang  down ;  fometimes  they  were  tied  in
d:e  render  part,  and  then  they  did  hang  down  but  a  ve|7  little.


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  233

Bat  it  is  of  great  advantage  to  the  vines  to  unbind  them  every  year ;
for  they  are  both  more  conveniently  freed  from  knots,  and  they  are
refrefhed  when  they  are  bound  in  another  place,  and  they  are  the  lefs
hurt,  and  grow  and  recover  flrength  the  better.  And  it  is  proper,  that
the  fruit-bearing  branches  themfelves  be  fo  placed  upon  the  feveral  (lories
of  the  tree,  that  they  may  hang  down  tied  from  the  third  or  fourth
eye,  and  that  they  be  not  bound  too  hard,  left  the  fpray  be  cut  with
the  willow.  But,  if  the  (lory  or  divifion  of  the  tree  be  at  fo  great  a
diftance,  that  the  firm-wood  branch  cannot  be  very  conveniently  brought
up  to  it,  having  bound  the  fruit-bearing  branch  itfelf  fall  to  the  vine,
we  will  bind  it  again  above  the  third  eye.  We  diredt  this  to  be  done
for  this  reafon,  becaufe  that  part  of  the  fruit-bearing  branch,  which  is
precipitated,  is  cloathed  with  fruit  ;  but  that  which,  being  tied  with  a
band  to  the  vine,  tends  upward,  affords  firm-wood  branches  the  year
following.

But  of  the  young  fruit-bearing  branches  themfelves  there  are  two
forts;  one  which  comes  forth  out  of  the  hard  part  of  the  vine,  which
they  call  a  leaf-bearing  foot,  becaufe  the  firft  year,  for  the  mod  part,
it  brings  a  leaf  without  fruit.  The  other  is  that  which  is  procreated  of
a  fruit-bearing  branch  of  one  year  old,  which  they  call  a  frubhtary  Jhoot ,
becaufe  it  forthwith  produces  fruit ;  of  which  fort  that  we  may  always
have  plenty  in  our  vineyard,  the  parts  of  the  fruit-bearing  branch  muft
be  bound  as  far  as  three  eyes,  that  whatever  is  below  the  band  may  put
forth  firm-wood  branches.  Then  afterwards,  when  the  vine  is  grown
up,  and  advanced  in  years  and  flrength,  the  long  rods,  or  young  branches,
muft  be  conveyed  to  every  tree  that  is  next  to  them ;  and,  after  two
years,  it  is  proper  to  cut  them  all  off  together,  and  to  tranfmit  or  carry
over  others  that  are  younger ;  for,  when  they  grow  old,  they  weary  the
vine.  Sometimes  alfo,  when  a  vine  cannot  compafs  and  take  up  the
whole  tree,  it  has  been  ufual  to  bend  a  part  of  it  downwards,  and  im-
merge  it  into  the  earth,  and  to  raife  up  two  or  three  layers  again  to  the
fame  tree,  that,  being  furrounded  with  feveral  vines,  it  may  be  the
more  fpeedily  cloathed.

A  leaf-bearing  foot,  growing  out  of  the  hard  part  of  a  young  vine,
mufl  not  be  preserved  and  left  upon  it,  unlefs  it  is  fprung  out  of  a  ne-
ceffary  place,  that  it  may  marry  a  branch  that  is  a  widower.  Leaf¬
bearing  fhoots,  that  fpring  out  of  old  vines,  and  in  a  proper  place,  are
ufeful,  and  mofl  of  them,  when  they  are  cut  to  the  third  eye,  are  pre-
ferved,  and  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit  with  very  good  fuccefs;  for  the
enfuing  year  they  put  forth  firm-wood  in  abundance.  But  whatever
leaf-bearing  (hoot,  growing  out  of  a  good  place  of  the  vine,  is  broken,

H  h  either


234  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

either  in  the  pruning  or  bending,  ought  not  to  be  taken  clean  away,
provided  it  have  any  eyes,  becaufe  the  next  year  it  will  pro  luce  even” a
Wronger  firm-wood  branch  from  one  eve.  Thole  are  called  precipitated
fruit-bearing  branches,  which,  being  fprung  out  of  rods  of  one  year  old,
are  made  fad  with  a  band  in  the  hard  part  of  the  vine.  Thefe  bring  very
much  fruit;  but  they  hurt  the  mother  very  much:  therefore  a  fruit¬
bearing  branch  mud  not  be  precipitated,  except  from  the  extreme
branches,  or  if  the  vine  has  furmounted  the  too  of  the  tree.  But  if,  ne-
verthelefs,  any  perfon  has  a  mind  to  fet  apart  for  growth  this  kind  of
ihoot  for  the  benefit  of  its  fruit,  let  him  writhe  or  twill:  the  fruit-bear¬
ing  branch;  then' let  him  bind  it  fad,  and  precipitate  it ;  for  both  be¬
hind  the  place  which  you  have  tvvided  will  it  put  forth  thriving  firm-
wood,  and,  when  it  is  precipitated,  it  will  attract  lefs  drength  to  itfelf,
altho’  it  may  bear  fruit  in  great  abundance:  but  a  branch  that  is  preci¬
pitated  mud  not  be  differed  to  continue  above  one  year.

There  is  another  fort  of  a  young  fruit-bearing  branch,  which  fprings
out  of  the  tender  part  of  the  vine,  and,  being  made  fad  with  a  band  in
the  tender  part  of  the  vine,  hangs  down  from  it  (we  call  it  a  firm-
wood  branch).  It  produces  both  very  good  fruit,  and  new  fhoots.  And
now,  if,  out  of  one  head,  two  rods  be  preferved,  and  fet  apart  for
fruit,  neverthelefs  both  of  them  are  termed  you?ig  jinn-wood-,  for  I  have
above  taught  you  what  drength  a  leaf-bearing  fhoot  growing  out  of  the
dock  of  the  vine  has.  The  cbops-Jhoot  (7)  is  that  which  fprings  out  of
the  middle,  between  two  arms  of  the  vine,  as  it  were,  in  a  fork.  I
have  found  by  experience,  that  this  is  the  very  word  fhoot  of  all,  be¬
caufe  it  does  not  bear  fruit,  and  weakens  both  the  arms  of  the  vine,
between  which  it  is  fprung  up  ;  therefore  it  mud  be  taken  away.

Mod  people  have  falfly  believed,  that  a  drong  and  luxuriant  vine
would  become  more  fertile,  if  it  were  loaded  with  many  young  branches,
fet  apart  for  growth,  and  bearing  of  fruit;  for  the  more  rods  it  has,  the
more  leaf-bearing  fhoots  it  produces ;  and,  when  it  has  covered  itfelf
with  many  leaves,  it  cads  its  bloffoms  the  worfe,  and  contains  both  the
fogs  and  the  dews  the  longer,  and  lofes  all  its  grapes.  Therefore  my
opinion  is  to  feparate  and  divide  a  drong  vine  into  boughs,  and  to  dira-
diate  and  fpread  it,  by  carrying  its  young  branches  to  other  trees,  that

1

(7)  Valmes  focaneus  is  a  young  branch,  that  grows  out  in  the  middle  between  two  arms
of  the  vine,  as  it  were,  in  a  fork.  This  branch  the  author  advifes  to  cut  away  immedi¬
ately,  becaufe  it  weakens  the  vine ;  but,  if  it  has  already  weakened  one  of  the  arms,  he  ad-
vites  to  preferve  it,  and  to  fubftitute  ic  in  the  room  of  that  which  is  decayed.  You  may
fee  why  ic  is  fo  called,  lib.  iv.  cap.  24.


grow


Chap.  VII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  235

grow  next  to  it  (8),  and  to  precipitate  the  reft  of  the  fruit-bearing
(hoots ;  and,  if  it  becomes  too  luxuriant,  to  leave  the  firm-wood
branches  loofe,  and,  by  that  method,  make  the  vine  more  fertile.  But
as  a  thick,  clofe  plantation  of  trees,  with  vines  upon  them,  is  commend¬
able,  both  for  its  fruit,  and  for  its  beautiful  appearance,  fo  when,  with
old  age,  it  grows  thin,  it  is  equally  unprofitable,  and  difagreeable  to
the  eye.  To  prevent  this,  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  a  diligent  Mafter  of  a
family  to  remove  the  very  firft  tree,  that  is  decayed  with  old  age,  and
to  plant  a  young  one  in  its  place,  and  fupply  and  fill  up  the  vacancies
of  the  vines,  not  fo  much  with  quickfets,  (tho’  he  may  have  where¬
withal  to  do  it)  as  with  layers  from  the  neighbourhood,  which  is  far
better ;  the  manner  and  method  of  both  which  is  very  like  to  that  we
have  already  delivered  and  taught  you.  And  thefe  directions  concern¬
ing  Italian  plantations  of  trees  for  fupporting  vines,  which  we  have
given,  are  fufiicient.


CHAP.  VII.

Of  Gallic  Plantations  of  Trees  for  fupporting  Vines .

THERE  is  another  fort  of  plantation  of  trees  ufed  in  Gaul  {ox  fup¬
porting  vines,  which  is  called  rumpotinum ,  that  requires  a  low
tree,  which  does  not  produce  many  leaves ;  for  which  bufinefs  the  pop¬
lar-tree  feems  the  fitteft.  This  tree  is  very  like  the  cornel-tree  ;  yea,
the  cornel-tree  alfo,  the  horn-beam,  and  the  mountain-a{h,  and  fome-
times  alfo  the  willow,  is  planted  by  moft  people  for  this  very  purpofe  ;
but  the  willow  muft  not  be  planted,  except  in  watery  places,  where
other  trees  with  difficulty  take  root,  becaufe  it  hurts  the  tafte  of  the
wine.  The  elm-tree  alfo  may  be  fo  ordered,  that  it  may  have  its  top
cut  off  while  it  is  yet  tender  and  young,  that  it  may  not  exceed  the

(8)  Tradux  is  a  rod  of  a  vine,  carried  from  the  tree  which  fupports  it,  to  another  at
fome  diftance  from  it,  and  is  either  tied  to  that  tree,  or  to  a  branch  of  the  vine,  which
grows  upon  the  fame.  This  is  done  when  a  tree  cannot  fupport  all  the  branches  of  its  own
vine.  Thefe  branches,  as  Varro  fays,  lib.  i.  cap.  8.  were  by  fome  called  rumpi ,  perhaps
becaufe  they  were  broken,  as  it  were,  or  bended  from  the  vine  and  .tree  on  which  they
grew,  and  carried  to  another  tree.  They  may  be  called  pla[hed  vines.  A  plantation  of
low  trees  for  fupporting  fuch  vines  was  called  rumpotinum ,  probably  becaufe  they  made  ufe
of  them  for  thofe  plalhed  vines,  which  they  called  rumpi  y  yet,  from  the  account  our  au¬
thor  gives  of  this  rumpotinum ,  there  is  reafon  to  think,  that  this  fort  of  plantation  was  fo
called  from  their  breaking  off  the  tops  of  the  young  trees,  in  order  to  prevent  their  grow¬
ing  too  high.

H  h  2  height


236  ,L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

height  of  fifteen  feet ;  for  I  have  obferved  the  rumpotinum ,  or  a  planta¬
tion  of  dwarf-trees  for  fupporting  of  vines,  commonly  fo  ordered,  that
the  ffories  were  contrived,  in  dry  and  hilly  places,  about  eight  feet,  and,
in  flat  and  oufy  lands,  about  twelve  feet  Jrom  the  ground.  But,  for  the
mofl  part,  that  tree  is  divided  into  three  boughs,  upon  each  of  which,
from  both  Tides,  feveral  arms  are  fet  apart  for  growth.  Then  almoft  all
the  rods  are  pared  off  them  at  the  time  when  the  vine  is  pruned,  that
they  may  not  form  a  lhade.

If  there  is  no  corn  fown  among  thofe  dwarf  trees,  they  leave  fpaces
of  twenty  feet  between  them  on  both  fides ;  but,  if  people  are  fond  of
having  a  crop  of  corn,  they  leave  forty  feet  on  one  fide,  and  twenty  on
the  other.  As  to  all  other  things,  they  are  managed  and  carried  on
here  in  the  fame  manner,  as  in  Italian  plantations  of  trees  for  fupport¬
ing  vines  j  viz.  the  vines  are  fet  in  long  trenches ;  they  are  taken  care
of,  and  drefled  with  the  lame  diligence,  and  divided  into  boughs ;  and
new  vine-branches  are  brought  over  every  year  from  the  neighbouring
trees,  and  tied  together,  and  the  old  ones  are  cut  off.  If  a  young
branch  of  a  vine,  that  is  extended  and  carried  from  one  tree,  does  not
reach  to  that  which  is  brought  from  another,  let  them  be  tied  with  a
rod  put  between  them.  Then,  when  the  fruit  fhall  prefs  them  down¬
wards  with  its  weight,  let  props  be  put  under  them  to  fupport  them.
But  this  kind  of  plantation  for  fupporting  vines,  and  all  other  trees
whatsoever,  the  deeper  the  ground  is  plowed  and  digged  round  them,
the  greater  abundance  of  fruit  they  produce ;  but,  whether  it  may  be
expedient  for  a  Mailer  of  a  family  to  make  them,  the  culture  of  them
teaches  him.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  the  feveral  Kinds  of  Olive-trees  (1).

NEverthelefs  the  culture  of  every  kind  of  tree  is  more  Ample  than
that  of  vines ;  and,  of  all  Hems,  the  olive-tree,  which  is  the  chief
©f  all  trees,  requires  the  leaft  expence  by  far :  for,  altho’  it  does  not

bring

(1)  'Pliny  tells  us,  that  the  culture  of  the  olive-tree  was  not  introduced  very  early  into
Italy and  that  Fenefletla  affirmed,  that,  in  the  reign  of  Tarquinius  Prifcus ,  in  the  year  of
the  city  183.  there  was  not  an  olive-tree  either  in  Italy ,  Spain,  or  Africa-,  but  that,  in  his
time,  the  way  of  cultivating  it  was  fo  well  known,  that  it  had  parted  the  Alps,  and  got

-  into


Chap.  VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  237

bring  fruit  conftantly  every  year,  but  almoft  every  other  year,  never-
thelefs  there  is  very  great  account  to- be  made  of  it,  becaufe  it  isfupported
with  very  flight  culture}  and,  when  it  does  not  array  itfelf  either  with
blofloms  or  fruit,  it  fcarcely  requires  any  expence }  but,  if  any  charges
are  beftowed  upon  it,  it  thereupon  multiplies  its  fruit.  When  negledted
for  feveral  years,  it  does  not  decay,  as  the  vine;  and,  even  in  that  very
time  all'o,  it  yields  fomething,  notwithftanding,  to  the  Matter  of  the
family  }  and,  when  culture  is  beftowed  upon  it,  in  one  year  it  is  reco¬
vered.  Wherefore  alfo  we  have  thought  it  proper  to  give  directions
carefully  concerning  the  culture  of  this  kind  of  tree.

I  believe  there  are  many  kinds  of  olive-trees,  as  there  are  of  vines  5.
but  only  ten  of  them  have  come  to  my  knowledge,  the  Paujian  (2),  the
Algian  (3),  the  Licinian  (4),  the  Sergian  (5),  the  Nevian ,  the  Cnlmi-
nian  (6),  the  Orchis  (7),  the  royal  olive-tree  (8),  the  circites  (p),  and

the

>nto  Gaul,  and  the  middle  of  Spain;  and  that  they  planted  it  in  nurferies;  and,  the  year
after  they  tranfplanted  it,  they  received  fruit  of  it.

Columella  mentions  ten  different  forts  of  olive-trees.  Virgil  mentions  only  three  forts,
the  orchitis ,  the  radius,  and  th epaujia.  Pliny  mentions  fome  forts,  which  our  author  takes
no  notice  of.  None  of  the  ruftic  writers  give  us  any  exadt  defcription  of  the  different  cha¬
racters  of  all  thefe  trees,  fo  as  to  enable  one  to  diftinguiih  them.  They  do  little  more  than
mention  them  by  their  names,  as  being  then  very  well  known }  and  their  chief  bufinefs
was  to  teach  how  to  cultivate  them.

The  olives,  as  many  other  fruit-trees,  took  their  names,  fometimes  from  the  country
where  they  firft  were  known  to  grow,  and  from  which  they  were  brought  into  Italy ;  or
from  the  perfon,  who  firft  brought  them  out  of  Afia  or  Greece ,  and  firft  cultivated  and  im¬
proved  them}  and  thefe  names  give  little  or  no  knowledge  of  the  tree..  Others  of  them-
have  their  names  from  fome  diftinguifhing  quality  of  the  fruit,  ihape,  or  colour }  as  may  bo
feen  in  thofe  different  forts  mentioned  by  our  author,  of  which  there  are  feveral,  whofe
diftinguifhing  characters  we  know  nothing  of.

(2)  Pau/ia. '  Virgil  feems  to  infinuate,  that  the  berry  of  this  is  bitterer  than  that  of  other-
forts  of  olive-trees;  and  Pliny  fays,  that  they  have  moft  flefh  upon  them,  and,  being  very
tender,  fall  fooneft  to  the  ground ;  as  do  alfo  thofe  of  the  orchitis  and  radius.  Ifidorus
fays,  that  it  is  very  proper  for  green  and  fweet  oil.  But  I  fuppofe  the  reafon  he  affigns
why  it  is  called  paujia' will  not  give  any  great  fatisfadtion,  quod paviatur ,  i.  e.  tundatur
for  they  were  all  bruifed,  in  order  to  exprefs  the  oil  out  of  them.

(3)  Algiana.  Whther  this  is  fo  called  becaufe  it  ripens  with  the  cold  weather,  and  does
not  fuffer  by  it,  or  from  the  name  of  fome  perfon  or  place,  I  know  not.

(4)  Licinian,  This  olive  has  its  name  from  the  perfon- who  firft  brought  if'into  Italy,
and  cultivated  it.  It  is  a  callous  fruit,  of  a  fmall  fiz,e,  late  in  ripening,  refills  moifture,  and
yields  an  excellent  oil,  and  the  beft  both  for  eating  and  ointments.

(5)  Sergian.  This  probably  has  its  name  from  Sergius  Grata.  Our  author,  lib.  viii.  c.  16 .
makes  mention  of  two  famous  Romans,  Sergius  Or  at  a,  and  Licinius  Murejia.  Perhaps  they
introduced  thefe  two  olive-trees  laft-mentioned.

(6)  Culminea ,  by  Pliny  called  comminiana ,  by  Cato,  colmrniana ,  and  by  Varro ,  colminia.
Thefe  three  above-mentioned  are  all  callous  and  fmall,  and  therefore  the  moifture  makes  no
impreflion  upon  them.  They  begin  to  grow  black  in  the  month  of  February ,  when  the
weftern  winds  begin  to  blow.  Pliny  fays,  that  thefe  callous  olives  yield  the  moft  oil ;  and
that  it  is  a  common  error  to  think,  that  the  largeft  olives  yield  the  moft }  for  they  eafily
admit  the  moifture,  which  makes  them  fwell,  and  ills  them  with  lees.


(7)  Orchis ,


238  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELL  A,  Book  V.

the  my  tie  olive  (10) ;  of  all  which  the  berry  of  the  Paujian  is  the
fweeteft,  and  that  of  the  royal  the  .moft  beautiful,  which  is  rather  fit
for  food,  than  for  oil.  Neverthelefs  the  oil  of  the  Paufian  is  of  an  ex¬
cellent  tafle  while  it  is  green ;  but  it  fpoils  when  it  is  long  kept.  The
Orchis  alfo,  and  the  Radius,  are  better  gathered  for  food,  than  for  liquor.
The  Licinian  gives  the  bed:  oil,  and  the  Sergian  the  moft  j  and,  for  the
moft  part,  all  the  larger  olives  are  fitter  for  eating,  and  the  lefter  for
oil.  None  of  thefe  kinds  endures  either  an  -excefiive  hot,  or  a  cold
conftitution  of  the  climate :  therefore,  in  very  hot  places,  it  rejoices  in
the  north  fide  of  a  hill  j  and,  in  hot,  on  the  fouth  fide.  But  it  neither
loves  low  places,  nor  fuch  as  very  high ;  but  rather  fmall  hills,  fuch
as  we  fee  thofe  of  the  Sabines  in  Italy,  or  in  the  whole  province  of
Bcetica.

Mold  people  think,  that  this  tree  either  does  not  live,  or  at  leaf!;  is
not  fertile,  beyond  fixty  miles  from  the  fea  ;  but,  in  fome  places,  it
thrives  very  well.  The  Paujian  bears  the  heats  beft,  the  Sergian  the
cold.  The  fitted:  kind  of  earth  for  olives  is  that  which  has  gravel  under
it,  if  chalk,  mixed  with  coarfe  fand,  be  placed  above  it.  The  foil,
where  there  is  fat  coarfe  fand,  is  not  lefs  efteemed ;  but  a  denfer  earth
alfo,  if  it  be  moift  and  rich,  •  receives  and  entertains  this  tree  very  com-
modioufly.  That,  which  is  wholly  chalk,  mull  be  rejected,  and  much
more  that  alfo,  which  is  full  of  fprings  of  water,  and  wherein  an  oufi-
nefs  always  remains.  Land,  that  is  lean,  with  coarfe  fand,  and  bare
gravel,  is  unfriendly  to  it ;  for,  tho’  it  does  not  intirely  die  in  this  kind
of  foil,  neverthelefs  it  never  recovers  ftrength :  yet  it  may  be  planted
in  corn-land,  where  either  the  arbute  or  ftrawberry-tree,  or  the  ever¬
green  oak-tree,  have  flood ;  for  the  common  oak,  even  when  it  is  ait
down,  leaves  roots  that  are  hurtful  to  the  olive-yard,  the  poifon  of
which  kills  the  olive.  But  thefe  things  I  had  to  fay  to  you  in  general

(7)  Orchis ,  Orchita ,  Orchitis.  In  fome  editions  of  Virgil ,  and  in  Ijldorus ,  it  i?  called

O rchades.  The  firffc  termination  comes  neareft  to  the  Greek  word  from  which  it  has  its
name,  as  Servius ,  and  fome  other  authors  fay,  tefiiculus ,  from  the  refecrblance  they

bear  to  the  tefticles,  perhaps  both  in  their  fhape,  and  hanging  in  pairs  upon  their  pedicle.
Pliny  fays,  lib.  xv.  c.  3.  that  it  yields  the  moft  oil.

(8)  Regia,  the  royal  olive,  fo  called  from  its  excellent  qualities,  or  rather  from  its  fize,
from  which,  by  fome,  thefe  olives  were  called  majorities.  They  were  the  largeft  of  all,
and  had  the  moft  flefti;  but  yielded  the  leaft  juice.

(9)  Circites  is  the  fame  with  Radius ,  and  by  Ifidorus  thefe  are  called  radioLs ,  as  he  fays,
eo  quod  oblongec  funt  in  modum  radiorum.  It  is  probable,  that  they  were  (o  called,  becaufe
they  were  fomewhat  like  a  weaver’s  fhuttle,  fmall  at  each  end,  and  thick  in  the  middle.
Servius  alfo  fays,  that  they  were  fo  called  from  their  long  fhape,  Vtr.  georg.  ii.  85.  xsf-:<V,
radius  textorius.

(xo)  Mur  tea  ole  a ,  the  myrtle  olive,  fo  called  from  the  refemblance  it  bears  to  the  myrtle-
tree,  or  fome  likeneb  in  their  berries.

I  con-


Chap.  IX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  239

concerning  this  tree  of  every  kind.  Now  I  (hall  particularly  defcribe  its
culture.


CHAP.  IX.

Of  making  Nurferies  for  Olive-yards.

LET  a  nurfery  for  an  olive-yard  be  prepared  in  a  free  air,  in  land
indifferently  ftrong,  but  juicy  ;  in  a  foil  neither  denfe  nor  loofe,
vet  rather  in  that  which  is  open.  This  kind  of  earth  is  almoft  black,
which  when  you  have  paginated  three  feet  deep,  and  furrounded  with
a  deep  ditch,  that  cattle  may  have  no  accefs  to  it,  give  it  leave  to  fer¬
ment.  Then  take  off  from  the  trees  the  young,  tall,  and  fair  branches,
and  fuch  as  are  the  moft  fertile,  and  which  your  hand  can  fpan,  when
it  takes  hold  of  them  (that  is,  about  the  thicknefs  of  the  handle  of  any
thing) ;  and  from  thefe  cut  off  the  very  frefheft  cuttings,  fo  as  you  may
not  hurt  either  the  bark,  nor  any  other  part,  except  where  the  faw
fhall  have  cut  through  :  and  this  is  eafily  done,  if  you  firft  make  a
forked  piece  of  wood  to  faw  them  upon,  and  cover  with  hay  or  ftraw
that  part,  which  you  are  going  to  cut  the  branch  upon,  that  the  cut¬
tings,  which  are  placed  upon  it,  may  lie  foftly,  and  be  cut  without
hurting  the  bark.  Then  let  the  cuttings  be  cut  off  with  the  faw  a  foot
and  an  half  long,  and  let  their  wounds  be  fmoothed  at  both  ends  with
a  pruning-knife,  and  let  them  be  marked  with  red  lead,  that  fo  they
may  be  fet  into  the  ground,  after  the  fame  manner  as  the  branch  flood
upon  the  tree,  looking  with  its  lower  part  to  the  earth,  and  with  its
top  to  the  heavens  ;  for,  if  it  be  put  under-ground  inverted,  it  will  with
difficulty  flrike  root,  and,  when  it  has  recovered  itfelf,  and  got  flrength,
it  will  be  barren  for  ever.  But  you  muff  daub  the  heads  and  the  lower
parts  of  the  cuttings  with  dung  mixt  with  afhes,  and  fo  immerge  them
wholly,  that  fo  the  rotten  or  loofe  crumbling  earth  may  come  over
them  four  fingers  deep.  But  they  are  put  under-ground  with  two  marks
or  indexes  on  each  fide  of  them.  Thefe  may  be  taken  from  any  tree,
and  placed  at  a  fmall  diftance  hard  by  them,  and  tied  together  with  a
firing  in  the  uppermoft  part,  that  they  may  not,  when  ftanding  by
themfelves,  be  eafily  thrown  down.  It  is  good  to  do  this,  becaufe  of
the  ignorance  of  the  Diggers,  that,  when  you  fhall  direfl  your  nurfery
to  be  cultivated,  either  with  fpades,  hoes,  or  farcies,  the  cuttings,  which
you  have  fet,  may  not  be  hurt.


Some


240  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V.

Some  think  it  better  to  form  their  nurfery  with  eyes,  and  to  difpofc
or  fet  them  in  like  manner  regularly  upon  a  line'  marked  out  with  a
cord  ;  but  both  the  one  and  the  other  ought  to  be  planted  after  the
vernal  Equinox,  and  the  nurfery  ought  to  be  very  frequently  hoed  the
firft  year.  The  next  and  following  years,  now  when  the  fmall  roots
of  the  plants  have  gathered  ftrength,  it  ought  to  be  cultivated  with
fpades ;  but  it  will  be  proper  to  abftain  from  pruning  for  two  years,  and
that  the  third  year  two  fmall  branches  be  left  upon  each  plant,  and  the
nurfery  frequently  hoed.  The  fourth  year  the  weakeft  of  the  two
branches  muft  be  cut  off.  The  little  trees,  being  thus  cultivated,  are
fit,  the  fifth  year,  to  be  tranfplanted.  But,  in  lands  that  are  dry,  and
not  at  all  oufy,  the  plants  are  beft  fet  in  the  olive-yards  in  autumn ;  but,
in  fuch  lands  as  are  rich  and  moift,  in  the  fpring-time,  a  little  before
they  bud.  And  trenches  of  four  feet  are  prepared  for  them  a  year
before :  or,  if  fo  much  time  is  not  allowed  them,  let  ftraw  be  burnt
in  the  trenches,  that  the  fire  may  make  them  loofe  and  crumbling,
which  the  fun  and  the  hoar-froft  ought  to  have  done.

In  ground  that  is  fat,  and  fit  for  corn,  the  leaft  fpace  between  the
rows  ought  to  be  fixty  feet  on  one  fide,  and  forty  on  the  other ;  but
in  that  which  is  lean,  and  not  fit  for  corn,  twenty-five  feet.  But  it  is
proper,  that  the  rows  be  diredted  and  turned  towards  the  weft,  that
they  may  be  refrefhed  with  the  fummer  breezes  blowing  freely  through
them.  But  the  little  trees  themfelves  may  be  tranfplanted  in  this  man¬
ner  :  Before  you  pull  up  the  little  tree,  mark  w'ith  vermilion  that  part
of  it,  which  looks  to  the  fouth,  that  it  may  be  fet  in  the  fame  manner
it  was  in  the  nurfery ;  then  that  the  fpace  of  one  foot  be  left  to  the
little  tree  all  round  it,  and  fo  the  plant  be  digged  up  with  its  own  turf;
and,  that  the  faid  turf  may  not  fall  into  pieces  in  taking  it  out,  you
muft  weave  fmall  twigs  of  rods,  and  join  them  to  one  another,  and
apply  them  to  the  lump  of  earth  that  is  taken  out,  and  bind  it  fo  with
the  twigs,  that  the  earth,  being  prefled  faft  together,  may  be  kept,  as
it  were,  fhut  up  clofe  within  them.  Then,  having  digged  up  the
lower  part,  you  muft  move  the  lump  gently,  and  bind  it  with  the  rods,
which  you  have  put  under  it,  and  fo  carry  the  plant  from  the  one  place
to  the  other.  And,  before  you  fet  it,  you  muft  dig  the  bottom  of  the
trench  w'ith  hoes :  then  put  earth  into  it,  which  has  been  well  wrought
and  broken  with  the  plough,  (provided  neverthelefs,  that  the  upper
ground  be  fat)  and  fo  ftrew  feeds  of  barley  under  it;  and,  if  there  be
water  ftanding  in  the  trenches,  it  muft  be  all  drawn  out  before  the
trees  be  put  down  into  them.  Then  you  muft  throw  fmall  ftones  into
them,  or  gravel  mixt  with  fat  earth;  and,  after  the  plants  are  fet,  the

fides


Chap.  IX.  O/HUSBANDRY.  241

lides  of  the  trench  muft  be  pared  all  round,  and  fome  dung  put  in  be¬
tween  them.  But  if  it  does  not  fuit  to  remove  the  plant  with  its  own
earth,  then  it  is  bed;  to  ft  rip  the  flock  of  all  its  twigs  and  leaves,  and,
having  fmoothed  its  wounds,  and  daubed  them  with  dung  and  afhes,  to
fet  it  in  the  trench  or  furrow.

But  a  trunk  or  flock,  which  is  as  thick  as  one’s  arm,  is  fitter  for
tranfplanting  ;  alfo  that  which  is  of  a  much  larger  and  flronger  growth,
may  be  tranfplanted,  which  it  is  proper  fhould  be  fo  fet,  that  if  it  be
in  no  danger  from  the  cattle,  very  little  may  appear  above  the  trench  ;
for  it  thrives  the  better,  and  puts  forth  its  leaves  more  joyfully.  Ne-
yerthelefs,  if  the  incurfion  of  cattle  cannot  be  otherwife  prevented,
the  flock  mud;  be  placed  higher,  that  it  may  be  fecure  from  the  injury
of  the  cattle.  Alfo  the  plants  muft  be  watered,  when  droughts  come
on,  and  they  muft  not  be  touched  with  a  knife  till  two  years  are  ex¬
pired.  And  they  ought  to  be  fo  lopped  at  firft,  that  the  fingle  flalk
or  ftem  may  exceed  the  depth  of  the  greateft  trench  (i),  that  after¬
wards,  in  ploughing,  the  ox  may  not  hurt  his  haunches,  or  any  other
part  of  his  body.

It  is  alfo  bed;  to  fence  the  plants  all  round  with  pales,  when  they
are  firft  planted,  and  then  to  divide  the  olive-yard,  now  it  is  con  di¬
luted  and  finifhed,  into  two  parts,  which  may  be  cloathed  with  fruit
every  other  year  by  turns.  For  the  olive-tree  does  not  produce  fruit
in  great  plenty,  two  years  fucceftively.  When  the  land  that  lies  under
it  is  not  fown,  the  tree  puts  forth  fmall  fhoots ;  when  it  is  replenifhed
with  feeds,  it  brings  forth  fruit :  fo  the  olive-yard,  being  thus  divided,
brings  an  equal  income  every  year.  But  it  ought  tobe  plowed  twice
every  year  at  lead;,  and  digged  deep  all  round  with  hoes.  For,  after
the  Solftice,  when  the  earth  gapes  with  the  fervent  heats,  care  muft
be  taken,  that  the  fun  may  not  penetrate  thro’  the  chinks  to  the  roots
of  the  trees.  After  the  autumnal  Equinox,  the  trees  muft  be  fo  ab-
laqueated,  that,  if  the  olive-tree  be  upon  a  declivity,  furrows  may  be
drawn  from  the  higher  part,  which  may  convey  the  muddy  water  to
the  ftock  of  the  tree.  Then  all  the  young  fhoots,  fprung  out  of  the
lower  part  of  the  tree,  muft  be  extirpated  yearly,  and  every  third  year
the  olive-trees  muft  be  nourilhed  with  dung  (2)  ;  and  the  olive-yard

muft

(1)  Simplex  flilus  ahitudinem  maximi  fcrobis  excedat.  Gefierus  is  of  opinion,  that  it
Ought  to  be  bovis  inftead  of  fcrobis,  which  is  not  improbable ;  and  then  the  meaning  of
the  author  is,  that  the  ftem  ought  to  be  higher  than  the  higheft  ox,  thac  he  may  not  hurt
hi f  haunch  in  plowing.

(2)  Ac  tertio  quoque  jjmo  vel.  This  fentence  feems  to  be  imperfedt  ;  fomething  or
Otjier  h  -rewith  the  olive-tree  vyas  nourifhed,  is  wanting ;  probably,  it  is  amurca ,  the

1  i  lees


242  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

muft  be  dunged  in  the  fame  manner  I  propofed  in  the  fecond  book.
Neverthelefs,  care  mull  be  taken  of  the  corns.

But  if  you  have  only  the  doing  fervice  to  the  trees  themfelves,  which
you  have  planted,  in  view,  fix  pounds  of  goats  dung,  and  a  fingle  mo -
dius  of  dry  dung  (3),  or  one  congius  of  lees  of  oil,  ought  to  be  thrown
into  the  roots  of  each  of  them  in  autumn,  that  the  dung  being  throughly
mixed  with  it,  it  may  warm  the  roots  of  the  olive-tree  in  winter.  Lees
of  oil  muft  be  poured  into  them  when  they  are  ftrong,  and  in  a  thriv¬
ing  condition  j  for  if  worms,  or  other  animals,  have  got  into  them,
during  winter,  they  are  killed  by  this  medicament.  Alfo  for  the  moft
part,  both  in  dry  and  moift  places,  trees  are  infefted  with  mofs;  and,
unlefs  you  cut  it  off  with  an  iron  tool,  the  olive-tree  will  neither  pro¬
duce  fruit  nor  leaves  in  abundance.  Moreover,  the  olive-yard  muft
be  pruned  alfo,  after  feveral  years  intermiffion  :  for  it  is  proper  to
remember  the  old  proverb,  That  he  who  plows  his  olive-yard ,  ajks
fruit ;  he  that  dungs  it ,  begs  and  intreats  it ;  but  he  who  lops  it,  forces
it.  Neverthelefs,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  do  this  every  eighth  year,  left
the  fruit-bearing  branches  be  cut  off  from  time  to  time.

It  often  happens  alfo,  that,  tho’  the  trees  thrive  mighty  well,  yet
they  produce  no  fruit.  It  is  proper,  that  thefe  be  bored  with  a  Gallic
augre,  and  fo  a  green  graft,  or  flip  of  a  wild  olive-tree  be  put  into  the
hole  ;  thus  the  tree,  being  as  it  were  impregnated  with  fruitful  feed,
becomes  more  fertile.  But  alfo,  without  laying  open  the  roots,  it  muft
be  aflifted  with  lees  of  oil,  wherein  there  is  no  fait,  and  with  hogs-ftale  :
or  our  own  old  urine,  of  both  which  a  certain  quantity  is  oblerved.
For  one  urn  of  it  will  be  abundantly  enough  for  the  greateft  tree,  if
it  be  mixed  with  water.  Alfo,  thro’  the  badnefs  of  the  foil,  olive-trees
ufe  to  deny  their  fruit ;  which  thing  we  may  thus  remedy  :  We  muft
ablaqueate  them  very  deep  all  round  ;  then  we  muft  put  more  or  lefs
lime  round  them,  according  to  the  bignefs  of  the  tree  ;  but  the  leaft
tree  requires  a  modius  of  it.  If  this  remedy  has  no  effedt,  we  muft
have  recourfe  to  ingrafting  as  the  only  refuge.  But  after  what  manner
the  olive-tree  muft  be  ingrafted,  we  fhall  afterwards  declare.  Some¬
times  alfo,  in  an  olive-tree,  one  branch  thrives  fomewhat  better  than
the  reft  *  and,  unlefs  you  cut  this  off,  the  whole  tree  will  languifh.  What
has  been  thus  far  faid  concerning  olive-yards,  is  fufficient.  It  remains

lees  of  oil  j  which,  in  other  places,  our  author,  as  alfo  Varro  and  Talladius,  recommend,
as  of  very  great  benefit  to  olive-trees.

(3)  Talladius ,  who  borrows  moft  things  from  Columella ,  when  fpeaking  of  this  article,
inftead  of  fiercoris  Jkci}  as  in  Columellay  has  cineris  modii  fmguli,  a  modius  of  afhes  to
«ach  of  them.


to


Chap. X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  243

to  give  fome  account  of  the  way  of  managing  pomiferous  trees,  con¬
cerning  which  we  Ihall  give  diredtions  in  what  foliov/s.


CHAP.  X.

Of  pomiferous  Trees .

YOU  muft  inclofe  and  fence  all  round  the  place  for  an  orchard,  be¬
fore  you  fet  the  plants,  either  with  walls,  or  an  hedge,  or  with
a  Iteep  ditch,  that  it  may  refufe  a  paffage  not  only  to  cattle,  but  alfo
to  men  :  becaufe  if  their  tops  be  often  handled  by  men,  or  gnawn  and
browfed  by  the  cattle,  the  plants  can  never  arrive  at  their  due  growth.
But  it  is  neceffary  to  range  the  trees  according  to  their  feveral  kinds  j
and  efpecially  that  the  weak  be  not  oppreffed  by  the  ftronger,  becaufe
it  is  neither  equal  to  it  in  ftrength  nor  bignefs,  and  it  grows  up  in  an
unequal  fpace  of  time.  Earth  that  is  fit  for  vines,  is  alfo  proper  for
trees.  Dig  the  trench  one  year  before  you  refolve  to  fet  your  plants  j
fo  it  will  be  macerated  with  the  fun  and  the  rains ;  and  what  you  fet
in  it  will  foon  take  root.  But  if  you  have  a  mind  both  to  make  the
trench,  and  plant  the  trees,  the  fame  year,  dig  the  trenches  two
months  before  at  leaft,  and  afterwards  warm  them  by  burning  ftraw
in  them  ;  and  the  broader  and  more  open  you  fhall  make  them,  the
better  and  the  greater  plenty  of  fruit  you  fhall  gather.  But  let  the
trench  be  made  like  an  oven  or  furnace,  the  bottom  of  which  is  wider
than  the  upper  part,  that  the  roots  may  be  at  more  liberty  to  extend
themfelves  on  every  fide,  and  that  lefs  cold  in  winter,  and  lefs  heat  in
fummer,  may  penetrate  thro’  its  narrow  mouth  j  and  alfo,  that  in
floping  places  the  earth,  which  is  gathered  into  it,  may  not  be  walhed
away  by  the  rains.

Plant  the  trees  thin,  and  at  a  confiderable  diftance,  that  when  they
grow,  they  may  have  fpace  wherein  they  may  extend  their  branches  :
for,  if  you  plant  them  thick,  you  can  neither  fow  any  thing  below
them,  neither  will  they  themfelves  be  fruitful,  unlefs  you  pull  up
fome  of  them  here-and-there,  and  thin  them.  Therefore  it  is  proper
to  leave  forty,  or  at  leaft  thirty  feet  between  the  rows.  Chufe  and
gather  the  plants  as  thick  at  leaft  as  the  handle  of  a  prong,  ftraight,
fmooth,  tall,  without  blotches  or  gafhes,  and  with  the  bark  found
and  intire.  Thefe  will  take  root  well  and  fpeedily.  If  you  take
them  off  from  old  branches,  chufe  them  of  thofe  alfo  which  bring

I  i  2  good


244  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

good  fruit,  and  in  great  plenty,  every  year ;  and  rather  thofe  which  arc
expofed  to  the  fun,  than  thofe  which  are  inclofed,  and  furrounded  with
(hades,  branches,  and  other  plants.  But,  before  you  tranfplant  the  little
trees,  obferve  what  winds  they  were  before  expofed  to,  and  afterwards
put  to  your  hands,  that  you  may  tranfplant  them  from  a  Hoping  and
dry  land  to  that  which  is  moiif.  Plant  that  which  is  three-forked
preferably  to  any  other  :  let  it  ftand  three  feet  above-ground  at  lead.
If  you  have  a  mind  to  place  two  or  three  little  trees  together  in  the
fame  trench,  take  care  that  they  touch  not  one  another  ;  becaufe  by
mutual  con  tad;  they  will  either  rot  together,  or  perifh  by  the  worms.
When  you  fet  the  plants,  put  down  into  the  bottom  of  the  trench,
both  on  the  right  and  left,  bundles  of  fprays,  of  the  thicknefs  of  one’s
arm,  fo  as  they  may  appear  a  little  above  the  ground ;  by  which  you
may  with  little  labour  administer  and  convey  water  to  their  roots  in
fummer.

Plant  trees  and  plants  of  trees  with  roots  in  autumn,  that  is,  about
the  firft  and  fifteenth  of  OBober  :  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring  fet
them  before  the  trees  put  forth  their  buds  (i).  And,  that  the  moth-
worm  may  not  be  troublefome  to  fig-tree-plants,  put  down  into  the
bottom  of  the  ditch  a  cutting  of  the  maftich-tree,  with  its  top  inverted.
Plant  not  the  fig-tree  during  the  colds  :  it  loves  places  expofed  to  the
fun,  that  are  full  of  fmall  (tones,  and  gravelly,  and  fometimes  it  loves
rocky  places.  This  kind  of  tree  foon  grows  ftrong,  if  you  make  the
trenches  large,  open,  and  wide.  The  feveral  kinds  of  fig-trees,  tho’
they  differ,  and  are  unlike,  in  their  tafte,  habit,  form,  and  make,  are
planted  after  one  manner,  but  with  due  regard  to  the  difference  of
land.  In  cold  and  watery  places,  plant  the  early-ripe  fig-trees  in  autumn,
that  you  may  gather  the  fruit  off  them  before  the  rains  come  on.  Plant
winter  fig-trees  in  warm  places :  but  if  you  (hall  have  a  mind  to  make
a  fig-tree  late  in  ripening,  tho’  it  is  not  fo  naturally,  then  fhake  off
its  unripe  figs,  or  the  fruit  which  it  firff  produces,  it  will  again  pro¬
duce  a  fecond  fruit,  which  it  will  defer  ripening  till  winter.  Some¬
times  alfo  it  is  an  advantage  to  cut  off  with  a  knife  the  uppermoff  tops
of  the  fig-tree,  after  they  have  begun  to  put  forth  their  leaves :  fo  the

(i)  Arbor es  ac  femina  cum  radicibus  autumno  ferito  j  primo  twf,  antequam  germinent
arbores ,  depo?iito.  Po?itedera  thinks  that  this  fentence  is  iraperfedt,  and  that  it  is  not  to  be
underftood,  that  trees  fhould  be  planted  in  the  fpring,  but  cuttings  and  branches,  as  appears
by  the  author’s  book  de  arboribus  ;  and  therefore  taleas  and  ramos  ought  to  be  put  before
v ere.  Others  are  for  putting  alteras  before  vere  j  and,  as  Gefnerus  fays,  it  is  very  likely,
that  the  author,  in  the  laft  period  of  the  fentence,  (peaks  of  [ome  other  kind  of  plants  with¬
out  roots-.


trees


Chap.  X.  O/HUSB.ANDR  Y.  245

trees  become  firmer,  and  more  fertile  j  and  it  will  always  be  proper,  as
foon  as  the  fig-trees  fhall  have  begun  to  put  forth  leaves,  to  dilute  and
difi'olve  okre  in  lees  of  oil,  and  pour  it  with  human  dung  about  their
roots.  This  makes  the  fruit  more  plentiful,  and  the  fluffing  and  pulp
of  the  fig  fuller  and  better.  But  we  muff:  chiefly  plant  the  Livian  (2),
African ,  Chalcidian  (3),  Lydian  (4),  CalliJiruthian  (5),  Topian  (6),
Rhodian ,  Libyan  (7),  and  winter  fig-trees ;  alfo  all  thofe  that  bear  a
floret  twice  or  thrice  in  a  year  (8).

(2)  Ficus  Uviana.  Fig-trees,  as  feveral  other  fruit-trees  mentioned  by  Columella,  have
for  the  moft  part  their  names  from  the  places  from  which  they  were  firft  brought,  or  from
the  perfons  who  firft  brought  them  into  Italy,  and  cultivated  them,  or  were  mighty  fond
of  them.  Thus  the  Livian  fig-tree,  they  fay,  had  its  name  from  Livia,  wife  of  the  Em¬
peror  Auguflus :  fhe  made  but  a  bad  ufe  of  her  favourite  figs,  if  it  be  true,  as  fhe  is
charged,  that  fhe  poifoned  her  husband  with  them.

(3)  Chalcidia ,  from  Chalcis,  a  city  in  Eubcea ,  now  called  Negroponte,  of  which  Pliny
fays  there  were  two  forts ,  one  black,  the  other  white.

(4)  Lydia.  The  Lydian  fig  was  of  a  purple  colour,  as  Pliny  fays.  Columella  in  his
tenth  book  fays,  that  it  had  a  painted  back,  &  Lydia  tergo.

(5)  Calliflruthia,  called  pajfaria ,  or  rather  paJJ'eraria,  probably  becaufe  fparrows  fed
greedily  upon  them.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  were  of  an  excellent  tafte,  but  the  coldeft  of
all  figs.  Columella,  in  his  tenth  book,  mentions  this  fig,  <&  calliftruthis  rofeo  qua  femine
ridet.  When  it  was  laid  open,  it  feemed  to  fmile  with  its  bright,  reddifh,  rofe-coloured
feeds.

(6)  Sulca,  Topia.  Thefe  two  kinds  of  fig-trees  are  mentioned  neither  by  Pliny,  nor
Varro ,  nor  Athenaus }  nor  does  our  author  mention  them  in  his  tenth  book,  where  he  men¬
tions  moft  of  the  other  forts.  Pontedera  thinks,  that  Topia  ought  to  be  read  Chia ,  which
were  a  fort  of  fig-trees  firft  brought  from  the  ifland  of  Chios.  The  Chian  fig  was  in  great
efteem,  as  feveral  authors  teftify.  Martial  fays,  it  was  of  a  pungent  tafte,  and  pleafed  him
much.  Columella  mentions  it  in  his  tenth  book,  which  makes  it  probable  he  would  not
have  omitted  it  here,  where  he  enumerates  the  feveral  forts  of  fig-trees.  Whether  Sulca  be
a  corruption  of  Marifca ,  is  very  uncertain.  Both  Cato  and  Pliny  mention  the  Marifcan
fig,  as  alfo  our  author,  in  his  tenth  book.  It  was  a  large  fat  fig,  not  agreeable  to  the
tafte,  rather  fit  to  be  preferved,  than  to  be  eaten  green.  As  the  Chian  and  Marifcan  figs
were  fo  well  known,  and  fo  often  mentioned,  and  the  Topia  and  Sulca  are  obfcure  and
uncertain,  it  is  probable,  that  Columella  intended  the  firft,  and  that  the  laft  are  corrupt
readings ,  of  which  no  account  can  be  given.

(7)  Libyca.  Columella  here  mentions  thefe  as  different  from  the  African  •  fo  that  father
Hardouin  (eems  to  be  miftaken,  when  he  fays,  illas  vocat  Columella  Africanas.  Perhaps
Fliny ,  who  does  not  mention  them  under  this  name,  looked  upon  them  as  the  fame  with
the  Alexandrian ,  which  he  fays  were  black,  and  had  a  white  chanel  or  clifc,  candicante
vima  ',  by  which  it  is  probable  he  meant  a  hollow  or  chanel  that  ran  lengthwife  round
the  fig,  and  is  what  Columella  means,  when  he  calls  it  fciffa  Libyjfa ;  for  when,  thro’  over-
ripenefs,  figs  begin  to  open,  the  cleft  or  opening  at  firft  will  appear  whitifh  in  them  all ;
fo  that  the  candicans  rima ,  probably,  was  a  mark  upon  the  outfide  appearing-  like  a  cut,
which  diftinguifhed  this  from  other  forts.  Father  Hardouin  explains  it  of  its  being  white
when  it  opens  •  cum  hiat,  albet.

(8)  Bifera ,  trifera ,  flofculi.  Pliny,  in  his  Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  xv.  cap.  1 8,  fays,  that  fame  of
the  Chalcidian  fig-trees  bear  fruit  thrice  a  year ;  and  lib.  xvi.  cap.  25.  fays,  that  fig-trees
have  no  flower  or  bloffom,  as  fome  others  alfo  afifert.  So  that  by  fiofculus  here,  probably,
the  author  means,  the  firft  breaking  out  or  appearance  of  the  young  fruit.


About


246  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V.

About  the  firft  of  February  plant  the  almond-tree,  which  begins  to-
bud  the  firft  of  any  :  it  requires  hard,  warm,  dry  land.  For,  if  you
plant  the  almond  in  places  of  different  qualities,  for  the  mod  part  it
rots.  Before  you  put  the  nut  into  the  ground,  deep  it  in  honey-
water,  not  too  fweet :  fo,  when  it  is  grown  up,  it  will  yield  fruit  of  a
more  agreeable  tafte,  and,  in  the  mean  time,  it  will  put  forth  its  leaves
the  better,  and  the  more  fpeedily.  Place  three  nuts  in  a  triangle,  that
a  nut  may  be  at  leaft  four  fingers  breadth  diftant  from  a  nut,  and  that
two  of  them  look  towards  the  weft  (9)  :  but  each  nut  puts  forth  one
root,  and  creeps  forth  with  a  Angle  ftalk.  When  the  root  reaches  to
the  bottom  of  the  trench,  it  is  checked  by  the  hardnefs  of  the  ground,
and  bended  back  again  ;  and,  from  the  fummit  or  top  of  the  two
branches  the  root  forms,  it  fends  out  other  roots  (10).

You  may  make  an  almond,  andafilberd,  become  aTarentinian  (11)
nut-tree  in  this  manner.  Into  the  trench,  wherein  you  defign  to  plant  your
nuts,  put  fmall  earth  about  half  a  foot  deep,  and  there  fet  a  plant  of
fennel-giant.  When  the  fennel-giant  is  fprung  up,  cleave  it,  and  in
its  pith  hide  an  almond  or  filberd-nut  without  a  (hell,  and  fo  put  it
under-ground.  Do  this  before  the  firft  of  March ,  or  alfo  between
the  feventh  and  fifteenth  days  of  the  faid  month.  At  the  fame  timte
you  muft  plant  the  walnut,  the  pine,  and  the  chefnut-trees.

It  is  right  to  plant  the  pomegranate  from  the  fame  time  to  the  firft
of  April ,  which,  if  it  produces  acid,  or  not  fo  fweet  fruit  as  you  defire,
may  be  corrected  in  this  manner.  Water  the  roots  of  it  with  ftale
urine  mixed  with  human  and  hogs  dung.  This  will  both  make  the
tree  fertile,  and  the  firft  years  it  makes  the  fruit  of  a  winy  tafte,  and,
after  five  years,  makes  it  fweet,  and  without  any  woody  fubftance.
We  have  diffolved  a  very  little  lafer wort-juice  in  wine,  and  fo  have

(9)  Et  anceps  in  favonium  fpeffet.  The  three  nuts  were  to  be  placed  in  a  triangle,
not  equilateral,  as  Gefnerus  thinks,  and  that  the  top  of  the  triangle  is  what  the  author
means  by  anceps  ;  but  it  is  more  probable,  that  Columella's  meaning  is,  that  the  three  nuts
were  to  be  fo  placed,  as  that  two  of  them  might  incline  towards  the  weft.

(xo)  Et  ex  Jummo  duum  ramorum  ambas  radices  emittit .  In  his  book  de  arboribus ,  it  is
exteufa  in  modum  ramorum  alias  radices  emittit  j  and  not  ambas ,  which,  as  Vontedera  thinks,
is  probably  the  true  reading  here.  Gefnerus  thinks  it  ought  to  be  read  &  ex  fe  in  modum
ramorum  amp/as  radices  emittit.  Perhaps  the  two  branches  the  root  forms  after  its  bend¬
ing  may  be  properly  enough  exprefled  by  ambas ,  i.  e.  it  forms  both  its  roots  from  the
bending  it  made  of  the  firft  root ;  but  it  is  more  probable,  that  alias  is  the  true  reading,
feeing  the  bending  of  a  root  will  naturally  put  forth  other  roots,  as,  in  vines,  any  bending
will  put  forth  young  fhoots.

(11)  Tarentina  nux.  ATarentinian  nut  was  fo  foft,  that  it  could  fcarcely  be  handled
without  breaking,  as  Macrobius  fays.  Vliny  fays,  that  there  were  two  forrs  of  them  j  one
with  a  brittle  fhell,  and  the  other  harder.  They  were  common  about  Tarentvm.

anointed


Chap. X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  247

anointed  the  uppermoft  tops  of  the  tree.  This  did  corredt  the  acidity
of  the  apples.  If,  when  you  plant  the  tree,  you  place  three  flones  at
the  very  root  of  it,  they  will  remedy  and  prevent  the  burfting  of  pome¬
granates  upon  the  tree.  But,  if  you  have  a  tree  already  planted,  fow
fquills  hard  by  the  root  of  the  tree.  This  may  be  prevented  by  an¬
other  method  alfo  :  when  the  apples  are  almoft  ripe,  before  they  burft,
twift  the  fmall  branches  upon  which  they  hang.  In  the  fame  manner
they  will  keep  even  a  whole  year  without  fpoiling.

Plant  the  pear-tree  (12)  in  autumn,  fo  that  there  may  be  at  lead:
twenty-five  days  to  come  before  winter.  And  that  it  may  be  fruitful,
when  it  (hall  come  to  its  full  growth,  lay  its  roots  open  to  a  confider-
able  depth,  and  cleave  the  dock  hard  by  the  very  root,  and  drive  into
the  cleft  a  wedge  of  torch-pine-tree,  and  there  leave  it  :  then,  after
you  have  covered  the  roots  of  the  tree,  by  replacing  the  earth,  throw
afhes  upon  the  earth.  But  we  mud  take  care  to  plant  our  orchards
with  the  mod  generous  pears  that  can  be  found.  Thefe  are,  the
Cruftuminian  (13),  the  Royal  (14),  the  Signinian  (15),  the  Tarenti-
nian  (16),  which  are  called  Syrian ,  the  Purple- coloured,  the  Su¬
perb  (1 7),  the  Barley-pear  (18),  ihzAnician  (ip),  the  Navi  an,  the

(12)  The  fame  thing  may  be  faid  of  pear-trees  and  apple-trees,  as  was  faid  of  vines
and  olives,  that  the  antient  ruftic  writers  give  us  but  very  little  infight  into  their  different
characters.  It  is  probable,  that  moft  of  them  were  fo  well  known,  that  they  thought  it
needlefs  to  defcribe  them  ;  and  that  their  bufinefs  was  chiefly  to  teach  how  to  cultivate
them.  The  greateft  part  of  them  had  their  names  from  men  who  either  brought  then*
vnioltaly ,  or  took  great  delight  in  them,  and  cultivated  and  improved  them  j  who,  as  Pliny
fays,  by  fo  fmall  a  matter,  have  rendered  their  memory  immortal,  as  if  they  had  done  fome-
thing  very  notable  in  life.  Others  of  them  have  their  names  from  the  countries  and  places-
from  whence  they  were  brought ;  and  fome  of  them  from  fome  quality  or  character  pe  •
culiar  to  themfelves.

(15)  Cruflumina  fir  a,  fo  called  from  Cruftuminum,  a  town  in  Hetruria,  where  they  were
beft,  and  in  greateft  plenty.  Yliny  commends  them  for  their  moft  agreeable  tafte.  Ser-
<vius  fays,  that  they  were  partly  red,  and  they  were  of  a  fmall  fize.

( 14)  Regia,  the  royal  pear.  Yliny  fays,  that  it  has  a  very  fliort  pedicle  or  ftalk,  and
grows  cloie  to  the  branch ;  it  is  fomewhat  round.  Father  Hardouin  lays,,  it  was  what  is
now  called  a  Bergamot-pear,  from  Bergamo  in  the  State  of  Venice.

(15)  Signina  pira ,  from  Signia  a  town  in  Italy.  Yliny  fays,  that  by  fome  they  were
called  tefiacea  •  perhaps,  becaufe  they  were  fit  for  being  preferved  and  kept  in  earthen
pots  ;  but  he  fays,  they  are  fo  called  from  their  colour.

(16)  Tarentina,  qua  Syria  dicuntur.  Both  Yliny  and  Servius  lay,  they  were  of  a  black
colour  ,•  and  they  are  commended  by  Martial ,  and  other  authors.

(17)  Superba.  Yliny  fays,  they  are  fo  called,  becaufe  they  come  the  firft  of  any,  and
ripen  very  quickly  ;  and  they  are  of  a  fmall  fize.  Father  Hardouin  calls  them  poires  mu feat es
»u  mufcadelles ,  mufcadelle-pears.

(18)  Ordeacea ,  barley-pears.  Yliny  fays,  they  are  fo  called,  from  the  feafon,  or  time  when
they  are  ripe,  in  the  time  of  barley-harveft.  Father  Hardouin  calls  them  St.John's  pears.

(19)  Aniciana,  fo  called,  from  fome  perfon  probably  who  firft  introduced  them.  Yliny
lays,  they  are  gathered  after  autumn,  and  that  they,  are  agreeable  from  their  fomewhat
acid  tafte.


I


Favo-


248  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  V

Favonian  (20),  the  Lateritan  (21),  the  Dolabellian  (22),  the  Turra-
nian  (23),  the  Warden  (24),  the  Honey-pears ,  and  the  Early-ripe ,  and
the  Venus-pears  (2  5),  and  fome  others,  which  it  would  be  tedious  now
to  enumerate.

Moreover,  thofe  kinds  of  apples  muft  be  chiefly  fought  after  ;  the
Scandian(ib ),  xk&Matian  (27),  the  Orbicular  (28),  thcSextian  (29),
the  Pelujian  (30),  the  Amerinian ,  the  Syrian ,  or  red-coloured  (31),
the  Honey-apples ,  and  Quinces  (32),  of  which  there  are  three  forts,
the  Strut  hian,  the  Orange  or  Gold- quinces ,  and  the  Muft  quinces  :  all
which  not  only  yield  pleafure,  but  health  alfo.  The  fervice-apple,  the
apricot  (33),  and  the  peach  (34)  alfo,  are  not  the  leafl  beautiful  and

.  lovely.

(20)  Pavoniana ,  from  one  F avonius.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  were  red,  and  larger  than
the  Superb  before-mentioned.  Father  Hardouin  fays,  it  is  the  great  mufcadelle-pear.

(21)  Eateritana ,  Lateritiana,  Laterana,  one  and  the  fame  pear  thus  differently  written.
Probably  it  is  fo  called,  from  its  brick-colour.

(22)  Do/abelliana.  They  have  their  name  from  'Dolabella ,  a  Roman  citizen.  Pliny  fays,
that  they  had  a  very  long  ftalk.

(23)  Turraniana.  This  has  its  name  from  one  Niger  Turranius ,  mentioned  by  Varro ,
//'£.  ii.  and  commended  as  a  great  lover  of  cattle,  &c.

(24)  Volema.  They  were  fo  called,  becaufe  they  filled  the  hand.  They  were  alfo  called
libralia,  from  their  weight,  pound-pears.

(25)  Venerea ,  Fo  called  from  their  beauty.  Pliny  fays,  they  were  alfo  called  celorata ,
from  their  being  as  it  were  painted  with  feveral  beautiful  colours.

(2 6)  Mala  Scandiana ,  from  one  Scandius ,  as  Pliny  fays.

(27)  Maliana ,  from  Caius  Matius ,  a  Roman  knight,  and  a  great  favourite  of  the  Em¬
peror  Augujtus  :  he  is  probably  the  fame  whom  Columella  mentions  in  his  twelfth  book  as
author  of  three  books  of  cookery,  &c.

(28)  Orbiculata ,  fo  called,  from  their  round  figure,  as  Pliny  (ays ;  and  adds,  that  they  were
originally  of  Epirus ,  and  that  the  Greeks  called  them  Epirotica.

(29)  Sextiana ,  or  rather  Sejliana ,  as  lib.  xii.  45.  They  are  not  mentioned  by  Pliny  by
this  name.  He  fays,  there  is  a  fort  which  have  their  name  from  one  Gejlius ,  which  father
Hardouin  is  inclined  to  change  into  Sejlius.

(30)  Pelufiana,  Amerim t,  from  Pelufium  in  Egypt ,  and  Ameria  a  town  in  Umbria  in  Italy.

(31)  Syrita.  Pliny  fays,  they  were  fo  called,  from  their  colour,  being  a  bright  red.
Ijldorus  fays,  that  Syricum  is  a  certain  red  colour  or  paint,  which  the  Syrophoenicians  gathered
upon  the  fhore  of  the  Red  Sea.  Pliny  fays,  that  it  is  alfo  a  made  colour,  by  mixing  finoper,
or  ruddle,  and  fandyx  together.  This  laft,  he  fays,  was  alfo  a  made  colour  of  fandarac
and  ruddle  an  equal  quantity,  and  toafted  in  a  furnace.

(32)  Cydonia ,  r.vS'uvia.  from  a  town  in  Crete,  called  Cydon.  The  Romans  called

them  mala  cotonea.  Our  author  mentions  three  forts  of  them.  The  Jlruthia ,  Pliny  fays,
were  of  a  fmaller  fort  :  they  were  covered  with  much  down,  and  had  a  ftronger  fmell
than  the  other  forts,  and  were  late  in  ripening.  Why  they  were  called  Jlruthia,  feems  not
fo  certain,  whether  from  their  fixe,  or  from  fparrows  delighting  in  them.  The  fecond
fort  were  called  chryfomela,  golden  apples,  and  were  diftinguifhed  with  incifurss,  and  of  a
colour  inclining  to  gold.  The  third  fort  were  called  mujtea ,  probably  from  their  having
the  tafte  of  muft,  or  new  wine  :  they  were  early  ripe.  Pliny  mentions  a  fort  of  apples
that  were  called  mujlea  a  celeritate  mitefcendi ,  becaufe  they  grew  foon  mellow,  and  that
they  afterwards  were  called  Honey-apples.

(33)  Armeniaca.  Our  author  feems  to  rank  thefe  among  apples:  they  are  commonly

fuppofed


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  249

lovely.  Plant  apples,  forbs,  and  plums,  after  the  middle  of  autumn,
till  the  thirteenth  of  February.  The  feafon  for  planting  mulberry-trees
is  from  the  thirteenth  of  February  till  the  vernal  ./Equinox.  Set  the
Carob-tree  (35),  which  fome  call  xegdrtov,  and  the  peach-tree,  during
autumn,  before  winter.  If  the  almond-tree  bear  but  little  fruit,  after
you  have  made  a  hole  in  the  tree,  drive  a  ftone  into  it,  and  leave  it  there,
that  the  bark  may  grow  over  it.

But,  of  all  thefe  kinds,  it  is  proper  to  fet  the  branches  regularly  in
orchards,  about  the  beginning  of  March ,  upon  beds  raifed  in  the  feve-
ral  divilions  thereof,  and  made  of  earth  that  has  been  well  manured
and  dunged.  Care  muft  be  taken,  that  when  their  fmall  branches  are
young  and  tender,  they  be,  as  it  were,  pampinated,  or  freed  from
fuperfluous  twigs  and  leaves,  as  you  do  vines ;  and  that  the  plants  be
reduced  the  firft  year  to  one  item  :  and  when  autumn  approaches,
before  the  colds  pinch  them,  and  dry  up  their  tops,  it  is  proper  to
pull  off  all  the  leaves,  and  fo  cover  them  with  thick  reeds,  which  have
their  knots  intire  at  one  end,  as  it  were  with  caps,  and  fo  to  defend
the  yet  tender  rods  from  the  cold  and  the  frofts  :  then,  after  twenty-
four  months,  whether  you  have  a  mind  to  tranfplant  them,  and  range
them  in  rows,  or  to  ingraft  them,  you  may  fafely  enough  do  either  the
one  or  the  other.

fuppofed  to  be  what  we  call  Apricocks ;  but  'Plhty  feems  to  rank  them  among  the  plums,'
and  fays,  they  have  their  name  from  Atmenia ,  their  native  country,  and  are  commended
for  their  agreeable  fmell.

(34)  Perfica,  peaches.  Pliny  fays,  they  were  foreign  both  to  A  ft  a  and  Europe ,  being
brought  out  of  Per  (la,  and  have  their  name  from  their  country  3  that  it  was  with  difficulty
they  fucceeded  when  tranfplanted,  for  which  reafon  it  was  late  before  they  came  into  Italy  y
and  that  it  was  falfe,  that  they  were  of  a  poifonous  quality  in  Perfia ,  as  was  commonly
believed,  as  Columella  fays  exprefly  in  his  tenth  book.  But  this  was  a  vulgar  opinion,  and
our  author  fays  nothing  of  it  here.

(3<0  Silt  qua  Grceca,  which  fome  call  /.spyrsoy,  the  carob-tree  :  it  grows  in  great  plenty
in  Greece  and  Syria ,  and  in  many  parts  of  Italy.  Its  fruit  is  ftiaped  like  the  husk,  or  pods,
of  fome  forts  of  pulfe.  In  Syria ,  it  feems,  the  poorer  fort  of  people,  and  cattle,  feed
upon  it,  as  we  fee  in  St.  Luke  xv.  16.  where  the  prodigal  fon  is  faid  to  have  delired  to  fill
h  $  belly,  d-r'o  upyaluv,  which  is  rendered  husks  by  our  tranflators  of  the  New  Tefta-
ment.


250


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book V.


CHAP.  XI.

Of  ingrafting  of  Trees ,

EVERY  kind  of  fhoot  or  cyon  can  be  grafted  upon  every  kind  of
tree,  ifin  its  bark  it  is  not  unlike  to  that  upon  which  it  is  grafted;
but  if  it  produces  alfo  like  fruit,  and  at  the  fame  time,  it  may  be
grafted  upon  it  perfectly  well,  without  any  fcruple.  Moreover,  the
undents  have  given  us  an  account  of  three  kinds  of  ingrafting,  one,
whereby  a  tree  that  is  cut  and  cloven,  receives  cyons  that  are  cut  off
from  Jome  other  tree  :  a  fecond,  whereby  a  tree,  after  it  is  cut,  admits
the  plants  or  cyons  between  its  bark  and  wood,  both  which  kinds  are
proper  for  the  fpring-time ;  the  third  kind,  whereby  the  tree  receives
the  buds  themfelves,  with  a  little  bark,  into  a  part  of  itfelf,  from
which  the  bark  is  taken  away,  which  Hufbandmen  call  Emplajlra -
tion  (i),  or,  as  fome  call  it,  Inoculation .  This  kind  of  ingrafting  is
beft  put  in  practice  in  the  fummer-time.  When  we  lhall  have  de-
fcribed  the  way  and  method  of  thefe  ingraftings,  we  fhall  alfo  teach
you  that  which  we  have  invented.

Graff  all  trees  in  the  increafe  of  the  moon,  as  foon  as  they  (hall
begin  to  put  forth  their  buds,  but  the  olive-tree  about  the  vernal
iEquinox,  till  the  thirteenth  of  April.  From  whatever  tree  you  (hall
have  a  mind  to  chufe  grafts,  and  are  going  to  take  cyons,  fee  that  it  be
young  and  fertile,  and  with  frequent  knots  or  joints  ;  and  as  foon  as
the  buds  fhall  fwell,  chufe  them  of  the  thicknefs  of  your  little  finger,
from  the  fmall  branches  of  one  year  old,  which  look  to  the  rifing  of
the  fun,  and  are  perfectly  found.  Let  the  cyons  be  two  or  three¬
forked.  Cut  the  tree  which  you  have  a  mind  to  graff  upon,  carefully
with  a  faw,  in  that  part  where  it  is  faireft  and  in  beft  condition,  and
without  any  fear  ;  and  you  muft  be  very  careful  not  to  hurt  the  bark.
Then  after  you  have  cut  the  trunk  through,  fmooth  the  wound  with  a
fharp  iron  tool.  Then  put  down  a  fmall  iron  or  bone-wedge  between
the  bark  and  the  wood,  not  lefs  than  three  fingers  breadth  ;  but  do  it
very  confiderately,  that  you  may  not  hurt  or  break  the  bark.  Afterwards
pare,  with  a  fharp  pruning-knife,  the  cyonsyou  have  a  mind  to  ingraft,
on  one  fide  only,  as  far  as  the  wedge  which  you  have  put  down  will

fi)  "Emplaftration,  fo  called,  from  the  plaifter  of  clay  or  wax  ufed  in  this  fort  of  graff-
jng.  It  is  alfo  called  inoculation,  or  ineying,  from  the  tak;ng  an  eye  or  bud  off  a  tree,
and  felting  it  into  another,  with  a  bit  of  the  bark  of  its  own  tree.


1


give


Chap.  XI.  O/HUSBANDRY.  25r

give  them  fpace,  and  do  it  fo  as  you  may  not  hurt  the  pith,  nor  the
bark  of  the  other  lide.  When  you  have  prepared  your  cyons,  pull  out
the  wedge,  and  immediately  put  down  the  cyons  into  the  holes  which
you  fhall  have  made  with  the  wedge  driven  in  between  the  bark  and
the  wood  j  but  infert  the  cyons  by  that  end  which  you  have  pared,  in
fuch  a  manner,  that  they  may  ftand  out  from  the  tree  half  a  foot,  and
no  more.  You  may  very  well  graff  two  grafts  into  one  tree  ;  or,  if
the  trunk  be  larger,  you  may  graff  more.  Let  there  be  a  fpace  of
four  fingers  breadth  between  them  :  do  thefe  things  according  to  the
bignefs  of  the  tree,  and  the  goodnefs  of  the  bark.  When  you  have
thruft  down  all  the  grafts  which  that  tree  will  fuffer,  bind  the  tree
faft  with  elm-tree  inward  bark,  or  with  a  bulrufh,  or  a  willow.  Then
daub  the  wound  all  over  with  well-wrought  clay,  mixed  with  ftraw,
and  the  fpace  which  is  between  the  grafts,  fo  far,  as  that  the  grafts
may  appear  and  ftand  out  at  leaft  four  fingers  breadth  above  it ;  then
put  mofs  upon  it,  and  bind  it  fo,  that  the  rain  may  not  fink  into  it.

Neverthelefs,  fome  are  better  pleafed  with  making  a  place  for  the
grafts  with  a  faw  in  the  ftock  of  the  tree,  and  to  fmooth  the  parts
which  are  cut,  with  a  fmall  penknife,  and  fo  to  fit  the  grafts  to  them.
If  you  have  a  mind  to  ingraft  a  very  fmall  tree,  cut  it  off  very  low,  fo
that  it  may  ftand  only  one  foot  and  an  half  above  the  ground  j  and  then
when  you  have  cut  it  through,  fmooth  the  wound  carefully,  and,  with
a  fharp  penknife,  cleave  the  middle  of  the  ftock  a  very  little  way,  fo
that  there  may  be  a  cleft  in  it  of  three  fingers  breadth ;  and  then  infert
a  wedge  into  it,  whereby  it  may  be  kept  open ;  and  put  down  into  it
grafts  pared  on  both  fides,  fo  that  you  may  make  the  rind,  or  inward
bark  of  the  graft,  equal  to  the  rind  of  the  tree.  When  you  have  care¬
fully  fitted  the  grafts,  take  out  the  wedge,  and  bind  up  the  tree,  as  I
faid  above  :  then  heap  up  the  earth  about  the  tree  to  the  very  place
where  the  ingraftment  is  made  j  this  will  defend  it  moft  of  any  thing
from  the  wind  and  heat.

The  third  kind  of  ingraftment,  inafmuch  as  it  is  exceeding  nice
and  delicate,  is  not  fit  for  all  forts  of  trees  j  but,  for  the  moft  part,
fuch  as  have  a  moift,  juicy,  and  ftrong  bark,  admit  of  fuch  an  ingraft¬
ment;  as  the  fig-tree  ;  for  it  yields  great  abundance  of  milk,  and  has  a
very  ftrong  bark.  Therefore  it  is  exceeding  proper  to  be  grafted  upon
after  this  manner  :  Chufe  young  and  fair  branches  from  off  that  tree
from  which  you  have  a  mind  to  take  your  grafts ;  and  in  them  take
particular  notice  of  the  eye,  which  fhall  make  a  fair  appearance,  and
afford  a  certain  hope  of  a  bud  :  mark  it  all  round,  about  two  fingers
fquare,  fo  that  the  eye  may  be  in  the  middle  j  and  fo  cut  it  all  round

K  k  2  with


252  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  V.

with  a  (harp  penknife,  and  take  off  the  bark  carefully,  that  you  may
not  hurt  the  gem.  After  this,  chufe  alfo  the  faireft  branch  of  the  tree
which  you  are  about  to  inoculate,  and  cut  all  round  the  fame  quantity
of  its  bark,  and  take  it  off  the  wood:  then  fit  the  fcutcheon,  which
you  have  prepared,  into  that  part  which  you  have  dripped  of  its  bark,
fo  that  it  may  agree  exatftly  to  the  part  from  which  the  bark  is  taken.
When  you  have  done  thefe  things  thus,  bind  it  well  round  the  gem,
and  beware,  that  you  do  not  hurt  the  bud  itfelf :  then  daub  the  join¬
ings  and  bindings  with  clay,  leaving  a  fpace,  that  the  gem  may  be  at
liberty,  and  not  be  preffed  with  the  binding  :  but  chop  off  all  the  under
fhoots  and  upper  branches  of  the  tree  which  you  have  graffed  upon,
that  there  may  be  nothing  whereby  the  juice  may  be  diverted,  and  to
which  it  may  minifter  nourifhment  rather  than  to  the  graft.  After
the  twenty-firft  day,  unbind  the  fcutcheon,  and  with  this  kind  of  graff-
ing  the  olive-tree  alfo  is  graffed  upon  with  exceeding  good  effedt.

We  have  already  taught  you  that  fourth  kind  of  graffing,  when  we
treated  of  vines:  therefore  it  is  needlefs  to  repeat,  in  this  place,  the  way
and  method  of  terebration,  which  we  have  already  described.  But,
forafmuch  as  the  antients  denied,  that  every  kind  of  graft  might  be
graffed  into  every  kind  of  tree,  and  eftablifhed,  as  a  certain  law,  that
limitation,  as  it  were,  which  a  little  before  we  made  ufe  of,  viz.  that
only  thofe  grafts  could  coalefce,  which,  in  their  bark,  and  rind,  and
fruit,  were  confimilar  to  thofe  trees  upon  which  they  are  ingrafted  j
we  thought  it  proper,  that  this  erroneous  opinion  fhould  be  confuted,
and  a  method  delivered  to  pofterity,  whereby  every  kind  of  graft  might
be  graffed  upon  every  kind  of  tree.  But  that  we  may  not  weary  the
reader,  by  drawing  out  this  book  to  too  great  a  length,  we  (hall  fub-
join,  as  it  were,  one  example,  whereby  all  forts  of  grafts  may  be  graffed
upon  all  forts  of  trees.

Dig.  a  trench  four  feet  every  way,  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  an  olive-
tree,  that  the  extreme  branches  of  the  olive  may  reach  to  it :  then
plant  in  the  trench  a  fmall  fig-tree,  and  take  great  care,  that  it  become
fair,  found,  and  ftrong.  After  the  fpace  of  three  years,  when  it  has
had  a  large-enough  growth,  bend  downwards  the  branch  of  the  olive-
tree,  which  feems  to  be  the  faireft  and  the  goodlieft,  and  tie  it  to  the
ftock  of  the  fig-tree  ;  and  fo,  having  cut  off  all  the  other  fmall
branches,  leave  only  thofe  tops  which  you  fhall  have  a  mind  to  ingraft :
then  chop  off  the  fig-tree  by  the  trunk,  and  fmooth  the  wound,  and
cleave  it  down  the  middle  with  a  wedge  :.  then  pare  the  tops  of  the
olive-tree  on  both  fides,  as  they  flick  to  their  mother,  and  fo  infert
them  into  the  cleft  of  the  fig-tree,  and  take  out  the  wedge,  and  bind


Chap.  XII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  253

the  fmall  branches  carefully  together,  that  they  may  not,  by  any  force?
be  pulled  away.  Thus,  in  the  ipace  of  three  years,  the  fig-tree  grows
up  together,  and  takes  with  the  olive-tree  ;  and  then,  at  length,  the
fourth  year,  when  they  are  well  co-united,  you  (hall  cut  off  the  branches
of  the  olive  from  their  mother,  as  if  they  were  layers.  Ih  this  man¬
ner  you  fhall  graflf  every  kind  of  tree  on  every  kind  of  tree.  But,  be¬
fore  we  make  an  end  of  this  book,  fince  we  have  in  the  former  books,
treated  almoft  of  all  the  different  forts  of  grafts,  it  is  now  a  proper
time  to  fpeak  of  the  Cytifus ,  or  Shrub-trefoil.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  the  Cytifus,  or  Shrub-trefoil.

IT  is  of  great  importance,  that  there  be  great  abundance  of  the  Cy¬
tifus,  or  fhrub-trefoil,  in  your  land,  becaufe  it  is  mod  ufeful  for
hens,  bees,  goats,  oxen  alfo,  and  for  all  kind  of  cattle ;  becaufe  they
foon  grow  fat  thereby,  and  it  gives  the  ewes  plenty  of  milk  j  as  alfo,
becaufe  you  may  ufe  it  eight  months  for  green  fodder,  and  afterwards
you  may  make  ufe  of  it  dry.  Moreover,  it  quickly  takes  in  any  land
whatfoever,  altho’  exceeding  lean  :  it  bears  all  kind  of  ill  ufage  with¬
out  receiving  any  hurt.  Yea,  if  women  labour  under  fcarcity  of  milk,
the  Cytifus ,  or  dry  fhrub-trefoil,  muffc  be  fteeped  in  water ;  and,  when
it  has  foaked  throughly  the  whole  night,  the  next  day  the  juice  of  it
mull  be  fqueezed  out,  and  three  hemince  of  it  mixed  with  a  little  wine,
and  fo  given  them  to  drink  :  thus,  both  they  themfelves  fhall  enjoy
good  health,  and  their  children  fhall  be  flrengthened  with  abundance
of  milk.

The  Cytifus ,  or  fhrub-trefoil,  may  be  fown  either  in  autumn,  about
the  fifteeenth  of  05tober  \  or  in  the  fpring.  After  you  have  well  manured
the  earth,  make  it  into  fmall  beds,  and  there  fow  the  feed  of  the
fhrub-trefoil,  as  you  do  that  of  common  bafil.  Then  fet  the  plants
regularly  in  the  fpring,  fo  that  there  may  be  fpaces  of  four  feet  every
way  between  them.  If  you  have  no  feed,  fet  the  tops  of  the  fhrub-
trefoil  in  the  fpring,  and  heap  up  well-dunged  earth  all  round  them.
If  rain  does  not  come  on  presently  after,  water  them  the  next  fifteen
days  j  and  hoe  them  as  foon  as  they  begin  to  put  forth  new  leaves  ;
and,  after  three  years,  cut  it  down,  and  give  it  to  the  cattle.  Fifteen
pounds  weight  of  it  green  is  enough  for  an  horfe,  and  twenty  pounds


2  54  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &c.  Book  V.

for  oxen,  and  for  other  cattle  in  proportion  to  their  ftrength.  A1  fo
Shrub-trefoil  may  be  conveniently  enough  planted  in  branches  before
the  month  of  September ,  becaufe  it  eafily  takes  hold,  and  bears  with
ill  ufage.  If  you  give  it  dry,  give  it  more  fparingly,  becaufe  it  hath
greater  ftrength  ;  fteep  it  firft  in  water,  and,  after  it  is  taken  out,  mix
it  with  chaff,  or  ftraw.  When  you  have  a  mind  to  dry  the  CytiJ'm ,
cut  it  down  when  its  feed  fhall  begin  to  grow  big,  and  keep  it  a  few
hours  in  the  fun,  till  it  fade  ;  then  dry  it  throughly  in  the  (hade,  and
fo  lay  it  up.  It  is  enough  for  me  thus  far  to  have  given  precepts  and
directions  concerning  trees :  now  I  am  going,  in  the  following  book,
to  give  an  account  of  the  care  and  management  of  cattle,  and  of  the
remedies  proper  for  them.


L.  JWNIUS


C  255  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  SIXTH.

I  Know,  Publius  Silvinus ,  that  fome  prudent  Hufbandmen  have
refufed  to  take  upon  themfelves  the  care  and  management,  either
of  greater  or  fmaller  cattle  j  and  have  moft  conftantly  flighted  and
reje&ed  that  art  and  occupation,  as  hurtful  and  contrary  to  their
profeffion :  nor  do  I  deny,  that  they  did  this  with  fome  reafon,  as  if  the
purpofe  and  aim  of  the  Grazier  were  contrary  to  that  of  the  Hufband-
man,  inafmuch  as  the  latter  rejoiced  moft  in  ground  that  is  exceedingly
well  manured,  and  perfectly  clean  and  free  from  weeds  5  the  former
delights  in  that  which  is  unplowed,  and  produces  plenty  of  grafs  j  the
one  hopes  for  fruit  from  the  earth,  the  other  from  his  cattle.  So  it
comes  to  pafs,  that  what  the  plower  abominates,  the  Grazier,  on  the
contrary,  wifhes  for,  viz.  great  plenty  of  grafs  and  herbs.

Neverthelefs,  in  thefe  fo  difcordant  defires,  there  is  a  certain  foeiety,
or  fellowfhip,  or  communion  j  becaufe  it  is  cuftomary  to  eat  up  the
fodder  which  the  ground  produces,  for  the  moft  part  rather  with  do-
meftic  cattle,  than  with  thofe  belonging  to  ftrangers.  And  by  plen¬
tiful  dunging,  which  is  owing  to  flocks  and  herds  of  cattle,  the  earth
produces  her  fruits  in  great  abundance  :  nor  yet  is  there  any  country,
provided  there  is  corn  produced  in  it,  which  does  not  receive  great
benefit  and  advantage  from  the  help  and  afiiftance  of  all  forts  of  great
cattle,  as  well  as  of  men.  Hence  labouring  cattle  alfo  derived  their
name  from  the  thing,  being  called  jumenta ,  (helps)  becaufe  they  eafed
and  helped  us  in  our  labour,  either  by  carrying  loads,  or  by  plowing.
Therefore,  as  the  zntiznt  Romans  commanded,  Imyfelf  alfo  am  of  opi¬
nion,  that  we  fhould  throughly  underftand  the  management  of  cattle,
as  well  as  the  culture  of  lands.  For,  in  a  i;ural  life,  the  bufinefs  and

oc-


256  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VI.

occupation  of  Grazing  is  certainly  moft  antient  (i),  and  the  fame  is
alfo  exceeding  gainful :  for  which  reafon,  the  Latin  words  for  money
and  goods  feem  to  be  derived  from  the  word  which  fignifies  cattle ,
becaufe  the  antients  poffefled  nothing  elfe  ;  and  at  this  time,  with  fome
nations,  this  one  kind  of  riches  only  is  in  ufe  and  efteem  ;  and  now,
with  our  farmers,  there  is  no  other  thing  whatfoever,  that  turns  to
better  account,  or  yields  a  greater  increafe  ;  as  M.  Cato  alfo  believed,
who,  when  one  afked  his  advice,  What  part  of  Hufbandry  he  fhould
follow,  whereby  he  might  quickly  be  enriched  ?  anfwered,  If  he
would  apply  himfelf  diligently  to  the  bufinefs  of  a  Grazier.  And
when  he  afked  him  again,  What  he  fhould  do  next,  in  order  to  receive
a  plentiful  enough  income  ?  affirmed,  If  he  would  apply  himfelf  to
the  bufinefs  of  Grazing  but  indifferently.  But  I  am  loth  to  tell  (2)  of
fo  wife  a  man,  what  fome  authors  relate ;  that  when  the  fame  man
afked,  What  was  the  third  gainful  thing  in  Hufbandry  ?  he  afferted.
If  one  would  follow  the  bufinefs  of  Grazing,  even  but  negligently ;
efpecially  confidering,  that  the  lofs  which  follows  a  flothful  and  igno¬
rant  Grazier,  is  greater  than  the  advantage  which  redounds  to  one  that
is  prudent  and  diligent.  Neverthelefs,  as  to  the  fecond  anfwer,  there
is  no  doubt  but  the  produce  of  the  cattle  may  do  more  than  make
an  amends  for  the  tolerable  negligence  of  the  owner.  For  which  rea¬
fon,  we  alfo,  Silvinus ,  have  committed  this  part  of  Hufbandry  to
pofterity,  having  followed  the  precepts  of  our  anceftors,  with  all  the
induftry  we  have  been  capable  of.

(1)  yumenta.  Horfes  and  oxen  are  fo  called,  becaufe  they  help  and  aftift  men  in  their
labour.  It  feetns  to  be  an  abbreviation  of  juvamenta,  helps.

In  all  the  antient  poets,  both  Greek  and  Latin ,  the  breeding  and  feeding  of  cattle  is
always  honourably  mentioned,  as  a  bufinefs  to  which  perfons  of  the  greateft  charadter
applied  themfelves ;  and  -^-oAuctfv®-’,  toKvCoutik,  rich  in  fneepand  oxen,  drc.

were  common  epithets  of  the  greateft  Captains,  Leaders,  and  Governors.  And  the
Poets,  from  the  great  riches  that  great  plenty  of  wool  produced,  invented  their  fable  of
the  Golden  Fleece,  &c.  And  Varro,  who  was  a  very  great  antiquarian,  and  with  very
good  reafon  gathers  the  nature  and  origin  of  things  from  the  names  by  which  they  were
called,  fays,  that  the  ftory  of  the  golden  apples,  fo  much  celebrated  by  the  antient  Poets,
fignified  only  fheep  and  goats,  which  Hercules  brought  out  of  Africa  into  Greece ,  which
the  Greeks  called  in  their  own  tongue  fdiA*-  and  he  is  of  the  fame  opinion  with  our
author,  that  pecunia ,  and  peculium ,  money,  and  all  kinds  of  goods  whatfoever,  were  fo
called  from  pecus ,  which  iignifies  cattle.  g

(2)  Piget  dicere.  Here  Columella  blames  Cato  for  after  ting,  that  even  bad  feeding  of
cattle  would  not  fail  to  bring  l'ome  gain  to  a  Grazier.  But  Cato’s  anfwer  fignifies  only  the
great  efteem  he  had  of  cattle,  and  how  great  gain  might  be  made  by  breeding  them.  Pliu.
Nat.  Hifl.  lib.  xviii.  cap.  5.  mentions  the  two  firft  queftions  and  anfwers,  but  takes  no
notice  of  the  third.  Tully ,  in  his  Offices,  lib.  ii.  27.  takes  notice  of  all  the  three,  and
adds  a  fourth  way  of  being  rich,  viz.  that  of  Tillage.


There-


Chap.  I.  O/HUSBANDRY,  257

Therefore  there  are  two  kinds  of  four-footed  beads,  with  one  kind
of  which  we  furnifh  ourfelves  in  order  to  take  them  into  a  copartner¬
ship  of  our  labours,  as  the  ox,  the  mule,  the  horle,  the  afs ;  the  other
we  provide  ourfelves  with  for  our  pleafure,  for  our  guard  and  pro¬
tection,  and  for  the  fake  of  the  yearly  profit  they  bring  us  }  as  the
fheep,  the  goat,  the  hog,  the  dog.  We  Siall  firfl  fpeak  of  that  kind,
which  we  make  ufe  of  as  copartners  in  our  labour  ;  nor  is  there  any
doubt  but  (as  Varro  (a)  fays),  the  ox  ought  to  be  honoured  and  re-
fpeCted  above  all  other  cattle,  but  efpecially  in  Italy ,  which  is  fuppofed
to  have  derived  its  name  from  this  animal,  becaufe,  of  old,  the  Greeks
.  called  bulls  ’SaAas ;  and  in  that  city,  where  a  male  and  a  female  of
this  kind  of  cattle  marked  out  the  bounds  with  a  plough,  when  they
were  going  to  build  the  walls :  alfo,  becaufe  at  Athens  the  ox  is  faid  to
be  the  minifter  of  Ceres  and  Triptolemus  (5) :  and  becaufe  he  has  ob¬
tained  a  place  in  the  heavens  amongft  the  brighteS  ftars  :  moreover,
becaufe  he  is  Sill  man’s  moft  laborious  companion  in  Hufbandry,  and
for  whom  they  had  fo  great  a  veneration  among  the  antients,  that  it
was  as  capital  a  crime  to  have  killed  an  ox,  as  a  citizen.  With  him,
therefore,  let  us  begin  the  work  we  have  prosified.


CHAP.  I.

Of  buying  Oxen ,  'and  of  their  Shape  and  Make.

IT  is  not  an  eafy  matter  for  me  to  tell,  what  things  are  to  be  ob-
ferved,  and  what  to  be  avoided,  in  buying  of  oxen  ;  feeing  cattle
derive  both  the  habit  of  their  body,  and  the  difpofition  of  their  mind,

(2)  Varro,  in  his  fecond  book  of  Husbandry,  fays,  that  if  the  antients  had  not  had  a
great  efteem  for  cattle,  their  aftronomers  would  not,  in  deferibing  the  heavens,  have
called  fome  figns  by  their  names ;  fo  that  fome  of  them  began  the  twelve  figns  with  the
two  chief  names  of  cattle,  Aries  and  Taurus ,  the  Ram  and  the  Bull,  preferring  them  to
Apollo  and  Hercules ,  which  fome  thought  were  intended  by  Gemini ,  tho’  commonly  it  is
thought,  that  -Cajlor  and  Pollux  were  fignified  thereby  •  and,  not  content  with  the  fixth
part  of  the  figns  being  called  by  their  names,  they  added  Capricornus ,  in  order  to  have
the  fourth  part  3  and,  that  feveral  places,  both  by  fea  and  land,  retain  their  names,  as
the  Bofphorus  and  JEgean  feas ;  the  mountain  Taurus ,  &c.  and,  that  feveral  eminent  men
had  their  names  from  different  forts  of  cattle,  as  Porcius-,  Ovinius ,  Caprinius ,  Taurus ,  Vi-
tulus-,  &c.  all  which,  and  many  other  things,  fhew  the  great  regard  they  had  for  cattle.

(3)  Cereris  &  Triptolemi  minifler.  Ceres ,  the  goddefs  of  corn  and  tillage:  fhe  nurfed
Triptolemus  the  fon  of  Celeus  King  of  Athens ,  and  taught  him  Husbandry.  The  poets
feign,  that  he  travelled  over  the  whole  earth,  in  order  to  teach  men  Husbandry.  Pro¬
bably,  he  wrote  of  Husbandry,  and  publifhed  his  books  to  the  world,  which  gave  occa¬
sion  to  the  fable.

L  1  and


258  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VI.

and  the  colour  of  their  hair,  from  the  condition  of  the  country,  and
the  conditution  of  the  climate.  The  Afiatic  have  one  form,  the  Gal¬
ilean  another,  and  thofe  of  Epirus  a  third.  Nor  is  there  only  a  di-
verfity  in  thofe  of  the  Provinces,  but,  in  Italy  itfelf  alfo,  they  differ
in  its  feveral  parts.  Campania ,  for  the  mod  part,  breeds  white  and
flender  oxen  ;  nevertheless,  they  are  not  unfit  for  labour,  and  for  cul¬
tivating  their  native  foil.  Umbria  produces  fuch  as  are  huge,  and  of
a  white  colour  ;  the  fame  produces  alfo  fuch  as  are  red,  and  they  are
no  lefs  to  be  approved  for  their  temper  and  difpofition,  than  for  their
bodies.  Hetruria  and  Latium  produce  fuch  as  are  compatft,  but  drong
for  labour  :  the  Jpennine  mountains,  fuch  as  are  exceeding  hardy  and
fturdy,  and  which  endure  any  kind  of  hardfhip,  but  not  comely  nor
beautiful  to  look  upon.  Since  in  thefe  there  is  fo  great  diverfity  and
variety,  the  Plower,  in  buying  bullocks,  ought  to  obferve  fome  com¬
mon  and  certain  precepts  as  it  were  :  and  thefe  Mago  the  Carthaginian
has  tranfmitted  and  delivered  to  us,  fo  as  we  fhall  hereafter  relate
them.

Such  oxen  are  to  be  purchafed  as  are  young,  fquare,  with  huge
members,  lofty  horns,  and  fomewhat  blackifh  and  robuft,  with  a
broad  and  curled  forehead,  hairy  rough  ears,  black  eyes  and  lips,  wide
noflrils,  a  camoys  nofe,  a  long  and  brawny  neck,  large  dewlaps,  and
almod  hanging  down  to  their  knees,  a  great  bread:,  vad  fhoulders,  a
capacious  belly,  and,  as  it  were,  great  with  young,  extended  fides,
broad  loins,  a  draight  and  even  back,  or  even  fomewhat  fubfiding,
round  buttocks,  with  compadt,  well-fet,  and  draight  legs,  but  rather
fhorter  than  longer,  and  not  with  big  and  ill-fhaped  knees,  with  great
hoofs,  and  exceeding  long  bridly  tails,  and  the  hair  of  their  whole
body  thick  and  fhort  (1),  of  a  red  or  dark  colour,  and  exceeding  loft
to  the  touch..


(1)  Pilofifque,  cor  pore  denfo  brevique.  Tn  this  laft  paragraph  I  have  followed  ■the  cor¬
rection  of  Pontedera ,  the  errors  of  the  text  being  very  manifeft,  as  Gefnerus  and  others
have  obferved ,  for  oxen  with  thick  and  fhort  bodies  are  not  at  all  approved.  Varro ,
l:b.  ii.  5.  fays,  Let  thefe  cattle  be  well  made,  with  found ,  oblong a?id  large  members.  Pai~
ladius ,  lib.  iv.  1 1.  Let  oxen  have  fquare  and  huge  limbs ,  and  a  firm  and  folid  body.  And
Columella ,  in  this  very  chapter,  directs  us  to  purchafe  young  oxen  that  are  fquare,  and
have  huge  limbs.  So  that  it  is  very  probable  the  true  reading  is,  c audit  longijfimis  &  fetofr ,
filo  totius  corporis  denfo  ac  brevi.


CHAP.


Chap.  II.


Of  HUSBANDRY.


259


CHAP.  II.

Of  breaking  of  Oxen.

CALVES  of  fuch  a  character  you  mud  accudom,  while  they  are
yet  young,  to  be  handled  and  tied  to  their  mangers,  that  there
may  be  very  little  labour,  and  lefs  danger,  in  breaking  of  them.  But
I  am  of  opinion,  that  deers  ought  not  to  be  broken,  either  before  their
third,  or  after  their  fifth  year,  becaufe  that  age  is,  as  yet,  too  tender
and  young,  and  this  is  now  exceeding  diff  and  durdy.  But  it  is  pro¬
per,  that  thofe,  which  are  caught,  and  taken  wild  out  of  the  herd,
fhould  be  tamed  and  broken  in  this  manner  :

Firft  of  all,  let  a  fpacious  dable  be  prepared,  where  the  perfon,  that
breaks  them,  may  eafily  go  about  his  bufinefs,  and  from  whence  he
may  retire  without  danger.  Let  there  be  no  narrow  drait  places  before
the  dable,  but  either  a  field,  or  a  wide  open  way,  that,  when  the  bul¬
locks  are  brought  out,  they  may  have  a  free  excurfion,  that  fo,  when,
they  are  timorous  and  fkittifh,  they  may  not  intangle  themfelves  with
trees,  or  any  other  thing  lying  in  their  way,  and  receive  hurt.  Let  there
be  large  cribs  in  the  liable,  and  above  them  tranfverfe  planks,  fallened
in  the  manner  of  yokes,  feven  feet  high  from  the  ground,  to  which  the
deers  may  be  tied.  Then  make  choice  of  the  morning  of  a  day,  w’hich
is  free  from  dorms  and  religious  ceremonies,  when  you  may  begin  the
breaking  of  your  cattle,  and  bind  the  horns  of  the  bullocks  with  hempen
ropes ;  but  let  the  ropes,  wherewith  they  are  at  fird  caught,  be  wrapt
about  with  wooly  fkins,  that  their  tender  foreheads  under  their  horns
may  not  be  hurt.  Then,  after  you  have  feized  the  young  deers,  bring
them  to  the  dable,  and  tie  them  to  the  dakes,  fo  that  they  may  be  at
their  eafe,  and  have  a  little  room  to  move  in  ;  and  let  them  be  a  little
fpace  didant  from  each  other,  that,  in  druggling,  the  one  may  not
hurt  the  other.  If  they  are  too  fierce,  differ  them  to  give  vent  to  their
fury  for  one  day  and  a  night  j  and,  as  foon  as  they  have  adwaged  and
repreded  their  anger,  let  them  be  led  out  in  one’s  hand,  fo  that  there
may  be  both  fomebody  before  them,  and  feveral  behind  them,  who  may
follow  them,  and  keep  them  in  with  ropes  4  and  let  one  go  before  with
a  willow  cudgel,  and,  with  gentle  blows,  from  time  to  time  redrain
and  dop  their  fudden  fallies  and  efforts.  But,  if  the  oxen  are  gentle
and  quiet,  you  may  lead  them  forth  before  the  evening,  even  the  very
fame  day  you  tied  them  to  the  dake,  and  teach  them  to  walk  a  thoufand

L  1  2  paces


260  L.  T.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

paces  quietly  and  without  fear.  After  you  have  led  them  home,  tie
them  again  dole  to  the  flakes,  fo  that  they  may  not  be  able  to  move
their  head.  Then  afterwards  come  up  to  the  oxen,  when  they  are  tied,
neither  behind  them,  nor  fidevvays,  but  right  before  them,  gently,  and
with  a  toothing  and  fawning  voice,  that  they  may  accuftom  themfelves
to  look  to  you  when  you  come  up  to  them.  Then  rub  their  noftril?,
that  they  may  learn  to  fmell  a  man.  Afterwards  alfo  it  is  proper  to
handle  all  their  lkin,  and  to  lprinkle  it  all  over  with  pure  wine,  that
they  may  become  more  familiar  with  him  that  tends  them,  or  labours
with  them  ;  and  to  put  your  hand  alfo  under  their  belly,  and  upon  their
thighs,  that  afterwards  they  may  not  be  frightened,  when  they  are
touched  in  this  manner,  and  that  the  tikes,  which  commonly  hick  to
their  thighs,  may  be  taken  away.  Therefore,  when  the  perfon  that
breaks  them  is  doing  this,  he  ought  to  ltand  at  a  fide,  that  he  may  be
out  of  the  reach  of  their  heels.  After  thefe  things,  having  opened  their
jaws,  draw  out  their  tongue,  and  rub  their  palate  all  over  with  lalt,  and
put  down  their  throat  with  a  flice  a  pound  of  fops  dipped  in  verv  fait
melted  fat  -}  and  pour  into  their  jaws,  thro’  an  horn,  a  fextarius  of  wine
each ;  for,  by  thefe  blandifhments,  they  grow  tame  almoft  in  three
days  time,  and  receive  the  yoke  the  fourth  day,  to  which  a  bough  of
a  tree  is  tied,  and  drawn  inftead  of  the  beam  of  the  plough  ;  and  fome-
times  fomething  of  weight  is  joined  to  it,  that,  by  their  greater  effort,
their  patience  of  labour  may  be  tried.

After  experiments  of  this  fort,  they  muft  be  yoked  to  an  empty  cart,
and  gradually  led  out  to  a  greater  diflance  with  their  loads.  Being  thus
throughly  broken,  let  them  be  prefently  inftruCted  and  bred  up  to  the
plough,  but  in  manured  land,  that  they  may  not  prefently  dread  the
difficulty  of  the  work,  nor  bruife  their  necks,  that  are  but  tender  as  yet,
with  breaking  up  unplowed  land,  which  is  very  hard  and  difficult.  But
I  gave  directions  in  the  firft  book,  after  what  manner  a  Ploughman  may
train  up  an  ox  in  plowing.  You  muft  take  care,  that  the  ox,  during
the  time  you  are  breaking  him,  may  not  touch  any  perfon  either  with
his  horn,  or  his  heel ;  for,  unlefs  thefe  things  are  prevented,  he  can
never  be  freed  from  thefe  vices,  even  tho’  he  be  throughly  broken.

But  we  diredt,  that  thefe  things  be  done  thus,  in  cafe  you  have  no
veteran  cattle  at  hand  ;  for,  if  there  are  any  at  hand,  there  is  a  fafer  and
more  expeditious  way  of  breaking  them,  which  we  follow  in  our  own
lands :  for,  when  we  accuftom  a  bullock  to  the  cart,  or  the  plough,  wTe
voke  one  of  the  ftrong-eft  and  g-entleft  of  our  broken  oxen  with  one

J  O  O  ^

that  is  not  broken,  who  may  both  pull  him  back  when  he  makes  too
great  hafte,  and  lead  him  on  when  he  lingers  or  flops.  But,  if  we  do

not


Chap.  II,  Of  HUSBANDRY.  26!

not  grudge  the  being  at  the  trouble  to  make  a  yoke,  wherein  three  oxen
may  be  yoked,  we  fhall,  by  this  contrivance,  gain  our  end  fo  far,  that
even  ftubborn  headftrong  oxen  will  not  refufe  the  heavieft  loads ;  for>
where  a  flow  or  reftiff  bullock  is  yoked  in  the  middle  between  two  vete¬
ran  oxen,  and,  being  put  into  the  plough,  is  forced  to  till  the  ground;
he  is  no  more  left  at  liberty  to  refufe  and  difobey  what  is  commanded  ;
for,  whether  he  falls  into  a  fury  and  rage,  and  leaps  out  on  one  fide,  he
is  kept  in  his  place  at  the  pleafure  of  the  other  two 3  or  whether  he  ftands
ftill,  when  the  other  two  go  on,  he  alfo  obeys  3  or,  if  he  endeavours  to
lie  down,  he  is  held  up  and  drawn  along  by  the  Axonger;  by  which
means,  he  is  forced  on  every  fide  today  down  his  ftubbornnefs,  and,
with  very  few  ftrokes,  is  brought  to  endure  labour.

There  is  alfo  an  ox  of  a  fofter  kind  after  breaking,  who  lies  down  in
the  furrow.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  he  muft  be  cured,  not  by  cruelty;
but  by  reafon  3  for  they  who  judge,  that  this  vice  is  beft  removed  with
goads,  or  fire,  and  other  torments,  are  ignorant  of  true  reafon,  becaufe
their  obftinate  ftubbornnefs,  for  the  molt  part,  wearies  the  perfon  that
is  enraged  againft  them,  and  that  ufes  them  cruelly 3  for  which  reafon,
it  is  better  to  cure  an  ox,  that  lies  down,  with  hunger  and  thirft,  with¬
out  tormenting  his  body 3  for  his  natural  defires  aflfedt  him  more  vehe¬
mently  than  blows.  Therefore,  if  an  ox  has  lain  down,  the  moft  effect¬
ual  way  is  to  bind  his  feet  with  ropes,  fo  that  he  may  neither  be  able  to
Hand,  or  go  forward,  nor  to  feed:  By  doing  of  which,  being  forced
with  hunger  and  thirft,  he  lays  down  his  fluggifhnefs  3  which  neverthe-
lefs  is  very  rare  in  our  own  country  cattle.  And  every  ox,  bred  in  our
own  country,  is  better  than  one  that  is  a  ftranger ;  for  he  is  neither
tempted  by  the  change  of  water,  nor  of  fodder,  nor  of  climate,  nor
infefted  with  the  ftate  and  condition  of  the  country,  as  that  ox  is,  which
is  brought  from  even  and  champain  places  into  fuch  as  are  mountainous
and  rugged  3  or  from  mountainous  places  into  a  champain  country.
Therefore,  when  we  are  forced  to  bring  oxen  from  a  diftant  country,
we  muft  alfo  take  care,  that  they  be  taken  from  fuch  places  in  their
own  country,  as  are  like  to  thofe  into  which  they  are  brought.  We
muft  alfo  obferve,  that  one  that  is  unequal  in  bulk  of  body,  or  in  fta-
ture,  or  in  ftrength,  be  not  yoked  with  one  that  is-ftronger  ;  for  both,
thefe  things  prove  deftruftive  to  the  weaker.

The  manners,  or  temper  and  difpofition,  of  this  cattle  are  moft  ap¬
proved,  which  are  nearer  to  the  gentle  and  peaceable,  than  to  the  vio¬
lent  and  fierce,  but  not  fluggifh  and  dull 3  which  are  afraid  of  loud  blu-
ftering  words,  but,  in  confidence  of  their  ftrength,  are  not  ftartled  at
what  they  either  fee  or  hear,  nor  afraid  to  go  into  rivers,  or  pafs

bridges  3


262  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

bridges  j  which  eat  up  a  vaft  quantity  of  food,  but  are  flow  in  chewing
it  j  for  thefe  digefl  better :  and  therefore,  fuch  as  eat  at  their  leifure
and  conveniency,  prelerve  the  flrength  of  their  body  without  leannefs,
better  than  thoie  which  eat  in  a  hurry.  But  it  is  as  great  a  fault,  in
one  that  has  the  care  of  oxen,  to  make  an  ox  fat,  as  it  is  to  make  him
lean  ;  for  the  bulk  and  plight  of  body  in  labouring  cattle  ought  to  be
moderate,  and  fit  for  their  buflnefs,  robuft  in  nerves  and  mufcles,  not
fwelled  with  fat,  that  they  may  neither  be  weighed  down  and  wearied
with  the  bulk  of  their  own  hide,  nor  with  the  drudgery  of  their  work.
But,  fince  we  have  given  an  accounf  of  fuch  things  as  ought  to  be  ob-
ferved  in  buying  and  breaking  of  oxen,  let  us  now  give  directions  for
managing  and  keeping  them.


CHAP.  III.

Of  the  Care  that  is  requifite  in  beeping  of  Oxen ,  and  of  the

Food  that  is  proper  for  them.

IN  hot  weather  oxen  muft  abide  in  the  open  air,  and,  in  cold,  with-
in-doors  :  therefore,  for  their  winter  flabling,  ftubble  muft  be  pre¬
pared,  which,  being  cut  down  in  the  month  of  Augiijl ,  within  thirty
days  after  the  harveft  is  removed,  ought  to  be  put  up  in  flacks.  The
cutting  it  down  is  of  great  advantage,  both  to  the  cattle,  and  the  land.
The  corn-Aelds  are  freed  from  briars  and  thorns,  which,  being  cut  down
in  the  fummer-time,  about  the  time  that  the  Dog-ftar  rifes,  perifh  to
the  very  roots,  and,  being  laid  under  the  cattle’s  litter,  make  a  great
deal  of  dung.  When  we  have  thus  taken  care  of  thefe  things,  then  we
muft  both  make  provifion  of  all  kinds  of  fodder,  and  be  careful,  that
the  cattle  don’t  grow  lean  through  fcarcity  or  want  of  food.

But  there  is  not  one  method  only  of  feeding  oxen  rightly  ;  for,  if  the
great  plenty  of  the  country  affords  green  fodder,  nobody  doubts  but  this
kind  of  food  is  to  be  preferred  to  all  other;  which,  neverthelefs,  does
not  happen,  but  in  places  that  are  well  watered,  or  where  the  dew  falls
in  great  abundance."  Therefore,  in  thefe  very  places,  the  greateft  ad¬
vantage  and  conveniency  is,  that  one  Ploughman  is  fufficient  for  two
yoke  of  oxen,  which,  on  the  fame  day,  do  either  plow,  or  go  out  to
pafture  by  turns.  In  drier  lands,  the  oxen  muft  be  fed  at  their  cribs  ;
and  their  food  is  given  them  according  to  the  ftate  and  condition  of  the
country  >  and  nobody  doubts  but  vetches  and  chichlings,  as  alfo  mea¬
dow-


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDR  Y.  263

dow-hay  tied  up  in  bundles,  are  the  bed:  food  for  them.  We  maintain
and  fupport  our  herds  lefs  commodioufly  with  chaff  or  corn-draw,
which  every-where  are  a  fupport  to  them,  and,  in  fome  countries,  the
only  one  they  have.  Chaff  or  draw  of  millet  is  mod  approved,  then  that
of  barley,  and  next  that  of  wheat  alfo.  But,  befides  thefe,  they  give
barley  to  labouring  oxen,  which  perform  the  full  talk  of  labour.

But  fodder  is  difpenfed  to  oxen,  according  to  the  feafons  of  the  year.
In  the  month  of  January,  it  is  proper  to  give  each  of  them  four J'exta-
rii  of  bitter  vetches,  bruiied  and  foaked  in  water,  and  mixt  with  draw
or  chad* ;  or  one  modius  of  foaked  lupins  ■>  or  half  a  modius  of  foaked
chichlings;  and,  over  and  above  thefe,  draw  or  chaff  in  abundance.
We  may  alfo,  if  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  pulfe,  mix  with  their  draw  or
chaff  wafhed  and  dried  grape-dones,  that  are  taken  out  of  the  (mail
wine,  which  is  lad  made.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  it  is  better  to
give  them  thefe  with  their  hufks,  before  they  are  wafhed;  for  they  have
the  drength  both  of  food,  and  of  wine,  and  make  the  cattle  both  fleek
and  fair,  and  chearful  and  plump.  If  we  keep  them  from  grain,  a
fodder-bafket  full  of  dry  leaves  of  twenty  modii  is  fufficient,  or  thirty
pound  weight  of  hay  j  or,  if  we  do  not  with-hold  corn  from  them,  a
modius  of  green  laurel,  and  of  ever-green  oak-leaves.  .  But  to  thefe  you
add  mad,  if  the  plenty  of  the  country  will  permit  it  j  which,  unlefs  it
be  given  to  fatiety  (i),  breeds  the  fcab.  Alfo  you  may  give  them  half
a  madius  of  bruifed  beans,  if  the  great  crop  you  have  of  them  make  it
turn  to  your  advantage.

In  the  month  of  February ,  for  the  mod  part,  the  fame  kinds  of  food
fuffice.  In  the  months  of  March  and  April ,  fome  addition  ought  to  be
made  to  the  weight  of  hay,  becaufe  they  are  then  tilling  the  ground ;
but  it  will  be  enough,  if  you  give  them  forty  pound  weight  each.  Ne-
verthelefs,  from  the  thirteenth  of  the  month  o {  April,  to  the  fifteenth
of  June ,  it  is  right  to  cut  green  fodder  for  them.  Alfo,  in  colder
places,  the  fame  thing  may  be  done  to  the  fird  of  July  •  from  which
time,  to  the  fird  of  November ,  during  the  whole  dimmer,  and  after
that  in  autumn,  let  them  be  fatiated  with  leaves ;  which  neverthelefs
are  not  ufeful,  till  they  be  fully  ripened  with  fhowers,  or  continual
dews.  The  elm-tree-leaf  is  mod  approved  j  afterwards  that  of  the  afh  ;
and  next  that  of  the  poplar-tree.  Thofe  of  the  ever-green  oak,  com¬
mon  oak,  and  laurel  or  bay-tree,  are  lead  edeemed ;  but,  after  dimmer,
they  are  neceflary,  when  the  others  fail.  You  may  alfo  give  them  fig-

(x)  jjW,  n'tfi  ad  fatietatem  datur,  fcab’ein  parit.  Some  think,  that  the  true  read  ng  is,
fi  ad  fatietatem  datur ,  becaufe  afterwards  he  limits  the  quantity  of  mail  to  be  given,  mixed
with  other  fodder.  *\


tree-


264  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

tree -leaves  very  fafely,  if  you  have  plenty  of  them,  or  if  it  be  expedient
to  ftrip  the  trees.  Neverthelefs  the  ever-green  oak-leaf  is  better  than
that  of  the  common  oak,  but  of  that  kind  which  has  not  prickles;  for
cattle  refufe  and  diflike  that,  as  they  do  the  juniper-tree,  becaufe  of
their  prickles.  In  the  months  of  November  and  December ,  during  the
feed- time,  you  muff  give  the  ox  as  much  as  he  defires,  and  has  an  appe¬
tite  for.  Neverthelefs,  for  the  moft  part,  a  modius  of  maft  to  each  of
them,  and  chaff  or  flraw  given  them  till  they  be  fatiated,  is  fufficient ;
or  a  modius  of  fteeped  lupins  ;  or  feven  jextarii  of  bitter  vetches,
fprinkled  with  water,  mixt  with  chaff ;  or  twelve  Jextarii  of  chick¬
lings,  fprinkled  in  like  manner  with  water,  and  mixed  with  chaff ;  or
to  each  of  them  a  modius  of  grape-ftones,  if  to  thefe  be  added,  as  I  faid
above,  a  large  quantity  of  chaff;  or,  if  you  have  none  of  thefe,  forty
pound  weight  of  hay  by  itfelf.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  Difeafes  of  Oxen ,  and  of  their  Remedies .

BUT  it  will  be  of  no  advantage,  that  cattle  have  food  to  the  full,
unlefs  they  be  affifled  with  all  diligence,  that  they  may  be  of  a
wholfome  body,  and  preferve  their  ftrength ;  both  which  are  main¬
tained,  by  giving  them,  for  three  days,  a  large  dofe  of  a  medicine,  which
is  compounded  of  an  equal  weight  of  bruifed  lupins,  and  of  cyprefs-
tree,  and  with  water  kept  for  one  night  in  the  open  air ;  and  this  ought
to  be  done  four  times  in  the  year,  about  the  latter  end  of  the  fpring,
fummer,  autumn,  and  winter.  Oft-times  alfo  feeblenefs,  and  want  of
fpirits,  and  naufeating,  are  removed,  if  you  put  an  hen’s  egg  raw,
without  breaking  it,  into  their  chops  faffing;  and,  the  day  after,  bruife
cloves  of  Cyprian  or  common  garlick  (1)  with  wine,  and  fo  pour  it  into
their  noftrils :  neither  do  thefe  remedies  only  make  them  healthful.

Many  alfo  mix  a  large  quantity  of  fait  with  their  fodder  ;  fome  have
given  them  horehound  with  oil  and  wine ;  fome  infufe  fibres  of  leeks ;
others  grains  of  frankincenfe  ;  others  the  herb  favine,  and  rue,  in  pure
wine  ;  and  give  them  thefe  medicines  to  drink.  Many  cure  their  oxen

(1)  Spicas  ulpici.  Both  Pliny  and  our  author  fay,  that -this  ulpicum  is  called  Cyprian
garlick.  Pliny  fays  the  Greeks  alfo  called  it  antifeorodon ;  but  Co  'luviella  fays  they  called  it
^ phroj'corodon .  Sec  Hb.  ix.  c.  3.  for  a  further  delcription  of  it.


■with


Chap.  V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  265

with  dalks  of  the  white  vine  (2),  and  hufks  of  the  bitter  vetch.  Some
bruife  the  fkin  of  a  ferpent,  and  mix  it  with  wine.  Mother  of  thyme,
bruifed  with  fweet  wine,  is  alfo  a  remedy  for  them  ;  and  fquills  cut
fmall,  and  deeped  in  water.  All  which  forefaid  potions  given  them  for
three  days,  three  hemince  every  day,  purge  their  belly,  and,  after  remov¬
ing  their  didempers,  repair  their  drength.  Neverthelefs  the  lees  of  oil
are  reckoned  the  moll  falutary,  if  you  mix  an  equal  quantity  of  water
with  them,  and  accudom  the  cattle  to  them  by  degrees ;  but  they  can¬
not  be  given  them  immediately  j  but  firft  their  food  is  fprinkled  with
them,  then  a  fmall  quantity  of  them  is  mixed  with  their  water,  and,
foon  afterwards,  you  mix  an  equal  quantity  of  both,  and  give  them  as
much  as  they  are  able  to  drink.


CHAP.  V.

Of  fuch  Things  as  bring  the  Plague  upon  Cattle ,  and  what

Remedies  are  to  be  applied .

BUT  it  is  of  no  advantage  at  any  time,  but  lead:  of  all  in  fummer,
to  roufe  the  oxen  fo  as  to  make  them  run ;  for  this  either  gives
them  a  loofenefs,  or  raifes  a  fever.  You  mud:  alfo  beware,  that  neither
a  fow  nor  a  hen  creep  into  their  cribs  j  for  that  which  falls  from  them,
being  mixed  with  their  fodder,  is  certain  death  to  oxen ;  and  that  efpe-
cially,  which  a  lick  fow  throws  up  and  vomits,  is  enough  to  raife  the
plague  :  and,  when  this  lights  upon  an  herd,  you  mud:  prefently  change
the  climate,  and,  having  didributed  the  cattle  into  feveral  divifions,  you
mud  go  with  them  into  regions  that  lie  at  a  great  didance ;  and  the
difeafed  mud  be  fo  feparated  from  the  founds  that  not  fo  much  as  one
may  come  among  them,  which  may,  with  the  contagion,  infeed  the
red.  Therefore,  when  they  are  removed  to  a  great  didance,  they  mud
be  brought  into  thofe  places  wherein  no  other  cattle  are  fed,  led,  by
their  coming,  they  bring  the  plague  alfo  among  them.

But  difeafes,  altho’  pedilential,  mud  be  conquered  and  repelled  by
exquidte  remedies.  Then  the  roots  of  allheal  and  eringo  mud  be  mixed
with  fennel-feeds ,  and  fprinkled  with  mud  boiled  into  a  third  of  the

(2)  Vttis  alba.  Pliny  fays,  that  this  plant  is  by  fome  called  •white  bryony.  The  Greeks
call  it  by  many  other  names,  as  he  tells  us,  lib.  xxiii.  cap.  i.  It  fhoots  forth  with  many
fprays,  with  long  joints  and  knots,  and  jagged  leaves  and  tendrils,  like  a  vine ;  of  which
the  forefaid  author  gives  a  diftindt  account  in  the  fore-mentioned  place.

Mm


fird


266  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VE

firft  quantity,  and  with  wheat-flour  and  boiling  water  j  and  with  this
medicine  the  Tick  cattle  mud  be  drenched.  -  Then  you  make  a  potion
with  an  equal  quantity  of  caflia,  myrrh,  and  frankincenfe,  and  a  like
quantity  of  the  blood  of  a  fea-tortoife,  with  three  fextarii  of  old  wine,
and  fo  pour  it  into  their  noftrils.  But  it  will  be  fufflcient,  if  you  give
the  medicine  itfelf  divided  into  equal  dofes  of  one  ounce  and  an  half,
with  wine,  for  three  days.

We  have  alfo  known,  that  a  fmail  root,  which  Herdfmen  call  con-
JMgo  (lungwort)  (i),  has  been  a  prefent  remedy.  It  grows  in  great
plenty  in  the  Marjian  mountains,  and  is  exceeding  wholfome  for  all
kinds  of  cattle.  They  dig  it  up  with  the  left-hand  before  the  riling  of
the  fun  ;  for  they  believe  it  has  greater  virtue,  when  it  is  fo  gathered.
The  account  they  give  of  the  way  of  ufing  it  is  this :  They  draw  a  round
line  with  a  brafen  awl  upon  the  broadeft  part  of  the  ear,  fo  that,  when
the  blood  iffues  out  of  it,  there  may  appear  a  fmail  circle  drawn  like
the  letter  O.  When  this  is  done,  both  in  the  infide  and  on  the  upper
part  of  the  ear,  they  pierce  through  with  the  fame  awl  the  middle
part  of  the  fmail  circle  which  they  have  defcribed,  and  infert  the  fore-
faid  fmail  root  into  the  hole  they  have  made ;  which  when  the  frefti
wound  has  taken  hold  of,  it  holds  it  fo,  that  it  cannot  flip  out.  Then
all  the  ftrength  of  the  difeafe,  and  the  peftilential  poifon,  is  drawn  out
into  that  ear,  till  that  part,  round  which  the  line  was  defcribed  with
the  awl,  mortifies  and  falls  out  5  and,  by  the  lofs  of  that  very  fmail  part,
the  head  is  preferved.  Cornelius  Celfus  alfo  orders  us  to  pour  into  them
through  their  noftrils  the  leaves  of  miflelto  bruifed  with  wine.  Thefe
things  muft  be  done,  if  all  the  cattle  in  general  are  ftck.  and  thofe  more¬
over,  if  any  one  in  particular  is  out  of  order.

(1.)  Confrfigo.  The  antienc  ruftics  called  this  herb  by  this  name,  becaufe  they  found
it  frequently  growing  among  a  fort  of  wheat  they  called  Jiligo.  Vegettus  fays,  that  it  was
called  pu  mo7ia.ria.-i  lungwort,  becaufe  it  was  a  fpeedy  relief  to  difeafes  of  the  lungs  in
cattle.  Fa  her  Hardeuin  fays,  that  in  France  it  is  commonly  called  pomelee ,  which  feems
to  be  a  corruption  of  pubnonaria  ;  and  that  Tome  herbalifts  call  it  pata  leovis.  See  Kuel/ius,
lib  ii  p.  488.  The  Marian  mountains,  where  it  was  firir  found,  are  in  that  part  of  Italy,
which  is  now  called  JDucato  de  Marji ,  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  and  bordering  upon  the
Pope's  territories.


CHAP;


Chap.  VL  Of  HUSBANDRY.


267


CHAP.  VI.


Of  Remedies  to  be  applied  to  Oxen ,  that  are  difordered  with


THE  figns  of  crudity  are  frequent  belchings,  and  rumbling  noife
in  their  belly,  naufeating  of  their  food,  contraction  or  (liflnefs
of  their  nerves,  dull  heavy  eyes ;  becaufe  of  which  the  ox  neither  chews
his  cud,  nor  licks  or  wipes  himfelf  with  his  tongue.  Two  congii  of  warm
water,  and,  prefently  after,  thirty  (talks  of  colewort,  moderately  boiled
and  dipped  in  vinegar,  and  given  them,  will  cure  them ;  but  they  muft,
for  one  day,  abftain  from  other  food.

Some  keep  the  cattle  (hut  up  in  the  houfe,  that  they  may  not  feed.
Then  they  mix  four  pound  weight  of  the  tops  of  the  maftic,  and  of  the
wild  olive-tree,  and  a  pound  of  honey,  bruifed  together,  with  a  con -
gius  of  water,  which  they  keep  for  one  night  in  the  open  air,  and  fo
pour  it  into  their  chops.  Then,  after  the  (pace  of  one  hour,  they  lay
before  them  four  pounds  of  bitter  vetches  deeped  in  water,  and  keep
them  from  all  other  drink.  This  ought  to  be  done  for  the  fpace  of  three
days,  till  all  the  caufe  of  their  languor  be  difcufled  ;  for,  if  the  crudity
be  negleCted,  both  an  inflation  of  their  belly,  and  a  greater  pain  in  their
bowels,  follow  upon  it,  which  neither  fuffers  them  to  take  their  food,
nor  to  (land  in  their  place ;  but  draws  groans  from  them,  and  forces
them  to  lie  down  frequently,  and  tofs  their  heads,  and  move  their  tails,
oftener  than  ufual.  A  fure  remedy  for  this  is  to  bind  exceeding  fad
with  a  cord  that  part  of  their  tail,  which  is  next  to  their  buttocks,  and
to  pour  a  fextarius  of  wine,  with  an  hemina  of  oil,  down  their  throat,
and  fo  to  drive  them  for  fifteen  hundred  paces  as  fad  as  they  can  go.

If  the  pain  dill  continues,  you  mud  cut  their  hoofs  all  round  ;  and,
having  anointed  your  hand,  put  it  into  their  anus,  and  pull  out  the
dung,  and  then  drive  them  again,  fo  as  to  make  them  run ;  or,  if
this  thing  has  had  no  good  effeCt,  they  bruife  dry  wild  figs,  and  give
them  with  three-fourths  of  a  fextarius  of  warm  water.  When  neither
this  medicine  has  fucceeded,  they  choofe  two  pounds  of  wild  myrtle-
tree-leaves,  and  mix  them  with  as  many  fextarii  of  warm  water,  and
pour  it  into  their  chops  with  a  wooden  ladle,  and  fo  they  let  them
blood  under  the  tail,  and,  when  they  have  bled  enough,  they  (lop  the
blood  with  a  ru(h-binding.  Then  they  drive  the  cattle  again  very  hard,
till  they  be  out  of  breath.  There  are  alfo  thofe  following  remedies


Mm2


before


268  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VI.

before  letting  of  blood  :  They  mix  three  ounces  of  garlick,  bruifed
in  a  mortar,  with  three  hemince  of  wine;  and,  after  they  give  them  this
potion,  they  force  them  to  run:  or  they  bruife  two  ounces  of  fait  with
ten  onions,  and,  having  mixed  well-boiled  honey  with  them,  they  make
them  into  fuppofitories,  and  adminifter  them,  and  then  they  drive  the
ox  full  fpeed.


CHAP.  vir.

With  what  Remedy  the  Pain  of  the  Belly ,  and  of  the  Inte-
flines  of  Cattle ,  may  be  quieted ’

rT^HE  pain,  both  of  the  belly  and  the  inteftines,  is  affwaged  with
the  fight  of  fwimming  fowls,  efpecially  of  a  duck,  which,  if  an
ox,  which  has  a  pain  in  any  of  his  inteftines,  looks  upon,  he  is  quickly
freed  from  the  torment.  The  fame  duck  more  effectually  cures  mules
and  the  horfe  kind  with  her  afpecft :  but  fometimes  no  remedy  is  of
any  benefit.  Now  follows  the  diftemper  of  the  gripings  or  wringing  of
the  guts,  of  which  a  bloody  and  mucous  loofenefs  is  the  fign.  The
remedies  are  fifteen  cyprefs-cones,  and  as  many  galls,  and  of  the  weight
of  both  thefe  a  quantity  of  very  old  cheefe,  which  being  bruifed  into
one  mafs,  they  mix  four  fextarii  of  rough  wine  with  them,  and  dif-
penfe  the  fame  to  them  in  equal  quantities  for  four  days ;  nor  let  the
green  tops  of  the  maftich,  myrtle,  and  wild  olive-trees,  be.  wanting.  A
loofenefs  waftes  their  body,  and  their  ftrength,  and  makes  them  unfit
for  labour.  When  thefe  things  happen,  the  ox  muff  be  reftrained  from
drinking  for  three  days ;  and  the  firft  day  he  muft  be  kept  from  food  t
but,  prefently  after,  you  muff  give  him  the  tops  of  the  wild  olive-tree,
and  the  reed,alfo  maftich,  and  myrtle-berries.  Nor  muft  he  have  liberty
to  drink  water  but  exceeding  fparingly.

There  are  fome  who  give  them  a  pound  of  the  ftalks  or  fhoots  of  a
tender  young  laurel  or  bay-tree,  with  an  equal  quantity  of  fteeped
fouthernwood,  with  two  fextarii  of  warm  water,  and  fo  pour  it  down
their  throat;  and  throw  the  fame  fodder  before  them  as  we  mentioned
above.  Some  toaft  two  pounds  of  grape-ftones,  and  fo  bruife  them,
and,  with  as  many  fextarii  of  rough  wine,  give  them  as  a  medicine  to
drink,  and  keep  them  from  all  other  moifture  whatfoever ;  and  they
alfo  threw  the  tops  of  the  forefaid  trees  before  them.  But,  if  neither
the  violent  loofenefs  ftops,  nor  the  pain  of  the  belly  and  inteftines  abates  5


Chap.  IX.  (^HUSBANDRY.  269

and  if  he  refufes  his  meat,  and  if  his  head  is  fo  weighty,  that  he  can¬
not  bear  it  up,  and  tears  flow  from  his  eyes,  and  rheum  from  his
noftrils,  oftener  than  ufual,  let  the  middle  of  his  forehead  be  burnt  to
the  bones,  and  his  ears  cut  with  a  knife.  But  it  is  proper  to  rub  with
ox’s  urine  the  wounds  that  are  made  with  fire,  while  they  are  healings
but  thofe  that  are  cut  with  a  knife,  are  better  cured  with  pitch  and  oil.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  a  diftempered  Growth  or  Swelling  of  the  ‘Tongue .

Diftempered  growings  or  fwelling8  of  the  tongue,  which  the  Far¬
riers  call  frogs ,  ufe  alfo  to  occafion  loathings  of  their  food.  They
cut  thefe  off  with  a  knife^  and  rub  the  wounds  with  fait  and  garlic
bruifed  together,  till  the  rheum  is  provoked,  and  runs  out  of  their
mouth.  Then  they  wafh  their  mouth  throughly  with  wine,  and,  after
the  fpace  of  one  hour,  they  give  them  green  herbs  and  leaves,  till  the
wounds  that  are  made  heal  up,  and  form  a  fear.  If  the  ox  has  neither
fwellings  or  pufhes  in  his  tongue,  nor  a  violent  loofenefs,  and,  notwith-
ftanding,  has  no  appetite  for  his  meat,  it  will  be  of  benefit  to  pour  into
him,  through  his  noftrils,  garlic  and  oil  beaten  together  in  a  mortar,  or
to  rub  his  chops  with  fait  or  favory  ;  or  to  anoint  the  fame  part  with
bruifed  garlic  and  a  pilchard.  But  thefe  things  are  proper,  if  he  only
have  a  loathing.


CHAP.  IX.

Of  the  Fever  of  Oxen .

IT  is  proper,  that  an  ox,  that  has  a  fever,  fhould  be  kept  from  food
for  one  day,  and  then  the  next  day  be  let  a  little  blood  under  the
tail,  when  he  is  failing  j  and  that,  after  the  fpace  of  one  hour,  thirty
ftalks  of  colewort  or  cabbage  of  a  moderate  bignefs,  dipped  in  oil.,
and  pickle  made  of  fait  fifh,  be  put  down  his  throat  in  the  manner
of  a  drench  j  and  that  this  food  be  given  him  five  days  failing  ;  more¬
over,  that  the  tops  of  the  maftich,  or  of  the  olive-tree,  or  the  tendered:
leaves  of  any  fort,  or  the  young  leaves  and  ftioots  of  vines,  be  thrown

before


270  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI-

before  him  ;  as  alfo,  that  his  lips  be  wiped  with  a  fponge  j  and  that  cold
water  be  given  him  three  times  a  day  to  drink  :  which  phyfic  01  ght  to
be  given  him  in  the  houfe,  and  the  ox  not  to  be  let  out,  before  he  reco¬
vers  his  health.  The  figns  that  he  is  in  a  fever  are,  dropping  tears,  a
great  heavinefs,  and  hanging  down  of  his  head,  comprefled  eyes,
the  faliva  flowing  from  his  mouth,  drawing  his  breath  more  flowly
than  ordinary,  and  with  a  certain  impediment,  and  fometimes  with
a  groan.


CHAP.  X.

Of  the  Cough  of  Oxen.

AFrefli  cough  is  bell  difcufled  with  a  drench  of  barley-meal.  Some¬
times  grafs  cut  fmall,  and  bruifed  beans  mixed  with  it,  are  more
effectual.  Alfo  they  mix  two  fextarii  of  lentils,  taken  out  of  their  hulls,
and  ground  very  fmall,  with  warm  water  j  and,  having  made  a  potion
therewith,  pour  it  into  them  through  an  horn.  Two  pounds  of  hyflop,
macerated,  or  fteeped  in  three  fextarii  of  water,  cure  an  old  cough;
for  this  medicine  is  bruifed,  and  given,  with  four  fextarii  of  lentils
ground  fmall,  as  I  faid,  in  the  manner  of  a  drench  ;  and  then  the  hyf-
fop-water  is  poured  into  them  through  an  horn.  Alfo  the  juice  of  a
leek  with  oil,  or  the  fibres  themfelves  bruifed  with  barley -meal,  is  a
remedy  for  it.  The  roots  of  the  fame  carefully  walhed,  and  beaten  in
a  mortar,  with  wheat-meal  without  bran,  and  given  him  falling,
remove  the  oldell  cough.  The  bitter  vetch,  without  hulks,  ground
with  toalled  barley,  in  equal  quantity,  and  put  down  their  chops,  in
the  manner  of  a  drench,  has  the  fame  effedt.


CHAP.  XI.

Of  Remedies  for  an  Impofiume .

IT  is  better  to  open  an  impollume  with  a  lancet,  than  with  a  medi¬
cine  ;  and  when  the  f?ius  itfelf,  which  contained  it,  is  emptied,  you
walh  it  with  an  ox’s  wrarm  urine,  and  bind  it  up  with  linaments  foaked
in  liquid  pitch  and  oil ;  or,  if  that  part  cannot  be  bound  up,  you  mull


Chap.  XII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  271

drop  ox’s  or  goat’s  tallow  into  it  from  a  burning-hot  plate  of  metal.
Some,  after  they  have  burnt  the  part  affected,  wafh  it  with  ftale  urine ;
and  fo  anoint  it  with  liquid  pitch,  and  old  hogs-lard,  or  axle-tree
greafe,  melted  together  in  equal  quantities.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  the  Remedy  to  he  applied  to  an  Ox  that  is  lame.

|  '’HE  blood  falling  down  to  the  feet  occafions  lamenefs.  Whens
:•!  this  happens,  you  mud:  prefently  examine  the  hoof,  and  by
touching  it  you  know  its  burning  heat  :  nor  does  the  ox  fuffer  the
affe&ed  part  to  be  vehemently  preffed.  But,  if  the  blood  be  as  yet  in
the  legs  above  the  hoofs,  you  may  difcufs  it  by  frequent  fri&ion  ;  or,
when  this  has  been  of  no  benefit,  it  is  removed  by  fcarification.  But,
if  it  is  already  in  the  hoofs,  you  muft  open  it  gently  with  a  knife  be¬
tween  the  two  hoofs.  Afterwards  you  apply  linaments  foaked  in  fait
and  vinegar,  and  then  put  a  (hoe  of  Spanijh  broom  on  his  foot  ;  and:
you  muft  take  great  care,  that  he  do  not  put  his  foot  in  water,  and
that  he  be  kept  in  a  dry  (liable.

This  fame  blood,  unlefs  it  be  let  outr  will  breed  putrified  matter;,
and,  if  it  turns  to  a  fuppuration,  it  will  be  long  before  it  be  throughly
cured  :  and  it  is  brought  to  a  perfect  cure,  firft  by  cutting  it  round
with  a  knife,  and  cleanfingit  throughly,  and  then  by  thrufting  tentsin  to
it  wet  with  vinegar,  fait,  and  oil,  and  afterwards  with  dale  hogs-lard,
or  axle-tree  greafe,  and  goats-tallow,  boiled  together  in  equal  quantity.
If  the  blood  is  in  the  lower  part  of  the  hoof,  you  muft  cut  the  ex¬
treme  part  of  the  hoof  itfelf  to  the  quick,  and  fo  let  it  out ;  and  after
you  have  wrapt  up  the  foot  with  linaments,  fecure  it  with  Spanijh
broom  from  receiving  any  hurt.  It  is  not  proper  to  open  the  middle
of  the  hoof  on  the  lower  part,  unlefs  the  fuppuration  is  already  begun
in  that  place.  If  he  halts,  and  is  lame  from  a  pain  in  his  nerves  and
finews,  his  knees,  hams,  and  legs,  muft  be  rubbed  with  oil  and  fait,
till  he  be  cured.  If  his  knees  be  fwelled,  they  muft  be  fomented
with  warm  vinegar  ;  and  you  muft  put  linfeed,  or  bruifed  millet,
fprinkled  with  honey-water,  upon  them.  And  it  is  right  alfo  to  dip
fponges  in  boiling  water,  and  then  fqueeze  the  water  out  of  them,  and
anoint  them  with  honey,  and  apply  them  to  his  knees,  and  furround
them  with  bandages.

But,.


272  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

But,  if  there  is  fome  humour  under  the  fwelling,  you  muft  put  lea¬
ven,  or  barley-meal  boiled  in  raifin-vvine  or  honey- water,  upon  it  :
and,  when  the  fuppuration  is  ripe,  you  muff  open  it  with  a  lancet  j  and,
after  you  have  let  it  out,  you  cure  it  with  linaments,  as  I  taught  you
before.  The  root  of  the  lily,  or  a  fquill  with  fait,  or  the  blood-
herb,  which  the  Greeks  call  Polygonon  (i),  or  horehound,  may  (as
Cornelius  Celfus  directs)  cure  fores  which  have  been  laid  open  with  the
lancet.  But  almoft  every  pain  of  the  body,  if  it  be  without  a  wound,
is  better  difcuffed,  when  it  is  frefh,  with  fomentations  ;  but  an  old
pain  is  belt  removed  with  burning,  and  dropping  burnt  butter,  or  the
fat  of  goats,  upon  it.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  the  Remedies  for  curing  the  Scab,  and  the  Bite  of  a  mad
5 Dog  or  a  Wolf,  and  alfo  for  curing  Hidebinding.

THE  fcab  is  diminifhed  with  rubbing  it  hard  with  bruifed  garlic  j
the  bite  of  a  mad  dog  is  cured  with  the  fame  remedy,  the
which  neverthelefs  is  equally  well  cured,  by  putting  a  piece  of  old
falted  flefh  or  fifh  upon  the  wound.  And  there  is  another  more  fpeedy
and  effectual  medicine  for  the  fcab.  Wild  marjoram  and  fulphur  are
bruifed  together,  and  boiled  in  lees  of  oil  mixed  with  oil,  water,  and
vinegar  :  then,  when  they  are  lukewarm,  bruifed  fciffile  alum  (f)  is
fprinkled  upon  them.  This  medicine,  if  they  be  anointed  with  it  in
die  burning  heat  of  the  fun,  will  be  of  exceeding  great  benefit.

Bruifed  galls  are  a  remedy  for  ulcers.  The  juice  of  horehound  with
foot  is  not  lefs  effectual.  There  is  a  plague  that  is  troublefome  to
ox-cattle  j  ruftics  call  it  Hidebinding  when  the  fkin  flicks  fo  clofe  to
their  back,  that,  when  they  ttake  hold  of  it  with  their  hands,  they  can-

(i)  Polygonon.  Flin.Hifl.  Nat.  lib.  xxvii.  cap.  12.  fays,  that  this  herb  has  leaves  like  rue,
and  feed  like  grafs,  and  that  it  has  its  name  from  the  multitude  of  its  feeds  :  it  is  alfo
called  Proferpinaca.  Father  Hardouin  fays,  that  the  Trench  call  it  Renouee,  from  its  fre¬
quent  knots  and  joints.

(i)  Alumen  fcijfum ,  or  fciflUe,  as  Cornelius  Celfus  calls  it  :  the  Greeks  call  it  fchiflon.
It  is  a  kind  of  alum,  as  Diofcorides  fays,  which  is  not  clofely  compacted  and  condenfed
into  a  mafs,  nor  appears  in  folid  pieces  and  chips,  but  which  opens  and  divides  itfelf,  and
feparates  into  certain  hoary  capillaments,  from  which  fome  call  it  trichitin ,  or  capillary
alum.  Plin.  Nat.  Hifl.  lib.  xxxv.  cap.  1 6.  fays,  that  it  is  made  of  the  flone  they  call  chalcitis ,
copper-ftone,  which  was  firft  found  in  Cyprus  :  he  fays,  it  is  the  fweat  of  that  flone  coa¬
gulated  into  a  froth.  1  fee  fome  call  it  flaky  alum.

5


not


Chap.  XIV.  Of  H  U  6  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  273

not  remove  it  from  their  ribs.  This  thing  happens  by  no  other  means,
but  either  by  the  ox’s  being  reduced  to  a  lean  habit  of  body  by  fomc
kind  of  languor  or  other ;  or  by  his  growing  cold  after  he  has  been  in
a  fweat  in  doing  his  work  ;  or  by  his  being  wet  with  rain,  when  under
his  load.  And,  becaufe  thefe  things  are  pernicious,  you  muft  take  care,
that  when  the  oxen  return  from  their  work,  they  be  Iprinkled  with
wine,  while  they  are  yet  all  in  a  heat,  and  breathe  Ihort,  and  that
lumps  of  fat  be  put  into  their  chops.  But  if  the  forefaid  difeafe  cleaves
to  them,  it  will  be  of  benefit  to  boil  laurel  throughly,  and,  while  it  is
warm  to  foment  their  backs  with  it,  and  prefently  to.  rub  them  with
much  oil  and  wine  j  and  that  is  belt  done  in  the  open  air,  when  the
fun  is  very  hot.  Some  mix  a  math  of  fqueezed  or  prefled  olives  with
wine  and  fat,  and  ufe  this  medicine  after  the  forefaid  fomentations.

1  »  1  "  'j  11  1  IL‘"  1  ■  1  "

CHAP.  XIV.

Of  Remedies  for  ulcerated  Lungs ,  and  Swelling  of  the

Palate  and  Neck.

There  is  alfo  that  grievous  and  deftru&ive  diftemper,  when  their
lungs  are  ulcerated  ;  hence  a  cough,  and  leannefs,  and  at  laft  a
confumption  attacks  them  :  and  that  thefe  things  may  not  be  the  oc-
cafion  of  their  death,  you  muft  bore  a  hole  in  their  ear,  and  infert
the  root  of  lungwort  into  it,  -as  we  taught  above  j  alfo  you  muft  mix
about  an  hemina  of  the  juice  of  leeks  with  the  like  quantity  of  oil,  and
give  it  them  to  drink  with  a  fextarius  of  wine  for  feveral  days.

Sometimes  alfo  the  ox,  by  reafon  of  a  fwelling  of  his  palate,  refufes
his  food,  groans  frequently,  and  makes  fuch  an  appearance,  that  he  feems
to  hang  towards  one  fide.  It  is  necefiary  to  lance  his  palate,  that
the  blood  may  flow  out  abundantly,  and  to  give  him  bitter  vetches
foaked  in  water,  without  their  hulks  and  green  leaves,  or  forae  other
foft  fodder,  till  he  be  cured.

If  his  neck  be  bruifed  in  doing  his  work,  letting  him  blood  in  the
ear  is  the  moft  fpeedy  and  effectual  remedy  j  or  if  this  is  not  done,  an
herb,  which  they  call  avia( i),  bruifed  with  fait,  and  put  upon  it.  If

(1)  Avip.  This  herb  is  not  defcribed  by  any  author  I  have  feen.  It  is  very  probable,
this  is  not  the  right  name.  There  are  feveral  emendations  offered  by  critics ;  but  their  con¬
jectures  are  fo  ill  fupported,  that  it  is  better  to  leave  it  in  uncertainty,  than  trouble  the
reader  with  them.

N  n  his


274  L  j;  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VI.

his  neck  be  moved  from  its  ufual  pofture,  and  hangs  down,  we  muft
confider  towards  which  fide  it  declines,  and  let  him  blood  in  the  oppo-
fite  car.  Moreover,  we  muft  firft  beat  that  vein  in  the  ear,  which
appears  the  largeft,  with  the  fpray  of  a  vine.  Then,  after  it  is  fwelled
with  the  lafhes,  you  muft  open  it  with  a  lancet ;  and,  the  day  after,  let
him  blood  again  in  the  fame  place  ;  and  let  him  reft  from  labour  for
two  days  :  then  the  third  day  you  exad  fome  eafy  labour  of  him,,  and
by  degrees  bring  him  to  perform  his  ordinary  talk.

But  if  his  neck  declines  to  neither  fide,  and  is  fwelled  in  the  middle*
you  muft  let  him  blood  in  both  ears  ;  and,  if  blood  be  not  let  within
two  days  after  the  ox  has  received  the  hurt,  his  neck  fwells,  and  the
nerves  are  ftretched ;  and  hence  arifes  an  hardnefs  which  cannot  en¬
dure  the  yoke.  We  have  found  for  fuch  an  ailment  a  molt  excellent
medicine  compounded  of  liquid  pitch,  ox’s  marrow,  and  goat’s  tallow,
and  old  oil,  in  equal  quantities,  and  boiled  together.  You  muft  ufe
this  compofition  thus.  When  the  ox  is  loofed  from  his  work,  you
muft  wet  the  fwelling  of  his  neck  with  the  water  of  that  pond  out  of
which  he  drinks,  and  then  dry  it,  and  rub  it,  and  anoint  it  with  the
forelaid  medicine.  If  he  refufes  the  yoke  intirely,  becaufe  of  the  fwell¬
ing  of  his  neck,  you  muft  give  him  reft  from  his  labour  for  a  few  days.
Then  his  neck  muft  be  rubbed  with  cold  water,  and  anointed  with  the
lcum  of  filver.  Cel  fits ,  indeed,  orders  the  herb  called  avia  to  be
bruifed,  as  I  faid  before,  and  put  upon  his  fwelled  neck.  There  is
lels  trouble  in  fmall  boils,  which  commonly  infeft  his  neck  :  for  it  is
eafy  to  drop  oil  out  of  a  lamp  into  them  when  he  is  at  work.  Never-
thelefs,  ’tis  a  better  way  to  take  care,  that  they  may  not  breed  there,
and  that  their  necks  may  not  grow  bald,  which  otherwife  do  not  lofe
their  hair,  and  become  bare,  but  when  their  neck  is  either  wet  with
fweat  or  rain,  while  they  are  at  their  work.  Therefore,  when  this
happens,  you  muft  rub  one  old  brick  againft  another,  and,  with  the
fmall  duft  that  falls  from  them,  fprinkle  their  necks  before  they  are
unyoked  :  then,  after  this  brick-duft  dries  upon  the  part,  moiften  it
with  oil  from  time  to  time.


CHAP.


Ghap.XVL  Of  HUSBANDRY.


275


CHAP.  XV.

Of  curing  their  Paftenis  or  Hoofs  when  they  are  hurt.

IF  (i)  the  fock  has  hurt  his  pattern  or  hoof,  burn  upon  the  wound,
with  a  red-hot  iron,  hard  pitch  and  hogs-lard,  or  axle-tree  greale,
wrapped  up  with  fulphur,  and  new-fhorn  greafy  wool  ;  which  fame
remedy  has  a  very  good  effe<tt,  after  you  have  taken  a  flick  or  root  out
of  the  ox's  foot,  if  by  chance  he  has  trodden  upon  a  fprig  or  fpray,
or  pierced  his  hoof  through  with  a  (harp  tile,  potfherd,  or  ftone
which,  neverthelefs,  if  it  be  wounded  to  a  greater  depth,  mutt  be  cut
all  round  with  a  knife,  to  a  confiderable  breadth,  and  fo  have  thefe
materials  burnt  upon  it,  as  I  directed  above  :  then  by  putting  a  fhoa
of  Spanijh  broom  upon  his  foot,  and  fprinkling  vinegar  upon  it  for
three  days,  it  will  be  healed.  Alfo,  if  the  fock  has  wounded  his  leg,
you  mutt  fput  the  fea-lettice,  which  the  Greeks  call  TtSa^taAos,  mixed
with  fait,  upon  it.

When  his  feet  are  worn  and  bruifed  underneath*,  they  mutt:  be-
throughly  wafhed  with  ox’s  urine  warmed ;  then  you  mutt  fet  fire  to  a?
-bundle  of  fprays,  and,  when  the  fire  falls  to  embers,  you  mutt  fore©
him  to  ftand  upon  the  hot  afhes,  and  anoint  his  hoofs  with  liquid  pitch
mixed  with  oil,  or  axle-tree  greafe.  Neverthelefs,  oxen  will  be  lefs
liable  to  be  lame,  if  their  feet  are  wafhed  with  plenty  of  cold  water,
when  they  are  unyoked  from  their  work,  and  afterwards  their  patterns,
coronets,  and  alfo  the  cleft  itfelf,  which  divides  the  hoof  of  the  ox*
be  rubbed  with  old  hogs-dard,  or  axle-tree  greafe.


CHAP.  XVI.

Of  Remedies  for  their  fprained  Shoulder s,  and  broken  Horns .

Sometimes  alfo  the  ox  fprains  hisihoulders,  either  with  the  weight
of  his  load  in  a  long  rugged  way,  or  when  in  tilling  he  ftruggles
with  very  hard  ground,  or  with  the  root  of  a  tree  that  he  meets  with

(i)  The  firft  fentence  of  this  chapter  feems  to  want  fome  words  ;  bat  the  meaning  is
obvious,  and  the  words  that  are  wanting  may  very  well  be  fupplitd  from  Vegetius,  who
frequently  copies  Columellas  own  words,  lib.  iii.  4.

Nn  2


id


276  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VI.

in  his  way.  When  this  happens,  you  muft  let  him  blood  in  his  fore¬
legs  ;  if  he  has  hurt  his  right  fhoulder,  he  muft  be  bled  in  the  left  leg  ;
if  his  left,  you  muft  bleed  him  in  the  right  leg.  If  he  has  hurt  both
his  fhoulders  to  a  greater  degree,  you  muft  alfo  open  the  veins  of  his
hinder  legs.

Wh?n  his  horns  are  broken,  you  muft  put  linen  clouts  upon  them,
l'oaked  in  fait,  vinegar,  and  oil;  and,  having  bound  them  up,  pour  the
fame  upon  them  for  the  fpace  of  three  days.  Then  the  fourth  day  you
muft  put  axle-tree  greafe  with  liquid  pitch  in  equal  quantity,  and  pine-
tree  bark  fmoothed,  upon  them;  and  laft  of  all,  when  they  have  be¬
gun  to  form  a  fear,  you  muft  rub  them  with  foot.

Ulcers  alfo,  when  neglecfted,  ufe  to  fwarm  with  worms  ;  which,
if  in  the  morning  they  are  fprinkled  with  cold  water,  fhrink  and  grow
ftift  with  the  cold,  and  fall  out  of  them.  Or,  if  they  cannot  be
taken  out  by  this  method,  you  muft  bruife  horehound,  or  leeks,  and
mix  fait  with  them,  and  put  them  upon  the  ulcers.  This  very  quickly
kills  the  forefaid  animals.  But  the  ulcers  being  throughly  cleanfed,
you  muft  prefently  apply  linaments  with  pitch  and  oil,  and  ftale  axle-
tree  greafe,  and  the  wounds  muft  be  anointed  all  round  on  the  outfide,
with  the  fame  medicament,  that  they  may  not  be  infefted  with  flies,
which  breed  worms  when  they  fettle  upon  ulcers.


CHAP.  XVII.

Of  Remedies  againft  the  Bitings  of  Serpents ,  and  other  noxious

Animals.

THE  bite  of  a  ferpent  alfo  is  mortal  to  oxen,  and  the  poilon  of
lefler  animals  alfo  is  hurtful  to  them  :  for  both  the  viper,  and
the  floe- worm,  provoked  with  his  weight,  when  in  the  pafture  the  ox
has  improvidently  lain  down  upon  them,  often  faften  their  teeth  on
him.  And  the  fhrew-moufe,  which  the  Greeks  call  fjLvyd. An  (1),  altho’
its  teeth  are  very  fmall,  is  the  occalion  of  no  fmall  mifehief  to  them.
The  herb  which  they  call  Vipers  BugloJ's  (2),  bruifed  and  laid  with

(1)  Mi lyaKi).  Some  fay  it  is  (o  called,  quia  /jlvo{  ^  «y  ylviixi,  becaufe  it  is  of
a  moufe  and  a  weafel.

(2)  Perfonata.  P/in.  Nat.  Hip/.  Lb.  xxv.  cap.  9.  fays,  that  eebion ,  vipers  buglofs,  is
called  by  this  name,  and  recommends  it,  among  other  things,  againft  the  bitings  of  fer-
j^nts.  He  fays,  that  no  herb  has  a  broader  leaf,  and  that  it  produces  great  burs.


fait


Chap.  XVII.  ^HUSBANDRY.  277

fait  upon  the  fcarification  made  with  a  knife,  drives  away  the  poilon
of  the  viper.  The  root  alfo  of  the  fame,  bruited,  is  more  effectual ;  or
Sitnonian  Trefoil  (j),  that  which  is  found  in  rough  craggy  places,  is  laid
to  be  the  moft  effectual :  it  is  of  a  very  difagreeable  fmell,  and  not  un¬
like  bitumen  -r  and  therefore  the  Greeks  call  it  Afphaltion  :  but  our
people,,  becaufe  of  its  fhape,  call  it  Trifolium  acutum ,  fharp  trefoil  ;
for  it  grows  up  with  long  and  briftly  leaves  :  it  makes  a  flronger  ftalk
than  that  which  grows  in  meadows.  They  pour  the  juice  of  this  herb,
mixed  with  wine,  into  their  chops ;  and  fpread  the  leaves  themfelves
bruifed  with  fait,  in  the  manner  of  a  pultefs,  upon  the  fcarification.
Or,  if  the  feafon  of  the  year  does  not  afford  this  green  herbj  they  ga^-
ther  the  feeds  of  it,  and:fmooth  them,  and  give  them  with  wine  to.
drink ;  and  they  put  upon  the  fcarification  the  roots  of  it  bruifed  with
its  own  ftalk,.  and  mixed  with  meal  and  fait,  after  they  have  been
foaked  in  honey-water.  It  is  alfo. a  fpeedy  and  effectual  remedy,  if
you  bruife  five  pound  weight  of  the  tops  of  afh,  with  as  many  fextarii
of  wine,  and  two  of  oil  j.  and,  after,  you  have  fqueezed  out  the  juice,
pour  it  into  their  chops :  alfo  you  may  put  the  tops  of  the  fame  tree,
bruifed  with  fait,  upon  the  part  that  is  hurt.

The  bite  of  a  floe-worm  caufes  a  fwelling  and  fuppuration  :  that
of  a  fhrew-moufe  has  the  fame  effedt.  But  the  hurt  fuftained  by  the
firft  is  cured  with  a  brazen  awl,  if  you  prick  the  place  that  is  hurt
with  it,  and  anoint  it  with  Cimolian  chalk,  or  clay  (4),  foaked  in  vine¬
gar.  The  moufe  pays  with  her  own  body  for  the  mifchief  it  has  been
the  caufe  of  j  for  they  plunge  the  animal  itfelf  into  oil, and  kill  it  j  and,
after  it  is  putrified,  they  bruife  it,  and  with  that  medicine  they  anoint
the  part  that  is  bitten  by  the  fhrew-moufe  :  or,  if  that  cannot  be  had,
and  the  humour  fhews  the  hurt  that  its  teeth  have  done,  they  bruife
cumin,  and  add  a  little  liquid  pitch,  and  hogs-lard,  or  axle-tree
greafe,  to  it,  that  it  may  have  the  clamminefs  of  a  pultefs  :  this  put
upon  it  removes  the  mifchief :  or  if,  before  the  fwelling  is  difcuffed,
it  turns  to  a  fuppuration,  it  is  beft  to  cut  off  all  the  fuppurated  part

(3)  Simonianum  trifolium ,  fo  called  from  Simus  a  phyfician,  who  probably  firft  found
out  the  qualities  cf  this  fort  of  trefoil.  Pliny  makes  mention  of  him,  and  by  his  authority
fupports  his  opinion,  that  this  fort  of  trefoil  has  fomething  of  a  poifonous  quality ;  for  he
fays,  that  if  either  a  decodtion  of  it,  or  the  juices  of  it  bruifed,  be  poured  into  the  body,
it  will  occafion  the  fame  burnings  and  itchings,  as  it  does  when  it  is  laid  upon  the  wound
made  by  the  bite  of  a  ferpent  j  and  advifes  not  to  ufe  it  but  againft  the  poiions  of  ferpents,
where  Pliny  fuppofes  it  may  operate,  as  one  fort  of  poifon  does  againft  another.

(4)  Cimolia  creta-,  a  kind  of  chalk  or  fullers  earth,  which  is  found  in  the  iftand  Cimolus ,
which  is  one  of  the  iflands  the  antients  called  Spcrades  :  it  lies  in  the  Cretiau  fea,  and  is  by
the  inhabitants  ftill  called  Kimolo}  tho’  it  feems  the  Venetian  have  changed  its  name,  and
call  it  Argent  ter  a.


with


278  L.  J,  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI

with  a  burning-hot  lamin,  and  to  burn  all  the  affedted  part  with  an
hot  iron,  and  fo  anoint  it  with  liquid  pitch  and  oil.  They  alfo  ule
to  wrap  up  the  animal  itfelf  alive  in  potters  -clay,  and,  after  it  is  dried,
to  hang  it  at  the  neck  of  the  oxen.  That  thing  preferves  the  cattle
from  receiving  any  hurt  from  the  bite  of  a  Ihrew-moufe.

Difeafes  or  blemifhes  in  their  eyes  are  for  the  mod:  part  cured  with
honey  :  for,  if  either  they  are  fwelled,  they  fprinkle  honey-water
upon  wheat-flour  j  and  put  it  upon  them,  or,  if  there  be  a  white  fpot
pr  web  in  the  eye,  mountain  fait  (5),  or  Spanijh  fait,  or  ammoniac (6),
or  Cappadocian  fait  (7)  alfo,  bruifed  very  fmall,  and  mixed  with  honey,
diminilhes  the  blemifh.  The  (hell  of  the  cuttle-fifh  bruifed,  and
blown  into  the  eye  thrice  a  day  through  a  reed,  has  the  fame  effedl.
The  root,  which  the  Greeks  call  Silphion ,  but  the  common  people,
according  to  the  cuftora  of  our  country,  call  LaJ'erpitium ,  Laferwort,
does  the  fame.  To  any  quantity  whatfoever  of  this,  they  add  ten
parts  of  fal  ammoniac,  and  throw  them  likewife  into  the  eye,  after
they  have  been  bruifed  in  the  fame  manner :  or  the  fame  root  bruifed,
and  mixed  with  the  oil  of  maflich,  and  put  upon  the  eye,  purges  away
die  blemifhes.  Barley-meal  foaked  in  water,  and  dried  at  the  fire,  and
fprinkled  with  honey-water,  and  put  upon  their  eyebrows  and  cheeks,
fupprefles  an  inflammation  and  fluxion  in  their  eyes  ;  and  the  feeds  of
the  wild  parfnip,  and  the  juice  of  the  wild  radifh,  with  honey,  aflwage
the  pain  of  the  eyes,  when  they  are  anointed  therewith.  But  when¬
ever  honey,  or  any  other  juice,  is  applied  with  remedies,  the  eye  mufl:
be  anointed  all  round  with  liquid  pitch  and  oil,  that  it  may  not  be  in-
fefted  by  the  flies  ;  for  not  thefe  only,  but  bees  alfo,  fly  to  the  fweet-
nels  of  honey,  and  other  medicines.


(5)  Sal ) montanus ,  by  Vegetius  called  fojftl  fait,  bccaufe  it  is  dug  out  of  pits  or  quar¬
ries  upon  mountains,  where  it  is  cut  like  lione  out  of  quarries.

(6)  Sal  ammoniacus ,  fo  called,  as  Pliny  tells  us,  becaufe  it  is  found  under  the  fands  in
great  quantity,  in  the  Tandy  deferts  of  Africa ,  especially  in  the  Cyrenian  tradts  :  therefore
it  has  its  name,  not  from  the  place  where  Jupiter  Hamnon's  temple  flood,  but  from  the
fand  where- ever  it  is  found.

(7)  Sal  Cappadocius.  Pliny  mentions  two  forts  of  fait  found  in  Cappadocia ,  one  fort
formed  in  the  extreme  parts  of  a  lake,  where  the  water  is  condenfed  into  fait  by  the  beat
of  the  fun ;  and  another  fort  dug  out  of  the  mountains  in  very  great  quantities,  and  in
great  lumps.


CHAP.


Chap.  XIX.


Of  HUSBANDRY.


279


CHAP.  XVIII.

Of  Remedies  to  be  given  them  when  they  have  fwallowed  an
Hojf e-leech  with  their  W ater.

AN  horfe-leech  alfo,  fwallowed  with  their  water,  is  often  the  caufc
of  great  mifehief.  This,  flicking  to  their  jaws,  fucks  the  blood,
and  by  its  growth  fhuts  up  the  paffage  for  their  food.  If  it  is  in  a  place
fo  difficult  to  come  at,,  that  it  cannot  be  ptilled  away  with  the  hand,
put  a  pipe  or  reed  into  it,  and  fo  pour  warm  oil  into  it  :  for,  when¬
ever  this  touches  it,  the  animal  falls  off.  Alfo  the  fmellof;  a  burnt
bug  may  be  conveyed  into  it  through  .a  pipe  ;  for  the  b.ug,  when  it  is
put  upon  the  fire,  fends  forth  a  fmoke,  and  the  pipe  conveys  the  burn¬
ing  fmell,  that  it  attracts  as  far  as  the  horfe-leach  j  and  that  fmell  drives
it  away,  and  makes  it  quit  its  hold.  If,  neverthelefs,  it  takes  hold,
either  of  the  ftomach,  or  inteftines,  it  is  killed  with  hot  vinegar  poured
into  them  through  an  horn.  Although  we  have  directed  thefe  medi¬
cines  to  be  applied  to  oxen,  neverthelefs  there  is  no  doubt,  but  very
many  of  them  are  alfo  proper  for  all  forts  of  greater  cattle.


CHAP.  XIX..

Of  a  Machine  in  which  Cattle  are  put  up  when  their  Sores

are  drejfed \

BUT  a  machine  alfo  muff  be  framed,  wherein  horfes  and  oxen
may  be  fhut  up  and  dreffed,  and  that  they  who  have  the  cattle
under  cure,  may  have  nearer  accefs  to  them,  and  that  the  four-footed
bead:  may  not,  by  Draggling  again!!  them,  refufe  the  remedies  at  the
very  time  they  are  dreffing  him.  And  this  is  the  form  of  luch  a  ma¬
chine  :  You  muff  lay  a  firm  compadl  floor  upon  the  ground  with  oaken
planks,  of  nine  feet  in  length  ;  and  let  the  fore-part  have  two  feet  and
an  half  in  breadth  ;  and  the  hinder-part  four  feet.  Upon  this  floor  you
muff  fix  on  both  fides  of  it  four  upright  ports  of  feven  feet.  More¬
over,  you  muff  faften  fuch  of  them  as  are  in  the  very  four  corners  to
one  another.  And  bind  them  all  to  each  other  with  fix  crofs-poles,  as
if  they  were  rails,  fo  that  the  four-footed  beaft  may  be  brought  into

it


280  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

it  at  the  hinder-part  where  it  is  broaded,  as  into  a  cage,  and  may  not  be
able  to  go  out  at  the  other  end,  the  fmall  oppofite  planks  hindering
him.  But  upon  the  two  fird  eredt  polls  you  mull  place  a  drong  yoke
or  beam,  to  which  horfes  may  be  tied  with  an  halter,  or  the  horns  of
the  oxen  be  fadenedj  where  you  may  alfo  frame  (locks  or  collars,  that,
after  their  head  is  put  into  them,  their  neck  may  be  held  fad  by
rulers,  or  pins  defcending  through  holes  made  in  them  :  the  red  of
their  body  is  bound  fad,  being  intangled  and  didended  with  the  poles
that  are  laid  acrofs,  fo  that  the  bead  is  expofed  to  the  will  and  pleafure
of  him  that  has  him  under  cure,  without  being  able  to  move.  This  very
machine  (hall  be  common  for  all  four-footed  beads  of  a  larger  fize.


CHAP.  XX.

Of  the  Form  and  Shape  of  a  Bull,

FOrafmuch  as  we  have  given  you  diffident  indrudtions  concerning
oxen,  it  will  be  proper  and  convenient  now  to  fpeak  of  bulls
and  cows.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  bulls  are  mod  to  be  approved,  which
have  the  larged  members,  are  of  a  gentle  difpofition,  and  good-natured,
and  of  a  middle  age  :  as  to  other  things,  we  mud  obferve  almod  the
fame  diredtions  in  chudng  them,  as  in  chudng  oxen.  For  in  no  other
thing  does  a  good  bull  differ  from  one  that  is  cadrated,  but  that  he  has
a  grim,  dern  countenance,  a  more  lively,  brifk  afpedl,  (horter  horns,
a  more  brawny  neck,  and  fo  huge,  that  it  makes  the  greated  part  of
his  body,  with  a  fomewhat  lanker  and  more  truffed  up  belly  ;  and
that  he  is  more  draight,  and  fitter  for  coupling  with  the  females.


CHAP.  XXI.

Of  the  Form  or  Shape  of  a  Cow .

COWS  alfo  are  approved,  which  are  of  the  tailed  make,  and  long,
with  very  great  bellies,  exceeding  broad  foreheads,  black,  wide,
and  full  eyes,  beautiful  horns,  that  are  both  fmooth,  and  inclining  to
black,  hairy  ears,  flat,  compreffed  cheek-bones,  exceeding  large  dew¬
laps  and  tails,  moderately  fmall  hoofs  and  legs.  As  to  other  things,
almod  the  fame  are  required  in  the  females  as  in  the  males,  -and  efpe-

cially.


Chap.  XXII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  281

daily,  that  they  be  young  j  becaufe  when  they  are  above  ten  years
old,  they  are  ufelefs  for  breeding.  On  the  other  hand,  they  muft  not
be  put  to  the  bull  when  they  are  under  two  years  old  :  if,  neverthelefs,
they  conceive  before,  I  think  it  proper,  that  their  young  be  taken  from
them,  and  that  during  three  days  their  udders  be  emptied,  that  they
may  not  be  in  pain,  and  that  afterwards  they  be  intirely  removed  from
the  milk-pail.


CHAP.  XXII.

Of  reviewing  and  picking  the  Cattle  every  Tear .

BUT  you  muft  take  care  to  review  every  year  this  fort  of  cattle,
as  well  as  all  other  herds  and  flocks  whatfoever,  and  to  pick
them  carefully  :  for,  both  fuch  as  have  brought  forth  young,  and  are
old,  and  have  left  off  breeding,  muft  be  removed  j  and  alfo  fuch  as
have  never  been  with  young,  which  take  up  the  place  of  thofe  that
are  fruitful,  muft  be  banifhed  from  the  herd,  or  broken  for  the  plough ;
for,  by  realbn  of  the  barrennefs  of  their  womb,  they  can  endure  la¬
bour  and  fatigue  no  lefs  than  bullocks.

This  kind  of  cattle  defires  to  have  their  winter  quarters  upon  the
fea  coaft,  and  expofed  to  the  fun  j  and  in  the  fummer  delights  more
in  the  darkeft  recedes  of  woods,  and  tops  of  mountains,  than  in  plain
paftures :  for  their  hoofs  are  better  hardened  (i)  in  grafly  woods  and
thickets,  and  fedge-plots,  than  in  ftony  places.  Nor  have  they  fuch  a
defire  for  rivers  and  brooks,  as  for  pools  made  by  hand  j  becaufe  river-
water,  which  is  commonly  colder,  makes  them  caft  their  calves,  and
rain-water  is  fweeter.  Neverthelefs,  all  cows  whatfoever  can  endure
external  cold,  better  than  horfe-cattle  of  any  kind :  therefore  they  eafily
pafs  the  winter  in  the  open  air.

(1)  Dur.antur  uvgyla:.  There  is  very  great  reafon  to  think,  as  Pontedera  obferves,  that
the  text  is  corrupted  in  this  place  j  for  it  cannot  be,  that  their  hoofs  are  better  hardened
in  watery  places,  marlhes,  and  fens,  than  upon  hard  and  rocky  mountains ;  for  Varro,
lib.  ii.  cap.  8.  fays,  that  mules,  bred  in  marfhy  and  oufy  places,  have  foft  hoofs  ,•  but  if  they
be  driven  in  the  fummer-time  to  the  mountains,  as  in  the  territory  of  Reate,  their  hoofs
become  .exceeding  hard  :  and  Columella  himfelf  fays,  lib.  vii.  cap.  37.  that  it  is  fit  to  re¬
move  a  mule  from  its  dam  when  it  is  one  year  old,  and  fend  it  to  the  mountains  to
harden  its  hoofs  ;  fo  that  it  feems  neceflary  to  read  it  Jaturantur  juvenca.  That  grafly
woods  and  marfhes  afford  better  pafture  for  heifers.  And  this  is  evident  from  the  follow¬
ing  words,  which  are  more  fuitable  to  this  amendment.  Gefnerus  thinks,  that  it  comes
near  to  the  common  reading,  to  change  it  to  durant  juvencula.

o  o  CHAP.


282


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.


CHAP.  XXIII.

Of  making  Liclofures  and  Stables .

BUT  you  mud;  make  inclofures  for  them  in  a  wide  fpace,  that  fo,
in  ftrait  and  narrow  places,  the  one  may  not  crufh  the  other,
and  make  her  call  her  calf,  and  that  the  weak  may  be  able  to  avoid
the  blows  of  the  ftronger.  Stables  that  are  laid  with  great  rough  ftones,
or  round  pebbles,  are  the  bed  :  neverthelefs,  fuch  as  are  laid  with
gravel  alfo,  are  not  incommodious  j  thofe,  becaufe  they  throw  off
and  refufe  the  fhowers ;  and  thefe,  becaufe  they  fuck  them  up  quickly,
and  let  them  pal's  through.  But  let  them  both  be  Hoping,  that  they
may  throw  off  the  moifture  j  and  let  them  look  to  the  fouth,  that  they
may  dry  eafily,  and  not  be  expofed  to  cold  winds.

Paflure-grounds  require  but  very  little  care  j  for,  that  the  grafs  may
thrive  the  better,  and  fpring  up  in  greater  plenty,  commonly  in  the
latter  end  of  the  fummer  they  fet  it  on  fire  :  this  both  makes  tenderer
new  grafs  to  fpring  up  again,  and  the  thorns  and  briars  being  burnt*
it  checks  the  fhrubs  and  herbs  with  great  ftalks,  which  would  rife  to
a  great  height.  But  fait,  thrown  upon  rocks  and  troughs  near  the  in-
clofure,  contributes  to  the  health  of  their  bodies :  to  this  they  willingly
have  recourfe,  after  they  have  filled  their  bellies,  when  with  the  paflo-
ral  fignal  there  is  as  it  were  a  retreat  founded.  For  this  ought  always
to  be  done  towards  the  twilight,  that  fo,  at  the  found  of  the  horn,  the
cattle,  if  any  of  them  remain  ftill  in  the  woods,  may  accuftom  them-
felves  to  return  to  their  inclofures ;  for  fo  the  whole  herd  may  be  re¬
viewed,  and  their  number  reckoned  up,  if,  according  to  military  dif-
cipline,  as  it  were,  they  abide  within  the  quarters  affigned  them  by
the  keeper  of  the  ftables.  But  the  fame  power  and  authority  is  not
exercifed  over  bulls,  which,  relying  upon  their  great  ffrength,  wander
through  the  woods,  and  have  free  egrefs  and  ingrefs,  and  return  when
they  pleafe,  and  are  not  called  back,  unlefs  it  be  to  couple  with  the.
females.


CHAP.


Chap. XXIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY,  283

CHAP.  XXIV.

Of  the  Age  ft  for  a  Bull  to  couple  with  the  Female .

SUCH  of  the  bulls  as  are  younger  than  four,  and  older  than  twelve
years,  are  not  allowed  to  couple  with  the  females  :  thole,  becaufc
of  their  puerile  age,  as  it  were,  are  reckoned  not  very  fit  for  raifing  a
new  breed,  and  increafing  the  herd  j  thefe,  becaufe  they  are  worn  out
with  old  age,  and  paft  gendering.  In  the  month  of  July,  for  the  moll
part,  the  females  muft  be  allowed  to  be  with  the  males,  that  fo  the  next
fpring,  when  the  forage  is  grown  up,  they  may  bring  forth  the  young
they  conceived  at  that  time.  For  they  go  with  young  ten  months,
nor  do  they  fuffer  the  male  at  the  command  of  their  keeper,  but  of
their  own  accord  j  and  for  the  moft  part  their  natural  defires  anfwer
to  the  time  I  have  mentioned,  becaufe  the  cattle,  being  exhilarated  with
the  fuperabundance  of  vernal  forage,  grow  lafcivious.  But  if  either
the  female  refufes,  or  the  male  has  no  defire,  their  defire  is  raifed  by
the  fame  method  we  (hall  prefently  direft  with  refped:  to  horfes  which
difdain  the  female,  <viz.  by  conveying  the  fmell  of  their  genitals  to
their  noftrils.

But  you  mull  with-hold  a  part  of  their  fodder  from  the  females
about  the  time  you  put  them  to  the  male,  left  the  too  great  fatnefs  of
their  body  make  them  barren  ;  and  you  muft  add  to  the  bulls  allow¬
ance,  that  they  may  be  the  ftronger  for  gendering  j  and  one  male  may
abundantly  fuffice  for  fifteen  cows  :  and  when  he  has  leapt  upon  an
heifer,  you  may  know,  by  certain  figns,  which  fex  he  has  generated ;
becaufe,  if  he  leapt  off  at  the  right  fide,  it  is  manifeft  he  has  gendered
a  male  ;  if  at  the  left  fide,  a  female.  Neverthelefs,  that  does  not  ap¬
pear  to  be  true,  other  wife,  but  when,  after  one  coition,  being  with
calf,  flie  does  not  afterwards  admit  the  bull ;  which  very  thing  rarely
happens.  For,  altho’  fhe  be  with  young,  yet  her  luft  is  not  fully  fa-
tisfied :  fo  mighty  powerful  even  in  cattle,  beyond  the  bounds  of  nature,
are  the  flattering  allurements  of  pleafure.  But  there  is  no  doubt,
where  there  is  great  plenty  of  fodder,  that  a  cow  may  have  a  calf,
and  bring  it  up  every  year  j  but,  when  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  forage,
(lie  ought  to  be  put  upon  breeding  every  other  year,  which  we  are  of
opinion  ought  to  be  done,  efpecially  with  refpedt  to  cows  that  are  put
to  labour,  that  fo  the  calves  may  be  fatiated  with  milk  for  the  fpace  of
one  whole  year  j  and  that  the  cow  which  is  with  calf  may  not  be

O  o  2  grieved


284  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VI.

grieved  and  oppreffed  with  the  burden  both  of  her  belly  and  her  work
at  the  fame  time  :  and  after  fhe  has  brought  forth  her  young,  unlefs
file  be  fufficiently  fupported  with  food,  tho’  fhe  be  a  good  nurfe,  yet,
being  fatigued  with  labour,  (he  with-holds  from  her  fon  a  great  part  of
his  nourilhment.  Therefore  they  give  her,  after  (he  has  calved,  green
CytiJks ,  (fhrub-trefoil)  and  parched  barley,  and  foaked  bitter  vetches  ;
or  they  give  her  a  drench  of  young  cole  wort,  and  toafted  and  ground
millet  (1),  and  foaked  in  milk  for  one  night,  mixed  together.  The
Altinian  cows  (2)  alfo,  which  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  call  Ce-
*uas  (3),  are  more  efteemed  for  thefe  ufes.  Thefe  are  of  a  low  ftature,
and  yield  abundance  of  milk  ;  for  which  reafon,  their  own  offspring,
being  removed  from  them,  are  brought  up  and  educated  at  the  udders
of  thole  that  are  aliens  and  utter  ffrangers  to  them  :  or,  if  this  relief
is  not  at  hand,  bruifed  beans  and  wine  fuftain  them  very  well  ;  and
this  muft  be  done  efpecially  in  great  herds.


CHAP.  XXV.

Of  Remedies  for  Worms  in  Calves .

BUT  worms,  which  commonly  breedin  crudities,  are  ufually  hurtful
to  calves ;  therefore  they  muft  be  moderately  fed,  that  they  may
digeft  well  :  or,  if  they  labour  already  under  fuch  an  indifpofition,  they
bruife  parboiled  lupins,  and  thruft  morfels  of  them  down  their  throats  in
the  manner  of  a  drench.  Alfo  the  herb Santonica,  (wormwood  of  Sain-
tonge )  may  be  bruifed  together  with  dry  figs  and  bitter  vetches,  and
made  into  fops,  and  put  down  their  throats,  as  if  it  were  a  drench.  One
part  of  greafe,  mixed  with  three  parts  of  hyffop,  has  the  fame  effect.

(1)  Tenno  olere,  et  caetera,  falivatur.  From  the  different  readings  of  this  fentcnce,
Vontedera  is  of  opinion,  that  it  ought  to  be  corrected  thus  ;  Et  tener  vitufus  torrido  molt-
toque  milio,  gyc.  Ja/ivatur.  This  correction  is  not  improbable  ;  tor  Palladius,  who  copies
from  Columella ,  fays,  that  toafted  and  ground  miller,  mixed  with  milk,  ought  to  be  given
them  in  the  manner  of  a  drench.

(2)  Altiux  vacca.  Pliny,  lib.  viii.  c.  4.5.  mentions  vaccaAlpimc  ;  and  Father  Hardouin
fakes  occafion  there  to  correct  this  place  of  Columella ,  and  fays,  (hat  it  ought  to  be  read
naccteAlpin.o  j  for  if  the  author  had  meant,  that  they  had  their  name  from  Alt'ma ,  a  town
in  Italy ,  they  would  have  been  called  vacc^Alt'uiates  j  and  accordingly  Columella „  lib.  vii.
t  2.  has  oxesAltinates.

(3)  Cevas.  Gefncrus  thinks,  that  this  word  is  almoft  the  fame  with  kuhe,  or  kwjje,
th t  German  or  S^ifs  word  for  vacca,  a  cow ;  and  the  author  might  mean,  cow;  brought
out  of  Svijfcrland  for  the  purpofe  mentioned  in  the  text.


Alfo


Chap. XXVI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  285

Alfo  the  juice  of  horehound,  and  of  the  leek,  is  effectual  for  killing
animals  of  this  fort.


CHAP.  XXVI.

Of  cafirating  Calves.

is  of  opinion,  that  calves  fhould  be  cadrated  while  they  are
yet  very  young  ;  and  advifes  not  to  do  it  with  a  knife,  but  to  com-
prefs  their  tedicles  with  cloven  fennel-giant,  and  to  bruife  them  by
degrees ;  and  he  thinks,  that  of  all  ways  of  cadrating,  that  is  the  bed,
which  is  performed  upon  the  young  and  tender  age,  without  a  wound  ;
for,  when  the  calf  is  already  grown  drong,  and  the  parts  hardened,  it
is  better  to  cadrate  him  when  he  is  two  years  old,  than  when  he  is
one.  And  he  directs  to  do  it  either  in  the  fpring,  or  in  autumn,  when
the  moon  is  decreafing,  and  to  bind  the  calf  to  a  machine  ;  then,  before
you  apply  the  knife,  to  take  hold  with  two  wooden  rules  (as  it  were
with  a  pair  of  pincers)  of  the  drings  of  the  tedicles,  which  the  Greeks
call  (1),  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  the  genital  parts  hang  by

them  ;  and,  having  taken  fad  hold  of  them,  presently  to  lay  open  the
tedicles  with  a  knife  ;  and,  after  you  have  fqueezed  them  out,  to  cut
them  in  fuch  manner,  that  the  extreme  part  may  be  left  dicking  to
the  forefaid  drings  :  for,  by  this  method,  the  deer  is  neither  endan¬
gered  by  the  eruption  of  the  blood,  nor  intirely  emafculated,  by  taking
away  all  his  virility;  but,  preferving  the  form  of  a  male,  he  lays  down
his  power  of  gendering,  which,  neverthelefs,  he  does  not  prefently  lofe ;
for,  if  you  differ  him,  after  he  is  newly  cadrated,  to  couple  with  the
female,  it  is  manifed  fhe  may  conceive  by  him.  But  that  is  not  at
all  to  be  permitted,  led  he  perifli  by  a  large  effufion  of  blood  ;  but
you  mud  anoint  his  wounds  with  fpray-afhes,  and  the  fcum  of  fiber;
and  you  mud  keep  him  that  day  from  water,  and  nouridi  him  with
very  little  food.  The  three  following  days  you  mud  folace  and  cherifh
him,  as  if  he  were  dck,  with  tops  of  trees,  and  green  fodder  cut  down
for  him, and  redrain  himfrom  much  drinking.  Iadvileyou  alfo  to  anoint
the  wounds  themfelves,  after  three  days,  with  liquid  pitch  and  adies,
with  a  little  oil,  that  they  may  both  clofe,  and  form  a  fear  the  more
quickly,  and  not  be  infeded  by  the  flies.  What  we  have  faid  thus  far
of  oxen  is  abundantly  enough.

(1)  Cremafters,  from  fufpet;do.


C  IT  A  P,


286


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.


CHAP.  XXVII.

Of  Horfes,

IT  is  highly  proper,  that  they  who  have  the  bringing  up  of  the
horfe-kind  much  at  heart,  fhould  provide  an  indulfrious  keeper,
and  plenty  of  forage,  both  which,  fuppofe  they  be  but  indifferent  and
ordinary,  may  ferve  for  other  cattle.  But  horfe-cattle  requires  the
greateft  diligence  and  attendance,  and  a  large  quantity  of  food,  even  as
much  as  they  can  eat.  This  kind  is  divided  into  three  forts  ;  for  there
is  a  noble  generous  breed,  which  furnifhes  horfes  for  the  Circus ,  and
the  Sacred  Games.  There  is  the  mule-breed,  the  foals  of  which  are
purchafed  at  a  noble  price.  There  is  alfo  the  vulgar  breed,  which  pro¬
duces  indifferent  and  ordinary  males  and  females.  The  more  excel¬
lent  each  of  thefe  forts  is,  the  more  plentiful  and  rich  field  they  have
afiigned  to  them  for  their  paftu re.  But,  for  herds  of  this  kind  of  cattle,
fpacious,  marfhy,  and  alfo  mountainous  paflures,  muff  be  chofen  ;
fuch  as  are  well  watered,  and  never  naturally  dry  j  rather  free  from
any  kind  of  trees  or  fhrubs,  than  intangled  and  incumbred  with  them  j
abounding  in  very  thick  and  foft,  rather  than  in  high  grafs.

Vulgar  ordinary  horfes,  both  male  and  female,  are  allowed  to  feed
together  promifcuoufly  ;  nor  are  there  any  certain  times  obferved  for
putting  the  males  and  females  together.  Let  the  males  be  joined  to
the  females,  of  a  noble  and  generous  race,  about  the  time  of  the  ver¬
nal  fEquinox,  that  fo  foaling  at  the  fame  time  of  the  year  wherein
they  conceived,  they  may  bring  up  their  foals  with  little  labour,  the
fields  being  now  verdant,  and  abounding  in  grafs  after  the  harveft  is
gathered  in  ;  for  they  bring  forth  their  young  in  the  twelfth  month.
Therefore  great  care  muff  be  taken,  at  the  forefaid  time  of  the  year,
that  both  the  mares  and  the  ftallions  may  have  full  liberty  to  couple,
when  they  have  a  defire  to  it  ;  becaufe  this  kind  of  cattle,  efpecially
if  you  reftrain  them,  is  extimulated  by  the  furious  ragings  of  luff  j
and  it  is  for  that  reafon,  that  the  name  Hippomanes  (i)  is  given  to  that
poifon,  which  kindles  in  mortals  a  fire  of  love,  like  the  libidinous  de-
iires  of  horfes.  Nor  is  there  any  doubt,  but,  in  fome  countries,  the

(i)  Hippomanes,  a-rt  rrf  y.a.vi&(  Ttl;  irt-Xi.  Plin.  Hijl.  Nat.  lib.  viii.  42.  fays,  that  this
is  an  excrefcence  in  the  forehead  of  a  foal,  at  the  time  it  is  foaled,  which  was  a  principal
ingredient  in  philtres,  and  other  poifonous  draughts.  They  who  have  the  curiofity  ro  know
more  of  it,  may  confulr  Pliny  and  Arijlotle .  Virgil  alfo,  in  his  4th  JEneid,  and  in  fome
other  places,  makes  mention  of  it.

I


mares


Chap.  XXVII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  287

mares  are  inflamed  with  fuch  a  ftrong  and  ardent  defire  of  coition,  that,
altho’  they  have  not  the  male,  yet,  by  their  continual  and  exceffive
defire,  raifing  in  themfelves  the  imagination  of  venery,  they  (in  the
manner  of  fowls  conftantly  kept  in  a  barton)  conceive  with  the  wind  :
which  things  the  poet  exprefles  with  greater  licence  (2)  :

4  But,  more  than  all,  remarkable  and  ftrange

*  The  fury  of  the  mares :  fair  Venus'  felf

4  Gave  them  this  bent,  of  mind,  juft  at  the  time
4  When  the  four  Potman  mares,  which  drew  the  car

*  Of  Glaucus ,  all  his  limbs  in  pieces  tore

‘  With  their  devouring  jaws.  Them  Cupid  leads

*  O’er  Gargarus,  and  o’er  the  founding  ftream
4  Of  loud  Afcanius  :  they  o’er  the  tops

4  Of  mountains  climb,  and  over  rivers  fwim.

4  Still  in  their  tender  marrow  lurks  the  flame,

*  And  new  defires  arife,  which,  in  the  fpring,

‘  More  ardent  grow  j  for  then  the  genial  heat

*  Into  their  bones  returns  ;  then  to  weft  winds
4  All  turn  their  heads,  and  on  the  lofty  rocks

*  Stand  paufing,  and  the  light  and  cooling  breeze
4  Snuff  up  j  and  often  by  the  wind  conceive,

4  Without  the  male,  (too  wondrous  to  relate  !  )

4  Then  over  rocks,  and  hills,  and  dales,  they  fly  :

4  Not  where,  EajiWind!  thou  firft  beginn’ft  to  blow,

4  Nor  where  the  fun  firft  rears  his  radiant  head  ;

4  But  whence  the  north  and  north-weft  winds  arife,

4  And  fouth  wind,  which,  with  blacked:  darknefs  clad,

4  With  cold  and  rains,  makes  fad  the  chearful  day. '

Forafmuch  as  it  is  a  thing  alfo  very  well  known,  that  on  the  Sacred
Mountain  in  Spain  (3),  which  extends  itfelf  toward  the  weft,  hard
by  the  ocean,  mares  have  frequently  been  pregnant  without  coition,

and

(2)  Vtrg.  Georg.  Jib.  iii.  2 66.

(3)  Monte  Sacro.  Varro  fays,  that  this  happens  upon  mount  Tagrus  in  Portugal,  near
Lisbon ,  hard  by  the  ocean.  Pliny  alfo  mentions  this  fable,  and  fays,  that  it  was  a  thing
which  was  well  known  to  happen  upon  the  river  Tagus  near  Lisbon,  &c.  It  cannot  but
feem  ftrange,  that  fuch  grave  authors  fliould  mention  this  as  a  thing  to  be  depended  on.
Virgil,  indeed,  is  to  be  excufed,  who,  as  a  poet,  might  indulge  his  own  fancy.  But  Jujlin
fpeaks  more  rationally,  and  fays,  that  many  authors  indeed  had  delivered  it  as  a  truth ;  but
that  it  was  only  a  fable,  which  had  its  rife  from  the  fruitfulnefs  of  mares,  and  the  vaft  mul  •
titude  of  horfes,  in  Gallicia  and  Lujitania,  which  are  fo  numerous,  and  fo  fwift,  that  not

without


288  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

and  have  brought  up  their  offspring  ;  which  neverthelefs  is  of  no  ufe,
becaufe  it  is  fnatched  away  by  death  when  three  years  old,  before  it
comes  to  maturity.

Wherefore,  as  I  have  faid,  we  muff  take  care,  that  mares  be  not
tormented  with  their  natural  defires,  about  the  time  of  the  vernal
^Equinox.  But,  during  the  reft  of  the  year,  you  muff  remove  from
the  females  the  horfes  of  great  value,  that  they  may  neither  cover  them
when  they  have  a  mind  to  it,  nor  fuffer  harm,  if  they  are  reffrained
from  doing  it,  when  they  are  folicited  by  their  natural  defires  :  there¬
fore  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  male  ought  either  to  be  fent  out  of  the
way  into  very  diftant  paftares,  or  kept  at  his  manger.  And,  at  the
time  when  he  is  invited  by  the  females,  he  muff  be  ffrengthened  with
a  large  allowance  of  food  ;  and,  when  the  fpring  approaches,  you  muff
pamper  him  with  barley  and  bitter  vetches,  that  he  may  endure  the
fatigue  of  venery  ;  and  the  ftronger  he  is  for  this  talk,  fo  much  the
ftronger  feminal  principles  will  he  communicate  to  his  future  offspring.

Some  alfo  diredt  us  to  fatten  a  ffallion  (4.)  in  the  fame  manner  we  do
mules,  that  fo,  being  heartened  by  this  good  keeping,  he  may  fuffice
for  very  many  females.  Neverthelefs,  one  ffallion  ought  not  to  im¬
pregnate  lefs  than  fifteen,  nor  more  than  twenty  mares.  And  he  may
be  made  ufe  of  for  this  purpofe  when  he  is  three  years  old  ;  and  for
the  moft  part  he  is  fit  for  it  till  he  is  twenty.  But  if  the  ffallion  is
lazy,  and  backward  to  perform  his  part,  they  pafs  a  fponge  over  the
parts  of  the  female,  and  convey  the  fmell  to  the  horfe ’s  noftrils,  by
rubbing  him  with  the  fame.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  mare  will
not  fuffer  the  male,  they  anoint  her  natural  parts  with  bruifed  fquills,
which  thing  kindles  her  luff.  Sometimes  alfo  a  vulgar  ignoble  horfe
raifes  in  them  a  defire  of  coition  ;  for,  when  he  is  let  into  her,  and
has  almoff  brought  her  to  a  compliance,  they  take  away  jhe  female,
and,  now  fhe  is  become  more  paflive,  they  put  a  horfe  of  a  nobler
breed  upon  her.  From  the  time  they  are  pregnant,  greater  care  muff
be  taken  of  them,  and  they  muff  be  ffrengthened  with  plentiful  paftures:
and  if  with  the  cold  of  winter  the  grafs  (hall  fail,  let  them  be  kept  in

without  reafon  they  may  Teem  to  be  conceived  by  the  wind.  Some  authors  think,  that
both  in  our  author,  and  in  Varro ,  the  true  reading  is,  MovteArtabro.  Pliny,  indeed,  fays,
that  in  this  place  of  the  country  there  is  a  vaft  promontory,  which  runs  out  inro  the  ocean,
which  fome  called  Artabrum,  lib.  iv.  21.  Perhaps  it  was  called  the  Sacred  Mount,  from
l'ome  famous  temple  that  flood  there.

(4.)  Adviijfarium  faginare  eodem  modo  quo  mulot.  Pontedera  thinks,  that  inflead  of  mu-
ios  we  ought  to  read  tauros  ■  -for,  as  mules  do  not  propagate,  it  is  not  probable  the  author
had  his  eye  upon  them  :  but  both  Varro  and  Columella ,  and  other  anoent  authors,  direct
us  to  pamper  bulls  at  a  certain  feafon,  and  keep  them  apart  from  the  cows  till  the  .proper

time.

the


Chap.  XXVIII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  289

the  houfe,  and  neither  be  employed  in  working,  nor  running,  nor  ex-
pofed  to  the  cold,  nor  {hut  up  in  a  narrow  confined  place,  left  one
make  the  other  caft  her  foal ;  for  all  thefe  inconveniences  have  this
effedft.

But  if  the  mare  has  fuffered,  either  in  foaling,  or  by  abortion,  rock-
fern  bruifed,  and  throughly  mixed  with  lukewarm  water,  and  given
through  a  horn,  will  be  a  remedy  for  her.  But,  if  all  has  fucceeded
well,  the  foal  muft  by  no  means  be  handled  ;  for  he  is  hurt  even  by
the  lighted:  touch  :  only  care  muft  be  taken,  that  he  keep  with  the
dam  in  a  large  and  warm  place,  left  either  the  cold  hurt  him,  while
he  is  yet  weak,  or  his  mother  fqueeze  and  bruife  him  in  a  narrow
ftraight  place.  Then  you  muft  bring  him  out,  by  little  and  little,  and
take  care  that  he  do  not  parch  his  hoofs  with  the  dung.  When  he  is
grown  ftronger,  he  muft  be  prefently  fent  out  into  the  fame  paftures
where  his  mother  is,  left  the  mare  be  in  pain  for  want  of  her  foal.
For  this  kind  of  cattle  efpecially,  catches  hurt  from  the  love  they  have
to  their  young,  unlefs  they  be  allowed  to  have  them  in  their  company.
It  is  ufual  fora  vulgar  mare  to  bring  a  foal  every  year  ;  it  is  proper  to
reftrain  one  of  a  noble  breed  every  other  year,  that  fo  her  foal,  grow¬
ing  ftronger  with  his  mother’s  milk,  may  be  prepared  for  the  labours
of  the  public  games.


CHAP.  XXVIII.

Of  the  slge  of  a  Stallion .

THEY  think,  that  a  male  younger  than  three  years  is  not  fit  for
a  ftallion  ;  but  that  he  may  procreate  till  his  twentieth  year  ;
and  that  a  female  of  two  years  old  may  very  well  conceive,  that  fo,
foaling  after  her  third  year,  fhe  may  bring  up  her  foal  ;  and  that  {he
is  ufelefs  after  her  tenth  year,  becaufe  the  breed  of  an  old  mare  is  flow
and  fluggifh.  Democritus  affirms,  that  it  depends  upon  our  own  pleafure,
whether  a  male  or  a  female  be  conceived  :  and  he  directs,  that  when
we  have  a  mind  that  a  male  ffiould  be  procreated,  we  lhould  bind  the
ftallion’s  left  tefticle  with  a  fmall  flaxen  cord,  or  with  any  other  cord
whatfoever  j  and  when  we  would  have  a  female,  the  right  tefticle.
And  he  is  of  opinion,  that  the  fame  thing  ought  to  be  done  with  almoft
all  cattle  whatfoever.


F  P


CHAP.


290


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.


C  H  A  P.  XXIX.

Of  the  Temper ,  Difpofition ,  and  Fortn  of  an  Hcrfe.

BUT  when  a  foal  is  foaled,  we  may  prefently  judge  of  its  temper
and  difpofition.  If  it  is  chearful,  if  intrepid,  if  it  is  neither
frightened  at  the  fight,  nor  with  the  hearing  of  any  new  thing  ;  if  it
runs  before  the  herd  ;  if  in  wantonnefs  and  chearfulnefs,  and  fome-
times  in  running  a  race,  it  furpafies  all  its  equals  ;  if  it  leaps  over  a
ditch,  or  crofles  a  river,  ora  bridge,  without  Hopping  ;  thefe  things
will  be  documents  of  the  noble,  ingenuous  difpofition  of  his  mind.

But  the  form  of  his  body  will  appear  by  his  very  fmall  head,  black
eyes,  wide  noftrils,  fhort  and  ftraight  eredf  ears ;  his  foft  and  broad,
but  not  long  neck  ;  thick  mane,  hanging  down  and  fpreading  upon  the
right  fide  ;  broad  and  well-proportioned  breaft,  with  brawny  and  regu-
larly-fwelling  mufcles ;  large  and  ftraight  fhoulders ;  infledted  or  bend¬
ing  fides  ;  double  back-bone  ;  lank  and  trufled-up  belly  ;  two  equal
and  very  fmall  tefticles ;  broad  and  fubfiding  loins  ;  a  long  briftly  and
curled  tail  j  equal,  tall,  and  ftraight  legs ;  a  round  and  fmall  knee,  and
not  looking  inwards  ;  round  buttocks ;  brawny,  mufculous,  and  well-
proportioned  thighs ;  hard  and  high,  and  hollow  and  round  hoofs,  upon
which  middling  coronets  are  placed ;  and  his  whole  body  fo  compactly
formed,  as  to  be  majeftic,  tall,  ere£t,  and  from  its  afpedt  nimble  and
adtive  alfo  ;  and,  as  much  as  its  figure,  or  natural  fihape,  permits,  with
a  tendency  from  long  to  round.  But  that  temper  and  thefe  manners
are  commended,  which  from  gentle  and  quiet  become  fiery  and  eager,
and,  from  being  fiery  and  eager,  return  again  to  be  exceeding  gentle
and  calm  :  for  fuch  as  thefe  are  found  to  be  more  yielding  and  tradfable,
and  exceeding  patient  of  the  labour  and  fatigue  of  the  public  games.

It  is  right  to  break  an  horfe  for  domeftic  ufe,  when  he  is  two  years
old  ;  but,  for  the  public  games,  when  he  is  three  years  complete  j  fo,
neverthelefs,  that  he  be  put  to  labour  after  his  fourth  year  at  fartheft.
The  marks  of  his  years  change  with  his  body  ;  for,  while  he  is  two
years  and  fix  months  old,  his  upper  and  lower  middle-teeth  fall :  when
he  is  going  in  his  fourth  year,  having  caft  thole  that  are  called  the
canine  teeth,  he  brings  others  :  then,  within  the  fixth  year,  his  upper
jaw-teeth  or  grinders  fall.  In  his  fixth  year  he  fills  up  and  makes
even  thofe  teeth  he  firft  changed.  In  his  feventh  year  they  are  all
filled  up  equally,  and  from  that  time  he  carries  them  hollowed  :  nor
afterwards  can  it  be  certainly  known  how  many  years  old  he  is.  Ne¬
ver-


Chap.  XXX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  291

verthelefs,  in  his  tenth  year  his  temples  begin  to  grow  hollow,  and
fbmetimes  his  eye-brows  to  grow  grey,  and  his  teeth  to  hick  out.  I
reckon,  that  what  I  have  already  faid,  relating  to  his  mind,  temper,
and  manners,  and  his  body  and  age,  may  abundantly  fuffice.  Now
our  next  bufinefs  is  to  fhew  the  care  that  is  to  be  taken  of  them,  both
when  they  are  in  a  good  and  in  a  bad  hate  of  health.


■  ;  hie

CHAP.  XXX.

*

Of  the  Care  of  Horfes ,  and  of  Medicines  proper  for  thejn.

IF  horfes  in  good  health  are  lean,  they  are  more  fpeedily  reftored
and  made  up  again,  with  parched  wheat,  than  with  barley.  But  a
potion  of  wine  mu  ft  alfo  be  given  them,  and  then  you  mu  ft  with¬
draw  this  fort  of  food  from  them  by  degrees,  mixing  bran  with  their
barley,  till  they  be  accuftomed  to  live  upon  beans,  and  pure  barley.
The  bodies  of  horfes  mutt  be  daily  rubbed  down  no  lefs  than  thofe  of
men  :  and  oftentimes  your  having  curried  them,  and  rubbed  their  backs
as  hard  as  you  can,  is  of  more  benefit  to  them,  than  if  you  fhould
give  them  the  largeft  allowance  of  food  ;  but  it  is  of  great  importance
to  preferve  the  ftrength  of  their  body  and  feet,  both  which  we  may
maintain,  if  we  lead  the  cattle  at  proper  times  to  their  mangers,  to
water  and  to  exercife  j  and  take  care  that  they  be  {tabled  in  a  dry
place,  that  their  hoofs  may  not  grow  moift  with  wet,  which  we  {hall
eafily  avoid,  if  either  the  {tables  are  laid  with  oak-planks,  or  if  the
ground  be  carefully  cleaned,  and  flraw  thrown  upon  it.

For  the  moft  part,  labouring  horfes  contract  difeafes  from  wearinefs,
and  violent  heat ;  fometimes  alfo  from  cold,  and  from  their  not  having
made  water  at  their  own  time  ;  or  if  they  are  in  a  fweat,  and  drink
prefently  after  their  having  been  in  a  violent  motion  :  or  if,  after  they
have  flood  long,  they  are  all  of  a  fudden  fpurred  and  galloped.  Reft
is  a  cure  for  latitude,  if  fo  be  that  oil,  or  fat  mixed  with  wine,  be
poured  into  their  chops.  To  a  cold,  fomentations  are  applied,  and
their  head  and  back-bone  are  anointed  with  warm  greafe  or  wine.  The
remedies  are  almoft  the  fame,  if  he  does  not  make  water  :  for  they
pour  oil  mixed  with  wine  upon  his  flanks  and  reins ;  and,  if  that  has  no
good  effedt,  they  put  a  very  fmall  fuppofitory,  made  of  boiled  honey
and  fait,  into  the  hole  by  which  the  urine  pafles  •  or  they  put  a  living
fly,  or  a  grain  of  frankincenfe,  or  a  fuppofitory  of  bitumen,  into  his

P  p  2  naturals.


2p 2  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

naturals.  They  apply  the  fame  remedies,  if  the  urine  has  fcaldcd  his
genitals.

Tears  running  down  in  abundance,  and  flaccid  ears,  and  a  neck
over-burdened  with  the  weight  of  his  head,  and  hanging  down  to  the
ground,  are  indications  of  a  pain  in  his  head  :  then  they  cut  and  open
the  vein  which  is  under  his  eye,  and  foment  his  mouth  with  warm
water,  and  keep  him  from  meat  the  firft  day.  But  the  next  day  they
give  him  falling  a  potion  of  lukewarm  water,  and  green  grafs  ;  alfo
they  fpread  old  hay  or  foft  llraw  under  him,  and  give  him  water  again
in  the  twilight,  and  a  little  barley  with  two  pounds  and  an  half  of
vetches,  that  with  a  very  fmall  portion  of  food  he  may  be  brought  to
his  ordinary  allowance,  and  to  perform  his  ufual  talk.

If  an  horfe  has  a  pain  in  his  jaw-bones,  you  mull  foment  them  with
warm  vinegar,  and  rub  them  all  over  with  hogs-greafe  ;  and  you  mull
apply  the  fame  medicine  to  them  when  they  are  fwelled.  If  he  has
hurt  his  fhoulders,  or  if  the  blood  be  fallen  down  into  his  legs,  let  the
veins  be  opened  almoll  in  the  middle  of  both  his  legs,  and  let  his
fhoulders  be  anointed  with  the  blood  that  flows  out  of  them,  after  you
have  mixed  fine  powder  of  frankincenfe  with  it ;  and  you  mull  apply
the  horfe’s  own  dung  to  his  flowing  veins,  and  bind  them  up  with
bandages,  that  they  may  not  be  emptied  more  than  they  ought  to  be.
Alfo,  the  day  after,  let  him  be  blooded  in  the  fame  veins,  and  treated
after  the  fame  manner  j  and  let  him  be  kept  from  barley,  and  a  little
hay  given  him.  Then  the  day  following,  and  always  till  the  fixth
day,  let  about  three  cyathi ,  or  cupfuls,  of  the  juice  of  leeks,  mixed
with  an  hernina  of  oil,  be  poured  down  his  throat  thro’  an  horn.  After
the  fixth  day,  let  him  be  made  to  ftep  flowly ;  and,  after  he  has  walked,
it  will  be  proper  to  put  him  down  into  a  pond,  fo  that  he  may  fwirm
Thus,  by  degrees,  being  cherifhed  and  affifled  with  ftronger  food,  he
will  be  brought  to  his  ordinary  allowance  and,  ufual  talk.

But  if  bile  be  troublefome  to  an  horfe  ;  if  his  belly  fwells,  and  he
does  not  break  wind  ;  they  put  their  hand,  anointed  with  oil,  into  his
fundament,  and  open  the  natural  paflages  that  are  obftrudled,  and  take
out  the  dung :  afterward  they  bruife  wild  origany  (i),  and  loufewort  (2)

with

(1)  Cunila  bubula  is  the  Time  with  origanum  filvcfire ,  wild  origany  Vlhiy  fi ys,  that  it
has  a  feed  like  penyroyal  j  it  is  called  Heracleion  origanum ,  or  panax  Herac/ea.  Father
Hardouin  quotes  averfe  out  of  Nic under,  to  prove,  that  cunila  and  origanum  Heracleoticum
are  the  fame.  Diofiorides  alfo  fays,  lib.  iii.  32.  that  feme  call  the  origanum  Heracleoticum,
cunila.  Columella  fays,  lib.  ix.  4.  that  the  garden  cunila  is  by  the  Ruftics  in  Italy  called
Jatureia ,  favory.

(2)  Herb  a  pedicular  is,  loufewort  j  fo  called,  from  the  effect  it  has  in  deftroying  lice.

By


Chap.  XXXI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  293

with  fait,  and  boil  them,  and  mix  them  with  honey,  and  fo  make  them
into  fuppofitories,  and  adminifter  them  to  him  3  thefe  will  move  his
belly,  and  bring  away  all  the  bile.  Some  pour  a  quarter  of  a  pound
of  bruifed  myrrh,  with  an  hemina  of  wine,  down  his  throat,  and  anoint
his  fundament  with  liquid  pitch.  Some  give  him  a  clyfter  of  fea-water  3.
others  of  frefh  brine.  Worms  alfo,  like  earth-worms,  ufe  to  hurt  their
inteftines,  of  which  the  figns  are,  if  the  horfes  tumble  frequently
with  pain  3  if  they  move  their  head  to  their  belly  3  if  they  frequently
tofs  their  tails.  A  prefent  remedy  is  as  we  have  already  directed,  to
thruft  in  your  hand,  and  pull  out  the  dung,  and  then  to  give  them  a
clyfter  of  fea-water,  or  very  ftrong  brine  3  and  afterward  to  pour  down
their  throat  the  root  of  the  caper-bufh  bruifed,  with  a  fextarius  of
vinegar  :  for  by  this  means  the  forefaid  animals  are  deftroyed.


CHAP.  XXXI.

Of  Remedies  for  a  Cough.

BUT  litter  muft  be  fpread  very  deep  under  all  feeble  cattle  what-
foever,  that  they  may  lie  the  fofter.  A  frefh  cough  is  quickly
cured  with  lentils  beaten  in  a  mortar,  and  feparated  from  their  hulks,
and  ground  very  fmall  5  which  things  being  thus  done,  they  mix  a
fextarius  of  warm  water  with  the  fame  quantity  of  lentils,  and  pour
them  down  their  throat  :  they  give  the  like  medicine  for  three  days,,
and  the  lick  cattle  is  comforted  and  reftored  with  green  herbs,,  and  the.
tops  of  trees.  But  an  old  cough  is  difcufted  with  three  cyathi  of  the
juice  of  leeks  with  a  pint  of  oil  poured  into  their  chops,  and  by  giving;,
them  the  fame  food  as  we  directed  before.

You  muft  rub  ring-worms,  tetters,  and  whatever  part  the  fcab  feize3
upon,  with  vinegar  and  alum  3  and,  if  thefe  continue,  they  are  fome-
times  anointed  with  nitre  and  fcifille  alum  in  equal  quantity,  mixed'
throughly  with  vinegar.  Then  rub  pimples,  blifters,  or  rifings  on  the
fkin  with  the  currycomb,  in  the  fcorching  heat  of  the  fun,  till  fuch
time  as  the  blood  be  forced  out  of  them then  they  mix  an  equal

By  Pliny  it  is  reckoned  to  be  the  ft  ap  his-  agria  of  Diofcorldei.  It  has  leaves  like  tbofe  of  the
wild  vine,  and  a  flower  like  that  of  woad  3  ftraight,  foft,  and  black  fhoots,  and  green
little  hulls  or  pods  like  thofe  of  chiches,-  and  in  them  a  triangular  rough  kernel,  of  a  black-
yellowifli  colour,  white  within,  and  ftiarp  to  the  tafte.  See  Matthioh  in  Diofcor.  p.  850.

■r

quantity


*94  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

quantity  of  the  roots  of  Quick-grafs  ( i),  fulphur,  liquid  pitch,  and
alum  ;  and  with  this  medicine  the  forefaid  ailments  are  cured.


CHAP.  XXXII.

Of  Remedies  for  Hurts  by  Interfering ,  and for  the  Scab.

WHEN  the  fldn  is  rubbed  off,  and  a  wound  made  by  interfer¬
ing  (i),  they  wafh  it  twice  a  day  with  warm  water,  and,  pre-
fently  after,  they  rub  it  with  fait  bruifed  and  boiled  with  greafe,  till
the  llrength  of  the  corrupted  matter  drops  out  of  it.  The  fcab  is  mor¬
tal  to  this  four-footed  heart:,  unlefs  a  fpeedy  remedy  be  applied  to  it.
If  it  be  but  flight  and  inconfiderable,  when  it  firft:  begins,  they  anoint
it  in  the  heat  of  the  fun,  either  with  the  rofin  or  pitch  of  the  cedar-
tree^), or  with  the  oil  of  maftich  (3),  or  with  nettle-feed  and  oil  bruifed
together,  or  with  whale-oil,  or  with  that  which  falted  tunny  throws
out  in  the  difhes  it  is  ferved  up  in.  Never thelefs  the  fat  of  a  fea-calf
contributes  moft  of  any  thing  to  cure  this  ailment.  But,  if  it  is  already
become  inveterate,  more  violent  remedies  are  necertary  ;  for  which
reafon  they  boil  bitumen,  and  fulphur,  and  white  hellebore,  mixt  to¬
gether  in  equal  quantities,  in  liquid  pitch,  and  if  ale  hogs-lard,  or  axle-

(1)  Agreflis  herba.  If  this  be  the  true  reading,  it  is  impoflible  to  divine  what  kind  of
herb  the  author  means  :  perhaps  it  may  be,  as  fome  conjedhire,  a  kind  of  graft  called
agroflis ,  which  they  fay  is  a  kind  of  herb  with  many  knots  and  joints,  from  each  of  which
it  puts  forth  ftalks  upward,  and  roots  downward  ;  and  the  faid  ftalks  are  the  feminaries  of
others ;  and  fo  it  proceeds,  till  it  overfpreads  every  place,  which  cannot  be  prevented  but
by  pulling  it  up  intirely  by  the  roots.  Homer  mentions  it,  and  calls  ic  aypar/y  J'ta.,
Some  call  it  quick- graft,  or  dogs-graft.

( 1 )  Intertrigo ,  interfering ,  from  inter  and  tero.  It  is  rubbing  or  knocking  one  heel
againft  another  j  and  here  it  fignifies  the  hurt  or  fore  made  by  interfering.

(2)  Cedria  is  the  rofin  iffuing  out  of  the  great  cedar-tree.  Pliny  indeed  fays,  that  cedria
is  the  pitch  of  the  great  cedar  called  cedrelate.  But  Diofcorides  fays,  that  the  cedar  is  a  great
tree,  from  which  that,  which  they  call  cedria ,  is  gathered;  by  which,  no  doubt,  he  means
the  rofin  or  gum.  Some  authors  call  it  gummi ;  others  lacryma  or  unguentum ,  which  is
different  from  the  pitch,  which  is  extracted  by  fire,  which  Pliny,  in  his  nat.  hifl.  lib.  xvi.
c.  11.  fays,  is  maue  by  cutting  of  wood,  laying  it  in  heaps,  and  furrounding  it  with  fur¬
naces  ;  and  that  the  liquor,  which  flows  firft,  and  is  the  moft  liquid,  is  called  cedrium.
This  lome  call  virgin  pitch ,  being  the  pureft  and  the  beft,  the  other  which  follows  being
Of  a  grofler  quality.

(5;  Lentifci  oleo.  Lentifcus  is  the  tree,  and  the  rofin  of  it  is  called  mafiche.  Diofcoridet
fays,  that  the  beft  is  in  the  ifland  of  Chios ,  from  which  they  extract  an  oil,  as  alfo  from  the
wood  of  the  tree.  Pliny,  in  feveral  places,  mentions  oleum  e  lentifeo.  Some  fay  the  tree  has
13  name  from  its  pliabienefs  and  toughnefs.


tree-


Chap. XXXIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  295

tree-greafe  (4),  and  cure  them  with  that  compofition  ;  but  they  fir  ft
fcrape  off  the  fcab  with  a  knife,  and  wafh  it  throughly  with  urine.
Sometimes  alfo  it  has  been  of  great  benefit  to  open  to  the  quick,  and
cut  away  the  fcab  with  a  penknife,  and  fo  to  cure  the  wounds  that  are
thus  made  with  liquid  pitch  and  oil,  which  throughly  cleanfe  and  fill
up  the  wounds  equally  •  and,  when  they  are  filled  up,  that  they  may
clofe  and  form  a  fear  the  more  quickly,  foot,  from  a  caldron  or  kettle,
rubbed  upon  the  ulcer,  will  be  of  very  great  benefit.


CHAP.  XXXIII.

Of  Remedies  againfi  Flies ,  and  for  Pains  in  the  Eyes.

WE  fhall  alfo  remove  flies,  which  infeft  their  wounds,  with  pitch
and  oil,  or  any  other  ointment,  mixt  together,  and  poured
upon  them.  As  for  other  things,  they  are  cured  very  well  with  the
meal  of  bitter  vetches.  Cicatrices  ( 1 )  or  fpecks  of  the  eye  are  diminifhed,
when  they  are  rubbed  with  fafling-fpittle  and  fait,  or  with  the  fhell  of
the  cuttle-fifh  bruifed  with  foflile  fait,  or  with  the  feed  of  the  wild
parfnip  bruifed  in  a  mortar,  and  fqueezed  through  a  linen  cloth  upon
the  eyes.  And  all  pains  of  the  eyes  are  quickly  eafed,  by  anointing
them  with  the  juice  of  a  plantane,  with  honey  made  without  fmoke,
or,  if  this  cannot  be  had,  certainly  with  thyme-honey.  Sometimes
alfo  a  flowing  of  blood  through  their  noftrils  has  brought  them  into
danger;  and  this  is  flopped  by  pouring  the  juice  of  green  coriander  into
their  noftrils. .

(4)  Axungia,  hogs-lard,  or  axletree-greafe.  Both  Pliny  and  our  author  highly  commend
hogs-lard  for  feveral  ufes  and  cares,  efpeciaHy  that  of  a  boar,  which  they  ufe  for  anoint¬
ing  axletrees,  from  which  it  has  its  name,  quaji  ab  ungendo  axes.  Probabiy  they  intended
that  which  had  been  ufed  for  fome  time  for  chatpurpofe,  and  then  to  be  taken  off,  and
applied  as  they  direited;  for  the  particles  of  the  iron,  by  frequent  attrition,  mixing  with
-the  greafe,  and  heated  to  a  certain  degree,  may  be  of  great  efficacy  in  many  cafes.  See
Plin.  nat.  hift.  lib.  xxviii.  c.  9

(1)  Cicatrices  oculorurn.  The  Greeks  call  them  vup’iK let,  the  Latins,  nubecula ?,  little
clouds.  Some  define  them  a  fuperficial  exulceration  of  the  black  of  the  eye,  occafioned
by  the  difhllation  of  an  humour  into  it.  Some  diftinguifh  the  albugines  and  cicatrices  thus,
that  thefe  are  upon  the  furface,  and  are  called  aActi  and  j'taU/cc;  thofeare  called  tevx.uy.ct.T#,
and  are  the  cicatrices  longius  progrejfa.


CHAP.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.


CHAP.  XXXIV.

Of  Remedies  for  naufeating  of  their  Food ,  and  a  peflilential

falling  away  of  their  Flefh .

SOMETIMES  alfo  the  cattle  languilhes  with  a  loathing  of  their
food.  A  kind  of  feed,  which  they  call  git  (1),  is  a  remedy  for
this,  of  which  they  put  two  cyathi  or  cupfuls  bruifed  to  three  cyathi
of  oil,  and  a  fcxtarius  of  wine,  and  fo  pour  it  into  their  chops.  A
naufeating  is  alfo  removed,  if  you  give  them  frequently  to  drink  the
head  of  a  garlick  bruifed  with  an  hemina  of  wine.  It  is  better  to  open
an  impoflumation  with  a  red-hot  lamina ,  than  with  a  cold  iron-inftru-
mentj  and,  when  it  is  fqeezed  out,  it  is  afterwards  cured  with  lina-
ments.  There  is  alfo  that  peftilential  pining  ficknefs,  when,  in  a  few
days,  mares  are  feized  with  a  fudden  leannefs,  and  then  with  death.
When  this  happens,  it  is  of  fome  benefit  to  them  to  pour  into  each  of
them,  through  their  noftrils,  four J'extarii  of  falt-fifh-pickle,  or  mac-
krel-brine  (2),  if  they  be  of  a  lefler  fize;  for,  if  they  be  of  a  larger
fize,  you  may  even  pour  a  congius  of  it  into  each  of  them.  This  brings
out  all  the  rheum  through  their  noftrils,  and  throughly  purges  the
cattle.


CHAP.  XXXV.

Of  Madnefs  incident  to  Mares.

THERE  is  a  madnefs  which  feizes  mares,  which  is  rare  indeed,  but
very  well  known,  that,  when  they  have  feen  their  own  image
in  the  water,  they  are  taken  with  a  filly  vain  love  of  it  •  and  thereby

forgetting


(1)  Gitb  or  git.  The  Greeks  call  it  melanthio n  or  melaufyermon,  from  che  blacknefs  of
irs  feed.  It  is  commonly  called  nigella ,  fennel-flower,  or  devil-in-a-bufh.

(2)  Garum ,  a  certain  fait  liquor  or  fauce  made  of  a  fifh,  which  the  Greeks  called  gar  on.
There  is  no  certain  account  given  of  this  fifh;  therefore  we  may  fay  it  is  now  unknown.
The  fame  fort  of  liquor  was  afterwards  made  of  many  different  fifhes,  which  ftill  retained
the  antient  name  garum.  We  have  this  account  of  the  way  of  making  it :  they  threw  the
inteftines  of  fillies  into  a  vefTel,  and  faked  them,  and  then  fet  them  out  in  the  fun  to  mace¬
rate,  frequently  turning  them,  till  they  had  formed  a  certain  quantity  of  liquor,  the  fineft
of  which  chey  drained  off,  and  called  it  garum.  Of  the  remainder  or  refufe  of  all  this  fluff


Chap.  XXXVI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  297

forgetting  their  food,  they  pine  away,  and  perifh  with  defire.  The
figns  of  this  madnefs  are,  when  they  run  up-and-down  their  paftures,
as  if  they  were  put  to  the  fpur,  and  from  time  to  time  looking  round
them,  they  feem  as  if  they  were  feeking  for,  and  wanted  fomething.
This  phrenfy  of  theirs  is  removed,  if  you  lead  them  to  the  water  5  then,
beholding  at  length  their  own  uglinefs,  they  abolifh  and  lofe  the  remem¬
brance  of  their  former  image.  What  has  been  faid  concerning  mares
in  general  may  fuffice.  The  following  directions  in  particular  muft  be
given  to  thofe,  who  make  it  their  bufinefs  to  breed  and  bring  up  herds
of  mules.


CHAP.  XXXVI.

Of  Mules.

IN  educating  the  mule-kind,  the  firft  and  principal  thing  to  be  done
is,  carefully  to  inquire  after,  and  find  out,  a  male  and  female  parent
of  the  future  offspring,  of  which,  if  either  the  one  or  the  other  be
unfit  for  the  purpofe,  even  that  which  is  formed  of  the  two  decays,
and  comes  to  nought.  It  is  proper  to  chufe  a  mare  of  any  age  under
ten,  as  long  as  the  is  of  the  larged:  and  the  mod:  beautiful  fhape,  with
ffrong  members,  and  exceeding  patient  of  labour,  that  ffie  may  ealily
receive  and  bear  the  full  time  the  plant  of  a  ftrange  and  different  kind,
that  is  ingrafted  into  her,  and  is  difcordant  to  her  womb ;  and  may
communicate  to  her  offspring  not  only  the  good  qualities  of  her  body,
but  alfo  thofe  of  her  natural  difpofition  and  temper  j  for  not  only  the
feeds,  which  are  thrown  into  the  genital  parts,  are  animated  with  diffi¬
culty,  but  alfo,  after  they  are  brought  to  conception,  they  are  longer
in  growing  ripe  for  the  birth,  and  are  fcarcely  brought  forth  in  the  thir¬
teenth  month,  after  the  full  year  is  pad ;  and  there  is  more  of  the  pater¬
nal  dulnefs  and  fluggifhnefs,  than  of  the  maternal  vigour,  inherent  in
the  offspring.

Neverthelefs,  as  mares  are  found  with  lefs  care  for  the  forefaid  ufes,
fo  there  is  greater  trouble  in  chufing  a  male,  becaufe  oft-times  the  ex-

they  made  another  coarfer  fauce,  which  they  called  alex.  In  Pliny  s  time,  the  moft  efteemed
of  any  was  that  made  of fcombri ,  which,  fome  fay,  is  a  fort  of  mackrel,  which  they  brought
from  Spain,  and  from  an  iflmd  near  Carthage ,  which,  from  that  fifh,  they  called  fcombra-
ria }  fo  that  this  exquifite  liquor,  as  he  fays,  lib.  xxxi.  c.  8.  was  made  of  the  guts  of  fiih,
and  other  things,  which  were  proper  to  be  thrown  away,  macerated  in  fait  j  and  that  ic  was
the  juice  that  iffued  out  of  them  when  they  were  beginning  to  putrify.


periment


29S  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

periment  fru  ft  rates  the  expettation,  and  does  not  fucceed  according  to
the  opinion  of  him  that  approved  him.  Many  ftallions,  of  a  wonder-
ous  beautiful  outward  appearance  (1),  do  generate  a  low  mean  race,
either  as  to  their  form  or  fex ;  for,  whether  they  procreate  females  of
a  fmall  body,  or  more  males  alfo  than  females  of  a  beautiful  body,  they
diminilh  the  income  of  the  mailer  of  the  family  :  but  fome,  of  a  con¬
temptible  afpedt,  are  productive  and  full  of  moft  precious  feeds.  Some¬
times  there  are  fome  of  them,  which  convey  their  excellent  and  noble
qualities  to  their  offspring  :  but,  being  dull  and  flow  to  pleafure,  are
very  rarely  provoked  to  venery.  To  a  male  of  this  temper  the  Keep-
pers  ought  to  bring  near,  by  degrees,  a  female  of  the  fame  kind,  becaufe
nature  has  made  animals,  that  are  alike,  more  familiar  with  their  like  5
for  fo  it  is  brought  about,  that,  by  throwing  the  female  in  his  way,
when  the  male  alfo  is  foothed  into  good  humour  by  leaping  upon  her,
being,  as  it  were,  fet  on  fire,  and  blinded  with  luff,  after  they  have
withdrawn  her,  which  he  had  a  liking  to,  and  fought  after,  he  may
be  put  upon  the  mare,  which  he  had  an  averfion  to.


CHAP.  XXXVII.

Of  refraining  the  Cruelty  of  a  Stallion ,  mad  upon  gratifying

his  luuf .

THERE  is  alfo  another  kind  of  ftallion,  who  runs  furioufly  to  the
gratification  of  his  lull,  which,  if  he  is  not  artfully  refrained,
proves  deftrudtive  to  the  ftud ;  for  oft-times,  having  broken  his  bonds,
he  difquiets  thofe  that  are  with  young ;  and,  when  he  is  admitted,  he
fallens  his  teeth  in  the  necks  and  backs  of  the  females.  To  prevent  his
doing  of  this,  they  bind  him  a  little  while  to  the  mill,  and  moderate
the  cruelty  of  his  love  with  labour,  and  fo  admit  him  to  venery  when
he  is  become  more  model!.  Neverthelefs  a  ftallion  alfo,  that  is  of  more
clemency  in  his  libidinous  gratifications,  is  not  to  be  admitted  upon  other
terms,  becaufe  it  is  of  much  importance,  that  the  naturally  droufy  and
dull  difpofition  of  this  beaft  be  put  in  motion  and  roufed  by  moderate
exercife ;  and  that  the  male,  when  he  is  made  more  lively  and  brifk

(l)  Multi  admijjarii  Jpecie  tenus  inirabilijjimam.  This  fentence  Teems  to  be  imperfect  j
and,  in  order  to  make  it  intelligible,  viirabilijjimatn  muft  be  changed  into  mirabt'es pejjim am ,
or,  as  GeJ>:erus  corrects  it,  mrabiles  imam,  which  will  make  it  very  confident.


2


than


Chap. XXXVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  299

than  ufual,  be  joined  to  the  female,  that  fo  the  feeds  themfelves  may,
by  a  certain  fecret  efficacy,  be  formed  and  faffiioned  of  more  lively  and
active  principles.

But  a  mule  is  generated  not  only  of  a  mare  and  an  he-afs,  but  alfo
of  a  ffie-afs  and  an  horfe,  and  of  a  wild  he-afs  and  a  mare.  But  fome
authors  not  to  be  concealed,  as  Marcus  Varro ,  and,  before  him,  Dio-
nyjius  and  Mago ,  have  related,  that,  in  fome  countries  in  Africa ,  the
breed  of  mules  is  fo  far  from  being  looked  upon  as  prodigies,  that  their
bringing  forth  of  young  is  as  familiar  to  the  inhabitants,  as  that  of  mares
is  to  us.  Neverthelefs  there  is  none  of  this  kind  of  cattle  that  is  more
excellent  and  valuable,  either  with  refped  to  their  difpofition  andtem-
per,  or  the  form  of  their  body,  than  that  which  is  begotten  by  an  he-
afs,  altho’  that  which  is  begotten  by  a  wild  he-afs  may,  in  fome  mea-
fure,  be  compared  to  this,  except  that  it  always  carries  along  with  it  the
lean  and  ill-favoured  appearance  and  mein  of  its  fire,  and  cannot  be
tamed  and  broken,  and  will  not  yield  and  fubmit  to  labour,  as  is  the
temper  of  every  bead:  that  is  wild.  Therefore  a  ftallion  of  this  fort  is
more  profitable  in  his  nephews  than  in  his  fons ;  for,  when  one  that  is
fprung  of  a  ffie-afs  and  a  wild  he-afs  is  admitted  to  a  mare,  whatever
proceeds  from  him,  its  wildnefs  and  fiercenefs  gradually  abating,  retains
the  form  and  modefty  of  its  fire,  and  the  ftrength  and  fwiftnefs  of  its
grandfire.

Such  as  are  conceived  and  procreated  of  an  horfe  and  a  ffie-afs,  altho’
they  take  their  name  from  their  fire,  being  called  hinni  (i),  are,  in  all
things,  more  like  their  dams ;  therefore  it  is  mod:  advantageous  to  defti-
nate  an  he-afs  for  procreating  the  mule-kind,  the  breed  of  which  (as
I  faid)  is  found  by  trial  to  be  of  a  more  goodly,  lightly  and  beautiful
appearance.  Neverthelefs  he  ought  not  otherwife  to  be  approved  of
from  his  afped,  but  by  his  being  of  a  very  large  body,  with  a  drong
neck,  robud:  and  broad  ribs,  a  mufculous  and  vail;  cheft,  brawny  thighs,
compad  legs,  of  a  black  or  fpotted  colour;  for  the  moufe-colour,  as  it
is  very  common  in  an  he-afs,  is  not  very  fuitable  alfo  in  a  mule.  Nei¬
ther  let  the  outward  appearance  of  the  four-footed  bead  in  general  de¬
ceive  us,  if  we  behold  him  fuch  as  we  approve  ;  for  in  the  fame  man¬
ner  as  the  fpots,  which  are  in  the  tongues  and  palates  of  rams,  are  found,
for  the  mod;  part,  in  the  fleeces  of  lambs,  fo,  if  the  he-afs  carries  hairs
of  a  different  colour  in  his  eye-lids  or  ears,  he  frequently  procreates  an
offspring  of  divers  colours  alfo;  which  colour  itfelf,  tho’  it  has  been


(1)  Hinni ,  fo  called  from  their  neighing  fomewhat  like  a  horfe,  retaining  fcraethinz  of

their  fire.  0

Qjq  2  mod:


300  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

mod  diligently  examined  and  fearched  for  in  a  ftallion,  neverthelefs  oft-
times  deceives  the  owner:  for  fometimes  alfo,  without  the  forefaid
figns,  he  procreates  mules  very  unlike  to  himfelf,  which,  I  think,  does
not  happen  otherwife,  but  that  the  colour  of  the  grandfire,  by  being
mixt  with  the  primordial  feed,  is  communicated  and  reftored  to  his
grandfons.

Therefore  fuch  a  foal  of  an  afs,  as  I  have  deferibed,  mud,  as  foon
as  he  is  foaled,  be  prefently  taken  from  his  mother,  and  put  under  a
mare,  without  her  having  any  knowledge  of  him.  She  is  very  eafily
deceived  in  the  dark ;  for  her  own  foal  being  taken  away  from  her,  the
forefaid  one  is  nourifhed  by  her  in  a  dark  place,  as  if  fhe  had  foaled  it
herfelf.  Then,  when  the  mare  has  been  accuftomed  to  him  for  ten
days,  fhe  will  always  afterwards  give  him  her  dugs  when  he  feeks  for
them.  The  ftallion,  beings  thus  foftered,  learns,  by  degrees,  to  love
mares.  Sometimes  alio,  tho’  he  be  brought  up  with  his  mother’s  milk,
yet,  having  been  familiarly  converfant  with  mares  from  his  younger
days,  he  may  have  a  liking  to  them,  and  feek  to  be  in  their  company,
and  be  familiar  with  them.  But  one  under  three  years  old  mud  not  be
admitted  to  be  a  ftallion  ;  and,  if  even  this  be  allowed,  it  will  be  proper
to  be  done  in  the  fpring,  when  he  muft  be  ftrengthened  both  with  green
cut-grafs,  and  a  large  allowance  of  barley ;  and  fometimes  alfo  you  muft:
give  him  a  drench.  Neverthelefs,  he  muft  not  be  put  to  a  young  fe¬
male;  for  unlefs  fhe  has  known  a  male  before,  fhe  drives  away  the
ftallion  with  her  kicking,  when  he  leaps  upon  her ;  and  when  he  is  thus
violently  driven  away,  and  feverely  ufed,  it  makes  him  an  enemy  to
all  other  mares  alfo.  To  prevent  this,  they  put  an  ignoble  and  vulgar
little  he-afs  to  the  female,  to  folicit  her  compliance.  Neverthelefs,
they  do  not  fuffer  him  to  cover  her,  but,  if  the  mare  is  brought  to  be
paftive,  they  prefently  drive  away  that  of  a  more  ignoble  breed,  and
put  her  to  a  male  of  greater  value,  and  of  a  more  noble  extraction.

There  is  a  place  built  on  purpofe  fort  hefe  ufes,  (peafants  call  it  a
machine)  which  has  two  walls  built  into  a  gently  riling  ground,  and
at  fo  fmall  diftance  the  one  from  the  other,  that  the  female  may  not
ftruggle,  nor  turn  herfelf  away  from  the  ftallion  when  he  leaps  upon
her.  There  is  accefs  into  it  at  both  ends,  but  in  the  lower  end  it  is
fecured  and  fhut  up  with  crofs-bars ;  to  which  the  mare  being  bound
with  a  halter,  is  placed  in  the  lower  part  of  the  declivity,  that  fobend¬
ing  downward  fhe  may  both  receive  the  feed  of  the  ftallion,  that  covers
her  the  better,  and  afford  to  the  lefler  four-footed  beaft,  an  eafy  afeent
to  her  back  from  the  higher  part.  After  fhe  has  brought  forth  that
which  fhe  has  conceived  by  the  he-afs,  the  following  year,  Ihe  nurfes

and


Chap.  XXXVIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  301

and  brings  up  her  young  one  without  being  with  foal  again  :  for  that
is  better  than  what  fome  do,  who,  notwithftanding  fhe  has  but  lately
foaled,  yet  fill  her  belly  again  by  admitting  an  horfe  to  her.  When
the  fhe-mule  is  one  year  old,  it  is  proper  to  drive  her  from  her  dam  ;
and,  after  fhe  is  removed,  to  pafture  her  upon  the  mountains,  or  in
wild  places,  that  fhe  may  harden  her  hoofs,  and  be  afterwards  fit  for
long  journeys  ;  for  the  he-mule  is  fitter  for  the  pack-faddle.  She  in¬
deed  is  nimbler  ;  but  both  fexes  are  very  proper,  both  for  travelling,
and  alfo  for  tilling  the  ground  ;  unlefs  the  price  of  the  quadruped  be
too  burdenfome  an  expence  to  the  Hufbandman,  or  the  field,  with  its
weighty  glebe,  require  the  ftrength  of  oxen.


CHAP.  XXXVIII.

Of  Medicines  for  curing  Mules.

I  Have  already,  in  fpeaking  of  the  other  kinds,  taught  you,  for  the
moft  part,  the  medicines  proper  for  this  cattle  :  neverthelefs,  I
fhall  not  omit  certain  difeafes  peculiar  to  mules,  the  remedies  of  which
I  have  here  fubjoined.  They  give  raw  cole  wort  or  cabbage  to  a  mule
that  has  a  fever.  They  take  away  fome  blood  from  one  that  is  purfy,
and  has  a  difficulty  in  breathing,  and  mix  about  an  hemina  of  the  juice
of  horehound,  with  a  fextarins  of  wine  and  oil,  and  half  an  ounce  of
frankincenfe,  and  pour  them  into  her.  They  apply  barley-meal  to
one  that  is  affected  with  the  fpavin  j  and  afterwards,  when  they  have
opened  the  fuppuration  with  a  lancet,  they  cure  it  with  linaments :  or
they  pour  into  her,  thro’  the  left  noftril,  a  fextarius  of  the  belt  garum,
or  falt-mackrel-brine,  with  a  pound  of  oil  ;  and  with  this  medicine
they  mix  the  liquor  of  three  or  four  eggs,  after  they  have  feparated  the
yolks  from  it.  They  fometimes  are  wont  to  cut  their  thighs,  and  to
burn  them  with  an  hot  iron.  They  let  out  the  blood  that  falls  down
into  their  feet,  in  the  fame  manner  as  they  do  in  horfes ;  or  if  they  have
an  herb,  which  peafants  call  white  hellebore ,  they  give  it  them  for  fod¬
der.  There  is  henbane,  the  feed  of  which,  bruifed,  and  given  with  wine,
cures  the  forefaid  difeafe.

Leannefs  and  a  languor  are  removed  by  giving  them  frequently  a  po¬
tion,  into  which  they  put  half  an  ounce  of  bruifed  fulphur,  and  a  raw
egg,  and  a  dram  weight  of  bruifed  myrrh.  They  mix  thefe  three  things
with  wine,  and  fo  pour  them  down  their  throat.  But  thefe  felf-fame

things


300  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VI.

moft  diligently  examined  and  fearched  for  in  a  ftallion,  neverthelefs  oft-
times  deceives  the  owner:  for  fometimes  alfo,  without  the  forefaid
figns,  he  procreates  mules  very  unlike  to  himfelf,  which,  I  think,  does
not  happen  otherwife,  but  that  the  colour  of  the  grandfire,  by  being
mixt  with  the  primordial  feed,  is  communicated  and  reftored  to  his
grandfons.

Therefore  fuch  a  foal  of  an  afs,  as  I  have  deferibed,  muft,  as  foon
as  he  is  foaled,  be  prefently  taken  from  his  mother,  and  put  under  a
mare,  without  her  having  any  knowledge  of  him.  She  is  very  eafily
deceived  in  the  dark ;  for  her  own  foal  being  taken  away  from  her,  the
forefaid  one  is  nourifhed  by  her  in  a  dark  place,  as  if  fhe  had  foaled  it
herfelf.  Then,  when  the  mare  has  been  accuftomed  to  him  for  ten
days,  fhe  will  always  afterwards  give  him  her  dugs  when  he  feeks  for
them.  The  ftallion,  being*  thus  foftered,  learns,  by  degrees,  to  love
mares.  Sometimes  all'o,  tho’  he  be  brought  up  with  his  mother’s  milk,
yet,  having  been  familiarly  converfant  with  mares  from  his  younger
days,  he  may  have  a  liking  to  them,  and  feek  to  be  in  their  company,
and  be  familiar  with  them.  But  one  under  three  years  old  muft  not  be
admitted  to  be  a  ftallion  ;  and,  if  even  this  be  allowed,  it  will  be  proper
to  be  done  in  the  fpring,  when  he  muft  be  ftrengthened  both  with  green
cut-grafs,  and  a  large  allowance  of  barley;  and  fometimes  all'o  you  muft
give  him  a  drench.  Neverthelefs,  he  muft  not  be  put  to  a  young  fe¬
male;  for  unlefs  fhe  has  known  a  male  before,  fhe  drives  away  the
ftallion  with  her  kicking,  when  he  leaps  upon  her ;  and  when  he  is  thus
violently  driven  away,  and  feverely  ufed,  it  makes  him  an  enemy  to
all  other  mares  alfo.  To  prevent  this,  they  put  an  ignoble  and  vulgar
little  he-afs  to  the  female,  to  folicit  her  compliance.  Neverthelefs,
they  do  not  fuffer  him  to  cover  her,  but,  if  the  mare  is  brought  to  be
paffive,  they  prefently  drive  away  that  of  a  more  ignoble  breed,  and
put  her  to  a  male  of  greater  value,  and  of  a  more  noble  extraction.

There  is  a  place  built  on  purpofe  fort  hefe  ufes,  (peafants  call  it  a
machine)  which  has  two  walls  built  into  a  gently  riling  ground,  and
at  fo  fmall  diftance  the  one  from  the  other,  that  the  female  may  not
itruggle,  nor  turn  herfelf  away  from  the  ftallion  when  he  leaps  upon
her.  There  is  accefs  into  it  at  both  ends,  but  in  the  lower  end  it  is
fecured  and  fhut  up  with  crofs-bars ;  to  which  the  mare  being  bound
with  a  halter,  is  placed  in  the  lower  part  of  the  declivity,  that  fobend¬
ing  downward  fhe  may  both  receive  the  feed  of  the  ftallion,  that  covers
her  the  better,  and  afford  to  the  leffer  four-footed  beaft,  an  eafy  afeent
to  her  back  from  the  higher  part.  After  fhe  has  brought  forth  that
which  fhe  has  conceived  by  the  he-afs,  the  following  year,  fhe  nurfes

and


Chap.  XXXVIII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  301

and  brings  up  her  young  one  without  being  with  foal  again  :  for;  that
is  better  than  what  fome  do,  who,  notwithftanding  fhe  has  but  lately
foaled,  yet  fill  her  belly  again  by  admitting  an  horfe  to  her.  When
the  fhe-mule  is  one  year  old,  it  is  proper  to  drive  her  from  her  dam  ;
and,  after  fhe  is  removed,  to  pafture  her  upon  the  mountains,  or  in
wild  places,  that  fhe  may  harden  her  hoofs,  and  be  afterwards  fit  for
long  journeys  ;  for  the  he-mule  is  fitter  for  the  pack-faddle.  She  in¬
deed  is  nimbler  ;  but  both  fexes  are  very  proper,  both  for  travelling,
and  alfo  for  tilling  the  ground  ;  unlefs  the  price  of  the  quadruped  be
too  burdenfome  an  expence  to  the  Hufbandman,  or  the  field,  with  its
weighty  glebe,  require  the  ftrength  of  oxen.


CHAP.  XXXVIII.

Of  Medicines  for  curing  Mules.

I  Have  already,  in  fpeaking  of  the  other  kinds,  taught  you,  for  the
mod;  part,  the  medicines  proper  for  this  cattle  :  neverthelefs,  I
fhall  not  omit  certain  difeafes  peculiar  to  mules,  the  remedies  of  which
I  have  here  fubjoined.  They  give  raw  cole  wort  or  cabbage  to  a  mule
that  has  a  fever.  They  take  away  fome  blood  from  one  that  is  purfy,
and  has  a  difficulty  in  breathing,  and  mix  about  an  hemina  of  the  juice
of  horehound,  with  a  fextarius  of  wine  and  oil,  and  half  an  ounce  of
frankincenfe,  and  pour  them  into  her.  They  apply  barley-meal  to
one  that  is  affe&ed  with  the  fpavin  ;  and  afterwards,  when  they  have
opened  the  fuppuration  with  a  lancet,  they  cure  it  with  linaments :  or
they  pour  into  her,  thro’  the  left  noftril,  a  fextarius  of  the  belt  garum,
or  falt-mackrel-brine,  with  a  pound  of  oil  ;  and  with  this  medicine
they  mix  the  liquor  of  three  or  four  eggs,  after  they  have  feparated  the
yolks  from  it.  They  fometimes  are  wont  to  cut  their  thighs,  and  to
burn  them  with  an  hot  iron.  They  let  out  the  blood  that  falls  down
into  their  feet,  in  the  fame  manner  as  they  do  in  horfes ;  or  if  they  have
an  herb,  which  peafants  call  white  hellebore ,  they  give  it  them  for  fod¬
der.  There  is  henbane,  the  feed  of  which,  bruifed,  and  given  with  wine,
cures  the  forefaid  difeafe.

Leannefs  and  a  languor  are  removed  by  giving  them  frequently  a  po¬
tion,  into  which  they  put  half  an  ounce  of  bruifed  fulphur,  and  a  raw
egg,  and  a  dram  weight  of  bruifed  myrrh.  They  mix  thefe  three  things
with  wine,  and  fo  pour  them  down  their  throat.  But  thefe  felf-fame

things


302  L,J.  M.  COLUMELL  A,  &c.  Book VI.

things  do  equally  cure  a  cough,  and  a  pain  of  the  belly.  There  is  no¬
thing  of  fo  great  efficacy  for  leannefs,  as  medic.  That  herb,  when  it
is  green,  and  even  when  it  is  dry,  prefently  fattens  labouring  beafts  :
but  it  muft  be  given  moderately,  left  the  cattle  be  fuffocated  with  too
much  blood.

They  put  greafe  into  a  mule’s  chops,  when  ffie  is  tired  and  exceed¬
ing  hot,  and  pour  pure  wine  into  her  mouth.  As  to  what  is  further
neceflary  for  mules,  we  will  put  in  practice  the  directions  we  delivered
in  the  former  parts  of  this  book,  which  contain  every  thing  relating  to
the  care  and  management  of  oxen,  and  of  mares.


L.  yUNIUS


[  3°3  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  SEVENTH.

AS  we  are  now,  Publius  Sihinus ,  going  to  fpeak  of  leffer  cattle,
we  {hall  begin  with  this  lelfer,  vulgar,  little  Arcadian  he-
afs,  of  fmall  value,  of  which  moft  authors  of  Hufbandry
think  that  principal  account  ought  to  be  made,  and  the
greateft  regard  had  to  him,  both  in  buying  and  managing  of  beads
deftined  for  labour  :  and  not  without  reafon  j  for  he  may  be  kept
even  in  that  farm  which  has  no  pafture,  being  content  with  a  very
fmall  allowance  of  fodder,  and  of  any  fort  whatfoever  :  for  they  nou¬
rish  him  either  with  leaves,  or  thorn-bufhes,  or  thirties,  or  willow-
rods,  or  with  a  bundle  of  vine-fprays  thrown  before  him  but  he  even
grows  fat  with  ftraw  and  chaff,  with  which  almoft  all  countries  abound.
Alfo  he  bears  up  moft  valiantly  under  the  negledt  of  an  imprudent
keeper  :  he  can  endure  blows,  and  ftripes,  and  penury,  with  the  greateft
patience :  for  which  reafons,  he  fails  and  decays  more  flowly  than  any
other  fort  of  cattle  whatfoever.  For,  being  exceeding  patient  of  labour
and  hunger,  he  is  rarely  affedfed  with  difeafes.  The  very  many  and
necefiary  fervices  of  this  animal,  beyond  what  comes  to  his  fhare,  con-
iidering  his  fize,  do  more  than  compenfate  the  little  trouble  and  charges
in  keeping  him,  forafmuch  as  with  light  ploughs  he  breaks  up  eafy
ground,  fuch  as  that  in  Bcctica  and  all  Libya  is,  and  draws  fuch  car¬
riages  as  are  not  of  too  great  weight.  Oft-times  alfo,  as  the  moft  cele¬
brated  poet  fays  (i),

- —  ‘  The  driver  of  the  flow  dull  afs,

‘  Returning  from  the  city,  loads  his  ribs

(i)  Virg.  georg.  lib.  i.  273.


With


3°+


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

*  With  cheap  and  paltry  apples,  or  brings  back
‘  His  dented  done,  or  mats  of  coal-black  pitch.  ’

•

Now,  indeed,  working  in  mills,  and  grinding  of  corn,  is  almoft
the  ufual  and  ordinary  labour  of  this  cattle  :  wherefore  every  manor
whatfoever  requires  this  little  afs,  as  what  is  exceeding  neceflary,  which,
as  I  faid,  can  very  conveniently  carry  to  town,  or  bring  back  again,
either  upon  his  back,  or  with  his  neck,  moft  part  of  things  neceflary
for  ufe.  But  which  fpecies  of  them  is  mold  approved,  or  what  is  the
molt  approved  way  of  managing  them,  has  been  abundantly  declared
in  the  preceding  book,  when  directions  were  given  concerning  the  afs
of  great  price,  and  noble  extraction.


CHAP.  II.

Of  Buying  and  Managing  of  Sheep.

AFTER  the  greater  quadrupeds,  fheep-cattle  are  of  fecond  ac¬
count,  which  may  be  of  firft  account,  if  you  have  regard  to  the
greatnefs  of  the  profit  redounding  from  them.  For  this  fort  of  cattle
chiefly  protects  us  againft  the  violence  of  the  cold,  and  furnilhes  comely
and  magnificent  coverings  for  our  bodies.  Moreover,  it  not  only  fatiates
the  country  people  with  abundance  of  milk  and  cheefe,  but  alfo  gar-
nilhes  the  tables  of  the  elegant  with  agreeable  and  numerous  dilhes.
To  fome  nations,  indeed,  which  are  intirely  deflitute  of  corn,  it  fur-
nifhes  their  whole  fuflenance  :  hence  it  is,  that  very  many  of  the  No -
mades(i)  and  Getce  (2)  are  called  GalaBopotce  (milk-drinkers).  There¬
fore  this  cattle,  though  it  be  exceeding  delicate,  as  Celfus  fays  very
prudently,  enjoys  a  very  fafe  fate  of  health,  and  is  not  at  all  afflicted
with  peflilential  ficknefs.  Neverthelefs,  it  muff  be  chofen  according
to  the  nature  of  the  place  ;  which  Virgil  direCts  to  be  obferved,  not
only  with  refpeCt  to  this  cattle,  but  alfo  in  all  rural  difcipline  whatfo¬
ever,  when  he  fays  (3),

‘  Nor  can  all  forts  of  lands  all  things  produce. 5

(1)  Komades  were  fuch  people  in  general,  as  iubfifted  by  feeding  of  cattle,  and  had  no
certain  habitation,  but  wenc  where-ever  they  could  find  pafture  for  their  cattle,  as  the  wild
Tartars ,  &c.

( 2 )  Get*,  a  people  in  Dacia ,  upon  the  confines  of  Scythia ;  fome  think  they  were  the
Moldavians.  Plmy  lays,  that  thefe  Getcs  were  by  the  'Romans  called  Daci.

(3)  ^’r£  Zeord-  kb.  11.  39.


‘  A  fat


Chap.  II.  0/HUSBANDRY.  305

A  fat  and  champagne  country  fuftains  tall  fheep  ;  a  lean  and  hilly,
thofe  that  are  fquare  and  well-let ;  a  woody  and  mountainous,  fuch  as
are  fmall.  Covered  cattle  find  very  convenient  pafture  in  meadows
and  level  fallow  lands.

And  this  direction  is  not  only  of  great  importance,  with  refped;  to
4he  feveral  kinds  of  fheep,  but  alfo  to  their  colours.  Our  people  for¬
merly  reckoned,  that  the  Milejian  (4),  Calabrian ,  and  Apulian  (5)
fheep,  were  of  an  excellent  kind  ;  and  that  the  Earentinian  (6)  were
the  beft  of  them.  Now  thofe  of  Gaul  are  efteemed  more  valuable  ;
and  of  thefe,  the  Altinian  (7)  are  preferred  to  all  the  reft.  Alfo  thofe
which  have  their  folds  upon  the  lean  fields  about  Parma  and  Modena.
The  white  colour,  as  it  is  the  beft,  fo  alfo  it  is  the  moft  profitable ;  be-
caufe  that  of  it  very  many  other  colours  are  made  ;  but  this  is  not
made  of  any  other.  The  black  and  brown  dark  colours,  which  Pol-
lentia  (8)  in  Italy ,  and  Cor  dub  a  (9)  in  Baetica,  furnifh  us  with,  are
of  their  own  nature  commendable  for  their  price.  Nor  does  Afia  pro¬
duce  lefs  plenty  of  thofe  of  a  bright-red  colour,  which  they  call  Ery-
threan  (10).

But  experience  has  taught  to  produce  and  exprefs  other  varieties  alfo
in  this  kind  of  cattle  ;  for,  at  a  certain  time,  when  fome  wild  and  fierce
rams  of  a  wonderful  colour,  as  other  beafts,  were  brought  from  the
neighbouring  parts  of  Africa ,  to  the  municipal  city  of  Cadiz ,  by  thofe
who  entertained  the  people  with  public  games  and  fhews,  M.  Colu¬
mella  my  uncle,  a  man  of  a  quick  difcerning  genius,  and  a  famous
Hulbandman,  having  bought  fome  of  them,  carried  them  to  his  own
lands,  and  when  they  were  tamed,  admitted  them  to  couple  with  co¬
vered  fheep.  Thefe,  at  firft,  brought  forth  rough  briftly  lambs,  but
of  the  colour  of  their  fire  ;  and  afterwards  they  themfelves,  being  put
upon  Earentinian  iheep,  generated  rams  of  a  finer  fleece.  Moreover,
whatever  was  afterwards  conceived  by  them,  refembled  the  colour  of
the  fire  and  grandfire,  but  the  delicacy  and  foftnefs  of  the  dam.  In
this  manner  Columella  faid  that  any  colour  or  outward  appearance

(4)  Milefii  were  a  people  in  Caria ,  or  Ionia,  in  the  letter  AJia.

(5)  Calabria  and  Apulia ,  both  Provinces  in  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  •  thelaft  is  mighty
fruitful  in  cattle.

(6)  Tarentinian  peep  were  fuch  as  were  bred  in  the  territory  of  Taranto ,  in  the  King¬
dom  of  Naples,

(7)  Altinum ,  now  called  Altino ,  in  the  Venetian  territory,  once  a  famous  city  at  the
mouth  of  the  river  Sile}  which  falls  into  the  gulf  of  Venice.

(8)  Pollentia ,  once  a  famous  town,  but  now  ruinous,  upon  the  River  Tanaro ,  in  that
part  of  Italy  formerly  called  Lirnria.  The  country  about  it  was  famous  for  black  fheep.

(9)  Cor  dub  a ,  now  called  Cordova,  a  very  famous  city  upon  the  river  Beet  is  in  Spain.

(10)  Erythrean  wool,  fo  called  from  its  reddtlh  colour,  red.

R  r


what-


306  L.  J.  M.  COLUME  LLA  Book  VII.

whatfoever,  that  was  in  beads,  did  return  with  a  mitigation  of  their
fiercenefs  and  wildnefs,  through  the  feveral  degrees  of  their  defendants.
I  fhall  return  to  what  I  propofed.

Now  there  are  two  kinds  of  fheep-cattle  ;  the  foft  and  delicate,  and
the  rough  and  bridly.  But,  in  buying  both  the  one  and  the  other,
there  are  feveral  things  that  are  common  to  both.  Neverthelefs,  there
are  fome  things  that  are  peculiar  to  the  noble  and  excellent  kind,  which
it  may  be  proper  fhould  be  obferved.  In  buying  flocks,  the  following
are  the  things,  for  the  mod  part,  which  ought  to  be  obferved  in
common.  If  the  whitenefs  of  the  wool  pleafes  you  mod,  you  fhall
always  chufe  the  whited  males  :  for,  of  a  white  male,  there  is  often
produced  a  dark  tawny  offspring  ;  but  that  which  is  white  is  never
generated  by  one  that  is  red  or  black.


CHAP.  III.

Of  chufvig  Rams.

THerefore  the  way  to  judge  and  approve  of  a  ram,  is  not  only
that  of  obferving  if  he  is  cloathed  with  a  white  fleece,  but  alfo,
if  his  palate  and  tongue  are  of  the  fame  colour  with  his  wool  :  for,
when  thefe  parts  of  his  body  are  black  or  fpotted,  there  arifes  a  black
or  fpeckled  offspring.  And  this,  among  other  things,  the  fame  poet
I  mentioned  above,  has  excellently  pointed  out  in  fuch  numbers  as
thefe  ( 1 )  :

‘  Rejedl  him,  tho’  the  ram  himfelf  be  white,

*  Under  whofe  oufy  palate  lies  conceal’d
4  A  black  or  fpotted  tongue  ;  for  with  black  fpots
*  He’ll  dain  the  fleeces  of  his  future  race.  5

One  and  the  fame  reafon  holds  with  refpedt  both  to  Erythrean  and
black  rams,  of  which  (as  I  have  already  faid)  no  part  ought  to  be  of
a  different  colour  from  the  wool,  and  much  lefs  their  whole  fkin  be
chequered  with  fpots :  therefore  we  mud  never  buy  fheep,  except  they
have  their  wool  upon  them,  that  fo  the  unity  of  their  colour  may  the
better  appear  j  which  unlefs  it  be  particularly  remarkable  in  rams,
the  paternal  fpots,  for  the  mod  part,  are  inherent  in  their  offspring.

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.ui.  387.


But


Chap.  III.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  307

But  the  make  of  his  body  is  moll  approved,  wheft  it  is  high  and
tall,  with  an  hanging-down  and  woolly  belly,  an  exceeding  long  tail,
and  of  a  thick  fleece,  with  a  broad  forehead,  large  tefticles,  twilled
horns  ;  not  becaufe  this  laft  is  more  ufeful,  (for  a  ram  without  horns  is
better)  but  becaufe  horns  that  are  twilled  and  bended  inwards  are  not
at  all  fo  hurtful,  as  thofe  that  are  fet  upright  and  expanded.  Never-
thelels,  in  fome  countries,  where  the  climate  is  wet  and  windy,  we
would  with  for  he-goats  and  rams  even  with  the  very  largell  horns  ;
becaufe,  when  they  are  high  and  extended,  they  defend  the  greatell
part  of  the  head  from  the  form.  Therefore,  if  for  the  moll  part  the
winter  is  violently  cold,  we  will  choofe  this  kind  j  but,  if  it  be  milder,
we  fhall  approve  of  a  male  that  has  no  horns  ;  becaufe  there  is  this
inconveniency  in  one  that  is  horned,  that  when  he  perceives  himfelf
armed,  as  it  were,  with  a  certain  natural  weapon  upon  his  head,  he
frequently  rulhes  out  to  battle,  and  becomes  more  faucy  and  frolick-
fome  with  the  females  :  for  he  perfecutes  his  rival  moll  violently,
tho’  he  alone  is  not  fufficient  for  ferving  the  whole  flock  j  nor  will  he
fufter  the  flock  to  be  ferved  in  due  time  by  any  other,  except  when  he
is  fatigued  with  lull.  But  one  that  has  no  horns,  when  he  knows  him¬
felf  to  be  as  it  were  difarmed,  is  neither  fo  ready  to  quarrel,  and  is
more  gentle  in  his  amours.  Therefore  fhepherds  check  the  cruelty  of
a  mifehievous  he-goat  or  ram,  by  this  cunning  contrivance  ;  they  flick
a  llrong  board  of  one  foot  meafure  full  of  pricks,  and  bind  it  to  his
horns  with  the  points  towards  his  forehead.  This  thing  reftrains  one
that  is  fierce  from  quarrelling,  when  he  is  pricked,  and  wounds  him¬
felf  with  his  own  blow.  But  Epicharmus  the  Syracujian ,  who  wrote
very  carefully  of  the  art  of  curing  cattle,  and  of  the  medicines  that  are
proper  for  them,  affirms  that  a  fighting  quarrelfome  ram  is  tamed
by  having  his  horns  bored  with  a  gemlet,  hard  by  his  ears,  where  they
are  firlt  crookened  in  the  bending.  The  bell  age  of  this  quadruped  for
procreating,  is  when  he  is  three  years  old  :  nor  yet  is  he  unfit  for  it
till  he  be  eight  years.

The  female  ought  to  be  joined  to  an  hufband  after  fhe  is  two  years
old,  and  Ihe  is  reckoned  to  be  young  and  in  her  prime,  when  Ihe  is  five
years  old  :  after  her  feventh  year  fhe  begins  to  decline.  Therefore,  as  I
laid,  you  fhall  purchafe  fheep  that  are  not  (horn :  you  fhall  rejedt  the
grey  and  fpeckled  hair,  becaufe  it  is  of  an  uncertain  colour  :  yqu  fhall
refufe  the  barren  one,  that  threatens  you  with  her  three-year-old
tooth  :  you  fhall  choofe  her  that  is  two  years  old,  and  of  a  huge  body,
with  a  long  neck,  long  wool,  but  not  harlh  and  coarfe,  with  a  woolly

Rr  j  and


308  L,  J.  M,  COLUMELL  A  Book  VII.

and  large  belly;  for  an  ewe  with  a  peeled,  bare,  and  very  fmall  belly,
mu  ft  be  avoided.

And  thefe  almoft  are  the  things  in  common  to  be  obferved  in  pur-
chafing  fheep  :  alfo  thofe  following  are  to  be  obferved  in  keeping  and
managing  them,  viz.  that  their  folds  be  low,  but  rather  extended  in
length  than  in  breadth,  that  they  may  be  both  warm  in  winter,  and
the  ftraightneis  of  the  place  may  not  make  them  caft  their  young  :  and
they  ought  to  be  placed  againft  the  fouth  ;  for  this  cattle,  tho’  of  all
animals  it  is  the  beft  cloathed,  is  neverthelefs  moft  impatient  of  cold,
and  no  lefs  of  the  heat  of  fummer.  Therefore,  a  clofe  furrounded  with
an  high  wall,  ought  to  be  placed  before  their  porch,  that  they  may
go  out  into  it  with  fafety,  and  fummer  in  the  cool ;  and  let  care  be
taken,  that  no  moifture  remain  in  it,  and  that  their  folds  be  always
ftrewed  with  very  dry  ferns  or  ftraw,  that  fo  the  ewes,  that  are  with
young  may  lie  the  cleaner,  and  the  fofter.  Let  their  bafkets  be  exceed¬
ing  clean  (a),  that  their  health,  which  is  chiefly  to  be  taken  care  of,
may  not  be  impaired  with  any  kind  of  moifture.

But  large  allowances  of  food  muft  be  given  to  all  forts  of  fheep  :  for
even  a  very  fmall  number,  when  fatiated  with  food,  yields  more  to
their  owner,  than  the  greateft  flock,  if  they  be  pinched  with  want.  But
you  muft  endeavour  to  find  for  them  fallow-grounds,  that  are  not  only
graffy,  but  which,  for  the  moft  part,  are  void  of  thorns  ;  and  let  us
often  make  ufe  of  the  authority  of  that  divine  poem  (3) :

4  If  wool’s  thy  care,  then  firft  from  prickly  woods,

4  And  briars,  and  thorns,  and  burs,  thy  tender  flock

*  Keep  at  a  diftance.’  —

For,  as  the  fame  poet  fays,  this  thing  makes  the  fheep  fcabby  :

*  When  to  their  fkin,  which  in  a  wholfome  ftream

‘  Has  not  been  wafh’d  when  newly  fhorn,  the  fweat

4  Adheres  ;  and  when,  with  prickly  bri’rs  and  thorns,

‘  Their  tender  bodies  wounded  are  and  torn.  ’


(2)  Quala  muvdijjima.  Some  think,  that  the  true  reading  is  il/a ,  inftead  of  quala,  refer¬
ring  to  Jlabula ,  viz.  that  their  folds  be  kept  clean  and  dry,  without  any  moiiture  to  impair
their  health :  and  indeed  it  is  not  eafy  to  conjecture,  why  the  author  fhould  bring  quala
into  this  place,  unlefs  by  it  he  means  fome  dole  baskets,  wherein  they  gave  them  fodder
in  hard  weather  y  but  in  common  fodder  baskets  no  moifture  could  remain,  that  could  be
hurtful  to  them.

(3)  Georg,  lib.  iii.  384.  442.


Moreover,


Chap.  III.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  309

Moreover,  their  wool  is  thereby  daily  dimini  fhed,  which  how  much
the  longer  and  thicker  it  grows  upon  the  cattle,  fo  much  the  more
obnoxious  is  it  to  the  brambles,  which  catch  it  as  it  were  with  fo  many
hooks,  and  pull  it  from  their  fkins  while  they  are  feeding.  The  deli¬
cate  fheep  alfo  lofe  the  covering  wherewith  they  are  provided,  and
that  is  not  repaired  with  a  fmall  expence.

Almoft  all  authors  are  agreed,  that  the  fpring-time,  when  the  feaft
of  Pales  (4)  is  celebrated,  is  the  moft  proper  for  admitting  the  ram,  if
it  be  an  ewe  juft  come  to  maturity  j  but,  if  fhe  has  already  had  a  lamb,
about  the  ninth  of  July  is  the  proper  time.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  to
be  doubted,  the  firft  is  more  to  be  approved  of  ;  that  as  the  vintage
follows  the  harveft,  fo  the  yeaning-time  may  fucceed  to  the  gathering
in  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine ;  and  the  lamb,  being  fatiated  with  the  fod¬
der  of  the  whole  autumn,  may  become  ftrong  before  the  melancholy
colds,  and  the  fafting-days  of  winter  approach  :  for  a  lamb,  yeaned  in
autumn,  is  better  than  one  in  the  fpring,  as  Celjiis  fays  very  truly,  be-
caufe  it  tends  more  to  our  advantage,  that  he  grow  ftrong  before  the
fummer  folftice,  than  before  that  of  winter  :  and  of  all  animals  he
alone  fuffers  no  inconveniency,  by  being  brought  forth  in  the  middle
of  winter.  And  if  our  prefent  occalion  requires,  that  moft  males  fhould
be  procreated,  Arijlotle ,  a  man  exceedingly  well  acquainted  with  the
nature  of  things,  directs  us  to  obferve  and  watch  for  the  northern
breezes  in  dry  weather,  at  the  time  when  the  rams  are  admitted  j  that
we  may  feed  the  flock  againft  the  wind,  and  that  the  cattle  may  take
the  ram  when  they  are  looking  towards  it  :  but,  if  females  are  to  be
generated,  he  directs  us  to  catch  the  fouthern  breezes,  that  the  rams
may  leap  upon  the  ewes  in  the  fame  manner.  For  that  which  we
taught  in  the  preceding  book,  that  the  right,  or  even  the  left,  tefticle
of  the  ram  which  ferves  the  flock,  be  tied  up  with  a  band,  is  too  great
a  labour  in  great  flocks.

Then,  after  the  yeaning-time  is  paft,  when  the  fhepherd  is  preparing
to  go  to  paftures  of  a  far  diftant  quarter,  let  him  referve  almoft  all  the
young  offspring  for  the  paftures  that  are  contiguous  to  the  city  ;  for
the  bailiff  delivers  the  young  lambs  to  the  butcher,  before  they  have
tailed  any  grafs,  becaufe  they  are  carried  thence  at  a  very  fmall  charge  ;
and,  after  they  are  taken  away,  the  advantage  accruing  from  their  mo¬
ther’s  milk  is  not  diminifhed.  Nevertheless,  it  is  neceftary  fometimes
to  bring  up  lambs  for  a  new  breed,  even  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the

(4)  Parifia,  or  Palilia.  Among  the  Romans-,  Pales  was  the  goddefs  of  fhepherds,  under
V’hofe  pro'edtion  they  fuppofed  fheep  were.  Her  feaft  was  celebrated  the  i8rh  day  of
April,  with  great  foletnnity,  as  we  fee  in  Ovidii  Fajli ,  Servius  upon  Virgil,  and  others.

city  :


312


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VII.  ,

‘  And  while  the  morning’s  new,  while  grafs  is  grey,

‘  And  dew  diAilling  from  each  tender  herb
4  Is  fiv’ry,  and  invites  the  flocks  to  eat  ;

‘  Let  us  conduct  them  to  cold  fpacious  fields
4  And,  when  the  fourth  hour  of  the  day  has  rais'd
‘  Their  third:,  then  thence  to  wells,  or  to  deep  pools,

let  us  lead  them  ;  and,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  as  the  fame  poet  fays,
let  us  conduct  them  to  a  valley,

4  Where  Jove's  huge  oak,  with  years  made  hard  and  Arong,

4  Its  mighty  boughs  extends  ;  or  gloomy  grove,

4  With  thick-fet  holms  fecur’d  from  Phoebus  rays,

4  Its  facred  lhade  fpreads  on  th’  adjacent  ground.

Then,  after  the  heat  is  abated,  let  us  drive  them  again  to  water,  and
lead  them  out  to  the  paAures  a  fecond  time,

4  Till  fun  goes  down,  when  the  cold  Ev’ning-flar
4  Allays  the  heat,  and  dew-diAilling  moon
4  Repairs  the  forefts.  ’

But,  about  the  time  that  the  Dog-Aar  firA  £hews  itfelf,  we  mud  take
particular  notice  of  the  fun,  that  before  noon  we  drive  our  flock  with
their  heads  to  the  weft,  and  that  they  advance  toward  that  part,  and
in  the  afternoon  toward  the  eaA  :  for  it  is  of  very  great  importance,
that  their  heads  be  not  turned  exactly  toward  the  fun  when  they  are
feeding,  which  for  the  moft  part  is  hurtful  to  animals  when  the  forefaid
Aar  is  rifing.

In  winter  and  fpring  let  them  be  kept  in  their  Aaeep-cotes  during
the  morning,  till  the  fun  removes  the  fro  As  from  the  fields  :  for,  in
thele  days,  grafs  with  hoar-froA  upon  it  gives  the  cattle  a  great  heavi-
nefs  and  Auffing  in  their  heads,  and  brings  a  loofenefs  upon  them  j
wherefore,  in  moiA  and  cold  times  of  the  year  alfo,  they  mu  A  be
allowed  to  drink  only  once  a  day.  Alfo  let  him  who  follows  the  flock
be  vigilant  and  circumfpeCt,  and  (which  is  given  as  an  injunction  to
all  keepers  of  all  four-footed  beaAs  whatfoever)  let  him  govern  and
rule  over  them  with  great  clemency,  and  let  this  fame  perfon  be  more
like  a  captain  and  leader,  than  a  lord  and  mafler  ;  and  both  when  he
gathers  his  fheep  together,  and  houfes  them,  let  him  threaten  them
with  a  loud  fhout,  and  with  his  Aaff,  but  never  throw  any  offenfive
4  weapon


Chap. IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  313

weapon  at  them,  nor  return  to  any  great  diftance  from  them  ;  neither
let  him  either  lie  down,  nor  fit  down  :  for,  unlefs  he  is  going  for¬
ward,  he  ought  to  ftand }  becaufe,  indeed,  the  duty  of  a  Keeper  requires,
that  he  be  always  as  it  Were  upon  a  high  and  lofty  watch-tower,  that
he  may  turn  his  eyes  every  way,  and  neither  fuffer  thofe  that  are  flow
and  great  with  young,  while  they  loiter,  nor  thofe  that  are  nimble,
and  have  already  brought  forth,  while  they  run  before,  to  be  feparated
from  the  reft  ;  left  either  a  thief,  or  a  wild  beaft,  deceive  the  heedlefs
unattentive  Shepherd.  But  thefe  things  relate  in  general  almoft  to  all
fheep-cattle  whatfoever.  Now  we  (hall  fpeak  of  fuch  things  as  are
peculiar  to  the  generous  kind.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  covered  Sheep.

IT  is  fcarcely  any  advantage  at  all  to  have  Greek  cattle,  which  moft
people  call  Tarentinian ,  in  one’s  poffeflion,  except  when  the  owner
is  actually  prefent  himfelf  j  confidering  that  they  require  both  greater
care,  and  a  greater  allowance  of  food :  for  inafmuch  as  the  wool¬
bearing  kind  in  general  is  more  tender  and  delicate  than  any  other  cattle
whatfoever,  fo  the  Tarentinian  is  the  moft  tender  and  delicate  of  them
all,  which  cannot  bear  with  any  manner  of  flothfulnefs,  either  of  their
owner  or  keepers,  and  much  lefs  with  their  covetoufnefs  j  and  it  can
neither  endure  exceffive  heat  nor  cold.  They  are  feldom  fed  without
doors,  but  for  the  moft  part  in  the  houfe;  and  they  are  exceeding  greedy
of  food,  of  which  if  any  part  be  withdrawn  by  the  villainy  of  the  Bailiff,
ruin  and  deftrudtion  follow  the  flock.  During  winter,  they  are  fed  very
well  at  their  cribs  with  three  Jextarii  of  barley,  or  of  beans  bruifed  with
their  own  hufks,  or  wflth  four [extarii  of  chichlings  each  head,  but  fo
as  jo  give  them  like  wife  dried  leaves,  or  dry  or  green  medic,  or  fh  rub-
trefoil  ;  as  alfo  feven  pound  weight  of  fecond-crop-hay,  or  chaff  of
pulfe  in  abundance.

There  is  the  leaft  advantage  to  be  had  by  felling  the  lambs  of  this
kind  of  cattle,  nor  can  any  be  made  by  their  milk  ;  for  fuch  of  them
as  ought  to  be  removed  from  their  dams,  are  killed  for  the  moft  part  a
very  few  days  after  they  are  yeaned,  before  they  come  to  maturity  ;
and  their  mothers,  being  bereaved  of  their  own  young  ones,  give  fuck
to  the  offspring  of  a  ftranger  :  for  each  lamb  is  put  to  be  fuckled  and
brought  up  by  two  nurfes,  nor  is  it  expedient,  that  any  thing  be  with-

S  f  '  drawn


3 14  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIL

drawn  from  fuch  as  are  put  to  be  fuckled  and  brought  up,  that  fo  the
lamb,  being  fuller  fed,  and  glutted  with  milk,  may  quickly  grow  ftrong  j.
and  the  ewe  which  brought  it  forth,  being  aflociated  with  a  nurfe,  may
labour  lefs  in  the  education  of  her  own  offspring.  For  which  reafon
you  muft  be  very  careful  to  obferve,  that  the  lambs  be  put  daily  both
to  the  dugs  of  their  own  dams,  and  alfo  to  thofe  of  others,  that  are
Grangers  to  them,  and  dp  not  love  them.

But,  in  flocks  of  this  kind,  you  muft  nourifh  and  bring  up  more
males,  than  in  thofe  which  have  coarfe  hairy  wool :  for  the  males,  be¬
ing  caftrated  before  they  can  couple  with  the  females,  are  killed  when
they  are  two  years  old  complete ;  and  their  fkins  are  delivered  to  the
merchants,  at  a  greater  price  than  other  fleeces,  becaufe  of  the  exqui-
flte  beauty  of  the  wool.  But  we  muft  remember  to  feed  our  Greek
fheep  in  free  open  fields,  void  of  all  manner  of  bufhes,  fprigs,  or
briars,  left,  as  I  faid  above,  both  their  wool  and  their  covering  be
pulled  off  them  j  nor  yet  do  they  require  lefs  diligence  and  care  with¬
out  doors,  becaufe  they  feldom  go  forth  to  the  paftures,  but  greater
care  and  attendance  at  home  ;  for  they  muft  be  frequently  uncovered,
refrefhed,  and  cooled  :  their  wool  muft  be  frequently  opened  and  parted,
and  moiftened  with  oil  and  wine  :  fometimes  alfo  they  muft  be  waftied
all  over  with  water,  if  the  mildnefs  and  brightnefs  of  the  day  permit
it  ;  and  it  is  enough,  if  that  be  done  three  times  a  year.  But  the  fheep-
cotes  muft  be  often  fwept  and  cleanfed,  and  all  the  moifture  of  their
urine  conveyed  away,  which  is  very  conveniently  dried  up  by  boring
holes  in  the  boards  wherewith  the  floors  of  the  fheep-houfes  are  laid,  that
the  flock  may  lie  upon  them  :  and  let  their  houfes  be  freed  not  only
from  mire,  and  dirt,  and  dung,  but  from  deftrudtive  ferpents  alfo  :
and,  that  this  may  be  done,  (i)

‘  Strong- fcen  ted  cedar  like  wife  learn  to  burn
‘  Within  thy  folds  ;  and,  with  the  burning  fmell
‘  Of  Galbanum ,  the  hurtful  fnakes  purfue,

‘  And  drive  them  thence  ;  for  oft,  below  the  cribs

*  Unmov’d,  a  deadly  viper  lurks  unfeen,

4  Which  frighted  fhuns  the  light,  and  hurts  when  touch’d  j
‘  Or  adder,  which  is  wont  to  haunt  the  houfe.

Wherefore,  as  the  fame  poet  commands,

4  Shepherd  !  lay  hold  on  ftones,  and  oaken  clubs ;

‘  And,  when  his  threat’ning  head,  and  hiding  neck,

*  Swelling  with  rage,  he  rears,  then  lay  him  flat. 5

(r)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iii.  414.


Chap. V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  515

Or,  that  it  may  not  be  neceffary  to  do  this  with  danger,  burn  womens
hair,  or  harts  horns  frequently,  the  fmell  of  which,  mod:  of  any  thing,
will  not  fuffer  the  forefaid  peft  to  harbour  in  the  fheep-cotes.

A  certain  fixed  time  of  the  year  cannot  be  obferved  in  all  countries
for  {hearing  fheep  ;  becaufe  the  fummer  does  neither  advance  {lowly
every-where,  nor  yet  quickly ;  and  the  bed  way  is,  to  confider  the
feafons,  and  the  date  of  the  weather,  wherein  the  flieep  may  neither
feel  the  cold,  if  you  drip  it  of  its  wool,  nor  the  great  heat,  if  you  do
not  as  yet  {hear  it.  But,  at  what  time  foever  it  fhall  be  {horn,  it  ought
to  be  anointed  with  fuch  a  medicament  as  this.  The  juice  of  throughly
boiled  lupins,  and  the  dregs  of  old  wine,  and  the  dregs  of  oil,  of  each
an  equal  quantity,  are  mixed  together ;  and  with  this  liquor  the  flieep
is  foaked,  after  it  is  {horn ;  and  when  its  {kin  has  imbibed  the  medica¬
ments,  after  it  has  been  anointed  with  them  for  three  days,  upon  the
fourth  day,  if  the  fea  is  in  the  neighbourhood,  let  it  be  led  to  the  fea-
fhore,  and  dipped  therein  ;  but,  if  otherwife,  they  boil  rain-water  a
little,  after  it  has  been  hardened  with  fait  in  the  open  air  for  this  pur-
pofe,  and  wafh  the  flock  throughly  therewith.  Celfus  affirms,  that
cattle  treated  after  this  manner  cannot  become  fcabby  during  that  year ;
nor  is  there  any  doubt,  but  that  even  by  fo  doing,  and  for  that  reafon,
their  wool  may  grow  again  both  fofter  and  longer.


CHAP.  V.

Of  Remedies  for  Sheep-cattle.

FOrafmuch  as  we  have  already  given  an  account  of  the  way  of
managing  and  taking  care  of  fuch  as  are  in  a  good  {late  of  health,
we  fhall  now  give  directions  after  what  manner  fuch  as  labour  under
any  ailments  or  difeafe,  muff  be  relieved  j  although  that  part  of
our  argument  has  been  already  almofl:  wholly  exhauffed,  when  we
difcourfed,  in  the  preceding  book,  of  remedies  proper  for  greater  cattle.
For,  confidering  that  the  nature  of  the  bodies  of  lefler  and  greater  qua¬
drupeds  is  almofl:  the  very  fame,  the  differences  that  can  be  found  in
their  difeafes  and  remedies  are  but  few  and  fmall,  which,  how  incon-
fiderable  foever  they  may  be,  {hall  not  be  omitted  by  us.

If  all  the  cattle  in  general  are  fick,  as  we  both  directed  before,  and
now  (becaufe  we  think  it  moft  falutary  for  them)  we  again  confidently
affirm  it,  in  this  cafe  (which  is  the  moft  fpeedy  and  effectual  remedy)

S  f  2  let

I  «


3 1 6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

let  us  change  the  pastures  and  the  watering-places  of  the  whole  coun¬
try,  and  go  to  another  climate,  and  a  different  conftitution  of  the  air  ;
and  take  care,  if  the  plague  which  has  attacked  them,  has  had  its  rife
from  fcorching  heat,  to  make  choice  of  fields  that  are  fhady,  and  de¬
fended  from  the  fun  ;  or,  if  it  feized  them  from  cold,  then  fuch  as  are
expofed  to  the  fun.  But  the  cattle  mud  be  driven  foftly,  and  with¬
out  hurrying  them,  left  their  weaknefs  be  over-burdened  and  oppreffed
with  long  journeys.  Neverthelefs,  you  mud  not  drive  them  altoge¬
ther  in  a  flow  and  lazy  manner  ;  for  as  it  is  not  proper  vehemently  to
tofs  and  drive  cattle  that  are  weary  with  their  difeafe,  and  to  put  them
upon  the  flretch,  fo  it  is  an  advantage  to  them  to  give  them  moderate
exercife,  and  to  roufe  them  when  they  are  as  it  were  benumbed,  and
not  fuffer  them  to  grow  old,  and  be  confumed  with  drowfinefs  and
iloth  :  then,  when  the  flock  is  brought  to  the  place,  let  it  be  diftributed
to  the  Peafants  in  parcels  j  for  they  recover  their  health  more  eafily
when  they  are  feparated,  than  when  they  are  all  together,  either  be-
caufe  the  infectious  fleam  of  the  difeafe  is  lefler  in  a  fmall  number,  or
becaufe  greater  care  is  more  expeditioufly  taken  of  a  few.  Thefe  there¬
fore,  and  the  other  things  (that  we  may  not  now  repeat  the  fame
things)  which  we  have  made  mention  of  in  the  preceding  book,  we
ought  to  obferve,  if  all  our  fheep  in  general  are  lick  j  but  if  only  fome
of  them  in  particular,  then  thofe  following  things  are  to  be  obferved  :

Sheep  are  more  frequently  infefted  with  the  fcab,  than  any  other
animal  whatfoever ;  which  commonly  affeCts  them,  as  our  poet
fays  (i),

*  When  a  cold  fhow’r,  or  winter's  hoary  froft,

*  Sink  thro’  their  wool,  and  pierce  them  to  the  quick.  ’

Or  if,  after  {hearing  them,  you  do  not  apply  the  forefaid  medicine  as  a
remedy  ;  or  if  you  do  not  walh  away  the  fummer  fweat  in  the  fea,  or
in  a  river  j  or  if  you  fuffer  the  flock,  after  it  is  fhorn,  to  be  wounded
with  the  wild  bramble-bufhes  and  thorns  j  if  you  make  ufe  of  a  liable
wherein  mules,  horfes,  or  afles,  have  flood;  but  efpecially  a  fcanty
allowance  of  food  caufes  leannels,  and  leannefs  the  fcab.  When  this
has  begun  to  creep  in  among  them,  it  is  known  thus  :  The  cattle
either  fcratch  the  part  affe&ed  with  their  teeth,  or  thump  it  with  their
horn  or  hoof,  or  rub  it  againft  a  tree,  or  wipe  it  upon  the  walls ;  which
when  you  fhall  fee  any  of  them  doing,  you  muft  lay  hold  of  them, and


(i)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iii.  442.


open


Chap.  V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  317

open  their  wool  j  for  below  it  the  fkin  is  rough,  and  there  is  as  it  were
a  certain  fcurf  under  it,  which  you  muft  apply  a  remedy  to,  as  foon  as
poflible,  left  it  defile  and  infe<5t  the  whole  progeny  ;  and  indeed  it  muft
be  done  quickly,  forafmuch  as  both  other  cattle  alfo,  but  efpecially
flieep,  are  afflicted  with  contagious  diftempers.

But  there  are  very  many  medicines  for  curing  them,  which  we  fhall
therefore  enumerate,  not  becaufe  it  may  be  neceilary  to  ufe  them  all,
becaufe  in  fome  countries  fome  of  them  cannot  be  found ;  and  out  of
many,  fome  one  being  found,  may  prove  a  remedy.  But,  in  the  firft:
place,  that  compolition,  which  we  explained  and  informed  you  of  a
little  before,  does  exceeding  well,  if  with  the  dregs  of  wine,  and  the
lcum  or  dregs  of  oil,  and  the  juice  of  boiled  lupins,  you  mix  white
hellebore,  bruifed  in  equal'quantity.  Alfo  the  juice  of  green  hemlock
is  effectual  to  remove  fcabbinefs ;  which,  in  the  fpring-time,  when  it
has  begun  to  make  its  ftalk,  but  not  its  feeds,  they  cut  down,  and  bruife,
and  put  up  in  an  earthen  veflel  the  juice  they  have  fqueezed  out  of  it,
after  they  have  mixed  half  a  modius  of  toafted  fait  with  two  urns  of  the
liquor.  And,  when  this  is  done,  they  pitch  the  veflel  well,  and  bury  it
in  a  dunghil ;  and  after  it  has  been  concodled  for  a  whole  year  with
the  heat  of  the  dung,  they  afterwards  take  it  out,  and,  having  warmed
the  medicine,  they  anoint  the  fcabby  part  therewith,  which  they  firft
reduce  to  a  fore,  by  rubbing  it  with  a  rough  tile  or  potffierd,  or  with  a
pumice-ftone.

Lees  of  oil,  boiled  in  two  thirds,  is  a  remedy  for  the  fame  diftemper.
Alfo  a  man’s  ftale  urine,  heated  with  red-hot  tiles.  Neverthelefs,  fome
people  fet  the  urine  itfelf  upon  the  fire,  and  thereby  leflen  it  one  fifth-
part,  and  mix  with  it  an  equal  quantity  of  the  juice  of  green  hemlock;
and  then,  upon  potters  veflels  bruifed,  they  pour  melted  pitch  and
parched  fait,  of  each,  one  fextarius.  An  equal  quantity  of  bruifed
iulphur  and  liquid  pitch,  boiled  into  a  confiftency  with  a  flow  fire,  has
alfo  good  effect.  But  the  Georgic  poem  affirms,  that  there  is  not  a  more
excellent  remedy,  than  (2)

*  With  piercing  lancet  to  rip  up  the  fore,

*  Where  next  the  top  it  opens.  This  diieafe,

4  If  hid,  new  life  and  nouriffiment  receives.’

Therefore  it  muft  be  laid  open,  and  cured  with  medicines,  as  other
wounds  are.  Then  it  prefently  adds,  with  equal  prudence,  that,  when


(2)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  3.  453,'


flieep


318  L.J.  M.COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

fheep  have  a  fever,  they  muft  be  let  blood  in  the  pattern,  or  between
the  hoofs  j  for  indeed

*  For,  to  allay  the  fever’s  burning  heat,

*  It  has  availed  much,  the  leaping  vein,

*  Turgid  with  blood,  below  the  foot  to  ftrike.’

We  let  them  blood  alfo  under  their  eyes,  and  in  their  ears.

Boils  alfo  infeft  fheep  two  different  ways,  either  when  the  foul  and
the  chafe-gall  arife  in  the  very  dividing  of  the  hoof ;  or  when  there  is  a
tubercle  or  fwelling  in  the  fame  place,  almott  in  the  middle  of  which  there
appears  hair  like  that  of  a  dog  ;  and  under  it  there  is  a  fmall  worm.
The  foul  and  chafe-gall  may  be  rooted  out,  by  anointing  them  with
liquid  pitch  by  itfelf ;  or  with  alum,  and  fulphur  and  vinegar  mixed
together  j  or  with  a  tender  pomegranate,  before  it  make  its  grains,
with  brayed  alum,  and  vinegar  poured  upon  it ;  or  with  the  green  ruft
of  copper  reduced  to  a  powder  j  or  a  burnt  gall  allayed  with  rough
wine,  and  placed  upon  the  part.  The  little  fwelling,  under  which
there  is  a  worm,  mutt:  be,  with  as  much  caution  as  pofiible,  cut  off
all  round  with  a  knife,  lett,  while  we  are  cutting  it  off,  we  wound  the
animal  alfo  which  is  below 3  for  when  that  is  wounded,  it  fends  forth
a  putrified,  poifonous,  bloody  matter,  which,  when  the  wound  is  be-
fprinkled  with  it,  makes  it  fo  incurable,  that  the  whole  foot  muft  be
cut  off :  and,  after  you  have  cut  it  carefully  off,  drop  burning  hot  tal¬
low  from  a  burning  torch  into  the  wound.

It  is  proper,  that  a  fheep  difeafed  in  her  lungs  fhould  be  cured  in
the  fame  manner  as  an  hog,  by  inferting  into  its  auricle  what  the  far¬
riers  call  lungwort.  We  fpoke  of  it  already,  when  we  gave  an  account
of  fuch  medicines  as  are  proper  for  greater  cattle,  But  that  difeafe  is
for  the  moft  part  contracted  in  fummer,  if  they  have  wanted  water  j
for  which  reafon,  all  quadrupeds  whatfoever  ought  to  have  liberty  to
drink  plentifully  in  hot  weather.  CclJ'us  advifes,  if  the  fheep  has  any
difeafe  in  its  lungs,  to  give  it  as  much  fharp  vinegar  as  it  can  bear  ;  or
to  pour  into  it  with  an  horn,  thro’  its  left  noftril,  about  three  hernina  of
ftale  human  urine  warmed,  and  to  put  into  their  jaws  two  ounces  of
greafe.  Alfo  wild-fire,  which  fhepherds  call  pufula  (3),  is  incurable  ;

(3)  Ignis  facer.  This  difeafe  is  commonly  called  St.  Antony's  Tire,  and  facer ,  con¬
trary  to  its  common  fignification,  is  fuppofed  to  fignify  the  fame  thing  as  cxecrandus,  fle-
lefus,  abominandus ,  exitialis,  curled,  deftrudcive,  abominable,  &c.  Some  call  it  tryfpelas,
or  rather,  as  Tollux ,  eruthropelas ;  which  is  more  expreffive  of  the  nature  of  the  d  :  temper,
which  they  define,  a  rednefs  with  a  burning  inflammation,  attended  with  a  fever,  &c.  The
Roman  Shepherds  calied  it  pufula ,  by  which  they  meant,  no  doubt,  a  biifter  with  pus  in  it.

I  which,


Chap.  V.  O/HUSBANDRY.  319

which,  unlefs  it  be  checked  and  confined  to  the  firffc  fiieep  that  has
been  feized  with  fuch  a  difeafe,  deftroys  the  whole  flock  with  its  con¬
tagion,  forafmuch  as  it  does  not  admit  of  any  cure,  either  with  medi¬
cines,  or  the  knife  :  for,  at  every  touch  almoft,  it  grows  angry,  and  is
more  and  more  inflamed  ;  only  a  fomentation  of  goats  milk  it  does  not
make  light  of,  which,  when  poured  upon  it,  is  only  able  to  mitigate
its  fiery  fiercenefs  and  rage,  rather  deferring  than  hindering  the  intire
deftruftion  of  the  flock.  But  Bolus  Mendejius ,  a  memorable  Egyptian
author,  whole  commentaries,  which  in  Greek  are  called  uVo//. vr-
fj.cclx  (4),  are  falfly  publifhed  under  Democritus' s  name,  advifes  for  this
frequently  and  carefully  to  view  and  examine  the  backs  of  the  fheep,
that  if  by  chance  fuch  a  difeafe  Ihould  be  found  in  any  of  them,  we
fhould  prefently  dig  a  pit  in  the  threfhold  of  the  fold,  and  therein
bury  the  Iheep  infected  with  the  wild-fire,  with  its  face  upwards;  and,
after  it  is  put  under  ground,  fuffer  the  whole  flock  to  go  over  it ;  and
that  by  fo  doing  the  difeafe  will  be  repelled.

Bile,  which  in  the  fummer-time  is  not  the  lead:  deftrudtion  that  be¬
falls  them ,  is  expelled  with  a  potion  of  ftale  human  urine,  which  is
alio  a  remedy  for  cattle  that  have  the  jaundice  (5).  But,  if  phlegm  be
troublefome  to  them,  they  wrap  ftalks  of  wild  favory,  or  wild  cat¬
mint,  in  wool,  and  put  them  into  their  noftrils,  and  turn  them  to-
and-fro  till  the  fheep  fneezes.  The  broken  legs  of  cattle  are  not  cured
otherwife  than  thofe  of  men,  being  wrapped  up  in  wool,  foaked  in  oil
and  wine,  and  prefently  afterwards  bound  up  and  furrounded  with
fplints  of  fennel-giant.  Knot-grafs  (6)  is  alfo  a  grievous  plague  to

them,

(4)  'T7rojj.vri[s.ci}a,  fometimes  fignify  a  man’s  own  private  notes  and  obfervations  for  his
own  life  ;  fometimes  they  fignify  what  the  Romans  called  comment ariuvi ,  that  is,  a  writing,
wherein  the  heads  only,  and  fummaries  of  things,  are  touched  upon,  and  which  are  writ¬
ten  rather  for  the  fake  of  memory,  than  in  order  to  a'full  narration  of  things.  Sometimes
alfo  they  fignify  annotations  or  commentaries  upon  any  author.  Here,  to  be  fure,  they
muft  fignify  fhort  commentaries,  or  fummaries  of  things

(5)  Fecus  arcuatum ,  or  arquatum.  This  difeafe  in  cattle  has  its  name  from  the  rainbow,
becaufe  fome  parts  of  their  bodies,  efpecially  their  eyes,  lofe  .their  natural  colour,  and  be¬
come  yellowifh  or  greenilh.

(6)  Herba  fanguinaria.  This  herb  was  fo  called  by  the  Latins ,  as  Pliny  fays,  becaufe
it  flops  a  bleeding  at  the  nofe,  by  putting  the  juice  of  it  up  the  nofe ;  and  by  drinking  the
juice  of  it  with  wine,  they  ufed  to  flop  a  flux.  The  Greeks  called  it  polygonon ,  as  fome
fay,  becaufe  it  grows  and  fpreads  every-where.  Some  call  it  p oiygonaton ,  becaufe  of  its
many  joints  and  knots;  which  feems  to  be  the  reafon,  why  it  is  called  in  Englijb  knot-graji.
Matthiolus  fays,  that  the  male  fort,  which  creeps  upon  the  ground,  grows  in  the  fields,
areas  of  buildings,  highways,  and  every-where;  but  the  female,  which  grows  upintoaftalk,
is  found  moftly  in  well-watered  and  rnoift  places.  Our  author  fays,  that  when  a  fheep
feeds  upon  it,  toto  ventre  diflenditur,  contrahiturque ;  which  I  think  muft  fignify  a  fwelling


320  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

them,  which  if  the  fheep  feed  upon,  their  whole  belly  is  diftended
and  bound  up,  and  they  /pit  out  a  certain  thin  foam,  of  a  noifome
fmell.  You  muft  quickly  let  them  blood  under  the  tail,  in  that  part
which  is  next  the  buttocks ;  a  vein  muft  be  alfo  opened  in  thei  pper-
lip.  The  ears  of  fuch  as  are  purfy  and  broken- winded  muft  be  cut
with  a  knife,  and  they  muft  change  their  quarters  ;  which  we  are  of
opinion  ought  to  be  done  in  all  aifeafes  and  plagues  whatfoever.

Relief  muft  be  given  alio  to  lambs  which  have  the  fever,  or  are
affedted  with  any  other  ficknefs  ;  which,  when  they  labour  under  any
difeafe,  ought  not  to  be  admitted  to  their  dams,  left  they  transfer  the
plague  to  them.  Therefore  the  ewes  muft  be  milked  apart,  and  an
equal  quantity  of  rain-water  mixed  with  the  milk,  and  that  potion
given  to  fuch  as  have  a  fever.  Many  cure  the  fame  with  goats  milk,
which  they  pour  into  their  jaws  through  a  little  horn.  The  fcab  upon
their  chin  and  lips,  which  fhepherds  call  ofrigo,  is  alfo  mortiferous  to
fucking  lambs.  This,  for  the  moft  part,  is  occafioned,  if,  by  the  im¬
prudence  of  the  Shepherd,  the  lambs,  or  kids  alfo,  being  let  out,  have
fed  upon  dewy  herbs,  which  muft  not  at  all  be  allowed  j  but,  when
that  is  done,  it  furrounds  their  mouth  and  lips  with  filthy  ulcers  like
wild-fire.  Hyffop  and  fait,  bruifed  together  in  equal  quantities,  are
a  remedy  for  it  j  for,  with  this  mixture,  they  rub  throughly  the  roof
of  their  mouth,  and  their  tongue,  and  their  whole  mouth.  Prefently
after,  they  wafh  the  ulcers  with  vinegar,  and  then  anoint  them  all
over  with  liquid  pitch  and  hogs  greafe.  Some  think  proper  to  mix  a
third  part  of  brafs,  or  copper  ruft,  with  two  parts  of  hogs  lard,  and  to
life  this  medicine  after  it  is  warmed.  Some  mix  with  water  the  leaves
of  the  cyprefs-tree  bruifed,  and  fo  wafh  their  ulcers,  and  the  roof  of
their  mouth.  But  the  way  of  caftrating  we  have  already  defcribed  ;
nor  indeed  is  there  any  other  method  obferved  in  caftrating  lambs,
than  in  caftrating  a  larger  quadruped.


of  the  belly,  without  any  evacuation.  The  nature  of  this  graft  is  aftringent,  fo  that  it  has
a  double  eff'edt  upon  them,  both  to  fwell  and  bind  their  belly,  which  is  more  probable,
than  to  render  the  words,  convulfes  their  belly ,  which  dijlentio  and  contr actio  frequently
fsgnify.


CHAP.


Chap.  VL


Of  HUSBANDRY.


321


CHAP.  VI.

Of  Goat-Cattle.

AND  forafmuch  as  enough  has  been  faidof  fheep-cattle,  I  (hall  now
return  to  the  goat-cattle.  But  this  kind  requires  and  delights  in
thickets,  rather  than  in  a  champain  fituation  j  and  finds  exceeding
good  pafture  alfo  in  rough,  rugged,  and  woody  places  :  for  it  neither
diflikes  brambles,  nor  is  hurt  with  briars  ;  and  it  delights  moft  of  all  in
little  trees,  and  in  places  where  fhrubs  grow.  Thefe  are  the  flrawberry-
tree,  the  ever-green  privet,  wild  fhrub-trefoil,  as  alfo  ever-green  and
common-oak-fhrubs,  which  do  not  leap  up  to  a  great  height.  An  he-
goat,  who  has  two  fmall  warts  hanging  down  from  his  neck,  is  rec¬
koned  the  beft,  of  a  very  large  body,  with  thick  legs,  a  full  and  fhort
neck,  flaccid  and  fwagging  ears,  a  fmall  head,  black,  thick,  fhining,
and  exceeding  long  hair  ;  for  he  himfelf  alfo  paffes  through  the  hands
of  the  fhearers,

‘  For  wretched  feamens  coats,  and  th’  ufe  of  camps  ( 1).’

But  one  of  feven  months  is  fit  enough  for  procreating,  becaufe  he  is
immoderate  in  his  luft ;  and  while  he  is  yet  nourifhed  with  the  dug,  he
leaps  upon  his  dam ;  and  therefore  he  grows  quickly  old,  even  before
he  is  fix  years  complete,  becaufe  he  is  exhaufted  with  a  too  early  defire
of  venery,  during  the  very  firft  years  of  his  puerility.  Therefore,  when
he  is  five  years  old,  he  is  reckoned  not  very  fit  for  impregnating  the
female.

A  fhe-goat  is  chiefly  approved,  which  is  the  moft  like  to  the  he-goat
we  have  described,  if  fhe  has  alfo  a  very  great  udder,  and  gives  milk
in  great  abundance.  In  a  calm  conftitution  of  the  climate,  we  will
purchafe  this  cattle  without  horns,  but  in  a  ftormy  and  rainy  climate,
always  that  which  has  horns  :  for  even  in  every  region  it  is  neceffary,
that  the  hufbands  of  the  flocks  fhould  be  without  horns  j  becaufe  fuch
as  are  horned  are  almoft  pernicious,  by  reafon  of  their  petulancy,  and
aptnefs  to  butt.  But  it  is  not  expedient  to  have  a  greater  number  of  this
kind,  than  one  hundred  heads  in  one  inclofure,  feeing  a  thoufand  of
the  wool-bearing  kind  may  be  provided  with  folds,  with  equal  eafe
and  conveniency.  And  when  fhe-goats  are  firft  bought,  it  is  better  to
buy  one  intire  flock,  than  fmall  parcels  out  of  feveral,  that  while  they

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  iii.  313.

T  t


are


1 2  2  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

are  feeding,  they  may  not  feparate  and  divide  into  feveral  diftindt  par¬
cels,  and  that  they  may  ftand  together  quietly  and  with  greater  concord
in  the  goat-houfe.  Violent  heat  hurts  this  cattle,  but  cold  is  more
hurtful,  and  efpecially  to  fuch  as  are  great  with  young  ;  for  the  froft
deftroys  their  conception.  Neverthelefs  thefe  are  not  the  only  things
which  occafion  abortion,  but  mart  alfo,  when  they  give  them  lefs  of
it  than  is  fufficient  to  fatiate  them  :  therefore,  unlefs  it  can  be  given
them  in  great  abundance,  no  allowance  of  it  at  all  ought  to  be  given  to
the  flock.

The  principal  time  for  the  putting  the  male  to  the  female  is  com¬
monly  during  the  autumn,  before  the  month  of  December ,  that  fo
they  may  bring  forth  their  young  when  the  fpring  approaches,  when
the  thickets  are  budding,  and  when  the  woods  begin  firft  to  put  forth
their  new  leaves.  But  you  ought  to  chufe  fuch  a  goat-cote  for  them,
as  is  all  paved  with  a  natural  rock,  or  by  hand,  becaufe  there  is  no
litter  laid  under  this  cattle,  and  a  diligent  Goatherd  fweeps  their  cotes
every  day,  and  neither  buffers  dung  nor  moifture  to  remain  in  them,
nor  mire  and  dirt  to  be  formed,  all  which  are  hurtful  to  goats  :  but,  if
they  be  a  generous  race,  they  bring  forth  frequently  two,  fometimes
three  at  a  time.  It  is  a  very  forry  increafe  of  the  flock,  when  two
mothers  produce  but  three  kids,  which,  when  they  are  brought  forth,
are  educated  in  the  fame  manner  as  lambs,  except  that  the  lafciviouf-
nefs  of  the  kids  muft  be  checked,  and  reftrained  within  narrower
bounds.  Alfo,  over-and-above  plenty  of  milk,  you  muft  give  them
elm-feed,  or  fhrub-trefoil,  or  ivy  j  or  you  muft  throw  tops  of  the
maftich-tree  alfo,  and  other  fmall  leaves,  before  them.  But  of  twins,
one  head,  which  appears  to  be  the  ftrongeft,  is  referved  for  recruiting
the  flock,  the  other  is  delivered  to  the  merchants.  A  kid  muft  not  be
put  under  a  ftie-goat  of  one  or  two  years  old  to  be  fuckled  and  brought
up  (for  both  thefe  ages  bring  forth  young) ;  for  none  of  them  ought  to
educate,  but  fuch  as  are  three  years  old.  But  the  young  offspring  muft
be  prefently  driven  away  from  her  that  is  but  one  year  old,  and  have
admittance  to  her  that  is  two  years  old,  till  it  be  fit  for  fale.  Nor
muft  the  mothers  be  kept  beyond  eight  years,  becaule,  being  wearied
with  continual  births,  they  become  barren.

But  the  Overfeer  of  the  cattle  ought  to  be  lively  and  adlive,  hardy,
flout,  exceeding  patient  of  labour,  brifk,  chearful,  courageous,  and
daring,  and  one  who  eafily  goes  over  rocks  and  defarts,  and  thro’  briars
and  thorns ;  and  that  he  may  not,  as  keepers  of  cattle  of  another  kind,
follow,  but  for  the  moft  part  go  before  the  flock :  wherefore  it  is  ne-
ceffary,  that  he  be  exceeding  nimble  and  adtive.  The  young  goats,

while


Chap. VII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  323

while  they  are  browzing  in  the  thickets,  give  place  to  the  older  goats.
She  that  gives  place  ought  to  be  checked  from  time  to  time,  that  fhe
may  not  run  before,  but  browze  and  gather  her  fodder  quietly  and
llowly,  that  fhe  may  both  have  a  large  udder,  and  not  be  of  a  very
lean  and  ill-favoured  body.


CHAP.  VII.

Of  Medicines  for  Goats.

OTHER  kinds  of  cattle,  when  they  are  afflidfed  with  a  peftilence,
at  firft  gradually  decay,  and  fade  away  with  their  difeafe,  and
their  languifhing  illnefies.  Young  goats  alone,  though  they  be  in  good
plight  of  body,  and  chearful,  are  fuddenly  cut  down,  and  deftroy ’d  in
whole  flocks,  as  it  were  with  fome  hidden  deftrudfion.  This  ufes  to
happen  chiefly  from  great  plenty  of  fodder  *.  wherefore,  when  the
plague  has  ftruck  one  or  two  of  them,  they  mu  ft  all  prefently  be  let
blood :  nor  muft  they  be  fed  the  whole  day,  but  fhut  up  within  their
folds  the  four  middle  hours  of  the  day.  But,  if  any  other  languifhing
illnefs  infefts  them,  they  are  cured  with  a  potion  made  of  the  roots  of
the  reed,  and  the  white  thorn,  with  which,  after  we  have  carefully
bruifed  them  with  an  iron  peftle,  we  mix  rain-water,  and  give  that
alone  to  the  cattle  to  drink.  But,  if  this  thing  does  not  drive  away
their  ficknefs,  the  cattle  muft  be  fold  ;  or,  if  this  cannot  be  done,  they
muft  be  killed  with  the  knife,  and  falted.  Afterwards,  fome  fpace  of
time  interpofed,  it  will  be  proper  to  provide  again  another  flock  j  ne-
verthelefs,  not  before  the  peftilent  time  of  the  year,  whether  that  be
in  the  winter,  be  removed  by  the  fummer,  or,  if  it  be  in  the  autumn,  it
be  changed  by  the  fpring.  But,  when  any  particular  one  of  them  is
fick  in  the  houfe,  we  fhall  apply  the  fame  remedies  to  them,  as  we
did  to  fheep  alfo.  For  when  their  fkin  is  diftended  with  water,  which
difeafe  the  Greeks  call  vApw-^,  (a  dropfy)  a  flight  incifion  made  in  the
fkin  under  the  fhoulder  will  let  out  the  pernicious  water,  then  the
wound  that  is  made  may  be  cured  with  liquid  pitch.  When  the  geni¬
tal  parts  of  one  that  has  newly  brought  forth,  are  fwelled,  or  the  after¬
births  have  not  anfwered,  let  a  fextarius  of  muft,  boiled  into  two
thirds  of  the  firft  quantity,  or,  if  that  be  wanting,  the  fame  quantity
of  good  wine,  be  poured  into  their  jaws  3  and  let  their  natural  parts  be
filled  with  liquid  ointment,  wherein  wax  is  the  chief  ingredient.  But,

T  t  2  that


324  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VII.

that  I  may  not  now  treat  fully  of  every  particular,  we  (hall  cure  goat-
cattle  in  the  fame  manner  as  has  been  already  directed  with  refpett  to
fheep.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  the  Method  of  making  Cheefe .

TH  E  care  of  making  cheefe  mud  not  be  omitted,  efpecially  in
regions  that  lie  at  a  great  didance  from  town,  where  there  is
not  the  conveniency  of  carrying  the  milk-pail  to  market.  Moreover,
if  the  cheefe  be  made  of  thin  liquor,  it  mud:  be  fold  as  quickly  as  pof-
fible,  while  it  is  yet  green  and  retains  the  juice.  If  it  be  made  of
rich  and  fat  milk,  it  will  bear  to  be  kept  longer.  But  it  ought  to  be
made  of  pure  milk,  and  of  the  frefhed,  without  any  mixture  :  for
that  which  has  flood  long,  and  is  mixed,  contra&s  a  fharpnefs.  They
commonly  curdle  it  with  a  lamb’s  or  a  kid’s  runnet,  although  it  may
alfo  be  brought  into  a  confidency,  both  with  the  flower  of  the  wild
thiflle,  and  with  the  feeds  of  badard-faffron,  or  the  blefled  thiftle  ;
and  alfo  with  fig-tree-milk,  which  the  tree  emitteth,  if  you  wound  its
green  bark.  But,  indeed,  that  is  the  bed  cheefe  which  has  the  lead
of  the  drug  in  it.  But  the  weight  of  a  denarius  of  runnet  is  the  lead
that  a  pail  of  milk  requires.  Nor  is  there  any  doubt  but  cheefe  made
of  milk  congealed  with  fig-tree-twigs  tades  exceeding  fweet.

But  the  milk-tub,  when  it  is  filled  with  milk,  ought  not  to  be
without  fome  gentle  warmth.  Nevertheless,  it  mud  not  be  brought
fo  near  as  to  touch  the  flames,  as  fome  people  are  of  opinion,  but  be
placed  not  far  from  the  fire  and  prefently  after  it  is  curdled,  the  liquor
mud  be  transferred  into  wicker-bafkets,  cheefe-vats,  or  moulds ;  for
it  is  of  great  importance,  that  the  whey  be  drained  and  feparated  from
the  condenfed  fubdance  as  foon  as  poflible  :  for  which  reafon,  the
country-people  do  not  indeed  fuffer  the  moidure  to  drop  flowly  from
it  of  its  own  accord  j  but,  when  the  cheefe  becomes  a  little  more  folid,
they  put  weights  upon  it,  that  thereby  the  whey  may  be  fqueezed  out :
then,  as  it  is  taken  out  of  the  moulds  or  frails,  it  is  laid  up  in  a  dark
and  cold  place,  upon  the  very  cleaned  boards,  that  it  may  not  be
fpoiled  ;  and  it  is  fprinkled  with  bruifed  fait,  that  it  may  fweat  out
the  acid  liquor :  and  when  it  is.  hardened,  it  is  prefled  more  vehe¬
mently,  that  it  may  be  confpiflated  and  it  is  fprinkled  again  with

toafled


Chap.  VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  325

toafted  fait,  and  condenfed  again  with  weights.  After  this  has  been
done  for  nine  days,  it  is  wafhed  throughly  with  fweet  water,  and
placed  in  fuch  a  manner  under  a  fhade,  upon  hurdles  made  for  that
purpofe,  that  one  cheefe  may  not  touch  another,  and  that  it  may  be
moderately  dried.  Then,  that  it  may  keep  the  tenderer,  they  put  it
clofe  together  in  feveral  dories,  in  a  clofe  place,  not  expofed  to  the
winds.  Thus  it  neither  becomes  fpongy  and  full  of  holes,  nor  fait,
nor  dry  :  the  firft  of  which  faults  ufes  to  happen,  if  it  be  prefled  but  a
little  j  the  fecond,  if  it  be  feafoned  with  too  much  fait ;  and  the  third,
if  it  be  fcorchcd  in  the  fun.  This  kind  of  cheefe  may  be  exported  alfo
beyond  fea.  For  that  which  is  defigned  to  be  eaten  in  a  few  days,
while  it  is  new,  is  made  up  with  lefs  care  :  for,  being  taken  out  of  the
wicker  bafkets,  it  is  put  into  fait  and  brine,  and  foon  afterwards  dried
a  little  in  the  fun.

Some,  before  they  put  the  fhackles  upon  the  cattle,  put  green  pine¬
apples  into  the  milk-pail,  and  prefently  milk  the  cattle  upon  them  ;
and  they  do  not  feparate  them  till  they  have  tranfmitted  the  coagulated
fubftance  into  moulds.  Some  bruife  the  green  kernels  themfelves,  and
mix  them  with  the  milk,  and  fo  congeal  it.  There  are  fome  who
put  bruifed  thyme,  (trained  through  a  fieve,  with  the  milk  when  they
curdle  it.  In  like  manner  you  may  make  it  of  whatever  tafte  you
pleafe,  by  adding  to  it  the  feafoning  you  have  made  choice  of.  But
that  way  of  making  what  we  call  hand-prefled  cheefe,  is  exceeding
well  known  ;  for  when  it  is  a  little  congealed,  and  while  it  is  yet
warm  in  the  milk-tub,  they  cut  it  j  and,  having  fprinkled  it  with  boil¬
ing  water,  they  either  fhape  it  by  hand,  or  fqueeze  the  whey  out  of
it  in  box-wood  moulds.  Alfo  that  which  is  hardened  in  brine,  and
fo  coloured  with  the  fmoak  of  apple-tree  wood,  or  of  ftubble  or  draw,
is  not  of  a  difagreeable  tafte  (1).  But  now  let  us  return  to  the  breed¬
ing  of  cattle.

(1)  Cheefe  dried  in  the  fmoak  was  much  efteemed  by  the  Romans ,  and  preferred  to  all
other  forts  r  and  at  Rome  there  was  a  particular  place  for  fmoking  it,  which  Pliny  fays
made  it  very  agreeable  to  the  tafte,  lib.  xi.  42.  Our  author  recommends  che  fmoak  of
apple- tree- wood  or  ftubble  for  that  purpofe.


CHAP,


326


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA


Book  VII.


CHAP.  IX.

Of  Swine ,  and  of  Medicines  proper  for  them.

IN  all  kinds  of  four-footed  beads,  the  fliape  and  form  of  the  male
is  chofen  with  great  care,  becaufe  the  progeny  is  frequently  more
like  the  father  than  the  mother ;  wherefore,  in  fwine-cattle  alfo,  cer¬
tain  of  them  muff  be  approved,  which  are  choice  and  lingular  for  the
largenefs  of  their  whole  body,  and  fuch  as  are  rather  fquare,  than  thofe
that  are  long  or  round,  with  an  hanging-down  belly,  vail  buttocks,
but  not  fo  long  legs  and  hoofs,  of  a  large  and  glandulous  neck,  with
fhort  fnouts,  and  turned  upwards ;  and  efpecially,  which  is  more  to
the  purpofe,  the  males  muft  be  exceeding  falacious,  and  fuch  as  are
proper  for  gendering  from  the  age  of  one  year,  till  they  come  to  their
fourth  year :  neverthelefs  they  can  alfo  impregnate  the  female  when
they  are  fix  months  old.  Sows  of  the  longed:  fize  and  make  are  approved,
provided  they  be,  in  the  red:  of  their  members,  like  the  boars,  which
have  been  already  defcribed.

If  the  country  is  cold,  and  liable  to  hoar-frods,  the  herd  mud:  be
chofen  of  an  exceeding  hard,  thick  and  black  briftle.  If  the  country  be
temperate,  and  lie  expofed  to  the  fun,  the  cattle  that  is  fmooth,  and
has  no  bridles,  or  even  that  which  is  white,  and  proper  for  the  mill,
and  the  bakehoufe,  may  be  fed.  The  female  is  reckoned  fit  for  pigging
till  die  be  almod  feven  years  old ;  and  by  how  much  the  more  fruitful
fhe  is,  by  fo  much  the  fooner  does  fhe  grow  old.  One  of  a  year  old  is
not  altogether  unfit  for  conceiving  -,  but  die  ought  to  be  put  to  the  boar
in  the  month  of  February ,  that  fo,  being  four  months  with  young,  die
may  farrow  in  the  fifth,  at  a  time  when  the  herbs  are  more  folid  and
fubdantial,  that  fo  the  pigs  may  both  have  milk  in  its  greated  drength
and  perfection,  and  that,  when  they  leave  oft  receiving  nouridiment
from  the  udder,  they  may  be  fed  with  dubble,  and  with  fuch  legu¬
minous  fruits  as  fall  to  the  ground  of  their  own  accord.  This  is  what  is
praCtifed  in  regions  very  remote  from  cities,  where  nothing  turns  to  ac¬
count  but  the  bringing  them  up  for  breed  •  for,  in  regions  contiguous  to
the  city,  a  fucking  pig  mud  be  exchanged  for  money ;  for  fo  the  mother,
by  not  bringing-up  her  young,  is  freed  from  labour,  and  will  more
quickly  conceive,  and  bring  forth  again  ;  and  that  fhe  will  do  twice  a
year.

The  males  are  cadrated,  that  they  may  grow  fat,  either  after  their
fird  coition,  when  they  are  fix  months  old,  or  after  they  have  often

*  gen-


Chap.  IX.  O/HUSBANDRY,  327

gendered,  when  they  are  three  or  four  years  old.  They  alfo  exulcerate
the  wombs  of  the  females  with  an  iron  inftrument,  and  £hut  them  up
with  the  cicatrices,  that  they  may  not  breed.  What  reafon  fhould  induce
people  to  this,  I  do  not  underftand,  except  it  be  fcarcity  of  food ;  for,
where  there  is  great  plenty  of  fodder,  it  is  always  expedient  to  put  them
upon  breeding,  to  raife  a  new  offspring.

This  cattle  will  make  a  fhift  in  any  grounds  whatfoever,  whatever
their  fituation  may  be  ;  for  they  are  fed  very  commodioufly  both  upon
mountains  and  in  plains  j  better  neverthelefs  in  marfhy,  than  in  thirfty
lands.  Woods  are  mod:  proper  for  them,  which  are  cloathed  with  the
common  oak,  the  cork-tree,  the  beech-tree,  the  tall  cerrua  (i),  and
ever-green  oaks,  wild-olive  trees,  tamarifk(2),  hazel,  and  wild  pomife-
rous  trees,  fuchas  the  white  hawthorns,  Greek  carob-trees,  the  juniper,
the  lote  or  nettle-tree,  the  pine,  the  cornel-tree,  the  ftrawberry-tree,
the  plum-tree,  and  Chrift’s  thorn,  and  choak-pear-trees  ;  for  thefe
grow  mellow,  and  ripen  at  different  times,  and  fatiate  the  herd  almolf
the  whole  year.  But,  where  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  trees,  we  will  endea¬
vour  to  get  for  them  food  that  grows  immediately  upon  the  ground,
and  prefer  dirty  and  miry  pafture  to  that  which  is  dry,  that  they  may
fearch  all  the  marfhes  and  bogs,  and  dig  out  the  worms,  and  wallow
in  the  mire,  which  is  mighty  agreeable  to  this  cattle ;  as  alfo  that
they  may  be  at  liberty  to  fpoil  and  wafte  the  waters ;  for  it  is  alfo  of
great  benefit  to  them  to  do  this,  efpecially  during  the  fummer,  and
to  grub  up  the  fmall  roots  of  the  aquatile  wood,  as  of  the  rufh,  the
flag,  and  the  low  baftard  reed,  which  the  vulgar  calls  canna.  For,
indeed,  land  that  is  cultivated  makes  fwine  fat,  when  it  is  graffy,  and
planted  with  very  many  forts  of  pomiferous  trees,  that  throughout
the  different  feafons  of  the  year  it  may  yield  apples,  plums,  pears,  nuts
of  many  different  forms,  and  figs.  Neverthelefs,  we  muff  not,  be-
caufe  of  thefe,  be  fparing  of  our  barns :  for,  when  forage  fails  with¬
out  doors,  we  muff  give  it  them  by  hand.  For  which  purpofe,  a  great

(1)  Cerrus.  This  kind  of  oak,  as  has  been  already  faid,  according  to  the  account  that
Pliny  gives  of  it,  Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  xvi.  5.  was  in  his  days  fcarcely  known  in  moft  parts  of
Italy.  It  is  a  very  tall  tree,  with  an  acorn  unpleafant  and  difagreeable  to  the  eye,  rough
and  unpleafant  to  the  hand,  when  it  is  handled,  with  an  echinated  calyx,  or  a  cup  belet
with  prickles  like  an  hedge-hog,  and  much  longer  than  that  of  other  oaks.

(2)  Tamaricibus.  Some  think  that  this  is  not  the  true  reading,  becaufe  the  fruit  of  this
tree  is  exceeding  fmall,  and  covered  with  a  down,  and  cannot  be  good  for  fwine.  Fliny
Toys,  that  it  is  only  fit  for  brooms,  and  denies  that  it  has  any  fruit,  Nat.  Hijl.  lib.  xvi.  2 6.
Fontedera  thinks,  that  the  true  reading  is  termtibus,  which  ought  to  be  joined  with  the
preceding  word  oleajlris ,  fo  that  it  may  fignify,  boughs  of  the  olive-tree  with  fruit  upon
them.  But  as  other  authors  fay,  that  it  bears  fruit,  and  Matthiolus  makes  it  the  fame
with  the  Myrica ,  probahly  Fliny  meant  a  certain  wild  fort  in  fome  parts  of  Italy.


quan


328  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VII*

quantity  of  mad:  mud  be  laid  up  in  water-ciderns  (3),  or  in  the  fmoak
in  lofts:  they  mud  alfo  have  an  allowance  of  beans,  and  fuch-like  le¬
gumes,  when  their  low  price  permits  it  ;  and  efpecially  in  the  fpring,
while  green  things  are  as  yet  in  the  milk,  which  for  the  mod  part  is
hurtful  to  fwine  :  therefore  in  the  morning,  before  they  go  forth  to
the  padures,  they  mud  be  fudained  with  fuch  food  as  has  been  laid
up  in  dore  for  them,  led  the  herbs,  which  are  not  come  to  maturity,
give  them  a  loofenefs,  and  the  cattle  be  emaciated  with  that  didem-
per  ;  nor  ought  they  to  be  all  fout  up  clofe  together,  as  our  other  flocks;
but  the  fwine-Aies  mud  be  made  after  the  manner  of  porticoes,  wherein
they  may  be  fhut  up,  either  after  they  have  farrowed,  or  when  they  are
pregnant  alfo  :  for  fwine  efpecially,  when  they  are  fliut  up,  and  confu-
fedly  huddled  in  whole  herds  together,  lie  one  upon  another,  and  make
one  another  cad  their  young,  or  overlay  and  Another  them.  Wherefore,
as  I  faid,  fwine-dies  mud  be  built  joining  to  walls,  to  the  height  of
four  feet,  that  the  fow  may  not  be  able  to  leap  over  the  inclofures ;  for
foe  ought  not  to  be  covered  over,  that  fo  the  Keeper  may  from  the  up¬
per  part  count  the  number  of  the  pigs  ;  and  if  the  mother  be  lying
upon  any  of  them,  and  fmothering  them,  pull  it  from  under  her.

But  let  the  Keeper  be  vigilant,  adtive,  indudrious,  knowing,  and
fkilful ;  and  he  ought  exactly  to  remember  all  the  fwine  which  he
feeds,  both  fuch  as  are  kept  for  breed,  and  have  pigs  actually  under
their  care,  and  alfo  thofe  that  are  younger,  that  he  may  confider  and
take  care  of  every  one  of  their  litters  in  particular  :  and  let  him  always
obferve  her  that  is  near  the  time  of  her  farrowing,  and  fout  her  up,
that  foe  may  bring  forth  her  young  in  the  fwine-die  ;  then  let  him
mark  down  prefently  how  many,  and  what  kind  the  young  ones  are
of ;  and  efpecially  take  care,  that  none  of  them  be  brought  up  by  a
drange  nurfe  :  for  pigs,  if  they  efcape  out  of  the  hog-die,  very  eaflly
mix  themfelves  with  others ;  and  the  fow,  when  foe  has  laid  herfelf
down,  gives  her  dugs  equally  to  a  dranger  and  to  her  own.  There¬
fore  the  chief  bufinefs  of  a  fwineherd  is  to  fout  up  every  one  of  them
with  her  own  offspring,  who,  if  his  memory  fails  him,  fo  that  he  can¬
not  know  every  fow's  progeny  in  particular,  may,  with  liquid  pitch,
put  the  fame  mark  upon  the  fow  and  her  pigs,  and  either  by  letters,

(3)  Cifemis  in  aquam.  It  is  very  probable,  that  this  fentence  is  corrupt,  for  it  can¬
not  be  liippofed,  that  mart  can  be  kept  long  in  water  without  fpoiling ;  fo  that  PonreJera's
correction  feems  very  probable,  cijlernis  fine  aqua ,  vel  fumofis  tabulatis  ;  in  cifterns  with¬
out  water,  or  in  fmoaky  lofts  :  or  perhaps  the  author  directs,  that  they  be  laid  up  in
order  to  throw  them  into  the  cifterns,  when  they  go  to  drink,  that  they  may  then  eat
them,  after  they  have  been  foftened  in  the  water.


or


Chap. X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  329

or  by  fome  other  marks,  diftinguifh  the  dam  and  every  one  of  her
young.  For,  in  a  greater  number,  it  is  neceffary  to  have  different
marks,  that  the  Keeper’s  memory  may  not  be  confounded.  Never-
thelefs,  becaufe  it  feems  troublefome  and  difficult  to  do  this  in  large
herds ;  it  is  moft  convenient  fo  to  build  the  fwine- flies,  that  their
.  threfholds  may  rife  to  fuch  an  height,  as  the  nurfe  may  juft  be  able
to  get  out  of  it,  but  the  fuckling  not  be  able  to  flep  over  it ;  fo  a
flranger  does  not  creep  in  j  and  every  litter,  which,  neverthelefs,
ought  not  to  exceed  the  number  of  eight  heads,  waits  for  its  own
mother  in  her  bed-chamber.  Not  that  I  am  ignorant,  that  the  fecun¬
dity  of  breeding  fows  is  productive  of  a  greater  number ;  but  becaufe
fhe  that  brings  up  more,  lofes  her  flrength,  and  very  quickly  decays.
And  thofe  which  fuckle  and  bring  up  their  own  young,  muft  be  fuf-
tained  with  boiled  barley,  left  they  be  reduced  to  extreme  leannefs,
and  from  that  to  fome  deftruCtive  diftemper.  But  let  a  diligent
Swineherd  frequently  fweep  the  hog-houfe,  and  oftener  the  fwine-
fties :  for  tho’  the  forefaid  beaft  is  very  nafty  and  dirty  in  its  way  of
feeding,  neverthelefs  it  loves  to  have  a  very  clean  bed  to  lie  in.  This
is  commonly  the  way  of  managing  of  fwine-cattle,  that  enjoy  a  good
ftate  of  health.


CHAP.  X.

Of  Medicines  proper  for  Swine *

OUR  next  bufinefs  is  to  tell,  what  care  is  to  be  taken  of  that
which  is  difeafed.  The  figns  of  fwines  being  in  a  fever,  are,
when  they  hang  down  their  heads,  and  carry  them  awry  ;  and,  after
they  have  run  a  little  up  and  down  the  paftures,  they  fuddenly  ftand
ftill,  and,  being  feized  with  a  giddinefs,  fall  down.  We  muft  take
particular  notice,  to  what  fide  their  heads  incline,  that  we  may  let
them  blood  in  the  ear  on  the  contrary  fide.  Let  us  alfo  ftrike  a  vein
under  their  tail,  at  the  diftance  of  two  inches  from  their  buttocks,
which  is  large  enough  in  that  place  }  and  it  muft  be  firft  beaten  with
the  fprig  of  a  vine}  then,  when  it  is  fwelled  with  the  ftroke  of  a  rod,
be  opened  with  a  lancet}  and,  after  they  have  been  blooded,  the  vein
muft  be  bound  up  with  the  rind  of  the  willow-tree,  or  of  the  elm-
tree  alfo.  When  we  have  done  this,  we  muft  keep  the  cattle  one  or
two  days  in  the  houfe,  and  give  them  moderately  warm  water,  as

U  u  much


}3o  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VII.

much  as  they  dial!  defire  ;  and  to  each  of  them  a  fextarius  of  barley-
meal.

Such  of  them  as  have  fwellings  in  the  glands  under  the  throat,  mull
be  let  blood  under  the  tongue;  and,  when  it  has  flowed  abundantly,
it  will  be  proper,  that  their  whole  mouth  he  rubbed  over  with  bruifed
fait  and  wheat-meal.  Some  think  it  a  more  prefent  and  effectual  re¬
medy,  when  they  pour  into  each  of  them,  through  an  horn,  three
cup-fulls  of  garum  or  fait  filh-pickle  ;  then  they  bind  cloven  tallies  or
cuttings  of  fennel-giant  with  a  fmall  flaxen  cord,  and  hang  them  fo  at
their  necks,  that  the  fwellings  may  be  touched  with  the  fennel-giant
cuttings.  Ivory  faw-dud,  or  filings  of  ivory,  alfo,  mixed  wdth  parch¬
ed  fait,  and  beans  bruifed  very  fmall,  thrown  before  them  when  thev
are  hungry,  before  they  go  forth  to  their  padures,  is  reckoned  verv
falutary  to  fuch  of  them  as  naufeate  their  food.  Alfo  the  whole  herd
ufes  to  be  fo  fick,  that  it  is  emaciated,  and  takes  no  food  ;  and  when
they  are  led  forth  to  the  paftures,  they  lie  down  in  the  middle  of  the
field,  and,  being  feized  with  a  certain  lethargy,  they  give  themlelves
wholly  up  to  fleep  in  the  heat  of  the  fummer-lun  ;  which  when  they
do,  they  fhut  up  the  whole  herd  in  a  covered  hog-houfe,  and  keep
them  from  drinking  and  forrage  for  one  day :  the  day  after,  they  give
them,  while  they  are  thirdy,  the  root  of  the  ferpentine  cucumber
bruifed  and  mixed  with  water  ;  which  when  the  cattle  have  drunk,
they  are  taken  with  a  naufeating,  and  both  vomit  and  purge ;  and,
when  all  the  bile  is  driven  out,  they  allow  them  chichlings  or  beans
fprinkled  with  very  drong  brine,  and  then  they  give  them  (as  they  do
to  men)  warm  water  to  drink.

But,  as  thirfb,  during  the  fummer,  is  hurtful  to  all  four-footed
beads  whatfoever,  fo,  mod  of  all,  is  it  pernicious  to  fwine.  Where¬
fore  we  do  not  command,  that,  as  the  .goat  and  the  flieep,  fo  this  ani¬
mal  alfo  fhould  be  led  twice  to  water  :  but  that,  if  it  can  be  done,  it
be  conftantly  kept  hard  by  a  river,  lake,  or  pond,  during  the  rifing  of
the  Dog-dar;  becaufe,  as  it  is  an  exceeding  hot  bead,  it  is  not  con¬
tented  with  drinking  the  water,  unlels  it  plunges  its  nady  fat  flanks,
and  belly  diflended  with  fodder,  into  it,  and  cools  them  therein  :  nor
does  it  delight  more  in  any  thing,  than  to  wallow  in  brooks,  and  in  a
miry  lake  or  bog.  But,  if  the  iituation  of  the  place  does  not  allow
this  to  be  done,  you  mud  draw  water  out  of  wells,  and  put  it  into
troughs  in  large  quantities,  and  give  it  them  to  drink  plentifully  ;
with  which  if  they  be  not  abundantly  fatiated,  they  become  difeafed
in  their  lungs.  And  this  difeafe  is  exceedingly  well  cured,  by  inferting
lungivcrt  into  the  flaps  of  their  ears ;  concerning  which  little  root  we

have


Chap. XI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  531

have  carefully  and  very  often  fpoken  already.  Alfo  the  pain  of  a
diftempered  fpleen  ufes  to  plague  them,  which  happens,  when  there
chances  to  be  a  great  drought  and,  as  the  Bucolic  poem  fpeaks,

*  When  on  all  fides  the  apples  fcatter’d  lie
‘  Each  under  its  own  tree  (i).’

For  it  is  an  infatiable  cattle,  and  the  fwine,  while,  beyond  all
meafure,  they  eagerly  feek  after  fodder  that  is  fweet,  labour  and  are
affe&ed  in  the  fummer  with  a  fwelling  or  growth  of  the  fpleen  ;  from
which  they  are  relieved,  if  troughs  be  made  of  tamarilks  and  butchers
brdom,  and  filled  with  water,  and  fet  before  them  when  they  are
thirfty  :  for  the  medicinal  juice  of  the  wood,  being  fwallowed  with
their  drink,  puts  a  flop  to  the  inteftine  fwelling  (2).


CHAP.  XL

Of  Cafirating  of  Swine.

THERE  are  two  times  obferved  for  cafirating  this  kind  of  cattle,
the  fpring  and  autumn :  and  there  are  two  different  ways  of
performing  it.  The  firffc  is  that  which  we  have  already  given  an  ac¬
count  of ;  when,  after  two  wounds  or  incifions  are  made,  the  tefticles
are  fqueezed  out  one  by  one,  through  each  of  the  wounds :  the  other
is  more  fpecious,  but  more  dangerous ;  which,  neverthelefs,  I  (hall  not
omit.  After  you  have  cut  with  a  knife,  and  pulled  out  one  of  the
virile  parts,  thrufl  in  a  penknife  through  the  wound  which  you  have
made,  and  cut  the  middle  fkin  as  it  were,  which  intervenes  between
the  two  genital  members,  and  with  your  crooked  fingers  pull  out  the
other  tefticle  alfo  :  thus,  having  applied  the  other  remedies,  which  we
taught  you  before,  there  will  be  but  one  cicatrice.

But  there  is  one  thing  which  I  thought  ought  not  to  be  concealed,
which  concerns  the  religion  of  a  Mafter  of  a  family,  and  which  may  raife
fcruples,  and  fuperftitious  fancies,  in  his  mind.  There  are  fome  fows,

(1)  Virgil.  Ec/og.  vii.

(2)  The  only  difficulty  here  is,  how  troughs  can  be  made  of  rvfcus-y  butchers  broom.
Some  thick,  that  the  true  reading  is  tanaricis  e  truneo  Fiiny ,  lib.  xxiv.  9.  fpeaks  of
canals  or  troughs  made  of  the  tamarix.  Authors  are  not  fo  very  cxadt  in  every  fen-
tence,  as  to  be  confined  always  to  the  very  letter;  perhaps  Columella  meant  no  more,
than  that  the  infide  of  their  troughs  fliould  be  well  lined  with  the  branches  of  thefe
trees.


U  U  2


which


332  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

which  eat  their  own  young,  which,  when  it  happens,  is  not  looked
upon  as  a  prodigy  ;  for,  of  all  cattle  whatfoever,  fwine  are  the  mod
impatient  of  hunger  ;  fo  that,  fometimes,  if  they  want  food,  they
devour,  not  only  the  offspring  of  other  creatures,  (if  they  have  liberty)
but  their  own  alfo.  1  have  difcourfed  accurately  enough  (if  I  am  not
miftaken)  of  Herds  of  big  Cattle,  of  the  other  forts  of  Cattle,  and  of
Shepherds  and  Herdfmen,  by  whom  flocks  and  herds  of  four-footed
beaffs  are  taken  care  of,  tended,  and  looked  after,  both  in  the  houfe
and  without  doors,  fo  far  as  human  prudence  and  induftry  are  re-
quifite.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  Dogs.

I  Shall  now,  as  I  promifed  in  the  preceding  book,  fpeak  of  dumb
keepers,  or  watches,  tho’  a  dog  is  falfly  called  a  dumb  keeper  :  for
what  man  living  can  publifh  or  proclaim  more  diftindtly,  and  with  fo
great  vociferation,  the  approach  of  a  beaft,  or  a  thief,  as  he  can  do  with
his  barking  ?  What  fervant  is  there,  that  loves  his  maffer  more  ?  What
companion  more  faithful  ?  What  keeper  or  watchman  lefs  liable  to
bribes  and  corruption  ?  What  watchman  can  be  found  more  vigilant  ?
In  a  word,  Who  will  be  more  fteady  in  avenging  your  injuries,  or  in
protecting  you  from  them  ?  Wherefore  an  Hufbandman  ought  to  pur-
chafe  and  maintain  this  animal,  even  among  the  very  firft  things,  be-
caufe  he  keeps  and  guards  both  the  manor-houfe,  and  the  fruits,  and
the  family,  and  the  cattle.

But  there  are  three  different  purpofes  to  which  regard  is  had  in  pur-
chafing  and  maintaining  this  animal  :  for  one  kind  is  chofen  to  protett
us  againft  the  fnares  and  infidioufnefs  of  men,  and  this  keeps  and
guards  the  manor-houfe,  and  fuch  things  as  are  adjoining  to  it.  But
a  fecond  kind  is  chofen  for  repelling  the  injuries  of  men,  and  wild
beafts  i  and  this  kind  watches  over  the  ffables  and  folds  at  home,  and
the  cattle  when  they  are  feeding  abroad.  A  third  kind  is  provided  for
hunting  withal  ;  and  this  not  only  gives  no  afliflance  to  the  Hufband¬
man,  but  it  takes  him  off  his  bufinefs,  and  makes  him  lazy  and  flothful:
therefore  we  muft  fpeak  of  thehoufe-dog,  and  of  that  of  the  Shepherd  ■,
for  the  hunting-dog  does  not  at  all  belong  to  our  profefilon.


The


Chap. XII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  333

The  keeper  of  the  manor-houfe  muft  be  chofen  of  a  very  large  body,
and  of  a  vaffc  canorous  bark,  that  the  evil-doer  may  be  firft  terrified
when  he  hears  him,  and  afterwards  alfo  when  he  fees  him ;  and  even
fometimes  when  he  is  not  feen,  may  notwithstanding,  with  his  hideous
roaring  and  growling,  put  to  flight  him  that  lies  in  wait  to  do  you
hurt.  But  let  him  be  of  one  colour,  and  let  that  rather  be  chofen
white  in  a  Shepherd’s  dog,  and  black  in  one  for  the  manor-houfe  ;  for
a  various  colour  is  commendable  in  neither.  A  Shepherd  approves  of
the  white,  becaufe  he  is  unlike  to  the  wild  beafts  ;  and  fometimes
there  is  great  occafion  for  fome  remarkable  difference  to  diftinguifh
them,  when  he  is  driving  away  the  wolves,  either  in  a  dark  morning,
or  in  the  twilight  in  the  evening  alfo,  left,  inftead  of  the  wolf,  he  ft r ike
the  dog,  if  he  is  not  very  confpicuous  by  his  white  colour.

The  manor-houfe  dog,  which  is  placed  there  in  order  to  oppofe  the
mifchievous  deeds  of  wicked  men,  whether  the  thief  comes  when  it  is
fair  daylight,  appears  more  terrible  when  he  is  black  j  or  whether  he
comes  in  the  night,  the  dog  is  not  fo  much  as  feen,  becaufe  of  the*
relemblance  he  bears  to  darknefs  ;  wherefore  being  covered  with  the
darknefs,  he  has  fafer  aecefs  to  him  who  lies  in  wait  to  hurt  you.
One  that  is  fquare  is  more  efteemed  than  one  that  is  long  or  fhort,
with  fo  huge  an  head,  that  it  may  feem  to  be  the  greateft  part  of  his
body,  with  dejected  and  propendent  ears,  black  or  fiery  red-coloured
eyes  radiant  with  fparkling  dazling  light,  a  large  and  hairy  breaft  or
cheft,  broad  fhoulders,  thick  and  rough  briftly  legs,  a  fhort  tail,  ex¬
ceeding  large  toes  and  nails,  which  in  Greek  are  called  (i).

This  fhall  be  the  form,  and  fize,  and  make  of  the  manor-houfe  dog,
moft  to  be  commended  3  but  his  manners  or  natural  temper  ought
neither  to  be  exceeding  gentle  and  mild,  nor,  on  the  contrary,  cruel
and  fierce  5  becaufe  with  the  firft  he  fawns  upon  a  thief  alfo,  and
with  the  laft  he  falls  upon  the  domeftics.  It  is  enough,  that  they  be
fevere,  and  not  fawning 3  and  that  they  fometimes  look  upon  their
fellow-fervants  with  fomewhat  of  a  more  angry  and  furly  countenance,
and  be  always  in  a  fume  and  rage  againft  ftrangers.  But  efpecially,
when  they  are  upon  guard,  they  ought  never,  to  be  feen  fleeping,  but
always  upon  the  watch  ^  not  wandering  up  and  down,  but  afliduous
and  circumfpedl,  rather  than  rath  and  inconfiderate  :  for  thofe  never
give  the  alarm,  or  warning  of  any  thing,  but  what  they  are  very  fure
of  3  thefe  are  roufed  up  with  any  vain  noife,  and  groundlefs  fufpicion.

(1)  AgjtW/,  in  fome  editions  which  fignifies,  handfuls  of  any  thing.  Htfy-

chius  fays,  that  the  word  fignifies  th  of  the  hand:  when  applied  to  dogs,  no  doubt,

it  fignifies  their  toes  and  nails.

I  thought


334  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.

I  thought  that  thefe  things  were  therefore  proper  to  be  mentioned,  be-
caufe  not  nature  only,  but  difcipline  alio,  forms  the  manners  and  tem¬
per,  that  fo,  when  we  have  occafion  to  buy  them,  we  may  make
choice  of  fuch  as  have  thefe  qualities ;  and,  when  we  educate  fuch  as  are
whelped  at  home,  we  may  form  them  with  fuch  inditutions  as  thefe.
Nor  is  it  of  any  great  importance,  whether  manor-houfe  dogs  be  of
heavy  bodies,  and  not  very  fwift,  or  no  ;  for  they  ought  to  do  more
upon  the  place  where  they  are  polled,  and  in  the  pafifage  and  entry  to
the  houfe,  than  in  (allying  out  to  the  open  ground,  and  at  a  dillance
from  their  llation  :  for  they  ought  always  to  remain  about  the  inclo-
l'ures,  and  within  the  edifice,  yea  never  fo  much  as  to  retire  to  any
great  dillance  from  it  5  and  they  do  their  duty  well  enough,  if  they
both  fagacioully  fmell  any  one  coming  toward  them,  and  terrify  him
with  their  barking,  and  do  not  fuffer  him  to  come  nearer,  or  violently
fall  upon  him  that  perfills  to  approach.  For  the  firffc  thing  is,  not  to
be  attacked  ;  and  the  fecond  thing  is,  when  provoked  and  fet  upon,
to  defend  and  avenge  himfelf  with  courage  and  perfeverance.  And
what  has  been  faid,  relates  to  domeftic  guards ;  what  follows,  to  pa-
floral.

A  dog  for  keeping  cattle  ought  neither  to  be  in  fo  bad  a  plight  of
body,  nor  fo  fwift,  as  one  that  purfues  fallow-deer  and  flags,  and  the
fwifteft  animals  ;  nor  fo  fat  and  heavy,  as  the  guard  and  keeper  of
the  manor-houfe  and  the  barn  :  but,  neverthelefs,  he  ought  to  be  ro-
buft,  and  to  a  certain  degree  prompt  and  bold,  becaufe  he  is  prepared
and  appointed  for  quarrelling  and  fighting,  no  lefs  than  for  running,
feeing  he  ought  to  repel  and  oppofe  the  fnares  of  the  wolf,  and  pur-
fue  the  favage  and  cruel  robber  when  he  dies,  and  (hake  the  prey  out
of  his  jaws,  and  refcue  it,  and  take  it  away  from  him.  Wherefore
a  longer  and  more  produced  or  out-llretched  date  or  make  of  body
is  more  fit  and  fuitable  for  thefe  adventures,  than  the  Ihort,  or  even
than  that  which  is  fquare ;  becaufe  (as  I  faid)  neceffity  fometimes  re¬
quires,  that  a  bead  lliould  be  purfued  with  great  celerity  :  the  red  of
his  joints,  being  like  the  members  of  the  houfe-dog,  are  equally  ap¬
proved.

Almod  the  fame  food  mud  be  given  to  both  kinds :  for,  if  your
lands  are  fo  wide  and  fpacious,  as  to  fudain  flocks  and  herds  of  cattle,
barley-meal  with  whey  is  excellent  food  for  all  dogs  whatfoever,  with¬
out  any  didindtion.  But  if  your  land  is  planted  with  trees,  and  with¬
out  padure,  they  mud  be  fatiated  with  bread  made  of  red  or  bearded
or  common  wheat :  neverthelefs,  you  mud  mix  the  liquor  of  boiled

beans


Chap.  XII.  O/HUSBANDRY.  335

beans  with  it:  but  it  muft  be  lukewarm  ;  for,  when  it  is  boiling  hot,
it  creates  madnefs.

To  this  quadruped,  whether  male  or  female,  venery  muft  not  be
permitted,  till  after  it  is  a  year  old  j  for,  if  it  is  allowed,  it  confumes
both  their  body  and  their  ftrength,  and  makes  their  minds  to  dege¬
nerate.  The  firft  birth  of  one  that  has  brought  forth  muft  be  taken
away  from  her  ;  for,  being  a  young  novice,  without  any  experience,
fhe  cannot  nurfe  them  rightly  :  and  her  educating  them  fpoils  the
growth  of  her  whole  habit.  The  males  procreate  in  a  youthful  man¬
ner  till  they  are  ten  years  old  ;  after  that  age  they  feem  unfit  for
coupling  with  the  female,  becaufe  the  offspring  of  fuch  as  are  older
proves  dull  and  unadtive.  The  females  conceive  till  they  are  nine
years  old  5  nor  are  they  ufeful  after  their  tenth  year.  The  whelps
muft  not  be  let  out  during  their  firft  fix  months,  till  they  are  grown
ftrong,  except  it  be  to  their  dam,  in  order  to  play  and  wanton  :  after¬
wards  they  muft  be  kept  in  chains  in  the  day-time,  and  loofed  during
the  night.  Nor  will  we  ever  fuffer  thofe,  whofe  generous  difpofitions
we  have  a  mind  to  prefer  ve,  to  be  educated  at  the  dugs  of  a  ft  range
nurfe  ;  becaufe  both  the  maternal  milk  and  fpirits  do  always  much
more  improve  the  growth  of  their  genius,  and  of  their  body.  But,  if
fhe  that  has  brought  forth  is  deficient  in  milk,  goats  milk  will  be
proper  to  be  given  to  the  puppies,  till  they  be  four  months  old.

Alfo  they  muft  be  called  by  names  that  are  not  very  long,  that
every  one  of  them  may  hear  the  more  fpeedily  when  he  is  called  :
neverthelefs  not  with  fhorter  names,  than  what  may  be  pronounced
with  two  fyllables  ;  as  the  Greek  name  o-jtuAaf,  (puppy)  the  Latin
ferox ,  (furly)  the  Greek  a dxcov,  ( lacon )  the  Latin  celer  (nimble,  or
fwift-foot) ;  or  for  the  female,  as  the  Greek  names  o^a^ri,  (fpeedful)
aAjoj,  (courage)  poopy,  (prowefs)  and  the  Latin  lupa ,  (harlot)  cerva ,
(deer-like)  tigris  (tygrefs).  It  will  be  proper  to  curtail  the  puppies,
the  fortieth  day  after  they  are  whelped,  in  this  manner  :  there  is  a
nerve,  which  creeps  all  along  through  the  joints  of  the  back-bone,  as
far  as  the  extremity  of  the  tail  j  they  take  faft  hold  of  this  with  their
teeth ;  and,  after  they  have  drawn  it  out  a  little,  they  bite  or  break  it
off ;  which  being  done,  the  tail  does  not  grow  out  into  an  abominable
length  ;  and  (as  very  many  Shepherds  affirm)  madnefs,  a  difeafe  mortal
to  this  kind,  is  thereby  prevented  (2).

CHAP.

(2)  This  laffc  paragraph,  relating  to  the  curtailing  of  whelps,  is  quoted  by  Piiny,  lib.  viii.
c.  41.  and  commended  in  order  to  prevent  their  running  mad,  which,  he  fays,  is  fatal
to  them  during  the  dog-days  j  and  lays,  that,  in  order  to  prevent  it,  they  ufed  at  that

time


336


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VII.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  Difeafes  incident  to  %)ogsy  and  of  the  Way  of  curing

them.

BU  T  commonly,  during  the  fummer,  the  ears  of  dogs  are  fo  ex-
ulcerated  by  flies,  that  they  oft-times  lofe  them  intirely  :  to
prevent  which,  they  muft  be  anointed  with  bitter  nuts  bruifed.  But,
if  they  are  already  affedted  with  ulcers,  it  will  be  proper  to  drop
into  the  wounds  liquid  pitch  boiled  with  hogs-lard.  The  tykes  fall
off  them,  when  they  are  touched  with  this  fame  medicine ;  for  they
muff  not  be  pulled  off  with  the  hand,  left,  as  I  faid  before,  they  make
ulcers.

The  remedies  for  a  dog  plagued  with  fleas  are,  either  cumin
bruifed  in  equal  quantity  with  white  hellebore,  and  mixed  with  water,
and  rubbed  upon  them;  or  the  juice  of  the  ferpentine  cucumber  (1) ;
or,  if  you  have  not  thefe,  old  lees  of  oyl,  fprinkled  over  their  whole
body.  If  the  fcab  infeft  them,  bruife  the  fame  quantity  of  cytifus ,


time  to  mix  the  dung  of  a  cock,  or  an  hen,  with  their  food  ;  bur,  if  the  difeafe  prevented
them,  they  ufed  to  mix  white  eilebore  with  if.  But  this  difeafe  is  not  only  fatal  to  the
dogs  themfelves,  but  to  men  alfo,  if  they  be  bitten  by  them  ;  for,  as  Cornelius  Celfus
fays,  lib.  v.  c.  i.  from  this  wound,  if  timely  afliftance  is  not  given  to  prevent  the  bad
effe&s  of  it,  there  arifes  what  the  Greeks  call  an  hydrophobia ,  or  fear  of  water,  a  mod:
terrible  difeafe,  whereby  the  Tick  perfon  is  both  tormented  with  thirft,  and  with  dread  of
water  at  the  fame  times.  There  is,  fays  he,  very  little  hope  of  the  recovery  of  a  perfon
thus  afflidted;  but  yet  there  is  one  only  remedy,  which  is,  to  throw  the  perfon  all  of  a
fudden  into  a  pond,  without  his  apprehending  or  forefeeing  it  before  it  is  done.  Pliny
fays,  that  there  was  lately  found  out  a  remedy  by  a  certain  oracle,  viz.  the  root  of  the
wild  rofe-bufh,  which  they  called  cynofrhodos.

It  would  be  needlefs  to  give  many  inftances  of  the  fagacity  and  faichfulnefs  of  dogs,
of  their  courage  in  defending  their  mafters,  and  of  their  forrow  at  their  death  ;  of  which
Pliny,  in  his  nat.  hifi.  lib.  viii.  c.  40.  gives  feveral  inftances.

(1)  Cucumis  anguine  us :  Probably  it  is  fo  called  from  its  figure,  refembling  the  winding
of  a  ferpent;  accordingly  by  fome  authors  it  is  called  cucumis  fiexuofus.  Pliny  fays,  that
fome  thought  it  was  the  fame  with  that  which  is  called  cucumis  filvejlris ,  of  which  they
made  a  medicine,  which  they  called  elaterium,  by  expreffing  the  juice  out  of  its  feed  :
And  Cornelius  Celfus,  lib.  v.  cap.  12.  fays,  that  the  juice  of  the  feed  of  the  wild  cucumber
was  fo  called,  becaufe  of  its  ftrong  purgative  quality,  etxs  r«  £A:J>,  pellere,  quafi  depulfo -
rium.  And  Galen ,  in  explicat.  vocum  Hippocrat.  fays,  that  not  only  this  juice,  but  every
thing  that  purged  the  belly  downward,  was  fo  called.  And  Hefychius  fays,  that  the  word
ftgnifies  a  cathartic  medicine ;  fo  that  it  feems  very  ftrange,  that  the  plant  itfelf  ftiould  be
called  by  this  name ;  or  that  it  ftiould  be  thought  to  be  fo  called  from  the  elaftic  force
of  the  feed  leaping  out  of  it,  as  fome  authors  have  faid.


or


Chap. XIII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  337

or  (hrub-trefoil,  and  fefamum ,  or  oily-grain  together;  and  mix  them
throughly  with  liquid  pitch,  and  anoint  the  part  affeCted  :  which
medicine  is  reckoned  proper  alfo  for  men.  This  fame  peft,  if  it  be
more  violent,  is  removed  with  the  liquor  that  diftils  from  the  cedar-
tree.  Their  other  difeafes  muft  be  cured  in  the  fame  manner  as  we
directed  with  refpeCt  to  other  animals.  Thus  far  of  leffer  cattle.
We  fhall  prefently,  in  the  following  book,  give  directions  concerning
manor-houfe  pafturings,  which  comprehend  the  care  and  management
of  fowls,  fifties,  and  wild  four-footed  beafts.


X  x


L.  JUNIUS


[  338  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  EIGHTH.


CHAP.  I.

Of  Pajlurings  in  and  about  the  Manor-houfe  ( i ).

WE  have  in  feven  books,  Publius  Silvinus ,  given  an  account  of
thofe  things  which  almoft  confummate  the  fcience  of  Tilling
and  Cultivating  the  ground  ;  as  alfo  of  fuch  things  as  the  connderation
of  the  bulinefs  of  managing  cattle  required.  Now  this  book  fhall
bear  the  title  of  the  following  number :  not  becaufe  thofe  things,
which  we  intend  to  fpeak  of,  require  the  immediate  and  peculiar  care
of  the  Hufbandman  ;  but  becaufe  they  ought  not  to  be  undertaken

(i)  The  Romans ,  who  for  many  ages  lived  after  a  very  plain  manner,  and  con¬
tented  ihemfelves  with  what  their  own  country  produced,  without  any  great  art,  apply¬
ing  themfelves  more  to  the  plain  culture  of  the  ground,  than  to  any  nice  improvements
in  Husbandly  ;  after  they  became  acquainted  wr.h  Greece  and  Africa ,  improved  their
Agriculture  to  a  great  degree  ;  and  their  men  of  learning  and  cunofity  collected  all  the
knowledge  they  could  have  both  from  Greek  and  Carthaginian  authors,  which  were  very
numerous,  and  alfo  from  their  own  obfervation  •  fo  that  in  a  little  while  the  art  of  Hus¬
bandry  was  carried  to  as  great,  if  not  greater,  perfection  in  Italy ,  than  in  Greece  and
Africa :  and  they  not  only  adopted  the  ufeful  improvements  of  Greece ,  but  foon  fell  into
their  delicacy  and  luxury ;  which  was  in  nothing  more  remarkable  than  in  their  fifh-
ponds,  which  they  carried  to  extravagant  expences :  and  of  fuch  things  as  they  derived
from  the  Greeks ,  they  frequently  retained  their  Greek  names,  as  w?e  fee  in  this  author.;
who  in  this,  and  the  laft  chapter  of  the  Vllth  book,  has  more  Greek  words,  than  in
his  whole  work  befide;  which  probably  he  did,  tacitly  to  expofe  and  cenfure  a  piece  of
vanity,  which  was  more  common  in  cur  author’s  days,  U'hen  luxury  was  come  to  its
grcaceft  height,  of  giving  foreign  names  to  a  great  many  of  their  delicacies.  And  as
this  chapter  could  not  be  fo  well  mandated,  without  leaving  the  Greek  words  in  the  text,
as  our  author  has  done ;  if  any  want  to  know  the  true  fignification  of  them,  they  may  find
it,  by  cafting  their  eye  on  the  place  referred  to  by  the  number  placed  after  the  word.


and


Chap.  I.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  339

and  carried  on  in  any  other  place  but  in  the  country,  or  in  manor-
houfes ;  and  they  turn  to  more  advantage  to  thofe  that  live  in  the
country,  than  to  thofe  that  live  in  cities.  For  it  is  no  very  fmall
peny  that  feeding  of  fmaller  animals  within  the  precindts  of  the
manor-houfe  brings  in  to  the  Hufbandman,  as  well  as  feeding  of
cattle,  lince  with  the  dung  of  fowls  they  both  cure  the  leaned:  vine¬
yards,  and  all  forts  of  young  trees,  and  of  land  whatfoever :  and  with
the  fowls  themfelves  they  make  plentiful  provifion  for  their  kitchen,
and  furnifh  their  table  with  valuable  and  excellent  difhes :  laftly,  with
the  price  of  the  animals  that  are  fold,  they  increafe  the  yearly  in¬
come  of  the  manor-houfe.  Wherefore  I  thought  it  proper  to  fpeak
of  this  kind  of  pafturing  alfo  ;  and  it  is  commonly  carried  on  either
in,  or  near  to,  and  about,  the  manor-houfe.

In  the  manor-houfe  there  is  what  the  Greeks  call  opvtSrwvcts  (2),  and
'srepirepeiuvcLS  (3)  ;  and,  where  there  |is  conveniency  of  water  at  com¬
mand,  l%SruoTpo<pe?<z  (4),  alfo,  are  carried  on  and  managed  with  fedu-
lity  and  care.  But,  that  we  may  rather  fpeak  E?iglijh}  all  thefe  are
the  very  fame  as  cells,  and  roofting-places  for  common  poultry-yard-
fowls  ;  and  likewife  as  receptacles  of  fuch  fowls  as  are  fhut  up  in
coops,  and  fattened,  and  of  aquatile  animals.  Moreover,  about  the  ,
manor-houfe  are  placed  /mAiaac/oves  (y),  and  ^yivoTpocpsioc  (6j,  yea  Actyo-
rpocpeicc  (7)  alfo,  are  managed  and  tended  with  great  care  and  atten¬
tion.  Which  bee- flails,  or  lodgings  for  bees,  we  in  like  manner  call
apiaries  •  and  the  harbouring  places  for  fwimming  fowls,  which  de¬
light  in  lakes,  and  pools,  and  fifh-ponds,  we  call  aviaries  j  and  thofe
alfo  of  wild  cattle,  which  are  kept  confined  in  inclofed  woods  and
fore  ft  s,  we  call  vi varies.

(2)  ’Oft'/flftWf,  acc.  plur.  aviaries,  or  poultry  houfes.  Varro ,  lib.  iii.  c.  3.  by  this  word
meant  receptacles  of  all  manner  of  birds  or  fowls  fed  within  the  walls  of  the  villa.

(3)  acc.  plur.  ameitiftcov,  ihe  fame  as  tzzejsi&rr&tpelcv,  a  dove-houfe  or
pigeon-houfe,  for  ^breeding  and  feeding  doves  and  pigeons.

(4)  a  fifti-pond,  a  fifh,  and  Tpztpv,  to  feed  or  nourifh;  a  lake,

pool,  or  pond,  inclofed  in  fuch  a  manner  as  the  fifties  cannot  efcape.

(5)  MsA/o’a-ftSi',  a  bee-hive  or  bee  ft  all,  where  bees  were  kept.  Varro  alfo  makes  ufe  of
this  word  }  and^  it  feems  the  word  apiarium  was  not  much'  in  uie :  y£\t<ro'ct,  a  bee.

(6)  Xm'oT£?<p«oi',  a  goofe-pen,  or  place  where  geefe  are  fed  :  a  goofe,  and  7pspa>,  to

feed.

(7)  ActyoT£?<p£ov,  leporarium,  a  hare-warren:  *etyof  or  A*yc»of}  an  hare.  Varro  fays,
that  he  would  have  this  word  taken  in  a  larger  fenfe  than  what  the  aniient  Romans  meant
by  it,  who  kept  nothing  but  hares  in  them  •  but  he  would  have  it  to  fignify  all  inclo-
fures  contiguous  to  the  villa,  w'here  wild  animals  are  fhut  up  and  fed.


X  x  1


CHAP,


340


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.


CHAP.  II.

Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  common  Poultry-yard  Hens  and
Cocks  proper  to  be  provided  and  brought  up.

THerefore  I  {hall  firft  give  directions  concerning  thofethat  are  fed
within  the  precinCts  of  the  manor-houfe :  and,  indeed,  with
rei'peCt  to  others,  it  is  perhaps  doubted  whether  country-people  ought
to  have  them  in  their  poflehion.  But,  for  the  mod  part,  it  is  a  com¬
mon  and  ufual  thing  for  an  Hufbandman  to  bring  up  hens :  and  they
are  either  of  the  common  poultry  kind,  which  they  keep  in  farm-
houfes  j  or  what  they  call  ruftic  hens ;  or  of  that  kind  they  call  African
hens.  The  common  poultry-yard  or  farm-houfe  hen,  is  a  fowl  which
is  commonly  feen  in  all  manor-houfes  whatfoever  :  the  rujiic  hen ,
which  is  not  unlike  to  that  which  is  common  in  all  farm-houfes,  is
deceived  and  caught  by  the  fowler  ;  and  there  are  great  numbers  of
this  kind  in  an  ifland  fituate  in  the  Ligurian  fea,  which  mariners,  by
lengthening  the  Latin  name  of  the  fowl,  have  called  Gallinaria(  i):
the  African  hen,  which  mod  people  call  the  Numidian ,  is  like  to  the
Meleagris  { 2),  except  that  fhe  bears  upon  her  head  a  bright-red  helmet
and  creft,  both  which  are  blue  in  the  Meleagris  hen.

But,


(1)  Gal’inaria.  Varro  fays,  that  this  ifland  is  in  :he  Tufcan  fea,  near  the  coaft  of  Italy,
over-againft  the  Ligurian  mountains  lntemiiium  and  Album  Gaunum.  Some  authors  fay,
it  is  rather  a  rock  than  an  ifland.  Co'itmella  fays,  that  thefe  ruftic  hens  were,  in  their
face,  not  very  unlike  the  common  farm-houfe  hem-.  And  Varro  fays,  that  at  Rome  they
were  rare,  and  feldom  feen  tame  without  a  cage;  that  in  their  face  they  were  not  like
the  common  poultry  hens,  but  like  the  African  he  as,  of  a  fair  and  beautiful  afpeifc;  and
that  commonly  they  did  not  breed  in  the  houfe,  but  in  woods.  It  is  not  eafy  to  deter-
naine  by  what  name  thefe  ruftic  hens  are  now  called:  perhaps  they  might  be  the  breed
of  the  common  poultry-yard  hens  carried  by  mariners  to  that  ifland,  where,  being  left,
they  turned  wild,  as  Varro  feems  to  insinuate ;  tho1 2 * * 5  the  fen  ence  is  fomewhat  obfcure,
and  imperfect.

(2)  Meleagrides.  Varro,  lib.  iii.  c.  9.  fpeaking  of  African  hens,  which,  according  to
our  author,  were  alfo  called  Numidian,  fays,  thar  they  were  large,  various  or  fpotted,  and
crook-back’d  ;  and  that  the  Greeks  called  them  Melcagriclas.  But  Columella  fays  exprefsly,
that  they  were  different  fowls ;  that  the  African  hen  was  like  the  Meleagris ,  except  that
fhe  carried  upon  her  head  a  bright-red  helmet  and  creft,  which,  in  the  Meleagris ,  were
both  blue.  It  is  ftrange,  that  Varro  and  Columella  fhould  differ  fo  much  in  their  defcrip-
tion  of  thefe  two  fowls;  but  either  Varro  was  miftaken,  or  the  fenrence  is  imperfeff,  or
not  rightly  poimed.  Some  authors  fay,  that  the  Gallince  Africans  or  Numidicce  are  what

we  call  Guiney  bens ;  and  that  the  Meleagrides  are  what  we  call  Turkey  bens.  But  the

great  difficulty  is,  that  the  defcription  given  by  Atberueus  of  the  Me’eagrides ,  does  not

at  all  agree  to  the  Turkey  hen,  which,  feme  lay,  was  not  known  to  the  antienrs ;  and


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  341

But,  of  thefe  three  kinds  the  common  poultry-yard  females  are
properly  called  hens-,  but  the  males  are  called  cocks,  and  the  half-males
capons ,  which  have  this  name  given  them  when  they  are  caflrated,
in  order  to  deftroy  their  luff.  Neverthelefs,  they  do  not  fufifer  this
by  lofing  their  genitals,  but  by  having  their  fpurs  burnt  with  a  red-
hot  iron  j  which,  when  they  are  confumed  with  the  force  of  the  fire,
are  daubed  over  with  potters-clay,  till  the  fores  that  have  been  made
are  healed  up.  Therefore  the  gain,  arifing  from  this  farm  or  manor-
houfe  kind,  is  not  defpicable,  if  there  be  a  due  application  of  {kill
and  knowledge  in  bringing  them  up ;  which  mod  of  the  Greeks ,  and
efpecially  the  Delians ,  were  very  famous  for,  and  made  great  account
of.  But  they,  becaufe  they  fought  for  tall  bodies,  and  mind9  cbdi-
nate  in  battle,  and  of  invincible  courage,  did  chiefly  approve  the  Tana-
grian  (3)  and  Rhodian  kind  ;  as  alfo  the  Chalcidian  and  Median ,
which,  by  the  ignorant  vulgar,  is  called  Melian.  Our  own  Italian
kind  pleafes  us  mod  of  any  :  neverthelefs,  we  have  no  regard  to  that
darling  inclination  of  the  Greeks ,  who  prepared  all  the  fierced  fowls
they  could  find,  for  fighting  at  their  public  games.  For  we  give  our
opinion,  and  declare  what  we  think  proper  for  eftablifhing  a  revenue,
or  yearly  income,  for  an  indudrious  matter  of  a  family,  and  not  for  a
cock-mader,  or  a  keeper  of  quarrelfome  birds,  whofe  whole  patri¬
mony  for  the  mod  part,  which  he  had  laid  at  dake,  and  hazarded,
the  conquering  cock- champion  has  carried  away.

Therefore  he  who  fhall  have  a  mind  to  follow  our  directions,
mud  confider  fird  of  all  how  many,  and  what  kind,  of  breeding  hens
he  ought  to  provide  :  fecondly,  he  ought  to  confider,  after  what  man¬
ner  he  ought  to  manage  and  feed  them ;  then,  at  what  times  of  the
year  he  ought  to  receive  their  eggs;  and,  afterwards,  to  make  them
fit  upon  them,  and  hatch  them  :  ladly,  he  ought  to  take  great  care,
that  the  chickens  be  rightly  brought  up.  For  by  thefe  cares,  and

that  it  was  firft  brought  from  America  into  Europe.  It  feems  difficult  to  determine  by
what  modern  name  they  oughc  to  be  called.  We  are  told,  that  ihey  have  their  name
from  Meleager ,  tire  Son  of  Oeneus  King  of  Calydonia ,  whofe  lifters  were  called  Melea-
grides ;  and  that,  being  confumed,  and  much  wafted,  with  mourning  for  the  death  of  their
brother,  the  poets  feigned,  that  they  were  changed  into  Gurney  hens,  or  whatever  elfe  is
fignified  by  that  word.  The  fable  is  in  Ovid ,  Metamorpb.  lib.  viii.  if  any  have  the  cu-
riofity  to  look  into  it.

(3)  Tanagrici  Galli.  Tanagra  is  a  city  in  Bceotia ,  vety  remarkable  for  the  courage  and
obftinacy  of  its  cocks.  Pliny  fays,  that  they  made  their  country  famous  by  their  courage.
Varro  and  feveral  other  authors  mention  them  with  great  commendation.  Rbodus,  an
ifland  of  the  Leffer  Afia ,  on  the  coaft  of  Caria ;  and  Delos ,  in  the  JEgean  fea  ;  and
Chalcis  in  Euboea ,  an  illand  upon  the  coaft  of  Greece ,  now  called  Negropovte ;  were  all
famous  for  fighting  cocks.


ways


342  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

Ways  cf  managements,  the  whole  poultry-yard  bufinefs,  which  the
Greskr call  ornitbctropbia ,  is  tranfadted  and  carried  on.  Two  hun¬
dred  heads  are  a  fufficient  number  for  employing  the  whole  care  of
one  perfon  to  feed  them :  provided  neverthelefs,  that  either  a  diligent
old  woman,  or  a  boy,  be  -ppcinted  to  keep  them,  and  watch  over  them
v  hen  they  wander  up  and  down,  leib  they  be  fnatched  away,  either
by  men  who  lay  wait  tor  them,  or  be  taken  in  the  l'nares  of  infi-
CjOus  animals.

Moreover,  it  is  not  expedient  to  purchafe  any  fowls  but  the  moil:
fruitful :  and  let  them  be  of  a  very  red,  or  a  dark-coloured  feather,
with  black  pinions :  and,  if  it  can  be  done,  let  them  be  all  cbofen  of
this  colour,  or  ol  that  next  to  it.  If  otherwile,  let  the  white  be
avoided  ;  which,  as  they  are  for  the  moil  part  tender,  and  not  very
long-lived,  fo  l’uch  of  them  as  are  fruitful  are  not  eafily  found  :  and,
being  alio  very  confpicuous,  they  are,  by  reafon  of  their  remarkable
white  colour,  very  frequently  fnatched  away  by  hawks  and  eagles.
Therefore,  let  inch  of  them  as  are  let  apart  for  breeding,  be  of  a
right  good  colour,  of  a  drongbody,  fquare,  large-breailed,  with  great
heads,  ilraight,  bright-red  and  fmall  crefls,  white  ears  ;  and,  of
this  make  and  appearance,  the  largeil  that  can  be  found,  and  not  with
an  even  number  of  claws :  they  are  reckoned  the  moll  generous  which
have  five  toes,  but  lo  that  no  crofs-fpurs  appear  and  ilick  out  upon
their  legs :  for  (he  that  bears  this  maiculine  badge,  is  obdinate  and
refractory;  and  difdains  to  admit  the  male ;  and  is  l’eldom  fruitful:
and  alfo,  when  ihe  fitteth  upon  her  eggs,  fhe  breaks  them  with  the
lharp  points  of  her  claws.

I:  is  not  expedient  to  keep  any  cocks  for  hens,  but  fuch  as  are  ex¬
ceeding  falacious ;  and  in  thele  alfo,  the  lame  colour  as  in  the  females,
2nd  the  fame  number  of  claws,  but  a  loftier  make  and  ilature,  is  re¬
quired  :  lofty  crslls,  of  a  bloody  colour,  and  not  crooked,  or  (landing
awry:  yellow-redeyes,  or  tending  fomewhat  to  black:  ihort  and
crocked  bills ;  exceeding  great  and  very  white  ears :  rattles  from  a
bright-red  tending  to  white,  which  hang  down  like  grey  beards :  then
manes  of  various  colours,  or  yellow,  fomewhat  varying  from  a  gold
colour,  ciffufed  all  over  their  necks  to  their  ihoulders :  then  broad
and  mufculous  breads,  and  brawny  wings  like  arms ;  alfo  very  long
tails,  bending  with  a  double  row  of  large  feathers  dicking  out  on  each
fide  ,  a?  alio  vad  thighs,  covered  all  over  with  thick  bridly  feathers,
all  danding  on  end  ;  robud  legs,  but  not  long,  armed,  as  it  were,
with  raifchievous  fpears,  in  order  to  hurt.  But  their  manners  and
natural  temper,  tho'  they  are  not  prepared  and  trained  up  for  the
2  battle,


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  343

battle,  nor  for  obtaining  the  prize,  neverthelefs  fuch  as  are  generous
are  moil  approved ;  that  they  be  elate,  chearful,  watchful,  and  ready
to  crow  often,  not  fuch  as  are  eafily  frightened  ;  for  fometimes  they
ought  to  refill:  and  protect  their  conjugal  flock  ;  yea,  even  kill  a  fer-
pent,  when  he  rears  his  threatening  heed,  or  any  other  noxious  ani¬
mal  :  for  fuch  males  as  thefe  they  provide  five  females  each.  For  of
the  Rhodian  and  Median  kind,  becaufe  of  their  heavinefs,  neither  are
the  fathers  very  falacious,  nor  the  mothers  fruitful  ;  neverthelefs,
they  match  three  of  them  with  one  hufband.  And  when  they  have
laid  a  few  eggs,  they  are  flothful  and  backward  to  fit  upon  them,  and
much  more  to  hatch  them  ;  and  feldom  bring  up  their  young  ones.
Therefore  they  who  love  to  have  thefe  kinds  in  their  poffeffion,  by
reafon  of  the  beautiful  make  of  their  bodies,  when  they  have  got  the
eggs  of  fuch  as  are  of  a  generous  excellent  breed,  put  them  under
common,  ordinary  hens ;  and,  when  the  chickens  are  hatched,  they
are  brought  up  by  them.  The  Tanagrian ,  being  for  the  rnofl  part
equal  in  fize  to  the  Rhodia?i  and  Median ,  are  not  much  different  in
their  manners  from  thofe  of  our  own  country,  as  alfo  the  Chalci -
dian.

Neverthelefs,  of  all  thefe  kinds,  the  baftard  chickens  are  the  bell:,
which  our  own  Italian  hens  have  brought  forth,  having  conceived
them  by  foreign  males  :  for,  they  both  retain  their  beautiful  paternal
fhape,  and  their  native  falacioufnefs  and  fruitfulnefs.  I  do  not  too
much  approve  of  dwarf  fowls ;  neither  on  account  of  their  fruitful-
nel's,  nor  for  any  other  advantage  they  may  bring,  unlefs  their  very  low
flature  is  pleafing  to  any  one  :  nor,  indeed,  do  I  like  a  male  that  is  given
to  fighting,  or  whofe  amours  make  him  quarrelfome^  for,  for  the  moft
part,  he  torments  and  vexes  the  other  males,  and  will  not  fuffer  the
females  to  couple  with  them,  tho’  he  himfelf  is  not  able  to  content
many  of  them :  therefore  his  faucinefs  mull  be  checked  with  a  piece
of  leather,  fuch  as  they  make  bottles  of ;  which,  when  it  is  made
into  a  fmall  globular  form,  you  cut  it  in  the  middle,  and  put  the  cocks
feet  into  it,  through  that  part  which  you  have  cut ;  and  by  this  fhackle,
as  it  were,  his  fierce  and  favage  manners  will  be  kept  within  due
bounds.  But,  as  I  propofed,  I  fhall  now  give  directions  relating  to
the  care  and  management  of  the  whole  kind  in  general.


C  H  A  P.


344


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VIII.


CHAP.  III.

Of  the  right  Contrivance  and  Making  of  an  Hm-houfe,

HEN-houfes  ought  to  be  placed  in  that  part  of  the  manor-houfe
which  looks  to  the  fun-rifing  in  winter  ;  let  them  be  contiguous
either  to  the  oven,  or  to  the  kitchen,  that  the  fmoak  may  reach  the
place  where  the  fowl  roods,  it  contributing  very  much  to  the
health  of  this  kind  elpecially.  The  whole  building  defigned  for  the
hen-houfe,  is  to  condd  of  three  cells,  built  clofe  to  one  another ;  of
which,  as  I  faid,  the  front,  being  all  in  one  continued  line,  is  to  be
turned  towards  the  ead  :  then  in  this  front  let  there  be  only  one  fmall
entry  made  into  the  middle  cell ;  which  itfelf  ought  to  be  the  lowed  of
the  three,  and  feven  feet  every  way  :  in  this  mud  be  made  one  fingle
entry  to  each  of  the  other  cells  in  the  right  and  left  wall ;  and  both
entries  mud  be  joined  to  the  wall  that  is  oppofite  to  fuch  as  come  in.
But  to  this  wall  let  there  be  an  hearth  applied,  or  a  place  for  making
a  fire,  of  fuch  a  length,  that  it  may  be  no  dop  or  hindrance  to  the
forefaid  padages,  and  that  the  fmoak  may  come  from  it  into  both
cells ;  and  let  thefe  have  twelve  feet  both  in  length  and  in  height,
but  no  more  breadth  than  the  middle  cell.  Let  their  height  be  di¬
vided  with  lofts,  which  may  have  above  them  four,  and  below  them
feven  feet,  free  from  any  incumbrance,  becaufe  the  lofts  themfelves
take  up  one  foot.  Both  lofts  ought  to  be  for  the  accommodation  of
the  hens ;  and  they  ought  to  be  illuminated  by  fmall  windows  from
the  ead,  one  for  each  cell ;  which  fame  windows  may  afford  a  paffage
for  the  fowls  to  go  out  by  in  the  morning  into  the  poultry-yard,  as
alfo  an  entry  into  the  cells  in  the  evening.  But  care  mud  be  taken,
that  they  be  always  fhut  at  nights,  that  the  fowls  may  remain  there
in  greater  fafety.

Below  the  lofts  let  greater  windows  be  opened,  and  let  them  be
fortified  and  fecured  with  grates  or  crofs-bars,  that  noxious  animals
may  not  be  able  to  creep  in ;  neverthelefs,  in  fuch  a  manner,  that
the  places  may  be  throughly  well  lighted,  that  they  may  dwell  the
more  conveniently :  and  the  Poultry-keeper  ought  from  time  to  time
to  fearch  and  watch  for  the  eggs  of  thofe  that  are  laying,  and  to  con-
fider  the  condition  of  thofe  that  the  Hens  are  dtting  upon  ;  for,
even  in  thofe  places  themfelves,  it  is  proper  to  build  the  walls  fo  thick,
that  they  may  admit  of  neds  cut  out  in  rows  for  the  hens  j  in  which


Chap.IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  34.5

they  may  either  lay  their  eggs,  or  hatch  their  chickens  j  for  this  is
both  wholfomer  and  neater,  than  that  which  fome  do,  who  drive
flakes  with  great  force  into  the  walls,  and  place  wicker- balkets  upon
them.  But  whether  you  make  hollow  places  in  the  walls  for  them,
as  I  faid  before,  or  place  wicker- baflcets  for  them,  there  mufl  be
porches  placed  before  them,  by  which  the  breeding  hens  may  come
to  their  nefts,  either  in  order  to  lay  their  eggs,  or  to  brood  ;  for  they
ought  not  to  fly  into  the  nefts  themfelves,  left,  when  they  leap  into
them,  they  break  their  eggs  with  their  feet.  Then  there  is  an  alcend-
ing-place  made  for  the  fowls  to  go  up  into  the  lofts  through  both
cells,  by  joining  fmall  planks  to  the  wall,  which  are  made  a  little
rugged  by  forming  fteps  in  them,  that  they  may  not  be  flipper y  when
they  fly  to  them.  But  let  fmall  ladders  likewife  be  applied  to  the
forefaid  little  windows  from  the  poultry-yard,  on  the  oqtfide,  by
which  the  fowls  may  creep  in  to  take  their  night’s  reft.

But,  above  all  things,  we  muft  take  care,  that  both  thefe  and  the
other  aviaries,  of  which  we  fhall  prefently  fpeak,  be  well  fmoothed
with  plaifter,  both  in  the  inftde  and  without,  that  neither  cats  nor
fnakes  may  have  accefs  to  the  fowls,  and  other  equally  hurtful  pefts
may  be  hindered  to  enter.  It  is  not  proper,  that  the  fowl  (hould  fit
upon  the  loft  when  it  fleeps,  left  it  be  hurt  with  its  own  dung,  which
gives  them  the  gout  in  their  feet,  when  it  (licks  to  their  crooked  toes.
That  this  deftrudive  evil  may  be  avoided,  you  muft  rough-hew  poles,
and  cut  them  fquare,  left,  when  they  are  round  and  fmooth,  they  do
not  receive  and  give  a  faft  hold  to  the  fowl  when  it  leaps  upon  them.
Then  you  fallen  the  poles  which  you  have  made  fquare,  in  the  two
oppofite  walls,  where  you  have  made  holes  for  them,  fo  that  they  may
be  diftant  the  fpace  of  one  foot  in  height  from  the  loft,  and  of  two
feet  in  breadth  from  one  another.  This  (hall  be  the  difpofition  of  the
hen-houfe  for  the  poultry-yard.

But  let  the  poultry-yard  itfelf,  through  which  they  draggle,  be  not
fo  free  from  dung  as  from  moifture ;  for  it  is  of  great  importance,
that  there  be  no  water  in  it,  except  in  one  place,  which  they  may
drink  of,  and  that  muft  be  exceeding  clean :  for  water  which  has  dung
in  it  gives  them  the  pip :  neverthelefs  you  cannot  keep  it  clean,  unleis
it  be  put  clofe  up  in  veflels  made  for  that  purpofe.  There  are  leaden
troughs,  which  are  found  by  experience  to  be  more  ufeful,  than  either
thofe  made  of  wood,  or  of  potters  earth  •  and  you  may  fill  them
either  with  water  or  food.  Thefe  are  (hut  up  by  putting  covers  upon
them,  and  have  fmall  holes  made  in  their  fides  above  the  middle  part
of  their  height,  at  the  diftance  of  an  hand- breadth  the  one  from  the

Y  y  other.


34-6  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

other,  fo  that  they  may  admit  the  heads  of  the  fowls :  for,  unlefs
they  be  fecured  with  covers,  whatever  quantity  of  water  or  food  is  in
them,  is  fweeped  out  with  their  feet.  There  are  fome  who  make
holes  in  the  upper-part  in  the  covers  themfelves,  which  ought  not  to
be  done ;  for  the  fowl,  leaping  up  upon  it,  fouls  both  its  water  and  its
food  with  its  excrements.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  Food  proper  for  Hens.

THE  belt  victuals  given  to  hens  are  bruifed  barley  and  tares,  as
alfo  the  chichling,  and  millet  or  panic:  but  thefe  are  given
only  when  the  low  price  of  corn  permits  it  j  but  where  corn  is  dearer,
the  fmall  liftings  and  refufe  of  wheat  are  very  convenient  food  for
them  :  for  it  does  not  turn  to  any  advantage  to  give  them  that  corn  by
itfelf,  even  in  thofe  places  where  it  is  cheapelt,  becaufe  it  is  hurtful
to  the  fowls.  Boiled  darnel  alfo  may  be  thrown  before  them ;  brawn
likewife,  from  which  the  meal  is  not  intirely  lifted ;  which,  if  it  has
no  meal  in  it,  is  not  proper  for  them :  nor  have  the  fowls  fo  great
appetite  for  it.  When  they  are  falling,  the  leaves  and  feeds  alfo  of
the  cytifus ,  (Ihrub-trefoil)  are  very  much  approved,  and  very  ac¬
ceptable  to  this  kind  of  fowl :  nor  is  there  any  country  where  there
may  not  be  even  the  greatefh  plenty  of  this  little  tree.  Hulks  and
kernels  of  grapes,  tho’  they  are  tolerable  food  for  them,  ought  not  to
be  given  them,  except  at  fuch  times  of  the  year  when  the  fowl  is  not
laying  her  eggs  j  for  they  make  them  lay  very  feldom,  and  make
their  eggs  very  fmall.  But  when,  after  autumn,  they  wholly  ceafe
from  laying,  they  may  be  fullained  with  this  kind  -of  food.  Never-
thelefs,  whatever  kind  of  food  you  lhall  give  them,  while  they  are
wandering  up  and  down  the  poultry-yard,  it  mull  be  dillributed  to
them  twice  ;  when  the  day  begins,  and  when  it  is  declining  towards
the  evening  j  that  in  the  morning  they  may  not  prefently  wander  at
too  great  a  diflance  from  their  lodging,  and  may,  in  hopes  and  expect¬
ation  of  their  food,  return  in  better  time  to  the  hen-rooft  in  the
evening ;  and  that  the  number  of  their  heads  may  be  more  frequently
reckoned  up  :  for  your  volatile  cattle  ealily  deceive  the  watchfulnefs
and  obfervation  of  their  feeder.


Dry


Chap. V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  347

Dry  duft  alfo,  and  afhes,  muft  be  placed  hard  by  the  walls,  where-
ever  a  porch  or  houfe  fhelters  the  hen-houfe,  that  the  fowls  may  have
wherewithal  to  fprinkle  themfelves  j  for  with  thefe  things  they  clean
their  feathers,  and  their  pinions,  if  fo  be  we  give  credit  to  Heraclitus
the  Eph'ejiatiy  who  fays,  that  fwine  are  wafhed  with  mire  and  dirt,  and
poultry-yard  fowls  with  dull  or  allies.  The  hen  ought  to  be  let  out
after  the  firft,  and  fhut  up  before  the  eleventh  hour  of  the  day.  This
fhall  be  the  way  of  managing  her  that  wanders  up  and  down,  as  I
have  already  defcribed  it :  nor  is  that  of  her,  which  is  fhut  up  in  the
houfe,  different  from  it ;  except,  that  fhe  is  not  allowed  to  go  abroad,
but  is  fed  thrice  a  day  within  the  aviary,  with  a  greater  quantity  of
food :  for  four  cyathi  of  food  is  the  daily  allowance  of  each  head,
when  only  three  or  two  are  given  to  fuch  as  wander  up  and  down.
A  hen  alfo  that  is  fhut  up,  muft  have  a  large  porch,  where  fhe  may
go  forth  and  bafk  herfelf  j  and  let  it  be  fecured  and  defended  with
nets,  left  an  hawk,  or  an  eagle,  fly  into  it :  which  expences  and  cares
it  is  hot  expedient  to  beftow,  except  in  fuch  places  where  thefe  things
bear  a  very  high  price.  But,  with  refpedt  to  all  cattle  in  general,  and
this  alfo  in  particular,  the  chief  and  principal  thing  is,  the  fidelity  of
the  Keeper }  which  unlefs  he  preferves  to  his  mafter  inviolate ,  no
gain  or  advantage  of  the  aviary  will  furmount  the  expences.  There
has  been  enough  faid  of  the  way  of  managing  and  keeping  them :  we
fhall  now  profecute  in  order  what  we  further  propofed.


CHAP.  V.

Of  preferving  the  Eggs>  and Jetting  them  under  the  Hens .

WHEN  the  middle  of  winter  is  paft,  this  kind  of  fowls,  for
the  moft  part,  is  wont  to  breed  j  and  fuch  of  them  as  are  the
moft  fruitful,  in  warmer  climates,  begin  to  lay  their  eggs  about  the
firft  of  January ;  but  in  cold  countries,  they  begin  after  the  fifteenth
of  the  fame  month :  but  their  fruitfulnefs  muft  be  drawn  out  with
proper  food,  that  they  may  bring  forth  the  fooner.  Parboiled  barley
is  excellent  food  for  them ;  and  you  may  give  it  them  to  fatiety,  for
it  makes  their  eggs  of  a  larger  growth,  and  makes  them  lay  the  more
frequently.  But  this  food  muft  be  feafoned,  as  it  were,  by  throwing
leaves  of  cytifus ,  (fhrub-trefoil)  as  alfo  the  feed  of  the  fame  among
it,  both  which  are  thought  exceedingly  to  increafe  the  fruitfulnefs  of

Y  y  2  fowls.


348  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VIII.

fowls.  But  let  the  quantity  of  food  be,  as  I  faid  before,  two  cyathi
of  barley  to  fuch  as  wander  up  and  down  :  neverthelefs,  fome  quan¬
tity  of  fhrub- trefoil  muft  be  mixed  with  it  j  or,  if  this  cannot  be  had,
fome  millet  or  tares.

But  the  Keeper  muft  take  care,  that  the  fowls,  when  they  bring
forth,  have  their  nefts  ftrawed  with  the  very  cleaneft  flraw  j  and  that
he  fweep  them  from  time  to  time,  and  put  other  ftraw,  the  frefhefl:
that  can  be  had,  into  them  :  for  they  are  full  of  fleas,  and  other  fuch-
like  animals,  which  the  fowl  brings  with  herfelf,  when  flie  returns  to
the  fame  neft.  The  Keeper  ought  to  be  very  affiduous,  and  to  watch
them  when  they  are  laying ;  which  the  hens  declare  they  are  doing,
by  frequent  cacklings  with  a  lhrill  voice,  or  fliriek  intermixed,  from
time  to  time.  Therefore  he  ought  to  be  upon  the  watch  while  they
are  laying  their  eggs,  and  muft  prefen tly  go  round  their  nefts,  that  he
may  gather  up  what  they  have  laid,  and  mark  fuch  as  are  laid  every
day,  that  fo  the  very  frefhefl;  may  be  fet  under  clucking  hens  :  for
fo  do  people  that  live  in  the  country  call  thofe  that  have  a  defire  to
brood  j  and  let  the  reft  of  the  eggs  be  either  laid  up,  or  exchanged
for  money.

Moreover,  the  frefhefl:  eggs  ( i )  are  the  moft  proper  for  hatching  j
yet  fuch  as  are  ftale  may  be  fet,  provided  they  be  not  above  ten

days

(i)  Pliny,  in  his  Natural  Hijlory,  {peaking  of  eggs,  lays,  that  fome  of  them  are  white,
as  thofe  of  pigeons  and  partridges;  lome  pale,  as  thofe  of  water-fowls;  others  diftin-
guifhed  by  points  or  {pots,  as  thofe  of  the  Meleagrides ;  fome  of  a  red  colour,  as  thofe  of
pheafants,  and  fome  forts  of  hawks :  that  the  infide  of  the  eggs  of  all  fowls  is  of  two
colours;  that  thofe  of  warer-fowls  have  more  of  the  yellow  than  of  the  white;  and  that
the  yellow  part  is  more  lucid  than  that  of  other  fowls;  that  thofe  of  water-fowls  are
rcunl,  but  thofe  of  other  forts  are  commonly  fharp,  and  drawing  to  a  point  at  one
end-;  and  that  when  they  are  laid,  the  roundeft  part  comes  out  firft ;  that,  when  they  are
firft  laid,  the  fhell  is  fomewhat  foft,  but  prefently  hardens  with  the  air.  Horace,  it  feems,
thought,  that  thofe  of  an  oblong  figure  are  of  a  more  grateful  tafte.  Pliny  adds,  that
the  rounder  produce  the  female,  and  the  others  the  male :  that  the  navel  of  the  egg  is
in  its  top,  like  a  drop,  rifing  up  upon  the  fhell:  that  fome  fowls  gender,  and  bring  forth
always,  except  two  months  in  the  middle  of  winter,  as  common  farm-houfe  hens ;  and
that  the  younger  lay  more  eggs  than  the  elder,  but  of  a  fmaller  fize;  and  that,  at  the  dif¬
ferent  births,  thofe  they  lay  firft  and  laft  are  the  fmalleft  ;  and  that  their  fecundity  is  fo
great,  that  fome  of  them  have  laid  fixty  eggs  at  one  laying,  before  they  gave  over  lay¬
ing;-  feme  lay  once  every  day,  fome  twice,  yea  fome  have  fo  far  exhaufted  themfelves,
that  they  have  died  with  laying :  that  in  the  middle  of  the  yolk  of  all  eggs  there  is,  as
it  were,  a  fmall  bloody  drop,  which,  fome  think,  is  the  heart  of  the  animal ;  and  are  of
opinion,  that,  in  every  body,  this  is  the  firft  thing  that  is  formed.  But  Arijlotle  fays,
that  this  drop  is  in  the  white  of  the  egg,  Hijl.  asiimalium,  lib.  vi.  cap.  4.  and  that  his
drop  palpitates  and  moves,  as  if  it  w'ere  animated :  that  the  body  of  the  animal  itfelf  is
formed  of  the  white  liquor  of  the  egg,  and  nourilhed  by  the  yellow ;  Arijlotle  was  alfo
of  this  opinion.  But  it  feems  Hippocrates  was  of  a  different  opinion ;  for  he  fays,  that  the
bird  is  formed  of  the  yellow  parr,  and  nouriflied  by  the  white.  But  Harvey  differs  from

them


Chap.  V.  ©/HUSBANDRY.  349

days  old.  But,  for  the  mod:  part,  hens,  after  they  have  completely
finilhed  their  firft  birth,  are  defirous  to  fit  upon  their  eggs  about  the
thirteenth  day  of  January ,  which  they  muft  not  at  all  be  permitted
to  do  j  becaufe,  indeed,  the  young  hens  are  more  ufeful  for  laying
than  for  hatching  eggs ;  and  their  defire  of  brooding  is  checked  by
palling  a  fmall  quill  through  their  noftrils :  therefore,  veteran  fowls
muft  be  chofen  for  this  bufinefs,  which  have  frequently  done  it
already  :  and  their  manners  and  difpofition  efpecially  muft  be  throughly
known,  becaufe  fome  of  them  are  beft  for  brooding,  others  of  them
bring  up  the  chickens  in  a  better  manner  after  they  are  hatched  ;  but
others  of  them,  on  the  contrary,  break  and  deftroy  both  their  own
eggs,  and  thofe  of  others ;  and,  when  any  of  them  is  found  fo  doing,
it  will  be  proper  forthwith  to  put  her  out  of  the  way.

But  the  chickens  of  two  or  three  fowls,  being  hatched,  ought,  while
they  are  yet  very  young,  to  be  transferred  to  one  of  them,  which
may  be  the  better  nurfe  but  this  muft  be  done  the  very  firft  day,
while  the  dam  cannot,  becaufe  of  their  likenefs,  diftinguifh  her  own
from  thofe  of  others :  neverthelefs,  you  muft  keep  to  a  certain  num¬
ber  j  for  it  ought  not  to  be  greater  than  that  of  thirty  heads  j  for  they
deny,  that  a  greater  flock  than  this  can  be  nurfed  by  one.  They
obferve,  that  the  eggs,  which  are  fet  under  the  hen,  be  of  an  un¬
equal  number,  and  not  always  the  fame  :  for  in  the  firft  feafon,  that
is,  in  the  month  of  January ,  fifteen,  and  never  more,  ought  to  be
fet :  in  the  month  of  March ,  nineteen,  and  not  fewer  than  thefe  j
twenty-one  in  the  month  of  April ;  then,  during  the  whole  fummer,
the  fame  number  :  afterwards  any  further  care  about  this  matter  is  to
no  purpofej  becaufe  chickens  hatched  during  the  colds,  for  the  moft
part,  perilh.  Neverthelefs  moft  people  think,  that  even  after  the

them  both ;  and  fays,  it  is  both  formed  of,  and  nourilhed  by,  the  white,  till  it  grows
big ;  fee  his  Exercitat.  52.  That,  when  the  chicken  grows  bigger,  the  white  is  turned  into
the  middle,  and  the  yellow  circumfufed :  that  the  20th  day,  if  the  egg  be  moved,  the
voice  of  the  chicken  may  be  heard  within  the  fhell :  that  from  that  day  its  feathers  grow
upon  it:  that  it  is  fo  placed  in  the  fhell,  that  it  has  its  head  upon  its  right  foot,  and  its
right  wing  above  its  head:  that  the  yolk  decreafes  by  little  and  little:  that  it  is  beft  the
eggs  be  fet  under  the  hen  within  ten  days  after  they  are  laid,  becaufe  fuch  as  are  fet
fooner  or  later  are  unfruitful:  that  the  4th  day  after  they  are  fet,  if  you  take  them  in
your  hand,  and  look  to  the  top  of  them  againft  the  light,  if  the  colour  be  pure  and  pel¬
lucid,  and  of  one  fort,  they  are  barren,  and  others  are  to  be  put  in  their  place ;  or,  It
they  float  upon  water,  they  are  empty,  and  others  that  fink  are  to  be  put  in  their
room  :  that  they  ought  not  to  be  fhaken,  becaufe  it  confounds  the  vital  veins :  that  they
ought  to  be  fet  after  the  new  moon,  becaufe  oiherwife  they  will  not  hatch  :  that  in  warm
weather  they  hatch  fooner  than  in  cold ;  therefore  in  fummer  they  bring  forth  their  young
the  19th  day,  and  in  winter  the  25th.  What  Eliny  fays  further,  is  moltly  contained  in
our  author.


fummer


350  L.  J.  M.  C  0  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VIII.

fummer  folftice,  it  is  not  a  good  time  for  hatching  of  chickens ;  be-
caufe  from  that  time,  although  they  are  eafily  brought  up,  yet  they
never  come  to  their  juft  growth.  But  in  places  that  lie  near  the  city,
where  chickens  from  their  dams  are  fold  at  no  fmall  prices,  and
where  they  do  not  perifli  for  the  moft  part,  the  bringing  them  up  in
the  fummer-time  is  to  be  approved.

But,  when  eggs  are  fet,  care  ought  always  to  be  taken,  that  it  be
done  when  the  moon  is  increafing,  from  the  tenth  to  the  fifteenth  }
for  both  the  fetting  of  the  eggs  itfelf,  almoft  during  thefe  days,  is
moft  convenient,  and  turns  to  moft  advantage  j  and  matters  muft  be
fo  managed,  that  the  moon  may  be  upon  the  increafe  again,  when  the
chickens  are  hatched.  One-and-twenty  days  are  requifite  for  animat¬
ing  the  eggs  of  this  kind  of  common  poultry-hens  j  but  a  little  more
than  twenty-feven  for  the  peacock  and  goofe-kind  :  which  if,  at  any
time,  it  be  found  neceflary  to  fet  under  common  poultry-hens,  we
muft  firft  fuffer  them  to  fit  ten  days  upon  the  eggs  of  thofe  fowls  of
a  different  fpecies ;  then  they  fhall  receive  four  eggs  of  their  own
kind  to  hatch,  and  never  more  than  five ;  and  thefe  muft  be  of  the
largeft  fize  j  for  of  very  fmall  eggs  fmall  birds  are  hatched  :  then,  if
any  one  fhall  defire,  that  moft  males  be  hatched,  he  muft  fet  all  the
longeft  and  the  fharpeft  eggs  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  have  a
mind  for  females,  he  muft  fet  the  roundeft  he  can  find.

But  the  ufual  manner  of  fetting  eggs  under  hens,  delivered  to  us
by  thofe  who  manage  thefe  things  with  greater  ceremony  and  fuper-
ftition,  is  fuch  as  this :  Firft,  they  choofe  the  moft  retired  ncfts  they
can  find,  that  the  brooding  hens  may  not  be  difquieted  by  other
fowls :  then  they  clean  them  carefully  before  they  put  ftraw  unto
them,  and  throughly  purify  the  ftraw  they  are  going  to  lay  under
them,  with  fulphur,  bitumen,  and  a  burning  torch  j  and,  after  they
have  expiated  it,  they  throw  it  into  their  beds,  and  fo  make  hollow
nefts  for  them,  left,  when  they  fly  into  them,  or  leap  out  of  them,
the  eggs  be  rolled  out,  and  fall  down.  Very  many  people  alfo  lay  a
little  grafs,  or  fmall  branches  of  laurel,  under  the  ftraw,  in  their  nefts  j
as  alfo  heads  of  garlick  with  iron  nails :  all  which  things  are  believed
to  be  remedies  or  prefervatives  againft  thunders,  whereby  the  eggs  are
fpoiled,  and  the  half-formed  chickens  are  deftroyed  before  they  are
perfected  in  all  their  parts.  But  he  that  fets  the  eggs  obferves,  not  to
lay  them  into  the  neft  in  order  with  his  hand,  one  by  one  j  but  puts
their  whole  number  together  into  a  fmall  wooden  tray,  and  then  pours
them  all  out  gently  into  the  neft  prepared  for  them.  But  food  muft
be  placed  hard  by  fuch  hens  as  are  brooding,  that  fo  when  they  have

their


Chap. V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  35i

their  belly  full,  they  may  with  more  eagernefs  continue  in  their  nefts,
and  not  cool  their  eggs  by  wandering  at  too  great  a  diftance  from
them  j  and  although  they  themfelves  turn  them  with  their  feet,  yet
the  Keeper  of  the  poultry,  when  the  dams  leap  down  from  their
nefts,  ought  to  go  round,  and  turn  the  eggs  with  his  hand,  that,  re¬
ceiving  the  heat  equally,  they  may  be  eafily  animated  j  and  alfo,  that,
if  any  of  them  be  hurt  or  broken  with  their  claws,  he  may  remove
them.  And  when  he  has  done  this,  let  him  obferve,  upon  the  nine¬
teenth'  day,  whether  any  of  the  chickens  have,  with  their  little  bills,
broke  through  the  eggs,  and  let  him  liften  if  they  peep  or  chirp  j  for
oft-times  they  cannot  break  out,  becaufe  of  the  thicknefs  of  the
fhells :  therefore  with  his  hand  he  muft  take  out  the  chickens  that
ftick  in  the  fhell,  and  put  them  under  their  dam,  that  the  may  cherifh
and  keep  them  warm :  and  he  muft  not  do  that  longer  than  three
days  j  for,  after  the  one-and-twentieth  day,  eggs  that  are  filent  have
no  living  creatures  in  them :  and  thefe  muft  be  removed,  that  the
hen,  not  having  been  able  to  hatch  them,  may  not,  with  vain  hope,
be  detained  longer  brooding  to  no  purpofe;,

You  muft  not  take  away  the  chickens  one  by  one  as  they  are
hatched,  but  you  muft  fuffer  them  to  ftay  one  day  in  the  neft  with
their  dam  j  and  keep  them  from  food  and  water  till  they  be  all  hatched.
The  next  day,  when  the  whole  brood  is  hatched,  they  are  brought
down  from  the  neji  in  this  manner :  let  the  chickens  be  placed  either
upon  a  tare-  or  a  darnel-fieve,  which  has  been  already  in  ufe  j  then  let
them  be  fumigated  with  fprigs  of  penny-royal.  This  thing  feems  to
prevent  their  having  the  pip,  which  very  fpeedily  kills  them  when
they  are  very  young.  After  thefe  things,  they  muft  be  fhut  up  with
their  mother  in  a  coop,  and  moderately  fed  with  barley-meal,  or  with
the  fine  flour  of  wheat-meal  fprinkled  with  wine  j  for  crudity  is
moft  to  be  avoided :  and  for  this  reafon  they  muft  be  kept  in  the
coop  the  third  day  with  their  dam ;  and,  before  they  are  let  out  to
their  frelh  victuals,  they  muft  be  tried  one  by  one,  if  they  have  any
thing  of  yefterday’s  food  in  their  gorge :  for  if  their  crop  is  not  empty,
it  is  a  fign  of  indigeftion ;  and  they  ought  to  be  kept  from  food  till
they  have  digefted.

But,  while  they  are  very  young,  they  muft  not  be  allowed  to  wan¬
der  and  ftraggle  at  too  great  a  diftance,  but  be  kept  about  the  coop,
£-nd  fed  with  barley-meal  till  they  gather  ftrength  :  and  you  muft  take
care,  that  they  be  not  blown  upon  by  ferpents,  the  fmell  or  breath
of  which  is  fo  peftilential,  that  it  intirely  kills  them  all.  This  is
prevented  by  burning  harts-horn  frequently,  or  galbanum,  or  womens

hair ;


352  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VIII.

hair  ;  by  the  burning  fmell  of  all  which,  for  the  mod  part,  the  fore-
faid  peft  is  removed,  and  kept  at  a  diftance.  But  care  alfo  muft  be  taken
to  keep  them  gently  warm,  for  they  can  neither  bear  heat  nor  cold;
and  it  is  bell:  to  keep  them  fhut  up  within  the  hen-houfe  with  their
dam,  and  after  the  fortieth  day  to  give  them  full  liberty  to  wander
up  and  down.  But  the  firft  days  of  their  infancy,  as  it  were,  they
muft  be  often  handled  and  drefled,  and  the  fmall  feathers  under  their
tails  plucked  off  their  buttocks,  left  they  grow  hard  when  they  are
bedaubed  with  their  dung,  and  obftrudt  their  natural  palfages.'  And
tho’  due  care  is  taken  to  prevent  this,  neverthelefs  it  often  happens,
that  their  belly  has  no  paffage  :  therefore  they  pierce  it  through  with
a  quill,  and  open  a  way  for  the  digefted  food.

But  now,  when  the  chickens  are  grown  ftronger,  care  muft  be  taken
to  preferve  both  them  and  their  dams  from  that  deftruCtive  diftemper
the  pip  ;  to  prevent  which,  we  muft  give  them  the  very  pureft  water
in  the  cleaned  veffels ;  likewife  we  muft  constantly  fumigate  the  hen-
houfes,  and  throughly  cleanfe  them,  and  free  them  from  dung.  But
if,  neverthelefs,  the  plague  breaks  in,  and  Spreads  itfelf  among  them,
there  are  fome  who  thruft  into  their  gorge  cloves  of  garlick  moiftened
in  lukewarm  oil.  Some  wet  their  mouths  with  a  man’s  lukewarm
urine,  and  comprefs  them  fo  long,  till  the  faltnefs  of  the  urine  forces
them  to  prefs  out  the  naufeous  phlegm  through  their  noftrils.  The
berry  alfo,  which  the  Greeks  call  dypioi  <ra<puAri,  (wild  grape)  mixed
with  their  meat,  is  of  great  benefit  to  them ;  or  the  fame  bruifed,
and  given  them  with  water  for  their  drink.  And  thefe  remedies  are
applied  to  fuch  of  them,  as  are  not  infeCted  with  the  diftemper  to
any  great  degree :  for  if  the  pip  Surrounds  their  eyes,  and  the  fowl
refufes  its  victuals,  they  lance  their  cheeks,  and  Squeeze  out  all  tha
corrupt  matter  that  is  gathered  under  their  eyes ;  and  fo  they  Sprinkle
a  little  bruifed  fait  upon  the  wounds.

Moreover,  this  difeafe  arifes  chiefly  when  the  fowls  are  much
pinched  with  cold,  and  in  diftrefs  with  want  of  food  ;  alfo  when  they
drink  the  ftanding  water  in  the  poultry-yards  during  the  Summer :
alfo  when  they  allow  them  figs  and  unripe  grapes,  but  not  their
belly-full  of  them,  from  which  kind  of  food  fowls  ought  carefully  to
be  kept.  And  the  wild  grape,  gathered  out  of  the  thickets  before
they  are  ripe,  will  effectually  make  them  loath  it,  when,  after  they
are  boiled  with  fmall  flour  of  wheat-meal,  they  are  thrown  before
them  when  they  are  hungry  j  for  the  fowls,  being  offended  with  their
tafte,  defpife  all  grapes  whatfoever.  The  wild  fig  produces  the  fame

effect


Chap.  VI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  3S3

effedt  alfo;  which  they  boil,  and  give  to  the  fowls  with  their  meat,
and  fo  it  creates  a  loathing  of  figs.

Let  the  cuftom,  which  is  commonly  obferved  with  refpedt  to  other
cattle,  of  picking  out  all  the  beft,  and  felling  the  word:,  be  obferved
alfo  in  this  kind,  that  every  year,  in  the  autumn,  when  their  fruit
ceafes,  their  number  alfo  may  be  diminilhed.  But  we  muft  remove
out  of  the  way  thofe  that  are  old,  that  is,  which  exceed  three  years
of  age ;  alfo  fuch  as  are  not  very  fruitful,  or  but  very  indifferent
nurfes ;  and  efpecially  fuch  as  deftroy  either  their  own  eggs,  or  thofe
of  others :  nor  muft  we  be  lefs  careful  to  remove  fuch  of  them  as
have  begun  to  crow,  or  to  tread  alfo,  as  the  males  do  ;  lateward
chickens  alfo,  which,  being  hatched  after  the  folftice,  cannot  arrive  at
their  due  growth.

But  the  fame  method  muft  not  be  obferved  with  refpedt  to  the
males ;  but  we  will  keep  fuch  of  them  as  are  generous,  as  long  as
they  can  impregnate  the  female  :  for  it  is  a  rare  thing  to  find  among
thefe  fowls  one  that  will  prove  a  good  hufband.  At  the  fame  time
alfo,  when  the  fowls  ceafe  to  breed,  that  is,  from  the  thirteenth  of
November ,  their  more  coftly  food  muft  be  withdrawn  from  them,
and  hulks  and  kernels  of  grapes  muft  be  given  them,  which  are  a
food  convenient  enough  for  them,  when  the  refufe  and  fiftings  of  the
wheat  are  fometimes  added  to  them.

^  _

•m  II  m ica»a— —— — — — — — mmm mmtm mu . —  ■  n  >  %  ■  ■  <■■"■■■  . .  ■  ,

CHAP.  VI.

Of  Eggs.

TH  E  keeping  and  preferving  of  eggs  for  a  longer  time  alfo,  is
not  foreign  to  this  care :  they  are  kept  in  very  good  order  during
the  winter,  if  you  cover  them  over  and  over  with  chaff,  or  corn-
ftraw  j  and  in  fummer  with  bran.  Some  cover  them  all  over  firft
with  bruifed  fait  for  fix  hours,  and  then  wafh  them,  and  fo  lay  them
deep  in  ftraw,  chaff,  or  bran  :  fome  lay  them  in  a  heap  of  unbroken
beans ;  others  in  beans  that  are  bruifed  :  fome  cover  them  with  un-
bruifed  fait  j  others  harden  them  in  lukewarm  brine.  But  all  manner
of  fait,  as  it  does  not  fuffer  the  eggs  to  rot,  fo  it  diminiihes  them,  and
does  not  let  them  continue  full ;  which  thing  deters  the  buyer.  There¬
fore  even  they  who  put  them  into  brine,  do  not  preferve  them  found
and  intire.

Z  z


CHAP.


354


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.


CHAR  VII.

Of  fattening^  and  cramming  of  Hens .

ALthough  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  a.  Poulterer,  and  not  of  an  Huf-
bandman,  to  fatten  an  hen  alfo  ;  neverthelefs,  becaufe  there  is
no  great  difficulty  nor  charges  in  doing  it,  I  thought  it  proper  to  give
directions  concerning  it.  An  exceeding  warm  place,  and  of  very  little
light,  is  requifite  for  this  purpofe ;  wherein  the  fowls  may  be  ffiut
up,  one  by  one,  in  very  narrow  coops,  or  in  hanging  baskets  ;  but  fo
ftraightened,  that  they  may  not  be  able  to  turn  themfelves.  But  let
them  have  holes  on  both  tides ;  one  where  they  may  put  out  their
head  at ;  and  another  where  they  may  put  out  their  tail  and  buttocks,
that  they  may  be  able  both  to  take  their  meat,  and,  when  it  is  di-
gefted,  fo  to  throw  it  out,  as  they  may  not  be  bedawbed  with  their
dung.  But  let  the  very  cleaned;  corn-draw  be  fpread  under  them,  or
foft  hay,  that  is,  hay  of  the  fecond  crop  j  for,  if  they  lie  hard,  they
do  not  eadly  grow  fat.  Let  all  their  feathers  be  plucked  clean  off
their  heads,  from  under  their  wings,  and  off  their  buttocks :  there,
that  they  may  not  breed  lice  ;  and  here,  that  they  may  not  with  their
dung  ulcerate  the  natural  padages  of  their  body.

But  they  give  them  barley-meal  for  their  food  •  of  which,  when
they  have  fprinkled  it  with  water,  and  kneaded  it,  they  make  pellets,
and  fatten  the  fowls  therewith.  But  thefe  ought  to  be  given  more
fparingly  the  firft  days,  till  they  be  accudomed  to  digeft  a  greater
quantity ;  for  indigeftion  is  efpecially  to  be  avoided  j  and  as  much  mud:
be  given  them  as  they  can  diged; :  nor  mud:  frefti  victuals  be  fet  be¬
fore  them  till  you  feel  their  crop,  and  it  appear,  that  nothing  of  their
old  food  remains  therein.  Then,  when  the  fowl  has  filled  its  belly,
they  put  down  the  coop  a  little,  and  let  it  go  out,  but  fo  that  it  may
not  wander  up  and  down,  but  rather  that  it  may  purfue,  with  its
bill,  whatever  pricks  or  bites  it.  This  is  almoft  the  common  care  of
thofe  who  cram  fowls  in  order  to  fatten  them.

But  they  who  are  defirous  not  only  to  make  their  fowls  fat,  but
alfo  tender,  lprinkle  that  kind  of  meal  before-mentioned  with  frefh
mead,  and  fo  cram  them.  Some  mix  one  part  good  wine  with  three
parts  water,  and  with  wheat-bread  foaked  therein  fatten  the  fowl  •
which,  beginning  to  be  fattened  with  the  new  Moon,  (for  this  alfo
mud:  be  obferved)  grows  plump,  and  is  throughly  fattened  on  the

twentieth


Chap. VIII,  Of  HUSBANDRY.  555

twentieth  day :  But  if  it  loaths  its  food,  you  muft  diminifh  it  as  many
days  as  are  paft  fince  you  began  to  cram  them  •  yet  fo,  as  the  whole
time  of  fattening  them  may  not  go  beyond  the  twenty-fifth  day  of
the  Moon.  But  it  is  beft,  and  what  one  ought  always  to  propofe  to
himfelf,  to  deftinate  all  the  largeft  fowls  for  the  more  fumptuous  en¬
tertainments  j  for  fo  a  worthy  and  fuitable  reward  follows  their  pains
and  expences.


CHAR  VIII.

Of  cramming  of  JVood-pigeons ,  or  Ring-doves ,  or  tame  Pigeons ,
that  breed  in  little  Cells  about  the  Houfe  \  and  of  making
Pigeon-houfes,

BY  this  fame  method  you  may  make  wood-pigeons,  or  ring¬
doves,  and  tame  pigeons,  that  keep  in  little  cells  about  the  houfe,
exceeding  fat  j  neverthelefs,  there  is  not  fo  great  an  income  redound¬
ing  from  cramming  pigeons,  as  from  bringing  them  up  :  for  the  having
of  thefe  things  alfo  in  pofleffion,  is  not  unfuitable  to,  or  unbecoming
the  care  of,  a  good  Hufbandman.  But  this  kind  is  fed  with  lefs  care
and  attendance  in  diftant  regions,  where  the  fowls  have  a  free  egrefs
allowed  them ;  becaufe  they  frequent  the  feats  afiigned  them  either
upon  the  tops  of  towers,  or  on  the  higheft  edifices,  where  the  windows
ftand  wide  open,  by  which  they  fly  out  to  feek  their  food.  Never¬
thelefs,  for  three  or  four  months  they  willingly  accept  of  food  laid
up  in  ftore  for  them ;  the  reft  of  the  months  they  feed  themfelves
with  feeds  they  gather  in  the  fields.  But  this  they  cannot  do  in  places
contiguous  to  the  city,  becaufe  they  are  intercepted  by  various  fnares
and  traps  of  fowlers :  therefore  they  ought  to  be  Ihut  up,  and  fed  in
the  houfe ;  but  neither  in  a  place  of  the  manor-houfe  that  is  even
with  the  ground,  or  in  one  that  is  cold ;  but  a  loft  muft  be  made  for
them  in  an  high  place,  which  may  look  to  the  Sun  at  noon  in  winter.

And  that  we  may  not  repeat  thofe  things  that  have  been  already
faid,  let  the  walls  thereof,  as  we  directed  in  the  aviary,  be  made  hol¬
low  with  nefts  all  in  a  line,  one  after  another ;  or,  if  there  be  no  con-
veniency  to  make  it  fo,  let  boards  be  put  upon  fmall  ftakes  driven
into  the  wall,  which  may  receive  either  fmall  lockers  wherein  the
fowls  may  make  their  nefts,  or  earthen  pots  for  them  to  breed  in,

Zz  2  with


356  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

with  porches  placed  before  them,  by  which  they  may  come  to  their
nefts.  But  the  whole  place,  and  the  pigeon-cells  themfelves,  ought
to  be  polifhed  with  white  plarter,  becaufe  this  kind  of  fowl  is  ex¬
ceedingly  delighted  with  this  colour.  Likewife  the  outfide  of  the
walls  ought  to  be  fmoothed,  efpecially  about  the  window ;  and  let
that  be  fo  placed,  that  it  may  admit  the  Sun  the  greater  part  of  the
winter-day.  And  let  it  have  a  large-enough  gallery  or  balcony  joined
to  it,  fecured  with  nets,  which  may  keep  out  hawks,  and  receive  the
pigeons  which  come  out  to  balk  themfelves  j  and  likewife  afford  a
paffage  to  go  out  into  the  fields,  for  fuch  of  the  breeding  pigeons  as
are  brooding  either  upon  their  eggs,  or  young  ones,  left,  being  dilheart-
ened,  as  it  were,  with  the  grievous  fervitude  of  perpetual  imprifon-
ment,  they  grow  old :  for,  after  they  have  flown  a  little  about  the
buildings,  they  are  exhilarated  and  refreftied,  and  return  more  lively  and
brifk  to  their  young  ones,  for  whofe  fake  they  do  not  indeed  endea¬
vour  to  rove  up  and  down  to  any  great  diftance,  nor  to  fly  away.

The  veflels,  wherein  water  is  given  them,  ought  to  be  like  thofe
ufed  in  poultry-yards  or  hen-coops,  which  may  only  admit  the  necks
of  thofe  that  drink  ;  and,  becaufe  of  their  narrownefs,  not  receive
thofe  that  defire  to  wafh  themfelves :  for  their  doing  this  is  neither
expedient  for  their  eggs,  nor  their  young  ones,  on  which  they  for  the
moft  part  fit  brooding.  Moreover,  it  will  be  proper  to  fcatter  their
food  hard  by  the  wall,  becaufe  thofe  parts  of  the  pigeon-houfe  are
almoft  free  from  dung.  Tares,  or  bitter  vetches,  are  reckoned  the
moft  convenient  food  for  them  ;  as  alfo  fmall  lentils,  millet  and  dar¬
nel,  and  the  refufe  and  liftings  of  wheat  j  and  if  there  be  any  other
forts  of  pulfe  wherewith  hens  alfo  are  nourilhed.

But  the  place  ought  to  be  fwept  and  cleaned  from  time  to  time ;
for  how  much  the  more  garnilhed  it  is,  fo  much  the  more  chearful
and  brifk  the  fowl  appears  j  and  it  is  fo  fqueamifb,  that  frequently,
abhorring  its  own  places  of  abode,  it  abandons  them,  if  it  have  liberty
to  fly  away ;  which  often  happens  in  thofe  regions  where  they  have
free  egrefs.  To  prevent  this,  there  is  an  antient  precept  of  Demo¬
critus  :  there  is  a  kind  of  hawk,  which  people  that  live  in  the  coun¬
try  call  a  kejirel ,  which  commonly  makes  its  neft  in  buildings ;  this
hawk’s  young  ones  are  Ihut  up  one  by  one  in  earthen  pots,  and  the
covers  are  put  upon  them  while  they  are  yet  breathing,  and  the  vef-
fels,  being  covered  with  plafter,  are  hung  up  in  the  corners  of  the
pigeon-houfe  ;  which  thing  does  fo  conciliate  the  love  of  the  fowls  to
the  place,  that  they  never  abandon  it.  Such  of  the  females  as  are
neither  old,  nor  too  young,  muft  be  chofen  for  bringing  up  young

2  ones  j


Chap. VIII  Of  HUSBANDRY.  357

ones ;  but  they  muft  be  of  the  largeft  bodies :  but  care  mufi  be  taken,
if  it  can  be  done,  that  the  young  pigeons  be  never  feparated,  but  kept
together  in  the  manner  they  were  hatched :  for,  if  they  be  married
after  this  manner,  they  for  the  moft  part  bring  up  more  young  ones ;
if  otherwife,  let  not  fuch  at  leaf!  as  are  of  another  kind  be  joined  to¬
gether,  as  the  Alexandrian,  and  the  Campanian ;  for  they  have  lefs
love  for  their  mates  that  are  not  like  themfelves,  and  therefore  they
do  not  couple  much  with  them,  nor  do  they  often  breed.

The  fame  colour  of  feathers  is  not  always,  nor  by  all,  approved ;
therefore,  which  may  be  the  beft  it  is  not  eafy  to  tell :  the  white,
which  is  commonly  feen  every-where,  is  not  too  much  commended
by  fome:  neverthelefs,  it  ought  not  to  be  avoided  in  thofe  that  are
fhut  up  in  a  clofe  place  j  for,  in  fuch  as  wander  up  and  down,  it  is
principally  to  be  difliked,  becaufe  the  hawk  efpies  it  very  eafily.

But  their  fecundity,  tho’  it  be  much  lefs  than  that  of  hens,  never¬
thelefs,  it  brings  in  a  greater  gain  :  for,  if  a  pigeon  be  a  good  breeder,
/he  brings  up  young  ones  eight  times  in  a  year,  and  with  their  prices
the  owners  fill  their  coffers,  as  Marcus  Varro  (i),  an  excellent  au¬
thor,  affures  us ;  who  has  told  us,  that  even  in  thofe  feverer  times
in  which  he  lived,  fingle  pairs  ufed  to  be  fold  for  one  thoufand
fefierces  each.  For  I  am  afhamed  of  our  own  age,  if  we  will  be¬
lieve,  that  there  are  fome  to  be  found,  who  pay  four  thoufand  nummi
for  a  couple  of  birds  (2) ;  although  I  think  even  thefe  more  fuffer-
able,  who  put  their  delights,  and  darling  amufements,  in  the  balance
with  great  fums  of  money,  merely  for  the  fake  of  having  them  in
their  poJTeflion,  than  thofe  who  empty  the  river  Phajis  in  Pontus  (3),

and

(1)  M.  Varro ,  lib.  iii.  7.  fays,  that  there  is  nothing  more  fruitful  than  doves :  for  in
40  days  they  conceive,  lay  their  eggs,  hatch,  and  bring  up  their  young  j  and  that  they  do
this  altnoft  the  whole  year,  only  they  intermit  from  the  winter  folftice  to  the  vernal  equi¬
nox  ;  that  they  who  fattened  them,  in  order  to  fell  them  at  an  higher  price,  fhut  them
up  as  foon  as  they  were  covered  with  feathers,  and  crammed  them  with  chewed  bread  j
and  in  fummer  they  fed  them  three  times  a  day,  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the
evening ;  but  in  winter,  twice  only.  And  of  fome  of  them,  when  their  pinions  begin
to  grow,  they  break  the  legs,  and  leave  them  in  their  nefts,  throwing  food  to  their
dams,  who  feed  their  young  all  the  day  long  j  that  fuch  of  them  as  are  thus  fed  grow
fooner  far,  and  are  whiter  than  others  j  and  that  the  old  ones,  if  they  were  beautiful,  and
of  a  good  colour,  and  good  breeders,  were  fold  at  Home  for  200  nummi  a  pair,  which
in  Englijb  make  il.  12  s.  3  d  £  ;  and  fuch  of  them  as  were  more  beautiful  than  ordinary,
fold  for  1000  nummi,  in  Englifh  money  8/.  is.  5 d.  5.  And  that  fome  refufed  to  take
lefs  than  400  denarii,  in  Englijb  money  12/.  i8r.  4  d.

(2)  Our  author  fays,  that  he  was  afhamed  of  the  age  he  lived  in,  if  it  could  be  be¬
lieved,  that  there  were  fome  who  paid  4000  nummi  for  two  birds,  (I  fuppofe  of  that
kind)  in  Englijb  money  32/.  5  s.  10  d.

(3)  Phafis ,  a  famous  river  of  Colchis  in  Pontus,  much  celebrated  by  the  expedition  of

the


358  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

and  the  Scythian  lakes  of  Mceotis  (4),  of  all  their  fowls ;  and  who  even
at  this  time,  in  their  drunkennefs,  belch  out  and  vomit  up  fowh
brought  from  the  Ganges  (5),  and  from  Egypt.

Never thelefs,  in  this  aviary  alfo  may  be  carried  on  the  bufinefs  of
fattening  fowls :  for  if  there  be  any  among  them  that  happen  to  be
barren,  or  of  a  fordid  difagreeable  colour,  they  are  crammed  after
the  fame  manner  as  hens  are.  But  young  pigeons  grow  more  eafily
fat  under  their  dams,  if,  when  they  are  grown  fomewhat  ftrong,  be¬
fore  they  begin  to  fly  a  little,  you  take  away  a  few  quills  from  them,
and  bruife  their  legs,  that  they  may  reft  in  one  place ;  and  if  you  give
plenty  of  food  to  thole  that  have  hatched  them,  wherewith  they  may
the  more  abundantly  nourifti  both  themfelves  and  them.  Some  tie  up
their  legs  gently,  becaufe,  if  they  be  broken,  they  think  that  they
luffer  great  pain,  and  thereby  become  lean  :  but  that  thing  contributes
nothing  at  all  to  their  fatnefs ;  for,  while  they  endeavour  to  get  rid
of  their  bonds,  they  never  reft  ;  and  by  this  conftant  exercife,  as  it
were,  they  add  nothing  to  their  body.  Their  broken  legs  give  them
pain  not  above  two,  or  three  days  at  moft ;  and  they  deprive  them
of  all  hopes  of  going  abroad,  and  of  wandering  up  and  down.


CHAP.  IX.

Of  the  bringing  up  of  'Turtle-doves .

TH  E  bringing  up  of  turtle-doves  is  of  no  advantage,  becaufe
that  kind  neither  lays  eggs,  nor  hatches,  in  an  aviary  j  they
are  deftinated  for  cramming,  fo  as  they  are  taken  from  the  flight :
therefore  they  are  fattened  with  lefs  trouble  and  care  than  other  fowls,
but  not  at  all  times.  During  the  winter,  tho’  pains  be  beftowed  upon

the  Argonaut a :  from  this  river,  they  fay,  pheafants  have  their  name  ;  either  becaufe
they  abound  moft  there,  and  affemble  in  great  numbers  at  the  mou'h  of  that  river,  to
gather  their  food ;  or  were  firft  brought  from  thence  by  the  Argonaut# ,  as  Martial  fays,
lib.  xiii.  Epigram  72.  in  whofe  days  it  was  reckoned  a  great  luxury  to  feaft  on

pheafants.

(4)  Maotidis  fiagna  Scythica  ;  by  Pliny  called  laeus  Maotius ,  and  palus  M#otis.  It
lies  between  the  Eeffer  Tart  ary  or  Tart  aria  Procopenjls ,  and  CircaJJia ,  a  country  of  AJia.
It  is  a  large  gulph,  or  rather  a  fea :  it  is  called  a  lake,  becaufe  it  is  fo  fhallow  in  many
places,  that  larger  vefteis  cannot  fail  in  it.  It  is  joined  to  the  Euxine  fea  by  the  Bof-
porus  Cirrmerius \  the  river  Tanais  runs  into  it.

(5)  Ganges ,  a  very  great  river  in  India ,  which  runs  through  the  dominions  of  the
Great  Mogul,  and  empties  itfelf  into  the  gulph  of  Bengal.

them,


Chap.  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


359


them,  it  is  difficult  to  fatten  them  j  and  yet  then  the  price  of  turtles  is
lower,  becaufe  there  is  then  greater  plenty  of  thrulhes.  Again,  in
fummer  they  grow  fat,  even  of  their  own  accord,  provided  they  have
abundance  of  food :  for  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  done,  but  to
throw  their  food  before  them,  but  efpecially  millet ;  not  becaufe  they
fatten  lefs  with  wheat,  or  other  forts  of  corn,  but  becaufe  they  are
moil  delighted  with  millet-feed.  Neverthelefs,  in  winter,  pellets  of
bread  foaked  in  wine  fatten  them,  as  alfo  wood-pigeons,  more  quickly
than  other  forts  of  food.

They  do  not  make  lockers,  or  fmall  hollow  cells,  for  receptacles
for  them,  as  they  do  for  tame  pigeons ;  but  brackets  faftened  into  the
wall,  all  in  a  line,  receive  fmall  hempen  mats,  with  nets  fpread  be¬
fore  them,  whereby  they  may  be  hindered  to  fly ;  becaufe,  if  they
do  this,  they  impair  their  bodies.  And,  in  thefe  receptacles,  they
are  continually  fed  with  millet  or  wheat :  but  thefe  feeds  muft  not  be
given  them,  except  they  be  dry.  And  half  a  modins  of  this  food,
for  every  day,  will  abundantly  fatisfy  one  hundred  and  twenty  turtle¬
doves  :  and  frefh  water,  and  the  cleaned  that  can  be  had,  is  given
them  in  fmall  veflels,  fuch  as  they  ufe  for  hens  and  pigeons.  And
their  little  mats  muft  be  cleaned,  left  their  dung  burn  their  feet,
which  itfelf  ought  alfo  to  be  carefully  laid  up  for  the  culture  of  lands,
and  of  trees ;  as  alfo  that  of  all  other  fowls,  except  of  thofe  that
fwim.  This  fowl  is  not  fo  fit  for  fattening  when  it  is  old,  as  when
it  is  very  young  :  therefore  about  the  time  of  harveft,  now  when  the
young  brood  is  grown  ft  rang,  they  are  chofen  for  this  purpofe.


CHAP.  X.


GREATER  pains  and  expences  are  beftowed  upon  thrufhcs,
which,  indeed,  are  fed  in  every  country-place,  but  more  whol-
fomely  in  that  wherein  they  are  taken  ;  for  they  are  with  difficulty
removed  into  another  country,  becaufe  they  defpond,  and  lofe  heart,
when  they  are  fhut  up  in  cages ;  which  they  alfo  do,  when,  the  fame
moment  they  are  taken  out  of  the  net,  they  are  thrown  into  aviaries:
therefore,  that  this  may  not  happen,  fome  that  are  old  ought  to  be
mixed  with  them  j  which,  being  bred  up  and  nourifhed  by  the  Fowler
for  this  ufe,  may,  as  it  were,  footh  and  cajole  the  prifoners,  and


mitigate


360  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VIII.

mitigate  their  forrow  by  flying  up  and  down  amongft  them.  They
require  a  place  equally  fecure,  and  as  much  expofed  to  the  Sun,  as
doves  do :  but  in  it  you  muft  fallen  tranfverfe  poles,  and  fit  them  to
holes  made  in  the  oppofite  walls,  upon  which  they  may  rooft  when
they  have  a  mind  to  reft,  after  they  have  filled  their  bellies.  Thefe
poles  ought  not  to  be  raifed  higher  from  the  earth,  than  a  man’s
ftature  may  allow,  that  he  may  be  able  to  touch  them  when  he
hands.

Their  food  is  commonly  placed  in  thofe  parts  of  the  aviary,  which
have  not  poles  over  them,  that  it  may  be  kept  the  cleaner :  but  dry
figs,  carefully  bruifed  and  well  mixed  with  fine  flour,  ought  always
to  be  given  them,  and,  indeed,  fo  largely,  that  fome  part  may  re¬
main.  Some  chew  them,  and  fo  throw  them  before  them  j  but  it
is  fcarcely  expedient  to  do  this,  where  there  is  a  great  number  of
them,  becaufe  they  who  chew  them  are  not  hired  for  a  fmall  matter  j
and  they  themfelves  always  confume  fome  part  of  them,  becaufe  of
their  fweetnefs.  Many  think,  that  a  variety  of  food  ought  to  be
given  them,  left  they  loath  one  fort ;  and  that  is,  when  the  feeds  of
the  myrtle-  and  maftich-trees,  wild  olive,  and  ivy-berries  alfo,  and
thofe  of  the  ftrawberry-tree,  are  thrown  before  them ;  for  commonly,
in  the  open  fields  alfo,  this  fort  of  wild  fowl  likes  and  feeks  after  thefe
things,  which  wipe  off  and  remove  the  nauleating  of  fuch  of  them
as  fit  loitering  in  the  aviaries,  and  makes  the  whole  volary  more  greedy
and  voracious,  which  is  a  very  great  advantage ;  for  with  a  larger
quantity  of  food  they  fooner  grow  fat.  Neverthelefs,  you  muft  alfo
always  place  by  them  fmall  troughs  filled  with  millet,  which  is  their
firmeft  and  moft  folid  food ;  for  thefe  things,  which  we  have  men¬
tioned  above,  are  given  them  by  way  of  dainties.

Let  not  the  veflels,  wherein  frefh  and  clean  water  may  be  given
them,  be  unlike  thofe  made  ufe  of  for  hens.  Marcus  'Terentius  in¬
forms  us,  that,  in  our  grandfathers  times,  by  this  expence  and  care,
thefe  birds  were  frequently  bought  for  three  denarii  each  (i),  with
which  they  who  triumphed  made  entertainments  for  the  people.  But
now  the  luxury  of  our  age  has  made  this  to  be  their  ordinary  price  every
day  ;  for  which  reafons,  indeed,  this  income  muft  not  be  defpifed  and
fet  at  nought  by  Hufbandmen.  We  have  already  treated  of  thofe
kinds  which  are  provided  with  food  within  the  precindts  of  the  manor-
houfe ;  now  we  muft  fpeak  of  thofe,  which  have  liberty  alfo  to  go
out  to  gather  their  food  in  the  open  fields.

(x)  Varro ,  lib.  iii.  cap.  i.  Three  denarii,  in  Englifb  Money,  make  is.  n


CHAP.


Chap.  XL


Of  HUSBANDRY.


361


CHAP.  XL

Of  the  Bringing  up  of  ‘Peacocks.

TH  E  education  of  peacocks  requires  rather  the  care  of  a  gentle
Houfholder,  who  dwells  in  a  city,  than  of  a  crabbed,  furly
Ruflic  j  but  neither  is  this  foreign  to  the  bafinefs  of  an  Hufband-
man,  who  is  always  endeavouring  to  procure  to  himfelf  pleafures  from
all  fides,  wherewith  all  the  folitudes  and  irkfomenefs  of  the  country
may  be  foftened  and  allayed  :  for  the  beauty  and  comelinefs  of  thefe
birds  not  only  gives  delight  to  their  owners,  but  alfo  to  Grangers.
Therefore,  this  kind  of  fowl  is  very  eafily  kept  in  fmall  woody  iflands,
fuch  as  lie  up  and  down  the  coad  of  Italy.  For  becaufe  it  can  neither
fly  high,  nor  over  any  great  fpace  of  ground,  as  alfo  becaufe  there  is
no  fear  of  the  rapine  of  thieves,  or  of  noxious  beads,  it  wanders  up
and  down  fafely  without  a  Keeper,  and  acquires  for  itfelf  the  greated
part  of  its  nourifhment.  The  females  indeed,  as  if  they  were  dif-
charged  from  bondage,  bring  up  their  young  ones,  of  their  own  ac¬
cord,  with  greater  care.  Nor  ought  he  that  has  the  care  of  them  to
do  any  other  thing,  but,  by  giving  a  fignal  at  a  certain  time  of  the
day,  to  call  together  the  whole  flock  near  the  manor-houfe,  and  to
throw  a  little  barley  before  them,  when  they  come  together,  that  the
fowls  may  not  be  hungry  3  and  that  he  may  review  them,  and  count
4he  number  of  thofe  that  come  to  the  place.

But  it  is  rare  to  have  the  conveniency  of  a  pofleflion  of  this  kind  :
wherefore,  in  inland  countries,  greater  care  mud  be  taken  of  them ;
and  let  them  be  managed  in  this  manner  :  you  mud  inclofe,  with  an
high  fence  or  wall,  a  piece  of  even,  grafly,  and  woody  land,  to  the
three  fides  of  which  you  mud  apply  porticos,  and,  on  the  fourth  fide,
two  cells,  that  one  of  them  may  be  an  habitation  for  their  Keeper,
and  the  other,  a  fhelter  or  lodging-place  for  the  peacocks :  then,  under
the  porticos,  you  mud  make  inclofures  with  reeds,  all  in  a  row,  in
the  manner  of  cages  or  coops,  fuch  as  they  place  upon  the  roofs  of
pigeon-houfes  3  thefe  inclofures  are  didinguifhed,  or  feparated  from
o?ie  another ,  by  reeds  running  between  them  like  bars,  fo  that  they
may  have  one  fingle  entry  on  both  fides.  But  their  lodging-place
ought  to  be  intirely  free  from  moidure,  in  the  floor  of  which  mud
be  fadened  fliort  Imall  dakes,  all  in  a  row,  the  uppermod  parts  of
which  mud  have  tenons  cut  very  fmooth,  which  may  be  put  into

A  a  a  holes


}62  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

holes  made  in  tranfverfe  poles.  Moreover  thefe  poles,  which  are
placed  upon  the  fmall  flakes,  ought  to  be  fquare,  that  they  may  re¬
ceive  the  fowl,  when  it  leaps  upon  them.  But  they  are  made  fo  as  to
he  taken  away  3  that,  when  it  is  neceffary,  they  may  be  taken  down
from  the  pofts,  and  give  free  accefs  to  thofe  who  fweep  the  peacock-
houfe.

This  kind  of  fowl,  when  full  three  years  old,  breeds  exceeding
well  3  whereas  their  more  tender  age  is  either  barren,  or  not  very
fruitful.  The  peacock  has  the  falacioufnefs  of  a  common  poultry-
cock,  and  therefore  requires  five  females  3  for  if  he  frequently  treads
one  or  two  of  them  that  are  laying,  he  mars  their  eggs,  fcarcely  as
yet  formed  in  their  wombs,  and  does  not  fuffer  them  to  be  brought
to  the  birth,  becaufe  they  fall  from  their  genital  parts  before  they
come  to  maturity.

In  the  latter  end  of  winter,  the  amorous  defires  of  both  fexes  muff
be  kindled  with  food  provocative  of  luff.  It  contributes  exceedingly
to  this  matter,  if  you  parch  beans  gently  in  embers  that  are  not  too
hot,  and  give  them  lukewarm  to  them  faffing  every  fifth  day  :
neverthelefs,  you  muft  not  exceed  the  quantity  of  fix  cyathi  to  each
fowl.  Thefe  victuals  muff  not  be  fcattered  promifcuoufly  to  them  all ;
but  they  muff  be  laid  in  each  of  the  inclofures,  which,  I  propofed,
ought  to  be  woven  with  reeds,  obferving  a  proportion  of  five  females  ,
and  one  male  3  water  alfo,  which  is  fit  for  drinking,  muft  be  fet  for
them  3  when  this  is  done,  the  males  are  conducted,  without  quarrel¬
ling,  into  their  feveral  inclofures  with  their  females,  and  the  whole
flock  is  fed  equally.  For  alfo,  of  this  kind,  there  are  found  males
given  to  quarrelling  and  fighting,  who  hinder  thofe  that  are  not  fo
ftrong  as  themfelves  both  from  their  food,  and  from  coition,  unlefs
they  are  feparated,  and  kept  apart,  in  this  manner.  But  commonly,
in  places  expofed  to  the  fun,  the  defire  of  coition  difquiets  and  tor¬
ments  the  males,  when  the  gentle  weft  winds  have  begun  to  blow,
that  is,  the  time  from  the  thirteenth  of  February  before  the  month
of  March.  It  is  a  fign,  that  his  luft  is  ftimulated,  when  he  covers
himfelf  with  the  pinions  of  his  tail,  which  glifter  as  if  they  were  fet
with  precious  ftones,  as  if  he  were  admiring  himfelf  3  and,  when  he
does  that,  he  is  faid  to  wheel,  or  be  in  his  pride.

Prefently  after  the  time  of  coupling,  the  pea-hens,  that  are  breed¬
ing,  muft  be  carefully  watched,  that  they  may  not  lay  their  eggs  in
any  other  place,  but  in  their  ftalls,  where  they  lodge  3  and  you  muft
often,  with  your  fingers,  feel  the  parts  of  the  females  5  for  their  eggs
are  very  obvious  to  the  touch,  when  their  time  of  laying  them  drawls

near.


Chap. XI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  363

near.  Therefore  fuch  of  them  as  are  near  the  time  of  their  laying
muft  be  {hut  up,  left  they  lay  their  eggs  without  their  inclofures :  and
efpecially  at  thofe  times  when  they  are  going  to  lay,  the  aviary  muft
be  well  filled  with  a  great  quantity  of  ftraw,  that  their  eggs  may  be
preferved,  and  received  found  and  intire.  For  commonly,  when  the
pea-hens  are  come  to  take  their  night’s  reft,  they  lay  their  eggs  when
they  are  fitting  upon  the  forementioned  poles  j  and  the  nearer  and
fofter  they  fall,  the  lefs  injury  are  they  liable  to  receive,  and  the
founder  are  they  kept.

Therefore,  during  the  times  of  their  laying,  you  muft  daily,  in  the
morning,  go  round  the  places  where  they  rooft,  and  gather  the  eggs
that  are  lying  there;  and  the  freftier  they  are  fet  under  common
poultry-hens,  fo  much  the  more  commodioufly  are  they  hatched  :  and
it  is  moft  for  the  Houfholder’s  advantage,  that  this  fhould  be  done.
For  pea-hens,  which  do  not  fit  upon  their  eggs  to  hatch  them,  for
the  moft  part,  lay  eggs  thrice  in  a  year  :  but  fuch  of  them  as  fit  upon
and  hatch  their  own  eggs,  confume  the  whole  time  of  their  fecun¬
dity  either  in  hatching,  or  in  bringing  up,  their  young  ones.

Their  firft  birth  or  laying  is,  for  the  moft  part,  of  five  eggs ;  their
fecond  of  four;  their  third  either  of  three  or  two;  nor  is  there  any
pretence  for  being  guilty  of  fuch  a  miftake,  as  to  let  Rhodian  hens  fit
upon  pea-hens  eggs,  which  do  not,  indeed,  rightly  nurfe  and  bring
up  their  own  offspring.  But,  let  all  the  largeft  veteran  hens,  of  our
own  Italian  breed,  be  chofen ;  and  let  them  fit  on  nine  eggs,  nine
days  from  the  firft  increafe  of  the  moon ;  and  let  five  of  them  be
pea-hens  eggs,  and  the  reft  of  the  common  poultry-kind.  Then,
upon  the  tenth  day,  let  all  the  common  poultry-hens  eggs  be  taken
away,  and  as  many  frefh  ones,  of  the  fame  kind,  put  in  their  place,
that  they  may  be  hatched  with  the  pea-hen’s  eggs  on  the  thirtieth
day  of  the  moon,  which  is  almoft  new  moon.

But  let  it  not  efcape  the  care  of  the  Keeper,  to  obferve  when  the
hen  that  is  brooding  leaps  down,  and  to  come  frequently  to  her  neft,
and  turn  the  pea-hen’s  eggs  with  his  hand,  which,  by  reafon  of  their
bignefs,  are  more  difficultly  moved  by  the  hen ;  and,  that  he  may  do
this  the  more  carefully,  one  fide  of  the  eggs  muft  be  marked  with
ink,  which  the  keeper  of  the  aviary  {hall  have  as  a  fign  to  know
whether  they  have  been  turned  by  the  hen,  or  no.  But,  as  I  faid  be¬
fore,  we  muft  remember,  that  the  largeft  common  poultry-hens  be
prepared  for  that  purpofe  ;  which,  if  they  be  of  a  middling  fize,
ought  not  to  be  put  to  fit  on  more  than  three  pea-hen’s  eggs,  and  fix
of  her  own  kind :  then,  after  {he  has  hatched  the  young  ones,  thofe

A  a  a  2  of


364.  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

of  the  common  poultry-kind  ought  to  be  transferred  to  another  nurfe;
and  thofe  of  the  peacock-kind,  which  fhall  be  hatched  from  time  to
time,  gathered  to  one  nurfe,  till  a  flock,  confifting  of  twenty-five
heads,  be  made  up.

But,  when  the  young  ones  are  hatched,  in  like  manner  as  the
chickens  of  the  common  poultry-kind,  let  them  not  be  removed  the
firft  day  :  the  next  day  let  them  be  transferred  into  a  coop,  with  their
nurfe  that  is  to  educate  them  ;  and  the  firft  days  let  them  be  nourifhed
with  barley-meal  befprinkled  with  wine,  as  alfo  with  boiled  pottage
or  gruel  of  any  kind  of  corn,  and  cooled.  Then,  after  a  few  days,
to  this  food  mu  ft  be  added  Tare?itinian  leek,  cut  very  fmall,  and  foft
cheefe,  out  of  which  the  whey  has  been  fqueezed  with  great  force  j
for  it  is  manifeft,  that  whey  is  hurtful  to  the  pullets.  Locufts  alfo,
when  their  feet  are  taken  from  them,  are  reckoned  ufeful  for  nourifh-
ing  thofe  little  ones ;  and  they  ought  to  be  fed  with  them  till  the
fixth  month  :  afterwards  it  is  fufficient  to  give  them  barley  by  hand.

But  after  the  thirty-fifth  day  that  they  are  hatched,  they  may  be
fafely  enough  led  out  into  the  fields,  and  the  flock  follows  the  cluck¬
ing  hen,  as  if  Ihe  were  their  mother.  She  is  fhut  up  in  a  cage,  and
carried  out  to  the  fields  by  their  Feeder ;  and  the  hen  being  let  out,  is
fecured  with  a  long  line  tied  to  her  foot,  and  the  young  ones  fly  up
and  down  round  her :  and,  when  they  are  fed  to  fatiety,  they  are
brought  back  to  the  manor-houfe,  following,  as  I  faid,  the  duckings
of  their  nurfe.  But  authors  are  well  enough  agreed,  that  other  hens,
which  bring  up  chickens  of  their  own  kind,  ought  not  to  be  fed  in
the  fame  place  ;  for,  after  they  have  feen  the  peacock-offspring,  they
ceafe  to  love  their  own  chickens,  and  leave  them  before  they  are
grown  up,  hating  them  indeed,  becaufe  they  are  not  equal  to  the
peacock  either  in  bignefs,  or  in  beauty.  The  fame  difeafes,  which
ufe  to  hurt  the  common  poultry-kind,  infeft  thefe  fowls :  but  no
other  remedies  are  given  them,  than  thofe  which  are  applied  to  the
common  poultry-kind  ;  for  the  pip  and  crudities,  and  if  there  are
any  other  pefts,  are  checked  by  the  fame  remedies  which  we  have
already  propofed.  Then,  when  they  are  above  feven  months  old,
they  ought  to  be  fhut  up  in  the  aviary  with  the  reft,  to  take  their
night’s  reft.  But  care  muft  be  taken,  that  they  do  not  abide  upon
the  ground  ;  for  fuch  of  them  as  ufe  to  lie  down  fo,  ought  to  be  taken
up,  and  placed  upon  the  poles,  left  they  fuffer  by  the  cold.


CHAP.


Chap. XIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


365


CHAP.  XII.

Of  the  Bringing  up  of  Numidian  and  Ruflic  Hens.

TH  E  way  of  bringing  up  Numidian  hens,  is  almoft  the  fame
with  that  of  peacocks.  But  wild  or  wood  hens,  which  are
called  ruftic,  do  not  breed  when  in  bondage :  and  therefore  we  give
no  directions  concerning  them,  but  that  food  be  given  them  to  fatiety,
that  they  may  be  the  fitter  for  feafts,  and  delicate  entertainments.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  Fowls  which  the  Greeks  call  (amphibious)  and

the  Latins,  duplicis  vitae  (of  a  double  Life).

I  Come  now  to  thofe  fowls  which  the  Greeks  call  d^iQia,,  (amphi¬
bious)  becaufe  they  not  only  feek  for  food  upon  the  dry  land,  but
in  the  water  alfo  :  and  they  accuftom  themfelves  not  more  to  the  dry
ground,  than  to  the  lake.  Of  this  kind  the  goofe  efpecially  is  accept¬
able  to  people  that  live  in  the  country  j  becaufe  it  does  not  require
tbe  greateft  attendance  and  care,  and  keeps  a  better  watch  than  a  dog :
for,  by  their  cackling,  they  difcover  him  that  lies  in  wait  to  furprife
you,  as  hiftory  alfo  has  informed  us,  in  the  fiege  of  the  Capitol,
when,  at  the  arrival  of  the  Gauls ,  they  made  a  loud  noife,  when  the
dogs  were  filent.

But  this  fowl  cannot  be  kept  every- where,  as  Celfus  judges  very
truly,  who  thus  fpeaks :  The  goofe  is  not  eafily  fuftained  either  with¬
out  water,  or  without  much  grafs ;  nor  is  it  profitable  in  fuch  places
as  are  fown  or  planted,  becaufe  it  plucks  whatever  tender  or  young
thing  it  can  reach;  but,  where-ever  there  is  a  river,  ora  lake,  and  plenty
of  grafs,  as  alfo  corn-fields  hard-by,  there  this  kind  of  fowl  muft  be
nourished.  This  we  alfo  advife  you  to  do ;  not  becaufe  it  is  of  any
great  fruit  or  advantage,  but  becaufe  it  is  of  very  little  burden  or  trouble :
neverthelefs,  out  of  itfelf  it  both  produces  goflings,  and  yields  feathers ;
which  you  muft  not  gather  as  you  do  wool  from  your  fheep,  only
once  a  year,  but  you  may  pluck  them  twice  a  year,  in  the  fpring
and  autumn ;  and,  indeed,  for  thefe  reafons,  if  the  condition  of  the

place


366  L.J.  M.COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

place  will  allow  it,  you  mud  bring  up  a  few  at  leaft,  and  to  each
male  afiign  three  females ;  for,  becaule  of  their  heavinefs,  they  can¬
not  couple  with  more.  As  alfo  you  muff  make  goofe-pens  for  them
in  retired  corners,  within  the  poultry-yard,  that  they  may  be  pro¬
tected  and  fheltered,  and  lodge,  and  lie  down,  and  lay  their  eggs,
and  hatch  them,  therein.


CHAP.  XIV.

Of  the  Bringing  up  of  Geefe ,  and  making  a  Goofe-pen  for

keepmg  a?id  feeding  them .

LE  T  thofe,  who  are  defirous  to  have  flocks  of  fwimming  fowls
in  their  pofleffion,  conflitute  proper  places  for  feeding  and  keep¬
ing  them,  which  then  will  turn  to  account,  and  anfwer  expectation,
if  they  be  duly  ordered  in  fuch  a  manner  as  this :  A  large  yard  is  in-
clofed,  remote  from  all  other  cattle,  furrounded  with  a  wall  nine  feet
high,  and  with  porticos,  fo  that  the  Keeper’s  cell  may  be  in  one  part
of  it  ;  then  under  the  porticos  are  built  fquare  goofe-pens,  with  rub-
bifh,  or  any  rough  materials  for  building,  or  with  fmall  bricks  alfo  j
it  is  fuflicient,  that  each  of  them  have  three  feet  every  way,  and  each
of  them  an  entry,  fecured  with  ftrong  little  doors  ;  becaufe  they
ought  to  be  carefully  fhut  up  during  the  time  they  are  laying  their
eggs,  and  hatching.  Then,  if,  without  the  manor-houfe,  not  far  from
the  building,  there  be  a  pond  or  pool  of  handing  water,  or  a  river,
let  no  other  water  be  fought  for;  if  not,  let  a  lake  or  pond  be  made
by  hand,  that  they  may  be  fuch  as  the  fowls  can  dive  in  :  for  they
can  no  more  live  conveniently  without  this  fhelter  and  defence,  than
they  can  do  without  that  upon  dry  land.

Let  marfhy  land  alfo,  but  fuch  as  is  grafly,  be  deftinated  for  them  j
and  let  other  forts  of  food  be  fown  for  them,  fuch  as  tares,  trefoil,  fenu¬
greek,  but  efpecially  a  kind  of  endive,  which  the  Greeks  call  ferin  (i) ;
the  feeds  of  lettice  alfo  ought,  above  all  things,  to  be  fown  for  this
ufe,  becaufe  it  is  both  an  exceeding  foft  and  tender  pot-herb,  and  very


(i)  Genus  intubi  quid  Grad  appellant.  In  Viifcorides  you  read  it  alfo  Sizcf a.  in
the  Accufative  :  he  diftinguifhes  it  into  wild  and  tame.  See  Matthiolus  in  D-'oJcoridem
his  defcription  of  it,  where  he  mentions  the  feveral  forts,  both  of  the  wild  and  tame  ;
and  fays,  that  the  wild  is  the  fame  with  what  they  call  cicborium  fylvejhey  and  picriny  becaufe
of  its  bitternefs.

much


Chap. XIV.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  367

much  fought  after,  and  much  liked,  by  thefe  fowls  j  as  alfo  very
ufeful  food  for  their  young  ones.  When  you  have  prepared  all  thefe
things,  you  muft  take  care,  that  males  and  females,  of  the  larged:
bodies,  and  of  a  white  colour,  be  chofen :  for  there  is  another  kind
of  divers  colours,  which,  from  being  wild,  is  foftened  and  made  tame.
That  kind  is  neither  equally  fruitful,  nor  fo  valuable  ;  for  which
reafon  it  muft  not  be  brought  up  at  all.

The  fitteft  time  for  putting  geefe  to  couple  is  after  the  fhorteft  day
of  winter  is  pad: ;  and,  afterwards,  for  laying  their  eggs,  and  brooding,
from  the  calends  of  February  or  March  till  the  folftice,  which  falls
in  the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  'June.  They  couple,  not  as  thofe
other  fowls  of  which  we  have  already  fpoken,  reding  upon  the
ground  ;  for,  for  the  mod  part,  they  do  that  in  a  river,  or  in  ponds :
and  each  of  them  lays  eggs  three  times  in  a  year,  if  they  are  kept
from  hatching  their  own  eggs ;  which  is  more  expedient,  than  when
they  themfelves  fit  upon  them  in  order  to  hatch  them ;  for  they  are
both  better  nurfed  by  common  hens,  and  a  much  greater  dock  of
them  is  made  up.

But,  the  firft  time  of  their  laying,  they  lay  five  eggs ;  the  fecond,
four ;  and  the  lad,  three :  which  lad  laying  fome  people  allow  the
dams  themfelves  to  bring  up,  becaufe  the  reft  of  the  year  they  will
ceafe  from  laying  any  more  eggs.  The  females  muft  not  at  all  be
allowed  to  lay  their  eggs  without  the  inclofure  ;  but,  when  they  fhall
be  feen  feeking  for  a  place  to  fettle  in,  you  muft  ftop  them,  and  feel
if  they  are  with  egg  :  for,  if  the  time  of  their  laying  approaches,  you
may  with  your  finger  touch  their  eggs,  which  are  near  the  entry  of
their  genital  parts.  Wherefore  they  ought  to  be  brought  to  their
goofe-pen,  and  fhut  up,  that  they  may  lay  their  eggs :  and  it  is  dif¬
fident  to  have  done  this  once  to  each  of  them,  becaufe  every  one  of
them  runs  again  to  the  fame  place  where  fhe  firft  laid  her  egg.  But,
at  the  lad  time  of  their  laying,  when  we  have  a  mind,  that  they  them¬
felves  fhould  fit  on  their  own  eggs,  the  eggs  of  every  one  of  them  in
particular  muft  be  marked,  that  fo  they  may  be  put  under  her  that
laid  them ;  becaufe  they  deny,  that  one  goofe  can  hatch  the  eggs  of
another,  unlefs  fhe  alfo  have  her  own  eggs  put  under  her.  But  five
eggs  of  this  kind,  as  thofe  of  the  pea-hen,  are  the  mod  that  are  fet
under  common  hens,  and  three  the  feweft :  but,  under  the  geefe
themfelves,  the  feweft  are  vii,  and  xv  the  mod.

But  great  care  muft  be  taken,  that  when  nettle-roots  are  laid  under
the  eggs,  by  which  remedy,  as  it  were,  they  are  cured,  they  may
not  hurt  the  goflings,  when  they  are  come  out  of  the  fhells  •  for

nettles


368  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

nettles  kill  them,  if  they  prick  them  when  they  are  very  young.  But
thirty  days  are  neceflary  for  forming  and  hatching  the  young  ones,
when  the  weather  is  cold  ;  for  in  mild,  warm  weather  xxv  days  are
futheient :  but,  more  frequently,  the  gofling  comes  out  of  the  {hell
the  thirtieth  day.  And,  while  it  is  very  little,  it  is  fhut  up  and  fed
with  its  dam  in  the  goofe-pen,  during  the  ArA  ten  days :  afterwards,
when  fair  weather  permits,  it  is  carried  out  into  the  meadows  and
ponds ;  and  care  muA  be  taken,  that  it  be  neither  pricked  with  the
prickles  of  nettles,  nor  fent  out  to  paflure  w'hen  it  is  hungry  ;  but  be
fatiated,  before  it  go  out,  with  endive,  or  leitice-leaves  cut  in  pieces.
For  if,  while  it  is  as  yet  not  very  Arong,  2nd  {landing  in  need  of
food,  it  come  out  to  the  paflure,  it  ftruggles  fo  obftinately  with  fhrubs,
or  the  more  folid  herbs,  that  it  choaks  itfelf,  or  di  joints  its  neck.
It  is  right  to  give  it  millet  alfo,  or  wheat  mixed  with  water  :  and,
after  it  has  gathered  a  little  flrength,  it  is  driven  to  a  flock  of  goflings
of  the  fame  age  with  itfelf,  and  nourifhed  with  barley  :  which  it  is
not  improper  to  give  alfo  to  fuch  geefe  as  are  laying  eggs,  or  brooding.

But  it  is  not  expedient  to  aflign  more  than  twenty  goflings  to  each
goofe-pen  ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  mufl  they  be  Aiut  up  at  all  with
fuch  as  are  older  than  themfelves,  becaufe  the  Aronger  kills  the
weaker.  The  cells,  wherein  they  lie,  muA  be  exceeding  dry ;  and
they  mu  A  have  Araw  fpread  under  them  :  or,  if  this  cannot  be  had,
hay  alfo  is  moA  acceptable  to  them.  As  to  the  re  A,  the  very  fame
things  mu  A  be  obferved  wdth  refpedl  to  them,  as  to  the  young  brood
of  other  kinds  of  fowls,  that  neither  a  ferpent,  nor  a  viper,  nor  cats,
nor  a  weafel  alfo,  may  be  allowed  to  breathe  upon  them  ;  which  peAs
reduce  them,  while  they  are  very  young,  almoA  to  utter  deArudtion.
There  are  fome  who  fet  foaked  barley  by  fuch  as  are  fitting  on  their
eggs,  and  do  not  fuffer  thofe  that  are  brooding  to  leave  their  neAs
frequently.  Some  alfo  give  them  green  crefles  with  water,  cut  very
fmall  j  and  this  is  a  moA  agreeable  food  to  them.  Afterwards,  when
they  are  four  months  old,  all  the  large  A  of  them  are  deAinated  for
cramming,  becaufe  their  tender  age  efpecially  is  reckoned  the  fitteA
for  this  purpofe :  and  thefe  fowls  are  eafily  fattened;  for,  befides
dried  barley-meal  foaked  in  water,  and  wheat-flour  three  times  a  day,
it  is  not  neceflary  to  give  them  any  other  thing,  provided  they  have
liberty  to  drink  abundantly,  but  are  not  allowed  to  wander  up  and
down,  and  that  they  be  kept  in  a  warm  and  dark  place :  which  things
contribute  very  much  to  breed  fat.  In  this  manner  they  grow  fat  in
two  months ;  and,  by  fuch  management,  even  the  tendereA  brood  is
•often  brought,  in  forty  days,  to  be  exceeding  fat  and  plump.

CHAP.


Chap.  XV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


369


CHAP.  XV.

Of  Duch,  Teahy  and  the  like,

A  Place  for  feeding  ducks  requires  the  like  care,  but  greater  ex-
pences.  For  ducks,  teals,  pocards,  phalerides  (i),  and  fuch-
like  fowls,  which  fearch  all  the  holes  and  corners  of  ponds  and  pools
*of  ftanding  water  and  marfhes,  are  put  under  confinement,  and  fed
in  a  clofe  place.  An  even,  level  place  is  chofen  for  this  pur p of e,  and
fenced  round  with  a  wall  fifteen  feet  high  :  then  it  is  covered  with
grates  or  crofs-bars  placed  over  it,  or  with  nets  with  large  mafhes,
that  neither  the  fowls  within  the  houfe  may  have  liberty  to  fly  out,
nor  eagles  and  hawks  to  fly  into  it.

But  this  whole  wall  muft  be  fmoothed  with  plafter,  both  without
and  within,  that  fo  neither  a  cat,  nor  a  ferret,  may  creep  over  it.
Then,  in  the  middle  part  of  this  duckery,  a  lake  is  digged  two  feet
deep,  and  as  much  fpace  is  afligned  to  the  length  and  breadth  thereof,,
as  the  condition  of  the  place  will  permit.  The  edges  or  fides  of  the
pool  are  all  laid  with  Signinian  work,  (plafter  of  Paris)  left  they
be  confumed  with  the  violence  of  the  waving  and  overflowing  of
the  water,  which  ought  always  to  flow  and  be  in  motion  between
them  :  and  they  mu  ft  not  be  raifed  and  formed  into  fteps,  but  gra¬
dually  fubfide  with  a  gentle  defcent,  that  there  may  be  an  eafy  delcent
into  the  water  as  from  a  fhore.  But  the  bottom  of  the  pond  or  pool,
as  far  almoft  as  two  thirds  of  the  whole  dimenfion,  muft  be  ftrongly
paved  all  round  with  ftones  well  driven  in,  and  plafter,  that  it  may
not  throw  up  grafs  and  weeds,  but  preferve  the  furface  of  the  water
pure  for  fuch  fowls  as  fwim  in  it.

Moreover,  the  middle  part  of  it  ought  to  be  of  earth,  that  it  may
be  planted  with  Egyptian  beans,  and  other  green  things,  which  com¬
monly  grow  in  water,  which  darken,  and  furnifh  a  fhade,  for  the
places  where  the  fowls  retire  and  fhelter  themfelves.  For  there  are
fome  of  them  which  delight  to  abide  either  in  little  woods  of  tamarilk-
trees,  or  in  thickets  of  fhrubs  and  ruihes :  neverthelefs,  let  not  the

(i)  Bbnleridcs.  Plin.  lib.  3.  cap.  48.  lay?,  that  in  Seleucia  of  the  Parthian r,  and  in
Apa-,  thefe  are  the  moft  commended  of  any  water- fowls  whatfoever.  Fath  r  Hardouiny
in  his  noe  upon  this  place,  fay?,  that  they  are  frequent  in  the  country  about  Soiffons  and
Beauvois  in  France.  It  is  a  beautiful  Ioa'I,  which  delights  in  ponds  and  lakes:  but  whe¬
ther  there  is  any  fuch  fowl  in  England)  or  by  what  name  it  is  called,  I  know  not.

B  b  b  whole


370  L.J.M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

whole  place,  for  this  reafon,  be  taken  up  with  little  woods ;  but,  as
I  faid,  let  it  be  free  and  open  all  round,  that  the  fowls,  when  a  clear,
warm,  fun-fhming  day  makes  them  leap  and  flcip  for  joy,  may,  with¬
out  any  hindrance,  drive  together  which  of  them  can  fwim  the
fwifted.  For,  as  they  defire  to  be  where  they  have  holes  to  creep
into,  and  where  they  may  lie  in  ambufh  for  animals  that  live  in  rivers,
and  lurk  and  hide  themfelves  from  them ;  fo  they  are  offended,  if
there  are  not  free,  open  fpaces,  where  they  may  go  freely  up  and
down.

Then,  without  the  lake,  let  the  banks  be  covered  with  grafs  for
twenty  feet  on  all  fides ;  and  behind  this  extent  of  ground,  about  the
wall,  let  there  be  places  for  them  to  lodge  in,  of  a  foot  fquare,  built
with  done,  and  lmoothed  with  plaider,  in  which  the  fowls  may
make  their  neds  •  and  let  them  be  covered  with  box  and  rnyrtle-dirubs
planted  among  them,  which  mud  not  exceed  the  height  of  the  wall.
Then  let  a  little  chanel  be  built  all  along,  and  funk  under-ground,
through  which  their  food  may  daily  run  down  mixed  with  the
water ;  for  in  this  manner  does  this  kind  of  fowl  gather  its  food.
Terredrial  food  alfo  of  puls,  as  millet,  panic,  and  barley  alfo,  is
very  acceptable  to  them :  but  they  alfo  give  them  mad,  and  hulks,
and  kernels  of  grapes,  where  there  is  plenty  of  them.  But,  of  aqua-
tile  food,  they  give  them  crab-fidi,  if  they  have  them  in  plenty,  or
fmall  river  pilchards,  or  anchoves  of  little  value  j  or  if  there  be  any
other  river  animals  of  a  fmall  growth.

They  obferve  the  fame  times  of  coupling,  in  March  and  the  follow¬
ing  month,  as  other  wild  fowls  do  j  during  which,  dalks  of  herbs,
fprays,  and  fprigs,  mud  be  fcattered  here-and-there  in  the  aviaries,
that  the  fowls  may  gather  them,  and  build  their  neds  therewith.
But  it  is  a  very  old  practice,  and  exceeding  proper,  that  when  one  has
a  mind  to  conditute  and  form  a  duckery,  he  fhould  gather  the  eggs
of  the  forefaid  fowls  about  the  marfhes,  wherein,  for  the  mod  part,
they  lay  them,  and  breed,  and  fet  them  under  common  poultry-
hens  ;  for  their  young  ones,  being  thus  hatched  and  brought  up,  lay
afide  their  wild  difpodtion,  and  will  certainly  breed  when  they  are
fhut  up  in  aviaries :  for,  if  you  would  put  into  cudody,  and  diut
up,  fowls  that  are  newly  taken,  which  have  been  accudomed  to  live
at  full  liberty,  they  delay  laying  their  eggs  in  their  fervitude.  But
enough  has  been  faid  of  the  tutelage  of  fwimming  fowls.


CHAP.


Chap. XVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


571


CHAP.  XVI.

Of  Fifh-ponds ,  and  of  feeding  of  Fifhes.

BU  T,  while  we  are  making  mention  of  aquatile  animals,  we
fhall  come  opportunely  to  the  care  and  management  of  filhes.
For  tho’  I  think,  that  the  gain,  redounding  from  them,  is  mod;  un-
fuitable  and  alien  to  Hufbandmen,  (for  what  can  I  imagine  fo  contrary
as  terreftrial  and  fluid,  or  dry  land  and  water  ?)  neverthelefs,  I  fhall
not  omit  it.  For  our  anceflors  took  great  delight  in,  and  applied
themfelves  much  to,  thefe  things,  even  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  they
fhut  up  falt-water  fifhes  alfo  in  frefii  waters,  and  nourifhed  the  mullet,
and  the  fcare,  with  the  fame  care  as  the  fea-lamprey,  or  fea-pike,  are
now  educated.  For  that  antient,  ruftic  progeny  of  Romulus  and
Numa  valued  themfelves  mightily  upon  this,  and  thought  it  a  great
matter,  that,  if  a  rural  life  were  compared  with  a  city  life,  it  did
not  labour  under  the  want  of,  or  come  fhort  in,  any  part  of  riches  or
wealth  whatfoever.  Wherefore,  they  not  only  ftored  the  fifh-ponds,
which  they  themfelves  had  built,  with  great  numbers  of  fifhes,  but
alfo  filled  the  lakes,  which  nature  had  formed,  with  fpawn,  or  young
fifhes,  brought  from  the  fea.  Hence  it  was,  that  the  lakes  of  Fe¬
ll  no  (1),  Bracciano  (2),  Bolfeno  (5),  and  Vico  (4)  alfo,  did  procreate
fea-jacks  and-  gilt-heads ;  and  if  there  be  any  other  kinds  of  fifhes
which  can  endure  frefh  water.

Afterwards  the  following  age  abolifhed  that  care ;  and  the  dain-
tinefs,  magnificence,  and  fumptuoufnefs  of  the  rich,  have  fhut  up
the  very  feas,  and  Neptune  himfelf  alfo ;  and  now,  with  the  hiflory
of  our  grandfathers,  the  action  and  faying  of  Marcius  Philippus  (y)

is

(1)  Lacus  Velinus ,  a  lake  in  Umbria.)  upon  the  borders  of  Sabina  in  Italy j  it  is  now
called  Lago  de  Pie  di  Luco.  It  lies  between  Reati ,  a  Town  in  Sabina ,  and  Tarni,  a  town
in  Umbria  :  the  river  Velino  runs  through  it.

(2)  Lacus  Sabatinus ,  now  called  the  lake  of  Bracciano ,  from  the  adjacent  town  of
that  name.

(3)  Lacus  Vulfinenfis ,  or  Vuljinienfts ;  the  lake  of  Boljeno,  in  the  duchy  of  Cajlro  in
Hetruria  in  Italy ,  almoft  round,  and  thirty  miles  in  circumference.  It  has  other  names
from  the  places  adjacent,  which  it  is  needlefs  to  trouble  the  reader  with.

(4)  Lacus  Ciminus ,  now  called  Lago  di  Vico,  between  Viterbo  and  Roncigl'tone.  It  may
as  properly  be  called  the  lake  of  Viterbo ,  as  mons  Ciminus  is  called  the  hill  of  Viterbo.

(5)  Marcius  Philippus.  This  ftory  our  author  has  taken  from  Varro,  lib.  iii.  cap.  3.
who  fays,  Did  not  Philippus,  when  he  turned  afide  to  lodge  with  his  friend  Imm'tdius  at
Caflinumi  and  at  fupper  had  tailed  of  a  beautiful  pike,  which  his  friend  had  fet  before

B  b  b  2  him,


372  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  VIII.

h  publifhed  every-where,  and  is  in  every  body’s  mouth  (as  mighty
pleafant  and  polite,  which  was,  indeed,  exceeding  luxurious) :  for  at
a  certain  time,  when  he  was  at  fupper  in  his  friend’s  houfe,  with
whom  he  lodged,  at  Cajjinum ,  and  had  tafted  of  a  pike,  out  of  the
neighbouring  river,  which  was  fet  before  him,  and  had  fpitten  it  out,
he  followed  the  impudent  and  naughty  action  with  a  jeft,  May
I  per  ijh,  faid  he,  if  I  did  not  think  it  was  a  jijh!  Therefore,  this
falfe  oath  has  put  many  upon  more  nice  and  uncommon  contrivances
to  gratify  their  gluttonous  appetite,  and  taught  delicate,  wife,  and
learned  palates  to  loath  and  make  no  account  of  the  river-pike,  ex¬
cept  that  which  the  adverfe  ftream  of  the  Tiber  had  wearied.  Therefore
Ter  ait  ius  Varro  fays,  4  That,  in  this  age,  there  is  not  a  vain,  paltry,

4  forry  fellow,  or  a  ftage-player  (6),  who  will  not  fay,  That  it  is  no
4  matter  to  him  whether  his  filh-pond  be  well  ftored  with  this  kind
4  of  filh,  or  with  frogs ;  and  that,  in  his  opinion,  there  is  no  dif-
4  ference  between  them.’  Neverthelefs,  in  thofe  very  times,  wherein
Varro  gives  an  account  of  this  luxury,  Cato  s  feverity  was  exceedingly
commended,  who,  notwithflanding,  when  he  himfelf  was  Lucullus’  s
guardian  (7),  fold  his  pupil’s  fifh -ponds  for  the  fum  of  four  hundred
thoufandy^r/Zz.  For  then  the  dainties  of  taverns,  and  of  houfes
of  riotous  entertainments,  were  in  great  vogue,  and  much  fought
after,  when  fifh-ponds  were  brought  from  the  fea ;  and  they  who
took  great  delight  in  them,  and  made  them  their  chief  ftudy,  rejoiced,

him,  and  had  fpit  it  out,  fay.  May  I perifi b,  if  I  did  not  take  it  to  be'afijb!  Cajjinum ,
now  called  Monte  CaJJino.  It  was  antiently  a  town  of  the  Volfci  in  Latium ,  near  the  bor¬
ders  of  Campania  ;  now  it  is  in  the  province  of  the  Terra  di  Lavoro ,  in  the  kingdom
of  Naples.  It  is  very  uncertain  who  this  Marcius  Phrlippus  was;  probably  he  was  one  of
the  Marcian  family,  which  was  very  noble  and  antient,  being  defcended  from  Ancus  Marcius ,
who  was  once  king  of  Rome.  By  Varro’s  manner  of  relating  the  ftory,  it  feems  to  have
happened  in  his  ovm  time.  It  feems  they  only  valued  fuch  pikes  as  were  taken  in  a  cer¬
tain  place  of  the  river  Tiber.

(6)  Rbinton.  This  was  probably  the  name  of  fome  famous  afcor  or  buffoon;  and
Varro  perhaps  had  in  his  view,  and  applied  it  to,  JEfop  the  ftage-player,  who  was  known
to  him ;  and  whofe  extravagant  luxury  and  profufion  Pliny ,  in  his  natural  hijlory ,  and
feveral  other  authors,  take  particular  notice  of,  and  condemn.

(7)  Tutor  Luculli  grand!  are  fejlertium  millium  quadringentorum  pupilli  fui  pijcinas
•venditabit.  Cato ,  who  perilhed  atUtica,  was  guardian  to  this  Lucullus  ;  and  our  author
fays,  he  fold  his  fifh-ponds  for  400000  feftertii,  which,  in  Englijlo  money,  amount  only
to  3229/.  3  s.  4 d.  But  Pliny  fays,  that  they  were  fold  for  four  millions  of  feftertii,
which  amount,  in  Englijh  money,  to  32,291/.  13*.  4 d.  fo  that  there  feems  to  be  an
error  in  the  text  of  Columella ;  for  the  fum  mentioned  by  Pliny  feems  much  more  pro¬
bable,  confidering  the  vaft  profufenefs  of  L.  Lucullus,  and  the  great  fums  he  expended
in  making  fifh-ponds  near  Naples ,  and  the  prevailing  humour  of  the  great  men  at  Rome
about  that  rime,  who  fpared  no  coft  in  order  to  excel  in  the  magnificence  of  their
villas  and  fifh-ponds ;  fo  that  Lucullus’s  fifh-ponds  mull  have  fold  for  much  more  than
this  fum,  as  it  now  ftands  in  our  author.


and


Chap. XVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  373

and  were  glad,  to  be  called  by  the  names  of  the  fifties  they  had
catched.  So  Sergius  was  called  Or  at  a  (8)  j  and  Licinius,  Murcena  (9) ;
juft  as  Scipio  was  called  Numantinm  (10),  and  P.  Servilius,  Ifauri-
cus  ( 1 1 ),  from  the  nations  they  had  before  conquered.

But  becaufe  the  manners  of  this  age  are  become  fo  callous,  that
thefe  things  are  reckoned  not  as  cuftomary  and  common  amufe-
ments,  but  as  highly  commendable  and  honeft  ftudies  j  we  alfo,  left
we  fhould  feem  to  be  late  cenfurers  of  fo  many  ages  now  paft,  fhall
explain  and  point  out  this  kind  of  gain  alfo,  that  a  mafter  of  a  family
may  make  at  his  villa.  Let  the  man  who  has  purchafed  iflands,  or
lands  contiguous  to  the  fea,  and  cannot  receive  any  fruits  from  his
ground,  becaufe  of  the  poornefs  of  the  foil,  which,  for  the  moft
part,  is  the  cafe  near  the  fea-fhore,  raife  to  himfelf  a  revenue  from
the  fea.  But  it  is,  as  it  were,  the  beginning  of  this  affair,  carefully
to  view  and  confider  the  nature  of  the  place,  where  you  refolve  to
make  and  conftitute  your  fifh-ponds  :  for  all  kinds  of  fifties  (12)  can¬
not  be  had  in  all  fhores.  A  flimy,  muddy  region  educates  the  flat
fifh,  as  the  foal,  the  turbot,  the  plaife  :  the  fame  alfo  is  exceeding
proper  for  conchy  Is  (13),  burrets,  oyfters,  and  others  of  the  purple

kind  :

(8)  Sergius  Orata,  as  'Pliny  fays,  lib.  ix.  52.  was  the  firft  who  invented  oyfter-bedsii  at
Baia  near  Naples.  He  was,  as  fome  think,  called  Aurata ,  becaufe  he  delighted  much
in  a  fort  of  fifh  called  aurata ,  which,  as  Fefius  fays,  were  of  the  colour  of  gold  :  he
fays,  that  the  common  people  called  orumy  what  ought  properly  to  be  called  aurum ,
which  is  the  reafon  why  he  was  called  orata.

(9)  Licinius  Murana,  as  Pliny  fays,  lib.  ix.  55.  was  the  firft  who  invented  ponds  for
many  forts  of  fifhes  j  and  from  one  fort  of  them,  which  he  delighted  moft  in,  had  the
furname  of  Mur  ana :  many  of  the  quality  followed  his  example,  as  Philippus  Hortenfiusy
Lucullus ,  and  others.

(xo)  Scipio  was  called  Numantinus,  from  bis  taking  Numantium  in  Spain ,  after  a  long
and  tedious  fiege :  but  he  got  nothing  but  the  bare  walls  ;  for  the  people  chofe  rather
to  burn  themfelves,  and  all  that  they  had,  than  fubmit  to  him,  and  live  with  the  lofs
of  their  precious  liberty.

(11)  P.  Servilius  was  called  Ifauricus  from  his  conquering  Ifauria,  a  country  of  LeJJer
AJia,  on  the  fouth  of  Galatia ,  2nd  bordering  upon  Pijidia.

(12)  It  is  not  eafy  to  determine  by  what  Engliflj ,  or  other  modern  names,  feveral  of
the  fifhes,  mentioned  by  our  author,  ought  to  be  rendered :  authors,  who  have  written
upon  this  fubjedt,  are  not  at  all  agreed  upon  this  particular ;  many  of  them  are  not
known  in  our  feas,  fo  that  it  cannot  be  expedited,  that  they  have  any  names  in  our  lan¬
guage.  Both  the  Greeks  and  Romans  called  feveral  fifhes  by  the  names  of  terreftrial  ani¬
mals,  and  other  things  to  which  they  thought  they  bore  fome  refemblance,  either  in
their  fhape,  colour,  or  fome  other  remarkable  quality ;  and  thefe  I  have  rendered  accord¬
ingly  :  and  of  others  I  have  retained  the  original  names,  as  has  been  often  done  by  others
who  have  had  occafion  to  mention  them.

(13)  Conchylia  fometimes  fignify  fmall  fhell-fifhes  of  the  purple  kind,  which  yielded
z  kind  of  juice  or  blood,  wherewith  they  dyed  purple.  But  Pliny  frequently  makes  ufe

of


374  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VIII.

kind  :  as  alfo  of  the  fcallop  kind,  the  peduncles  (14),  and  the  fea-
acorns  (if),  or  the  fphondyli  (16):  but  Tandy  gulphs  afford  not  very
bad  food  indeed  to  flat  fifties;  but  they  feed  better  fuch  as  are  bred
in  the  deep  Tea,  as  gilt-heads,  and  fea-ruffs,  and  the  Carthaginian ,
and  our  own  Italian  ombers  or  ftiade-fifhes ;  but  they  are  not  fo  pro¬
per  for  conchyls,  or  fliell-fiflies  of  the  purple  kind.  Moreover,  a
rocky  lea  nourifhes  very  well  fifhes  of  its  own  name,  which,  doubt-
lefs,  are  called  Jaxatile ,  or  rock-fifhes,  becaufe  they  harbour  and
lodge  in  rocks,  as  the  merle,  the  fea-thrufh,  and  the  fea-bream  (17);
And  it  is  neceflary  to  know  the  differences  of  Teas  alfo,  as  well  as  of
fhores,  left  fifhes,  bred  in  different  feas,  deceive  us :  for  all  fifhes
cannot  fubfift  in  every  fea,  as  the  helops  (18),  which  is  fed  in  the
Pamphylian  deep,  and  in  no  other  whatfoever  :  as  the  dory  in  the
Atlantic  fea,  which  alfo,  in  our  municipal  city  of  Cadiz ,  is  num¬
bered  with  the  mod  generous  fifhes,  and,  by  antient  cuftom,  we  call
it  zeus.  As  the  fcarus  (15?),  or  cud-fifh,  alfo,  which,  in  great  num¬
bers,

of  che  word  conchylium  to  fignify  the  colour  itfelf,  and  always  diftinguifhes  it  from  the
beautiful  Tyr'an  or  deep-purple  colour,  which  was  fo  highly  efteemed  by  the  antient
"Romans  ;  and,  for  the  moft  part,  the  murex,  which  fome  call  a  turret,  was  only  ufed
for  this  valuible  colour,  and  was  moft  fought  after.  The  conchylium  was  much  paler,
and  more  diluted,  than  the  purpura,  which  bad  abundantly  more  of  the  juice  or  blood
of  the  fifh  than  the  other :  the  matter  ufed  for  both  thele  colours  might  be  the  fame,
•but  differed  in  the  way  of  tempering  it;  for  that  for  the  rich  purple  was  only  mixed
with  water,  whereas  the  other  was  mixed  with  urine,  which  gave  the  concbyliata  veftes
a  di [agreeable  fmell,  and  made  them  lefs  efteemed  ;  and,  according  to  the  mixture,  they
had  more  or  lefs  of  the  purple,  but  all  had  fomething  of  a  tendency  to  blue.

(14)  Pettunculus ,  the  diminutive  of  peffen,  which  is  a  large  kind  of  fcollop.  They
have  a  double  fhell  chanelled ;  and  are  fo  called,  becaufe  their  fhells  are  chanelled,  and
formed  in  the  fafhion  of  a  comb.

(15)  Balanv.s.  It  is  fo  called,  becaufe  it  is  fhaped  like  an  acorn.

(16)  Sphondylus ,  or  rather  fpondylus ,  as  it  is  in  P/iny ,  a  kind  of  fhell-fifh  ;  probably  fo

called,  becaufe  it  bears  fome  refemblance  to  a  vertebra  of  the  neck,  and  is  what  Atbe-
naus  calls  Pliny  fomecimes  calls  by  this  name  that  callous  and  white  part  of

an  oyfter,  or  other  fhell-fifhes,  which  fticks  to  the  fhell.

(17)  Melanurus.  Some  call  this  a  bream :  it  has  its  name  from  the  blacknefs  of  its
tail.

(18)  Helops.  Pliu.  ? tat.  hifi.  lib.  xxxii.  c.  n.  makes  mention  of  this  fifh  from  Ovid,
who  had  feen  it  in  Pontus ,  and  fays,  that  it  was  not  known  in  the  Mediterranean  fea  ;
2nd  that  many  preferred  it  to  all  other  fifhes  for  its  exquifite  tafte.

(19)  Scarus.  Pliny  fays,  that  this  is  the  only  fifh  that  is  faid  to  chew  its  cud;  and
that  it  feeds  on  herbs,  and  not  on  other  fifhes ;  and  is  very  frequent  in  the  Caipaihian
fea :  that,  of  its  own  accord,  it  never  paffes  the  promontory  Leclon  of  Troas ;  but  that,
in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Claudius ,  a  certain  admiral  difleminated  them  on  the  coaft  be¬
tween  Cjlium  and  Campania ;  and  that  for  five  years,  when  any  of  them  were  taken,
they  were  thrown  again  into  the  fea  ;  and  that  afterwards  there  were  abundance  of  them

taken

5.


Chap.  XVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  375

bers,  comes  out  of  the  coafts  of  all  AJia  and  Greece  as  far  as  Sicily »
but  has  never  fwum  out  of  them  into  the  Ligurian  fea,  nor  by  Gaul
into  the  Hiberian  fea  :  therefore,  fuppofe  they  were  taken  and  brought
into  our  fifh-pcnds,  they  could  not  be  long  in  our  pofleflion.  Of  all
the  rare  and  valuable  fifhes,  the  fea-lamprey  alone,  tho’  it  is  originally
a  native  of  the  Tarjian  fea,  and  of  the  Carpathian ,  which  is  the  utmoft
fea,  endures  a  foreign  fea,  whatever  frith  it  is  a  gueft  in.  But  now  we
muft  fpeak  of  the  fituation  of  fifh-ponds.


CHAP.  XVII.

Of  the  Situation  of  a  Fifj-pond.

WE  are  of  opinion,  that  that  pond  is  incomparably  the  befb^
which  is  fo  fituated,  that  the  lucceeding  wave  of  the  fea  may
remove  the  former,  and  not  fuffer  the  old  one  to  remain  within  the
inclofure  :  for  that  pond  is  the  moft  like  the  fea,  which,  being  agi¬
tated  by  the  winds,  is  continually  renewed,  and  cannot  grow  warm,
becaufe  it  conflantly  revolves  the  cold  wave  from  the  bottom  to  the
uppermoft  part.  But  this  pond  is  either  cut  out  of  a  rock,  of  which
it  is  very  rare  to  find  the  conveniency ;  or  it  is  built  with  Signinian
work,  or  plafler  of  Paris ,  upon  the  fea-fhore :  but,  whatever  way
it  be  built,  if  it  be  exceeding  cold  by  the  gulph  flowing  conflantly
into  it,  it  ought  to  have  caves  hard  by  the  bottom,  fome  of  them
Angle  without  windings,  and  ftraight,  where  the  fcaly  flocks  may
retire  ;  others  of  them  crooked  and  winding,  but  not  too  fpacious,  in
which  the  fea-lampreys  may  lurk  :  although  fome  do  not  think  it
proper,  that  they  fhould  be  mixed  with  fifhes  of  a  different  fort,  be¬
caufe,  if  they  are  feized  with  madnefs,  which  this  kind  is  liable  to,
in  the  fame  manner  as  dogs  are,  they  perfecute  the  fcaly  fifhes  moft
cruelly,  and  devour  and  eat  a  great  many  of  them.

And,  if  the  nature  of  the  place  will  allow  it,  it  is  proper  that  paf-
fages  be  made  for  the  water  on  every  fide  of  the  fifh-pond  :  for  the
old  water  is  more  eafily  removed,  when,  by  whatever  part  the  wave
prefies,  there  is  an  open  outlet  for  it  through  the  oppofite  fide.  But

taken  upon  the  coaft  of  Italy  \  fee  lib.  ix.  c.  17.  The  Carpathian  fea,  where  they  abound
moft,  has  its  name  from  the  illand  Carpathus  between  Crete  and  Rhodes,  and  is  one  ot
the  Sporades.


we


376  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book VIII.

we  arc  of  opinion,  that  thefe  paffages  fhould  be  made  along  the  lower
part  of  the  inclofure,  if  the  lituation  of  the  place  will  allow  it,  that
a  plumbet,  being  placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  fifh-pond,  may  fhew,
that  the  furface  of  the  fea  is  feven  feet  higher  j  for  this  meafure  of
the  depth  of  the  gulph  is  abundantly  fufficient  for  pond-fifhes :  nor
is  there  any  doubt,  but,  by  how  much  deeper  the  fea  is,  which  the
water  comes  from,  by  fo  much  the  colder  it  is,  which  is  mod;  proper
for  fwimming  fifhes.  But  if  the  place,  where  we  advife  you  to  build
the  fifh-pond,  be  upon  an  equal  level  with  the  furface  of  the  fea,
let  it  be  digged  to  the  depth  of  nine  feet ;  and  below,  two  feet  from
the  uppermolt  part,  let  a  fmall  canal  be  laid  all  along  for  a  gentle
current  of  water  ;  and  care  mud;  be  taken,  that  it  come  in  very  plen¬
tifully,  becaufe  that  quantity  of  water,  which  lies  below  the  level  of
the  fea,  is  not  otherwife  fqueezed  out,  but  by  a  greater  force  of  re¬
cent  fea-water  rufhing  in  upon  it.

Many  think,  that,  in  thefe  kinds  of  ponds,  there  ought  to  be  built
long  places  of  retirement  for  the  fifhes,  and  winding  caves  in  the  fides
of  the  fame,  that  fo  they  may  have  the  darker  lurking  places  when
they  are  very  hot.  But,  if  recent  fea-water  does  not  always  pafs
freely  through  the  pond,  it  would  be  hurtful  to  them  to  do  this :  for
receptacles  of  this  fort  do  neither  eafily  admit  new  waters,  nor  emit
the  old  but  with  great  difficulty  ;  and  rotten  water  does  more  hurt,
than  the  darknefs  of  thofe  places  does  good.  Neverthelefs,  there  ought
to  be  like  as  it  were  hollow  cells  made  in  the  walls,  for  protecting
them  when  they  fly  from  the  heat  of  the  fun  j  and  which,  notwith-
ftanding,  may  eafily  let  out  the  water  which  they  have  received  :  but
it  is  neceffary  to  remember,  that  brazen  crofs-bars,  or  lattices,  with
fmall  holes,  be  fadened  before  the  canals  through  which  the  water
flows,  that  the  fifhes  may  be  hindered  from  making  their  efcape.  But,
if  the  extent  of  the  place  will  allow  it,  it  will  not  at  all  be  amifs  to
place  rocks  from  the  fea-fhore,  efpecially  fuch  as  are  covered  with
fea- weeds,  in  feveral  places  of  the  pond ;  and,  as  much  as  the  wit  of
man  can  contrive,  to  reprefent  the  appearance  of  a  real  fea,  that  the
confined  may  be  as  little  fenfible  of  their  imprifonment  as  poffible.

Having  in  this  manner  prepared  ftables  for  the  aquatile  cattle,  we
muft  bring  them  in  to  them.  And,  let  it  be  a  principal  point  with
us  to  remember  alfo,  in  all  river-bufinefs,  and  water-affairs  whatfoever,
the  direction  given  relating  to  what  is  done  upon  dry  land  :

4  Confider  well  what  ev’ry  place  will  bear.’


For


Chap. XVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  377

For  we  cannot,  if  we  had  a  mind  to  it,  feed  a  multitude  of  barbels
in  a  filh-pond,  as  we  have  fometimes  feen  in  the  fea ;  forafmuch  as
it  is  a  mod:  delicate,  tender  kind  of  filh,  and  differs  bondage  with
great  indignation ;  therefore,  of  many  thoufands,  rarely  one  or  two
of  them  endure  confinement:  but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  frequently
obferve,  within  inclofures,  fhoals  of  fluggifh  fea-mullets,  and  rapacious
fea-wolves,  which  commonly  breed  in  the  deep  fea.  Wherefore,  as  I
propofed,  let  us  confider  the  quality  of  our  fea-fhore,  whether  we
avoid  rocks,  or  if  we  approve  of  them.

We  muft  fhut  up  in  our  ponds  the  feveral  forts  of  fea-thruflies,
merlins,  and  the  greedy  fea-weafels  j  as  alfo  fea-wolves,  or  fea-jacks,
that  have  no  fpots,  (for  there  are  fome  of  them  of  divers  colours)  as
alfo  floating  lampreys,  which  are  very  much  commended  ;  and  if
there  be  any  others  of  the  faxatile  or  rock  character,  which  bear  a
very  great  price  ;  for  it  profiteth  nothing  indeed  to  catch,  much  lefs
to  nourifh,  fuch  as  bear  a  low  price  :  thefe  fame  kinds  alfo  may  be
kept  in  ponds  upon  a  fandy  fhore  :  for  fuch  ponds  as  grow  dirty  with
flime  and  mud,  as  I  faid  before,  are  more  proper  for  conchyls,  and
for  animals  that  lie.

Nor  is  a  pond,  for  the  reception  of  fuch  fifties  as  lie,  to  have  the
fame  polition  :  but  the  fame  food  is  given  both  to  eredt  and  to  pro-
ftrate  filhes  :  for,  for  foals  and  turbuts,  and  fuch-like  animals,  they
link  a  pond  two  feet  deep,  in  that  part  of  the  fhore  which  is  never
left  deftitute  of  water  by  the  ebbing  of  the  fea  j  then  they  fallen  very
clofe  crofs-bars  upon  the  brim  or  fide  of  the  pond,  which  may  always
appear  above  water,  even  when  the  tide  fvvells,  and  rifes  to  its  full
height.  Afterwards  they  call  up  moles  before  it,  and  round  the
whole  circumference  of  it,  and  fo  as  they  may  encompafs  it,  and  con¬
tain  it  in  their  bofom,  and  exceed  the  dimenfions  of  the  pond  :  for
fo  the  raging  and  violence  of  the  fea  is  broken  by  the  interpofition  of
the  bank  j  and  the  filh,  keeping  in  a  quiet  and  calm  place,  is  not
dilturbed  and  driven  out  of  its  habitations,  nor  is  the  pond  itfelf  filled  up
with  a  heap  of  fea- weeds,  which  the  raging  of  the  fea  throws  up  in  ftormy
weather.  But  in  fome  places,  the  moles  muft  be  cut  through  in  the
manner  of  a  Mczander  (i),  with  fmall  but  ftrait  narrow  paflages,
which  may  let  the  fea  pals  through  without  a  wave,  in  the  moft
ftormy  winter-weather  whatfoever.

(i)  Maunder  j  a  river  in  Phrygia,  which  runs  through  Carta  and  Ionia,  full  of  various
windings  and  turnings :  hence  any  place,  with  many  turnings  and  windings,  is  called  by
that  name.


C  c  c


Here


378  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  VIII.

Here  the  food  of  fifties,  that  lie  proftrate,  ought  to  be  fc  r  •  ^han
that  of  rock-fifh;  for,  becaufe  they  want  teeth,  they  e  lick
their  victuals,  or  fwallow  them  whole;  for,  indeed,  they  cai  k  chew
them  :  therefore  it  is  proper,  that  rotten  or  damaged  pilcha.us  fhould
be  given  them;  and  fardels  confumed  with  fait,  and  rotten  fardines,
as  alfo  the  gills  of  fcares ,  or  whatever  entrails  the  young  tunny  and
the  fea-lizzard  have ;  as  alfo  the  ventricles  of  the  mackrel,  the
carcharus  (2),  and  the  diftaff-fifh  (3) ;  and,  that  I  may  not  men¬
tion  every  thing  in  particular,  all  the  garbage  of  falted  fifti,  which
are  fwept  out  of  fifhmongers  fhops.  But  we  have  mentioned  feveral
kinds  of  them,  not  becaufe  all  of  them  come  forth  of  all  fea-fhores,
but  that  we  may  give  them  fome  of  thofe  which  we  fhall  have  in  our
power  to  give.

Of  green  fruit  of  the  apple-kind,  the  fig  laid  open  is  very  proper
for  them ;  and  nuts  alfo,  broken  with  your  fingers,  muff  be  given
them  •  as  alfo  the  foft  forb-apple  boiled,  and  fuch  victuals  as  are  next
to  fuch  as  are  fupable,  as  new  cheefe  or  curds  out  of  the  milk-pail,
if  the  condition  of  the  place,  or  the  plenty  and  cheapnefs  of  the  milk,
will  permit  it.  But  there  is  no  food  that  is  equally  proper  and  con¬
venient  for  them,  as  the  forefaid  falted  provifion  taken  out  of  the
brine,  becaufe  they  havea  ftrong  fmell :  for  every  fifh  that  lies,  fearches
for,  and  finds  out,  its  food  more  with  its  nofe  than  with  its  eyes ;
for,  while  it  conflantly  lies  upon  its  back,  it  looks  more  aloft,  and
does  not  eafily  fee  fuch  things  as  are  upon  a  level  with  itfelf,  upon
the  right  and  left :  therefore,  when  falted  fifh  is  thrown  to  them,  they
follow  their  fmell,  and  come  to  their  victuals.

But  other  fifties,  that  either  live  among  rocks,  or  in  the  open  fea,
are  well  enough  nourifhed  with  thefe  fait  things,  but  better  with  fuch
as  are  frefh  :  for  the  fmall  pilchard  or  anchove  newly  taken,  and  the
crevice,  and  the  fmall  gudgeon,  and,  in  a  word,  every  other  fifti  that
is  of  a  minute  growth,  nouriflies  the  greater.  Neverthelefs,  if,  at
any  time,  the  boifteroufnefs  of  the  winter  does  not  fuffer  this  kind  of
food  to  be  given  them,  either  morfels  of  coarfe  bread,  or,  if  there  be
any  apples  of  this  feafon,  they  are  cut  fmall,  and  given  to  them.
Indeed  the  dry  fig  is  always  thrown  to  them,  and  is  excellent,  if  it
be  large,  as  is  that  of  the  regions  of  Bcetica  and  Numidia.  But  that
ought  never  to  be  pradtifed  which  many  do,  who  give  them  nothing

(2)  Carcharus.  I  do  not  find  this  among  the  many  fifties  mentioned  by  Pliny,  and
probably  this  is  not  the  true  reading.

(3)  E/acata.  This  fifti  has  its  name  from  its  refembling  a  diftafF.  Pliny  calls  fifties
of  this  fort  Hslacatenes.


at


Chap.  XVII.  0/  HUSBANDRY,  379

at  all,  becaufe,  even  when  they  are  fhut  up,  they  can  fupport  them-
felves  for  a  long  while  :  for,  unlefs  the  fifh  is  fattened  with  its  own¬
er’s  victuals,  when  it  is  brought  to  the  filh-markets,  its  leannefs  de¬
clares,  that  it  was  not  taken  in  the  open  fea,  but  brought  out  of  a
place  of  confinement ;  for  which  reafon  there  is  a  very  great  abate¬
ment  made  of  the  price.  And,  let  this  fort  of  manor-houfe  paftur-
ing  put  an  end  to  this  prefent  difcourfe,  left  the  reader  be  wearied
with  the  immoderate  length  of  the  volume.  But,  in  the  following
book,  we  fhall  return  to  the  care  and  management  of  wild-cattle,
and  to  the  culture  of  bees.


C  C  C  2


CHAP.


[  38o  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  NINTH.


The  PREFACE.

I  Come  now  to  the  tutelage  of  wild  cattle,  and  the  education  of
bees ;  which  very  things,  Publius  Silvinus ,  I  may  alfo  very  juflly
call  manor-houfe  pafturings :  forafmuch  as  antient  cuflom  placed  parks
for  young  hares,  and  wild  goats,  and  fuch-likc  wild  beafts,  hard  by
the  manor-houfe  ;  for  the  moft  part  fituated  below  the  owner’s  apart¬
ments,  that  fo  the  feeing  of  them  hunted  within  the  inclofure
might  both  delight  the  eyes  of  him  who  had  them  in  his  pofleffion  j
and  that  they  might  be  brought  forth,  as  it  were,  out  of  a  flore-
houfe,  when  he  had  occafion  to  make  entertainments.  And,  even  in
our  own  memory,  bees  had  feats  affigned  them,  either  in  the  walls  of
the  manor-houfe  cut  into  niches,  or  in  porticos  flickered  from
the  weather,  and  in  orchards.  Wherefore,  feeing  there  is  a  reafon
given  of  the  title,  which  we  have  prefixed  to  this  difcourfe,  let  us
profecute  particularly  each  of  the  things  we  have  now  propofed.


CHAP.  I.

Of  making  Parks ,  and  Jhutting  up  wild  Cattle  in  them .

WILD  cattle,  as  young  roe-bucks,  fallow  deer,  as  alfo  the  feveral
kinds  of  ounces,  and  flags,  and  boars,  fometimes  ferve  for
the  magnificence,  and  fplendor,  and  pleafures  of  their  owners;  and,

at


Chap.  I.  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  381

at  other  times,  to  make  gain,  and  increafe  their  revenue :  but  they
who  {hut  up  wild  beads,  in  order  to  hunt  them  for  their  pleafure,  are
fatisfied,  whatever  the  fituation  of  the  place  next  to  the  dwelling-
houfe  may  be,  with  inclofing  a  park  for  their  cattle,  and  giving  them
always  food  and  water  by  hand.  But  they  who  are  defirous  of  gain,
and  of  a  revenue  from  them,  when  there  is  a  wood  near  to  the  manor-
houfe,  (for  it  is  of  great  importance,  that  it  be  not  far  from  the  own¬
er’s  eyes)  dedinate  it  for  the  forefaid  animals,  without  any  hefitation :
and,  if  natural  water  is  wanting,  they  either  bring  running  water  into
it,  or  dig  ponds  in  it,  and  lay  them  with  Signinian  work,  (plader
of  Paris)  that  they  may  contain  the  rain-water  that  they  (hall  have
received.

There  is  fuch  an  extent  of  wood  taken  in,  as  is  fuitable  to  every
man’s  edate;  and,  if  the  cheapnefs  of  done  and  labour  give  en¬
couragement,  without  all  manner  of  doubt  a  wall,  made  of  rough
done  and  lime,  is  built  round  it ;  if  otherwife,  it  is  built  with  un¬
burnt  brick  and  clay.  But,  when  neither  of  thefe  is  for  the  advan¬
tage  of  the  mader  of  the  family,  reafon  requires  that  it  fhould  be  in-
clofed  with  wooden  rails ;  for  fo  a  certain  kind  of  bars  is  called  :  and
they  are  made  of  red-oak,  or  evergreen-oak,  or  of  the  cork-tree  ;  for
it  is  rare  to  have  the  conveniency  of  the  olive-tree  :  in  a  word,  what¬
ever  is  more  lading  under  the  injuries  of  the  rains,  is  chofen  for  this
ufe,  according  to  the  circumdances  of  the  country.  And  whether  it
be  the  round  dock  of  a  tree,  or  it  be  cloven  into  dakes,  as  the  thick-
nefs  of  it  requires,  it  is  bored  through  the  dde  in  feveral  places,  and
ereded  and  fadened  round  the  whole  circumference  of  the  park,  cer¬
tain  {paces  intervening  between  each  dake :  then  crofs-bars  are  put
through  the  holes  that  are  made  in  their  {ides,  which  may  {hut  up  all
padages  for  the  wild  beads  to  go  out  at.

But  it  is  fuflicient  to  faden  the  pales  in  the  ground,  at  the  didance
of  eight  feet  from  one  another,  and  to  bind  them  together  fo  clofely
with  crofs-bars,  that  the  widenefs  of  the  fpaces  between  the  holes
may  not  give  the  cattle  an  opportunity  to  make  their  efcape  :  and,  in
this  manner,  you  may  inclofe  even  the  broaded  countries,  and
trads  of  mountains,  as  the  vad  extent  of  the  countries  in  Gaul,  and
alfo  of  places  in  fome  other  provinces,  will  bear ;  for  there  is  both
very  great  plenty  of  wood  for  making  pales,  and  every  other  thing
necefiary  for  this  purpofe  is  ready  at  hand,  and  can  be  eadly  obtained ;
for  the  foil  abounds  in  frequent  fprings,  which  is  exceeding  whol-
fome  for  the  forefaid  kinds  of  wild  beads :  and  it  alfo  furniffies  fo¬
rage  for  them  very  liberally  of  its  own  accord.  And  fuch  foreds  are

chiedy


3B2  L.J.M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

chiefly  chofen,  which  abound  both  in  fruits  of  the  ground,  and  in
fruits  of  trees;  for  as  they  have  need  of  all  forts  of  grafs,  fo  likewife
of  oak-mad: :  and  thofe  foreds  are  mod  commended,  which  are  the
mod  fertile  of  acorns,  both  of  the  common-  and  evergreen-oak,  like¬
wife  of  the  cerrus-oak,  as  alfo  of  the  arbute-  or  drawberry-tree,  and
other  wild  apples,  which  we  carefully  treated  of,  when  we  difcourfed
of  fuch  cattle  as  are  kept  in  yards  about  the  manor-houfe  ;  for  the
forage  of  wild  cattle  is  almod  the  fame  with  that  of  tame.

Neverthelefs,  a  diligent  mader  of  a  family  ought  not  to  be  con¬
tented  with  thofe  forts  of  food,  which  the  earth  produces  naturally  of
its  own  accord  ;  but,  at  fuch  times  of  the  year,  wherein  the  woods
want  fudenance  for  them,  he  ought  to  relieve  the  confined  with  the
fruits  of  the  earth,  which  he  gathered  in  harved,  and  laid  up  in  his
dore-houfes,  and  nourifh  them  with  barley-  or  wheat-meal,  or  beans,
and  mod  of  all  with  hulks,  and  kernels  of  -grapes ;  and,  in  a  word,
to  give  them  whatever  cods  but  very  little.  And,  that  the  wild  beads
may  underdand,  that  that  is  laid  before  them,  it  will  be  proper  to  fend
out  among  them  one  or  two  which  have  been  tamed  at  home,  which,
wandering  over  the  park,  may  lead  the  cattle,  which  dand  boggling,
to  the  victuals  that  are  thrown  before  them.  And  it  is  expedient,  that
this  be  done,  not  only  during  the  fcarcity  of  the  winter,  but  alfo  after
fuch  as  are  with  young  have  brought  them  forth,  that  they  may  bring
up  their  young  ones  the  better  :  therefore  the  Park-keeper  ought  fre¬
quently  to  be  upon  the  watch,  and  fee  if  they  have  already  brought
forth  their  young,  that  they  may  be  fudained  with  corn  given  them
by  hand.  But  neither  ought  the  ounce,  nor  the  wild  boar,  nor  any
other  of  thefe  wild  beads,  to  be  differed  to  grow  above  four  years
old;  for  till  that  time  they  always  advance  in  their  growth ;  after¬
wards  they  decay,  and  grow  lean  with  old  age :  wherefore,  while  their
green  age  preferves  the  beauty  of  their  body,  they  mud  be  exchanged
for  money  :  but  a  dag  can  be  fudained  for  a  great  many  years ;  for
he  continues  long  young  in  your  polfeffion,  becaule  he  has  a  life  of  a
longer  duration  bedowed  upon  him.

But,  concerning  animals  of  a  lelfer  growth,  fuch  as  the  hare,  we
give  thofe  following  directions :  That,  in  thofe  parks  which  are  fur-
rounded  and  fecured  with  a  wall,  the  feeds  of  barley,  and  of  leveral
other  forts  of  grain,  mixt  together,  and  of  pot-herbs,  wild  endive,
and  lettice,  be  thrown  into  fmall  beds  of  earth  made  at  various
didances.  Let  alfo  the  Carthaginian  chich-peafe,  or  that  of  our  own
country,  as  alfo  barley  and  chichlings,  that  have  been  laid  up  in  dore,
be  brought  forth  out  of  the  barn,  and  moidened  with  rain-water,

and


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  ~  3S3

and  thrown  before  them  ;  for  dry  things  are  not  too  much  fought  after
by  hares.  Moreover,  it  is  eafily  underitood  (fuppofe  I  ftiould  be  filent)
how  improper  it  is  to  bring  thefe  animals,  or  others  like  to  them,
into  that  park  which  is  furrounded  with  rails ;  confidering,  that,  by
reafon  of  the  fmalnefs  of  their  body,  they  eafily  creep  under  the
bars,  and,  having  gotten  open  paflages  to  go  out  by,  they  endeavour  to
make  their  efcape.


CHAP.  II.

Of  Bees .

I  Come  now  to  the  management  of  bee-hives,  concerning  which  no
precepts  can  be  given  with  greater  diligence,  than  have  been  already
delivered  by  Hyginus  ;  nor  more  gracefully  and  handfomely,  than  by
Virgil ;  nor  more  elegantly,  than  by  Celfus.  Hyginus  has  induftrioufly
collected  the  fentiments  of  antient  authors,  that  were  difperfed  in  their
writings,  which  were  unknown  to  the  world.  Virgil  has  illuminated
them  with  flowers  of  poetry  ;  Celfus  has  adapted  and  made  ufe  of  the  man¬
ner  of  both  thefe  mentioned  authors  :  wherefore  we  would  not  have  fo
much  as  attempted  to  difcourfe  of  this  fubjedt,  but  that  the  confumma-
tion  of  the  profeffion  we  have  undertaken  required  the  handling  of  this
part  of  it  alfo,  left  the  body  of  the  work,  which  we  have  begun,
ihould  appear  maimed  and  imperfect,  as  if  fome  member  were  cut  off
from  it.  And  I  would  rather  allow  to  poetical  licence,  than  to  our  belief,
thofe  things  which  have  been  fabuloufly  related  concerning  the  origi¬
nation  of  bees,  which  Hyginus  has  not  paft  over.  Nor,  indeed,  is  it
worthy  of  an  Hufbandman,  to  inquire  whether  there  ever  was  fuch
a  woman  as  MeliJJ'a ,  of  a  moft  exquifite  beauty,  which  Jupiter  tranf-
formed  into  a  bee ;  or  whether  (as  Euhemerus  the  Poet  fays)  bees  were
bred  of  hornets  and  the  fun,  which  the  Phryxonian  nymphs  (i)  edu¬
cated;  and  that  foon  afterwards  they  became  nurfes  to  Jupiter  in  the
HiBcean  cave  (2) ;  and,  by  the  free  gift  of  the  god,  they  obtained

(1)  Phryxonides  nymph# .  I  have  not  feen  any  other  antient  author,  befide  Columell^y
that  mention  thefe  nymphs:  whether  he  means  by  them  Amalthea  and  Melijja ,  daugh¬
ters  of  Melijfeus,  a  king  of  Cre/e,  who,  as  the  fable  fays,  educated  Jupiter ,  and  fed  him
with  honey,  I  know  not.  Perhaps  they  were  fo  called,  becaufe  they  were  afterwards
made  priefteffes  to  Cybele  by  their  father  ;  and  from  this  Melijfiea  the  fucceeding  priefteffes
were,  by  the  antienrs,  called  by  the  fame  name.

(2)  Dittei  a  mountain  in  Crete ,  where  the  Poets  fay  Jupiter  was  educated.

I


the


384  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IX.

the  fame  food  for  their  own  fuftenance,  wherewith  they  had  brought
up  their  little  fofter-child  :  for,  tho’  thefe  things  are  not  unbecoming
a  poet,  neverthelefs  Virgil  touched  upon  them  flightly,  and  very
briefly,  only  in  one  fmall  verfe :  In  DidfeV  cave  they  fed  the  king  of
heavn .

But  neither  does  that  indeed  belong  to  Hufbandmen  ;  when,  and
in  what  country,  they  were  firfl:  produced,  whether  in  EheJJaly  under
Arifceus  (3)  j  or  in  the  ifland  of  Cea  (4),  as  Euhemerus  writes  (f)  j
or  in  the  times  of  Erichthonius  (6),  in  mount  Hymettus  (7),  as  Eu -
thronius  (8) ;  or  in  the  times  of  Saturn  of  Crete ,  as  Nicander  fays  (9),
no  more,  than  whether  the  fwarms  procreate  their  offspring  by  cou¬
pling  together,  as  we  fee  other  animals  do  ;  or  choofe  the  heir  of  their
family  from  among  the  flowers,  which  our  Maro  affirms  j  and  whe¬
ther  they  vomit  the  liquid  honey  out  of  their  mouth,  or  yield  it  from
any  other  part  of  their  body  j  for  it  rather  belongs  to  the  fearchers
into  the  fecret  and  hidden  things  of  nature,  than  to  Hufbandmen,  to
inquire  after  thefe  and  fuch-like  things.  Alfo  thefe  things  are  more
agreeable  to  men  of  ftudy  and  learning,  who  have  leifure  to  read,  than
to  Hufbandmen,  who  are  full  of  bufinefs  j  becaufe  they  neither  affift
them  in  their  work,  nor  contribute  any  thing  to  increafe  their  effate.


(3)  Arijiceus ,  a  king  of  Thejfaly,  the  inventor  of  honey,  as  Virgil ,  lib.  iv.  1.  2.83.

(4)  Cea  or  Ceos ,  an  ifland  in  the  JEgean  fea  j  one  of  the  Cyclades.

(5)  Euhemerus ,  an  ancient  Greek  writer  of  MeJJtna  in  Sicily:  he  wrote  the  hiftory  of
the  heathen  gods,  their  death,  burial,  &c.  Ennius  tranflated  him  into  Latin ,  and  fol¬
lowed  his  opinion  of  them.  Tullius ,  de  nat.  deorum ,  lib.  i.  makes  mention  of  him  ;  and
feems  to  think,  that  the  account  he  gave  of  them  took  away  all  pretence  for  wor/hipping
them.

(6)  Erichthonius :  fome  make  him  a  king  of  Athens.  Plin.  hjjl.  nat.  lib.  vii.  c.  56.
mentions  him  as  the  inventor  of  filver,  and  the  firft  that  made  ufe  of  a  chariot  and  four.
Perhaps  he  may  be  different  from  another  of  that  name,  who  was  fon  of  Dardanus  the
firft  king  of  Troas.

(7)  Hymettus ,  a  famous  mountain  in  Attica ,  where  they  fay  is  the  beft  honey,  and
where  it  was  firft  found  out.

(8)  Euthronius.  Perhaps  this  is  the  fame  as  Eupbronius,  whom  both  Varro  and  Colu¬
mella  mention  as  a  ruftic  writer.

(9)  Nicander  was  of  Colophon,  a  city  of  Ionia  in  the  Lejfer  Apa  :  he  was  both  a  poet,
a  phyfician,  and  an  excellent  grammarian  :  his  Therjaca  and  Alexipharmaca  are  ftill  ex¬
tant.  Several  of  his  writings  are  mentioned  by  Suidas ;  amongft  other  things  he  wrote
of  Husbandry,  which  Tally  commends  very  much  for  its  poetry,  lib.  i.  de  Oratore
Athejuus  alfo  mentions  feveral  of  his  works.  He  lived  in  the  times  of  Attains,  the  laft.
king  of  Pergamus.


CHAP.


Chap.  III.


Of  HUSBANDRY.


38S

CHAP.  III.

Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  Bees ,  and  which  of  them  is  the  hef.

WHerefore  let  us  return  to  thofe  things  which  are  more  proper
for  them  who  have  bee-hives  under  their  care  and  manage¬
ment.  Arijlotle ,  the  founder  of  the  Peripatetic  feft,  in  thofe  books
which  he  wrote  of  animals,  fhews,  that  there  are  feveral  kinds  of
bees,  or  of  fwarms  of  bees ;  and  that  fome  of  thofe  fwarms  have
bees  that  are  exceeding  large,  but  round  and  compadt,  and  the  fame
black  and  (haggy ;  others  lefler  indeed,  but  equally  round,  and  of  a
duiky  colour,  with  horrid  grifly  hair  j  and  others  of  a  fmaller  fize,
but  not  fo  round,  but  neverthelefs  fat,  and  broad,  and  of  a  fomewhat
better  colour :  and  they  have  fome  that  are  very  fmall  and  (lender,
with  the  trunk  of  their  belly  (harp,  and  drawing  to  a  point,  of  divers
colours,  fomewhat  (hining  like  gold,  light  and  nimble.  And  Virgil ,
following  his  authority,  approves  mod  of  fuch  as  are  very  fmall,
oblong,  fmooth  and  nimble,  bright  and  (hining  (i) :

‘  Whofe  bodies,  mark’d  with  pairs  of  fpots  like  drops
*  Of  liquid  gold,  a  dazling  ludre  caft

Of  gentle  and  mild  difpofitions  j  for  by  how  much  the  greater,  and
rounder  alfo,  the  bee  is,  by  fo  much  the  worfe  it  is :  but  if  it  be  of
a  more  fierce  and  cruel  temper,  it  is  by  much  the  word  of  all.  But,
neverthelefs,  the  angry  difpofition  of  bees  of  a  better  charadter  is
eafily  mitigated  and  foftened  by  the  continual  intervention  of  thofe  who
take  care  of  the  bee-hives ;  for  they  grow  quickly  tame  when  they
are  often  handled,  and  endure  for  ten  years,  if  they  are  carefully  ma¬
naged  :  nor  can  any  fwarm  of  bees  exceed  this  age,  although  they
yearly  fubditute  young  ones  in  the  room  of  thofe  that  are  dead  ;  for,
in  the  tenth  year,  almod  the  whole  family,  that  lives  together  in  one
hive,  is  confumed,  and  reduced  to  utter  dedrudtion.  Therefore,  led
that  (hould  be  the  cafe  of  the  whole  apiary,  a  new  race  mud  be  con-
dantly  propagated ;  and,  in  the  fpring,  you  mud  carefully  obferve
when  the  new  fwarms  iflue  forth  in  great  numbers,  that  they  may  be
received,  and  the  number  of  their  dwelling-houfes  increafed  :  for  they
are  often  feized  with  difeafes.  After  what  manner  the  fame  mud  be
cured,  (hall  be  declared  in  its  proper  place.

(i)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iv.  98.


Ddd


CHAP.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.


CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  Pajlures  proper  for  Bees ,  and  what  Sort  of  Situation

the  fame  ought  to  have .

IN  the  mean  while,  having  made  choice  of  bees  according  to  the
marks  we  have  now  mentioned,  you  ought  to  deflinate  proper
places  for  them  to  gather  their  food ;  and  let  them  be  the  moft  retired
that  can  be  had ;  and,  as  our  Maro  directs,  void  of  cattle,  and  in  fuch
a  fituation  as  is  expoled  to  the  Sun,  and  fheltered  from  ftormy  wea¬
ther  ( i )  ;

‘  Where  winds  have  no  accefs  j  for  winds  impede
‘  Their  courfe,  when  with  their  food  they’re  homeward-bound,

1  Where  neither  fheep,  nor  frifking  kids,  infult
*  The  flow  rs ;  nor  heifers,  rambling  o’er  the  fields,

*  Shake  off  the  dew,  and  crufh  the  rifing  herb/

Let  the  fame  quarter  alfo  be  abundantly  productive  of  fmall  fhrubs,
and  efpecially  of  thyme,  or  baftard  marjoram  (2),  as  alfo  of  thymbra,
or  Greek  favory,  or  our  own  Italian  favory,  which  the  country-
people  call  fatureia  :  after  thefe,  let  there  be  abundance  of  fhrubs  of
a  greater  growth,  as  rofemary,  and  the  cytifus  or  fhrub-trefoil  (3),  of

^l)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iv.  9.

(2)  Origanum ,  baftard-marjoram  j  fo  called,  becaufe  it  delights  in  mountains.

(3)  Cytifus.  We  fee  here,  that  our  author  places  the  cytijus  among  the  fhrubs.  Pliny
alfo,  Hifi.  Nat.  lib.  xiii.  c.  23.  calls  it  a  fhrub.  It  is  mightily  commended  by  many
anticnt  authors,  as  good  for  fheep,  fwine,  hens,  &c.  and  they  fpeak  of  it  as  a  mighty
common  thing  in  Italy  in  their  days ;  fo  that  it  is  ftrange,  that  writers  are  not  agreed
about  it.  Both  Columella  and  Pliny  fpeak  of  it,  as  if  it  were  fown  or  planted,  grew  up,
and  were  cut  down,  like  trefoil.  Pliny  fays,  it  may  be  fown  in  feed,  or  planted  in
fblks  3  and  if  any  would  exprefs  the  likenefs  of  it,  it  is  angvfioris  trifolii  frutex ,  has
leaves  like  trefoil,  but  lefler:  and  Diofcorides  fays,  x.vti<t&‘  sr/V,  i.e.  a  fhrub  or

bufh.  Pliny  fays  it  was  found  in  the  ifland  Cytkifus ,  from  thence  trat. flared  into  all  the
Cyclad  iflands,  and  foon  afterwards  into  all  parts  of  Greece.  Ic  feems,  it  was  not  very
plentiful  in  Italy  in  Pliny’s  timej  for  he  fays,  that,  confidering  the  ufefulnefs  of  it,  he
wonders  that  it  is  fo  rare.  All  writers  upon  Husbandry  celebrate  it  much,  which  makes
it  feem  ftrange,  that  it  has  not  been  more  cultivated,  or,  at  leaft,  that  it  is  not  better
known.  The  account  that  Columella  and  Pliny  give  of  this  fhrub,  does  not  very  well
agree  with  what  our  writers  fay  of  it.  Pliny ,  as  has  been  already  faid,  among  other
things,  fays,  that  it  may  either  be  fown  in  feed  at  the  time  they  fow  barley,  or  fet  in
ftalks  or  flips  ( caule )  in  autumn  before  winter  j  that  it  comes  to  ptrfefh'on  in  three
years,  and  is  cut  down  about  the  equinox  j  that  it  is  of  an  hoary  afpedl,  and  fo  hardy,
that  it  fears  neither  heat  nor  cold,  hail  nor  fnow.


both


Chap. IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  387

both  forts :  for  there  is  one  fort  of  it  that  is  fown  or  planted,  and
another  fort  which  grows  of  its  own  accord.  And,  likewife,  the
ever-green  pine,  and  the  lelfer  ever-green  oak ;  for  the  taller  one  is
difapproved  by  all :  ivy-trees  alfo  are  received,  not  for  their  gocdnefs,
but  becaufe  they  yield  very  much  honey.  But,  the  mod  approved
trees  are,  the  bright-red  and  white  jujube-tree,  likewife  the  ama¬
ranth  (4),  as  alfo  walnut-trees,  peach-trees,  and  pear-trees ;  in  a
word,  the  greateft  part  of  pomiferous  trees,  that  I  may  not  infifl:  upon
each  of  them.  But,  of  foreft  or  wild  trees,  the  mod:  fui table  and
convenient  for  them  are  the  maft-bearing  red  oaks,  as  alfo  the  tur¬
pentine-tree,  and  the  maftich-tree,  which  is  not  unlike  to  this,  and
the  fweet-fmelling  cedar  :  but  of  all,  the  lime-  or  linden-trees  alone
are  hurtful  to  them  j  yew-trees  are  intirely  rejected.  Moreover,  a
thoufand  plants,  which  either  fpring  up  and  flourifh  upon  the  uncul¬
tivated  turf,  or  are  cultivated  and  improved  with  the  furrow,  produce
flowers  exceeding  friendly  to  bees  5  as  are  the  fhrubs  of  the  amellus  (5)

in

(4)  Amaranthus.  The  amaranth ,  fo  called,  becaufe  its  flower  does  not  foon  wither,
but  keeps  the  beauty  of  its  colour  a  long  while.  Some  authors  call  it  flower-gentle ,  and
the  amaranthus  maximus  they  call  great  flor amour,  or  purple  flower-gentle :  but  fome
authors  think,  that  it  ought  not  to  be  read  amaranthus,  but  tamarix ,  becaufe  the  author
is  here  fpeaking  of  trees,  and  not  of  herbs ;  and  the  tamarix ,  when  it  flourifhes,  is  very
proper  for  bees.

(5)  Amelli  frutex.  There  is  fome  difpute  about  this  herb  j  Matthiolus  thinks  that  it
is  the  after  Atticus ,  the  Italian  ftarwort,  becaufe  Virgil’s  beautiful  defcription,  Georg,
lib.  iv.  Ihews,  that  it  has  certain  characters  which  belong  to  the  after  Atticus  ,•  and
that  the  words  in  Virgil,  ipfle  aureus ,  ought  to  be  underftood  of  the  flower  itfelf ;  and
the  following  words,  fled  in  foliis  pure  plurima  circum  funduntur ,  viola  flublucet  pur¬
pura  nigra,  are  to  be  undertlood  of  the  leaves  that  furround  the  flower  itfelf,  which
fomewhat  referable  the  black  violet  in  their  colour :  therefore  he  fays  flublucet  purpura%
becaufe  that  purple  colour,  which  is  feen  in  thefe  leaves,  is  not  fo  bright  as  in  the  violet
itfelf,  but  much  more  diluted  j  fo  that  it  is  a  great  miftake  to  think,  that  Virgil  under¬
ftood  this  colour  to  be  that  of  the  leaves  of  the  herb.  Moreover  Virgil ,  in  effeCt,  fays,
that  the  flower  of  this  herb  is  found  in  the  end  of  fumrner,  or  beginning  of  autumn,
tonfts  in  vallibus ,  in  the  mown  valleys,  it  growing  up  after  the  hay  is  cut  down.  The
defcription  he  gives  of  the  amellus  is  this :  *  It  is  an  herb  that  fends  forth  from  its
4  root  ftraight,  folid,  and  woody  ftalks,  of  a  dark,  yellowifli  colour,  from  which,  about
4  the  top,  fpring  forth  fmall  little  branches,  on  the  top  of  which  are  feen  flowers  radiated
4  after  the  manner  of  a  ftar ;  in  the  middle  they  are  yellowifh,  all  furrounded  with  little
4  leaves,  fliining  with  a  diluted  purple  colour  j  it  bears  leaves  acuminated  like  thofe  of
4  the  olive-tree,  but  fmaller,  rough,  hairy,  blackilh,  of  a  rough-bitterifh  tafte;  thofe
4  that  furround  the  ftalk  are  by  much  the  fmalleft :  it  has  a  multifidous  fibrous  root,  of
4  no  unpleafant  fmell,  fomething  like  that  of  gilliflowers.  It  bloffoms  or  flouriihes  in
4  the  end  of  fumrner,  or  beginning  of  autumn,  in  Auguft  and  September ;  the  leaves
4  grow  at  length  flaccid,  and  diflblve  into  down,  with  a  fmall  oblong  feed,  not  very
4  unlike  endive :  it  grows  in  rough  uncultivated  hills  and  valleys.’  I  have  tranfcribed
this  out  of  Matthiolus ,  becaufe  I  have  not  found  it  under  this  name  in  any  of  our  beft

D  d  d  2  Engliflj


388  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX-

in  well-watered  ground,  branke-urfine-ftalks,  the  iliank  of  the  afpho-
del  or  king’s-fpear  (6),  the  fword-like  leaves  of  the  daffodil  (7).  But
the  white  lilies,  planted  in  the  garden-ridge,  make  a  bright  appear¬
ance;  nor  are  the  white  violets  or  ftock-gillidowers  inferior  to  thefe
in  beauty;  alfo  fcarlet  rofes,  and  yellowilh  and  purple  violets  (8) ;
and  likewife  the  fky-coloured  hyacinth  (9) ;  alfo  the  Corycian  ( 10)  and
Sicilian  faffron-bulb  is  planted,  in  order  to  give  a  colour  and  flavour
to  the  honey.  Moreover,  innumerable  herbs  of  a  bafer  character
fpring  up,  both  in  cultivated-  and  in  paftu re-lands,  which  furnifli  and
replenifh  the  honey-combs  with  abundance  of  wax  ;  as  the  lapfance ,
or  common  wild  cole  worts  (1 1) ;  and,  which  is  not  more  precious

than

Englifb  books  of  herbs.  Columella ,  cap.  15.  fays,  there  is  a  fort  of  it  with  a  yellowi/h
ftalk,  and  purple  flower.

(6)  Afphodeli  fcapusy  by  Pliny  called  bacillus  regius ,  or  hajlula  regia ,  king’s-fpear,  be-
caufe,  when  it  is  in  the  flower,  it  refembles  a  royal  feeptre.  Some  French  authors  call  it
hache  royale :  it  has  a  round  and  very  fmooth  ftalk,  which  rifes  a  cubit  high,  fometimes
two  cubits.  Columella  calls  the  ftalk  of  ic  fcapus ,  becaufe  it  refembles  the  thank  or  fhafe
of  a  column.

(7)  Narcijffus,  daffodil.  Probably  fo  called  from  ra'fwi,  torpor  ;  the  fmell  of  it  is  ftupe-
fying,  and  caufes  an  heavinefs  of  the  head :  its  leaves,  which  arife  from  its  root,  are
fhaped  like  a  fword,  which  is  the  reafon  why  our  author  fays  gladiolus  narcijji.  There
are  many  different  forts  of  it,  which  Mr.  Miller ,  in  his  Dictionary,  gives  us  an  exact
delcription  of:  and  Matthiolus  has  given  us  cuts  of  the  different  forts,  whofe  leaves  have
all  the  fhape  of  a  fword,  fome  broader,  fome  narrower :  perhaps  the  bees  fuck  honey
out  of  the  leaves  and  flowers.

(8)  Sarrana  viol <«,  purple  violets.  Sarranus ,  the  purple  colour,  either  from  farra ,
the  name  of  the  fhell-fifh,  with  whofe  blood  they  dyed  this  colour;  or  from  Sor ,  the  He¬
brew  name  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Sarrante  vefies ,  in  many  authors,  fignify  cloaths  of  a
purple  colour.  Some  fay,  that  formerly  Tyre  was  called  Sarra ,  and  the  fifti  Sar.

(9)  Ccelejlis  numinis  byatinthus.  The  learned  Morgag?ii  of  Padoua  thinks,  that  it  ought
to  be  read  luminis ,  fo  that  the  author  means  the  sky-blue  hyacinth ;  this  would  be  very
well,  if  warranted  by  fome  manufeript :  what  makes  it  very  probable  is,  that  Columella
very  frequently  mentions  the  colour  of  herbs,  or  of  their  flowers,  without  any  further
defeription ;  or  perhaps  he  means,  that  this  flower  was  facred  to  fome  deity.

(10)  Corycius  bulbus  croci.  Corycus ,  a  high  hill  in  Cilicia ,  where  grew  plenty  of  excel¬
lent  faffron.  Pliny  gives  the  preference  to  the  Cicilian ,  efpecially  to  that  which  grew  upon
this  mountain,  next  to  the  Lycian  upon  mount  Olympus ,  and  the  third  place  to  that  of
Sicily :  he  fays,  that  it  is  eaGly  adulterated ;  he  gives  a  mark  whereby  to  know  the  ge¬
nuine,  viz.  if  it  cracks,  and  makes  a  noife  when  the  hand  is  laid  upon  it,  as  if  it  were
brittle,  this  is  to  be  underftood,  when  it  is  dry ;  and  that  the  moift,  which  becomes  fo
by  adulteration,  yields  when  it  is  handled;  Another  fign  of  its  being  genuine  is,  that,
when  any  one  has  handled  it,  and  brings  his  hand  to  his  mouth,  it  gently  bites  the  face,
and  the  eyes ;  with  feveral  other  remarks  to  be  feen  in  his  Natural  Hijlory ,  lib.  xxi.
cap.  6.

( 1 1)  Lapfana.  Pliny  places  it  among  the  wild  coleworts  or  cabbage;  fays  it  is  a
foot  high,  with  hairy  leaves,  very  like  thofe  of  the  navew,  except  that  it  has  a  whiter
flower,  lib.  xx.  cap.  9.  And  in  another  place  he  calls  it  olus  filvefire  trium  foliorum ;  a
wild  kind  of  pot-herb,  with  three  leaves,  much  celebrated  by  fome  verfes  Julius  cJfar

made


Chap. IV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  3S9

than  thefe,  the  wild  radifh  (12),  and  the  charlock ,  or  wild  muftard  pot¬
herb,  and  the  flowers  of  wild  endive,  and  black  poppy  ;  alfo  the  wild
parfnip,  and  the  cultivated  one  of  the  fame  name,  which  the  Greeks
call  ftaphylinon.  But  of  all  thefe  I  have  mentioned,  and  of  thofe
which  I  have  omitted,  endeavouring  to  fave  time,  (for  their  number
could  not  be  reckoned  up)  thyme  gives  the  moll  exquifite  tafte  t%
honey:  then  the  next  is  thymbra  or  Greek  favory  (13),  and  mother
of  thyme :  of  the  third  fort,  but  yet  exceeding  good,  is  rofemary,
and  our  own  Italian  favory,  which  I  call  fatureia  :  then  tamarifk-
and  jujeb-flowers,  and  the  other  kinds  of  food  which  we  have  pro-
pofed,  are  of  a  middling  tafte.  But,  of  all,  wood-honey,  which
cometh  of  the  broom-tree,  and-  the  ftrawberry-tree,  and  the  manor-
houfe  honey  alfo,  which  breeds  in  pot-herbs,  and  in  herbs  that  grow
in  dunghils,  are  reckoned  of  the  very  worft  charadter.  And  fince  I
have  defcribed  the  fttuation  of  their  paftures,  and  alfo  their  feverai
forts  of  food,  I  flhall  now  fpeak  of  the  receptacles  of  the  fwarms,  and
of  their  little  dwelling-houfes.

made  upon  it,  which  his  foldiers  ufed  to  fing  by  tarns ;  and  by  thefe,  and  their  own
military  jokes,  they  ufed  to  reproach  him  with  their  living  upon  this  herb  at  Dyrrhachiumy
fcoffing  and  cavilling  at  the  niggardly  rewards  they  received  for  the  hardfhips  they  en¬
dured.  Some  think  that  the  root,  wherewith  Julius  C<efar's  army  fuftained  themfelves,
and  of  which  they  made  bread,  was  different  from  this,  and  was  the  wild  parfnip.

(12)  Armor acicty  the  wild  radifh.  The  Italians  have  made  but  very  little  alteration
in  this  word,  and  call  it  aramoricoy  and  remolaco.  Diofcorides  fays,  'Pa.tpa.pts  dyela,  tjr
'PufjLdLtQt  df(ji.ogrjix.ta.v  kak!s<ti}  the  wild  radifh,  which  the  Romans  call  armor acia.

(13)  Thymbra.  Some  make  this  thymbra ,  eunilay  and  faturetay  to  be  the  very  fame;
but  our  author  feems  to  make  them  different  herbs.  Matthiolus  fays,  that  there  are  two  forts
of  the  thymbra ;  firft,  that  of  Diofcoridesy  which  is  like  thyme,  but  leffer  and  tenderer ;
that  its  fmall  ftalks  end  in  fpiked  procefles,  in  which  appear  flowers  fomething  of  a  purple
colour :  the  other  fort  is  more  bufhy,  with  many  little,  round,  woody  branches  circu¬
larly  difpofed :  that  it  has  leaves  larger  than  thyme,  fomewhat  rough,  and  harder,  which
fprout  out  about  the  fhoots  feverai  together,  at  certain  diftances ;  and  from  the  place
where  thefe  leaves  arife,  certain  fpiked  proceffes  come  forth,  crouded  with  little  leaves
fmaller  than  the  reft,  out  of  which  fpring  fmall  flowers,  tending  from  purple  to  white  :
and  this  he  thinks  to  be  the  cunila  Co  often  mentioned  by  Columella  3  and  that  in  Tuf-
cany  they  call  it  coniellay  which  is  a  corruption  of  cunila.  Pliny  fays,  that  it  has  feed
like  that  of  penny-royal.  See  Matthiolus  in  Diofcorid.  for  a  further  description  of  it.


CHAP.


39°


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA


Book  IX


CHAP.  V.

Of  chufing  Seats  for  Bees.

A  Seat  for  bees  mu  ft  be  placed  oppofite  to  the  Sun  at  noon,  in  the
middle  of  winter,  far  from  tumult,  and  crouds  of  men  and
cattle,  in  a  place  neither  warm  nor  cold ;  for  both  the  one,  and  the
other,  is  very  troublefome  to  them.  But  let  it  be  in  the  lower  part  of
a  valley,  that  both  the  empty  bees,  when  they  go  forth  to  forage,  or
to  gather  their  food,  may  fly  up  the  more  eafily  to  the  higher  grounds  j
and,  having  gathered  fuch  things  as  are  proper  for  their  ufe,  may  fly
down  through  the  fteep  places,  with  their  burden,  without  any
difficulty.

If  the  fituation  of  the  manor-houfe  will  admit  of  it,  it  is  not  to
be  doubted,  but  we  fhould  join  the  apiary  to  the  building,  and  fur-
round  it  with  a  wall ;  but  it  muft  be  in  that  part  which  is  free  from
the  noifome  fmells  of  the  neceflary-houfe,  the  dunghil,  and  the
bagnio.  But,  fuppofe  the  fituation  be  unfavourable,  neverthelefs,  if
other  very  great  inconveniences  do  not  concur,  it  is  more  expedient,
that  the  apiary  be  thus  placed,  and  be  under  the  eyes  of  the  owner.
But,  if  all  things  be  unfriendly,  without  doubt  let  a  neighbouring
valley  be  pitched  upon,  whither  the  pofleflor  may  frequently  go  down
without  any  great  inconveniency  :  for  that  bufinefs  requires  the  greateft
honefty  and  fidelity  j  which,  becaufe  it  is  exceeding  rare,  is  better
fecured  and  preferved  by  the  owner’s  coming  unawares.  Nor  does  it
only  hate  and  abhor  a  fraudulent  Overfeer  and  Manager,  but  floth-
fulnefs  alfo,  which  produces  naftinefs :  for  it  is  equally  provoked  and
offended  with  dirty  and  flovenly  treatment,  as  with  fraudulent  manage¬
ment.

But,  where-ever  the  bee-hives  fhall  be  placed,  let  them  not  be  in-
clofed  with  a  very  high  wall  j  and  if,  through  fear  of  robbers,  you
are  better  pleafed  with  one  that  is  higher,  let  it  be  paffable  for  the
bees,  with  fmall  windows,  all  in  a  row,  three  feet  high  from  the
ground  ;  and  let  a  cottage  be  joined  to  it,  wherein  both  the  Keepers  may
dwell,  and  the  implements  be  laid  up  :  and  let  it  be  chiefly  replenished
with  hives  prepared  before-hand  for  the  ufe  of  the  young  fwarms,  as
alfo  with  wholfome  medicinal  herbs ;  and  if  there  be  any  other  things
which  are  applied  to  fuch  as  are  fick  and  languishing.


z


‘  And


39i


Chap. V.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

4  And  let  the  palm,  or  huge  wild-olive  tree
c  O’erfhade  the  porch,  that,  when  new  kings  lead  forth

*  The  firft-hatch ’d  fwarms ;  and  when  the  fportive  youth,

*  From  clofe  confinement  freed,  {hall,  in  the  fpring,

*  Make  fallies  from  their  hives,  and  play  all  round  ;

*  The  neighb  ring  bank  may,  from  the  fcorching  heat,

4  Invite  them  to  retire ;  and  th’  obvious  tree
4  With  verdant  leavy  {helters  flop  their  flight  (i).’

*

Then  let  continually  running  water,  if  you  have  the  conveniency  of
it,  be  conveyed  into  it ;  or  let  it  be  given  by  hand  in  a  canal  or  trough,
built  for  that  purpofe,  without  which  neither  the  honey-combs,  nor
the  honey,  nor  the  young  bees,  can  be  formed.  Whether  therefore,
as  I  faid,  water  that  is  conftantly  running  by,  or  well-water,  be  fent
into  them  by  canals,  let  there  be  piles  of  hones  and  rods  raifed  in  it
for  the  conveniency  of  the  bees  (2);

4  That  on  thefe  frequent  bridges  they  may  hand
4  Secure,  and  to  the  fummer-fun  expand
4  Their  wings,  if  chance  the  eaft  wind’s  headlong  blafl
4  Has  fprinkled,  or  has  plung’d  them  in  the  deep.’

Then  round  the  whole  apiary  ought  to  be  planted  little  trees  of
fmall  growth,  efpecially  for  their  wholfomenefs  :  for  cytifus  or  fhrub-
trefoil,  as  alfo  the  caffia,  and  the  pine-trees,  and  rofemary,  are  a
remedy  for  them  when  they  are  Janguifhing ;  as  alfo  the  flalks  of
wild  marjoram  and  thyme ;  as  alfo  thofe  of  violets,  or  whatever  other
things  the  quality  of  the  ground  fuffers  to  be  ufefully  planted.  Let
not  only  green  things  of  a  difagreeable  and  noifome  fmell,  but  alfo
all  other  things  whatfoever,  of  the  fame  quality,  be  kept  at  a  diftance
from  them ;  fuch  as  the  fmell  of  a  crab,  when  it  is  burnt  in  the  fire  j
or  the  fmell  of  mud  and  dirt  taken  out  of  a  marfh.  Like  wife  let
hollow  rocks,  or  fhrill  loud-founding  valleys,  which  the  Greeks  call
(echoes)  be  avoided.

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iv.  20.

(2)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  iv.  zji


CHAP.


39*


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX,


CHAP.  VI.

Of  fuch  Sorts  of  Bee-hives  as  ought  to  he  approved.

THerefore,  when  their  feats  are  put  in  order,  bee-hives  muft  be
fabricated  according  to  the  condition  and  circumftances  of  the
country.  For  if  it  be  fertile  of  the  cork-tree,  without  any  doubt  we
may  make  very  ufeful  hives  of  its  bark,  becaufe  they  are  neither  ex¬
tremely  cold  in  winter,  nor  exceeding  hot  in  fummer  :  or,  if  it  abounds
in  fennel-giants,  of  thefe  alfo  vafes  are  woven  with  equal  conveniency,
as  they  are  like  to  the  nature  of  bark.  If  neither  of  thefe  is  ready  at
hand,  they  join  willows  together,  and  weave  them  like  wer  vers  work :
and,  if  thefe  cannot  be  had,  they  mu  ft  be  made  of  the  wood  of  a  tree
made  hollow,  or  fawn  into  boards.  Tliofe  made  of  potters  earth
have  the  very  worft  quality  of  any  ;  for  the  fummer-heats  fet  them
on  fire,  and  they  are  frozen  with  the  winter-colds.

There  are  two  other  kinds  of  hives  remaining,  which  may  either
be  made  of  dung,  or  built  of  brick  :  one  of  which  Celfus  very  juftly
difapproved,  becaufe  it  is  very  obnoxious  to  fire  j  the  other  he  ap¬
proved,  tho’  he  did  not  difiemble  its  chiefeft  difadvantage,  viz.  that,
if  there  fhould  be  occafion  for  it,  it  cannot  be  removed  from  one
place  to  another :  therefore  I  do  not  agree  with  him  who  thinks,
that,  notwithstanding  this  inconveniency,  bee-hives  of  this  kind  ought
to  be  had  ;  for  not  only  is  it  repugnant  to  the  intereft  of  the  owner,
that  they  be  fuch  as  cannot  be  removed,  when  at  any  time  he  may
have  a  mind  either  to  fell  them,  or  to  furnifh  other  grounds  with
them  (for  this  conveniency  relates  only  to  the  advantage  of  the  Mafter
of  the  family)  j  but  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done  for  the  advantage,
and  on  the  account,  of  the  bees  themfelves,  when  they  are  afHidted
either  with  a  diftemper,  or  with  the  barrennefs  and  penury  of  the
place ;  and  it  may  be  proper,  that  they  be  fent-  into  another  quarter  ;
and  they  cannot  be  moved  for  the  forefaid  reafon ;  this  is  principally
to  be  avoided.  Therefore,  altho’  I  reverence  the  authority  of  that
moft  learned  man,  yet,  fetting  afide  all  ambition,  I  have  not  omitted
tc  declare  my  own  opinion :  for  that  which  chiefly  moves  Celfus ,  viz.
left  the  bee-ftalls  be  liable  either  to  fire  or  thieves,  may  be  avoided
by  building  a  brick-work  round  the  hives,  that  an  obftacle  may  be
put  to  the  rapacioufnefs  of  the  robber,  and  the  hives  be  protected
againft  the  violence  of  fire  :  and  when  it  is  neceffary  to  move  them,
i  and


Chap. VII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  393

and  carry  them  to  another  place,  it  may  be  done  by  loofening  the
joinings  of  the  ftru&ure.


CHAP.  VII.

After  what  Manner  the  Hives  muft  he  placed.

BUT  becaufe  mod  people  think,  that  this  requires  too  much
labour  and  pains,  therefore  whatever  fort  of  hives  they  fhall
think  mod  proper  to  be  placed,  there  ought  to  be  a  bank  of  ftone
extended  through  the  whole  apiary,  three  feet  in  height,  and  as  many
in  thicknefs  j  and,  when  it  is  thus  built,  it  ought  to  be  carefully
fmoothed  with  plaifter,  that  there  may  be  no  way  for  lizzards,  or
ferpents,  or  other  noxious  animals,  to  climb  up  to  them.  Then  upon
this  bank  are  placed,  either  (as  Celfus  diredts)  domicils  made  of  bricks,
or  (as  we  are  beft  pleafed  with)  hives,  with  brick-work  built  about
them,  except  behind:  or,  which  is  the  common  practice  with  all
people,  who  are  diligent  and  careful  about  thefe  things,  there  are
vafes  placed  all  in  a  row,  which  are  faftened  and  bound  either  with
fmall  bricks,  or  with  rough  ftone  and  mortar,  fo  that  each  of  them
is  contained  within  two  narrow  walls,  and  the  back-  and  fore-parts
are  open  and  free :  for  fometimes  they  muft  be  laid  open  both  on
that  fide  where  the  bees  go  forth,  and  much  more  on  the  back-fide,
becaufe  the  fwarms  are  cured  from  time  to  time.

But  if  no  walls  are  built  between  the  hives,  neverthelefs  they  muft
be  fo  placed,  that  they  may  be  a  little  diftant  from  each  other,  left,
when  they  are  viewed  and  looked  into,  that  which  is  handled  in  the
cleaning  and  curing  of  it,  fhould  fhake  the  other,  which  flicks  clofe
to  it,  and  bruife  the  neighbouring  bees,  which  are  afraid  of  every
motion  given  to  their  weak  wax-works,  as  of  ruin  and  deftrudtion  to
them.  It  is  fufficient  indeed,  that  there  be  three  rows  of  vafes  built
up  in  height  one  above  the  other,  becaufe  even  fo  the  perfon  that
cures  them  cannot  very  conveniently  look  into  the  uppermoft.

Let  the  mouths  of  the  hives,  which  afford  entries  to  the  bees,  lean
more  downward,  and  be  more  Hoping,  than  their  backs,  that  the
rains  may  not  flow  into  them  j  and  if,  notwithftanding,  they  chance
to  get  in,  that  they  may  not  remain  there,  but  run  out  by  the  entry  :
for  which  reafon  it  is  proper,  that  the  hives  be  fenced  and  fecured
with  porches  above  the  entries :  if  otherwife,  they  muft  be  fhadowed

E  e  e  with


394-  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book IX.

with  green  boughs  daubed  over  with  Carthaginian  clay,  which  cover¬
ing  keeps  out  both  the  colds,  and  the  rains,  and  the  heats.  Never-
thelcfs  the  burning  heat  is  not  fo  hurtful  to  this  kind  of  animals  as
the  winter  is :  therefore  let  there  always  be  a  building  behind  the
apiary,  which  may  receive  the  injury  of  the  north  wind,  and  give  a
moderate  heat  to  the  bee-hives.  Likewiie  the  domicils  themfelves,
altho’  they  be  protected  by  the  building,  ought  to  be  fo  placed,  as
to  be  diredtly  oppofite  to  the  fun-rifing  in  winter,  that  fo  the  bees
may  have  the  benefit  of  the  warmth  of  the  fun  when  they  go  out  in
the  morning,  and  may  be  thereby  the  more  brifk  and  adtive ;  for  cold
begets  fluggUhnefs :  for  which  reafon  alfo  the  holes,  by  which  they
go  out  and  come  in,  ought  to  be  very  {trait,  that  they  may  admit  as
little  cold  as  poflible :  and  it  is  fufficient,  that  they  be  fo  bored,  that
they  may  not  receive  more  than  one  bee  at  its  full  growth.  So  neither
the  poifonous  newt,  nor  the  unlucky  and  mifchievous  kind  of  beetle
or  butterfly,  nor  the  light-fhunning  wood-loufe,  as  Maro  fays,  plunder
the  honey-combs  through  the  gate,  when  it  is  wider  and  larger  than
it  ought  to  be.  And  it  is  a  very  great  advantage,  that,  in  proportion
to  the  number  of  bees  in  the  bee-hive,  there  be  two  or  three  paflages
made  in  the  fame  cover,  at  fome  diftance  the  one  from  the  other,  to
guard  againfl:  the  deceit  and  craft  of  the  lizzard,  who,  like  a  watch
or  keeper  of  the  entry,  and  gaping  for  his  prey,  with  open  mouth
deftroys  the  bees  as  they  go  out ;  and  fewer  of  them  perifh  when  they
are  at  liberty  to  avoid  the  fnares  -of  this  pefl,  that  befieges  them,  by
efcaping  through  another  paflage.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  pur  chafing  Bees ,  and  how  wild  Swarms  may  be  tahe?i .

W  HAT  we  have  faid  may  fuffice  concerning  the  chufing  of
paftures,  dwelling-houfes,  and  feats  for  them ;  which  being
provided,  the  next  thing  we  are  to  do  is  to  feek  for  fwarms :  and
they  come  to  us  either  by  purchafe,  or  by  free  gift.  But  fuch  of
them  as  we  {hall  purchafe  with  money,  let  us  try,  and  approve  them
more  carefully  by  the  forefaid  marks  :  and  let  us  confider  how  nu¬
merous  they  are  before  we  buy  them,  by  opening  the  hives,  and
looking  into  them  :  or,  if  we  cannot  conveniently  look  into  them,
doubtlefs  we  {hall  mark  what  we  can  call  our  eyes  upon,  whether

there


Chap.  VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  395

there  are  very  many  of  them  ftanding  in  the  porch  of  the  gate,  and  a
vehement  found  be  heard  of  thofe  that  are  humming  within  doors ;
and  aifo  (if  peradventure  they  are  all  filent,  and  at  reft  within  their
dwelling-houfe)  we  may  make  an  eftimate  either  of  the  greatnefs  or
fmalnefs  of  their  number,  from  the  fudden  noife  and  murmuring,
that  will  follow  upon  our  having  applied  our  lips  to  the  holes  of  the
entry,  and  breathed  ftrongly  into  them.

But  we  muft  efpecially  be  careful,  that  they  be  brought  rather  from
the  neighbourhood  than  from  diftant  regions,  becaufe  they  ufe  to  be
highly  provoked  with  the  ftrangenefs  of  the  climate.  But  if  this  can¬
not  be  obtained,  and  we  be  under  the  neceffity  of  carrying  them  long
journeys,  we  muft  take  care,  that  they  be  not  difturbed  and  made
uneafy  by  the  ruggednefs  of  the  roads  :  and  it  will  be  beft  to  carry
them  upon  one’s  fhoulders  in  the  night-time  ;  for  in  the  day-time  they
muft  have  reft  given  them ;  and  fuch  liquors  as  are  acceptable  to  the
bees  muft  be  poured  into  the  hives,  whereby  they  may  be  nourifhed
within  their  inclofures.  Then  after  they  are  brought  home,  if  the
day  come  upon  you  fooner  than  you  expedted,  the  hive  muft  neither
be  opened,  nor  placed  in  the  bee-ftall,  except  in  the  evening,  that
the  bees  may  go  out  peaceable  and  quiet  in  the  morning,  after  they
have  refted  the  whole  night :  and  we  ought  to  be  upon  the  watch
for  the  fpace  of  three  days  almoft,  to  obferve  if  they  fally  out  all  in
a  body  j  which  when  they  do,  they  are  contriving  to  make  their
efcape  :  we  muft  prefently  give  orders  for  fuch  remedies  as  ought  to
be  made  ufe  of,  in  order  to  put  a  ftop  to  them.  But  fuch  as  come
into  our  hands,  either  in  prefents,  or  which  we  catch  by  furprize,
are  not  fo  fcrupuloufly  inquired  into  :  although  even  in  that  manner,
I  would  not  have  any  in  my  poffeffion  but  the  very  beft  ;  feeing  both
the  good  and  the  bad  require  the  fame  expence,  and  the  fame  labour
of  a  Keeper  :  and,  which  is  of  very  great  importance,  the  bafe  and
degenerate,  which  may  bring  infamy  and  reproach  upon  thofe  that
are  of  a  generous  kind,  muft  not  be  intermixed  with  them  ;  for  the
produce  of  honey  is  lefs  than  you  expected,  when  more  flothful  and
idle  fwarms  intervene.

Neverthelefs,  becaufe  fometimes,  by  reafon  of  the  nature  and  cir-
cumftances  of  the  places,  we  muft  provide  ourfelves  even  with  cattle
that  are  but  indifferent,  (for,  to  be  fure,  that  which  is  bad  is  by  no
means  to  be  provided)  we  muft  ufe  our  endeavours  to  fearch  out  the'
fwarms  after  this  manner :  Where-ever  there  are  forefts  proper  for
making  of  honey,  there  is  nothing  that  the  bees  do  fooner,  than  to
make  choice  of  the  neighbouring  fountains,  which  they  may  make

E  e  e  2  ufe


396  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IX.

ufe  of.  Therefore  it  is  proper  to  befet  them,  for  the  mod  part,  from
the  fecond  hour  of  the  day,  and  to  watch  what  numbers  of  them
come  to  fetch  water :  for,  if  there  are  few  of  them  that  fly  about,  (ex¬
cept  there  be  leveral  heads  of  rivulets,  which  make  them  thinner,  when
they  are  feparated  from  one  another)  they  give  us  to  underfland,  that
there  is  a  fcarcity  of  them;  by  reafon  of  which  we  will  fufpeCt,  that
the  place  is  not  productive  of  honey.  But,  if  they  aflemble  in  great
numbers,  they  give  us  alfo  greater  hopes  of  catching  fwarms  of  them,
and  they  are  found  out  after  this  manner :

Firft,  we  muft  fearch,  and  find  out,  how  far  off  they  are  ;  and
for  this  purpofe  liquid  oker  muft  be  prepared,  wherewith  having
tinged  fome  ftraws,  or  ftalks  of  herbs,  when  with  the  fame  you  touch
the  backs  of  the  bees  that  fip  in  the  fountains,  if  you  ftay  in  the  fame
place,  you  will  the  more  eafily  know  them,  when  they  come  back  ;
and  if  they  make  no  great  flay,  you  may  know,  that  they  have  their
abode  in  the  neighbourhood  :  but,  if  they  be  a  long  while  before  they
return,  you  fhall  make  an  eflimate  of  the  diftance  of  the  place  accord¬
ing  to  the  time  of  their  delay.  But,  if  you  obferve,  that  they  return
quick,  if,  with  no  great  difficulty,  you  can  follow  them  in  the  way
they  fly,  you  fhall  be  eafily  conducted  to  the  place  where  the  fwarm
has  its  feat.

But  you  muft  make  ufe  of  more  fkill  and  prudence,  with  refpeCt
to  thofe  which  fhall  be  feen  to  go  farther  off;  which  is  fuch  as  this :
You  muft  cut  off  an  intire  joint  of  a  reed  with  its  own  knots,  and
bore  an  hole  in  the  fide  of  the  cutting ;  and,  having  dropped  a  little
honey,  or  fodden  muft,  into  it  through  the  faid  hole,  you  muft  place
it  hard  by  the  fountain  :  then,  when,  at  the  fmell  of  the  fweet  liquor,
feveral  bees  fhall  have  crept  into  it,  you  muft  take  up  the  cutting ;
and,  having  put  your  thumb  upon  the  hole,  you  muft  let  out  only  one
of  them  at  a  time,  which,  after  it  has  made  its  efcape,  fhews  the
Obferver  the  place  to  which  it  direCts  its  courfe ;  and  he,  as  long  as
he  can  hold  it  out,  purfues  it  as  it  flies  away  :  then,  wrhen  he  lofes
fight  of  the  bee,  he  fends  out  another ;  and  if  it  flies  towards  the
fame  part  of  the  heaven,  he  continues  to  purfue  in  the  fame  path ;
but  if  otherwife,  he  fuffers  one  after  another  to  go  out  at  the  open
hole  :  and  let  him  mark  the  quarter  towards  which  moft  of  them  fly,
and  purfue  them,  till  he  be  brought  to  the  lurking-hole  of  the  whole
fwarm.

But,  if  the  fwarm  be  hid  in  a  cave,  you  may  fetch  them  out  with
fmoak  ;  and,  when  they  have  fallied  out,  you  check  and  flop  them
with  the  noife  of  brafs :  for,  being  prefently  terrified  with  the  found,

.  they


%


Chap.  VIII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  397

they  will  fit  down  either  upon  a  fhrub,  or  on  an  higher  bough  of  a
tree  j  and  the  perfon  that  fearches  for  them,  and  finds  them  out,  puts
them  up  in  a  vafe  prepared  for  that  purpofe.  But  if  they  have  taken
up  their  feat  in  an  hollow  tree,  and  if  either  the  branch,  which  they
have  feated  themfelves  upon,  flands  out  from  the  body  of  the  tree,
or  they  are  in  the  very  trunk  of  the  tree  itfelf,  then,  if  the  middling
fize  of  it  will  fuffer  it,  firft  the  upper-part  of  it,  which  is  empty  of
bees,  is  cut  off  with  a  very  fharp  faw,  that  it  may  be  done  the
fooner  j  then  the  lower  part  alfo,  as  far  as  it  feems  to  be  inhabited.
Then,  after  it  is  cut  through  at  both  ends,  it  is  covered  over  with  a
clean  garment  ;  for  this  alfo  is  of  very  great  importance  ;  and,  if  it
has  any  gaping  chinks,  you  fill  them  up  with  clay,  and  fo  bring  it  to
the  place  :  and,  fome  fmall  holes  in  it  (as  I  faid  already)  being  left
open,  it  is  placed  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  reft  of  the  bee-hives.

But  it  is  proper,  that  the  perfon,  who  makes  it  his  bufinefs  to  fearch
for  them,  and  find  them  out,  make  choice  of  the  morning- tide,  that
he  may  have  the  whole  day  before  him  to  fpy  out  the  places  where
the  bees  frequent,  and  go  and  come;  For  often,  if  he  has  begun  to
obferve  them  too  late,  when  they  have  their  feat  in  the  neighbour¬
hood,  they  retire,  after  they  have  finifhed  their  ordinary  talk  of  work,
and  do  not  return  to  the  water  ;  whereby  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  the
perfon  who  fearches  for  them  is  ignorant  how  far  the  fwarm  is  diftant
from  the  fountain.  There  are  fome  who,  in  the  beginning  of  the
fpring,  gather  mint,  and  (as  the  forefaid  poet  fays)

‘  Bruis’d  balm,  and  honey  wort’s  ignoble  grafs  (i) ;

And  other-like  herbs,  wherewith  this  kind  of  animals  .'is  delighted  j
and  fo  rub  the  hives  throughly  with  them,  that  the  fmell  and  the
juice  of  them  may  ftick  to  the  veflel ;  which,  when  they  have  cleaned
them,  they  fprinkle  again  with  a  little  honey,  and  place  them  up
and  down  the  woods  not  far  from  the  fountains;  and,  when  they  are
filled  with  fwarms,  they  carry  them  home.  But  it  is  not  expedient
to  do  this,  except  in  places  where  there  is  abundance  of  bees;  for
often  they  who  by  chance  pafs  by,  when  they  find  the  empty  veflels,
carry  them  away  with  them :  nor  is  the  obtaining  one  or  two  full
ones  of  fo  great  account,  as  to  compenfate  the  lois  of  leveral  empty
ones.  But  in  a  greater  plenty,  altho’  many  of  them  are  intercepted,
yet  more  is  acquired  by  the  bees  that  are  found :  and  this  is  the  method
of  catching  wild  fwarms  of  bees. .

(1)  Vtrg.  Georg,  iv.  70.


CHAR


398


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.


CHAP.  IX.

After  what  Manner  our  own  Coimtry-Bees  ought  to  he  obfervecl>

a?id  put  up  into  Hives.

MOreover,  there  is  fuch  another  method  of  retaining  the  fwarms
that  are  bred  in  our  own  country.  The  Keeper,  indeed,  ought
always  carefully  to  go  round  the  bee-hives ;  for  there  is  no  time
wherein  they  do  not  want  his  care  and  management :  but  they  re¬
quire  a  more  punctual  and  diligent  attendance,  when  they  fwarm  in
the  fpring,  and  their  new  offspring  breaks  out  of  their  hives,  which
cannot  contain  them ;  and  unlefs  the  Overfeer  conffantly  befieges  them,
and  prefently  receives  and  entertains  them,  the  young  ones  make  their
efcape ;  becaufe,  fuch  is  the  nature  of  bees,  that  every  commonalty
is  generated  at  the  fame  time  with  their  kings,  which,  as  foon  as  they
have  got  ftrength  to  fly  out  of  their  hives,  difdain  and  defpife  the
company,  and  the  fociety,  of  their  feniors,  and  much  more  their  govern¬
ment  and  command :  for  as  mankind,  endued  with  reafon,  will  not
allow  of  any  partnerfhip  in  the  regal  power,  far  lefs  will  thefe  dumb
animals,  who  are  deflitute  of  counfeh

Therefore  the  new  chieftains  come  forth  with  their  youth,  which
remaining  conglomerated  for  one  or  two  days  in  the  very  porch  of
their  dwelling-houfe,  by  their  coming  out  of  it  they  fhew,  that  they
defire  to  have  a  feat  of  their  own  ;  and  if  one  be  prefently  afiigned
them  by  their  Keeper,  they  are  fatisfied  with  it,  as  if  it  were  their
native  country.  But  if  the  Keeper  be  out  of  the  way,  and  negledls
it,  they  go  to  a  ffrange  country,  as  if  they  were  wrongfully  call  out
of  their  own.  To  prevent  this,  it  is  the  bufinefs  of  a  good  Overfeer
to  have  his  eyes  upon  the  hives,  during  the  fpring-time,  almofl  till
the  eighth  hour  of  the  day,  after  which  the  young  fwarms  do  not
precipitantly  withdraw  themfelves;  and  carefully  to  watch  and  obferve
both  when  they  go  out,  and  when  they  return  :  for  there  are  fome,
which,  breaking  out  all  of  a  fudden,  fteal  away  without  any  delay.
He  may  certainly  find  out,  and  know  beforehand,  their  intended
flight,  by  applying  his  ear  to  each  of  the  hives  in  the  evening:  for  fo
it  is,  that  almofl  for  three  days  before  they  defign  to  make  an  erup¬
tion,  there  ariles  a  tumult,  and  confufed  noife  and  murmur  among

them.


Chap.  IX.  O/HUSBANDRY,  399

them,  as  of  an  army  going  to  march :  from  which,  as  Virgil  fays
very  truly  (i),

*  Tis  eafy  to  foreknow  the  vulgar’s  minds :

*  For  fuch  as  loit’ring  (land,  the  martial  found

‘  Of  the  hoarfe  brafs  reproves  j  likewife  a  voice

*  Is  heard,  which  imitates  the  broken  founds

‘  Of  trumpets.’

Therefore  the  hives  that  do  this  ought  efpecially  to  be  obferved,
that  whether  they  fhall  fally  out  to  battle,  (for  they  often  fight
amongft  themfelves,  as  in  civil  wars,  and  with  other  hives,  as  with
foreign  nations)  or  break  out  all  of  a  fudden,  in  order  to  make  their
efcape,  the  Keeper  may  be  prefent,  ready  prepared  for  both  events.
A  quarrel,  indeed,  either  of  one  hive  difagreeing  among  themfelves,
or  of  two  hives  at  variance  the  one  with  the  other,  is  eafily  quelled :
for,  as  the  fame  poet  fays  (2),

‘  With  throwing  of  fmall  duff  the  ftrife  is  check’d,

*  And  ceafes’ -

Or  with  raifin-wine,  or  mead,  or  any  other  fuch-like  liquor  fprinkled
upon  them :  for  fo  it  is,  that  the  fweetnefs  of  thefe  things,  being
familiar  to  them,  appeafes  their  wrath,  when  they  are  in  a  rage.  For
the  fame  things  alfo  have  a  wonderful  influence  to  reconcile  the  kings
that  are  at  variance  :  for  often  there  are  more  captains  of  one  people,
and  by  the  fedition,  as  it  were,  of  the  nobility,  the  common  people
is  divided  into  fa&ions,  which  muft  not  be  fuffered  to  happen  fre¬
quently,  becaufe  whole  nations  are  confumed  by  inteftine  wars.  There¬
fore,  if  the  princes  be  in  friendfhip  and  favour  with  one  another,
peace  continues  without  bloodlhed:  but,  if  you  fhall  obferve  them
very  often  engaged  in  a  pitched  battle,  you  fhall  take  care  to  kill  the
ring-leaders  of  the  feditions ;  but  by  the  forefaid  remedies,  their  battles
and  quarrels  are  compoled.  And,  furthermore,  when  a  great  multi¬
tude  of  them  fits  down  all  in  a  lump,  upon  the  next  branch  of  a
green  leavy  little  tree,  obferve  whether  the  whole  fwarm  hangs  down
from  it  like  one  clufter  of  grapes  :  and  this  fhall  be  a  fign,  either  that
there  is  only  one  king  among  them  or  that,  if  there  be  more  of
them,  they  are  heartily  reconciled  j .  which  you  may  fuffier  to  continue
fo,  till  they  fly  back  again  to  their  own  habitation.

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  iv.  70.

(2J  Virg.  Georg,  iv.  87.


7


But


400  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

But  if  the  fwarm  be  divided  and  diftinguilhed,  as  it  were,  into
two,  or  feveral  udders  alfo,  you  need  not  doubt  but  there  are  feveral
rulers  among  them,  and  that  they  are  as  yet  angry :  and  you  ought
to  fearch  for  their  captains  in  thofe  parts  wherein  you  fee  the  bees  are
aflembled  and  conglomerated  in  greateft  numbers.  Therefore,  having
anointed  your  hand  with  the  juice  of  the  fore-mentioned  herbs,  that
is,  of  balm-gentle  or  mint,  left  they  run  away  when  you  touch  them,
you  muft  put  in  your  fingers  gently  among  them  ;  and,  having  feparated
the  bees  from  one  another,  you  muft  fearch  till  you  find  the  author
of  the  quarrel,  whom  you  ought  to  fqueeze  to  death.


CHAP.  X.

Of  the  Form  and  Make  of  the  King  of  the  Bees.

BU  T  thefe  kings  are  a  little  larger  and  more  oblong  than  the  other
bees,  with  ftraighter  legs,  but  not  fo  large  wings,  of  a  beautiful
bright-fhining  colour,  brifk  and  nimble,  and  without  hair,  without  a
fling,  unlefs  any  think,  that  the  fuller  hair,  as  it  were,  which  they
carry  in  their  belly,  is  their  fling ;  and  even  of  this  itfelf  they  make
no  ufe  to  hurt  withal.  Some  of  them  alfo  are  found  of  a  dufky
colour,  and  briftly,  whofe  difpofition  and  temper  you  may  condemn
from  the  habit  and  make  of  their  body.

*  Two  forts  of  features,  and  two  different  forms
4  Of  bodies,  have  the  kings,  which  rule  this  folk :

4  The  one  with  fpots  of  glift ’ring  gold  adorn’d,

4  And  with  bright-fhining  fcales,  and  comely  face,

4  In  fplendid  ftate  appears  (i).’

And  this,  which  is  the  beft  of  the  two,  is  moft  approved ;  for  the
worft,  like  fordid  fpittle,  is  as  ugly  and  ill-favoured  as

4  The  traveller,  who  comes  from  depths  of  duft,

4  And  from  his  parched  mouth  fpits  moift’ned  earth

And,  as  the  fame  poet  fays,

4  With  floth  inglorious  drags  his  fpacious  paunch.’

(i)  Virg.  Georg,  iv.  93 — 97.


Therefore


Chap.  XI.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  '401

Therefore  all  the  Generals  of  a  bafer  character

*  Deftroy,  and  let  the  better  Prince  bear  fway,

■*  And  reign  without  a  rival  in  his  court.’

Neverthelefs  he  himfelf  mu  ft  be  ftript  of  his  wings,  when  he  often
makes  eruptions  with  his  fwarm,  and  endeavours  to  run  away :  for,
having  pulled  off  his  wings,  we  fhall  retain  the  vagabond  General,  as
it  were,  with  a  chain  at  his  foot ;  who,  being  deprived  of  all  means  of
making  his  efcape,  will  not  dare  to  go  without  the  bounds  of  his
kingdom  ;  for  which  reafon  he  does  not  indeed  allow  the  people  of
his  dominion  to  ramble  up  and  down,  and  wander  at  a  greater  diftance
from  him.


CHAR  XL

How  the  Smalnefs  of  the  Number  of  the  Bees  may  bt,

remedied, .

BUT  fometimes  the  King  muft  be  put  to  death,  when  the  old
bee-hive  has  not  a  fufficient  number  of  bees ;  and  its  want  of
number  muft  be  fupplied  by  fome  other  fwarm.  Therefore,  when,
in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  a  numerous  young  brood  has  been
hatched  in  that  hive,  the  new  King  muft  be  fqueezed  to  death,  that
the  multitude  may  continue  to  live  with  their  parents  without  dif-
cord.  But  if  the  honey-combs  fhall  have  produced  no  progeny  at
all,  you  may  bring  the  commonalty  of  two  or  three  hives  together
into  one ;  but  they  muft  be  firft  fprinkled  with  fweet  liquor :  then
afterwards  you  may  fhut  them  up,  and,  having  placed  meat  for  them,
you  may  keep  them  fhut  up  almoft  for  the  fpace  of  three  days,  leav¬
ing  fmall  breathing-places  for  them,  till  they  accuftom  themfelves  to
converfe  familiarly,  and  live  together.

There  are  fome  who  may  rather  chufe  to  put  the  older  King  out  of
the  way,  which  proves  very  hurtful ;  becaufe  the  more  aged  multi¬
tude,  if  he  be  put  to  death,  muft  of  necefiity,  like  a  number  of  old
fenators,  obey  thofe  that  are  younger  than  themfelves ;  and,  if  there
be  any  of  them  that  obftinately  defpife  the  commands  of  thofe  that
are  ftronger,  they  are  punifhed,  and  put  to  death.


F  f  f


Never  thelefs


40£  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

Neverthelefs  this  inconveniency  ufually  befals  a  younger  fwarm
when  the  King  of  the  antienter  bees,  which  was  left  by  us,  fails,  and*
through  old  age,  becomes  uncapable  to  govern,  that  the  family  falls
into  dilcord  from  too  great  licentioufnefs,  as  if  their  Lord  were  dead.
To  which  a  remedy  is  eafily  applied  :  for  out  of  thofe  hives,  which
have  feveral  kings,  one  General  is  chofen ;  and,  being  tranflated  to
thole  bees  which  are  without  any  government,  is  conftituted  their
ruler.

But  the  paucity  of  the  bees  may  be  remedied  with  lefs  trouble,  in
thofe  domicils  which  labour  under  any  peftilential  diftemper :  for
after  the  havock  and  deftnnftion  of  the  hive,  reduced  to  a  fmall
number,  is  known,  you  muft  examine  and  view  what  honey-combs
it  has :  then,  afterwards,  from  the  wax  which  contains  the  feeds  of
the  young  bees,  you  muft  cut  away  that  part  wherein  the  offspring
of  the  royal  kind  is  animated  :  for  this  is  eafy  to  be  feen  •  be-
caufe,  at  the  very  end  of  the  wax- works,  there  appears,  as  it  were,
the  nipple  of  a  pap  riling  higher,  and  of  a  wider  cavity  than  the  reft
of  . ►the  holes  are  of  wherein  the  young  bees  of  vulgar  note  are  con¬
tained.  Gelfus  indeed  affirms,  that,  in  the  outmoft  honey-combs,
there  are  tranfverfe  pipes  or  cavities,  which  contain  the  young  royal
progeny.  Hygimts  all'o,  following  the  authority  of  the  Greeks ,  de¬
nies  that  the  Captain-general  is  formed  of  a  little  worm  or  maggot
(as  the  reft  of  the  bees  are) ;  but  that  in  the  circumference  of  the
honey-combs  theie  are  found  ftraight  holesr  fomewhat  larger  than
thofe  of  the  Plebeian  feed,  filled,,  as  it  were,  with  a  fordid  fubftance
of  a  red  colour,  out  of  which  the  winged  King  is  at  firft  immediately
formed.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  putting  up  a  Swann  of  Bees  into  their  Hive ,  and  hinder¬
ing  them  from  7naki?ig  their  Efcape.

THere  is  alfo  that  care  which  is  to  be  taken  of  a  fwarm  bred  in
our  own  bee-ftall,  if  by  chance  they  fhould  grow  weary  of,
and  abhor,  their  native  country  ;  and,  by  making  an  eruption  at  the
forefaid  time,  declare  their  intention  of  betaking  themfelves  bv  flight
to  a  more  diftant  habitation.  And  the  hive  gives  intimation  of  this,
when  the  bee  fo  avoids  the  porch  of  her  houfe,  that  not  one  of  them
6  .  flies


Chap.  XIII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  403

flies  back  to  it,  but  prefently  raifes  herfelf  to  a  greater  height.  Let
the  youth  that  are  making  their  efcape  be  terrified  with  brazen  tim¬
brels,  or  rattles,  or  with  the  found  of  earthen  veflels,  or  tiles,  which,
for  the  moft  part,  lie  every-where  :  and  when,  after  they  are  fright¬
ened,  they  either  return  to  their  maternal  hive,  and  hang  all  in  a
clew  in  the  entry  to  it,  or  prefently  betake  themfelves  to  the  next
green  leavy  bough ;  let  the  Keeper  prefently  rub  and  anoint  all  over
a  new  hive,  prepared  for  that  purpofe,  with  the  forefaid  herbs :  then
having  fprinkled  it  with  drops  of  honey,  let  him  apply  it  to  them  ;
then,  gathering  the  bees  together,  let  him  put  them  into  it,  either
with  his  hands,  or  with  a  bowl :  and  after  all  other  due  care  has
been  taken,  and  the  vafe  has  been  carefully  adjufted  and  daubed  over,
let  him  fuffer  it,  in  the  mean  while,  to  remain  in  the  fame  place,
till  it  draws  towards  evening  then,  in  the  beginning  of  the  twilight,
let  him  remove  it  thence,  and  place  it  in  the  row  of  the  other  hives.
But  it  is  necefiary  alfo  to  have  empty  houfes  placed  for  them  in  the
apiary  :  for  there  are  fome  hives  which,  as  foon  as  they  come  forth,
prefently  feek  for  a  feat  for  themfelves  in  the  neighbourhood,  and
take  pofieflion  of  that  which  they  find  empty.  This  is  almoft  a  com¬
plete  account  of  the  care  that  is  necefiary  both  for  acquiring  and  re¬
taining  of  bees.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  Remedies  for  Bees  labouring  under  any  Diflemper .

The  next  thing  is  to  inquire  after  remedies  for  fuch  as  labour
under  any  diflemper,  or  are  affli&ed  with  the  peftilence.  The
plague  rarely  proves  definitive  to  bees :  neverthelefs  I  do  not  find
that  any  other  thing  can  be  done,  than  that  which  we  directed  with
refpecft  to  other  forts  of  cattle,  that  the  hives  be  removed  to  fome
diftant  place.  But,  in  thefe,  both  the  caufes  of  their  difeafes  are  more
eafily  difcerned,  and  their  remedies  found  out.  But  their  greatefi  an¬
nual  diflemper  is  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,  when  the  young
fprigs  of /purge  bloflom,  and  the  elms  difclofe  their  feeds ;  for  as  with
new  apples,  fo  they  are  allured  with  thefe  primitive  flowers j  and
they  feed  greedily  upon  them  after  their  winter  hunger,  fuch  food
being  no  otherwife  hurtful  to  them  but  their  eating  of  it  to  excefs,
with  which  having  glutted  themfelves,  they  die  of  a  loofenefs,  unlefs

F  f  f  2  they


404  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IX.

they  have  fpeedy  relief ;  for  fpurge  gives  a  loofenefs  to  other  animals
alfo,  but  elms  particularly  to  bees  :  and  this  is  the  reafon  why  bees
feldom  continue  numerous  in  the  regions  of  Italy ,  which  are  planted
with  trees  of  this  kind.  Therefore  in  the  beginning  of  the  fpring,
if  you  give  them  medicated  food,  by  the  fame  remedies  you  may  both
prevent  their  being  afflicted  with  fuch  a  plague,  and  they  may  be
cured  when  they  are  feized  with  it.

For  as  to  what  Hyginus ,  who  followed  authors  that  lived  before
his  time,  has  delivered,  I  myfelf  dare  not  affirm  it,  not  having  made
the  experiment ;  neverthelefs  they  who  have  a  mind  to  it  may  try
it.  For  he  directs  us  about  the  time  of  the  vernal  equinox,  when
the  clemency  of  the  day  invites,  after  the  third  hour,  to  bring  forth,
and  expofe  to  the  Sun,  the  bodies  of  thofe  bees,  which,  when  fuch
a  plague  has  feized  them,  are  found  killed  in  heaps  under  the  honey¬
combs,  and  have  been  laid  up  in  a  dry  place  during  the  winter,  and
to  cover  them  over  with  fig-tree  affles  j  which  being  done,  he  affirms,
that,  within  two  hours,  being  animated  with  the  enlivening  fleam
of  the  heat,  and  having  refumed  their  fpirit,  they  will  creep  into  an
hive  prepared  for  that  purpofe,  if  it  be  fet  before  them.  We  rather,
that  they  may  not  periffi,  advife  that  fuch  things,  as  we  fhall  here¬
after  prefcribe,  be  given  to  the  hives  when  they  are  fick  :  for  either
the  kernels  of  the  pomegranate  bruifed,  and  fprinkled  with  Aminean
wine,  or  raifins  of  the  Sun  bruifed  in  a  mortar  with  ros  Syriacus  (i)
(. Syrian  fumach)  in  equal  quantity,  and  w'ell  foaked  in  rough  wine,
oaght  to  be  given  them ;  or,  if  thefe  by  themfelves  have  no  effect,
all  thefe  fame  things,  an  equal  weight  of  each,  being  fmoothed,  and
reduced  into  one  mafs,  and  boiled  with  Aminean  wine  in  an  earthen
veffel,  and  afterward  cooled,  ought  to  be  fet  before  them  in  wooden
troughs.

Some  people  make  a  decodtion  of  rofemary  and  mead,  and,  after  it
is  turned  to  a  gelly,  pour  it  into  hollow  tiles,  and  give  it  them  to  fip.
Some  fet  oxs  or  human  urine  by  the  hives  (as  Hyginus  affirms).
Likewife  that  difeafe  alfo  is  very  remarkable,  which  confumes  them,
and  makes  them  fhrink,  and  become  ill-favoured  -3  when  feme  of

(x)  Ros  Syriacus  is  the  Rhus  Grcecorum.  Plitiy  fays,  that  the  Romans  had  no  name  for
it,  lib.  xxiv.  cap.  n.  plura  Rhois  nomina  apud  Galenum ,  modo  Syriacum ,  modo  Ponticum,
modo  Olfoniorurn.  Matthiolus  fays,  they  are  all  of  one  fort,  and  tbac  there  was  no  man¬
ner  of  difference  in  the  trees ;  that  the  feed  was  ufed  for  feafoning  victuals,  and  the  tan¬
ners  made  ufe  of  the  leaves  and  fprigs  becaufe  of  their  aftringent  quality,-  fo  that,  it
feeros,  they  are  miftaken,  who  think,  that  Ros  Syriacus,  in  Columella  and  Celj'us ,  is  a  fort
of  manna  or  dew  that  falls  from  the  air  fo  that  Rbos,  which  is  a  Greek  word,  muft  be
the  true  reading.  It  is  of  an  aftringent  quality,  and  preferibed  by  our  author  as  a  remedy
for  bees,  when  they  are  troubled  with  a  loofenefs.

them


Chap.  XIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  405

them  frequently  carry  out  of  their  houfes  the  bodies  of  thofe  that  are
dead,  and  others  of  them  fit  dull  and  languifhing  within  their  houfes,
in  forrowful  filence,  as  in  a  public  mourning.  When  this  happens,
food  poured  into  pipes,  or  troughs  made  of  reeds,  is  offered  them;
efpecially  of  well-boiled  honey,  and  bruifed  with  a  gall,  or  a  dry  rofe.
It  is  proper  alfo  to  burn  galbanum,  that  they  may  be  cured  with  the
l'mell  of  it;  and,  when  they  are  wearied,  to  fuftain  them  with  raifins
of  the  Sun,  and  old  fodden  muff :  neverthelefs  the  root  of  amellus,  of
which  theftalkand  fprigs  are  yellowifh,  and  the  flower  purple-coloured,
does  exceeding  well;  it  is  boiled  with  Aminean  wine,  and  drained,
and  fo  the  diflolved  juice  of  it  is  given  them.

Hyginus  indeed,  in  the  book  he  wrote  of  bees,  fays,  that  Arijio -
machus  was  of  opinion,  that  relief  ought  to  be  given  to  fiich  of  them
as  are  fick,  in  this  manner:  firft,  That  all  the  vitiated ‘honey-combs
be  taken  away,  and  frefh  food-  placed  anew  for,  them  ;  and  then  that
they  be  fumigated.  He  alfo  thinks,  that  it  does  good  to  bees,  wafted
with  old  age,  to  add  a  new  fwarm  to  them,  altho’  they  may  be  in
danger  of  being  confirmed  by  {edition  ;  neverthelefs  they  will  be  glad,
when  a  multitude  is  joined  to  them.  But,  that  they  may  live  together
in  concord,  the  Kings  of  thofe  bees,  which  are  tranflated  from  another
habitation,  being,  as  it  were,  a  foreign  people,  ought  to  be  removed  out.
of  the  way.  Neverthelefs  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that  the  honey¬
combs  of  very  numerous  fwarms, .  which  have  young  ones  already
formed  in  them,  ought  to  be  tranflated,  and  fubjedted  to  thofe  fwarms
which  are  fewer  in  number,  that  fo  their  houfes  may  be  confirmed
and  eftablfthed  by  the  adoption,  as  it  were,  of  a  new  offspring.  But,
whenever  this  fhall  be  done,  we  mud  be  mindful  to  put  thofe  honey¬
combs  under  their  care,  whofe  young  bees  do  already  break  open  the
places  of  their  abode,  and  gnaw  through  the  wax.  which  was  laid
over  them  as  covers  to  their  holes,  putting  out  their  heads :  for,  if  we
tranflate  the  honey-combs  while  the  brood  is  not  come  to  maturity,
the  young  bees  will  die,  when  they  ceafe  to  be  cherifhed  and  kept,
warm.

Oft-times  alfo  they  die  of  a  difeafe,  which  the  Greeks  call  <pctye-
£clivcl  (2) :  forafmuch  as  this  is  an  ordinary  cuftom  with  bees,  to  make
as  much  wax-work  at  firft;  as  they  think  they  fhall  be  able  to  fill  up ;
it  fometimes  comes  to  pafs,  that,  after  their  wax- works  are  finifhedj

(2)  tya.yiJ'cuva..  Pliny ,  Hijl.  Najl.  lib,  xxvi.  ii.  tells  us,  that  this  word  has  two  figni-
fication  ;  either  an  eating  ulcer,  or  a  voracious  appetite  that  cannot  be  fatisfied,  which  ,
the  Greeks  call  Probably  our  author  took  it  in  the  firft  fenfe,  to  denote  Tome

difeafe  incident  to  bees.

the


4o6  L,  J,  M,  COLUMELLA-  Book  DC

the  fwarm,  wandering  at  too  great  a  diftance,  in  order  to  fearch  for
honey,  is  overwhelmed  with  ludden  thowers,  or  whirlwinds,  in  the
woods,  and  lofes  the  greateft  part  of  the  Plebeian < :  whenever  this
happens,  the  few  that  remain  are  not  able  to  li  11  up  the  honey¬
combs  ;  then  thofe  parts  of  the  wax- works  which  are  empty  rot,
and  difeafes  creeping  in  by  little  and  littie,  after  the  honey  is  cor¬
rupted,  the  bees  themfelves  perifh  alfo.  To  prevent  this,  two  dif¬
ferent  people  ought  to  be  united,  which  may  be  able  to  fill  up  the
wax-works  while  they  are  yet  found  5  or,  if  we  have  not  another
fwarm  fit  for  our  purpofe,  we  nn  ft,  with  a  very  fharp  knife,  free
the  honey-combs  from  the  empty  parts  before  they  begin  to  rot :  for
this  alfo  is  of  very  great  importance,  that  the  iron  tool  be  not  very
blunt,  left,  being  prefted  in  with  greater  force,  (becaufe  it  does  not
eafily  penetrate)  it  move  the  honey-combs  out  of  their  places  j  for,  if
this  be  done,  the  bees  forfake  their  habitation.

There  is  this  caufe  alio  of  their  deftrucftion,  that  fometimes  for
feveral  years  following  very  many  flowers  come  up,  and  the  bees  are
more  intent  upon  making  honey  than  upon  brooding.  Therefore  fome
who  have  lefs  knowledge  in  thefe  things,  are  delighted  with  a  great
produce,  not  knowing  that  the  bees  are  upon  the  very  brink  of  de-
ftru&ion  ;  becaufe,  being  wearied  with  too  much  labour,  very  many
of  them  perifh;  and  their  numbers  not  being  increafed  with  new  fupplies
of  youth,  at  laft  the  reft  die  alfo.  Therefore,  if  fuch  a  fpring  fhould
happen,  that  both  the  meadows  and  the  corn-lands  fhould  abound  in
flowers,  it  will  be  of  very  great  advantage,  that  all  the  paflages  of  the
hives,  through  which  the  bees  go  out,  be  fhut  up,  leaving  fmall  holes,
through  which  they  may  not  be  able  to  go  out,  that  fo  being  with¬
drawn  from  their  bufinefs  of  making  honey,  becaufe  they  have  no
hopes  of  filling  up  all  their  wax- works  with  liquors,  they  may  fill
them  up  with  a  young  breed.  And  thefe  are  ordinarily  the  remedies
of  fwarms  of  bees  that  labour  under  any  diftemper.


CHAP.


Chap.  XIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


407


CHAP.  XIV.

Of  that  which  the  Bees  do  at  all  ‘Times ,  and  what  the  B  erf  on
that  has  the  Care  of  them  ought  to  do.

HERE  follows  next  the  care  that  is  to  be  taken  of  them  through
the  whole  year,  as  the  fame  Hyginus  has  defcribed  it,  in  a  very
eafy  and  agreeable  manner.  From  the  firft  equinox,  which  happens
about  the  twenty-fourth  of  March  (1),  in  the  eighth  part  of  Aries ,
to  the  riling  of  the  Pleiades  (2),  there  are  reckoned  forty-eight  days
of  fpring-time.  He  fays,  that  the  bees  ought  to  be  cured,  for  the
firft  time,  by-  opening  their  hives,  that  all  the  filth  and  naftinefs,
which  has  been  gathered  daring  the  winter,  may  be  taken  out  of
them  j  and  that  after  the  fpiders,  which  fpoil  the  honey-combs,  are
pulled  out,  the  fmoak,  made  by  kindling  of  ox’s  dung,  may  be  con¬
veyed  into  them  ;  for  this  fmoak,  from  a  certain  cognation  or  fame-
nefs  of  parentage  and  extraction  as  it  were,  is  very  fuitable  and  proper
for  bees.  The  little  worms  alfo,  which  are  called  mothsy  and  the
butterflies,  muft  be  killed  :  which  pelts,  adhering  for  the  molt  part
to  the  honey-combs,  fall  down  from  them,  if  you  mix  ox’s  marrow
with  the  dung,  and,  having  fet  them  on  fire,  convey  their  burning
fmell  to  them  :  by  this  management,  during  the  time  which  we  have
mentioned,  the  lwarms  will  be  ftrengthened,  and  they  will,  with
more  courage  and  refolution,  apply  themfelves  to  their  bufinefs,  and
carry  on  their  works. ,

(1)  Although  Columella  was  very  well  acquainted  with  the  exaCt  times  of  the  riling
and  fetting  of  the  ftars,  and  of  the  equinoxes  and  folflices,  <&c.  yet,  as  he  himfelf  de¬
clares  in  this  chapter,  he  rather  chofe  to  follow  the  commonly  received  opinions,  with,
which  Husbandmen  had  been  long  acquainted,  than  to  diflurb  them  with  new  compu¬
tation- :  fo  hat  no  perfon  need  be  offended,  when  they  hear  him  fpeaking  of  the  Sun’s
entering  into  fuch  and  i'uch  figm,  and  of  the  equinoxes  and  folflices  falling  upon  fuch
and  fuch  days,  when  they  really  do  not  happen,  fince  he  only  accommodated  himfelf  to
the  common  way  of  reckoning  at  the  time  he  wrote.  Thus,  in  this  chapter  he  fays,
.that  the  firft  equinox,  that  is,  the  vernal ,  falls  about  the  24th  of  March ;  whereas,  ac¬
cording  to  the  computations  of  the  beft  aftronomers,  it  happens  about  the  10th  day  of
the  (aid  monrh,  old  ftile.

(2)  Pleiades.  The  duller  of  feven  fmall  flats,  in  the  neck  of  the  Bull,  are  ufually
thus  called  Some  fay  they  are  thus  called,  becau'e  formerly  they  thought,  that,  when
they  began  to  rife,  they  might  fafely  go  to  fea :  others  affign  different  reafons  of  their
name,  which  do  not  feem  to  be  well  founded.  They  were  by  the  Romans  called  ver-
gilitf,  becaufe  they  rife  in  the  fpring.


But


^  _  %

4 69  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

But  he  who  has  the  charge  of  them,  and  who  nourifhes  the  bees
mult  be  exceeding' careful,  when  he  is  going  to  handle  the  hives,  that
the  day  before  he  be  chafte,  and  pure  from  all  venereal  affairs ;  and,
that  he  neither  come  to  them  when  he  is  drunk,  nor  till  fucii  time  as
he  has  wafhed  himfelf ;  and  that  he  abftain  almoft  from  all  eatables
of  a  ftrong  difagreeable  finell,  fuch  as  falt-fifh  or  fleffi,  and  all  man¬
ner  of  pickle  or  gravy  belonging  to  them:  as  alfo  from  garlick,
onions,  and  other  fuch-like  things,  of  {linking,  acrimonious  qualities.
On  the  forty-eighth  day  from  the  vernal  equinox,  when  the  Pleiades
arile  about  the  eighth  day  of  Mayy  the  fvvarms  begin  to  increafe,
both  in  flrength  and  number :  but,  on  the  fame  days  alfo,  fuch
fwarms  as  have  few  and  lick  bees  utterly  perilh  ;  and,  at  the  fame
time,  are  generated,  in  the  extremities  of  the  honey-combs,  young
ones  of  a  larger  fize  than  thofe  of  other  bees  are  ;  and  fome  think,
that  they  are  Kings.  But  fome  of  the  Greeks  call  them  otrpas  (3),  be-
caufe  they  vex  and  moleft  the  fwarms,  and  do  not  fuffer  them  to
reft :  therefore  they  command  them  to  be  killed.

From  the  riling  of  the  Pleiades  to  the  folftice,  which  falls  in  the
latter  end  of  the  month  of  *June ,  about  the  eighth  part  of  Cancer  (4),
for  the  moft  part,  the  hives  begin  to  fwarm  ;  at  which  time  they
ought  to  be  watched  very  narrowly,  left  the  young  offspring  make
their  efcape  :  and  then,  from  the  time  that  the  folftice  is  paft,  till  the
riling  of  the  Dog-Jlar  (5),  which  are  almoft  thirty  days,  the  corns
and  the  honey-combs  are  cut  down  together.  But,  after  what  man¬
ner  thefe  ought  to  be  taken  away,  we  fhall  afterwards  direCt,  when
we  come  to  give  directions  concerning  the  making  of  honey.

But  Democritus ,  and  Mago ,  and  Virgil  alfo,  have  reported,  that
bees  may,  at  this  fame  time,  be  generated  or  produced  from  a  flain  bul¬
lock.  Mago  indeed  affirms,  that  the  fame  may  be  alfo  done  from  the
bellies  of  oxen ;  which  method  of  production  I  think  it  needlefs  to  pro-


(3)  olrp^,  cefirus ,  a  gad-bee,  or  a  horfe-  or  ox-fly,  by  Homer  called  oirp&t

perhaps  from  its  fpots.  Columella  does  not  mean,  that  thefe  larger  bees,  which  are  gene¬
rated  in  the  extremities  of  the  honey-combs,  are  properly  gad-bees ;  but  that  they  were
fo  called,  becaufe  of  their  mifchievous  qualities  of  tormenting  the  bees,  as  the  gad-bees

do  oxen.

(4)  The  Sun  enters  the  tropic  of  Cancer  about  the  nth  of  June ,  being  then  arrived
at  his  utmoft  northern  declination,  making  the  longeft  day,  and  the  fhorteft  night,  in
north  latitude;  and  then  is  the  fummer  folftice,  when  the  Sun  appears  to  ftop  his  courfe
northward,  and  returns  back  again  towards  the  equator.

(5)  Cajiicula ,  the  Dog-flar ,  is  a  bright  ftar  of  the  firft  magnitude,  in  the  mouth  of  Cams
major ;  which,  as  fome  fay,  rifing  with  the  Sun  about  the  24'h  of  July,  and  fetting
about  the  28th  of  Augufi ,  gives  occafion  to  that  time,  which  is  ufually  very  hot  and
dry,  to  be  called  the  Canicular ,  or  Dog-days.  This  ftar  was  by  the  Greeks  called  Sirius ,
becaufc  of  its  fcorching  and  drying  influence.

6  fecute


6


Chap.  XIV.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  4.09

fecute  more  carefully,  being  of  the  fame  mind  with  Celfus ,  who  fays
very  prudently,  that  this  fort  of  cattle  is  never  loft  with  fo  great  a
dedrutdion,  as  to  make  it  neceflary  to  feek  to  recover  them  in  fuch
a  manner.  But  during  this  time,  and  always  till  the  autumnal  equi¬
nox,  the  hives  muft  be  opened,  and  fumigated,  every  tenth  day  ;
which,  tho’  it  be  troublefome  to  the  hives,  yet  it  is  agreed,  that  it  is
exceeding  wholfome.  Then  you  mud;  cool  and  refrefh  the  bees  after
they  have  been  fumigated,  and  are  all  in  an  heat,  by  fprinkling  the
empty  parts  of  the  hives,  and  pouring  the  colded  new-drawn  water
into  them :  then,  if  there  be  any  thing  that  cannot  be  wafhed  away,
it  muft  be  cleaned  with  the  pinions  of  an  eagle,  or  of  any  other  huge
fowl  alfo,  which  have  a  diffnefs  in  them.

Moreover  you  mud:  take  care,  that,  if  any  moths  appear,  they  be
fwept  out  of  the  hives ;  and  that  the  butterflies  be  killed,  which
commonly,  abiding  among  the  hives,  are  dedruftive  to  the  bees :  for
they  both  gnaw  into  and  confume  the  wax,  and  with  their  dung
breed  worms,  which  we  call  hive-moths.  Therefore,  at  the  time
when  the  mallows  bloflom,  when  there  is  the  greated  multitude  of
thefe  butterflies,  if  an  high  brazen  veflel,  with  a  narrow  neck  like  the
mile-column  (6),  be  placed  in  the  evening  among  the  bee-hives,  and
fome  light  put  down  to  the  bottom  of  it,  the  butterflies  gather  to¬
gether  to  it  from  all  places  j  and,  while  they  flutter  about  the  fmall
flame,  they  are  fcorched,  becaufe  they  can  neither  fly  eafily  upward
out  of  the  narrow  place,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  can  they  retire  at
a  greater  didance  from  the  fire,  fince  they  are  furrounded  by  the  fldes
of  the  brazen  veflel :  therefore  they  are  confumed  by  the  burning
heat  that  is  near  them.  Almod  after  the  fiftieth  day  from  the  rifing
of  the  Dog-dar,  Arliurns  rifeth  (7),  when  the  bees  make  their  honeys
from  the  dewy  flowers  of  thyme,  and  Italia n  and  Greek  favory  ;  and
this  honey,  which  is  of  the  bed  fort,  appears  in  all  its  ludre  and
beauty  at  the  autumnal  equinox,  which  is  before  the  fird  of  Oftober,
when  the  Sun  is  jud  arrived  at  the  eighth  part  of  Libra „  But  great
care  mud  be  taken,  between  the  rifing  of  the  Dog-dar,  and  that  of

(6)  Simile  miliario.  It  is  manifeft  from  Palladius ,  lib.  v.  tit.  8.  that  this  veflel  was
high  and  narrow,  fuch  as  they  ufed  in  baths  for  warming  water  j  but  what  the  author
means  by  directing  it  to  be  made  fmile  vriliario,  is  not  fo  eafy  to  determine.  It  is  pro¬
bable  he  means,  that  it  fliouid  be  fhaped  like  the  ftones  which  marked  the  miles,  which
were  long  and  narrow  towards  the  top,  or  like  the  column  which  was  eredted  in  the
forum ,  to  mark  the  place  from  whence  they  began  to  count  their  miles :  other  reafons
are  afligned,  which  are  not  fatisfying.

(7)  Artfurus ,  a  fixed  ftar  of  the  firft  magnitude,  placed  in  the  skirt,  or,  as  others  ex-
prefs  it,  between  the  knees,  of  Arftophylax,  a  conftellation  in  the  northern  hemifphere,
otherwife  called  Bootes.

G  g  g  ArAurust


4.10  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

Arflurus,  that  the  bees  be  not  furprifed  and  intercepted  by  the  furv
and  violence  of  wafps,  which,  for  the  molt  part,  lie  in  wait  before
the  doors  of  the  hives,  and  watch  for  their  coming  out.

After  the  riling  of  Artturus ,  about  the  time  of  the  equinox,  when
the  Sun  is  in  Libra ,  (as  I  faid)  is  the  fecond  taking  out  of  the  honey¬
combs.  Then  from  the  time  of  the  equinox,  which  falls  about  the
twenty-fourth  of  September,  to  the  fetting  of  the  Pleiades ,  for  the
fpace  of  forty  days,  the  bees  lay  up  for  their  winter  provifion  the
honeys  they  have  gathered  from  tamarilk-flowers,  and  fhrubs  which
grow  in  thickets  and  woods ;  from  which  nothing  at  all  muft  be  taken
away,  left,  being  dilheartened  by  repeated  injuries,  they  fhould,  through
delpair,  as  it  were,  of  retrieving  their  affairs,  run  awav,  and  forfake
all.

From  the  fetting  of  the  Pleiades  to  the  winter  folftice,  which  hap¬
pens  almoft  about  the  twenty-third  of  December ,  in  the  eighth  part  cf
Capricorn  (8),  the  hives  then  make  ufe  of  the  honey  which  they  laid
up  in  ftore,  and  with  it  they  are  nourifbed  and  Supported  till  the
riling  of  Ardlurus.  Nor  am  I  ignorant  of  Hipparchus's  computation,
which  teaches,  that  the  folftices  and  the  equinoxes  do  not  happen  in
the  eighth,  but  in  the  firft  parts  of  the  ligns.  But,  in  this  rural  dif-
dpline,  I  now  follow  the  calendars  of  Eudoxus  and  Meton  (9),  and
thofe  of  the  antient  Aftronomers,  which  are  adapted  to  the  public
facrifices ;  becaufe  Hufbandmen  are  both  better  acquainted  with  that
old  opinion  which  has  been  commonly  entertained  :  nor,  yet,  is  the
nicenefs  and  exadtnefs  of  Hipparchus  neceffary,  to  the  groffer  appre-
henfions,  and  fcanty  learning,  of  Hufbandmen.  Therefore,  at  the
firft  fetting  of  the  Pleiades ,  it  will  be  proper  to  open  the  hives  pre-
fently,  and  to  cleanfe  them  from  all  manner  of  filth  and  uncleannefs,
and  to  cure  them  the  more  carefully,  becaufe  in  the  winter-time  it  is
not  expedient  to  move,  or  lay  open,  the  vafes :  for  which  reafon,
while  there  is  yet  any  part  of  the  autumn  remaining,  after  you  have
cleanfed  their  domicils  in  a  very  bright  fun-fhining  day,  the  covers
muff  be  put  in  the  infide,  clofe  to  the  honey-combs,  all  the  empty
part  of  their  feat  being  excluded,  that  fo,  their  cages  being  reduced  to
a  narrower  compafs,  they  may  the  more  eafily  gather  heat  during  the

(8)  The  Sun  makes  his  entrance  into  Capricorn  the  nth  of  December ,  and  then  is  the
winter  folftice,  when  he  is  got  fartheft  from  the  equator  ;  and,  in  northern  regions,  the
nights  are  at  the  longeft,  and  the  days  at  the  fhorteft.

(9)  Eudoxus  and  Meson ,  both  mentioned  in  the  preface  to  the  firft  book;  and  Hip¬
parchus ,  in  the  firft  chapter  of  the  firft  book  :  this  laft  was  of  Nicea  in  Bithjnia ,  accord¬
ing  to  Suidas ,  and  the  moll  renowned  Aftronomer  of  his  age:  he  flourifhed  about  120
years  before  the  Chrifliin  cera.

winter.


Chap.  XIV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  411

winter.  And  this  muft  always  be  done,  even  in  thofe  hives,  which,
by  reafon  of  the  fewneis  of  the  common  people,  are  but  thinly  in¬
habited.

Moreover,  whatever  chinks  or  holes  there  are  in  them,  we  muft
dawb  them  on  the  outfide  with  clay  and  ox’s  dung  mixed  together,
and  leave  nothing  but  the  entries  for  them  to  go  out  and  come  in  by.
And,  altho’  the  vafes  be  protected  by  a  portico,  neverthelefs  we  muft
cover  them  over  with  ftraw  and  leaves  put  clofe  together,  and  fecure
them  from  cold  and  ft  or  ms,  as  much  as  the  thing  will  bear.  Some
kill  fowls,  and,  after  they  have  taken  out  their  entrails,  fhut  them  up
in  the  hives ;  and  they  afford  a  gentle  heat  to  the  bees,  which  lurk
in  their  feathers  in  the  winter-time :  as  alfo,  if  their  provifions  are
fpent,  they  feed  commodioufly  upon  them  when  they  are  hungry,
and  leave  nothing  but  their  bones.  But,  if  the  honey-combs  are
fufficient  for  them,  the  fowls  remain  intire  ;  nor  do  they  offend
the  bees  with  their  fmell,  altho’  they  love  cleanlinefs  exceed¬
ingly.  Neverthelefs  we  think  it  better,  in  the  winter-time,  when
they  are  in  diftrefs  with  hunger,  to  give  them,  in  little  troughs  at  the
very  entry  of  their  hives,  either  dry  figs  bruifed  and  moiftened  in
water,  or  rob  of  grapes,  (muft  boiled  in  to  a  third  part)  or  raifin
wine ;  with  which  liquors  you  muft  moiften  and  imbue  clean  wool,
that  the  bees,  {landing  upon  it,  may  draw  up  the  juice,  as  it  were,
through  a  fiphon.  It  will  alfo  be  very  proper  to  give  them  raifins  of
the  fun,  fprinkled  a  little  with  water,  after  we  have  broken  them.
And  with  thefe  forts  of  food  they  muft  be  fupported,  not  only  in
winter,  but  alfo  at  fuch  times  (as  I  faid  before)  as  the  fpurge,  and
alfo  the  elm-trees,  bloffom.

After  the  {horteft  day  of  winter  is  paft,  they  confume  almoft,  in
forty  days,  all  the  honey  that  was  laid  up  in  ftore  for  them  (unlefs  a
more  liberal  allowance  was  left  them  by  their  Overfeer)  j  and  oft-
times  alfo,  after  they  have  emptied  their  wax-works,  they  lie  in  the
honey-combs  faffing,  and  benumbed,  without  motion,  in  the  manner
of  ferpents,  till  the  riling  of  ylrffiurus,  which  is  about  the  thirteenth
of  February ,  and  by  their  reft  preferve  their  life  :  neverthelefs,  that
they  may  not  lofe  it,  if  a  longer  famine  affinal  ts  them,  it  is  belt  to
put  into  the  hives,  through  the  entrance  of  the  porch,  fweet  juices
or  gellies  in  tubes,  and  fo  fuftain  them  during  the  fcarcity  of  the
times,  till  the  rifing  of  ArBurus ,  and  the  coming  of  the  fwallow,  pro-
mife  that  the  enfuing  weather  will  be  more  favourable.  Therefore
after  that  time,  when  the  chearfulnefs  of  the  day  permits,  they  have
the  courage  to  go  out  to  the  paftures :  for  after  the  vernal  Equinox,

G  g  g  2  without


412  L.  ].  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  IX.

without  any  delay,  they  wander  up  and  down  every-where,  and  pluck
the  flowers  that  are  lit  for  the  production  of  their  young  ones,  and
carry  them  home  to  their  hou fes.

Thefe  things  Hyginus  commands  to  be  moft  carefully  obferved
through  all  the  fealons  of  the  year  :  but  Celfus  adds  to  them  the  fol¬
lowing  things,  that  few  places  have  the  happinefs  of  being  in  a  condi¬
tion  to  afford  one  lort  of  food  for  bees  in  winter,  and  another  in  fummer  ;
therefore  he  denies,  that,  in  thofe  places  where  flowers,  that  are  proper
for  them,  fail,  after  the  fpring  of  the  year  is  paft,  the  hives  ought  to  be
left  without  moving  them  ;  but  that,  after  the  vernal  paftures  are  con-
fumed,  they  ought  to  be  tranflated  into  thofe  places  which  can  nourifh
the  bees  more  liberally  with  the  lateward  flowers  of  thyme,  baffard
marjoram,  and  Greek  favory,  which,  he  fays,  is  praefifed  both  in  the
regions  of  Achaia ,  where  they  are  tranflated  into  the  Attican  paffures,
and  in  Euboea  (io),  and  the  Cyclad  iflands,  where  they  are  tranfported
out  of  the  other  iflands  into  Scyrus ,  as  alfo  in  Sicily ,  when  they  are
brought  to  Hybla  out  of  other  parts  of  the  country.  The  fame  author
fays,  that  the  wax-works  are  make  of  flowers,  and  the  honey  of  the
morning  dew,  which  aflumes  fo  much  the  better  quality,  the  fweeter
the  materials  are,  of  which  the  wax  is  compounded.  But  he  directs
us  to  look  carefully  into  the  hives,  before  they  are  removed  from  one
place  to  another-  and  to  take  out  the  honey-combs  that  are  old,  and
full  of  moths,  and  ready  to  drop  down ;  and  to  referve  only  a  few  of
them,  and  of  the  beff:  fort,  that  fo  as  many  of  them  as  can  be,  may
be  made,  at  the  fame  time,  of  the  beff  flowers  ;  and  that  fuch  vafes,
as  any  one  has  a  mind  to  remove,  be  carried  only  in  the  night-time,
and  without  fhaking  them.


CHAP.  XV.

Of  the.  Making  of  Honey ,  and  of  the  T*ime  when  the  Hives

ought  to  he  caftrated .

PRefently  after  the  fpring  is  pall:,  follows,  as  I  faid,  the  time  for
gathering  in  and  making  the  honey  j  for  which  the  labour  of
the  whole  year  is  employed.  We  underhand,  that  the  honey  is  ripe

(io)  Euboea ,  now  called  by  many  writers  Negroponte,  an  ifland  upon  the  coaft  of
u4chaia\  and  Scyrot,  an  ifland  in  the  aEga’anCc a,  about  28  miles  diftant  from  it  j  and  the
Cyclad  iflands,  in  the  fame  lea,  have  been  already  mentioned.


for


Chap.  XV.  O/HUSBANDRY.  4.1 3

for  gathering,  when  we  obferve  the  bees  expelling  and  driving  away
the  drones,  which  is  a  kind  of  animal  of  a  larger  growth,  and  very
like  a  bee,  and,  as  Virgil  fays,  an  idle  JluggiJh  cattle ,  and,  that  fits
conftantly  by  the  honey-combs,  without  any  induftry  :  for  they  do
not  gather  any  provifions  themfelves,  and  conlume  thofe  that  are
brought  in  by  others.  Neverthelcfs  thefe  drones  fecm  to  contribute
fomething  towards  the  procreation  of  the  young  generation,  they  fit¬
ting  upon  thofe  feeds,  of  which  the  bees  are  formed  :  therefore  they
are  admitted  into  greater  familiarity,  in  order  to  hatch,  cherilh,  and
educate  the  new  offspring ;  but,  after  the  young  bees  are  hatched,
they  are  thru  ft  out  of  the  houfes  by  force,  and,  as  the  fame  poet
fays,  driven  from  the  mangers.  Some  order  them  to  be  intirely  ex¬
terminated  ;  but  I  am  of  Mago's  opinion,  and  think  that  this  ought
not  to  be  done,  but  that  bounds  ought  to  be  let  to  cruelty ;  for  the
whole  race  ought  not  to  be  utterly  deftroyed,  left  the  bees  be' in¬
fected  with  lloth  and  idlenefs,  which,  when  the  drones  confume  a
part  of  their  provifions,  become  more  nimble  and  active  in  repairing,
their  lofies :  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  muft  we  fuffer  a  multitude  of
robbers  to  grow  ftrong,  and  form  themfelves  into  a  body,  left  they
pillage  and  deftroy  all  the  wealth  and  riches  belonging  to  others.
Therefore,  when  you  fee  the  bees  and  the  drones  frequently  quarrel¬
ling  with  one  another,  you  muft  open  the  hives,  and  look  into  them,
that  if  the  honey-combs  be  half-full,  they  may  be  deferred,  and  let
alone,  for  fome  time  ;  or,  if  they  are  already  full  of  liquor,  and  all
daubed  over  with  wax,  as  it  were,  with  covers  placed  upon  them,
they  may  be  cut  down.

But  we  muft  feize  upon  almoft  the  morning  of  the  day  for  caftra-
ting  the  hives ;  for,  it  is  not  proper  that  the  bees,  which  are  already
exafperated,  fliould  be  provoked  in  the  middle  of  the  heat  of  the
day.  Two  iron-tools  are  necefifary  for  this  ufe,  made  of  the  meafure
of  one  foot  and  an  half,  or  a  little  larger  ;  of  which,  let  one  be  an
oblong  knife,  with  a  broad  edge  on  both  fides,  having  a  crooked
feraper  or  bill  for  paring  on  one  fide  ;  let  the  other  be  plain,  and  very
fharp  on  the  forepart ;  that  by  this  the  honey-combs  may  be  the
better  cut  down,  and  by  that  other  fcraped  off ;  and  whatever  filth
falls  down  from  them,  may  be  drawn  towards  you  :  but  where  the
bee-hive  has  no  open  porch  on  the  backfide,  we  muft  convey  into  it
fmoak  made  with  galbanum,  or  dry  dung.  Moreover,  thefe  you  muft
put  up  into  an  earthen  veffel,  mixed  with  live-coals ;  and  this  veffel  is
made  with  handles,  and  fhaped  like  a  ftrait  narrow  pot,  fo  as  one
part  of  it  may  be  (harper,  or  draw  towards  a  point,  by  which  the

fmoak


414  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  IX.

fmoak  may  iflue  out  at  a  fmall  hole  ;  the  other  part  broader,  and  with
a  wide  mouth,  by  which  the  coals  may  be  blown.  When  fuch  a
pot  is  applied  to  the  hive,  by  blowing  into  it,  the  fmoak  is  conveyed
to  the  bees,  which,  not  being  able  to  endure  the  burning  fmell,  pre-
fently  betake  thcmfelves  to  the  forepart  of  their  domicil,  and  fome-
tires  retire  without  the  porch.

And,  when  you  have  made  way  for  looking  more  freely  into  the
hives,  if  there  be  two  fvvarms  of  bees,  for  the  moft  part  there  are
alfo  two  kinds  of  honey-combs  found  in  them :  for,  even  when  they
live  in  concord  together,  each  commonalty  obferves  its  own  cuftom
and  manner  of  ihaping^  and  fafhioning  their  wax-works.  But  all
honey-combs  do  always  hang  down  from  the  roofs  of  the  hives,  and
adhering  a  very  little  to  the  fides,  fo  as  not  to  touch  the  bottom,  be-
caufe  that  affords  a  way  for  the  fwarms  to  go  and  come  by.  But  the
figure  of  the  wax-works  is  fuch  as  the  fhape  or  make  of  the  hive  is ;
for  both  the  fquare  and  round  fpaces,  and  alfo  fuch  as  are  long,  give
their  own  fhape,  as  if  they  were  certain  moulds,  to  the  honey-combs ;
therefore  the  honey-combs  are  not  always  found  of  the  fame  figure.
But,  whatever  form  they  may  be  of,  let  them  not  be  all  taken  out :
for,  at  the  gathering  of  the  firft  crop,  while  the  fields  do  yet  abound
in  pafture,  the  fifth  part  of  them  muff  be  left ;  and,  at  the  latter
crop,  when  now  we  are  under  apprehenfions  of  the  winter,  the  third
part  muff  be  left.  And,  yet,  this  is  not  a  certain  meafure  in  all
countries  j  becaufe  due  regard  muff  be  had  for  the  bees,  and  provifion
left  for  them,  in  proportion  to  the  multitude  of  flowers,  and  the
plenty  of  food,  they  have.  But,  if  the  dependent  wax-works  run
out  in  length,  the  honey-combs  muft  be  cut  with  that  iron-tool,  which
is  like  to  a  knife  ;  and  then  they  muft  be  received  by  putting  your
two  arms  under  them,  and  fo  brought  out :  but,  if  they  run  crofs-
wife,  and  flick  to  the  roofs  of  the  hives,  then  there  is  occafion  for  the
iron-tool,  made  with  the  paring-knife  on  the  fide  of  it,  that,  thruft-
ing  it  into  them,  they  may  be  cut  down  with  the  forepart  of  the  tool
turned  towards  you.  But  fuch  of  them  as  are  old,  or  fpoiled,  ought
to  be  taken  out,  and  thofe  that  are  the  foundeft,  and  full  of  honey,
left  j  and,  finally,  if  there  be  any  of  them  that  contain  young  bees,
that  they  be  referved,  in  order  to  form  a  new  fwarm.

Then  your  whole  ftore  of  honey-combs  muft  be  brought  together
into  that  place,  wherein  you  refolve  to  make  the  honey  ;  and  the
holes  of  the  walls  and  windows  muft  be  carefully  daubed  over,  and
filled  up,  that  there  may  be  no  place  for  the  bees  to  pafs  through,
which  eagerly  fearch  after  their  loft  goods,  as  it  were,  and,  having
4  traced


Chap. XVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  415

traced  them,  and  found  them  out,  confume  them  :  therefore  a  fmoak
mud  be  made,  of  the  fame  materials,  in  the  entrance  of  the  place
alfo,  which  may  repell  fuch  of  them  as  attempt  to  come  in.  Then,
if  any  of  the  hives,  that  are  cadrated,  fhall  have  honey-combs  that  lie
crofs  the  entry,  they  mud  be  turned,  that  fo  the  hinder-parts  may,
by  turns,  becomes  the  porches  or  entries :  for  fo  the  next  time  they
are  cadrated,  the  old  honey-combs  fhall  rather  be  taken  away  than
the  new,  and  the  wax-works  will  be  renewed,  which  by  how  much
the  older,  by  fo  much  the  worfe  they  are.  But  if  peradventure  the
hives  are  furrounded,  and  inclofed  with  a  wall,  and  are  immoveable,
we  mud  take  care,  that  they  be  cadrated  at  one  time  in  the  hinder-
part,  and  in  the  forepart  at  another  time  :  and  this  ought  to  be  done
before  the  fifth  hour  of  the  day,  and  then  repeated,  either  after  the
ninth  hour,  or  the  morning  following.

But  how  many  honey-combs  foever  are  cut  down,  it  is  proper  to
make  the  honey  the  fame  day,  while  they  are  warm.  A  willow
bafket,  or  a  fack  woven  pretty  thin  with  ofiers,  like  an  inverted  cone,
luch  as  that  wherewith  wine  is  racked  or  drained,  is  hung  up  in  a
dark  place  ;  then  the  honey-combs  are  gathered  into  it  one  by  one,  as
they  are  taken  out.  But  care  mud  be  taken,  that  thofe  parts  of  their
wax-works,  which  either  have  young  bees,  or  red  fordid  matter  in
them,  be  feparated  from  them  :  for  they  are  of  a  bad  tade,  and  fpoil
the  honey  with  their  juice.  Then,  when  the  drained  honey  has
flowed  into  a  tub  fet  under  it  to  receive  it,  it  is  transferred  into  earthen
veffels,  which  are  left  open  for  a  few  days,  till  the  new  honey  leave
off  fermenting  and  it  mud  be  frequently  fcummed- with  a  ladle  or
fcummer.  Then  prefently  afterwards  the  fragments  of  honey-combs,
which  have  remained  in  the  fack,  are  dreffed  and  handled  afrefh,  and
the  juice  fqueezed  out  of  them  ;  and  the  honey  that  flows  from
them  is  of  a  fecondary  fort,  and,  by  perfons  that  are  more  exad  and
careful  in  their  affairs,  is  laid  up  apart  by  itfelf,  led  that  which  is  of
the  mod  exquifite  tade,  by  adding  this  to  it,  lhould  become  worfe.


CHAP.  XVI.

Of  the  Making  of  Wax.

n^HE  crop  of  wax,  tho’  it  amounts  to  very  little  money,  is
§j  neverthelefs  not  to  be  negle&ed,  inafmuch  as  the  ufe  of  it  is
neceflfary  for  many  things.  The  remains  of  the  honey-combs,  when

the


4i6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  Book  IX.

the  honey  is  fqueezed  out  of  them,  after  they  are  carefully  wafhed
with  fweet  water,  are  thrown  all  together  into  a  brazen  veflel :  then
water  being  put  to  them,  they  are  melted  upon  a  good  fire :  and,
when  this  is  done,  the  wax  is  poured  out,  and  drained  through  draw
or  rufhes,  and  then  boiled  over-again  in  the  fame  manner  as  before,
and  poured  out  into  fuch  moulds  as  every  one  thinks  mod  proper,
water  being  fird  put  into  them  :  and  it  is  eafy  to  take  it  out  of  the
moulds  after  it  is  congealed  and  hardened,  becaufe  the  moidure  that
is  under  it  does  not  differ  it  to  dick  to  the  moulds.  But  now  having
finished  my  difiertation  upon  cattle,  that  are  kept  in  or  about  the
manor-houfe,  and  the  feveral  ways  of  paduring  the  fame,  that  part
of  Hufbandry,  which  yet  remains  to  be  treated  of,  viz.  the  culture
of  gardens ,  I  (hall  next  put  into  verfe,  as  both  you,  Publius  Silvinus ,
and  our  friend  Gallio ,  have  been  pleafed  to  require.


L.  JUNIUS


[  417  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA


O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  TENTH.

Of  the  Culture  of  Gardens .


The  PREFACE.

REceive,  O  Silvinus ,  the  remaining  fmall  payment  of  your  ufury,
which  you  demanded,  and  I  engaged  to  pay  you  :  for,  with
the  nine  former  books  I  payed  what  I  owed,  except  this  part  only,
which  I  now  fully  pay.  There  remains,  therefore,  the  culture  of
gardens,  notably  neglected  formerly  by  antient  Hufbandmen,  but  now
in  very  great  requeft.  Tho’  it  is  true,  indeed,  that,  among  the  an-
tients,  there  was  greater  parfimony  and  frugality,  neverthelefs  the
poor  were  wont  to  fare  better,  and  to  be  frequently  admitted  to  public
feafts ;  the  higheft  and  the  lowed  fuftaining  themfelves  with,  and  living
upon,  plenty  of  milk,  venifon,  and  flefh  of  tame  cattle  alfo,  juft  in
the  fame  manner  as  they  did  upon  corn  and  water  :  but  afterwards,
when  the  following  age,  and  efpecially  our  own,  did  fet  a  mighty
value  upon  dainty  difhes,  invented  for  promoting  luft  and  wanton-
nefs,  and  fuppers  were  eftimated,  not  by  mens  natural  wants  and  ne-
ceflities,  but  by  the  value  of  their  eftates,  and  yearly  income,  Ple¬
beian  poverty  was  removed  from  the  more  coftly  and  delicate  viands,
and  forced  to  betake  itfelf  to  common  and  ordinary  fare.

Wherefore  we  muft  be  more  careful  and  diligent,  than  our  anceftors
were,  in  delivering  precepts  and  dire&ions  for  the  cultivation  of
gardens,  becaufe  the  fruit  of  them  is  now  more  in  ufe ;  and  I  would
have  fubjoined  them  in  profe  to  the  preceding  books,  as  I  had  refolv- .
ed,  unlefs  your  frequent  and  earned:  demand  had  overcome  my  pur-

H  h  h  pofe,


4i  8  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  X.

pofe,  and  prevailed  with  me  to  fill  up,  with  poetical  numbers,  thofe
parts  of  the  Georgic  poem,  which  were  omitted,  and  which  even
Virgil  himfelf  intimated, that  he  left  to  be  treated  of  by  thofe  that  fhould
come  after  him.  And,  indeed,  we  would  not  have  dared  to  attempt
that  any  otherwife,  but  at  the  defire  and  command  of  that  poet,  who
is  worthy  of  the  greateft  veneration  and  honour,  by  whofe  divine  in-
ftigation  and  authority,  as  it  were,  (flowly  without  doubt,  becaule  of
the  difficulty  of  the  work,  neverthelefs  not  without  hope  of  pro-
fperous  fuccefs)  we  have  undertaken  a  very  (lender  and  lean  fubjeft,
and  alinoft  intirely  deftitute  of  a  body,  which  is  fo  very  fmall  and  in-
con  (iderable,  that,  in  the  confummation  indeed  of  the  whole  work,
it  may  be  reckoned  and  confidered  as  a  particle  of  our  labour  3  but  by
itfelf,  and  confined,  as  it  were,  within  its  own  bounds,  it  can  by  no
means  be  put  into  fuch  a  drefs,  as  to  make  any  graceful  appearance.
For  altho’  it  has  many  members,  as  it  were,  of  which  we  may  be
able  to  fay  fomething ;  neverthelefs  they  are  fo  very  fmall,  that  (as
the  Greeks  fay)  of  the  incomprehcnfible  Jmalnefs  of  fan  d  a  rope  cannot
be  made  (1).  Wherefore,  whatever  it  is  that  our  elucubrations  have
produced  upon  this  fubjedt,  it  is  fo  far  from  laying  claim  to  any  com¬
mendations  peculiar  to  itfelf,  that  it  will  be  very  well  Satisfied,  if  it
be  no  difgrace  to  the  things  which  I  have  formerly  written  and  pub-
lifhed.  But  now  let  us  leave  off  prefacing.

rFHEE  likewife,  O  Silvinus ,  I  will  teach
-*  The  culture  of  thy  gardens,  and  thofe  things
Which  Virgil  (2),  in  too  narrow  bounds  confin’d,

Unfinifh’d  left,  by  us  to  be  fupply’d  j
;  When  of  the  fruitful  fields,  the  plenteous  crops,

The  gifts  of  Bacchus ,  and  celeftial  honey,

And,  O  great  Pales  !  thee,  likewife,  he  fung:

Firft,  to  thy  num’rous  garden  (3 )  let  fat  land

(1)  This  Greek  proverb,  ig  xy.uv  <ryjiv\ov  ■—hzx.zii,  you  plait  a  rope  of  J and^  i,  applica¬
ble  ro  fuch  as  undertake  impoilibilities.

(2)  Virgil,  in  his  4'h  book  of  Georgies ,  /.  146.  fays,  that,  if  he  had  had  time,  he
would  have  fung  alfo  of  gardening,  of  which  he  has  given  a  mod  beautiful  sketch,  and
touched  a  little  upon  the^plcafures  and  advantages  of  it  in  his  description  of  the  Coryciu?e
old  man  3  which  fhews  how  lovely  a  performance  it  would  have  b:en,  if  he  had  pur-
lu:d  ir 3  but  he  left  it  to  the  care  of  future  poets.  Columella ,  his  great  admirer,  in  obe¬
dience  to  him,  as  he  fays,  arrempted  it.  How  far  he  has  lucceeded,  or  whether,  in  any
part  of  his  performance,  he  has  come  up  to  the  beauty  of  Virgil’s  £ horc  sketch,  all  they
who  underftand  the  original  will  ju  !ge  for  themfelves.

(3)  Kurnerofo  horto.  This  epithet  is  given  to  the  garden,  becaufe  of  the  vaft  variety
of  plants,  Ihrubs,  &c.  in  it  3  or  it  may  fignify  large  and  fpacious,  with  a  vaft  many  beds
and  borders.

.  6  Afford


Book  X.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  41c

Afford  a  feat,  whofe  loofe  and  crumbling  glebe,

10  And  open  fur  face,  to  the  piercing  fpade

Yields  freely  ;  which,  when  digg’d,  refembles  fand.

Fit  is  the  nature  of  that  foil,  which  grafs
In  great  abundance  brings  j  or  moift’ned  well,

Dwarf-elder’s  ruddy  berries,  bright  like  gold,

15  Produces  :  for  I  neither  love  the  dry,

Nor  that  where  water  Magnates,  and  doth  form
A  marfh  ;  and  which,  of  the  complaining  frog,

The  curfes  and  reproaches  dill  endures  (4,).

That  foil  is  alfo  good,  which  leavy  elms

2©  Spontaneous  educates,  and  is  made  glad

With  branches  of  wild  vines,  or  rough  with  woods
Of  wild  pear-tree  (y),  or  with  the  ftony  fruits
Of  plum-trees  overfpread,  or  ftrew’d  with  fruits
Which  uncommanded  apple-trees  produce  ;

2y  But  bears  no  hellebores,  nor  galbanum  (6),

With  noxious  juice ;  nor  yew-tree  doth  endure,

Nor  pungent  poifons  fweats,  altho’  it  may

The  mournful  hemlock  (7),  and  the  mandrake’s  flow’rs  (8),

Produce,  whofe  root  fhews  half  a  man,  whofe  juice

30  With  madnefs  ftrikes*  it  may  like  wife  bring  forth  •'

The  fennel-giant  (9),  which  to  fchool-boys  hands
No  pity  fhews ;  and  brambles,  to  the  legs

(4)  The  poet  here  alludes  to  the  fable  of  Latona ,  who  transformed  the  boors  into
frogs,  becaufe  they  refufed  to  let  her  drink  out  of  a  pond  of  clear  water,  which  they  had
cleared  of  weeds ;  of  which  we  have  an  account  in  Ovid.  Metamorph.  fab.  9.

(5)  Achrados.  Pyri  Jilvefiris.  Columella  retains  the  Greek  name  and  termination.
Diofcorides  fays,  lib.  i.  that  it  is  a  kind  of  wild  pear-tree,  whofe  fruit  ripens  very  late  ;
and  that  it  has  a  more  ftyptic  quality  than  the  pear-tree.

(6)  Galbanum ,  a  gum  that  i flues  out  of  a  fpecies  of  fennel-giant.  Pliny  fays,  that  the
mountain  Arnanus.  in  Syria  yields  it.  It  is  the  juice  of  a  ferulaceous  tree  or  plant,  and
from  the  juice  dropping  out  of  it  the  tree  is  called  Jlagonitis.

(7)  Cicuta ,  hemlock.  Pliny ,  in  the  book  and  chapter  above-mentioned,  fays  it  was
publica  Athenienjlum  invifa  poena  ;  they  put  their  ffate-prifoners  and  other  criminals  fre¬
quently  to  death  with  it;  for  which  reafon,  I  fuppofe,  our  poet  calls  it  mcefla  cicuta.

(8)  Mandr agora ,  a  mandrake.  Plin.  Nat.  Hifi.  lib.  xxv.  cap.  13.  gives  a  large  de-
fcription  of  it  ,•  and  altho’  he  mentions  fome  of  its  hurtful  effects,  yet  I  don’t  obferve,
that  he  mentions  its  caufing  madnefs ;  neither,  if  I  miftake  not,  does  he  take  any  no¬
tice,  in  defcribing  the  roots  of  it,  of  their  refembling  the  lower  parts  of  the  human
body.  The  ingenious  Mr.  Miller  fays,  that  all  this  is  fable;  tho’  Pliny  takes  notice  of
the  danger  of  taking  up  its  roots.  Perhaps  it  may  be  either  a  different  herb  from  what
we  call  by  that  name;  or,  in  very  hot  countries,  it  may  have  different  qualities  from
what  it  has  here.

(9)  Ferula,  fennel-giant :  the  rods  of  it  were  the  inftruments  of  fchool-difciplfne.

H  h  h  2  Unkind,


1-20  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  X.

Unkind,  or  Chrift’s-thorn  with  fharp  prickles  arm’d.

Likewile  let  near  this  ground  Tome  rivers  flow,

3  y  Whofe  dreams  the  hardy  gard'ner  may  attratft
To  help  to  quench  his  garden’s  conflant  third.

Or  let  fome  gentle  fpring  into  a  well
Didil,  not  funk  too  deep,  led  too  much  toil  •

The  drawer’s  panting  Tides  diould  over-dretch.

40  And  let  fuch  ground  with  walls,  or  prickly  hedge,

Thick-fet,  furrounde'd  be,  and  well  fecur’d  ;

Not  pervious  to  the  cattle,  nor  the  thief.

Search  not  for  gifts  of  the  Dczdalian  hand  (10),

Nor  thofe  of  Polyclete  (11) ;  nor  datues  carv’d
45-  By  Pbradmons  curious  art,  or  Agelad ’.

But  chufe  the  trunk  of  fome  huge  antient  tree  j
Rough-hue  it,  ufe  no  art;  Priapus  (12)  make
With  frightful  members,  of  enormous  fize  ;

Him,  in  the  middle  of  thy  garden,  place,

50  And  to  him,  as  its  guardian,  homage  pay,

That  with  his  mondrous  parts  he  may  deter

The  plund  ring  boy  ;  and  with  his  threat’ning  feythe,

The  robber  from  intended  rapine  keep.

€ome  now,  Pierian  Mufes  (13),  and  lpin  out,

In


(10)  Daedalus,  a  famous  flatuary  of  Sicyon ;  he  lived  in  the  days  of  Minos  :  he  was  the
inventor  of  many  ufeful  thing5  in  life,  as  the  faw,  the  ax,  the  plumber,  the  auger,  glue,
cement,  fails  for  drips,  <6  c.  Plin.  Nat.  Hift.  lib.  vii.  cap.  56.  Some  fay  he  was  an  Athe¬
nian,  and  the  firft  ftatuary  who  feparated  the  legs  of  Itatues,  they  being  united  and  joined
before  his  time.  All  curious  pieces  of  workmanfhip  are  from  him  called  Dedalian ,  fo
that  our  author  only  means  curious  ftatues,  by  whatever  hand  they  were  made.

(11)  Polycletus ,  Phradmon ,  Agelades ,  three  famous  ftatuaries,  who  flourifhed  about
the  07th  olympiad.  Polycletus  was  fcholar  to  Agelades ,  who,  by  Paufanias ,  is  called.
IIoauxas/t©--  both  he  and  Pliny  make  frequent  mention  of  them,  and  of  many  of  their
pieces.

(12)  The  antienrs  put  their  gardens  under  the  protection  of  Priapus ,  whom  they  called
the  fon  of  Dionyfus  and  Venus.  He  is  faid  to  have  been  of  Lampfacus  in  the  Helle¬
spont  fo  Virgil  calls  him  Priapus  Hellefpontiacus :  Columella  calls  him  Ithypkallus ,  ob
pudendi  ere  Bam  for  mam.  It  feems  the  antients  fet  him  over  their  gardens  2s  a  fymbol
of  frui.fu'nefs.  Both  Virgil ,  Horace ,  Ovid ,  and  Tibullus ,  make  mention  of  him  as  the
keeper  of  gardens,  or  a  lcarecrow  to  thieves  and  fowls.

(15)  Our  author,  as  all  other  peers,  antient  and  modern,  invokes  and  implores  the
afliitance  of  rhe  Mufes ,  a  fet  of  fictitious  deities,  which  were  called  Pierides  or  P;eri<et
from  mount  Pier  ns  in  Tkejfaly ,  as  Ftp  us  and  Cicero  fay.  Some  affirm,  that  Fieri  a  was  a
mountain  in  Thracia ,  where  Orpheus  Lved  :  others,  that  ic  was  a  mountain  in  Macedonia ,
where  the  Mufes  were  born,  which  mountain,  they  fay,  touched  upon  Thracia ;  and  fome
fay,  that  the  foundation  o'-  this  fiCtic  n  was,  becaufe  Orpheus,  the  firft  wife  man,  poet,  and
divine  among  the  Greeks}  w.nc  and  made  his  abode  in  thefe  places.  Ovid  and  others


421


Book  X;  Of  HUSBANDRY.

55  In  (lender  verfe,  the  culture,  and  the  times,

Of  fowing  every  feed  j  the  care ,  when  fown  )

Beneath  what  (lar  fair  flow’rs  firft  (hew  their  heads.
And  Te/iums  rofe-beds  (14)  firft  begin  to  budj
And  Bacchus ’  genuine  plants,  or  other  trees,

60  Mild  by  ingraftment  on  a  borrow’d  (lock,

Bend  with  the  burden  of  adopted  fruits.

Now,  when  the  thirfty  Dog  far  (hall  have  drank
Full  draughts  of  Oceans  dreams  ;  and  when  his  orb
With  equal  hours  bright  Titan  (hall  have  pois’d,

65  And  Autumn ,  glutted  with  all  forts  of  fruit.

Shaking  his  hoary  head,  with  apples  deck’d,

And  all  his  garments  wet  and  dain’d  with  mud,

Shall  from  ripe  grapes,  the  foaming  liquor  fqueeze  ;
Then  let  the  lovely  ground,  with  drength  of  fpades
70  Well  arm’d  with  iron,  be  turned  up-fide-down.

If  delv’d  before,  and  moid’ned  with  the  rains.

But  if,  with  burning  heat,  and  (ky  ferene.

Made  hard,  it  without  culture  dill  remains,

Then  let  commanded  brooks,  arid  cooling  fprings,

75  In  (loping  paths  defcend  ;  that  fo  the  earth

May.  drink,  and  therewith  fill  her  gaping  mouth.

But  if  no  moidure  from  the  clouds  your  fields
Derive,  nor  in  themfelves  the  fame  contain
If  nature  of  the  place,  or  heav’n  itfelf,

80  With-holds  the  (how’rs  j  then  wait  till  winter  come.
Till  in  the  fea’s  green  waves,  the  fparkling  Crown,
The  gift  of  Bacchus  to  his  Gnojian  bride  ( 1 5),

By  turning  of  the  world’s  poles  be  hid,


give  us  different  reafons  why  they  were  fo  called:  if  any  have  a  mind  to  know  their
feveral  names  and  offices,  they  may  confult  theOVee*  epigrams,  and  fome  Doems  attributed
to  Virgil,  where  they  may  l'atisfy  themfelves.

(I4 )  T>arft'uvh  a  town  of  Lucania  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  between  Salerno  and
Velia.  Pliny  fays,  that  the  Greeks  called  it  Pofulonia ,  which  is  the  reafon  why  Velleius
calls  u  Neptuma  :  the  gulph  near  it  was  called  Sims  Pafiinus,  now  called  the  Gulpb  of
Salerno.  This  place  was  very  much  celebrated  for  its  rofes,  which  flouriffied  twice  i
year,  in  May  and  September.  Virgil  commends  biferi  rofaria  Pafti

(te)  Thefe  lines  allude  to  the  ftory  of  Bacchus’  marrying  Ariadne,  daughter  of  Minor
km?,  °f  Crete,  at  Cnotfus  in  Crete- ,  and  his  making  her  a  piefent  of  a  crown,  which  after
wards,  to  prefer ve  her  memory,  he  t  ran  Hated  into  the  heavens,  of  which  Was  formed  a
conftellauon,  called  Corona  borealis ,  or  Corona  Cm  (ft  a  or  Gnojla,  or  Ariadne  Corona,  See.

6


i.  22  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  X.

And  Atlas  loving  daughters  (i6),  ftruck  with  fear,

85  Shun  of  the  rifing  fun  the  adverfe  rays.

And  now  when  Phoebus  (17)  in  fome  parts  of  heav'n
Does  not  confide,  nor  think  himfelf  fecure,

But  from  the  Scorpions  claws  and  deadly  fling
Flees  trembling,  and  on  Crotus'  horfe-like  back
90  Makes  hafle  the  threatening  danger  to  efcape,

Ye  vulgar,  unacquainted  with  your  race  (18},

Her  lpare  not,  whom,  deceiv’d.,  you  falfly  call
Your  mother  ;  {he,  who  of  Promethean  clay
Was  form’d,  is  mother  of  a  diff’rent  race,

9y  Not  yours:  another  parent  brought  us  forth.

When  unrelenting  Neptune  with  the  fea
O’erwhelnTd  the  earth,  and  fhook  the  lowed:  pit
Of  hell,  and  Lethe's  flreams  with  terror  ftruck.

Then,  firft,  th’  infernal  hods,  the  Stygian  king
100  Saw,  with  his  trembling  joints,  betray  his  fear.

When,  with  the  Ocean’s  weight,  departed  fouls
Opprefs’d,  complained,  and  an  uproar  made.

Us,  when  this  globe  of  mortals  was  bereft,

A  fruitful  hand  did  form ;  Us  ragged  rocks,

■105  Torn  by  Deucalion's  hands  from  lofty  hills,

Brought  forth.  But  lo !  an  harder  toil  us  calls.


(1 6)  Atlaniides  were  the  daughters  of  Atlas,  a  certain  King  of  Mauritania ,  as  fome
fay,  who  W2S  a  great  aftronomer  j  they  were  fifteen  in  number,  and,  as  the  poet  tells  us,
were  mandated  into  the  heavens,  and  converted  into  ftarsj  and  they  fan fy,  that  fome  of
them  are  the  clufter  of  fmall  ftars  in  the  neck  of  the  Bull,  called  Pleiades,  which  have
been  already  mentioned  }  and  that  others  of  them  are  the  five  ftars  in  the  Bull’s  face,
by  the  Greeks  called  Hyades ,  becaufe  they  imagined  they  were  the  caufe  of  rain  :  thefe,
by  the  Romans,  were  called  SucuU,  from  a  wrong  interpretation  of  the  Greek  name,
they  being,  at  that  time,  it  feems,  very  little  acquainted  either  with  the  Greek  learning
or  language.

(17)  Here  Columella  defcribes,  poetically  enough,  the  Sun’s  retiring  from  the  fign  Scor¬
pio  to  that  of  Sagittarius ,  in  the  month  of  November  }  and,  becaufe  of  the  fhortening  of
the  day,  he  is  faid  to  fly  away  upon  the  back  of  Crotus ,  who,  as  the  mythologifts  fay,
was  transformed  into  this  conftellation  ac  the  prayer  of  the  Mufes,  with  whom  he  had
lived  familiarly,  being  fon  to  their  nurfe  Eupbemes.  They  paint  him  half  a  man,  and
half  an  horfe  j  and  put  a  bow  and  arrow  into  his  hands,  he  being  an  excellent  hunter  and
archer.

(18)  Here  the  poet  addrefTes  himfelf  to  Husbandmen  }  and  tells  them,  that  they  need
not  be  afraid  to  dig  the  earth,  from  a  vain  apprehenfion  of  tearing  out  their  mother’s
bowels  j  for,  fays  he,  you  are  not  of  that  race  of  mankind  which  Prometheus  formed  of
clay}  thefe  all  perifhed  by  Deucalion s  flood}  you  are  of  another  race  of  mortals,-  you
were  not  formed  out  of  the  earth,  but  made  of  ftones,  which  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha
threw  behind  their  back.


A


Book  X.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  423

A  never-ceafing  labour :  roufe,  awake.

Ye  drowfy  fluggards,  rife,  drive  deep  away,

Now  come,  and  with  the  plough-fhare’s  crooked  tooth
no  Her  green  hairs  tear,  now  her  green  garments  cutj
With  pond’rous  rakes  pierce  her  unyielding  back ;

And  fear  not,  with  large  mattocks,  to  pull  out
Her  entrails,  and  them  mix  with  th’  upmoft  turf,

And  place  them  to  be  pinched  with  hoar-frofts,

1 1  y  To  frozen  fcourges,  and  the  wrath  expos’d

Of  north- welb  winds  j  and  let  the  fierce  north  wind
Them  bind,  and  let  the  eaftern  wind  unbind.

But,  as  foon  as  white  Zephyr  (19),  with  his  gale
Warm’d  with  the  Sun,  the  numbing  colds  and  frods
120  Of  the  Riphcean  winter  (20)  fhall  have  thaw’d ;

And  Orpheus'  Lyre  (1)  fhall  from  the  darry  pole
Retire,  and  plunge  itfelf  into  the  deep  j
And  fwallows  (2)  in  their  neds  the  fpring’s  advent
Shall  chant  $  then  let  the  Kitchen-gard’ner  bring

12  f  Himfelf  full  bafkets  yielding  with  the  weight,

And  with  fat  rubbifh,  or  the  folid  dung
Of  ades,  or  with  that  of  other  herds.

Feed  to  the  full  the  hungry  fading  ground.

Nor  let  him  fhew  reluctance  to  prefent
130  As  food  to  weary  fallow  ground,  whate’er
The  privy  vomit  from  its  dirty  finks.

(19)  That  wind,  which  the  Greeks  called  Zephyrus ,  becaufe  of  its  animating  influ¬
ence,  was  by  the  Romans  called  Favonius ,  both  names  denoting  the  gentlenefs  of  the
weather,  when  the  gentle  weftern  breezes  began  to  blow,  whereby  all  things  were  en¬
livened  and  cherilhed  P liny  fays,  that  this  wind  blows  from  that  place  in  the  heayens
where  the  Sun  fets  at  the  time  of  the  equinox ;  that  it  begins  the  fpring,  opens  the  earth,  and  is
very  whollbme  with  its  gentle  cold,  lib.  xviii.  34.  Our  authorfays,  lib.  viii.  11.  that  they
begin  to  blow  about  the  5th  of  February ;  and  Varro ,  before  the  7th  day  of  the  faid
month  •  and  Fliny  fays  they  begin  to  blow  commonly  about  the  8th.

(20)  Riphaa  bruma.  The  Riphaan  mountains  are  in  the  northern  parts  of  Mufiovy,
out  of  which  the  river  Tanais ,  now  called  the  Don ,  arifeth,  and  empties  itfelf  into  the
Rains  Mxotis.  In  thefe  mountains  the  colds  in  winter  are  exceeding  fevere.

(1)  Orphei  Lyra.  The  Harp  is  a  confteljation  in  the  northern  hemifphere.  The  poets
feign,  that  it  was  placed  in  the  heavens  in  honour  of  Orpheus,  who  was,  as  fome  fay,
fon  of  one  of  the  Mufes.  Varro ,  lib.  ii.  cap.  5.  fays,  that  what  the  Greeks  called  Au'gjr,
was  by  the  Romans  called  Fidis.  Our  author  fays  it  begins  to  fet  the  firfh  of  February.
The  brighteft  ftar  in  the  confteilation  was  by  the  Romans  called  Fidicula :  buc  Pliny ,  if
I  miftake  not,  calls  always  the  whole  confteilation  by  this  name:  and  Columella  feems
to  call  it  fometimes  Fidis ,  fometimes  Fidicula.

(2)  Hirundo  cantdrit.  Pliny  fays,  that  fwallows  are  feen  the  22d  of  February ;  and
Columella ,  on  the  23d  of  the  faid  month.

Now


424  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  X,

Now  let  him  with  the  {harp  point  of  the  hoe
Attack  again  the  furface  of  the  ground
Condens’d  with  rains,  and  hard’ned  with  hoar  frofls  :

137  Soon  after  with  the  tufk  of  rake  or  fpade

The  green  turf’s  lively  herbage  let  him  bruife,

And  mix  well  with  the  clods ;  that  of  the  field,

Now  ripe  for  plants,  and  feeds,  the  nurfing  breads
May  be  unbound,  and  [nourijhment  convey].

140  Then  let  him  alfo  take  the  glitt’ring  fpade,

Worn  with  the  ground,  and  from  each  adverfe  bound,

Straight  narrow  furrows  draw,  from  fide  to  fide,

And  then  obliquely  with  fmall  paths  divide.

Now,  when  the  well-comb’d  earth  her  filthy  garb
145  Puts  off,  and  in  gay  drefs,  and  well-fet  hair,

Appears,  and  her  own  plants  and  feeds  demands,

Then  plant  the  various  flow’rs,  thofe  earthly  flars,

White  gi lUflow  rs ,  and  the  bright-yellow  eyes
Of  marigold^  and  fair  Narcifl'us  hairs  (3),

150  The  ftern  and  furious  lions  gaping  mouth  (4),

And  lilies ,  which  in  bafkets  long  preferve
Their  verdure ;  and  the  hyacinth ,  white  as  fnow,

Or  bluej  then  let  the  beauteous  violet
Be  planted,  which,  with  purple  and  with  gold
lyf  Richly  adorn’d,  its1  boughs  and  leaves  extends,

And  that  which  creeps  pale-colour’d  on  the  ground}

The  rofe  likewife,  too  full  of  modefl  blufh.

Now  fcatter  all-heal ,  with  its  healing  tear,

And  horned  poppies,  with  their  whollbme  juice,

1 60  And  poppies  which  bind  faft  efcaping  fleep.

From  Megaris  now  let  the  genial  feeds

Of  bulbs  (5)  be  brought,  which  fharpen  mens  defires,

And  put  young  modefl  ladies  on  their  guard.

And

(3)  Narcijjl  cojfias,  daffadil.  The  poet  tells  us,  that  a  certain  beautiful  boy,  feeing
himfelf  in  a  fountain,  fell  in  love  with  his  own  image,  and,  pining  away,  died  ,•  and  was
changed  into  a  flower  of  that  name.

(4)  Hi  antis  j era  leonis.  I  have  not  found  out  the  name  of  this  flower,  which,  when
it  opens,  refembles  the  gaping  mouth  of  a  lion.

(5)  Bulbi.  Pliny ,  Cato ,  and  feveral  other  antier.t  authors,  make  great  account  of
bulbs,  which,  in  their  days,  were  fo  common,  that,  as  father  HarJouin  obferves,  they
thought  it  needlefs  to  mention  their  names}  and  that  now  they  are  fo  much  in  dtufe,
that  we  fcarce;y  have  any  knowledge  of  thofe  which  the  ancients  valued  mo  ft  P/.w  /
reckons  the  fcilla  or  fiurlla,  the  Tea-onion,  as  the  French  call  it,  among  the  firft  ,  and
mentions  a  few  others  with  Greek  names,  which  I  believe  few  at  prefent  know  what

they


4-25


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

And  fuch  as  Sicca  (6)  gathers,  and  finds  hid
1 6f  Below  Getulian  (7)  clods;  and  rocket  (8)  fovvn
Near  to  Priapus ,  crown’d  with  ears  of  corn.

That  flow  and  drowfy  hufbands  it  may  roufe.

Small  lettice  now  is  fown,  which,  full  of  leaves,

With  tender  fibres  grows ;  and  fhort  chervil ,

170  And  endives ,  which  the  blunted  palate  pleafe  :

And  garlicks,  fmall  and  great  (9),  which  far  and  wide
From  their  divided  cloves  diffufe  their  fmell;

And  herbs  they  mix  with  beans  for  vulgar  fare  (10).

Now  is  the  time  for  Jkir'wort ,  and  that  root
1 75  Which  comes  of  Syrian  feed  (1 1),  which  flic’d  is  given

they  are.  Thofe  of  Megara ,  a  city  of  Achaia ,  between  Athens  and  Corinth ,  are  mod
commended?;  they  were,  it  feems,  great  provocatives,  and  as  fuch  are  taken  notice  of  by
Petronius,  Martial ,  Ovid ,  and  others ;  and  as  fuch  our  author  mentions  them.

( 6 )  Sicca ,  an  inland  town,  and  a  colony  in  Numidia ,  as  Pliny  fays,  lib.  v.  c.  3.  Some
authors  call  it  Veneria.

(7)  Gatuli.  The  Getulians  were  a  very  numerous  people  of  Africa.  Pliny  mentions
them  as  inhabiting  many  different  places  thereof,  and  diflinguifhes  them  by  feveral  names,
as  Gatuli  Autolotes ,  Gatuli  Vara,  &c.  He  places  fome  of  them  in  Mauritania  Ca fa¬
tten  fis.  Ptolemy  places  them  in  Inner  Libya.  Some  authors  place  them  between  Car¬
thage  and  Numidia.  It  is  probable,  that,  being  a  numerous  people,  they  fent  fome  of
their  number  into  different  places.

(8)  Rocket ,  a  very  hot  herb,  good  for  generation,  as  Pliny  and  feveral  others  affirm,
it  being  a  great  provocative  to  venery ;  which  the  author  infinuates  by  faying,  it  is  fown
near  to  Priapus.

(9)  Ulpicum ,  a  larger  fort  of  garlick :  I  have  not  found  it  under  this  name,  in  fuch  of
our  botanifts  as  I  have  looked  into.  Columella  fays,  lib.  xi.  c.  3.  that  fome  call  it  Punic
garlick ,  but  the  Greeks  call  it  Aphrofcorodon ;  and  that  it  is  of  a  much  greater  growth
than  common  garlick.  Pliny ,  lib.  xix.  c.  6.  fays,  that  the  Greeks  called  it  Cyprian  gar¬
licky  others  Antifcorodony  and  that  it  is  much  efleemed  in  Africa ,  as  a  principal  ingredient
in  their  delicate  falads :  that  it  ought  to  be  farcied  or  hoed,  ftmulatque  tria  folia  erupe-
rint ,  as  foon  as  three  blades  or  leaves  fhall  fpring  out  of  it.  Columella  fays,  cum  ternas
fibras  emiferint  fpica ,  when  its  cloves  fend  forth  three  fibres ;  by  which  we  may  obferve,
that  Columella  means  the  fame  thing  by  fibra,  as  Pliny  does  by  folia ,  viz.  the  blades,  as
he  fays,  that  wheat  ought  to  be  farcied  cum  eft  trium  ftbrarum.  I  believe  it  was  obferved
before,  that  father  Uardouin  underflood  this  to  fignify  when  it  has  three  fibres  at  the
root,  which,  I  think,  is  a  miftake.  When  mixed  with  oyl  and  vinegar,  it  raifeth  a  fur-
prifingly  great  froth,  as  Pliny  obferves,  which,  perhaps,  is  the  reafon  why  it  is  called
aphrofcorodon.

(10)  Quaque  fabis  habilis  fabrilia  mifcet.  Some  authors  fay,  that  they  ufed  to  mix
with  beans  water-creffes,  cat-mint,  and  mother  of  thyme,  penny- royal,  &c.  fo  that  in
this  line  he  comprehends  all  thefe  and  other  herbs  ufually  mixed  with  beans,  without
naming  them,  as  being  very  well  known :  but  the  general  opinion  is,  that  we  have  not
the  true  reading  of  this  line ;  and  the  attempts  that  fome  have  made  to  corred  it,  are
fo  different  from  the  text,  that  it  is  needlefs  to  mention  them.

(11)  Radix  qua  venit  AJfyrio femine.  What  this  root  is,  it  is  not  eafy  to  determine:
fome  fay  it  was  gingidium ,  toothpick-chervil.  Pliny  and  Diofcorides  fay  it  is  like  th efta-
phylinus ,  the  wild  parfnip,  but  fmaller  and  bitterer ;  and  is  eaten  both  raw  and  boiled
and  is  of  great  benefit  to  the  flomach.

I  i  i  With


Book  X,


426  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A

With  moift’ned  lupines  joined,  that  it  may
Provoke  frelh  bumpers  of  Pelujian  beer  (12).

The  low-pric’d  pickles  at  no  other  time,

Nor  caper-bufo ,  nor  mournful  el'campane ,

180  Nor  fennel-giant ,  with  its  threat’ning  rods,

Are  planted  :  now  the  creeping  grafs  of  mint.

And  dill's  fweet-fmelling  flow’rs,  are  fcattered  ;

And  rue  (13),  which  the  Palladian  berry's  tafte
Excels ;  and  mujlard ,  which  will  force  to  weep
185  Him  that  provokes  it :  now  is  fet  the  root
Of  Alifander  (14),  and,  which  caufeth  tears,

The  onion  j  and  that  herb  ( 1  y)  which  feafons  milk.

And  from  the  flave’s  audacious  front  removes
The  fhameful  brand,  and  tokens  of  his  flight  j
190  And,  therefore,  by  its  Greek  name  it  declares
Its  virtue  j  and  at  this  fame  time  is  fown
That  herb  (16),  which  o’er  the  whole  terreftrial  globe

Doth


(12)  Zythum ,  a  kind  of  drink  made  of  barley,  firft  in  ufe  among  the  Egyptians ;  hence
our  author  calls  it  Pelufiacum  Zythum.  Some  authors  fay  it  was  made  both  of  barley  and
wheat.

Pelufium ,  once  a  city  in  Egypt ,  now  only  a  village,  called  Behais ,  as  fome  authors  fay,
near  the  eaftern  mouth  of  the  Nile,  about  150  mi  es  from  Alexandria.

(13)  Rut  a.  Our  author  fays  it  excels  the  tafte  of  the  Palladian  berry,  meaning  the
olive,  which  was  dedicated  to  Minerva.  Some,  inftead  of  villura,  read  jutura,  to  fignify
that  rue,  joined  with  oil,  improved  the  tafte  thereof.

(14)  Oleris  pulli  radix  j  in  other  places,  Columella ,  as  allb  Pliny ,  call  it  olus  atrum ,
from  the  blacknefs  of  its  root  and  feed.  The  Greeks  call  it  Smyrnium  and  Hippofelinum .
The  EngliJJj  writers  call  it  Alexander ,  which  fome  think  to  be  a  corruption  of  olus
atrum.

(15)  This  herb,  by  the  defcription  the  author  gives  of  it,  is  lepidium.  Pliny  fays  it  is

only  ufed  with  milk.  Columella ,  lib.  xii.  8.  prefcribes  it  for  making  what  he  calls  oxy-
gala>  four  milk.  Pliny ,  lib.  xx.  c.  17.  fays,  that  it  is  placed  among  the  cauftics ;  that  it
removes  freckles,  cicatrices,  and  marks  upon  the  face.  It  feems  that  flaves  ufed  it  to  re¬
move  certain  Jligmata  or  marks  their  mailers  put  upon  them  j  which  being  obferved,
father  Hardouin  fays,  they  introduced  the  cuftom  of  branding  them  with  a  hot  iron.  It
feems  it  has  its  name  from  a irrds,  a  fpot  or  mark  upon  the  face  :  probably  it  may  be  fo
called  from  decortico  j  for  Diofiorides  fays,  that  the  leaves  of  it  have  an  acrimo¬

nious  ulcerating  quality.

(16)  Brajjica:  what  the  Romans  underftood  by  this  word,  is  but  imperfedlly  exprefled
by  the  word  cabbage  or  coleioort.  They  comprehended  a  variety  of  pot-herbs  under
this  name,  of  which  our  author  here  mentions  fifteen  different  forts,  which,  no  doubt,
v/ere  all  diftinguifhed  by  fomething  peculiar  to  each,  which  I  believe  is  very  difficult
now  to  find  out,  he  mentioning  moll  of  them  without  any  particular  defcription.  Pliny
indeed  gives  a  pretty  diftindl  account  of  a  few  of  them,  but  takes  no  notice  of  feveral
of  the  forts  mentioned  here.  The  Romans  were  great  lovers  of  thofe  kinds  of  pot-herbs  >
and  both  Cato  and  Pliny  commend  them  highly  for  their  great  ufefulnefs,  both  for  food
and  phyfic.  What  Cato  fays  is  very  remarkable,  that  the  Romans  made  ufe  of  no  other


4-2  7


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

Doth  flourifh,  and  in  great  abundance  yields
To  low  'Plebeian ,  and  the  haughty  King,

195  In  winter,  cabbage;  and  green  fprouts,  in  fpring:

Such  as  in  antient  Cuma’s  turfy  lhore  (17),

And  in  Abruzzo  (18),  and  near  Segni ,  grow  (19)

On  mount  Lepinus ,  and  fat  Capua’s  plains  (20) :

Such  as  the  gardens  in  Caudinian  ftraits  (1),

200  And  Stabian  lands  (2),  for  fountains  much  renown ’d,

And  learned  Naples  (3),  with  Sebethis'  ftream  (4)

Bedew’d,

things  for  phytic  for  fix  hundred  years,  from  the  foundation  of  Rome ;  and  about  that
time  Phyficians  began  to  introduce  themfelves  among  them,  very  much  againft  his  opi¬
nion,  who  was  a  mighty  ftickler  for  their  antient  plain  way  of  living,  which,  no  doubt,
contributed  much  to  the  prefervation  of  their  health  ;  bur,  when  once  luxury  got  foot¬
ing  among  them,  and  they  began  to  loath  their  former  plain  diet,  their  difeafes,  no  doubt,
varied  alfo,  and  different  medicines  became  necefiary.  Both  Cato  and  Pliny  mention  a
great  many  cafes,  wherein  the  ufe  of  braffica ,  differently  prepared,  was  very  beneficial;
which  is  not  my  bufinefs  to  trouble  the  reader  with.

(17)  Braffica  Cumana.  Vliny  fays,  that  this  kind  is  of  a  low  ftature,  with  leaves  fitting
upon  the  ground,  and  a  broad  fpreading  head.  Father  Hardouin ,  from  Dodonaus,  fays
it  was  of  a  red  colour,  and  is  what  the  French  call  now  Chou  rouge ,  red  cabbage.  It
feems  it  was  originally  of  Cuma ,  once  a  colony,  and  a  very  confiderable  town,  upon  the
fea-fhore  in  Campania ;  the  place  is  now  intirely  ruinous,  the  fnore  is  graffy,  and  may
very  well  be  called  cefpojum  littus ;  as  it  is  in  our  author,  tho’  fome  editions  have  it
cepofo,  others  tepofo  :  probably  the  editors  thought,  that,  if  the  author  meant  a  turfy  fit  ore,
he  would  have  faid  cefpitofo ;  but  this  is  what  they  could  not  be  very  fure  of.

(18)  Qua  Marrucini  pariunt.  Thefe  people  formerly  inhabited  a  part  of  the  kingdom
of  Naples ,  now  called  abruzzo,  on  the  coaft  of  the  Adriatic  fea.  Pomponius,  in  his
notes  on  our  author,  fays,  this  fort  was  fomewhat  reddifh  with  few  leaves.

(19)  Qua  parit  Segnia.  Segiii,  a  town  in  Latium,  which  antiently  belonged  to  the
people  called  Volfci.  It  lies  about  30  miles  eaft  of  Rome ;  it  Hands  upon  the  top  of
mount  Lepinus.  This  fort,  as  the  forementioned  author  fays,  is  fhorter,  thicker,  and
more  favoury,  than  the  others;  and  they  commonly  eat  them  with  oil.

(20)  Capua ,  a  famous  town  in  Campania  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples.  Some  very  good
authors,  as  Livy ,  Pliny,  and  others,  fay,  that  it  has  its  name  a  Campo,  from  the  fpacious
fields  where  it  is  fituated ;  and  it  is  called  pinguis,  fat,  from  their  great  fertility.

(1)  Caudium  oppidum,  and  Furca  Caudina^  a  very  remarkable  place,  where  the  Roman
army  was  furprifed  by  the  Samnites ,  and  made  to  pafs  under  the  yoke,  of  which  Livy
gives  an  account  in  his  ixth  book.  It  lies  about  four  miles  from  Santa  Agatha ,  and
fixteen  miles  eaft  of  Capua.  Thefe  Fauces  Caudina  are  now  called  Stretto  d’Arpaia,  and
Giogo  di  Santa  Maria ;  the  village  itfelf  is  called  Arpaia._  The  faid  Pomponius  fays,  that
this  fort  is  the  tendered  of  any.

(2)  Stabia ,  a  fmall  town  in  Campania ,  upon  the  fea-coaft,  about  5  miles  from  the
mouth  of  the  river  Sarnus ,  which  empties  itfelf  into  the  gulph  of  Naples.  It  is  about
10  miles  from  Surrentum ;  the  river  Sarnus  is  now  called  Scafati.

(3)  Lottatpue  Partheisope.  The  city  of  Naples  was  antiently  fo  called,  as  Pliny  fays,
becaufe  Parthenope,  one  of  the  Sirenes ,  was  buried  there.  Our  author  calls  it  learned
becaufe,  in  his  days,  probably  it  was  famous  for  learned  men.  Pomponius  fays,  that  the
braffica  of  this  place  was  formed  like  a  thyrfus ;  by  which,  I  fuppofe,  he  means,  that  the
leaves  were  fo  fet  upon  the  ftalk  as  fomewhat  to  refemble  a  fpike,  a  name  given  to  the
flowers  of  any  herb  which  are  fet  fo  clofe,  and  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  form  an  acute

I  i  i  2,  cone  .


Book  X-


428  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A

Bedew’d,  and  the  Vefuvian  (5)  fields,  produce:

Such  as  the  charming  fweet  Pompeian  marfli  (6),

Near  the  Herculean  falt-pits  (7),  does  afford  ;

205  And  Siler  (3),  which  flows  down  with  cryftal  ftream  :

Thole  which  the  hardy  rough  Sabellians  (9)  give
With  fprouty  flalks,  and  fervile  Brutian  lands  (10),

And  apple-bearing  Ttbur ,  and  the  lake

Of  Turnus  (11),  and  Aricia,  mother  of  leeks  (12).

When

cone ;  bur,  in  the  thyrfus ,  the  leaves,  or  flowers,  or  fruit,  are  fet  more  loofely  ;  fo  that
there  are  fpaces  vilibly  betwixt  them.

(4)  Sebethis ,  a  very  fmall  river  hard  by  Naples ,  of  which  rhe  water  is  conveyed  to
moft  of  the  ftreers  of  that  city  :  rhe  common  people  call  it  Fornello ;  fome  call  it  the
river  della  Maddalena :  a  part  of  it  runs  by  the  walls  of  the  city,  and  falls  into  the  gulph
near  St.  Magdalen  s  bridge.

(5)  bref'i'ia  rura ,  Vejevum ,  or  Vifuvium ,  a  well-known  mountain  near  Naples ;  all  the
country  round  it  was  very  delicious,  before  it  was  ruined  by  the  eruptions  of  the  vol¬
cano.  Pomponius  fays,  that  the  brajjica  of  thefe  lands  was  of  a  more  bicterifh  tafle  than
that  of  others,  notwithftanding  very  agreeable  to  the  tafte.

( 6 )  Pompeia  palus.  Pompeii ,  or  Pompeianum ,  formerly  a  conflderable  town,  but  now
ruinous,  in  Campania ,  fituated  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Sarnus ,  upon  the  gulph  of
Naples  ;  it  is  now  called  Torre  deW  Annunciata.  Pliny  fays,  that  this  kind  of  cabbage
was  of  a  taller  fort ;  that  its  ftalk  was  fmall  from  the  root  upward,  but  that  it  grew
thick  amongft  the  leaves,  which  were  thinner  and  narrower  than  thole  of  other  forts,  and
Were  exceeding  tender,  which  made  amends  for  their  not  bearing  the  cold.

(7)  Salinis  Hercu/eis.  Herculaneum  was  a  town  in  Campania ,  upon  the  gulph  of  Na¬
ples,  where  it  feems  were  falt-pits.  Some  authors  fay  it  is  now  called  Torre  di  Ripalta ;
others  call  it  Torre  del  Gr*eco.  Pliny ,  in  enumerating  the  places  upon  the  coaft  of  this
gulph,  mentions  it  after  Naples ,  and  after  it  he  places  Pompeianum.

(8)  Siler,  or,  as  Pliny  calls  it,  Silarus ;  a  river,  which  formerly  feparated  the  Picentini
from  the  Eucani  almoft  in  the  middle,  between  Salernum  and  Pasjlum,  about  12  miles
from  each  :  it  emptieth  itfelf  into  the  gulph  of  Salerno,  and  is  now  called  Selo.

(9)  Brajjica  Sabellica',  fo  called  from  Sabelli ,  a  rough  and  hardy  people,  who  dwelt  in
the  mountains  between  the  Sabini  and  the  Map.  Pliny  makes  them  a  colony  of  the
Samnites  \  bur  Cato,  in  his  Excerpta  Orig.  fays,  that  the  Sabelli  were  fo  called,  becaufe  they
were  the  offspring  of  the  Sabini.  Pliny ,  lib.  xix.  c.  8.  fays,  that  the  leaves  of  this  fore
of  cabbage  are  curled  even  to  admiration,  the  thicknefs  of  which  extenuated  their  ilaiks  -
they  are  faid  to  be  the  fweeteft  of  all.  Our  author  fays,  they  had  a  fprouty  ftalk.

(10)  Brut'ti,  a  people  that  inhabited  that  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  now  called
Calabria-  which  lies  partly  on  the  Adriatic ,  and  partly  on  the  Mediterranean  feas.  Aulus
Gellius ,  lib.  x.  fays,  that  they  were  conquered  by  the  Romans ,  and  reduced  to  a  ftate  of
fervitude,  becaufe  they  were  the  firft  who  received  Hannibal.  Pliny  fays,  their  cabbage
was  nouriftied  by  the  cold,  of  exceeding  large  leaves,  fmall  ftalks,  and  of  a  fharp  and
poignant  tafte.

(11)  Lacus  Tumi,  or,  as  Pliny  calls  it,  Eacuturris,  from  a  lake  and  tower  in  the
valley  of  Aricia  This  fort  of  brajjica  had  a  very  large  head,  and  numberlefs  leaves;
fome  of  them  grew  up  round,  others  extended  themfelves  in  breadth.  Some  think  they
are  that  fort  which  the  French  call  choux  cabus ,  headed  cabbage,  becaufe  they  grew  into
the  fthape  of  a  man’s  head.

(12)  Aricia ,  now  called  I’Arriccia ,  a  place  in  Latium,  where  there  was  a  famous
grove  facred  to  Diana ,  called  Lucus  Arfcinus ,  near  Veletri .  This  place  was  called  the

mother


Book  X.  0/  HUSBANDRY,  42

210  When  to  the  loofe  and  well-prepared  earth

We  have  committed  all  thefe  feeds  and  plants  (13),

With  conftant  culture,  and  unweary’d  care,

While  pregnant,  we  her  cherifh,  that  full  crops
With  double  uf’ry  may  repay  our  pains..

2iy  Firft,  I  advife  large  fountains  to  convey

Into  your  garden,  left  the  parching  drought
Mar  the  conception,  and  burn  up  the  birth.

But,  when  the  pregnant  earth  her  fruitful  womb
Does  open,  and  her  hidden  knots  unbinds,

220  And  all  her  florid  offspring,  unconfin’d,

Breaks  forth  j  then  let  the  careful  Gardner  come.

And  from  his  wat’rrng-pot,  with  gentle  drops.

Like  milling  rain,  bedew  the  infant  plant.

And  with  his  forked  iron  the  furface  comb,

225  And  from  the  furrows  throw  the  choaking  weed.

But  if  on  bulhy  hills  your  garden’s  plac’d.

And  from  the  woody  tops  no  gentle  ftreams

Glide  down ;  then,  with  the  clods  of  well-trench ’d  ground,

Together  thrown,  thy  beds  and  borders  raife,

230  That  fo  the  plant  may  be  inur’d  to  grow

In  the  dry  duft,  and,  when  it  changes  place,

The  dry  and  fcorching  heats  it  may  not  dread.

’Soon  as  the  Prince  of  flocks,  and  of  the  figns  (14),.

Who

mother  of  leeks ;  probably  becaufe  they  were  firft  cultivated  there,  and,  becaufe  of  their
excellency  and  great  plenty,  they  were  fent  from  thence  to  other  countries :  they  are
much  celebrated  by  many  authors,  particularly  Martial ,  lib.  xiii.  epigr.  19.  Pliny  fays,
that  the  cabbage  of  this  place  did  not  grow  higher  than  that  of  Cuma ,  whofe  leaves  fat
upon  the  ground ;  that  it  was  reckoned  the  mod  profitable  kind,  becaufe  it  put  forth
fprouts  with  litrle  ftalks  almoft  under  all  its  leaves.

(13)  Our  author  has  mentioned  feveral  forts  of  brajjica-,  which  Pliny  has  taken  no
notice  of;  but  he  has  mentioned  fome  which  are  not  in  our  author:  and  he  tells  us,
lib.  xx.  cap.  8.  that  the  antient  Greeks  divided  their  brajjica  into  three  different  forts ;
•viz.  the  curled ,  which  they  called  felinoidea  from  its  likenefs  to  parfley,  which  is  good
for  the  ftofnach,  and  foftens  the  belly  ;  the  other  fmooth,  with  fmaller  leaves  growing
out  of  the  Hern;  the  third,  properly  called  crambe,  with  fmaller  leaves,  {ingle,  and  very
thick,  bitterer  than  the  other,  but  very  efficacious.  Cato  efteemed  the  curled  fort  the
beft ;  next  to  ir,  the  fmooth,  with  great  leaves,  and  a  great  ftem  :  fome  fay,  that  the  wild
brajjica  is  properly  the  crambe.  Some  call  it  brajjica  petr<za ,  becaufe  it  grows  in  fteep
rocky  places,  \v  rep tot rots,  as  Diofcorides  fays;  and  from  this,  they  think,  it  has
its  name;  which  feems  too  far  fetcht.  Of  all  thefe  different  forts  the  cymata ,  i.  e.  the
fprouts,  as  Pliny  fays,  are,  by  all  nicer  palates,  reckoned  the  fweeteft,  and  more  tender
and  delicate  than  the  brajfica  itfelf.  They  are  the  fmall  ftalks  fhooting  out  of  the  main
ftem  or  ftalk.

(14)  Here  the  author  alludes  to  the  ftory  of  Phryxus  and  Hells,  fon  and  daughter  of

Athamas


Book  X.


430  L.].M.  COLUMELLA

Who  cloud-born  'Thryxus  fafe  to  harbour  brought,
235-  But  dropt  his  lifter  Helle  in  the  deep,

Shall  from  the  fwelling  waves  lift  up  his  head.

The  nurling  earth  her  bofom  lhall  expand,

And  claim  the  adult  feeds,  and  fhew  defire
In  wedlock  with  fet  plants  herfelf  to  join  :

240  O  men!  keep  conftant  watch,  good  reafon  why  !
With  filent  pace  the  feafons  fly  away,

And  without  noife  the  year  is  turned  round.

Behold  !  with  ardent  with,  and  fond  defire,

The  mod  indulgent  mother  now  demands
245-  Her  offspring,  her  own  children  which  fhe  bore,

.  To  nurfe  and  bring  them  up  with  tender  care.

The  time’s  now  come,  now  to  the  mother’s  care
The  tender  pledges  of  her  love  commit :

J  The  parent  with  her  own  green  offspring  crown ;
2yo  Adorn  her  with  her  hair ;  in  order  fet

Her  locks :  now  likewife  let  the  florid  earth
Be  curled  with  green  parfley,  and  made  glad
With  the  green  leek’s  long  and  difhevell’d  hair  j
Let  the  wild  parfnip  her  foft  bofom  lhade.

2yy  Now  let  fweet-fmelling  plants,  of  foreign  lands
The  gifts,  from  the  Sicanian  (15)  hills  defcend,
And  from  mount  Hyblas  (1 6)  lofty  faffron  tops.


Athamas  King  of  Theba,  by  his  wife  Nephele ,  who,  flying  from  the  fnares  of  their  ftep-
mother  Ino ,  fwam  over  the  fea  upon  the  back  of  the  ram  with  the  golden  fleece.  Helle
fell  into  the  fea,  and  was  drowned ;  from  her  that  fea  has  fince  been  called  the  Hellef-
pont.  Phryxus  got  fafe  to  Colchos ,  and  facrificed  the  ram  to  Mars ,  and  hung  up  the
golden  fleece  in  his  temple,  which  afterwards  became  the  fubjedt  of  two  noble  poems ;
the  one  Greek ,  the  other  Latin.  Phryxus  is  called  Nubigena ,  cloud-born,  from  his
mother’s  name  Nephele ,  which,  in  Greek ,  fignifies  a  cloud.  The  poet’s  intention  here  is,
only  to  defcribe  the  Sun’s  entering  into  the  fign  Aries ,  the  Ram,  which  he  calls  the
Prince  of  flocks,  becaufe  of  the  worth  and  ufefulnefs  of  that  animal;  and  the  flrfl  of  the
flgns,  becaufe  the  antients  began  their  year  in  the  month  of  March ;  and,  in  enumerate-
ing  the  figns  of  the  Zodiac,  we  ftill  begin  with  Aries.  The  Hellefpont  is  a  narrow
fea  by  Confla?!tinople ,  dividing  Europe  from  A  fa :  it  is  narroweft  between  Seflos,  a  town
in  Tbracia  in  Europe,  and  Abydos ,  a  town  of  Phrygia  in  Lejfer  Afla,  diftant  about  feven
or  eight  furlongs :  thefe  two  places  are  now  called  the  Dardanelles.  Some  call  the  fea
the  (Iraits  of  Gallipoli ,  or  il  braccio  di  Sa?t  Georgio.

(15)  Sicania ,  another  name  for  Sicily :  a  well-known,  large  and  opulent  ifland  in  the
Mediterranean  fea,  feparated  by  a  very  narrow  fea,  of  1500  paces,  from  the  kingdom  of
Naples.

(1 6)  Hybla,  a  mountain  in  Sicily,  famous  for  honey ;  the  bees  feeding  there  upon  many

odoriferous  plants.

4.  From


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  431

From  gay  Canopus  (17)  let  fweet  marjorams  (18)  come,

And  let  fweet  cicely  from  Achaia  brought  (ip),

260  With  better  juice  than  the  myrrh-tree  diftills,

And  always  imitates  thy  doleful  tears,

O  Cinyreian  ‘virgin  !  and  thofe  flow’rs
Be  planted,  which  from  Ajax ’  mournful  blood
Arife,  who  was  by  partial  judges  doom’d  (20) ;

265  And  amaranths ,  which  never  fade  nor  die.

And,  in  due  order  let  the  Gardner  place.

In  plants,  a  thoufand  various  colours,  which
Rich  nature  does  bring  forth,  and  which  he  fow’d
In  feed  j  now  let  fea-cabbage  alfo  come,

270  Tho’,  to  the  eyes  a  foe,  it  blunts  the  fight.

(17)  Canopus ,  a  town  in  Egypt,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile.  Our  author  gives  it  the
epithet  of  hilaris,  chearful  ;  other  authors  fay  it  was  much  addidted  to  voluptuoufrrefs.
It  feems  to  have  given  name  to  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Nile  ;  although  the  learned
father  Hardouin  fays,  in  his  note  on  Plin.  Hijl.  Nat.  lib.  v.  cap.  io.  that  it  is  uncertain'
whence  the  Canopic  mouth  of  the  river  had  its  name  ;  whether  from  a  town,  or  a  man,
or  fotne  other  thing,  Pliny  having  made  no  mention  of  the  town.  But,  it  feems  pretty
clear,  from  Pliny's  own  words,  that  it  had  its  name  from  this  town  :  Sunt  in  honore  <&
intra  decurjus  Nili  multa  oppida ,  pracipue  cputs  nomina  dedere  ojliis ,  non  omnibuSy  fed  cele-
berrimis  feptem ,  proximo  Alexandrine  Canopica ,  deinde,  &c.

(1)  Sampfuchum ,  Amaracus.  Pliny ,  lib.  xxi.  cap.  12.  fays,  that  Diodes  the  phyfician,
and  the  Sicilians ,  called  that  herb  amaracus ,  which  the  Syrians  and  Egyptians  called  fam-
pfuchum.  Father  Hardouin ,  in  his  note  on  this  herb,  fays  that  it  is  a  miftake  to  think,
that  what  in  the  fhops  is  called  major  ana,  la  marjolaine ,  is  the  fampfuchum  or  amaracus
of  the  antients;  for  this  reafon  efpecially,  becaufe  Diofcorides  fays,  that  the  fampfuchum
creeps  upon  the  ground,  but  the  majorana  rifes  high;  but  Matthiolus  thinks,  that  they
are  much  the  fame :  and,  if  any  defire  a  full  defcription  of  both,  they  may  confult  this
learned  author,  who  has  delineated  and  defcribed  them  fully,  but  does  not  make  the
fampfuchum  to  creep  on  the  ground  in  father  Hardouin' s  fenfe:  he  thinks,  that  majorana
was  fo  called,  becaufe,  being  of  a  very  agreeable  fmell,  it  was  cultivated  by  the  ladies
with  great  care,  both  in  the  ground,  and  in  earthen  pots;  and  upon  no  herb  greater  pains
was  bellowed,  p.  535.

(19)  This  herb  is  called  myrrhis ,  or  myrrha ,  or  fmyrrhiza ,  as  Pliny  fays;  and,  accord¬
ing  to  him,  it  is  very  like  hemlock  in  its  ftalk,  leaves,  and  flower,  but  lefier  and  fmaller,
not  unpleafant  to  eat.  Diofcorides  adds,  that  it  has  an  oblong,  foft,  round,  and  fweet-
fmelling  root.  Mr.  Miller  calls  it  fweet  cicely  ;  fome  think  it  to  be  angelica ;  others
chervil ;  others  laferpitium,  or  fmyrnium ;  the  French  call  it  cherfeuil  mufqud.

Myrrha ,  the  daughter  of  Cynaras  King  of  Cyprus,  was  transformed  into  a  tree  of  that
name,  which  always  fweats  out  a  juice,  in  memory  of  the  many  tears  fhe  fhed  in  the
time  of  her  afflidhon.  See  the  fable  elegantly  told  by  Ovid,  Metamorph.  lib.  x.

(20)  Ajax,  a  famous  Hero  in  the  Grecian  expedition  againft  Troy  :  he  contended  with
Ulyjfes  for  Achilles's  armour,  and  was  call:  by  the  Princes  who  judged  of  their  preten-
fions;  which  fo  aflfedted  him,  that  he  grew  delirious,  and  killed  himfelf.  The  poet  tells
us,  that  he  was  turned  into  an  hyacinth,  which  wears  upon  it  the  two  firft  letters  of  his
name,  a,  i.  Our  author  fays,  this  herb  fprurig  out  of  his  blood.


And


Book  X.


432  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A

And  now  let  lettice  (1),  with  its  healthful  fleep,

Make  hafte,  which  of  a  tedious  long  difeafe
The  painful  loathings  cures ;  one  fort  grows  green.

With  num’rous  thick-fet  leaves 3  a  fecond  fort
2 75  With  dufky  purple  hair  is  fprucely  drefs’d.

Both  call’d  Cecilian  (2),  from  Metellus'  name;

The  third  with  thick,  but  a  fmooth  top,  looks  pale ;

Of  Cappadocia ,  its  own  nation,  this
Retains  the  name  :  there’s  that  which  is  mine  own,

280  Which  Cadiz  (3)  on  Tartefus'  fhore  brings  forth ;

White  is  its  curled  top,  white  is  its  ftalk.

And  that  which  Cyprus  (4.)  on  fat  ‘Paphian  land
Doth  nourifh,  which  with  well-trimm’d  fcarlet  hair,

And  milk-white  leg,  a  gay  appearance  makes.

285  As  many  as  their  features,  fo  the  times

(1)  Lattuca ,  lettice.  Pliny  fays,  that  all  forts  of  it  have  a  foporiferous  quality,  but
efpecially  a  blackifh  fort,  which,  from  the  abundance  of  foporiferous  milk  contained  in
it,  as  in  poppy,  was  called  mecojiis ;  and  that  this  kind  alone,  amongft  the  antient  Italians,
was  greatly  efteemed,  and  from  the  abundance  of  milk  in  it  was  called  lattuca :  that  all
•forts  of  it  are  of  a  cooling  nature;  therefore  in  fummer  are  very  grateful  to  the  ftomach,
and  free  it  from  naufeating,  and  give  a  good  appetite ;  and  adds,  that  the  Emperor  Au¬
gustus  was,  by  the  ufe  of  it,  cured  of  a  great  fit  of  ficknefs,  by  the  prudent  advice  of
Antonius  Mujfa  his  phyfician,  his  former  phyfician  having  denied  him  the  ufe  of  it ;  for
which  cure  the  commons  of  Rome  erected  a  ftatue  to  Mufa,  hard  by  that  of  JEfculapius.
See  Sueton.  in  Auguft.  cap.  59.  This,  fays  he,  gave  fuch  reputation  to  lettice,  that  they
ufed  to  preferve  it  in  oxymel,  to  be  ufed  during  the  months  it  was  not  to  be  found
green.

(2)  Columella  mentions  here  five  different  forts  of  lettice,  mod  of  which  have  their
names  either  from  the  perfons  who  brought  them  to  Rome ,  and  cultivated  them  much ;
or  from  the  country  which  they  were  brought  from.  That  of  a  dark,  and  fomewhat  of
a  purple  colour,  and  that  of  a  green  colour,  and  a  curled  leaf,  he  calls  Cecilian ,  from
Cecilius  Metellus ,  who  was  Conful  in  the  firft  Punic  war,  in  the  year  of  Rome  502.  Pliny
fays,  that  the  purple-coloured,  with  a  very  great  root,  was  fo  called ;  and  that  it  was
rightly  fown  in  January.  The  Cappadocian  has  a  pale,  fmooth,  thick  leaf,  and  is  fown
beft  in  February.

(3)  That  of  Bcetica ,  and  upon  the  borders  of  Cadiz ,  which  Columella  calls  his  own,
becaufe  he  was  a  native  of  that  country,  was  white,  with  a  leaf  very  much  curled  :  the
feafon  for  fowing  it  was  in  March.

(4)  There  was  the  Cyprian  kind,  of  a  whitifh-red  colour,  with  a  fmooth  and  very
tender  leaf,  which  is  planted  very  commodioufly  till  the  13th  of  April.  See  for  all  thefe
forts  Columella ,  lib.  xi.  c.  3.

Pliny  mentions  feveral  other  forts,  one  of  which  he  calls  Cilician ,  which  has  the  leaf
of  the  Cappadocian ,  except  that  it  is  curled,  and  broader.

The  Greeks  had  various  forts,  fome  with  broad,  fome  with  round  ftalks,  forae  white,
fome  red,  fome  black,  fome  purple,  fome  with  large,  fome  with  narrow  leaves  like  en¬
dive.  They  had  one  fort  they  called  Laconicon,  becaufe  it  was  fhort,  and  fat  clofe  to  the
ground ;  another  they  called  picrida ,  becaufe  it  was  of  a  ibitterifia  tafte,  which  was  the
worft  of  all.  They  had  another  fort  they  called  eu?iuchion ,  becaufe  they  reckoned  it
hurtful  to  generation  ;  this  fort,  Pliny  fays,  was  round,  with  a  very  fmall  root,  and  broad
leaves.


Of


433


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

Of  planting  each  ;  when  the  new  year  begins,

Aquarius  (f)  the  Ccecilian  lettuce  fows,

And  in  the  mournful  month  (6)  the  priefts  of  Pan
The  Cappadocian  prefs  into  the  ground.

290  Mars  !  in  thy  calends  the  Tart  ef an  (7)  fow.

The  Paphian ,  O  fair  Venus  !  in  thine  own  (8).

While  ardently  it  feeks  itfelf  to  join
To  its  own  moth’r  inflam’d  with  like  defire
And  fhe,  mod  foft,  beneath  the  eafy  ground
2 95  Repofeth  ;  make  her  pregnant,  now’s  the  time  ;

For  now  the  world’s  genial  times  are  come,

Now  love  impatient  to  coitions  haftes :

The  fpirit  of  this  orb  now  headlong  driv’n,

With  Cupid's  piercing  flings,  impetuous  joins
500  With  Venus  in  her  revels,  and  promotes
Her  plots  of  love  :  to  every  congruous  part
He  love  for  love  repays,  and  fills  with  young.

The  Father  of  the  feas  (9)  now  with  fair  words
His  Thetys  courts,  and  to  his  bed  allures  j

(5)  When  the  Sun  is  in  the  fign  Aquarius,  viz.  in  the  month  of  January,  it  is  proper
to  fow  Cecilian  lettuce.

(6)  The  month  of  February  was  called  menfs  feralis,  becaufe  then  they  ufed  to  offer
facrifices  to  their  infernal  gods,  or  ghofts  of  men  departed  this  life ;  thefe  facrifices  they
called  parentalia :  they  then  pretended  to  purge  the  city,  which  the  Sabines  called  fe-
bruare.  The  priefts  of  Fan  Lyceus ,  called  Luperci ,  then  ran  up  and  down  the  city
naked,  after  they  had  facrificed  a  goat  to  Pan-,  and,  with  girdles  made  of  his  skin,  they
ftruck  the  hands  of  pregnant  women,  that  they  might  have  a  fafe  delivery  :  thus  they
pretended  to  purge  the  city.  Pan  was  called  Lyceus ,  as  they  fay,  a  lupis  abigendis ,  be-
caufe  they  thought  he  drove  away  the  wolves.  In  this  month  our  author  dire&s  to  fow
Cappadocian  lettuce.

(7)  Tartefida ,  Tartefian  lettuce.  Tartefus  was  a  municipal  city  near  Cadiz,  the  native
country  of  Columella  j  from  whence,  it  feems,  this  fort  was  firft  brought  to  Rome,  for
which  reafon  he  calls  it  his  own  lettuce.  The  month  of  March  was  facred  to  Mars ,  and
from  him  called  Martius ;  and  then  was  the  feafon  for  fowing  this  fort.

(8)  The  month  of  April  was  facred  to  Venus,  who  was  called  Paphia  from  Paphos ,  a
city  in  Cyprus ,  where  fhe  was  either  born  or  worshipped ;  fo  the  poet  calls  upon  her  to
plant  the  Paphian  lettuce  in  her  own  month  of  April ,  fo  called  from  aperiendo ,  as  feme
think,  becaufe  the  earth  then  opens  her  womb,  and  produces  all  things  in  abundance,
©r  receives  the  feeds  of  many  things  into  her  womb.

(9)  The  heathen  theology,  and  hdions  of  the  poets,  are  in  nothing  more  inconfiftent
and  contradictory,  than  in  the  accounts  they  give  of  their  marine  gods ;  fometimes  one
is  fupreme,  fometimes  another.  By  fome  Oceanus  is  called  the  Father  of  the  feas,  and
by  lleftod  he  is  faid  to  be  the  fon  of  Cesium  and  Terra ,  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth  :  they
tell  us,  he  has  his  name  from  the  fwiftnefs  of  his  motion,  'ua.pf  to  m'iuc  nziv.  Some
make  him  the  Father  of  all  rivers,  fountains,  and  fprings :  his  wife,  they  tell  us,  is  Tethys\
fo  called  from  r«S«,  a  nurfe,  becaufe  the  water  nourifhes  all  things.


Kkk


And


43 4-  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  X.

30^  And  he  who  o’er  the  waters  rules  fupreme  (10),

For  Amphitrite  the  fame  fondnefs  fhews:

And  both  thefe  ladies,  to  their  hufbands  joy,

An  azure  offspring  quickly  bring  to  light.

And  with  a  fwimming  people  fill  the  fea.

310  The  greateji  of  the  gods  ( 1 1)  himfelf  lays  down
His  thunderbolt,  and  with  deceitful  arts,

As  with  th’  Acrifian  maid  of  old,  re-a<£ts
His  am’rous  fcenes,  and,  in  a  violent  fhower.

Into  his  mother’s  bofom  now  defcends :

315  Nor  does  fhe  treat  his  filial  love  with  fcorn.

But,  with  defire  inflam’d,  the  patient  earth
To  ftrongeft  bonds  of  love  fubmiffive  yields :

Hence  Teas,  hence  mountains,  hence  the  world  intire.

Feel  of  returning  fpring  the  warm  effeds ;

3*o  Hence  fpring  the  flaming  love,  and  fond  defires
Of  mankind  ;  and -of  fowls,  of  flocks  and  herds.

Which  by  degrees  get  ftrength,  and  feize  their  hearts.

And  in  their  marrow  rage  like  wafting  fire,

Till  Venus ,  wfith  enjoyment  glutted,  fills
Their  fruitful  joints,  and  various  offsprings  brings
To  light,  and,  with  a  new  fucceeding  race
The  world’s  conftant  ruins  ftill  repairs,

Left  with  old  age  it  languifh,  and  be  void.

But  why  fo  bold  fhould  I  allow  my  fteeds
330  With  loos’ned  reins,  and  unreftrained  courfe.

In  paths  fublime  through  boundlefs  flues  to  fly  ?

Let  him  whofe  head  the  Delphic  laurel  crowns.

And  warms  with  more  of  Phoebus'  heav’nly  fire,

Who  into  nature’s  fecret  rites  doth  pry,

335  And  who  the  fixed  fecret  laws  of  heav’n,

And  of  all  things  the  hidden  caufes  knows,


(10)  Neptunus  is  here  called  regnat  or  aqvarum,  as  if  the  government  of  the  feas  was
committed  to  his  charge  j  and  his  wife  is  called  Amphitrite ,  from  dpLp'}eJ€ei»i  its  fur¬
rounding,  rubbing  upon,  wearing  and  preffing  the  earth  all  round  j  or  from  dpufilp^y^
becaufe  the  fea  ftrikes  with  terror,  on  all  fides,  fuch  as  fail  upon  it,  &c.

(n)  Here  the  poet  alludes  to  the  ftory  of  Jupiter  turning  himfelf  into  a  golden
Diower,  and  dropping  through  the  tiles  into  Danae's  lap,  who  was  (hut  up  in  a  ftrong
tower  by  her  father  Acrijius  King  of  the  Ar gives,  and  getting  her  with  child.

It  is  very  common  with  the  poets,  to  reprefent  Jupiter  as  the  father,  and  the  Earth  as
the  mother,  of  all  things.  Here  our  poec  reprefents  Jupiter  as  the  ion,  and  the  Earth
*s  his  mother  j  and  by  it  they  fignify,  that  the  rain  makes  the  earth  fruitful.


Make


435


Book X.  Of  HUSBANDRY*

Make  fuch-li'ke  things  the  fubjedt  of  his  fong.

Let  ‘Phoebus  fpur  this  Poet  o’er  the  tops
Of  Dindymus  (12),  where  Cybele  encamps,

340  And  o’er  Cithceron  (13),  and  Nyfcean  cliffs  (14),

To  Bacchus  facred  ;  and  the  lofty  tops
Of  his  own  hill  Parnajfus  (if),  where  he  dwells;

Through  filent  groves  of  the  Pierian  wood  {16),

The  Mufes  friendly  and  fecure  retreat ;

34^  Like  frantic  prieftefs,  with  an  hideous  voice,

Inceffantly  invoking  each  by  turns,

Thee,  Euan  (17),  and  thee,  Poean ,  Delian  born  {18),

Me,  my  Calliope ,  from  fruitlefs  cares.

And  wand  ring  after  vain  purfuits,  recalls,

3  yo  And  bids  me  move  in  more  confined  orb,

And  with  her  verfes  knit  with  flender  thread,

Which,  with  a  tuneful  voice,  when  hard  at  work,

The  Pruner,  hanging  on  his  elms,  may  fing,

(12)  Dindymus,  a  famous  hill  in  Phrygia-,  with  two  tops,  where  Cybele ,  whom  the
poets  call  the  wife  of  Saturn,  and  the  mother  of  the  gods,  was  worfhipped,  and  her  cere¬
monies  celebrated  with  noife  of  arms,  drums,  <&c.  by  the  Corybantes ,  a  company  of
mad  enthufiaftic  priefts.

(13)  Citharon ,  a  famous  mountain  in  Bxotia ,  facred  to  the  Mujes ,  near  Parnajfus,  of
which  fome  make  it  a  part :  it  is  now  called  Citherone.

(14)  Nyfea  juga.  The  poet  here  means,  either  one  of  the  tops  of  Parnajfus,  called
Nyfa ,  which  was  facred  to  Bacchus ;  as  the  other,  called  Cyrrha ,  was  to  Apollo  :  or,  per¬
haps,  he  had  his  eye  upon  Nyfa ,  a  city  in  Arabia ,  where  Bacchus  was  educated  by  the
Nyfean  nymphs,  at  the  defire  of  Jupiter,  after  the  death  of  his  mother  Semele.  Some
fay  Nyfa  was  one  of  the  tops  of  Citharon  or  Helicon.

(15)  Parnajfus ,  a  very  famous  mountain  in  Phocis  in  Achaia ,  facred  to  the  Mufes,  and
the  conftant  theme  of  poets.

(16)  Pierius,  a  mountain  in  Theffaly,  facred  alfo  to  the  Mufes ;  from  which,  as  fome
think,  they  are  called  Pierides.

(17)  Euius.  They  fay  this  name  was  given  to  Bacchus  by  his  father  Jupiter,  upon
his  having  performed  fome  great  exploit:  it  fignifies  a  good  fon ;  and  the  priefteftes  of
Bacchus,  in  their  mad  procemons  and  revels,  ufed  to  call  upon  him  by  this  name and
it  is  common  with  the  poets  alfo  to  give  him  this  name.  Columella  here  puts  the  poet,
who,  he  wifhes,  would  undertake  what  he  himfelf  could  not  perform,  into  a  ftrange  fit
of  enthufiaftic  madnefs,  and  fends  him  from  one  hill  and  wood  into  another,  and  makes
him  invoke  both  Apollo  and  Bacchus :  this  laft  is  frequently  called  Euan',  and  his  priefteftes,
in  their  mad  proceflions,  commonly  called  him  by  this  name.

(18J  Apollo  is  called  Delius,  becaufe  he  was  born  in  the  ifland  Delos  in  the  JEgean
fea  :  it  is  the  chief  of  the  Cyclades ,  much  reverenced  by  the  antients.

Paan  was  a  name  they  gave  to  Apollo ,  from  a  Greek  word  ar«.'w,  percutio,  to  ftrike,
fuppofing  him  very  dextrous  at  fhooting  with  arrows :  or,  perhaps,  dvro  rs  araouv  rdc
dviets,  a  fedando  molejlias ,  fuppofing  him  the  inventor  of  phyfic,  and  the  prote&or  of
phyficians.

Calliope,  one  of  the  Mufes,  the  mother  of  Orpheus ;  frie  is  Paid  to  be  the  prote&refs
of  heroic  poetry :  Ihe  has  her  name  from  the  fweetnefs  of  her  voice.

K  k  k  2  And


436  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  X-

And  Gardner  in  his  gardens  cloath’d  in  green.

55  Wherefore  what  follows  here,  obferve  to  do:

Let  creJJ'es ,  direful  to  thofe  latent  worms,

Which,  with  food  ill-digefted,  th’  unfound  bowels
Bring  up,  be  fcatt’red  on  fmall  ridges,  rais’d
Between  fmall  furrows  at  fmall  diftance  plac’d,

360  And favory ,  in  tafte  refembling  thyme:

The  cucumber ,  with  tender  neck  ;  the  gourd
With  brittle  ;  let  the  prickly  artichoke  (19)

Be  planted,  which  to  Bacchus ,  when  he  drinks.

Is  grateful  j  not  to  Phcebus ,  when  he  fings :

365  This  fometimes  riles  with  a  purple  head,

Sphere-like,  with  fcales  clofe,  and  compatibly  fet^

Sometimes  with  myrtle  hair,  and  bended  neck,

It  verdant  grows ;  fometimes  with  pungent  top,

Like  pine-tree  cone  ;  expanded  fome  appear  :

370  Sometimes  ’tis  like  an  ofier-baiket  fhap’d,

With  threafning  prickles  horrid  ;  fometimes  pale,

It  imitates  brankurfine’s  crook’ned  leaves.

’Soon  as  th z  punic-trce  (20),  whofe  num’rous  grains,

When  throughly  ripe,  a  bright-red  covering  hides,

375  Itfelf  fhall  with  its  bloody  blolfoms  cloathe ;

Then  is  the  time  wakerobin-feed  to  fow;

(19)  Columella  fays  here,  thac  the  artichoke  gives  an  agreeable  tafte  to  wine,  and  im¬
proves  it;  and  therefore  is  acceptable  to  Bacchus  ■,  bat,  byrealon  of  its  bitcerifh  tafte,  it
is  difagreeable  to  Apollo ,  becaufe  it  hurts  the  voice.  He  mentions  here  fix  different  forts
of  artichokes,  diftinguifhing  them  by  their  colour,  fhape,  form  of  their  leaves ;  and
other  things  peculiar  to  them  :  the  firft,  he  fays,  is  formed  round,  and  clofely  compacted
with  a  purple  corymhus ;  by  which  he  means,  that  either  the  fcales  are  fo  fee  as  to  form
fomething  of  a  fpherical  figure,  that  they  have  fomething  of  a  purple  colour,  or  that  it
puts  forth  its  flower  in  fuch  a  manner ;  for  corymbus  figmfies  a  clufter  of  flowers  or  fruit,
ftanding  on  pedicles,  which  aredifpofed  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  form  a  Iphere.  A  fecond
fort  is  of  the  colour  of  myrtle-tree  flowers;  I  fuppofe  he  means,  has  a. flower  like  that
►of  the  myrtle-tree,  and  that  it  bends  with  the  weight  of  its  head.  A  third  forr,  he  fays,
rnanet  adaperta ,  i.  e.  open  and  expanded,  in  oppolition  to  the  fourth  fort,  with  a  pinea
vertex ;  by  which,  I  fuppofe,  he  means,  that  it  is  fhaped  like  a  pine-tree  cone.  A  fifth
fort,  he  fays,  is  fhaped  like  a  wicker  basket,  which,  I  fuppofe,  was  fomewhat  of  an
oblong  figure,  wider  in  the  middle,  and  narrower  and  more  contracted  at  each  end,  in
which  form  fuch  as  are  more  prickly  may  grow.  The  fixth  fort,  he  fays,  is  of  a  palifh
colour,  and  like  the  bended  or  crook’ned  leaves  of  the  acanthus ,  fuch  as  we  fee  them
-on  the  chapiters  of  pillars,  of  the  Corinthian  order.

(20)  Arbos  Tunica,  the  pomegranate  tree ;  fo  called,  as  fome  think,  from  the  red
colour  of  its  flowers  and  fruit.  But  Pliny,  lib.  xiii.  c.  19.  fays,  that  it  has  its  name  from
-Carthage ;  probably  becaufe  it  grew  there  in  great  plenty,  and  was  firft  brought  from
thence,  being  a  native  of  Africa :  the  apple  is  called  granatum ,  becaufe  of  the  great
■number  of  grains  or  feeds  it  contains.  The  flower  of  this  tree  they  called .baUufiium.

£  Then


+37


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

Then  corianders>  much  renown’d,  fpring  up;

Then  to  the  {lender  cumin  grateful  grow
The  fennel-flowers  j  then  from  its  prickly  herb
3  80  The  fperage-berry  leaps,  the  mallow  {hoots,

Which  follows  with  its  bending  head  the  Sun  :

Then  likewife  rifes  that  audacious  plant
Which  imitates,  O  Bacchus!  thine  own  vines,

Nor  dreads  the  thorns  ;  for  ’midft  the  prickly  briers
38  f  The  br iony  lifts  up  its  fearlefs  head.

And  with  its  clafpers  binds  the  wild  pear-trees
And  alder-trees,  which  culture  has  not  tam’d.

As  that  Greek  letter,  which  in  order  {lands
Next  to  the  firfl:  (1),  is  on  the  yielding  wax
35>o  Imprinted  with  the  learned  mailer’s  ftyle,

So  then  the  beet,  with  white  foot,  and  green  leaf,

And  with  its  Grecian  name,  is,  with  the  ftroke
Of  the  iron-pointed  tool,  fet  in  the  ground.

Yea,  now  the  harveft,  with  its  fragrant  flowers,

39.5  Approaches;  now  the  purple  fpring  is  come ;

Now  the  kind  parent  does  rejoice  to  fee,

With  changing-colour’d  offspring  of  the  year.

Her  brows  furrounded  ;  now  their  gem-like  eyes
The  Phrygian  melilots  difclofe  ;  the  violet  beds
.400  Unfold  their  winking  eyes ;  the  lion  yawns  (2).

The  rofe  abafhed,  with  a  comely  blufh
Unveils  her  virgin-cheeks,  and  to  the  gods
Due  honours  pays,  and  with  its  fragrant  fmell,

Sabean  odours  like,  perfumes  their  domes.

405  Ye  Nymphs  (3),  which  dwell  on  Achelous  banks  (4),

Com-

(1)  Our  author  here  alludes  to  the  fecond  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet,  Beta ;  and
fays,  that,  as  this  letter  is  imprinted  upon  the  wax  with  a  ftyle,  lb  the  herb,  which  bears
the  name  of  this  letter,  is  fet  into  the  ground  with  a  dibble.

.(2)  The  lion  yawns ;  by  this  he  underftands,  that,  at  fuch  a  time,  a  certain  flower,
which  has  fome  likenefs  to  the  mouth  of  a  lion,  begins  to  open  and  fpread.  The  name
of  this  herb  I  have  not  as  yet  found.

,(3)  Here  the  Poet  addrefles  himfelf  to  the  Nymphs  of  feveral  denominations,  and  in¬
vites  them  to  gather  the  flowers  of  this  agreeable  feafon :  what  kind  of  beings  the fe
Nymphs  were,  is  difficult  to  determine.  Both  the  Greek  and  Batin  Poets,  whos'deiighted
in  fictions,  make  mention  of  many  different  forts  of  them  ;  and  by  them  they  underllood
xertain  powers,  who  prefided  over,  or  had  their  relidence  and  abode  in  certain  places
and  things;  and  they  reprefent  them,  as  appearing  in  the  form  of  beauuful  young
women.;  and  there  is  no  end  of  their  feveral  names  and  forts  ;  fome  celeflial,  others
tcrreftrial;  fome  belonged  to  the  Tea,  fome  to  rivers,  fome  to  mountains,  fome  to  val


Book  X.


438  L.  j.  M.COLUMELLA

Companions  of  the*  Mufes,  which  frequent
The  PegaJ'eian  fpring  (?),  I  you  befeech  ;

Likewife,  ye  choirs  of  Nymphs,  which  fport  and  dance
Among  ft  Mccnalian  oaks  (6) ;  and  ye  which  dwell
41c  In  forelts  (7),  or  in  the  Amphryfian  wood  (8),

Or  in  ‘ Thejjalian  Tempe  (9),  or  the  cliffs
Of  mount  Cyllene  (10),  or  the  fpacious  lawns
Of  dark  Lycceus  ( 1 1 ),  or  the  caves,  bedew’d
With  conftant  drops  of  the  Cajialian  fpring  (12):

4.15  And  ye,  who  in  Sicania  (13)  pick’d  the  flowers
Upon  Halefus'  banks,  when  ProJ'erpine  (14),

Of  Ceres  born,  the  blooming  lilies  cropp’d

leys,  Come  to  woods  and  forefts,  others  to  ponds  and  lakes,  <&c.  and  there  is  fcarcely
any  remarkable  river,  fountain,  lake,  mountain,  v/ood,  or  grove,  buc  the  Poets  have
afligned  Nymphs  to  them.  Some  fay  thefe  beings  were  called  Nymph*,  o  ts  dii  rkttf
aa.11/iSK,  becaufe  they  always  appear  young  j  or  d-ro  tk  cpazivziv,  becaufe  of  their  fplendid
appearance;  for  which  reafon  they  gave  this  name  to  young  brides,  when  they  firft
fhewed  themfelves  in  public.  Whatever  may  be  che  occalion  or  original  of  their
name,  they  ieem  to  be  nothing  buc  certain  powers  or  divinities  of  the  Poets  own  mak¬
ing,  which,  upon  all  occafions,  have  been  of  mighty  fervice  to  them,  and  always  helped
them  forward,  and  fupported  them  when  they  began  to  flag  and  be  dull  upon  their  main
fu’ojedt.  Our  author  addrefles  himfelf  to  the  greareft  part,  if  not  the  whole  tribe.

(4)  Achelous ,  a  famous  river  in  Greece ,  rifing  out  of  mounc  Pindus,  dividing  JEtolia
from  Acarnania  :  it  runs  into  the  Ionian  fea,  over-againft  the  iflands  called  Echinades.

(5)  Pogafides  were  the  Mufes  that  frequented  a  certain  fountain  called  Hippocrene,  or,
as  Per  pus  fays.  Eons  Caballinus ,  pretended  to  be  made  by  the  winged  horfe  Pcgafus’s  foot.
It  is  a  fountain  in  Bceotia ,  by  mount  Helicon ,  not  far  from  Theh*.

(6)  Masnalus,  or  Manalius ,  a  famous  mountain  in  Arcadia ,  near  the  city  Tegea  ;  the
jD ryades,  or  Nymphs  that  delighted  in  oaks,  the  Poet  tells  us,  frequented  this  place  very
much.

(7)  Nymph*  Nape*,  were  fuch  as  inhabited  valleys  and  forefts.

(8)  Amphryfus ,  a  fmall  river  in  Thejfaly ,  much  celebrated  by  the  Poets.  Our  author
fpeaks  of  a  wood,  which,  it  feems,  growing  upon  the  banks  of  the  faid  river,  took  its
name  from  the  fame.

(9)  Tempe ,  a  molt  delicious  fmall  valley  in  Thejfaly ,  through  which  the  river  Peneus
runs,  furrounded  by  the  mountains  Pelion ,  Offa ,  and  Olympus ,  much  celebrated  by  the

Poets.

(10)  Cyllesie ,  an  high  mountain  in  Arcadia ,  famous  for  cyprefs-trees,  where  the  Poets
fay  Mercury  was  born,  and  for  that  reafon  was  called  Cyllenius.

fn)  Lyc*us  is  alfo  a  mountain  in  Arcadia ,  facred  to  Pan->  the  Prote&or  of  the  Shep¬
herds.

(12)  Pons  Cr.fi alius,  a  famous  fpring  in  a  mountain  of  the  fame  name  in  Pbocis :  it  was
a  part  of  Parnajfus :  the  fountain  was  facred  to  the  Mufes.  The  Poets  fay  it  had  its  name
from  Caflalia,  a  virgin,  who,  flying  from  Apollo ,  was  changed  into  a  fountain.

(iA  Sicania,  another  name  for  Sicily ;  and  Halefus  is  a  river  in  Sicily,  which  riles  in  a
moun:ain  not  far  from  mount  JEtna.

(i+)  Proferpina.  The  Poets  tell  us,  that  (he  was  daughter  of  Ceres,  and  ravilhed  by
Pluto  on  the  plains  of  Enna,  near  a  city  of  that  name,  in  the  middle  of  Sicily ,  where
Ceres  had  a  famous  temple ;  and  carried  to  the  infernal  regions,  where  Ihe  became  his
■Queen.  «

Of


439


Book  X.  0/  HUSBANDR Y.

Of  the  Ennoean  plain,  with  mind  intent
Upon  your  dances,  and  was  fnatch’d  away
420  By  the  Lethcean  Tyrant,  and  became

His  wife ;  and  fo  the  gloomy  (hades  preferr’d
To  the  bright  ftars ;  the  manfions  of  grim  death
To  thofe  of  life ;  and  the  'Tartarean  pit
To  heav’n ;  and  Pluto  to  the  mighty  Jove  ;

42 y  And  o’er  th’  infernal  kingdom  now  (he  reigns:

Now  lay  afi.de  your  mourning,  and  fad  fear,

And  with  a  gentle  pace  your  tender  feet
Turn  hither  ;  and  our  parent  Earth’s  foft  hairs
In  order  in  your  facred  bafkets  lay.

.430  Here  are  no  fnares  to  catch  unwary  Nymphs,

No  rapes  to  fear ;  by  us  chafte  faith  is  kept
Inviolate;  pure  are  our  houfhold  gods :

With  jokes,  and  carelefs  laughter,  and  with  wines
Unmixt,  each  place  is  fill’d ;  with  chearful  feafts
435  And  banquets  the  green  meadows  gay  appear.

Now  is  the  lukewarm  fpring,  and  of  the  year
The  fofteft  feafon  ;  now  young  Phoebus'  rays
Are  gentle,  and  invite  us  to  lie  down
Upon  the  tender  grafs,  where  with  delight
440  We  drink  of  fprings,  which  are  not  chill’d  with  cold,

Nor  heated  with  the  Sun,  which  with  (hrill  voice
O’er  grafly  fields  refounding  fly  away.

And  now  Dione  s  daughter  (15),  with  fvvect  flowers,

The  gardens  crowns ;  and  now  the  rofe,  more  bright
445  Than  Tyrian  fcarlet,  does  begin  to  blow.

Not  with  fo  bright  and  radiant  face  appears
The  daughter  of  Latona  (16),  Phoebe ,  when
The  cold  and  cloud-difpelling  North- wind  blows  ;

Nor  yet  the  ardent  Sirius  ( 17),  when  his  heat
450  Is  mod  intenfe ;  nor  (far  of  fiery  Mars

(15)  Dione,  the  mother  of  Venus  by  Jupiter:  Venus  prefided  over  gardens,  and  the
month  of  April  was  facred  to  her  ;  from  her  mother’s  name  (he  was  called  Dionca.

(16)  Latona ,  in  the  heathen  mythology,  is  faid  to  have  brought  forth  two  children
to  Jupiter,  Apollo  and  Diana ,  otherwife  called  Phoebus  and  Phoebe  •  the  fir  ft  frequently  „
put  for  the  Sun,  and  the  fecond  for  the  Moon.

(17)  Sirius  is  a  bright  (tar  in  the  mouth,  of  Canis  major ,  fo  called  from  its  drying  and
•feorehing  influence.


4^0  L  j.M.  COLUMELLA  Book  X

So  brightly  fliirve ;  nor  Hefperus  (18),  with  face
So  glittering,  from  th’  eaftern  climes  returns,

The  forerunner  of  the  approaching  day  ;

Nor  Iris  (19),  with  her  glorious  rainbow  cloath’d

So  fulgent,  as  the  chearful  gardens  {hind

With  their  bright  offspring,  when  they’re  in  their  bloom,

Mark  therefore  when  the  night  is  near  its  end,

And  the  Day-liar  appears,  or  when  the  Sun
His  horfes  plunges  in  th’  Iberian  fea,

4 'So  Where-e’er  fweet  marjoram  perfumed  fhades

Does  fpread,  come  now  and  pluck  it ;  and  the  hair9
Of  daffodil ;  and  fragrant  leaves  and  flowers
Of  the  wild  punic-tree ,  which  bears  no  fruit.

And,  that  Alexis  (20)  may  not  look  with  fcorn
465  On  Cory  dons  great  wealth,  fair  NaisJ  come,

More  beauteous  than  the  beauteous  boy,  and  bring
In  bafkets  violets,  and  fragrant  balms ,

Mixt  with  white  privet ;  and  with  faffron-fiovoers
Sweet  cajjia  bind  ;  and  with  the  pureft  wine,

470  Which  Bacchus  moft  approves,  all  thefe  bedew ;

For  Bacchus  odours  with  this  juice  preferves.

Likewife,  ye  ruftics,  who  with  hard’ned  thumb
The  tender  flowers  crop,  with  hyacinths
Iron-colour’d,  the  white  ojier  bafkets  fill.

47y  Now  let  the  rofe  the  threads  of  twifted  rufli
Diftend  ;  and,  with  flame-colour ’d  marigolds
Let  the  fqueez’d  panier  burft;  of  vernal  wares
For  fale,  let  rich  Vortumnus  (1)  have  great  {tore  j

And

(18)  Hefperus.  The  planet  Venus,  appearing  in  the  morning  before  day-light,  is  called
Lucifer  j  and  in  the  evening,  after  the  Sun  fets,  is  called  Vefperus :  the  morning  and  the

evening  liar.

(19)  Iris ,  the  rainbow,  reckoned,  as  Mercury ,  the  meffenger  of  the  gods-  but,  asfome
think,  moftly  in  litigious  matters,  fo  called  quaf  lets,  i.  e.  ftrife  and  contention }  others,
as  Flato  and  Froclus ,  rather  think  fhe  was  fo  called  from  if  «V,  to  /peak,  becaufe  fhewas
employed  by  them  for  this  purpofe.  Cicero ,  de  Natura  Deorum ,  lib.  iii.  fays,  fhewas  faid
to  be  the  daughter  of  Thauvians ,  becaufe  of  her  wonderful  and  beautiful  appearance  :
fhe  is  called  by  our  author  Thaumantias.

(20)  Here  our  author  imitates  Virgil ,  Formofi  fecoris  cuflos  formofior  ipfe and  alludes
to  the  fecond  Eclogue.

(1)  Vortumnus ,  the  god  of  merchandife  :  he  prefided  over  buying  and  felling,  a  ver-
tendis  mercibus :  all  the  firft  fruits  were  dedicated  to  him,  grapes,  apples,  pears,  cher¬
ries,  &c.  There  are  feveral  other  reafons  given  of  this  name ;  one  is  ab  anno  vertente,

which


44i


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

And  let  the  Carrier,  with  a  ftagg ’ring  pace,

480  Wet  with  much  wine,  from  town  with  joy  return,

Weigh’d  down  with  cafh  with  which  his  bofom’s  fill’d.

But  when  the  harvelt  with  ripe  ears  of  corn
Grows  yellow,  and  bright  ’Titan  (2)  with  his  Twins
Extends  the  day,  and  with  his  burning  heat
48  f  Shall  fcorch  the  claws  of  the  Lenuean  Crab ,

Then  garlick  join  with  onions ,  and  with  dill
The  Cereali an  poppies  (3)  ;  and,  when  bound
In  bundles,  while  they’re  green,  to  market  bring;

And,  when  your  wares  are  fold,  with  chearful  voice
490  The  praifes  of  propitious  Fortune  found.

And  to  your  gardens  haften  back  with  joy  :

And,  in  new-broken  and  well-wat’red  ground
Sow  bafil ,  and  with  weighty  cylinders
Comprefs  it,  left  the  fcorching  heats  pervade
495  The  loofe  and  open  dull:,  and  parch  the  feeds;

Or  the  fmall  garden-infedl,  creeping  in
By  flealth,  infeft  and  vex  them  with  its  teeth;

Or  the  rapacious  plund’ring  ant  deftroy.

Not  only  dares  the  / hail ,  wrapt  in  its  fhell,

5©0  And  hairy  palmer-worm ,  prefume  to  gnaw
The  tender  buds  and  leaves ;  but,  as  foon  as
The  lurid  cabbage ,  on  its  thriving  flalk.

Begins  to  fwell,  and  pale  beet  bulky  grows ;

And  Gardner,  free  from  fear,  rejoices  in
fOf  His  adult  wares,  and,  now  they’re  ripe,  prepares
The  fickle  to  put  in  ;  oft-times  fierce  Jove
Does  dart  his  grievous  fhow’rs,  and  with  hail-ftones
The  labours  both  of  men  and  beads  deftroys :

which  was  fo  called  by  the  ancients,  when  the  Sun  returns  to  the  fign  from  whence  it
began  its  courfe.  If  any  defire  to  have  a  full  account  of  this  pagan  divinity,  he  may
confult  Propertius,  lib.  iv.  de  fabula  Vortumni.

(2)  Titan:  the  Sun  is  frequently  called  by  this  name;  and  the  author’s  meaning  is,
That,  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  iigns  Gemini  and  Cancer ,  the  day  lengthening,  and  the  heat
increafing,  then  fuch  and  fuch  things  are  proper  to  be  done.  The  Poet  tell  us,  that,
when  Hercules  was  fighting  with  the  (erpent  Hydra ,  with  many  heads,  Juno  fent  the  Crab
to  bite  his  heel,  and  that  Hercules  flew  it.  It  is  called  Cancer  Lcrnaus,  becaufe  it  was
of  the  lake  Lerna  in  Peloponnefus ,  near  Argos.  They  tell  us  alfo,  that  Juno  placed  it
among  the  ftars.

(3)  Cereale  papaver :  this  our  author  borrows  from  Virgil,  Georg,  i.  211.  where  Ser¬
ves  fays,  that  poppy  was  fo  called,  either  becaufe  it  was  eaten  as  corn,  or  becaufe  Ceres
made  ufe  of  it  to  forget  her  forrows.  Pliny,  lib.  xix.  8.  fays,  that  ruftics  ufed  to  fprinkle
it  upon  the  cruft  of  their  bread,  mixed  with  an  egg,  to  make  it  flick  to  it,

L 11  He,


442


Book  X.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA

He,  likewife,  oft  with  rains,  pregnant  with  feeds
fio  Peftiferous,  bedews  them,  which  produce

Thofe  worm?,  which  to  grey  willow -groves,  and  vines.

Are  hurtful ;  and  o’er  all  the  gardens  creeps
The  caterpiller,  which,  with  pois’nous  bite,

Dries  up  the  plants,  which,  of  their  comely  hair
5 1 5-  Bereft,  lie  mangled  with  their  naked  tops,

And  with  the  baneful  poifon  pine  and  die.

That,  with  thefe  direful  woes,  the  Hufbandmen
Should  not  be  overwhelm’d,  labour  and  ufe,

And  various  experience  itfelf
520  Of  things,  their  teacher,  and  their  fafert:  guide,

Has  fhown  to  wretched  men  new  arts  and  means
Of  fafety  j  how  to  Hill  the  raging  winds,

And  to  avert,  with  facred  Tiijcan  rites  (4),

The  boift’rous  ftorm :  hence  is  it  that  with  blood,

525  And  entrails  of  a  whelp,  fnatch’d  from  the  dug,

Rubigo  (f),  full  of  milchief,  is  appeas’d,

That  fo  the  verdant  herbs  he  may  not  parch.

Hence  Tages  (6),  (as  we’re  told)  the  Tnfcan  Seer,

In  borders  of  his  field  was  wont  to  place
530  Th’  Arcadian  afs’s  head,  ftript  of  its  fkin.

And  Tarchon  (7),  to  avert  the  thunderbolts
Of  mighty  Jove ,  his  feats  with  white-vine  hedge

(4.)  Tv  feast  rites.  The  Tufcans  were  very  famous  of  old  for  their  facred  ceremonies
and  luperftitions,  and  were  the  great  directors  of  the  Romans,  who  adopted  moft  of
them.

(5)  Rubigo  or  Rubigus.  Our  author  puts  it  feminine  j  fome  write  it  Robigo.  They
offered  facrifice  to  this  god,  that  he  might  not  fmite  the  corns  with  blafting  and  mildew:
fee  Aul.  Gell.  lib.  iv.  c.  6.  alfo  lib.  v.  c.  12.  They  ufed  to  facrifice  to  him  a  wbelp  and
a  fheep  in  the  month  of  April ,  and  offered  them  with  frankincenfe  and  wine  :  they
celebrated  his  feftival  at  Rome ,  on  the  25  ft  day  of  that  month,  becaufe,  about  that  time,
the  corns  began  to  be  blafted.  Numa  inftituted  this  feaft  in  the  nth  year  of  his  reign,
as  Pliny  tells  us,  lib.  xviii.  cap.  29.  Of  thefe  fuperftitious  practices,  &c.  he  fays  a  great
deal,  lib.  xvii.  cap.  28.  and  Palladius ,  lib.  i.  cap.  35.

(6)  Tages  was  had  in  great  veneration  among  the  Hetrufci,  was  the  Inventor  of  Divi¬
nation,  as  Tally,  de  Divinatione ,  and  Valerius  Maximus ,  affirm:  it  feems  he  wrote  fome
books  upon  the  art  for  explaining  of  prodigies,  thunders,  lightnings,  <&c.  Plutarch ,
JJidorus ,  and  feveral  other  authors,  mention  him  as  the  Founder  of  the  Hetrufcan  cere¬
monies  ;  and  the  Au/pices ,  Harufpices ,  and  all  the  other  Diviners  among  the  Romans,  de¬
rived  their  difeipline  from  him,  which  they  improved,  and  amplified  afterwards  by  their
own  obfervations.  If  any  want  to  know  more  of  this  Diviner,  they  may  confult  Tally,
de  Divinatione ,  lib.  ii.

(7)  Tarchon.  Perhaps  this  is  the  lame  with  that  Tarchon  General  of  the  Hetrufci,  who
C3me  to  affift  AZneas  againft  Turnus  and  the  Rutili ,  Virg.  JEtieid.  lib-  viii.  /.  121,  &c.

Sur-


443


Book  X.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  V.

Surrounded ;  and  Amythaoris  Ton  (8),  who  learn  a
Of  Chiron  various  arts,  was  wont  to  hang
535  No&urnal  birds  on  croftes,  and  forbid

On  high  houfe-tops  their  mournful  fongs  to  weep.

But,  that  dire  animals  may  not  devour
The  tender  blades,  it  fometimes  has  avail'd.

With  lees  of  olive-oil,  not  mixt  with  fait,

54.0  To  fprinkle  ;  or  to  fatiate  the  feeds

With  that  black  foot,  which  in  the  chimney  breeds.

It  alfo  has  avail’d,  on  tender  plants
The  bitter  waters  of  horehound  to  pour,

Or  with  much  juice  of  houjleek  to  anoint.

5-4.5  But,  if  no  medicine  this  hurtful  plague
Is  able  to  repel,  then  to  your  aid
Let  the  Dardanian  arts  (9)  make  hafte  and  come :

Thrice  round  the  garden’s  hedge,  and  all  its  beds,

With  open  bofom,  and  difhevell’d  hair,

550  Barefooted,  fad  and  penfive,  and  aiham’d,

A  woman  they  conduft,  who  then  does  feel
The  force  of  fettled  laws,  to  which  her  youth
Is  fubjedt  j  and  when,  with  a  gentle  pace.

She  has  furvey’d  them,  (’tis  a  wond’rous  fight)

555  Juft  as  a  fhow’r  of  maft  wrapt  in  its  bark.

Or  apples  round,  rains  from  the  ftiaken  tree,

(8)  Amythonias  is  Melampus  the  fon  of  Amythaon,  a  famous  Diviner  and  Phyfician,
as  Flirty  fays.  He  is  much  celebrated  by  Homer ,  and  other  Poets :  he  found  out  the
virtues  of  one  kind  of  hellebore,  which,  from  his  name,  is  called  Melampodion.  He  was,
as  our  author  infinuates,  Chiron’s  fcholar,  who  was  Achilles’s  Tutor,  and,  as  fome  fay,  the
Inventor  of  Phyfic,  which  he  taught  JEfculapius.

(9)  Dardan'ue  artes.  Magic  was  fo  called  from  one  Dardanus,  a  famous  Magician,
and  a  great  Promoter  of  this  vain,  pretended,  occult  fcience  :  he  wrote  a  great  deal  upon
this  art,  from  whom,  as  Pliny  fays,  Democritus,  a  great  Promoter  of  it,  derived  his  pre¬
tended  knowledge.  Pliny,  lib.  xiii.  cap.  i.  exclaims  highly  againft  the  vanity  of  this  art,
and  calls  it  the  mold  deceitful  of  all  arts  whatfoever  j  fays,  that  it  had  its  rife,  at  firft,
from  Phyfic;  and  that,  from  a  pretext  of  curing  people  by  a  more  profound  and  facred
art  of  Phyfic,  it  creeped  in  gradually,  and  became  in  great  requeft ;  and  to  the  art  of
curing  difeafes  it  added  that  of  foretelling  things  by  Mathematical  knowledge,  Aftro-
nomy,  <&c.  fo  that  it  prevailed  over  all  nations  almoft  in  his  time.  This  Democritus ,  he
fays,  gave  the  firft  recommendation  to  the  art,  which  the  greateft  Philofophers  after¬
wards  were  at  the  greateft  pains  to  attain  to ;  as  Pythagoras,  Plato ,  See.  He  wonders
that  this  art  and  Phyfic  flourifhed  at  the  fame  time  j  for  Democritus  and  Hippocrates  were
cotemporaries,  about  the  three  hundredth  year  of  Pome.  Columella  here  gives  us  an  ac¬
count  of  as  vain  and  ridiculous  a  pra&ice  as  any,  and  yet,  in  fome  other  places,  he  in¬
veighs  againft  all  fuperftitious  practices ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  ftrange,  that  both  he,  and  the
other  ruftic  writers,  fhouli  fo  gravely  recommend  this.

L 1 1  2


The


444


Book  X.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA

The  caterpiller,  of  all  fenfe  bereft,

Rolls,  with  diftorted  body,  to  the  earth  :

Thus  once,  in  former  times,  Iolcos  favv  (io)

>60  The  Dragon ,  lull'd  alleep  with  magic  fongs,

From  Phryxus  golden  fleece,  fall  to  the  ground,

But  now's  the  time,  the  early  cabbage  {talks
Firft  to  cut  down,  and  alfo  to  pluck  up
The  Papbian  and  Tartejian  lettice-thyrle,

565  And  with  the  leek,  form'd  to  be  often  cut,

And  parjley ,  the  green  bundles  to  l'urround.

Now  in  the  fruitful  garden  fprings  apace
Salacious  rocket  ( 1 1 ) ;  likewife  now  begin
The  flipp’ry  rhubarb  (12),  buckthorn ,  and  fen-leek,

570  Spontaneous  to  wax  green;  the  prickly  hedge,

Horrid  with  butcbers-broom,  begins  to  fhoot  :

Wild  f per  age  likewife,  which  great  likenels  bears
T’  afparagus,  comes  forth ;  the  outmoft  ranks
Oppreft  with  tliirft,  moift  purjlane  now  protects :

57  y  And  the  long  kidney-bean ,  a  conflant  foe
To  arrach ,  at  fame  time  lifts  up  his  head.

The  crooked  cucumber  (13),  and  pregnant  gourd.
Sometimes  from  arbors  pendent,  and  fometimes,
Snake-like,  through  the  cold  fhades  of  grafs  they  creep,
580  And  from  the  Summer-lun  a  fhelter  feek.

Thefe  have  not  the  fame  features,  nor  one  fhape  ;

For,  if  the  longeft  pleafes  moft,  which  grows
Sufpended  by  its  own  head's  {lender  top,


(10)  Iolcos ,  a  town  in  Tbeffaly ,  the  native  country  of  Jafon ,  who,  by  the  afliftance  of
Medea ,  recovered  the  golden  fleece  from  Colcbos ,  whither  Pbryxus  had  carried  it,  where
it  was  conftantly  watched  by  a  dragon,  which  the,  by  her  magic  arts,  lulled  afleep,  till
JaJon  carried  away  the  fleece.

(11)  Eruca  fa/ax  :  Rocket  is  fo  called,  becaufe  it  is  a  provocative  to  venery.

(12)  Lubrica  lapathos}  flippery  rhubarb  ;  fo  called  from  its  lubricating  and  purging
quality.

(13)  Cucumis.  Ic  feems  that  this  word,  amongft  the  Romans,  was  of  a  larger  fignifica-
tion ;  and  fignified  not  only  what  we  call  cucumbers ,  but  pompions  and  melons  alfo:
fuch  of  them  as  grew  bulk)’}  and  ran  out  in  length,  and  became  very  mellow,  tender,
and  flaccid,  when  throughly  ripened,  loft  their  name,  and  were  called  pepones ;  but  fuch
of  them  as  grew  round,  like  an  apple,  they  called  melopepones :  but  the  true  cucumis ,  the
riper  it  grows,  the  more  folid  cartilages  does  it  confift  of,  and  is  covered,  as  it  were,
with  an  hard  woody  cruft.  Our  author  feems  here  to  have  defcribed  particularly  the
cucurbita ,  which  grows  to  a  great  bulk,  fo  that  they  formed  veffels  of  them  for  contain¬
ing  honey  and  pitch,  and  goblets  for  drinking ;  and,  when  dried,  were  made  ufe  of  by
boys  for  fupporting  them  in  the  water,  when  they  were  learning  to  fwim.

1


Then


445


Book  X.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.

Then  from  its  flender  neck  feledt  the  feeds ;

^85  But  if  that,  with  a  globe-like  body,  pleafe,

Which  with  too  huge  a  belly  fwells,  then  choofe
The  feed  which  in  its  womb  inclofed  lies  ;

This  will  an  offspring  bring,  fit  to  contain
Hymettian  honey  (14),  or  Narycian  pitch  (if) :
f 90  It  likewife  flagons,  fit  for  Bacchus ’  ufe,

And  goblets,  meet  for  water,  will  produce  j
And  boys  in  rapid  dreams  will  teach  to  fwim  :

But  then  the  livid  cucumber ,  which  grows
With  pregnant  womb,  and  hairy  like  a  fnake,
fpf  Lies  on  its  crooked  belly,  always  coil’d,

And,  cover’d  with  the  knotty  grafs,  impairs
The  health,  and  of  th’  unfriendly  Summer  makes
Difeafes  more  acute  ;  of  this  the  juice
Is  fetid  ;  likewife  with  fat  feeds  ’tis  duff’d.

600  But  that  which  to  the  dropping  water  creeps  (16)

Below  the  arbour,  and  purfues  the  fame
As  down  it  trickles,  and  with  too  much  love
Extenuated,  and  of  a  colour  white,

More  trembling  than  the  udder  of  a  fow
60 f  Which  newly  has  brought  forth,  and  fofter  is
Than  curdled  milk  jud  in  the  cheefe-vat  pour’d,

Shall  to  the  tade  be  fweet ;  and,  when  ’tis  ripe.

In  land  well  watered  it  yellow  grows.

And  to  flck  mortals  fure  relief  will  bring.

610  When  of  Erigone  (17)  the  faithful  Dog ,

With  Bhcebus  fcorching  heat  all  in  a  flame.

Shall  of  the  fruitful  trees  the  fruits  difclofe ;

(14)  Hymettut ,  a  mountain  in  Attica ,  famous  for  honey.

(15)  Naricia ,  a  town  in  Magna  Gr<ecia}  belonging  to  the  people  called  Locri.  It
feems  this  country  produced  abundance  of  pines,  which  yielded  abundance  of  tar  and
pitch.

(16)  Pliny  mentions  this  quality  of  the  cucumis ,  of  the  pompion-kind,  that,  when  it
grows  hanging,  it  always  inclines  towards  water  ^  and,  if  water  be  placed  near  it,  it  will  foon
fhew  its  tendency  towards  it :  fo  here  our  author  fays  it  grows  flender  with  too  much
love,  nimio  tenuatur  amove.

(17)  Erigone  was  the  daughter  of  Icarus ,  who  firft  taught  the  people  of  Attica  the
ufe  of  wine,  of  which  the  Shepherds  having  drunk  too  freely,  were  intoxicated  with  ir,
and  flew  Icarius,  whofe  dog  difcovered  the  murder  to  the  daughter,  by  conducing  her  to
the  dead  body :  her  grief  was  fo  exceffive,  that  fhe  hanged  herfelf.  The  Poets  have
placed  her  in  the  heavens,  and  made  her  one  of  the  twelve  figns ;  and  they  have  done
the  fame  favour  to  the  dog,  and  called  him  Sirius ,  or  the  Dog-ftar:  it  is  faid  to  difclofe
the  fruits,^ becaufe  it  parches  the  leaves  which  cover  them.

And


446  L,  J.  M.  COLUMELL  A  Book  X

And  when  the  final!  white  ofier-bafket,  fill’d
With  mulberries,  diftils  with  bloody  juice  ;

6 15  Then  from  twice- bearing  tree  the  rathe-ripe  fig
Defcends ;  then  are  the  wicker  bafkets  cramm’d
With  Damafc,  and  Armenian ,  and  wax  plums  (18);

And  apples,  which  rood  barbarous  Perfia  lent  (19)

With  native  poilons  arm’d  (as  Fame  relates) :

620  But  now  they’ve  loft  their  pow’r  to  kill,  and  yield
Ambrofian  juice,  and  have  forgot  to  hurt ;

And  of  their  country  dill  retain  the  name  :

Thofe  of  fmall  fize,  to  ripen  make  great  hafte ;

Such  as  great  Gaul  beftows  obferve  due  time,

62  y  And  feafon,  not  too  early,  nor  too  late.

In  colds  the  Afian  come,  a  tardy  fruit :

But  underneath  Arfturus  hurtful  ftar

The  Lhian-tree ,  which  with  Chalcidian  vies.

As  Caunian  with  the  Chian ,  brings  forth  figs  (20) ;

And

(18)  Our  author  mentions  here  only  three  different  forts  of  plums,  viz.  the  Arme¬
nian ,  which,  Pliny  fays,  are  commendable  for  their  fmell.  Father  Hardouin  fays,  that
fome  modern  writers  have  in  vain  contended,  that  they  are  the  fame  as  apricocks  j  the
cereola ,  or,  as  Pliny  calls  them,  cerina ,  from  their  wax  colour ;  and  the  Damagcus plums,
fo  called  from  Damagcus  in  Syria,  which  are  commonly  called  Damage  prunes.  Pliny
mentions  feveral  other  forts,  and  fays,  nec  aliud  pomum  ingeniogus  gem  in  at  um,  fo  curioufly
diverfified  by  ingraftments.

(19)  Pergca ,  peaches:  they  are  natives  of  Perga,  and  Hill  retain  their  name,  with  very
little  variation,  in  feveral  languages.  Pliny  fays,  they  were  foreign  both  to  Afia  and
Greece ,  and  that  it  was  late  before  they  were  brought  into  Italy  ;  and  with  difficulty  took
there ;  that  it  is  falle,  that  they  were  poifonous  in  Perga,  6cc.  By  this  he  feems  to  con¬
fute  Columella's  opinion,  which,  I  fuppofe,  was  commonly  received  at  that  time,  and
not  improper  to  be  mentioned  in  a  poem,  where  fictions  often  help  the  Poet  very  much
forward  in  his  work,  which  he  is  not  to  be  fuppofed  always  to  believe.

Our  author  mentions  only  three  forts  j  Prtecocia ,  Agatica,  Gallha.  The  firft,  Pliny
fays,  ripen  in  fummer,  and  were  brought  into  Italy  not  thirty  years  before  his  time.
Diogcorides  fays,  that  the  fmaller  peaches  were  called  Armeniaca ,  and  by  the  Romans  Pra-
cocia.  Some  ca*l  them  apricocks ,  but  others,  with  more  reafon,  call  them  early  peaches :
the  French  call  them  les  avant-pegches.  The  Agan  and  Gallican  were  of  a  larger  fize,
and  have  their  names  from  the  countries  where  they  were  moft  cultivated,  and  did
thrive  beft,  and  from  whence  probably  they  were  firft  brought  to  Rome.  Pliny  gives  the
preference  to  a  fort  he  calls  duracina,  of  a  firmer  and  harder  fieffiy  fubfiance,  which  does
not  cleave,  and  is  not  eafily  feparated  from  the  ftones.

(201  Columella  mentions  here  nine  different  forts  of  figs;  they  take  their  names  either
from  the  perfons  who  firft  cultivated  them,  or  delighted  moft  in  them ;  the  places
where  they  abounded  moft,  or  grew  in  greateft  perfection  ;  or  from  their  colour,  ffiape,  &c.
Moft  part  of  them  have  been  already  mentioned  in  the  fifth  book,  except  three  or  four ;
viz.  cue  Chelidonian ,  fo  called  from  yyhiduv,  a  gra allow ;  either  fcecaufe  fwailows  feed
on  them,  or,  as  fome  fay,  becauie  they  are  ripe  about  the  time  the  fwailows  depart ;
but  this  does  not  agree  with  what  Pliny  fays,  lia.  xv.  c.  18.  that  it  ripens  the  laft  in  the

Winter-


447


Book  X.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

630  And  Chelidonians  of  a  purple  hue.

And  the  Marijcans ,  which  are  fat  and  plump ;

And  Callijiruthian ,  which  with  rofy  feed
Does  fmile  ;  the  white ,  which  of  the  yellow  wax
The  furname  keeps  j  and  Libyan ,  chanell’d  round  j
63  5:  The  Lydian  alfo  with  its  painted  back.

But,  when  flow-footed  Vulcan  %  (21)  facred  rites
Have  duly  been  perform’d,  and  clouds  begin
To  rife,  and  rains  hang  hovering  in  the  air.

Then  is  the  turnep  (2  2)fown,  which  Nurjia  fends
640  From  her  renowned  fields  ;  and  navews ,  brought
From  the  well-manur’d  Amiternian  lands.

But  anxious  Bacchus ,  now  the  grapes  are  ripe,

Requires  our  cares,  and  our  attendance  waits.

And  all  our  well-dreft  gardens  bids  us  fhut  5
645”  We  ruftics  fhut  them,  and  without  delay,

Dear  Bacchus!  (23)  we,  fubmiffive,  thy  commands
Obey  :  we  own  thy  empire,  and  with  joy
Thy  gifts  we  gather,  and,  reviv’d,  we  tofs

Winter-time.  Columella  fays  they  are  of  a  purple  colour.  The\Marifcan  jig  is  to  called,
pet  hups,  from  its  ftrong  robuft  quality  :  fome  think  they  ought  rather  to  be  called  mo~
rifca,  from  /zaps;,  fatuus,  becaufe  Martial  calls  them  fatuas  marifcas ,  becaufe  of  their
inlipid  difagreeable  flat  tafte  :  the  Italians  call  it  jico  lardare ,  it  being  exceeding  large
and  fat.  They  ufed  to  dry  them  in  the  Sun,  and  keep  them  for  the  fervice  of  the  whole
year  j  albacpue  quis  cera.  Pliny  calls  thefe  albicerata ,  from  the  refemblance  they  bear  in
their  colour  to  white  bees-wax.

(21)  Vulcan ,  according  to  the  Mythologies,  was  the  fon  of  Jupiter  and  Juno.  They
tell  us,  that  his  father,  once  in  an  angry  fit,  threw  him  headlong  out  of  heaven,  down
to  the  ifland  Lemnos  ■,  and  that  by  his  fall  he  contracted  a  lamenefs;  for  which  reafon
they  call  him  tarpides ,  and  by  the  Greeks  he  is  called  k'jAAottoJW,  and  xt/AAv/Var,  and
^AoiVar  and  they  frequently  make  themfelves  very  merry  with  the  misfortunes  and
adventures  of  this  lame  divinity.  His  feaft  was  celebrated  in  the  month  of  ALugujl.

(22)  Rapum ,  a  turnep,  by  the  Greeks  called  yoryyv An,  from  its  round  figure.  Napur ,
a  navew,  by  them  called  jimas,  from  0a vos,  an  hill,  perhaps  becaufe  they  were  planted  on
riling  grounds.  Our  author  fays,  that  the  firft  grew  out  into  a  broad  belly,  and  the
fecond  did  ftrike  its  fmall  root  downward.  The  turneps  of  Nurjia,  a  town  of  the  Sabines,
as  Pliny  fays,  were  moft  efteemed  both  for  their  bignefs  and  fweetnefs ;  but  the  navews
of  Amitemum,  a  town  in  Campania,  according  to  our  author,  were  the  bell.

(23;  Bacchus,  as  every  body  knows,  was  reckoned  the  Inventor  of  Wine,  and  by  the  hea¬
thens  numbered  amongft  their  gods,  and  worfhipped:  amongft:  other  names  he  was  called
Manalus,  as  fome  fay,  from  a  mountain  in  Arcadia,  where  he  had  a  temple,  and  was  wor-
fhipped.  Eufebius,  de  PraparationeEvangeliiy  fays  he  was  called  Manolos,quaji totusfurens
which  is  a  name  more  fuitable  for  him  :  his  facred  rites  were  called  orgia ,  as  the  fame
author  thinks,  r>i{  opyns,  becaufe  of  the  madnefs  and  fury  wherewith  his  priefts  cele¬
brated,  his  feftivals  :  his  priefteffes  were  called  Manades,  7a  {xetinod-a./,  from  the  mad¬
nefs  of  their  behaviour  alfo  at  the  fame  time.  He  is  alfo  called  Lyaus ,  from  a vuv,  to
dijjolve,  becaufe  wine  dififolves  cares ;  and  Lemeus,  ra  Awa,  becaufe  he  prefided  over
the  wine-prels :  all  which  names  our  author  has  diftindtly^exprefied  in  a  few  lines.

Our


448  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A,  &?c.  Book  X.

Oar  arms,  enfeebled  with  dale  wine:  ’rnidd  crouds
650  Of  wanton  Satyrs ,  Fauns ,  and  Pan  himfelf.

With  double  form,  we  thee  invoke  and  praife,

Who  dwell’d  in  Mrenalus ,  who  all  our  cares
Didolv’d ;  thee,  Father  Bacchus !  who  prefid’d
O’er  the  wine-prefs,  we  to  our  homes  invite,

6f5  That  in  our  vats  the  grape’s  pred  juice  may  work,

And  all  our  tuns  with  much  Falernian  fill’d,

And  riched  mud,  may  foam  and  overflow.

Thus  far,  Sihinus ,  I  ve  eflay’d  to  teach
The  culture  of  the  ground,  and  to  relate
660  The  precepts  which  our  heav’nly  Maro  taught,

Who  fird  the  antient  fountains  to  uniock
Adventur’d,  and  through  all  the  Roman  towns
His  rural  verfe,  like  Aj'cra  s  Poet  (24),  fung.

(24.)  Afcraum  carmen.  Hefiod,  a  very  antient  Pbet,  probably  as  old,  if  not  older
than  Homer :  he  was  of  AJcra  in  Bceotia ,  and  was  therefore  cal  ed  Afcraus  •vates.  He
wrote  of  Husbandry  in  verfe :  Virgil  imitated  him,  and  therefore  he  called  his  Georgies
Afcrceum  carmen.


L.  JU-


[  4+9  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA

O  F

HUSBANDRY.

BOOK  ELEVENTH.


CHAP.  I.

What  things  ought  to  he  done  within  the  Manor-  houfe^  hy  a
Man  advanced  to ,  and  intrufied  with  the  Office  of  a
Bailiff.

S~yLAU DIUS,  a  fellow  of  the  college  of  Augujlus\  priefts  (i),
a  youth  of  as  ingenuous  a  natural  difpofitian,  as  of  excellent
learning,  incited  by  the  difcourfes  of  feveral  learned  men,  and
efpecially  of  fuch  as  are  fkilful  in  Hufbandry,  has,  by  his  importunity,
engaged  me  to  compofe  a  treatife  of  the  Culture  of  Gardens,  in  profe :
nor  indeed  was  I  miftaken,  as  to  this  event  of  the  matter,  when  I
reduced  the  forefaid  fubjedt  to  the  laws  of  verfe.  But  as  you,  Publius
Silvinus,  ftill  perfifted  to  alk  a  tafte  of  my  verfification,  I  had  not

(i)  Claudius  Augujlalis.  The  Emperor  Tiberius  inftituted  a  college  of  priefts,  21  in
number,  to  the  honour  of  the  Julian  family,  as  he  pretended  ;  and,  as  they  had  ranked
Augujlus  among  their  gods,  thefe  priefts  were  appointed  to  celebrate  the  facred  ceremo¬
nies  they  performed  to  this  new  divinity :  Claudius ,  who  was  afterwards  Emperor,  was,
as  Suetonius  fays,  by  a  vote  of  the  Senate,  added  to  their  number,  contrary  to  the  ufual
■way  of  ele&ion,  which  was  by  lot.  It  is  very  probable,  that  this  Claudius ,  mentioned
here  by  Columella ,  is  the  fame  who  was  afterwards  Emperor,  who,  in  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  Tiberius ,  might  properly  enough  be  called  adolefcens3  being  but  about
24  years  old,  for  he  died  aged  64:  he  reigned  13  years,  8  months,  28  days  3  fo  that  he
was  about  50  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign  3  from  which  if  we  fubtradl  22  years
that  Tiberius  reigned,  there  remain  24,  the  age  of  Claudius  when  Augujlus  died ;  and  we
may  find  fome  above  that  age  called  adolefcentes  by  claftical  authors.  From  this  we  may
conclude,  that  Columella  wrote  this  book  either  in  the  lacter  end  of  Auguftus’s  reign,  or
in  the  beginning  of  that  of  Tiberius.

M  m  m


power


450  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

power  to  deny  you,  intending  prefently  afterwards,  if  it  Ihould  be
acceptable  to  you,  to  do  that  which  I  am  now  undertaking  ;  'viz.  to
fubjoin  die  bufinefs  of  a  Gardener  to  the  offices  of  a  Bailiff:  which
tho’  I  fecmed,  in  fome  meafure,  to  have  fully  done  in  the  firfl:  book
of  Hufbandry  ;  neverthelefs,  becaufe  our  friend  of  the  college  of
Augujlus' s  priefts  has  frequently,  with  earnetlnefs,  demanded  it  of
me,  I  have  exceeded  the  number  of  books,  which  I  had  now  almoft
completed,  and  have  publifhed  this  eleventh  book  of  the  precepts  of
Hufbandry.

It  is  proper,  that  a  Bailiff,  who  has  the  charge  of  your  land  and
family  committed  to  him,  fhould  be  neither  in  the  firft,  nor  in  the
laft  ffage  of  life  :  for  the  fervants  defpife  a  novice  as  much  as  they  do
an  old  man;  becaufe  the  former  is  not  as  yet  acquainted  with  rural
affairs,  and  the  latter  is  not  now  in  a  condition  to  manage  them  ;  and
youth  makes  the  one  negligent,  and  old  age  the  other  flow  and  un-
adtive ;  therefore  a  middle  age  is  the  fitted:  for  this  office  :  and,  if
accidental  defedts  and  indifpofitions  of  body  do  not  happen,  from
thirty  years  old  to  fixty,  he  may  be  able  to  perform  all  the  offices  of
an  able  and  fufficient  Hufbandman.

But  whoever  he  be,  that  fhall  be  deflinated  to  this  bufinefs,  he
muff  be  very  knowing,  and  exceeding  robuft,  that  he  may  teach
thofe  that  are  under  his  command,  and  that  he  himfelf  may  eafily
do  what  he  commands :  for,  indeed,  nothing  is  either  taught  or
learned  rightly,  without  an  example;  and  it  is  bell,  that  a  Bailiff  be
the  mailer  of  the  Labourers,  and  not  their  fcholar  ;  confidering  what
Cato ,  who  was  an  example  of  the  manners  of  antient  times,  did  fay,
’That  a  Mafter  is  ill  dealt  by ,  whom  his  Bailiff  teaches.  Therefore  in
Xenophon \  Oeconomic ,  which  Marcus  Cicero  tranflated  into  Latin ,
that  excellent  man  Ifchomachus  the  Athenian  (2),  being  alked  by
Socrates,  whether  he  ufed,  when  the  affairs  of  his  family  required  it,
to  purchafe  a  Bailiff  in  the  market,  as  he  did  a  common  Handicrafts¬
man,  or  to  train  him  up  himfelf ;  I  myfelf,  fays  he,  inllrudt  him  :
for  he,  who,  in  my  abfence,  is  fubftituted  in  my  room,  and  fucceeds
as  my  deputy,  to  fupply  my  diligence,  ought  to  know  fuch  things  as
I  myfelf  know.  But  thefe  things  are  too  antient,  and,  indeed,  belong
to  that  time  wherein  the  fame  Ifchomachus  denied,  that  there  was
any  man  ignorant  of  adting  the  part  of  an  Hufbandman.  But  let  us,

(2)  Ifchomachus.  It  is  no  matter  whether  this  was  a  fi&itious  or  a  real  peiTon :  he  is
introduced  by  Xenophon  as  difcourfmg  with  Socrates  about  the  management  of  domeftic
affairs;  where  we  have  many  wife  precepts  of  ceconomy  put  into  his  mouth  by  that
noble  and  ingenious  antient  author,  many  of  which  are  here  mentioned  by  Columella.

who


Chap.  I.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  451

who  are  mindful  of  our  own  ignorance,  commend  to  the  care  of  the
moft  fkilful  Hufbandmen  fuch  young  men,  as  are  of  a  quick  and
lively  apprehenlion,  and  of  a  robuft  body  ;  by  whofe  inftrudtions,  if
it  were  but  one  out  of  many  (for  it  is  a  difficult  thing  to  inftrudt
perfectly)  may  attain  to  the  knowledge,  not  only  of  adting  the  part
of  an  Hufbandman,  but  of  commanding  alfo  :  for  there  are  fome,
who,  tho’  they  are  moft  excellent  and  approved  workmen,  and  under-
ftand  all  kinds  of  work,  having  very  little  prudence  and  (kill  to  com¬
mand,  ruin  their  Matters  affairs,  by  adfing  either  with  too  much
cruelty,  or  with  too  much  lenity  alfo.  Wherefore,  as  I  have  faid,
the  future  Bailiff  mutt  be  taught,  and,  from  the  time  he  is  a  boy,
hardened  in  rural  bufinefs  and  labour,  and,  by  many  trials,  be  firft  nar¬
rowly  examined  and  looked  into  ;  not  only  whether  he  has  throughly-
learned,  and  attained  to  the  knowledge  of  rural  difcipline,  but,  alfo,
if  he  is  honeft  and  faithful  to  his  Mafter,  and  has  a  real  good  will  and
attention  to  him,  without  which  the  Bailiff’s  greateft  knowledge  is  of
no  advantage.

But  the  chief  and  principal  thing,  in  this  kind  of  mafterfhip,  is  to
know  and  to  judge  rightly,  what  fort  of  office,  and  what  fort  of
labour,  is  to  be  affigned  and  injoined  to  every  one  in  particular  :  for
even  the  ftrongeft  cannot  execute  what  is  commanded,  if  he  be  igno¬
rant  of  what  he  is  doing  ;  nor  the  moft  fkilful,  if  he  has  not  ftrength:
fo  the  quality  of  every  thing  muft  be  confidered  5  becaufe  there  are
fome  works  that  require  ftrength  only,  fuch  as  removing  weighty
things,  and  carrying  burdens ;  fome  require  ftrength  and  art  united,
as  digging  and  plowing,  and  cutting  down  corns  and  meadows ;  to
fomelefs  ftrength,  and  more  art,  is  applied,  as  to  the  pruning  and  graft¬
ing  of  vineyards :  alfo  knowledge  is  of  moft  account  in  fome  things,
as  in  feeding  of  cattle,  and  giving  them  medicines :  of  all  which  offices
the  Bailiff,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned,  cannot  be  a  right  judge,
unlefs  he  be  alfo  fkilful,  that,  in  every  thing  whatfoever,  he  may  be
able  to  correct  what  is  done  amifs :  for  it  is  not  enough,  that  he  has
reproved  one  that  has  done  a  fault,  if  he  does  not  teach  him  the  way
to  do  right.  Therefore  I  am  willing  to  fay  the  fame  thing  oyer  again  :
it  is  as  neceffary,  that  one,  that  is  to  be  a  Bailiff,  be  taught,  as  one
that  is  to  be  a  Potter,  Carpenter,  Mafon,  or  any  trade  whatfoever  :
and  I  would  not  take  upon  me  to  determine,  whether  thefe  trades  are
not  fo  much  the  more  expeditioufly  learned,  inafmuch  as  they  are
of  lefs  compafs.  But  the  fubjedt- matter  of  Agriculture  is  great  and
diffufe ;  and,  if  we  would  fully  enumerate  all  its  parts,  we  could
fcarcely  number  them.  Wherefore  I  cannot  enough  admire,  which

M  m  m  2  I  very


452  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book XI.

I  very  jufllv  complained  of  in  the  firft  book  of  my  writings,  that  of
the  other  arts,  which  are  lefs  neceffary  for  life,  there  were  found
Mailers  and  Teachers ;  but  of  Hulbandry,  there  were  neither  Scholars
nor  Teachers  to  be  found,  unlefs  the  grcatnefs  of  the  fubje£t  has  be¬
gotten  an  awe  and  reverence,  either  of  learning  or  profeffing  a  fcience
which  is  almoft  boundlefs,  when  notwithftanding  it  ought  not  there¬
fore  to  have  been  negle&ed,  by  bafely  defpairing  of  it.  For  neither
is  the  art  of  Oratory  deferted,  becaufe  a  perfedt  Orator  has  no- where
been  found ;  nor  Philofophy,  becaufe  there  is  no  man  of  confummate
wifdom;  but,  on  the  contrary,  very  many  men  encourage  them felves
at  leaf;  to  learn  fome  parts  of  them,  altho’  they  cannot  underhand
them  all :  for  what  juftifiable  reafon  is  that  of  being  intirely  fpeech-
lefs,  becaufe  you  cannot  be  a  perfect  Orator ;  or  to  be  driven  to  floth  •
and  idlenefs,  becaufe  you  defpair  of  wifdom  ?  for  it  is  no  fmall  glory
to  have  had  a  fliare  of  a  great  thing,  how  little  foever  you  may  have
poffeffed  of  it.

Who  therefore,  fay  you,  fhall  teach  him  that  is  to  be  a  Bailiff,  if
there  is  no  Profeffor  ?  And  I  myfelf  know  very  well,  that  it  is  a  moffc
difficult  thing  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  all  the  precepts  of  Huf¬
bandry  from  one  author,  as  it  were :  neverthelefs,  tho’  you  will
fcarcely  find  any  one  man  throughly  acquainted  with  the  whole  art,
yet  you  may  find  many  that  are  mailers  of  parts  of  it,  by  whom  you
may  be  able  to  form  a  complete  Bailiff.  For  there  is  both  fomebody
to  be  found  who  is  a  good  Tiller  of  the  ground,  and  an  excellent
Digger,  or  Mower;  as  alfo  a  good  Planter  and  Dreffer  of  trees,  and
a  Vine-dreffer ;  as  alfo  a  Farrier,  and  a  very  good  Shepherd  or  Herds¬
man  ;  and  none  of  thefe  will  refufe  to  communicate  the  principles  of
their  knowledge  to  one  that  defires  it.

Therefore  let  him,  who  is  formed  and  inftru&ed  by  the  knowledge
and  Ikill  of  feveral  Hulbandmen,  and  who  fhall  take  upon  himfelf
the  office  of  a  Bailiff,  avoid,  in  the  firfl  place,  the  familiar  and  inti¬
mate  converfation  of  thofe  of  the  family,  and  much  more  that  of
Grangers.  Let  him  be  very  abftemious  with  refpedl  to  wine  and  deep,
both  which  are  very  great  enemies  to  diligence  :  for  as  a  drunkard
impairs  his  memory,  fo  he  becomes  remits  and  carelefs  in  his  office ;
and  very  many  things  efcape  one  that  is  given  to  deep  :  for  what  can
he  either  do  himfelf,  or  command  any  other,  when  he  is  afleep  ?.  Alfo
let  him  have  an  averfion  to  venereal  amours,  to  which  if  he  once  give
up  himfelf,  he  will  not  be  able  to  think  of  any  other  thing  what-
loever,  but  that  which  he  loves :  for  his  mind,  being  inveigled  and
bewitched  with  vices  of  this  fort,  thinks  that  there  is  neither  any

reward


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  453

reward  more  agreeable  than  the  gratification  of  his  luft,  nor  punifh-
ment  more  grievous  than  the  being  deprived  of  what  he  defires,  and
is  fond  of.

Therefore  let  him  be  firfl:  awake,  and  up  in  the  morning,  before
any  other  body ;  and,  according  to  the  feafons  of  the  year,  let  him
bring  out  the  fervants  to  their  work  quickly,  who  are  always  for
lingering  and  delaying  to  go  to  it ;  and  let  him  march  at  their  head
himlelf,  and  fhow  himfelf  aftive  and  forward  :  for  it  is  of  very  great
importance,  that  fuch  as  labour  the  ground  fhould  begin  their  work
as  loon  as  the  morning  begins  to  dawn,  and  not  through  idlenefs  and
lazinefs  proceed  flowly  in  it  i  for,  as  the  fame  IJchomachus  before-
mentioned  fays,  I  would  rather  have  the  fervice  and  labour  of  one
active  and  induftrious  man,  than  that  of  ten  men  who  are  negligent
and  flow  ;  for  it  occafions  a  great  deal  of  mifchief,  if  labouring  men'
have  liberty  to  trifle  away  their  time  wantonly  (3).  For  as  in  going
a  journey,  the  man,  who  always  goes  on,  and  does  not  loiter  and  flop
by  the  way,  frequently  comes  by  one  half  fooner  to  the  end  of  his
journey,  than  he,  who,  having  fet  out  at  the  fame  time,  fought  after,
and  amufed  himfelf  with  the  fhades  of  trees,  the  delightfulnefs  of
fprings,  or  the  refrefhing  coolnefs  of  the  air  ;  fo,  in  the  bufinefs  of
Agriculture,  it  can  fcarcely  be  told,  how  much  an  afliduous  conftant
labourer  is  preferrable  to  one  that  is  fluggifh,  and  a  loiterer.  There¬
fore  it  is  neceffary,  that  the  Bailiff  take  care,  that  all  the  fervants,  as
foon  as  it  is  light,  go  forth  to  their  work,  not  in  a  dilatory  languith-
ing  manner,  but  that  with  vigour,  and  chearfulnefs  of  mind,  as  if
they  were  going  forth  to  fome  battle,,  they  boldly  follow  him,  march¬
ing  at  their  head  as  their  Captain ;  and  let  him  frequently  encourage
and  chear  them  up,  while  they  are  actually  at  work :  and  fometimes,
as  if  he  were  going  to.aflift  him  that  is  flagging  and  fainting,  let  him,
for  a  little  while,  take  the  iron-tool  out  of  his  hand,  and  do  his
bufinefs ;  and  admonifh  and  diredt  him,  that  it  ought  to  be  done  fo,  as
he  himfelf  has  vigoroufly  done  it.

And  in  the  evening,  when  the  twilight  is  come,  let  him  leave  no
body  behind  him  ;  but  let  him  march  after  them  all,  like  a  good
Shepherd,  who  fuffers  none  of  the  cattle  in  his  flock  to  be  left  in  the
field.  Moreover,  when  he  comes  under  the  roof,  let  him  do  the
fame  thing  that  that  careful  Shepherd  does ;  and  not  prefently  (hut  up
and  hide  himfelf  in  his  apartment,  but  take  as  much  care  of  every

(-;)  Meretricandi.  Some  divide  this  word  into  two;  and  thus  it  figrifies,  to  pafs  the
time  -with  mere  trifling ;  if  it  is  to  be  read  in  one  word,  it  fi° nifies,  following  after  le-wd
•women :  but  the  firfl:  feems  to  be  the  true  reading!

body


454  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

body  as  poffibly  he  can.  Or,  if  there  be  any  body  (as  it  often  hap¬
pens)  wounded,  or  that  has  received  hurt  in  doing  his  work,  let  him
apply  fomething  to  affwage  his  pain  ;  or,  if  there  be  any  other  in  a
more  weak  and  languifhing  condition,  let  him  prefently  convey  him
to  the  infirmary,  and  give  orders,  that  every  other  thing,  convenient
and  neceffary  for  his  cure,  be  given  him.  But,  of  thofe  who  are  in
a  good  ffate  of  health,  no  lefs  care  muff  be  taken,  that  their  meat
and  drink  be  given  them  without  fraud,  by  thofe  who  have  the  charge
of  the  provifions.  And  let  him  always  accuftom  the  Ruftics  to  eat
their  meals  in  their  Mafter’s  houfe,  and  by  the  fire  appointed  for  the
ufe  of  fervants ;  and  let  him  eat  his  own  meals  within  their  view,
and  be  an  example  of  frugality  to  them :  neither  let  him  fup  leaning
upon  a  couch,  except  upon  folemn  holidays  and  let  him  fo  celebrate
the  feftivals,  as  to  bellow  fome  largefs  upon  the  flouted  and  mod
adtive  and  frugal  among  them  :  and  let  him  fometimes  admit  them  to
his  own  table,  and  vouchfafe  to  confer  fome  other  honours  alfo  upon
them.

Let  him  alfo,  upon  idle  days,  review  all  the  implements  of  Huf-
bandry,  without  which  no  work  can  be  done ;  and  frequently  exa¬
mine,  look  into,  and  review  the  iron-tools :  and  let  him  always  pur-
chafe  them  double ;  and,  having  mended  and  repaired  them  from  time
to  time,  let  him  keep  them  fafely,  that  fo,  if  any  of  them  be  damaged
while  they  are  at  work  with  them,  there  may  be  no  necefiity  of  bor¬
rowing  of  a  neighbour ;  for  there  is  more  loft  by  diverting  the  fer¬
vants  from  their  bufinefs,  than  the  price  of  fuch  things  amounts  to.

Let  him  keep  the  family  rather  neatly  and  profitably,  than  deli¬
cately  cloathed  ;  that  is,  well  fenced  againft,  and  defended  from  the
colds  and  rains ;  both  which  are  bell  guarded  againft  by  coats  of  fkins
with  fleeves,  and  frocks  with  hoods :  and  if  this  be  done,  they  may
endure  any  winter-day  whatfoever,  when  they  are  at  work.  Where¬
fore  he  ought  to  review,  and  count  over,  as  well  the  fervants  cloaths
as  the  iron-tools,  as  I  faid  before,  twice  every  month :  for  a  frequent
reviewing  and  taking  an  inventory  of  them,  neither  affords  hope  of
impunity,  nor  room  for  committing  a  fault.  Therefore  he  ought
daily  to  call  by  name  all  the  (laves  which  are  in  bonds,  and  which
are  condemned  to  prifon,  or  the  houfe  of  correction  (4),  and  examine

if

(4)  After  the  Romans  had  conquered  Italy-,  and  many  other  countries,  the  moft  power¬
ful  amongit  them  got  poflcffions  of  lands  in-o  their  own  hands,  contraiy  to  the  laws
formerly  made  for  reftraining  them  from  poffeffing  above  500  jugera  at  moll :  but  they
frequently  eluded  thefe  laws,  and,  under  fictitious  names,  purchaled,  or,  by  other  mean?,
got  into  their  pcfTefiion,  valt  tra&s  of  land,  which  they  either  let  to  others  at  a  certain

rent,


4


Chap. I.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  455

if  they  are  carefully  fettered  ;  as  alfo  if  the  place  where  they  are  in
ctittody  be  well  fecurcd,  and  ttrongly  fortified  :  neither  let  him,  if
either  his  Lord,  or  he  himfelf,  has  put  any  body  in  fetters,  loofe  them
from  their  bonds,  without  the  Matter  of  the  family’s  exprefs  com¬
mand  :  let  him  not  know  what  it  is  to  offer  facrifices,  but  by  his
Lord’s  direction.  He  fhall  never  willingly  know,  or  have  any  ac¬
quaintance  with  any  Diviner  (5),  or  Sorcerefs,  both  which  forts  of
people  difturb  fimple  and  ignorant  minds  with  vain  fuperttition.

He  fhall  not  frequent  the  town,  nor  any  fairs  and  markets,  but  in
order  to  fell  or  buy  fome  neceflary  thing.  Neither  ought  he  to  go
out  of  the  bounds  of  his  own  colony  or  farm,  nor  by  his  abfence  give
the  fervants  opportunity  and  time  to  leave  off  working,  and  commit
mifdemeanours.  Let  him  hinder  all  new  paths,  or  new  limits,  to  be
made  in  the  land.  Let  him  very  rarely  receive  and  entertain  any
ttranger,  except  it  be  his  Matter’s  intimate  friends.  Let  him  not  make
ufe  of  his  fellow- fervants  for  any  fervice  of  his  own,  nor  allow  any
(except  great  neceffity  fhall  force  him)  to  go  out  of  the  bounds.  Let
him  not  make  ufe  of  his  Matter’s  money,  either  for  buying  cattle,  or
any  other  thing  to  fell  again :  for  this  thing  diverts  and  withdraws  the
Bailiff  ’s  care  from  his  proper  bufinefs,  and  makes  him  rather  a  Trader
than  an  Hufbandman  ;  and  never  fuffers  him  to  balance  accounts  with
his  Matter,  and  pay  him  what  he  owes  him  :  but,  when  he  is  required'
to  tell  down  the  money,  inttead  of  the  cafh,  the  goods  are  produced ..

renr,  or  cultivated  them  by  vaft  numbers  of  (laves,  which  they  conftantly  employed  and
kept  at  their  villas,  where  they  commonly  built  an  houfe  they  called  ergaftulum,  which,
according  to  its  etymology,  fignifaes  a  ivork-houfe ,  but  was  really  a  prifon :  it  was  moftly
built  under-ground,  with  fmall  windows,  and  well  fecured  ;  there  they  confined  their
(laves,  fometimes  only  in  the  night-time,  and  then  led  them  out  to  work  in  the  day¬
time.  But  our  author  feems  to  intimate,  that  they  were  defigned  for  naughty  fervants,
who  were  confined  there  as  a  punifhment  for  crimes  they  had  committed ;  and,  no  dotibr,
were  condemned  to  hard  labour;  as  grinding  of  corn,  beating  of  hemp,  &c.  To  thefe
places  alfo  they  commonly  confined,  in  the  night-time,  fuch  of  their  (laves  as  they  fu-
fpedted  were  inclined  to  run  away.  Thefe  private  prifons,  as  has  been  already  raid,  were
fo  much  abufed  in  after-times,  that  feveral  Emperors  thought  fit  to  abolifh  them ;  it
having  been  found,  that  feveral  innocent  perfons,  and  even  freemen,  had  been  trepanned
into  them,  and  kept  as  (laves  therein,  by  the  tyrannical  and  oppreffive  proprietors  of  the
fame.  .  1

(5)  Arufpex ,  a  Diviner:  their  bufinefs  was  to  look  into  the.'en trails  of  their  facrifices;
and  from  the  appearances  they  made,  viz,,  if  the  parts  were  found  and  intire,  or  de¬
cayed,  or  not  in  their  natural  pofition,  or  from  the  appearance  of  the  flame  when  they
were  burning,  <&c.  to  foretel  good  or  bad  fuccefs,  &c.  They  were  once  in  great  efteem
at  Rome ,  and  their  dilcipline,  which  was  brought  from  Tufcany ,  was  greatly3  reverenced
by  the  Romans:  but,  it  feems,  our  author  had  no  great  opinion  of  Them,  and  looked
upon  them  as  a  pack  of  deceivers ;  and  advifes  a  Bailiff  not  to  be  acquainted  with  any
of  them.


Therefore


456  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

Therefore  he  muft  be  obliged  to  avoid  this,  as  much,  indeed,  as  an
inclination  for  hunting  and  fowling  is  to  be  avoided ;  by  which  things
very  many  fervants  are  taken  away  from  their  proper  bufinefs.

Alfo,  he  ought  carefully  to  confider  and  obferve  thofe  things,  which
with  difficulty  are  obferved  in  greater  governments,  that  he  deal
neither  too  cruelly,  nor  too  remifsly,  with  thofe  that  are  fubjedt  to
him  ;  and  that  he  always  cherifh  the  virtuous  and  the  diligent,  and
alfo  fpare  fuch  as  are  not  fo  good  and  dutiful  as  they  ought  to  be  ;
and  that  he  ufe  fuch  moderation,  that  they  may  rather  be  afraid  of
his  feverity,  than  deteft  and  abhor  his  cruelty.  And  it  will  be  in  his
power  to  guard  againft  and  prevent  this,  if  he  rather  choofe  to  ufe
precautions,  that  the  Labourer  may  not  commit  a  fault,  than  to  punith
him  in  the  evening  after  he  has  committed  it :  for  there  is  no  hirer
guard  can  be  let  even  upon  the  naughtieft  man  living,  than  the  daily
exacting  a  certain  tafk  of  him  :  for  that  famous  faying  of  Marcus
Cato  is  as  true  as  an  oracle,  That  by  doing  nothing  men  learn  to  do
evil.  Therefore  the  Bailiff  muft  take  care,  that  the  talks  be  perform¬
ed  ;  and  thefe  things  he  will  with  no  great  difficulty  obtain,  if  he
always  make  his  appearance,  and  fhew  himfelf :  for  thus  the  Over-
feers  of  every  particular  fort  of  bufinefs  will  diligently  execute  their
•offices  i  and  the  fervants,  after  having  been  kept  hard  at  work,  being
tired,  will  rather  fet  their  minds  upon  their  victuals,  and  upon  reft
and  fleep,  than  upon  doing  of  mifchief.

Moreover,  in  every  thing  relating  to  Hufbandry,  and  in  all  rural
affairs  whatfoever,  as  in  all  other  affairs  of  life,  the  moft  valuable
thing  of  all  is,  that  every  man  fhould  be  fenfible,  that  he  is  really
ignorant  of  what  he  knows  nothing  of,  and  be  always  defirous  to  learn
what  he  is  ignorant  of.  For,  tho’  knowledge  is  of  great  advantage,
neverthelefs  imprudence,  or  negligence,  does  more  hurt  than  it,  viz.
knowledge ,  does  good ;  efpecially  in  Hufbandry,  of  which  art  the
principal  point  is  to  have  done,  once  for  all,  whatever  the  nature  and
method  of  the  culture  fhall  require  to  be  done  :  for  altho’  what  is
done  amifs,  either  through  negligence  or  imprudence,  may  fometimes
be  mended ;  neverthelefs,  the  Owner  has  already  fuftained  a  prefent
lofs :  nor  can  the  thing  afterwards  yield  fuch  an  increafe,  as  both  to
repair  the  lofs  of  the  article  that  has  been  loft,  and  make  up  again
the  advantage  which  would  have  redounded  from  it.  Who  is  it  that
doubts  how  irrecoverable  time  is,  that  maketh  its  efcape,  and  flideth
away  before  our  eyes  ?  Therefore  let  him  remember  this,  and  always
beware,  above  all  things,  that,  for  want  of  forefight,  he  be  not  over¬
come  by  his  work  :  for  the  bufinefs  of  Agriculture  is  moft  infidious,

and


Chap.  I.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  4r7

and  apt  to  deceive  a  dilatory  man :  which  very  thing  Hejiod ,  a  moft
antient  author,  has  more  exprefsly  intimated  in  this  verfe  (6),

*  The  man,  who,  full  of  doubts,  delays  his  work,

c  With  Ioffes  always  wreftles.’

Wherefore  let  the  Bailiff  be  of  opinion,  that  that  common  faying,
which  Hulbandmen  make  ufe  of,  concerning  the  planting  of  trees,  viz.
Do  nut  hejitate  to  plant,  is  to  be  applied  to  the  whole  culture  of  the
ground  ;  and  believe,  that  not  twelve  hours  are  negledted  and  let  pafs,
but  that  a  year  is  loft,  unlefs  he  do  and  finifh  prefling  bufinefs  upon
its  own  day.  For  fince  every  thing  ought  to  be  done  almoft  in  its
own  proper  moments,  if  one  work  be  done  later  than  it  ought  to  have
been  done,  the  other  parts  of  Culture  alfo,  which  follow,  will  be
entered  upon  too  late,  after  their  proper  feafons  are  paft ;  and  the
whole  order  of  the  work  being  difturbed,  and  put  out  of  its  due
courfe,  deprives  you  of  the  hope  of  the  whole  year.  Therefore  fuch
a  directory,  concerning  the  work  and  bufinefs  of  every  month,  as
depends  upon  the  obfervation  of  the  pofition  and  influence  of  the
ftars  of  Heaven,  is  very  neceffaryj  for,  as  Virgil  fays  (7),

1  With  as  much  care  we  mull  obferve  the  ftars,

‘  Artturus,  and  the  Kids ,  and  gliff’ring  Snake ,

*  As  they,  who,  homeward-bound,  through  fformy  waves

*  Of  th’  Euxine  fea,  Abydus  narrow  chops,

*  Where  breeds  the  purple-filh,  attempt  to  pafs/

Againft  which  obfervation  I  do  not  deny  I  have  difputed  with  many
arguments,  in  thofe  books  which  I  wrote  againft  Aftrologers.  But
in  thefe  difputations,  inquiry  was  made  into  the  truth  of  that  which
the  Chaldeans  moft  impudently  affirm  as  a  thing  certainly  to  be  de¬
pended  on.  That  the  changes  of  the  air  anfwer  to  certain  ftated  days,
as  if  they  were  confined  within  certain  bounds.  But,  in  this  rural
difcipline,  fuch  fcrupulous  nicenefs  is  not  required  :  for  the  progno-
fticating  the  future  weather,  tho’  it  be  done  but  grofly  and  inartifi-


(6)  Hefod,  Epf.  2.  31.

(7)  Vir5'  Georg,  lib.  i.  204.

The  antients,  as  has  been  already  faid,  were  of  opinion,  that  the  rifiog  and  fettin®  of
feveral  ftars  had  a  mighty  influence  upon  all  the  fruits  of-  the  ground,  and”  fome  of  them
they  looked  upon  as  mighty  pernicious;  for  which  reafon  Pliny  calls  them  horrida  Jldera,
as  Artturus ,  Orion,  and  the  Kids,  which  they  thought  always  produced  florins  and’
tempefts.

N  n  n  cialJy?


45B  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI.

dally,  as  they  fay,  and  not  with  that  exa&nefs  as  might  be  wifhed,
yet  will  be  of  as  great  advantage  to  the  Bailiff  as  you  can  defire,  if
he  be  fully  perfuaded,  that  the  flar  will  have  its  due  force  and  influ¬
ence,  fometimes  before,  fometimes  after,  and  fometimes  alfo  upon
the  very  day  when  it  rifes  or  fets :  for  that  man  will  be  provident
enough,  who  fhall  have  it  in  his  power  to  take  precautions,  and  fecure
himfelf  feveral  days  before,  againft  fufpe&ed  weather.


CHAP.  II.

What  mujl  be  done  every  Months  by  accommodating  all  Sorts
of  Work  to  the  Times  and  Seafons .

THerefore  we  fhall  give  directions  what  muft  be  done  every
month  (i),  fo  accommodating  rural  bufinefs  to  the  times  and
feafons,  as  the  date  of  the  weather  will  allow  j  of  the  variety  and

changes

(i)  The  antients  were  great  obfervers  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and,  from  their  obfer-
vations,  they  formed  to  themfelves  certain  rules  for  their  guidance  and  direction  in  all
the  different  parts  of  Agriculture  :  they  not  only  confidered  the  rifing  and  fetting  of  cer-
rain  confteilations,  and  particular  ftars,  as  indications  and  figns  when  to  begin  plowing,
fowing,  and  other  works  of  Husbandry,  but  they  thought,  that  they  had  great  influence
over  the  temperature  of  the  air,  and  the  fruitfulnefs  of  the  earth :  and  tho’,  at  firft,  they
only  took  notice  of  them  as  flgns  pointing  out  the  times  of  the  year,  when  heat  or  cold,
arinefs  or  moifture,  are  ufually  predominant  ^  yet,  in  procefs  of  time,  many  began  to
look  upon  them  as  the  caufes  of  thefe  qualities.  But  Columella  was  fo  far  from  attribute-
mg  fo  great  virtue  to  the  ftars,  that  he  compofed  fome  books  againft  thofe  Aftrologers,
who  pretended  certainly  to  foretel  the  changes  of  the  weather :  and  all  that  he  pretends
in  this  chapter  is,  to  warn  Husbandmen  to  be  conftantly  upon  their  guard  j  becaufe,
from  a  long  feries  of  obfervations,  made  both  by  himfelf  and  others,  there  was  reafon
to  expedt,  that  fuch  and  fuch  changes  of  weather  would  happen  about  the  rifing  or  fet¬
ting  of  fuch  and  fuch  ftars,  not  always  indeed  upon  the  very  fame  day,  but  fometimes
before,  fometimes  after :  accordingly,  in  this  chapter,  he  gives  an  account  of  the  rifing
and  fetting  of  fuch  of  them  as  he  thought  neceflary  to  be  known  for  the  purpofes  of
Husbandry  and  he  has  formed  a  calendar  for  the  direction  of  Husbandmen  in  every
part  of  it,  throughout  all  the  months  of  the  year.  And  here  it  may  not  be  amifs,  for
the  information  of  fuch  as  are  unacquainted  with  fuch  things,  to  tell  them,  that  the  an-
tient  Aftronamers,  in  order  to  affift  the  memory  to  retain  the  number  and  difpofition  of
the  ftars,  2nd  to  enable  themlelves  and  others  to  fpeak  intelligibly  of  them,  and  commu¬
nicate  their  thoughts  to  others  concerning  them,  divided  or  reduced  the  ftarry  firmament
to  ce'tain  fyftems  and  collections  of  ftars,  or  confteilations,  which  they  imagined  or
fuppo  ed  to  reprefent  the  figures  of  fome  real  or  imaginary  animals,  or  of  fome  other
known  vifib'e  thing,  and  gave  them  names  accordingly ;  moft  of  which  they  borrowed
from  the  fabulous  hiftortes  of  their  gods,  heroes,  &c.  By  which  contrivance,  when¬
ever  any  mention  is  made  of  any  of  thefe  confteilations,  or  of  any  particular  ftar  belong¬
ing  to  the  lame,  fuch  as  are  acquainted  with  the  celeftial  fphere,  can  as  eafiiy  turn  their

thoughts


Chap.  II.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  459

changes  of  which,  if,  from  this  brief  account,  the  Bailiff  fhall  be
forewarned,  he  fhall  either  never  be  deceived,  or,  I  am  perluaded,
not  very  often.  And,  that  we  may  not  depart  from  our  excellent
Poet  (2),

‘  When  Spring  begins,  let  him  begin  to  till

*  The  ground.’

But  an  Hufbandman  ought  not  to  obferve  the  beginning  of  the  new
Spring  in  the  fame  manner  as  an  Aflronomer,  fo  as  to  wait  for  that
particular  day,  which  is  faid  to  begin  the  Spring  j  but  let  him  even
take  in  fome  part  of  the  Winter :  becaufe  after  the  fhortefl  day  is
paft,  the  year  begins  to  grow  warm,  and  a  milder  day  permits  him  to
begin  his  works.

Therefore  from  the  13th  day  of  'January ,  (that  he  may  fhew  re¬
gard  to  the  firft  month  of  the  Roman  year)  he  may  aufpicioufly  begin
the  feveral  parts  of  every  fort  of  Culture,  of  which  he  fhall  finifh
fome  that  have  been  already  begun,  and  are  not  yet  finifhed,  and
begin  others  which  belong  to  the  future  time.  And  it  will  be  fuffi-
cient,  that  every  work  be  finifhed  towards  the  middle  of  each  month  :
for  a  work  difpatched  and  finifhed  fifteen  days  fooner  than  is  needful,
cannot  be  faid  to  be  done  too  much  out  of  feafon  ;  nor,  on  the  other
hand,,  can  that  which  is  done  fo  much  later,  be  faid  to  be  done  too
late.  The  xiii  of  January  is  ftormy  windy  weather,  and  an  uncer¬
tain  Hate.  The  xv  of  January  uncertain  weather.  On  the  xvi  of

thoughts  or  their  eyes  towards  them,  as  they  can  to  fuch  places  of  the  earth  where  they
dwell,  or  are  well  acquainted  with.  Columella ,  in  this  chapter,  mentions  not  all,  but
many  of  thefe  conftellations,  and  only  tells  us  when  they  rife  and  fet,  without  any  fur¬
ther  defcription;  fo  that  he  fuppofes  his  readers  to  have  fome  knowledge  of  the  celeftial
fphere,  and  which  he  did  not  think  it  his  bulinefs  to  teach.  But,  as  it  is  probable  there
may  be  fome  who  may  have  the  curiofity  to  look  into  this  chapter,  who  are  not  very
well  acquainted  with  thefe  things,  perhaps  it  may  not  be  unacceptable  to  them,  to  give
them  an  imperfedt  hint,  from  Aratus ,  Hyginus ,  and  fome  others,  of  the  places  of  the
fphere  wherein  they  are  fituated,  and  of  their  fituation  in  refpedt  of  thofe  that  are  near
them  j  and  of  the  charadters  wherewith  the  twelve  figns  of  the  Zodiac,  through  which
the  path  of  the  Sun  pafifes,  are  commonly  marked;  and  fometimes  give  the  reafons  of
the  names  of  the  conftellations,  &c.  and  this  without  any  order,  but  juft  as  they  are
mentioned  by  the  author :  and,  as  the  greateft  part  of  the  Latin  names  of  the  Conftella¬
tions  are  become  familiar  to  our  language,  and  are  as  eafily  underftood  as  if  they  were
rendered  into  Englijh ,  it  will  not  feem  neceffary  always  to  tranflate  them  ;  and,  probably,
it  may  be  thought  better  frequently  to  retain  them,  and  put  the  Englijh  names  after
them.

(a)  Virg.  Georg,  lib.  i.  43.


N  n  n  2


January


460  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Bool?  XI.

< 'January  the  Sun  pafies  into  Aquarius  (3)  j  Leo  (the  Lion)  (4)  begins
to  let  in  the  morning  :  a  fouth-weft  wind,  fometimes  a  fouth  wind,
with  rain.  The  xvii  of  January ,  Cancer  (the  Crab)  (5)  leaves  off
fetting:  it  is  cold  Winter- weather.  The  xviii  of  January,  Aquarius
begins  to  rife  :  the  fouth-weft  wind  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xxii
of  January ,  the  bright  ftar  in  the  Harp  (6)  fets  in  the  evening  :
a  rainy  day.  The  xxiv  of  January  forebodes  a  florin,  from  the  fet¬
ting  of  the  Conftellation  Prijles  (the  Whale) :  fometimes  alfo  there  is
a  ltorm.  The  xxvii  of  January ,  the  bright  Star  which  is  in  the
breaft  of  Leo  fets :  fometimes  it  is  a  fign,  that  the  Winter  is  divided
into  two  parts  (7).  The  xxviii,  either  the  fouth,  or  fouth-weft  wind
blows,  cold  Winter-weather  :  a  rainy  day.  The  xxx  of  January ,

(3)  Aquarius ,  the  Water-bearer,  is  the  eleventh  fign  of  the  Zodiac:  it  is  commonly
marked  thus  which  reprefents  the  wavy  furface  of  the  water,  there  being  a  certain
r  umber  of  Scars  in  this  Conftellation  fo  placed,  as  feem  to  have  this  appearance.  Ara-
tus ,  and  fome  other  antienc  Aftroncmers,  have  reckoned  about  thirty  St2rs  in  this  Con¬
ftellation.  He  has  his  feet  fixed  in  the  tropic  of  Capricorn ,  and  ftretches  out  bis  left-
hand  as  far  as  the  back  of  Capricorn ,  and  with  his  right-hand  almoft  touching  the  mane
of  Pegafus.  Some  fay,  that  this  Conftellation  had  its  name  in  memory  of  Ganymedes,
who  was  cup-bearer  to  Jupiter:  others  fay,  that  it  was  fo  called  in  memory  of  Deu¬
calion,  in  whofe  reign  a  great  deluge  of  water  happened.

(4)  Leo ,  the  Lion,  is  the  fifth  fign  of  the  Zodiac,  and  is  marked  thus  Si,  which  re¬
prefents  the  tail  of  the  Lion,  and,  as  fome  fay,  is  an  emblem  of  his  courage,  he  lafhing
himfelf  with  his  tail  when  fte  is  angry  :  perhaps  they,  by  this  furious  animal,  intended  to
exprefs  the  violent  heat  ot  the  Sun,  at  the  time  when  the  Sun  enters  into  this  fign.  He
is  reprefented  as  looking  towards  the  weft,  and  placed  above  the  body  of  Hydra ,  from
its  head  to  its  middle  parr,  and  divided  by  his  middle  by  the  tropic  of  Cancer ;
and  as  having  his  fore  feet  placed  below  the  circle  itfelf.  The  ancient  Aftronomers
reckoned  abouc  19  Stars  in  this  Conftellation.

(5)  Cancer ,  the  Crab,  is  the  fourth  fign  of  the  Zodiac,  drawn  on  the  globe  in  ;he
figure  of  a  Crab:  ft  is  marked  with  this  character  ®.  The  learned  Dr.  Lowe’s  opinion
feems  very  reTonabie,  that  the  intention  of  the  Inventor  of  this  character  was  to  re-
p  efent  the  change  of  the  Sun’s  declination  from  north  to  fouth,  by  two  lines  drawn  fo
as  to  point  contrary  ways.  The  circle  that  is  parallel  to  the  equinoctial,  and  pafies
through  the  beginning  of  this  fign,  is  called  the  tropic  of  Cancer ,  or  the  northern  tropic,
to  which  when  the  Sun  comes,  about  the  nth  of  June ,  it  makes  the  Summer-folftice,
and  he  then  turns  his  courfe  back  again  towards  the  equator :  they  reckoned  formerly
18  Stars  in  this  Conftellation.  It  is  reprefented  as  divided  by  the  middle  by  the  tropic
cf  Cancer ,  and  placed  a  little  above  the  head  of  Hydra.

( 6 )  Fidicula  is  the  biggeft  fbr  in  the  Conftellation  Lyra,  or  the  Harp:  fometimes  by
authors  it  is  put  for  the  whole  Conftellation.

(7)  Hiems  bipartita.  If  regard  be  had  to  the  number  of  days,  more  than  the  half
of  the  Winter  is  now  paft:  but,  it  may  be.  Columella's  meaning  is,  that,  with  refperft  to
the  wea  her,  or  coldnefs  of  the  feafon,  the  fetting  of  the  bright  Star  in  the  breaft  of
Lco  fignifies,  that  only  the  half  of  Wimer  is  paft  j  but  the  meaning  of  this  expreflion
feems  very  dubious :  however,  it  cannot  be,  that,  according  to  the  number  of  the  days
they  aftigned  to  the  Winter,  it  was  then  divided  into  two  equal  parts.


Del-


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  461

Delphinus  (8)  (the  Dolphin)  begins  to  fet ;  alfo  Fidicula  (the  Harp)
fets.  The  xxxi  of  'January  the  fetting  of  the  forementioned  Stars
caufes  a  ltorm  :  fometimes  it  is  only  a  fign  of  it.

We  have  run  over  this  half  month,  and  thofe  following,  one  after
another,  by  taking  particular  notice  of,  and  mentioning  the  ftorms,
that  the  more  cautious  Bailiff,  (as  I  have  already  faid)  may  either  abf-
tain  from  all  manner  of  work,  or  make  the  greater  difpatch.  There¬
fore  from  the  xiii  of  January ,  which  is  accounted  to  be  the  time
between  the  Winter  folftice  and  the  coming  of  the  weftern  breezes,
if  you  have  a  larger  extent  of  vineyard,  or  of  plantations  of  trees  for
fupporting  of  vines,  you  muft  return  to  prune  that  part  which  re¬
mained  unpruned  in  Autumn,  but  fo  that  the  vine  may  not  be  wounded
in  the  morning;  becaufe  the  firm-wood  of  it  being  as  yet  ftiff  with
the  hoar-frofts,  and  the  nocturnal  frofts,  greatly  dreads  the  iron-tool.
Therefore  while  you  give  it  leave  to  thaw,  till  the  fecond  and  third
hour  of  the  day  ;  the  thorn-  and  briar-hedges  may  be  thinned,  left
by  their  growth  they  incroach  upon,  and  take  up  the  land,  the  corns
may  be  weeded,  the  rods  and  fprays  gathered  into  heaps,  and,  finally,
wood  may  be  cut  for  fuel,  that  fo  when  the  day  grows  warm,  the
bufinefs  of  pruning  may  be  carried  on.

In  places  expofed  to  the  Sun,  and  alfo  in  fuch  as  are  lean  and  dry,
the  meadows  muft  now  be  cleanfed,  and  preferved  from  the  cattle,
that  there  may  be  plenty  of  hay.  It  is  alfo  a  proper  time  to  till  dry
and  fat  lands ;  but  both  fuch  as  are  of  an  oufv  and  of  a  middling
habit,  muft  be  fallowed  in  Summer ;  but  fuch  as  are  very  lean  and
dry,  muft  be  plowed  after  Summer  in  the  beginning  of  Autumn,  and
afterwards  fown.  But  a  jugerum  of  fat  land,  at  this  time  of  the  year,
is  very  eafily  plowed  by  two  labourers  ;  becaufe  the  earth,  being  as
yet  wet  with  the  Winter  rains,  yields  eafily  to  culture.  And  in  the
fame  month,  before  the  firft  of  February ,  the  corns  fown  in  Autumn
muft  be  farcied,  whether  they  be  of  the  feed  of  red-bearded  hufked
wheat,  which  fome  call  our  own  Italian  hufked  wheat,  or  of  com¬
mon  wheat :  and  the  proper  time  for  farcling  them  is,  when  the  corns
that  are  fprung  up  have  begun  to  have  four  blades  or  leaves :  and  they
who  have  a  Labourer  to  fpare  front  other  work,  ought  now  at  length
to  farcle  the  early  barley  alfo.

(8)  Delphinus,  the  Dolphin ;  a  Conftellation  in  the  northern  hemifphere :  it  is  repre-
fented  not  far  from  that  called  the  Eagle,  with  its  head  almoft  touching  the  nofe  or  fnout
of  Pegafus :  it  contains  ten  Stars :  it  rifes  with  the  hinder-part  of  Sagittarius ,  and  it  fees
when  the  head  of  Virgo  rifes :  it  confiits  of  ten  Stars,  according  to  the  antients.


The


462  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

The  bean  alfo  requires  the  fame  culture,  if  now  its  ftalk  be  grown
up  to  the  height  of  four  inches:  for  it  is  not  expedient  to  farcle  it
before,  while  it  is  too  tender.  It  will  be  better  for  us  to  fow  vetches
the  preceding  month  j  nor  yet  will  it  be  amils  to  fow  them  in  this
very  month,  or  in  the  next :  for  Hufbandmen  diredt,  that  by  no
means  they  ihould  be  committed  to  the  earth  in  the  month  of  March.
It  is  right  now  to  dig  vineyards,  which  are  propped  and  fupported
with  flakes,  and  tied.  Such  grafts  or  cyons,  as  bloffom  firft,  muft
be  prefently  graffed  about  the  13th  of  the  month,  as  thofe  of  cherry-
trees,  inheres  or  peach-nuts  (9),  almond-trees,  and  peach-trees.  It  is  a
fit  time  for  making  cloven  vine-props,  or  pales  on  flakes  alfo  :  nor  is  it
lefs  proper  for  cutting  down  trees  for  buildings.  But  both  thefe  things
are  better  done  when  the  Moon  is  decreafing,  from  the  twentieth  to
the  thirtieth  day  ;  becaufe  all  wood  fo  cut  is  thought  not  to  be  in-
fefled  with  carioufnefs.  One  workman  can,  in  one  day,  cut  down
one  hundred  pales  or  flakes,  and  lop,  fharpen,  and  point  them  :  but
he  can  cleave,  chip,  and  plain  on  both  fides,  and  fharpen  fixty  oaken
or  olive  vine-props.  Alfo  he  can  by  candle-light  in  the  evening  make
ten  pales  or  flakes,  and  five  cloven  vine-props  j  and  the  like  number
by  candle-light  in  the  morning.  If  the  wood  be  of  oak,  one  Car¬
penter  ought  to  hew  perfectly  well  twenty  feet  fquare  of  it,  and  this
fhall  make  one  load  :  but  if  it  be  of  pine-tree,  twenty-five  feet  fquare
may  be  as  expeditioufly  done  by  one  man  j  and  this  alfo  is  called  a
load :  as  alfo  of  elm  and  afh  xxx  feet  fquare  :  but  of  cyprefs-tree
xl  feet.  As  alfo  of  the  fir-  or  poplar-tree,  every  fingle  workman  may
hew  perfectly  well  fixty  feet  fquare ;  and  all  thefe  meafures  are  in
like  manner  called  loads.  In  thefe  days  alfo  the  early  lambs,  and  the
young  of  other  cattle,  and  the  larger  four-footed  beafls  alfo,  ought
to  be  marked  with  a  branding  iron.

The  firft  of  February  Fidis  (the  Harp)  begins  to  fet :  the  wind  is
eafterly,  and  fometimes  it  is  a  fouth-wind  with  hail.  The  iii  of  Fe¬
bruary  all  the  Harp,  and  the  half  of  Leo ,  fet :  the  wind  is  north-
weft  or  north,  and  fometimes  weft.  On  the  v  of  February  the  mid¬
dle  parts  of  Aquarius  rife  :  windy  ftormy  weather.  The  vii  of  Fe¬
bruary  the  Conftellation  Calijio  fets  (10) :  the  wefterly  winds  begin  to

blow.

(9)  Tuberes :  a  kind  of  fruit-tree,  brought  out  of  Africa  in  the  time  of  Augujlus .
Pliny-,  hb.  xv.  c.  14.  reckons  it  among  pomiferous  trees ;  and  fays  that  its  fruit  is  but
fmall,  and  more  like  berries  than  apples.  Father  Hardouin  fays,  they  call  them  in  France
pefches-?Joix  (peach-nuts):  they  are  mentioned  in  fome  other  parts  of  this  work.

^10)  Califio  occidit.  Antient  authors  call  Urfa  major  (the  great  Bear)  by  this  name:
foe  was,  as  the  Mythologifts  fay,  the  daughter  of  Lycaon  King  of  Arcadia  ;  and,  being

by


Chap.  II.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  463

blow.  The  viii  of  February ,  windy  ftormy  weather.  The  xi  of
February  the  eaft-wind  blows.  During  thefe  days,  in  fuch  places  as
lie  upon  the  fea-coafts,  and  are  warm  and  dry,  the  meadows,  or
arable  lands,  are  cleanfed,  and  fet  apart  and  kept  for  hay.  Such
parts  of  vineyards  as  were  omitted,  and  left  unfinifhcd,  becaufe  of
the  fhorteft  day,  or  the  colds,  muft  now  be  propped  and  tied,  left
afterwards  the  fwelling  buds  be  hurt,  and  the  eyes  bruifed  and  rubbed
off.  Alfo  in  the  fame  places,  the  digging  of  the  vineyards  muft  be
difpatched  and  finifhed,  and  both  the  lopping  of  the  trees  planted  for
the  fupporting  of  vines,  and  the  binding  of  the  vines  to  them,  muft
be  finithed  ;  of  which  things  no  certain  tafks  can  be  afligned.

Then,  between  the  yth  and  13th,  nurferies  of  apple-trees  muft  be
made,  and  the  plants  that  are  come  to  maturity  muft  be  transferred
from  the  nurferies  to  trenches.  The  paftination  alfo,  which  was
begun  in  the  month  of  December,  or  of  January ,  muft  now  be  put
an  end  to,  and  planted  with  vines.  But  a  jugerum  of  ground,  if  the
earth  be  digged  down  to  the  depth  of  three  feet,  is  paftinated  by
lxxx  labourers  in  one  day ;  or,  if  it  be  digged  to  the  depth  of  two
feet  and  an  half,  by  L.  Labourers  s  or  if  to  the  depth  of  two  feet,
by  xl.  Nevertheless,  in  dry  land  this  is  the  leaft  depth  that  the
paftinated  ground  muft  have,  where  young  ftocks  or  cuttings  are  to
be  planted :  for  even  the  depth  of  one  foot  and  an  half  may  fuffice
for  any  kind  of  pot-herbs  that  are  to  be  planted  in  it,  which,  for  the
moft  part,  is  difpatched  by  thirty  Day-labourers  to  each  jugerum.

At  this  fame  time  a  part  of  the  dung  muft  be  fpread  upon  the
meadows,  and  a  part  of  it  fprinkled  round  the  olive-trees,  and  other
trees :  as  alfo  nurferies  of  vines  muft  be  carefully  made,  and  moft
carefully  planted  with  the  very  frelheft  cuttings.  Now  it  is  profit¬
able  to  plant  poplars,  willows,  and  a(h- trees,  before  they  put  forth
their  leaves,  and  alfo  elm-plants ;  or  to  lop  fuch  as  have  been  fet
before,  and  to  dig  round  them,  and  cut  off  their  uppermoft  fmall
Summer-roots.  You  muft  now  alfo  carry  out  of  the  corn-lands  all
the  fprays  of  the  vines,  while  the  vineyards  are  not  yet  digged,  and
the  branches  of  the  trees  that  fupport  the  vines  j  or  briars ;  and,  in  a

by  Diana  changed  into  a  bear,  becaufe  fhe  had  not  preferved  her  virginity,  fhe  was  by
Jupiter ,  who  had  debauched  her,  placed  among  the  Scars,  &c.  The  fevcn  principal
Stars  of  this  northern  Conftellation  are  commonly  called  Charles’s  wain,  having  four  Stars
in  the  form  of  a  parallelogram,  which  reprefent  the  wheel }  and  three  lying  almoft  in  a
ftraight  line,  which  reprefent  the  beafts  of  draught ;  thefe  were  the  Stars  they  chiefly
took  notice  of :  but  in  all,  the  antients  reckoned  twenty-one  Scars  therein.  But,  as  this
Conftellation  does  not  fet,  it  is  probable  the  text  is  corrupted  in  this  place,  or  that  the
author  means  fome  other  Star  by  this  word.


6


word.


4^4-  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

word,  whatever  thing  is  lying  upon  the  ground,  and  may  hinder  the
perfon  that  digs,  or  in  any  other  way  moves  and  labours  the  earth,
and  lay  them  to  an  hedge  :  you  mud  plant  new  rofe-beds,  or  drefs  the
old  ones  :  you  muft  now  plant  nurferies  of  reeds,  or  cultivate  the  old
ones  alfo ;  and  make  willow-groves,  or  lop,  weed,  and  dig  them :
and  either  fow  broom-feed,  or  let  it  in  plants  in  trenched  ground  ;
or  alfo  in  a  furrow.  Alfo  it  is  not  improper  to  fow  trimeifrian  corn
in  this  feafon  ;  altho’  in  warm  regions  it  is  better  to  do  it  any  time
in  the  month  of  January.

The  xiii  of  February  Sagittarius  (the  Archer)  ( 1 1)  fets  in  the  even¬
ing  :  it  is  extremely  cold  Winter  weather.  The  xiv  of  February
Crater  (the  Cup)  (12)  riles  in  the  evening  :  the  wind  changes.  The
xv  of  February  the  Sun  palfes  into  Pi  fees  (the  Fifhes)  ( 13) :  fometimes
there  is  a  florin  of  wind.  The  xvii  and  xviii  of  February ,  it  is  a  weft
or  fouth  wind,  with  hail  and  fhowers  of  rain.  The  xx  of  February
Leo  (the  Lion)  ceafes  to  fet :  the  north  winds,  which  are  called  Orni-
tbian  (14)  are  wont  to  continue  for  thirty  days  :  then  alfo  comes  the
f wallow.  The  xxi  of  February  ArEiurus  rifes  in  the  fore-part  of  the
night :  the  day  is  cold,  with  a  north  or  north-weft  wind,  and  fome¬
times  rain.  The  xxii  of  February ,  in  the  twilight  in  the  evening,
Sagitta  (the  Arrow)  begins  to  rife :  variable  weather  (they  are  called
the  Halcyon  days)  (iy).  In  the  Atlantic  fea  indeed,  there  is  obfervei

to


fix)  Sagittarius ,  the  Archer,  is  the  ninth  fign  of  the  Zodiac,  and  it  is  marked  with
this  character  ■? .  In  old  books  he  is  reprefented  as  a  Centaur,  with  a  bow  and  arrow,
in  a  pofture  of  juft  going  to  fhooc :  he  is  placed  from  his  feet  to  his  fhoulders  in  the
circle  of  Capricorn ,  fo  that  his  head  feems  to  appear  without  the  circle :  his  bow  is  di¬
vided  by  the  circulus  laclens,  and,  according  to  the  antients,  he  conlifts  of  Stars.

(12)  Crater ,  the  Cup,  is  a  fmall  Conftellation,  confiding  of  eight  Stars,  placed  above
the  firft  curvature  of  that  great  fouthern  Conftellation  called  Hydra.

(13)  Pifces ,  the  12th  and  laft  fign  of  the  Zodiack^  it  is  commonly  marked  thus  X,
and,  in  fome  old  books,  it  is  the  picture  of  two  fifhes  tied  toge  her  back  to  back  :  one
of  them  is  called  the  northern  fifh,  becaufe  it  is  placed  between  the  equinoftial  and  the
tropic  of  Cancer ,  under  the  arm  of  Andromeda ,  and  looks  towards  the  north:  the  other
is  called  the  fouthern  fifh,  and  is  placed  in  the  extremity  cf  the  Zodiac,  under  the
fhoulders  of  the  Horfe ,  and  they  are  joined  together  with  certain  Stars  like  a  fmall  line,
from  the  firft  foot  of  Aries:  the  fouthern  fifh  has  17  Stars,  and  the  northern  12  j  and  the
line  of  Stars  that  joins  them  are  12  in  number.

(14)  Venti  Ornithia.  Fliny3  lib.  2.  c.  47.  gives  an  account  of  Etefian  or  anniverfary
winds,  which,  in  different  countries,  blow  from  different  quarters  3  and  fays,  that  when
they  blow  from  the  fouth-eaft  they  are  called  ornithic  3  probably  becaufe  with  them  came
fome  birds,  which  change  countries  at  certain  feafons  of  the  year,  ep vis  figmfying  a
bird.

(15)  Halcyonei  dies.  Thefe  days  have  their  names  from  a  certain  bird  they  called  hal-

cyone  or  balcedo ,  to  \v  dri  Kt/eir,  as  fome  think,  becaufe  it  makes  its  neft,  and  hatches

its  eggs  in  the  fea,  during  which  time  it  is  very  calm.  Pliny  fiys,  chat  the  Halcyon  days

are


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  465

to  be  the  greateft  calm.  The  xxiii  of  February  windy  weather  :  the
fwallow  is  feen.  During  thefe  days,  in  cold  places,  is  the  proper
feafon  for  the  doing  of  thofe  things  we  have  already  mentioned  ;  but
in  warmer  places,  altho’  it  is  too  late,  neverthelefs  it  is  neceffary.  But
this  feems  to  be  the  beft  feafon  for  planting  cuttings  and  quickfets  j
neverthelefs,  it  is  not  worfe  between  the  firft  and  fifteenth  of  the  fol¬
lowing  month,  provided  the  country  be  not  exceeding  hot :  but,  if  it
be  colder,  it  is  even  better.  Alfo,  in  moderately  warm  places,  this
will  be  a  convenient  time  for  grafting  trees  and  vines.

On  the  firft  of  March  a  fouth-weft  wind ;  fometimes  a  fouth  wind
with  hail.  On  the  fecond  of  March  Vindemiator  (the  Vintager)  (16)
appears,  which  the  Greeks  call  rguyvVg :  northerly  winds.  The  fourth
of  March  a  weft  wind,  fometimes  it  is  a  fouth  wind  :  it  is  very  cold
weather.  The  vii  of  March  PegaJ'us  (the  Horfe)  (17)  rifes  in  the
morning :  a  blaft  of  the  north-eaft  wind.  The  xiii  of  March  the
northern  Pifces  leave  off  riling  :  northerly  winds.  The  xiiii  of  March
the  fhip  Argo  (18)  rifes :  a  weft  or  a  fouth  wind,  fometimes  a  north-
eaft  wind.  In  thefe  days  it  is  proper  to  put  in  order,  and  furnifh
gardens  with  every  thing  neceffary,  of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  more  par¬
ticularly  in  their  proper  place,  left,  in  this  croud,  as  it  were,  of  differ¬
ent  forts  of  bufinefs,  I  fhould  feem  to  have  defcribedfomewhat  too  negli-

are  about  the  time  of  the  Winter-folftice,  and  that  about  (even  days  before  that  time
they  make  their  nefts,  and  hatch  their  eggs  about  feven  days  after,  and  then  the  fea  is
calm  and  navigable :  he  fays  alfo,  that  this  bird  is  a  little  larger  than  the  fparrow ;  the
greateft  part  of  it  of  a  bright  azure  colour,  with  fome  purple  and  white  feathers  inter¬
mixed,  with  a  fmall  long  neck,  and  is  feldom  feen  but  at  the  fetting  of  the  Pleiades,  and
about  the  time  of  the  Solftices;  fo  that,  in  the  opinion  of  fome,  it  is  rot  what  is  com¬
monly  called  the  King’s  fijher.  Gefnerus  thinks,  that  thefe  words  are  an  addition  to  the
text,  and  not  originally  of  the  author,  but  added  as  an  explication  of  the  text :  perhaps
the  author  only  meant,  that  they  were  only  like  the  halcyon  days  becaufe  of  their  calm-
nefs:  tho’  they  were  not  the  Halcyon  days  properly  fo  called  •  for  both  Ariflotle  and  Pliny
fay,  that  they  were  feven  days  before,  and  as  many  after,  the  Winter-folftice.

(16)  Vindemiator ,  Tpvynlng,  by  others  called  protrygeter ,  becaufe  it  rifech  a  little  before
the  vintage  begins.  It  is  a  fixed  Star  of  the  third  magnitude,  in  the  right  wing  of  Virgo.
Ovid ,  lib.  iii.  Fajl.  mentions  this  Star;  and  tells  us,  that  a  certain  boy,  beloved  of  Bac¬
chus,  being  killed  by  a  fall  from  a  tree  when  he  was  gathering  grapes,  was  tranflated  into
Heaven,  and  transformed  into  this  Star.

(17)  Pegafus ,  the  Horfe;  a  Conftellation  of  the  northern  Hemifphere,  confiftin^  of
23  Stars :  he  is  reprefented  as  looking  to  the  Ar£lic  Circle,  and  with  his  feet  leaning
upon  the  Tropic  of  Cancer ,  and  feems  to  touch  the  Dolphin  with  the  extremity  of  his
mouth,  and  with  his  neck  as  joining  the  right-hand  of  Aquarius.

(18)  Argo,  the  fhip ;  a  Conftellation  of  the  fouthern  Hemifphere,  confifting,  accord¬
ing  to  the  antient  Aftronomers,  of  23  Stars :  with  its  hinder  part  it  touches  the  Tropic  of
Capricorn ,  and  wi:h  its  under  part  the  tail  of  Canis  major ;  and  then  bends  towards  the
Antarctic  Circle,  which  it  touches :  it  fets  when  Sagittarius  and  Capricorn  arife,  and  rifes
with  Virgo  and  Libra.


O  0  0


gently


466  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI.

gently  the  offices  of  a  Gardener,  or  to  have  interrupted  the  order  of
the  other  forts  of  culture,  which  I  have  now  begun.  Therefore  from
the  firft  to  the  xxiii  of  March  is  an  excellent  time  for  the  pruning  of
vines,  if,  neverthelefs,  the  buds  do  not  as  yet  move  themfelves.  This
is  alfo  the  principal  time  for  chufing,  to  bed  advantage,  cyons  that
have  not  begun  to  bud,  in  order  to  graft  withal  ;  and  it  is  now  by  far
the  very  bed:  time  for  grafting  both  vines  and  trees.  Alfo,  in  cold  and
moilf  places,  now  is  the  principal  time  for  planting  of  vines :  alfo  the
tops  of  fig-trees,  that  are  now  fwelling,  are  fet  to  mod  advantage.
Alfo  this  is  an  excellent  feafon  for  farcling  corns  a  fecond  time  :  one
Labourer  farcies  very  well,  in  one  day,  as  much  corn-land  as  three
modii  will  low.

Now  is  the  proper  time  to  cleanfe  meadows,  and  to  defend  and
fecure  them  from  cattle  :  in  warm  and  dry  places  indeed,  that  ought
to  be  done  even  from  the  month  of  "January ,  as  we  faid  above ;  for
in  cold  places  it  is  foon  enough  to  fhut  up  meadows,  and  fet  them
apart,  for  growth,  at  the  feaft  of  Minerva  (19)  :  at  this  time  you
mud  prepare  all  the  trenches  wherein  you  defign  to  plant  trees  in
autumn  ;  if  the  ground  be  convenient,  and  eafy  to  work,  one  man
may  make  xiiii  of  them  of  four  feet  every  way  j  but  xviii  when  they
are  three  feet.  But  for  planting  of  vines,  or  trees  of  no  great  growth,
a  furrow  one  hundred  and  twenty  feet  long,  and  two  feet  in  breadth,
ought  to  be  funk  to  the  depth  of  two  feet  and  an  half,  and  one
Labourer  will  make  it  in  one  day.  Now  it  is  time  to  have  finifhed
the  digging  and  dreffing  of  your  lateward  rofe-beds  :  now  it  will  be
proper  to  pour  lees  of  oil,  which  have  no  fait  in  them,  round  the
roots  of  olive-trees  that  are  in  a  bad  date  -}  fix  congii  fuffice  for  the
greated  trees,  and  an  urn  for  thofe  of  a  middling  fize  ;  for  the  red  a
proportional  quantity  mud  be  allotted.  But  even  thofe  which  have
no  defetd  will  thrive  fo  much  the  better,  if  they  be  watered  with  lees
of  oil-olive  that  have  no  fait  in  them.  Some  have  faid,  that  this  is
the  bed  time  for  indituting  and  forming  of  nurferies,  and  alfo  have
directed  to  fow  laurel  and  myrtle-tree  berries,  and  the  feeds  of  other
green  things  here  and  there,  in  fmall  beds  and  gardens.  The  fame
perfons  alfo  have  given  it  as  their  opinion,  that  the  did'  upright  ivies,
and  other  ivy-trees,  mud  be  planted  foon  after  the  xiii  of  February ,
or  the  fird  of  March  alfo.  <

(19)  ® uinquatribus .  fUiinquatria  were  feaft-days  inftituted  in  honour  of  Minerva ;
fo  called,  as  Ovid  fays,  becauie  they  lafted  five  days  j  or,  as  others,  becaufe  celebrated
the  fifth  day  after  the  ides  of  March  about  the  19th  or  20th  of  this  month.

Upon


Chap.  II.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  467

Upon  the  xv  of  March  Nepa  (the  Scorpion)  begins  to  fet,  and  is
the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xvi  of  March  Nepa  (the  Scorpion)  fets :  very
cold  weather.  The  xvii  of  March  the  Sun  paftes  into  Aries  (the
Ram)  (20):  a  weft  or  north-weft  wind.  The  xxi  of  March  the
Horfe  lets  in  the  morning:  northerly  winds.  The  xxiii  of  March
Aries  begins  to  rife  :  a  rainy  day ;  fometimes  it  fnows.  The  xxiv
and  xxv  of  March ,  the  vernal  Equinox  is  the  fign  cf  a  ftorm.  From
the  fifteenth  the  fame  things,  above-mentioned,  muft  certainly  be
finiftied.  Now,  and  not  before,  is  the  beft  time  for  tilling  oufy  and
fat  places :  and  fuch  places  as  we  fallowed  in  the  month  of  January ,
muft  be  twifallowed  in  the  latter  end  of  March ;  and  if  there  be  any
arbours  of  generous  vines,  or  any  fingle  trees  married  to  vines,  either
in  the  fields  or  thickets,  left  by  the  Pruner,  they  ought  certainly  to
be  pruned  before  the  firft  of  April ;  after  which  day  the  culture  of
fuch  fort  of  things  will  be  too  late  and  fruitlefs.  Alfo  this  is  the  firft
time  for  fowing  millet  and  panic,  which  ought  to  be  finifhed  about
the  xiii  of  April :  five  fextarii  of  each  feed  take  up  one  jugerum.
Alfo  it  is  the  fit  time  for  caftrating  woolly  cattle,  and  other  fourfooted
beafts :  but  in  warm  places,  it  is  a  right  time  for  caftrating  all  cattle
whatfoever,  from  the  xiii  of  February  till  the  xiii  of  April  -}  and  in
cold  places,  from  the  xv  of  March  till  the  xv  of  May.

The  firft  of  Aprils  Nepa  (the  Scorpion)  fets  in  the  morning  :  it
fignifies  a  tempeft.  The  v  of  April ,  a  wefterly  or  fouth  wind  with
hail :  fometimes  this  fame  thing  happens  the  day  before.  The  vi  of
April  the  Pleiades  (21)  are  hid  in  the  evening  :  fometimes  it  is  winter
weather.  The  vii,  viii,  and  ix  of  April ,  the  fouth  and  fouth-weft

(20)  Aries ,  a  Conftellation,  drawn  on  the  globe  in  the  figure  of  a  Ram  ;  it  is  the  firft
of  the  12  figns  of  the  Zodiac,  and  marked  thus  T-  He  is  reprefented  as  ftanding  in  the
Equinodtial  Circle,  with  his  head  turned  to  the  eaft,  and  his  rifing  head  is  placed  below
the  Triangle,  and  with  his  feet  almoft  touches  the  head  of  the  Whale:  it  confifts  of  18
Stars.  The  Sun  enters  this  Sign  about  the  10th  of  March ,  old  ftyle,  and  makes  the  vernal
Equinox,  his  apparent  diurnal  motion  being  then  in  the  Equator,  when  the  night  and  day
are  equal  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  It  is  reckoned  the  beginning  of  the  aftro-
nomical  year,  becaufe  it  is  the  entrance  into  the  Spring,  when  the  face  of  the  earth  is
renewed,  and  the  vegetables,  that  grow  thereon,  recover  from  the  languifhing  ftate  into
which  they  were  thrown  by  the  coldnefs  of  the  Winter  ^  and  many  of  them,  which
feemed  to  be  intirely  dead,  rife  again,  as  it  were,  and  recover  a  new  life  ^  and  the  ani¬
mals,  which  feemed  to  decline  apace,  and  tend  towards  a  diffolution,  by  the  returning
of  the  warmth  of  the  Sun,  have  new  vigour  and  life  communicated  to  them  :  from  that
time  the  Sun  appears  to  decline  more  and  more  towards  the  north,  till  the  Summer  be¬
gins  about  the  nth  of  June.  It  is  probable,  that  the  antients  intended,  by  this  prolific
animal,  to  reprefent  the  genial  fertilizing  warmth  of  the  Sun  in  the  Spring.

(ai)  Pleiades ,  by  the  Romans  called  Vergilia-,  are  a  clufter  of  fmall  Stars  in  the  neck
of  the  Bull :  thefe  have  been  already  mentioned  in  the  ixth  and  xth  books.

Ooo  2


winds


468  LJ.M.COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

winds  fignify  a  ftorm.  The  x  of  April ,  when  the  Sun  rifes,  Libra
(the  Balance)  begins  to  fet :  fometimes  it  is  a  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The

xii  of  April ,  the  Hyades  (22)  are  hid:  it  is  exceeding  cold,  as  in

Winter.  In  thefe  days  the  firft  digging  of  vineyards,  in  cold  places,
mud  certainly  be  finished  before  the  xiii  j  and  fuch  things  as  ought  to
have  been  done  in  the  month  of  March ,  after  the  equinox  was  pad,

mud  now,  at  length,  be  done  as  foon  as  poflible.  It  is  yet  a  right

feafon  to  ingraft  fig-trees  and  vines  :  nurferies,  which  are  made  be¬
fore,  may  be,  as  yet,  very  conveniently  weeded  and  digged.  Taren-
t  ini  an  fheep  ought  to  be  wafhed  with  foapwort-root  (23),  that  they
may  be  prepared  for  (hearing.

The  xiii  of  April  Libra  (24)  fets,  as  above  :  it  is  very  cold.  The
xiiii  of  April ,  a  ftorm  of  wind  and  ftiowers;  nor  does  this  conftantly
happen.  The  xvii  of  April  the  Sun  pafles  into  Taurus  (the  Bull)  (25-) :
it  is  a  fign  of  rain.  The  xviii  of  April  the  Hyades  hide  themfelves  in
the  evening  :  it  is  a  fignification  of  rain.  The  xxi  of  April  divides
the  Spring  into  two  parts  (26) :  it  is  rain,  and  fometimes  hail.  The
xxii  of  April ,  the  Pleiades  rife  with  the  Sun  :  a  fouth-weft  or  fouth
wind  ;  a  moift  day.  The  xxiii  of  April ,  in  the  beginning  of  the
night,  Fidicula  (the  Harp)  appears :  it  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The
xxviii  of  April ,  the  wind  is  almoft  fouth,  with  rain.  The  xxix  of

(22)  Hyades  are  five  Scars  in  the  Bull’s  face  ,*  fo  called  by  the  Greeks,  perhaps,  becaufe
they  thought  they  had  great  influence  to  produce  rain :  by  the  Romans  they  were  called
Sucula ,  from  a  wrong  imerpretarion  of  their  Greek  name,  as  has  been  already  faid.

(23)  Radix  lanaria.  It  is  highly  probable,  that  the  planr,  the  juice  of  whofe  root
our  author  recommends  for  whitening  wool,  is  what  is  called  faponaria ,  foapwort.  P/iny
fays,  that  it  is  wonderful  how  effectual  the  juice  of  this  root  is  for  wafhing  and  whiten¬
ing  wool,  and  making  it  foft,  which  is  the  reafon  why  it  is  called  radix  lanaria.

(24)  Libra ,  the  Balance,  or  the  Scales  j  one  of  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  feventh
in  order,  exactly  oppofite  to  Aries ;  it  is  commonly  marked  thus  which  is  the  beam
of  the  balance.  It  is  probable,  that  the  antients  made  ufe  of  this  mark  to  fhew,  that
when  the  Sun  enters  into  this  Sign,  about  the  12th  of  September,  he  diftributes  day  and
night  equally  to  all  the  earth  3  and  this  is  called  the  autumnal  Equinox.

(25)  Taurus ,_  the  Bull,  the  fecond  Sign  of  the  Zodiac,  marked  thus  \S,  to  reprefent
the  head  and  horns  of  the  Bull ;  the  Equino&ial  Circle  divides  his  knees  from  the  reft  of
his  body,  and  with  his  left  horn  he  is  joined  with  the  left  foot  of  Auriga  :  befides  the
Vergilia ,  already  mentioned,  it  confifts  of  14  Stars,  five  of  which  on  his  face  are,  as  has
been  faid,  called  Hyades.

(2 6)  Ver  bipartitur.  Varro,  lib.  i.  c.  28.  fays,  that  the  Spring  begins  about  the  12th
of  February ,  and  has  ninety-one  days  ;  fo  that  according  to  this  computation-,  the  twenty  •
firft  of  April  does  not  divide  the  Spring  into  two  equal  parts :  but  it  is  probable,  that
Columella  only  means,  that,  if  regard  be  had  to  the  weather,  the  half  only  of  the  Spring
is  paft ;  but,  with  refpedt  to  the  number  of  days,  more  than  the  half  is  paft  :  for,  accord¬
ing  to  Varro,  the  Summer  begins  about  the  nth  of  May  3  but  here  the  author’s  mean¬
ing,  to  me,  feems  not  very  plain.

April >


Chap.  n.  O/HUSBANDRY,  469

April,  Capra  (the  Goat)  (27)  rlfes  in  the  morning :  the  wind  is  fouth
the  whole  day  j  fometimes  rains.  The  xxx  of  April,  Canis  (the
Dog)  (28)  hides  himfelf  in  the  evening  :  he  fignines  a  tempeft.  During
thefe  days  we  will  profecute  the  things  above-mentioned ;  and  olive-
trees,  if  they  have  now  flackened  their  back,  may  either  be  ingrafted
or  inoculated ;  and  other  pomiferous  trees  may  be  grafted  with  the
fame  kind  of  emplaftration  or  inoculation.  It  is  alfo  right  to  hegin  to
fhred  off  the  fuperfluous  leaves  and  twigs  for  the  firft  time,  while  the
buds  that  are  creeping  forth  by  little  and  little,  can  be  ftruck  off  with
the  finger.  Moreover,  if  the  Digger  has  put  any  things  in  the  vine¬
yard  out  of  their  due  place,  or  by  negligence  omitted  any  things,  the
diligent  Vine-dreffer  ought  to  reftore  it  j  and  to  obferve  and  take
notice  of  the  broken  frames,  and  repair  them,  or  replace  the  poles  or
flakes  that  are  thrown  down,  fo  as  he  may  not  pull  off  the  tender
buds  or  leaves.  At  the  fame  time  cattle  that  are  fruitful,  and  have
brought  forth  their  young,  muft  be  marked  (29).

The  firft  of  May,  during  thefe  two  days  the  Sun  is  faid  to  keep  in
one  particle  or  degree  of  the  Ecliptic.  The  ii  of  May ,  one  of  the
Hyades  rifes  with  the  Sun  :  northerly  winds.  The  iii  of  May ,  the
whole  Conftellation  Centaurus  (30)  (the  Centaur)  appears:  it  is  the
fign  of  a  tempeft.  The  v  of  May  the  fame  Conftellation  forebodes

(27)  Capra ,  a  She-goat ;  a  bright  fixed  Star  in  the  left  fhoulder  of  Auriga  (the  Waggoner)  ;
its  longitude  77  degr.  16  min.  lat.  22  degr.  50  min.  The  Poetfr  tell  us.  that  this  was  the
goat  which  fuckled  Jupiter  in  Crete-:  in  recompence,  Jupiter  transformed  her  into  this

Star.

(28)  Canis  major ,  a  Conftellation  of  Stars,  drawn  on  the  globe  in  figure  of  this  ani¬
mal  ;  by  his  hinder-feet  he  is  divided  by  the  tropic  of  Capricorn-,  with  his  head  he  almoPc
joins  the  right  foot  of  Orion  -,  he  looks  with  his  head  to  the  weft,  but  ftretches  his  head
to  the  Equinodtial  Circle  :  he  fets  when  Sagittarius  rifes,  and  rifeth  with  Cancer.  He  has
in  his  mouth  that  vaft  Star  by  fome  called  Canicula,  the  true  name  of  which  feems  ra’her
to  be  Sirius :  this  Conftellation  confifts  of  19  Stars.  One  would  think,  that  the  Con¬
ftellation  Canis  minor  ought  rather  to  be  called  Canicula.

(29)  Pecudes  fcecundi  partus:  this  is  the  reading  in  fome  editions;  in  others  it  is  ficundi
partus:  it  is  uncertain  which  is  the  true  reading:  I  have  followed  the  former;  if  the
latter  be  right,  then  the  meaning  probably  is,  that  fuch  cattle  as  have  brought  forth  a
iecond  time,  ought  to  be  marked ;  or  perhaps  the  author  means,  that  fuch  cattle,  as  were
brought  forth  at  the  fecond  birth,  were  the  ftrongeft  and  the  beft,  and  therefore  ought
to  be  marked  :  but  the  meaning  feems  very  uncertain.

(30)  Centaurus ,  a  Conftellation  of  thefiouthern  Hemisphere:  he  is  repre^  .  as  lean¬
ing  with  his  feet  on  the  Antarctic  Circle,  and  as  feeming  to  fupport  with  his  fhoulders
the  Tropic  of  Capricorn ,  and  with  his  head  almoft,  joining  the  tail  of  Hydra  :  trey  alfo
reprefent  him  as  holding  fome  wild  beaft  fupine  in  his  right-hand,  which  with  its  feet
and  fnout  touches  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn-,  being -placed  between  him  and  th  zAntar&ic
Circle,  the  Circuhis  Latfeus  divides  the  legs  of  the  Centaur  from  the  reft  of  his  body.  He
lets  wholly  when  Aquarius  and  Pifces  rife,  and  rifeth  with  Scorpio  and  Sagittarius :  he
confifts  of  34  Stars.  The  Mythologifts  tell  us,  that  this  is  the  famous  Chiron ,  who  taught
JEfculapius  Phyftc,  and  was  Tutor  to  Achilles.


jam*


470  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

rain.  The  vi  of  May  the  middle  of  Scorpio  fets:  it  forebodes  a  ftorm
The  vii  of  May  the  ‘ Pleiades  rife  in  the  morning  :  a  weft  wind.  The
ix  of  May  Summer  begins :  a  weft  or  north-weft  wind  ;  fometimes
rain  alfo.  The  x  of  May  all  the  Pleiades  appear:  a  welterly  or  north-
weft  wind,  and  fometimes  rains.  The  xiii  of  May  Fidis  (the  Harp)
rifes  in  the  morning,  and  forebodes  a  ftorm.  During  thefe  days  the
corns  muft  be  weeded ;  and  they  muft  begin  to  cut  down  and  make
the  hay.  A  good  Labourer  cuts  down  a  jugenim  of  meadow  in  one
day  i  and  one  Labourer  alfo  binds  one  thoufand  and  two  hundred
bottles  of  hay,  weighing  four  pounds  each.  It  is  alfo  the  time  to  dig
round  the  trees  that  have  been  ablaqueated,  and  to  cover  them  :  one
Labourer  will  be  able  to  dig  round  eighty  young  trees  in  a  day,  fixty-
five  of  a  middling  fize,  and  fifty  large  ones.

This  month  you  muft  dig  all  your  nurferies  frequently  :  but,  from
the  firft  of  March  to  the  xiii  of  September ,  you  muft  beftow  a  digging
every  month,  not  only  upon  nurferies,  but  upon  new  vineyards  alfo.
During  the  fame  days,  where  the  weather  is  very  cold  and  rainy,  olive-
trees  are  pruned  and  cleared  from  mofs  :  but,  in  warm  regions,  you
do  this  at  two  times  of  the  year  ;  the  firft  time,  from  the  xv  of  Odlober
till  the  xiii  of  December ,  and  the  fecond  time  from  the  xiii  of  February
to  the  xv  of  March-,  provided  neverthelefs,  that  the  tree  does  not
flacken  its  bark.  In  this  fame  month  is  the  laft  feafon  for  fetting
an  olive-cutting  in  a  paftinated  nurfery  ;  and  when  you  fet  it,  you
muft  fmeer  it  over  with  dung  and  allies  mixed  together,  and  place
mofs  upon  it,  left  it  be  cloven  with  the  heat  of  the  Sun.  But  this
fame  work  will  be  better  done  in  the  latter  end  of  the  month  of
March ,  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  April ;  and  at  other
times  wherein  we  directed  you  to  plant  nurferies,  either  with  plants  or
branches.

The  xv  of  May  Fidis  (the  Harp)  rifes  in  the  morning :  a  fouth  or
fouth-eaft  wind  fometimes  it  is  a  moift  day.  The  xvi  of  May  the
fame  as  above.  The  xvii  and  xviii  of  May,  a  fouth-eaft  or  fouth  wind
with  rain.  The  xix  of  May,  the  Sun  makes  his  entry  into  Gemini  (i)
(the  Twins).  The  xxi  of  May  the  Hyades  arife  :  northerly  winds  j
fometimes  a  fouth  wind  with  rain.  The  xxii  and  xxiii  of  May

(x)  Gemini,  the  Twins  j  one  of  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  third  in  order,  and
marked  thus  IE.  Probably  the  ancients,  to  reprefent  the  fraternal  affe&ion  of  Cajtor  and
Pollux,  puc  together  two  logs  of  wood,  and  joined  them  by  two  crofs  pieces.  They
feem  to  be  placed  toward  the  right  fide  of  Auriga,  above  Orion ;  their  heads  are  divided
from  the  reft  of  their  body  by  the  Tropic  of  Cancer:  they  fet  upright  upon  their  feet,
and  rife  inclined,  as  if  they  were  lying:  this  Conftellation  confifts  of  18  S tars*

Ardfurus


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  471

ArSiurus  fets  in  the  morning :  it  fignifies  a  ftorm.  The  xxv,  xxvi,
and  xxvii  of  May,  Capra  (the  Goat)  rifes  in  the  morning  :  northerly
winds.  From  the  xv  of  May  to  the  firft  of  June,  you  muft  dig  your
old  vineyard  a  fecond  time,  before  it  begins  to  bloffom,  and,  at  the
fame  time,  fhred  off  all  the  fuperfluous  buds  and  leaves  from  the  fame,
and  all  the  reft  of  your  vineyards ;  which  if  you  do  frequently,  a  boy,
with  one  day’s  labour,  will  pampinate  a  jugerum  of  vineyard.  In  fome
countries  they  now  fhear  their  fheep,  and  take  an  account  of  what
young  cattle  they  have  bred,  and  what  are  loft.  Alfo  he  who  fows
lupins,  in  order  to  dung  the  land  therewith,  now  at  length  turns  them
up  with  the  plough.

On  the  firft  and  fecond  of  June  Aquila  rifes :  a  ftorm  of  wind,
and  fometimes  rain.  The  vii  of  June  Ardiurus  fets :  a  weft  or  north-
weft  wind.  The  x  of  June  Delphinus  rifes  in  the  evening :  a  weft
wind  ;  fometimes  there  falls  a  dew.  In  thefe  days,  if  we  have  been
overcome  by  our  work,  the  fame  things  muft  be  done,  which  ought
to  have  been  done  in  the  latter  end  of  the  month  of  May  :  alfo  all
fruit-bearing  trees,  having  been  digged  round,  ought  to  have  new
earth  laid  to,  and  heaped  up  about  their  roots,  that  that  work  may  be
finifhed  before  the  Solftice.  Moreover,  according  to  the  ltate  and  con¬
dition  of  the  country  and  climate,  the  earth  is  either  cut  up  for  the
firft  time,  oj  twifallowed;  and,  if  it  be  difficult  to  labour,  a  jugerum
of  it  is  cut  up,  for  the  firft  time,  by  one  Labourer  in  three  days,,
twifallowed  in  two,  and  fallowed  a  third  time  in  one  day  ;  but  one
Labourer  will  roll  and  break  the  clods  of  two  jugera  in  one  day.  But,
if  the  ground  be  eafy  to  labour,  a jugerum  is  tilled  by  one  Labourer
in  two  days,  twifallowed  in  one;  and  four  jugera  harrowed,  and  fur¬
rows  drawn  in  them,  with  one  day’s  labour  ;  from  which  reckoning
we  infer,  that  during  the  Autumn,  one  hundred  and  fifty  modii  of
wheat  may  be  eafily  fown  by  one  yoke  of  oxen,  and  one  hundred
modii  of  any  kind  of  pulfe.

In  thefe  fame  days  the  threfhing-floor  muft  be  prepared,  that  every
thing,  as  it  fhall  be  cut  down,  may  be  brought  into  it.  The  culture
alfo  of  vineyards,  which  are  of  a  greater  extent,  ought  to  be  per¬
formed  a  fecond  time.  Before  the  Solftice,  fodder  (if  you  have  any
(tore  of  it)  muft  be  given  to  the  cattle  either  now,  or  even  the  fifteen
days  preceding  the  firft  of  June :  but,  from  the  firft  of  June,  if
green  grafs  is  now  wanting,  till  the  latter  end  of  Autumn,  we  muft
cut  down  boughs  and  leaves  of  trees,  and  give  them.  On  the  xiii  of;
Jwie  the  heat  begins.  The  xix  of  June  the  Sun  makes  his  entry
into  Cancer  :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The  xxi  of  June  Serpent arius
2  which.


47 2  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI.

which  by  the  Greeks  is  called  c(ptB%os  (2),  fets  in  the  morning :  he
fignifies  a  ftorm.  On  the  xxiv,  xxv,  and  xxvi  is  the  Sol/lice  (3) :  a
weft  wind,  and  heat.  In  thefe  days  the  fame  things  muft  be  done,
as  I  directed  above:  but  you  muft  cut  down  vetches  for  fodder  before
the  pods  are  hardened;  reap  barley,  pull  up  lateward  beans,  threfli
eai  ly-ripe  beans,  and  lay  up  their  chaff  carefully;  threfh  barley,  and
lay  up  all  its  ft  raw  and  chaff ;  caftrate  the  bee-hives,  which  you  ought
from  time  to  time  to  view,  and  cure  every  ninth  or  tenth  day,  to  the
hril  of  May.  But  now,  if  the  honey-combs  are  full,  and  have  covers
or  lids  upon  them,  they  muft  be  cut  down  :  but  if  they  are,  for  the
moft  part,  empty,  and  open,  without  lids  or  covers,  it  is  a  fign,  that
they  are  not  yet  ripe  ;  therefore  the  gathering  and  making  of  the
honey  muft  be  deferred.  In  the  provinces  beyond  fea,  fome  fow  their
lefam-feeds  either  in  this  or  the  following  month.

The  firft  of  July,  a  weft  or  a  fouth-weft  wind,  and  heat.  The
iv  of  July  Corona  (4)  (the  Crown)  fets  in  the  morning.  The  vi  of
July  the  middle  of  Cancer  (the  Crab)  fets :  a  great  heat.  The  viii  of
July  the  middle  of  Capricornus  fets.  The  ix  of  July  Cepheus  (y)

fets

(2)  A-uguifer  or  Ophiuchus ,  commonly  called  Serpent arius ;  a  Confteliation  of  the  nor¬
thern  Hemifphere:  he  is  reprefented  as  leaning  backward  with  his  head,  and  holding  a  fer-
pent  in  his  hands,  and  the  greateft  part  of  which  he  fupports  with  his  left  arm  :  his  fhoul-
ders  are  divided  from  the  reft  of  his  body  by  the  Tropic  of  Cancer ;  and  towards  his
knees  he  is  terminated  by  the  Equinodtial :  with  his  left  he  treads  upon  the  eyes  of  the
Scorpion,  and  with  his  right  he  leans  upon  his  back;  and  the  ferpenr,  which  is  held  by
him,  with  the  extremity  of  its  mouth  almoft  touches  the  Crown,  and  twifts  itfelf  round
his  middle,  and  with  the  extremity  ot  its  tail  joins  the  Equinodtial  line  with  the  tail  of
the  Eagle  :  when  he  riles,  he  appears  with  Scorpio  and  Sagittarius ,  and  fets  when  Gemini ,
Cancer ,  and  Leo  arife.  The  Poets  tell  us,  that  this  is  JEjculapius  the  fon  of  Apollo,vtho,
being  by  Jupiter  ftruck  with  a  thunder-bolt,  becaufe,  by  his  skill  in  Phyfic,  he  had  raifed
the  dead  to  life,  was  afterwards,  at  the  requeft  of  Apollo ,  tranflated  into  the  heavens.
This  Confteliation  confifts  altogether  of  between  30  and  40  Stars.

(3)  Columella ,  as  has  been  Paid,  places  the  Sun’s  entry  into  the  feveral  figns  later  by
feveral  days  than  it  really  happens ;  and  here  he  reckons  the  Summer-folftice  to  be  about
the  24th  of  June,  according  to  the  antient  computation  then  in  ufe  among  Husband¬
men  ;  but,  according  to  the  corredtions  made  in  the  Calendar,  the  Summer-folftice  falls
about  the  nth  of  June.

(4)  Corona  borealis,  the  northern  Crown;  a  Confteliation,  confuting  of  about  20  Stars:
nine  of  them  are  placed  circularly,  fo  as  to  reprefcnt  a  Crown.  Bootes  feems  almoft  to
touch  the  Crown  with  his  left  fhoulder,  and  Engonapn ,  or  Hercules  kneeling,  joins  it  with
the  heel  of  his  right  foot :  it  fets  when  Cancer  and  Leo  rife,  and  rifes  with  the  Scorpion.
The  Poets  tell  us,  that  this  is  the  crown  of  gold  and  precious  ftones  made  by  Vulcan ,
which  Bacchus  gave  to  his  bride  Ariadne ,  daughter  of  Minos  King  of  Crete.  No  doubt
the  Aftronomers,  who  divided  the  Stars  into  Conftellations,  took  this  name  out  of  fome
hiftory  of  Crete ,  which  gave  an  account  of  this  marriage.

(5)  Cepheus,  a  Confteliation  in  the  northern  Hemifphere,  conGfting  of  about  20 Stars:
he  is  placed  behind  the  Lejfer  Bear :  from  his  feet  to  his  breaft  he  is  inclofed  within
the  Arftic  Circle,  fo  that  nothing  of  him  is  fecn  to  fet,  except  his  (houlders  and  his

head :


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  473

fets  in  the  evening :  he  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The  x  of  July  the  Har~
binger  or  Forerunner  winds  (6)  begin  to  blow  :  in  thel'e  days,  the  fame
things  to  be  done  as  above.  But  it  is  alfo  very  proper  now  to  twi-
fallow  fuch  fallow  ground,  as  has  been  tilled  for  the  firft:  time;  and,
when  the  Moon  is  upon  the  decreafe,  wood-land  is  grubbed  up  to  very
great  advantage.  The  xv  of  July  Procyon  (the  LefTer  Dog)  (7)  riles
in  the  morning  :  he  fignifies  a  ftorm.  The  xx  of  July  the  Sun  paftes
into  Leo :  a  weft  wind.  [The  xxiv  of  July  the  bright  Star  in  the
breaft  of  Leo  rifes]  :  fometimes  it  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xxv
of  July  Aquarius  (the  Water-bearer)  begins  to  fet  bright  and  clear :
a  weft  or  fouth  wind.  The  xxvi  of  July  the  Canicule  appears  :  a  fultry
hot  fog.  The  xxvii  of  July  Aquila  (the  Eagle)  rifes.  The  xxix  of
July  the  bright  Stars  in  the  breaft  of  Leo  arife :  fometimes  this  is  the
iign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xxx  of  July  Aquila  fets  :  it  forebodes  a
ftorm.

In  thefe  days  the  harveft  is  finifhed,  in  places  that  are  temperate,
and  lie  near  the  fea;  and,  within  thirty  days  after  the  corns  are  cut
down,  the  ftubble  is  cut  down,  and  gathered  together  into  heaps :
one  Labourer  cuts  down  a  jugerum  of  ftubble  in  one  day,  which  be¬
ing  removed  before  the  violent  heat  of  the  Sun  fcorches  the  earth,  you
muft  dig  round  all  the  trees  that  were  in  the  corn-land,  and  heap  up
the  earth  round  them.  Alfo  they  who  make  preparation  for  the  feed¬
time,  in  order  to  fow  a  great  quantity,  ought  now  to  plow  their  land
a  fecond  time :  for,  as  to  digging  and  cultivating  new  vineyards,  I  have
already  often  faid,  That  no  month  ought  to  be  omitted,  till  the  autumnal

head  :  he  is  not  far  diftant  from  the  winding  that  the  Dragon  feems  firft  to  make  with
his  head :  he  is  reprefen  ted  with  both  his  arms  projected,  and  is  as  far  diftant  from  the
feet  of  the  L°fer  Bear ,  as  the  fpace  between  his  own  feet  feems  to  be  :  his  head  feems
to  fet  when  the  Scorpion  rifes,  and  to  rife  with  Sagittarius.  This  Cepheus  is  faid  to  have
been  a  King  of  the  Ethiopians ,  and  father  of  Andromeda ,  whom  Perfeus  refcued  from
the  fea-monfter  to  which  fhe  was  expofed;  a  ftory  much  celebrated  by  Poecs  and  Painters.
From  this  hiftory,  Aftronomers  have  taken  names  for  fome  other  Conft  llations  conti¬
guous  to,  or  not  far  diftant  from  this  ^  as  Cajjiopea ,  Andromeda ,  and  Perfeus.

(6)  Prodromi  flare  iricipiunt.  Pliny  fays,  that,  about  eight  days  before  the  riftng  of  the
Dog-par,  the  notth-eaft  winds  begin  to  blow  ^  and,  becauie  they  come  before  the  riling
of  this  Star,  they  a-e  called  the  Forerunners  or  Harbingers. -

(7)  Procyon ,  or  Anticanis.  The  Left'er  Dog  is  fo  called,  becaufe  he  rifes  before
Canis  major  (the  Greater  Dog)  he  with  his  feet  fixed  in  the  Ci*  cuius  Latfeus  touches  the
Equinoctial:  he  looks  to  the  weft,  as  placed  between  Gemini  and  Cancer :  he  fets  when
Capricorn  rifes,  and  riferh  with  Leo;  according  to  Hyginus ,  ds  fignis  cosleftibus,  it  is  a
fmall  Conftellarion,  confiding  of  three  Stars,  and  mull:  be  coniidered  as  different  from
that  vaft  bright  Star  in  the  mouth  of  Canis  major ,  which  is  commonly  called  Canicula ,
the  Dog-ftar,  and  tho’  but  one  fingle  Star,  yet  taket  che  name  of  the  whole  Con  ft  e  da-
tion.  Pliny ,  and  fome  other  authors,  feem  to  take  Procyon  and  Canicula  for  one  and
the  fame  S  at,  but  our  author  mentions  them  as  differen..

ppp


Equinox


474  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI.

Equinox  be  paft.  But  we  mull  remember,  that,  during  thefe  days,
and  the  days  of  the  month  of  Augufl ,  early  in  the  morning,  and  in  the
evening,  we  cut  down  boughs  and  leaves  for  the  cattle  ;  alfo  what¬
ever  vineyards  we  defign  to  cultivate,  that  we  do  not  dig  them  during
the  great  heat,  but  in  the  morning,  till  the  third  hour  of  the  day,
and  from  the  tenth  hour  till  the  evening.

In  fome  countries,  as  in  Cilicia  and  Pamphylia ,  they  fow  fefame-
feeds  in  this  month  :  but,  in  the  moift  regions  of  Italy ,  they  may  be
fown  in  the  latter  end  of  the  month  of  June.  It  is  alfo  the  time  for
hanging  branches  of  wild  fig-trees  (8)  upon  fig-trees;  which  fome
think  ought  to  be  done  for  this  reafon,  that  the  fruit  may  not  fall  off
them,  and  that  it  may  come  the  more  fpeedily  to  maturity.

The  firft  of  Augujl  the  Ftefian  winds  blow  (9).  The  iv  of  Au-
gujl  the  middle  of  Leo  riles :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The  vii  of  Au-
gujl  the  middle  of  Aquarius  fets :  a  foggy  heat.  The  xii  of  Au¬
gufl  Fidis  (the  Harp)  fets  in  the  morning,  and  Autumn  begins.  In
thefe  days  the  fame  things  are  to  be  done  as  above  :  neverthelefs,  in
fome  places  they  cut  down  the  honey-combs,  which  if  they  are  not
full  of  honey,  nor  have  lids  upon  them,  the  gathering  and  making  of
the  honey  mufl  be  deferred  till  the  month  of  Odlober.  The  xiii  of
Augujl  the  fetting  of  Delphinus  is  the  fignification  of  a  ftorm.  The
xiv  of  Augujl ,  the  fetting  of  the  fame  Conftellation  in  the  morning
forebodes  a  ftorm.  The  xx  of  Augujl  the  Sun  pafifes  into  Virgo  (10):
jt  forebodes  a  tempeft  in  this  and  the  following  day ;  and  fometimes

(8)  Pliny ,  lib.  xv.  c.  19.  tells  us,  that  they  ufed  to  haften  the  ripening  of  figs,  by  take-
jncr  branches  of  the  wild  fig-tree,  which  itfelf  never  produces  fruit,  and  hanging  them
amongft  the  fig-trees ;  and  that  thefe  branches  did  produce  a  certain  fort  of  flies,  which,
when'the  branches  began  to  rot,  being  deprived  of  their  natural  nourifhment,  left  them,  and
flew  to  the  fig-trees,  and  fed  greedily  upon  the  figs,  and,  with  their  bite  opening  the  tops
of  the  figs,  gave  free  entrance  to  the  Sun,  and  the  ripening  breezes;  and  fucked  out  the
acid  milky  juice  of  the  young  figs,  and  thereby  haftened  their  ripening.  Palladius^
fpeaking  of  the  fame  thing,  advifes  to  take  wild  figs,  and,  putting  a  flaxen  rope  through
them,  hang  them  up  among  the  fig-trees :  this  the  Romans  called  caprificatio.

(9)  Etefi£')  anniverfary  winds,  formed  from  the  Greek  word  It&,  which  fignifies  a
year  :  they  are  north-eaft  winds,  which  blow  yearly  about  this  time  in  Summer.

(10)  Virgo ,  one  of  the  12 Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  fixth  in  order;  it  is  marked  thus  f%.
In  fome  old  books  fhe  is  reprefented  as  holding  three  ears  of  corn  in  her  left-hand,  for
which  reafon  fhe  is  fuppofed  to  reprefent  Ceres ;  but  Aratus  and  others  fay,  that  this
Si<m  reprefents  Juftice,  which,  abhorring  the  wickednefs  of  mankind,  forfook  the  earth,
and  retired  to  heaven.  She  is  placed  below  the  feet  of  Bootes :  with  her  head  fhe  touches
the  hinder-part  of  Leo ,  and  with  her  right-hand  the  Tropic  of  Cancer  ;  the  lower  part  of
her  body  is  feen  above  the  Raven ,  and  the  tail  of  Hydra  :  fhe  fets  with  her  head  before
the  reft  of  her  members.  This  Conftellation  confifts  of  16  or  18  Stars,  one  of  which
in  her  right-wing,  fixed  to  her  fhoulder,  is  called  Vindemiator ,  the  Vintager,  and  by  the
Greeks  called  Protrygeter ;  probably  becaufe  it  rifeth  before  the  vintage,  as  has  been
already  faid.


Chap.  II.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  475

it  thunders.  This  fame  day  Fidis  (the  Harp)  fets.  The  xxiii  of  Au-
gujl ,  from  the  fame  Conftellation,  for  the  moil  part,  a  ftorm  arifeth,
and  rain.  The  xxvi  of  Augufi  Vindemiator  (the  Vintager)  rifes  in
the  morning,  and  Arflitrus  begins  to  fet :  it  is  fometimes  rain.  The
xxx  of  Augufi  the  fhoulders  of  Virgo  appear :  the  Etefian  winds  ceafe
to  blow,  and  fometimes  it  is  Winter-weather.  The  xxxi  of  Augufi
Andromeda  (1 1)  rifes  in  the  evening  :  fometimes  it  is  very  cold,  as  in
Winter.

And  in  thefe  days  fig-trees  are  inoculated,  which  kind  of  ingrafting
is  called  Emplajlration  { 12):  and  this,  indeed,  may  be  done  more
conveniently  in  the  preceding  month,  after  the  xv  of  July,  in  which
time  fome  inoculate  other  trees  alfo.  In  fome  places  the  vintage  is
finiffied,  as  in  Bcetica ,  in  the  regions  that  lie  upon  the  fea-coaft,  and
in  Africa:  but  in  colder  regions  they  make  their  Pulverization  (13),
which  Ruftics  call  Harrowing ,  when  every  glebe  in  the  vineyards  is
broken,  and  reduced  into  powder.  At  this  fame  time,  before  the
vineyards  are  pulverized,  if  the  vines  themfelves  are  very  fmall  or
thin,  three  or  four  modii  of  lupins  are  fcattered  upon  each  jugerum ,
and  harrowed  in  ;  which  being  turned  up  with  the  firfi:  digging,  after
they  have  fprung  up  into  ftalks,  afford  dung  good  enough  for  vine¬
yards.

Many  alfo,  if  the  conftitution  of  the  climate  be  rainy,  as  in  that
region  of  Italy  which  lies  contiguous  to  the  city,  ftrip  the  vine  of  its
young  fhoots  and  leaves,  that  the  fruit  may  be  throughly  concodted
and  ripened,  and  not  rot  with  the  fhowers.  But  on  the  contrary,  in
warmer  places,  as  in  the  provinces  juft  now  named,  about  the  time  of
the  vintage,  the  grapes  are  overfhadowed  either  with  ftraw,  or  other
coverings,  that  they  may  not  wither,  and  be  dried  up  by  the  winds
or  heats.  This  fame  time  is  alfo  proper  for  making  dry  grapes  and
figs,  of  which,  after  what  manner  they  may  be  dried  in  the  Sun,  we
(hall  afterwards  give  an  account,  when  we  (hall  treat  of  the  offices  of

(11)  Andromeda. ,  a  northern  Conftellation,  confiding  of  20,  or,  as  others  fay,  of  27
Stars :  (he  is  reprefented  as  placed  near  Cajfepea ,  above  the  head  of  Perjeus ,  there  being
a  fmall  diftance  between  them  :  her  head  is  joined  to  the  belly  of  the  Horfe  Pegafus ,  the
fame  Scar  being  called  the  navel  of  Pegajus,  and  the  head  of  Andromeda ;  the  Tropic  of
Cancer  paffes  through  and  divides  her  breaft,  and  her  left-hand  by  the  middle :  fhe  rifes
with  the  figns  Pifcis  and  Aries.

(12)  Emplaf  ratio :  of  this  way  of  ingrafting  amongft  the  aritients,  you  have  an  account
lib.  V.  c.  11.

(13)  Pulveratio.  Pliny ,  Theophraflus ,  and  others,  recommend  the  pulverizing  of  vines,
in  order  to  plump  and  ripen  the  fruit:  it  is  digging  the  vineyards  when  the  ground  is
very  dry,  breaking  the  -clods,  and  raifing  the  duft.  Vide  lib.  iv.  28.  and  Palladius ,
Jun.  7.  2.

PpP  j


the


47  6  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI.

the  Bailiff's  wife.  It  is  right  alfo  to  extirpate  fern  or  fedge  in  the
month  of  Augufl ,  where-ever  they  grow  :  neverthelefs,  it  is  better  to
do  it  about  the  xv  of  July ,  before  the  rifingof  the  Dog-flar.  The  firft
of  September ,  hot  weather.  The  ii  of  September ,  the  fouthern  PiJ'cis
ceafes  to  fet :  hot  weather.  The  v  of  September  Ardlurus  rifes :  a  weft
or  north-weft  wind.  The  vii  of  September  the  northern  Pifcis  ceafes
to  fet,  and  Capra  rifes:  it  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xi  of  September
a  weft  or  fouth  wind  ;  the  middle  of  Virgo  rifeth.  In  thefe  days,  in
places  that  lie  upon  the  fea-coaft,  and  are  warm,  it  is  a  convenient
time  for  carrying  on  the  vintage,  and  managing  the  other  things  above-
mentioned.  Alfo  twifallowing  the  plowed  land  ought  then  to  be
finhhed,  if  the  ground  has  been  tilled,  for  the  firft  time,  fomewhat
too  late  ;  but,  if  it  has  been  tilled  fooner  than  ufual,  it  is  proper  alfo,
that  the  ground  be  plowed  a  third  time.  At  this  time  alfo  they,  who
are  accuftomed  to  preferve  wines,  prepare  fea-water,  and,  after  they
have  brought  it  home  boil  it :  concerning  the  preparing  of  which  I
fhall  give  directions,  when  I  come  to  treat  of  the  offices  of  a  Bailiff's
wife.  The  xiii  of  September  fometimes  fignifies  a  tempeft,  from  the
Conftellation  they  call  the  Whale  (14).  The  xvii  of  September  Ar-
Elurus  rifes :  a  weft  or  fouth  wind  ;  fometimes  an  eaft  wind,  which
fome  call  Vulturnus.  The  xviii  of  September  Spica  Virginia  (the  ear
of  corn  in  the  left-hand  of  Virgo )  rifes  :  a  weft  or  north- weft  wind.
The  xix  of  September  the  Sun  paffes  into  Libra  ;  Crater  (the  Cup)
appears  in  the  morning.  The  xxi  of  September  Pi  fees  (the  Fifties)  fee
in  the  morning  ;  alfo  Aries  (the  Ram)  begins  to  fet :  a  weft  or  north-
weft  wind  ;  fometimes  a  fouth  wind  with  fhowers.  The  xxii  of  Sep¬
tember  the  fliip  Argo  fets :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm,  fometimes  rain  alfo.
The  xxiii  of  September  Centaurus  (the  Centaur)  begins  to  rife  in  the
morning:  it  forebodes  a  ftorm,  and  fometimes  rain.  The  xxiv,  xxv,
and  xxvi  of  September ,  the  autumnal  equinox  forebodes  rain.  The
xxvii  of  September  Hcedi  (the  Kids)  arife  (if)  :  a  weft  wind,  fome¬
times  a  fouth  wind,  with  rain.  The  xxviii  of  Septe??iber  Virgo  ceafes
to  rife:  it  forebodes  a  ftorm.

In  thefe  days  they  gather  their  grapes,  and  make  their  vintage,  in
many  countries.  Some  take  the  indication  of  their  being  ripe  from

(14)  Cetus ,  the  Whale;  otherwife  called  Prifies,  or  Priflhium  fdtts ;  a  Conftellation  in
the  fouthern  hemifphere,  confiding  of  13,  or,  as  others  fay,  of  23  Stars.  TheTropic  of
Capricorn  divides  its  tail  by  the  middle;  with  its  fnout  it  almoft  joins  the  hinder  foot  of
Aries ;  the  river  Eridanus  almoft  walhes  the  fore-part  of  its  body  :  it  lets  when  Cancer
and  Leo  rife,  and  rifes  with  the  Centaur  and  the  Trains.

fi<t)  Hadi,  the  Kids,  are  two  Stars  in  the  left-arm  of  Auriga ,  the  Waggoner,  which  is
a  Conftellation  in  the  northern  hemifphere,  under  the  feet  of  Perfeus.


one


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  477

one  thing,  fome  from  another.  Some,  when  they  had  feen  fome  part
of  the  grape  grow  mellow,  have  believed,  that  the  time  of  vintage
was  come,  and  that  the  grapes  were  ripe  for  gathering  :  fome,  after
they  have  oblerved  them  to  be  difcoloured  and  tranfparent :  fome  alfo,
when  they  had  obferved  the  fmall  twigs  and  leaves  to  fall  off :  all
which  things  are  fallacious ;  becaufe  all  thefe  fame  things  may  happen,
to  unripe  grapes,  by  reafon  of  the  exceftive  heat  of  the  Sun,  or  in-
temperatenefs  of  the  year.  Therefore  fome  have  attempted  to  find
out  when  they  are  ripe  by  their  tafte,  that  whether  the  tafte  of  the
grape  was  fweet  or  four,  they  might  judge  accordingly.  But  even
this  thing  itfelf  has  fome  fallacy  :  for  fome  kinds  of  grapes,  becaufe
of  their  too  great  roughnefs,  never  contract  any  fweetnefs.  There¬
fore  it  is  proper  (which  we  do)  to  confider  the  natural  maturity  itfelf:
and  this  is  the  natural  maturity,  if  the  kernels  or  grape-ftones,  which
are  hid  in  the  grapes,  when  you  have  fqueezed  them  out  of  them,
are  of  a  dufky  colour,  and  fome  of  them  almoft  black  :  for  nothing
wnatfoever  can  give  a  colour  to  the  kernels  or  grape-ftones,  except
the  natural  ripenefs ;  efpecially  confidering,  that  they  are  fo  placed  in
the  middle  part  of  the  grapes,  that  they  are  protected  both  from  the
violent  heat  of  the  Sun,  and  from  the  winds ;  and  the  moifture  itfelf
does  not  l'uffer  them  to  be  throughly  ripened,  or  reduced  to  a  dufky
colour,  except  by  their  own  very  nature  itfelf:  therefore,  when  the
Bailiff  fhall  be  fure  of  this,  let  him  know,  that  he  muft  begin  his
vintage,  and  gather  his  grapes.

But,  before  he  begins  to  gather  the  fruit,  all  things  muft  be  prepared
(if  it  can  be  done)  in  the  preceding  month  ;  if  not,  that,  at  leaft  fifteen
days  before,  the  hogfttead  be  partly  pitched,  partly  rubbed,  and  care¬
fully  walhed  with  lea- water,  or  lalted  water,  and  rightly  dried  j  as
alfo  the  covers  and  ftrainers,  and  the  other  things,  without  which  the
muft  cannot  be  well  managed  ;  and  that  the  wine-preftes  and  tubs
be  carefully  cleaned,  and  walked,  and  pitched,  if  the  matter  fo  re¬
quire  :  and  let  him  have  wood  prepared,  wherewith  he  may  boil  the
muft,  either  into  a  third  or  an  half  of  the  firft  quantity,  for  making
rob  of  grapes.  As  alfo  fait,  and  perfumes,  and  fweet  fpices,  with,
which  they  ufe  to  give  a  relifh  to,  and  prefer ve  wines,  muft  be  laid,
up  in  ftore  a  good  while  before.

Never thelefs,  let  not  this  care  call  him  wholly  off  from  the  other
parts  of  Hulbandry  :  for,  during  thefe  days,  both  navew-  and  turnep-
beds  are  made  in  places  that  are  naturally  dry.  Mifcellany  alfo,  which
will  be  a  great  fupport  to  cattle  during  Winter,  and  alfo  that  hufk  on
pod  which  Ruftics  call  fenugreek,  as  alfo  tares  for  fodder,  are  now

fawni


478  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

fown,  and  not  till  now.  This  alfo  fliall  be  the  principal  time  for
fowing  of  lupines,  which,  fome  people  think,  muft  be  forthwith  car¬
ried  directly  from  the  threfifing- field  into  the  land.  At  this  time
millet  and  panic  are  cut  down,  when  the  kidney-bean  is  fown  for
food  :  for,  in  order  to  gather  feed  of  it,  it  is  better  to  put  it  under¬
ground  the  latter  end  of  OBober ,  about  the  firft  of  November.  Where¬
fore,  feeing  he  ought  to  tranfa<fl  and  execute  all  thefe  things  in  the
fields,  he  may  delegate  the  care  of  thofe  things,  which  mull  be  done
within  the  Manor-houfe,  to  his  wife  the  Houfekeeper ;  yet  fo,  that
he  himfelf  may  examine  and  confider  whether  they  are  rightly  done,
or  not.

The  firfl  and  fecond  of  October  fometimes  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The
iv  of  October ,  Auriga  (the  Waggoner)  fets  in  the  morning  :  Virgo
leaves  off  fetting ;  fometimes  it  is  the  fign  of  a  florm.  The  v  of
October  Corona  (the  Crown)  begins  to  rife  :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The
vi  of  OBober  Hcedi  (the  Kids)  rife  in  the  evening  ;  the  middle  of  Aries
fets :  a  north-eaft  wind.  The  viii  of  OBober ,  the  bright  Star  of  Co¬
rona  (the  Crown)  rifes.  The  x  of  OBober ,  the  ‘Pleiades  rife  in  the
evening:  a  weft  wind,  and  fometimes  a  fouth-weft  wind,  with  rain.
The  xiii  and  xiv  of  OBober ,  the  whole  Conftellation  Corona  rifes  in
the  morning  :  a  winterly  fouth  wind,  and  fometimes  rain.  During
thefe  days  they  ufually  gather  their  grapes,  and  make  their  vintage,  in
cold  countries,  and  do  the  other  things  which  are  above-written  :  and
in  the  fame  regions  they  fow  their  early-ripe  corns,  and  efpecially
red-bearded  hujked  ’wheat .  Alfo,  in  places  not  expofed  to  the  Sun,  it
is  now  the  right  time  to  fow  the  beft  common  wheat.

And,  fince  we  have  made  mention  of  the  feed-time,  it  will  not  be
unfeafonable,  that  we  give  an  account,  how  much  feed  of  every  fort
a  jugerum  of  land  may  receive.  A  jugerum  of  land  receives  four  or
five  modii  of  common  wheat,  nine  or  ten  modii  of  red-bearded  hulked
wheat,  five  or  fix  modii  of  barley,  four  or  five  fextarii  of  millet  or
panic,  eight  or  ten  modii  of  lupines,  four  modii  of  kidney-beans,
three  or  four  modii  of  peafe,  fix  modii  of  beans,  one  modius ,  or  a
little  more,  of  lentils,  nine  or  ten  modii  of  linfeed,  three  or  four
modii  of  chichlings,  two  or  three  modii  of  chich-peafe,  four  or  five
fextarii  of  fefame-feed,  feven  or  eight  modii  of  vetches  for  fodder,  and
five  or  fix  modii  of  vetches  for  feed,  four  or  five  modii  of  better  vetches,
feven  or  eight  modii  of  barley  mifcellany,  fix  modii  of  fenugreek-feed  j
in  beds  ten  feet  long,  and  five  feet  broad,  you  muft  fow  a  cyathus  of
medic,  or  St.  Foin-Jeed  each :  fix  grains  of  hempfeed  are  fet  in  a  fquare
foot  of  ground.

4


On


Chap. II.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  479

On  the  xv  of  October,  and  the  two  following  days,  there  is  fome-
times  a  dorm;  fometimes  there  falls  a  dew.  The  xx  of  OSlober  the
Sun  pafl'es  into  Scorpio  (16).  The  xx  and  xxi  of  OPlober ,  at  the  rifing
of  the  Sun  the  Pleiades  begin  to  fet :  it  is  the  fign  of  a  dorm.  The
xxii  of  October  the  tail  of  Taurus  fets :  a  fouth  wind,  fometimes  rain.
The  xxv  of  Ottober  Centaurus  ceafes  to  rife  in  the  morning  :  it  fore¬
bodes  a  dorm.  The  xxvi  of  OPiober  the  forehead  of  Scorpio  rifes :  it
is  the  fign  of  a  dorm.  The  xxviii  of  October  the  Pleiades  fet :  it  is
dormy  weather,  with  cold  and  frods.  The  xxix  of  OPlober  ArPturus
fets  in  the  evening :  a  windy  day.  The  xxx  and  xxxi  of  October
CaJJiope  (17)  begins  to  fet:  it  fignifies  a  dorm.

During  thefe  days  it  is  a  right  time  to  fet  whatever  plants  ought
to  be  tranfplanted,  and  fet  at  a  didance  from  one  another,  and  fmall
trees  of  all  forts.  It  is  alfo  a  proper  time  to  match  elms  with  vines,
and  to  propagate  the  vines  themfelves  by  layers,  in  places  where  they
are  fupported  by  trees,  and  in  vineyards.  It  is  the  time  to  weed  and
dig  nurferies,  as  alfo  to  ablaqueate  trees,  and  vineyards  alfo,  and  to
prune  the  fame ;  as  alfo  to  prune  fuch  vines  as  are  fupported  by  trees.
Nurferies  which  have  not  been  pampinated  in  their  due  time,  and
fmall  fig-trees,  which  grow  in  nurferies,  ought  to  be  pruned,  and  re¬
duced  to  fingle  dems  ;  which  neverthelefs,  while  they  are  young  and
tender,  are  better  pampinated  while  they  are  putting  forth  their  buds.
But,  as  all  things  in  Hufbandry  mud  be  done  fpeedily,  and  with
refolution,  fo  efpecially  fowing  of  feed,  and  planting.  It  is  an  antient
proverb  among  Hufbandmen,  That  early  fowing  and  planting  life  often
to  deceive  us ,  but  that  that  which  is  late  never  deceives  us ,  as  to  its
being  certainly  bad.  Therefore  we  diredt,  upon  the  whole,  that,  ac¬
cording  as  every  place  fhall  be  naturally  cold,  let  that  be  fird  fown
or  planted :  and  in  proportion  as  every  place  fhall  be  warm,  let  it
be  lad.

(1 6)  Scorpio,  the  Scorpion,  is  the  eighth  Sign  of  the  Zodiac,  and  is  commonly  marked
thus  HI.  By  the  antients  the  Scorpion  was  drawn  larger  than  at  prefent,  fo  that  the
claws  of  it  took  up  that  part  of  the  heavens  which  is  now  affigned  to  Libra :  ic  is  placed
under  the  feet  of  Serpent  arius ,  and  Teems  to  touch  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn  with  the  point
of  its  tail,  and  is  not  far  from  the  animal  which  the  Centaur  is  reprefenced  as  holding  in
his  hand.  This  Conftellation  confifts  of  19  Stars.

(17)  Cafjiope ,  or  CaJJiepea ,  as  the  Mythologifts  tell  us,  was  wife  of  Cepheus  a  King  of
the  Ethiopians :  line  by  her  pride,  in  preferring  her  own  and  her  daughter  Andromeda’s
beauty  to  that  of  the  Nereides ,  was  the  caufe  of  her  daughter’s  being  expofed  to  be  de¬
voured  by  a  whale,  but  was  refcued  by  Perfeus.  She  alfo,  as  her  husband  and  daughter,
gives  name  to  a  northern  Conftellation,  and  is  reprefented  as  fitting  in  a  chair  next  to
Cepheus ,  with  her  feet  placed  in  the  Artfic  circle,  and  her  body  reaching  to  the  Tropic
of  Cancer ,  which  fhe  touches  with  her  head  and  her  right-hand,  and  the  Circulus  Lac-
teus  divides  her  almoft.  in  the  middle.


Tares


48o  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

Tares  and  beans  are  faid  to  dung  land:  unlefs  you  turn  up  lupines
in  the  bloffom,  you  will  not  thereby  contribute  any  thing  towards
dunging  the  land  :  for  there  is  nothing  whatfoever  that  is  more  com¬
monly  either  fown  or  gathered  in,  when  the  Labourers  have  nothing
to  do ;  for,  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  feed-time,  it  may  be  put
under-ground  before  any  other  feed,  and  it  may  be  taken  off  the
ground  very  late  in  the  year,  after  all  the  fruits  are  gathered  in.  After
you  have  fown  your  feed,  you  muft  harrow  in  what  you  have  fown.
Three  Labourers  will  with  eafe,  in  three  days,  harrow  two  jugera ,
and  ablaqueate  the  trees  that  fhall  be  upon  the  ground  :  although  the
antients  would  have  every  Labourer  farcle  and  harrow  a  jugerum  a
day  each  ;  which,  whether  it  can  be  done  rightly  or  not,  I  dare  not
affirm.

At  the  fame  time  it  is  proper  to  cleanfe  the  ditches  and  rivulets,
and  make  gutters  for  drains,  and  water-furrows  :  at  the  fame  times  it
will  be  proper  that  we  give  the  oxen  affi-leaves,  if  we  have  them  ;  if
not,  wild  affi-leaves;  if  we  have  not  thefe  neither,  evergreen-oak-
leaves.  It  will  not  be  amifs  alfo,  to  give  to  each  yoke  of  oxen  one
tnodius  of  maft ;  neverthelefs  you  muft  not  give  them  more,  left  they
be  fick  with  it ;  nor  for  lefs  time  than  thirty  days :  for  if  you  give
it  them  for  fewer  days  (as  Hyginus  fays)  the  oxen  become  fcabby  in
the  Spring ;  but  the  maft  muft  be  mixed  with  chaff,  and  fo  laid  be¬
fore  the  oxen.  Alfo,  if  any  man  has  a  mind  to  make  a  wildernefs,
where  all  forts  of  trees  grow  together  wild  without  order,  then  is
the  proper  time  to  plant  them  with  maft,  and  other  feeds  or  plants.
Then  alfo  the  olive-tree  muft  be  ftript  cf  its  berries,  of  which  you
have  a  mind  to  make  green  oil,  the  beft  of  which  is  made  of  the
olive-berry  which  is  fpeckled,  when  it  begins  to  grow  black :  for
bitter  oil  ought  not  to  be  made  but  of  the  white  olive-berry.

The  firft  of  November ,  and  the  day  after,  the  head  of  Taurus  fets :
it  is  a  fign  of  rain.  The  iii  of  November  Fidicula  (the  biggeft  Star  in
the  Harp )  rifes  in  the  morning:  it  is  cold  ftormy  weather,  and  rains.
The  vi  of  November  this  fame  whole  Conftellation  rifes :  a  fouth  or
weft  wind  :  it  is  cold  ftormy  weather.  The  vii  of  November  the
bright  Star  of  Scorpio  rifes :  it  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm  :  it  is  cold  Winter-
weather,  or  a  north-eaft  wind  ;  fometimes  there  is  a  dew.  The  viii
of  November  the  Pleiades  let  in  the  morning :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm  :  it
is  cold  Win  ter-  weather.  The  ix  of  November  the  Winter  begins :  a
fouth  or  eaft  wind  ;  fometimes  there  falls  a  dew.  In  thefe  days,  till
the  xiiith,  you  may  yet  do  tolerably  well  fuch  things  as  you  could
not  do  the  preceding  month  :  but  you  muft  obferve  this  particularly,

that


Chap.  II.  •  Of  HUSBANDRY.  481

that  the  day  before  it  is  full  Moon,  if  not  then,  yet  without  fail  upon
the  very  day  of  the  full  Moon,  you  fow,  in  one  day,  all  the  beans
you  delign  to  fow  :  but  afterwards  you  may  cover  them  with  earth,  to
defend  them  from  the  fowls  and  the  cattle ;  and,  'if  the  courfe  of
the  Moon  lhall  fo  fall  out,  take  care  to  have  them  harrowed,  in  the
fatted:  and  new  ground,  before  the  xiii  of  November  j  but,  if  you
have  not  fuch  kind  of  ground,  let  it  be  in  ground  exceeding  well
dunged.  It  will  be  fufficient  to  provide  eighteen  loads  of  dung  for
each  jugerum ;  but  a  load  of  dung  contains  eighty  modii :  from  which
you  may  infer,  that  you  muft  fcatter  five  modii  of  dung  upon  ten  feet
fquarej  which  computation  teaches  us,  that  mccccxl  modii  are  fuf¬
ficient  for  the  whole  jugerum.  Then  it  is  alio  proper  to  ablaqueate
olive-trees,  and  if  they  bear  but  little  fruit,  or  if,  upon  their  tops,  their
twigs  and  leaves  are  fhrivelled  and  withered,  to  fcatter  four  modii  of
goats-dung  round  the  great  trees,  and  to  obferve  a  proportion  in  the
reft,  according  to  their  bignefs :  at  the  fame  time,  in  fuch  vineyards
as  are  ablaqueated,  to  pour  about  one  Jextarius  of  pigeon’s  dung,  or
a  congius  of  human  urine,  or  four  fextarii  of  other  dung  about  each
vine.  Two  Labourers  will,  in  one  day,  ablaqueate  a  jugerum  of  vine¬
yards,  where  the  vines  are  placed  at  the  diftance  of  fix  feet.

The  xiii  of  November  an  uncertain  day  j  neverthelefs  it  is  oftenefl
calm  and  mild.  The  xv  of  November  a  north  wind,  fometimes  a
fouth  wind  with  rain.  The  xvi  of  November  Fidis  (the  Harp)  rifes
in  the  morning :  a  fouth  wind,  fometimes  a  great  north-eaft  wind.
The  xvii  of  November  a  fouth-eaft  wind,  fometimes  a  fouth  wind  with
rain.  The  xviii  of  November  the  Sun  paffes  into  Sagittarius.  The
Hyades  rife  in  the  morning  :  it  forebodes  a  tempeft.  The  xx  of  IVo-
vember  the  horns  of  Taurus  fet  in  the  evening  :  a  cold  north-eafl  wind
and  rain.  The  xxi  of  November  one  of  the  Hyades  fets  in  the  morn¬
ing  :  it  is  flormy  Winter- weather.  The  xxii  of  November  Lepus  (the
Hare)  (18)  fets  in  the  morning:  it  forebodes  a  florm.  The  xxv  of
November  Canicula  (the  Dog-flar)  fets  at  the  rifmg  of  the  ‘Sun  :  it  is
cold  Winter- weather.  The  xxx  of  November  all  the  Hyades  fet :  a
weft  or  fouth  wind,  fometimes  rain.

In  thefe  days  you  muft  finifh  fuch  works  as  were  omitted  the  pre¬
ceding  days ;  and  if  we  do  not  fow  very  much,  it  will  be  befl  to
have  finifhed  our  fowing  before  the  firfl  of  December.  But  alfo,  when

(t8)  Lepus,  the  Hare,  a  fmall  fouthern  Conftellation,  confifting,  as  Tome  fay,  of  fix,
and  as  others,  of  1 3  Stars.  It  is  place!  under  the  feet  of  Orion ,  and  has  Sirius  behind,
as  if  he  were  always  in  purfuit  of  it  j  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn  divides  the  lower  part  of
its  body  :  it  rifeth  with  Leo ,  and  fets  when  Sagittarius  rifeth.'

Q-qq


the


482  L.J.  M.COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

the  nights  are  long,  fome  part  of  the  night  muft  be  added  to  the
day-time  :  for  there  are  many  things  which  are  very  well  done  by
candle-light.  For,  if  either  we  poffefs  vineyards,  the  ftakes  and  poles,
or  props  round  and  fquare,  may  be  hewed  fmooth,  and  fharpened  ;
or  if  the  country  be  fertile  of  fennel-giant  or  bark,  hives  ought  to  be
made  for  bees;  or  if  it  be  fruitful  in  palm-trees,  or  Spanijh  broom,
bafkets,  frails,  and  panniers,  ought  to  be  made  ;  or  if  it  abounds  in
young  l'prigs,  then  hampers  and  ofier  bafkets.  But  not  to  mention
all  other  things  at  prefent,  there  is  no  region  which  does  not  afford
fomething  which  may  be  done  by  candle- light :  for  it  is  the  character
-of  a  flothful  Hufbandman,  to  delay  beginning  his  work  till  it  be  day¬
light,  when  the  days  are  fhort,  efpecially  in  thofe  regions  where  the
lhorteft  days  are  of  nine  hours,  and  the  nights  of  fifteen.  Willows
alfo,  which  have  been  cut  down  the  day  before,  may  be  cleaned  by
candle-light,  and  prepared  for  bindings  for  the  vines,  which,  if  they
be  naturally  not  very  tough,  muft  be  cut  down  fifteen  days  before,
and,  after  they  are  cleaned,  covered  with  dung,  that  they  may  be¬
come  tough  and  pliant  :  but  if  they  have  been  cut  down  a  great
while  ago,  and  are  grown  dry,  they  muft  be  fteeped  in  a  pond.  You
muft  alfo  fharpen  the  iron-tools  by  candle-light,  and  make  handles
for  them,  or  fit  to  them  fuch  as  are  already  made,  of  which  thofe
of  evergreen  oak  are  the  beft,  then  thofe  of  hornbeam,  and  after  thefe
thofe  made  of  afh.

The  firft  of  December  an  uncertain  day  ;  neverthelefs  it  is  oftener
calm  and  mild.  The  vi  of  December  one  half  of  Sagittarius  (the
Archer)  fets :  it  forebodes  a  ftorm.  The  vii  of  December  Aquila  (the
Eaglej  (19)  rifes  in  the  morning:  a  fouth-weft  wind,  fometimes  a
fouth  wind  ;  there  falls  a  dew.  The  xi  of  December  a  north-weft  or
north  wind;  fometimes  a  fouth  wind  with  rain.  In  thefe  days,  fuch
works  as  have  been  omitted  the  former  month,  muft  be  throughly
done,  viz.  in  temperate,  or  in  hot  places ;  for  in  fuch  places  as
are  cold  they  cannot  now  be  rightly  done.  The  xiii  of  December  the
whole  Conftellation  of  Scorpio  rifes  in  the  morning :  it  is  cold
Win  ter- weather.  The  xvii  of  December  the  Sun  paffes  into  Capri -

(19)  Aquila,  the  E?gle,  a  Constellation  in  the  northern  Hemifphere,  confifting,  ac¬
cording  to  fome  writers,  of  32  Stars;  but  the  annenc  Aftronomers  make  their  number
much  fmaller:  with  its  right  wing  it  is  not  much  difbnt  from  the  Equinoctial  Circle,  and
with  its  left  wing  it  is  reprefcnted  as  not  far  from  the  head  of  Serpentarius :  a  circle,
which  is  fuppofed  ro  pafs  from  Cancer  to  Capricorn ,  .divides  its  bill  trom  the  reft  of  its
body :  ir  fets  when  Leo  rifes,  and  rifeth  with  Capricorn.


corn ;


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  483

corn  (20) :  it  is  the  Winter-folftice,  as  Hipparchus  will  have  it ;  there¬
fore  it  often  is  the  iign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xviii  of  December  forebodes
a  change  of  the  winds.  The  xxiii  of  December  Capra  (the  Goat)  fets
in  the  morning:  it  is  the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xxiv  of  December  is
the  Winter-folftice  (as  the  Chaldeans  obferve).  The  xxvii  of  De¬
cember  Delphinus  (the  Dolphin)  begins  to  rife  in  the  morning  :  it  is
the  fign  of  a  ftorm.  The  xxix  of  December  Aquila  (the  Eagle)  fets
in  the  evening :  it  is  cold  Win  ter- weather.  The  xxx  of  December
Canicula  (the  Dog-ftar)  fets  in  the  evening :  it  is  the  ftgn  of  a  ftorm.
The  xxxi  of  December  a  ftorm  of  wind.

They  who  pradtife  Hufbandry  with  more  fcrupulous  exacftnefs  and
fuperftition  than  ordinary,  deny  that  the  earth  ought  to  be  moved,  in
thefe  days,  with  any  iron-tool,  except  you  trench  it  on  account  of  a
vineyard.  Therefore  whatever  may  be  done  befides  that  kind  of
work,  is  by  them  comprehended  in  fuch  things  as  thofe ;  viz.  that
olive-berries  may  be  gathered,  and  oil  made;  that  a  vine  may  be  ftaked,
and  faftened  to  the  ftake  as  far  as  its  head ;  that  frames  may  be  placed
in  vineyards,  and  the  flocks  of  the  vines  faftened  to  them  as  high  as
their  heads :  but  it  is  not  expedient,  at  this  time,  to  bind  the  branches
of  the  vine  to  the  frame,  for  very  many  of  them  would  break,  be-
caufe  of  their  ftiffnefs,  occafioned  by  the  cold.  Alfo,  in  thefe  days
cherry-trees  and  tuber es,  apricock-  and  almond-trees,  and  fuch  other
trees  as  bloftom  firft,  may  be  commodioufly  grafted.  Some  alfo  fow
pulfe.

The  firft  of  'January  an  uncertain  day.  The  iii  of  January  Cancer
(the  Crab)  fets :  changeable  weather.  The  iv  of  January  is  the  middle
of  Winter:  much  wind  from  the  fouth;  fometimes  rain.  The  v  of
January  Fidis  (the  Harp)  riles  in  the  morning  :  variable  weather.
The  viii  of  January  a  fouth  wind,  fometimes  a  weft  wind.  The  ix
of  January  a  fouth  wind,  fometimes  a  fhower.  The  xii  of  January
the  ftate  of  the  weather  is  uncertain.  During  thefe  days  alfo  the
more  fcrupulous  and  fuperftitious  Hufbandmen  abftain  from  all  man¬
ner  of  working  whatfoever  in  the  ground  ;  fo  neverthelefs  that,  for
the  fake  of  good  luck,  they  begin  every  kind  of  work  upon  the  very


I20)  Capricornus,  the  ioth  Sign  of  the  Zodiac,  marked  commonly  with  this  character  v?.
When  the  Sun  enters  into  this  Sign,  about  the  nth  of  December,  he  is  come  to  his  ut-
moft  fouthem  declination,  and  makes  the  fhorteft  day  to  them  who  live  in  the  northern
Hermfphere,  which  is  called  the  JVinter-folflice ,  he  proceeding  no  further  fouth,  but  re¬
turns  again  towards  the  Equinoctial.  He  is  reprefented  as  looking  towards  the  weft,  and
is  divided  by  the  middle  by  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn,  and  is  placed  under  the  left-hand
of  Aquarius.  They  reckon  21  Stars  in  this  Conltellationj

Q^q  q  2  firft:


484  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

firft  day  of  January  :  bat  they  defer  the  moving  and  labouring  of  the
earth  till  the  enfuing  xiiith  day  of  the  month.

But  neither  ought  the  Bailiff  to  be  ignorant,  of  what  is  fufficient
to  be  given  to  one  yoke  of  oxen  every  day  throughout  every  month  :
wherefore  we  (hall  fubjoin  an  account  of  this  care  alfo.  In  the  month
of  January  he  fhall  give  them  ftraw  and  chaff  with  fix  J'extarii  of
fteeped  bitter  vetches,  or  ftraw  and  chaff  with  half  a  modius  of  bruifed
chichlings,  or  a  fodder-bafket  full  of  leaves  of  twenty  modii ,  or  as
much  ftraw  and  chaff  as  they  will  eat,  and  twenty  pound  weight  of
hay,  or  green  leaves  from  off  the  evergreen  oak  or  laurel  in  abundance;
or,  which  is  better  than  all  thefe,  dry  barley  mifcellany.  In  the
month  of  February  the  fame.  In  March  the  fame  ;  or,  if  they  are
going  to  do  their  work,  fifty  pound  weight  of  hay.  In  Jlpril  he  fhall
give  them  common  oak-  and  poplar-leaves  from  the  firft  to  the  thir¬
teenth,  or  chaff  and  ftraw,  or  forty  pound  weight  of  hay.  In  May
he  fhall  give  them  fodder  in  abundance.  From  the  firft  of  June
leaves  in  abundance.  In  July  the  fame.  ulugujl  the  fame  ;  or  fifty
pound  weight  of  ftraw  or  chaff  out  of  the  field.  In  September  leaves
and  boughs  in  abundance.  In  Offober  green  boughs  with  leaves,  and
fig-tree-leaves.  In  November ,  till  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month,
green  boughs  with  leaves,  or  fig-tree  leaves,  as  many  as  one  forage-
bafket  wall  contain  ;  and  from  the  thirteenth  one  modius  of  maft
mixed  with  ftraw  or  chaff,  and  one  ?nodius  of  fteeped  lupines  mixed
with  ftraw  or  chaff,  or  ripe  mifcellany.  In  the  month  of  December
he  fhall  give  them  dry  leaves,  or  ftraw  and  chaff,  with  half  a  modius
of  bitter  vetches  fteeped  in  water,  -or  lupines,  as  many  as  half  a  modius
of  them  fteeped  may  amount  to;  or  on  &  modius  of.  maft,  as  is  above-
written,  or  mefcelin.


CHAP.  III.

Of  the  Culture  of  Gardens ,  and  of  Garden-herbs,  in  Profe .

FOrafmuch  as  we  have  given  a  particular  account  of  the  works  in¬
cumbent  upon  the  Bailiff  to  perform  throughout  the  whole
year,  each  in  its  proper  feafon  ;  being  mindful  of  our  promife,  we
fhall  fubjoin  the  culture  of  gardens,  of  which  he  is  equally  obliged  to
undertake  the  care,  both  that  he  may  leffen  the  expences  of  his  daily
maintenance ;  and  that,  when  his  Mafter  comes  to  him,  he  may,  as

the


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  485

the  Poet  fays,  fet  before  him  the  country's  unhought  viands  (i).  De¬
mocritus,  in  that  book  which  he  called  Georgicon ,  is  of  opinion,  that
they  do  not  atd  very  prudently,  who  build  drong  fences  round  their
gardens,  becaufe  neither  can  a  wall  made  of  brick  lad:  many  years,
it  being,  for  the  mod  part,  damaged  by  rains  and  dorms ;  nor  does
the  expence,  beyond  the  dignity  and  worth  of  the  thing,  require
dones.  But,  if  any  perfon  would  inclofe  a  large  extent  of  ground,
it  is  neceffary,  that  he  have  a  good  edate  :  therefore  I  myfelf  will  diew
you  a  method,  whereby,  with  no  great  pains,  we  fecure  our  garden
from  the  incurfion  both  of  men  and  of  cattle.

The  mod  antient  authors  preferred  a  quickfet  hedge  to  a  built  wall,
becaufe  it  would  not  only  require  lefs  expences,  but  lad  a  vad  time
longer  j  therefore  they  have  given  us  this  following  method  of  making
of  hedges,  by  planting  of  thorns.  The  place  which  you  defign  to
inclofe  with  an  hedge,  mud,  as  foon  as  the  earth  (hall  be  moidened
with  fhowers,  after  the  autumnal  Equinox,  be  lurrounded  with  two
furrows  didant,  about  the  fpace  of  three  feet  the  one  from  the  other.
It  is  diffident,  that  the  meafure  of  their  depth  and  breadth  be  two
feet:  but  we  mud  differ  them  to  lie  open  without  filling  them  up
throughout  the  whole  Winter,  having  prepared  the  feeds  to  fow  them
withal :  and  let  them  be  thofe  of  the  larged  thorns,  and  efpecially  of
bramble,  and  of  white  thorn,  and  of  that  which  the  Greeks  call
xuvocr€a.iov'  we  call  it  dogs  thorn  :  but  the  feeds  of  thefe  thorns  mud
be  chodn  as  ripe  as  poflible;  and  you  mud  mix  them  with  the  meal
of  bitter  vetches,  well  ground,  which,  when  fprinkled  with  wate^
you  mud  daub  upon  old  lhip-ropes,  or  any  other  forts  of  ropes  what-
loever ;  then  the  fmall  ropes,  being  dried,  are  laid  up  in  a  loft.  After¬
wards,  when  the  Winter-foldice  is  pad,  having  intermitted  forty  days,
about  the  time  that  the  fwallow  comes ;  now,  when  the  wed  wind
begins  to  rife,  after  the  thirteenth  of  February ,  if  any  water  has  dood
in  the  furrows  during  the  Winter,  you  draw  it  out ;  and,  having
loofened  the  ground  which  was  thrown  out  of  the  furrows  in  Au¬
tumn,  you  replace  it  again  as  far  as  the  half  of  the  depth  of  the
furrows :  afterwards  the  aforefaid  ropes  are. taken  out  of  the  loft,  and
uncoiled;  and,  being  dretched  to  their  full  length,  are  laid  along  both
the  furrows,  and  covered  with  earth,  but  fo,  that  there  not  being
too  much  earth  thrown  upon  them,  the  feeds  of  the  thorns,  which
dick  in  the  twills  of  the  ropes,  may  be  able  to  fpring  up.  They
creep  forth  about  the  thirtieth  day;  and,  after  they  are  advanced  fome-
what  in  their  growth,  they  ought  to  be  fo  formed,  that  they  may

(1)  Virg.  Georg,  iv.  133.


lean


4H6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

lean  towards  that  fpace  which  lies  between  the  two  furrows :  but  you
mu  ft  place  between  them  an  hedge  or  row  of  rods,  which  the  thorns
of  both  furrows  may  climb  up  upon,  and  that  it  may  be  as  a  prop  or
-fupport  whereupon  they  may  lean  and  reft,  till  fuch  time  as  they  be
grown  ftrong  :  it  is  manifeft,  that  this  thorn-hedge  cannot  be  deftroy-
cd,  unlefs  you  dig  it  up  by  the  very  roots.  Moreover,  r  body  doub.s,
but  even  after  it  has  fuffered  by  fire,  it  will  grow  up  again  the  better:
and  this,  indeed,  is  the  way  of  inclofing  a  garden,  which  the  antients
approved  moft.

But  it  will  be  proper,  if  the  fituation  of  the  land  will  allow  it,
that  you  make  choice  of  a  place  for  it,  hard  by  the  manor-houfe;
efpecially  a  place  that  is  fat,  and  which  may  be  watered  with  a  rivulet
running  into  it ;  or,  if  there  be  no  flowing  or  running  water,  with  a
fpring  of  well-water.  But,  that  you  may  have  an  undoubted  affur-
ance,  that  your  well  will  never  fail,  but  flow  all  the  year  long,  it  muft
be  digged  when  the  Sun  lhall  poffefs  the  laft  parts  of  Virgo ,  and  not
before,  that  is,  in  the  month  of  September ,  before  the  autumnal  Equi¬
nox  ;  becaufe  then  the  ftrength  of  lprings  is  moft  certainly  known,
and  belt  found  out,  when  the  earth,  by  the  long  drought  of  Summer,
is  deprived  of  rain-water  :  but  you  muft  order  matters  fo,  that  the
garden  be  not  fituated  near  the  threfhing-floor,  left  the  winds,  during
the  threflhing-time,  carry  chaff  or  duft  into  it  ;  for  both  thefe  are
hurtful  to  all  forts  of  pot-herbs.  Then  there  are  two  feafons  for
trenching  and  putting  the  ground  into  good  order,  becaufe  there  are
alfo  two  feafons  for  fowing  of  pot-herbs ;  for  very  many  of  them  are
fown  both  in  Autumn  and  in  the  Spring  :  neverthelefs  it  is  better  to
fow  them  in  the  Spring,  in  fuch  places  as  are  well  watered,  becaufe
both  the  clemency  of  the  growing  year  does  kindly  receive  and  enter¬
tain  the  young  plants  and  feeds  when  they  come  forth,  and  the  thirlt
of  Summer  is  quenched  by  the  fountains  and  fprings  of  water.  But,
where  the  nature  of  the  place  neither  differs  you  to  be  ferved  with
water  brought  in  by  hand,  nor  with  that  which  flows  in  of  its  own
accord,  there  is,  indeed,  no  other  refource  or  fupply  but  the  Winter-
rains.  Neverthelefs,  even  in  the  drieft  places,  your  work  may  be
preferved,  if  the  ground  be  trenched  deeper  than  ordinary  :  and  it  is
fufficient  to  dig  each  gradation  of  it  three  feet  deep,  that  fo  the  ridge
of  the  earth,  that  is  thrown  out  of  the  trench,  may  rife  to  four  feet.
But  where  there  is  the  conveniency  of  watering  plentifully,  it  will  be
fufficient,  that  lay-land  be  turned  up  with  a  fpade  that  is  not  too  deep,
that  is,  with  an  iron-tool  lels  than  two  feet :  but  we  muft  take  care,
that  the  land,  which  muft  be  planted  in  the  Spring,  be  paftinated  or

trenched


Chap.  III.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  487

trenched  in  Autumn,  about  the  firft  of  November :  then  that  which
we  would  inftitute  in  Autumn,  W'e  mull  turn  it  up  in  the  month  of
May,  that  both  the  glebe  may  be  loofened,  and  the  roots  of  the  weeds
killed,  either  by  the  Winter-colds,  or  the  Summer-lim  ;  and  we  ought
to  dung  it  not  long  before  :  and,  when  the  time  of  bowing  or  plant¬
ing  (hall  draw  near,  the  place  mull  be  cleared  from  herbs  and  weeds,
and  dunged  five  days  before,  and  fo  carefully  digged  a  fecond  time,
that  the  earth  may  be  mixed  with  the  dung.  But  affes  dung  is  the
bell;  for  this  ufe,  becaufe  it  breeds  feweft  weeds :  the  next  is  either
that  of  the  herds,  or  of  fheep,  if  it  be  macerated  one  year ;  for  what
men  make,  altho’  it  is  reckoned  moll  excellent,  neverthelefs  it  is  not
neceffary  to  apply  if,  except  to  bare  gravel,  or  to  the  loofeft  fand
which  is  without  any  ftrength,  where,  doubtlefs,  a  greater  ftrength
of  nourilhment  is  required.  Wherefore  we  mull  buffer  that  ground,
which  we  have  deftinated  to  fow  or  plant  in  the  Spring,  to  lie  digged
after  the  Autumn,  in  order  to  be  pinched  with  the  Mid-winter-colds,
and  hoar-frofts :  for  contrariwife,  as  the  heat  of  Summer,  fo  the  vio¬
lence  of  the  cold,  purges  and  refines  the  earth  ;  and,  by  having  fermented
it,  loofens  it.  Wherefore,  when  the  Winter- folftice  is  pall,  then,  at
la  ft,  dung  mu  ft  be  thrown  upon  it ;  and,  about  the  xiiith  of  January ,
the  ground,  being  digged  over  again,  is  divided  into  beds  or  quarters ;
which,  neverthelefs,  muft  be  fo  contrived  and  formed,  that  the  hands
of  the  Weeders  may  eafily  reach  to  the  middle  of  their  breadth,  left:
they,  who  fearch  after  the  weeds,  be  forced  to  trample  upon  the
plants ;  but  rather  let  them  go  in  by  paths,  and  let  them  weed  the
half  of  the  beds  by  turns.  What  we  have  faid  is  abundantly  enough,
with  relpedt  to  fuch  things  as  muft  be  done  before  the  fo  wing¬
time.

Now  let  us  direct  what  muft  either  be  cultivated  or  fown  in  every
feafon :  and  firft,  we  muft  fpeak  of  thofe  kinds  which  can  be  fown
in  two  feafons,  that  is,  in  Autumn  and  in  Spring  :  and  thefe  are  the
feeds  of  cabbage  and  lettuce,  of  the  artichoke,  rocket,  garden-creffes,
coriander,  chervil,  dill,  the  parfnep,  fkirwort,  and  of  poppy  ;  for
thefe  are  fown  either  about  the  firft  of  September,  or  rather  in  Fe¬
bruary,  before  the  firft  of  March :  but  in  dry  or  warm  places,  fuch
as  thole  of  the  fea-coafts  of  Calabria  and  Apulia ,  they  can  be  com¬
mitted  to  the  earth  about  the  thirteenth  of  January.  Moreover,  fuch
things  as  ought  to  be  planted  only  in  Autumn  (provided  neverthelefs
we  inhabit  a  land  that  either  lies  upon  the  fea-coaft,  or  is  expofed  to
the  Sun)  are  commonly  thofe,  garlick,  the  little  heads  of  onions,
African  garlick,  muftard,

6


But  .


488  L.  J.  M.  -COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

But  now  alio  let  us  digeffc,  by  months,  at  what  time  it  may  be
proper,  for  the  moil  part,  that  every  thing  be  committed  to  the
earth  :  therefore  prefently  after  the  fird  of  January ,  it  will  be  proper
to  plant  dittander  or  peppervvort.  But  in  the  month  of  February
iuc  and  alparagus,  either  in  the  plant,  or  in  the  feed;  and  fometimes
the  Iced  of  the  onion,  and  of  the  leek,  may  be  put  into  the  ground  :
alfo  you  (hall  put  under-ground  the  feeds  of  the  Syrian  root,  and  of
the  turnep  and  the  navew,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  have  fruit  of  them
both  in  the  Spring,  and  in  Summer ;  for  common  garlick,  and  Afri¬
can  garlick,  are  the  laffc  things  that  are  fet  at  this  time.  But  about
the  fir  ft  of  March ,  in  funny  places,  you  may  tranfplant  the  leek  (if
it  is  now  grown  big) ;  Hercules s  all-heal  alfo  in  the  latter  part  of  the
month  of  March.  Then,  about  the  fird  oi  April,  you  may  tranf¬
plant  equally  the  leek,  and  elecampane,  and  the  lateward  plant  of
rue  :  alfo  the  cucumber,  the  gourd,  and  the  caper,  mud  be  fown,
'that  they  may  grow  up  the  fooner;  for  beet-feed  is  then,  at  length,
bell  fown,  when  the  pomegranate-tree  blofioms :  but  the  head  of
a  leek  is  as  yet  tolerably  well  tranlplanted  about  the  fifteenth  of
May.  After  this  nothing  ought  to  be  put  under-ground,  when  the
Summer  is  coming  on,  except  parfley-feed,  provided  you  fail  not  to
water  it  well ;  for  fo  it  comes  up  very  well  during  the  Summer.
Moreover,  in  Augu/l  is  the  third  lowing  time,  about  the  time  when
they  celebrate  the  fead  of  Vulcan  ;  and  this  is  the  bed  feafon  for  fow-
ing  the  Syrian  root,  and  the  turnep,  the  navew  alfo,  and  lkirwort,
and  Alexanders  :  and  thefe  are  the  times  for  fowing.

Now  I  fhall  fpeak  of  each  of  thefe  in  particular,  which  require
any  care;  and,  as  to  fuch  of  them  as  I  fhall  pafs  over,  it  mull  be
underdood,  that  they  require  no  other  pains  and  labour  but  that  of
the  Weeder,  of  which  we  mud  fay  this  once  for  all,  that  at  all  times
particular  care  mud  be  taken  to  exterminate  the  weeds.  That  kind
of  garlick,  which  fome  call  Carthaginian  garlick,  but  the  Greeks  call
d(ppoaApoS'ov,  is  of  a  much  greater  growth  than  common  garlick :  and
about  the  fird  of  OEiober ,  before  it  is  planted,  it  mud  be  divided  from
one  head  into  feveral ;  for,  like  common  garlick,  it  has  feveral  cloves
dicking  together ;  and,  when  thefe  are  divided,  they  ought  to  be  planted
in  ridges,  that,  being  placed  in  raifed  beds,  they  may  be  the  lefs  in-
felled  by  the  Winter- rains.  But  a  ridge  in  a  garden  is  like  to  that
which  Hufbandmen  make  where  they  fow  their  champagne  lands,  that
they  may  avoid  and  carry  off  the  moillure.  But  in  gardens  this  mud
be  made  lefier;  and  upon  the  uppermod  part  of  it,  that  is,  upon  the
back  or  riling  part  of  it,  mud  the  cloves  of  Carthaginian  garlick,  or

of


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  489

of  common  garlick  (for  this  is  planted  after  the  fame  manner)  be  re¬
gularly  fet  at  the  diftance  of  an  hand  breadth,  the  one  from  the  other:
let  the  furrows  of  the  ridges  be  half  a  foot  diftant  from  each  other.
Then,  when  the  cloves  have  fent  forth  three  blades  or  leaves,  let  them
be  farcied  ;  for  the  oftener  this  is  done,  the  greater  growth  the  plants
attain  to.  Then  before  they  make  their  ftalk,  it  will  be  proper  to
twift  the  uppermoft  green  part  of  it,  and  to  lay  it  flat  upon  the  ground,
that  their  heads  may  grow  the  larger.  But  in  regions  liable  to  hoar-
froils,  neither  of  thefe  ought  to  be  planted  during  the  Autumn  :  for
when  the  day  is  at  the  fhorteft  they  fpoil  and  rot  with  the  cold  wea¬
ther,  which  commonly  grows  mild  in  the  month  of  January  :  and
therefore  in  cold  places,  the  beft  time  for  planting  either  common  or
Carthaginian  garlick,  is  about  the  thirteenth  of  the  forefaid  month.
But  at  what  time  foever  we  (hall  either  plant  them,  or  when  they  are
ripe,  lay  them  up  in  a  loft,  we  mud  obferve,  that  the  Moon  be  under
the  earth,  with  jrefpedt  to  thofe  places  where  they  are  either  put  into
the  earth,  or  taken  out  of  it :  for,  being  planted  after  this  manner,  and
alfo  laid  up  fo,  they  are  reckoned  not  to  be  of  fo  very  pungent  a  tafle,
nor  to  give  fuch  a  ftrong  fmell  to  the  breath  of  thofe  that  eat  them.
Neverthelefs,  many  plant  them  before  the  firft  of  January ,  in  the
month  of  December ,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  if  the  warmnefs  of
the  weather,  and  the  fituation  of  the  ground,  permit  it.

Cabbage  ought  to  be  tranfplanted  when  it  confifts  of  fix  leaves,  fo
that  it  be  fet  after  its  root  has  been  firft  daubed  over  with  thin  dung,
and  wrapped  up  in  three  fmall  fillets  of  fea-weed  ;  for  this  thing  has
this  eftedl,  that  in  the  boiling  it  becomes  more  quickly  foft  and  tender,
and  preferves  its  green  colour  without  nitre.  But  in  cold  and  rainy
countries,  the  beft  time  for  fetting  it  is  after  the  thirteenth  of  April  ;
the  plants  of  which  being  thruft  into  the  ground,  when  they  have
once  taken  hold,  the  oftener  they  are  farcied  and  dunged,  as  far  as
the  Kitchen-gardener’s  bufinefs  and  intereft  will  allow,  the  better  they
thrive,  and  the  ftronger  they  grow,  and  of  a  fuller  growth  will  they
make  both  their  ftalks  and  their  fprouts.  Some  people  fet  the  fame
immediately  after  the  firft  of  March ,  in  fuch  places  as  are  more  ex-
pofed  to  the  Sun ;  but  the  greater  part  of  it  lhoots  out  into  fprouts,
and  a  top;  and,  when  it  is  once  cut,  it  does  not  afterwards  make  a
large  Winter-cabbage.  But  you  may  tranfplant  even  the  greateft  cab-
bage-ftalks  twice ;  and  if  you  do  this,  they  fay  that  they  yield  more
feed,  and  of  a  greater  growth.

Lettuce  ought  to  be  tranfplanted,  when  it  has  as  many  leaves  as  the
cabbage.  Indeed,  in  funny  and  maritime  places,  the  beft  time  to  plant

Rrr  it


490  L.  J.  M.  C  0  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI

it  is  in  Autumn;  but  in  inland  and  cold  places  it  is  otherwife:  in
Winter  it  is  not  fo  convenient  to  tranfplant  it.  But  the  root  of  this
alfo  ought  to  be  daubed  with  dung  ;  and  it  requires  a  greater  plenty  of
water,  and  fo  it  becomes  of  a  tenderer  leaf.  But  there  are  feveral
kinds  of  lettuce,  which  muft  be  Town  alfo  each  in  its  own  feafon  ;  and
of  them  that  which  is  of  a  dark,  and,  as  it  were,  of  a  purple,  or  of
a  green  colour  alfo,  and  of  a  curled  leaf,  as  the  Cecilian ,  is  rightly
fown  in  the  month  of  January.  But  the  Cappadocian ,  which  grows
up  with  a  pale-green  fmooth  and  thick  leaf,  is  fown  in  the  month  of
February  ;  then  that  which  is  white,  with  a  leaf  very  much  curled,
as  in  the  province  of  Bcetica ,  and  in  the  borders  of  the  municipal  city
of  Cadiz ,  is  rightly  planted  in  the  month  of  March.  There  is  alfo
that  of  the  Cyprian  kind,  of  a  whitifh-red,  with  a  light  and  very
tender  leaf,  which  is  very  conveniently  planted  till  the  thirteenth  of
April  t  neverthelefs,  in  a  climate  where  the  Sun  moftly  fhines,  lettuce
may  be  fown  almoft  the  whole  year  in  fuch  places  where  there  is
plenty  of  water.  And,  that  it  may  make  its  ftalk  the  more  {lowly,
when  it  has  had  fome  growth,  let  it  receive  a  fmall  brick  or  tile  in
the  middle  of  it :  being  checked,  as  it  were,  with  this  w;eight,  it  dif-
fufos  itfelf  into  breadth.

The  fame  method  is  to  be  obferved  with  refpedt  to  endive  alfo,  ex¬
cepting  that  it  bears  the  Winter  better;  therefore  it  may  be  fown  in
the  beginning  of  Autumn,  even  in  cold  countries.  We  fhall  plant  the
flip  or  fucker  of  the  artichoke,  to  better  advantage,  about  the  autumnal
Equinox,  and  fow  the  feed  of  it  more  commodioufly  about  the  hrft
of  March ,  and  thruft  the  plant  of  it  into  the  earth  about  the  firft  of
November-,  and  we  muft  dung  it  with  plenty  of  allies;  for  this  kind
of  dung  feems  the  fitted  for  this  pot-herb.  Muftard  and  coriander,
as  alfo  rocket  and  bafft,  abide  in  their  feats,  as  they  are  fown,  with¬
out  being  removed ;  nor  do  they  require  any  other  culture,  but  that
they  be  dunged  and  weeded  :  but  they  may  be  fown  not  only  in
Autumn,  but  in  the  Spring  alfo.  Alfo  the  plants  of  muftard,  tranf-
planted  in  the  beginning  of  Winter,  bring  a  more  buftiy  top  in  the
Spring.  All-heal  is  fown,  in  both  feafons,  exceeding  thin,  upon  light
and  well-manured  ground,  that  it  may  arrive  at  a  greater  growth :
neverthelefs  it  is  better  to  fow  it  in  the  Spring.  If  you  would  make
the  leek  festive,  or  fit  for  being  often  cut,  the  antients  dire&ed  it  to
be  left  very  thick-fow-n,  and  fo,  when  it  is  grown  up,  to  be  cut.  But
experience  has  taught  us,  that  it  thrives  much  better  if  you  tranfplant
it,  and  fet  it  in  the  fame  manner  as  you  do  the  headed  leek,  at  fmall
diftances,  that  is,  within  four  inches  the  one  from  the  other ;  and,

when


Chap.  III.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  491

when  it  is  grown  up,  cut  it.  But,  as  to  that  which  you  have  a  mind
to  form  into  a  great  head,  you  mult  take  care,  before  you  tranfplant
and  fet  it  again,  that  you  cut  away  all  its  fmall  roots,  and  clip  off
the  uppermoft  parts  of  its  fibres  or  leaves :  then  little  tiles  or  fhells  are
put  under-ground,  and  placed,  as  it  were  feats,  under  each  of  the
plants,  that  fo  their  heads  may  become  of  a  larger  growth.  But  the
culture  of  the  headed  leek  is  continual  farcling  and  dunging :  neither
is  that  of  the  feffive  leek  different,  except  that  it  ought  to  be  as  often
watered,  dunged,  and  farcied,  as  it  is  cut.  In  warm  places  its  feed
is  fown  in  'January ,  and  in  cold  in  February ;  and,  that  its  growth
may  become  the  greater,  feveral  grains  of  it  are  tied  up  in  a  thin  linen
clout,  and  fo  put  under-ground.  But,  after  it  is  fprung  up  in  thofe
places  to  which  water  cannot  be  conveyed,  it  ought  to  be  tranfplanted
about  the  time  of  the  autumnal  Equinox  ;  but  in  fuch  places  as  you
can  give  moifture  to,  it  is  rightly  tranfplanted  in  the  month  of
May.

You  may  raife  parfley  alfo  both  by  plants  and  feed :  it  chiefly  de¬
lights  in  water,  and  therefore  it  is  moft  commodioufly  placed  hard  by
a  fountain:  and,  if  any  one  has  a  mind  to  raife  it  with  a  broad  leaf,
let  him  tie  up  as  much  feed  of  it  as  his  three  fingers  can  hold,  in  a
thin  linen  rag,  and  fo  put  it  into  little  beds  of  earth  in  a  regular  man¬
ner  :  or,  if  he  would  rather  have  it  grow  up  with  curled  leaves,  let
him  put  its  feed  into  a  mortar,  and  beat  it  with  a  willow  pefile,  and
clear  it  from  its  hufks  ;  and  then,  when  it  is  bound  up  in  linnen  rags,
in  the  fame  manner  put  it  under-ground.  It  may  alfo,  without  all
this  pains,  be  made  curled,  whatever  way  it  is  fown,  if,  when  it  is
fprung  up,  he  check  its  growth  by  rolling  it  over  with  a  roller.  The
beft  time  for  fowing  it  is,  after  the  fifteenth  of  May  till  the  Solftice  j
for  it  requires  warmth.

Alfo,  commonly  in  thefe  days  bafil  is  fown,  the  feed  of  which,
when  it  is  put  into  the  ground,  is  carefully  thruft  into  it  with  a  beetle
or  roller ;  for  if  you  leave  the  earth  fufpended  and  loofe,  it  corrupts
for  the  moft  part.  The  parfnep,  fkirret-root,  and  elacampane,  thrive
exceedingly  in  a  place  that  is  trenched  deep  and  dunged  ;  but  they
muft  be  fet  exceeding  thin,  that  they  may  grow  the  bigger.  But  it
is  proper,  that  elacampane  be  planted  at  the  diftance  of  three  feet,  be-
caufe  it  makes  vaft  bufhy  ftalks,  and  creeps  with  its  roots  like  the  eye
of  a  reed  :  nor  do  all  thefe  require  any  other  culture,  but  that  the
weeds  be  taken  away  by  frequent  farcling.  But  the  moft  proper  time
for  putting  them  into  the  ground  will  be  in  the  former  part  of  the

Rrr  2  month


492  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  BookXI.

month  of  September ,  or  in  the  latter  part  of  Augujl.  Alifander  (2),
which  fome  of  the  Greeks  call  I'^rntoa-ihivov^  fome  cry.v^vi ov,  ought  to
be  fovvn  in  feed,  in  a  place  that  is  well  trenched,  especially  hard  by
a  wall ;  becaufe  it  both  rejoices  in  a  Shade,  and  thrives  and  grows  Strong
in  any  place,  how  indifferent  Soever  :  and  when  you  have  once  Town
it,  if  you  do  not  pull  it  all  up  by  the  roots,  but  leave,  and  fet  apart,
Stalks  of  it  here-and-there  for  feed,  it  will  laft  an  age,  and  requires
but  the  very  Small  culture  of  farcling.  It  is  Sown  from  the  fe aft  of
Vulcan  till  the  firft  of  September ,  and  even  in  the  month  of  'January
alfo.

Mint  requires  a  Sweet  oufy  foil,  for  which  reafon  it  is  rightly  placed
near  a  fountain  in  the  month  of  March-,  and,  if  the  plants  of  it  Should
happen  to  fail,  you  may  gather  wild  mint  from  off  fallow  lands,  and
plant  it  with  its  tops  inverted ;  which  thing  takes  away  its  wildnefs,
and  makes  it  tame.  The  rue  which  you  have  Sown  in  feed  in  Au¬
tumn,  you  muff  tranfplant  in  the  month  of  March  into  a  funny  place,
and  heap  allies  upon  it,  and  weed  it  till  it  grow  Strong,  left  it  be  killed
with  weeds :  but  it  ought  to  be  weeded  with  the  hand  well  covered  ;  for,
unlefsyou  cover  it,  pernicious  ulcers  will  breed:  if  nevertheless,  through
ignorance,  you  Shall  weed  it  with  your  naked  hand,  and  an  itching
and  Swelling  follow  upon  it,  anoint  it  throughly  with  oil  from  time
to  time.  Its  fhrub  or  Stalk  continues  for  many  years  without  Suffer¬
ing  any  hurt,  except  a  woman  in  her  menfes  touch  it,  and  it  wither
and  dry  up  becaufe  of  that.

Thyme,  and  garden  favory,  which  comes  from  beyond  Sea,  and
mother  of  thyme,  as  I  have  already  related  in  a  former  book,  are
more  carefully  planted  by  Such  as  take  care  of  bee-hives,  than  by
Kitchen-gardeners.  But  we  do  not  think  it  amifs  to  have  them  alfo
in  gardens,  by  reafon  of  their  ufefulnefs  for  leafoning  (for  they  are
exceeding  proper  for  fome  forts  of  efculents) :  they  require  a  place
neither  fat,  nor  dunged,  but  expofed  to  the  Sun  ;  for  the  moft  part
they  grow  up  of  their  own  accord  in  the  leaned:  ground  :  thefe  are
raifed  both  from  the  feed,  and  from  plants,  about  the  time  of  the  vernal
Equinox:  nevertheless  it  is  better  to  fet  young  plants  of  thyme  j  and,  after
they  have  been  fet  in  well-manured  ground,  left  they  Strike  root  Slowly,

(2)  0 !us  dram,  fomerroes  by  cur  au’hor  called  ohis  puHum,  commonly  rrarfla'ed  a'i-
favder,  which,  as  has  been  faid,  fome  think  to  be  a  corruption  or  the  Latin:  it  is  o
called  probably  from  the  blacknefs  of  its  »cot  and  feed.  The  Greeks  called  ir  t-lippcfe-
livutr^  i  e.  horfe  ioverge  cr  paiflty,  either  becaufe  of  the  bignefc  of  its  growth,  or  Pc-
esufe  i:  was  given  to  horfes  as  a  remedy:  they  alfo  called  it  fmyrxitm  becaufe  the  juice
that  flows  from  it  refembies  myrrh  in  tafle  or  frnell.  It  was  called  by  fome  ‘ivxuw
stKiH >r,  cf  which  hippo feh<:  on  is  only  an  abbreviation.


you


Chap.  III.  O/HUSBANDRY,  493

you  muft  bruife  a  ftalk  or  brufh  of  dry  thyme  in  a  mortar ;  and,
after  it  is  bruifed,  you  muft  infufe  it  in  water  the  day  before  you  de-
fign  to  ufe  itj  and,  after  the  water  has  extracted  the  juice  of  it,  you
muft  pour  it  upon  the  ftalks  which  you  have  fet,  until  it  has  throughly
ftrengthened  them,  and  make  them  take  faft  hold  :  but  Italian  favory
is  more  lively,  than  that  you  need  to  beftow  much  trouble  and  pains
in  taking  care  of  it.  When  you  (hall  have  planted  your  dittander  or
pepperwort  before  the  firft  of  March ,  you  may  cut  it  down  as  you
do  fe&ive  leeks  or  chives :  neverthelefs  it  muft  be  done  feldomer ;  for
it  muft  not  be  cut  after  the  firft  of  November,  becaufe,  if  it  be  hurt
in  cold  weather,  it  utterly  decays  and  dies :  neverthelefs  it  will  hold
out  for  two  years,  if  it  be  carefully  farcied  and  dunged  :  in  many
places  alfo  it  prolongs  its  life  even  for  ten  years.  The  Beet  is  put
under-ground  in  feed  when  the  pomegranate-tree  blofToms ;  and,  if
the  garden  be  well  watered,  it  is  tranfplanted  in  Summer,  as  the
cabbage  or  colewort,  as  foon  as  it  confifts  of  five  leaves :  but,  if  the
garden  be  naturally  dry,  it  ought  to  be  fet  in  Autumn,  fome  time  after
the  rains  are  come  on.

About  the  firft  of  Odlober ,  chervil ,  as  alfo  the  pot-herb  orrach ,
which  the  Greeks  call  (3),  muft  be  put  under-ground,  in  a

place  that  is  not  very  cold:  for,  if  the  country  has  very  hard  winters,
the  plants  muft  be  tranfplanted  from  the  place  where  they  were  feated
clofe  together,  and  feparated  to  a  greater  diftance  the  one  from  the
other.  The  fame  method  is  obferved  in  the  fowing  of  poppy  and
dill,  as  of  chervil  and  orrach.  The  feeds  of  garden  afparagus,  and
of  that  which  thepeafants  call  corruda  (wild  afparagus)  are  almoft  two
years  in  preparing  :  when,  in  a  fat  and  well-dunged  foil,  you  fhall
have  put  them  under-ground,  fo  as  to  place  into  every  little  trench
you  have  made  for  them,  as  much  feed  as  your  three  fingers  can  hold ;
commonly  after  the  fortieth  day  they  are  twifted  and  interwoven  with
one  another,  and  make,  as  it  were,  an  unity,  or  one  united  mafs  ;
which  fmall  roots,  thus  twifted  and  connected,  the  Kitchen-gardeners
call  Jpunges :  and  it  is  proper,  that,  after  twenty-four  months,  they
be  tranfplanted  into  a  funny  place,  fufficiently  moift,  and  well  dunged  :
but  the  trenches  or  furrows  are  made  at  the  diftance  of  one  foot  the
one  from  the  other,  and  not  more  than  three-fourths  of  a  foot  in


(•$)  atriplex*  orach.  Pliny  fays,  that  Pythagoras  blamed  this  pot-herb  as  the

Caufe  of  dropfies,  jaundice,  palenefs,  &c.  and  tome  pretend,  that  us  Latin  name  inti¬
mates,  that  it  makes  fuch  as  eat  it  pale  and  difcoloured  :  but,  whatever  there  is  in  this,
its  Greek  name,  which  fome  pretend  to  be  made  up  of  two  words,  etQ&us  av^eiv,  from
its  quick  growth,  feenris  more  exprefiive  of  its  nature;  for  it  comes  forth,  as  Pliny  fays,
the  ikh  day,  and  is  fit  for  eating  the  15  th.


494  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

depth,  into  which  the  little  fpunges  are  fo  thrud  down,  that,  after
the  earth  is  put  upon  them,  they  may  ealily  fpring  up.  But,  in  dry
places,  the  feeds  or  plants  mud  he  placed  in  the  lower  parts  of  the
furrows,  that  they  may  abide,  as  it  were,  in  little  chanels  or  troughs :
but  in  fuch  as  are  ouly,  on  the  contrary,  they  mud:  be  placed  in  the
uppermod  back  of  the  ridge,  led  they  be  hurt  with  too  much  moidure.
Then  the  fird:  year,  after  diey  have  been  thus  planted,  the  afparagus,
which  they  fhall  lend  forth,  mud  be  broken  off  fhort  5  for  if  you
fhould  pull  it  up  from  the  bottom,  the  little  roots  being  as  yet  tender
and  weak,  the  whole  little  fpunge  will  follow  :  the  red  of  the  years
it  mud  not  be  cropped,  but  plucked  up  by  the  root ;  for,  unlefs  you
do  fo,  the  dalks  that  are  broken  off  fhort,  hurt,  and  give  pain  to  the
eyes  of  the  fpunges,  and,  as  it  were,  blind  them,  and  do  not  differ
them  to  put  forth  the  afparagus.  Moreover,  every  dalk,  which
iprings  up  lad  in  Autumn,  mud  not  be  intirely  taken  away,  but  fome
of  them  mud  be  left,  and  fet  apart  for  feed.  Then,  after  it  has
made  its  prickle,  the  feeds  themlelves  being  gathered,  the  haulm  mull
be  throughly  burnt  in  its  own  place,  jud  as  it  is ;  and  then  all  the
furrows  mud  be  farcied,  and  raked  at  the  fame  time,  and  the  weeds
taken  out  of  them  ;  and  prefently  after,  either  dung  or  afhes  thrown
into  them,  that  the  juice  of  them,  trickling  down  with  the  rains  the
whole  Winter,  may  come  to  the  root.  Then  in  the  Spring,  before
it  fhall  begin  to  fprout,  let  the  earth  be  dirred  with  a  forked  iron-
tool,  that  the  dyle  may  the  more  eafily  fpring  up,  and  fhew  itfelf,  and
become  thicker  and  fuller  when  the  ground  is  loofened.

The  radifh  root  is  rightly  fown  twice  in  the  year  ;  in  the  month  of
February ,  when  we  expedf  fruit  of  it  in  the  Spring;  and  in  the  month
of  Auguft,  about  the  fead  of  Vulcan ,  when  we  expert  it  earlier :  but
this  time  of  fowing  it  is,  without  doubt,  edeemed  the  bed.  The
care  to  be  taken  of  it  is,  that  it  be  fown  in  ground  that  is  wrell  dunged
and  manured ;  and,  after  it  is  arrived  to  fome  growth,  that  it  be
earthed  from  time  to  time ;  for  if  it  emerge,  or  fhoot  up  above  the
earth,  it  will  become  hard  and  fpungy.

The  cucumber  and  gourd,  when  there  is  plenty  of  water,  require
lefs  care  ;  for  they  are  very  much  delighted  and  helped  with  moidure.
But,  if  they  mud  be  fown  in  a  dry  place,  where  there  is  not  the
conveniency  of  watering  them,  in  the  month  of  February  furrows,
of  the  depth  of  one  foot  and  an  half,  mud  be  made.  Then  after
the  fifteenth  of  March ,  almod  the  third  part  of  the  depth  of  the
furrow  mud  be  covered  with  draw  put  into  it;  then  well-dunged
earth  mud  be  thrown  into  it,  till  it  come  up  to  the  middle  of  the

furrow ;


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDR  Y.  49  5

farrow  ;  and,  after  the  feeds  are  put  into  them,  they  muft  be  con¬
tinually  watered,  till  they  fpring  up  j  and,  after  they  have  begun  to
thrive  and  grow  ftrong,  their  growth  muft  be  promoted  and  forwarded
by  adding  earth  to  them,  till  the  furrow  be  filled  up,  and  made  even  :
the  feeds,  being  thus  cultivated,  will  thrive  well  enough,  and  be  in  a
good  ftate  the  whole  Summer,  without  watering,  and  will  yield  fruit
of  a  more  delicious  tafte  than  fuch  as  are  watered.  But,  in  watery
places,  the  feed  muft  be  put  into  the  ground  as  foon  as  pofiible ;
neverthelefs  not  before  the  firft  of  March ,  that  it  may  be  tranfplanted
when  the  Equinox  is  paft  :  and  take  this  feed  out  of  the  middle  of
the  gourd,  and  place  it  in  the  ground  with  its  top  inverted,  that  it
may  be  of  a  vafter  growth  ;  for  when  they  are  throughly  dried,  they
may  be  ufed  as  vefiels,  as  the  Alexandrian  gourds  are.  But,  if  you
prepare  them  for  eatable-ftuff,  you  muft  take  the  feed  out  of  the
neck  of  the  gourd,  and  fet  it  with  its  top  upright ;  by  which  means
its  fruit  will  grow  up  both  longer  and  fmaller,  which  certainly  brings
a  greater  price  than  the  others.  But  care  muft  be  taken,  that  as  fel-
dom  as  can  be,  a  woman  be  admitted  into  that  place  wherein  either
the  cucumber,  or  the  gourd,  is  planted :  for,  commonly,  green  things
languidly  and  are  checked  in' their  growth  by  her  handling  of  them.
But  if  floe  be  alfo  in  her  menfes,  fhe  will  kill  the  young  offspring  alfo
with  her  look.  A  cucumber  becomes  tender,  and  exceeding  agree¬
able  to  the  tafte,  if  you  foak  its  feed  in  milk  before  you  fow  it :  fome
alfo,  that  it  may  be  the  fweeter,  do  it  in  mead.  But  any  perfon  that  is
defirous  to  have  the  fruit  of  the  cucumber  earlier  ripe  than  ordinary,
let  him  fhut  up  well-dunged  earth  in  a  cafe,  or  ofier-bafket,  and  fow
the  feed  therein,  and  give  it  moderate  moifture.  Then,  when  the
feeds  are  fprung  up,  let  him  place  them  in  the  open  air,  in  mild  and
warm  funny  days,  hard  by  the  houfe,  that  they  may  be  prote&ed
from  every  blaft  of  wind.  But  in  cold  and  ftormy  weather,  let  him
bring  them  back  again  into  the  houfe ;  and  let  him  conftantly  do  this
till  the  vernal  Equinox  be  paft  :  afterwards  let  him  put  down  the
whole  bafket  into  the  ground  -}  for  thus  he  Avail  have  early  fruit.
Alfo,  if  it  be  worth  the  while,  little  wheels  may  be  put  under  larger
vafes,  that  they  may  be  brought  out  with  lefs  labour,  and  harboured
again  in  the  houfe  :  but,  notwithftanding,  they  onght  to  be  covered
with  glaffes  (4),  that  in  cold  weather  alfo,  when  the  days  are  clear,

(4)  Specularibus.  Though  this  v/ord  is  tranflated  as  being  agreeable  to  the  mo¬

dern  pra&ice  in  this  thing-  yet  by  fpecularis ,  1  fuppofe,  the  author  means  a  certain  trarT-
parent  ftone,  which  they  clove  and  cut  into  as  fmall  pieces  as  they  pleafed,  and  ufed
them  for  their  windows,  to  keep  out  the  winds  and  let  in  the  light,  <&c.  as  they  did
afterwards  with  giafs.  This  ftone,  it  feems,  was  firft  found  in  Spain ,  and  afterwards  in
{Several  other  countries,  as  Pliny  fays  j  and,  as  Seneca  fays,  was  not  in  ufe  before  his  davs.

they


496  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI.

they  may  be  fafely  brought  forth  to  the  Sun.  By  this  method  Tiberius
Ceefar  was  provided  with  cucumbers  almoft  the  whole  year  (5).  But
we  read  in  Bolus  Mendejius ,  an  Egyptian  author,  that  this  is  done
with  much  lefs  trouble :  he  directs  us  to  keep  in  our  gardens,  in  a
place  expofed  to  the  Sun,  and  well-dunged,  brambles  and  fennel-giants
planted  in  rows  one  after  another  by  turns :  then,  after  the  Equinox  is
pad,  to  cut  them  a  little  below  the  gro  md  ;  and  after  having,  with  a
wooden  bodkin,  loofened  the  pi  .h  either  of  the  fennel-giant  or  bramble,
to  put  dung  into  them,  and  lo  put  the  feeds  of  the  cucumber  into
them,  which  by  their  gro  vth  may  clolely  unite  with  the  brambles
and  fennel-giants ;  for  thus  they  arc  no-,  nourifhed  by  their  own,  but,
as  it  were,  by  their  maternal  root  ;  and  the  dock,  thus  ingrafted,  will
alio  in  cold  weather  yield  the  fruit  of  the  cucumber.  The  fecond
feal'on  they  obferve  for  fowing  this  feed,  is  commonly  at  the  fead  of
Minerva ,  after  the  middle  ot  March.

The  caper-bujk ,  in  very  many  provinces,  grows  of  its  own  accord
in  fallow  lands  j  but,  in  fuch  places  where  there  is  a  fcarcity  of  it,  if
it  mud  be  fown,  it  will  require  a  dry  place ;  and  that  ought  to  be
1’urrounded  with  a  fmall  ditch  before-hand,  which  may  be  filled  with
dones  afid  lime,  or  Carthaginian  clay,  that  it  may  be,  as  it  were,  a
certain  intrenchment,  that  the  dalks  of  the  forefaid  feed  may  not  be
able  to  break  through  it,  which  commonly  lpread  themfelves  almod
over  the  whole  land,  unlefs  they  be  hindered  by  fome  fence  or  mound :
which  thing,  neverthelefs,  is  not  of  itfelf  fo  great  an  inconveniency,
(for  they  may  be  rooted  out  from  time  to  time)  as  that  they  contain
an  hurtful  poifon,  and  with  their  juice  make  the  ground  barren.  It
is  fatisfied  with  very  little  or  no  culture  ;  for  it  is  a  thing  that  grows
up  and  thrives  even  in  untilled  lands,  without  any  pains  of  the  Huf-
bandman.  It  is  fown  at  the  time  of  both  the  Equinoxes.

An  onion-bed  requires  earth  that  is  frequently  manured,  rather  than
that  which  is  turned  up  deeper  than  ordinary  :  therefore  the  ground
ought  to  be  cut  up  from  the  firfl  of  November ,  that  it  may  rot  with
the  Winter  colds  and  frofts ;  and,  after  an  intermiflion  of  forty  days,
digged  a  fecond  time  3  and  then,  after  twenty-one  days,  digged  a  third
time,  and  prefently  dunged  ;  and  then,  after  it  is  equally  and  thoroughly
digged  writh  fpades,  divided  into  beds  or  quarters,  after  all  the  roots

(5)  Pliny,  in  his  nin:h  book,  cap.  5.  mentions  the  grest  liking  that  the  Emperor  Tibe¬
rius  had  to  cucumbers :  perhaps  both  Pliny  and  Columella  take  the  word  in  its  largeft
fignification,  as  dignifying  me.ons  alfo  j  and  then  Tiberius's  fondnefs  ior  them  may  be  better
accounted  for,  this  fruit  being  extremely  delicious  in  many  places  of  Italy,  and  the
Italians  great  eaters  of  it.


have


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  497

have  been  pulled  up  and  deftroyed.  Then,  about  the  firft  of  February ,
it  may  be  proper,  that,  on  a  clear  bright  day,  the  feeds  be  fcattered  ;
with  which  fome  feed  of  favory  mull  be  intermixed,  that  we  may
have  that  alfo ;  for  it  is  both  agreeable  to  eat  when  it  is  green ;  and
when  it  is  dry,  it  is  not  ufelel's  for  feafoning  broth,  or  any  other
dainty  difhes.  An  onion-bed  ought  to  be  farcied  not  lefs  than  four
times  at  leaft,  or  even  oftener.  If  you  have  a  mind  to  make
provifion  of  the  feed  of  it,  in  the  month  of  February  fet  the  largeft
heads  of  the  Afcalonian  kind  (6),  which  is  the  bed,  four  or  even  five
inches  diftant  from  each  other ;  and  when  they  begin  to  thrive  well,
do  not  farcle  them  lefs  than  three  times :  then,  after  they  have  made
their  ftalk,  preferve  the  ftiffnefs  of  their  ftalks  by  placing  low  rails,
as  it  were,  of  fmall  Hakes  among  them  ;  for  unlefs  you  place  reeds
crolfwife  among  them,  very  clofe  upon  each  other,  after  the  manner
of  frames  in  a  vineyard,  the  ftalks  of  the  onions  will  be  thrown  down
by  the  winds,  and  all  the  feed  will  be  fhaken  out ;  which,  indeed,
muft  not  be  gathered  before  it  begins  to  grow  ripe,  and  to  have  a
black  colour.  But  you  muft  neither  fuffer  it  to  grow  throughly  dry
and  withered,  nor  to  fall  all  to  the  ground ;  but  the  ftalks  muft  be
pulled  up  intire,  and  dried  in  the  Sun.

There  are  two  feafons  for  lowing  the  turnep  and  the  navew,  and
they  require  the  fame  culture  as  the  radifh :  neverthelefs,  the  beft:
time  for  fowing  them  is  in  the  month  of  Auguji.  A  jugerum  of  land
requires  four  Jextarii  of  their  feed;  but  fo,  that,  over  and  above  this
meafure,  it  may  receive  a  little  more  than  an  hemina  of  the  feed  of
the  Syrian  root.  Let  him  who  {hall  fow  thefe  feeds  in  Summer  have
a  care,  that  the  gnat  or  little  fly,  by  reafon  of  the  droughts,  do  not
deftroy  the  yet  tender  leaves,  when  they  are  creeping  forth.  That  this
may  be  alfo  prevented,  the  dull  which  is  found  upon  an  arched  roof,
or  the  foot  alfo  which  fticks  to  the  roofs  above  the  hearths,  ought  to
be  gathered ;  then  the  day  before  the  fowing,  to  be  mixed  with  the
feeds,  and  fprinkled  with  water,  that  they  may  imbibe  the  juice  the
whole  night  •  for  the  feeds  being  thus  foaked,  they  may  be  fafely
fown  the  next  day.  Certain  antient  authors,  as  Democritus ,  diredt
us  to  medicate  all  feeds  with  the  juice  of  the  herb  they  call  houjleek ,
and  to  ufe  the  fame  remedy  againft  the  little  vermin,  which  expe¬
rience  has  taught  us  to  be  true.  But  yet  we  more  frequently  make
ufe  of  the  foot,  and  the  duft  before-mentioned:  becaufe  there  is  but

(6)  Afcalonii  generis.  Pliny,  lib.  xix.  cap.  6.  fays,  that  this  fort  of  onion  had  its  name
from  Afca/onia,  a  town  in  Judea ;  and  Father  Uardouin  thinks  they  are  what  the  French
call  efchalotes ,  ltill  retaining  fomething  of  their  former  name.

S  f  f


a  fmall


4-qS


L.  J .  M.  COLUMELLA


Book  XI.


i  final;  qnantirv  of  this  herb  to  be  had  ;  and  bv  thefe  we  preferve  the
plants  in  faf.iy  comm  odiou  fly  enough.  H  gi.rus  thinks,  that,  after
the  threlbn;:,  the  ruroep-feeds  ought  to  be  l’cattered  upon  the  grouru,
v  hhe  the  ft  raw  and  chan  are  as  vet  Ivins  in  the  threfhine-floor ;  be-
canfe  their  heads  become  the  larger,  when  the  hardnefs  of  the  ground
that  lies  under  them,  does  not  la  her  them  to  defcemd  deep  into  the
earth  :  we  have  often  tried  that  without  any  lucceis  j  therefore  v>  e
think,  that  the  turner,  the  radiah,  and  the  navew,  are  better  down
in  well -manured  ground.  And  the  Hufhandmen .  that  are  more  reli-
cicus  than  crdinarv,  do  as  vet  cbferve  the  cuitom  of  the  antients,
who,  '.vhen  they  low  them,  pray,  Tb-at  they  nay  greor  both  ~br  tbr.-
cnA  for  tbe:r  veighrsurs,  In  cold  r laces,  where  thev  are  afraid,
left  wha:  thev  low  in  Autumn  may  be  chilled  with  the  froths  in.
Voter,  thev  make  low  rails  with  reeds,  and  place  rods  acrofs  upon
them,  ana  throw  itraw  upon  the  rods,  and  fo  defend  the  feeds  from
the  hoar- fro  its.  Eat.  in  regions  expolei  to  the  Sun,  where,  after  the
rains,  thole  noxious  animals  we  call  pcbrier-iDcnriS,  bat  in  the  Greek
lanpuige  are  caiied  "  ,  fall  upon  them,  they  ought  either  to

be  gathered  by  hand,  cr  early  in  the  morning  the  italks  of  the  pot¬
herbs  ihoui'i  be  fhaken ;  for  thus,  irk  while  they  are  as  yet  ft  iff  with
the  coid  of  the  night,  thev  fall  down,  they  cannot  afterwards  creep
an  to  the  hi  she:  part.  Neverthelefs  i:  is  r.eedlels  to  do  this,  if.  as  I
raid  before,  the  feeds  be  macerated,  before  they  are  town.  with  the
of  the  herb  f ::  fnk  ;  for  the  palmer- worms  do  no  manner  of  hurt
to  them,  when  they  are  medicated  arter  this  manner.  Bat  Dernceritus,
in  that  book  winch,  in  Greek,  is  intituled  drm-a&u*  (8)  affirm^
that  thefe  felr-iame  beaits  me  killed.  ::  a  woman,  in  her  merles,  po
with  her  hair  loofe,  and  bare-footed,  thrice  round  each  bed  in  the
garden  .  and  that,  after  this,  all  the  little  worms  will  fail  down,  and


■  mg-vo-TD,  :a  n  name  from  in  nip  jrinrp  m;  beading  in

mif  c  irrnen*  pirrj  Tinea  it  c  :ee  ti¬
ll  ae  fotrs  read  s-  nsJh.ai  If  the  £id  be  the  true  *e-b--r.  'bee  ~r~

nr.  £gn  r  the  dime  2?  -zrrr;r----.-rr.  2  reoedv  n  gener^  it:. rut  inv  d:de~-
w  :  r  .  . .  :  :  .  r  ’  .  .-  t  :  - . : .  :  is  i~t~  i.  ~ -•  t'  - :  :  .  p:  ;  v

bt“eer  r+>o  things,  teirafe  of  cor  rsry  is  oemeen  -rz  :nd  Truer,  cw  ct

•'.•t  irrat  cr  poi^-r  ddi:  2  thing  mu  :i  :  of  r-eilkdnz,  cr  relieving  from-  2nd  afTidirg
ia.  t :r.  -£  r.  :’al  ciadtr  cf  len;  other  tnlng  Duse r. ms  ~'3:e  -nu  -

cf  t  there  :s  :  frir-.er.i  re  mining,  vfcich  is  rabiar.ee  :n  Fas~:~

ci.  .  3  .  Irr:  v.  rereir  *rere  noth  a®  or’  this  rdiciious  drew;  or..y-  ir  :  ordtn


there


Thus


T


Chap.  III.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  499

Thus  far  have  I  thought  it  proper  to  give  directions  concerning  the
culture  of  gardens,  and  the  offices  of  a  Bailiff :  and,  though  I  have
already  given  it  as  my  opinion,  in  the  firfl:  part  of  this  book,  that  he
fhould  be  well  inftruCted  and  learned  in  all  manner  of  bufinefs  relating
to  Hufbandry ;  neverthelefs,  becaufe  it  moft  commonly  happens,  that
our  memory  of  the  things  we  have  learned  fails  us,  and  that  it  muft
be  frequently  renewed  from  notes,  and  abftraCts,  and  memorandums
of  things,  I  have  fubjoined  the  arguments  or  contents  of  all  my  books,
that  whatever  thing  fhould  be  fought  for,  and  after  what  manner  every
thing  fhould  be  done,  might  be  eafily  found  out,  whenever  there  ffiould
be  occafion  for  it  (9).

( 9)  From  this  laft  paragraph  there  Teems  to  be  Tome  reafon  to  think,  that  Columella
defigned  to  have  finifhed  here ;  but  he  changed  his  mind,  and  probably  forgot  to  change
this  paragraph.  There  is  alfo  ground  to  think,  that  he  compofed  an  index  to  his  work;
probably  like  that  of  Pliny  and  Aulus  Gellius  :  but  it  is  now  loft,  or  torn  in  pieces  and
mangled  by  thofe  who  divided  his  books  into  chapters,  to  which  they  prefixed  arguments
taken  out  of  the  index;  and  in  many  places  not  very  judicioufly.


S  f  1  2


L.  JU-


[  5°°  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA


O  F

HUSBANDRY.

The  TWELFTH  and  Laft  BOOK.

The  Bailiff  Wife.


The  PREFACE.


T^\E  KOPHOK  the  Athenian ,  in  that  book,  Publius  Silzinur,
which  is  intituled  his  Ot commie  .1),  has  declared,  that  the
matrimonial  union  is  fo  wifely  ordered  and  deviled  by  Nature,
that  riot  only  the  moft  agreeable,  but  all'o  the  mod*  profitable  iociety
and  partnerfhip  in  life,  might  be  entered  into;  which,  not  long  ago,
Cicero  alfo  laid  :  and  left  mankind  thould,  in  procels  of  time,  utterly
perifh,  for  this  reafon  a  Man  and  a  Woman  were  ioined  together  :
moreover  that,  from  this  fame  iociety,  there  might  be  prepared  for
mortals  not  cr.ly  helps  and  rapports,  but  alfo  defences  for  their  old
age.  Yea  further,  conddering  that  food,  clotheing,  and  other  things
neceuary  for  mankind,  were  net  to  be  prepared  for  them,  as  for  wiid
beaits,  in  the  open  air,  and  in  woods  and  forefts,  but  at  home,  under
a  roof,  it  was  necefTary,  that  one  of  the  two  fhould  be  abroad,  and
in  the  open  air,  who,  by  labour  and  incuftry,  might  procure  and  pro¬
vide  the  lame ;  and  the  other  within  doers,  who  might  lay  them  up


C:ce  Tcls  Grech  ~crd,  though  ntcffv  zbed  a  an  ar;  active,  -re:  bv  Xeint-

}'■  ir..  zac  force  c-be-t-  ::  is  frecuecth  ur.d  as  a  lubfbnave,  and  iipniSe.-  cue  :~z:  has
..  arc  decent}  in  the  management  of  domes:  c  zr-.r-  C  here

a.ven  us  be  _bfa-.ee  cf  what  Xentfan  hat  fad  .per.  this  fabled-  v.  .thou:  confn:cg
hrUeh  to  bit  verv  words;  and,  at  be  tabes  notice  of  Ctzenrs  having  trarlateC  thus
-oc.-U;  it  :t  probable  he  rttte  ufe  of  bis  v.  3rd:  :  but  this  cannot  ae  affinsed  fur  certain,
face  we  have  no:  that  trandatioc.


m


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &c.  501

in  houfes,  and  watch  over  and  keep  them  fafely  j  forafmuch  as  it
was  neceffary  for  us,  either  to  pradtile  Hufbandry,  or  Navigation,  or
carry  on  fome  other  kind  of  bufinefs,  that  we  might  acquire  fome
worldly  fubflance.  But,  when  the  things  acquired  were  brought  to¬
gether  under  our  roof,  it  was  alfo  neceffary  that  there  fhould  be  an¬
other,  who  might  watch  over  and  keep  them,  after  they  were  brought
in,  and  do  all  fuch  other  buiinefs  as  ought  to  be  managed  and  done
at  home  :  for  both  the  corns,  and  the  other  things,  which  the  earth
produces  for  our  fuflenance,  flood  in  need  of  an  houfe  to  cover  them  ;
and  it  was  neceffary,  that  the  offspring  of  fheep,  and  the  increafe  and
produce  of  other  forts  of  cattle,  fhould  be  fafely  kept  in  a  clofe  and
l'ecure  place  j  as  alfo  the  other  things  that  are  ufeful  and  neceffary  for
the  fuflenance,  clotheing,  accommodation,  and  conveniency  of  man¬
kind.  Wherefore,  fince  the  things  we  have  mentioned  did  require
both  pains  and  diligence,  and  that  fuch  things  as  it  was  neceffary
fhould  be  fafely  kept,  and  taken  care  of  at  home,  were  not  with
fmall  care  acquired  abroad  ;  it  was  rightly  ordered  and  provided,  as  I
faid,  by  Nature,  that  domeflic  diligence  fhould  be  the  bufinefs  and
talk  of  the  Woman ;  and  that  of  the  Man,  all  bufinefs  tranfadled  abroad
and  without-doors.  Therefore  Nature  has  allottted  to  Man  the  fuf-
fering  of  heat  and  cold,  as  alfo  journeys,  and  the  labours  and  fatigues
both  of  peace  and  war ;  that  is,  all  the  laborious  bufinefs  of  Hufban¬
dry,  and  Military  Service  :  moreover,  to  the  Woman,  becaufe  Nature
had  made  her  inhabile  for  all  thefe  things,  fhe  committed  the  care  of
domeflic  affairs :  and,  becaufe  fire  had  afiigned  diligence,  and  the
cuflody  and  charge  of  things,  as  the  proper  bufinefs  of  this  lex  ;  there¬
fore  fhe  made  it  more  timorous  than  that  of  the  male:  for  fear  con¬
tributes  very  much  to  the  diligence  that  is  requifite  for  the  cuflody  and
prefervation  of  any  thing.

And  becaufe  it  was  neceffary,  that  they  who  feek  their  living,  with¬
out-doors,  and  in  the  open  fields,  fhould  fometimes  repel  injuries  ;
therefore  fhe  has  made  the  Man  more  courageous  and  bolder  than  the
Woman.  But  becaufe,  after  they  had  acquired  riches,  they  Hood  both
equally  in  need  of  memory  and  diligence,  fhe  has  not  given  a  leffer  (hare
of  thefe  things  to  the  Woman,  than  to  the  Man.  Moreover,  becaufe
Ample  Nature  would  not,  that  any  one  of  them  fhould  comprehend  all
things  commodious  for  them,  therefore  fire  willed,  that  the  one  fhould
ftand  in  need  of  the  other  ;  becaufe  what  is  wanting  to  the  one  is.
for  the  moll  part,  in  the  poffeffion  of  the  other.  Thefe  things  did
Xenophon ,  and  after  him  Cicero ,  who  tranfiated  him  into  Latin ,  not
unprofitably  difcourfe  of.  For  both  among  the  Greeks ,  and  afterwards

among


502  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

among  the  Romans ,  even  down  to  the  memory  of  our  fathers,  the
Matron  took  all  the  domeftic  labour  upon  herfelf ;  the  Matters  of
families,  when  they  laid  afide  all  care  of  public  affairs,  and  bufinefs
without-doors,  retiring  into  their  own  houfes,  as  into  a  place  of  reft :
for  the  higheft  reverence  and  regard  were  mixed  with  concord  and
diligence,  and  the  beautifulleft  Woman  did  burn  with  emulation  to
excel  in  diligence,  ftudying,  by  her  care,  to  inlarge  and  make  better
the  affairs  and  circumftances  of  her  Hufband.  There  was  no  feparate
or  divided  interett  feen  in  the  houfe,  nothing  that  either  the  Hufband
or  the  Wife  would  properly  call  their  own;  but  they  both  confpired
together  for  their  common  and  mutual  advantage,  that  fo  the  diligence
and  carefulnefs  of  the  Wife  might  amount  to  an  equal  proportion  of
induftry,  with  the  bufinefs  and  affairs  tranfacfted  without-doors.  There¬
fore  neither  the  Bailiff,  nor  his  Wife,  had  much  bufinefs  to  do,  when
their  Matter  and  Miftrefs  themfelves  did  daily  review,  overfee,  and
manage  their  own  affairs.  But  now-a-days,  when  moil  part  of  Wives
are  fo  diffolved  in  luxury  and  idlenefs,  that  they  do  not,  indeed,
vouchfafe  to  take  upon  themfelves  the  care  of  manufacturing  wool  for
their  own  cloaths,  but  difdain  and  fet  light  by  cloaths  made  at  home,
and  with  a  perverfe  defire,  by  fair  words,  obtain  from  their  Hufbands
others  that  are  more  coftly,  which  are  purchafed  with  great  fums  of
money,  and  coft  almoft  the  whole  yearly  income  of  their  eftates  j  it
is  no  wonder  at  all,  that  thefe  fame  Ladies  think  themfelves  mightily
burdened  with  the  care  of  rural  affairs,  and  of  the  implements  of
Hufbandry,  and  efteem  it  a  moft  fordid  and  mean  bufinefs,  to  ftay  a
few  days  in  their  country-houfes :  for  which  reafon,  fince  that  an-
tient  cuftom  of  the  Sabine  and  Roman  Mittreffes  of  families  is  not
only  intirely  grown  out  of  fafhion,  but  alfo  quite  extinCt;  the  bu-
fitlefs  and  office  of  the  Bailiff's  Wife,  as  a  Keeper  of  the  Manor-houle,
is  crept  in  as  neceffary,  that  fhe  might  perform  the  offices,  and  do  the
bufinefs  of  the  Matron  :  forafmuch  as  the  Bailiffs  alfo  have  fucceeded,
and  come  into  the  room  of  their  Matters,  who,  formerly,  by  antient
cuftom,  did  not  only  praftife  Hufbandry,  but  dwelt  in  the  country
alfo.  But,  left  I  ihould  feem  to  have  unfeafonably  taken  upon  me
the  office  of  a  Cenfor,  in  reproving  the  manners  of  our  own  times,

I  fhall  now  go  on  to  defcribe  the  offices  of  the  Bailiff  s  Wife.


CHAP.


Chap.  I.


Of  HUSBANDRY.  503

CHAP.  I.

Of  the  Care  that  the  Bailiff's  Wife  ought  to  take  of  the
Houjhold- affairs  ;  and  of  the  Precepts  flje  ought  to  obferve.

Moreover,  (that  we  may  keep  to  the  method  .we  have  laid  down,
which  we  began  in  the  preceding  book)  (i)  the  Bailiff’s  Wife
ought  to  be  a  young  Woman,  that  is,  not  too  much  of  a  Girl,  for  the
fame  reafons  we  mentioned,  when  fpeaking  of  the  age  of  a  Bailiff :
fhe  ought  alfo  to  be  of  found  health,  and  in  her  perfon  neither  ugly,
nor  yet  exceeding  beautiful  and  bandfome  :  for  a  found  and  robuft
conftitution  will  enable  her  to  fupport  both  watchings,  and  other
fatigues  and  labours  :  uglinefs  will  make  her  Mate  loath  and  abhor
her,  and  too  great  beauty  will  make  him  lazy  and  flothful.  Therefore
we  muft  take  care,  that  we  neither  have  a  Bailiff  that  is  unfettled,
and  always  wandering  abroad,  and  has  an  averfion  to  be  at  home
with  his  Wife ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  one  that  is  lazy,  and  loiters
at  home,  always  lolling  in  his  Wife’s  arms.

But  the  things  we  have  mentioned  are  not  the  only  precautions  we
muft  take  with  refpeCt  to  the  Bailiff’s  Wife  j  for,  among  the  firft
things,  it  muft  be  confidered,  whether  fhe  be  very  far  from  being  ad¬
dicted  to  wine,  delicious  fare,  fuperftitions,  fleepinefs,  and  drowfinefs,
and  keeping  company  with  men,  that  fhe  may  have  .a  concern  and
care  upon  her  mind,  about  what  fhe  ought  to  remember,  and  what
it  is  file  is  to  make  provifion  for,  and  to  take  care  of  for  the  future,
that,  for  the  moft  part,  fhe  may  obferve  and  keep  to  the  fame  way
and  manner  of  aCting,  as  we  commanded  the  Bailiff  to  obferve  :  be-
caufe  the  Hufband  and  the  Wife  ought  to  be  like  to  one  another  in
moft  things}  and  that  fhe  be  as  ready  to  avoid  what  is  evil,  as  to  hope
for  a  reward  of  fuch  things  as  file  has  done  well  :  alfo  that  fhe  ufe
her  utmoft  endeavours,  that  the  Bailiff  employ  liimfelf  as  little,  in
bufinefs  within-doors,  as  poffible  }  his  bufinefs  being  to  go  forth  with
the  fervants  early  in  the  morning,  and  to  return  with  them  fatigued,
in  the  twilight,  after  they  have  finifhed  their  work.

Neverthelefs,  by  inftruCling  the  Bailiff's  Wife,  we  by  no  means
difpenfe  with  the  Bailiff’s  care  of  houfhold-affairs,  but  we  only  alle¬
viate  his  labour,  by  giving  him  an  afliftant.  But  the  feveral  offices

(1)  He  means  the  nth,  wherein  he  treated  of  the  qualifications  of  a  Bailiff.


504.  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

and  duties,  to  be  performed  within-doors,  muft  not  be  wholly  left  to
the  Woman’s  province  j  but  they  muft  be  fo  delegated  to  her,  that,
from  time  to  time,  they  may  be  all'o  under  the  obfervation  and  eye
of  the  Bailiff :  for  thus  the  Bailiff’s  Wife  will  be  more  diligent,  if  fhe
remembers,  that  there  is  one  there,  to  whom  fhe  muft  frequently  give
an  account.

Moreover,  fhe  ought  to  be  fully  perfuaded  of  this,  that  it  is  in¬
cumbent  upon  her  to  lfay  at  home,  either  wholly,  or,  at  leaft,  for
the  moft  part ;  both  that  fhe  may  fend  fuch  fervants  out  of  doors,  as
have  bufinefs  to  do  in  the  fields ;  and  to  keep  fuch  of  them  within
the  walls,  as  have  any  thing  to  do  in  the  manor-houfe ;  and  to  ob-
ferve,  that  they  do  not  negleft  their  bufinefs,  by  fitting  long  ftill,  and
doing  nothing ;  and  carefully  to  examine  and  infpedt  fuch  things  as
are  brought  into  the  houfe,  and  fee  if  there  be  no  part  of  them  im-
bezzled j  and  fo,  after  they  are  examined  and  found  found  and  in¬
tire,  to  receive  them  into  her  cuftody  3  then  to  fet  apart  fuch  things
as  are  defigned  for  confumption  j  and  to  keep  carefully  fuch  things
as  can  be  laved,  and  that  remain  over  and  above  the  daily  expence,
that  fo  the  provifion  of  the  whole  year  may  not  be  fpent  in  one
month.

Moreover,  if  any  one  of  the  family  begin  to  be  ii*  a  bad  ftate  of
health,  fhe  muft  fee,  that  he  be  well  tended,  and  ferved  with  every
thing  convenient  for  him,  as  much  as  is  poflible  :  for  from  this  kind
of  care  fpring  benevolence  and  obfequioufnefs.  As  alfo  they,  who
have  recovered  their  health,  ftudy  to  ferve  more  faithfully  than  be¬
fore,  when  there  is  due  care  taken  of  them  when  they  are  fick.


CHAP.  II.

After  what  Ma?mer  Jhz  ought  to  manage  the  Provijions ,  or

the  Store-houfes.

AFTER  all  this,  befides  thefe  things,  fhe  ought  to  remember
what  things  are  brought  into  the  houfe,  that  they  be  laid  up  in
proper  and  wholfome  places,  that  they  may  continue  there  without
receiving  any  damage  :  for  there  is  nothing  that  we  ought  to  be  more
careful  of,  than  to  prepare  places  where  every  thing  may  be  laid  up
fafely,  that  it  may  be  brought  out,  and  produced  again,  when  there  is
occafion  for  it.  What  fort  of  places  thefe  ought  to  be,  we  have

already


Ciiap.  II.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  505

already  told  you,  both  in  the  fir  ft  book,  when  we  gave  a  plan  and
defcription  of  a  manor-houfe  ;  and  in  the  eleventh,  when  we  dil-
courfed  of  the  office  of  a  Bailiff :  but,  even  at  this  time,  we  fhall
not  think  it  any  great  trouble,  briefly  to  demonftrate  and  explain
them.

The  higheft  room  of  the  houfe  requires  the  veffels  and  the  cloaths
of  the  greateft  value :  moreover,  a  ftore-houfe  that  is  dry,  and  free
from  moifture,  is  reckoned  proper  for  corn  ;  that  part  of  the  houfe
which  is  cold,  is  molt  commodious  for  keeping  wine  with  fafety  :
that  part  which  is  well  lighted,  demands  the  houfhold-furniture  that
is  brittle,  and  fuch  forts  of  work  to  be  done  therein,  as  ftand  in  need
of  much  light.

Therefore  having  prepared  the  receptacles,  fhe  mu  ft  lay  up  and  dif-
pofe  every  thing  in  its  place,  according  to  its  kind,  and  alfo  fome
things  particularly  by  themlelves,  that  fo  fhe  may  the  more  eafily  lay
her  hand  upon  them,  when  there  (hall  be  occafion  to  ufe  them  :  for
it  is  an  old  proverb.  That  it  is  the  moft  certain  poverty,  when  you
ftand  in  need  of  any  thing,  not  to  be  able  to  make  ufe  of  it,  becaufe
you  know  not  the  place  where  the  thing,  which  you  want,  lies  care-
lefsly  thrown  by.  Therefore,  in  the  management  of  family-affairs,
negligence  is  the  occafion  of  more  labour  than  diligence.'

For  who  is  he  that  doubts,  that  there  is  nothing  more  beautiful,  in
every  ftate  and  condition  of  life,  than  order  and  regularity  ?  which
we  have  frequent  occafion  to  obferve,  and  take  notice  of,  even  in  lu¬
dicrous  fhews :  for,  when  the  chorus  of  the  Singers  does  not  agree  in
certain  meafures  and  cadences,  nor  keep  time  and  proportion  with  the
Mafter  that  beats  the  time,  and  directs  them,  they  feem  to  them  that
hear  them,  to  fing  fomething  that  is  diffonant,  harfh,  confufed,  and
diforderly  :  but  when,  as  it  were,  with  one  confent,  they  all  confpire
and  agree  in  certain  numbers  and  meafures,  and  fo  form  a  concert ;
from  fuch  an  agreement  of  voices  there  is  formed  a  certain  found,
which  is  not  only  pleafant  and  delightful  to  the  Singers  themfelves,
but  alfo  the  fpe&ators  and  hearers  are  charmed  and  ravifhed  with  the
greateft  pleafure  and  delight.

In  an  army  alfo,  neither  the  General,  nor  the  Soldier,  can  be  able
to  execute  any  thing  whatfoever,  without  order,  and  a  right  difpo-
fition  of  things ;  feeing  the  armed  man  puts  the  unarmed  into  dis¬
order ;  the  horfeman  the  foot-foldier ;  and  the  waggons  and  carriages
the  cavalry;  if  they  be  mixed  and  jumbled  together.  This  fame  me¬
thod,  of  having  every  thing  in  readinefs  beforehand,  and  of  obferving
a  due  order  in  every  thing,  is  of  great  ufe  and  advantage  on  fhip-

T  t  t  board


5o6  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

board  alfo  :  for  when  a  form  comes  on,  and  the  fhip  is  in  right  order
as  it  (hould  be,  the  tackling,  and  every  other  thing  belonging  to  it,
being  placed  in  its  proper  order,  and  in  its  own  place,  the  Boatfwain,
or  any  other  perfon  whofe  bufineis  it  is,  brings  it  out  without  being
in  a  confternation,  when  the  Mailer  of  the  fhip  calls  for  it.

Now  if  thefe  things  are  of  fo  great  importance,  either  in  theatres,
or  in  armies,  or  even  in  fhips,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  the  bufinefs  of
the  Bailiff's  Wife  requires  order,  and  a  due  difpofition  of  fuch  things
as  fhe  lays  up  :  for  every  particular  thing  is  the  more  eafily  viewed
and  examined,  when  it  is  affigned  to  its  own  place ;  and,  if  any  thing
happens  to  be  out  of  its  place,  the  empty  place  itfelf  puts  her  in  mind
to  make  inquiry  after  what  is  wanting  :  and  if  there  be  any  thing  that
fhould  be  taken  a  particular  care  of,  or  adj ufted,  and  make  fit  for  ufe,
it  is  the  more  eafily  taken  notice  of,  when  it  is  reviewed  and  num¬
bered  in  its  own  rank  or  order  :  concerning  all  which  M.  Cicero ,  fol¬
lowing  the  authority  of  Xenophon  in  his  Oeconomic ,  thus  introduces
Ifchomachus  narrating  thefe  things  to  Socrates ,  who  queftioned  with
him  concerning  the  fame.


CHAR  III.

Of  the  Dijlribution  of  the  Implements  of  Hufbandry ,  and

the  Houf  hold-  furniture.

AFTER  we  had  prepared  proper  places,  we  began  to  diftribute
the  tools,  implements  of  Hufbandry,  Houfhold-furniture,  and
every  thing  belonging  to  a  family  :  and,  firfl  of  all,  we  placed  by  them-
felves  all  thofe  things  we  are  wont  to  make  ufe  of  in  celebrating
divine  fervice  ;  afterwards  the  Womens  apparel, "which  is  provided  for
holy-days,  then  the  Mens  apparel ;  alfo  their  drefs  for  folemn  days ;
as  alfo  fhoes  fuitable  for  both  fexes :  then  alfo  arms,  darts,  and  arrows
were  laid  apart  by  themfelves ;  and,  in  another  place,  all  the  tools
they  make  ufe  of  for  manufacturing  of  wool.

After  which  things  were  placed  the  vefifels  they  are  wont  to  make
ufe  of  for  dreffing  of  victuals  ;  then  were  fet  in  view  the  things  which
belonged  to  wafhing  and  bathing,  and  what  things  were  neceflary  for
elegant  drefs  and  apparel,  and  what  belonged  to  our  daily  table,  and
to  feafting  and  banquetting :  afterwards,  out  of  fuch  things  as  we  ufe
daily,  we  fet  apart  what  might  fuffice  for  one  month  j  and  what

might  -


Chap.  III.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  507

might  fuffice  for  the  whole  year  alfo  we  divided  into  two  parts  j  for
thus  we  cannot  be  fo  eafily  deceived  as  to  the  time  they  will  laft,  and
when  they  will  be  at  an  end.

After  we  had  fet  all  thefe  things  by  themfelves,  then  we  difpofed
and  placed  them  in  due  order,  every  thing  in  its  own  place  :
then  fuch  things  as  the  fervants  ufe  daily,  and  fuch  as  belong  to  the
manufacturing  of  wool,  cooking,  and  drefting  of  victuals,  thefe  very
things  we  delivered  to  the  perfon  who  is  wont  to  ufe  them,  and  pointed
out  the  places  where  they  fhould  put  them,  and  gave  them  charge  to
keep  them  fafely.

But  fuch  things  as  we  make  ufe  of  upon  holy-days,  and  when
Grangers  come  to  our  houfe,  and  upon  other  certain  occahons,  which
rarely  happen ;  thefe  we  delivered  to  the  Larderer,  and  pointed  out
a  particular  place  for  every  one  of  them ;  and  we  counted  over  to
every  one  the  things  they  were  to  take  the  charge  of 3  and,  after  we
had  counted  them  over,  we  fet  them  down  in  writing  ourfelves 3  and
admonifoed  him,  that  whatever  thing  there  might  be  occalion  to  ufe,
he  fhould  know  from  what  place  he  fhould  give  it,  and  remember,
and  mark  down,  what,  and  when,  and  to  whom  he  had  given  it 3
and  that  he  foould  put  every  thing  again  in  its  own  place,  when  he
received  it  back  again.

Thefe  precepts  of  induftry  and  diligence  the  antients  have  delivered
to  us  in  the  perfon  of  Ifchomachus  3  and  we  now  explain  and  point  them
out  to  the  Bailiff’s  Wife,  who  is  employed  as  an  Houfekeeper.  Nor
yet  muft  her  care  be  confined  to  this  one  thing,  to  lock  up,  and  keep
fafely,  fuch  things  as  are  brought  into  the  houfe,  and  which  foe  foall
receive  into  her  cuftody  3  but  let  her  review  and  examine  them
from  time  to  time,  left  either  the  houfhold-furniture,  or  the  garments
that  are  laid  up  in  the  wardrobe,  receive  damage,  and  be  fpoiled,  or
grow  mouldy  with  moifture,  and  lying-by ;  or  the  fruits  of  the  earth,
or  any  tools  and  utenfils  be  fpoiled  and  rot  through  her  neglect  and
lazinefs.

But  in  rainy  days,  or  in  cold  and  frofty  weather,  when  a  Woman
cannot  go  about  any  rural  work  in  the  open  air,  in  order  that  foe
may  be  put  to  manufacturing  of  wool,  let  the  wool  be  prepared  and
combed  beforehand,  that  foe  (the  Bailiff’s  Wife)  may  the  more  eafily
go  through  with,  and  exaCt  the  ufual  tafk  of  fpinning  and  weaving  ;
for  it  will  do  no  hurt,  if  garments  fit  for  fervants  be  made  at  home,
for  herfelf,  the  Factor  or  Agent,  and  others  in  a  more  honourable
ftation  in  the  family,  that  the  Matter  of  the  family’s  accounts  may  be
lefs  burdened,  and  his  charges  leffened.

Ttt  2


Moreover,


508  L.  j.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

Moreover,  this  alfo  fhe  muft  conftantly  watch  ovef,  and  be  parti¬
cularly  careful  of,  that,  when  the  fervants  are  already  gone  forth  out
of  the  manor-houfe,  fhe  fearch  and  look  for  thofe  whole  bufinefs  it
is  to  be  abroad,  and  employed  in  works  of  Hufbandry  without-doors  :
and,  if  any  one  of  them,  boggling  and  fauntering  within-doors,  (as
it  happens)  has  efcaped  the  care  of  her  Mate,  that  fhe  inquire  after
the  caufe  of  his  idlenefs,  and  examine  and  find  out  whether  he  has
flayed  behind,  and  has  been  hindered  by  indifpofition,  and  want  of
health,  or  has  only  fkulked  through  idlenefs  and  fioth  ;  and,  if  fhe
lhall  find  him  even  counterfeiting  feeblenefs,  and  want  of  ftrength,.
let  her  condudt  him,  without  any  further  delay,  into  the  infirmary;
for  it  is  better,  that  a  fervant,  who  is  fatigued  with  his  work,  fhould
reft  a  day  or  two,  under  cuftody,  than  contract  a  real  illnefs  by  too
much  labour.

In  fine,  fhe  muft  remain  in  one  place  as  little  as  poffible,  for  her’s
is  not  a  fedentary  bufinefs;  but  fhe  ought  fometimes  to  come  to  the
web,  and  give  inftrudtion,  if  there  be  any  thing  fire  knows  better
than  they  ;  if  not,  to  learn  from  him  who  may  underftand  and  know
more  than  fhe  does ;  at  other  times  fhe  ought  to  come  and  look  over
them  that  are  cooking  and  drefling  the  victuals  for  the  family  :  as  alfo
to  take  care,  that  the  kitchen,  and  the  ox-ftalls,  as  alfo  the  mangers,-,
be  made  clean :  alfo  to  open  the  infirmaries  from  time  to  time,  even
fuppofe  they  have  no  fick  people  in  them,  and  to  clear  and  free  them'
from  all  manner  of  dirt  and  naftinefs,  that,  when  neceflity  fhall  re¬
quire  it,  they  may  be  configned  in  good  order,  and  in  a  clean,  neat,
and  wholfome  condition,  to  fuch  as  are  fick  and  languifhing.

Alfo  fhe  ought  to  come  unawares  upon  thofe  who  have  the  over¬
fight,  and  charge,  and  giving  out  of  the  provifions,  and  are  Keepers
of  the  ftores,  when  they  are  weighing  or  meafuring  any  thing :  as
alfo  to  be  prefent  with  the  Shepherds,  when  they  are  milking  the  ewes
in  the  folds,  or  putting  the  lambs,  or  the  young  of  other  cattle,  to
the  dug  :  fine  ought  alfo  to  be  prefent  at  the  fheep-fbeering,  and  ga¬
ther  up  the  fleeces  carefully,  and  count  the  fleeces,  and  compare  them
with  the  number  of  the  fheep :  alfo  to  infift,  and  be  very  prefling,
with  them  that  have  the  care  of  the  porch,  that  they  fet  out  and  air
the  houfhold-furniture ;  and  that  the  irons  and  the  iron-tools  be
fcoured  and  made  bright,  and  freed  from  raft  ;  and  that  the  reft
of  the  things,  if  they  want  mending,  be  delivered  out  to  the  proper
Workmen  to  be  mended,  and  make  fit  for  ufe.

Laftly,  after  all  thefe  things  are  put  into  due  order,  I  do  not  think.,
that  this  diftribution  will  be  of  any  advantage,  unlefs,  as  I  have  faid,

the


Chap.  IV.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  509

the  Bailiff  very  frequently,  and  even  the  Mafter  and  the  Miftrefs  of
the  family,  remark  and  take  notice,  how  the  eftablifhed  order  and
method  is  obferved.  Which  thing  alfo  has  been  conftantly  obferved
in  cities,  where  right  policy  and  good  manners  have  been  eftablifhed,
whofe  chief  and  principal  men  did  not  think  it  enough  to  have  good
laws,  unlefs  they  created  the  moft  diligent  citizens  Guardians  of  the
fame,  which  the  Greeks  call  yojKopuAaxas  (Guardians  of  the  laws)  :  their
office  was  to  beftow  praifes  and  commendations,  as  alfo  honours,  upon
thofe  who  obeyed  the  laws,  but  to  muldt  and  punifh  thofe  who  were
difobedient:  which  is  now,  indeed,  the  bufinefs  of  the  Magiftrates,
who,  by  conftant  adminiftration  of  juftice,  preferve  and  maintain  the
power  of  the  laws.  But  let  it  fuffice  to  have  delivered  thefe  things
in  general,  as  abfolutely  neceffary  to  the  right  management  and  govern¬
ment  of  a  family,.


G  H  A  P.  IV.

What  Kinds  of  Veffels  Jhe  ought  to  prepare  for  falting  and
picklmg  Provifions ,  and  for  Conferves ..

NOW  we  fhall  give  diredf ions  about  the  other  things  which  were
omitted  in  the  former  book,  becaufe  we  referved  them  for
the  offices  of  the  Bailiff’s  Wife;  and,  that  fome  order  may.  be  pre-
ferved,  we  fhall  begin  with  the  fpring  of  the  year,  becaule  both  the
early  and  the  trimeftrian  fowings  being  finifhed,  then  there  happen
vacant  times  for  executing  thofe  things  we  fhall  hereafter  teach.

The  hiftorical  records  of  former  times  inform  us,  that  the  Car -
thaginian  zn&  Greek  authors,  as  alfo  the  Roman ,  were  not  wanting  in-
their  care  of  lmall  things:  for  both  Mago  the  Carthaginian  (i),  and
Hamilcar {2),  which  Mnafias  and  Paxamus ,  no  obfcure  authors  of

(1)  Mago  the  Carthaginian  has  been  already  mentioned,  lib.  i.  c.  1.  as  the  Father  of.
Husbandry;  and,  no  doubt,  the  author  mentions  him  again,  in  this  place,  to  intimate
that,  although  he  was  fo  eminent  a  perfon,  and  whofe  buftnefs,  as  a  ruftic  writer,  was
chiefly  to  teach  the  art  of  Agriculture ;  yet  he  did  not  difdain  to  defcend  even  to  the.
fimileft  parts  of  the  oeconomy  of  a  family,

(2)  It  is  not  certain  who  this  Hamilcar  was;  probably  he  was  the  Father  of  Hannibal ,
but  neither  Varro  nor  Pliny  mention  him  as  a  ruftic  writer.  Mnajias  is  mentioned  by
Varro  and  P/m/,  as  alfo  by  Athenaus  :  he  was  of  Patara,  a  city  of  Lycia  mLcjJer  Afia,
Paxamus  is  not  mentioned  neither  by  Varro,  nor  Pliny,  nor  M.  Ambivius  nor  Manas
Licinius  ;  but  Cains  Matins  is  mentioned  by  Tacitus:  he  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor
Augujlus ,  whofe  favourite  he  feems  to  have  been.


the


5io  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

the  Greek  nation,  feem  to  have  followed  ;  as  alfo  fome  of  our  own
country,  after  they  had  reft  from  wars,  did  not  think  it  below  them
to  contribute,  as  it  were,  a  fort  of  tribute  for  the  fuftenance  of  man-  *
kind ;  as  M.  Ambivius  and  Mcenas  Licinius ,  as  alfo  C.  Matins,  whofe
ftudy  it  was,  by  their  precepts,  to  inftrudt  and  form  the  diligence  of
a  Baker,  and  of  a  Cook,  and  alfo  of  a  Butler,  or  Clerk  of  the
Kitchen.

But  all  thefe  authors  were  of  the  mind,  that  it  was  neceffary,  that
he,  who  undertakes  any  of  thefe  offices,  fhould  be  chafte  and  conti¬
nent,  becaufe  the  whole  confifted  in  this,  that  neither  cups,  nor
victuals,  ffiou'd  be  handled,  but  by  one  under  age ;  or,  at  leaf!,  one
that  moft  carefully  refrained  from  Venereal  affairs,  which  if  either
Man  or  Woman  has  meddled  with,  they  ought  to  be  waffied  and
cleanfed,  either  in  a  river,  or  in  conftantly  running  water,  before  ever
they  touch  the  provifions  *,  for  which  reafon  the  fervice  of  a  boy,  or  a
virgin  is  neceffary  for  thefe  things,  by  whom  fuch  things,  as  there
fhall  be  occafion  to  ufe,  may  be  brought  out.

After  this  precept,  they  order  a  place,  and  proper  veffels,  for  pow¬
dered  provifions,  pickles,  preferved  fruit,  &c.  to  be  prepared ;  and,
that  the  place  ought  not  to  be  expofed  to  the  Sun,  but  the  coldeft  and
the  dried;  that  can  poffibly  be  had,  left  the  provifions  contract  mouldi-
nefs  by  the  moifture.  But  thefe  veftels  muft  be  either  of  potters-
earth,  or  of  glafs,  rather  more  in  number  than  large  j  and  fome  of
them  well  pitched;  neverthelefs,  others  of  them  muft  be  pure  with¬
out  pitch.

Thefe  veffels  muft  be  made  on  purpofe,  with  a  wide  mouth,  and
equal  to  the  very  bottom,  not  ffiaped  in  the  manner  of  a  wine-veffel,
that  fo,  when  the  pickles  are  taken  out  for  ufe,  whatever  remains
may  be  preffed  down  equally  to  the  bottom,  with  a  weight ;  for  this
keeps  the  provifions  from  fpoiling,  when  they  do  not  fwim  upon,  but
are  always  funk  under  the  brine,  which  can  fcarcely  be  done  in  the
belly  of  a  wine-veffel,  becaufe  of  the  inequality  of  its  ftiape  :  it  is
very  neceffary  for  this  to  make  ufe  of  vinegar,  and  of  very  ftrong
brine  j  both  which  are  made  after  this  manner.


CHAP.


Chap. VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


CHAP.  V.


How  Vinegar  may  be  made  of  flat  Wine.


OR  forty-eight  fextarii  of  vapid  wine,  that  it  may  become  acid,


bruife  a  pound  of  leaven,  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of  dry  figs,  a


J’extarius  of  fait ;  and,  after  they  are  bruifed  with  a  quarter  of  a  pound
of  honey,  dilute  them  with  vinegar,  and  fo  put  them  to  the  forefaid
quantity  :  fome  add  to  the  fame  quantity  four  J'extarii  of  parched
barley,  and  forty  burning  walnuts,  and  a  pound  and  an  half  of  green
mint :  fome  heat  mafles  of  iron  in  the  fire,  till  they  have  the  appear¬
ance  of  fire  itfelf,  and  put  them  into  the  fame  quantity  of  wine  :
fome  alfo,  after  they  have  taken  out  the  kernels  of  five  or  fix  pine¬
apples,  fet  the  empty  pineapples  themfelves  on  fire,  and  put  them
down  burning  into  the  wine  mothers  do  the  fame  thing  with  burning
pine-fir- tree-nuts.


CHAP.  VI.


How  ftrong  Brine  or  Pickle  may  be  made.

MAKE  ftrong  brine  after  this  manner:  In  that  part  of  the
manor-houfe  which  receives  moft  of  the  Sun,  place  a  barrel
or  vale  with  a  very  wide  mouth ;  fill  this  veftel  with  rain-water,  for
this  is  the  fitted;  water  for  this  bufinefs ;  or,  if  you  have  no  rain¬
water,  be  fure  that  it  be  fpring-water  of  the  fweeteft  tafte :  then  into
this  water  put  a  rufb-  or  Spanijh  broom-bafket,  which  muft  be  filled
with  white  fait,  that  the  brine  may  be  the  whiter :  when  you  fhall
fee,  that  the  fait  continues  to  melt  for  fome  days,  you  fhall  thereby
underftand,  that  the  brine  is  not  as  yet  ripe.

Therefore  you  (hall  ftill  put  in  more  fait  from  time  to  time,  till  it
remain  in  the  bafket  intire,  without  melting,  which  when  you  fhall
obferve,  you  fhall  know,  that  the  brine  is  come  to  its  maturity  :  and,
if  you  have  a  mind  to  make  other  brine  in  the  fame  veftel,  you  fhall
pour  this  into  vefiels  that  are  well  pitched,  and  keep  it  covered  in  the
Sun ;  for  the  ftrength  of  the  Sun  takes  away  all  muftinefs,  and  gives
it  a  fweet  fmell.  There  is  another  way  to  try  if  brine  be  ripe  for.


1


when


512  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

when  you  fhall  have  put  fweet  cheefe  into  it,  if  it  fink  down  to  the
bottom,  you  (hall  know,  that  it  is  not  as  yet  ripe  •  if  it  fwim  in  it,
you  fhall  know,  that  it  is  ripe.


CHAP.  VII.

JVhat  Herbs  may  be  pickled  throughout  the  four  Seafons  of
the  Tear ,  and  after  what  Manner .

r*J  ^HESE  things  being  prepared,  about  the  vernal  Equinox  herbs
muft  be  gathered,  and  laid  up  for  ufe,  viz.  fprouts,  colewort
or  cabbage,  capers,  the  frnall  tender  ftalks  of  parfley,  rue,  aliflan-
der  with  its  ftalk,  before  it  comes  out  of  its  hofe :  alfo  the  tender
tops  of  the  ftalks  of  fennel-giant  before  they  begin  to  fpread,  and  the
tendered  flower  of  the  wild  and  garden  parfnep,  with  its  frnall  ftalks ;
the  flower  of  the  white  bryony,  before  it  begins  to  fpread  ;  and  of
afparagus,  and  butchers-broom,  and  buckthorn,  and  of  the  common
great  houfleek,  penny-royal,  and  cat-mint,  and  of  wild  colewort,  and
iamphire,  and  its  frnall  ftalk,  which  is  called  kite’s-footj  as  alfo  the
frnall  tender  ftalk  of  fennel.

All  thefe  are  very  fafely  preferved  with  one  pickling,  that  is,  if  you
mix  two  parts  of  vinegar,  and  a  third  part  of  ftrong  brine:  but  the
white  bryony,  the  butchers-broom,  and  buckthorn,  and  afparagus,
wild  colewort,  and  the  parfnep,  and  the  cat-mint,  and  famphire  are
put  into  trays,  according  to  their  kinds ;  and,  when  they  are  fprinkled
with  fait,  they  are  placed  for  two  days  in  the  fhade,  till  they  be  all
in  a  fweat :  then,  if  they  have  thrown  out  as  much  moifture,  as  that
they  may  be  waflied  with  their  own  juice,  it  is  well ;  if  not,  they  pour
ftrong  brine  upon  them,  and  wafh  them  therein,  and  fqueeze  the
liquor  out  of  them  by  a  weight  laid  upon  them  ;  then  each  of  them
is  put  up  into  its  own  veflel,  and  the  liquor,  as  I  faid  above,  which  is
mixed  with  two  parts  vinegar,  and  one  of  ftrong  brine,  is  poured
upon  them,  and  a  fluffing  of  dry  fennel,  which  was  gathered  laft  year
during  the  vintage,  is  put  upon  them ;  fo  that  it  mayprefs  down  the
•herbs,  and  that  the  liquor  may  come  up  to  the  brim  of  the  jar.

When  you  gather  aliflander,  fennel-giant,  and  fennel,  expofe
them  within-doors  till  they  grow  yellow  j  then  pull  the  leaves,  and  all
the  bark,  off  the  ftalks :  if  the  cabbages  or  colliflowers  be  thicker  than
the  thumb,  cut  them  with  a  reed,  and  divide  them  into  two  parts :

alfo


Chap.  VIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  513

alfo  the  flowers  themfelves  muft  be  laid  open  and  divided,  that  they
may  not  be  too  large,  and  fo  put  up  into  veflels ;  then  the  liquor
above-mentioned  muft  be  poured  upon  them,  and  a  few  fmall  roots
of  lafer,  which  the  Greeks  call  o-iKpov,  added  to  them,  and  fo
covered  with  a  flufling  of  dry  fennel,  that  the  liquor  may  come  up
over  them.  y

Sprouts,  cabbage  or  colliflowers,  caper- fhrub,  kite’s-foot,  penny¬
royal,  the  common  great  houfleek,  muft  be  dried  feveral  days  under
the  roof,  till  they  grow  yellow,  and  then  it  is  proper  they  ftiould  be
pickled  in  the  fame  manner  as  you  did  the  fennel-giant,  rue,  favory,
and  wild  marjoram.  There  are  fome  who  pickle  rue  with  ftrong
brine  only,  without  vinegar ;  then  when  they  have  occafton  to  ufe  it,
they  wafh  it  with  water,  or  even  with  wine;  and,  after  they  have
poured  oil  upon  it,  make  ufe  of  it.  With  this  pickling  green  garden
lavory,  as  alfo  green  wild  marjoram,  may  be  commodioufly  preferved.


CHAP.  VIII.

How  Oxygal ,  or  four  Milk ,  may  be  made.

MAKE  oxygal,  or  four  milk,  after  this  manner;  Take  anew
pot,  and  bore  a  hole  in  it,  hard  by  the  bottom ;  then  with  a
fprig  flop  up  the  hole  you  have  made,  and  fill  the  veflfel  with  the
freflieft  ewe-milk,  and  to  it  add  fmall  bundles  of  green  feafoning
herbs,  origany,  mint,  onion,  coriander :  put  thefe  herbs  fo  far  down
into  the  milk,  that  the  firings,  wherewith  they  are  tied,  may  appear  on
the  outfide.

After  the  fifth  day,  take  out  the  fprig  wherewith  you  flopped  the
hole,  and  let  out  the  whey  ;  then,  when  the  milk  begins  to  drop  out,
flop  up  the  hole  with  the  fame  fprig ;  and,  after  three  days  intermit-
fion,  let  out  the  whey  in  the  fame  manner  as  has  been  already  faid;
and  take  out  the  fmall  bundles  of  feafoning  herbs,  and  throw  them
away  ;  then  rub  a  little  dry  thyme,  and  dry  wild  marjoram,  upon  the
milk ;  and  add  to  it  as  much  of  a  festive  leek,  cut  very  fmall,  as  you  {hall
think  fit,  and  mix  them  together :  after  having  flayed  two  days,  let
out  the  whey  again,  and  flop  up  the  hole,  and  put  as  much  brayed
fait  to  it  as  fhall  be  fuflicient,  and  mix  them  ;  then,  having  put  a  cover
upon  it,  and  daubed  it,  you  {hall  not  open  the  pot,  till  you  {hall  have
occafion  to  ufe  it.


Uu  u


There


5i4  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XI

There  are  Tome,  who,  after  they  have  gathered  garden  or  even  wild
dittander,  or  pepperwort,  dry  it  in  the  fhade ;  then,  having  thrown
away  the  (talk,  they  deep  the  leaves  a  day  and  a  night  in  ftrong  brine;
and,  after  they  have  fqueezed  the  liquor  out  of  them,  they  mix  them
with  the  milk  without  the  feafoning  herbs,  and  add  as  much  fait  to
it  as  they  think  enough  :  then  they  do  the  other  things  we  directed
above.  Some  mix  young  frefh  leaves  of  dittander  with  the  fweet  milk
in  the  pot,  and,  after  the  third  day,  let  out  the  whey  in  the  manner
we  have  directed  :  then  they  find  fome  green  favory,  as  alfo  the  dry
feeds  of  coriander,  dill,  thyme,  and  parfley;  and  bray  them  well  into
one  mafs,  and  add  them  to  it,  and  mingle  the  beft-made  and  well-
fifted  fait  throughly  with  it.  The  other  things  above-mentioned  they
do  after  the  fame  manner.


CHAP.  IX.

Of  Pickling  of  Lettuce.

HAV I N  G  cleanfed  the  ftalks  of  the  lettuce  from  the  lower  part,
as  far  as  where  the  leaves  fhall  feem  to  be  tender,  you  muft
fait  them  in  a  tray,  and  let  them  alone  a  day  and  a  night,  till  they
have  thrown  out  their  brine ;  then  wafh  them,  and  take  them  out  of
the  brine;  and,  after  they  are  fqueezed,  fpread  them  upon  hurdles,  till
they  grow  dry  ;  then  fpread  dry  dill  and  fennel  under  them,  and  cut
a  little  rue  and  leek,  and  fo  mix  them  together :  then,  when  the  little
ftalks  are  dried,  you  muft  put  them  up  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  green
kidney-beans  in  tire  may  be  placed  among  them,  the  which  you  muft
fteep  a  day  and  a  night  before  in  ftrong  brine  ;  and,  after  they  are  dried
in  the  like  manner,  they  muft  be  put  up  with  the  bundles  of  lettuce,
and  a  liquor  made  of  two  parts  of  vinegar,  and  one  of  ftrong  brine
poured  upon  them  ;  then  they  muft  be  fo  preffed  down  with  a  fluffing
of  dry  fennel,  that  the  liquor  may  fwim  above  them.

That  this  may  be  done  effedually,  he  that  has  the  direction  and
management  of  this  affair,  ought  frequently  to  pour  liquor  upon  them,
and  not  fuffer  the  pickles  to  grow  dry,  but  wipe  the  outfide  of  the
veliels  with  a  clean  f'ponge,  and  cool  them  with  the  frefheft  fpring-
water.  After  the  lame  manner  you  muft  pickle  endive,  and  the  tops
of  the  blackberry-bufh,  as  you  do  lettuce  ;  as  alfo  of  thvme,  and
favory,  and  wild  marjoram,  and  the  fprouts  of  wild  radifhes  :  but
thefe  things  above-mentioned  are  made  up  and  pickled  in  the  Spring.

CHAP.


Chap.  X.


Of  HUSBANDRY.  5is

CHAP.  X.

Of  preferving  of  Onions ,  Pears ,  and  Apples ,  and  all  Fruits

of  the  Apple-kind.

NOW  we  {hall  give  directions  concerning  fuch  things  as  ought  to
be  gathered  and  laid  up  in  Summer,  about  the  time  of  harveft,
and  alfo  after  the  harveft  is  over :  Choofe  the  Afcalonian  or  Pompeian
onion,  or  the  Angle  Marjian  alfo,  which  Ruftics  call  nnio ;  and  it  is
that  which  has  not  put  forth  any  fprouts  or  fhoots,  and  has  not  had
any  offspring  or  young  ones  adhering  to  it  (i).

Dry  this  firft  in  the  Sun,  and  then,  having  cooled  it  in  the  {hade,
put  it  up  in  a  jar,  having  fpread  thyme,  or  favory,  or  wild  marjoram,
under  it  j  and,  having  poured  a  liquor  upon  it,  confiding  of  three  parts
vinegar,  and  one  of  ftrong  brine,  put  a  fmall  bundle  of  favory  or  wild
marjoram  upon  it,  fo  that  the  onion  may  be  deprefted ;  and  when  it
has  drunk  up  the  liquor,  let  the  veflel  be  filled  up  again  with  the  like
mixture.  At  the  fame  time  the  fruit  of  the  cornel-tree  or  cornel-
berries,  and  onyx-coloured  plums,  and  wild  plums,  bullaces  or
floes  j  as  alfo  the  feveral  kinds  of  pears  and  apples,  are  preferved.

The  fruit  of  the  cornel-tree,  or  cornel- berries,  which  we  may  ufe
inftead  of  olives,  alfo  wild  plumbs,  or  bullaces,  or  floes,  and  onyx-
coloured  plumbs,  muft  be  gathered  while  they  are  yet  firm  and  folid,
and  not  when  they  are  very  ripe,  nor  yet  muft  they  be  too  green  ;
then  they  muft  be  dried  one  day  in  the  fhade ;  then  let  vinegar,  and
muft  boiled  into  one  half  or  one  third  of  the  firft  quantity,  be  mixed
together  in  equal  quantities,  and  poured  upon  them.  But  you  muft
add  fome  fait  to  them,  left  maggots,  or  any  other  animals,  breed  in
them :  but  they  will  keep  better,  if  two  parts  of  fweet  muft,  boiled
into  one  half  of  the  firft  quantity,  be  mixed  with  one  part  vinegar.

After  you  have  gathered  the  Dolabellian ,  the  Crujluminian ,  the
royal  and  Venus  pears,  the  warden  pears,  the  Ncevian ,  the  brick-
coloured  pears,  the  huge  fair  pear,  the  laurel  and  tnufk  pears,  and  the
purple  plums,  before  they  are  throughly  ripe,  neverthelefs  not  very

(i)  It  has  been  already  obferved,  that  the  adfcalonian  onion  had  its  name  from  j4fca-
lonia,  a  city  in  Judea ,  and  is,  as  fome  think,  what  we  call  Jljalot ,  and  the  Trench  efcha-
lotes  The  Pompeian  has  i:s  name  from  Pompeii,  a  town  in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,
mentioned  in  the  tenth  bock.  The  Marjian  was  originally  from  the  Marfi,  a  people
formerly  inhabiting  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples  •  the  author  hitnfdf  mentions  its
diltinguiftiing  character.


U  U  U  2


green.


516  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

green,  examine  them  carefully,  and  fee  that  they  be  found,  without
any  blemifh,  or  little  worms  in  them  ;  then  put  them  up  in  a  pitched
earthen  jar,  and  fill  it  either  with  railm  wine,  or  with  muft  boiled  in
to  a  third  of  the  fird  quantity,  fo  that  all  the  apples  may  be  below
the  liquor  j  and,  after  you  have  put  the  cover  upon  it,  plader  it.

I  thought  it  nccedary  to  give  you  this  direction  upon  the  whole,
that  there  is  no  kind  of  apple,  which  may  not  be  preferved  in  honey  :
therefore,  dnce  this  thing  is  very  falutary  to  fuch  as  are  fick,  I  am  of
opinion,  that  a  few  apples,  at  leaft,  fhould  be  preferved  in  honey,  but
kept  feparate  according  to  their  kinds ;  for,  if  you  mix  them  together,
one  kind  is  corrupted  by  the  other.  And,  feeing  we  have  very  oppor¬
tunely  made  mention  of  honey,  at  this  fame  time  the  bee-hives  mull
be  cadrated,  and  the  honey  and  the  wax  made  :  of  which  we  have
already  fpoken  in  the  ninth  book.  Nor  do  we  now  require,  that  the
Houfe-keeper,  the  Bailiff's  Wife,  fhould  take  any  other  care  upon
her  in  this  matter  ;  but,  that  fhe  be  prefent  with  them  that  have  the
management  of  this  affair,  and  take  the  fruit  into  her  cudody.


CHAP.  XI.

Of  the  Compofitioji  of  a  fweet  Water ,  which  they  ufe for  the

preferring  of  Fruit ,  &c.

BUT  forafmuch  as,  at  the  fame  time,  bees-wax- water  (1),  as
alfo  mead,  ought  to  be  laid  up,  in  order  to  be  kept  till  they
grow  old ;  you  muft  remember,  that,  when  you  have  received  the
Secondary  honey  from  the  honey-combs,  the  wax  be  prefently  fepa-
•rated  and  broken  into  very  fmall  pieces,  and  deeped  in  fpring-  or  rain¬
water  ;  and,  after  the  water  is  fqueezed  out,  let  it  be  drained,  and
poured  into  a  leaden  veffel,  and  boiled,  and  let  all  the  filth  and  nadi-
nefs  be  taken  off  it  with  the  feum  :  after  it  is  boiled,  when  it  is  as
thick  as  mud  fodden  in  to  a  third  part  of  its  fird  quantity,  let  it
be  cooled,  and  put  up  in  done  bottles  well  pitched.

Some  ufe  this  bees-wax-  or  honey-water  indead  of  mead ;  fome
alfo  make  ufe  of  it,  indead  of  mud  fodden  in  to  a  third  of  the  fird

(1)  Mella-  This  feminine  fubftantive,  though  twice  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  and
alfo  cap.  47.  is  not  to  be  found  in  feveral  Dictionaries :  it  is  a  liquor  made  with  water,
and  the  frefh  bees-wax  fteeped  in  it  for  a  certain  time,  and  afterwards  boiled,  as  here
directed.

quantity.


Chap.  XII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  517

quantity,  for  preferring  of  olives ;  for  which,  indeed,  I  think  it  is
more  proper,  becaufe  it  gives  a  relifli,  and  is  favory  for  eating  :  and  it
cannot  be  a  remedy,  inftead  of  mead,  to  fuch  as  are  in  a  languithing
condition ;  becaufe,  if  they  drink  it,  it  caufes  an  inflation  of  the
ftomacb,  and  the  bowels.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  the  Way  to  make  Mead.

THerefore  having  fet  apart  this  bees-wax-water,  and  deflinated  it
for  preferving  of  fruits,  mead  muff  be  made  by  itfelf  of  the
very  beft  honey  j  but  it  is  not  made  after  one  manner:  for  fome,
many  years  before,  put  up  rain-water  in  veffels,  and  fet  it  in  the  Sun
in  the  open  air ;  then,  having  emptied  it  from  one  veffel  to  another,
and  made  it  very  clear,  (for,  as  often  as  it  is  poured  from  one  veffel  to
another,  even  for  a  long  time,  there  is  found,  in  the  bottom  of  the
veffel,  fome  thick  fettling  like  dregs)  they  mix  a  fextarius  of  old  water
with  a  pound  of  honey.

Neverthelefs  fome,  when  they  have  a  mind  to  make  the  mead  of  a
rougher  tafte,  mingle  a  fextarius  of  water  with  three  quarters  of  a  pound
of  honey  ;  and  after  they  have,  according  to  this  proportion,  filled  a  done
bottle,  and  plaiftered  it,  they  fuffer  it  to  be  forty  days  in  the  Sun,  during
the  riling  of  the  Dog-ftar  ;  then  they  put  it  up  in  a  loft,  which  receives
fmoak.  Some,  who  have  not  been  at  the  pains  to  preferve  rain-water
till  it  becomes  old,  take  that  which  is  frefh,  and  boil  it  in  to  a  fourth
part :  then,  after  it  is  grown'  cold,  if  either  they  have  a  mind  to  make
mead  fweeter  than  ordinary,  they  mix  a  fextarius  of  honey  with  two
fextarii  of  water ;  or,  if  they  would  have  it  rougher,  they  put  three
quarters  of  a  pound  of  honey  to  a  fextarius  of  water  and,  having  made
it  according  to  thefe  proportions,  they  pour  it  into  a  ffone  bottle  ;  and,
after  they  have  kept  it  forty  days  in  the  Sun,  as  I  faid  above,  they
put  it  up  in  a  loft,  which  receives  fmoak  from  below.


CHAP,


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.


CHAP.  XIII.

Of  preferving  Cheefe ,  and  pickling  certabi  Herbs.

T^HIS  is  the  fitted  time  for  preparing  cheefe  for  domedic  ufes,
when  both  the  cheefe  fends  forth,  or  throws  out,  the  leaft
whey  ;  and  in  the  latter  feafon,  now  when  there  is  but  little  milk,  it
is  not  fo  expedient  to  take  up  the  Labourers  time  in  carrying  the
fruits  to  the  market :  and,  indeed,  when  they  are  carried  to  market
during  the  Summer,  they  often  fpoil  by  turning  four  ;  therefore  it  is
better  to  make  them  up  for  ufe  at  this  very  time.  And  it  belongs  to
the  office  of  a  Shepherd,  to  fee  that  it  be  as  well  done  as  poflible ;
to  whom  we  gave  directions  in  the  feventh  book,  which  he  ought  to
follow.

There  are  alfo  certain  herbs,  which  you  may  pickle  when  the  vint¬
age  approaches ;  as  purjlain ,  and  that  lateward  potherb ,  which  fome
call  garden  J'amphire.  Thefe  herbs  are  carefully  cleanfed,  and  fpread
in  the  fhade ;  then,  on  the  fourth  day,  they  fpread  fait  in  the  bottoms
of  jars,  and  each  of  the  herbs  is  put  up  apart  by  itfelf;  and,  after  they
have  poured  vinegar  into  the  vedels,  they  again  put  fait  over  the  herbs ;
for  drong  brine  is  not  proper  for  thefe  herbs.


CHAP.  XIV.

Of  drying  Apples  and  Pears  in  the  Sun .

AT  this  fame  time,  or  even  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  Au-
guji ,  they  pick  out  apples  and  pears  of  the  fweetefl  tade,  and
middling  ripe  ;  and,  when  they  have  divided  them  into  two  or  three
parts,  with  a  reed  or  a  bone-knife,  they  lay  them  in  the  Sun,  till  they
grow  dry.  If  there  be  great  plenty  of  them,  the  Peafants  prefer ve
them  as  not  the  leaft  part  of  their  food  during  Winter  ;  for  they  are
indead  of  dainties  to  them,  as  figs,  which,  when  they  are  laid  up  dry,
contribute  greatly  to  the  fudenance  of  country-people  during  the
Winter-time.


CHAP.


Chap.  XV.


Of  HUSBANDRY.


5i9


CHAP.  XV.

Of  dry  Figs.

THESE  ought  to  be  gathered  when  they  are  neither  too  ripe,
nor  too  green,  and  fpread  abroad  in  a  place  which  may  receive
the  Sun  :  and  they  fatten  ftakes  at  the  diftance  of  four  feet  from  each
other,  and  couple  them  together  with  poles  laid  acrofs  them.  Then
upon  thefe  frames  they  place  canes  made  for  this  ufe,  fo  that  they
may  be  at  the  diftance  of  two  feet  from  the  earth,  left  they  attract
the  moifture,  which  the  ground  commonly  fends  forth  in  the  night :
then  they  throw  the  figs  upon  them ;  and  on  each  fide  they  place,
flat  upon  the  ground,  Shepherds  hurdles,  woven  either  with  haulm,
or  fedge,  or  fern,  that  fo,  when  the  Sun  is  near  fetting,  they  may  be
eredted,  and,  being  placed  leaning  towards  each  other,  may,  with  their
arched  roof,  in  the  manner  of- a  fhed  or  lodge,  defends  the  figs,  which
begin  to  grow  dry,  from  the  dew,  and  fometimes  from  the  rain ;  for
both  thefe  fpoil  the  forefaid  fruit.

Then,  after  the  figs  are  dried,  about  the  middle  of  the  day,  while
they  are  warm,  you  muft  put  them  in  jars  that  are  well  pitched,
and  tread  them  down  carefully  :  neverthelels  dry  fennel  muft  be  laid
under  them,  and  then  put  over  them,  when  the  veftels  are  filled  :
which  veftels  it  is  proper  forthwith  to  put  covers  upon,  and  to  daub
them  over,  and  lay  them  up  in  the  drieft  ftore-houie  you  have,  that
the  figs  may  keep  the  better  all  the  year  long.

Some,  after  they  have  gathered  the  figs,  take  away  their  pedicles
or  ftalks,  and  fpread  them  in  the  Sun  ;  then,  after  they  are  dried  a
little,  before  they  begin  to  grow  hard,  they  gather  them  together  into
earthen  or  ftone  veflels ;  then  with  their  walked  feet  they  tread  them
down  as  they  do  meal,  and  mix  with  them  parched  fefamum,  with
Egyptian  anife,  and  fennel-  and  cumin-feeds.

When  they  have  trodden  thefe  well  together,  and  mixed  the  whole
mafs  of  the  bruifed  figs  throughly,  they  wrap  up  fmall  lumps  of  it
in  fig-tree-leaves  j  and,  having  tied  the  lumps  with  a  rufh,  or  any
other  herb,  they  lay  them  upon  hurdles,  and  fuffer  them  to  dry  :
then,  when  they  are  throughly  dried,  they  put  them  up  in  pitched
veftels.  Some  put  up  figs,  in  this  very  form,  in  tubs  and  jars  without
pitch ;  and,  having  daubed  the  veftels,  they  toaft  them  either  in  a
lmall  moveable,  or  great  oven,  that  all  the  moifture  may  be  dried  up
4  die


520  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

the  more  fpeedily  :  after  they  are  dried,  they  lay  them  up  in  a  loft ;
and,  when  they  have  occafion  to  ufe  them,  they  break  the  earthen
veflel  j  for  otherwife  they  cannot  take  out  the  hardened  mafs  of

%3-  i

Others  pick  out  all  the  fatted  of  the  green  figs,  and,  having  divided
them,  either  with  a  reed  or  with  their  fingers,  dilate  them,  and  fo
fuffer  them  to  grow  dry  in  the  Sun  :  then,  when  they  are  well  dried
with  the  warmth  of  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  when  they  are  foften-
ed  with  the  heat  of  the  Sun,  they  gather  them  together  :  and,  as  it
is  the  cuftom  with  the  Africans  and  Spaniards ,  after  they  have  put
them  into  a  certain  regular  pofition  with  one  another,  they  fqueeze
them,  and  reduce  them  into  the  figures  of  ftars,  and  fmall  flowers,
or  into  the  form  of  bread  ;  then  they  dry  them  again  in  the  Sun,  and
fo  put  them  up  in  veflels.


CHAP.  XVI.

Of  making  dried  Raijins^  or  Raijim  of  the  Sun,  a?id  pre¬
fer  ving  Sorb- apples.

(”T  RAPES  require  the  like  care  as  figs :  When  the  weather  is
X  fair  and  dry,  in  the  decline  of  the  Moon,  after  the  fifth  hour
of  the  day,  you  mult  gather  fuch  of  them  as  are  white,  of  the  fweeted
tafle,  with  the  largeft  grains,  not  too  thick  and  clofe  upon  one  an¬
other  •  and  fpread  them  for  a  little  while  upon  boards,  led,  being  laid
clofe  upon  one  another,  they  be  bruifed  with  their  own  weight :
then,  having  prepared  beforehand  a  lixivium  of  the  afhes  of  vine-
fpravs,  it  is  proper,  that  it  be  warmed  in  a  kettle,  or  in  a  new  large
earthen  pot ;  and,  when  it  boils,  that  a  little  of  the  very  bed  oil  be
added  to  it,  and  fo  mixed  throughly  together  ;  then,  that  the  grapes,
two  or  three  cinders  of  them  being  tied  together,  according  to  their
bignefs,  be  put  into  the  boiling  kettle,  and  kept  in  it  a  little  while,
till  they  be  difcoloured  :  nor  mud  you  again  fufler  them  to  boil
throughly  j  for  here  a  certain  moderation  and  temperament  is  neceflary.
Then,  when  you  fliall  have  taken  them  out,  lay  them  in  order  upon
an  hurdle,  and  at  fuch  a  didance,  as  not  to  touch  one  another  :  then,
after  three  hours,  turn  each  bunch,  and  do  not  lay  it  again  in  the
lame  place  where  it  lay  before,  led  it  be  fpoiled  by  the  moilfure  which
runs  from  it.  But,  in  the  night-time,  they  ought  to  be  covered  in  the

fame


Chap.  XVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  521

lame  manner  as  figs,  that  they  may  be  defended  from  the  dew,  or  the
rain  :  then,  after  they  are  moderately  dried,  put  them  into  new  vef-
fels,  with  covers  upon  them,  without  any  pitch,  but  plaiftered  and
lay  them  up  in  a  dry  place.

Some  wrap  up  grapes  to  be  dried  in  the  Sun  in  fig-leaves,  and
fo  dry  them  j  others  cover  the  half* withered  grapes  with  vine-  or
plane- tree-leaves,  and  fo  put  them  up  in  amphors.  There  are  fome
who  burn  the  ftalks  of  beans,  and  of  the  allies  thereof  make  a  lixivium ;
then  to  three  Jextarii  of  the  lixivium  they  add  ten  cyathi  of  fait,
and  one  cyatbus  of  oil  ;  then  they  fet  it  on  the  fire,  and  warm  it,  and
fo  perform  the  other  things  in  the  fame  manner  as  before.  But  if
it  (hall  appear,  that  there  is  but  little  oil  in  the  kettle,  let  as  much  be
added,  from  time  to  time,  as  fhall  be  fufficient,  that  fo  the  raifins
may  be  the  brighter  and  the  fatter.

At  the  fame  time  gather  and  pick  out  the  beft  fervice-apples,  and
put  them  carefully  into  little  pots,  and  put  pitched  covers  upon  them,
and  daub  them  with  plafter ;  then  after  you  have  made  trenches  or
pits,  two  feet  deep,  within  the  houfe,  place  the  little  pots  together
therein,  fo  that  their  mouths,  which  are  daubed  over  with  plafter,
may  look  downward :  then  gather  the  earth  together,  and  tread  it
down  foftly  upon  them.  But  it  is  better  to  place  fewer  veftels,  at  a
diftance  from  each  other,  in  feveral  pits ;  for  in  taking  them  out,
while  you  are  taking  away  one,  if  you  move  the  reft,  the  forb-apples
will  quickly  fpoil.  Some  alfo  preferve  this  fame  apple  very  well  in
muft,  boiled  into  one  third  of  the  firft  quantity,  putting  a  fluffing  of
dry  fennel  upon  them,  that  thereby  the  fervice-apples  may  be  fo  prefled
down,  that  the  liquor  may  always  fwim  above  them ;  and  notwith-
ftanding  this,  they  carefully  daub  the  pitched  covers  with  plafter,  that
no  air  may  be  able  to  get  in.


CHAP.  XVII.

Of  making  Vinegar  of  Figs.

9  I  ^HERE  are  certain  countries,  wherein  there  is  a  fcarcity  of
ji  wine,  and  confequently  of  vinegar  alfo  :  therefore  at  this  fame
time,  the  frefheft  figs  muft  be  gathered  as  ripe  as  poflible ;  yea,  even
tho’  the  rains  be  now  come  on,  and  they  be  fallen  upon  the  ground  by
reafon  of  the  fhowers }  which,  when  they  are  picked  up,  are  put

X  x  x  into


522  L.  J.  M.  C  OLUMELL  A  BookXII.

into  firkins  or  barrels,  and  there  left  to  ferment :  then,  when  they
have  thrown  out  their  juice,  and  it  is  grown  acid,  whatever  vinegar
they  have  yielded  is  carefully  ftrained,  and  poured  into  pitched  veflels
that  have  a  good  fmell.  This  will  be  as  good  for  ufe,  as  the  Iharpefl:
vinegar  of  the  firft  note ;  and  will  never  contract  any  bad  fmell,  or
grow  mufty,  if  it  is  not  put  in  a  moift  place.

There  are  fome,  who,  having  regard  to  the  quantity,  mix  water
with  the  figs,  and  add  to  them  the  ripeft  frefti  figs  from  time  to  time,
and  fuffer  them  to  confume  and  diflolve  in  that  liquor,  till  it  have  the
tafte  of  fharp-enough  vinegar :  afterwards  they  ftrain  it  through  a
rufh-frail,  or  a  bag  made  of  Spanijh  broom  ;  then,  when  the  vinegar
is  clear,  they  boil  it  till  they  take  away  the  fcum,  and  all  the  filth  and
naftinefs  from  it  \  then  they  add  a  little  toafted  fait  to  it,  which  hin¬
ders  little  worms  and  other  animals  to  breed  in  it.


CHAP.  XVIII.

Of fuch  Things  as  mufl  he  prepared  for  the  Vintage  (i).

ALthough,  in  the  preceding  book,  which  is  intituled  the  Bailiff r
we  have  already  told  what  things  mull  be  prepared  for  the  vint¬
age  j  neverthelefs,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  give  directions,  to  the
Bailiff’s  Wife,  concerning  the  fame  things,  that  fhe  may  underfland,.
that  whatever  things,  relating  to  the  vintage,  are  tranfadted  within¬
doors,  ought  to  be  under  her  infpeCtion  and  care..

If  the  ground  is  of  a  large  extent,  or  if  the  vineyards,  and  the
plantations  of  trees  for  the  fupporting  of  vines,  be  large,  veflels,  con¬
taining  three  modii  and  ten  modii ,  mufl:  be  made  year  after  year,  and


(i)  Ir  may  be  neceflary  here  to  obferve,  that  dolium ,  Jeria ,  and  cadus ,  denote  no  cer¬
tain  determinate  meafure  thefe  veflels  were  of  different  fixes,  fome  larger,  fome  fmaller.  In-
this  chapter  there  is  mention  made  of  a  dolium  fefyuiculeare,  i.  e.  of  a  culeus  and  an  half,
which  contained  21+  gallons,  7  pints,  and  a  little  more.;  which,  I  reckon,  was  one  of
their  largeft  fort  which  they  fixed  in  the  ground.  And,  in  the  xxviiith  chapter  of  this
book,  we  read  of  a  Jeria  of  7  amphorce^  which  make  about  57  gallons  ,*  and  he  makes
mention  there  of  a  cadus  which  contained  two  «r»^,  which  make  7  gallons  and  one  pint,
and  a  little  more.  All  thefe  different  veflels  cannot  well  be  tranflated  by  any  Englijb
words  exa&ly  anfwering,  moft  part  of  modern  wine-veflels  being  intirely  different  from
thofe  in  ufe  among  the  antient  Romans  ;  and,  being  for  feveral  ages  made  moffly  of  earth,
they  were,  both  in  their  fhape  and  capacity,  very  different  from  ours:  though  afterwards
they  were  made  of  wood  in  many  places,  efpecially  near  the  Alps,  which  probably  at
firft  differed  very  little  from  the  others,  except  in  the  fluff  they  were  made  of.


fmall


Chap.  XVIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  523

fmall  bafkets  muft  be  woven  and  pitched ;  as  alfo  fmall  fickles  or
bills,  and  iron-hooks  in  great  number  muft  be  prepared,  and  well
whetted,  left  the  Grape-gatherer  ftrip  off  the  bunches  of  grapes  with
his  hand,  and  no  fmall  part  of  the  fruit  flip  out  of  his  hands,  and  be
loft,  by  fcattering  the  berries  upon  the  ground.

Small  cords  muft  be  fitted  to  the  little  balkets,  and  leather-ftrops
to  the  veffels  that  contain  three  modii ;  alfo  the  wine-vat,  and  the
preffes,  and  the  places  where  the  grapes  are  prefled,  and  all  the  vef¬
fels,  muft  be  throughly  wafhed  with  fea-water,  if  the  fea  be  near  at
hand;  if  not,  they  muft  be  walhed  with  frefh  water,  and  carefully
cleanfed  and  dried,  left  they  contain  any  moifture.  The  wine-cellar
alfo  muft  be  cleared  from  all  dung  and  dirt,  and  perfumed  with  good
odours,  that  it  may  not  fend  forth  any  {linking  favour,  or  have  any
four  fmell.

Then  facrifices  muft  be  offered,  with  the  greateft  fandtimony  and
purity,  to  Liber  and  Libera  (2),  and  to  the  veflels  belonging  to  the
wine-prefs  :  nor  muft  the  Bailiff’s  Wife  depart  from  the  wine-prefs,
or  the  wine-cellar,  during  the  vintage,  that  they  who  manage  and
prepare  the  muft,  may  do  all  things  in  a  clean  and  neat  manner;  and
that  no  opportunity  may  be  given  to  a  thief  to  lay  hands  on,  and
intercept  the  fruit  that  is  there.

The  hogfheads  alfo,  and  buts,  and  other  veffels,  muft  be  pitched
forty  days  before  the  beginning  of  the  vintage  ;  and  fuch  of  them  as
are  funk  into  the  ground,  muft  be  done  after  one  manner  ;  and  thofe
that  ftand  above-ground,  after  another :  for  thofe  that  are  funk  into
the  ground,  are  heated  with  burning  iron-lamps ;  and  the  lamp,  when  it
has  diftilled  the  pitch  into  the  bottom  of  the  veffel,  being  removed,  the
pitch,  which  has  diftilled  to  the  bottom,  or  has  ftuck  to  the  fides,  is
fpread  with  a  fkealing-ftick,  and  a  crooked  iron-fcraper ;  then  it  is
wiped  with  a  mop,  and,  after  exceeding  hot  boiling  pitch  is  poured

(2)  Libero  Liber <eqtie.  It  is  not  very  certain  whether  the  author  here,  by  Liber ,  means
Bacchus,  who,  indeed,  is  frequently  called  by  this  name ;  becaufe,  as  fome  fay,  wine
chears  the  mind,  and  frees  it  from  anxiety  and  care :  but  the  difficulty  is  to  tell,  who
this  Libera  was:  Cicero ,  de  Natura  Deorum ,  mentions  one  Liber  different  from  Bacchus ,
who,  with  Libera  and  Ceres ,  were  religioufly  worffiipped  by  the  Romans.  Some  by
Ceres  mean  the  Earth,  and  by  Liber  and  Libera  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  :  and,  both  in
Livy  and  Tacitus ,  there  is  mention  made  of  a  temple  dedicated  to  Ceres ,  Liber ,  and  Li¬
bera  :  their  facrihcing  to  thefe  was  common  enough;  but  their  paying  any  fuch  refpetffc
to  the  veffels  they  made  ufe  of  in  preffing  their  grapes,  &c.  is  not  fo  evident.  Perhaps
the  text  is  corrupted  here,  as  in  fome  other  places,  and  it  ought  to  be  read,  as  the  learned
Ge frier  us  conjectures,  e  vafs  prejforiis ;  and  fo  the  meaning  will  be,  that  they  ufed  thefe
veflels,  at  that  time,  in  the  facrifices  they  offered  when  they  began  their  vintage,  in
order  to  purify  and  confecrate  them.


X  X  X  2


into


524  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XI L

into  it,  the  pitch  is  fpread  over  it  with  another  new  lkealing-ftick,  and

a  fmall  bel'ome.

But  fuch  veffels  as  (land  above-ground,  are  brought  out  to  the  Sun
feveral  days  before  they  are  cured  j  then,  when  they  have  been  long
enough  expoled  to  the  Sun,  they  are  turned  upon  their  brims,  and
lufpended  upon  three  fmall  ftones  put  under  them  ;  and  fo  a  fire  is
put  under  them,  and  kept  fo  long  burning,  till  fuch  a  vehement  heat
comes  up  to  the  bottom  of  the  veffel,  that  the  hand,  when  it  is
applied  to  it,  cannot  endure  it ;  then  the  hogfhead  being  fet  down
upon  the  ground,  and  laid  upon  its  fide,  the  hotted  boiling  pitch  is
poured  into  it,  and  it  is  rolled  up  and  down,  that  all  the  parts  of  the
hogfhead  may  be  daubed  with  it.

But  thefe  things  ought  to  be  done  in  a  calm  day,  w7hen  there  is  no
wind,  left  the  veffels  fhould  burft  by  putting  the  fire  to  them,  when
the  wind  blows  upon  them.  But  tw'enty-five  pound-weight  of  hard
pitch,  is  enough  for  pipes  that  contain  a  culeus  and  an  half :  nor  is
there  any  doubt,  but  if  a  fifth  part  of  Brutian  pitch  (3)  be  added  to
the  whole  quantity  that  is  boiled,  it  will  be  of  very  great  advantage
to  all  the  vintage.


CHAP.  XIX.

Of  feveral  Compofetions  for  preferving  and  Jlrengthening

TVins .

CARE  alfo  muft  be  taken,  that  the  muft,  which  is  fqueezed  out
of  the  grapes,  may  keep  for  a  long  time,  or,  at  leaft,  that  it  be
durable  till  it  be  fold  :  after  what  manner  this  ought  to  be  done,  and
with  what  compofitions  it  may  be  benefited  and  preferved,  we  fhall
next  fet  before  you.  Of  the  muft  which  they  have  thrown  into

(3)  Fix  Brutia.  Pliny  tells  us,  that  liquid  pitch,  which,  no  doubt,  is  what  we  call
tar,  was  obtained  from  the  pine-tree,  and  fir-trees  of  feveral  forts,  by  cutting  them  into
biiiers,  and  ranging  them  into  piles,  and  furrounding  them  with  furnaces,  the  heat  of
which  made  the  wood  exfude  the  moifture  it  contained  :  the  firft  running  of  this  liquor
they  called  liquid  f  itch  :  the  fecond  running  was  thicker,  and  was  properly  what  they
called  pitch  j  this  being  thrown  into  caldrons,  and  boiled  to  a  certain  degree,  when  it
was  coagulated,  took  the  name  of  Brutian  f  itch :  it  was  more  vifcous  and  glutinous  than
that  other  pitch,  and  of  a  bright-fhining  reddifh  colour  j  and,  when  the  greateft  part  of
its  moifture  was  exhaled  by  the  heat,  it  was  called  dry  pitchy  and,  bec2ufe  it  was  at
firft  made  by  the  BrutH,  2  people  in  Calabria ,  or,  at  leaft,  in  the  greateft  perfe&ion,  they
therefore  called  it  Brutian  f  itch.

leaden


Chap.  XIX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  525

leaden  veflels,  fome  boil  away  a  fourth  part  of  it,  others  a  third  :  nor
is  there  any  doubt,  but,  if  any  fhould  boil  it  to  one  half,  he  would
make  a  better  rob  of  grapes,  and  fo  much  the  more  profitable  for  ufe,
infomuch,  indeed,  that,  inftead  of  mud  boiled  in  to  one  third  of  the
fil'd  quantity,  this  muji ,  boiled  away  into  one  half,  may  fuffice  to
preferve  the  mart  which  is  the  produce  of  old  vineyards.

Whatever  character  the  wine  may  be  of,  which  can  be  kept  for
years,  without  any  cornpofition  or  mixture  to  preferve  it,  we  are  of
opinion  that  is  the  bed ;  nor  mud  any  thing  at  all  be  mixed  with  it,
whereby  its  natural  tade  may  be  blunted  or  allayed  ;  for  that,  which
can  pleafe  by  its  own  natural  quality  alone,  is  the  mod  excellent.  But
when,  either  through  the  fault  of  the  country,  or  of  new  vineyards,  the
mud  labours  under  any  defedt,  we  mud  make  choice  of  a  part  of  an
Aminean  vineyard  (if  we  have  any  in  our  pofleflion)  ;  if  we  have  none,
then  we  mud  make  choice  of  a  vineyard,  which  produces  the  neated
and  the  mod  agreeable  wine  $  and  which  is  neither  very  antient,  nor
yet  wet  and  marfhy.

Then  we  mud  obferve  when  the  Moon  is  decreafing,  and  when  die
is  under  the  Earth ;  and,  in  a  clear  and  dry  day,  we  mud  gather  the
very  riped  grapes,  which,  being  trodden  out,  we  mud  carry  from  the
vat  to  the  veflels  wherein  we  make  the  rob  of  grapes,  as  much  of  the
mud  which  has  flowed  from  the  grapes  before  the  dalks  and  hufks
are  prefled,  as  we  fhall  have  occafion  for ;  and  we  mud  heat  the  fur¬
nace,  at  fird,  with  a  gentle  fire,  and  with  very  fmall  pieces  of  wood,
fuch  as  the  Peafants  call  brufh-wood,  that  fo  the  mud  may  boil  at
leifure.

And  let  him,  who  has  the  charge  of  boiling  it,  have  ready  pre¬
pared  beforehand  rufh-  or  Spani/h  broom-drainers,  made  of  raw  Spa-
nijh  broom,  that  is,  which  has  not  been  beetled ;  as  alfo  bundles  of
fennel  tied  to  clubs,  which  he  may  put  down  to  the  very  bottom  of
the  veflels,  that  he  may  dir  up  whatever  part  of  the  dregs  fhall  have
fubfided,  and  bring  them  to  the  top ;  then  let  him  take  away,  with
the  drainers,  all  the  filth  that  rifes  up,  and  fwims  upon  the  top  in
great  abundance  :  nor  let  him  defid  from  doing  this,  till  the  mud  ap¬
pear  clear  and  free  from  all  manner  of  dregs :  then  let  him  either  put
quinces  into  it,  which  he  mud  take  away  when  they  are  throughly
boiled,  or  any  other  agreeable  and  fuitable  odours  he  fhall  think  pro¬
per.  Neverthelefs,  let  him  dir  it  up  throughly,  from  time  to  time,
with  the  fennel,  led  any  thing  fubfide  which  may  perforate  the  leaden
veflel.


But


526  L.  [.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

But  now,  when  the  vefiel  fhall  be  able  to  bear  a  fiercer  fire,  that

is,  when  the  mu  ft,  being  in  Come  part  boiled  away,  fhall  now  leeth
into  itfelf,  then  let  flumps  of  trees,  and  larger  wood,  be  put  under

it,  but  fo  as  not  to  touch  the  bottom  of  it  9  for,  unlels  this  be  avoided,
either  the  vefiel  itfelf,  which  fometimes  happens,  will  be  pierced
through  ;  or  if  this  is  not  done,  the  muft  will  certainly  be  burnt-to,
and,  having  contracted  a  bitternefs,  will  be  unfit  to  be  ufed  as  a  pre-
lerve  for  any  thing:  but,  before  the  muft  is  thrown  into  the  vefi'eh
for  boiling  it  in  to  a  certain  quantity,  it  is  necefiary,  that  fuch  of  them
as  are  made  of  lead,  be  foaked  and  anointed  with  good  oil  in  the  in-
iide,  and  well  rubbed,  and  fo  the  mult  put  into  them  :  this  thing
hinders  the  fodden  muft  to  be  burnt-to.


CHAP.  XX.

Of  boiling  Muft  into  one  half  or  into  one  third  of  the  frfl

Quantity,

BUT  even  the  rob  of  grapes  alfo,  or  the  fweet  muft,  fodden  into
one  third  of  the  firft  quantity,  though  carefully  made,  ufes  to
grow  four  in  the  fame  manner  as  wine ;  and  fince  it  is  fo,  we  muft
remember  to  preferve  our  wine  with  muft,  fodden  into  a  third  part
of  a  year  old,  the  goodnefs  of  which  we  have  already  had  fufficient
proof  of ;  for  the  fruit  which  we  have  gathered  is  corrupted,  and
fpoiled  with  a  bad  medicament.  But  the  vefiels  themfelves,  w'herein
the  muft,  which  is  to  be  reduced  into  one  half,  or  one  third  of  the
firft  quantity,  is  boiled,  ought  rather  to  be  of  lead  than  of  brafs  j  for,
in  the  boiling,  the  brazen  vefiels  throw  out  a  ruft,  and  corrupt  the
tafte  of  the  medicament.

The  odours  which  are  commonly  proper  for  wine,  and  are  boiled
with  the  fodden  muft,  are  the  flower-de-luce,  flemigreek ,  jiveet  rufl:  :
one  pound  weight  of  each  of  thefe  things  ought  to  be  put  into  a  muft-
caldron,  which  has  received  ninety  amphorce  of  muft,  juft  after  it  has
left  off  boiling,  and  is  cleared  from  all  its  filth.  Then,  if  the  muft
be  of  its  own  nature  fmall,  when  it  is  boiled  away  to  a  third  part,  the
fire  muft  be  withdrawn  from  it,  and  the  furnace  muft  be  forthwith
cooled  with  water :  which  tho’  w?e  have  done,  neverthelefs  the  fodden
muft  finks  below  the  third  part  of  the  vefiel.  But,  tho’  this  may  be
of  fome  detriment,  yet  it  has  its  advantage ;  for,  the  more  it  is

5  boiled


Chap.  XX.  O/HUSBANDRY.  527

boiled  away,  (provided  it  be  not  burnt-to)  the  better  and  thicker  lt
will  be.

But,  of  this  muft,  boiled  after  this  manner  into  a  third  part  of
the  firft  quantity,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  mix  one  fextarius  with  one
amphora  of  wine  :  for,  when  you  have  boiled  ninety  amphora  of  muft
in  a  muft-caldron,  fo  that  there  is  but  a  little  over  and  above  the
quantity  to  which  it  is  to  be  boiled,  (that  is  to  fay,  a  third  part  of  the
firft  quantity)  then,  and  not  before,  add  the  medicaments  to  it,  which
may  be  either  liquid  or  refinous  j  that  is,  ten  fextarii  of  liquid  Neme-
turican  pitch  or  tar  (i),  when  you  have  firft  carefully  waffied  it  with
boiled  fea-water^  alfo  a  pound  and  an  half  of  turpentine  refin.

When  you  {hall  have  added  thefe  things  to  it,  you  fhall  {hake  and
ftir  the  leaden  veflel  throughly,  that  they  may  not  burn- to :  then,
when  the  boiling  liquor  is  funk  down  to  a  third  part,  withdraw  the
fire  j  and  you  muft  ftir  the  leaden  veflel  from  time  to  time,  that  the
fodden  muft  and  the  medicaments  may  mix  together  :  then,  when  the
muft,  boiled  into  a  third  part  of  its  firft  quantity,  fhall  feem  tolerably
warm,  you  fhall,  by  little  and  little,  fprinkle  the  reft  of  the  fpices
into  it,  after  they  are  bruifed  and  lifted  y  and  you  fhall  order  what
you  have  boiled  to  be  ftirred  with  a  wooden  ladle,  till  fuch  time  as  it
grows  cold :  but,  if  you  do  not  throughly  mix.  it,  as  we  direct,  the
fpices  will  fubfide,  and  burn-to;

But.,  to  the  forefaid  quantity  of  muft  thofe  odours  ought  to  be  added,
the  leaf  of  fpikenard ,  th c  Illyrian  Iris  or  flower-de-luce  (2),  Galilean
flptkenard ,  dates,  coflum  (3),  cyperus  (4),  flweet  rujh  j  of  which  half
a  pound  each  will  fuflice  :  alfo  five  ounces  of  myrrh,  a  pound-weight,
of  calamus ,  half  a  pound  of  cafla ,  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of  amomum ,
five  ounces  of  fafl’ron ,  a  pound  of  melilot.

Thefe,  as  I  faid,  dry,  bruifed,  and  fifted,  ought  to  be  added  to  it  j
and  with  them  a  certain  quantity  of  crude  pitch  ought  to  be  mixed :
and  the  older  that  is,  fo  much  the  better  it  is  reckoned  ;  for,  become-
ing  harder  by  long  keeping,  when  it  is  bruifed,  it  is  reduced  into
powder,  and  mixed  with  thefe  medicaments but  it  is  fufficient,  that

(1)  Uemeturica  picis-liq^id#.  Vliny  menrions  the  Nemeturi  among  the  people  inhabir¬
ing  the  Alps  :  probably  they  made  a  fort  of  liquid  pitch  or  tar,  which  was  reckoned  beft
for  preferving  wine;  and  it  had  its  name  from  the  people  who  made  it;  as  the  Brutian,
Uarycian ,  &c.

(2}  Iris  Jllyrica ,  the  Illyrian  flower-de-luce  :  the  beft  fort  of  it  grew  in  the  inland  parts
of  Jllyrium ,  from  which  country  it  has  its  name.

(3)  Cofiusy  or  c-ojlum,  as  our  author  has  it,  is  an  Indian  fhrub,  greatly  efteemed  for  its
root,  which  has  a  moft  fragrant  fmell;  fo  that  they  called  it  commonly,  by  way  of  emi¬
nence,  radix-,  the  root-,  as  they  did  the  leaf  of  fpikenard  folium ,  the  leaf*

(4)  Cyprus,  an  angular  rufh  of  an  agreeable  fmell,  like  fpikenard.

fix:


528  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

fix  pounds  of  this  be  mixed  with  the  forefaid  quantities.  It  is  uncer¬
tain,  how  much  of  this  compofition  mud  be  put  to  forty-eight  J'ex -
tarii  of  mult ;  becaufe,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  wine,  an
edimation  mud:  be  made,  how  much  may  be  enough :  and  we  mud:
take  care,  that  the  tade  of  the  medicaments,  ufed  for  preferves,  be
not  felt  ;  for  that  will  drive  away  the  buyer.

Neverthelefs,  if  the  vintage  be  wet,  I  ufually  mix  four  ounces  of
this  medicament  ;  if  dry,  three  ounces  of  it,  with  two  amphora  of
mud  [fo  that  the  quantity  of  muji  be  four  urns ,  and  the  urna  con¬
tain  twenty-four  Jextariij  I  know,  that  fome  Hufbandmen  have
put  three  ounces  of  the  medicament  into  each  amphora ;  but  that  they
were  forced  to  do  this,  becaufe  of  the  too  great  weaknefs  of  this  fort
of  wine,  which  fcarcely  continued  found  for  thirty  days;

Neverthelefs,  if  there  be  plenty  of  wood,  it  is  better  to  boil  this
mud:,  and  to  purge  all  the  fcum  and  dregs  out  of  it;  by  doing  which
a  tenth  part  of  it  will  wade,  but  the  red  will  keep  long:  but,  if
there  be  a  fcarcity  of  wood,  you  mud  mix  an  ounce  of  what  they
call  the  dower  of  marble,  or  of  bruited  done,  for  plader ;  as  alfo
two  fextarii  of  rob  of  grapes,  or  mud  fodden  in  to  a  third  part  of  the
fird  quantity,  with  each  amphora  of  the  wine:  this  thing, tho’  it  does
not  make  the  wine  altogether  durable,  yet  it  preferves  the  tade  of  it
till  another  vintage.


CHAR  XXL

Of  Rob  of  Grapes ,  or  Mufl  boiled  in  to  a  third  Fart  of  its
frJl  ^ua?itity-i  put  to  Wine  to  preferve  it  till  it  become
old .

LET  mud,  of  the  very  fweeted  tade,  be  boiled  in  to  a  third
part  of  its  fil'd  quantity ;  and,  after  it  is  boiled  in,  as  I  faid  above,
it  is  called  defrutum ,  ( rob  of  grapes ,  or  muji  fodden  in  to  a  third  part)
which,  when  it  is  grown  cold,  is  decanted  into  vefiels,  and  laid  up,
that  after  a  year  it  may  be  made  ufe  of;  neverthelefs,  it  may  alfo
be  put  into  wine  nine  days  after  it  is  cooled:  but  it  is  better,  if  it
red  a  year.  A  fextarius  of  this  fodden  mud  is  put  into  two  urns  of
mud,  if  the  mud  be  of  hilly  vineyards ;  but  if  of  champagne  vine¬
yards,  they  put  three  hemince  to  it.


But


Chap.  XXI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  529

But,  when  the  mult  is  taken  otit  of  the  vat,  we  fuffer  it  to  leave
off  fermenting  for  two  days,  and  to  grow  cool,  and  be  purged  :  on
the  thk'd  day,  we  add  to  it  the  rob  of  grapes  (/.  e.  mufi  fodden  in  to
a  third  part) ;  then,  after  the  fpace  of  two  days,  when  that  mull  has,
in  like  manner,  left  off  fermenting  with  the  rob  of  grapes,  and  is
cooled,  we  purge  it,  and  fo  throw  into  it  an  heaped  ligula  (i)  of
toafted  and  bruifed  fait,  or  fucli  a  quantity  as  is  a  very  large  24th  part
of  a  fextarius.  But  they  throw  the  whiteff  fait  they  can  find  into  an
earthen  pot  without  pitch ;  which  pot,  after  it  has  received  the  fait,
they  carefully  daub  with  clay  mixed  with  ftraw,  and  fo  put  it  to  the
fire,  and  then  keep  it  as  long  toafting,  as  the  fait  makes  a  noife,  and
cracks :  wThen  it  has  begun  to  be  filent,  they  leave  off  toaffing  it.

Moreover,  they  ffeep  fenugreek  in  old  wine  for  the  fpace  of  three
days ;  then  they  take  it  out,  and  dry  it  in  an  oven,  or  in  the  Sun  ;
and,  when  it  is  dried,  they  grind  it ;  and  of  this,  when  it  is  ground,
after  the  muff  has  been  falted,  they  put  an  heaped  fpoonful,  or  fuch
a  kind  of  cupful  or  meafure ,  as  is  the  fourth  part  of  a  cyathus ,  into
two  urns  of  it.  Then,  when  the  mull  has  intirely  left  off  ferment¬
ing,  and  has  flood  (till,  we  mix  as  great  a  quantity  of  the  flour  of
calcined  ffone  with  it,  as  we  had  put  fait  into  it :  and  fo,  the  day  fol¬
lowing,  we  purge  the  wine-veffel,  and  cover  up  the  wine  we  have
preferved,  and  daub  it  all  over.

My  uncle  Columella ,  an  illuftrious  Hufbandman,  was  wont  to  ufe
this  fort  of  preferve,  in  thofe  lands  wherein  he  had  marfhy  vineyards ;
but  the  fame  illuftrious  perfon,  when  he  preferved  wfines  that  grew  on
hills,  inftead  of  fait,  put  fait- water,  boiled  into  one  third  of  the  firft:
quantity,  to  them  :  this,  indeed,  without  doubt,  makes  it  meafure
more,  and  of  a  better  flavour  j  but  it  is  attended  with  danger,  left  the
wine  be  vitiated,  if  the  water  be  ill  boiled.  But  this  water,  as  I  have
already  faid,  is  taken  up  as  far  from  the  fhore  as  can  be  conveniently
done ;  for  the  further  from  fhore,  and  the  deeper  the  fea  is  from
whence  it  is  drawn,  the  clearer  and  the  purer  it  is.

If  any  one  fhall  lay  it  up,  and  keep  it,  (as  Columella  did)  after  the
fpace  of  three  years,  when  it  is  {trained,  and  perfectly  clear,  let  him

(1)  Ligula  at  firft  fignified  a  fpoon,  but  afterwards  it  was  uftd  as  a  meafure,  and,  I  be¬
lieve,  the  fmal'.eft  in  ufe  among  the  Romans,  at  leaft  mentioned  by  our  author-  it  was
moftly  ui'ed  for  liquids,  but  here  it  is  put  for  a  diy  meafure:  and  Columella  makes  an
heaped  ligula  equal  to  a  femuncia  bene  plejta  j  by  which,  1  think,  he  means  not  the  half
of  an  ounce  in  weight,  but  the  24th  part  of  the  fextarius,  which  was  a  meafure  of  dry
things  as  well  as  of  liquid,  and  was  divided  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  as ,  and  its  divi-
fions  had  the  fame-names,  and  it  is  mandated  accordingly :  however,  I  believe  there  is  no
great  difference  between  a  pound-weigh-,  and  a  fextarius  full  of  fait.

Yyy


pour


530  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

pour  it  into  other  veffels ;  then,  after  other  three  years,  let  him  boil
it  into  a  third  part :  thus  he  will  have  a  much  better  preferve  for  his
wine,  nor  will  his  wines  be  in  any  danger  of  fpoiling.  But  it  is
enough  to  put  one  fextarius  of  falt-water  to  every  two  urns  of  muft  j,
altho’  many  alfo  mix  two  fextarii  with  that  quantity,  and  fome  three
alfo  :  and  I  would  not  refufe  to  do  this,  if  the  kind  of  wine  has  fo
much  ftrength,  as  the  tafte  of  the  falt-water  may  not  be  felt.

Therefore  a  diligent  Maher  of  a  family,  when  he  has  purchafed
and  prepared  his  ground,  will,  the  fir  ft  vintage,  prefently  make  trial
of  three  or  four  different  fort  of  preferves  upon  as  many  amphors  of
muft,  that  he  may  have  a  full  proof,  how  much  falt-water  the
wine,  which  he  has  made,  will  be  able  to  bear,  without  hurting  the
tafte  of  it.


CHAP.  XXII.

Another  Medicament  of  liquid  Pitch  (or  Tar)  wherewith  you

?nay  preferve  IVine .

PUT  a  firkin  of  liquid  Nemeturian  pitch  into  a  tub  or  trough,  and.

pour  into  the  fame  two  congii  of  a  lixivium  of  allies ;  then  mix
them  throughly  with  a  wooden  fpatula :  when  it  is  fettled,  drain  off
the  lixivium  j  then  put  a  fecond  time  the  fame  quantity  of  lixivium
to  it  •  mix  it  throughly,  and  drain  it  off  after  the  fame  manner  :  do
the  fame  thing  a  third  time  alfo ;  for  the  aflies  take  away  the  lmell  of
the  pitch,  and  wafh  the  filth  out  of  it.  Afterwards,  add  to  the  fame
five  pounds  of  Brutian  pitch  j  or,  if  you  have  not  that,  of  fome  other-
pitch,  the  cleaned  you  can  find  ;  thefe  divide  into  fmall  pieces,  and
mix  them  with  the  Nemeturian  pitch:  then  put  into  it  two  congii  od
the  very  olded  fea-water,  if  you  have  any  ;  if  not,  two  congii  of  fea-
water,  newly  taken  out  of  the  lea,  boiled  in  to  a  third  part  of  the
fird  quantity.  Let  the  tub  dand  uncovered  in  the  Sun,  during  the
rifin"  of  the  Dog-dar ;  and  mix  it  very  often  with  the  wooden  fpa¬
tula0  till  fuch  time  as  the  things  you  fhall  have  put  into  it  diffolve  in
the  pitch,  and  incorporate  with  it.

But  it  will  be  proper  to  cover  the  tub  in  the  night-time,  led  the
dew  fall  into  it :  then,  when  it  fliall  appear,  that  the  fea-water,  which
vou  have  out  into  it,  is  confumed  by  the  Sun,  you  mud  take  care  to.
carry  the  veffel  into  the  houfe.  Some  are  wont  to  mix  a  quarter

of


Chap. XXIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  531

of  a  pound  of  this  medicament  with  xlviii  fextarii  of  wine,  and  to
content  themfelves  with  preferving  it  after  this  manner.  Others
put  three  cyathi  of  it  into  as  many  fextarii  as  we  have  above-men¬
tioned.


CHAP.  XXIII.

Of  Pitch  which  the  Savoyards  ufe  for  preferving  of  pitched

Wine.

THE  pitch,  which  the  Savoyards  ufe  for  preferving  their  wines,
is  called  barky  or  fcaly  pitch :  it  is  fo  made  as  to  be  hard ;  and
the  older  it  is,  fo  much  the  better  it  is  for  ufe ;  for,  having  loft
all  its  toughnefs,  it  is  the  more  eafily  reduced  into  powder,  and  fifted.
Therefore  this  pitch  muft  be  bruifed  and  lifted  ;  then,  when  the  muft
has  twice  left  off  fermenting,  which,  for  the  moil  part,  is  within  the
fourth  day  from  the  time  it  is  taken  out  of  the  vat  which  is  under  the
wine-prefs,  they  carefully  cleanfe  it  from  filth  with  their  hands  5  and
then  put  two  ounces  and  an  half  of  the  forefaid  pitch  into  fifty-five
fextarii  of  it,  and  mix  it  throughly  with  a  wooden  ladle  :  nor  do
they  afterwards  touch  it,  till  it  ferment  together ;  which,  neverthe-
lefs,  muft  not  be  buffered  more  than  fourteen  days,  from  the  time
that  the  preferve  has  been  put  into  it :  for,  after  this  number  of  days,
you  muft  prefently  cleanfe  your  wine  from  all  manner  of  filth  ;  and,
if  any  of  the  dregs  have  ftuck,  either  to  the  brim  or  fides  of  the  vef-
fels,  they  muft  be  fcraped  and  rubbed  off ;  and,  having  put  on  the
covers,  they  muft  be  forthwith  daubed  over.

But,  if  you  will  preferve  your  whole  vintage  with  this  fame  pitch,
fo  that  it  may  not  be  known,  by  the  tafte  of  it,  that  the  wine  is
pitched,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  mix  fix  fcruples  of  the  faid  pitch  with
forty-five  fextarii  of  muft,  when  it  has  left  off  fermenting,  and  the
dregs  are  purged  out  of  it,  and  not  before  ;  but  you  muft  put  the
24th  part  of  a  fextarius  of  toafted  and  bruifed  fait  into  the  fame
quantity  of  muft.  Nor  muft  fait  be  put  into  wine  of  this  character
only,  but,  if  it  can  be  done,  all  forts  of  wine  whatfoever,  in  all
countries,  ought  to  be  falted  with  this  very  fame  quantity  of  fait  •  for
this  prevents  the  wine  from  becoming  mufty.


yyy  2


C  H  A  P.


532


L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.


C  H  A  P.  XXIV.

Of  Nemeturian  Pitch  for  the  preferving  of  Wine .

\TEmeturian  pitch  is  made  in  Liguria-,  but,  that  it  may  be  made
’  fit  for  preferving  wine,  fea- water  muft  be  taken  out  of  the  deep
lea,  at  as  great  a  difiance  from  the  Ihore  as  can  be  done  conveniently,
and  boiled  into  one  half  of  the  hrft  quantity  ;  and,  when  it  is  cooled
to  fuch  a  degree,  as  not  to  burn  the  body  when  it  is  touched,  we  mix
fuch  a  quantity  of  it  with  the  forefaid  pitch,  as  (hall  feem  fufficient ;
and  we  muft  ftir  it  about  carefully  with  a  wooden  fpatula,  or  even
with  our  hand,  that  if  there  be  any  blemilh  in  it,  or  any  part  of  it
vitiated,  it  may  be  wafhed  out.  Then  we  muft  fuffer  the  pitch  to
link  to  the  bottom,  and,  when  it  is  fettled,  drain  the  water  from  it ;
afterwards  we  mult  wadi  it  twice  or  thrice  in  the  remaining  part  of
the  boiled  water,  and  work  it  fo  long,  till  it  become  of  a  bright-red
fhining  colour  ;  then,  having  drained  the  water  off  it,  we  mult  let  it
ffand  in  the  Sun  fourteen  days,  that  whatever  moifture  from  the  water
fhall  remain  in  it,  may  be  dried  up.  But  in  the  night-time  the  veffel
mult  be  covered,  that  the  dew  may  not  fall  into  it.

When  we  lhall  have,  in  this  manner,  prepared  the  pitch,  and  h^ve
a  mind  to  preferve  our  wines  therewith,  when  they  have  now  twice
left  off  fermenting,  we  mult  put  two  cyathi  of  the  forefaid  pitch  into
forty-eight  fexiarii  of  mult,  in  this  manner :  We  mult  take  two  fcx-
tarii  of  mult  out  of  that  quantity  we  are  going  to  preferve  ;  then,
from  thefe  two  fextarii ,  we  mult,  by  little  and  little,  pour  the  mult
into  the  two  cyathi  of  pitch,  and  work  it  with  our  hand  as  it  were
honey  and  water,  that  it  may  the  more  ealily  mix  with  the  muft :
but,  when  the  whole  two  J’cxtarii  of  mult  are  mingled  with  the
pitch,  and  make,  as  it  were,  an  unity  of  Jubjiance ,  then  it  will  be
proper  to  pour  them  into  the  veffel  from  whence  we  took  them,  and
to  dir  it  about  with  a  wooden  ladle,  that  the  medicament  may  be
throughly  mixed  with  it.


CHAP.


Chap.  XXV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


533


CHAP.  XXV.

Of  fait  Water  and  frong  Brine  for  preferring  Wines .

FOrafmuch  as  Tome  people,  yea,  even  almoft  all  the  Greeks  alfo,
preferve  their  muft  with  falt-water  or  ftrong  wine,  I  thought
that  that  part  alfb  of  our  care  was  not  to  be  omitted.  In  the  inland
country,  whither  it  is  not  eafy  to  carry  falt-water,  ftrong  brine  muft
be  made  for  preferves  after  this  manner.

Rain-water  is  by  much  the  fitted:  for  this  purpofe ;  if  not  this,
then  that  which  flows  from  the  cleared:  fpring.  Therefore  you  muft
take  care  to  place  in  the  Sun,  five  years  before,  a  great  quantity  of
either  the  one  or  the  other  of  thefe,  and  put  it  up  in  the  very  beft
vefiels  you  have  ;  then,  when  it  is  putrefied,  you  muft  let  it  ftand  fo
long,  till  it  fhall  return  to  its  former  condition  ;  when  this  is  done,
provide  other  vefiels,  and  ftrain  the  water  by  little  and  little  into  them,
till  you  come  to  the  dregs;  for  there  is  always  found  fome  thick  fettle-
ment  in  the  bottom  of  water,  which  you  let  ftand  without  ftir-
ring  it.

When  the  water  has  been  thus  managed,  it  muft  be  boiled  into  one
third  of  the  firft  quantity,  after  the  manner  of  rob  of  grapes  ;  and,
into  fifty  J'extarii  of  fweet  water  they  put  one  fextarius  of  lalt,  and
a  fextarius  of  the  beft  honey  :  thefe  muft  be  boiled  all  together,  and
all  filthinefs  purged  out  of  them ;  and,  when  the  water  is  cooled,  a
certain  quantity  of  it  muft  be  put  into  an  amphora  of  muft.

But,  if  your  land  lie  near  the  fea,  the  water  muft  be  taken  out  of
the  deep  when  the  winds  are  filent,  and  the  fea  exceeding  calm  ;  and
it  muft  be  boiled  into  a  third  part,  after  you  have  put,  if  you  think
proper,  fome  of  thofe  fpices  into  it,  which  I  mentioned  above,  that
fo  the  wine  may  have  a  better  flavour  after  it  is  cured.  But,  before
you  take  up  the  muft  out  of  the  vat  which  is  under  the  wine-prefs,
fuffumigate  the  vefiels  with  rofemary,  or  laurel,  or  myrtle,  and.  fill
them  up  to  the  brim,  that,  when  the  wine  ferments,  it  may  purge  itfelf
well  ;  afterwards  rub  the  vefiels  with  pine-apples.  The  wine  which
you  have  a  mind  ftiould  be  fweeter  than  ordinary,  you  muft  preferve
it  the  day  after  you  have  taken  it  out  of  the  vat ;  and  that  which  you
would  have  rougher,  you  muft  preferve  it  the  fifth  day,  and  fo  fill
up  and  daub  the  vefiels.  Some  alfo,  having  fuffumigated  the  hogft
heads,  put  the  preferve  in  firft,  and  fo  pour  in  the  muft.


C  H  A.  P;


534


L.  T.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.


CHAP.  XXVI.


Oj  Retnedies  for  Wine  that  grows  four.


IN  whatever  land  the  wine  ufes  to  turn  acid,  you  mud:  take  care,
that,  when  you  have  gathered  and  trodden  out  the  grapes,  be¬
fore  the  hufks  are  fqueezed  in  the  wine-preffes,  you  pour  the  mud:
into,  and  drain  it  through  the  twig-bafket,  and  put  to  it  a  tenth  part
of  fweet  well-water,  out  of  the  fame  ground,  and  boil  it,  till  that
water  which  you  have  added  to  it  be  boiled  away  ;  afterwards,  when
it  is  cooled,  pour  it  into  veffels,  and  cover  it,  and  plader  it :  thus  it
will  keep  the  longer,  and  fuftain  no  damage.

It  is  better,  if  you  put  old  water  to  it,  which  has  been  kept  a  great
many  years;  and  it  is  much  better,  if  you  put  no  water  to  it  at  all,
and  boil  away  the  tenth  part  of  the  mud,  and  decant  it  into  a  cold
veffel ;  and  if,  after  it  is  boiled  in,  and  grown  cold,  you  mix  an  he-
mina  of  plader,  or  calcined  done,  with  feven  Jextarii  of  mud.  The
red  of  the  mud,  which  you  have  fqueezed  out  of  the  hufks,  ufe  as
foon  as  you  can,  or  exchange  it  for  money.


CHAP.  XXVII.


YO  U  mud  make  fweet  wine  in  this  manner  :  Gather  the  grapes,
fpread  them  in  the  Sun  during  the  fpace  of  three  days ;  on  the
fourth  day,  at  noon,  tread  out  the  grapes ;  when  they  are  warm,
take  up  mud  of  the  fird  running,  that  is,  the  mud  which  flows  into
the  mud-vat,  before  it  is  fqueezed  out  of  the  grapes  with  the  prefs ;
when  it  has  left  off  fermenting,  put  well-bruifed  flower-de-luce,  but
not  above  an  ounce-weight,  into  fifty  fextarii  of  it ;  drain  it  off  its
dregs,  and  pour  it  into  other  veffels.  This  wine  will  be  fweet,  firm,
holding,  and  wholfome  for  the  body.


CHAP.


Chap. XXVIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


535


CHAP.  XXVIII.

Of  other  wholfome  Sorts  of  Preferves.

OTHER  kinds  of  medicaments,  very  proper  for  preferving  wines,
and  keeping  them  very  firm,  make  after  this  manner :  Bruife
the  very  whiteft  Iris,  or  flower-de-luce,  in  a  mortar  ;  fteep  fenugreek
in  old  wine;  then  expofe  it  in  the  Sun,  or  in  an  oven,  that  it  may
grow  dry  ;  then  pound  it  very  fmall :  alfo  mix  bruifed  odoriferous
things  together  into  one  mafs,  that  is,  fifted  flower-de-luce,  about  the
quantity  of  nine  ounces,  of  fenugreek  in  weight  nine  ounces,  of  fweet
rufli  five  ounces ;  then,  into  each  hogfhead  or  veflel,  which  may  con¬
tain  feven  amphora,  put,  of  this  medicament,  the  weight  of  one  ounce
and  eight  fcruples ;  of  plafter,  made  of  calcined  marble,  three  heminte
into  each,  when  the  mull  is  the  produce  of  marfhy  places ;  but  one
fextarius  only,,  when  it  is  of  new  vineyards :  when  the  muft  is  the
produce  of  old  vineyards,  and  dry  places,  put  one  hcmina  into  each.

The  third  day,  after  you  have  trodden  out  the  grapes ,  pour  the
preferve  into  the  muft;  but,  before  you  put  the  preferve  into  it,  pour
a  fmall  quantity  of  the  muft  from  one  veflel  into  another,  left,  when
you  put  the  preferve  into  it,  it  ferment  with  the  medicament,  and
run  over  r  but  the  plafter,  or  the  calcined  marble,  and  the  medicament,
being  thus  prepared,  mix  throughly,  in  a  pan,  as  much  of  them  as
fhall  be  neceflary  for  each  wine-veflel,  and  dilute  that  medicament
with  muft,  and  put  them  into  the  veflels,  and  mix  them  throughly;
and,  when  the  muft  has  left  oft  fermenting,  fill  it  up  prefently,  and
daub  it  over.

When  you  preferye  any  wine  whatfoever,  do  not  prefently  pour  it
into  other  veflels,.  but  let  it  reft  in  the  wine-velfels ;  afterwards,  when
you  have  a  mind  to  pour  it  out  of  the  barrels  or  hogfheads  into  other
veflels,  having  taken  it  as  clear  off  the  dregs  as  you  poflibly  can,  in
the  Spring,  when  the  role  is  blolfoming,  transfer  it  into  veflels  that
are  well-pitched,  and  exceeding  clean.  If  you  are  defirous  to  keep  it
till  it  be  old,  put  a  fextarius  of  the  very  beft  wine,  or  three  fextarii
©f  frefh  generous  dregs,  into  a  firkin,  containing  twro  unis ;  or,  if  you
have  frefh  veflels,  out  of  which  wine  has  been  taken,  pour  it  into
them  :  if  you  do  any  one  of  thel'e  things,  the  wine  will  be  much
better  and  firmer.  Alfo,  if  you  put  good  odours  into  it,  you  will
hindq-  it  from  contracting  any  bad  fmell  cr  tafte  whatfoever  ;  for

4  there


S36  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

there  is  nothing  that  attracts  to  itfelf  the  fmell  of  other  things  more
quickly  than  wine.


CHAP.  XXIX.

Aj ter  what  Manner  Muft  may  he  kept  always  fweet ,  as  if  it

were  new.

THAT  muff  may  continue  always  fweet,  as  if  it  were  new,
manage  it  thus :  Before  the  hulks  of  the  grapes  are  put  under
the  prefs,  take  the  very  frefheft  muft  out  of  the  wine-fat,  and  put  it
into  a  new  amphora,  and  daub  it,  and  pitch  it  carefuily,  that  no  water
at  all  may  enter  into  it ;  then  fink  the  whole  amphora  into  a  pond  of
cold  and  fweet  water,  fo  that  no  part  of  it  may  hand  out  of  it ;  then,
after  forty  days,  take  it  out  of  the  pond  :  thus  it  will  continue  fweet
for  a  whole  year.


CHAP.  XXX.

Of  the  beft  TV ay  of  curing  Wme ,  and  of  Remedies  for  Wine

that  is  upon  the  Decay .


FROM  that  time,  when  you  fhall  have  firft  put  the  covers  upon
the  wine-veftels,  till  the  vernal  Equinox,  it  is  fufficient  to  cure
the  wine  once  in  xxxvi  days,  and  after  the  vernal  Equinox  twice  ;  or,
if  the  wine  begins  to  flower,  you  mull  cure  it  oftener,  left  its  flower
fall  to  the  bottom,  and  vitiate  the  tafle  of  the  wine  :  the  greater  the
heat  is,  the  oftener  is  it  proper  that  wine  be  nourifhed,  cooled,  re-
frefhed,  and  vent  given  to  it;  for,  as  long  as  it  is  kept  abundantly
cold,  fo  long  will  it  continue  in  good  condition.

The  brims  and  chops  of  the  veflels  muft  always  be  rubbed  with
pine-apples,  as  often  as  the  wine  is  cured  ;  if  your  wines  be  rougher,
or  not  fo  good  as  you  could  wifh,  which  may  be  occafioned  by  the
bad  quality  of  the  ground,  or  by  the  weather,  take  the  dregs  of  good
wine,  and  make  it  into  cakes,  and  dry  them  in  the  Sun,  and  toaft
them  at  the  fire  ;  afterwards  bruife  them  fmall,  and  rub  a  quarter  of
a  pound  of  them  into  each  amphora ,  and  plafter  it,  and  the  wine  will
become  good.  -  •


CHAP.


537


Chap.  XXXIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.

r  _  rv  ^  ’  r  -*  *r  *4  '  it

C  H  A  P.  XXXI.

0/*  Remedies ,  ^  living  Creature  fall  into  the  Mufl>

and  perijh  in  it,

IF  any  living  creature  (hall  fall  into  the  mull,  and  perifh  in  it,  as
a  ferpent,  or  a  moufe,  or  a  rat ;  left  it  make  the  wine  of  a  bad
fmell,  if  the  body  be  found,  let  it  be  burnt  in  the  fire,  and  the  allies
of  it  poured  in  cold  into  the  veffel  into  which  it  did  fall ;  and  let  it
be  throughly  mixed  with  a  woodea  ladle  :  this  thing  will  be  a  remedy
for  it.


CHAP.  XXXII.

Of  Horehound-wine.

MANY  think,  that  horehound-wine  is  ufeful  for  all  difeafes  of
the  bowels,  and  efpecially  for  the  cough.  When  you  make
your  vintage,  gather  tender  ftalks  of  horehound,  chiefly  from  uncuK
tivated  and  lean  places,  and  dry  them  in  the  Sun  ;  then  make  them
into  bundles,  and  bind  them  with  a  palm-  or  rufh-rope,  and  put  them
into  a  hogfhead,  fo  that  the  band  may  be  on  the  outfide  :  put  vm
ponnds  of  horehound  into  cc fextarii  of  fweet  muff,  that  fo  it  may
continue  in  it,  till  the  muff  leave  off  fermenting  ;  afterwards  take  out
the  horehound,  and,  when  the  wine  is  well  cleanfed,  daub  it  care-
fuliy.  .  ■'  •


CHAP.  XXXIII.

Of  Squil-wine .

YOU  mufl  in  this  manner  prepare  and  preferve  Squil-wine,  for
promoting  digeftion,  and  repairing  the  body ;  and  alfo  for  an
old  cough,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  ftomach.  Forty  days  before
you  defign  to  gather  grapes  for  wine,  firft  gather  the  Squil,  and  cut  it
exceeding  fmall,  like  the  root  of  a  radifh,  and  hang  up  the  fmall

Zzz  cuttings


S38  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

cuttings  of  it  in  the  fhade,  that  they  may  dry  j  then,  when  they  are
dry,  put  a  pound-weight  of  the  dry  fquil  into  xlviii  fextarii  of  Ami -
nean  muft,  and  let  it  remain  in  it  for  xxx  days  j  afterwards  take  it
out,  and,  after  you  have  feparated  the  wine  from  the  dregs,  put  it
up  into  two  amphors.  Others  write,  that  a  pound-weight  and  a
quarter  of  dry  fquil  muft  be  put  into  forty-eight  J'extarii  of  muft  :
and  this  very  thing  I  do  not  difapprove.


CHAP.  XXXIV.

Of  Squil-vinegar.

THEY  who  have  a  mind  to  make  Squil-vinegar  for  fauce,  put
this  very  weight  of  fquil,  which  I  have  mentioned  above,  into
two  urns  of  vinegar,  and  fuffer  it  to  remain  forty  days  in  it :  into
three  amphora  of  muft  you  put  a  congins  of  fharp  vinegar,  or  two
congii ,  if  it  is  not  lharp  ;  and  in  a  pot,  which  contains  four  amphora ,
you  boil  it  in  one  fourth  part ;  or,  if  the  muft  is  not  fweet,  one  third
part  j  let  it  be  fcummed.  But  let  the  muft  be  of  the  middle  fort,
and  very  clear.


CHAP.  XXXV.

How  you  muft  make  TV irmwood-wine ,  Hyjfop-wine ,  Southern¬
wood-  and  other  Sorts  of  Wine .

YO  U  muft  make  up  and  prepare  wormwood-  hyflop-  fouthem-
wood-  thyme-  pennyroyal-  and  fennel-wines,  after  this  manner:
Boil  one  pound-weight  of  Pontic  wormwood,  with  four  fextarii  of
muft,  till  one  fourth  part  of  it  be  boiled  away ;  what  remains  of  it,
put  it  cold  into  an  urn  of  Aminean  muft  :  do  the  fame  with  the  other
things  above-mentioned.  Alfo  three  pounds  of  dry  pennyroyal  may
be  boiled  with  a  congius  of  muft,  till  a  third  part  of  it  be  boded  away ;
and,  when  the  liquor  is  cooled,  and  the  pennyroyal  taken  out  of  it,
it  may  be  put  into  an  urna  of  muft ;  and  this  is  very  proper  to  be
given  prefently,  to  fuch  as  are  affedted  with  the  cough  during  the
Winter  -}  and  this  is  called  pennyroyal-wine.


CHAP.


Chap.  XXXVIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


539


CHAP.  XXXVI.

Of  Mujl  of  the  laft  Pr  effing ,  or  fqueezed  Muft .

SQueezed  muft  is  that  which  is  prefled  out,  when  the  mafs  of  the
hulks  of  the  grapes  is  cut  after  the  firft  prefling :  You  (hall  throw
that  muft  into  a  new  veflel,  and  fill  it  up  to  the  brim ;  then  you  lhall
put  to  it  fmall  branches  of  dry  rofemary,  tied  together  with  flax,  and
fuffer  them  to  ferment  together  for  feven  days ;  then  you  (hall  take
out  the  bundle  of  fmall  branches,  and,  when  the  wine  is  carefully
purged,  plafter  it  up:  but  it  will  be  fufficient  to  put  a  pound  and  an
half  of  rofemary  into  two  urns  of  muft.  After  two  months  you  may
ufe  this  wine  for  a  remedy.


CHAP.  XXXVII.

To  make  Wine  like  to  Greek  Wine.

GAther  the  very  ripeft  early-ripe  grapes,  and  dry  them  three  days
in  the  Sun ;  tread  them  out  the  fourth  day,  and  throw  the  muft,
which  has  none  of  the  laft  prefling  in  it,  into  a  hoglhead,  and  take
diligent  care,  that,  when  it  has  left  off  fermenting,  the  dregs  be  purged
out  of  it ;  then  the  fifth  day,  when  you  have  purged  the  muft,  put
two  fextarii  of  toafted  and  lifted  fait ;  or,  which  is  the  leaft  quantity,
one  fextarius  to  xlix  J'extarii  of  muft.  Some  alfo  mix  a  fextarius  of
rob  of  grapes,  (muft  fodden  in  to  one  third  of  the  firft  quantity)  with
it.  Some  alfo  add  two  fextarii  to  it,  if  they  think,  that  the  wine  is
not  of  a  very  firm  and  holding  kind.


CHAP.  XXXVIII.

How  you  may  make  Myrtle-wine.

MAKE  myrtle- wine  for  gripings  of  the  guts,  and  a  Ioofenefs,  and
for  a  weak  ftomach,  after  this  manner :  There  are  two  kinds
of  myrtle-trees,  of  which  the  one  is  black,  and  the  other  white;  the
*  Z  z  z  2  berries


540  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

berries  of  the  black  kind  are  gathered  when  they  are  ripe,  and  their
feeds  taken  out ;  and  the  berries  themfelves,  without  the  feeds,  are
dried  in  the  Sun,  and  laid  up  in  a  dry  place,  in  an  earthen  jar.

Then,  in  the  time  of  the  vintage,  when  the  Sun  is  hot,  they  ga¬
ther  Aminean  grapes,  that  are  throughly  ripe,  off  old  vines  that  are
fupponed  with  trees ;  or,  if  they  have  no  fuch  vines,  they  gather
them  from  the  oldeft  vineyards  they  have ;  and  the  muft  that  they
have  from  thefe  they  put  into  a  wine-veflel;  and  prefently,  the  firft
day,  before  it  ferments,  they  carefully  bruife  the  myrtle-berries,  that
they  have  laid  up  ;  and  they  weigh  as  many  pounds  of  them,  after
they  are  bruifed,  as  they  defign  to  prepare  amphors  of  wine  :  then  we
take  a  little  muft  out  of  that  veflel  which  we  are  going  to  put  the
berries  into,  and  fprinkle  it  upon  that  which  we  have  bruifed  and
weighed,  as  it  were,  upon  meal.  Afterwards  we  make  up  feveral
fmall  mafTes  of  it,  and  fo  let  them  down  by  the  Tides  of  the  veffel  into
the  muft,  left  one  of  the  lumps  fhould  fall  upon  the  other.

Then,  when  the  muft  has  twice  left  off  fermenting,  and  has  been
twice  cured,  they  bruife  again  the  lame  quantity  of  berries,  and  in
the  fame  manner  as  I  faid  above  :  but  they  do  not  make  them  into
fmall  mafTes  or  lumps,  as  before ;  but  they  take  muft  out  of  the  fame
veffel,  and  put  it  into  a  pan,  and  mix  it  throughly  with  the  forefaid
quantity  of  bruifed  berries,  fo  as  it  may  be  like  thick  broth;  and,
>vhen  it  is  throughly  mixed,  they  pour  it  all  together  into  the  fame
wine-veflel,  and  ftir  it  throughly  with  a  wooden  flice.  Then,  nine
days  after  they  have  done  this,  they  purge  the  wine,  and  rub  the  vef¬
fel  with  fmall  bruthes  of  dry  myrtle,  and  put  the  cover  upon  it,  that
nothing  may  fall  into  it  :  this  being  done,  after  the  feventh  day  they
purify  the  wine  a  fecond  time,,  and  pour  it  into  flrkins  that  are  well-
pitched,  and  have  a  good  fmell.  But  you  muft  take  care,  when  you
pour  it  into  veflcls,  that  you  pour  it  into  them  clear,  and  without
dregs.

Another  kind  of  myrtle-wine  mingle  after  this  manner  :  Boil  Attic
honey  thrice,  and  feum  it  as' often  ;  or,  if  you  have  no  Attic  honey,
clioofe  the  very  beft  you  can  .find,  and  feum  it  four  or  five  times ;  for
the  worfe  it  is,  the  more  filth  it  has  in  it :  then,  when  the  honey  is
cooled  again,  gather  the  very  ripeft  berries  of  the  white  kind  of  myrtle,
and  break  them,  fo  as  not  to  bruife  with  them  the  feeds  that  are
within  them;  and,  having  prefently  fhut  them  up  in  a  wooden  bafket,
prefs  the  juice  out  of  them,  and  mix  about  fix  Jextarii  of  their  juice
with  on e  fextarius  of  boiled  honey;  and,  after  you  have  poured  it  into
a  little  ftone  bottle,  plafter  it  over.  But  this  ought  to  be  done  in  the

month


Chap.  XXXIX.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  541

month  of  December ,  at  which  time  commonly  the  feeds  of  the  myrtle
are  ripe  :  and  you  muft  obferve,  that  the  weather  be  fair  and  clear
feven  days  before  the  berries  are  gathered,  if  it  can  be  done;  but,  if
not,  that  it  be  fair  weather  not  lei's  than  three  days  before,  or,  at  lead:,
that  it  has  not  rained ;  and  you  muft  take  care,  that  they  be  not  ga¬
thered  with  the  dew  upon  them.

Many  gather  the  black  or  white  myrtle-berry  after  it  is  fully  ripe  5
and,  having  expofed  it  for  two  hours,  and  dried  it  a  little  in  the  fhade,
they  bruife  if  l'o,  that  the  feeds  it  contains  may,  as  much  as  pofiible,
remain  intire ;  then  they  fqueeze  the  juice  out  of  what  they  have
bruifed,  through  a  flaxen  frail,  and,  having  drained  it  very  clear
through  a  rudi-drainer,  they  put  it  up  in  fmall  done  bottles,  well-
pitched,  without  mixing  honey,  or  any  other  thing  with  it.  This
liquor  is  not  fo  durable;  but,  as  long  as  it  keeps  without  fpoiling,  it
is  of  greater  benefit  to  health,  than  that  other  fort  of  compolition
made  with  the  juice  of  myrtle-berries.

There  are  fome,  who,  having  fqueezed  out  this  very  juice,  if  they
have  a  larger  quantity  of  it,  boil  it  in  to  a  third  part,  and,  when  it  is
cooled,  put  it  up  in  well-pitched  fmall  done  bottles.  When  it  is  pre¬
pared  after  this  manner,  it  keeps  longer;  but  that  which  you  diall  not
have  boiled,  may  keep  found,  without  fudaining  any  hurt,  for  two
years,  provided  you  make  it  very  clean,  and  wbth  great  care.


CHAP.  XXXIX.

After  what  Manner  Wine  may  he  made  of  Grapes  dried  in

the  Sun .

~\AslGO  directs  the  bed  raifin-wine  to  be  made  in  this  manner,  as  I
myfelf  alfo  have  made  it;  viz.  To  gather  the  early-ripe  grapes
when  they  are  very  ripe,  and  to  rejedt  fuch  of  the  berries  as  are
withered  or  fpoiled  ;  to  fallen  in  the  ground  forks  or  dakes,  at  the
didance  of  four  feet  the  one  from  the  other,  for  fuppordng  reeds,  and
to  couple  them  together  with  poles ;  then  to  put  reeds  upon  them,
and  to  fpread  the  grapes  in  the  Sun,  and  cover  them  during  the  night,
led  they  be  wet  with  the  dew;  then,  when  they  are  throughly  dried,
to  pluck  off  the  berries,  and  throw  them  into  a  barrel  or  hoglhead,
and  to  put  the  very  bed  mud  to  them,  till  all  the  grapes  are  covered
with  it :  when  the  grapes  fhall  have  drunk  it  up,  and  filed  them-

feives


542  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

felves  with  it,  to  put  them  all  together  into  a  frail  the  fixth  day,  and
prefs  them  in  the  wine-prefs,  and  take  the  dried  railin-wine  from
them  ;  afterwards  to  tread  the  hulks,  after  the  very  frefheft  mull,
which  has  been  made  of  other  grape6,  which  you  have  expofed  to  the
Sun  for  the  fpace  of  three  days,  has  been  put  to  them  ;  then,  to  mix
all  together,  and  put  the  whole  kneaded  mafs  of  bruifed  grapes  under
the  prefs,  and  prefently  to  put  up  this  fecondary  railin-wine,  in
plaftered  velfels,  that  it  may  not  become  too  rough :  then,  after
twenty  or  thirty  days,  when  it  has  left  off  fermenting,  to  pour  it  very
clear  into  other  velfels ;  and  prefently  to  plafter  the  covers,  and  cover
them  with  lkin.

If  you  would  make  railin-wine  of  the  Apia?i  grape,  gather  the
Apian  grape  found  and  in  tire  i  purge  them  of  l'uch  grains  as  are  rotten
and  fpoiled,  and  put  them  apart  by  themfelves ;  afterwards  hang  them
up  on  poles,  and  order  it  fo,  that  the  poles  may  be  always  in  the  Sun.
After  the  berries  are  Ihrivelled  enough,  pull  them  off,  and  throw
them  into  a  tub  without  the  ftalks,  and  tread  them  well  with  your
feet.  When  you  have  made  one  floor  or  ftory  of  them,  fprinkle  old
wine  upon  it;  afterwards  tread  down  another  upon  it,  and  alfo  fprinkle
wine  on  it.  In  the  fame  manner  tread  a  third  flory,  and  continue  to
pour  wine  upon  them,  fo  that  it  may  fwim  above  them,  and  let  them
alone  for  five  days ;  afterwards  tread  them  with  your  feet,  and  prefs
the  grapes  in  a  new  wicker-balket.

Some  prepare  old  rain-water  for  this  ufe,  and  boil  it  in  one  third  ;
then,  having  dried  the  grapes  in  the  Sun,  in  the  manner  above  defcri-
bed,  they  put  boiled  water  inftead  of  wine,  and  manage  the  reft  after
the  fame  manner.  This  wine,  where  there  is  plenty  of  wood,  is
made  with  very  little  charge,  and  comes  very  cheap  ;  and,  when  it
is  ufed,  it  is  even  fweeter  than  the  other  forts  of  railin-wine  above-
mentioned.


CHAP.  XL.

How  the  beft  Jmall  thin  Wine  may  be  made.

TH  E  beft  fmall  thin  wine  is  made  in  this  manner  :  Confider  how
many  firkins  the  tenth  part  of  the  quantity  of  wine,  which
you  have  made  in  one  day,  may  amount  to;  and  put  as  many  firkins
of  frelh  water  to  the  hulks  of  the  grapes ;  but  let  them  be  fuch  as
wine  of  one  day  old  has  been  prefled  from  :  pour  like  wife,  into  the

fame


Chap.  XLI.  O/HUSBANDRY.  543

fame  place,  the  fcum  of  the  mu  ft  that  has  been  fodden  in  to  one
third,  or  one  half  of  the  firft  quantity  for  making  rob  of  grapes,  and
the  dregs  out  of  the  wine-vat,  and  mix  them  throughly  together ;  and
let  this  mixed  mafs  foak  for  one  night :  the  day  after  tread  it  with  your
feet ;  and,  when  it  is  thus  throughly  mixed,  put  it  under  the  wine-
prefs ;  then  put  up  that  which  flows  from  it,  either  in  hogfheads  or
amphors j  and,  when  it  has  left  off  fermenting,  ftop  them  up :  but  it  is
more  commodioufly  kept  in  amphors.  M.  Columella  made  this  felf-
fame  thin  fmall  wine  of  old  water  •  and  fometimes  he  kept  it  above
two  years  without  fpoiling.


CHAP.  XLI.

How  to  make  the  be  ft  Honey-wine  (i).

MAKE  the  beft  honey-wine  thus :  Take  up  prefently,  out  of
the  wine-vat,  the  pureft  muft  which  diftils  from  the  grapes,
before  they  are  too  much  trodden  :  but  make  it  of  the  muft  of  grapes
of  that  kind  of  vine  which  grows  upon  trees,  and  which  you  have
gathered  in  dry  weather.  Into  an  urn  of  muft  you  {hall  put  ten
pound- weight  of  the  beft  honey  j  and,  having  mixed  it  carefully  with
the  muft,  you  (hall  put  it  up  in  a  ftone  bottle,  and  immediately  plafter
it,  and  order  it  to  be  laid  up  in  a  loft  :  if  you  havaa  mind  to  make  a
greater  quantity  of  it,  you  ihall  put  honey  to  it  in  the  proportion
above-mentioned.  After  thirty-two  days  you  muft  open  the  bottle  j
and,  after  you  have  ftrained  the  muft,  and  put  it  very  clear  into  an¬
other  veffel,  plafter  it,  and  fet  it  into  an  oven.

A  preferve,  or  fyrup  of  quinces,  is  made  in  this  manner :  They
boil  an  urn  of  Amincan  muft  of  the  grapes  of  vines,  fupported  by
trees,  in  a  new  earthen  or  tin  pot,  and  twenty  large  quince-apples
well  clean  fed,  and  found  fweet  pomegranates,  which  they  call  Car¬
thaginian  apples,  and  forb-apples  not  throughly  ripe,  divided,  and
their  feeds  taken  out,  which  may  be  of  about  the  quantity  of  three
fextarii :  thefe  are  fo  boiled,  that  all  the  apples  may  diffolve  in  the

(i)  The  title  of  this  chapter,  in  all  the  editions  I  have  feen,  is  by  no  means  agreeable
to  the  defign  of  it ;  which,  among  other  things,  is  to  direct  how  to  make  honey-wine,
but  fays  nothing  of  making  what  they  call  mvftum  lix'tvum ,  by  which  is  underftood  that
muft  which  drops  from  the  grapes  of  its  own  accord,  before  they  are  prefled :  therefore  I
have  made  the  firft  words  of  the  chapter  the  title  of  it.

3  '  mufti


544.  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

muft;  and  let  there  be  a  boy  to  dir  and  mix  the  apples  throughly
with  a  wooden  (lice  or  reed,  that  they  may  not  be  burnt- to.  Then,
after  they  are  boiled,  fo  that  there  is  not  much  of  the  liquor  remain¬
ing,  they  let  them  to  cool,  and  drain  them ;  and  fuch  of  them  as
fublide  in  the  drainer,  they  carefully  bruile  and  fmooth,  and  boil  a
fecond  time  in  their  own  juice,  upon  a  dow  fire  of  charcoal,  that  they
may  not  burn-to,  till  the  liquor  that  fettles  to  the  bottom  appears  like
dregs.  Neverthelefs,  before  the  medicament  is  taken  oft'  the  fire,  they
add  to  it,  over-and-above  all,  three  heminez  of  rhus  Syriacus ,  bruifed
and  fifted;  and  mix  it  throughly  with  a  wooden  fpatula,  that  it  may
incorporate  with  the  red  :  then,  when  the  medicament  is  cooled,
they  put  it  into  a  new-pitched  earthen  vefiel  5  and,  when  they  have
pladered  it,  they  hang  it  up  high,  that  it  may  not  contract  a  palenefs.


CHAP.  XLII.

Of  preferring  Cheefe .

WE  mud  preferve  cheefe  in  this  manner  :  Cut  large  pieces  of  dry
ewe-milk-cheefe  of  the  lad  year,  and  dow  them  in  a  pitched
vefiel j  then  fill  it  with  the  bed  kind  of  mud,  fo  that  it  may  cover
the  cheefe ;  and  let  there  be  a  larger  quantity  of  liquor,  than  of  cheefe  j
for  the  cheefe  drinks  it  up,  and  fpoils,  unlefs  the  mud  always  fwim
above  it.  But,  when  you  have  filled  the  vefiel,  you  mud  plader  it
immediately  ;  then  after  twenty  days  you  may  open  it,  and  uie  it  with
any  kind  of  fauce  or  feafoning  you  pleafe ;  and  by  itfelf  alfo  it  is  not
unplea  fant.


CHAP.  XLIII.

After  what  Manner  potted  Grapes  may  he  put  up  and  kept.

WHEN  you  have  cut  oft  from  the  vine  the  Bianaft  grapes,  or
fuch  as  have  hard  and  thick  fkins,  or  fuch  as  are  of  a.  purple
colour,  pitch  their  pedicles  or  dalks  immediately  with  hard  pitch  j
then  fill  a  fmall  new  earthen  pan  with  the  very  dried  fifted  chaff,  that
it  may  be  without  any  dud  in  it ;  and  fo  place  the  cluders  of  grapes

upon


Chap.  XLIII.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  545

upon  it ;  then  cover  it  with  another  earthen  pan,  and  daub  it  all  round
with  clay  mixt  with  ftraw;  and  fo,  after  you  have  flowed  the  pans  in
a  very  dry  loft,  cover  them  all  over  with  dry  chaff.

And  all  forts  of  grapes  whatfoever  may  be  kept  without  fpoiling,  if
they  be  plucked  off  the  vine  in  the  decreafe  of  the  Moon,  and  in  fair
weather,  after  the  fourth  hour  of  the  day,  and  when  they  have
already  had  the  Sun  for  fome  time  upon  them,  and  have  no  dew  upon
them.  But  let  a  fire  be  made  in  the  next  large  crofs-way,  that  the
pitch  may  be  boiling  hot,  into  which  the  ftalks  of  the  cluflers  may  be
prefently  dipt  ;  throw  a  firkin  of  the  rob  of  grapes,  or  muft  boiled  in  to
a  third  part  of  the  firft  quantity,  into  a  well-pitched  barrel  j  then
thruft  in  crofs-pieces  of  wood  very  clofe,  fo  as  they  may  not  touch
the  fodden  muft;  then  place  new  earthen  difhes  upon  them,  and  in
them  fo  difpofe  the  bunches  of  grapes,  that  one  of  them  may  not
touch  the  other  ;  then  put  covers  upon  the  difhes,  and  daub  them
over.  Then  build  a  fecond  ftory  after  the  fame  manner,  and  a  third,
and  as  long  as  the  bignefs  of  the  barrel  will  allow,  and  flow  the
bunches  after  the  fame  manner  ;  then  having  pitched  the  cover  of  the
barrel,  anoint  it  thoroughly  with  fodden  muft ;  and,  when  you  have
put  it  on,  flop  it  up  clofe  with  afhes.

Some,  after  they  have  put  the  fodden  muft  into  the  barrel,  con¬
tent  themfelvee  with  thrufting  in  tranfverfe  pieces  of  wood  very  clofe,
and  hanging  the  bunches  of  grapes  upon  them,  fo  as  not  to  touch  the
fodden  muft  ;  then  having  put  on  the  cover,  daub  it  all  over.  Others,
after  they  have  gathered  the  grapes,  in  the  manner  as  I  faid  above,
dry  new  fmall  barrels  in  the  Sun,  without  any  pitch  ;  then,  when
they  have  cooled  them  in  the  fhade,  put  barley-bran  into  them,  and
place  the  bunches  of  grapes  fo  upon  it,  as  one  of  them  may  not  prefs
upon  another ;  then  they  pour  in  the  fame  kind  of  bran  upon  them,
and  place  another  row  of  bunches  in  the  fame  manner ;  and  this  they
do,  till  they  fill  the  barrel  with  bran  and  bunches  of  grapes  by  turns ;
and,  when  they  have  put  the  cover  upon  it,  they  daub  it  over,  and
lay  up  the  grapes  in  a  very  dry  and  cold  loft.

Some,  after  the  fame  method,  preferve  green  grapes  with  dry
poplar-  or  evergreen-oak- faw-duft.  Others  cover  over,  with  dry  par¬
get-flower,  the  bunches  of  grapes  which  they  have  plucked  off  the
vines  before  they  are  too  ripe.  Others,  when  they  have  gathered  the
grapes,  if  there  are  any  of  the  grapes  fpoiled,  cut  them  off  with  a
pair  of  fheers,  and  fo  hang  them  up  in  a  barn,  where  there  is  wheat
placed  under  them.  But  this  method  makes  the  berries  to  flirivel,  and
become  wrinkly,  and  almoft  as  fvveet  as  raifins  dried  in  the  Sun.

4  A  Marcus


r46  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

Marcus  Columella ,  my  uncle,  ordered  broad  veffels,  after  the  man¬
ner  of  dirties,  to  be  made  of  that  fort  of  clay  wherewith  they  make
the  amphora,  and  to  be  pitched  very  thick,  both  on  the  infide  and  out-
fide  ;  and  after  he  had  prepared  them,  he  ordered  the  purple-coloured,
and  the  bumaft  grapes,  and  the  Numifian ,  and  the  thick  and  hard-
fkinned  grapes  to  be  gathered,  and  their  ffalks,  without  delay,  to  be
dipt  into  boiling  pitch,  and  every  kind  to  be  put  up  feparately  by  it-
felf,  fo  that  the  bunches  might  not  touch  each  other  :  after  this  he
ordered  covers  to  be  put  upon  them,  and  that  they  fhould  be  daubed
with  thick  plarter  ;  then,  after  all,  to  be  pitched  with  hard  pitch,
which  was  melted  upon  the  fire,  fo  that  no  moifture  whatfoever
might  be  able  to  pafs  through ;  then  he  ordered  the  whole  veffels  to
be  funk  in  fpring-  or  ciftern-water,  with  weights  laid  upon  them,  and
that  no  part  of  them  fhould  be  buffered  to  appear  above  the  water.
Thus  grapes  are  exceedingly  well  preferved  :  but,  when  they  are  taken
out  of  the  water,  unlefs  they  be  eaten  that  very  day,  they  grow  four.

Neverthelefs,  there  is  nothing  furer  than  to  make  earthen  veffels,
which  may  contain  one  fingle  bunch  of  grapes  each,  with  room  fuffi-
cient :  thefe  veffels  ought  to  have  four  handles,  wherewith  they  mav
hang  tied  to  the  vine  ;  alfo  their  covers  ought  to  be  fo  formed,  as  to
be  divided  in  the  middle,  that  fo,  when  the  veffels  are  hung  up,  and
have  received  a  bunch  of  grapes  into  each  of  them,  the  two  parts  or
divifions  of  the  covers,  being  applied  on  both  Tides,  may  join  together,
and  cover  the  bunches  of  grapes  :  and  both  the  veffels  and  their  covers
ought  to  be  carefully  pitched,  both  on  the  infide  and  on  the  outlide  ;
then,  when  they  have  covered  the  grapes,  they  ought  to  be  covered
over  with  abundance  of  clay  mixed  with  ftraw :  but  the  clurters
of  grapes,  which  hang  upon  the  mother  vine,  ought  to  be  put  up  into
the  pipkins,  fo  as  no  parts  of  them  may  touch  the  veffels.

But  the  time  when  they  ought  to  be  fhut  up  in  the  vafes,  is  com¬
monly  when  the  wreather  is  as  yet  very  dry  and  fair,  and  the  berries
or  grains  of  the  clurters  plump,  and  of  divers  colours.  This,  upon
the  whole,  we  rtridtly  injoin,  above  all  things,  that  apples  and  grapes
be  not  laid  up  together  in  the  fame  place,  nor  in  any  place  near  to
one  another,  from  whence  the  fmell  of  the  apples  may  reach  them :
for,  with  this  kind  of  fteam,  the  grains  of  the  clurters  quickly  fpoil
and  rot.  Neverthelefs,  the  methods  of  keeping  and  preferving  apples
or  grapes,  which  we  have  mentioned,  are  not  all  proper  for  all  re¬
gions;  but  fome  of  them  agree  with  one,  and  fome  with  another,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  places,  and  the  qualities  of  the  grapes.


The


Chap. XL1II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  547

The  antients,  for  the  moft  part,  pat  up  in  veffels  the  Scircitulan,
the  Venuculan ,  and  the  larger  Aminean  and  Galilean  grapes,  and  fuch
as  were  of  large,  and  hard,  and  thin  berries  :  but  now,  in  and  about
the  city,  the  Numifian  grapes  are  moft  approved  for  this  ufe ;  they
gather  the  choiceft  of  thefe  when  they  are  moderately  ripe,  in  fair
weather,  after  the  Sun  has  removed  the  dew,  about  the  fourth  or  fifth
hour  of  the  day,  provided  the  Moon  be  decreafing,  and  under  the
earth  j  then  they  place  them  upon  hurdles,  fo  that  the  bunches  may
not  bruife  one  another  j  then,  afterwards,  they  bring  them  into  the
houfe,  and,  with  a  pair  of  Iheers,  cut  off  the  dry,  withered,  and
rotten  berries ;  and,  after  they  are  cooled  a  little  in  the  fhade,  they
put  three  or  four  bunches  of  them  into  the  pots,  according  to  the
largenefs  of  the  veffels,  and  flop  up  the  covers  carefully  with  pitch,
that  they  may  not  let  the  moifture  pafs  through  :  then  they  take  out
the  mafs  of  the  hulks  of  the  grapes,  which  have  been  well  fqueezed
in  the  wine-prefs,  and,  having  feparated  the  ftalks  pretty  well  from
them,  and  loofened  the  bruifed  mafs  of  the  hulks,  they  fpread  them
in  the  bottom  of  the  barrel,  and  flow  the  pots  therein  with  their
mouths  downward,  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  each  other,  that  the  hulks
and  grape-ftones  may  be  trodden  in  between  them  j  and  when,  with
thefe  preffed  clofe  together,  they  have  made  the  firft  ftory ;  they  How
other  pots  in  the  fame  manner,  and  fill  up  the  fecond  ftory,  then,
after  the  fame  manner,  the  barrel  is  filled  up  with  rows  or  ftories  of
pots,  one  above  another,  which  are  made  fall  with  the  hulks  and
grape-ftones,  trodden  in  clofe  about  them  ;  then  they  prefen tly  fill  up
the  veffel  to  the  brim  with  hulks,  and  prefs  them  clofe  together ;  and,
after  they  have  put  the  cover  upon  it,  they  immediately  daub  the  barrel
with  afhes,  tempered  after  the  manner  of  plafter.  Neverthelefs,  it  is
neceffary  to  caution  him,  who  is  about  to  buy  thefe  veffels,  that  he
do  not  buy  the  pots  which  imbibe  the  moifture,  or  are  not  well  baked ;
for  both  thefe  things  fpoil  the  grapes,  by  letting  the  water  pafs  through.
Moreover,  when  the  pots  are  brought  out  for  ufe,  a  whole  row  or
ftory  of  them  muft  be  pulled  down  at  once  ;  for  the  hulks  and  grape-
ftones,  which  are  preffed  clofe  together*  if  they  are  once  moved,
quickly  grow  four,  and  fpoil  the  grapes.


4  A  2


CHAP.


5+8


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  BookXII.


CHAP.  XLIV.

After  what  Manner  Pomegranates  may  be  preferved.

AFTER  the  vintage  follow  the  compolitions  ©f  autumnal  things,
which  of  themfelves  very  much  inlarge  the  care  and  bufinefs
of  the  Bailiff’s  Wife  :  nor  am  I  ignorant,  that  there  are  many  things,
which  Cains  Matius  has  moil  carefully  treated  of,  which  I  have  not
brought  together,  and  put  into  this  book.  For  -what  he  propofed  to
himfelf  was,  to  give  directions  about  furnifhing,  preparing,  and  fet-
ting  in  order  plentiful  tables,  and  making  magnificent  entertainments
in  town.  He  publifhed  three  books  :  the  one  he  called  the  Cook ,  the
other  the  Fijhmonger ,  and  the  third  the  Oibnan.  Neverthelefs,  we
are  abundantly  fatisfied  with  fuch  things,  as  may  fall  to  the  fhare  of
rural  fimplicity,  and  are  eafily  attainable,  and  without  any  great  ex¬
pence  j  as,  in  the  firft  place,  all  forts  of  apples.

And,  that  I  may  begin  with  the  pomegranates,  fome  twift  their
pedicles  or  flalks  as  they  grow  upon  the  tree,  that  the  apples  may  not
burft  with  the  rains,  or,  chapping,  utterly  perifh ;  and  they  tie  the  apples
to  the  larger  branches,  that  they  may  remain  unmoved  :  then  they
inclofe  the  tree  with  nets  made  of  Spanijh  broom,  left  the  apples  be
torn,  either  by  crows,  or  rooks,  or  other  fowls.  Some  fit  fmall  earthen
pots  to  the  apples,  as  they  hang  on  the  trees  ;  and,  having  daubed
them  over  with  clay  mixed  with  ftraw,  fuffer  them  to  flick  to  the
trees :  others  wrap  them  up,  one  by  one,  in  hay  or  ftraw ;  and,  more¬
over,  daub  them  over  very  thick  with  clay  mixed  with  ftraw,  and  fo
bind  them  to  the  larger  branches,  that  they  may  not,  as  I  faid,  be
moved  with  the  wind.

But  all  thefe  things  ought  to  be  carefully  done,  as  I  faid,  in  fair
weather,  and  when  there  is  no  dew  upon  them  •  which,  neverthe¬
lefs,  ought  either  not  to  be  done  at  all,  becaufe  the  fmall  trees  are
hurt  thereby ;  or,  at  leaft,  it  ought  not  to  be  put  in  pradlice  every
year,  efpecially  confidering,  that  we  may  keep  the  apples  very  fafely,
even  when  they  are  pulled  off  the  trees,  without  fuftaining  any  da¬
mage  :  for,  even  within-doors,  you  may  make  fmall  trenches  of  three
feet  dimenfion,  in  a  very  dry  place  ;  and,  after  you  have  put  a  fmall
quantity  of  very  fmall  earth  into  them,  you  fallen  fmall  branches
of  the  elder-tree  therein  ;  then,  when  the  weather  is  fair,  you  gather
the  pomegranates  with  their  pedicles,  and  infer t  them  into  the  elder-
2  *  tree-


Chap. XLIV.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  549

tree-branches  [for  the  elder-tree  has  its  pith  fo  loofe  and  open,  that
it  may  eafily  receive  the  pedicles  of  the  apples].  But  you  muft  take
care,  that  the  apples  be  not  lefs  than  four  inches  diftant  from  the
earth,  and  that  they  do  not  touch  one  another.  Then  you  put  a  cover
upon  the  ditch  you  have  made,  and  daub  it  all  round  with  clay  mixed
with  ftraw,  and  heap  the  earth  upon  it,  that  was  digged  out  of  it.

This  fame  thing  may  be  done  in  a  tub  or  barrel,  if  any  one  fhall
have  a  mind  to  fill  a  velfel  half-full,  either  with  fmall,  loofe  earth,
or,  which  fome  like  better,  with  river-fand ;  and  to  do  all  the  other
things  after  the  fame  manner.  Indeed,  Mago  the  Carthaginian  orders
fea-water  to  be  made  exceeding  hot,  and  the  pomegranates  to  be  tied
with  flax  or  nifties,  and  let  down  into  it  for  a  little  while,  till  they
be  difcoloured ;  and,  after  they  aFe  taken  out,  to  be  dried  three  days
in  the  Sun,  and  afterwards  to  be  hung  up  in  a  cold  place  ;  and,  when
there  is  occafion  to  ufe  them,  to  fteep  them  in  cold  frefh  water  one
night,  and  the  day  following,  till  the  hour  when  they  are  to  be  ufed..
But  the  fame  author  alfo  dire&s  us,  to  daub  the  frefh  apples  all  over,
very  thick,  with  well-wrought  potters-clay ;  and,  when  the  clay
is  dried,  to  hang  them  up  in  a  cold  place  j  afterwards,  when  there  is
occafion  to  ufe  them,  to  put  them  into  water,  and  foften  the  clay.
This  method  prefer ves  the  apple  as  frefh,  as  if  it  were  newly  ga¬
thered.

The  fame  Mago  commands  us  to  fpread  poplar-  or  evergreen-oak-
faw-duft,  in  the  bottom  of  a  new  earthen  pot,  and  to  flow  the  apples
fo,  that  the  faw-duft  may  be  trodden  in  between  them  ;  then,  after-
the  firft  ftory  is  finifhed,  to  fpread  faw-duft  a  fecond  time,  and  flow
the  apples  after  the  fame  manner,  till  the  pot  be  filled  ;  and,  when  it
is  full,  to  put  a  cover  upon  if,  and  daub  it  over  carefully  with  thick
clay.

But  all  forts  of  apples  whatfoever,  that  are  laid  up  in  order  to  be
kept  for  a  long  time,  ought  to  be  gathered  with  their  pedicles,  and
even  with  their  fmall  branches  alfo,  provided  it  can  be  done  without
any  injury  to  the  tree ;  for  this  contributes  very  much  towards  pre-
fervjng  them  for  a  long  time.  -  Many  pull  them  off  the  trees  with
their  fmall  boughs ;  and,  when  they  have  carefully  covered  the  apples-
over  with  potters-clay,  dry  them  in  the  Sun:  then,  if  the  potters-
clay  chap  in  any  place,  they  daub  it  over  with  common  clay ;  and^
when  they  are  dried,  hang  them  up  in  a  cold  place.


CHAP;


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.


55°

CHAP.  XLV.

How  Globe-apples ,  or  Pome-par adifes ,  Honey-apples ,  Seftian
Apples ,  other  Kinds,  may  be  prejerved.

MANY  preferve  and  keep  quinces  in  pits,  or  trenches,  or  in
barrels,  in  the  fame  manner  as  they  do  pomegranates.  Some
bind  them  up  in  fig-tree-leaves ;  then  they  knead  potters-clay  with  lees
of  oil,  and  daub  the  apples  with  it;  and,  after  they  are  dry,  lay  them
up  in  a  loft,  in  a  cold  and  dry  place.  Others  put  up  thefe  fame  apples
into  pans,  and  cover  them  all  over  with  dry  parget,  fo  that  they  may
not  touch  one  another.

Neverthelefs,  we  have  not  experienced  any  thing  furer  or  better,
than,  in  fair  weather,  and  in  the  wane  of  the  Moon,  to  gather  the
ripeft  quinces,  that  are  found,  and  without  any  blemifh  ;  and  after
the  down,  which  is  upon  the  apples,  is  wiped  off,  to  put  them  up
lightly,  and  very  loofe,  that  they  may  not  be  bruited  the  one  again tt
the  other,  in  a  new  flone  bottle  with  a  very  wide  mouth  ;  then,  when
they  are  flowed  up  to  the  neck  of  the  bottle,  to  thruft  them  down
dole  to  one  another,  with  willow-twigs  laid  crofs  them  in  fuch  a
manner,  as  gently  to  comprefs  the  apples,  and  not  fuffer  them  to  be
lifted  up  with  the  liquor,  when  it  is  poured  in  upon  them  ;  then  to
fill  the  veffel  to  the  brim  with  the  belt  and  the  moft  liquid  honey,
fo  that  the  apples  may  be  intirely  covered  with  it.  This  method  not
only  preferves  the  apples  themfelves  fafely,  but  alfo  affords  a  liquor
of  an  honey-wine  tafle,  which  fometimes  may  be  given,  without  any
hurt,  to  fu.ch  as  are  fick  of  a  fever  ;  and  it  is  called  Jyrup  of  quinces
and  honey..  •  .

But  you  muff  take  care,  that  the  apples,  which  you  would  preferve
with  honey,  be  not  gathered,  and  put  up,  before  they  are  ripe  ;  be-
caufe,  if  they  be  gathered  green,  they  grow  fo  hard,  that  they  are
of  no  ufe.  But  that  which  many  do,  viz.  dividing  them  with  an
ivory  knife,  and  taking  out  the  feeds,  becaufe  they  think  they  lpoil
the  apple,  is  intirely  fuperfluous :  but  the  method  which  I  have  now
taught,  is,  indeed,  fo  lure,  that,  altho’  there  even  be  a  little  worm  in
them,  yet  the  apples  fpoil  no  further,  after  they  have  received  the
forefaid  liquor;  for,  fuch  is  the  nature  of  honey,  that  it  puts  a  Hop
to  any  blemilB  or  corruption,  and  fuffers  them  not  to  fpread  any  fur¬
ther  }


Chap*  XLVI.  0/  HUSBANDRY,  551

tyer ;  for  which  reafon,  it  preferves  alfo  a  dead  human  body  found
and  intire  for  very  many  years.

Other  kinds  of  apples  therefore,  fuch  as  the  orbicular ,  or  pome -
paradifes,  or  Seftian ,  Matiant  and  honey-apples,  may  be  fafely  kept
and  preferved  in  this  liquor ;  but  becaufe,  preferved  after  this  man¬
ner,  they  feem  to  grow  fweeter  in  the  honey,  and  not  to  retain  their
own  natural  tafte,  fmall  chefts  of  beech,  or  of  lime-tree  alfo,  fuch  as
Senators  or  Judges  robes  are  laid  up  in,  but  fomewhat  larger,  ought
to  be  prepared  for  this  purpofe,  and  placed  in  a  very  cold  loft,  and
in  a  very  dry  place,  where  neither  fmoak,  nor  noifom  fmell,  may
come ;  then,  having  fpread  the  forementioned  faw-duft  under  them,
the  apples  ought  to  be  fo  ranged,  that  their  fleurets  (i)  may  look  up¬
wards,  and  their  pedicles  or  ftalks  downwards,  after  the  fame  manner
as  they  grew  upon  the  tree,  and  fo  as  not  to  touch  one  another.

Alfo  particular  care  muft  be  taken,  that  each  kind  be  put  up  fepa-
rately  in  their  own  little  chefts  ;  for,  when  different  kinds  are-  fhut
up  together,  they  difagree  one  with  another,  and  are  more  fpeedily  cor¬
rupted  and  fpoiled  :  for  which  reafon  alfo  the  wine  of  fuch  vineyards,  as
are  planted  with  different  forts  of  plants,  is  not  fo  firm,  as  if  you
fhould  put  up  pure  unmixed  Aminean ,  or  Apian ,  or  even  dreggy  wine
by  itfelf.  But  when  the  apples,  as  I  faid  before,  are  thus  carefully
packed  up,  let  them  be  covered  with  the  lids  of  the  chefts,  and  let
the  lids  be  daubed  all  over  with  clay  mixed  with  ftraw,  that  the  air
may  not  be  able  to  get  in.  And  thefe  very  apples  fome  people  keep
very  fafely,  as  they  do  other  forts  of  apples,  as  we  faid  above,  by
putting  poplar-faw-duft,  and  others  alfo  fir-faw-duft  between  them :
nevertheless,  thefe  apples  ought  to  be  gathered,  not  ripe,  but  very
bitter.


CHAP.  XLVI.

Of  Fielding  of  Elecampane ;

THE  pickling  of  Elecampane  fhall  be  performed  in.  this  manner  :

After  you  have  digged  up  the  root  of  it  out  of  the  earth,  in
the  month  of  Ottober,  when  it  is  come  to  its  greateft  maturity,  wipe

(1)  F lofculi,  fleurets:  that  part  of  the  apple,  oppofite  to  the  pedicle,  is  called  flofculut->
it  being  the  place  where  the  blofforn  was.  It  is  fometimes  called  umbilicus ,  the  navel
of  the  apple.


552  L,  J.-M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

off,  with  a  coarfe  rough  linen  cloth,  or  even  with  a  hair-cloth,
whatever  fand  fhall  dick  to  it  ;  then  ferape  it  (lightly  with  a  very
lharp  knife  j  and  where  the  fmall  root  is  fulled,  in  proportion  to  its
thicknefs  cleave  it  into  two  or  more  parts  of  a  finger’s  length ;  then
boil  them  moderately  with  vinegar,  in  abrafs  pot,  fo  that  the  dices  may
not  be  burnt-to  :  after  all  this  let  them  be  dried  three  days  in  the  (hade,
and  fo  put  up  into  a  pitched  jar  ;  and  wine,  made  of  raifins  dried  in  the
Sun,  or  mud:  boiled  into  a  third  part  of  its  firft  quantity,  added  to
them,  till  it  fvvim  above  them  ;  and,  having  put  a  fluffing  of  favory,
or  wild  marjoram,  upon  them,  let  the  vefTel  be  fhut  up,  and  covered
with  leather.

There  is  another  way  of  pickling  Elecampane :  When  you  have
(craped  the  roots  of  it,  cut  them  into  dices,  as  above,  and  dry  them
in  the  (hade  for  the  fpace  of  three,  or  even  four  days  ;  then,  when
they  are  dried,  having  put  wild  marjoram  among  them,  throw  them
into  veflels  without  any  pitch  ;  and,  having  alfo  put  wild  marjoram
upon  them,  with  fix  parts  of  vinegar,  let  one  part  of  mud,  fodden
into  one  half  of  its  firffc  quantity,  be  mixed  with  an  hemina  of  toafted
lalt,  that  the  dices  may  be  foaked  in  this  liquor,  till  they  have  very
little  of  a  bitteridi  fade  :  afterwards,  being  taken  out,  let  them  be  dried
afecond  time,  for  the  fpace  of  five  days,  in  the  (hade  j  then  pour  toge¬
ther,  into  a  pot,  the  fediment  of  dreggy  wine,  and  of  honey-wine  alfo,
if  you  have  it,  and  the  fourth  part  of  both  thefe  of  good  mud  fodden
into  a  third  part;  and,  when  it  has  boiled,  put  the  dices  of  Elecam¬
pane  to  it,  and  remove  it  prefently  from  the  fire,  and  dir  them
throughly  with  a  wooden  fpatula,  till  they  grow  perfectly  cold  ;  after
which  pour  them  into  a  pitched  jar,  cover  them  with  its  lids,  and
then  put  a  cover  of  leather  upon  it.

There  is  a  third  way  to  pickle  the  fame  Elecampane :  When  you
have  carefully  feraped  the  fmall  roots,  cut  them  into  fmall  pieces,  and
deep  them  in  drong  brine,  till  they  lofe  their  bitternefs ;  then,  having
poured  out  the  brine,  bruife  the  very  bed  and  riped  fervice-apples,
after  you  have  taken  out  the  feed,  and  mix  them  with  the  Elecam¬
pane  ;  then  add  to  it  either  wine  made  of  raidns  dried  in  the  Sun,  or  the
very  bed  mud  fodden  into  one  third,  and  dop  up  the  vefTel.  Some,
after  they  have  pickled  the  Elecampane,  and  foaked  it  in  drong  brine,
dry  it,  and  mix  it  with  bruifed  quinces,  which  they  have  boiled  be¬
fore  in  honey,  or  in  mud  fodden  into  one  third ;  and  fo  pour  raidn-
wine,  or  mud  fodden  in  to  one  third,  upon  them  ;  and,  w’hen  they
have  put  the  lid  upon  the  vefTel,  cover  it  with  leather.


CHAP.


Chap.  XLVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


553


CHAP.  XLVII.


Of  pickling  of  Olives .


IN  the  months  of  September  or  Offober,  while  it  is  yet  vintage,
bruife  the  bitter  Paujian  olive ;  and,  having  fteeped  it  a  little  in
warm  water,  fqueeze  it ;  and,  after  you  have  mixed  it  with  a  mode¬
rate  quantity  of  toafted  fait,  put  it  up  in  a  jar  with  the  feeds  of  fennel,
and  of  the  maftich-tree,  and  pour  the  very  frefheft  muft  into  it;  then
put  a  fmall  bundle  of  green  fennel  upon  them,  and  prefs  it  down  into
the  liquor,  that  the  olives  may  be  prefled  down,  and  the  liquor  ap¬
pear  above  them  :  having  thus  managed  your  olives,  you  may  ufe  them
the  third  day.

When  you  bruife  the  white  Paujian ,  or  the  large  and  round,  or
the  long  Jhuttle-olive,  or  the  royal  olive ;  firft  plunge  each  of  them
into  cold  ftrong  brine,  that  they  may  not  lofe  their  colour ;  and,
when'  you  have  fuch  a  quantity  of  any  of  them  ready  as  may  be  fufti-
cient  to  fill  a  jar,  fpread  a  bundle  of  dry  fennel  in  the  bottom  of  it ;
then  take  care  to  have,  in  a  little  pot,  the  feeds  of  green  fennel,  and
of  the  maftich-tree,  ftript  off  their  ftalks,  and  cleanfed  ;  then  take
the  olives  out  of  the  brine,  and  fqueeze  them ;  and,  when  you  have
mixed  them  with  the  forefaid  feeds,  put  them  into  the  veflel ;  and
then,  when  they  come  up  to  the  neck  of  the  veflel,  put  bundles  of
dry  fennel  upon  them,  and  mix  two  parts  of  frefh  muft,  and  one  of
ftrong  brine  together,  and  put  it  to  them.  You  may  ufe  olives  very
agreeably  the  whole  year,  when  you  put  them  up  in  this  fort  of
pickle.

Some  do  not  bruife  the  olive,  but  cut  it  with  a  fharp  reed  :  this,
indeed,  requires  more  labour,  but  it  is  much  better  ;  for  this  olive  is
fairer  and  whiter  than  that  which  contracts' a  bluenefs  from  contufion.
Others,  whether  they  bruife  or  cut  the  olives,  mix  them  with  a  little
toafted  fait,  and  the  forefaid  feeds  ;  then  they  pour  in  muft  fodden  in
to  one  half  of  the  firft  quantity,  or  raifin-wine,  or  a  liquor  made  with
frefh  bees-wax  and  water,  if  they  can  have  it.  We  gave  directions  a
little  before,  in  this  felf-fame  book,  how  this  liquor  may  be  made;  all
the  reft  of  the  things  they  manage  after  the  fame  manner.

Chufe  the  very  faireft  and  whiteft  Paujian  or  royal  olives ,  which
have  been  ftript  off  the  tree  by  hand,  and  are  without  a  fpot  upon
them  ;  then  throw  them  into  an  amphora ,  after  you  have  fpread  dry


4  B


i54  L.J.M.  COLUMELLA  Book XIL

fennel  under  them,  and  mixed  maflich-  and  fennel-feeds  with  them;
and,  when  you  have  filled  the  veflel  to  the  neck,  put  flrong  brine  to
them  ;  then  make  a  fluffing  of  the  leaves  of  reeds,  and  prefs  down
the  olives  therewith,  that  they  may  be  funk  below  the  liquor  ;  and
pour  in  flrong  brine  a  fecond  time,  till  it  come  to  the  brim  of  the
amphora.  But  this  olive  is  not  very  agreeable  in  itfelf,  but  it  is  ex¬
ceeding  proper  for  thofe  pickles  and  fauces  which  are  ufed  at  more
fumptuous  and  plentiful  tables ;  for,  when  occafion  requires,  it  is
taken  out  of  the  amphora ,  and,  when  bruifed,  admits  of  any  other
leafoning  or  pickle  you  ffiall  pleafe  to  join  with  it;  and  you  may  make
it  up  any  way  you  think  proper.  Neverthelefs,  mod  people  cut  the
fedtive  leek  and  rue,  with  young  parfley  and  mint,  very  fmall  toge¬
ther,  and  mix  them  with  the  bruifed  olives ;  then  they  add  to  them
a  little  peppered  vinegar,  and  a  little  more  honey  or  honey- wine ;  and
bedew  them  with  green  oil,  and  fo  cover  them  up  together  with  a
bundle  of  green  parfley.

Some,  with  each  modius  of  olives,  gathered  and  pickled  after  this
manner,  mix  three  hemince  of  fait ;  and,  having  added  the  feeds  of
the  maftich-tree  to  them,  and  fpread  fennel  under  them,  fill  up  the
amphora ,  as  far  as  the  neck,  with  olives ;  then  they  pour  vinegar,  that
is  not  very  fharp,  into  it;  and,  when  they  have  almoft  filled  the  am¬
phora,  they  prefs  down  the  berry  with  a  fluffing  of  fennel ;  and  then
add  more  vinegar,  till  it  come  up  to  the  very  brim  of  the  veffiel :  after¬
wards,  on  the  fortieth  day,  they  pour  out  all  the  liquor,  and  mix  three
parts  of  mud,  lodden  into  one  half,  or  one  third  of  the  firft  quan¬
tity,  with  one  part  vinegar,  and  fill  the  amphora  again.  There  is  alfo
that  other  way  of  pickling  them,  which  is  approved;  viz.  That,  when
the  white  Paufian  has  been  ripened  with  flrong  brine,  all  the  liquor
be  poured  out,  and  the  amphora  filled  again  with  two  parts  of  muft,
and  one  of  vinegar,  mixed  together.  The  royal,  or  the  orchita  olive
may  be  alfo  put  up  and  preferved  in  this  pickle.

Some  mix  one  part  wine  and  two  parts  vinegar,  and,  with  that
liquor,  make  the  Paufian  olives  become  fo  light,  as  to  fwim  in  the
liquor  (i);  which  if  any  have  a  mind  to  ufe  by  themfelves,  they
jfhall  find  them  agreeable  enough ;  although  even  thefe,  when  they
come  out  of  the  brine,  may  be  made  up  in  any  other  manner,  and
joined  with  any  other  pickle  or  feafoning  whatfoever. - Paufan  olives,

(i)  Colymbades.  Thefe  olives  were  fo  called,  to  kow^Cclv,  becaufe  they  fwim
upon  the  brine  wherewith  they  were  pickled,  as  Athetiaus  fays :  they  were  alfo  called
ttA/za/ef,  from  the  brine  wherewith  they  were  prepared ;  and  from  their  fwirn-

xning.

after


Chap.  XL VII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  555

after  they  are  difcoloured,  and  before  they  grow  ripe  and  mellow,  are
gathered  with  their  ftalks,  and  kept  in  the  very  bed;  oil :  this  fort,
above  all  others,  even  a  whole  year  after,  have  the  tafte  of  frefli  green
olives.  Some  alfo,  after  they  have  taken  them  out  of  the  oil,  and
iprinkled  them  with  bruifed  fait,  ferve  them  up  for  new  olives.

There  is  alfo  that  kind  of  pickle,  which  is  commonly  made  ufe  of
in  the  cities  of  Greece ,  and  they  call  it  epityrum  (2);  as  foon  as  the
Vaufian ,  or  the  large  round  olive,  changes  its  colour  from  white,  and
becomes  a  little  yellowilh,  they  gather  them  off  the  trees  by  hand,
when  the  weather  is  fair,  and  fpread  them  in  winnowing  fans  under
a  {hade,  for  one  day  ;  and,  if  any  pedicles  or  flalks,  leaves  or  twigs,
flick  to  them,  they  gather  and  pick  them  ;  the  next  day  they  fift

them,  and  {hut  them  up  in  a  new  frail,  and  put  them  under  the  prefs,
and  prefs  them  very  flrongly,  that  they  may  exfude  all  the  lees  they
have  in  them.  But  we  fuffer  fometimes  the  berry  to  continue  one
whole  night  and  the  next  day  under  the  prefs,  and  to  be  prefled  with
the  weight,  and  emptied,  as  it  were,  of  all  its  filth  and  corruption  ;

then,  when  the  thin  rind  is  broken  and  opened,  we  take  it  out  of
the  prefs  j  and,  upon  each  modius  of  olives,  we  pour  a  fingle  Jextarius.
of  bruifed  toafted  fait ;  alfo  we  mix  maftich-feed  with  them,  and  fen¬
nel-  and  rue-leaves  dried  under  a  {hade,  after  they  feem  to  be  cut  fmall
enough  ;  and  we  let  them  ftand  three  hours,  till  the  berry,  in  fome
meafure,  drink  up  the  fait.  Then  we  pour  oil  of  a  good  tafle  upon
them,  fo  that  it  may  cover  the  olive  ;  and  we  prefs  down  a  bundle
of  dry  fennel  upon  them,  fo  that  the  liquor  may  fwim  above  them.
But,  for  this  fort  of  pickle,  new  earthen  veflels,  without  any  pitch,
are  prepared;  and,  that  they  may  not  fip  up  the  oil,  they  are  foaked
with  melted  tallow,  or  the  like,  as  oil-jars  are ;  and  then  afterwards
they  are  dried.

(2)  Epityrum.  Some  think,  that  this  kind  of  preparation  was  fo  called  from  wItv&i',
which  fignifies  bran,  or  the  fmall  skins  which  come  off  the  wheat  in  grinding ;  and  thefe
olives  were  called  nmueifa,  becaufe  they  were  thus  bruifed  like  bran :  but  this  account
of  them  is  not  very  fatisfying.  Some  conjecture  it  was  fo  called,  becaufe  it  was  ferved
up  with  cheefe,  ^uafi  ini  rev  rt/£oV,  which  feems  more  probable.


4  B  s


C  H  A


556


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.


CHAP.  XLVIII.

Of  the  TV ay  to  pickle  black  Olives.

BUT  after  this  comes  the  cold  of  Winter,  daring  which  the  ga¬
thering  of  the  olives,  and  the  making  of  the  oil,  call  again  for
the  care  of  the  Bailiff’s  Wife,  as  the  vintage  did  before.  We  fhall
therefore,  in  the  hr  ft  place,  (fince  we  have  already  begun  it)  give  di¬
rections  about  pickling  of  olives,  and  prelently  after  fubjoin  an  account
of  the  method  of  making  oil.  They  prepare  the  Paufian  or  the  Orchitan
olives,  and,  in  fome  countries,  the  Ncevian  alfo,  for  great  banquets  and
feafts:  therefore  it  is  proper,  when  the  weather  is  fair,  to  gather  thefe
off  the  trees  by  hand,  as  loon  as  they  are  grown  black,  but  are  not  as
vet  throughly  ripe ;  and  to  pick  and  fift  them,  and  put  apart  fuch  of
them  as  (hall  feem  fpotted  or  fpoiled,  and  of  a  leffer  growth  :  then
to  every  modius  of  olives  to  put  three  hemince  of  unbruifed  fait,  and
to  pour  them  together  into  willow-bafkets,  and  put  plenty  of  fait
upon  them,  fo  that  it  may  cover  the  olives,  and  fo  leave  them  to
fweat  together  for  thirty  days,  and  drop  out  all  their  lees ;  afterwards
to  pour  them  out  into  a  tub  or  tray,  and,  with  a  clean  fponge,  wipe
off  all  the  fait,  fo  as  none  of  it  may  remain  upon  them  ;  then  to  put
them  into  a  veflel,  and  fill  up  the  amphora  with  muft  fodden  in  to
one  half,  or  one  third  of  its  firft  quantity  ;  and  put  a  fluffing  of  dry
fennel  upon  them,  to  prefs  down  the  olives.  Neverthelefs,  moft
people  mix  three  parts  of  muft  boiled  in  to  one  third  of  its  firft  quan¬
tity,  and  one  part  of  vinegar.  Some  mix  two  parts  of  muft  and  one
of  vinegar,  and  pickle  them  with  this  liquor.

Some,  when  they  have  gathered  the  black  olives,  fait  them  with
the  fame  quantity  of  fait  as  above,  and  fo  place  them  in  bafkets,  that,
after  they  have  mixed  maftich- feeds  with  them,  they  may  make  one
layer  of  olives,  and  another  of  fait  by  turns,  till  they  come  to  the
top ;  then,  after  forty  days,  when  the  olives  have  exfuded  all  the
lees  they  had  in  them,  they  pour  them  out  into  a  tray  or  trough;
and,  having  lifted  them,  they  leparate  them  from  the  maftich-feeds,
and  wipe  them  with  a  fponge,  that  none  of  the  fait  may  ftick  to  them ;
then  they  throw  them  into  an  amphora ,  and  add  to  them  muft  boiled
in  to  one  third,  or  one  half  of  its  firft  quantity,  or  even  honey,  if
Iney  have  plenty  of  it.


To


Chap.  XLIX.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  557

To  every  modius  of  olives  mu  ft  be  added  one  fextarius  of  ripe  anife-
and  maftich-feeds,  and  three  cyathi  of  fennel-feed  ;  and  if  you  have
not  this,  the  fennel  itfelf  cut  fmall,  as  much  as  fhall  feem  fufficient;
and,  with  every  modius  of  olives,  three  hemince  of  toafted  lalt,  but
not  ground,  muft  be  mixed  ;  and  fo  they  muft  be  put  up  in  am -
fhors ,  and  thefe  muft  be  flopped  clofe  up  with  bundles  of  fennel,
and  daily  rolled  up  and  down  upon  the  ground;  and  then  every  third
or  fourth  day,  whatever  lees  may  be  in  them,  muft  be  let  out.  After
forty  days,  the  olives  muft  be  poured  into  a  trough,  and  only  fepa-
rated  from  the  fait ;  but  let  them  not  be  wiped  with  a  fponge,  but
put  up  into  the  amphor  juft  as  they  are  taken  out  of  it,  with  fmall
lumps  of  fait  mixed  with  them ;  and,  after  you  have  put  ftuffings
upon  them  to  keep  them  clofe,  let  them  be  laid  up  in  the  cellar  for
ufe.

„  The  olive  which  was  gathered  when  it  was  ripe,  and  which,  by-
lying  in  the  brine,  is  become  light,  and  fwims  above  the  liquor,  take
out  of  the  brine,  and  wipe  it  with  a  fponge  ;  then  cut  it  in  two  or
three  places  with  a  green  reed,'  and  keep  it  three  days  in  vinegar ;  the
fourth  day  wipe  it  clean  with  a  fponge,  and  put  it  up  into  a  new  pot
or  jar,  after  you  have  fpread  parfley  and  a  little  rue  under  it.  Then,
when  the  veffel  is  full  of  the  cut  olives,  put  muft  boiled  in  to  one.
third  of  its  firft  quantity  into  it,  till  it  come  to  the  mouth  of  the  vef¬
fel  ;  put  the  tender  tops  of  young  branches  of  laurel  upon  the  olives
that  are  pickled  after  this  manner,  to  prefs  them  down  :  after  twenty
days  make  ufe  of  them.


CHAP.  XLIX.

:/'V‘  ;£ .  nisi  .  •}  -

How  a  Marmelad  of  Olives  may  be  made .

THEY  gather  bkck  olives  exceeding  ripe,  when  the  weather  is
fair ;  and  fpread  them  upon  reeds  for  one  day,  under  a  fhade,
and  feparate  all  the  damaged  berries  from  them.  Alfo,  if  there  be
any  pedicles  or  ftalks  flicking  to  them,  they  take  them  away,  and
take  out  from  among  them  all  the  leaves  and  twigs  that  are  mixed
with  them  :  the  next  day  they  fife  them  carefully,  that,  if  there  be
any  dirt  among  them,  it  may  be  feparated  from  them ;  then  the.  un-
bruifed  olive  is  fhut  up  in  a  new  frail,  and  put  under  the  prefs,  that
it  may  be  fqueezed  the  whole  night.  The  day  following  they  throw

it


558  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

it  into  a  very  clean  fufpended  mill,  that  its  kernel  may  not  be  broken :
and,  when  they  are  reduced  to  a  ma(h,  then  with  their  hand  they
mix  wfith  them  toafted  and  bruifed  fait,  with  the  other  dry  feafon-
ings  ;  and  thefe  are  fenugreek,  cumin,  fennel-feed,  and  Egyptian
anife-feed.  But  it  will  be  fufficient  to  put  as  many  hemina  of  fait  to
them,  as  there  are  modii  of  olives ;  and  to  pour  oil  upon  them,  left
they  wither ;  and  that  ought  to  be  done  as  often  as  they  ftiall  feem
to  be  dried.

Nor  is  there  any  doubt  but  the  marmelad,  which  is  made  of  the
Taufian  olive,  has  the  beft  tafte  ;  but  its  tafte  does  not  continue  found
above  two  months :  but  other  kinds  of  olives,  fuch  as  the  Licinian
and  Cuhninian ,  are  fitter  for  this  thing.  Neverthelefs  the  Calabrian
olive-tree,  which  fome  call  the  wild-Jkrub  olive ,  becaufe  of  its  like-
nefs  to  it,  is  reckoned  the  beft  for  thefe  ufes.


C  H  A  p..-  L.

After  what  Manner  Oil  may  be  made,

THE  beginning  of  December ,  for  the  moft  part,  is  the  middle
feafon  for  gathering  of  olives,  and  making  oil ;  for,  before  this
time,  the  bitter  oil,  which  is  called  Summer. oil ,  is  made  j  and  about
this  month  they  prefs  the  green  oil,  then  afterwards  the  ripe  oil.  But
it  is  not  for  the  intereft  of  a  Mafter  of  a  family  to  make  bitter  oil,
becaufe  the  olives  yield  but  very  little  of  it,  except  the  berry  fall  to
the  ground  by  tempeftuous  weather,  and  it  be  neceflary  to  gather  it
up,  left  it  be  eaten  up  and  deftroyed  by  tame  cattle  or  wild  beafts.
But  it  is  of  very  great  advantage  to  him  to  make  of  the  green  fort,
becaufe  the  olives  both  yield  enough  of  it,  and  by  its  price  it  almoft
doubles  the  income  of  the  Owner  :  but,  if  the  olive-yards  are  very
large,  it  is  neceflary,  that  fome  part  of  them  be  referved  for  ripe  fruit.

But  the  place,  wherein  the  oil  ought  to  be  made,  has  been  already
deferibed  in  the  firft  book  ;  neverthelefs  there  are  a  few  things  relating
to  this  affair,  which  I  had  before  omitted,  which  muft  be  mentioned.
A  loft  to  carry  the  olives  into  is  very  neceflary,  though  we  have  already
given  directions,  that  the  fruit,  of  every  day’s  gathering,  be  prefently
put  under  the  millftones  and  the  prefs.  Neverthelefs,  becaufe  fome-
times  the  immoderate  multitude  of  berries  overcomes  the  labour  of
them  that  attend  the  prefs,  and  are  more  than  they  can  manage,  there

muft


Chap.  L.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  5  59

muft  be  a  ftore-room  in  the  upper-part  of  the  houfe,  where  the  fruits
may  be  put :  and  this  loft  ought  to  be  like  a  granary,  and  to  have  as
many  fmall  bings,  or  diftindt  partitions,  as  the  quantity  of  olives  lhall
require,  that  fo  the  gathering  of  each  day  may  be  put  apart,  and  laid
up  by  itfelf.

The  floor  or  bottom  of  thefe  fmall  partitions  muft  be  paved  with  done
or  tiles,  and  made  fo  Hoping,  that  all  the  moifture  may  run  quickly
out  of  them  by  gutters  or  pipes  ;  for  the  lees  are  very  hurtful  to  the
oil,  which,  if  they  remain  in  the  berry,  corrupt  and  fpoil  the  tafte
of  the  oil.  Therefore,  when  you  have  built  the  partitions  in  the
manner  we  have  faid,  place  upon  the  floor  fmall  boards,  half  a  foot
diftant  from  each  other  j  and  lay  reeds  upon  them,  that  are  carefully
and  clofely  woven,  fo  that  they  may  not  let  fo  much  as  a  berry  pafs
through,  and  be  able  to  fupport  the  weight  of  the  olives.  But  hard
by  all  thefe  fmall  partitions,  in  that  part  where  the  lees  run  out  of
them,  under  the  very  pipes,  the  floor  muft  be  concave,  after  the  man¬
ner  of  little  trenches ;  or  there  muft  be  a  hollow  ftone,  wherein  may
ftand  whatever  liquor  fhall  flow  out  of  them,  and  from  whence  it
may  be  drawn  out.  Moreover  you  muft  have  fats  or  barrels  ready
prepared  within-doors,  which  may  receive  the  lees  of  every  kind  of
olives  apart  by  themfelves,  whether  they  be  fuch  as  flow  from  the
olives  pure  without  any  mixture,  or  fuch  alfo  as  have  received  fait  ;
for  both  of  them  are  fit  for  many  ufes.

But  mills  are  more  ufeful  than  the  pr-efs,  for  the  making  of  oil ;
and  the  p refs  than  the  canalis ,  and  the  J'ole a  (1).  The  mills  are  very
eafily  managed  ;  for,  according  to  the  bignefs  of  the  berries,  the  mill-
ftones  may  be  either  lowered  or  raifed,  that  fo  the  kernel,  which
fpoils  the  tafte  of  the  oil,  may  not  be  broken  :  moreover,  the  prefs
difpatches  more  work,  and  more  eafily,  than  the  folea  and  canalis .
There  is  alfo  a  machine  like  an  eredt  threfhing  instrument,  which  is
called  a  beetle ;  and  that  does  the  work  not  incommodioufly,  except
that  it  is  frequently  fpoiled,  and  out  of  order  j  and,  if  you  throw  a

(1)  Columella  mentions  here  feveral  machines,  wherewith  the  oil  was  fqueezed  out  of
the  olive-berries  •  but  gives  no  particular  defcription  of  any  of  them,  fo  that  it  is  not
eafy  to  form  any  diftindt  idea  of  them.  Cato  indeed,  in  his  22d  chapter,  gives  a  par¬
ticular  defcription  of  the  trapetum :  but  it  is  not  very  intelligible,  perhaps  becaufe
of  the  incorredtnefs  of  the  text;  and  learned  men  differ  in  their  opinions  about  it.
Varto  fays,  that  the  trapeta  were  oil-mills  made  of  hard  rough  ftones;  and  Columella
feems  to  make  the  mola  and  the  trapetum  two  diftindt  things :  perhaps  by  the  laft  he
means  a  prefs  for  fqueezing  the  olives,  which  had  its  name  from  the  turning  of  the  fcrews'.
We  have  no  account  at  all,  that  I  can  find,  of  the  canalis  and  folea:  nor  is  it  any  great
fatisfa&ion  to  be  told  by  Antiquarians,  that  they  were  certain  machines,  ufed  by  the  an-
tients  for  making  oil,  fines  they  give  us  no  account  of  their  ftrudture.

little


56o  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

little  too  many  berries  into  it,  you  flop  it.  Neverthelefs,  the  forefaid
machines  are  made  ufc  of  according  to  the  hate,  and  condition,  and
cuftom  of  the  countries :  but  that  of  mills,  as  alfo  of  the  turning
prefs,  is  the  beft.  I  thought  it  neceffary  to  premife  thefe  things,  be¬
fore  I  dilcourfed  of  making:  the  oil.

Now  we  mu  ft  come  to  the  thing  itfelf,  altho’  we  have  omitted
many  things,  which,  as  before  the  vintage,  fo,  before  the  gathering
of  the  olives,  and  making  the  oil,  myft  be  all  ready  prepared  j  fuch  as
plenty  of  wood,  which  mult  be  brought  home  a  long  time  before,  that
fo,  when  the  thing  is  wanted,  the  Labourers  may  not  be  called  away
from  their  bu fine fs :  ladders  alfo,  fmall  bafkets,  and  fowers  bafkets,
of  ten  modii  and  three  modii  each,  wherein  the  berries,  which  are
gathered  off  tire  trees,  are  received  ;  frails,  hempen-  and  Spanij Z>-
broom-ropes,  iron-ladles,  wherewith  the  oil  is  emptied  from  one  velfel
to  another ;  covers  or  lids,  wherewith  the  oil-veffels  are  covered  ;
fponges,  greater  and  fmaller  ;  pitchers,  in  which  the  oil  is  carried  out ;
cane-  or  reed-mats,  into  which  the  olives  are  gathered  ;  and,  if  there
are  any  other  things  which  now  efcape  my  memory.  All  thefe
ought  to  be  in  great  number,  becaufe  they  perifh  with  the  ufing,  and
become  fewer ;  of  which  if  any  one  thing  be  wanting,  when  there
is  occafion  to  ufe  it,  the  work  is  at  a  ftand.  But  now  I  fhall  perform
what  I  promifed.

As  foon  as  the  berries  fhall  begin  to  be  of  different  colours,  and
fome  of  them  are  already  black,,  yet  more  of  them  white,  the  olive
muff  be  gathered  by  hand,  when  the  weather  is  fair,  and  fifted  and
cleanfed  upon  mats  or  reeds  fpread  under  them  :  then,  after  they  are
cleanfed,  they  muff  be  prefently  carried  to  the  place  where  the  preffes
ftand,  and  fhut  up  intire  in  new  frails,  and  put  under  the  preffes,  that
they  may  be  fqueezed  as  little  a  while  as  can  be.  Afterward,  when
their  thin  rinds  are  opened,  they  ought  to  be  foftened,  by  adding  two
fextarii  of  whole  fait  to  each  modius  of  olives ;  and  the  mafs  of  bruifed
olives  ought  to  be  fqueezed  out,  either  in  oblong  fquare  boards,  if  it
be  the  cuftom  of  the  country,  or  in  new  frails  at  lead: :  then  that
which  fhall  firft  flow  from  the  prefs  into  a  round  vat,  (for  that  is
better  than  a  fquare  leaden  veffel,  or  a  receiver  made  of  ifone  or  brick,
with  two  divifions  in  it)  let  the  Lader  empty  it  prefently,  and  pour  it
into  great  earthen  pans  prepared  for  this  ufe.

But,  in  the  oil-cellar,  let  there  be  three  rows  of  pans,  that  one  of
them  may  receive  the  oil  of  the  firft  note,  that  is,  of  the  firft  pref-
fing ;  the  fecond,  that  of  the  fecond  j  and  the  third  row,  that  of  the
2  third }


Chap.  L.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  561

third  ;  for  it  is  of  great  importance  not  to  mix  that  of  the  fecond,  and
much  lefs  that  of  the  third  prefling,  with  that  of  the  firfl ;  becaufe
that  is  of  a  much  better  tafte  which  flows  from  the  olives  with  leaft
force  of  the  prefs,  as  if  it  dropped  from  them  of  its  own  accord.
When  therefore  the  oil  has  flood  a  little  in  the  firfl  pans,  the  Lader
ought  to  ftrain  and  empty  it  into  the  fecond,  and  then  into  the  next,
till  he  come  to  the  laftj  for  the  oftener  it  is  ventilated,  and  worked,
as  it  were,  by  emptying  it  from  one  vefifel  into  another,  the  clearer  it
becomes,  and  the  more  it  is  freed  from  its  dregs.  But  it  will  be  dif¬
fident  to  place  thirty  large  pans  in  each  row,  except  the  olive-yards
be  very  large,  and  require  a  greater  number.

But  if,  with  the  colds,  the  oil  fhall  be  congealed  with  the  lees,  you
mufl,  in  that  cafe,  certainly  ufe  a  little  more  toafted  fait ;  that  thing
refolves  and  Ioofens  the  oil,  and  feparates  it  from  every  thing  that  may
hurt  or  corrupt  it.  Nor  is  there  any  reafon  to  fear,  that  the  oil  will
become  fait  or  brackifh  j  for,  whatever  quantity  of  fait  you  fhali  put
to  it,  yet  the  oil  does  not  receive  the  tafie  of  it.  But,  even  thus  the
oil  ufually  does  not  diflolve,  when  greater  colds  than  ordinary  come
on  fuddenly  ;  therefore  they  toafl  nitre,  and  bruife  it  and  fprinkle  it
upon  the  oil,  and  mix  it  with  it :  this  liquifies  the  lees.  There  are
fome,  tho’  very  careful  Oilmen,  who  do  not  put  the  berry  under  the
prefs  whole,  without  breaking  it,  becaufe  they  think,  that  fome  part
of  the  oil  is  loft  by  fo  doing ;  for,  when  the  berry  receives  the  weight
of  the  prefs,  the  lees  alone  are  not  prelfed  out  of  it,  but  they  attrad
fomething  of  the  fatnefs  of  the  oil  with  themfelves.

But  I  have  this  direction  to  give  you  upon  the  whole,  That  neither
fmoak  nor  foot  be  admitted  into  the  place  where  the  oil-prefs  ftands,
or  into  the  oil-cellar,  as  long  as  the  green  oil  is  making  there ;  for
both  thefe  are  very  prejudicial  to  this  affair,  and  the  fkilfulleft  Oilmen
fcarcely  fuffer  their  work  to  be  done  at  the  light  of  one  fingle  lamp  j
wherefore  both  the  place  where  the  oil-prefs  Hands,  and  the  oibcellar,
muft  be  fituated  towards  that  quarter  of  the  heavens  which  is  moft
fheltered  from  cold  winds,  becaufe  the  heat  of  the  fire  is  not  at  all
required.  Moreover,  the  barrels  and  jars,  into  which  the  oil  is  put,
muft  not  only  be  carefully  cleanfed,  and  put  in  order,  at  the  time
when  the  neceflity  of  bellowing  the  fruit  forces  to  do  it,  but,  when
they  are  emptied  by  the  Merchant,  the  Bailiff’s  Wife  ought  prefently
to  take  care,  that,  if  any  dregs  or  lees  have  fallen  to  the  bottom  of
the  veflfels,  they  be  immediately  cleaned  out,  and  wafhed  with  a  lye
of  afhes,  not  very  hot,  left  the  veffels  throw  off  and  lofe  their  wax  j
and  let  it  be  done  once  and  again  :  then  let  them  be  gently  rubbed

4  C  with


562  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Book  XII.

with  the  hand  with  lukewarm  water,  and  often  rinfed,  and  fo  let  all
the  moifture  be  dried  up  with  a  fponge.

There  are  fome  who  diffolve  potters-clay  in  water  like  liquid  dregs,
and,  after  they  have  walked  the  veffels,  daub  them  on  the  infide  with
this  fort  of  gruel,  as  you  may  call  it,  and  fuffer  it  to  dry  upon  them  :
afterwards,  when  they  have  occafion  to  ufe  them,  they  rinfe  them
with  pure  water.  Some  wafh  the  veffels  throughly  all  over  with  lees
of  oil  firfi: ;  then  they  wafh  them  with  water,  and  dry  them  :  then
they  examine  whether  the  barrels  want  new  wax;  for  the  anticnts
faid,  that  it  was  neceflary  to  wax  them  almoft  every  fixth  year,  at
the  time  of  making  the  oil,  which  I  do  not  underhand  how  it  can  be
done  :  for,  as  new  veffels,  if  they  be  heated,  eafily  receive  the  melted
wax,  fo  I  cannot  believe,  that  fuch  as  are  old  will  bear  waxing,  be-
caufe  of  the  juice  of  the  oil ;  which  very  waxing,  neverthelefs,  the
Hufbandmen  of  our  times  have  wholly  laid  afide,  and  have  been  of
opinion,  that  it  was  better  to  wafh  the  new  barrels  all  over  with  liquid
gum,  and  to  fuffumigate  them  with  white  wax  when  they  are  dried,
that  they  may  not  lofe  their  good  colour,  and  tarnifh  :  and  they  judge,
that  this  fumigation  ought  to  be  done,  as  often  as  either  the  new  or
old  veflels  are  cured  and  feafoned,  and  prepared  for  the  new  oil.
Many,  when  they  have  daubed  their  new  barrels  or  jars  with  grofs
fat  gum,  are  fatisfied  with  one  gumming  for  ever  :  and,  indeed,  a
veffel  which  has  once  imbibed  the  oil,  does  not  admit  of  a  fecond
gumming;  for  the  fatnefs  of  the  oil  refufes  any  fuch  matter  as  that  of
gum  is.

After  the  month  of  December ,  about  the  beginning  of  January,
the  olive-berry  muft  be  gathered  in  the  fame  manner  as  above,  and
the  oil  prelently  preffed  out  of  it ;  for,  if  it  be  laid  up  in  a  loft,  it
quickly  grows  hot ;  for,  with  the  Winter-rains,  it  breeds  a  greater
quantity  of  lees,  which  are  very  hurtful  to  oil.  Therefore,  you  muft
beware  of  making  oil  for  eating  of  this  kind  of  berry,  which  may,  by
this  one  way,  be  avoided ;  if,  as  foon  as  the  berry  is  brought  out  of
the  held,  it  be  ground,  and  put  into  the  prefs,  and  the  oil  preffed  out
of  it,  and  managed,  as  we  have  faid  above.  All  Hufbandmen,  for
the  moft  part,  have  believed,  that,  if  the  berry  be  laid  up  within  the
houfe,  the  oil  will  grow  in  the  loft ;  which  is  as  falfe,  as  that  corn
of  any  fort  grows  in  the  threfliing-floor  :  and  this  falfhood  that  an-
tient  author,  Porcius  Cato ,  refutes  thus ;  for  he  fays,  that  the  olive
grows  wrinkled  in  the  loft,  and  becomes  fmaller :  for  which  reafon,
when  the  Hufbandman  has  laid  up  fuch  a  quantity  in  the  houfe,  as
is  fufficient  for  one  making ;  and,  after  many  days,  has  a  mind  to

grind


Chap.  L.  Of  H  U  S  B  A  N  D  R  Y.  563

grind  it,  having  forgotten  the  firft  quantity  that  he  had  brought  in,
he  fupplies  out  of  another  heap,  which  he  had  in  like  manner  placed
apart  by  itfelf,  as  much  as  is  wanting  to  each  quantity  j  and,  by  this
one  making,  the  berry,  that  has  refted  for  fome  time,  feems  to  yield
more  oil  than  that  which  is  frefh,  and  newly  gathered,  whereas  he
has  taken  many  more  modi'i  of  olives  to  it.  Yet,  fuppofe  that  were
exceeding  true,  neverthelefs  there  is  more  money  raifed  by  the  price
of  green  frefh  oil,  than  by  the  great  quantity  of  that  which  is  bad :
which  thing  Cato  alfo  faid.  And  thus,  indeed,  whatever  addition  of
weight  or  meafure  is  made  to  the  oil,  if  you  would  compute  the
quantity  of  berries,  added  to  that  which  you  reckoned  to  one  making,
you  would  think  it  not  an  increafe  and  advantage,  but  a  real  lot's :
wherefore  we  ought  not  to  helitate  to  grind  the  olives,  and  put  them
under  the  prefs,  as  toon  as  poflible,  after  we  have  gathered  them.

Nor  am  I  ignorant,  that  a  fecondary  oil,  for  common  eating,  muff
alfo  be  made  j  for,  when  the  olive,  which  is  gnawed  by  the  little
worms,  falls  off  the  tree,  or  has,  by  ftorms  and  rains,  fallen  into  the
dirt,  they  have  recourfe  to  warm  water  for  a  remedy  j  and  the  cal¬
dron  ought  to  be  made  hot,  that  the  dirty  berries  may  be  wafhed.
But  this  muft  not  be  done  with  exceeding  hot  water,  but  with  that
which  is  moderately  warm,  that  the  tafte  of  the  oil  may  become  the
more  agreeable ;  for,  if  the  agreeable  tafte  be  boiled  out  of  it,  it  at¬
tracts  the  tafte  of  the  little  worms,  and  of  any  other  forts  of  naftinefs
whatfoever :  but,  when  the  olive  has  been  throughly  wafhed,  the
other  things  ought  to  be  done,  as  I  directed  above.  But  the  pureft
and  bed:  oil,  and  that  of  the  fecondary  fort  for  common  ufe,  muft
not  be  prefled  in  the  fame  frails ;  for  old  frails  ought  to  be  fet  apart
for  fuch  olives  as  fall  off  the  trees  of  their  own  accord ;  and  thofe
that  are  new,  for  the  oil  of  the  firft  note  ;  and,  when  they  have  ferved
for  prefling  out  the  oil  of  every  particular  making,  they  ought  always
to  be  prefently  wafhed,  twice  or  thrice,  in  exceeding  hot  water  :  then,
if  there  be  any  brook,  or  running  water,  they  muft  be  funk  in  it  by
having  ftones  put  into  them,  that  they  may  be  prefled  down  and  de¬
tained  by  the  weight  thereof :  or,  if  there  be  no  river,  they  ought  to
be  foaked  in  a  lake,  or  pond,  of  the  pureft  water  you  can  find,  and
afterwards  beaten  with  rods,  that  the  dirt  and  dregs  may  fall  off  them ,
and  then  they  muft  be  wafhed  a  fecond  time,  and  dried.


4  C  2


CHAP.


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  BookXII.


564.


CHAP.  LI.

Of  Gleucine  Oil  (1).


Lthough  the  compofition  of  Gleucine  oil  does  not  belong  to  this


feafon  of  the  year,  neverthelefs  it  is  referved  for  this  part  of


the  book,  left  it  fhould  be  inferted  not  very  properly  among  the  rules
laid  down  for  making  wine  ;  but  it  ought  to  be  made  in  this  manner :
You  muft  prepare  an  oil-veflel,  of  the  largeft  fize,  either  new,  or,  at
leaft,  very  found  and  ftrong ;  then,  in  the  time  of  vintage,  you  muft
pour  into  it,  and  mingle  together,  fixty  fextarii  of  the  very  frefheft
and  of  the  beft  kind  of  muft,  with  eighty  pound- weight  of  oil  ;  then
you  muft  put  fpices  that  are  not  ftfted,  yea,  not  fo  much  as  bruifed
fmall,  but  ftightly  broken,  into  a  fmall  rufh-  or  flaxen-net,  and  let
them  down  with  the  fmall  weight  of  a  ftone,  into  a  part  of  the  muft
and  oil :  but,  let  the  fpices  be  weighed  in  the  proportions  we  have
here  fubjoined  ;  of  calamus ,  fweet-Jmelling  rujh ,  cardamom ,  the  wood
of  the  balfam-tree ,  palm-tree-bark ,  fenugreek  fteeped  in  old  wine,
and  afterward  dried,  and  alfo  toafted  ;  bulrufh.-root ,  as  alfo  Greek
flower-de-luce ,  and  Egyptian  anife ,  of  equal  weight ;  that  is,  of  each
one  pound  and  a  quarter,  as  we  faid  above :  fhut  them  up  in  a  fmall
net,  and  let  them  down  into  the  muft  and  oil,  and  daub  the  firkin
or  jar :  after  the  feventh  or  the  ninth  day,  if  any  dregs  or  filth  fhall
ftick  by  itfelf  to  the  chops  of  the  jar,  take  it  away  with  your  hand,
and  wipe  it ;  then  ftrain  off  the  oil,  and  put  it  up  in  new  veflels.

Prefently  after  take  out  the  fmall  net,  and  bruife  the  fpices,  as  clean
as  poflible,  in  a  mortar;  when  you  have  bruifed  them,  put  them  again
into  the  fame  jar,  and  pour  in  as  much  oil  as  you  did  at  firft,  and  flop
it  up,  and  place  it  in  the  Sun  :  after  the  feventh  day  decant  the  oil ;
and  what  remains  of  the  muft,  put  it  up  in  a  pitched  barrel :  and,  if
you  do  not  confume  all  this  medicament,  you  fhall  give  it  to  weak
oxen,  and  the  reft  of  the  cattle,  to  drink.  But  this  fecondary  oil,
which  is  not  of  a  difagreeable  fmell,  may  ferve  for  a  daily  ointment
for  fuch  as  are  affe&ed  with  a  pain  of  the  nerves.

(1)  Oleum  gleucinum  was  a  compofition  made  of  oil  and  muft:  this  laft  the  Greeks
called  yhtvK&>>  which,  being  mixed  with  the  oil,  gave  it  this  denomination.


CHAP.


Chap.  LIII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


565


CHAR  LII.

After  what  Manner  you  may  make  Oil  for  Ointments .

MAKE  oil  for  ointments  thus :  Before  the  olive-berry  grows
black,  when  it  firft  begins  to  be  difcoloured,  but  not  as  yet
fpotted,  and  of  various  colours,  gather  by  hand  the  Licinian  efpe-
cially,  if  you  have  any  j  if  not,  the  royal }  if  you  have  not  this
neither,  then  the  Culminian  berry  %  and,  when  you  have  cleanfed  it,
put  it  prefently  under  the  prefs  whole,  and  fqueeze  the  lees  out  of  it ;
then  break  the  olive  in  a  fufpended  mill,  and  put  it  either  into  frames
made  of  oblong  fquare  pieces  of  wood,  or  a  new  large  frail ;  and,
having  put  it  under  the  prefs,  prefs  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  you  may
not  writhe  the  veffels,  but  only  fuffer  it  to  be  fqueezed  as  little  as  can
be,  with  the  weight  of  the  prefs.  Then,  when  the  oil  has  flowed
from  them  in  this  manner,  let  the  Lader  feparate  it  forthwith  from  the
lees,  and  remove  it  into  new  pans,  apart  by  itfelf,  till  it  grow  clear.
The  reft  of  the  oil,  that  lhall  be  fqueezed  out  afterward,  may  be
approved  for  food,  either  when  it  is  mixed  with  that  of  another  fort,
or  by  itfelf.


CHAP.  LIII.

Of  falting  of  Swine  s  Flefh.

THUS  far  we  have  faid  enough  of  oil ;  now  let  us  return  to
leffer  things.  You  muft  reftrain  all  kinds  of  cattle,  and  efpe-
cially  fwine,  from  drinking,  the  day  before  they  are  killed,  that  their
flefh  may  be  the  drier ;  for,  if  they  drink,  their  flefh,  when  it  is
falted,  will  have  the  more  water  in  it :  therefore,  having  killed  them
when  they  are  thirlly,  bone  them  well ;  for  this  makes  the  falted  flefh
lefs  liable  to  corrupt,  and  more  durable :  then,  after  you  have  boned
it,  fait  it  carefully  with  toafted  fait,  which  is  not  too  fmall,  but
broken  in  a  fufpended  mill ;  and  fluff  in  a  large  quantity  of  fait,  into
thofe  parts  efpecially,  wherein  the  bones  are  left ;  and,  having  laid  the
flitches  or  pieces  in  due  order,  upon  boards,  place  huge  weights  upon
them,  that  the  blood  may  be  preffed  out  of  them.  The  third  day

remove


5 66  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

remove  the  weights,  and  rub  the  falted  flefli  carefully  with  your  hands ;
and,  when  you  have  a  mind  to  put  it  into  the  fame  place  again,
fprinkle  it  with  fmall  bruifed  fait,  and  fo  replace  it :  nor  fhall  you
ceafe  to  rub  the  fait  daily  into  it,  till  it  be  completely  falted  ;  but,  if
it  be  fair  and  clear  weather,  during  thefe  days,  wherein  the  flefli  is
rubbed  with  fait,  you  fhall  let  it  lie  in  the  fait  nine  days ;  but,  if  it
be  cloudy  weather,  or  rain,  the  falted  flefh  muft  be  carried  to  a  pond
on  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  day,  and  the  fait  firft  fliaken  off  it  j  then
it  mufl  be  carefully  wafhed  with  frefli  fweet  water,  and  let  not  the
fait  flick  any-where  upon  it ;  and,  when  it  is  dried  a  little,  it  mufl
be  hung  up  in  the  larder,  where  a  moderate  fmoak  may  come,  which
may  dry  it,  if  there  be  any  water  as  yet  contained  in  it.  The  proper
time  for  falting  flefli  after  this  manner,  will  be  when  the  Moon  is  in
her  wane,  efpecially  about  the  middle  of  Winter,  and  alfo  in  the
month  of  February ,  before  the  thirteenth  day.

There  is  another  way  of  falting  flefli,  which  may  be  put  in  practice
even  in  hot  countries,  at  all  times  of  the  year  and  it  is  luch  as  this :
When  the  fwine  are  kept  from  water  the  day  before,  they  are  killed
the  day  following  ;  and  they  take  off  their  hair,  either  with  fcalding
hot  water,  or  with  a  fmall  flame  of  brufliwood  (for  their  hair  is  pulled
off  both  ways).  They  cut  their  flefli  into  pieces  of  a  pound-weight ;
then  they  fpread  toafted  fait  in  the  bottom  of  a  barrel  or  tub,  but
moderately  bruifed  (as  we  faid  above) ;  then  they  lay  the  fmall  pieces
of  flefli  very  clofe  to  one  another,  and  in  good  order  j  and  throw  in
fait  by  turns  :  but,  when  they  come  almoft  to  the  brim  of  the  barrel,
they  fill  the  reft  of  it  with  fait,  and  prefs  it  down  into  the  barrel
with  weights  laid  upon  it :  and  this  flefli  is  always  preferved  and  kept
without  fpoiling,  and  remains  in  its  own  brine,  as  any  other  falted
thing  whatfoever.


C  H  A  P.  LIV.

After  what  Maimer  you  may  pickle  Turneps  and  Navews.

TAKE  the  roundeft  turneps  you  can  find,  and  wipe  them,  if  they
be  dirty ;  and,  with  a  fharp  knife,  pare  off  the  outer  flcin  •
then  (as  the  Oilmen  ufe  to  do)  make  an  incifion  upon  them  crofs-
wife,  with  an  iron-tool  in  form  of  a  crefcent :  but  beware  you  do
not  cut  the  turnep  through  to  the  bottom.  Then  fprinkle  fait,  that

is


Chap.  LV.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  567

is  not  too  fmall,  between  the  incifions  of  the  turneps,  and  lay  them
in  order  in  a  tray  or  tub ;  and,  having  fprinkled  them  with  a  little
more  fait,  let  them  alone  for  three  days,  till  they  exfude  their
moifture.  After  the  third  day,  tafte  the  middle  fibre  of  the  turnep,
if  it  has  taken  the  fait ;  then,  when  it  fhall  feem  to  have  taken  enough
of  it,  after  you  have  taken  them  all  out,  wafh  them,  one  by  one,  in
their  own  liquor  ;  or,  if  there  be  not  much  liquor,  put  ftrong  brine
to  it,  and  fo  wafh  them  :  then  put  up  the  turneps  into  a  fquare  wil¬
low  cheft,  which  is  not  woven  too  clofely,  but  yet  very  firmly,  with
large  willows  ;  then  put  a  board  upon  them,  fo  fitted,  that  it  may  be
prefled  down  within  the  cheft  to  the  very  bottom,  if  there  be  occa-
fion  for  it :  and,  after  you  have  thus  fitted  the  board,  put  heavy
weights  upon  it,  and  let  them  dry  one  whole  night  and  a  day  ;  then
put  them  up  in  a  pitched  earthen  jar,  or  in  a  large  glafs  bottle  ;
and  fo  pour  in  muftard  and  vinegar,  that  they  may  be  covered  with
liquor.

Navews  alfo  may  be  pickled  with  the  fame  liquor  as  turneps ;  but,
if  they  be  fmall,  they  mufl  be  pickled  whole  ;  if  large,  they  muft  be
cut.  But  you  mult  take  care,  that  both  thefe  be  pickled,  and  put
up,  while  they  are  young  and  tender,  before  they  form  their  ftalk,
or  put  forth  any  fprouts  or  fhoots.  Throw  the  fmall  navews  into  the
veflel  whole,  and  the  large  ones  divided  into  three  or  four  parts,  and
infufe  them  in  vinegar  ;  and  alfo  put  one  fextarius  of  toafted  fait  into
a  c  origins  of  vinegar.  After  the  thirtieth  day  you  may  ufe  them.


CHAP.  LV.

How  you  may  make  Muftard.

CLEANSE  and  lift  muftard-feed  carefully;  then  wafh  it  with
cold  water  ;  and,  when  it  has  been  well-wafhed,  let  it  lie  two
hours  in  water  ;  afterwards  take  it  out ;  and,  having  fqueezed  the
water  out  of  it  with  your  hands,  throw  it  into  a  new  mortar,  or  into
one  that  is  made  very  clean,  and  bruife  it  fmall  with  peftils :  when
you  have  bruifed  it,  draw  the  whole  mafh  together  to  the  middle  of
the  mortar,  and  prefs  it  down  with  your  flat  open  hand ;  and,  after
you  have  compreffed  it,  fcarify  it;  and,  having  placed  a  few  live  coals
upon  it,  pour  nitred  water  upon  it,  that  it  may  free  it  from  all  its
bitternefs  andpalenefs;  then  raife  the  mortar,  that  all  the  moiflure
may  be  drained  out  of  it ;  after  this  put  white  fharp  vinegar  to  it,
3  and


56S  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Book  XII.

and  mix  it  throughly  with  the  pellil,  and  flrain  it :  this  liquor  does
exceeding  well  for  pickling  of  turneps.  But,  if  you  would  prepare
muftard  for  the  ufe  of  great  entertainments,  when  you  have  fqueezed
all  the  noxious  juice  of  it,  add  the  frelhell  pine-apples  you  can  find,
and  almonds  to  it  ;  and  bruife  them  carefully  together,  and  pour  in
vinegar  upon  them  :  do  the  other  things  as  I  faid  above.  When  you
come  to  ufe  this  muftard,  it  will  not  only  be  very  fit  for  fawce,  but
very  beautiful  and  pleafing  to  the  eye;  for  it  is  of  an  exquifite  white-
nefs,  if  it  be  made  with  care.


CHAP.  LVI.

After  what  Maimer  you  may  preferve  and  pickle  the  Alif-
fander-  and  the  Skirret-^^/^.

BEFORE  the  aliifander  puts  forth  its  flalk,  take  its  root  out  of
the  ground  in  the  month  of  "January ,  or  even  in  February  ;
and  rub  it  carefully,  that  nothing  of  earth  may  flick  to  it,  and  lay  it
in  vinegar  and  fait;  then,  after  the  thirtieth  day,  take  it  out,  and
pare  the  bark  off  it,  and  throw  it  away  :  but,  having  cut  the  heart
of  it  into  fmall  pieces,  put  them  up  into  a  fmall  glafs  bottle,  or  a  new
earthen  pot;  and  put  liquor  to  them,  which  ought  to  be  made  as  is
diredled  below  :  Take  mint  and  raifins  of  the  Sun,  and  a  fmall  dry
onion  ;  and  bruife  it  fmall  with  parched  red-bearded  wheat,  and  a
little  honey  ;  and,  when  it  is  well  bruited,  mix  with  it  two  parts  of
mull  boiled  in  to  one  half,  or  a  third  part  of  its  firll  quantity,  and
one  part  vinegar  ^  and  fo  pour  them  all  together  into  the  fame  earthen
pot,  and,  having  put  its  cover  clofe  upon  it,  cover  it  over  with  leather  :
then,  when  you  have  a  mind  to  ufe  it,  bring  out  the  fmall  roots,  that
are  cut  into  pieces,  with  their  own  liquor,  and  put  oil  to  them.  At
this  very  time  you  may  pickle  the  fkirret-root,  in  the  fame  manner
as  above  ;  but,  when  you  fhall  have  occafion  to  ufe  it,  you  lhall
take  it  out  of  the  jar,  and  pour  oxymel,  with  a  little  oil,  upon  it.


CHAP.


Chap.  LVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.


56  9


CHAP.  LVII.

How  to  make  up  a  Sallet  of  eajy  and  quick  Digejlion  (i) ;  or,
as  others  will  have  it,  a  Sallet  or  Sawce  with  a  Mixture
of  Garum  and  Vinegar .

PUT  into  a  mortar  favory,  mint,  rue,  coriander,  parfley,  the
fe&ive  leek,  or,  if  you  have  none,  a  green  onion,  the  leaves  of
lettuce  and  of  rocket,  green  thyme,  or  cat-mint,  as  alfo  green  penny¬
royal,  and  falted  new-cheefe ;  bruife  all  thefe  equally  together,  and
mix  a  little  peppered  vinegar  with  them  :  when  you  have  made  up  all
this  mixture  together,  in  a  fmall  dith,  pour  oil  upon  it.  When  you
have  bruifed  the  forefaid  greens  all  together,  join  with  them  as  many
well-cleanfed  walnuts  as  you  (hall  think  fufficient  j  and  mix  a  little
peppered  vinegar  throughly  with  them,  and  pour  oil  upon  them  :
bruife  fefamum,  flightly  parched,  with  thefe  greens  above-mentioned  :
alfo  mix  a  little  peppered  vinegar  with  them,  upon  which  pour  a  little
oil.

Cut  Gallican  cheefe,  or  of  any  other  fort  whatfoever,  very  fmall,
and  bruife  it,  and  the  kernels  of  pine-apples,  if  you  have  plenty  of
them,  if  not,  toafted  filberts,  after  you  have  taken  off  their  fkin,  or
almonds ;  and  mix  them  in  equal  quantities  upon  the  forefaid  leafon-
ing  herbs ;  and  add  a  little  peppered  vinegar  to  them,  and  mix  them
throughly  j  and  pour  oil  upon  the  whole  compofition,

If  you  have  none  of  thefe  green  feafoning-  or  fallet-herbs,  bruife
dry  penyroyal,  or  thyme,  or  marjoram,  or  dry  favory,  with  cheefe,
all  together,  and  put  peppered  vinegar  and  oil  to  them.  Neverthe-
lefs,  any  one  of  thefe  herbs,  when  they  are  dry,  if  you  have  not  the
reft,  may  alfo  by  itfelf  be  mixed  with  cheefe.-— Take  of  white  pepper,
if  you  have  any,  if  not,  of  black  pepper,  three  ounces ;  of  parflev-
feed,  two  ounces ;  of  lafer-root,  which  the  Greeks  call  filphium ,  an
ounce  and  an  half ;  of  cheefe,  two  ounces  after  you  have  bruifed

(i)  Moretum  may  fignify  any  kind  of  hafh,  and  is  the  fame  as  ret^uci,  or  intritum :
it  was  commoniy  made  up  of  different  forts  of  herbs,  and  fome  orher  ingredients,  and
diverlified  according  to  every  one’s  fancy,  by  the  addition  of  fomeching  new,  as  we  fee
in  this  chapter.  It  is  called  here  vioretum  oxyporum ,  either  becaufe  it  was  of  itfelf  of
eafy  and  quick  digeftion,  or  contributed  to  the  quick  digeftion  of  other  things,  and  fo
may  be  tranflated,  a  fallet  or  fawce  of  quick  digeflion>  or  that  pajfeth  eafily ,  as  oppofed
to  which  paffeth  with  difficulty  When  it  had  garum  and  vinegar  mixed

with  it,  they  called  it  moretum  oxy garum.

4  D


and


57o  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A,  &?c.  Book  XII.

and  fifted  them,  mix  them  with  honey,  and  keep  them  in  a  new  pot :
then,  when  you  (hall  have  oocafion  to  ufe  them,  dilute  what  quan¬
tity  you  (hall  think  proper  with  vinegar,  and  garum. - Take  an  ounce

of  lovage,  two  ounces  of  raifms  of  the  Sun,  after  you  have  taken  out
fbeir  hones  j  three  ounces  of  black  or  white  pepper:  thefe,  if  you
avoid  greater  expences,  you  may  mix  throughly  with  honey,  and  fo
keep  them.  But,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  make  a  more  cohly  and
valuable  fallet,  for  eafy  and  quick  digehion,  you  (hall  mix  thefe  fame
things  with  the  compofition  above-delcribed,  and  fo  lay  it  up  for  ufe.
But  alfo,  if  you  have  no  lafer,  in  head  of  the  filphium ,  you  fhall  put
half  an  ounce  of  honey  to  it.

I  do  not  think  it  improper,  'Publius  Silvimis ,  as  a  conclufion  of
the  work  I  have  finifhed,  to  declare  to  my  Readers,  (if  fo  be  there
ihall  be  any  who  may  vouchfafe  to  take  cognizance  of  thefe  things)
that  I  did  not  at  all  doubt,  that  there  are  things  al-moh  infinite,  which
might  have  been  ingrafted  into  this  fubjedlj  but  that  I  judged  it
proper  to  publifb  only  fuch  as  feemed  the  mod  neceflary.  However,
"Nature  has  not  bellowed,  even  upon  grey  hairs,  knowledge  and  pru¬
dence  in  ail  things ;  -for,  even  whofoever  have  been  e deemed  the  wiled
•of  mortals,  are  faid  to  have  known  many  thingSj  but  not  all.


l.  y  u-


[  57*  ]


L.  JUNIUS  MODERATUS  COLUMELLA,

H  I  S

B  O  O  K

O  F

TREES  (i).

FOrafmuch  as  we  feem  to  have  given  abundance  of  precepts  in  the
firft  book,  concerning  the  culture  of  lands  j  the  care  of  trees
and  fhrubs,  which  is  even  reckoned  the  greateft  part  of  Huf-
bandry,  will  not  now  be  unfeafonable.  Therefore  we  alfo  think  it
proper,  as  Virgil  did,  to  diftinguifh  plants  of  trees  into  two  kinds ;
one  of  which  grows  up  of  its  own  accord,  the  other  proceeds  from
human  induftry  and  care.  That  kind,  which  does  not  come  forth  by
human  afliftance,  is  more  proper  for  timber  :  this,  upon  which  labour

is

(i)  In  all,  or  moft  of  the  oldeft  editions  of  Columella,  this  final!  treatife  upon  trees
was  placed  as  the  third  book  of  his  fyftem  of  Agriculture :  but  learned  men,  who  had
carefully  confidered  this  work,  foon  found,  that  this  fmall  book  made  no  part  of  it;  there¬
fore  Aldus ,  and  other  learned  Editors  after  him,  threw  it  out  of  the  place  wherein  it  had
been  inconfiderately  placed,  and  printed  it  feparately  by  itfelf.  There  are  many  reafons
which  may  convince  any  attentive  perfon,  that  this  book  is  not  at  all  a  part  of  that  work
infcribed  by  Columella  to  Publius  Silvinus ,  but  a  part  of  a  different  treatife  j  for  the  very
beginning  of  that  book,  which,  by  inferting  this,  was  difpofTefTed  of  its  rank,  and  placed
as  the  fourth  in  order,  proves,  that  not  this  book  of  trees,  but  one,  which  treats  of  the
culture  of  land,  did  immediately  precede :  for  the  author  fays,  Hitherto  we  have  treated
of  the  culture  of  la-ad ;  now  follows  the  care  of  trees :  and  it  cannot  be  fuppofed,  that,  if
he  had  treated  of  trees  in  the  book  immediately  preceding,  he  would  have  faid  in  the  next
following,  that  he  then  began  to  treat  of  that  fibjeft :  and  it  would  be  an  inexcufable
want  of  method,  diligence,  and  attention,  in  an  author,  if,  after  having  treated  of  feveral
things  in  a  preceding  book,  he  fhould  treat  of  the  fame  things  over  again,  and  in  the
fame  words,  in  the  very  next  book  j  which  would  be  exactly  the  cafe,  if  this  book  were
reckoned  the  third  in  Columella’s  fyftem  of  Husbandry  :  moreover,  by  fo  doing,  the  whole
order  and  numbers  of  the  books,  mentioned  by  Columella  himfelf  in  feveral  places,  would
be  inverted,  and  really  different  from  what  he  himfelf  afferts  it  to  be ;  and  when  he
fays,  in  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  book,  that  he  had  finifhed  luch  and  fuch  things  in
feven  books ,  he  ought  to  have  laid  eight ,  and  that  which  he  calls  his  eleventh ,  he  ought
to  have  called  the  twelfth  j  and  in  feveral  other  inftances,  which  it  is  needlef.  to  mention.

It  is  alfo  to  be  obferved,  that  in  all  the  other  books  he  mentions  Silvinus ,  but  in  this
there  is  no  mention  of  him  at  all :  from  all  which  it  is  reafonable  to  think,  that  this  book
is  the  fecond  of  two,  which  he  formerly  wrote  upon  Husbandry,  as  appears  by  the  very
firft  fentence:,  and  that  the  firft,  which  treated  of  the  culture  of  the  ground,  is  loft,  and
this  other?  concerning  trees,  has  been  preferved.  And  it  feems  very  probable,  that  thefe

4  D  2  were


572  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  I.

is  bellowed,  is  fit  for  fruit ;  therefore  this  one  is  the  chief :  and  this
kind  itfelf  is  divided  into  three  different  forts  j  for,  from  a  young
plant,  flip,  or  (hoot,  either  a  tree  arifes,  as  the  olive-tree ,  the  fig-tree ;
or  a  Jhrub ,  as  rofe-buJbesy  reeds  j  or  a  certain  third  thing,  which  we
cannot  properly  call  either  a  tree,  or  a  fhrub,  as  is  the  vine :  we  fhall
teach  you  the  culture  of  trees  and  fhrubs,  when  we  fhall  have  firft
given  precepts  and  directions  concerning  vines.

Whoever  fhall  have  a  mind  to  plant  a  vineyard,  or  to  make  a  plan¬
tation  of  trees  for  the  fupporting  of  vines,  ought  firft  to  make  nur-
feriesj  for  then  he  will  know  what  kind  of  vine  he  is  about  to  plant ;
for  that  which  is  purchafed  with  money,  and  is  fet  in  its  place,  has
no  certain  characters  of  excellency,  and  of  noble  qualities,  to  be  de¬
pended  on  j  becaufe  it  is  doubtful,  whether  he  who  fold  it  did  ufe
diligence  in  choofing  the  plants:  moreover,  that  which  is  brought
from  far  diftant  parts,  does  not  eafily  familiarize  itfelf  with  our  foil ;
for  which  reafon,  that  which  is  foreign,  and  of  a  diftant  county,  does,
with  greater  difficulty,  take  root,  and  grow  up.  It  is  beft  therefore
to  make  a  nurfery  in  the  fame  ground,  where  you  are  about  to  plant
the  vine,  or,  at  leaft,  in  the  neighbourhood  :  and  the  nature  of  the
place  is  of  great  importance  with  refpeCt  to  this ;  for,  if  you  are  about
to  lay  out  your  hills  and  rifing  grounds  in  vineyards,  and  in  plantations
of  trees  for  fupporting  vines,  you  muft  ufe  this  precaution,  to  make
your  nurfery  in  the  drieft  place  you  can  find  j  and  that  the  vine  may,
from  its  infancy,  as  it  were,  accuftom  itfelf  to  little  moillure  :  other-
wife,  where  you  have  tranfplanted  it  from  a  moift  to  a  dry  place,  be¬
ing  deprived  of  its  former  nouriffiment,  it  will  decay  and  fail.  But,
if  you  have  champagne  wet  and  oufy  lands  in  your  poffeffion,  it  will
be  of  advantage  to  make  a  nurfery  alfo  in  a  like  place,  and  to  ac-
cuftcm  the  vine  to  a  large  quantity  of  moift  u  re  j  for  a  flender  dry
vine,  when  tranfplanted  into  a  watery  ground,  does  certainly  rot.
But  it  will  be  fufficient  to  turn  up  the  plain,  even,  and  juicy  land  it¬
felf,  which  you  deflinate  for  a  nurfery,  with  that  fpade  of  two  feet
and  an  half,  which  Ruftics  call  fefiertium.  This  repaftination,  or
trenching  and  opening  the  ground  for  planting,  has  more  depth  than
one  foot  and  an  half,  but  lefs  than  two  feet :  with  this  kind  of  fpade,
a  jugerum  of  land  is  turned  up,  by  fifty  Labourers,  in  one  day.  But

were  his  firft  eflays  upon  this  fubjedtr,  which,  no  doubt,  being  well  received,  his  friends
engaged  him  to  levife  and  inlarge  the  fame  j  fo  that  having  afterwards  compofed  a  new
work,  much  more  complete  than  the  former  upon  the  fame  fabjedt,  ana  added  feveral
other  books,  for  the  improvement  of  Husbandry  and  domeftic  ceconomy,  his  firft  eiTay
wa  negle&ed  as  lefs  perfect,  and  afterwards  a  part  of  it  perifhed.


you


Chap.  II.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  573

you  may  trench  an  hill  or  rifing  ground,  of  the  compafs  of  one  ju-
gerum ,  with  fixty  Labourers,  if  you  do  not  trench  it  lefs  than  two
feet  deep  :  or,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  make  a  nurfery  in  the  fame
place,  when  you  defign  to  plant  a  regular  vineyard,  you  may  trench,
or  prepare  for  planting,  a  jugerum  of  ground,  three  feet  deep,  with
eighty  Labourers,  in  one  day  ;  provided  neverthelefs,  that  neither
ffone,  nor  gravel-ftones,  or  other  more  difficult  fluff  intervene  :  in
which  cafe,  how  many  Labourers  it  may  require,  is  very  uncertain.
But  we  fpeak  of  ground  where  there  is  nothing  but  earth.


CHAP.  II.

What  Sorts  of  Plants  or  Shoots  you  ought  to  gather ;  and

when..

HAVING  finifhed  the  trenching  or  the  digging  of  the  ground,
in  the  month  of  February ,  or  in  the  firft  part  of  March ,  gather
your  plants :  but  thofe  are  the  beft,  which  are  gathered  off  vines  that
have  been  marked  ;  for  he  that  has  it  much  at  heart,  to  make  good
nurferies,  about  the  time  of  vintage,  marks  with  ochre  mixed  with
vinegar  (that  it  may  not  be  wafhed  off  by  the  rains)  the  vines  which
have  brought  to  maturity  fruit,  that  is  both  found  and  incorrupted,
and  in  great  quantity.  And  he  does  not  do  this  only  for  one  year,
but  he  carefully  views  the  fame  vines  for  three  or  more  vintages  fuc-
ceffively,  to  fee  whether  they  continue  and  perfevere  to  be  fruitful ;
for  fo  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  fruit  proceeds  from  the  generous  quali¬
ties  of  the  vines,  and  not  from  the  plenty  of  the  year.

If  the  vines  keep  the  fame  conffant  courfe  for  feveral  vintages,
fhoots  gathered  from  fuch  vines  as  thefe  will  yield  good  wine,  and  in
great  quantity  :  for  grapes,  of  whatever  kind  they  may  be,  which
come  to  maturity  found,  and  without  fpoiling,  make  wine  of  a  far
better  tafte,  than  fuch  as  are  eafily  damaged,  or  over-hadily  ripened
by  the  great  heat,  or  by  any  other  caufe.


CHAP.


L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Chap.  III.


57+


CHAR  III.

After  what  Manner  you  may  choofe your  Shoots  ;  and  of  the
Quality  and  Condition  of  the  Ground.

BU  T  chufe  fhoots  from  vines  of  a  large  berry,  a  thin  hulk,  few
and  fmall  grape-ftones,  and  of  a  fweet  tafte.  Thofe  gathered
from  the  loins  of  the  vine  are  reckoned  the  beft  ;  thofe  from  the
fhoulders  are  next  to  them  ;  and  the  third  are  thofe  gathered  from  the
uppermoft  part  of  the  vine,  which  very  quickly  take  root  and  grow,
and  are  more  fertile  than  the  others ;  but  they  likewife  fpeedily  grow
old.  I  do  not  approve  the  fetting  of  fhoots  or  fprays,  that  grow  out
of  the  llock  of  the  vine,  becaufe  they  are  barren.

In  fat,  and  level,  and  moift  places,  plant  the  early-ripe  vines,  and
fuch  as  are  weak,  with  thin  berries,  and  fhort  joints  ;  for  this  kind  of
land  is  fit  for  fuch  kind  of  vines.  In  thirfty,  lean,  and  dry  places,
plant  a  vine  that  is  naturally  fertile  and  ftrong,  with  the  grapes  clofe
and  thick  fet :  for,  if  you  plant  ftrong  vines  in  fat  land,  they  will  be
the  more  luxuriant  in  fhoots  and  leaves ;  and  whatever  fort  of  fruit
they  bring  forth,  they  will  not  bring  it  to  maturity  :  on  the  other
hand,  vines  that  are  weak  will  quickly  fail  and  decay  in  poor,  lean
land,  and  will  yield  very  little  fruit.  Plant  every  kind  of  vine  apart
by  itfelf :  fo  you  will  prune  and  gather  the  grapes  of  every  fort  in
its  own  proper  feafon.

Young  fhoots,  planted  w'ith  a  piece  of  the  old  fpray,  foon  take
root,  and  grow  ftrongly  ;  but  they  quickly  grow  old  :  but  thofe  that
are  fet  without  any  part  of  the  old  branch,  take  root,  and  grow  up
more  flowly  ;  but  then  they  fail,  and  decay  more  flowly.  It  is  proper
to  commit  the  fhoots  to  the  earth,  as  frefh  and  newly  gathered  as
poftible  :  neverthelefs,  if  any  delay  or  hinderance  fhall  happen,  which
may  prevent  their  being  planted  prelently,  they  muft  be,  as  carefully
as  poftible,  covered  all  over  with  earth,  in  a  place  where  they  can  feel
neither  winds  nor  rains.  Make  your  nurferies  and  plantations  at  the
time  of  the  New  Moon,  and  about  the  tenth  and  the  twentieth  day.
This  is  the  beft  time  for  the  planting  of  vines :  but,  when  you  plant,
avoid  cold  winds.

Plant  the  malleolus  or  mallet-fhoot  in  this  manner :  It  is  proper,
that  the  mallet-fhoot- rod  fhould  not  be  of  more  than  fix  eyes  3  pro¬
vided  neverthelefs,  that  they  have  but  fhort  fpaces  between  the  knots,

5  with


Chap.  III.  HUSBANDRY.  575

with  a  very  (harp  bill  cut  off,  with  a  ‘round  cut,  the  lower  part  of  the
fhoot  you  are  about  to  fet  in  the  ground,  hard  by  the  knob  or  joint,
but  fo,  that  you  may  not  hurt  the  eye ;  and  prefently  fmear  it  over
with  ox*$  dung :  then  fatten  the  fprig  ftraight  into  earth  that  has  been
well  paftinated  and  dunged,  fo  that  no  lefs  than  four  eyes  of  -it  be  hid.
It  will  be  fufhcient,  that  the  fpace  of  one  foot  every  way  be  left  be¬
tween  the  plants.  When  they  have  taken  root,  and  grow  well,  let
them  be  pampinated,  or  freed  from  their  fuperfluous  twigs  and  leaves,
that  they  may  not  nourifh  more  twigs  than  they  ought ;  alfo  let  them
be  digged  as  often  as  can  be  :  let  them  not  be  touched  with  an  iron-
tool.  In  the  twenty-fourth  month  let  them  be  cut:  after  the  thirty-
fixth  month  let  them  be  tranfplanted.

Place  your  vineyard  in  land  that  has  reded  and  lain  fallow;  for
where  there  has  been  a  vineyard,  whatever  you  plant  fooner  than  the
tenth  year  will,  with  more  difficulty,  take  root  and  grow,  and  will
never  recover  drength.  Before  you  plant  land  with  vines,  examine
carefully,  and  try  what  tade  it  is  of;  for  fuch  a  tade  will  it  commu¬
nicate  to  the  wine.  But  the  tafoe  of  it  (as  we  taught  in  the  firft  book)
will  be  perceived  and  found  out,  if  you  foak  the  earth  in  water  ;  and,
when  you  have  {trained  it,  then  you  may  fade  the  water.  Sandv
earth,  under  which  there  is  conftantly  a  fweet  moidure,  is  fitted  for
vines;  land  like  to  this,  under  which  there  are  foft  crumbling  gravel-
dones,  is  alfo  very  good  :  earth  that  is  gathered  together,  and  moved
from  any  other  place,  is  equally  uktulfor  this  purpofe.  'Gravel  alia,
under  which  there  lies  fweet  white  day,  or  pottors-earth,  is  proper
for  vines:  but  all  land  whatfoever,  that  cleaves  and  chaps  during  the
Summer,  is  mlelefs  for  vines  and  trees.  The  lower  earth  nouritl.es  the
vines  and  the  tree,  and  that  which  is  uppermod  guards  and  preferves
them.

Rocks,  upon  the  uppermod  part  of  the  earth,  hurt  both  vines  and
trees  ;  in  the  lower  part  they  cool  and  refrefh  them  :  and  ground  of  a
middling  thinnefs  is  bed  for  vines  ;  but  that  which  tran limits,  or  pre¬
fently  drinks  up  the  (hewers,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  retains  them
long  upon  its  furface,  mud  be  avoided  :  but  that  which  is  tolerably
thin  on  the  upper  part,  and  thick  and  clofe  about  the  roots,  is  the
mod  ufeful  and  proper.  On  mountains,  and  riling  grounds,  and  fides
of  hills,  vineyards  have  difficulty  to  take  firm  root  and  grow  ;  but  they
yield  wine  of  a  dim  and  excellent  tade.  In  mold,  even,  and  level
places,  vineyards  are  exceeding  drong ;  but  they  produce  wine  of
a  weak  flat  tade,  and  which  does  not  keep  long.  And  fince  we
have  given  directions  concerning  the  plants,  and  the  quality  and  con-

'  ditfoa


576  L.  ].  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  IV.

dition  of  die  foil,  we  fhall  now  treat  of  the  different  kinds  of  vine¬
yards.

■■  ••  . .  -  - . . -  ■■■■  ■■  •'  '  JM

CHAP.  IV.

Of  the  fever al  Kinds  of  V ineyards.

VI  N'E  S  rejoice  moft,  and  thrive  bed,  on  trees,  becaufe  they
naturally  tend  aloft,  and  grow  to  a  great  height ;  alfo  upon
trees  they  produce  more  firm-wood,  and  larger  boughs ;  and  they
throughly  concodt  their  fruit,  and  ripen  it  equally.  This  kind  of
vines  we  call  arbuftive-  or  arbour-vines  ;  of  which  we  fliall  fpeak  at
greater  length  in  their  due  place.  But,  commonly,  there  are  three
kinds  of  vineyards  in  ufe :  vineyards,  where  the  vines  grow  upon
frames  ;  vineyards,  where  the  vines  lie  at  their  full  length  upon  the
ground ;  and  then  a  third  fort,  where  the  vines  grow  upright  from
the  ground,  fupporting  and  Banding  by  themfelves,  after  the  manner
of  trees.:  this  kind,  compared  with  that  which  grows  upon  frames,
has,  in  fome  things,  the  difadvantage,  and  is  inferior  to  it,  and  in
other  things  excels  it.  A  vineyard  laid  upon  frames  receives  more
air,  and  bears  fruit  higher,  and  concofts  and  ripens  it  more  equally ;
but  the  culture  of  it  is  more  difficult :  but  this,  that  grows  upright,
is  fo  conftituted,  that  it  m2y  be  plowed  alfo  ;  and  thereby  attains  to
greater  fruitfulnefs,  becaufe  it  is  oftener  cultivated,  and  with  lefs  ex-
pences.  But  that  which  is  immediately  laid  at  its  full  length,  and
thrown  flat  upon  the  ground,  produces  much  wine,  but  not  of  a  good
quality.

A  vineyard  is  befl:  planted  in  land  that  is  well  paflinated  or  trenched :
neverthelefs,  fometimes  vines  are  even  better  committed  to  furrows  in
fome  places ;  fometimes  alfo  they  fet  them  in  trenches ;  but,  as  I  faid,
a  jugerum  of  ground  may  be  paginated  three  feet  deep,  by  eighty  La¬
bourers,  in  one  day  :  but  one  Labourer  digs  a  furrow  in  the  earth
two  feet  deep  and  feventy  feet  long,  in  one  day.  One  Labourer  makes
eighteen  three  feet  trenches,  that  is,  three  feet  every  way,  in  one  day  :
or,  if  any  body  has  a  mind  to  plant  the  vines  wider,  and  at  a  greater
diftance,  from  one  another,  one  Labourer  makes  twelve  trenches,  four
feet  every  way,  in  one  day  j  or  one  Labourer  digs  twenty  trenches,
two  feet  every  way,  in  one  day.  But  you  muft  take  care,  that  the

vines


Chap.  V.  0/  HDSBANDRY.  577

vines  be  fet  deeper  in  places  that  are  dry  and  (loping,  than  in  fuch  as
are  moid  and  level.

In  a  vineyard  that  is  planted  exceeding  clofe,  they  fet  the  vines  at
the  didance  of  five  feet  from  each  other  ;  but,  in  fuch  vineyards  as
are  planted  wider,  they  put  the  fpace  of  feven  or  eight  feet  between
the  vines  j  but  in  fuch  as  are  planted  the  thinned,  (that  they  may  be
eafily  plowed  alfo)  they  place  the  vines  ten  feet  didant  from  each
other.  This  way  of  planting  a  vineyard  takes  up,  without  doubt,  a
greater  extent  of  ground  ;  but  the  vines  thrive  the  bed,  grow  exceed¬
ing  drong,  and  become  the  mod  fruitful.  When  you  fet  the  plants,
dig  the  bottom  of  the  furrow  or  trench  with  hoes,  and  make  it  foft :
fee  that  the  vine,  which  you  plant,  look  towards  the  Ead  when  it  is
tied  to  the  prop  :  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench  place  dones  about  five
pound-weight,  fo  that  they  may  not  prefs  upon  the  vine  ;  but  yet  let
them  be  hard  by  its  roots.  Moreover,  after  you  have  done  thefe
things,  put  an  hemina  of  the  hufks  and  dones  of  white  grapes  to  the
root  of  a  black  vine,  and  of  black  grapes  to  the  root  of  a  white  vine,
and  fo  -fill  up  the  trench  or  furrow  to  the  middle  with  dunged  earth  :
then  the  next  three  years  fill  up  the  trench  or  the  furrow  gradually,
till  you  fill  it  up  to  the  top,  fo  the  vines  will  accullom  themfelves  to
drike  their  roots  downwards.  But  the  dones  give  room  to  the  roots
where  they  may  creep  and  fpread  themfelves,  and  they  repel  the  water
in  Winter  j  and  the  hufks  of  the  grapes  afford  them  moidure  in  Sum¬
mer,  and  force  them  to  put  forth  their  roots.  Forafmuch  as  we
have  directed  you,  after  what  manner  vines  mud  be  planted  j  we  (hall
now  teach  you  how  to  cultivate  them.


CHAP.  V.

After  what  Manner  Vines  ought  to  he  cultivated.

SUFFER  the  vineyard  that  is  newly  planted  to  put  forth  all  its
buds ;  and,  as  foon  as  the  young  twig  or  dioot  ihall  be  about
four  inches,  then,  at  length,  pampinate  them,  and  leave  two  of  them
for  firm-wood.;  the  one,  which  you  may  fet  apart  to  grow  to  its  full
length,  for  forming  and  condituting  the  vine  ;  and  the  other,  which
you  may  have  for  a  fubfidiary  fhoot,  if,  perad venture,  that  which  is
defigned  for  the  row  fliould  perifh  :  this  the  Hufbandmen  call  the
Keeper,  or  the  Guardian.  Then  the  next  year,  when  you  prune  the

4  E  vine.


578  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  V.

vine,  leave  one  rod,  which  is  the  bed.  The  third  year  model  and
adjult  the  vine,  while  it  is  tender,  into  what  form  you  pleafe.  If
you  dcfign  to  form  it  for  a  frame,  fet  apart  one  firm  young  bough  for
growth,  lb  as  you  may  pare  off,  with  a  fharp  pruning  hook,  the  two
eyes  that  are  next  to  the  ground,  that  they  may  not  bud  j  then  leave
the  three  following  eyes,  and  cut  off  the  remaining  part  of  the  rod.
But,  if  you  defire,  that  the  vine  thould  hand  by  itfelf,  without  any
lupport,  vou  inuft  fuffer  its  arms,  or  boughs,  to  grow  and  extend
themfelves  as  you  do  thofe  of  a  tree  ;  and  you  muff  endeavour,  that
it  be  formed  into  an  orbicular  (hape,  as  exaftly  as  pofiible :  for,  be-
fides  that  it  has  a  beautiful  appearance  when  it  is  fo  trimmed,  it  is
alio  in  lefs  danger,  and  labours  lefs,  when,  being  dablifned  and  fe-
cured,  as  it  were,  by  an  equilibrium  on  every  fide,  it  refts  upon  it¬
felf.  But  it  will  be  diffident,  when  the  arms  of  the  vine  (hall  be
fird  fet  apart  for  growth,  that  one  (ingle  eye  be  left  on  each  (ingle
twig,  that  it  may  not  forthwith  be  oppreffed  with  their  burden  and
weight.  After  this  pruning,  when  you  have  gathered  the  fprays,  dig
the  vineyard  deep,  and  equally,  with  hoes ;  or  plow  it,  if  it  be  laid
out  fo  wide,  as  that  it  can  be  done.

From  the  fifteenth  of  Ottober,  begin  to  ablaqueate  your  vineyard  ;
and  fee  that  you  have  it  completely  ablaqueated  before  the  middle  of
Winter.  Do  not  drefs  the  vine  during  the  (horted  days  of  Winter,
unlefs  you  have  a  mind  to  trace  and  follow  thofe  roots  that  (hall
appear  in  the  ablaqueation  ;  for  then,  at  length,  it  will  be  very  proper
to  ampute  them  j  but  to  do  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  not  to  hurt  the
ffock,  but  rather  leave  about  one  inch  of  it  from  the  mother,  and  fo
cut  away  the  root.  For,  when  the  root  is  pared  away  nearer,  befides
that  it  fftves  a  wound  to  the  vine,  and  thereby  hurts  it,  there  is  this
farther  inconveniency,  that  from  the  very  fear  itfelf  more  roots  creep
forth:  therefore  it  is  bed,  that  a  (mall -part  of  the  root  be  left,  and
fo  to  cut  away  the  uppermod  parts,  which  Rudies  call  Summer-roots ;
which  being  cut  away  after  this  manner,  perilh,  and  do  not  hurt  the
vines  any  further.  Sucker--  alio  may  be  cut  during  the  diorted  days  j
fo  much  the  rather,  becaufe  when  they  are  extirpated,  during  the  colds,
others  do  not  fo  eafily  fpring  out  in  their  room.

After  the  ablaqueation  is  finiflied,  it  will  be  proper,  every  third
year,  before  the  Winter-foldice,  to  put  no  lefs  than  two  fextarii  of
foaked  dung  to  the  roots  of  the  vines,  except  pigeons-dung,  of  which
if  you  put  more  than  an  bemitia ,  it  will  hurt  the  vine :  then,  after
the  Winter-foldice,  dig  all  round  the  pit  you  have  made  in  abla-
queating,  or  laying  open  the  roots  of  the  vine,  and  the  earth  you
I  have


Chap.  VI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  579

have  thrown  out  of  it.  Before  the  vernal  Equinox,  which  is  on  the
twenty-fifth  of  March ,  level  or  fill  up  the  hollow  you  have  made
by  laying  open  the  roots  of  the  vine.  After  the  thirteenth  of  April  heap
up  the  earth  to  the  vine  :  then  in  Summer  harrow  it  as  often  as  you  pof-
fibly  can.  Five  Labourers  ablaqueate  a  jugerum  of  vineyard  in  one
day ;  five  dig  it,  and  three  harrow  it.  Four  Labourers  prune  a  juge¬
rum  of  ftrong,  thriving,  finifhed,  and  already  conftituted,  vineyard  in
one  day ;  and  fix  bind  it  to  the  frames  or  props.  As  to  vines  that
grow  upon,  and  are  fupported  by  trees,  nothing  of  this  nature  can  be
exactly  determined,  becaufe  the  inequality  of  the  trees  does  not  allow
us  to  apprehend  exa&ly  what  may  be  a  reasonable  talk  for  La¬
bourers.  Some  think  fit  not  to  prune  the  next  year  a  vine  that  is
tranfplanted ;  then  the  following  year  to  lop  and  purge  it,  and  to  cut
one  rod  of  it  to  the  third  eye,  which  we  may  fet  apart  for  growth,
and  bearing  fruit :  then  the  third  year,  if  the  vine  grows  ftrong,  and
thrives  well,  to  allow  one  eye  more  to  the  rod  we  fet  apart  for  growth  :
the  fourth  year,  to  add  two  eyes  more  to  the  next  pruning  ;  and  fo
the  fifth  year  at  furtheft,  to  place  the  vine  upon  the  frame.  This
fame  order  and  method  of  culture  we  ourfelves  alfo  have  approved,
after  having  made  a  trial  of  it.


CHAP.  VI.

Of  cutting  and  propagating  an  old  Vineyard*

I  Would  not  advife  you  to  cut  an  old  vineyard,  if  it  has  its  roots
upon  the  Surface  of  the  ground;  otherwife  the  new  vineyard  alfo,
which  fhall  Spring  up  out  of  the  cutting,  will  never  have  Strength  fo
as  to  turn  to  any  account,  its  roots  fwimming  upon  the  Surface  of
the  ground ;  for  which  reafon  you  Shall  not  reap  any  great  plenty  of
fruit ;  and,  notwithftanding  all  your  pains,  it  will  quickly  grow  old,
.and  decay.  Therefore  this  fort  of  vineyard,  if  the  trunks  and  bodies
of  the  vines  are  not  dried,  and  if  it  can  be  bended,  is  eafily  laid
flat  in  furrows  made  for  that  purpofe,  and  fo  renewed  and  reftored.
But  if  it  is  dried  and  withered  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  it  cannot  be
bended,  the  firft  year  ablaqueate  it,  not  too  deep,  but  only  towards
the  Surface  of  the  ground,  fo  that  you  may  not  dig  up  or  hurt  the
roots ;  and  put  dung  to  the  roots  of  the  vines,  and  prune  them,  fo
as  to  leave  but  few  firm- wood-branches  upon  them,  on  which  you

4  E  2  may


580  '  L.  J.  M.  C  O  L  U  M  E  L  L  A  Chap.  VI.

may  depend  ;  and  dig  it  carefully,  and  pampinate  it  frequently,  that
it  may  by  no  means  nourifh  any  fuperfluous  and  ufelefs  fprays.  When
it  is  thus  throughly  cultivated,  it  will  produce  firm  and  long  woody-
branches,  w’hich  the  following  year  you  muft  propagate  and  make
layers  of,  after  you  have  made  trenches  for  them  between  the  rows  of
the  vines :  and  then,  during  the  fpace  of  three  years  afterwards,  you
muft  frequently  dig  it,  till  it  take  firm  root,  and  grow  ftrong  j  and
you  muft  kill  the  mother  vine,  taking  no  care  of,  and  making  no
provifion  for,  the  fupport  of  her  which  you  defign  to  remove  and  take
out  of  the  way.  The  laft  year  of  the  three,  you  muft  intirely  extir¬
pate  and  take  away  the  mother  vine,  and  fo  reduce  the  young  vine¬
yard  into  regular  rows.

But  if  an  old  vineyard,  which  has  nothing  left  but  that  the  vines
are  of  a  good  kind,  fhall  have  its  roots  fituated  deep  in  the  earth,  fo
that  they  are  not  feen  when  they  are  ablaqueated,  ablaqueate  that
vineyard  about  the  beginning  o£  March,  before  you  cut  it ;  and,  when
you  have  ablaqueated  it  very  deep,  cut  it  immediately.  Leave  the
ftock  four  inches  from  the  roots,  and,  if  it  can  be  done,  cut  it  off
with  a  little  faw,  hard  by  fome  knot,  and  fmooth  the  wound  with  a
very  fiharp  knife  j  then  put  fmall  earth,  tolerably  well  dunged,  upon
it,  fo  that  when  the  ftock  is  covered  over  with  it,  there  may  not  be
lefs  than  three  inches  of  earth  upon  the  wound,  or  place,  where  it
was  cut.  The  reafon  for  doing  this  is,  that  it  may  not  dry  and  wither
with  the  Sun,  and  that,  from  attracting  and  receiving  the  moifture
which  the  earth  affords,  it  may  the  better  yield,  and  put  forth,  firm-
wood.  But  a  vineyard  that  is  of  a  bad  kind,  and  alio  unfruitful,
and  has  its  uppermoft  parts  both  mouldy,  hollow,  and  confumed,  if
the  roots  of  the  vines  are  placed  deep  enough  in  the  earth,  it  will  be
very  proper  to  ingraft  them ;  provided  that,  when  they  are  ablaqueat¬
ed,  their  lower  part,  which  is  laid  bare,  be  amputed  fo  exadtly  even,
with  the  ground,  that  it  may  not  appear  above  it,  when  the  earth  is-
heaped  upon  it.


CHAP.


Chap.  VII.


Of  HUSBANDRY.


5»i


CHAP.  VII.

Of  propagating  V ines.

THERE  are  three  kinds  of  propagations  mod:  in  life  :  one,
whereby  a  rod  fprung  from  its  mother  is  committed  to  a  fur¬
row  ;  a  fecond,  whereby  the  mother  herfelf  is  laid  flat,  and  all  her
young  branches  divided  and  diftributed  among  feveral  props ;  a  third
kind,  whereby  the  vine  is  cloven  into  two  or  three  parts,  if  it  is  to  be
divided  and  carried  into  different  rows  on  each  fide.  This  kind  of
propagation  gathers  firength,  and  grows  up  very  flowly,  becaufe  the
vine,  being  divided,  lofes  its  pith.  And,  fince  we  have  mentioned  the
feveral  ways  of  propagating,  let  us  demon ftrate  after  what  manner
each  of  them  mu  ft  be  performed.

When  you  have  a  mind  to  deprefs,  or  force  down,  a  young  branch
from  its  mother  into  the  earth,  make  a  trench  of  four  feet  every
way,  fo  that  the  layer  may  not  be  hurt  by  the  other’s  roots.  Then
leave  four  eyes,  which  may  reach  to  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  that
out  of  them  the  roots  may  fpring  ;  pare  away  the  eyes  of  the  other
part  that  adjoins  to  the  mother,  that  it  may  not  procreate  fuperfluous
and  ufelefs  fprays :  but,  as  to  that  part  which  is  next  to  the  ground,
and  is  not  next  to  the  mother,  you  muft  not  fuffer  it  to  have  more
than  two,  or,  at  moft,  three  eyes,  which  ought  to  appear  above¬
ground.  See  that  you  pare  away  the  reft,  which  are  hid  under¬
ground,  except  the  four  lowermoft,  left  the  vine  put  forth  roots  upon
the  furface  of  the  ground.  A  vine,  propagated  after  this  manner,
will  quickly  ftrike  root,  and  grow  ftrong  j  and  the  third  year  it  muft
be  fevered  from  its  mother.

,But,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  lay  the  vine  itfelf  flat,  dig  very  cau-
tioufly  hard  by  its  roots,  fo  as  you  may  not  hurt  the  fame  ;  and  fup-
plant  the  vine,  fo  as  you  may  not  break  it  off  from  the  root.  When
you  have  laid  it  flat  at  its  full  length,  and  fhall  fee  how  far  it  can
reach,  you  fhall  make  one  furrow,  into  which  you  may  let  down  the
whole  vine :  then,  from  that  furrow,  you  fhall  make,  as  it  were,
branches  of  trenches,  by  which  the  vine  may  be  propagated,  as  each
of  its  young  branches  fhall  require  j  and  fo  you  fhall  cover  them  all
over  with  earth.

But,  if  the  vine  has  but  very  little  firm-wood,  and  is  to  be  divided
and  carried  into  different  rows,  and  cannot  otherwife  reach  to  the

.  props


582  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  VIII.

props  to  which  it  is  carried,  but  by  fpreading  and  dividing  it,  you
mult  take  care  that  you  cleave  it,  with  the  fharpefl  bill  you  can  find,
in  that  part  where  it  is  forked  ;  and  with  the  fame  iron  mend  the  cut,
if  it  (hall  feem  any  where  to  be  unequally  cloven :  being  thus  divid¬
ed,  it  may  be  diftributed  into  feveral  rows.

Alfo  that  way  of  propagating  vines,  which  we  have  found  out,  is
not  unprofitable  :  If  at  any  time  a  vine  be  wanting  in  a  row,  and  the
young  branch,  which  is  laid  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench,  is  not  fo
long,  as  that  it  can  be  wreathed  back  again,  and  raifed  up  above  the
ground,  be  not  at  all  concerned  at  its  fhortnefs ;  but  deprefs  any
young  branch  whatfoever,  whofe  top  reaches  to  the  bottom  of  the
trench  ;  and  cover  it  over  with  earth  :  then  preferve,  and  fet  apart
for  growth,  the  eyes  which  are  next  to  the  mother  herfelf,  that  they
may  put  forth  firm-wood-branches  from  the  upper  part.  Then,  at
length,  after  the  fpace  of  three  years,  ampute  it,  and  reduce  that  part,
which  you  have  cut  off  from  its  mother,  to  its  own  prop,  and  make
it  the  head  of  the  vine :  fill  up,  by  little  and  little,  the  trench  where
the  layer  is,  but  not  in  lefs  than  three  years  time :  cut  away  the
uppermoft  roots,  and  dig  it  frequently.


CHAP.  VIII.

Of  Ingrafitments  from  Fruit-hearing  Vines ,  in  order  to  male

Vines  fruit  fid.

WHEN  you  have  a  mind  to  ingraft  a  vine,  cut  off  from  their
mother  fruit-bearing  fprays  of  the  befi  kind,  at  the  time  when
they  begin  to  bud,  and  when  the  wind  is  South.  Let  the  fpray,
which  you  ufe  as  a  graff,  be  taken  from  the  top  of  the  vine,  and  let  it  be
round,  with  good  and  frequent  knots :  then  leave  three  of  the  foundeft
knots  j  below  the  third  eye  pare,  with  a  fharp  knife,  the  fpace  of  two
inches,  very  thin  on  both  Tides,  after  the  manner  of  a  wedge,  fo  as
-you  may  not  hurt  the  pith  :  then  cut  the  vine  which  you  defign  to  in¬
graft,  and  fmooth  the  cut,  and  fo  cleave  it ;  and  put  the  cyons,
which  you  have  prepared,  into  the  cleft,  as  far  as  they  are  pared,  fo
that  the  bark  of  the  graff  may  touch  the  bark  of  the  vine  equally..
Whatever  you  have  ingrafted,  bind  it  carefully  with  a  willow,  or
the  bark  of  an  elm  ;  and  daub  it  over  with  well-wrought  clay  mixed
with  draw,  and  cover  the  cut,  and  wrap  it  up,  and  bind  it  fo  clofe,

that


Chap.  VIII.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  583

that  neither  wind  nor  water  may  be  able  to  enter  5  then  put  mofs  over
the  clay,  and  fo  bind  it  again  :  this  thing  affords  it  moifture,  and  does
not  fuffer  it  to  grow  dry,  and  wither.  Below  the  ingraftment  and  the
binding,  wound  the  vine  flightly,  on  both  Tides,  with  a  fharp  bill,
that  the  moifture  may  rather  flow  out  of  thefe  wounds,  than  out  of
the  ingraftment  itfelf;  for  too  much  moifture  is  hurtful,  and  does
not  fuffer  the  cyons,  that  are  ingrafted  into  the  ftock,  to  take  hold
of  it.

Some  of  the  antients  thought  proper  to  bore  the  vine,  and  fo  put
the  cyons  into  it,  after  they  had  pared  them  (lightly :  but  we  have
done  this  fame  thing  after  a  better  manner.  For,  the  antient  augre
makes  a  powder  like  faw-duft,  and,  by  reaion  of  this,  burns  that
part  which  it  perforates ;  but  the  burnt  part  very  rarely  takes  hold  of,
and  unites  with  the  cyons,  that  are  ingrafted  into  it.  We,  on  the
contrary,  have  adapted,  to  this  fort  of  grafting,  that  which  we  call
the  Galli can  wimble  :  this  makes  an  hole,  but  does  not  burn,  becaufe
it  does  not  make,  as  it  were,  a  faw-duft,  but  fhavings  or  parings :
therefore,  when  we  have  cleanfed  the  hole  which  we  have  bored,  we
ingraft  into  it  the  cyons  which  are  pared  on  all  fides,  and  fo  daub  it
all  round  :  fuch  an  ingraftment  unites  and  takes  hold  very  eafily  ;
therefore  fee  that  you  have  the  ingraftment  of  your  vines  finifhed
about  the  time  of  the  Equinox.  Ingraft  your  moift  places  from  the
white  grape,  and  the  dry  from  the  black.

Make  your  unfruitful  vines  fruitful  after  this  manner  :  Water  vines,
which  yield  very  little  fruit,  with  lharp  vinegar  mixed  with  afhes,
and  daub  the  ftock  itfelf  with  the  fame  afhes.  But,  if  any  of  your
vines  do  not  bring  to  maturity  the  fruit  which  they  make  a  fhew  of,
but  wither  and  dry  up  before  the  grapes  grow  mellow  and  ripe,  you
may  cure  them,  and  let  them  to  rights  after  this  manner:  When  the
berries  upon  the  grape- ftalks  are  come  to  their  natural  bignefs,  cut
down  the  vine  to  the  very  root,  and  daub  the  cut  with  earth,  mixed
throughly  with  an  equal  quantity  of  fharp  vinegar,  and  old  urine,
and  water  their  roots  with  the  fame  ;  and  dig  them  frequently.  Thefe
things  make  them  quickly  put  forth  firm- wood-branches,  and  con¬
vey  juice  to  the  grapes.


CHAP.


584


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA.  Chap.  IX.


CHAP.  IX.


How  a  Clttfler  of  Grapes  may  have  Berries  of  feveral  Kind.


HERE  is  alfo  a  kind  of  ingraftment,  which  produces  fucli


clutters  of  grapes,  wherein  there  are  found  berries  of  different


kinds  and  colours ;  and  this  is  effedted  in  fuch  a  manner  as  this :  Take
four  or  five,  or  more  rods,  if  you  have  a  mind,  of  different  kinds ;
and,  after  you  have. carefully  compacted  them,  fo  as  to  be  equal  to
each  other,  bind  them  all  together;  then  infert  them  very  clofe  into
an  earthen  tube,  or  into  an  horn,  fo  as  they  may  ttand  out  a  little  at
both  ends,  and  loofen  and  open  thofe  parts  which  fliall  ttand  out ;
then  put  them  into  a  trench,  and  cover  them  all  over  with  well-
dunged  earth,  and  water  them  till  they  put  forth  buds.  When  the
rods  fliall  have  cohered  with  one  another,  and  now,  after  the  fpace  of
two  or  three  years,  have  formed  an  unity,  or  are  united  into  one,  you
fhall  break  the  fmall  tube,  and  cut  the  vine  with  a  faw,  almoft  about
the  middle  of  the  ttock,  where  they  fhall  appear  to  have  united  them-
felves  mod  with  one  another,  and  grown  the  clofett  together  ;  and
fmooth  the  cut,  and  heap  up  fmall  earth  about  it,  fo  that  it  may
cover  the  wound  three  inches  deep  :  when,  out  of  this  ttock,  it  fhall
have  put  forth  fhoots,  fet  apart  for  growth  the  two  beft,  pull  off  the
reft :  fo  fuch  grapes  will  be  produced,  as  we  propofed.

But,  that  grapes  may  be  produced  without  grape- ftones,  cut  a  fhoot
of  a  vine  fo,  as  the  eyes  upon  it  may  not  be  hurt,  and  fcrape  out  all
the  pith;  then  afterwards  put  the  parts  exactly  together  again,  as  they
were  before,  and  bind  them  together,  fo  as  you  may  not  bruife  the
eyes ;  and  fo  fet  it  in  dunged  earth,  and  water  it :  after  it  has  begun
to  put  forth  fhoots,  dig  it  frequently  ever  and  over  again,  and  very
deep.  When  the  vine  is  come  to  full  age,  it  will  produce  fuch  grapes
without  grape-ftones.


CHAP.


Chap.  X.


Of  HUSBANDRY.  SS5

CHAP.  X.

How  you  may  prune  the  Vines  after  you  have  gathered  the

Grapes .

WHEN  you  have  finished  the  vintage,  begin  prefently  to  prune
with  the  very  beft  and  fharpeft  iron-tools ;  fo  the  cuts  will  be
made  fmooth :  nor  will  the  water  be  able  to  remain,  and  reft  in  the
vine,  which,  as  foon  as  it  ftops,  and  abides  long  upon  it,  fpoils  and
rots  the  vine,  and  breeds  worms,  and  other  animals,  which  gnaw  and
confume  the  wood :  but  make  the  cuts  round ;  for  they  the  more
quickly  form  a  cicatrice.  The  fprays  that  are  broad,  old,  ill-lhaped,
ugly,  and  crooked,  cut  all  thefe  clean  away  ;  fuch  fprays  as  are  young,
and  bear  fruit,  and  fometimes  their  offspring,  which  you  fhall  think
fit  for  your  purpofe,  fet  them  apart  for  growth,  if  the  uppermoft
part  of  the  vine  is  not  now  in  a  very  ftrong  and  thriving  condition  5
and  preferve  the  arms  of  the  vine  :  finifh  the  pruning  as  quickly  as
pofiibly  you  can.  Such  fprays  as  are  dry  and  old,  which  cannot  be
amputed  with  the  pruning-hook,  pare  away  with  a  fharp  chip-ax.

Prune  a  weak  vineyard,  in  lean  and  dry  land,  immediately  after
the  Winter-folftice;  and  what  part  you  fhall  not  have  pruned,  return
to  it  again  about  the  firft  of  February  it  is  not  proper,  that  a  vine  or
a  tree  be  touched  with  an  iron-tool,  from  the  13th  of  December  to
the  13th  of  January .  When  you  prune  a  vine,  make  the  cut  be¬
tween  two  eyes ;  for,  if  you  cut  it  hard  by  the  eye  itfelf,  it  will  re¬
ceive  injury,  and  will  not  put  forth  any  firm-wood.  But  let  the
cicatrice  always  look  downward:  fo  it  will  not  receive  any  hurt,  either
from  the  water,  or  from  the  Sun ;  and  it  will  receive  the  moillure
rightly.  In  fat  land,  and  in  a  ftrong  well-thriving  vineyard,  leave
more  eyes  and  fruit-bearing  {hoots ;  in  that  which  is  poor,  leave
fewer.  Where-ever  you  fhall  find  an  arm  wanting  in  a  vine,  wound
it  once  or  twice  in  that  place,  about  the  depth  of  one  inch,  with  the
point  of  a  fharp  bill.  Beware  you  do  not  take  away  the  whole  arm,
altho’  it  be  long,  except  it  be  all  withered  and  dried  up.

See  that  you  have  your  new  vineyard  ablaqueated  before  the  Winter-
folftice,  that  it  may  receive  all  the  fhowers,  and  the  flime  :  the  fooner
you  ablaqueate  vines  and  trees,  the  ftronger  they  will  be,  and  the
better  will  they  thrive.  But  all  fuch  vines  and  trees,  as  are  planted
on  the  fides  of  hills,  and  rifing  grounds,  mu  ft  be  fo  ablaqueated,  that
the  little  ditches  may  be  made  towards  the  uppermoft  part,  hard  bv


586  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XII.

the  flock but  that,  on  the  lower  part,  fmall  banks  be  railed  higher
than  thefe,  that  they  may  contain  the  more  water  and  dime.

An  old  vineyard  muft  neither  be  ablaqueated,  left  the  roots,  which
it  has  towards  the  furface  of  the  ground,  wither  and  dry  up  ;  nor
plowed,  left  the  roots  of  the  vines  be  torn  up,  and  broken  off.  Dig
it  often,  and  equally,  with  hoes,  and  dig  it  deep ;  and,  before  the
Winter-folftice,  ftrew  the  ground  with  dung  and  chaff ;  or,  when
you  have  ablaqueated  only  towards  the  furface  all  round  the  vine  itfelf,
lay  dung  upon  it.


CHAP.  XI.

Of  pampinatmg  a  Vineyard ,  or  pulling  off  its  fuperffuous

Shoots  and  Leaves .

IT  is  as  profitable  to  pampinate  a  vineyard  carefully,  as  to  prune  it
well ;  for  the  firm-wood-branches,  which  have  fruit  upon  them,
both  gather  ftrength,  and  thrive  the  better,  and  the  pruning  of  the
following  year  is  done  more  expeditioufly,  and  the  vine  alfo  becomes
not  fo  full  of  fears  ;  becaufe,  when  that  which  is  green  and  tender  is
plucked  off  the  vine,  it  forthwith  recovers,  and  the  part  grows  whole
again  :  befides  thefe  things,  the  grapes  alfo  ripen  the  better.  See  that
you  have  your  vineyard  pampinated  ten  days  before  it  begins  to  blof-
fom  :  take  away  whatever  luperfluous  thing  is  fprung  out  of  it  j  pluck
off  whatever  is  grown  out  of  the  top  or  arms  of  the  vine,  provided
it  has  no  fruit  upon  it:  cut  off  the  tops  of  the  young  branches  or
rods,  left:  they  become  luxuriant :  cover  the  grapes,  that  fhall  look
towards  the  South,  or  the  Weft,  with  their  own  peculiar  twigs  and
leaves,  that  they  may  not  be  lcorched  and  burnt  up  with  the  heat.


CHAP.  XII.

Of  digging  of  Vmeyards.

A&  foon  as  the  chiller  of  grapes  fhall  begin  to  be  of  different  co¬
lours,  dig  the  third  digging  ;  and  now,  when  it  fhall  have  begun
to  ripen,  dig  before  i.oon,  before  it  {hall  begin  to  grow  hot,  and  in
the  afternoon,  when  the  heat  is  over  $  and  raife  the  duft  :  this  thing
very  much  preferves  and  defends  the  grapes,  both  from  the  Sun,  and
from  fogs.  You  muft  neiuier  plow  nor  dig  clayey  ground,  becaufe

it


Chap.  XV.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  587

it  grows  exceeding  hard,  and  cleaves  when  it  is  plowed  or  digged.  It
is  more  advantageous  to  turn  up  the  ground  with  hoes,  than  with  a
plough  j  the  hoe  turns  up  all  the  ground  equally :  for  befides  that,
the  plough  makes  baulks  in  the  ground  :  the  oxen  alfo,  which  plow,
break  fome  parts  of  the  young  branches,  and  fometimes  whole  vines.
But  there  is  no  end  of  digging  a  vineyard  ;  for  by  how  much  the
oftener  you  fhall  dig  it,  by  fo  much  the  greater  plenty  of  fruit  you
fhall  find.


CHAP.  XIII.

To  preferve  the  Vines  from  bemg  hurt  by  Mildew .

IN  the  fpring-time,  fee  that  you  have  heaps  of  chaff  and  ftraw
placed  among  the  rows  in  the  vineyard.  When  you  fhall  feel  the
cold  contrary  to  what  is  ufual  in  that  feafon  of  the  year,  fet  all  the
heaps  of  chaff  and  ftraw  on  fire :  fo  the  finoak  will  remove  the  fog,
and  the  mildew.


CHAP.  XIV.

To  prevent  the  Ants  from  climbing  up  upo?i  the  Vines .

BRUISE  lupins,  and  mix  them  with  the  math  of  preffed  olives,
and  therewith  daub  all  round  the  lower-part  of  the  vine  :  or
boil  bitumen  with  oil ;  with  this  alfo  touch  the  lower-part  of  the  vine,
the  ants  will  not  pafs  over  it.


CHAP.  XV.

How  to  prevent  Rats  and  Vine- fret ters  from  vexing  the  Vine ,

\  TINES  which  are  contiguous  to  buildings,  are  infefied  by  rats
‘  and  mice.  To  prevent  this,  we  muff  obl'erve,  when  the  Moon
is  full,  and  when  fhe  is  in  the  fign  of  the  Lion,  or  of  the  Scorpion,
or  of  the  Archer,  or  of  the  Bull ;  and  we  muffc  prune  them  in  the
night-time  with  Moon-light.  There  is  a  kind  of  animal,  which  is
called  a  vine-fretter ;  this  commonly  gnaws  the  fprigs  and  leaves,
while  they  are  yet  young  and  tender  :  to  prevent  which,  after  you
have  finifhed  the  pruning,  anoint  the  pruning-hooks,  with  which  you

4  F  2  have


588  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XVI.

have  pruned  the  vineyard,  with  the  blood  of  a  bear  ;  or,  if  you  have
a  beaver’s  fkin,  as  often  as  you  fhall  whet  the  pruning-hook,  during
the  time  you  are  pruning  them,  wipe  the  edge  of  it  with  this  fkin,
and  lb  begin  to  prune.  Seeing  we  have  fpoken  abundantly  of  vines,
let  us  now  give  directions  concerning  plantations  of  trees  for  fupport-
ing  them.


CHAP.  XVI.

Of  Plantations  of  Trees  for  fupporting  Vines .

TH  E  poplar-tree  efpecially  nourifhes  the  vine,  next  to  this  the
elm-tree,  and  then  the  afh-tree.  The  poplar-tree  is  rejected
by  moft  people,  becaufe  it  has  not  a  leaf  proper  for  it :  but  that  which
Ruftics  call  the  Atinian  elm  is  the  noblefl,  and  thrives  the  bed,  and
has  great  plenty  of  leaves.  This  muft  be  chiefly  planted  in  fat  lands,
or  even  in  fuch-  as  are  indifferent:  but,  if  rugged  and  thirfty  places
mult  be  planted  with  trees,  neither  the  poplar-  nor  the  elm-tree  are
fo  fit  for  this  purpofe  as  mountain-afhes :  thefe  are  the  wild-afhes,
neverthelefs  with  fomewhat  broader  leaves  than  the  other  afh-trees :
nor  do  they  yield  a  worfe  leaf  than  elms.  Goats  indeed,  and  fheep,
feek  after  this  leaf  alfo  with  greater  liking  than  any  other.  Therefore
let  them,  who  have  a  mind  to  form  a  plantation  of  trees  for  fupport¬
ing  vines,  make  trenches  four  feet  every  way,  a  year  before  they  fet
the  trees :  then,  about  the  firft  of  March ,  let  them  fet,  into  the  fame
trench,  an  elm,  and  a  poplar-tree,  or  an  afh-tree,  that,  if  the  elm
fhall  fail,  the  poplar,  or  the  afh-tree,  may  fupply  its  place :  but,  if
they  both  fhall  live,  let  one  of  them  be  taken  out,  and  planted  in
another  place.

It  is  proper,  that  trees,  for  fupporting  vines,  fhouldbe  planted  at  the
diftance  of  twenty  feet  from  each  other  ;  for  thus  both  the  trees  them-
felves,  and  the  vines  that  are  joined  to  them,  will  thrive  and  gather
ftrength  the  better,  and  yield  better  fruit ;  the  corns  aifo,  which  fhall
be  in  the  place  where  the  trees  are  planted,  will  fuffer  lefs  injury  by
their  fhade.  Dig  frequently  all  round  the  tree  which  you  fhall  have
planted,  that  it  may  grow  up  the  more  fpeedily  ;  and  fee  you  touch  it
not  with  an  iron- tool  for  about  the  fpace  of  three  years :  at  the
end  of  thirty-fix  months,  you  fhall  form  it  for  receiving  the
vine,  and  cut  off  its  fuperfluous  branches,  leaving  every  other  bough


Chap.  XVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  589

by  turns,  after  the  manner  of  fteps  or  ladders.  Every  other  year  *  ( i).
The  fixth  year,  if  it  fhall  then  appear  to  be  ftrong  enough,  you  muft
match  it  to  a  vine  after  this  manner :  Leave  about  the  fpace  of  one
foot  from  the  very  ftock  of  the  tree ;  then  having  made  a  furrow  four
feet  long,  and  three  deep,  and  two  feet  and  an  half  broad,  you  muft
fuffer  it,  for  two  months  at  leaft,  to  be  beaten  with  the  ftorms ;  then
at  length,  about  the  firft  of  March ,  take  up  a  vine  out  of  the  nurfery.
not  lei’s  than  ten  feet  long ;  and  prop  it,  and  join  it  to  the  tree  :  do
not  prune  it  the  next  year;  but  the  third  year  reduce  it  to  one  young
branch  or  rod  ;  and  leave  a  few  eyes  upon  it,  that  it  may  not  creep
to  a  great  height,  before  it  grow  ftrong :  then,  after  it  has  had  a
large  growth,  diftribute  and  range  all  its  firm-wood-branches  over  all
the  ftories  of  the  tree ;  fo  never thelefs,  as  you  may  not  burden  the
vine,  but  fet  apart  for  bearing  fruit  fuch  fhoots  as  you  may  depend
upon  never  fail,  and  are  the  ftrongeft.

You  muft  be  as  careful  to  bind  as  to  prune  an  arbuftive-  or  arbour-
vine;  for  in  this  the  ftrength  of  the  fruit  principally  confifts;  and  a
vine,  which  is  tied  to  the  tree  with  faft  bindings,  and  in  proper  places,
holds  out  more  years,  and  lives  longer :  therefore  it  is  proper,  that
fomebody  Ihould  follow  after  the  pruning,  and  obferve  th^t  the  bind¬
ings  be  renewed,  and  the  vine  ranged  and  placed  in  due  order,  upon
proper  branches.


CHAR  XVII.

Of  Olive-yards.

THE  olive-tree  rejoices  moft:  in  dry  hills,  that  are  full  of  white
clay  ;  but,  in  moift  and  fat  fields,  it  produces  great  plenty  of
boughs  and  leaves  without  fruit :  but  an  olive-yard  is  better  formed
from  truncions  than  from  plants.  But  Mago  was  of  opinion,  that  the
olive-tree  fihould  be  planted  in  dry  places,  either  immediately  after  the
Equinox,  or  before  the  Winter-folftice.  The  Hufbandmen  of  our
age  keep  to  the  fpring  of  the  year,  for  the  moft  part,  about  the  firft

(1)  Altemis  annis  *.  After  thcfe  words  there  feems  fomething  to  be  wanting  in  this
fentence  :  no  doubr,  the  author  dir.&ed  forr.ething  to  be  done  every  other  year;  and  if
we  look  to  the  fifrh  book,  cap.  6.  when  treating  of  the  fame  fhing,  he  fays,  that  what¬
ever  leaves  fhall  fp'ing  out  of  it,  ought,  every  ocher  year,  either  to  be  cut  away  with  a
knife,  or  bound  up  to  the  tree,  or  pulled  off.

of


s9o  L.J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XVIII.

of  May  (i).  But  the  trench  for  an  olive-tree  mud  be  four  feet  wide
every  way  ;  and  you  mull  throw  flones  and  gravel  into  the  bottom  of
tlie  trench,  and  then  throw  in  earth  four  inches  deep  upon  them,  and
then  fet  the  little  tree  fo  flraight  and  upright  into  it,  that  that  part
of  it  which  hands  out  of,  and  appears  above  the  trench,  may  be
exactly  in  the  middle.  But  you  mult  carefully  defend  the  little  tree
from  dorms  by  propping  if,  and  mixing  dung  with  the  earth  which
is  replaced  in  the  trench.  It  is  proper,  that  olive-trees  be  planted  at
the  didance  of  fixty  feet  from  each  other,  that  they  may  have  room
to  grow  and  extend  themfelves  in  breadth  ;  for  fuch  of  them  as  hioot
up  in  height,  decay,  and  come  to  nothing  prefently,  and  bear  little
fruit.

The  Licinian  olive  is  the  bed,  the  Pauf.an  is  the  fecond  for  oil
and  the  Orchis  for  food  :  there  are  alfo  the  royal,  and  the  fhuttle-
like  olives,  which  neither  for  oil,  nor  for  their  beautiful  appear¬
ance,  are  fo  acceptable  as  thole  I  firfl  mentioned.  If  you  plant  an
olive-tree  in  the  place  from  whence  you  have  digged  up  an  oak,  it
will  die  3  becaufe  there  are  certain  worms,  which  breed,  and  are  brought
up,  in  the  root  of  the  oak  3  and  thefe  elpecially  confume  the  olive-
plants.  If,  in  an  olive-tree,  one  branch  thrives  fomewhat  better  than
the  red,  unlefs  you  cut  it  off,  the  whole  tree  will  wither,  and  dry  up.
It  is  convenient  to  mark  all  the  little  trees  with  oker,  before  they  be
tranfplanted,  that,  when  they  are  planted,  they  may  look  to  the  lame
parts  of  the  heavens,  which  they  alfo  looked  to  when  they  were  in
the  nurfery ;  otherwife  they  will  differ,  either  by  the  cold,  or  the  heat
in  thole  parts,  which  they  diall  have  expoled  in  a  different  place  and
dtuation,  contrary  to  what  they  have  been  accu domed  to.


CHAP.  XVIII.

Of  conjlitutmg  an  Orchard.

BEFORE  you  conditute  and  form  an  orchard,  inclofe,  with  a
wall,  or  a  ditch,  as  great  an  extent  of  ground  as  you  fhall  have
a  mind  to  make  ufe  of  for  that  purpofe,  fo  that  there  may  be  no
paffage,  not  only  for  cattle,  but  even  not  for  a  Man,  except  by  the
door,  till  the  plants  grow  up  j  for  if  the  tops  of  them  be  either  broken
with  the  hand,  or  the  cattle  browfe  them,  they  are  fpoiled  for  ever.

(1)  Ca'er.das  Mdias.  Pontedera  obferves  here  very  juftly,  that  the  true  reading  Teems
to  be  Calendar  Manias  3  for  Palladius  diiedts  to  plant  olive-yards  in  the  month  of  February ,
in  temperate  places:  and  Columella  himfclf  clearly  enough  exprefles  the  fame  thing,  lib.  v.
cap.  9.  viz.,  that,  in  rich  and  moift  land,  olives  ought  to  be  planted  in  the  fpring  of  the
year,  before  they  begin  to  bad,  which  they  do  long  before  the  month  of  May.


But


Chap.  XX.  O/HUSBANDRY.


59i;


Bat  it  turns  to  better  account,  to  difpofe  the  trees  according  to  their
feveral  kinds ;  efpecially,  that  the  weak  may  not  be  oppreffed  by  the
Wronger,  which  are  neither  equal  to  them  in  ftrength,  nor  in  bignefs,
nor  grow  up  equally.  The  earth  that  is  fit  for  vines,  is  all’o  good  for
trees.


CHAP.  XIX.

Trenches.


DI  G  the  trenches  one  year  before  you  intend  to  plant  your  or¬
chards:  fo  they  will  be  macerated  with  the  Sun  and  the  rain
and  what  you  {hall  fet  in  them  will  fcon  drike  root.  But,  if  you
have  a  mind  to  fet  your  plants  alfo  the  fame  year  you  make  the
trenches,  dig;  the  trenches  at  lead  two  months  before:  afterwards  fill
them  with  draw,  and  fet  them  on  fire.  The  broader  and  the  more
open  you  make  the  trenches,  the  better,  and  the  greater  plenty  of
fruit  you  fhall  have.  The  trench  ought  to  be  like  a  fmall  moveable
oven,  the  lower- part  wider  than  the  upper,  that  the  roots  may  fpread
and  extend  themfelves  the  wider  ;  and  that  they  may  admit,  through
the  narrow  mouth  of  the  earth,  lefs  cold  in  Winter,  and  lefs  heat  in
Summer :  as  alfo  the  earth,  that  is  gathered  together  into  them  in
deep  places  in  riling  grounds,  is  not  wafhed  away  with  the  rains.
Plant  the  trees  very  thin,  at  confiderable  dilbances  from  each  other,
that,  when  they  grow  up,  thev  may  have  room  where  they  may  ex¬
tend  their  branches ;  for  if  you  fet  them  thick,  you  can  neither  low
any  thing  under  them,  nor  even  fo  will  they  themfelves  be  fruitful,
unlefs  you  cut  off  fome  of  the  intermediate  branches therefore  I  ami
of  opinion,  that  forty  feet,  and,  at  lead,  thirty,  be  left  between  the
rows.


CHAP.  XX.


How  you  may  choofe  the  Plants  for  an  Orchard.


CHOOSE  and  gather  plants  that  are  not  lefs  thick  than  the  helve-
of  an  hoe,  draight,  fmooth,  tall,  without  botches  or  gaffe",
and  with  intire  found  bark  j  thefe  drike  root  well,  and  very  quickly.
If  you  take  the  plants  off  trees,  take  them  chiefiy  from  thofe  which
bear  good  fruit  every  year,  and  in  great  plenty  :  but  you  mud  obferve
to  pluck  the  fame  off  the  ffoulders  of  the  trees  that  are  oppofite  to


the;


592  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XXI.

the  Sun-rifing.  If  you  fet  a  plant  with  the  root,  it  will  have  an  equal
growth  with  the  other  trees  which  you  fet  after  you  have  ingrafted
them  ;  but  an  ingrafted  tree  is  more  fruitful  than  that  which  is  not
ingrafted,  that  is,  than  that  which  is  fet  in  branches  or  plants  before
they  are  ingrafted  ( l ).

Before  you  transplant  the  little  trees,  mark  them  with  oker,  or
any  other  thing  you  pleafe,  that  you  may  place  them  expofed  to  the
fame  winds,  to  which  they  flood  expofed  before  :  and  take  care  that
you  tranfplant  them  from  an  higher,  drier,  and  poorer  land,  into  that
which  is  lower  and  flatter,  moifier  and  fatter.  Set  fuch  plants  efpe-
cially  as  are  three-forked ;  let  them  Hand  out  and  appear  three  feet
above  the  earth.  If  you  have  a  mind  to  fet  two  or  three  little  trees
in  the  fame  trench,  take  care  that  they  do  not  touch  one  another ;
for  fo  they  are  confumed  and  killed  by  the  worms.  When  you  fet
the  plants,  put  down,  on  the  right  and  left  of  each  of  them,  into  the
very  bottom  of  the  trench,  bundles  of  fprays,  of  the  thicknefs  of  a
Man’s  arm,  fo  as  they  may  appear  and  Hand  out  a  little  above  the
earth,  by  which  you  may,  with  very  little  labour,  convey  water  in
Summer  to  their  roots.  Plant  trees,  or  plants  with  roots,  in  Autumn,
about  the  15th  of  OBob'er :  fet  cuttings  and  branches  in  the  Spring,
before  the  trees  begin  to  bud.  But,  lefl  the  moth  be  troublefome
to  fig-tree-plants,  cover  with  earth,  in  the  bottom  of  the  trench,
a  cutting  of  the  mafiich-tree,  fo  that  the  top  of  it  may  look  down¬
ward.


CHAP.  XXI.

When  the  Fig-tree  mufi  be  planted.

PLANT  not  the  fig-tree  during  the  colds ;  it  loves  places  ex¬
pofed  to  the  Sun,  and  fuch  as  abound  in  pebbles,  gravel,  and
lometimes  rocky  ground  :  it  foon  takes  root  and  grows  up  in  this  kind
of  land,  if  you  make  the  trenches  large  and  fit  for  them.  The  feveral
kinds  of  fig-trees,  altho’  they  differ  in  the  tafie,  fiiape,  and  quality
of  their  fruit,  yet  they  are  planted  after  one  and  the  fame  manner,
but  in  lands  of  a  different  quality.  In  places  that  are  cold,  and  that
are  watery  during  the  Autumn,  plant  the  early-ripe  fig-trees,  that  you
may  gather  their  fruit  before  the  rains  begin  :  in  warm  places  plant

(1)  Si  cum  radice  plantain  pofueris :  this  fentence  does  not  Teem  very  plain;  bur,  if  it
is  not  corrupted,  the  meaning  of  it  Teems  to  be.  That  the  plant  of  a  fruit-tree,  fet  with
a  root,  will  grow  equahy  well  with  fuch  as  have  been  irgrafted  before  they  were  fet  in
the  orchard,  but  they  will  not  be  equally  fruitful.

2  Winter-


Chap.  XXII.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  593

Winter-figs.  But,  if  you  have  a  mind  to  make  a  fig-tree  to  be  late
in  ripening,  which  is  not  naturally  late,  when  the  unripe  figs  are  very
fmall,  fhake  the  fruit  off  the  tree  ;  it  will  again  produce  a  fecond
fruit,  and  will  defer  to  bring  it  to  maturity  till  the  Winter  is  far
advanced.  Sometimes  alfo  it  is  an  advantage,  when  the  trees  have
begun  to  put  forth  their  leaves,  to  cut  off  the  uppermoft  tops  of  the
fig-tree  with  a  very  fharp  iron-tool  ;  fo  the  trees  will  both  be  firmer,
and  bear  more  fruit.  It  will  always  be  of  great  advantage,  as  foon  as
the  fig-tree  fhall  begin  to  put  forth  her  leaves,  to  dilute  oker  with
the  lees  of  oil,  and  to  pour  it,  with  human  dung,  to  the  root  of  it ;
this  thing  makes  greater  plenty  of  fruit,  and  makes  the  fig  plumper
and  fuller,  and  of  a  more  beautiful  appearance.


CHAP.  XXII.

Of  plaining  Nuts.

ABOUT  the  time  that  the  Star  ArBurus  rifeth,  or  about  the  nr  ft
of  February ,  plant  the  almond,  which  begins  to  bud  the  firft
of  any  :  it  requires  warm,  hard,  and  dry  land  ;  for  if  you  fee  this
kind  of  nut  in  places  of  a  different  nature,  it  will  prefently  rot.  Be¬
fore  you  fet  the  nut,  fteep  it  in  water  and  honey  fodden  together,  but
not  too  fweet :  fo  it  will  yield  fruit  of  a  fweeter  tafte  when  it  is  grown
up ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  it  will  grow  the  better,  and  the  more
fpeedily.  Place  three  nuts  in  a  triangle,  and  let  the  {harper  part  of
the  nut  be  undermoft,  becaufe  from  thence  it  puts  forth  its  roots  3  and
let  one  nut  be,  at  leaft,  an  hand-breadth  diftant  from  the  other;  and
let  it  incline  fomewhat  towards  the  Weft.  Every  nut  puts  forth  one
root,  and  creeps  forth  with  a  fingle  ftalk ;  when  the  root  comes  to
the  bottom  of  the  trench,  being  checked  by  the  hardnefs  of  the  ground,
Lt  is  bended  back  again ;  and,  extending  itfelf,  fends  forth  other  roots
after  the  manner  of  branches.

You  may  make  an  almond  and  a  filbert  become  a  Tarentinian  nut,
after  this  manner :  In  the  trench  wherein  you  defign  to  plant  the  nut,
place  fmall  earth,  about  half  a  foot  deep,  and  there  fet  a  fhoot  of
fennel-giant  j  when  the  fennel-giant  is  grown  up,  cleave  it,  and  hide
the  almond,  or  the  filbert,  without  a  fhell  in  the  pith  of  the  fame,
and  cover  it  over  with  earth  :  do  this  before  the  firft  of  March ,  or
between  the  feventh  and  the  fifteenth  of  March.  You  may  plant  the
walnut,  the  pine-apple,  and  the  chefnut,  at  this  fame  time.

4  G  CHAP.


594


L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XXV.

CHAP.  XXIII.

Of  planting  the  Pomegranate.

THE  pomegranate  is  rightly  planted  in  the  Spring,  always  till  the
fir  ft  of  April ;  and,  if  it  fhall  bring  forth  acid  fruit,  or  not  fo
fweet  as  you  would  have  it,  you  fhall  cure  and  make  it  better  in  this
manner  :  Moiften  the  roots  of  it  with  ftale  human  urine,  human  dung,
and  hogs  dung.  This  thing  will  both  make  the  tree  fertile,  and,  for
the  firft  years,  makes  the  fruit  have  a  winy  tafte  and  flavour;  and
afterwards  makes  it  fweet  alfo,  and  tender,  and  without  any  woody
fubftance  in  it.  We  have  mixed  a  very  little  Cyrenian  lafer  with  wine,
and  fo  have  anointed  the  upperinoft  tops  of  the  tree  with  it :  this
thing  corre&ed  the  tartnefs  of  the  apples.  If  you  place  three  ftones
at  the  very  root  of  the  tree  when  you  plant  it,  they  will  be  a  remedy
to  prevent  the  apples  from  burfting  upon  the  tree.  But  if  you  have  a
tree  that  is  already  planted,  fow  fquills  at  the  root  of  the  tree.  You
may  prevent  this  another  way :  When  the  apples  are  already  ripe,  be¬
fore  they  burft,  twift  the  ftalks  on  which  they  hang ;  by  this  method
you  may  alfo  keep  them  the  whole  year.


CHAP.  XXIV.

Of  the  Pear-tree.

PLANT  pear-trees  in  Autumn,  before  the  middle  of  Winter,  fo
that  there  may  remain  at  leaf!:  twenty-five  days  to  the  Winter-
l'olftice  ;  and,  that  they  may  be  fertile,  ablaqueate  them  very  deep,
when  they  are  already  grown  up  to  their  full  growth,  and  cleave  the
trunk  hard  by  the  very  root,  and  into  the  clift  drive  a  wedge,  made
of  the  heart  of  pine-wood,  and  there  leave  it ;  then,  after  you  have
filled  up  the  ablaqueation,  fcatter  afhes  upon  the  earth.


CHAP.  XXV.

Of  planting  Apples.

PLANT  Summer-apples,  quinces,  fervice-apples,  plums,  after
the  middle  of  Winter  till  the  13th  of  February .  You  will  be  in
the  right  to  plant  the  mulberry,  from  the  13th  of  February  till  the

vernal


Chap.  XXVI.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  595

vernal  Equinox.  Plant  the  carob,  which  fome  call  aepanov,  and
then  the  peach,  before  the  middle  of  Winter,  during  the  time  of
Autumn.  If  almond-trees  bear  but  very  little  fruit,  bore  the  tree,
and  drive  a  hone  through  it,  and  fo  let  the  bark  of  the  tree  grow
over  it.  But  it  is  proper,  about  the  firft  of  March ,  to  place,  in  a
regular  manner,  branches  of  all  thofe  kinds  in  your  orchards,  all  in
beds  raifed  in  the  different  quarters  thereof,  where  the  earth  is  both
well  manured  and  dunged  ;  then,  when  they  are  grown  up,  care  mull
be  taken,  that,  while  their  little  branches  are  tender  and  young,  they
be,  as  it  were,  pampinated  ;  and  let  the  plants  be  reduced  to  one  ftein
the  firft  year;  and,  when  the  Autumn  comes  on,  it  will  be  expedient
to  pluck  off  all  their  leaves,  before  the  cold  nips  and  dries  up  their
tops ;  and  fo  put,  as  it  were,  bonnets  upon  them,  wfith  thick  reeds,
which  have  their  knots  intire  at  one  end ;  and  fo  defend  the  rods,  that
are  ye.t  young  and  tender,  from  the  cold,  and  the  frofts :  then,  after
the  twenty-fourth  month,  whether  you  fhall  have  a  mind  to  tranf-
plant  them,  and  fet  them  regularly  in  rows,  or  whether  you  defign  to
ingraft  them,  you  may  do  either  the  one  or  the  other  fafely  enough.


CHAP.  XXVI.

Of  ingrafting  Trees.

EVERY  kind  of  cyon  may  be  ingrafted  into  every  kind  of  tree,
if  it  is  not  unlike,  in  its  bark,  to  that  into  which  it  is  ingrafted:
but,  if  it  brings  forth  fruit  alfo  at  the  fame  time,  it  may  be  ingrafted
very  fafely,  without  any  fcruple.  The  antients  have  taught  us  three
kinds  of  ingraftments :  one,  which,  after  the  tree  is  cut  and  cloven,
receives  the  cyons  which  are  infer  ted  into  it ;  a  fecond,  which,  after
the  tree  is  cut,  admits  the  graffs  between  the  bark  and  the  wood ;
both  which  kinds  are  proper  for  the  Spring  feafon :  the  third,  which
Hufbandmen  call  emplajlration ,  receives  the  buds  themfelves,  with  a
little  bark,  into  a  part  of  itfelf,  from  which  the  bark  is  pulled  off ;
this  kind  is  proper  for  the  Summer.  When  we  come  to  explain  the
method  of  performing  thefe  ingraftments,  we  fhall  alfo  teach  you
another  invented  by  us.

Ingraft  all  trees  as  foon  as  they  fhall  begin  to  put  forth  their  buds,
when  the  Moon  is  increafing ;  but  ingraft  the  olive-tree  about  the
vernal  Equinox,  till  the  13th  of  April.  Whatever  tree  you  have  a

4  C  %  mind


596  L.J.  M.COLUMELLA  Chap.  XXVI’.

mind  to  ingraft  from,  and  from  which  yea  are  about  to  take  cyons
for  ingrafting,  fee  that  it  be  young  and  fruitful,  and  with  frequent
knots  and  joints ;  and,  when  the  buds  (hall  firft  fwell,  choofe  them
from  off  fmall  branches  of  one  year  old,  which  fhall  look  to  the  Sun-
rifing,  and  are  found  :  let  the  grafts  be  forked,  and  of  the  thicknefs
of  the  little  finger.  Cut  the  tree  you  fhall  have  a  mind  to  ingraft
very  carefully,  with  a  faw,  in  that  part  which  is  faireft  and  fmootheft,
and  without  any  fear  ;  and  you  muft  take  care,  that  you  hurt  not  the
bark  :  then,  when  you  fhall  have  cut  the  flock,  fmooth  the  cut
with  a  fharp  iron-tool ;  then  put  an  iron-  or  ivory-wedge  down  be¬
tween  the  bark  and  the  wood  three  inches  at  lead  ;  but  do  it  very
gently,  left  you  hurt  or  break  the  bark  :  afterwards  pare  the  cyons,
which  you  defign  to  ingraft,  on  one  fide,  with  a  fharp  pruning-hook,  as
low  as  you  have  put  down  the  wedge  ;  but  fo  as  you  may  not  hurt  the
pith,  nor  the  bark,  on  the  other  fide  of  it:  when  you  have  prepared
the  cyons,  pull  out  the  wedge,  and  prefently  put  down  the  grafts
into  thofe  holes,  which  ar^rnade  by  the  wedge  driven  in  between  the
bark  and  the  wood.  Buf  put  down  the  grafts  by  that  end  where  you
have  pared  them,  fo  that  they  may  ftand  out  fix  inches  from  the
tree  :  but  fallen  two  or  three  fmall  branches  in  one  tree,  provided
there  be  no  lefs  a  fpace  than  of  four  inches  between  them  :  do  thefe
things  according  to  the  bignsfs  of-  the- tree,  and  the  goodnefs  of  the
bark.  When  you  have  put  down  all  the  cyons  which  the  tree  will
fuffer,  bind  up  the  tree-faft  with  the  bark  of' an  elm-  or  a  willow-
tree  :  afterward  daub  all  the  wound  over  with  well-wrought  clay
mixed  with  ftraw,  and  fill  up  the  fpace  which  is  between  the  eyens
fo  far,  that  the  grafts  may  ftand  out  two  inches :  put  mofs  over  the
clay,  and  bind  it  fo  fall  to  it,  that  it  may  not  be  wafted  and  confumed
by  the  rain.

If  you  have  a  mind  to  ingraft  a  very  fmall  tree,  cut  it  off  near  to
the  earth,  fo  that  it  may  ftand  one  foot  and  an  half  out  of  the  ground  :
then,  when  you  have  made  the  amputation,  fmooth  the  wound  care¬
fully,  and  cleave  the  middle  of  the  ftock  a  little  way,  with  a  fharp
bill  or  paring-knife,  fo  that  there  may  be  a  cleft  of  three  inches  ;  then
thruft  a  wedge  into  it,  as  far  as  it  will  bear  it;  and  put  down  cyons
into  it,  pared  on  both  fides,  fo  as  you  may  make  the  bark  of  the
graft  even  with  the  bark  of  the  tree.  When  you  have  carefully  fitted
the  cyons,  pull  out  the  wedge ;  then  bind  up  the  tree,  as  I  faid  above,
and  daub  it ;  then  heap  up  the  earth  about  the  tree,  as  high  as  the
graft  itfelf:  this  thing  will  yery  much  defend  it  from  the  wind  and
the  heat.


The


Chap.  XXVII.  Of  HUSBANDRY.  597

The  third  kind  of  ingraftment,  fince  it  is  very  nice  and  delicate,  is
not  proper  for  every  kind  of  tree  ;  and,  for  the  mod:  part,  thofe  trees
admit  of  fuch  an  ingraftment,  which  have  a  moift,  juicy,  and  ftrong
bark,  as  the  fig-tree  ;  for  it  both  yields  great  plenty  of  milk,  and  has
a  ftrong  bark ;  therefore  it  admits  exceeding  well  of  being  ingrafted
in  luch  a  manner.  From  whatever  tree  you  defign  to  take  the  grafts,
in  it  feek  out  for  the  young,  fair,  and  i'mooth  branches;  then,  in
thefe,  obferve  the  eye  which  fhall  have  a  godly  appearance,  and  a
certain  hope  of  producing  a  bud  :  mark  it  all  round  two  inches  fquare,
that  the  eye  may  be  in  the  middle,  and  fo  make  an  incifion  round  it
with  a  (harp  penknife ;  and  take  off  the  bark  carefully,  that  you  may
not  hurt  the  eye:  then,  into  whatever  tree  you  have  a  mind  to  in--
graft  it,  choofe  the  faireft  and  the  fmootheft  branch  of  the  fame ;
and  make  a  round  incifion  in  the  bark  of  the  fame  bignefs,  and  un¬
bark  the  wood  ;  and,  into  that  part  which  you  have  laid  bare,  fit,  and
join  exactly,  that  eye  which  you  have  taken  from  the  other  tree,  fo
that  the  fcutcheon  may  agree  to,  and  fit  the  part  where  you  have
made  the  rounded  incifion.  When  you  have  done  thefe  things,  bind
it  well  all  round,  fo  as  you  may  not  hurt  it ;  then  daub  the  joinings
and  the  bands  with  clay,  leaving  a  fpace  by  which  the  eye  may  freely
put  forth  its  bud.  If  the  tree  you  have  grafted  have  any  fhoots  or
upper  branches,  cut  all  away,  that  there  may  be  nothing  whereby  the
juice  may  be  diverted  and  withdrawn,  or  to  which  it  may  be  more
ferviceable,  than  to  the  graft  itfelf ;  after  one-and-twenty  days  unbind
the  fcutcheon  :  the  olive-tree  fucceeds  very  well  with  this  kind  of  in¬
graftment.  We  have  already  taught  you  that  fourth  kind  of  ingraft¬
ment,  when  we  treated  of  vines;  therefore  it  is  fuperfluous  to  repeat,,
in  this  place,  the  method  of  terebration,  '  which  we  have  already
defcribed.


CHAP.  XXVII.

That  Cyons  of  all  Kinds  may  he  graffed  upon  all  Sorts  of

Trees  whatfoever »

BUT  feeing  the  antients  denied,  that  all  kinds  of  cyons  might  be
graffed  upon  any  tree  whatfoever,  and  eftabliihed,  as  it  were,
into  a  certain  law  that  limitation  and  determination  of  this  matter,
which  we  made  ufe  of  a  little  before,  viz.  That  thofe  cyons  only
could  coalefce,  which  in  their  bark,  and  rind,  and  fruit,  are  like  to

thofe


598  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA  Chap.  XXVIII.

thofc  trees  upon  which  they  are  grafted,  we  thought  it  neceftary  to
inquire  into,  and  confute  this  erroneous  opinion,  and  to  deliver  to
potlerity  a  method,  whereby  all  kinds  of  cyons  may  be  grafted  upon
all  forts  of  trees  whatfoever.  And,  that  we  may  not  weary  our  read¬
ers  with  loo  long  a  difeourfe,  we  fhall  fubjoin  one  example,  as  it
were,  by  following  which,  every  body  may  graft”  any  kind  of  cyon
they  pleafe  upon  all  forts  of  trees.

Dig  a  trench,  of  four  feet  every  way,  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  an
olive-tree,  that  the  utmoft  branches  of  the  olive-tree  may  reach  to  it ;
then  fet  in  the  trench  a  young  fmall  fig-tree,  and  take  great  care,  that
it  may  grow  ftrong,  and  fmooth,  and  be  of  a  goodly  appearance.
After  the  fpace  of  three  or  five  years,  when  it  has  had  a  large-enough
growth,  bend  down  that  branch  of  the  olive-tree  that  fhall  appear  to
be  the  goodlieft  and  the  fmootheft  of  any,  and  bind  it  to  the  ftock  of
the  fig-tree  ;  and  fo,  having  cut  away  the  reft  of  the  fmall  branches,
leave  only  thefe  tops  which  you  defign  to  graft”:  then  cut  the  fig-tree,
and  fmooth  the  wound,  and  cleave  it  in  the  middle  with  a  wedge  ;
then  pare  the  tops  of  the  olive-tree  on  both  fides,  as  they  join  to,  and
grow  on  their  mother,  and  fo  fit  them  exactly  to  the  cleft  of  the
fig-tree ;  and  take  out  the  wedge,  and  bind  them  carefully  together,
that  they  may  not  be  pulled  away  by  any  force  whatfoever  :  fo,  in
the  fpace  of  three  years  after  this,  the  fig-tree  will  coalefce  with  the
olive  :  and  then  at  length,  in  the  fourth  year,  when  they  are  well
united  together,  you  muft  cut  off  the  fmall  olive-branches  from  their
mother,  as  if  they  were  layers.  After  this  manner  all  kinds  of  cyons
are  grafted  upon  all  forts  of  trees.


CHAP.  XXVIII.

Of  the  Cythifus,  or  Shrub-trefoil.

IT  is  very  neceftary  to  have  great  plenty  of  cythifus ,  or  fhrub-tre-
foil,  (which  the  Greeks  call  or  y-ctpvnc/i^  or  Ttvcpegr')  becaufe
it  is  exceeding  ufeful  for  hens,  bees,  fheep,  goats  alfo,  and  all  forts
of  cattle  whatfoever,  which  grow  foon  fat  with  it;  and  it  makes  the
ewes  yield  abundance  of  milk  :  as  alfo,  becaufe  you  may  ufe  this
fodder  green  for  eight  months,  and  afterward  you  may  ufe  it  dry.
Moreover,  it  quickly  takes  and  grows  in  any  kind  of  land,  tho’  ex¬
ceeding  lean  ;  and  bears  with  any  ill  ufage,  without  fuftaining  any
hurt.  Yea,  if  women  are  afflicted  with  fcarcity  or  want  of  milk,
this  fhrub-trefoil  muft  be  dried  and  fteeped  in  water,  when  it  has
i  foaked


Chap.  XXIX.  0/  HUSBANDRY.  599

foaked  throughly  the  whole  night  ;  the  day  following,  three  bemince
of  the  juice  that  is  fqueezed  out  of  it,  muft  be  mixed  with  a  little
wine,  and  fo  given  them  to  drink  :  thus  they  themfelves  (hall  enjoy  a
good  ftate  of  health,  and  their  children  thrive  and  grow  ftrong  with
plenty  of  milk.

But  the  cythifus ,  or  fh rub-trefoil,  may  be  fown  either  in  Autumn,
about  the  i  5th  of  October,  or  in  the  Spring.  After  you  have  manured
the  earth  well,  make  it  into  quarters  or  beds,  in  the  manner  of  a
garden  ;  and  there  fow  the  feed  of  your  flu  rub-trefoil  in  Autumn,  as
if  it  were  garden-bafil-feed :  then  in  the  Spring  fet  the  plants  regu¬
larly,  that  they  may  be  the  fpace  of  four  feet  every  way,  diftant  one.
from  another.  If  you  have  no  feed,  fet  the  tops  of  the  fh  rub- trefoil
regularly  in  the  Spring :  heap  up  dunged  earth  about  them  :  if  it  does
not  rain  foon,  water  them  during  the  next  fifteen  days;  then,  after
the  fpace  of  three  years,  cut  it,  and  give  it  to  the  cattle.  Fifteen
pound-weight  of  it,  green,  is  abundantly  enough  for  an  horfe,  and
twenty  pounds  for  an  ox  ;  and  for  other  cattle,  in  proportion  to  their
ftrength  [it  may  alfo  be  planted  in  branches  about  the  month  of  Sep¬
tember ].  If  you  give  it  dry,  give  a  lefs  quantity  of  it,  becaufe  it  has
greater  firength  ;  and  fieep  it  fir  ft  in  water,  and,  when  you  have
taken  it  out,  mix  it  with  ftraw  or  chaff.  Cut  down  the  ffirub- trefoil,
which  you  defign  for  dry  forage,  about  the  month  of  September ,
when  its  feed  begins  to  grow  big  ;  then  keep  it  a  few  hours  in  the
Sun,  till  it  fade  ;  then  dry  it  in  the  lhade,  and  fo  lay  it  up  fafe.


CHAP.  XXIX.

Of  the  Willow-tree ,  of  Broom ,  and  of  the  Reed.

PLANT  the  willow-tree  and  broom  in  the  Spring,  about  the  firft
of  March ,  when  the  Moon  is  in  her  increafe.  The  willow-tree
requires  moift  places,  but  broom  fuch  as  are  dry  :  never thelefs,  it  is
very  convenient  to  fow  them  both  about  a  vineyard,  becaufe  they  yield
bands  proper  for  the  young  branches  of  vines.  The  beft  way  of  plant¬
ing  reeds  is  by  fetting  their  roots,  which  feme  call  bulbs,  and  others
call  eyes.  As  foon  as  you  have  paftinated  the  ground  with  the  two-
feet-deep-fpade,  having  cut  the  root  of  the  reed  with  a  fbarp  bill,  fet
it  when  it  is  juft  going  to  rain.  There  are  fome,  who  lay  the  intire
reeds  flat  in  the  ground,  becaufe,  being  thus  planted,  they  put  forth
reeds  from  all  their  joints,  But,  commonly,  this  kind  produces  a  reed

that


6oo  L.  J.  M.  COLUMELLA,  &c.  Chap.  XXX.

that  is  flender  and  low,  and  which  foon  decays :  therefore  that  waj
of  planting  them,  which  we  firft  pointed  out  and  explained  to  you,
is  the  be  ft.  But  my  opinion  is,  that  every  year,  as  foon  as  you  have
cut  down  the  reeds,  you  fhould  dig  the  place  deep  and  equallv  and
fo  water  it.


CHAP.  XXX.

Of  the  Violet ,  and  the  Rofe.

WHoever  is  about  to  raife  the  violet,  let  him  reduce  into  beds,  or
borders,  ground  that  is  well  dunged,  and  paftinated  at  leaf!
one  foot  deep;  and  fo  let  him  have  his  plants,  of  one  year’s  growth
fet  in  fmall  trenches,  of  one  foot  dimenfton,  before  the  firft  of  March.
But  the  feed  of  the  violet  is  fown,  like  that  of  potherbs,  in  beds  at
two  different  feafons,  in  the  Spring,  or  in  Autumn  ;  and  it  is  culti¬
vated  after  the  fame  manner  as  the  other  potherbs  are,  that  it  be  weeded
that  it  be  farcied,  and  that  fometimes  it  be  watered  alfo.  It  is  proper
that  the  rofe-bufh  be  fet  at  the  fame  time  as  the  violet,  either  in  fhrubs
or  fuckers,  or  in  fhoots,  or  cuttings  (i),  all  along  furrows  of  one  foot
dimenfton  ;  but  it  muft  be  digged  every  year  before  the  firft  of  March
and  pruned  here-and-there.  When  cultivated  after  this  manner  it
lafts  for  many  years.

(i)  Rofam  fruticibus  ac  furculis  ;  in  the  oldeft  editions  we  read  frutfibus  fy  furculis;
and  Valladius-t  fpeaking  of  the  fame  thing,  has  virgultis  <&  femine-,  fo  that,  confidering
that  F  alladius  has  always  his  eye  upon  Columella ,  it  may  leetn  probable,  that  the  true
reading  here  ought  to  be  frutfibus,  which  will  anfwer  to  femine,  as  furculis  to  v'trgultis
But,  as  Columella  is  not  treating  here  fo  much  of  the  different  ways  of  propagating  the
rofe-bufh,  as  of  the  way  and  nunner  of  fetting  and  difpofing  it,  probably  he  only  means
what  is  exprcffed  in  the  tranfla;ion ;  and  there  feems  no  occafion  to  alter  the  -text  as  it
now  ftands.


FINIS.


IN  D  EX.


A.


ABlaqueation  of  Trees,  what,  and  when
to  be  performed  Page  168

Ablaqueated  mine,  how-  to  be  pruned

170

Agriculture.  See  Husbandry.

Alijf under s ,  when  to  be  fown  _  492

1  —  and  how  to  pickle  them  568

Almond-tree,  the  time  for  planting  it  246
Aminean  mines,  how  to  make  them  fruitful

1 30

Apple-trees,  their  different  forts,  id c.  248

Apples  of  all  forts,  how  to  preferve  them  5  1 5
—  and  how  to  dry  them  in  the  Sim  5 1 8

- honey-apples,  and  feveral  other,  how  to

preferve  them,  idc.  55a,  and  5-94

Andromeda,  a  Conftellation,  when  rifes,  idc.

47?

Ants,  how  to  prevent  their  climbing  up  upon
trees  587

Apris,  the  conftitution  of  the  weather,  and
the  work  to  be  done,  throughout  the  whole
month  467

Aquarius,  when  the  Sun  enters  this  Sign  460
Argo,  the  Ship,  when  rifes,  idc.  465

Aries,  the  Ram  ;  when  the  Sun  paffes  into
this  Sign,  id c.  467

Artichokes,  the  feveral  forts,  and  when  to  be
planted  436,  490

Affes,  their  chara&ers  and  forts,  how  to  manage
them,  idc.  300 ,etfeq.

Afparagus,.  when  to  be  fown,  its  Culture  493
Atlantides,  who  they  were,  id c.  422

Auguft,  the  conftitution  of  the  weather,  and
what  work  to  be  done  throughout  the
month  »  474


B


B.


Ailiff,  his  character  4©

- his  qualifications,  and  the  feveral

parts  of  his  office  450,  et  feq.

-  his  whole  conduct  and  behaviour  455


Barns,  their  fituation,  ftrufture,  idc.  Page

34,  et  feq.

Bafil,  when  to  be  fown,  idc.  4  fi

Beans,  of  the  time  and  manner  of  fowin
them,  and  of  threlhing  and  winnowin
them  73,  7

- when  to  be  farcied  46

— --  ■  when  to  be  fown,  how  dunged,  idc.

481

Bees,  of  their  feveral  forts,,  and  which  beft  385

- - of  their  paftures  386

- — -  of  chufing  feats  for  them  3g0-

- of  beehives  of  feveral  forts,  and  how  to

place  them  392,  et  feq.

- of  porehaftng,  and  taking  them  394

-  of  the  king  of  the  bees  400

- - of  increafing  their  number  40 x

— -  of  putting  them  up  in  hives,  and  hinder¬
ing  their  efcape  402

of  remedies  for  their  diftempers  403

-  of  their  bufinefs  throughout  the  year,

and  how  their  Overfeers  ought  to  manage
them  407

Beets,  when  to  be  fown,  idc.  437,  493

Bill,  or  pruning-hook,  its  figure,  idc.  192

Brine,  or  pickle,  how  to  make  it
Brine,  or  fait  water,  for  preferving  wine
Broom,  of  the  foil  proper  for  it
— - -  -  -  and  how  to  cultivate  it

how  and  when  to  plant  it'


511

533

202

203

599

424


Bulbs,  of  their  nature  and  quality
Bull,  his  form,  lhape  and  age,  &c.  280  et  feq.

C.


Barley,  its  feveral  forts,  and  of  the  land  pro¬
per  for  it  70


CAbbage,  01  Colwort,  its  different  forts,.

-  and  when  to  be  planted  and

tranfplanted  427, 489

Califlo,  a  Conftellation  462

Calmer,  medicines  for  killing  worms  in  them  284

- how  to  caftrate  them,  idc.  285

Cancer,  when  fets,  and  when  the  Sun  enters
into  this  Sign  471

Cam's  major,  a  Conftellation,  when  fets  469,

Caper-bujh,  its  culture,  idc.  4^6'

Capra,  a  bright  Star.  46m

H  h  h  tv  Caged


'a a  fcfl  'o  N


INDEX.


Caprictmai,  one  of  the  twelve  Sign**,  when
the  Sun  enter* *  it.  Page  483

C aerification,  what  it  fignifies  474

CaJ/iepea ,  a  Conilellation,  when  lets,  lAc.  478
Cafirating  cattle,  when  tlte  proper  time

.  467

Cattle,  of  reviewing  of  them,  Lfc.  261

• - of  fliutting  up  wild  cuttle  in  parks,

(Ac.  281

Cellar}  for  wine,  oil,  (Ac.  how  to  be  fituated  36
Ctntauras,  a  Conilellation,  when  riles  469
Cent  aria,  a  certain  meafure  of  land,  (Ac.  2  to
Cepheas,  a  Conilellation,  when  fets  472
Cheefe,  how  to  make  it  324

~ -  how  to  preferve  it  5  1 S,  544

Chervil,  when  to  be  Town  403

(■  hefnut-trees,  and  of  chelnut-tree-groves  204
Chiches,  See.  when  to  fow  them.  71

Chicklings ,  when  to  fow  them,  (Ac.  83

Ciconia,  a  machine  for  meafuring  the  deptli,
and  trying  the  level  of  trenches,  its  de-
feription  and  ufe  143

Clima,  a  fuperficial  meafure,  what  208
Corona  borealis ,  the  northern  Crown,  when

,et?  +72

Cough,  how  to  cure  it  in  oxen  270

-7 -  how  to  cure  it  in  horfes  29  f

Cr-M,  her  form  and  lhape  280

Crater,  the  Cup,  a  Conilellation,  when  it
__  rifes  464

Cucumbers,  their  feveral  forts,  when  to  be

fown,£3V.  444.494

Cuttings  of  vines,  Kow  long  they  ought  to  be

154

■  how  to  be  cut  and  lopped  17 1

—  and  when  to  be  put  upon  the  frame

1 73

Cyans,  how  to  graft  all  kinds  upon  all  forts  of
trees  397

Cytifus,  or  fnrub-trefoil,  when  to  fow  it

252,  598

D,

December,  the  State  of  the  weather,  and
of  the  work  to  be  done  in  it  482
De Ipbinus,  when  rifes  and  fets  46 1

D>ggwg  of  Vineyards  after  planting  them  1 74

how  many  diggings  necelfary,  (Ac.

n .  196

Dittander .  when  to  fow  it  403

D^gs,  their  lcveral  forts  proper  for  husband-
hi  c  n  ^  2

■ -  their  difeafes  and  cures  336

*  !-ow  to  cure  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog  in

*  ven  2,  ~  z


Ducks,  of  breeding  and  bringing  them  up,  (Ac.

Page  369

Dung,  the  feveral  forts,  how  to  be  made,
and  when  to  be  applied,  (Ac.  90 ,et  feq.
Dunging  land,  the  proper  time  for  it  59
Dunghills,  how  to  be  prepared  36

Dung,  how  many  modii  make  a  load  48 1


E


Agio ,  a  Conilellation,  when  it  rifes  481
Earth,  not  affected  with  barrennefs  ;
but  its  not  producing  fruit,  man’s  fault

1,  et  feq,

not  grows  old,  nor  wears  out,  if

47

how  it  ought  to  be  pallinated  1 40
hens  begin  to  lay,  of  fetting  and

347


dunged

Eggs,  when
hatching  them

- hc*v  to  preferve  chickens  when  hatched3  5 9

Elecampane,  when  to  be  fown,  (A c.  491

- how  to  pickle  and  preferve  it  550

Elms,  plantations  of  them  for  fupporting
vines  ;  of  their  feveral  forts ;  how  to  plant,
cultivate,  and  form  them  for  vines  223
Emplafiration,  what  it  fignifies  250

Endive,  when  to  be  fown  490

F.

FAmily,  the  feveral  offices  belonging  to  the
Mailer  37

February,  the  Hate  of  the  weather,  and  the
work  to  be  done  463

Fenugreek  8  8

Fever  in  oxen,  how  to  cure  it  269

Fig-trees,  their  feveral  forts,  and  when  to  plant
them  244,  592

Figs,  their  different  forts,  and  when  to  gather
them  44^

. - how  to  dry  them,  (Ac.  519

Fifio-ponds,  and  the  feveral  forts  of  fifb  to  be
kept  in  them,  and  how  to  feed  them

371,  et  feq.

Flies  molelling  horfes,  how  to  prevent  it  295
Fodder,  its  feveral  ferts  80

Foot  meafure  among  the  Remans  208

Frames  for  vines,  how  high,  (Ac.  173

_ _  when  of  reeds,  how  to  be  made

176,  et  feq.


G.


G. Ardens,  of  their  Culture,  in  verfe  418
- foil  proper  for  them,  with  marks

i/t  a  good  foil  4 1 9

Gardens,


I  N  D

Gardens,  of  their  fituation  and  ornaments

Page  420

- - when  to  be  delved,  and  watered  421

■  of  the  flowers  to  be  planted  in  them

424

-  and  of  the  times  of  gathering  them

450,  etfeq.

-  . —  offeveral  fuperftitious  rites  ufed  by  the

antients,  to  preferve  their  gardens  44 1 ,  et  feq.
Garden  ,  in  proie,  of  inclofures  proper  for
them,  &c.  485

»■ '  ■  of  their  fituation  486

—  -  of  trenching  and  preparing  the  ground

486,  et  feq.

—  ■  ■  ■■  of  the  things  proper  to  be  fown  in
them,  both  in  Spring  and  Autumn  487

- - of  things  to  be  fown  every  month  of

the  year  488

Garlick,  the  proper  time  for  fowing  it,  &c.

48  8

Garum,  how  to  make  it  296

Geefe,  of  breeding,  feeding,  and  bringing  them
up,  of  their  laying,  hatching,  CsY.  366
Gemini ,  the  Twins,  one  of  the  twelve  Signs ;

when  the  Sun  enters  into  this  Sign  470
Goats,  how  to  choofe  them,  &c.  321

Gourds ,  when  to  fow,  and  how  to  cultivate
them  494

Grapes,  indications  of  their  being  ripe,  and  fit
to  be  gathered  ;  and  preparations  for
gathering  them  476

■■■  how  to  put  them  up,  and  keep  them
in  pots  344

--  how  to  preferve  them  hanging  on

the  tree  546

Grazing  cattle,  an  antient  and  profitable  occu¬
pation  225,  etfeq.

Griping  of  the  guts  in  oxen,  its  cure,  (Ac.  268


H.


HAlcyon  days,  when  and  why  fo  called

464

Hay,  when  to  be  cut  down,  and  how  managed

97

Hemp,  when  to  be  fown,  &c.  78

Hens,  of  their  feveral  kinds,  and  which  are
bell,  &c.  34.0

- how  to  contrive  and  make  an  houfe

proper  for  them  344

- -  of  food  proper  for  them  346

. .  of  cramming  and  fattening  them  354

Hens,  Numidian,  ruttic,  &c.  365

Herbs  what,  and  when  to  be  gathered  ;  and
how  to  pickle  them  for  every  leafon  512


E  X.

Hidebinding,  in  oxen,  how  Co  Cure  it  Page

Hives,  when  to  be  callrated  412

Holidays,  what  things  lawful,  and  what  not
to  be  done  therein  10 1

Honey,  when  and  how  to  make  it  412

Hoofs  and  horns  of  oxen,  how  to  be  cured
when  hurt  or  broken  275

Horfes,  their  feveral  forts  286

- of  their  temper,  manners,  and  lhape

290

—  ■  ■  of  their  difeafes,  and  medicines  pro¬
per  for  them  291

Eoujkold  furniture,  its  diflribution,  &c.  506

Husbandry,  the  advantages  of  it  beyond  many
other  arts  -  3

■  ■  ■  ...  the  difadvantages  under  which  it
labours  4

. -  of  the  great  men  among  the  Ro¬
mans,  who  applied  themfeh.es  to  it  5

- - -  the  difadvantages  of  neglecting  it  8

- -  the  knowledge  nea  firry  to  make  a

complete  Hulbandman  9

— — - -  motives  and  encouragements  to  the

ftudy  of  it  1 1

—  - rulesand directions  for  hisconduCt  14

■ - the  authors,  Greek  and  Latin,  who

have  treated  of  it  15,  »t  feq.

• - implements  of  Hulbandry,  and  their

diflribution  506

Hyades,  when  they  fet,  &c.  468


I.


J’ Anuary,  of  the  flate  of  the  weather,  and
the  work  to  be  done  throughout  the
month  459

Impoflumes  in  oxen,  how  cured  270

Inclofures  for  cattle,  how  to  make  them  282
Ingrafting  vines,  and  preferving  the  ingraft-
ments,  and  of  the  feveral  forts  of  ingraft¬
ings  .  197

Ingrafting  trees,  (Ac.  250

Interfering  in  horfes,  its  cure  294

Jugerum,  a  meafure  of  land,  its  extent,  and
its  parts  and  divifions  210

June,  of  the  flate  of  the  weather,  and  the

47*


work  to  be  done  every  day


K


K.


Ids,  certain  Stars,  when  they  rife,  £?Y,

476


I.


II  hhh  s


I  N  D


L.


LAhourers,  how  many  days  work  to  a  ju-
gerum  of  land  according  to  the  foil,  and
different  forts  of  corn,  iAc.  Page  84,  87
Lambs ,  diredions  concerning  them  310

Lamenefs  in  oxen,  how  cured  271

Land,  its  fituation,  and  qualities  19

- - of  the  things  .to  be  confidcred  before  it

be  purchaled  21

- of  its  wholfomenefs,  and  the  way  to

difcover  its  bad  qualities  25

- of  the  feveral  forts  of  land,  and  dif¬
ferent  foils  and  fituations  49

■ - of  draining  it,  and  clearing  it  of  wood

and  Hones  5 1

-  how  to  diffinguifh  good  from  bad
land  53

- - -  of  the  price  of  land  proper  for  vine¬
yards  1 20

* - -  of  its-  feveral  forms,  fhapes,  and  di-

menfions,  and  how  to  meafure  it  213

Layers ,  how  to  be  managed  74

J.eecb ,  if  an  ox  or  horfe  1  wallows  it,  how  to
remove  it,  lAc.  279

Leeks,  when  to  be  fown,  and  their  different
forts  492

Lentils,  when  to  fow  them,  tz fc.  75

Lepus ,  the  Hare,  a  Conftellation,  when  fets  581
Lettice,  its  different  forts,  when  to  be  planted
and  tranfplanted,  izfc.  432,  489

- how  to  pickle  it  514

Libra,  one  of  the  twelve  Signs,  when  fets  468
Linfeed,  how,  where,  and  when  to  be  fown  76
Lungs  ulcerated  in  oxen,  izfc.  how  to  cure


them


M.


M


ing  it


E  X.

Meadov/s,  when  to  cleanfe  them,  and  to  fl. ut
them  up  from  cattle  Page  461

Meafures  of  liquids,  feveral  of  them  explained

1 1  8

Meafures  fuperficial,  and  of  length,  feveral
forts  207,  etfeq.

Medic ,  or  lucern,  its  nature  and  culture,  and
when  to  fow  it,  &c.  81

Mildew,  how  to  preferve  vines  from  being
hurt  by  it  587

Milk,  howto  make  it  four.  Vide  Oxygal.
Minerva,  her  feaft,  when  celebrated  466
Mint,  when  to  fow  it,  its  culture  492

Mifcelltny,  Sec.  how  and  when  to  fow  it,  its
Culture  82

Modius,  a  Roman  meafure  of  dry  things,  ex¬
plained  64

Money,  the  intereft  paid  for  it  amongft  the
Romans  122

Mules,  of  chufing  and  managing  them  297

- - of  medicines  proper  for  them  301

Muf,  of  boiling  it  into  a  certain  quantity,  to
make  rob  of  grapes,  &c.  826

— —  how  to  keep  it  always  fweet,  as  if  it
were  new  536

Mufiard-Jeed,  when  to  fow  it  490

- how  to  make  muftard  567


273


Ar.or-houfe,  or  villa,  directions  concern-


of  its  fituation,  difpofition,  parts,
conveniences,  (Ac.  31 ,  jt  feq.

March,  of  the  Hate  of  the  weather,  and  the
work  to  be  done,  in  this  month  463

Mares,  of  putting  them  to  the  horfe,  izfc.

2S6,  et  feq.

- - —  of  madr.efs  incident  to  them  297

Maji,  proper  for  feeding  cattle,  Ac.  4S0
May,  of  the  Hate  of  the  weather,  and  the
work  to  be  done,  in  this  month  469

Mead,  how  to  make  it  517

Meadows,  how  to  make  and  cultivate  them

94.  et  fee.


N.


NAuf eating,  in  horfes,  Ac.  and  its  cure

290

Navevus,  when  to  fow  them,  their  Culture,

&c-  78,  495

heck,  fwelling  of  it  in  oxen,  its  cure  273
Neighbours,  the  mifehief  of  bad  ones  22
November,  the  Hate  of  the  weather,  and  the
work  to  be  done  in  it  4 So

Nurf cries  for  olive-yards,  how  to  form  them

239

- for  vineyards  in  general,  Ac.  572

Nut-tree,  L arentinian,  how  to  be  planted  246
Nuts,  the  feafon  for  planting  them  593


O.


OAts,  how  and  when  to  fow  them  201
OJiober,  of  the  ftate  of  the  weather,
and  the  work  to  be  done  in  it  478

Oil,  after  what  manner  to  be  made,  and  of
ever}-  thing  neceffary  for  that  purpofe  558

-  of  gkucine  oil  564

— -  of  oil  for  ointments  565

Olive-trees  their  feveral  forts,  manner  of  Cul¬
ture,  nurferies,  Ac.  236  et  J'eq.

Olive . ,


INDEX.


Olives,  how  to  pickle  them  Page  553,  556
- how  to  make  a  marmelade  of  olives

557

Olive-yards,  Sec.  589

Onions,  when  to  fow  them,  and  how  to  cul¬
tivate  them  494

- -  and  how  to  pickle  them  515

Orchards,  how  to  conftitute  them,  fffc.  590

**- - how  to  choofe  plants  of  trees  for

them  5  9 1

Order  and  method,  the  advantages  of  it  525
Orrach,  when  to  fow -it  492

Ojiers,  their  feveral  forts,  and  directions  con¬
cerning  them  201

Oxen ,  directions  for  choofing,  purchafing,  and
breaking  them,  and  how  to  feed  and  manage
them,  and  of  their  difeafes  and  cures  257  to

272

■  ■■■■—  of  yoking  them  for  plowing,  CaY.  5' 4

etfeq.

- of  food  proper  for  them  throughout  the

whole  year  484

'Oxjgal,  how  to  make  it  513


P.


PA'late,  fwelling  of  it  in  oxen,  and  its  cure

273

Palmer-voorms,  how  to  deftroy  them  498

Pampinating  quickfets  and  cuttings,  and  the
proper  feafon  for  it  1 74

Pampination ,  how  a  vineyard  is  to  be  pampi-
nated  1 96

—  ■  —  —  the  proper  time  for  it  1 67
Parks,  how  to  make  them,  and  (hut  up  wild

380

49 1
49 1
273

338
446


cattle  in  them

Parjley ,  when  to  fow  it,  & c.

Parfnep,  when  to  fow  it,  & c.

Pajlerns  of  oxen,  their  cure  when  hurt
Pajiurings  in  and  about  the  manor-houfe
Peaches,  from  whence  firft  brought,  CsY.
Peacocks,  how  to  bring  them  up,  of  their  eggs.


fetting,  young,  -lif  e.

Pears,  how  to  preferve  them
Pear-trees,  their  different  forts
•  -  when  to  plant  them


361
5 1 6
247

594

73


Peas,  the  time  of  fowing  them,  &c.

Pegafus,  a  Conltellation,  when  it  rifes,  & c.  465
Pigeons,  wild  and  tame,  and  pigeon-houfes,  £3 Y.

r  555

Pifces,  the  1  2th  Sign  of  the  Zodiac,  £ 5  c.  464

Pitch,  Brutian ,  how  made  5  24

- - liquid,  or  tar,  for  preferving  wine,  how

to  be  prepared  530

- - of  feveral  other  forts  of  pitch  for  the  fame

jpurpofe  532


Plants  of  vines,  from  what  parti  of  the  vine  to
be  taken  Page  132

- -  -  '  —  of  the  feveral  riiftances  to  be

obferved  in  planting  them,  is’e.  2 1 7

Pleiades,  when  they  let,  £?Y.  467

Ploughman,  his  office,  and  how  to  manage  the
oxen  56

Procyon  or  Anlecanis,  when  it  rifes  473

Propping,  how  a  vineyard  ihould  be  propped

*7*

—  —  —  and  how  to  prop,  and  put  a  vine  on
a  frame  193

Props  for  vines,  their  feveral  forts  201

Provifions  and  Itores,  how  to  be  managed,  and
where  to  be  depofited,  £3Y.  304

Pruning,  when  the  belt  time  to  prune  a  vine

170

- how  a  young  vineyard  ffiould  be

pruned  18*

Pruning-kn'tfe  or  bill,  its  figure,  l$c.  192

Pulfe,  its  different  forts  62,  71

- -  what  forts  hurtful  to  land,  and  what  be¬
neficial  89

- of  the  foil  proper  for  different  forts  7 1

P ulverization  of  vines  what,  and  how  to  be
performed  4  75


Q


m' Uickfets ,  of  vines,  how  to  be  managed  at
to  planting,  pruning,  pampinating  and
tranfplanting  them  1 70  et  feq.


R.


RAdijh,  when  to  be  fown,  £sY.  494

Raifins,  of  the  Sun,  how  to  be  dried,
& c-  5  20

Rams,  how  to  choofe  them,  and  of  the  time  of
admitting  them,  &c.  306

Rats,  how  to  prevent  their  hurting  vines  5  87
Reaping,  when  to  begin  it,  CsY.  and  of  reaping-
inllruments  98,  et feq.

Reeds,  how  to  plant  and  cultivate  them  203
and  when,  £3Y.


Rob  of  Grapes.  See  Mujl.

Rofe-bujb,  when  to  plant  it

Rue,  when  to  fow  it,  its  Culture,  £gY.


600

492


s


Agittarius,  when  fets,  Wc.  4.^

Sar cling,  what,  and  when  to  be  per-

84

Sending,


formed


1  N  D

Sc reling,  to  what  forts  of  oorn  to  be  performed,
tfc.  Page  85

Salt,  how  to  toad  it  for  patting  it  into  wine

529

Sallets,  of  eafy  and  quick  digeflion  569

Savory,  its  Culture,  isle.  492

Scab  in  horfes,  how  to  cure  it  294

Scab  in  oxen,  how  to  cure  it  272

Scorpio,  when  the  Sun  enters  this  Sign  479
Seeds,  the  different  forts  to  be  fown  on  corn-
Jands,  and  of  the  feed-time  60,  et  feq.

. - diiedlions  how  to  chufe  and  cure  feeds

68

- of  the  quantity  of  feveral  feeds  fufficient

'  for  ajugerum  of  land  478

Serpcntarius,  a  Confteilation,  when  fets,  &c.

741

Serpents,  is'e.  how  to  cure  their  bite  276

Sejamum,  when  to  fow  it  77

Sheep,  of  buying  and  managing  them,  isle.  304

— -  of  covered  fheep  3  1 3

- of  their  dil'eafes  and  remedies,  isle.  315

- Tarentinian  fheep,  how  to  manage

them  5  1 3

Shoots,  or  plants,  for  nurferies  of  vineyards,
how  to  choofe  them,  and  of  the  quality  of
the  ground  where  they  are  to  be  planted,  of
the  feafon  for  planting  them,  and  how  to
cultivate  them  573,  et  feq.

Shoulders  of  oxen,  how  to  cure  them  when
fprained  273

Skenet-roots ,  how  to  pickle  them  568

Slaves,  their  fize,  and  plight  of  body,  and  the
work  to  be  2ffigned  to  each  of  them  44
Sol/lice  in  winter,  when,  isc.

Sorb  apple: ,  how  to  preferve  them
Sowing,  trimeftrian,  when,  isle.

Stables  for  cattle,  how  to  be  made,  isle.


433

520
67
282

'  .  etfa-

Stallion,  of  his  age,  and  how  to  fatten  him,
is'e.  288,  et  feq.

Summer,  when  it  begins,  is'e.  470

Swine,  their  feveral  kinds  326

- of  their  difeafes  and  remedies  329


of  caftrating  them


Swine s-flejh,  how  to  fait  it
T.


5  65


rAurus,  the  Bull,  one  of  the  12  Signs,
when  the  Sun  enters  into  it  462

'Teals,  how  to  keep  and  feed  them  369

T hr cfbmg -floor,  Tbrejhing-injlruments,  &c.  37,

98.

TLu&es,  how  to  bring  them  up,  isle.  359
3


E

Thyme,  when  to  fow  it,  isle.  Page  49*

Tongue,  the  dillempercd  growth  and  fwethr.g  of
it  in  exen  269

Trees,  of  plantations  of  them  in  Gaul  for  fup-
porting  vines  23;

— — different  forts,  isle.  57°

- of  ths  different  forts  of  pomiferous  trees

_  •  24*

- of  other  forts  for  fupporting  vines  5  88

- of  the  proper  time  for  ingrafting  fruit-

trees,  i sV.  495

Trenches,  for  planting  apple  and  pear-trees  59 1
- for  vine-plants,  and  of  their  depth,

isle.  160

Trenching  the  ground,  and  of  the  depth  and
width  of  the  trenches,  and  of  an  inltrument
for  meafuring  them  13,144

Turnep,  when  to  fow  it  78

- of  its  Culture,  isle.  495

- how  to  pickle  turneps  566


V.


VEJfels,  of  different  forts,  for  pickles,  con-
ferves,  and  other  provifions  509

Vetches,  when  to  fow  them,  is'c .  82

Vindemiator,  the  Vintager,  a  Confteilation,
when  riles  465

Vinegar,  how  to  make  it  of  flat  wine  5  *  t

■ - how  to  make  it  of  figs  521

- how  to  make  it  of  fquills  530

Vines,  their  feveral  forts,  and  of  the  climate
and  foil  proper  for  them  104 ,  et  feq,

— —  of  the  feveral  ways  of  planting  them  in
Italy,  and  in  the  provinces  147

• -  of  the  price  of  fhoots  or  cuttings  of  vine3

122

-  ■—  of  the  great  advantages  of  planting  them

117

-  how  many  kinds  ought  to  be  planted,  isle.

1 5S»  et  feq.

— —  after  what  manner  they  ought  to  be  cul¬
tivated,  and  of  their  feveral  forts  567,  577
—  of  propagating  them  581

- -  of  ingrafting  them  5 82

• -  of  ablaqueating  and  pampinating  them

585 ,  et  feq.

Vine-dr effer ,  what  things  he  ought  to  avoid  and
purfue,  in  a  well-conftituted  vineyard  185,

194

Vine-fretters,  how  to  prevent  their  hurting  the
-vines  5S7

Vineyards,  how  to  lay  them  out,  and  of  things
to  be  obferved  in  planting  them  151,  et  feq.


Vineyards y


INDEX.


Vineyards,  of  the  price  -of  land  proper  for  them

Page  120

- -  directions  about  planting  them  123

■  . .  ■  conftant  Culture  necefl'ary  to  keep

them  from  decaying  163

- -  how  they  are  to  be  pampinated,

propped,  recruited,  CsV.  166,  172,  et  feq.
- - -  of  binding  and  pruning  young  vine¬
yards,  and  reftoring  fuch  as  are  old,  and  of
pruning  them  alfo  1 80,  et  feq ,

■ — - provincial  vineyards,  their  feveral

forts,  and  of  the  quality  of  the  ground  proper
for  them  219,  et  feq.

—  - -  .  of  putting  them  upon  frames,  &V.

19  3,  et  feq.

■  of  the  feveral  forts  of  vineyards  576

—  ■■  ■■  ■  and  how  to  make  them  fruitful,  and

of  other  things  necefl'ary  to  be  done  in  them

.  576  to  586

Vintage,  of  fuch  things  as  are  to  be  prepared
for  it  522

Violet ,  when  to  plant  it  600

W.

•  *  —  •»  »  *•

WJter,  directions  concerning  it  28

-  and  how  to  prepare  falt-tvater  for

preferving  wine  5  29

Wax-bees,  howto  make  it  415

Weeding  of  corn,  CsV.  when  to  be  done  86

Well,  for  a  garden,  the  molt  proper  time  for
digging  it  486

Whale,  a  Conftellation  476

Wheat,  its  different  forts  60


Wife,  the  Bailiff's  wife,  and  houfekeeper,  her
office,  character,  qualifications,  bufmefs,  Is  e.

500,  et  feq.

Willow  groves,  how  to  plant  them,  (s'e.  202

Willow-tree,  of  the  time  and  manner  of  plant¬
ing  it  .  599

Winds ,  called  Ornithian,  at  what  time  they
begin  to  blow  464

- forerunner-  or  harbinger-winds,  when

they  begin  to  blow  473

- - etefian,  or  anniverfary  winds,  when

they  begin  to  blow  474

Wine,  feveral  compofltions  for  preferving  it

5  24,  etfeq.

—  remedies  for  four  wine  534

- how  to  make  fweet  wine  533

■■■  ■  -  of  diverfe  prefcrves  for  wine  5  35

■ —  -  of  curing  wine,  and  of  remedies  for  that
which  is  beginning  to  decay  536

— 1  -  of  horehound-wine  536

- - and  of  remedies  in  cafe  any  living  crea¬
ture  fall  into  it,  and  of  fquil-wine  536
of  wormwood  -,  hyffop  -,  fouthernwood-,
myrtle-,  and  other  forts  of  wine  538,  et  feq.
— —  how  to  make  wine  of  grapes  dried  in  the
Sun  541

- - how  to  make  a  fmall  thin  wine  542

■  —  -  how  to  make  honey-wine  543

Wives,  their  character  in  former  and  later
days  502

Z.

Ephyr,  what  kind  of  wind  423


0  MIS  S  A.


Lib.  cap.  I.  page  207.  the  title  omitted,
viz.  After  what  manner  you  ought  to  meafure
the  given  forms  of  land .


Lib.  7.  cap.  I.  page  303.  the  title  omitted,

viz.  Chap.  I.  Of  the  fmall  he-afs.

Page  571.  the  title  omitted,  viz.  Chap.  L
Of  a  nurfery  of  vines.


ERRATA.


Page  16.  Line  42.  add  commends  him,
ib.  1.  43.  read  places.

130.  1.  8.  read  kinds.

137.  1.  36.  read  whether.

238.  1.  1 1.  add  are.

253.  laft  line,  read  pound-weight .
292.  1.  30.  dele  comma  after  and.
318.  1.  3.  inftead  of for  read  thus.
339.  1.  28.  after  word  add  is.

347.  1.  25.  dele  s  in  Fowls.

382.  1.  11.  for  wherein  read  when.


Page  382.  1.  35.  for  thofe  read  thefe .
412.  1.  18.  for  make  read  made.
423.  1.  25.  adde  s  to  vomit.

506.  1.  13.  for  make  read  made.
527.  1.  23.  for  thofe  read  thefe.
554.  1.  6.  for  in  read  by.

572.  1.  16.  for  county  read  country.

573.  1.  4.  for  when  read  where.
590.  laft  line,  add  year.

597.  1.  18.  tend  round  incifion.
