Journal of the First Voyage of Christopher Columbus (Christopher Columbus, 1493; public domain)
===============================================================================
Columbus's 1493 mermaid sighting off the Rio del Oro — 'they were not as beautiful as they are said to be' — in Clements Markham's 1893 Hakluyt Society translation of the Las Casas abstract. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/journalofchristo00colurich).

WORKS    ISSUED    RY 


TLhe  Ifoaklirçt  Society 


THE     JOURNAL 

OF 

CHRISTOPHER     COLUMBUS. 

ETC. 


No.  LXXXVI. 


A  gran  admiracion  a  gran  espanto 
Pensando  sus  grandezas  me  provoco 
Y  su  mayor  loor  en  qualquier  canto 
No  se  podrá  decir  escesco  loco : 

Pues  Castilla  y  Leon  le  debe  tanto 
Que  cuanto  puedo  yo  decir  es  poço 
No  procuro  deleites  ni  gasajos 
Mas  sufridor  fue  grande  de  trabajos. 


Juan  ue  Castellanos,  Elegia  IV. 


THE     JOURNAL 

OF 

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS 

(During  his  First  Voyage,  1492-93), 

AND 

DOCUMENTS   RELATING    TO    THE    VOYAGES 

OF 

JOHN    CABOT 

AND 

GASPAR    CORTE    REAL. 


©ranulatrb,  to  it!)  jiotre  anir  an  SntroDurtion, 

BY 

CLEMENTS    R.    MARKHAM,    C.B.,   F.R.S., 


PRESIDENT    OF    THE    HAKI.tVT    SOCIETY, 


LONDON : 
PRINTED    FOR    THE    HAKLUYT    SOCIETY, 

4,  LINCOLN'S  INN  FIELDS,  W.C. 

M.DCCC.XCIII. 

ISO 


9  ■* 


LONDON : 
PRINTED   BY   CHAS.  J.  CLARK,  4,  LINCOLN'S   INN   FIELDS,  W.C. 


COUNCIL 


THE   HAKLUYT    SOCIETY. 


Clements  R.  Maekham,  Esq.,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,  President. 

Major-General  Sir   Henry   Rawlinson,   K.C.B.,  D.C.L.,  I.L.D.,  F.R.S. 

Associe  Etranger  de  L Instituí  de  France,   Vice-President. 
Lord  Aberdare,  G.C.B.,  F.R.S.,  late  Pres.  R.G.S. 
S.  E.   B.  Bouverie-Pusev,  Esq. 
Vice-Admiral  Lindesay  Brine. 
Robert  Brown,  Esq.,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 
Miller  Christy,  Esq. 

The  Right  Hon.  Sir  Mountstuart  E.  Grant  Duff,  G.C.S.I.,  Pres.  R.G.S. 
Albert  Gray,  Esq. 
A.  P.  Maudslay,  Esq. 
Admiral  Sir  E.  Ommanney,  C.B. ,  F.R.S. 
E.  A.  Petherick,  Esq. 

Ernest  SATOW,   Esq.,   C.M.G. ,   Minister  Resident  in  Uruguay. 
S.  W.  Silver,  Esq. 
Coutts  Trotter,  Esq. 
Prof.  E.  B.  Tylor,  D.C.L. 
Captain  Sir  J.  Sydney  Webb,  K.C.M.G. 
Captain  W.  J.   L.  Wharton,  R.X. 

E.  Delmar  Morgan.  Honorary  Secretary. 


f  nr*0/i  k 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction  : 

i.     Journal  of  Columbus 
ii.     John  Cabot 
in.     Sebastian  Cabot  . 
iv.     Gaspar  Corte  Real 

Sailing  Directions  of  Columbus. 

NELLI 


Letters  of  Tosca- 


journal  of  the  first  voyage  of  columbus 

Documents  relating  to  the  Voyages  of  John  Cabot 
Letters  Patent  granted  to  John  Cabot  and  his  sons 
Name  of  the  ship  .... 

Date  of  sailing  .... 

Landfall.     Legend  on  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot 
Reward  for  John  Cabot 
Letter  from  Lorenzo  Pasqualigo 
First  Despatch  from  Raimondo  di  Soncino    . 
Second  Despatch  from  Raimondo  di  Soncino 
Second  Letters  Patent  granted  to  John  Cabot 
Despatch  from  Ambassador  Puebla    . 
Despatch  from  Ambassador  Ayala 

Documents  relating  to  Sebastian  Cabot  : 
From  the  Decades  of  Peter  Martyr 
Ramusio.     Recollection  of  a  letter 
Account  by  the  Guest  of  Fracastor,  in  Ramusio 
From  Gomara   ..... 
From  Galvano  ..... 
Venetian  Intrigues.     Letter  from  the  Council  of  Ten 


i 

ix 

xxii 

xliv 


3 
15 


197 
199 
199 
200 
201 
201 
202 
203 
206 
207 
208 


209 
211 
212 
215 
216 
217 


VIII  CONTENTS. 

Reward  to  Cabot's  agent 

Despatch  from  Ambassador  Contarini 

Second  Despatch  from  Contarini 

Letter  from  the  Council  of  Ten  to  Contarini 

Letter  from  the  Ragusan  to  Cabot 

Third  Despatch  from  Contarini 

The  Council  of  Ten  to  Soranzo 


PACK 

218 
219 
223 
224 
225 
225 
226 


Documents  relating  to  the  Voyages  of  Gaspar  Corte 
Real  : 

Extract  from  Galvão    ......  229 

Extract  from  Damian  de  Goes             ....  230 

Letter  from  Cantino  to  the  Duke  of  Ferrara  .             .             .  232 

Letter  from  Pasqualigo  to  the  Government  of  Venice            .  235 

Letter  from  Pasqualigo  to  his  brothers            .             .             .  236 

Payment  for  the  Cantino  Map             ....  238 

Legends  on  the  Cantino  Map               ....  239 

Index  to  the  Journal  of  Columbus  .  .  .241 

Index  to  the  Documents  relating  to  the  Voyages  of 

John  Cabot  and  Gaspar  Corte  Real       .           .  253 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Sketch  of  the  vessels  in  the  first  voyage  of  Columbus      to  face  page  iv 
Map  of  Juan  de  la  Cosa       .  .  .  .  .         „         xx 

Map  of  Sebastian  Cabot      .  .  .  .  .  xxxii 

Restoration  of  the  Toscanelli  Map  .  .  •         »  3 

Map  of  Cantino        ......  240 


w  ^y-fià 


v  5E5E  pugg  3E3E    g,  -^c-. 


BBg 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. — Journal  of  Columbus. 


HE  Council  of  the  Hakluyt  So- 
ciety has  decided  upon  issuing 
a  translation  of  the  Journal  of 
the  First  Voyage  of  Columbus  on 
the  four  hundredth  anniversary 
of  that  momentous  expedition.  It  has  also  been 
arranged  that  translations  of  the  documents  relating 
to  the  voyages  of  John  Cabot  and  Gaspar  Corte 
Real  shall  be  included  in  the  same  volume.  Those 
voyages  were  direct  consequences  of  the  great  dis- 
covery of  Columbus.  The  Society  has  to  thank  Mr. 
Harrisse,  whose  exhaustive  works  on  the  Cabots 
and  Corte  Reals  leave  little  but  translation  to  be 
done,  for  his  kindness  in  giving  permission  for  the 
translation  from  his  texts  of  some  important  docu- 
ments,1 the  originals  of  which  are  difficult  of  access  : 
and  also  for  permission  to  reproduce  portions  of  the 


1  Specified  in  their  places. 


11  INTRODUCTION. 

Cantino  and  La  Cosa  maps  from  his  impressions. 
The  thanks  of  the  Society  are  also  due  to  Mr.  H. 
Welter,  the  publisher  of  Mr.  Harrisse's  last  work, 
for  permission  to  make  use  of  the  plates  of  the 
maps  of  Juan  de  la  Cosa  and  Cantino. 

Our  late  Secretary,  Mr.  R.  H.  Major,  by  his  pro- 
duction of  the  Select  Letters  of  Columbus  (1847 !  2n<^ 
ed.,  1870),  brought  within  the  reach  of  members  of 
this  Society  all  the  letters  written  by  the  Admiral 
himself  on  the  subject  of  his  four  voyages,  as  well 
as  some  other  original  documents.  There  remains 
for  the  Council  to  furnish  the  members  with  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Journal  of  the  first  voyage,  the  only  one 
that  has  been  preserved,  and  this  in  a  mutilated 
form.  Our  series  will  then  contain  all  the  contri- 
butions of  the  great  discoverer  himself,  that  have 
escaped  destruction,  to  the  history  of  his  mighty 
achievements. 

It  is  necessary,  for  the  proper  understanding  of 
the  Journal,  that  it  should  be  preceded  by  the 
Toscanelli  correspondence,  because  constant  allusion 
is  made  to  it  by  the  Admiral ;  the  places  mentioned 
by  Toscanelli  were  anxiously  sought  for  at  every 
turn;  and  the  letters  of  Toscanelli  were  practically 
the  sailing  directions  of  Columbus.  The  famous 
Florentine  astronomer,  Paolo  Toscanelli,  was  looked 
upon  as  the  highest  authority  on  cosmography  and 
navigation  in  that  age.  King  Affonso  V  of  Portu- 
gal, through  the  Canon  Fernam  Martins,  made  an 
application  to  Toscanelli  for  information  respecting 
the    voyage   westward    to    India.     The  astronomer 


INTRODUCTION.  Ill 

replied  fully  on  June  25th,  1474,  enclosing  a  map. 
Soon  afterwards  Columbus,  who  was  then  at  Lisbon, 
and  had  long  pondered  over  these  questions,  re- 
solved to  make  a  similar  application  to  the  Florentine 
philosopher.  He  sent  a  letter,  together  with  a  small 
globe  embodying  his  ideas,  to  Toscanelli,  entrusting 
them  to  the  care  of  an  Italian  named  Lorenzo 
Birardi,  who  was  going  to  Florence.1  The  reply 
was  satisfactory.2  Toscanelli  sent  his  correspondent 
a  copy  of  his  letter  to  Martins,  and  a  copy  of  the 
map,  with  some  additional  remarks.  It  was  that 
letter  and  that  map  that  were  destined  to  play  so 
important  a  part  in  the  conduct  of  the  first  voyage. 
Columbus  replied,  and  received  a  second  briefer  but 
equally  cordial  letter  from  Toscanelli.  The  Tos- 
canelli correspondence  is  given  in  Italian  in  the 
Vita  dell  Ammiraglio?  and  in  Spanish  in  the  History 
of  Las  Casas.4  Both  these  translations  are  inaccu- 
rate, and  several  passages  are  inserted  that  are  not 
in  the  original,  which  was  in  Latin.  This  original 
Latin  text  was  discovered  in  i860,  in  the  Colum- 
bine Library  at  Seville,  by  the  librarian,  Don 
José  Maria  Fernandez  de  Velasco.  He  found  it 
in  the  Admiral's  own  handwriting,  on  a  fly-leaf  of 
one  of  the  books  which  belono-ed  to  Columbus.5 


1  Las  Casas,  i,  p.  92. 

2  The  date  of  the  letter  to  Columbus  is  discussed  in  a  note  at 
pages  3  and  4.  3  Cap.  xiii. 

4  Las  Casas,  i,  92-96.     Las  Casas,  by  mistake,  calls  Toscanelli 
Marco  Paulo,  instead  of  Paulo,  in  two  places. 

5  The  book  is  Historia  rerum  ubique  gestarum,  by  Eneas  Silvio 
Piccolomini  (Venice,  1477,  small  folio,  105  leaves). 

b  2 


IV  INTRODUCTION. 

I  have  translated  from  the  Latin  text,  as  given  in 
his  life  of  Columbus  by  Don  José  Maria  Asensio.1 
The  Toscanelli  map  is  lost.  It  was  in  possession  of 
Las  Casas  when  he  wrote  his  history,  and  that  is 
the  last  trace  we  have  of  it.  But  it  is  so  minutely 
described  in  the  letter  that  its  restoration,  with  help 
from  the  globe  of  Martin  Behaim,  is  not  difficult. 
This  has  been  well  done  in  Das  Ausland  (1867, 
p.  5),  and  the  restoration  there  given  has  been 
repeated  to  illustrate  this  volume.2 

With  the  letter  and  map  of  Toscanelli  as  his 
sailing  directions  and  chart,  Columbus  began  to 
make  entries  in  his  Journal  of  Navigation,  morning 
and  evening,  from  the  day  he  left  Palos.  He  gives 
no  special  description  of  his  three  vessels,  but  it  is 
believed  that  sketches  of  them,  drawn  by  his  own 
hand,  have  been  preserved.  In  the  Columbine 
Library  at  Seville,  in  the  edition  of  the  first  decade 
of  Peter  Martyr,  which  belonged  to  the  Admiral's 
son  Fernando,  there  is  a  map  of  Espanola  drawn 
with  a  pen,  and  showing  the  earliest  Spanish  forts 
and  settlements.  In  two  places  on  the  map  there 
are  outline  sketches  of  the  three  caravels,  and  in  the 
opinion  of  competent  persons  these  sketches  are  by 
Columbus  himself.  If  so,  they  are  the  only  authentic 
representations  of  the  first  vessels  that  ever  crossed 

1  Cristobal  Colon,  por  D.  José  Maria  Asensio  (Barcelona,  1890), 
i,  p.  250. 

-  The  Ausland  restoration  is  given  by  Winsor  in  his  Narrative 
and  Critical  History  of  America,  ii,  p.  103,  and  in  his  Columbus, 
p.  no. 


INTRODUCTION.  V 

the  Atlantic.  One  of  them  has  been  reproduced  to 
illustrate  this  volume.1 

The  Admiral  diligently  wrote  his  Journal  until 
the  day  of  his  return  to  Palos.  It  was  forwarded  to 
Ferdinand  and  Isabella ;  but  it  is  now  lost.  Las 
Casas  had  access  to  it  when  he  wrote  his  history, 
and  gives  a  very  full  abstract,2  which  was  condensed 
by  Herrera.3  It  was  also  used  by  Fernando  Columbus 
in  the  Vita  dell  Ammiraglio}  In  one  place,  where 
the  Admiral  describes  his  proceedings  in  the  storm, 
when  he  threw  a  brief  account  of  the  voyage  over- 
board in  a  barrel,  the  version  of  Fernando  is  much 
more  full  than  that  of  Las  Casas,  and  appears  to  be 
copied  word  for  word.  I  have  noticed  the  differ- 
ences in  their  place.  It  is  probable  that  Bernaldez 
also  had  access  to  the  Journal,  but  made  no  great 
use  of  it,5  and  Oviedo  never  appears  to  have  seen  it.6 

In  the  archives  of  the  Duke  of  Infantado  there 
was,  in  the  end  of  the  last  century,  a  small  folio 
volume  in  a  parchment  cover,  consisting  of  seventy- 
six  leaves  closely  written.  It  is  in  the  handwriting 
of  Las  Casas.  There  is  another  old  volume,  but 
somewhat  later  than  that  of  Las  Casas,  also  in  folio, 
and  with  a  similar  cover,  consisting  of  140  leaves. 
These  are  duplicate  copies  of  a  full  abstract  of  the 

1  Asensio,  i,  p.  276. 

2  Lib.  1,  caps,  xxxv  to  lxxv.     The  History  by  Las  Casas  was 
printed  for  the  first  time  in  1875. 

3  Dec.  I,  Lib.  1,  caps,  ix  to  xx,  and  Lib.  11,  caps,  i  to  iii. 

4  Cap.  xxxvi. 

'°  Historia  de  los  Reyes  Católicos,  first  printed  in  1856. 
0  Historia  General  de  las  índias. 


VI  INTRODUCTION. 

Journal  of  Columbus.  They  were  carefully  collated 
by  Don  Juan  Bautista  Munoz,  the  learned  cosmo- 
grapher  of  the  Indies,  and  by  Don  Martin  Fernandez 
Navarrete  at  Madrid,  in  February  1 791.  The  ab- 
stract of  the  Journal,  in  the  handwriting  of  Las 
Casas,  was  printed  by  Navarrete  in  the  first  volume 
of  his  Coleccion  de  los  viages  y  descubrimientos  que 
hicieron  p07r  mar  los  Espanoles,  and  published  in 
1825.  The  present  translation  is  made  from  the 
text  of  Navarrete.1 

The  Prologue,  which  is  in  fact  the  covering-  letter 
to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  is  piven  in  full.  The 
rest  is  an  abstract  of  the  entries  of  each  day,  but 
there  are  long  and  frequent  quotations,  word  for 
word,  which  are  shown  by  the  phrases  "  the  Admiral 
says",  or  "these  are  the  Admiral's  words".  In 
more  than  one  place  Las  Casas  complains  of  the 
illegible  character  of  the  handwriting  of  the  original 
document  from  which  he  is  making  his  abstract,  but 
the  mistakes  appear  to  be  chiefly  with  regard  to 
figures.  The  substitution,  of  leagues  for  miles  occurs 
several  times  ;  and  there  are  other  blunders  of  the 
same  kind,  due  to  inaccurate  transcription. 

The  Journal,  even  in  the  mutilated  condition  in 
which   it  has   come  down   to  us,   is  a  document  of 


1  Sixty-six  years  ago  a  translation  was  made  in  America,  at  the 
suggestion  of  Mr.  Ticknor:  Personal  Narrative  of  the  First  Voyage 
of  Columbus,  translated  by  Samuel  Kettell  (Boston,  1827).  A 
portion  was  also  translated  by  Admiral  Becher  (12th  Oct.  to  28th 
Oct.),  for  the  purposes  of  his  book,  the  Landfall  of  Columbus 
(Potter,  1856). 


INTRODUCTION.  Vil 

immense  value.  Our  sympathy  and  interest  are  ex- 
cited in  every  page.  We  observe  the  conscientious 
care  with  which  the  great  discoverer  recorded  his  pro- 
ceedings, and  with  what  intelligence  he  noted  the 
natural  objects  that  surrounded  him  in  the  New 
World.  All  were  new  to  him  ;  but  he  compared 
them  with  analogous  products  seen  in  other  parts  of 
the  world,  and  drew  useful  inferences.  The  fulness 
of  his  entries  was  clue  to  the  rapid  working  of 
a  vivid  imagination,  as  one  thought  followed  another 
in  rapid  succession  through  his  well-stored  brain. 
Even  the  frequent  repetitions  are  not  tedious,  because 
they  give  such  life  and  reality  to  the  document, 
reminding-  us  of  the  anxious  and  overwrought  hero 
jotting  down  his  thoughts  whenever  he  could  find 
a  spare  moment  amidst  the  press  of  work.  It  has 
been  said  that  his  sole  aim  appeared  to  be  the 
acquisition  of  gold.  This  unfair  criticism  is  made 
in  ignorance.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the 
letter  of  Toscanelli  was  his  guide  ;  and  that  the 
gold,  pearls,  and  spices  were  the  marks  by  which  he 
was  to  know  the  provinces  of  the  great  Kaan  ;  so 
that  he  was  bound  to  make  constant  inquiries  for 
these  commodities.  The  eagerness  with  which  he 
pushed  his  inquiries,  and  his  repeated  disappoint- 
ments, are  touching.  He  seeks  to  find  the  places 
mentioned  by  his  guide,  by  fancied  resemblance  of 
names,  as  when  he  would  identify  Cipangu  with 
Cibao  in  Espanola.  This  search,  however,  only 
occupied  part  of  his  thoughts.  Nothing  seems  to 
escape  his   observation,    and   he   frequently   regrets 


Vlll  INTRODUCTION. 

his  ignorance  of  botany,  because  it  prevented  him 
from  being  able  to  report  more  exactly  on  the  new 
species  of  plants  that  surrounded  him.  But  the 
feature  in  his  remarks  which  comes  out  most  promi- 
nently is  his  enthusiastic  admiration  of  scenery,  and 
of  the  natural  beauties  of  the  strange  land.  The 
Journal  is  a  mirror  of  the  man.  It  shows  his 
failings  and  his  virtues.  It  records  his  lofty  aims, 
his  unswerving  loyalty,  his  deep  religious  feeling, 
his  kindliness  and  gratitude.  It  impresses  us  with 
his  knowledge  and  genius  as  a  leader,  with  his 
watchful  care  of  his  people,  and  with  the  richness  of 
his  imagination.  Few  will  read  the  Journal  without 
a  feeling  of  admiration  for  the  marvellous  ability 
and  simple  faith  of  the  great  genius  whose  mission 
it  was  to  reveal  the  mighty  secret  of  the  ages. 

The  Journal  is  the  most  important  document  in 
the  whole  range  of  the  history  of  geographical  dis- 
covery, because  it  is  a  record  of  the  enterprise  which 
changed  the  whole  face,  not  only  of  that  history,  but 
of  the  history  of  mankind.  Even  during  the  four- 
teen remaining  years  of  the  Admiral's  life  its  imme- 
diate result  was  the  completed  discovery  of  all  the 
West  Indian  islands  and  of  the  coast  of  the  New 
World  from  Cape  San  Agustin,  8°  S.  of  the  line,  to 
the  Gulf  of  Honduras,  either  by  the  Admiral  himself, 
or  by  his  followers  and  pupils. 

The  Admiral's  achievement  aroused  a  ieeling  of 
emulation  in  other  countries.  There  is  a  direct 
connection  between  the  ideas  and  labours  of  the 
illustrious   Genoese  and  the  vova^es  of  his  country- 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

man  John  Cabot.  From  rather  a  different  point  of 
view  the  undertakings  of  Gaspar  Corte  Real  had  its 
origin  in  the  discovery  of  Columbus.  The  work  of 
these  two  worthies,  Cabot  and  Corte  Real,  therefore, 
finds  its  proper  place  in  the  same  volume  with  the 
Journal   of  the  Admiral. 

The  foot-notes  in  the  Journal  marked  with  N.  are 
by  Navarrete.  Interpolations  by  Las  Casas  are  in 
brackets. 


II. — John  Cabot. 

A  remarkable  fatality  has  deprived  posterity  of 
any  authentic  record  of  the  first  English  voyages  to 
America.  Not  a  single  scrap  of  writing"  by  John 
Cabot  has  been  preserved.  The  map  and  globe  of 
John  Cabot  no  longer  exist,  and  although  a  single 
copy  of  a  map  by  his  son  Sebastian  has  survived,  it 
was  not  prepared  to  illustrate  his  father's  discoveries, 
but  is  a  compilation  drawn  for  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment nearly  half  a  century  afterwards.  The  second- 
hand information  fails  satisfactorily  to  supplement 
the  meagre  official  documents,  which  consist  of  two 
Letters  Patent  and  a  few  entries  in  the  Privy  Purse 
Accounts  of  Henry  VII  and  his  son.  There  are  two 
short  letters  from  Spanish  Ambassadors,  three  news- 
letters from  Italians  in  London,  the  reports  of  what 
Sebastian  is  said  to  have  dropped  in  conversation 
generally,  written  down  years  afterwards,  the  reports 
of  his  intrigues  with  the  Venetian  Government,  and 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

a  few  brief  notices  of  doubtful  authenticity  in 
English  chronicles  and  collections  of  voyages.  Even 
the  principal  entry  in  the  Chronicles,  said  to  be 
copied  from  Fabyan's  work,  is  not  to  be  found  in 
any  known  edition  of  Fabyan  ;  while  the  unfortunate 
habit  of  our  greatest  authority,  Richard  Hakluyt,  of 
making  verbal  alterations  in  the  documents  of  which 
he  made  use,  further  increases  our  difficulties. 

These  are  the  sources  of  information,  such  as  they 
are,  from  which  we  must  derive  our  knowledge  of 
the  first  English  voyages  to  America.  By  a  careful 
use  of  them,  and  an  equally  careful  avoidance  of 
conjecture  and  hypothesis,  we  can  piece  together  all 
that  can  now  be  known  of  the  earliest  important 
maritime  enterprises  in  which  England  was  con- 
cerned, and  of  the  great  navigator  who  conceived 
and  led  them. 

Mr.  Charles  Deane  contributed  an  admirable 
review  of  the  materials  forming  our  existing  know- 
ledge of  the  Cabot  voyages  to  Winsor's  Narrative 
and  Critical  History  of  America  (vol.  iii,  pp.  1-58), 
in  which  he  treats  the  various  questions  bearing  on 
the  subject  with  sound  judgment  and  great  learning. 

An  exhaustive  work  on  the  Cabots,  including  the 
original  documents  in  their  respective  languages,  and 
valuable  notes  on  the  cartography,  was  published  by 
Mr.  Harrisse,  at  Paris,  in  1882.1 

Desimoni  has  published  a  work  on  the  Cabots  at 


1  Jean  et  Sêbastien    Cabot,    lair  Origine  et  leur   Voyages,  par 
Henry  Harrisse  (Paris,  1882). 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

Genoa,1  and  a  considerable  work,  also  including  all 
the  original  documents,  by  Tarducci,  has  recently 
appeared  at  Venice.2 

John  Cabot  was  probably  a  Genoese3  who,  after 
having  resided  in  Venice  for  fifteen  years,  from  1461 
to  1476,  was  admitted  to  the  rights  of  citizenship  in  the 
latter  year.4  He  was  married  to  a  Venetian  woman, 
and  had  three  sons,  named  Luigi,  Sebastian,  and 
Saneio,  all  of  whom  must  have  been  of  age  when  the 
Letters  Patent  were  granted  to  them  in  1497  ;  so 
that  the  youngest  cannot  have  been  born  later  than 
1475.  As  this  was  within  the  period  during  which 
John  Cabot  was  qualifying  for  citizenship  by  resi- 
dence at  Venice,  his  sons  must  have  been  born  there. 

During  the  next  twenty  years  the  story  of  John 
Cabot  is  an  almost  entire  blank.  The  Genoese  was 
usually  called  a  Venetian  because  he  had  acquired 
Venetian    citizenship.      He    became  an  experienced 


1  C.  Desimoni,  Intorno  a  Giovanni  Caboto  (Genoa). 

2  Di  Giovanni  c  Sebastiano  Caboto,  Memorie  Raccolte  e  Docit- 
tnentate  da  F.  Tarducci  (Venezia,  1892). 

3  "Another  Genoese  like  Columbus"  (Puebla,  Spanish  Am- 
bassador, July  1498;  also  Ayala).  "Sebastian  Gaboto,  a  Genoa's 
son"  (Stow  from  Fabyan ;  also  Languet,  Grafton,  Holinshed). 
These  statements  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  confirmed  by  the  fact 
that  John  Cabot  required  to  be  naturalised  in  Venice,  which 
proves  that  he  was  not  a  Venetian  born.  On  the  other  hand, 
Tarducci  puts  forward  arguments  to  establish  his  Venetian  birth 
{Di  G.  e  S.  Caboto,  Memorie,  cap.  i). 

4  "  1476,  March  28th.  That  the  privilege  of  citizenship,  within 
and  without,  be  granted  to  John  Caboto  for  having  resided  15 
years  according  to  custom."  {Arc/iivo  di  Stato  Vaiezia,  Libro 
Privilegi,  t.  ii,  p.  53  ;   Tarducci,  p.  339.) 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

navigator,  and  had  commercial  transactions  along  the 
Arabian  coast,  even  visiting  Mecca,  or  its  port,1 
where  he  witnessed  the  arrival  of  caravans  with 
spices  from  the  distant  East,  and  speculated  on  the 
distance  they  had  come,  and  on  the  difficulties  of  the 
route.2 

When  the  news  of  the  great  discovery  of  Colum- 
bus became  known,  John  Cabot  eagerly  sought  for 
information,  and  was  aroused  to  a  spirit  of  emulation. 
He  went  to  Seville  and  Lisbon  to  seek  for  help  in 
the  enterprise  he  contemplated3 ;  and  adopted  all  the 
ideas  of  his  great  countryman  respecting  Antilla  and 
the  seven  cities,  the  Isle  of  Cipango,  and  the  king- 
dom of  the  great  Kaan.  He  then  came  to  settle  in 
London  as  a  merchant,4  with  his  wife  and  three  sons. 
Of  good  address  and  an  expert  navigator,5  John 
Cabot  presented  himself  at  the  Court  of  Henry  VII 

1  Soncino  (see  p.  204).  He  could  not  have  actually  visited 
Mecca,  as  stated  by  Soncino,  for  Christians  were  not  allowed  to 
approach  within  several  leagues  of  that  city.  He  may  have  been 
at  Jiddah. 

2  Despatch  of  Raimondo  di  Soncino  to  the  Duke  of  Milan, 
dated  London,  iSth  Dec.  1497  {Annuario  sa'entifico,  Milan,  1866, 
p.  700;  Arckiv  (T Etat  Milan ;  Harrtsse,  p.  324). 

:i  "  Pedro  de  Ayala  to  the  Catholic  Sovereigns,  25  July  1498.'' 
In  Calendar  of  Stale  Papers  (Spain),  i,  p.  176,  No.  210. 

4  The  Anonymous  Guest  in  Ranntsio,  i,  f.  414  (ed.  Yen.,  1550) : 
"  Nella  citta  di  Londra."  Sebastian  told  this  witness  that  he  was 
then  very  young,  yet  old  enough  to  have  already  learnt  the 
humanities  and  the  sphere:  "Che  gli  era  assai  giovane  non  gia 
peroche  non  avesse  imparato  et  lettere  d'humanita  et  la  sphera."' 
There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Cabots  were  at  Bristol  previous  to 
the  voyage  in  1497. 

5  Soncino,  1 8th  Dec.  1497  (see  p.  203). 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

at  the  right  moment.  The  great  discovery  of 
Columbus  was  being  much  discussed,  and  the 
courtiers  were  declaring  that  it  was  a  thing  more 
divine  than  human  to  have  found  that  way,  never 
before  known,  of  going  to  the  east  where  the  spices 
grow.1  In  the  midst  of  this  excitement,  John  Cabot, 
a  navigator,  "who  had  made  himself  very  expert 
and  cunning  in  the  knowledge  of  the  circuit  of  the 
worlde  and  islands  of  the  same",  was  presented  to  the 
King,  and  made  his  proposal  to  do  for  England  what 
Columbus  had  done  for  Spain.  He  would  show  a 
new  route  to  Cipango  and  the  land  of  the  great 
Kaan,  and  would  bring  back  his  ships  laden  with 
spices.  He  demonstrated  his  arguments  by  a  chart, 
and  eventually  gained  the  ear  of  the  wary  usurper. 
Henry  resolved  to  let  the  adventurer  attempt  the 
discovery  of  new  isles,  and  granted  him  and  his  sons 
Letters  Patent,  as  well  as  material  assistance. 

The  Letters  Patent,  dated  March  5th,  1496,2  grant 
to  John  Cabot,  Citizen  of  Venice,  and  to  his  sons 
Lewis,3  Sebastian,  and  Saneio,  the  right  to  navigate 
in  any  direction  they  please,  under  the  King's  flag, 
and  at  their  own  costs  and  charges,  to  seek  out  and 
discover  unknown  lands  and   islands.      They  were 

1  Eden's  Decades,  f.  255;  Ramusio,  i,  f.  415  :  "  Dicendosi  che 
era  stata  cosa  piu  tosta  divina  che  humana"  (see  p.  213). 

2  Old  style. 

3  Mr.  Deane,  quoting  from  the  Armorial  de  la  Noblesse  de 
Languedoc  (Paris,  i860,  vol.  ii,  p.  163),  mentions  that  Lewis  Cabot 
is  said  to  have  settled  at  Saint-Paul-le-Coste,  in  the  Cevennes,  and 
that  a  family  is  traced  from  him  to  the  present  time.  The  arms 
are :  Azure,  3  chabots  (fish)  or. 


XÍV  INTRODUCTION. 

authorised  to  become  governors  of  the  new  terri- 
tories, a  fifth  of  all  profits  and  revenues  being  re- 
served for  the  King ;  and  merchandise  coming  from 
the  new  lands  was  exempted  from  customs  duties. 
All  British  subjects  were  prohibited  from  visiting 
the  new  lands  without  a  licence  from  the  Cabots,  on 
pain  of  forfeiture  of  ship  and  cargo  ;  and  the  King's 
lieges  were  enjoined  to  afford  all  necessary  assistance 
to  the  adventurers. 

John  Cabot  selected  the  port  of  Bristol  for  the 
equipment  of  his  expedition,  and  there  he  embarked 
in  a  ship  believed  to  have  been  called  the  Matt/ieiv? 
with  a  crew  of  eighteen  men,  nearly  all  Englishmen, 
and  natives  of  Bristol.2  His  young  son  Sebastian, 
then  aged  twenty-two  at  least,  probably  accompanied 
him3 ;  but  the  other  two  sons  are  nowhere  men- 
tioned, except  in  the  Letters  Patent.  The  Matthew 
is  said  to  have  been  manned  and  victualled  at  the 
King's  cost,4  which  is  unlikely  ;  and  she  was  accom- 

1  "  In  the  year  1497,  the  24th  of  June,  on  St.  John's  Day,  was 
Newfoundland  found  by  Bristol  men  in  a  ship  called  the  Matthew? 
//is lory  and  Antiquities  of  Bristol ^  Win.  Barrett  (Bristol,  1789, 
p.  172),  quoting  from  an  old  document,  which,  however,  has  not 
since  been  seen. 

-  Soncino  :  "  Quasi  tutti  Inglesi  et  de  Bristo." 

8  On  legend  No.  8  of  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot  is  the  state- 
ment :  "  This  land,  formerly  unknown  to  us,  was  discovered  by 
Joan  Caboto,  Veneciano,  and  Sebastian  Caboto,  his  son."  This 
is  the  only  evidence  that  Sebastian  accompanied  his  father  on  his 
first  voyage.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Drapers'  Company,  in  1521, 
represented  that  it  was  then  the  belief  that  Sebastian  never  was 
there  himself. 

1  Stow,  quoting  from  Fabyan,  followed  by  Hakluyt. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

panied  by  three  or  four  small  vessels  laden  with 
merchandise,1  being  the  ventures  of  London  mer- 
chants. But  it  does  not  appear  whether  more  than 
one  ship  actually  crossed  the  Atlantic.  - 

The  expedition  sailed  in  the  beginning  of  May3 
1497,  and,  after  a  voyage  of  fifty  days,  it  reached 
land  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the 
24th  of  June,  being  St.  John's  Day,4  which  was 
called  "  Prima  terra  vista".  The  name  of  St.  John 
was  given  to  another  large  island  that  was  sighted.5 
We  know,  from  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  that 
the  "  Prima  terra  vista"  is  the  northern  end  of  the 
island  of  Cape  Breton,  and  "  St.  John"  is  in  the 
position  of  the  Magdalen  Islands.  This  is  just  the 
landfall  that  John  Cabot  would  have  naturally  made. 
His  course  is  clearly  pointed  out  by  the  object  of 
his  voyage,  which  was,  like  that  of  Columbus,  to 
reach  the  territory  of  the  Great  Kaan.  The  course 
of  Columbus  was  west,  and  that  of  John  Cabot 
must  also  have  been  west.6     The  distance  is  2,300 

1  Stow,  quoting  from  Fabyan,  followed  by  Hakluyt. 

-  Pasqualigo  only  speaks  of  one  ship  ("ando  con  uno  naviglio"), 
and  Soncino  speaks  of  one  ship  with  eighteen  men  (i£uno  piccolo 
naviglio  e  xviii  persone  si  pose  ala  fortuna").  The  letters  patent 
authorised  five  ships. 

3  Hakluyt  quoting  Fabyan  (see  p.  200). 

i  Legend  No.  8  on  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot.  The  Latin 
version  gives  the  hour  in  the  morning,  the  Spanish  only  says 
in  the  morning.  5  Ibid. 

6  Soncino,  in  his  despatch  from  London  to  the  Duke  of  Milan, 
of  December  18th,  1497,  says:  " Partitosi  da  Bristo,  et  passato 
Ibernia  piu  occidentale  e  poi  alzatosi  verso  el  septentrione,  co- 
mendo ad  navigare  ale  parte  orientale,  lassandosi  (fra  qualche 


Xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

miles1  in  a  voyage  of  fifty  days,  or  forty-six  miles 
a  day.  Working  her  way  slowly  westward  during 
many  days,  a  vessel  like  the  Matthew  would  have 
made  a  great  deal  of  leeway,  and  during  the  latter 
part  of  the  voyage  the  current  would  have  set  her 
two  hundred  or  more  miles  to  the  south.2  The 
south  coast  of  Newfoundland  being  obscured  by 
mist,  the  north  end  of  Cape  Breton  is  exactly  the 
landfall  the  Matthew  might  be  expected  to  make 
under  the  above  circumstances.  Cabot  hoisted  the 
English  standard  on  the  newly-discovered  land,  and 
side  by  side  with  it  he  planted  the  lion  of  St.  Mark, 
the  flag  of  his  adopted  country.  He  did  not  see 
any  inhabitants,  but  brought  back  some  snares  for 
game,  and  a  needle  for  making  nets. 

As  he  was  back  in  the  end  of  July,  he  had  no 
time  to  spare,  and  must  have  started  at  once  on  his 
voyage  home.3      Sailing  from    the    north    coast    of 


giorni)  la  tramontana  ad  mano  drita" — "  He  departed  from 
Bristol,  and  having  passed  Ireland,  which  is  further  west,  and 
then  turned  towards  the  north,  he  began  to  navigate  towards  the 
eastern  part,  leaving  (for  some  days)  the  pole  on  the  right  hand." 
This  is  not  very  clear.  If  Cabot  had  his  ship's  head  north,  cr 
north  of  west,  after  passing  Ireland,  it  would  be  owing  to  contrary 
winds  which  prevented  him  from  laying  his  course.  Soncino  has 
evidently  written  east  for  west,  because  he  says  that  the  Pole  was 
on  the  right  hand,  which  could  only  be  when  steering  west. 

1  Pasqualigo  gives  700  leagues,  which  is  nearly  right.  Soncino 
very  much  under-estimates  the  distance  at  400  leagues. 

-  The  course  actually  made  good  would  be  half  a  point  south 
of  west. 

3  Pasqualigo  says  :  "  Andato  per  la  costa  lige  300" — "He  went 
along  the  coast  300  leagues."     This  is  impossible.    Such  a  cruise 


INTRODUCTION.  Xvii 

Cape  Breton  on  June  26th,  with  a  southerly  set,  on 
the  next  day,  after  proceeding  about  seventy  miles, 
he  appears  to  have  sighted  land,  on  his  starboard 
hand,  near  Sydney1 ;  but  he  was  short  of  provisions, 
and  could  not  afford  to  lose  time  by  stopping.  As 
might  be  expected  in  going  eastward,  Cabot  made 
a  better  voyage  than  when  he  was  outward  bound. 
It  only  occupied  him  about  thirty-five  days,  and  he 
arrived  at  Bristol  in  the  last  days  of  July  or  the 
first  week  of  August.3 

John  Cabot  was  received  on  his  return  with  great 
honour.  The  King  granted  him  money  for  his  per- 
sonal expenses.  Pasqualigo  wrote  to  his  brothers  at 
Venice  to  report  how  the  great  discoverer  was 
dressed  in  silk  and  styled  the  Grand  Admiral,  was 
residing  at  Bristol  with  his  family,  and  preparing  for 


in  the  Matthew  would  have  occupied  three  weeks  at  least  from 
June  25th,  or  until  the  middle  of  July.  As  Cabot  was  back  in 
Bristol  in  the  end  of  July,  it  is  clear  that  this  additional  cruise 
cannot  have  taken  place.  Pasqualigo  was  merely  repeating 
second-hand  gossip. 

1  "Al  tornar  aldreto  a  visto  do  ixole  ma  non  havoluto  desender 
per  non  perder  tempo  che  la  vituaria  li  mancava" — "  On  the 
return  he  saw  two  islands  on  the  starboard  side,  but  he  would  not 
land  because  he  could  not  waste  time,  as  the  provisions  were 
running  short"  (Pasqualigo).     See  p.  201. 

2  The  date  is  fixed  by  Pasqualigo,  who  says  that  the  expedition 
was  absent  three  months;  and  also  by  a  royal  grant  of  ^10  to 
Cabot  on  August  10th.  Allowing  for  two  or  three  days  at  Bristol 
on  arrival,  the  journey  to  London  to  report  himself,  the  audiences, 
and  the  time  for  the  consummation  of  the  penurious  Henry's 
bounty,  the  ship  must  have  arrived  at  Bristol  at  least  ten  days 
previous  to  the  10th  of  August.  See  extract  from  Privy  Purse 
Accounts,  Henry  VII,  Biddle,  p.  80,  n. 

C 


XV111  INTRODUCTION. 

a  second  expedition  on  a  larger  scale.  The  Milanese 
envoy,  Raimondo  di  Soncino,  being  personally  ac- 
quainted with  Cabot,  wrote  a  more  authoritative 
despatch  on  the  subject  for  his  master,  Ludovico  il 
Moro.  Soncino,  as  well  as  the  Spanish  Ambassador, 
had  seen  the  chart  of  his  discoveries  prepared  by 
John  Cabot,  and  also  a  solid  sphere  constructed  by 
the  great  navigator.  The  Milanese  envoy  had  the 
advantage  of  conversing  with  Cabot  himself,  and 
heard  from  him  of  the  enormous  supplies  of  fish  to 
be  obtained  on  the  Newfoundland  banks,  which 
were  considered  likely  to  supersede  the  trade  in 
stock- fish  with  Iceland  ;  and  of  his  design  to  reach 
the  Spice  islands  by  way  of  Cipango,  in  imitation  of 
Columbus.  Soncino  also  spoke  to  several  of  the 
crew,  including  a  Buroomdian,  and  a  Genoese  barber 
from  Castione,1  both  of  whom  anticipated  great 
results  from  the  second  voyage. 

New  Letters  Patent  were  issued  on  February  3rd, 
1498,  this  time  to  John  Cabot  alone,  without  mention 
of  his  sons.  The  discoverer  is  authorised  to  equip 
six  English  ships  in  any  port  within  the  King's 
dominions,  being  of  200  tons  burden  or  under,  and 
to  take  them  to  the  land  and  isles  lately  discovered 
by  the  said  John.  He  is  empowered  to  enter  all 
men  and  boys  who  may  volunteer  for  the  service  ; 
and  all  officers  and  others,  the  King's  subjects,  are 
commanded  to  afford  needful  assistance. 

The    second    expedition    was    also    fitted   out   at 

1  Castiglione,  near  Chiavari.  according  to  Desimoni. 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

Bristol.  Sebastian  probably  accompanied  his  father 
again,1  and  it  would  appear  that  Thomas  Bradley 
and  Lancelot  Thirkill,  of  London,  commanded  two 
of  the  other  ships,  having  received  royal  loans  of 
£30  for  their  equipment.2  John  Carter  is  also 
mentioned  as  receiving  £2.  The  expedition  con- 
sisted of  five  armed  ships,  victualled  for  a  year,  with 
300  men,  according  to  Peter  Martyr  and  Gomara. 
They  sailed  in  the  summer  of  1498,  at  some  time 
before  the  25th  of  July.3  One  was  driven  back  by 
a  storm.4 

The  few  details  respecting  this  second  voyage  of 
John  Cabot  are  derived  from  the  reports  of  state- 
ments made  long  afterwards  by  his  son  Sebastian, 
which  appear  in  the  works  of  Peter  Martyr,  Ramusio, 
Gomara,  and  Galvano.  His  actual  discoveries  were 
shown  on  his  map,  a  copy  of  which  was  sent  to 
Spain,  and  transferred  to  the  famous  map  drawn  by 
Juan  de  la  Cosa  in  1500.  John  Cabot  first  directed 
his  course  to  the  north,  and  went  so  far  towards  the 

1  The  accounts  given  by  Sebastian  to  Peter  Martyr,  and  to  the 
anonymous  guest  whose  discourse  is  recorded  by  Ramusio,  evi- 
dently refer  to  the  second  voyage  of  John  Cabot,  although  the  son 
takes  all  the  credit  to  himself,  and  does  not  mention  his  father. 
It  was  the  general  belief,  in  152 1,  according  to  the  Drapers'  Com- 
pany, that  Sebastian  never  went  on  these  voyages.  It  may  be 
assumed,  however,  that  Sebastian  was  probably  on  board.  His 
age  would  have  been  twenty-three,  his  father's  over  sixty. 

2  Excerpta  Histórica,  Nicholas  (1831),  p.  116;  also  Biddle, 
p.  86. 

3  The  date  of  the  letters  from  the  Spanish  ambassadors,  Puebla 
and  Ayala,  reporting  their  departure. 

4  Ayala  to  the  Sovereigns,  25th  July  1498  (ffarrisse,  p.  329). 

C  2 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

Pole  as  to  meet  with  icebergs,  and  to  experience 
almost  constant  daylight  in  July.1  Seeing  so  much 
ice,  he  turned  to  the  south,  and  came  to  the  bank  of 
Newfoundland,  where  he  met  with  enormous  quanti- 
ties of  fish  called  Bacallaos?  The  people  are 
described  as  being  covered  with  the  skins  of  beasts, 
and  many  bears  were  seen.  Continuing  on  a 
southerly  course  along  the  North  American  coast, 
he  reached  the  latitude  of  Cape  Hatteras,3  whence 
he  was  obliged  to  return  home  owing  to  want  of 
provisions.  The  Spanish  Ambassador  had  reported, 
in  July  1498,  that  Cabot  was  expected  to  return  in 
the  following  September.  We  know  nothing  more 
of  John  Cabot.  Neither  the  return  of  his  expedition, 
nor  the  date  or  place  of  his  death,  is  recorded. 

Juan  de  la  Cosa  was  supplied,  through  the  Spanish 
Ambassador  in  London,  with  a  chart,  showing  the 
discoveries  of  John  Cabot.  On  his  mappe-monde  of 
1 500.  he  indicates  the  discoveries  by  English  flags 

1  Peter  Martyr  does  not  mention  any  latitude  for  the  farthest 
north  of  Cabot.  The  anonymous  guest,  whose  discourse  is  re- 
corded by  Ramusio,  says  56^  ;  Gomara  says  58' ;  Galvano,  60'. 
Ramusio,  writing  from  memory,  says  that  Cabot  had  once  written 
to  him,  years  before,  when  he  gave  67o  30'  as  the  latitude.  Sir 
Humphrey  Gilbert  also  has  67°  30',  copying  Ramusio. 

2  Peter  Martyr  makes  the  erroneous  statement  that  Cabot  gave 
the  country  the  name  of  Bacallaos.  It  is  really  the  Basque  name 
for  cod. 

3  Peter  Martyr  says  that  the  most  southern  point  reached  by 
Cabot  was  the  latitude  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar.  The  guest  in 
Ramusio  says  that  he  reached  Florida.  Gomara  gives  his  furthest 
south  at  38°;  and  Galvano  has  the  same  latitude;  adding  that 
"some  s.iv  he  reached  Florida". 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 

along  the  coast  of  North  America,  with  a  number  of 
names  of  capes  and  bays  between  them.  This  coast- 
line cannot  be  exactly  identified,  as  there  are  no  lines 
for  latitude,  and  the  West  India  Islands  are  placed 
north  of  the  tropic ;  but  it  appears  to  be  intended  to 
extend  from  50o  to  30o  N.  from  about  Cape  Breton 
to  a  little  south  of  Cape  Hatteras.1  This  would  be 
in  accordance  writh  the  statement  of  Peter  Martyr. 

John  Cabot  was  the  pioneer  of  English  discovery 
and  English  colonisation.  A  lonç  life  of  mercantile 
adventure  had  prepared  him  for  the  great  work  ; 
and  the  experienced  old  navigator  was  at  least  sixty 
years  of  age  when  he  offered  his  services  to  Henry 
VII.  His  great  merit  was  that  he  at  once  appre- 
ciated the  genius  and  prevision  of  Columbus,  and 
understood  the  true  significance  of  his  magnificent 
achievement.  He  studied  the  theories  and  the 
methods  of  his  illustrious  countryman,  and  under- 
stood the  great  work  that  was  left  for  others  to 
achieve  by  following  his  lead.  The  results  more 
than  justified  his  representations.  In  his  first  voyage 
he  showed  the  way  across  the  Atlantic  in  high 
latitudes  ;  and  in  the  second  he  discovered  the  coast 
of  North  America,  between  the  Arctic  Circle  and 
the  Tropic  of  Cancer.  We  learn  no  more  of  his 
career,  and  nothing  of  the  close  of  his  life  ;  but  this 


1  The  map  drawn  by  Sebastian  Cabot  in  1542  affords  little 
help  with  regard  to  his  father's  discoveries,  except  in  the  identifi- 
cation of  the  Prima  Tierra  Vista.  It  is  a  compilation  including 
later  work,  but  the  coast  of  North  America  is  represented  very 
much  as  it  is  on  the  map  of  Juan  de  la  Cosa. 


XX11  INTRODUCTION. 

is  enough  to  secure  a  place  for  John  Cabot  among 
the  greatest  navigators  of  that  age  of  discovery. 

The  work  of  John  Cabot  bore  fruit  in  subsequent 
years,  and  the  way  he  had  shown  across  the  Atlantic 
was  not  forgotten.  On  March  19th,  1501,  Letters 
Patent  were  granted  to  three  merchants  of  Bristol, 
named  Warde,  Ashurst,  and  Thomas,  associated 
with  three  natives  of  the  Azores.1  They  made 
a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic,  and  the  isle  discovered 
by  John  Cabot  was  again  visited.-  In  the  three 
following  years  other  voyages  were  undertaken 
across  the  Atlantic.3 


III. — Sebastian  Cabot. 

Since  the  results  of  recent  researches  have  been 
known,  the  son  can  no  longer  be  associated  with  the 
discoveries  of  the  father.  With  regard  to  the  place 
of  Sebastian's  birth,  he  told   Peter  Martyr,  in  15 19, 

1  Bid  die,  p.  312. 

-  27th  January  1502.  "To  men  of  Bristol  that  found  the  He, 
£5."    (Privy  Purse  Expenses,  Henry  VII.) 

3  1503.  "To  the  merchants  of  Bristol  that  had  been  in  New- 
foundland, ^20"  (Hak/i/yt,  i,  219).  1503,  November  17th.  "To 
one  that  brought  hawkes  from  the  Newfoundedland,  £1"  {Exc. 
Hist.).  1504,  April  8th.  "To  a  prieste  that  goeth  to  the  new 
ilande,  £2"  (Exc.  Hist.,  p.  131).  1505.  "To  Portyngales  that 
brought  popyngais  and  catts  of  the  mountaigne  with  other  stuf 
to  the  King's  grace,  ^5."  "Wild  catts  and  popyngays  of  the 
Newfound  Island"  (Exc.  His/.,  p.  [33). 


INTRODUCTION.  XXlll 

that  he  was  a  Venetian  born1;  he  told  Contarini,  in 
1522,  that  he  was  born  in  Venice'2;  and  he  told 
Richard  Eden  that  he  was  born  at  Bristol.3  His 
own  word  can  have  no  weight,  for  he  made  state- 
ments respecting  the  place  of  his  birth  just  as  it 
happened  to  suit  his  convenience.  But  we  know 
from  the  Letters  Patent  that  his  younger  brother 
must  have  been  of  age  when  they  were  granted  in 
1497.  Sebastian  must  have  been  at  least  a  year 
older.  So  he  was  born  not  later  than  1474.  His 
father  had  his  domicile  in  Venice  from  1461  to  1476. 
Sebastian  was,  therefore,  born  in  Venice. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  Sebastian  Cabot  accom- 
panied his  father  on  his  voyages  of  discovery.  He 
is  reported  to  have  said  that  he  was  himself  the 
discoverer,  ignoring  his  father ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  general  belief  in  England  was  that  he 
never  visited  the  new  land  himself.4     On  the  whole, 

1  "  Genere  Venetus,  sed  a  parentibus  in  Britanniam  insulam 
tendentious  ....  transportatus  pene  infans."     {Dec.  Ill,  Lib.  vi.) 

2  "  Per  dirve  il  tuto  io  naqui  a  Venetia  ma  sum  nutrito  in 
Ingelterra."     (Letter  from  Contarini  to  the  Council  of  Ten.) 

3  "  Sebastian  Cabote  tould  me  that  he  was  borne  in  Brystowe, 
and  that  at  iiii  yeare  ould  he  was  carried  with  his  father  to  Venice, 
and  so  returned  agayne  into  England  with  his  father  after  certayne 
years,  whereby  he  was  thought  to  have  been  borne  in  Venice" 
(margin  of  the  translation  of  Peter  Martyr,  ed.  1555,  fol.  255); 
Tarducci,  p.  89,  n.  Tarducci  argues  that  Cabot  cannot  have 
made  this  statement  in  the  form  given  by  Eden,  and  that  Eden 
must  have  misunderstood  him  (Di  G.  e  S.  Caboto,  Memorie, 
pp.  92,  93). 

4  In  March  i52i,when  the  great  Livery  Companies  of  London 
were  required  to  contribute  towards  the  fitting  out  of  the  ships  of 
discovery    to  be  commanded  by  Sebastian  Cabot,  the  Drapers' 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

it  seems  most  probable  that  John  Cabot  did  take 
his  young  son  with  him,  who  was  then  about  twenty- 
two  years  of  age.  There  is  also  reason  for  thinking 
that  he  was  employed  by  the  Bristol  merchants  in 
their  voyage  in  i  502,  for  he  is  said  to  have  brought 
three  men,  taken  in  Newfoundland,  to  the  King  in 
that  year.1  During  the  next  ten  years  we  hear 
nothing  of  Sebastian.  But  he  must  have  occupied 
them  in  business  connected  with  navigation  and 
cartography ;  for,  when  there  was  an  agreement 
between  Henry  VIII  and  Ferdinand  V  to  under- 
take a  combined  expedition  against  the  south  of 
France,  in  1 5 1 2,  Sebastian  Cabot  was  employed  to 
make  a  map  of  Gascony  and  Guienne.2  Lord 
Willoughby  de  Broke  had  command  of  the  troops 
which  were  landed  at  Pasages  in  June  1512,3  and 
Sebastian    accompanied    him.4       By    that    time    the 

Company  was  their  spokesman,  and  in  excusing  themselves  they 
said  :  "  Sebastian,  as  we  hear  say,  never  was  in  that  land  himself, 
but  he  makes  reports  of  many  things  as  he  hath  heard  his  father 
and  other  men  speke  in  tymes  past."  {Warden's  Account  of  the 
Drapers'  Company  MSS.,  vol.  vii,  fo.  87,  first  made  known  by  W. 
Herbert  in  his  History  of  the  Twelve  Great  Livery  Companies  of 
London,  1837,  i,  p.  410.)     See  Harrisse,  p.  29. 

1  Stow's  Chronicle  (1580),  p.  875,  said  to  be  quoted  from 
Fabyan.  But  no  such  passage  occurs  in  any  printed  edition 
of  Fabyan.  See  also  Hakluyt's  Divers  Voyages  (Hakluyt 
Society's  ed.,  p.   23). 

2  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  H.  VLLL  {Dom.  and  For.),  ii, 
Pt.  11,  p.  1456. 

3  Rymer,  xii,  297  ;  Herbert's  Hetiry  VLLL,  p.  20.  For  Lord 
Willoughby,  see  Dugdates  Baronage,  Pt.  11,  p.  88. 

4  MSS.  Mu  noz  Coll.,  t.  xc,  foi.  109,  verso,  quoted  by  Harrisse, 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

younger  Cabot  must  have  become  a  draughtsman 
of  some  note,  for  King  Ferdinand  applied  to  Lord 
Willoughby  for  his  services,  and,  on  September 
13th,  1 5 12,  gave  him  the  appointment  of  a  captain, 
with  a  salary  of  50,000  marks.1  In  March  15 14  it 
had  been  arranged  that  he  should  undertake  a  voy- 
age of  discovery  in  the  Spanish  service,  and  in  1 5 1 5 
he  was  appointed  a  pilot.  He  married  a  Spaniard 
named  Catalina  Medrano,2  and  it  was  at  this  time 
that  he  became  acquainted  with  Peter  Martyr,  who 
wrote  :  "  Familiarem  habeo  domi  Cabottum  ipsum, 
et  contubernalem  interdum"—"  Cabot  is  my  very 
frend  whom  I  use  familiarlye,  and  delyte  to  have 
hym  sometymes  keepe  my  company  in  my  owne 
house."3 

On  the  death  of  King  Ferdinand  in  15 16,  Sebas- 
tian Cabot  went  to  England  with  his  wife  and 
daughter  Elizabeth,  and  he  appears  to  have  re- 
mained there  during  the  rule  of  Cardinal  Cisneros, 
although  he  was  still  in  the  Spanish  service.  He  is 
said  to  have  been  concerned  in  the  equipment  of  an 
expedition  for  Henry  VIII  in  1 5 1 7,  which  is  alleged 
to  have  "  taken  none  effect"  owing  to  the  "  faint 
heart"  of  one  Sir  Thomas  Perte.4     But  as  Cabot  was 

1  Herrera,  Dec.  I,  Lib.  ix,  cap.  13;  Dec.  II,  Lib.  i,  cap.  12. 

2  Letter  cited  by  Navarrete,  Bib.  Mar.,  ii,  698. 

3  De  Rebus  Oceanicis  et  Orbe  Novo,  Dec.  Ill,  Lib.  vi,  p.  232 
(ed.  Paris,  1587);  Ederis  trans.,  Willes  ed.,  f.  125. 

4  This  circumstance  is  mentioned  by  Eden.  The  voyage  of 
15 1 7  is  not  mentioned  by  any  other  writer.  Eden's  work,  pub- 
lished in  1553,  is  entitled,  A  treaty se  of  the  Newe  India  after  the 
description  of  Sebastian  Munster  in  his  book  of  Universal  Cosmo- 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

then  in  the  Spanish  service,  and  as  he  declined 
similar  employment  in  15 19  on  that  very  ground,1 
there  must  be  some  mistake.  He  may  have  given 
advice,  but  nothing  more  ;  and  at  this  very  time  he 
was  engaged  in  an  intrigue  with  a  Venetian  friar 
named  Stragliano  Collona,  proposing  to  leave  both 
Spain  and  England  in  the  lurch,  and  to  devise  a 
plan  by  which  Venice  should  secure  all  the  benefits 
to  be  derived  from  the  northern  voyages.  His  own 
words  are  plain  enough  as  regards  England.  He 
said:  "  As  by  serving  the  King  of  England  I  should 
not  be  able  to  serve  my  country,  I  wrote  to  the 
Cesarean  Majesty  that  he  should  not,  on  any  account, 
give  me  permission  to  serve  the  King  of  England, 
because  there  would  be  great  injury  to  his  service."2 
In  the  face  of  all  this  it  is  not  credible  that  Sebastian 
Cabot  undertook  a  voyage  for  the  King  of  England 
in  1 5 17.  Indeed,  the  words  of  Eden,  "the  voyage 
took  none  effect",  can  only  be  explained  by  the 
assumption  that  the  Atlantic  was  not  crossed  by 
Perte's  ship.     There  was  some  intention  of  employ- 


graphia,  translated  out  of  Latin  into  English  by  Richard  Eden. 
The  passage  is  as  follows  :  "  At  such  time  as  our  sovereigne  Lord 
of  noble  memory,  King  Henry  the  Eight,  furnished  and  set  forth 
certen  shippes  under  the  governaunce  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  yet 
living,  and  one  Sir  Thomas  Perte,  whose  faynte  heart  was  the 
cause  that  the  voyage  took  none  effect"  (in  the  Dedication  to  the 
Duke  of  Northumberland ;  also  Hakluyt,  iii,  498). 

1  Contarini  to  the  Senate  of  Venice,  31st  December  1522  :  "I 
replied  that,  being  in  the  service  of  His  Majesty,  I  was  not  able 
to  undertake  it  without  permission." 

-  Letter  from  Contarini,  31st  December  1522.     See  p.  220. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVH 

ing  Sebastian  on  a  voyage  from  England  in  1521, 
but  it  came  to  nothing,  and  he  was  all  the  time 
playing  a  double  game  with  Spain  and  Venice. 

Cabot  returned  to  his  employment  at  Seville  in 
1 52 1,  having  previously  received  the  appointment  of 
Chief  Pilot.1  Yet,  while  in  the  service  of  Spain,  and 
in  possession  of  all  the  intentions  and  secrets  of  the 
Spanish  Government,  he  engaged  in  an  intrigue 
with  the  Venetian  Senate  to  transfer  his  services  to 
the  Republic.  He  employed  a  native  of  Ragusa, 
named  Hieronymo  di  Marin,  to  convey  his  pro- 
posals to  the  Council  of  Ten,  under  a  vow  of  secrecy 
sworn  on  the  sacrament.  These  proposals  appear 
to  have  been  no  less  than,  by  the  use  of  knowledge 
acquired  in  the  English  and  Spanish  services,  to 
transfer  all  the  advantages  and  benefits  of  the  con- 
templated northern  voyage  to  Venice.  The  Council 
of  Ten  heard  what  the  Ragusan  had  to  say,  rewarding 
him  with  a  present  of  20  ducats,  and  they  considered 
the  matter  to  be  of  such  importance  that  the  Vene- 
tian Ambassador  in  Spain,  Gasparo  Contarini,  was 
instructed  in  a  letter,  dated  September  27th,  1522, 
to  have  an  interview  with  Sebastian  Cabot  and 
report  the  result. 

Contarini's  account  was  that  his  first  step  in  the 
negotiation  was  successful.  He  quietly  ascertained 
whether  Sebastian  was  at  Court,  then  at  Valladolid, 
and  sent  his  secretary   to  tell  him  that  there  was 


1  Herrera,  Dec.  II,  Lib.  iii,  cap.  7.     He  was  appointed  Piloto 
Mayor  on  5th  February  1 5  t  S. 


XXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

a  letter  at  the  embassy  which  concerned  his  private 
affairs.  This  brought  the  Chief  Pilot  to  the  Vene- 
tian  Ambassador's  house,  and  Contarini  dexterously 
succeeded  in  gaining  his  confidence.  Cabot  related 
the  circumstances  of  his  employment  in  England 
and  Spain,  but  declared  that  his  desire  was  to 
benefit  his  native  country,  by  proceeding  to  Venice 
and  laying  the  details  of  his  proposal  before  the 
Council  of  Ten.  He  proposed  to  get  permission  to 
proceed  to  Venice,  on  the  plea  of  recovering  his 
mother's  jointure,  and  other  private  affairs. 

The  Venetian  Ambassador  felt  very  doubtful 
whether  the  scheme  of  Cabot  was  feasible.  Any 
expedition  fitted  out  at  Venice  could  easily  be  stopped 
by  the  King  of  Spain  in  passing  through  the  Straits 
of  Gibraltar.  The  only  other  plan  would  be  to 
equip  vessels  outside  the  Mediterranean,  on  the 
shores  of  the  Atlantic,  or  in  the  Red  Sea.  But  the 
difficulties  surrounding  any  such  projects  would  ren- 
der them  impracticable.  The  cogency  of  the  shrewd 
diplomatist's  argument  was  admitted  by  Cabot  ;  but 
he  maintained  that  his  great  knowledge  and  expe- 
rience had  suggested  to  him  other  means  by  which 
the  end  could  be  attained,  which  he  would  only 
divulge  in  person  to  the  Venetian  Council.  Conta- 
rini shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  the  interview  ended. 
But  after  an  interval  Cabot  a^ain  came  to  the  Vene- 
tian  embassy  at  Valladolid,  on  the  27th  of  December 
— St.  John's  Day.  On  this  occasion  he  did  all  he 
could  to  impress  Contarini  with  his  great  professional 
knowledge  and  skill,  discussing  many  geographical 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 

points  with  him,  and  explaining  a  method  he  had 
invented  of  finding  the  longitude  by  means  of  the 
variation  of  the  needle.  Then,  touching  on  the 
main  business,  he  confidently  asserted  that  the  Coun- 
cil of  Ten  would  be  pleased  with  the  plan  he  had 
devised,  declaring  that  he  was  ready  to  go  to  Venice 
at  his  own  expense.  He  entreated  Contarini  to 
keep  the  matter  secret,  as  his  life  depended  on  it. 

Four  days  afterwards,  on  the  31st  of  December 
1522,  the  Venetian  Ambassador,  in  a  long  and 
able  despatch,  reported  the  results  of  his  interviews 
with  Cabot;  and  on  March  7th,  1523,  he  further 
reported  that  Cabot  had  delayed  his  visit  to  Venice 
because  he  was  called  to  England  on  business,  and 
would  be  absent  for  three  months.  This  is  ex- 
plained by  an  entry  respecting  the  funeral  of  Sir 
Thomas  Lovell,  K.G.,1  from  which  it  appears  that 
Sebastian  Cabot,  Chief  Pilot  of  Spain,  came  to 
London  to  attend  at  the  obsequies  of  Sir  Thomas  in 

1  "  Expense  of  the  funeral  of  Sir  Thomas  Lovell,  K.G.,  who 
died  at  his  manor  of  Elsynge  in  Enfield,  Middlesex,  25th  May 
1524,  and  was  buried  at  Haliwell.  Item,  paide  the  18th  day  of 
February,  to  John  Godryk  of  Tory,  in  the  county  of  Cornwall, 
drap.,  in  full  satysfaccon  and  recompenses  of  his  charge,  costis,  and 
labour  conductyng  Sebastian  Cabott,  master  of  the  Pylotes  in 
Spayne,  to  London,  at  the  request  of  the  testator  by  Indenture  of 
Covenauntes,  43^.  4^/."  {Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Dom.  and  For., 
Henry  VIII,  iv,  Ft.  1,  p.  154,  No.  366),  quoted  by  Tarducci, 
p.  158,  and  Harrisse.  Sir  Thomas  Lovell  was  made  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer  for  life  in  1485,  Treasurer  of  the  Household, 
1502,  Constable  of  the  Tower,  one  of  the  executors  of  the  will 
of  Henry  VII,  and  Steward  and  Marshal  of  the  House  of  Henry 
VIII.     He  was  knighted  at  the  battle  of  Stoke,  1487. 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

1524,  in  compliance  with  a  request  in  the  will  of  the 
deceased.      Cabot   returned  to  Spain  in  the  end  of 

1524- 

Contarini  received  great  praise  from  his  Govern- 
ment for  the  way  in  which  he  had  conducted  the 
negotiations ;  but  they  fell  to  the  ground,  appa- 
rently owing  to  the  important  employment  on  which 
Cabot  was  soon  afterwards  engaged  under  the 
Spanish  Government. 

The  Conference  of  Badajoz  on  the  question  of 
the  right  to  Moluccas  between  Spain  and  Portugal 
was  opened  in  1524,  and  Sebastian  Cabot  was  em- 
ployed as  an  assessor.  The  decision  in  favour  of 
Spain  led  to  the  equipment  of  an  expedition  for  the 
discovery  of  the  isles  of  Tarshish,  Ophir,  and  the 
eastern  Catay,  of  which  Sebastian  Cabot  received 
the  command.1  It  consisted  of  three  vessels  and 
1 50  men  ;  the  two  other  ships  being  commanded  by 
Francisco  de  Rojas  and  Martin  Mendez,  with  whom 
the  Captain-General  disagreed.  Miguel  de  Rodas 
embarked  as  a  volunteer.  The  ships  sailed  in  April 
1526,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  quarrels  between 
the  leader  of  the  expedition  and  his  captains,  Cabot 
adopted  a  very  high-handed  measure.  He  beached 
the  two  captains,  Rojas  and  Mendez,  and  the  volun- 
teer Rodas,  on  the  coast  of  Brazil.  They  were 
rescued  by  a  Portuguese  ship,  and  trouble  was  thus 
prepared  for  the  Venetian  on  his  return.      Entering 


1  Cabot  laid  aside  a  portion  of  his  pay  for  the  maintenance  of 
his  wife,  Catalina  Medrano,  during  his  absence.  (Munoz  MSS., 
índios,  1524-26,  77,  Est  23  gr.,  foi.  165,  verso,  quoted  by  Harrisse, 

1>-  355-) 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 

the  river  Plate,  Cabot  explored  the  river  Parana  to 
its  junction  with  the  Paraguay,  and  established  two 
forts.  But  he  was  eventually  attacked  by  an  over- 
whelming force  of  natives,  one  of  his  forts  was  carried 
by  assault,  and  he  was  obliged  to  abandon  the 
enterprise.1  He  returned  to  Spain  in  August  1530, 
and  had  to  meet  serious  charges  respecting  his 
treatment  of  Mendez  and  Rojas.  On  February  1st, 
1532,  he  was  condemned  to  two  years  of  exile  at 
Oran  for  excesses  committed  during  the  expedition2 ; 
but  the  Emperor  pardoned  him  after  a  year,  and  he 
was  again  at  Seville  in  June  1533.3 

Sebastian  Cabot  must  have  been  a  man  of  great 
ability  and  address,  while  his  knowledge  and  experi- 
ence made  his  services  very  valuable.  It  is  evident, 
from  his  restoration  to  favour,  after  returning-  from 
his  disastrous  expedition,  that  the  Government  of 
Charles  V  entertained  a  high  opinion  of  his  useful- 
ness. He  remained  Chief  Pilot  of  Spain  from  1533 
to  1547,  and  it  must  have  been  at  this  time  that  the 
guest,  to  whose  conversation  Ramusio  listened  at 
the  table  of  Hieronimus  Fracastor,  visited  Cabot  at 
Seville.      Then  the  old  navigator,  who  had  reached 

1  Herrera,  Dec.  Ill,  Lib.  be,  cap.  3  ;  Dec.  IV,  Lib.  viii,  cap. 
1 1  ;   Gomara,  ch.  lxxxix. 

2  Navarrete,  Bib.  Mar.,  ii,  699. 

3  In  Tune  1533,  in  a  letter  to  Juan  de  Samano,  the  Emperor's 
secretary,  Cabot  excused  himself  for  not  having  finished  a  map, 
owing  to  the  death  of  his  daughter  and  the  illness  of  his  wife 
{Munoz  MSS.,  vol.  lxxix,  fo.  287,  quoted  by  Harrisse  ;  and  Tar- 
ducci,  p.  404).  In  the  will  of  William  Mychell,  chaplain,  in  15 16, 
there  is  a  legacy  of  3*.  4I.  to  Cabot's  daughter  Elizabeth. 


XXX11  INTRODUCTION. 

the  age  of  seventy,  professed  to  be  anxious  to  rest 
from  active  service,  "  after  having  instructed  so  many 
practical  and  valiant  young  seamen,  through  whose 
forwardness  I  do  rejoice  in  the  fruit  of  my  labours. 
So  I  rest  with  the  charge  of  this  office  as  you  see." 
The  guest  added  that,  among  other  things,  Cabot 
showed  him  a  great  mappe-monde,  illustrating  the 
special  navigations  as  well  of  the  Portuguese  as  of 
the  Spaniards.  If  this  was  the  mappe-monde  that 
was  discovered  lately,  it  bore  the  following  title  : 
"  Sebastian  Cabot,  Captain  and  Pilot  Major  to  his 
Cesarean  and  Catholic  Majesty  the  Emperor  Charles 
V  of  that  name,  the  King  our  Lord,  made  this 
figure  extended  on  a  plane,  in  the  year  of  the  birth 
of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  1544."  It  is  a  coloured 
map  drawn  on  an  ellipse,  4^  feet  long  by  3^  wide, 
having  a  series  of  descriptive  legends,  in  Latin  and 
Spanish,  on  the  right  and  left.  It  is  a  compilation 
showing  the  then  recent  discovery  of  the  Gulf  of 
St.  Lawrence  by  Jacques  Cartier.  Newfoundland 
is  represented  as  a  group  of  islands.  The  work 
done  by  John  Cabot,  in  his  first  voyage,  is  indicated 
by  the  Prima  Tierra  Vista,  at  the  north  end  of 
Cape  Breton,1  and  the  I.  de  S.  Juan  in  the  place  of 
the  modern  Magdalen  Islands.      Along  the  coast  of 


1  On  the  map  of  Michael  Lok,  given  in  Hakluyfs  Divers 
Voyages,  with  the  relation  of  Yerazzano,  the  words  "J.  Gabot, 
1497",  are  written  over  the  land  ending  with  the  north  point  of 
Cape  Breton.  But  the  island  "S.  Johan"  is  placed  to  the  south, 
and  not  in  the  position  of  the  Magdalen  Islands,  as  in  the  map  of 
Sebastian  Cabot. 


N°.  1 7      Stbaflian  Caboto capitan.y  piloto  mayor  dela  S.c^< 
20  cfla  Bgura  txtenfi  tn  piano, anno  del  nafom'  de  nrõ Í 


PART   OF   THE    MAP 

After  Harrisse's  "  Jean  et  Sebastian  Cabot,"  r< 


335  340  3+A  3Í0  35! 


,perador  don  Cariosquinto  deflc  nombre.y  Rty  nueQro  fennor  hi 
fuChriftode  u.n.xiun. annas 


SEBASTIAN    CABOT   (1544) 


hv  nriR  half,  and  renrinted  bv  the  Collotype  process. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXX  111 

Labrador  is  written  Costa  d  cl  hues  norueste.  San 
Brandon  Isle  retains  its  place  in  the  middle  of  the 
Atlantic.  From  Cape  Breton  a  coast-line  is  made 
to  run  west  and  south,  resembling-  that  shown  as 
discovered  by  the  English,  on  the  map  of  Juan  de 
la  Cosa  in  1500.  But  the  names  along  the  coast  of 
North  America  do  not  agree  with  those  on  the  map 
of  Juan  de  la  Cosa. 

The  great  value  of  the  1 544  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot 
is  that  it  fixes  the  landfall  of  his  father's  first  voyage. 
On  this  point  he  is  the  highest  authority,  and  his 
evidence  is  quite  conclusive  if  it  was  given  in  good 
faith.  Mr.  Harrisse  argues  that  it  was  not  «wen  in 
good  faith,  but  not,  I  think,  on  sufficient  grounds. 
He  first  endeavours  to  show  that  while  Cabot  was  at 
the  head  of  the  Hydrographic  Department  at  Seville, 
and  responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  the  charts,  the 
landfall  in  48o  was  never  shown,  and  the  three  maps 
of  that  period,  that  survive,  all  place  the  English 
discoveries  between  56"  and  6o°.  Mr.  Harrisse 
therefore  infers  that  Cabot  did  not  then  claim  dis- 
coveries further  south.  But  the  answer  to  this  is 
that  he  did  make  such  claim.  He  told  the  guest  in 
Ramusio,  Peter  Martyr,  and  everyone  he  met,  that 
he  discovered  all  the  coast  as  far  south  as  Florida. 
It  is  true  that,  after  the  map  of  La  Cosa  in  1500, 
where  the  English  southern  discoveries  are  fully 
portrayed,  they  do  not  appear  on  Spanish  maps  ; 
but  the  statements  of  Sebastian  Cabot  prove  that 
this  cannot  have  been  with  his  willing  concurrence. 

d 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

The  omission  must  have  been  due  to  some  other 
cause.  The  coast  shown  in  6o°  N.  on  the  Ribero 
and  other  maps  of  course  refer  to  John  Cabot's 
second,  not  to  his  first  voyage,  when  he  reached 
Cape  Breton. 

Mr.  Harrisse  then  justifies  his  hypothesis  that 
Sebastian  Cabot  placed  his  landfall  at  Cape  Breton, 
knowing  well  that  it  was  really  several  hundred 
miles  further  north,  by  pointing  out  his  constant 
mendacity  and  treason,  and  that  such  underhand 
dealings  were  in  keeping  with  his  natural  disposition. 
But  this  is  not  sufficient  without  a  motive,  and  the 
motive  suggested  by  Mr.  Harrisse  seems  quite  in- 
adequate. He  says  that  the  explorations  of  Jacques 
Cartier,  from  1534  to  1543,  had  brought  to  light 
a  valuable  region  round  Cape  Breton,  suitable  for 
colonies ;  and  that  Sebastian  placed  the  landfall 
there  in  1544  as  a  suggestion  of  British  claims, 
a  declaration  that  the  region  of  the  Gulf  of  St.  Law- 
rence belonged  to  England,  and  a  bid  for  favour, 
He  went  to  England  three  years  afterwards.  But 
it  would  have  been  useless  and  unnecessary,  as  well 
as  dangerous,  to  falsify  an  official  Spanish  map  with 
this  object ;  for  the  English  Government  possessed 
his  father's  maps,  and  he  had  all  along  claimed  the 
discovery,  not  only  of  this  part,  but  of  the  whole 
coast  as  far  as  Florida.  We  may  therefore  con- 
clude that,  as  Sebastian  Cabot  had  no  motive 
for  falsifying  his  map,  he  did  not  do  so ;  and 
that    the    "  Prima    Terra   Vista",  where    he    placed 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

it,  is  the   true    landfall  of  John  Cabot   on  his  first 
voyage.1 

On  November  28th,  1545,  Sebastian  Cabot  was 
charged,  in  conjunction  with  Pedro  Mexia,  Alonso 
Chaves,  and  Diego  Gutierrez,  to  examine  and  report 
upon  the  new  work  on  navigation  by  Pedro  de 
Medina,  entitled  Arte  de  Navegar?  This  is  the 
last  recorded  duty  performed  by  Cabot  in  Spain. 
Two  years  afterwards  he  left  that  country  and  arrived 
in  England.  The  old  man's  action  must  have  been 
secret,  and  in  the  nature  of  a  flight,  for  he  resigned 
neither  his  pension  nor  his  appointment  before  his 
departure.  It  was  a  betrayal,  for  he  took  with  him 
a  knowledge  of  all  the  secret  counsels  and  intentions 
of  the  Spanish  Government,  acquired  during  an 
official  career  extending  over  a  period  of  more  than 

1  The  mappe  monde  of  Sebastian  Cabot  is  mentioned  by 
Sanuto,  Ortelius,  Hukluyt,  Purchas,  and  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert. 
Hakluyt,  Purchas,  and  Gilbert  mention  "  the  great  map  in  Her 
Majesty's  privy  gallery  at  Whitehall,  cut  by  Clement  Adams";  and 
Hakluyt  gives  the  legend  No.  8  from  it,  referring  to  the  voyage  of 
John  Cabot.  The  map  of  Adams  must,  therefore,  have  been  a 
copy  of  the  1544  map  of  Sebastian.  Willes  mentions  another 
copy,  "  Cabot's  table  which  the  Earl  of  Bedford  hath  at  Cheynies" 
{Eden,  1577,  f.  232).     These  maps  have  disappeared. 

The  only  existing  copy  of  the  map  by  Sebastian  Cabot  was 
found  in  the  house  of  a  curate  in  Bavaria  by  Dr.  Martius,  Secre- 
tary of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Munich.  It  was  bought  from 
M.  de  Heunin  in  1844  for  400  francs,  and  is  now  in  the  Biblio- 
thèque  Nationale  at  Paris.  Jomard  has  reproduced  it,  but  with- 
out the  legends. 

2  Lista  de  la  Esposicion  Americanista  B.  52,  referred  to  by 
Tarducci,  p.  280,  n. 

d2 


XXXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

thirty  years.  The  actual  cause  for  this  flight  and 
betrayal  is  unknown.  That  the  flight  was  arranged 
in  concert  with  the  English  Privy  Council  is  made 
clear  by  a  warrant  of  ^ioo  paid  to  one  Mr.  Peck- 
ham,  on  October  9th,  1547,  for  transporting  "one 
Cabot,  a  Pilot,  to  come  out  of  Hispain,  to  serve  and 
inhabit  in  England". 

When  Sebastian  Cabot  came  to  England,  in  the 
beoinnine  of  the  reiori  of  Edward  VI,  he  was  at 
least  seventy-three  years  of  age.  On  January  6th, 
1548,  he  was  granted  a  pension  of  ^166  13.?.  4^. 
(250  marks)  a  year,1  with  the  duties,  though  not  the 
title,  of  Chief  Pilot  of  England.  The  Emperor 
Charles  V,  throiiQ-h  the  English  Ambassadors  at 
Brussels,  Sir  Thomas  Cheyne  and  Sir  Philip  Hoby, 
requested  that  Cabot  might  be  sent  back,  "  forasmuch 
as  he  cannot  stand  the  King  your  Master  in  any 
great  stead,  seeing  he  hath  small  practice  in  these 
seas,  and  is  a  very  necessary  man  for  the  Emperor, 
whose  servant  he  is,  and  hath  a  pension  of  him." 
The  despatch  containing  this  request  was  dated  at 
Brussels  on  November  25th,  1549.2  The  reply,  on 
April  2 1st,  1550,  was  that  Sebastian  Cabot  refused 
to  return  to  Spain,  and  that,  being  King  Edward's 
subject,  he  could  not  be  compelled  to  go  against  his 
will.3  In  the  following  year  Cabot  received  ^200 
from   Edward  VI,  by  Council  warrant,  "by  way  of 

1  Hakluyt. 

2  Strype's  Ecclesiastical  Memorials  >  vol.  ii,  Pt.  1,  p.  296  (Oxford, 
1822). 

3  Harleian  MS.  525,  f.  9  ;  quoted  by  Harrisse. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV11 

the  King's  Majesty's  reward",1  and  was  evidently  in 
high  favour.  Charles  V  made  one  more  effort  to 
recover  his  Chief  Pilot,  by  writing  to  his  cousin 
Queen  Mary  on  the  subject,  from  Mons,  on  the  9th 
of  September  1553,  but  without  effect.2 

Meanwhile,  Cabot  had  again  opened  communi- 
cations with  the  Venetian  Government,  through 
Giacomo  Soranzo,  their  Ambassador  in  London. 
His  proposal  was  to  conduct  a  Venetian  fleet  to 
Cathay  through  the  strait  of  which  he  pretended  to 
have  the  secret3 ;  and  the  same  excuse  for  asking 
permission  to  go  to  Venice,  on  urgent  private  affairs, 
was  to  be  adopted  as  had  been  proposed  in  the 
negotiation  with  Contarini  in  1522.  It  completely 
deceived  Dr.  Peter  Vannes,  the  English  Ambassador 
at  Venice,  who,  in  a  despatch  dated  September  12th, 
1 55 1,  reported  to  the  Council  the  steps  that  had 
been  taken  to  further  Cabot's  business,  and  the 
goodwill  of  the  Seigniory.4  The  contemporaries  of 
the  astute  old  pilot  had  no  suspicion  of  the  intrigues 
revealed  to  posterity  by  the  publication  of  the  Vene- 


1  Strype,  Ecc.  Mem.,  ii,  Pt.  11,  pp.  76  and  217. 
-   Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Foreign),    1553-58,    t.    i,    No.    31, 
p.  10.     Edward  VI  died  on  July  6th,  1553. 

3  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Rawdon  Brown,  t.  v,  No.  711, 
p.  264.  The  despatch  of  Soranzo  does  not  exist,  but  we  have  the 
reply  from  the  Council  of  Ten. 

4  Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Foreign),  1861,  p.  171,  No.  444. 
Dr.  Vannes  says  that  Ramusio,  the  Hakluyt  of  Italy,  and  then  one 
of  the  secretaries  of  the  Seigniory,  was  acting  as  Cabot's  agent  at 
this  time. 


XXXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

tian  State  Papers  ;  but  this  second  negotiation  ended 
in  nothing.1 

Cabot  was  employed  to  draw  up  instructions  for 
the  voyage  of  Willoughby  and  Chancellor  in  May 
1553,2  and,  when  the  Company  of  Merchant  Adven- 
turers was  incorporated  on  February  26th,  1555,  he 
was  named  Governor  for  life.3  In  this  capacity  he 
superintended  the  equipment  of  the  Searchthrift, 
under  the  command  of  Stephen  Burrough,  coming 
down  to  Gravesend  to  take  leave  of  that  gallant 
explorer  on  April  27th,  1556,  and  taking  part  in  the 
feasting  and  dancing  on  that  occasion.4 

On  the  27th  of  May  1557  Sebastian  Cabot  resigned 
his  pension,  and  on  the  29th  one  half  of  it  was 
restored  to  him,  and  the  other  half  was  granted  to 
one  William  Worthington,  apparently  as  a  colleague 
appointed  in  consequence  of  Cabot's  great  age.5  He 
was  at  least  eighty-three.  This  is  the  last  official 
mention  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  who  probably  died  the 
same  year. 

There  is  evidence  that  Sebastian  Cabot  gave 
close  attention  to  questions  relating  to  the  variation 
of  the  compass.      In  the  geography  of  Livio  Sanuto, 

1  Tarducci  offers  some  excuses  for  the  conduct  of  Cabot,  in 
having  entered  upon  these  intrigues  with  Venice,  while  he  was  a 
servant  of  the  Spanish  and  English  Governments  {Tarducci,  p.  157 
and  p.  291),  but  they  are  not  satisfactory. 

2  Hak/uyt,  i,  226. 

3  Strype,  Ecc.  Mem.,  iii,  Pt.  1,  p.  320;  Hak/uyt,  i,  p.  267. 

4  Hak/uyt,  i,  p.  274. 

5  Rymer,  xv,  466  ;  Bidd/e,  p.  217.  Philip  arrived  in  London 
on  May  20th,  1557. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 

that  learned  Italian  says  that,  many  years  before  the 
period  at  which  he  wrote,  Guido  Gianetti  da  Fano 
''informed  him  that  Sebastian  Cabot  was  the  dis- 
coverer of  that  secret  of  the  variation  of  the  needle 
which  he  then  explained  to  the  most  serene  King-  of 
England  (Edward  VI),  near  to  whom  (but  then  en- 
gaged in  other  affairs)  this  Gianetti  was  most  honour- 
ably employed  ;  and  he  also  demonstrated  how  much 
this  variation  was,  and  that  it  was  not  the  same  in 
everyplace."1  In  1522,  Cabot  had  told  the  Vene- 
tian Ambassador  Contarini  "  of  a  method  he  had 
observed  of  finding  the  distance  between  two  places 
east  and  west  of  each  other  by  means  of  the  needle, 
a  beautiful  discovery,  never  observed  by  any  one 
else".2  This  fallacy,  that  the  longitude  could  be 
found  by  observing  the  variation  at  two  places,  was 
subsequently  adopted  by  Plancius,  wTho  even  con- 
structed an  instrument  for  observing  it.  The  idea 
haunted  the  mind  of  Cabot  to  his  dying  day  ;  but  it 
was  not  original,  being  the  conception  of  Jacob 
Besson.3  Eden  mentions  that  Cabot  continued  to 
talk  of  a  divine  revelation  to  him  of  a  new  and 
infallible  method  of  finding  the  longitude,  which  he 
was  not  permitted  to  disclose  to  any  mortal,  even 
on  his  death-bed.  He  adds  :  "  I  thinke  the  goode 
old  man,  in  that  extreme  age,  somewThat  doted,  and 
had  not  yet,   even  in  the  article  of  death,   utterly 

1  Geographia,  Livio  Sanuto  (Venezia,  1588),  Lib.  i,  f.  2  ;  Biddle, 
p.  177,  quoted  by  Harnsse. 

2  Contarini,  ubi  sup, 

8  Besson,  La  Cosmolabe  (Paris,  4to),  1567,  quoted  by  Harrisse. 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

shaken  off  all  worldlye  vayne  glorie."1  Eden  was 
present  at  Cabot's  death,  but  does  not  mention 
when  or  where  it  took  place,  or  where  he  was 
buried. 

On  the  death  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  all  his  maps 
and  papers  came  into  the  possession  of  his  colleague, 
William  Worthington.  Hakluyt,  writing  in  1 582,2 
said  that  "shortly,  God  willing,  shall  come  out  in 
print  all  his  (Sebastian  Cabot's)  own  mappes  and 
discourses,  drawne  and  written  by  himselfe,  which 
are  in  the  custodie  of  the  worshipful  Master  William 
Worthington,  one  of  Her  Majesty's  Pensioners,  who 
(because  so  worthie  monuments  should  not  be  buried 
in  perpetual  oblivion)  is  very  willing  to  suffer  them 
to  be  overseene,  and  published  in  as  good  order  as 
may  be,  to  the  encouragement  and  benefite  of  our 
countrymen."      But  this  was  never  done.3 

1  "  Epistle  Dedicatory.  A  very  necessarie  and  profitable  book 
concerning  navigation,  compiled  in  Latin  by  Joannes  Taisnen/s,  a 
publik  Professor  in  Rome,  Ferraria,  and  other  Universities  in 
Italie,  named  a  Treatise  of  continual  motions.  Translated  into 
English  by  Richard  Eden"  (London,  Rd.  Jugge).      Biddk,  p.  222. 

2  Divers  Voyages,  p.  26  (Hakluyt  Society's  ed.).  Worth- 
ington was  one  of  the  ordinary  gentlemen  and  pensioners  of 
Edward  VI,  and  "  bailiff  and  collector  of  the  rents  and  revenues 
of  all  the  manors,  messuages,  and  hereditaments  within  the  city  of 
London  and  county  of  Middlesex  which  did  belong  to  colleges, 
guilds,  fraternities,  or  free  chapels"  (Strype,  Ecc.  Mem.,  vol.  ii, 
Ft.  11,  p.  234).  A  pardon  was  granted  to  him,  being  indebted  to 
the  King  ^392  \os.  3d.,  his  servant  having  run  away  with  the 
money.  He  seems  to  have  been  employed  in  France  and  Scot- 
land. 

3  Biddle  suggested  that  Worthington  handed  over  the  papers  of 


INTRODUCTION.  xll 

The  consideration  of  all  the  original  documents 
relating  to  Sebastian  Cabot  do  not  leave  a  pleasant 
impression  on  the  mind.  His  statements  about  his 
birth,  made  to  suit  his  purpose  at  the  moment,  show 
that  he  was  rather  unscrupulous  ;  while  his  recorded 
assertions  that  all  the  credit  of  his  father's  dis- 
coveries was  due  to  himself,  if  correctly  repeated, 
display  an  amount  of  vanity  and  an  absence  of  filial 
affection,  combined  with  a  disregard  for  truth,  which 
are  repelling.  He  is  said  to  have  told  the  guest, 
quoted  by  Ramusio,  that  his  father  had  died  at  the 
time  when  the  news  of  the  discovery  of  Columbus 
arrived  ;  and  that  it  was  he,  Sebastian,  who  made 
the  proposal  to  Henry  VII,  and  fitted  out  the  ships 
in  1497!  In  the  conversations  repeated  by  Peter 
Martyr,  by  Ramusio,  by  Gomara,  and  Galvano, 
the  father  is  never  mentioned,  and  the  reader 
is  made  to  suppose  that  Sebastian  alone  was  the 
discoverer.  The  same  impression  was  received  by 
writers  in  England.  Fabyan,  repeated  by  Stow, 
gives  Sebastian,  and  not  John,  as  the  name  of  the 
explorer,  and  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  was  even  more 
completely  deceived,  after  a  perusal  of  Ramusio. 
In  his  Discourse  of  a  New  Passage  to  Cataia,  he 
writes  as  if  John  Cabot  had  never  existed,  and  as  if 
Sebastian  had  commanded  the  expeditions.  This 
false  impression  was  often  repeated,  and  when   Mr. 


Cabot  to  Philip  II,  when  he  was  in  England  in  1557.  But  this 
appears  to  be  disproved  by  the  fact  that  they  were  still  in  Worth- 
ington's  possession  in  1582. 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

Biddle1  wrote  his  Memoir  on  Sebastian  Cabot,  he 
reached  the  climax  of  unintentional  injustice  by 
writing  of  the  father  as  merely  an  old  merchant, 
who  never  even  went  to  sea.  The  truth  was  re- 
vealed by  the  discovery  of  the  letters  of  the  Italian 
news-writers,  and  of  the  Spanish  despatches.  It  is 
true  that  on  Legend  No.  8  of  his  map  Sebastian 
mentions  his  father  coupled  with  himself — "this 
land  was  discovered  by  Joan  Caboto,  Venetian,  and 
Sebastian  Caboto  his  son" — but  this  rather  confirms 
the  painful  impression  caused  by  the  silence  respect- 
ing his  father  elsewhere.  For  John  Cabot  was 
a  great  navigator  of  long  experience,  advanced  in 
years,  and  in  sole  command  of  the  expeditions  ; 
while  Sebastian,  if  he  went  with  him  at  all,  which  is 
not  certain,  was  then  a  lad  of  twenty-two.  Fer- 
nando Columbus  might  as  well  have  coupled  his 
name  with  that  of  his  illustrious  father  when  he 
wrote  the  account  of  the  fourth  voyage.  But  that 
was  the  last  thing  Fernando  would  have  done. 
The  contrast  is  striking  between  the  filial  piety  of 
the  son  of  Columbus,  and  the  absence  of  feeling  for 
the  memory  and  fame  of  his  father  on  the  part  of 
the  son  of  John  Cabot. 


1  A  Memoir  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  without  author's  name  (Lon- 
don, 1831),  p.  50.  John  Biddle  was  an  eminent  American  jurist 
and  statesman  of  Pittsburg,  Pennsylvania.  He  was  born  in  1795, 
and  died  in  1847.  He  purchased  the  well-known  portrait  of 
Sebastian  Cabot  as  an  old  man,  which  was  burnt  with  his  house  at 
Pittsburg.  But  a  good  copy  had  been  made,  now  belonging  to 
the  New  York  Historical  Society. 


INTRODUCTION.  xIÍÍÍ 

It  is  fair,  however,  to  bear  in  mind  that  we  have 
the  statements  of  Sebastian  at  second-hand.  It  is 
possible  that  he  was  not  silent  respecting  the  ser- 
vices of  his  father,  and  that  those  who  repeated  the 
conversations  omitted  to  mention  one  who  would 
not  have  the  same  interest  for  them  as  the  living- 
explorer  with  whom  they  were  talking. 

A  still  more  unfavourable  impression  is  caused  by 
a  perusal  of  the  correspondence  of  Contarini  and 
Soranzo.  Sebastian  Cabot,  for  his  own  ends,  was 
ready  to  enter  upon  secret  negotiations  with  another 
country  at  a  time  when  he  was  in  the  pay  and 
employment  of  Spain  or  England,  and  was  trusted 
by  his  employers.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  his 
ability  and  knowledge.  He  would  not  have  re- 
tained his  employments  so  long,  and  his  services 
would  not  have  been  so  highly  valued,  both  by 
Charles  V  and  by  the  English  Privy  Council,  if  he 
had  not  possessed  those  qualities  in  an  eminent 
degree.  But  the  truth,  as  revealed  by  the  docu- 
ments that  have  been  preserved,  obliges  us  to  add 
that  Sebastian  Cabot  appears  to  have  been  wanting 
in  filial  affection,  that  his  veracity  is  more  than 
doubtful,  that  he  had  no  feeling  of  loyalty  to  his 
employers,  and  that  he  was  ready,  without  scruple, 
to  sacrifice  them  for  his  own  ends.  There  may  be 
some  mitigation  in  the  fact  that  all  his  intrigues 
appear  to  have  been  for  the  benefit  of  his  native 
country.  His  cunning  and  shrewdness  secured  his 
safety,  and  his  double  dealing  was  unknown.  He 
reached  an   honoured  and  respected  old   age,  after 


xliv  INTRODUCTION. 

a  long  and  prosperous  career ;  but  he  owed  his 
success  to  his  good  fortune  and  to  the  secrecy  in 
which  his  dealings  were  shrouded,  not  to  his  probity 
and  good  faith.  John  Cabot  was  the  great  navigator, 
the  explorer  and  pioneer  who  lighted  English  enter- 
prise across  the  Atlantic.  His  son  Sebastian  tried 
to  get  the  credit  of  his  father's  work,  and  for  a  time 
succeeded  ;  but  in  the  end  the  truth  has  prevailed. 
While  the  son  of  Columbus  devoted  his  life  to  the 
pious  work  of  preserving  his  father's  fame,  the  son 
of  Cabot  so  obscured  the  story  of  his  father's 
discoveries  that  the  merit  of  them  was  attributed 
to  himself,  and  it  has  taken  centuries  of  research  to 
recover  the  truth,  and  to  place  John  Cabot  in  his 
rightful  position.  He  was  second  only  to  his  illus- 
trious countryman  as  a  discoverer,  and  his  place  is 
in  the  forefront  of  the  van  of  the  long-  and  o-lorious 
roll  of  leaders  of  English  maritime  enterprise. 


IV. — Gaspar  Corte- Real. 

The  voyages  of  Gaspar  Corte- Real  were  the 
direct  consequence  of  the  first  voyage  of  Columbus. 
But  while  John  Cabot,  fully  imbued  with  the  ideas 
of  his  great  countryman,  sailed  in  quest  of  the  king- 
dom of  the  Grand  Kaan  and  of  Cipango,  the  Portu- 
guese had  the  more  practical  object  of  discovering 
what  unknown  lands  to  the  westward  were  within 
their  sphere  of  action.  By  the  Treaty  of  Tordesillas 
between  Spain   and   Portugal)  signed   on    June    ;th. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 

1494,  the  Papal  line  of  demarcation  was  extended  to 
eleven  hundred  and  thirteen  miles  (370  leagues)  west 
of  the  Cape  Verde  Islands.1  There  might  well  be 
valuable  unknown  lands  within  those  limits. 

Gaspar  Corte- Real,  the  third  and  youngest  son  of 
a  good  family  in  Algarve,  was  born  in  about  1450. 
His  father,  João  Vaz  Corte-Real,  became  Captain 
Donative  of  the  islands  of  Terceira  and  St.  George, 
in  the  Azores,  in  1474,  and  died  at  Angra,  in  Ter- 
ceira, in  July  1496.  Next  to  nothing  is  known  of 
the  early  life  of  Gaspar,  but  he  was  Lieutenant  for 
his  family  in  Terceira  in  1497  ;  and  in  May  1500 
he  received  letters  patent  from  Manoel,  King  of 
Portugal,  to  lead  an  expedition  of  discovery. 

He  fitted  out  two  ships  at  the  joint  expense  of 
himself  and  his  next  brother,  Miguel,2  and  sailed  in 
the  spring  of  1500,  from  Lisbon,  according  to 
Damian  de  Goes,  or  from  Terceira,  according  to 
Galvão. 

The  authorities  for  the  voyages  of  Corte-Real  are 
a  passage  in  the  Chronicle  of  King  Manoel,  by 
Damian  de  Goes ;  another  in  the  "  Tratado"  of 
Antonio  Galvão  ;  three  news-letters  from  Italians 
who  were  at  Lisbon  when  the  ships  returned,  and 
an  important  map  prepared  to  show  the  new  dis- 
coveries. Two  of  the  letters  are  from  Pietro  Pas- 
qualigo,  the  Ambassador  from  Venice,    one    to  the 

1  The  first  line,  by  the  Bull  of  May  4th,  1493,  was  drawn   100 
leagues  west  from  the  Cape  Verde  Islands. 

2  Galvão  says  that  it  was  at  his  own  sole  expense,  but  other 
documents  prove  that  his  brother  shared  the  cost. 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Seigneury,  and  the  other  to  his  brothers.1  The 
other  is  from  an  Italian  named  Alberto  Cantino  to 
Hercules  d'Este,  Duke  of  Ferrara.2  The  Society 
is  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Henry  Harrisse 
for  permission  to  have  these  letters  translated  from 
the  texts  in  his  important  work,  Les  Corte-Real  et 
leurs  voyages  au  Nouveau  Monde.  Cantino  was 
commissioned  by  the  Duke  of  Ferrara  to  have  a 
map  of  the  world  drawn  at  Lisbon,  to  show  the  dis- 
coveries of  Corte-Real.  It  was  executed  during  the 
year  1502,  with  the  title,  ''Nautical  Chart  for  the 
islands  newly  found  in  the  region  of  India";  and  was 
duly  transmitted  to  Ferrara.  Its  subsequent  history 
is  curious.  The  Pope  seized  the  duchy  of  Ferrara 
in  1592,  and  the  map  was  taken  to  Modena,  where 
one  of  the  degenerate  descendants  of  Duke  Hercules 
had  it  pasted  on  the  folds  of  a  common  screen. 
When  the  mob  broke  into  the  palace  at  Modena  in 
1859,  this  screen  was  stolen,  and  some  years  after- 
wards Signor  Boni,  the  librarian  of  the  D'Este 
Library,  found  it  in  a  pork  butcher's  shop.  He 
bought  it,  and  the  precious  map  is  now  preserved  in 
that  library  at  Modena.  Mr.  Harrisse,  to  whom 
geographical  science  is  deeply  indebted  for  so  many 


1  The  letter  of  Pasqualigo  to  his  brothers  has  long  been  known, 
as  it  was  published  in  the  Paesi  novamente  retrovati  in  1507. 
The  one  to  the  Seigneury  is  from  a  manuscript  in  the  Marcian 
Library  at  Venice,  published  in  the  Diarii  di  Marino  Samtto 
in  1880-81. 

2  From  the  State  Archives  at  Modena ;  and  first  published  in 
the  work  of  Mr.  Harrisse  on  the  Corte-Reales,  p.  204. 


INTRODUCTION.  xl 


Vil 


other  things,  published  a  fine  facsimile  of  the  Cantino 
map  in  1883. 

The  Cantino  map  is  drawn  on  vellum,  richly- 
coloured  and  gilt,  and  measures  3  feet  2  inches  long 
by  3  feet  5  inches.  It  is  a  plane  chart,  the  lengths 
of  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude  being  equal 
throughout.  The  draughtsman  employed  by  Cantino, 
in  order  to  execute  his  commission,  must  have  ap- 
plied to  the  pilots  who  returned  in  the  ships  of  the 
Corte- Real  expedition,  and  must  have  received  their 
rough  "cards"  showing  the  coast-lines  discovered, 
with  some  details.  He  alone  would  be  responsible 
for  the  positions  he  selected  for  these  new  coast-lines 
on  his  map  of  the  world.  They  are  represented  by 
the  southern  point  of  Greenland,  a  coast  with  a  forest 
of  trees  just  to  the  east  of  the  Papal  dividing  line 
(which  is  traced  across  the  map),  and  evidently 
intended  for  the  east  coast  of  Newfoundland,  and  a 
coast-line  drawn  due  north  and  south,  from  the 
latitude  of  Lisbon  for  about  700  miles  north,  and 
just  to  the  west  of  the  longitude  of  Cuba,  which  is 
shown  to  the  south  of  it,  but  much  too  far  north. 
This  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  coast  of  North 
America.  These  three  coast-lines  are  the  new 
features  of  the  map,  and,  therefore,  represent  the 
discoveries  of  Corte-Real. 

The  Cantino  map  is  the  most  important  authority 
for  these  discoveries,  supplemented  by  the  letters  of 
the  Italians  and  the  brief  notices  of  the  chronicles. 
There  are  also  two  legends  on  the  map  referring  to 
Greenland  and  Newfoundland. 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

Following  these  guides,  we  find  that,  after  a  long 
voyage  northwards,  Corte- Real  sighted  the  lofty 
mountains  of  Greenland  near  Cape  Farewell,  but 
did  not  land.  Greenland  is  called  "  Punta  d'Asia", 
and  we  learn,  from  the  legend  on  the  map,  that  the 
cosmographers  at  Lisbon  believed  it  to  be  a  part  of 
the  Asiatic  Continent.1  Proceeding  northwards,  they 
came  among  icebergs,  and  sent  boats  to  fill  up  with 
fresh  water  from  the  rills  flowing  down  their  sides. 
Next  day  they  reached  the  edge  of  the  ice.2  This 
obliged  them  to  alter  course,  and  they  eventually 
sighted  land  in  50°  N.,3  being  the  eastern  coast  of 
Newfoundland.  It  was  so  covered  with  trees, 
suitable  for  masts  and  yards  of  ships,  that  Corte- 
Real  gave  it  the  name  of  "Terra  Verde".4  Thence 
he  returned  to  Lisbon. 

The  second  expedition  was  fitted  out  by  Gaspar 
Corte-Real  at  Lisbon  in  the  spring  of  1501  ;  and  he 


1  See  page  240.  Legend  on  the  map.  This  view  was  adopted 
by  Ruysch,  who  was  the  first  to  separate  Greenland  from  Europe, 
and  connect  it  with  Asia. 

2  Cantino's  letter  (see  p.  233).  Cantino  mixed  up  the  first 
and  second  voyages.  The  first  part  of  his  account,  about  icebergs 
and  the  frozen  sea,  refers  to  the  first  voyage.  This  is  quite  clear, 
for  he  says  that  it  occupied  four  months  to  reach  the  icebergs 
{guatro  tnesi  conttnui),  and  three  more  months  to  arrive  at  the  land. 
Allowing  another  month  at  least  for  the  return  voyage,  that  makes 
eight  months.  Now  the  second  voyage  occupied  less  than  five 
months,  consequently  he  cannot  possibly  be  writing  of  that.  We 
do  not  know  the  duration  of  the  first  voyage,  except  roughly  from 
these  data  of  Cantino.  The  rest  of  the  letter  doubtless  refers  to 
the  second  voyage. 

3  Galvão.  4  Damian  de  Goes. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 

sailed  on  the  15th  of  May,1  to  complete  his  dis- 
coveries of  the  previous  year,  shaping  a  course 
west  and  north. 

The  key  to  an  understanding-  of  the  course  taken 
by  Corte- Real  on  his  second  voyage  is  to  be  found 
in  the  letters  of  Pasqualigo.  The  Italian  envoy 
says  that  at  a  distance  of  1,800  miles  (Cantino  gives 
more  correctly  2,800  miles)  they  came  to  land,  that 
they  coasted  along  it  for  600  or  700  miles,  but  that 
they  failed  to  reach  the  land  discovered  in  the  first 
voyage,  by  reason  of  the  ice.  Now  they  cannot 
possibly  have  coasted  for  700  miles  from  north  to 
south  after  leaving  Lisbon,  consequently  they  must 
have  coasted  from  south  to  north,  and  this  is  twice 
distinctly  stated  by  Pasqualigo.  An  explanation  of 
the  other  new  coast-line  on  the  Cantino  map,  placed 
south  to  north,  and  beoqnninQf  in  the  latitude  of 
Lisbon,  is  thus  supplied.  At  the  south  end  this 
land   turns   west,2  and   there  are  some  islands. 


1  Cantino  says  the  ships  had  been  absent  nine  months  in 
October,  and  consequently  they  must  have  sailed  in  January,  ac- 
cording to  him.  He  had  mixed  up  the  first  voyage  with  the 
second.  Damian  de  Goes  gives  the  date  of  May  15th  for  their 
sailing  :  which  is  probably  right.  Mr.  Harrisse  has  published 
documents  showing  that  the  supply  of  biscuit  was  received  on  board 
on  April  2 1  st. 

2  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  turn  of  the  coast  is  intended 
to  represent  Florida.  But  Florida  was  unknown  until  15 13,  and 
the  turn  of  the  coast  is  in  the  latitude  of  Lisbon.  It  may  perhaps 
be  argued  that  as  Cuba  and  Espafiola  are  placed  so  far  north  of 
their  real  latitude  on  this  map,  so  may  the  turn  of  the  coast  be. 
But  there  is  no  such  analogy.  Cantino's  draughtsman  was  de- 
pendent on  Spanish  cartographers,  such  as  Juan  de   la  Cosa,  for 


1 


INTRODUCTION. 


Corte-Real,  steering-  west  from  Lisbon  for  2,800 
(3,000)  miles,  always  with  fine  weather,  according  to 
Cantino,1  reached  the  entrance  to  Delaware  Bay, 
or  Chesapeake  Bay,  where  the  land  is  made  to  turn 
west,  and  this  point  is  named  the  Cape  of  the 
end  of  April,2  doubtless  to  commemorate  some 
event  which  took  place  on  that  day,  possibly  a 
visit  from  the  King,  just  before  the  expedition 
sailed.  Altogether,  there  are  twenty-two  names 
written  along  the  coast,  all  Portuguese,  though  the 
meaning  of  some  is  not  quite  clear,  owing,  perhaps, 
to  damp  or  rubbing  in  the  places  where  they  were 
written  on  the  original  "card"  of  the  pilot. 

After  reaching  this  bay,  Corte-Real  shaped  a 
course  to  the  north,  wishing  to  connect  his  dis- 
covery with  the  land  he  had  reached  on  the  previous 
voyage.  At  first  he  was  in  a  temperate  region 
yielding  delicious  fruits.  Proceeding  northwards, 
he  came  to  very  large  rivers,  indicating  the  exist- 
ence of  a  great  continent.      Next  there  was  a  region 

the  latitude  of  Cuba  and  Espaiiola,  who  misled  him.  Those  islands 
are  equally  out,  as  regards  latitude,  on  the  map  of  La  Cosa.  For 
his  new  coast-line  he  had  the  original  observations  of  the  pilots  of 
Corte-Real. 

1  "  Sempre  con  bon  tempo." 

2  C.  do  Jim  do  abrill.  Mr.  Stevens,  who  thought  that  the  west 
coast-line  on  the  Cantino  map  was  a  duplicate  Cuba  turned  the 
wrong  way,  stated  that  Columbus  himself  named  the  east  point  of 
Cuba  Cape  Fundabrill,  because  he  started  from  there  on  the 
30th  of  April  (JoJiann  Schoner,  a  reproduction  of  his  Globe  of 
1523,  by  Henry  Stevens,  edited  by  C  H.  Coote,  p.  xviii). 
Columbus  never  gave  it  that  name.  He  named  the  east  point  of 
Cuba  Alpha  et  Omega,  on  December  5th,  1492.    See  note  at  p.  97. 


INTRODUCTION.  li 

with  large  pine  trees.1  Then  they  came  to  a  sea 
abounding  in  fish.2  They  had  reached  Nova  Scotia 
or  Cape  Breton,  having  sailed  along  the  coast  for 
700  miles.  At  some  place,  where  they  landed, 
a  broken  sword  and  two  silver  rings  were  found, 
relics  of  the  second  voyage  of  John  Cabot.3 

Still  wishing  to  reach  Newfoundland,  the  land 
discovered  during  the  first  voyage  further  north, 
Corte- Real  left  the  coast,  and  pushed  into  the  foggy, 
ice-encumbered  sea.  He  and  his  vessel  were  never 
aofain  heard  of.  In  Portugal  his  east  coast  of 
Newfoundland  received  the  name  of  the  Land  of 
Corte-Real.4  The  other  two  vessels  made  the  best 
of  their  way  to  Lisbon,  with  several  natives  on 
board,  arriving  on  the  9th  and  11th  of  October, 
after  a  voyage  of  a  month.  The  distance  from 
Nova  Scotia  to  Lisbon  is  2,000  miles,  so  that  the 
ships  made  good  about  seventy  miles  a  day. 

In  due  time  the  rough  "cards"  of  the  pilots  were 
furnished  to  Cantino's  draughtsman  ;  and  he  had  to 
deal  with  the  materials  supplied  to  him  in  construct- 


1  See  the  letter  from  Cantino  at  p.  233. 

2  See  p.  238.  3  See  p.  237. 

4  In  the  map  of  the  Ptolemy  of  15 13,  by  Bernardus  Sylvanus, 
the  name  Corte-Real  is  turned  into  Latin.  There  is  an  island 
named  "  Regalis  Domus",  and  another  to  the  east  of  it  called 
"Terra  Labora'".  But  there  is  no  reference  to  Labrador  in  any 
of  the  authorities  for  the  voyages  of  Corte-Real.  The  King  of 
Portugal  is  said  to  have  hoped  to  derive  good  slave  labour  from 
the  lands  discovered  by  Corte-Real.  That  is  all.  The  name 
"  Labrador"  is  not  Portuguese  ;  and  Corte-Real  was  never  on  the 
Labrador  coast 

/ 


Hi  INTRODUCTION. 

ing    his    map    of    the    world,    drawn    to    show    the 
recently  found  lands.      He  placed  Newfoundland  to 
the  east   of  the   Papal  line,  just  bringing  it  within 
the   Portuguese  dominion.      This,   of  course,  causes 
serious  distortion,  for  the  3,000  miles  sailed  west  on 
the  second  voyage  obliged   him  to  place  the  North 
American  coast  much  further  to  the  west,  and  thus, 
drawing   on  a   plane   chart,  there  appears  to  be  an 
inordinate    distance    between    the    two    lands.      He 
also  made  the  mistake  of  putting  the  western   coast 
on  a   north  and  south  line,  instead  of  giving  it  the 
proper  trend  to   the  east.      If  this  had  been  done, 
with  more  easterly  longitude  to  commence  with,  and 
Cuba  with   the   other  islands  had  been  placed  south 
of  the  tropic,   the  map  would  not  have  been  amiss. 
The  same  draughtsman  must  have  supplied  materials 
for  other  maps.      The  Portuguese  map  by  Canerio, 
recently   discovered   at    Paris,    but    undated,    copies 
the  outlines  and  names  from  that  of  Cantino.      The 
same  western   coast-line    appears   on   the  important 
map  of  the  world  by  Johann   Ruysch,   engraved  in 
1508,    with     most    of    the    names.      But    here    the 
western  coast  of  Cantino  is  turned  into  Cuba,  while 
the   real    Cuba    is    omitted  ;    and   Newfoundland  is 
made  a  part  of  the  continent  of  Asia.      The  map  of 
the   world  by   Waldseemtiller,    for  the    Ptolemy   of 
1 5 13,  has   an   exact  copy  of  the  western  coast-line 
on  the  Cantino  map,  but  continues  it,  without  any 
names,  round  to  Venezuela.      The  blunder  of  placing 
Cuba   and    Espanola   north    of    the    tropic    is    here 
repeated. 


INTRODUCTION.  llll 

The  Cantino  coast  appears  again  on  the  Schemer 
globes  of  1 51 5  and  1520,  where  it  is  continued 
southwards  to  an  extensive  land  called  Parias,  which 
is  separated  by  a  strait  from  South  America.  It  is 
also  traceable  on  the  maps  of  Petrus  Apianus  (1520) 
and  of  Grynseus  (Basle,  1532),  which  in  this  part 
are  repetitions  of  the  delineation  on  the  Schemer 
globes.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  work  of  the 
Cantino  draughtsman,  based  on  surveys  by  the  pilots 
of  Corte-Real,  exercised  a  very  decided  influence  on 
cartography  for  many  years,  almost  until  the  appear- 
ance of  the  great  map  of  Ortelius  in  1570.  Recent 
writers  on  the  subject  of  the  Cantino  map  have 
ignored  the  obvious  fact  that  the  western  coast 
there  delineated  must  be  assumed  to  be  a  discovery 
by  Corte-Real  unless  there  is  positive  evidence  to 
the  contrary,  because  the  map  was  drawn  to  show 
those  discoveries.  It  was  a  Carta  da  nanigar  per 
le  isole  nouamte  tr{pvate).  The  consequence  has 
been  that  several  theories  have  been  started  to 
account  for  the  appearance  of  such  a  coast-line.1 


1  Mr.  Harrisse  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  coast  did  not 
represent  the  work  of  Corte-Real,  because  it  was  placed  at  such  an 
immense  distance  west  of  Newfoundland.  He  thought  that  an 
experienced  navigator  like  Corte-Real  could  not  possibly  have 
made  such  a  blunder  (Les  Corte-Real,  p.  149).  But  Corte-Real 
had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it.  He  never  returned,  and  was 
dead  long  before  the  map  was  drawn.  The  draughtsman  was 
alone  responsible  for  the  positions  of  the  coast-lines  on  his  mappa- 
mundi,  and  in  placing  Newfoundland  so  far  east  he  was  influenced 
by  political  motives,  as  has  been  explained.  Mr.  Harrisse  sees 
that  the  west  roast  must  be  that   of  North   America,  but  he  sup- 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

When  Gaspar  Corte- Real  did  not  return  all  through 
the  winter,  his  brother  Miguel  fitted  out  two  ships, 
and  went  in  search'  of  him  in  the  spring  of  1 502. 
He,  too,  was  never  heard  of  more,  although  his 
consort  returned  safely.  Then  the  eldest  brother, 
Vasque  Anes  Corte- Real,  the  Captain-donative  of 
Terceira  and  St.  George,  proposed  to  go  in  search 
of  Gaspar  and  Miguel.  But  King  Manoel  felt  that 
there  had  already  been  too  many  valuable  lives  lost, 
and  refused  his  consent.  Vasque  Anes  lived  to  the 
patriarchal  age  of  ninety,  and  continued  the  line. 
His  great-grandson,  Manoel  Corte- Real,  fell  fight- 
ing by  the  side  of  King  Sebastian  at  the  fatal  battle 
of  Kasr-el-Kebir,  in  1578,  when  the  male  line  of  the 
Corte- Reals  became  extinct. 


poses  that  it  was  discovered  and  mapped  by  a  series  of  unknown 
navigators  previous  to  the  year  1502.  The  rejection  of  the 
obvious  solution,  that  the  draughtsman  employed  to  draw  the 
discoveries  of  Corte-Real  did  draw  them,  has  given  rise  to  various 
other  untenable  theories  about  this  coast-line.  Mr.  Stevens 
thought  the  Cantino  coast-line  was  a  duplicate  Cuba  (p.  xx),  a 
"  bogus"  Cuba,  as  his  editor  calls  it  (p.  xxxiii),  {Johann  Schoner, 
by  Henry  Stevens,  edited  by  C.  H.  Coote,  1888);  while  Varn- 
hagen  conjectured  that  it  was  a  discovery  of  Vespucci  during  his 
apocryphal  first  voyage  !  Others  think  it  is  Yucatan,  or  work 
done  by  the  English.  Varnhagen  did  not  know  the  Cantino  map, 
but  argued  from  the  map  in  the  Ptolemy  of  15 13,  which  is  copied 
from  the  same  materials. 


SAILING    DIRECTIONS 


COLUMBUS, 


BEING  THE  LETTERS  FROM  PAOLO  TOSCANELLI. 


RESTORATION 


1  TOSCANELLI   MAP. 


FIRST    LETTER 

OF 

PAOLO    TOSCANELLI    TO    COLUMBUS. 

(Enclosing  a  map  and  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  Martins.) 


Prologue  to  Columbus} 

AUL,  the  Physician,  to  Cristobal 
Colombo  greeting.  I  perceive  your 
magnificent  and  great  desire  to  find 
a  way  to  where  the  spices  grow,  and 
in  reply  to  your  letter  I  send  you 
the  copy  of  another  letter  which  I 
wrote,  some  days  ago,2  to  a  friend  and  favourite  of  the 
most  serene  King  of  Portugal  before  the  wars  of  Castille,3 


1  The  prologue,  addressed  to  Columbus,  is  printed  by  Las  Casas, 
i,  92-96,  and  in  cap.  viii  of  the  Vita  del  Ammiraglio.  The  original 
Latin  is  lost. 

2  Las  Casas  has  "Ha  dias".     In  the  Vita — "Alquanti giomifa." 

3  Toscanelli  means  that  his  correspondent  was  a  friend  and  favourite 
of  the  King  before  the  wars  of  Castille  in  the  reign  of  Henry  IV, 
which  began  in  1465.  He  fixes  the  date  of  his  letter  to  Columbus  by 
the  words  "  some  days  ago",  that  is,  he  wrote  the  first  letter,  a  copy 
of  which  he  sends,  some  days  before  the  letter  to  Columbus.  The  date 
of  the  first  letter  is  June  24th,  1474. 

But  Mr.  Harrisse  takes  the  words,  "before  the  wars  of  Castille",  as 
referring  to  the  date  of  the  first  letter,  and  assumes  that  it  is  intended 

B  2 


4  FIRST  LETTER  OF  TOSCANELLI  TO  COLUMBUS. 

in  reply  to  another  which,  by  direction  of  his  Highness, 
he  wrote  to  me  on  the  said  subject,  and  I  send  you  another 
sea  chart1  like  the  one  I  sent  him,  by  which  you  will  be 
satisfied  respecting  your  enquiries :  which  copy  is  as 
follows : 

A  Copy  of  the  letter  to  Martins? 

"Paul,  the  Physician,  to  Fernan  Martins,  Canon  at  Lisbon, 
greeting,  it  was  pleasant  to  me  to  understand  that  your 
health  was  good,  and  that  you  are  in  the  favour  and  intimacy 
with  the  most  generous  and  most  magnificent  Prince,  your 
King.3  I  have  already  spoken  with  you  respecting  a 
shorter  way  to  the  places  of  spices  than  that  which  you 


to  imply  that  the  letter  of  Columbus  was  written  after  the  wars  of 
Castille,  which  he  supposes  to  mean  the  war  of  succession  with  Por- 
tugal from  1475  to  1479.  So  he  concludes  that  the  letter  to  Columbus 
was  not  written  before  1480.  But,  granting  that  the  words  "before 
the  wars  of  Castille"  refer  to  the  date  of  the  letter,  it  does  not  follow 
that  the  second  letter  was  written  after  the  war  was  over.  The  first 
letter  may  have  been  written  in  1474  before  the  war  began,  and  the 
second  in  1475  after  the  war  began. 

The  words  "  some  days  ago"  are,  however,  conclusive  evidence 
that  the  words  "  before  the  wars  of  Castille"  do  not  refer  to  the  date 
of  the  letter.  If  they  did,  the  words  "some  days  ago"  would  be  un- 
meaning. The  date  of  the  letter  to  Martins  being  June  24th,  1474, 
that  of  the  letter  to  Columbus  was    some  days  afterwards,  in  July 

1474. 

1  This  chart,  after  the  death  of  the  Admiral  and  his  son  Fernando, 
became  the  property  of  Las  Casas  (i,  p.  96),  but  it  is  now  lost. 

2  A  copy  of  the  original  Latin  letter  from  Toscanelli  to  Martins 
in  the  handwriting  of  Columbus  himself,  was  found  in  the  Columbine 
Library  at  Seville  in  i860.  It  was  in  a  fly-leaf  of  a  book  by  Eneas 
Silvius,  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  Admiral.  It  is  printed  in 
Asensio's  Life  of  Columbus  (i,  p.  250),  and  the  above  is  translated 
from  the  text  of  Asensio.  A  Spanish  version  is  given  by  Las  Casas, 
i,  p.  92,  and  an  Italian  version  is  in  the  Vita  del  Ammiraglio, 
cap.  xiii. 

3  Affonso  V,  who  was  a  nephew  of  Prince  Henry  the  Navigator. 
He  succeeded  his  father,  King  Duarte,  in  1438,  and  died  in  148 1. 


COPY   OF   THE   LETTER   TO   FERNAN    MARTINS.  5 

take  by  Guinea,  by  means  of  maritime  navigation.  The 
most  serene  King  now  seeks  from  me  some  statement,  or 
rather  a  demonstration  to  the  eye,  by  which  the  slightly 
learned  may  take  in  and  understand  that  way.  I  know 
this  can  be  shown  from  the  spherical  shape  of  the  earth, 
yet,  to  make  the  comprehension  of  it  easier,  and  to  facili- 
tate the  work,  I  have  determined  to  show  that  way  by 
means  of  a  sailing  chart.  I,  therefore,  send  to  his  Majesty 
a  chart  made  by  my  own  hands,  on  which  are  delineated 
your  coasts  and  islands,  whence  you  must  begin  to  make 
your  journey  always  westward,  and  the  places  at  which 
you  should  arrive,  and  how  far  from  the  pole  or  the 
equinoctial  line  you  ought  to  keep,  and  through  how  much 
space  or  over  how  many  miles  you  should  arrive  at  those 
most  fertile  places  full  of  all  sorts  of  spices  and  jewels. 
You  must  not  be  surprised  if  I  call  the  parts  where  the 
spices  are  west,  when  they  usually  call  them  east,  because 
to  those  always  sailing  west,  those  parts  are  found  by 
navigation  on  the  under  side1  of  the  earth.  But  if  by  land 
and  by  the  upper  side,2  they  will  always  be  found  to  the 
east.  The  straight  lines  shown  lengthways  on  the  map 
indicate  the  distance  from  east  to  west,  and  those  that  are 
drawn  across  show  the  spaces  from  south  to  north.  I 
have  also  noted  on  the  map  several  places  at  which  you 
may  arrive  for  the  better  information  of  navigators,  if 
they  should  reach  a  place  different  from  what  was  ex- 
pected, by  reason  of  the  wind  or  any  other  cause ;  and 
also  that  they  may  show  some  acquaintance  with  the 
country  to  the  natives,  which  ought  to  be  sufficiently 
agreeable  to  them.  It  is  asserted  that  none  but  mer- 
chants live  on  the  islands.  For  there  the  number  of 
navigators  with  merchandize  is  so  great  that  in  all  the  rest 

1  "  Per  subterrâneas  navigationes." 

2  "  Per  superiora  itinera." 


6  FIRST  LETTER  OF  TOSCANELLI  TO  COLUMBUS. 

of  the  world  there  are  not  so  many  as  in  one  most  noble 
port  called  Zaitun.1  For  they  affirm  that  a  hundred  ships 
laden  with  pepper  discharge  their  cargoes  in  that  port  in 
a  single  year,  besides  other  ships  bringing  other  spices. 
That  country  is  very  populous  and  very  rich,  with  a  multi- 
tude of  provinces  and  kingdoms,  and  with  cities  without 
number,  under  one  prince  who  is  called  Great  Kan,'2  which 
name  signifies  Rex  Regum  in  Latin,  whose  seat  and  resi- 
dence is  generally  in  the  province  Katay.3  His  ancestors 
desired  intercourse  with  Christians  now  200  years  ago. 
They  sent  to  the  Pope  and  asked  for  several  persons 
learned  in  the  faith,  that  they  might  be  enlightened,  but 
those  who  were  sent,  being  impeded  in  their  journey,  went 


1  "Zaitun  (or  Zayton)  is  believed  to  be  Chwangchan-fu  (often  called 
in  our  charts  Chinchew),  a  famous  seaport  of  Fokien,  in  China,  about 
100  miles  S.W.  by  S.  of  Fuchau"  (Sir  H.  Yule's  note,  Marco  Polo,  ii, 
219).  Marco  Polo  calls  it  "the  very  great  and  noble  city  of  Zayton". 
He  says  that  "  for  one  shipload  of  pepper  that  goes  to  Alexandria,  or 
elsewhere,  destined  for  Christendom,  there  come  a  hundred  such,  aye 
and  more,  too,  to  this  haven  of  Zayton,  for  it  is  one  of  the  two  greatest 
havens  in  the  world  for  commerce".  Ibn  Batuta  pronounces  it  to  be 
the  greatest  haven  in  the  world.  Marco  Polo  further  says  that  "  the 
haven  of  Zayton  is  frequented  by  all  the  ships  of  India,  which  bring 
thither  spicery  and  all  other  kinds  of  costly  wares,  including  precious 
stones  and  pearls". 

2  Sir  H.  Yule  points  out  the  distinction  between  Khan  and  Kaan 
(or  Kan).  The  former  may  be  rendered  Lord,  and  was  applied  to 
chiefs,  whether  sovereigns  or  not.  In  Persia,  Afghanistan,  and 
Musulman  India  it  has  become  a  common  affix  to  all  names.  But 
Kaan  is  a  form  of  Khakan,  the  peculiar  title  of  the  supreme  sovereign 
of  the  Mongols.  Marco  Polo  always  writes  Kaan  as  applied  to  the 
Great  Kaan.  Toscanelli,  followed  by  Columbus,  writes  Kan.  In 
1259,  Kublai  became  sovereign  of  the  Mongols,  and  the  Grand  Kaan 
was  the  Emperor  of  China  of  his  dynasty. 

3  The  name  of  Khitay,  or  Cathay,  is  derived  from  a  people  called 
Khitan,  whose  chief  ruled  over  northern  China  for  two  hundred  years, 
until  1 123.  Southern  China  remained  under  the  native  Sung 
dynasty,  and  was  called  Machin,  or  Mangi,  with  their  capital  at 
Hang-chau. 


COPY   OF   THE    LETTER   TO    FERNAN    MARTINS.  J 

back.  Also  in  the  time  of  Eugenius  one  of  them  came  to 
Eugenius,1  who  affirmed  their  great  kindness  towards 
Christians,  and  I  had  a  long  conversation  with  him  on 
many  subjects,  about  the  magnitude  of  their  rivers  in 
length  and  breadth,  and  on  the  multitude  of  cities  on  the 
banks  of  the  rivers.  He  said  that  on  one  river  there  were 
near  200  cities  with  marble  bridges  great  in  length  and 
breadth,  and  everywhere  adorned  with  columns.  This 
country  is  worth  seeking  by  the  Latins,  not  only  because 
great  wealth  may  be  obtained  from  it,  gold  and  silver,  all 
sorts  of  gems,  and  spices,  which  never  reach  us  ;  but  also 
on  account  of  its  learned  men,  philosophers, and  expert  astro- 
logers, and  by  what  skill  and  art  so  powerful  and  magni- 
ficent a  province  is  governed,  as  well  as  how  their  wars 
are  conducted.  This  is  for  some  satisfaction  to  his  re- 
quest, so  far  as  the  shortness  of  time  and  my  occupations 
admitted  :  being  ready  in  future  more  fully  to  satisfy  his 
royal  Majesty  as  far  as  he  may  wish. 
"  Given  at  Florence,  June  24th,  1474." 


1  In  1260,  Nicolo  and  Maffeo  Polo  left  Constantinople,  and  reached 
the  court  of  the  Great  Kaan  Kublai.  He  determined  to  send  them 
back  as  his  Ambassadors  to  the  Pope,  accompanied  by  an  officer  of 
his  own  court.  His  letters  to  the  Pope  were  mainly  to  desire  the 
despatch  of  a  large  body  of  educated  missionaries  to  convert  his 
people.  They  returned  in  1269,  and  found  that  no  Pope  existed,  for 
Clement  IV  died  in  1268,  and  no  new  election  had  taken  place. 
There  was  a  long  interregnum  ;  and  the  Polos,  tired  of  waiting,  started 
for  the  East  again  in  1271,  taking  their  nephew  Marco  with  them.  On 
the  coast  of  Syria  they  heard  of  the  Pope's  election  as  Gregory  X,  but 
the  new  Pope  only  supplied  them  with  two  Dominicans,  who  lost 
heart  and  drew  back.  The  Venetians  returned  to  the  court  of  Kublai 
in  1275. 

The  second  mission  of  which  Toscanelli  speaks  was  two  hundred 
years  later.  Eugenius  IV  (the  only  Eugenius  after  1153)  was  Pope 
from  1431  to  1447  ;  and  it  is  to  a  mission  in  his  time  that  the  Floren- 
tine astronomer  refers. 


FIRST  LETTER  OF  TOSCANELLI  TO  COLUMBUS. 


Letter  to  Columbus  Resumed} 

From  the  city  of  Lisbon  due  west  there  are  26  spaces 
marked  on  the  map,  each  of  which  has  250  miles,  as  far  as 
the  most  noble  and  very  great  city  of  Ouinsay.2  For  it  is 
a  hundred  miles  in  circumference  and  has  ten  bridges,  and 
its  name  signifies  the  city  of  Heaven  ;  many  wonders 
being  related  concerning  it,  touching  the  multitude  of  its 
handicrafts  and  resources.  This  space  is  almost  a  third 
part  of  the  whole  sphere.  That  city  is  in  the  province  of 
Mangi,3  or  near  the  province  Katay,  in  which  land  is  the 
royal  residence.    But  from  the  island  Antilia,  known  to  you,4 

1  In  the  Vita  del  Ammiraglio  this  is  printed  as  if  it  was  a  part  of 
the  letter  to  Martins. 

2  Quinsay,  or  Kinsay,  represents  the  Chinese  term  Kingaze,  which 
means  capital.  The  name  of  this  capital  city  was  then  Lin-ggan,  and 
is  now  Hang-chau-fu.  Marco  Polo  gives  an  account  of  the  great  city 
of  Kinsay  in  chapter  lxxvi  of  his  second  book.  He  calls  it  "the 
most  noble  city  of  Kinsay,  a  name  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  in  our 
tongue  the  city  of  Heaven".  He  also  says  that  it  was  a  hundred  miles  in 
circumference,  and  that  there  were  in  it  12,000  bridges  of  stone,  which 
Toscanelli  reduces  to  ten.  "The  Ocean  Sea  comes  within  25  miles 
of  the  city  at  a  place  called  Ganfu,  where  there  is  a  town  and  an 
excellent  Haven.  The  city  of  Kinsay  is  the  head  of  all  Mangi." 
(Yule's  Marco  Polo,  ii,  69. ) 

3  Mangi,  or  Manzi,  was  the  name  applied  to  China  south  of  the 
Hwang-ho,  held  by  the  native  Sung  dynasty  until  1176.  Persian 
writers  call  it  Machin. 

4  This  proves  that  Columbus  had  referred  to  Antilia  in  his  lost 
letter  to  Toscanelli.  The  fabulous  island  of  Antilia  or  Antilia  first 
appeared  on  a  portolano  of  1425.  It  is  placed  on  the  chart  of  Andrea 
Bianco  of  Venice,  bearing  date  1436,  in  longitude  25o  35'  W.  Ruysch, 
in  his  map  engraved  after  the  death  of  Columbus,  removed  it  to 
between  37o  W.  and  40o  W.,  adding  a  legend  to  the  effect  that  it  was 
discovered  long  ago  by  Roderick,  the  last  of  the  Gothic  Kings  of 
Spain,  who  took  refuge  there  after  his  defeat  by  the  Moors,  but  had 
since  been  searched  for  in  vain.  Another  tale  was  that  two  arch- 
bishops and  five  bishops  escaped  to  Antilia,  after  the  death  of  Rode- 
rick, and  that   they   built  seven  cities  there.     One  of  the  beautiful 


CIPANGU.  9 

to  the  most  noble  island  of  Cippangue1  there  are  ten 
spaces.  For  that  island  is  most  fertile  in  gold,  pearls,  and 
precious  stones,  and  they  cover  the  temples  and  palaces 
with  solid  gold.  Thus  the  spaces  of  sea  to  be  crossed  in 
the  unknown  parts  are  not  great.  Many  things  might 
perhaps  have  been  declared  more  exactly,  but  a  diligent 
thinker  will  be  able  to  clear  up  the  rest  for  himself.  Fare- 
well, most  excellent  one. 


portolani  of  Benincasa  shows  it,  on  the  western  edge,  as  a  very  large 
oblong  island,  with  the  names  of  the  seven  cities  all  given. 

The  name  Antilles  was  first  applied  to  the  West  Indian  Islands  on 
the  Portuguese  map  drawn  for  Cantino  in  1500. 

1  Marco  Polo  says  :  "  Chipangu  is  an  island  towards  the  east  in 
the  high  seas,  1,500  miles  distant  from  the  continent,  and  a  very  great 
island  it  is.  The  Lord  of  that  island  hath  a  great  palace  which  is 
entirely  roofed  with  fine  gold.  Moreover,  all  the  pavement  of  the 
palace,  and  the  floors  of  its  chambers,  are  entirely  of  gold,  in  plates 
like  slabs  of  stone,  a  good  two  fingers  thick  ;  and  the  windows  are 
also  of  gold,  so  that  altogether  the  richness  of  this  palace  is  past  all 
bounds  and  all  belief.  They  have  also  pearls  in  abundance  and 
quantities  of  other  precious  stones."     (Yule's  Marco  Polo,  ii,  p.  237.) 

Sir  H.  Yule  says  that  Chipangu  represents  the  Chinese  Zhi-pan- 
kwe,  the  kingdom  of  Japan.  The  name  Zhi-pan  being  the  Mandarin 
form  of  which  the  term  Niphon,  used  in  Japan,  is  a  variation,  both 
meaning  "  the  origin  of  the  sun",  or  sun-rising.  Our  Japan  was  pro- 
bably taken  from  the  Malay  "  Japang".  Kiempfer  repeats  the  fable  of 
the  golden  palace. 


SECOND  LETTER 


PAOLO  TOSCANELLI  TO  COLUMBUS.1 


PAUL,  the  Physician,  to  Cristoval  Colombo  greeting.  I 
received  your  letters  with  the  things  you  sent  me,  and 
with  them  I  received  great  satisfaction.  I  perceive  your 
magnificent  and  grand  desire  to  navigate  from  the  parts 
of  the  east  to  the  west,  in  the  way  that  was  set  forth  in 
the  letter  that  I  sent  you,  and  which  will  be  demonstrated 
better  on  a  round  sphere.  It  pleases  me  much  that  I 
should  be  well  understood ;  for  the  said  voyage  is  not 
only  possible,  but  it  is  true,  and  certain  to  be  honorable 
and  to  yield  incalculable  profit,  and  very  great  fame 
among  all  Christians.  But  you  cannot  know  this  perfectly 
save  through  experience  and  practice,  as  I  have  had  in  the 
form  of  most  copious  and  good  and  true  information  from 
distinguished  men  of  great  learning  who  have  come  from 
the  said  parts,  here  in  the  court  of  Rome,  and  from  others 
being  merchants  who  have  had  business  for  a  long  time 
in  those  parts,  men  of  high  authority.  Thus  when  that 
voyage  shall  be  made,  it  will  be  to  powerful  kingdoms  and 
cities  and  most  noble  provinces,  very  rich  in  all  manner  of 
things  in  great  abundance  and  very  necessary  to  us,  such 
as  all  sorts  of  spices  in  great  quantity,  and  jewels  in  the 
greatest  abundance. 

It  will  also  go  to  the  said  Kings   and    Princes  who  are 
very  desirous,  more  than  ourselves,  to  have  intercourse  and 

1    Given  by  Las  Casas,  i,  p.  95. 


SECOND  LETTER  OE  TOSCANELLI  TO  COLUMBUS.   I  I 

speech  with  Christians  of  these  our  parts,  because  a  great 
part  of  them  are  Christians,  as  well  as  to  have  speech  and 
intercourse  with  men  of  learning  and  ingenuity  here,  as 
well  in  religion  as  in  all  the  other  sciences,  by  reason  of 
the  great  fame  of  the  empires  and  governments  in  these 
parts  that  has  reached  them.  On  account  of  all  these 
things,  and  of  many  others  that  might  be  mentioned,  I  do 
not  wonder  that  you,  who  have  great  courage,  and  all  the 
Portuguese  people  who  have  always  been  men  eager  for 
all  great  undertakings,  should  be  with  a  burning  heart 
and  feel  a  great  desire  to  undertake  the  said  voyage. 


JOURNAL 


FIRST   VOYAGE    OF   COLUMBUS. 


JOURNAL 

OF  THE 

FIRST   VOYAGE   OF   COLUMBUS. 


This  is  the  first  voyage  and  the  routes 

and  direction  taken  by  the  Admiral  Don  Cristobal 
Colon  when  he  discovered  the   Indies,  sum- 
marized ;  except  the  prologue  made  for  the 
Sovereigns,  which  is  given  word  for 
word  and  commences  in   this 
manner. 

In  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

ECAUSE,  O  most  Christian,  and  very 
high,  very  excellent,  and  puissant 
Princes,  King  and  Queen  of  the 
Spains  and  of  the  islands  of  the 
Sea,  our  Lords,  in  this  present  year 
of  1492,  after  your  Highnesses  had 
given  an  end  to  the  war  with  the 
Moors  who  reigned  in  Europe,  and  had  finished  it  in  the 
very  great  city  of  Granada,  where  in  this  present  year, 
on  the  second  day  of  the  month  of  January,  by  force 
of  arms,  I  saw  the  royal  banners  of  your  Highnesses 
placed  on  the  towers  of  Alfambra,  which  is  the  fortress  of 
that  city,  and  I  saw  the  Moorish  King  come  forth  from 
the  gates  of  the  city  and  kiss  the  royal  hands  of  your 
Highnesses,  and  of  the  Prince  my  Lord,  and  presently    in 


l6       JOURNAL  OF  THE  FIRST  VOYAGE  OF  COLUMBUS. 

that  same  month,  acting  on  the  information  that  I  had 
given  to  your  Highnesses  touching  the  lands  of  India,  and 
respecting  a  Prince  who  is  called  Gran  Can,  which  means 
in  our  language  King  of  Kings,  how  he  and  his  ancestors 
had  sent  to  Rome  many  times  to  ask  for  learned  men  of 
our  holy  faith  to  teach  him,  and  how  the  Holy  Father  had 
never  complied,  insomuch  that  many  people  believing  in 
idolatries  were  lost  by  receiving  doctrine  of  perdition  : 
YOUR  HIGHNESSES,  as  Catholic  Christians  and  Princes  who 
love  the  holy  Christian  faith,  and  the  propagation  of  it, 
and  who  are  enemies  to  the  sect  of  Mahoma  and  to  all 
idolatries  and  heresies,  resolved  to  send  me,  Cristobal 
Colon,  to  the  said  parts  of  India  to  see  the  said  princes, 
and  the  cities  and  lands,  and  their  disposition,  with  a  view 
that  they  might  be  converted  to  our  holy  faith ;  and 
ordered  that  I  should  not  go  by  land  to  the  eastward,  as 
had  been  customary,  but  that  I  should  go  by  way  of  the 
west,  whither  up  to  this  day,  we  do  not  know  for  certain 
that  any  one  has  gone. 

Thus,  after  having  turned  out  all  the  Jews  from  all  your 
kingdoms  and  lordships,1  in  the  same  month  of  January, 


1  The  decree  for  the  expulsion  of  the  Jews  was  really  dated  March 
20th,  1492.  Dr.  Don  Fernando  Belmonte,  an  officer  employed  in  the 
archives  of  Seville,  recently  discovered  a  document  which  refers  to  the 
expulsion  of  the  Jews  from  Palos  while  Columbus  was  equipping  his 
expedition.  It  is  a  process  taken  before  the  Corregidor  of  Moguer  in 
January  1552,  and  one  Juan  de  Aragon,  a  native  of  Moguer,  then 
aged  70,  gave  evidence.  He  said  that  55  years  before,  more  or  less,  he 
was  a  boy  on  board  a  vessel  at  Palos,  and  saw  Cristobal  de  Colon 
ready  to  sail  for  the  Indies  with  three  ships.  This  was  in  August  or 
September.  He  further  deposed  that,  having  returned  from  his 
voyage,  after  having  left  the  Jews  in  the  parts  beyond,  and  in  another 
year,  coming  by  sea,  he  met  the  ship  of  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  return- 
ing from  the  discovery  (Ascnsio,  i,  264).  This  boy  was,  therefore,  in 
the  ship  which  conveyed  some  of  the  banished  Jews  from  Palos  to 
Africa,  at  the  very  time  that  Columbus  was  fitting  out  his  expedition. 
January,  in  the  text,  is  a  misprint. 


THE  JOURNAL  OF  COLUMBUS.  \J 

your  Highnesses  gave  orders  to  me  that  with  a  sufficient  fleet 
I  should  go  to  the  said  parts  of  India,  and  for  this  they 
made  great  concessions  to  me,  and  ennobled  me,  so  that 
henceforward  I  should  be  called  Don,  and  should  be  Chief 
Admiral  of  the  Ocean  Sea,  perpetual  Viceroy  and  Governor 
of  all  the  islands  and  continents  that  I  should  discover  and 
gain,  and  that  I  might  hereafter  discover  and  gain  in  the 
Ocean  Sea,  and  that  my  eldest  son  should  succeed,  and  so 
on  from  generation  to  generation  for  ever. 

I  left  the  city  of  Granada  on  the  12th  day  of  May,  in  the 
same  year  of  1492,  being  Saturday,  and  came  to  the  town 
of  Palos,  which  is  a  seaport ;  where  I  equipped  three 
vessels1  well  suited  for  such  service  ;  and  departed  from 
that  port,  well  supplied  with  provisions  and  with  many 
sailors,  on  the  3d  day  of  August  of  the  same  year,  being 
Friday,  half  an  hour  before  sunrise,  taking  the  route  to  the 
islands  of  Canária,  belonging  to  your  Highnesses,  which 
are  in  the  said  Ocean  Sea,  that  I  might  thence  take  my 
departure  for  navigating  until  I  should  arrive  at  the  Indies, 
and  give  the  letters  of  your  Highnesses  to  those  princes,  so 
as  to  comply  with  my  orders.  As  part  of  my  duty  I 
thought  it  well  to  write  an  account  of  all  the  voyage  very 
punctually,  noting  from  day  to  day  all  that  I  should  do  and 
see,  and  that  should  happen,  as  will  be  seen  further  on. 
Also,  Lords  Princes,  I  resolved  to  describe  each  night  what 
passed  in  the  day,  and  to  note  each  day  how  I  navigated 


1  Columbus  never  mentions  the  name  of  the  ship  in  which  he  sailed. 
It  was  owned  by  Juan  de  la  Cosa  of  Santona.  Oviedo  calls  it  the 
Gallega;  Herrera,  the  Santa  Maria.  It  was  the  largest,  about  100 
tons.  The  others  were  two  caravels  of  Palos,  called  the  Pinta  and 
Nina.  The  Pinta  was  commanded  by  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon,  and 
owned  by  two  sailors  who  served  on  board.  The  Nina,  named  after  its 
owners,  the  Nino  family,  was  commanded  oy  Vicente  Yahez  Pinzon, 
with  three  Nihos  on  board,  one  as  pilot,  another  as  master,  and  a 
third  as  one  of  the  seamen. 


1 8      DEPARTURE  FROM  THE  BAR  OF  SALTES. 

at  night.  I  propose  to  construct  a  new  chart  for  navigat- 
ing, on  which  I  shall  delineate  all  the  sea  and  lands  of  the 
Ocean  in  their  proper  positions  under  their  bearings  ;  and 
further,  I  propose  to  prepare  a  book,  and  to  put  down  all  as 
it  were  in  a  picture,  by  latitude  from  the  equator,  and 
western  longitude.  Above  all,  I  shall  have  accomplished 
much,  for  I  shall  forget  sleep,  and  shall  work  at  the  busi- 
ness of  navigation,  that  so  the  service  may  be  performed  ; 
all  which  will  entail  great  labour. 

Friday,  3d  of  A  agust. 

We  departed  on  Friday,  the  3d  of  August,  in  the  year 
1492,  from  the  bar  of  Saltes,1  at  8  o'clock,  and  proceeded 
with  a  strong  sea  breeze  until  sunset,  towards  the  south, 
for  60  miles,  equal  to  15  leagues2;  afterwards  S.W.  and 
W.S.W.,  which  was  the  course  for  the  Canaries. 

Saturday,  41/1  of  August. 
They  steered  S.W.  \  S. 


1  Saltes  is  an  island  formed  by  two  arms  of  the  river  Odiel,  in  front 
of  the  town  of  Huelva.  It  was  inhabited  certainly  until  the  twelfth 
century,  and  as  late  as  1267  King  Alonso  the  Wise  fixed  the  boundary 
between  the  towns  of  Saltes  and  Huelva.  It  is  unknown  when  it 
ceased  to  be  inhabited,  but  even  in  the  Suma  de  Geografia  of  Martin 
Fernandez  de  Enciso,  printed  in  15 19,  mention  is  made  of  that  town 
of  Saltes,  yet  it  is  certain  thai,  at  that  time,  only  the  church  remained, 
attached  to  those  of  Huelva,  which  shows  that  there  were  no  longer 
any  inhabited  houses.  No  length  of  time  can  have  passed  before  the 
church  itself  fell  into  ruins,  for,  in  order  to  preserve  some  memory  of  it, 
a  hermitage  was  founded  in  Huelva  with  the  title  of  "  Our  Lady  of 
Saltes",  in  which  a  cross  was  kept,  being  a  relic  of  the  old  church. 
Some  traces  of  the  church  remain,  and  the  district  is  divided  into 
arable  lands,  pastures,  and  woods  preserved  for  the  chase  ;  being  the 
property  of  the  Marquis  of  Ayamonte,  with  the  title  of  Count  of  Saltes. 
(Huelva  Ilustrada  del  Lie  D.  fuan  de  Mora.     Sevilla,  1762.) — N. 

2  Columbus  used  Italian  miles,  which  are  shorter  than  the  Spanish  ; 
four  Italian  being  equivalent  to  three  Spanish,  or  a  league. — N. 


THE  RUDDER  OF  THE  "  PINTA".  19 

Sunday,  $t/i  of August. 

They  continued  their  course  day  and  night  more  than  40 
leagues. 

Monday,  6th  of  August. 

The  rudder  of  the  caravel  Pinta  became  unshipped,  and 
Martin  Alonso  Pinzon,  who  was  in  command,  believed  or 
suspected  that  it  was  by  contrivance  of  Gomes  Rascon  and 
Cristobal  Ouintero,  to  whom  the  caravel  belonged,  for  they 
dreaded  to  go  on  that  voyage.  The  Admiral  says  that, 
before  they  sailed,  these  men  had  been  displaying  a  certain 
backwardness,  so  to  speak.  The  Admiral  was  much  dis- 
turbed at  not  being  able  to  help  the  said  caravel  without 
danger,  and  he  says  that  he  was  eased  of  some  anxiety 
when  he  reflected  that  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  was  a  man  of 
energy  and  ingenuity.  They  made,  during  the  day  and 
night,  29  leagues. 

Tuesday,  Jth  of  August. 

The  rudder  of  the  Pinta  was  shipped  and  secured,  and 
they  proceeded  on  a  course  for  the  island  of  Lanzarote,  one 
of  the  Canaries.  They  made,  during  the  day  and  night,  25 
leagues. 

Wednesday,  St/i  of  August. 

Opinions  respecting  their  position  varied  among  the 
pilots  of  the  three  caravels  ;  but  that  of  the  Admiral 
proved  to  be  nearer  the  truth.  He  wished  to  go  to  Gran 
Canária,  to  leave  the  caravel  Pinta,  because  she  was  dis- 
abled by  the  faulty  hanging  of  her  rudder,  and  was  making 
water.  He  intended  to  obtain  another  there  if  one  could 
be  found.     They  could  not  reach  the  place  that  day. 

Thursday,  gt/i  of  A  ugust. 

The  Admiral  was  not  able  to  reach  Gomera  until  the 
night  of  Sunday,  while  Martin  Alonso  remained  on  that 

C  2 


20  COMERA. 

coast  of  Gran  Canária  by  order  of  the  Admiral,  because  his 
vessel  could  not  be  navigated.  Afterwards  the  Admiral 
took  her  to  Canária,  and  they  repaired  the  Pinta  very 
thoroughly  through  the  pains  and  labour  of  the  Admiral,  of 
Martin  Alonso,  and  of  the  rest.1  Finally  they  came  to 
Gomera.  They  saw  a  great  fire  issue  from  the  mountain 
of  the  island  of  Tenerife,  which  is  of  great  height.  They 
rigged  the  Pinta  with  square  sails,  for  she  was  lateen 
rigged  ;  and  the  Admiral  reached  Gomera  on  Sunday,  the 
2nd  of  September,  with  the  Pinta  repaired. 

The  Admiral  says  that  many  honourable  Spanish  gentle- 
men who  were  at  Gomera  with  Dona  Ines  Peraza,  mother 
of  Guillen  Peraza  (who  was  afterwards  the  first  Count  of 
Gomera),  and  who  were  natives  of  the  island  of  Hierro,  de- 
clared that  every  year  they  saw  land  to  the  west  of  the 
Canaries  ;  and  others,  natives  of  Gomera,  affirmed  the  same 
on  oath.  The  Admiral  here  says  that  he  remembers,  when 
in  Portugal  in  the  year  1484,  a  man  came  to  the  King  from 
the  island  of  Madeira,  to  beg  for  a  caravel  to  go  to  this  land 
that  was  seen,  who  swore  that  it  could  be  seen  every  year, 
and  always  in  the  same  way.  He  also  says  that  he  re- 
collects the  same  thing  being  affirmed  in  the  islands  of  the 
Azores  ;  and  all  these  lands  were  described  as  in  the  same 
direction,  and  as  being  like  each  other,  and  of  the  same  size.2 


1  Herrera  says  that  the  rig  of  the  Niiía  was  altered  from  lateen  to 
square  sails,  at  this  time;  and  the  Pinta  was  supplied  with  a  new 
rudder.     {Dec.  I,  Lib.  1,  cap.  ix.) 

2  By  the  death  of  Fernan  Peraza  in  1452,  the  lordship  of  the 
Canaries  remained  with  his  daughter  Doha  Ines,  married  to  Diego  de 
Herrera,  whose  title  was  confirmed  by  the  King,  Don  Enrique  IV,  on 
the  28th  of  September  1454.  Then,  as  the  Admiral  says,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Gomera  and  of  Hierro  saw  land  to  the  westward  every  year, 
which  they  supposed  to  be  the  imaginary  isle  of  San  Borondon.  After- 
wards the  illusions  and  vulgar  belief  in  its  existence  continued  in  spite 
of  the  ships  sent  to  find  it,  which  never  were  able  to  do  so,  although 
the    ablest  mariners  were  employed  on  the  service.      Viera,  in   his 


DEPARTURE  FROM  COMERA.  21 

Having  taken  in  water,  wood,  and  meat,  and  all  else  that 
the  men  had  who  were  left  at  Gomera  by  the  Admiral  when 
he  went  to  the  island  of  Canária  to  repair  the  caravel  Pinta, 
he  finally  made  sail  from  the  said  island  of  Gomera,  with 
his  three  caravels,  on  Thursday,  the  6th  day  of  September. 

Thursday,  6tk  of  September. 

He  departed  on  that  day  from  the  port  of  Gomera  in  the 
morning,  and  shaped  a  course  to  go  on  his  voyage ;  having 
received  tidings  from  a  caravel  that  came  from  the  island 
of  Hierro  that    three    Portuguese    caravels  were  off  that 

history  of  the  Canaries,  refers  to  all  these  attempts  in  detail,  with 
sincerity  and  critical  judgment,  and  Feijoo  refutes  the  stories  as 
superstitions  of  the  common  people. 

Pedro  de  Medina,  in  his  Grandezas  de  Espana,  says  that  at  no  great 
distance  from  the  island  of  Madeira  there  was  another  island  called 
Antilia,  which  is  not  now  seen,  but  which  is  found  figured  on  a  very 
ancient  sea-chart  ;  and  Viera  affirms  that  some  Portuguese  and  in- 
habitants of  Madeira  saw  lands  to  the  westward  which  they  were  never 
able  to  reach,  although  they  tried.  From  this  took  its  origin  the 
representing  on  the  charts,  which  were  then  drawn,  of  some  new 
islands  in  those  seas,  especially  Antilia  and  San  Borondon.  This  is 
found  on  the  globe  which  was  drawn  by  Martin  Behaim  at  Nurem- 
berg in  1492,  to  the  S.W.  of  Hierro,  though  the  Cape  Verde  Isles  are 
interposed  between  them. 

From  these  groundless  notions  which  prevailed  for  nearly  four 
centuries,  and  particularly  at  the  time  of  the  discoveries  at  the  end  of 
the  fifteenth  and  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  centuries,  and  from  the 
malignant  envy  that  strove  to  detract  from  the  merit  of  the  great 
Columbus,  may  have  arisen  the  rumour  that  the  new  continent  and 
islands  had  previously  been  discovered  either  by  Alonso  Sanchez  de 
Huelva,  or  by  some  other  Portuguese  or  Biscayan  navigator,  as 
several  Spaniards  wrote  ;  or  by  Martin  de  Behaim,  as  even  in  modern 
times  some  foreigners  have  affirmed.  But  Oviedo,  a  contemporary 
author,  said  that  in  reality  no  one  was  able  to  declare  this  novelty 
which  was  current  among  the  vulgar,  and  that  he  considered  it  to 
be  false.  Don  Cristobal  Cladera,  in  his  Investigaciones  Históricas, 
refuted  these  pretensions  of  natives  and  foreigners  with  very  solid 
reasoning,  defending  the  merit  and  glory  of  the  first  Admiral  of  the 
Indies. — N. 


22        TWO  RECKONINGS  FOR  THE  VOYAGE. 

island  with  the  object  of  taking  him.  (This  must  have 
been  the  result  of  the  King's  annoyance  that  Colon  should 
have  gone  to  Castille.1)  There  was  a  calm  all  that  day  and 
night,  and  in  the  morning  he  found  himself  between 
Gomera  and  Tenerife. 

Friday \  yth  of  September. 

The  calm  continued  all  Friday  and  Saturday,  until  the 
third  hour  of  the  night. 

Saturday,  8t/t  of  September. 

At  the  third  hour  of  Saturday  night  it  began  to  blow 
from  the  N.E.,  and  the  Admiral  shaped  a  course  to  the 
west.  He  took  in  much  sea  over  the  bows,  which  retarded 
progress,  and  9  leagues  were  made  in  that  day  and  night. 

Sunday,  gt/i  of  September. 

This  day  the  Admiral  made  19  leagues,  and  he  arranged 

to  reckon  less  than  the  number  run,  because  if  the  voyage 

was  of  long  duration,  the  people  would  not  be  so  terrified 

and  disheartened.     In  the  night  he  made  120  miles,  at  the 

rate   of    12    miles    an    hour,  which  are  30  leagues.     The 

sailors  steered  badly,  letting  the  ship  fall  off  to  N.E.,  and 

even  more,  respecting  which  the  Admiral  complained  many 

times. 

Monday,  lot/i  of  September. 

In  this  day  and  night  he  made  60  leagues,  at  the  rate  of 
10  miles  an  hour,  which  are  2\  leagues ;  but  he  only 
counted  48  leagues,  that  the  people  might  not  be  alarmed 
if  the  voyage  should  be  long. 

Tuesday,  nt/i  of  September. 

That  day  they  sailed  on  their  course,  which  was  west, 
and  made  20  leagues  and  more.     They  saw  a  large  piece 

1  An  interpolation  by  Las  Casas. 


VARIATION  OF  THE  COMPASS. 


*â 


of  the  mast  of  a  ship  of  120  tons,  but  were  unable  to  get 
it.  In  the  night  they  made  nearly  20  leagues,  but  only 
counted  16,  for  the  reason  already  given. 

Wednesday,  12th  of  September. 

That  day,  steering  their  course,  they  made  33  leagues 
during  the  day  and  night,  counting  less. 

Thursday,  13th  of  September. 

That  day  and  night,  steering  their  course,  which  was 
west,  they  made  33  leagues,  counting  3  or  4  less.  The 
currents  were  against  them.  On  this  day,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  night,  the  needles  turned  a  half  point  to 
north-west,  and  in  the  morning  they  turned  somewhat 
more  north-west.1 

Friday,  \\tJi  of  September. 

That  day  they  navigated,  on  their  westerly  course,  day 
and  night,  20  leagues,  counting  a  little  less.  Here  those  of 
the  caravel  Nina  reported  that  they  had  seen  a  tern2  and  a 
boatswain  bird,3  and  these  birds  never  go  more  than  25 
leagues  from  the  land. 

Saturday,  i$th  of  September. 

That  day  and  night  they  made  27  leagues  and  rather 
more  on  their  west  course ;  and  in  the  early  part  of  the 
night  there  fell    from  heaven  into  the  sea   a  marvellous 

1  "  From  this",  says  Herrera,  "  the  Admiral  knew  that  the  needle 
did  not  point  to  the  North  Star  but  to  another  fixed  point  that  is 
invisible.  To  turn  north-west  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  the  fleur-de- 
tys,  which  denotes  the  north  point,  does  not  point  directly  to  the 
north,  but  that  it  turns  to  the  left  hand."  He  adds  that  this  variation 
had  never  been  observed  by  anyone  up  to  that  time,  and  that  it 
caused  much  astonishment.     (Dec.  I,  Lib.  i,cap.  ix.) 

2  Garjao.  3  Rabo  de  junco. 


■ 


24  VARIATION  OF  THE  COMPASS. 

flame  of  fire,1  at  a  distance  of  about  4  or  5  leagues  from 
them. 

Sunday,  1 6th  of  September. 

That  day  and  night  they  steered  their  course  west,  mak- 
ing 39  leagues,  but  the  Admiral  only  counted  ^6.  There 
were  some  clouds  and  small  rain.  The  Admiral  says  that 
on  that  day,  and  ever  afterwards,  they  met  with  very  tem- 
perate breezes,  so  that  there  was  great  pleasure  in  enjoy- 
ing the  mornings,  nothing  being  wanted  but  the  song  of 
nightingales.  He  says  that  the  weather  was  like  April  in 
Andalusia.  Here  they  began  to  see  many  tufts  of  grass 
which  were  very  green,  and  appeared  to  have  been  quite 
recently  torn  from  the  land.  From  this  they  judged  that 
they  were  near  some  island,  but  not  the  main  land,  accord- 
ing to  the  Admiral,  "  because",  as  he  says,  "  I  make  the 
main  land  to  be  more  distant". 

Monday,  ijth  of  September. 

They  proceeded  on  their  west  course,  and  made  over 
50  leagues  in  the  day  and  night,  but  the  Admiral  only 
counted  47.  They  were  aided  by  the  current.  They  saw 
much  very  fine  grass  and  herbs  from  rocks,  which  came 
from  the  west.  They,  therefore,  considered  that  they 
were  near  land.  The  pilots  observed  the  north  point,  and 
found  that  the  needles  turned  a  full  point  to  the  west  of 
north.  So  the  mariners  were  alarmed  and  dejected,  and 
did  not  give  their  reason.  But  the  Admiral  knew,  and 
ordered  that  the  north  should  be  again  observed  at  dawn. 
They  then  found  that  the  needles  were  true.  The  cause 
was  that  the  star  makes  the  movement,  and  not  the  needles."2 


1  "  Ramo"  in  the  Journal.     Herrera  has  ''  Llama  de  fuego". 

2  The  ingenious  Columbus,  who  was  the  first  observer  of  variation, 
succeeded  in  allaying  the   fears  of  his  people,  by  explaining,  in  a 


LOVELY  WEATHER.  25 

At  dawn,  on  that  Monday,  they  saw  much  more  weed 
appearing,  like  herbs  from  rivers,  in  which  they  found  a 
live  crab,  which  the  Admiral  kept.  He  says  that  these 
crabs  are  certain  signs  of  land.  The  sea-water  was  found 
to  be  less  salt  than  it  had  been  since  leaving  the  Canaries. 
The  breezes  were  always  soft.  Everyone  was  pleased,  and 
the  best  sailers  went  ahead  to  sight  the  first  land.  They 
saw  many  tunny-fish,  and  the  crew  of  the  Nina  killed  one. 
The  Admiral  here  says  that  these  signs  of  land  came  from 
the  west,  "  in  which  direction  I  trust  in  that  high  God  in 
whose  hands  are  all  victories  that  very  soon  we  shall  sight 
land".  In  that  morning  he  says  that  a  white  bird  was  seen 
which  has  not  the  habit  of  sleeping  on  the  sea,  called  rabo 
de  junco  (boatswain-bird). 


Tuesday,  1 8t/i  of  September. 

This  day  and  night  they  made  over  55  leagues,  the 
Admiral  only  counting  48.  In  all  these  days  the  sea  was 
very  smooth,  like  the  river  at  Seville.  This  day  Martin 
Alonso,  with  the  Pinta,  which  was  a  fast  sailer,  did  not 
wait,  for  he  said  to  the  Admiral,  from  his  caravel,  that  he 
had  seen  a  great  multitude  of  birds  flying  westward,  that 
he  hoped  to  see  land  that  night,  and  that  he    therefore 


specious  manner,  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon.  The  surprise  and 
anxiety  of  the  pilots  and  sailors  are  decisive  proofs  that  no  one  had 
observed  until  then  the  variation  of  the  needle. — N. 

Columbus  had  crossed  the  point  of  no  variation,  which  was  then 
near  the  meridian  of  Flores,  in  the  Azores,  and  found  the  variation  no 
longer  easterly,  but  more  than  a  point  westerly.  His  explanation  that 
the  pole-star,  by  means  of  which  the  change  was  detected,  was  not 
itself  stationary,  is  very  plausible.  For  the  pole-star  really  does 
describe  a  circle  round  the  pole  of  the  earth,  equal  in  diameter  to 
about  six  times  that  of  the  sun  ;  but  this  not  equal  to  the  change 
observed  in  the  direction  of  the  needle. 


20  INDICATIONS  OF  LAND. 

pressed  onward.     A  great  cloud    appeared   in  the  north, 
which  is  a  sign  of  the  proximity  of  land.1 


Wednesday,  yjjth  of  September. 

The  Admiral  continued  on  his  course,  and  during  the 
day  and  night  he  made  but  25  leagues  because  it  was  calm. 
He  counted  22.  This  day,  at  10  o'clock,  a  booby2  came  to 
the  ship,  and  in  the  afternoon  another  arrived,  these  birds 
not  generally  going  more  than  20  leagues  from  the  land. 
There  was  also  some  drizzling  rain  without  wind,  which  is  a 
sure  sign  of  land.  The  Admiral  did  not  wish  to  cause 
delay  by  beating  to  windward  to  ascertain  whether  land  was 
near,  but  he  considered  it  certain  that  there  were  islands 
both  to  the  north  and  south  of  his  position,  (as  indeed  there 
were,  and  he  was  passing  through  the  middle  of  them3). 
For  his  desire  was  to  press  onwards  to  the  Indies,  the 
weather  being  fine.  For  on  his  return,  God  willing,  he 
could  see  all.  These  are  his  own  words.  Here  the  pilots 
found  their  positions.  He  of  the  Nina  made  the  Canaries 
440  leagues  distant,  the  Pinta  420.  The  pilot  of  the 
Admiral's  ship  made  the  distance  exactly  400  leagues.4 

Thursday,  20th  of  September. 

This  day  the  course  was  W.  b.  N.,  and  as  her  head  was 
all  round  the  compass  owing  to  the  calm  that  prevailed, 
the  ships  made  only  7  or  8  leagues.  Two  boobies  came  to 
the  ship,  and  afterwards  another,  a  sign  of  the  proximity 
of  land.     They  saw  much  weed,  although  none  was  seen 


1  For  eleven  days  they  had  not  had  to  trim  sails  so  much  as  a 
pal  inn,  the  wind  always  aft,  the  Admiral  constantly  noting' everything, 
and  proceeding  carefully  with  astrolabe  and  sounding-lead.  (Herrera, 
Dec.  I,  Lib.  1,  cap.  ix.) 

2  Alcatraz.  3  Interpolation  by  Las  Casas. 
4  The  distance  of  the  Admiral's  pilot  is  exact. — N. 


SARGASSO  SEA.  27 

on  the  previous  day.  They  caught  a  bird  with  the  hand, 
which  was  like  a  tern.1  But  it  was  a  river-bird,  not  a  sea- 
bird,  the  feet  being  like  those  of  a  gull.  At  dawn  two 
or  three  land-birds  came  singing  to  the  ship,  and  they 
disappeared  before  sunset.  Afterwards  a  booby  came 
from  W.N.W.,  and  flew  to  the  S.W.,  which  was  a  sign 
that  it  left  land  in  the  W.N.W. ;  for  these  birds  sleep 
on  shore,  and  go  to  sea  in  the  mornings  in  search  of  food, 
not  extending  their  flight  more  than  20  leagues  from  the 

land. 

Friday,  21st  of  September. 

Most  of  the  day  it  was  calm,  and  later  there  was  a  little 
wind.  During  the  day  and  night  they  did  not  make  good 
more  than  13  leagues.  At  dawn  they  saw  so  much  weed 
that  the  sea  appeared  to  be  covered  with  it,  and  it  came 
from  the  west.  A  booby  was  seen.  The  sea  was  very 
smooth,  like  a  river,  and  the  air  the  best  in  the  world. 
They  saw  a  whale,  which  is  a  sign  that  they  were  near 
land,  because  they  always  keep  near  the  shore. 

Saturday,  22nd  of  September. 

They  shaped  a  course  W.N.W.  more  or  less,  her  head 
turning  from  one  to  the  other  point,  and  made  30  leagues. 
Scarcely  any  weed  was  seen.  They  saw  some  sandpipers 
and  another  bird.  Here  the  Admiral  says  :  "  This  con- 
trary wind  was  very  necessary  for  me,  because  my  people 
were  much  excited  at  the  thought  that  in  these  seas  no 
wind  ever  blew  in  the  direction  of  Spain."  Part  of  the 
day  there  was  no  weed,  and  later  it  was  very  thick. 

Sunday,  23rd  of  September. 
They  shaped  a  course  N.W.,  and  at  times  more  northerly; 
occasionally  they  were  on   their  course,  which  was  west, 

1  Garjao. 


28  THE  TOSCANELLI  CHART. 

and  they  made  about  22  leagues.  They  saw  a  dove 
and  a  booby,  another  river-bird,  and  some  white  birds. 
There  was  a  great  deal  of  weed,  and  they  found  crabs  in 
it.  The  sea  being  smooth  and  calm,  the  crew  began  to 
murmur,  saying  that  here  there  was  no  great  sea,  and  that 
the  wind  would  never  blow  so  that  they  could  return  to 
Spain.  Afterwards  the  sea  rose  very  much,  without  wind, 
which  astonished  them.  The  Admiral  here  says  :  "  Thus 
the  high  sea  was  very  necessary  to  me,  such  as  had  not 
appeared  but  in  the  time  of  the  Jews  when  they  went  out 
of  Egypt  and  murmured  against  Moses,  who  delivered 
them  out  of  captivity." 

Monday,  24///  of  September. 

The  Admiral  went  on  his  west  course  all  day  and  night, 
making  14  leagues.  He  counted  12.  A  booby  came  to 
the  ship,  and  many  sandpipers. 

Tuesday,  2$t/i  of  September. 

This  day  began  with  a  calm,  and  afterwards  there  was 
wind.  They  were  on  their  west  course  until  night.  The 
Admiral  conversed  with  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon,  captain  of 
the  other  caravel  Pinta,  respecting  a  chart  which  he  had 
sent  to  the  caravel  three  days  before,  on  which,  as  it  would 
appear,  the  Admiral  had  certain  islands  depicted  in  that 
sea.1     Martin  Alonso  said  that  the  ships  were  in  the  posi- 


1  This  chart,  drawn  for  the  Admiral,  must  have  been  that  which 
Paulo  Toscanelli,  the  celebrated  Florentine  astronomer,  sent  to  Lisbon 
in  1474.  It  included  from  the  north  of  Ireland  to  the  end  of  Guinea, 
with  all  the  islands  situated  on  that  route  ;  and  towards  the  west  it 
showed  the  beginning  of  the  Indies,  and  the  islands  and  places  whither 
they  were  proceeding.  Colon  saw  this  chart  and  read  the  accounts  of 
travellers,  especially  Marco  Polo,  which  confirmed  him  in  the  idea 
of  finding  India  by  the  west,  though  it  had  hitherto  always  been 
approached  by  the  east.     The  situations  of  coasts  and  islands  fixed  on 


FALSE  ALARM  OF  LAND.  29 

tion  on  which  the  islands  were  placed,  and  the  Admiral 
replied  that  so  it  appeared  to  him  :  but  it  might  be  that 
they  had  not  fallen  in  with  them,  owing  to  the  currents 
which  had  always  set  the  ships  to  the  N.E.,  and  that  they 
had  not  made  so  much  as  the  pilots  reported.  The 
Admiral  then  asked  for  the  chart  to  be  returned,  and  it 
was  sent  back  on  a  line.  The  Admiral  then  began  to  plot 
the  position  on  it,  with  the  pilot  and  mariners.  At  sunset 
Martin  Alonso  went  up  on  the  poop  of  his  ship,  and  with 
much  joy  called  to  the  Admiral,  claiming  the  reward  as  he 
had  sighted  land.  When  the  Admiral  heard  this  positively 
declared,  he  says  that  he  gave  thanks  to  the  Lord  on  his 
knees,  while  Martin  Alonso  said  the  Gloria  in  excelsis  with 
his  people.  The  Admiral's  crew  did  the  same.  Those  of 
the  Nina  all  went  up  on  the  mast  and  into  the  rigging,  and 
declared  that  it  was  land.  It  so  seemed  to  the  Admiral, 
and  that  it  was  distant  25  leagues.  They  all  continued  to 
declare  it  was  land  until  night.  The  Admiral  ordered  the 
course  to  be  altered  from  W.  to  S.W.,  in  which  direction 
the  land  had  appeared.  That  day  they  made  4  leagues 
on  a  west  course,  and  17  S.W.  during  the  night,  in  all  21  ; 
but  the  people  were  told  that  13  was  the  distance  made 
good  :  for  it  was  always  feigned  to  them  that  the  distances 
were  less,  so  that  the  voyage  might  not  appear  so  long. 
Thus  two  reckonings  were  kept  on  this  voyage,  the  shorter 
being  feigned,  and  the  longer  being  the  true  one.  The  sea 
was  very  smooth,  so  that  many  sailors  bathed  alongside. 
They  saw  many  dorados  and  other  fish. 

such  vague  information  must  have  been  very  inaccurate,  as  they  were  I 
on  the  globe  of  Martin  Behaim,  constructed  in  1492. — N. 

Mr.  Harrissehas  translated  the  words  segun  parece  tenia  pintadas  el 
Almirante  ciertas  islas,  "  in  which  the  Admiral  seemed  to  have  painted 
certain  islands,"  and  assumes  that  the  Admiral  had  painted  the  islands 
himself.  But  I  think  the  correct  rendering  of  the  passage  is  that  the 
Admiral  had  a  chart  with  certain  islands  depicted  on  it.  (See  Dis- 
covery of  North  America,  p.  401.) 


30  HABITS  OF  THE  MAN-O'-WAR  BIRD. 

Wednesday,  26th  of  September. 

The  Admiral  continued  on  the  west  course  until  after 
noon.  Then  he  altered  course  to  S.W.,  until  he  made  out 
that  what  had  been  said  to  be  land  was  only  clouds.  Day 
and  night  they  made  31  leagues,  counting  24  for  the  people. 
The  sea  was  like  a  river,  the  air  pleasant  and  very  mild. 

Thursday,  27  th  of  September. 

The  course  west,  and  distance  made  good  during  day 
and  night  24  leagues,  20  being  counted  for  the  people. 
Many  dorados  came.  One  was  killed.  A  boatswain-bird 
came. 

Friday,  2St/i  of  September. 

The  course  was  west,  and  the  distance,  owing  to  calms, 
only  14  leagues  in  day  and  night,  13  leagues  being  counted. 
They  met  with  little  weed  ;  but  caught  two  dorados,  and 
more  in  the  other  ships. 

Saturday,  2gth  of  September. 

The  course  was  west,  and  they  made  24  leagues,  count- 
ing 21  for  the  people.  Owing  to  calms,  the  distance  made 
good  during  day  and  night  was  not  much.  They  saw  a 
bird  called  rabiforcado  (man-o'-war  bird),  which  makes  the 
boobies  vomit  what  they  have  swallowed,  and  eats  it, 
maintaining  itself  on  nothing  else.  It  is  a  sea-bird,  but 
does  not  sleep  on  the  sea,  and  does  not  go  more  than 
20  leagues  from  the  land.  There  are  many  of  them  at  the 
Cape  Verde  Islands.  Afterwards  they  saw  two  boobies. 
The  air  was  very  mild  and  agreeable,  and  the  Admiral 
says  that  nothing  was  wanting  but  to  hear  the  nightingale. 
The  sea  smooth  as  a  river.  Later,  three  boobies  and  a 
man-o'-war  bird  were  seen  three  times.  There  was  much 
weed. 


MORE  ABOUT  VARIATION.  3 1 

Sunday,  ysth  of  September. 

The  western  course  was  steered,  and  during  the  day  and 
night,  owing  to  calms,  only  14  leagues  were  made,  1 1  being 
counted.  Four  boatswain-birds  came  to  the  ship,  which  is 
a  great  sign  of  land,  for  so  many  birds  of  this  kind  together 
is  a  sign  that  they  are  not  straying  or  lost.  They  also 
twice  saw  four  boobies.  There  was  much  weed.  Note  that 
the  stars  which  are  called  las  guardiãs  (the  Pointers),  when 
night  comes  on,  are  near  the  western  point,  and  when 
dawn  breaks  they  are  near  the  N.E.  point ;  so  that,  during 
the  whole  night,  they  do  not  appear  to  move  more  than 
three  lines  or  9  hours,  and  this  on  each  night.  The 
Admiral  says  this,  and  also  that  at  nightfall  the  needles 
vary  a  point  westerly,  while  at  dawn  they  agree  exactly 
with  the  star.  From  this  it  would  appear  that  the  north 
star  has  a  movement  like  the  other  stars,  while  the  needles 
always  point  correctly. 

Monday,  1st  of  October. 

Course  west,  and  25  leagues  made  good,  counted  for  the 
crew  as  20  leagues.  There  was  a  heavy  shower  of  rain. 
At  dawn  the  Admiral's  pilot  made  the  distance  from 
Hierro  5781  leagues  to  the  west.  The  reduced  reckoning 
which  the  Admiral  showed  to  the  crew  made  it  584  leagues  ; 
but  the  truth  which  the  Admiral  observed  and  kept  secret 
was  707. 

Tuesday,  2nd  of  October. 

Course  west,  and  during  the  day  and  night  39  leagues 
were  made  good,  counted  for  the  crew  as  30.  The  sea 
always  smooth.  Many  thanks  be  given  to  God,  says  the 
Admiral,  that  the  weed  is  coming  from  east  to  west,  con- 

1  Herrera  says  588. 


32  BIRDS  AND  FLYING  FISH. 

trary  to  its  usual  course.  Many  fish  were  seen,  and  one 
was  killed.  A  white  bird  was  also  seen  that  appeared  to 
be  a  gull. 

Wednesday,  yd  of  October. 

They  navigated  on  the  usual  course,  and  made  good 
47  leagues,  counted  as  40.  Sandpipers  appeared,  and 
much  weed,  some  of  it  very  old  and  some  quite  fresh  and 
having  fruit.  They  saw  no  birds.  The  Admiral,  there- 
fore, thought  that  they  had  left  the  islands  behind  them 
which  were  depicted  on  the  charts.  The  Admiral  here 
says  that  he  did  not  wish  to  keep  the  ships  beating  about 
during  the  last  week,  and  in  the  last  few  days  when  there 
were  so  many  signs  of  land,  although  he  had  information 
of  certain  islands  in  this  region.  For  he  wished  to  avoid 
delay,  his  object  being  to  reach  the  Indies.  He  says  that 
to  delay  would  not  be  wise. 

Thursday,  ^tJi  of  October. 

Course  west,  and  63  leagues  made  good  during  the  day 
and  night,  counted  as  46.  More  than  forty  sandpipers 
came  to  the  ship  in  a  flock,  and  two  boobies,  and  a  ship's 
boy  hit  one  with  a  stone.  There  also  came  a  man-o'-\var 
bird  and  a  white  bird  like  a  gull. 

Friday \  $t/i  of  October. 

The  Admiral  steered  his  course,  going  1 1  miles  an  hour, 
and  during  the  day  and  night  they  made  good  57  leagues, 
as  the  wind  increased  somewhat  during  the  night  :  45  were 
counted.  The  sea  was  smooth  and  quiet.  "  To  God",  he 
says,  "  be  many  thanks  given,  the  air  being  pleasant  and 
temperate,  with  no  weed,  many  sandpipers,  and  flying-fish 
coming  on  the  deck  in  numbers." 


SIGNS  OF  LAND.  33 

Saturday,  6th  of  October. 

The  Admiral  continued  his  west  course,  and  during  day 
and  night  they  made  good  40  leagues,  33  being  counted. 
This  night  Martin  Alonso  said  that  it  would  be  well  to 
steer  south  of  west,  and  it  appeared  to  the  Admiral  that 
Martin  Alonso  did  not  say  this  with  respect  to  the  island 
of  Cipango.  He  saw  that  if  an  error  was  made  the  land 
would  not  be  reached  so  quickly,  and  that  consequently 
it  would  be  better  to  go  at  once  to  the  continent  and 
afterwards  to  the  islands. 

Sunday,  yih  of  October. 

The  west  course  was  continued  ;  for  two  hours  they  went 
at  the  rate  of  12  miles  an  hour,  and  afterwards  8  miles  an 
hour.  They  made  good  23  leagues,  counting  18  for  the 
people.  This  day,  at  sunrise,  the  caravel  Nina,  which 
went  ahead,  being  the  best  sailer,  and  pushed  forward  as 
much  as  possible  to  sight  the  land  first,  so  as  to  enjoy  the 
reward  which  the  Sovereigns  had  promised  to  whoever 
should  see  it  first,  hoisted  a  flag  at  the  mast-head  and  fired 
a  gun,  as  a  signal  that  she  had  sighted  land,  for  such  was 
the  Admiral's  order.  He  had  also  ordered  that,  at  sunrise 
and  sunset,  all  the  ships  should  join  him  ;  because  those 
two  times  are  most  proper  for  seeing  the  greatest  distance, 
the  haze  clearing  away.  No  land  was  seen  during  the 
afternoon,  as  reported  by  the  caravel  Nina,  and  they  passed 
a  great  number  of  birds  flying  from  N.  to  SAV.  This  gave 
rise  to  the  belief  that  the  birds  were  either  going  to  sleep 
on  land,  or  were  flying  from  the  winter  which  might  be 
supposed  to  be  near  in  the  land  whence  they  were  coming 
The  Admiral  was  aware  that  most  of  the  islands  held 
the  Portuguese  were  discovered  by  the  flight  of  birds. 
For  this  reason  he  resolved  to  give  up  the  west  course,  and 
to  shape  a  course  W.S.W.  for  the  two  following  days.      He 

D 


34  DISCONTENT  OF  THE  SAILORS. 

began  the  new  course  one  hour  before  sunset.  They  made 
good,  during  the  night,  about  5  leagues,  and  23  in  the  day, 
altogether  28  leagues. 

Monday,  8t/t  of  October. 

The  course  was  W.S.W.,  and  \\\  or  12  leagues  were 
made  good  in  the  day  and  night  ;  and  at  times  it  appears 
that  they  went  at  the  rate  of  15  miles  an  hour  during  the 
night  (if  the  handwriting  is  not  deceptive).1  The  sea  was 
like  the  river  at  Seville.  "  Thanks  be  to  God",  says  the 
Admiral,  "  the  air  is  very  soft  like  the  April  at  Seville  ; 
and  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here,  so  balmy  are  the  breezes." 
The  weed  seemed  to  be  very  fresh.  There  were  many 
land-birds,  and  they  took  one  that  was  flying  to  the  S.W. 
Terns,  ducks,  and  a  booby  were  also  seen. 

Tuesday,  gt/i  of  October. 

The  course  was  S.W.,  and  they  made  5  leagues.  .The 
wind  then  changed,  and  the  Admiral  steered  W.  by  X. 
4  leagues.  Altogether,  in  day  and  night,  they  made 
1 1  leagues  by  day  and  20J  leagues  by  night  ;  counted  as 
17  leagues  altogether.  Throughout  the  night  birds  were 
heard  passing. 

Wednesday,  iot/1  of  October. 

The  course  was  W.S.W.,  and  they  went  at  the  rate  of 
10  miles  an  hour,  occasionally  12  miles,  and  sometimes  7. 
During  the  day  and  night  they  made  59  leagues,  counted 
as  no  more  than  44.  Here  the  people  could  endure  no 
longer.  They  complained  of  the  length  of  the  voyage. 
But  the  Admiral  cheered  them  up  in  the  best  way  he  could, 
giving  them  good  hopes  of  the  advantages  they  might 
gain   from   it.     He  added  that,  however  much  they  might 

1  The  parenthesis  is  by  Las  Casas.  These  miles  were  four  to  a 
league  (see  note  2,  p.  18);  so  that  fifteen  miles  would  not  really  be 
quite  ten  geographical  miles  an  hour. 


LAND  SIGHTED.  35 

complain,  he  had  to  go  to  the  Indies,  and  that  he  would 
go  on  until  he  found  them,  with  the  help  of  our  Lord. 

Thursday,  nt/i  of  October. 

The  course  was  W.S.W.,  and  there  was  more  sea  than 
there  had  been  during  the  whole  of  the  voyage.  They  saw 
sandpipers,  and  a  green  reed  near  the  ship.  Those  of  the 
caravel  Pinta  saw  a  cane  and  a  pole,  and  they  took  up 
another  small  pole  which  appeared  to  have  been  worked 
with  iron  ;  also  another  bit  of  cane,  a  land-plant,  and  a 
small  board.  The  crew  of  the  caravel  Nina  also  saw  signs 
of  land,  and  a  small  branch  covered  with  berries.  Every- 
one breathed  afresh  and  rejoiced  at  these  signs.  The  run 
until  sunset  was  26  leagues. 

After  sunset  the  Admiral  returned  to  his  original  west 
course,  and  they  went  along  at  the  rate  of  12  miles  an 
hour.  Up  to  two  hours  after  midnight  they  had  gone 
90  miles,  equal  to  22 \  leagues.  As  the  caravel  Pinta  was 
a  better  sailer,  and  went  ahead  of  the  Admiral,  she  found 
the  land,  and  made  the  signals  ordered  by  the  Admiral. 
The  land  was  first  seen  by  a  sailor  named  Rodrigo  de 
Triana.1  But  the  Admiral,  at  ten  in  the  previous  night, 
being  on  the  castle  of  the  poop,  saw  a  light,  though  it  was 
so  uncertain  that  he  could  not  affirm  it  was  land.  He 
called  Pero  Gutierrez,  a  gentleman  of  the  King's  bed- 
chamber, and  said  that  there  seemed  to  be  a  light,  and 
that  he  should  look  at  it.     He  did  so,  and  saw  it.2     The 


1  It  was  full  moon  on  October  5th.  On  the  night  of  the  11th  the 
moon  rose  at  1 1  p.m.,  and  at  2  a.m.  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  it  was 
39o  above  the  horizon.  It  would  be  shining  brightly  on  the  sandy 
shores  of  an  island  some  miles  ahead,  being  in  its  third  quarter,  and  a 
little  behind  Rodrigo  de  Triana,  when  he  sighted  land  at  2  A.M. 

2  Oviedo  says  that,  after  the  Admiral  and  Gutierrez  saw  the  light,  a 
sailor  from  Lepe  called  out  from  the  forecastle  that  there  was  a  light. 
He  was  told  by  Salcedo,  the  Admiral's  servant,  that  it  had  already 
been  seen.     Oviedo  adds  that  this  man  from  Lepe  was  so  disgusted 

D  2 


36  THE  LAND  SIGHTED. 

Admiral  said  the  same  to  Rodrigo  Sanchez  of  Segovia, 
whom  the  King  and  Queen  had  sent  with  the  fleet  as 
inspector,  but  he  could  see  nothing,  because  he  was  not  in  a 
place  whence  anything  could  be  seen.  After  the  Admiral 
had  spoken  he  saw  the  light  once  or  twice,  and  it  was  like 
a  wax  candle  rising  and  falling.  It  seemed  to  few  to  be 
an  indication  of  land  ;  but  the  Admiral  made  certain  that 
land  was  close.  When  they  said  the  Salve,  which  all  the 
sailors  were  accustomed  to  sing  in  their  way,  the  Admiral 
asked  and  admonished  the  men  to  keep  a  good  look-out  on 
the  forecastle,  and  to  watch  well  for  land  ;  and  to  him 
who  should  first  cry  out  that  he  saw  land,  he  would  give  a 
silk  doublet,  besides  the  other  rewards  promised  by  the 
Sovereigns,  which  were  10,000  maravedis  to  him  who 
should  first  see  it.1  At  two  hours  after  midnight  the  land 
was  sighted  at  a  distance  of  two  leagues.  They  shortened 
sail,  and  lay  by  under  the  mainsail  without  the  bonnets. 
The  vessels  were  hove  to,  waiting  for  daylight ;  and  on 
Friday  they  arrived  at  a  small  island  of  the  Lucayos,  called, 
in   the  language  of  the    Indians,  Guanahani?     Presently 

at  not  getting  the  reward,  that  he  went  to  Africa  and  became  a 
renegade.     {Oi'iedo,  Lib.  II,  cap.  v.) 

Oviedo  derived  his  information  from  the  gossip  of  Vicente  Vanez 
Pinzon  and  Hernan  Perez  Matheos.  The  latter  is  not  in  any  of  the 
lists  of  those  who  served  in  the  expedition.  Oviedo  knew  him  as  a 
pilot  at  St.  Domingo,  and  he  certainly  alleged  that  he  was  with  the 
Admiral  in  his  first  voyage. 

Fernando  Columbus,  in  the  Vita  del  Ammiraglid,  described  the 
light  as  like  a  candle  that  went  up  and  down,  as  if  people  on  shore 
wt  re  passing  with  it  from  one  house  to  another  (cap.  xxi).  See  also 
Herrera  {Dec.  /,  Lib.  1,  cap.  xii). 

1  The  pension  of  10,000  maravedis  was  secured  on  the  dues  derived 
from  the  shambles  at  Seville.  The  Sovereigns  awarded  it  to  the 
Admiral,  because  the  light  seen  first  by  him  was  believed  to  have  been 
on  land.     {Herrera.) 

2  Watling  Island,  S.E.  point  in  Lat.  23o  55'  S.,  Long.  74o  28' W.  It 
was  named  San  Salvador  by  Columbus  (See  Letter  to  San  tangei, 
.Major's  translation,  p.  2.) 


LANDING  OF  THE  ADMIRAL.  Z7 

they  saw  naked  people.  The  Admiral  went  on  shore  in 
the  armed  boat,  and  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon,  and  Vicente 
Yanez,  his  brother,  who  was  captain  of  the  Nina.  The 
Admiral  took  the  royal  standard,  and  the  captains  went  with 
two  banners  of  the  green  cross,  which  the  Admiral  took  in 
all  the  ships  as  a  sign,  with  an  F  and  a  Y1  and  a  crown  over 
each  letter,  one  on  one  side  of  the  cross  and  the  other  on 
the  other.  Having  landed,  they  saw  trees  very  green,  and 
much  water,  and  fruits  of  diverse  kinds.  The  Admiral 
called  to  the  two  captains,  and  to  the  others  who  leaped 
on  shore,  and  to  Rodrigo  Escovedo,  secretary  of  the  whole 
fleet,  and  to  Rodrigo  Sanchez  of  Segovia,'2  and  said  that 
they  should  bear  faithful  testimony  that  he,  in  presence  of 
all,  had  taken,  as  he  now  took,  possession  of  the  said  island 
for  the  King  and  for  the  Queen,  his  Lords  making  the 
declarations  that  are  required,  as  is  more  largely  set  forth 
in  the  testimonies  which  were  then  made  in  writing. 

Presently  many  inhabitants  of  the  island  assembled. 
What  follows  is  in  the  actual  words  of  the  Admiral  in  his 
book  of  the  first  navigation  and  discovery  of  the  Indies. 
"I,"  he  says,  "that  we  might  form  great  friendship,  for  I 
knew  that  they  were  a  people  who  could  be  more  easily 
freed  and  converted  to  our  holy  faith  by  love  than  by 
force,  gave  to  some  of  them  red  caps,  and  glass  beads  to 
put  round  their  necks,  and  many  other  things  of  little 
value,  which  gave  them  great  pleasure,  and  made  them  so 
much  our  friends  that  it  was  a  marvel  to  see.  They  after- 
wards came  to  the  ship's  boats  where  we  were,  swimming 
and  bringing  us  parrots,  cotton  threads  in  skeins,  darts, 
and  many  other  things ;  and  we  exchanged  them  for 
other  things  that  we  gave  them,  such  as  glass  beads  and 
small  bells.  In  fine,  they  took  all,  and  gave  what  they  had 
with  good  will.      It  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  race  of  people 


1  Fernando  and  Ysabel.  -  The  royal  in-uector. 


38  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  NATIVES 

very  poor  in  everything.  They  go  as  naked  as  when  their 
mothers  bore  them,  and  so  do  the  women,  although  I  did 
not  see  more  than  one  young  girl.  All  I  saw  were  youths, 
none  more  than  thirty  years  of  age.  They  are  very  well 
made,  with  very  handsome  bodies,  and  very  good  coun- 
tenances. Their  hair  is  short  and  coarse,  almost  like  the 
hairs  of  a  horse's  tail.  They  wear  the  hairs  brought  down 
to  the  eyebrows,  except  a  few  locks  behind,  which  they 
wear  long  and  never  cut.  They  paint  themselves  black, 
and  they  are  the  colour  of  the  Canarians,  neither  black 
nor  white.  Some  paint  themselves  white,  others  red,  and 
others  of  what  colour  they  find.  Some  paint  their  faces, 
others  the  whole  bod}-,  some  only  round  the  eyes,  others 
only  on  the  nose.  They  neither  carry  nor  know  anything 
of  arms,  for  I  showed  them  swords,  and  they  took  them  by 
the  blade  and  cut  themselves  through  ignorance.  They 
have  no  iron,  their  darts  being  wands  without  iron,  some 
of  them  having  a  fish's  tooth  at  the  end,  and  others  being 
pointed  in  various  ways.  The)'  are  all  of  fair  stature  and 
size,  with  good  faces,  and  well  made.  I  saw  some  with 
marks  of  wounds  on  their  bodies,  and  I  made  signs  to  ask 
what  it  was,  and  they  gave  me  to  understand  that  people 
from  other  adjacent  islands  came  with  the  intention  of 
seizing  them,  and  that  they  defended  themselves.  I  be- 
lieved, and  still  believe,  that  they  come  here  from  the  main- 
land to  take  them  prisoners.  They  should  be  good  ser- 
vants and  intelligent,  for  I  observed  that  they  quickly  took 
in  what  was  said  to  them,  and  I  believe  that  they  would 
easily  be  made  Christians,  as  it  appeared  to  me  that  they 
had  no  religion.  I,  our  Lord  being  pleased,  will  take 
hence,  at  the  time  of  my  departure,  six  natives  for  your 
Highnesses,  that  they  may  learn  to  speak.  I  saw  no  beast 
of  any  kind  except  parrots,  on  this  island."  The  above  is 
in  the  words  of  the  Admiral. 


OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  GUANAHANI.  39 

Saturday,  1 3///  of  October. 

"  As  soon  as  dawn  broke  many  of  these  people  came  to 
the  beach,  all  youths,  as  I  have  said,  and  all  of  good 
stature,  a  very  handsome  people.  Their  hair  is  not  curly, 
but  loose  and  coarse,  like  horse  hair.  In  all  the  forehead 
is  broad,  more  so  than  in  any  other  people  I  have  hitherto 
seen.  Their  eyes  are  very  beautiful  and  not  small,  and 
themselves  far  from  black,  but  the  colour  of  the  Canarians. 
Nor  should  anything  else  be  expected,  as  this  island  is  in 
a  line  east  and  west  from  the  island  of  Hierro  in  the 
Canaries.  Their  legs  are  very  straight,  all  in  one  line,1  and 
no  belly,  but  very  well  formed.  They  came  to  the  ship  in 
small  canoes,  made  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree  like  a  long 
boat,  and  all  of  one  piece,  and  wonderfully  worked,  consider- 
ing the  country.  They  are  large,  some  of  them  holding  40 
to  45  men,  others  smaller,  and  some  only  large  enough  to 
hold  one  man.  They  are  propelled  with  a  paddle  like  a 
baker's  shovel,  and  go  at  a  marvellous  rate.  If  the  canoe 
capsizes  they  all  promptly  begin  to  swim,  and  to  bale  it 
out  with  calabashes  that  they  take  with  them.  They 
brought  skeins  of  cotton  thread,  parrots,  darts,  and  other 
small  things  which  it  would  be  tedious  to  recount,  and  they 
give  all  in  exchange  for  anything  that  may  be  given  to 
them.  I  was  attentive,  and  took  trouble  to  ascertain  if 
there  was  gold.  I  saw  that  some  of  them  had  a  small 
piece  fastened  in  a  hole  they  have  in  the  nose,  and  by  signs 
I  was  able  to  make  out  that  to  the  south,  or  going  from 
the  island  to  the  south,  there  was  a  king  who  had  great 
cups  full,  and  who  possessed  a  great  quantity.  I  tried  to 
get  them  to  go  there,  but  afterwards  I  saw  that  they  had 
no  inclination.  I  resolved  to  wait  until  to-morrow  in  the 
afternoon  and  then  to  depart,  shaping  a  course  to  the  S.W., 


1  "  Todos  a  una  mano," 


4-0  NATIVES  OF  GUANAHANI. 

for,  according  to  what  many  of  them  told  me,  there  was 
land  to  the  S.,  to  the  S.W.,  and  N.W.,  and  that  the  natives 
from  the  N.W.  often  came  to  attack  them,  and  went  on  to 
the  S.W.  in  search  of  gold  and  precious  stones. 

"  This  island  is  rather  large  and  very  flat,  with  bright 
green  trees,  much  water,  and  a  very  large  lake  in  the 
centre,  without  any  mountain,  and  the  whole  land  so  green 
that  it  is  a  pleasure  to  look  on  it.  The  people  are  very 
docile,  and  for  the  longing  to  possess  our  things,  and  not 
having  anything  to  give  in  return,  they  take  what  they  can 
get,  and  presently  swim  away.  Still,  they  give  away  all 
they  have  got,  for  whatever  may  be  given  to  them,  down 
to  broken  bits  of  crockery  and  glass.  I  saw  one  give  16 
skeins  of  cotton  for  three  ceotis1  of  Portugal,  equal  to  one 
blanca  of  Spain,  the  skeins  being  as  much  as  an  arroba  of 
coti'on  thread.  I  shall  keep  it,  and  shall  allow  no  one  to 
take  it,  preserving  it  all  for  your  Highnesses,  for  it  may  be 
obtained  in  abundance.  It  is  grown  in  this  island,  though 
the  short  time  did  not  admit  of  my  ascertaining  this  for 
a  certainty.  Here  also  is  found  the  gold  they  wear  fastened  in 
their  noses.  But,  in  order  not  to  lose  time,  I  intend  to  go 
and  see  if  I  can  find  the  island  of  Cipango.'2  Now,  as  it  is 
night,  all  the  natives  have  gone  on  shore  with  their  canoes." 

Sunday,  \\tJi  of  October. 
"  At  dawn  I  ordered  the  ship's  boat  and  the  boats  of  the 
caravels  to  be  got  ready,  and  I  went  along  the  coast  of  the 


1  For  ceuti,  a  coin  current  at  Ceuta,  then  belonging  to  Portugal. 
— N. 

2  Toscanelli  said,  in  his  letter,  that  Cipango  was  an  island  225 
leagues  from  Antilla,  and  that  it  so  abounded  in  gems  and  gold  that 
the  temples  and  palaces  were  covered  with  golden  plates.  Marco 
Polo  describes  it  (Hook  ill,  cap.  ii),  and  also  says  that  the  quantity  of 
gold  is  endless,  that  the  palace  is  roofed  with  gold,  and  that  pearls  are 
abundant.  Chipangu  is  derived  from  Zhi-pan,  the  Chinese  form  of 
Japan.     (  Yuie,  ii,  p.  238.) 


EXPLORING  GUANAHANI.  41 

island  to  the  N.N.E.,  to  see  the  other  side,  which  was  on 
the  other  side  to  the  east,  and  also  to  see  the  villages. 
Presently  I  saw  two  or  three,  and  the  people  all  came  to 
the  shore,  calling  out  and  giving  thanks  to  God.  Some  of 
them  brought  us  water,  others  came  with  food,  and  when 
they  saw  that  I  did  not  want  to  land,  they  got  into  the 
sea,  and  came  swimming  to  us.  We  understood  that  they 
asked  us  if  we  had  come  from  heaven.  One  old  man 
came  into  the  boat,  and  others  cried  out,  in  loud  voices,  to 
all  the  men  and  women,  to  come  and  see  the  men  who 
had  come  from  heaven,  and  to  bring  them  to  eat  and 
drink.  Many  came,  including  women,  each  bringing  some- 
thing, giving  thanks  to  God,  throwing  themselves  on  the 
ground  and  shouting  to  us  to  come  on  shore.  But  I  was 
afraid  to  land,  seeing  an  extensive  reef  of  rocks  which 
surrounded  the  island,  with  deep  water  between  it  and  the 
shore  forming  a  port  large  enough  for  as  many  ships  as 
there  are  in  Christendom,  but  with  a  very  narrow  entrance. 
It  is  true  that  within  this  reef  there  are  some  sunken 
rocks,  but  the  sea  has  no  more  motion  than  the  water  in 
a  well.  In  order  to  see  all  this  I  went  this  morning,  that 
I  might  be  able  to  give  a  full  account  to  your  Highnesses, 
and  also  where  a  fortress  might  be  established.  I  saw 
a  piece  of  land  which  appeared  like  an  island,  although  it 
is  not  one,  and  on  it  there  were  six  houses.  It  might  be 
converted  into  an  island  in  two  days,  though  I  do  not  see 
that  it  would  be  necessary,  for  these  people  are  very  simple 
as  regards  the  use  of  arms,  as  your  Highnesses  will  see  from 
the  seven  that  I  caused  to  be  taken,  to  bring  home  and 
learn  our  language  and  return;  unless  your  Highnesses 
should  order  them  all  to  be  brought  to  Castille,  or  to  be 
kept  as  captives  on  the  same  island  ;  for  with  fifty  men 
they  can  all  be  subjugated  and  made  to  do  what  is  required 
of  them.  Close  to  the  above  peninsula  there  are  gardens 
of  the  most  beautiful  trees  I  ever  saw,  and  with  leaves  as 


42  SANTA  MARIA  DE  LA  CONCEPCION. 

green  as  those  of  Castille  in  the  month  of  April  and  May, 
and  much  water.  I  examined  all  that  port,  and  after- 
wards I  returned  to  the  ship  and  made  sail.  I  saw  so 
many  islands1  that  I  hardly  knew  how  to  determine  to 
which  I  should  go  first.  Those  natives  I  had  with  me 
said,  by  signs,  that  there  were  so  many  that  they  couid  not 
be  numbered,  and  they  gave  the  names  of  more  than 
a  hundred.  At  last  I  looked  out  for  the  largest,  and 
resolved  to  shape  a  course  for  it,  and  so  I  did.  It  will  be 
distant  five  leagues  from  this  of  San  Salvador,  and  the 
others  some  more,  some  less.  All  are  very  flat,  and  all  are 
inhabited.  The  natives  make  war  on  each  other,  although 
these  are  very  simple-minded  and  handsomely-formed 
people." 

Monday,  15///  of  October. 

"  I  had  laid  by  during  the  night,  with  the  fear  of  reach- 
ing the  land  to  anchor  before  daylight,  not  knowing  whether 
the  coast  was  clear  of  rocks,  and  at  dawn  I  made  sail.  As 
the  island  was  more  than  5  leagues  distant  and  nearer  7, 
and  the  tide  checked  my  way,  it  was  noon  when  we 
arrived  at  the  said  island.  I  found  that  side  facing  towards 
the  island  of  San  Salvador  trended  north  and  south  with 
a  length  of  5  leagues,2  and  the  other  which  I  followed  ran 
east  and  west  for  more  than  10  leagues.2  As  from  this 
island  I  saw  another  larger  one  to  the  west,  I  clued  up  the 
sails,  after  having  run  all  that  day  until  night,  otherwise 
I  could  not  have  reached  the  western  cape.  I  gave  the 
name  of  Santa  Maria  dc  la  Conception*  to  the  island,  and 
almost  as  the  sun  set  I  anchored  near  the  said  cape 
to  ascertain  if  it  contained  gold.     For  the  people   I   had 

1  Deceptive  appearance  of  clouds  on  the  horizon. 

2  A  misprint  for  miles.  This  is  a  mistake  which  the  transcriber  has 
made  in  several  other  places. 

3  Island  of  Rum  Cay.     See  Letter  to  Santangel,  p.  2. 


CANOES  AND  NATIVES.  43 

taken  from  the  island  of  San  Salvador  told  me  that 
here  they  wore  very  large  rings  of  gold  on  their  arms  and 
legs.  I  really  believed  that  all  they  said  was  nonsense, 
invented  that  they  might  escape.  My  desire  was  not  to 
pass  any  island  without  taking  possession,  so  that,  one 
having  been  taken,  the  same  may  be  said  of  all.  I  anchored, 
and  remained  until  to-day,  Tuesday,  when  I  went  to  the 
shore  with  the  boats  armed,  and  landed.  The  people,  who 
were  numerous,  went  naked,  and  were  like  those  of  the 
other  island  of  San  Salvador.  They  let  us  go  over  the 
island,  and  gave  us  what  we  required.  As  the  wind 
changed  to  the  S.E.,  I  did  not  like  to  stay,  and  returned  to 
the  ship.  A  large  canoe  was  alongside  the  Nina,  and  one 
of  the  men  of  the  island  of  San  Salvador,  who  was  on 
board,  jumped  into  the  sea  and  got  into  the  canoe.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night  before,  another  swam  away  behind 
the  canoe,  which  fled,1  for  there  never  was  boat  that  could 
have  overtaken  her,  seeing  that  in  speed  they  have  a  great 
advantage.  So  they  reached  the  land  and  left  the  canoe. 
Some  of  my  people  went  on  shore  in  chase  of  them,  but 
they  all  fled  like  fowls,  and  the  canoe  they  had  left  was 
brought  alongside  the  caravel  Nina,  whither,  from  another 
direction,  another  small  canoe  came,  with  a  man  who 
wished  to  barter  with  skeins  of  cotton.  Some  sailors 
jumped  into  the  sea,  because  he  would  not  come  on  board 
the  caravel,  and  seized  him.  I  was  on  the  poop  of  my 
ship,  and  saw  everything.  So  I  sent  for  the  man,  gave 
him  a  red  cap,  some  small  beads  of  green  glass,  which 
I  put  on  his  arms,  and  small  bells,  which  I  put  in  his  ears, 
and  ordered  his  canoe,  which  was  also  on  board,  to  be 
returned  to  him.  I  sent  him  on  shore,  and  presently 
made  sail  to  go  to  the  other  large  island  which  was  in 
sight    to   the  westward.     I    also    ordered    the    other  large 

1  This  is  a  doubtful  sentence,  with  a  word  omitted. 


44  VOYAGE  TO  FERNANDINA. 

canoe,  which  the  caravel  Nina  was  towing  astern,  to  be 
cast  adrift  ;  and  I  soon  saw  that  it  reached  the  land  at  the 
same  time  as  the  man  to  whom  I  had  given  the  above 
things.  I  had  not  wished  to  take  the  skein  of  cotton  that 
he  offered  me.  All  the  others  came  round  him  and  seemed 
astonished,  for  it  appeared  clear  to  them  that  we  were 
good  people.  The  other  man  who  had  fled  might  do  us 
some  harm,  because  we  had  carried  him  off,  and  for  that 
reason  I  ordered  this  man  to  be  set  free  and  gave  him  the 
above  things,  that  he  might  think  well  of  us,  otherwise, 
when  your  Highnesses  again  send  an  expedition,  they 
might  not  be  friendly.  All  the  presents  I  gave  were  not 
worth  four  maravedis.  At  10  we  departed  with  the  wind 
S.W.,  and  made  for  the  south,  to  reach  that  other  island, 
which  is  very  large,  and  respecting  which  all  the  men  that 
I  bring  from  San  Salvador  make  signs  that  there  is  much 
gold,  and  that  they  wear  it  as  bracelets  on  the  arms,  on 
the  legs,  in  the  ears  and  nose,  and  round  the  neck.  The 
distance  of  this  island  from  that  of  Santa  Maria  is  9  leagues 
on  a  course  east  to  west.  All  this  part  of  the  island  trends 
NAY.  and  S.E.,  and  it  appeared  that  this  coast  must  have 
a  length  of  28  leagues.  It  is  very  flat,  without  any  moun- 
tain, like  San  Salvador  and  Santa  Maria,  all  being  beach 
without  rocks,  except  that  there  are  some  sunken  rocks 
near  the  land,  whence  it  is  necessary  to  keep  a  good  look- 
out when  it  is  desired  to  anchor,  and  not  to  come  to  very 
near  the  land  ;  but  the  water  is  always  very  clear,  and  the 
bottom  is  visible.  At  a  distance  of  two  shots  of  a  lombard, 
there  is,  off  all  these  islands,  such  a  depth  that  the  bottom 
cannot  be  reached.  These  islands  are  very  green  and 
fertile,  the  climate  very  mild.  They  may  contain  many 
things  of  which  I  have  no  knowledge,  for  I  do  not  wish  to 
stop,  in  discovering  and  visiting  many  islands,  to  find  gold. 
These  people  make  signs  that  it  is  worn  on  the  arms  and 
legs  ;  and  it  must  be  gold,  for  they  point  to  some  pieces 


VOYAGE  TO  FERNANDINA.  45 

that  I  have.  I  cannot  err,  with  the  help  of  our  Lord,  in 
finding  out  where  this  gold  has  its  origin.  Being  in  the 
middle  of  the  channel  between  these  two  islands,  that  is  to 
say,  that  of  Santa  Maria  and  this  large  one,  to  which 
I  give  the  name  of  Fernandina}  I  came  upon  a  man  alone 
in  a  canoe  going  from  Santa  Maria  to  Fernandina.  He 
had  a  little  of  their  bread,  about  the  size  of  a  fist,  a  calabash 
of  water,  a  piece  of  brown  earth  powdered  and  then  kneaded, 
and  some  dried  leaves,  which  must  be  a  thing  highly  valued 
by  them,  for  they  bartered  with  it  at  San  Salvador.  He 
also  had  with  him  a  native  basket  with  a  string  of  glass 
beads,  and  two  â/ancas,2  by  which  I  knew  that  he  had  come 
from  the  island  of  San  Salvador,  and  had  been  to  Santa 
Maria,  and  thence  to  Fernandina.  He  came  alongside  the 
ship,  and  I  made  him  come  on  board  as  he  desired,  also 
getting  the  canoe  inboard,  and  taking  care  of  all  his 
property.  I  ordered  him  to  be  given  to  eat  bread  and 
treacle,  and  also  to  drink  :  and  so  I  shall  take  him  on  to 
Fernandina,  where  I  shall  return  everything  to  him,  in 
order  that  he  may  give  a  good  account  of  us,  that,  our 
Lord  pleasing,  when  your  Highnesses  shall  send  here, 
those  who  come  may  receive  honor,  and  that  the  natives 
may  give  them  all  they  require." 

Tuesday,  1 6th  of  October. 

"  I  sailed  from  the  island  of  Santa  Maria  de  la  Concep- 
cion  at  about  noon,  to  go  to  Fernandina  island,  which  ap- 
peared very  large  to  the  westward,  and  I  navigated  all  that 
day  with  light  winds.  I  could  not  arrive  in  time  to  be 
able  to  see  the  bottom,  so  as  to  drop  the  anchor  on  a  clear 
place,  for  it  is  necessary  to  be  very  careful  not  to  lose  the 
anchors.     So  I  stood  off  and   on  all   that  night  until  day, 

1  Long  Island.     See  Letter  to  San tange /,  p.  2. 
'-'  A  small  piece  of  money.     See  p.  40. 


46  FERNANDINA. 

when  I  came  to  an  inhabited  place  where  I  anchored,  and 
whence  that  man  had  come  that  I  found  yesterday  in  the 
canoe  in  mid  channel.  He  had  given  such  a  good  report 
of  us  that  there  was  no  want  of  canoes  alongside  the 
ship  all  that  night,  which  brought  us  water  and  what  they 
had  to  offer.  I  ordered  each  one  to  be  given  something, 
such  as  a  few  beads,  ten  or  twelve  of  those  made  of  glass 
on  a  thread,  some  timbrels  made  of  brass  such  as  are  worth 
a  maravedi  in  Spain,  and  some  straps,  all  which  they 
looked  upon  as  most  excellent.  I  also  ordered  them  to 
be  given  treacle  to  eat  when  they  came  on  board.  At 
three  o'clock  I  sent  the  ship's  boat  on  shore  for  water,  and 
the  natives  with  good  will  showed  my  people  where  the 
water  was,  and  they  themselves  brought  the  full  casks 
down  to  the  boat,  and  did  all  they  could  to  please  us. 

"  This  island  is  very  large,  and  I  have  determined  to 
sail  round  it,  because,  so  far  as  I  can  understand,  there  is  a 
mine  in  or  near  it.  The  island  is  eight  leagues  from  Santa 
Maria,  nearly  east  and  west  ;  and  this  point  I  had  reached, 
as  well  as  all  the  coast,  trends  N.N.W.  and  S.S.E.  I  saw 
at  least  20  leagues  of  it,  and  then  it  had  not  ended.  Now, 
as  I  am  writing  this,  I  made  sail  with  the  wind  at  the 
south,  to  sail  round  the  island,  and  to  navigate  until  I  find 
Samaot,  which  is  the  island  or  city  where  there  is  gold,  as 
all  the  natives  say  who  are  on  board,  and  as  those  of  San 
Salvador  and  Santa  Maria  told  us.  These  people  resemble 
those  of  the  said  islands,  with  the  same  language  and 
customs,  except  that  these  appear  to  me  a  rather  more 
domestic  and  tractable  people,  yet  also  more  subtle.  For 
I  observed  that  those  who  brought  cotton  and  other  trifles 
to  the  ship,  knew  better  than  the  others  how  to  make  a 
bargain.1     In  this  island   I    saw    cotton  cloths    made  like 


1  "  Refetar  el  pagamento."     Las  Casas  has  :    '  Regatear  sobre  los 
precios  y  paga  (i,  307). 


FERNANDINA.  47 

mantles.  The  people  were  better  disposed,  and  the  women 
wore  in  front  of  their  bodies  a  small  piece  of  cotton  which 
scarcely  covered  them. 

"  It  is  a  very  green  island,  level  and  very  fertile,  and  I 
have  no  doubt  that  they  sow  and  gather  corn  all  the  year 
round,  as  well  as  other  things.  I  saw  many  trees  very 
unlike  those  of  our  country.  Many  of  them  have  their 
branches  growing  in  different  ways  and  all  from  one  trunk, 
and  one  twig  is  one  form,  and  another  in  a  different  shape, 
and  so  unlike  that  it  is  the  greatest  wonder  in  the  world 
to  see  the  great  diversity  ;  thus  one  branch  has  leaves  like 
those  of  a  cane,  and  others  like  those  of  a  mastick  tree  : 
and  on  a  single  tree  there  are  five  or  six  different  kinds. 
Nor  are  these  grafted,  for  it  may  be  said  that  grafting  is 
unknown,  the  trees  being  wild,  and  untended  by  these 
people.  They  do  not  know  any  religion,  and  I  believe 
they  could  easily  be  converted  to  Christianity,  for  they 
are  very  intelligent.  Here  the  fish  are  so  unlike  ours  that 
it  is  wonderful.  Some  are  the  shape  of  dories,1  and  of  the 
finest  colours  in  the  world,  blue,  yellow,  red,  and  other 
tints,  all  painted  in  various  ways,  and  the  colours  are  so 
bright  that  there  is  not  a  man  who  would  not  be  astonished, 
and  would  not  take  great  delight  in  seeing  them.  There 
are  also  whales.  1  saw  no  beasts  on  the  land  of  any  kind, 
except  parrots  and  lizards  A  boy  told  me  that  he  saw  a 
large  serpent.  I  saw  neither  sheep,  nor  goats,  nor  any 
other  quadruped.  It  is  true  I  have  been  here  a  short 
time,  since  noon,  yet  I  could  not  have  failed  to  see  some 
if  there  had  been  any.  I  will  write  respecting  the  circuit 
of  this  island  after  I  have  been  round  it." 


1  Gallos. 


48  THE  HARBOUR  IN  FERNANDINA. 

Wednesday,   I'/th  of  October. 

"  At  noon  I  departed  from  the  village  off  which  I  was 
anchored,  and  where  I  took  in  water,  to  sail  round  this 
island  of  Fernandina.  The  wind  was  S.W.  and  South. 
My  wish  was  to  follow  the  coast  of  this  island  to  the  S.E., 
from  where  I  was,  the  whole  coast  trending  N.N.W.  and 
S.S.E.;  because  all  the  Indians  I  bring  with  me,  and 
others,  made  signs  to  this  southern  quarter,  as  the  direction 
of  the  island  they  call  Samoet,  where  the  gold  is.  Martin 
Alonso  Pinzon,  captain  of  the  caravel  Pinta,  on  board  of 
which  I  had  three  of  the  Indians,  came  to  me  and  said  that 
one  of  them  had  given  him  to  understand  very  positively 
that  the  island  might  be  sailed  round  much  quicker  by 
shaping  a  N.N.W.  course.  I  saw  that  the  wind  would  not 
help  me  to  take  the  course  I  desired,  and  that  it  was  fair 
for  the  other,  so  I  made  sail  to  the  N.N.W.  When  I  was 
two  leagues  from  the  cape  of  the  island,  I  discovered  a  very 
wonderful  harbour.1  It  has  one  mouth,  or,  rather,  it  may 
be  said  to  have  two,  for  there  is  an  islet  in  the  middle. 
Both  are  very  narrow,  and  within  it  is  wide  enough  for  a 
hundred  ships,  if  there  was  depth  and  a  clean  bottom,  and 
the  entrance  was  deep  enough.  It  seemed  desirable  to 
explore  it  and  take  soundings,  so  I  anchored  outside,  and 
went  in  with  all  the  ship's  boats,  when  we  saw  there  was 
insufficient  depth.  As  I  thought,  when  I  first  saw  it,  that 
it  was  the  mouth  of  some  river,  I  ordered  the  water-casks 
to  be  brought.  On  shore  I  found  eight  or  ten  men,  who 
presently  came  to  us  and  showed  us  the  village,  whither  I 
sent  the  people  for  water,  some  with  arms,  and  others  with 
the  casks  :  and,  as  it  was  some  little  distance,  I  waited  two 
hours  for  them. 


1   Port  Clarence,  in  Long  Island. 


HAMMOCKS.  49 

"  During  that  time  I  walked  among-  the  trees,  which  was 
the  most  beautiful  thing  I  had  ever  seen,  beholding  as 
much  verdure  as  in  the  month  of  May  in  Andalusia.  The 
trees  are  as  unlike  ours  as  night  from  day,  as  arc  the  fruits, 
the  herbs,  the  stones,  and  everything.  It  is  true  that  some 
of  the  trees  bore  some  resemblance  to  those  in  Castille, 
but  most  of  them  are  very  different,  and  some  were  so 
unlike  that  no  one  could  compare  them  to  anything  in 
Castille.  The  people  were  all  like  those  already  mentioned : 
like  them  naked,  and  the  same  size.  They  give  what  they 
possess  in  exchange  for  anything  that  may  be  given  to 
them.  I  here  saw  some  of  the  ship's  boys  bartering 
broken  bits  of  glass  and  crockery  for  darts.  The  men 
who  went  for  water  told  me  that  they  had  been  in  the 
houses  of  the  natives,  and  that  they  were  very  plain  and 
clean  inside.  Their  beds  and  bags  for  holding  things1 
were  like  nets  of  cotton.'2     The  houses  are  like  booths,  and 


1  "  Paramentos  de  cosas."  Las  Casas  has  :  "  Paramentos  de  casa" 
(i,  3io). 

2  Hammocks.  In  Espahola  they  were  called  Hamacas.  Las  Casas 
describes  them  as  "  made  in  loops,  not  woven  like  nets,  the  threads 
crossed,  but  the  threads  loose  in  their  lengths,  so  that  the  fingers  and 
hands  can  be  put  between  them,  and  from  palmo  to  palmo  (8.3  in.),  a 
little  more  or  less,  then  fastened  to  other  twisted  threads,  like  the  very 
well-worked  nets  which  are  made  at  Seville  of  esparto  grass,  for  har- 
ness. These  hamacas  are  the  length  of  a  man,  and  at  the  ends  the 
same  threads  are  formed  into  numerous  loops.  Into  each  loop  they 
pass  very  fine  cords  of  another  material,  stronger  than  cotton,  such  as 
rushes,  and  these  are  each  a  brazo  (6  ft.)  long,  and  the  ends  are  all 
united  in  a  knot  at  each  end  ;  the  hamaca  being  hung  by  these  knots 
to  the  posts  of  the  houses.  Thus  the  hamaca  remains  slung  in  the  air. 
The  best  are  3  or  4  yards  in  width,  and  they  open  them  when  they  get 
in,  as  we  open  a  sling  that  is  very  large.  They  lie  across  it,  and  are 
thus  on  the  hamaca,  with  which  they  cover  themselves,  and  as  it  is 
never  in  the  least  cold,  this  suffices"  (i,  p.  310).  Herrera  says  that 
their  beds  consisted  of  a  net  fastened  from  one  post  to  another  which 
they  call  Amacas.     {Dec.  /,  Lib.  1,  cap.  xiii.) 

E 


50  THE   COURSE   ALTERED. 

very  high,  with  good  chimneys.1  But,  among  many  vil- 
lages that  I  saw,  there  was  none  that  consisted  of  more 
than  from  twelve  to  fifteen  houses.  Here  they  found  that 
the  married  women  wore  clouts  of  cotton,  but  not  the 
young  girls,  except  a  few  who  were  over  eighteen  years  of 
age.  They  had  dogs,'2  mastiffs  and  hounds3;  and  here 
they  found  a  man  who  had  a  piece  of  gold  in  his  nose,  the 
size  of  half  a  castellano,  on  which  they  saw  letters.  I 
quarrelled  with  these  people  because  they  would  not 
exchange  or  give  what  was  required  ;  as  I  wished  to  see 
what  and  whose  this  money  was  ;  and  they  replied  that 
they  were  not  accustomed  to  barter. 

"  After  the  water  was  taken  I  returned  to  the  ship,  made 
sail,  and  shaped  a  course  N.W.,  until  I  had  discovered  all 
the  part  of  the  coast  of  the  island  which  trends  east  to 
west.  Then  all  the  Indians  turned  round  and  said  that 
this  island  was  smaller  than  Samoet,  and  that  it  would  be 
well  to  return  back  so  as  to  reach  it  sooner.  The  wind 
presently  went  down,  and  then  sprang  up  from  W.N.W., 
which  was  contrary  for  us  to  continue  on  the  previous 
course.  So  I  turned  back,  and  navigated  all  that  night 
to  E.S.E.,  sometimes  to  east  and  to  S.E.  This  course  was 
steered  to  keep  me  clear  of  the  land,  for  there  were  very 
heavy  clouds  and  thick  weather,  which  did  not  admit  of 
my  approaching  the  land  to  anchor.  On  that  night  it 
rained  very  heavily  from  midnight  until  nearly  dawn,  and 
even  afterwards  the  clouds  threatened  rain.  We  found 
ourselves  at  the  S.W.  end  of  the  island,  where  I  hoped  to 


1  These  were  ornamental  points  with  which  the  roofs  terminated. 
{Las  Casas.) 

2  Columbus  did  not  see  these  dogs,  but  only  heard  of  them  from  his 
men.  Las  Casas  tells  us  that  they  were  a  kind  of  dog  that  never 
barks  (i,  p.  311).  Herrera  says:  "  Yieronse  tambien  algunos  pernios 
mudos  pequenos." 

3  BracheteS)  in  English  brack.     {King  Lear,  Act  I,  Sc.  4.) 


ISLAND   OF   ISABELLA.  5  I 

anchor  until  it  cleared  up,  so  as  to  see  the  other  island 
whither  I  have  to  go.  On  all  these  days,  since  I  arrived  in 
these  Indies,  it  has  rained  more  or  less.  Your  Highnesses 
may  believe  that  this  land  is  the  best  and  most  fertile,  and 
with  a  good  climate,  level,  and  as  good  as  there  is  in  the 
world." 

Thursday,  I  8t/i  of  October. 

"  After  it  had  cleared  up  I  went  before  the  wind, 
approaching  the  island  as  near  as  I  could,  and  anchored 
when  it  was  no  longer  light  enough  to  keep  under  sail. 
But  I  did  not  go  on  shore,  and  made  sail  at  dawn " 

Friday,  igt/i  of  October. 

"  I  weighed  the  anchors  at  daylight,  sending  the  caravel 
Pinta  on  an  E.S.E.  course,  the  caravel  Nina  S.S.E.,  while  I 
shaped  a  S.E.  course,  giving  orders  that  these  courses  were 
to  be  steered  until  noon,  and  that  then  the  two  caravels 
should  alter  course  so  as  to  join  company  with  me.  Before 
we  had  sailed  for  three  hours  we  saw  an  island  to  the  east, 
for  which  we  steered,  and  all  three  vessels  arrived  at  the 
north  point  before  noon.  Here  there  is  an  islet,1  and  a  reef 
of  rocks  to  seaward  of  it,  besides  one  between  the  islet  and 
the  large  island.  The  men  of  San  Salvador,  whom  I  bring 
with  me,  called  it  Saoniete,and  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Isabella? 
The  wind  was  north,  and  the  said  islet  bore  from  the  island 
of  Fernandina,  whence  I  had  taken  my  departure,  east 
and  west.  Afterwards  we  ran  along  the  coast  of  the  island, 
westward  from  the  islet,  and  found  its  length  to  be 
12  leagues  as  far  as  a  cape,  which  I  named  Cabo  Hervioso, 
at  the  western  end.  The  island  is  beautiful,  and  the  coast 
very  deep,  without  sunken  rocks  off  it.     Outside  the  shore 

1  Bird  Rock. 

2  Crooked  Island.     See  Letter  to  Santangel,  p.  2. 

E  2 


52  BEAUTY   OF   THE   SCENERY. 

is  rocky,  but  further  in  there  is  a  sandy  beach,  and  here  I 
anchored  on  that  Friday  night  until  morning.  This  coast 
and  the  part  of  the  island  I  saw  is  almost  fiat,  and  the 
island  is  very  beautiful  ;  for  if  the  other  islands  are  lovely, 
this  is  more  so.  It  has  many  very  green  trees,  which  are 
very  large.  The  land  is  higher  than  in  the  other  islands, 
and  in  it  there  are  some  hills,  which  cannot  be  called 
mountains ;  and  it  appears  that  there  is  much  water 
inland.  From  this  point  to  the  N.E.  the  coast  makes  a 
great  angle,  and  there  are  many  thick  and  extensive  groves. 
I  wanted  to  go  and  anchor  there,  so  as  to  go  on  shore  and 
see  so  much  beauty  ;  but  the  water  was  shallow,  and  we 
could  only  anchor  at  a  distance  from  the  land.  The  wind 
also  was  fair  for  going  to  this  cape,  where  I  am  now 
anchored,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  Cabo  Hermoso, 
because  it  is  so.  Thus  it  was  that  I  do  not  anchor  in  that 
angle,  but  as  I  saw  this  cape  so  green  and  so  beautiful, 
like  all  the  other  lands  of  these  islands,  I  scarcely  knew 
which  to  visit  first ;  for  I  can  never  tire  my  eyes  in  looking 
at  such  lovely  vegetation,  so  different  from  ours.  I  believe 
that  there  are  many  herbs  and  many  trees  that  are  worth 
much  in  Europe  for  dyes  and  for  medicines  ;  but  I  do  not 
know,  and  this  causes  me  great  sorrow.  Arriving  at  this 
cape,  I  found  the  smell  of  the  trees  and  flowers  so  delicious 
that  it  seemed  the  pleasantest  thing  in  the  world. 
To-morrow,  before  I  leave  this  place,  I  shall  go  on  shore 
to  see  what  there  is  at  this  cape.  There  are  no  people, 
but  there  are  villages  in  the  interior,  where,  the  Indians  I 
bring  with  me  say,  there  is  a  king  who  has  much  gold. 
To-morrow  I  intend  to  go  so  far  inland  as  to  find  the 
village,  and  see  and  have  some  speech  with  this  king,  who, 
according  to  the  signs  they  make,  rules  over  all  the  neigh- 
bouring islands,  goes  about  clothed,  and  wears  much  gold 
on  his  person.  I  do  not  give  much  faith  to  what  they  say, 
as  well  because  I  do  not  understand  them  as  because  they 


ON    THE   COAST   OF   ISABELLA.  53 

are  so  poor  in  gold  that  even  a  little  that  this  king  may 
have  would  appear  much  to  them.  This  cape,  to  which  I 
have  given  the  name  of  Cabo  Fermoso,  is,  I  believe,  on  an 
island  separated  from  Saometo,  and  there  is  another  small 
islet  between  them.  I  did  not  try  to  examine  them  in 
detail,  because  it  could  not  be  done  in  50  years.  For  my 
desire  is  to  see  and  discover  as  much  as  I  can  before 
returning  to  your  Highnesses,  our  Lord  willing,  in  April. 
It  is  true  that  in  the  event  of  finding  places  where  there  is 
gold  or  spices  in  quantity  I  should  stop  until  I  had  collected 
as  much  as  I  could.  I,  therefore,  proceed  in  the  hope  of 
coming  across  such  places." 

Saturday,  20th  of  October. 

"  To-day,  at  sunrise,  I  weighed  the  anchors  from  where 
I  was  with  the  ship,  and  anchored  off  the  S.W.  point  of 
the  island  of  Saometo,  to  which  I  gave  the  name  of  Cabo 
de  la  Laguna,  and  to  the  island  Isabella.  My  intention 
was  to  navigate  to  the  north-east  and  east  from  the  south- 
east and  south,  where,  I  understood  from  the  Indians  I 
brought  with  me,  was  the  village  of  the  king.  I  found 
the  sea  so  shallow  that  I  could  not  enter  nor  navigate  in 
it,  and  I  saw  that  to  follow  a  route  by  the  south-east  would 
be  a  great  round.  So  I  determined  to  return  by  the 
route  that  I  had  taken  from  the  N.N.E.  to  the  western 
part,  and  to  sail  round  this  island  to 1 

"  I  had  so  little  wind  that  I  never  could  sail  along  the 
coast,  except  during  the  night.  As  it  was  dangerous  to 
anchor  off  these  islands  except  in  the  day,  when  one  can 
see  where  to  let  go  the  anchor  :  for  the  bottom  is  all  in 
patches,  some  clear  and  some  rocky :  I  lay  to  all  this 
Sunday  night.     The  caravels  anchored  because  they  found 

1  Word  missing  in  the  manuscript.     Navarette  suggests  "  recono- 
cerla".— N. 


54  EXPEDITION    INLAND. 

themselves  near  the  shore,  and  they  thought  that,  owing  to 
the  signals  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  making,  I  would 
come  to  anchor,  but  I  did  not  wish  to  do  so." 


Sunday,  21st  of  October. 

'•'  At  ten  o'clock  I  arrived  here,  off  this  islet,1  and  anchored, 
as  well  as  the  caravels.  After  breakfast  I  went  on  shore, 
and  found  only  one  house,  in  which  there  was  no  one,  and 
I  supposed  they  had  fled  from  fear,  because  all  their  pro- 
perty was  left  in  the  house.  I  would  not  allow  anything 
to  be  touched,  but  set  out  with  the  captains  and  people 
to  explore  the  island.  If  the  others  already  seen  are  very 
beautiful,  green,  and  fertile,  this  is  much  more  so,  with 
large  trees  and  very  green.  Here  there  are  large  lagoons 
with  wonderful  vegetation  on  their  banks.  Throughout  the 
island  all  is  green,  and  the  herbage  like  April  in  Andalusia. 
The  songs  of  the  birds  were  so  pleasant  that  it  seemed  as 
if  a  man  could  never  wish  to  leave  the  place.  The  flocks 
of  parrots  concealed  the  sun  ;  and  the  birds  were  so 
numerous,  and  of  so  many  different  kinds,  that  it  was 
wonderful.  There  are  trees  of  a  thousand  sorts,  and  all 
have  their  several  fruits  ;  and  I  feel  the  most  unhappy 
man  in  the  world  not  to  know  them,  for  I  am  well  assured 
that  they  are  all  valuable.  I  bring  home  specimens  of 
them,  and  also  of  the  land.  Thus  walking  along  round 
one  of  the  lakes  I  saw  a  serpent,2  which  we  killed,  and  I 
bring  home  the  skin  for  your  Highnesses.  As  soon  as  it 
saw  us  it  went  into  the  lagoon,  and  we  followed,  as  the 
water  was  not  very  deep,  until  we  killed  it  with  lances.  It 
is  7  palmos  long,  and  I  believe  that  there  are  many  like  it 
in  these  lagoons.  Here  I  came  upon  some  aloes,  and  I 
have  determined  to  take  ten  quintals  on  board  to-morrow, 

1  Bird  Rock,  where  he  was  on  the  19th.  2  Iguana. 


NATIVES   OF    ISABELLA.  55 

for  they  tell  me  that  they  are  worth  a  good  deal.  Also, 
while  in  search  of  good  water,  we  came  to  a  village  about 
half  a  league  from  our  anchorage.  The  people,  as  soon 
as  they  heard  us,  all  fled  and  left  their  houses,  hiding 
their  property  in  the  wood.  I  would  not  allow  a  thing  to 
be  touched,  even  the  value  of  a  pin.  Presently  some  men 
among  them  came  to  us,  and  one  came  quite  close.  I  gave 
him  some  bells  and  glass  beads,  which  made  him  very 
content  and  happy.  That  our  friendship  might  be  further 
increased,  I  resolved  to  ask  him  for  something  ;  I  requested 
him  to  get  some  water.  After  I  had  gone  on  board,  the 
natives  came  to  the  beach  with  calabashes  full  of  water, 
and  they  delighted  much  in  giving  it  to  us.  I  ordered 
another  string  of  glass  beads  to  be  presented  to  them,  and 
they  said  they  would  come  again  to-morrow.  I  wished  to 
fill  up  all  the  ships  with  water  at  this  place,  and,  if  there 
should  be  time,  I  intended  to  search  the  island  until  I  had 
had  speech  with  the  king,  and  seen  whether  he  had  the 
gold  of  which  I  had  heard.  I  shall  then  shape  a  course  for 
another  much  larger  island,  which  I  believe  to  be  Cipango, 
judging  from  the  signs  made  by  the  Indians  I  bring  with 
me.  They  call  it  Cuba,  and  they  say  that  there  are  ships 
and  many  skilful  sailors  there.  Beyond  this  island  there 
is  another  called  Bosio}  which  they  also  say  is  very  large, 
and  others  we  shall  see  as  we  pass,  lying  between.  Accord- 
ing as  I  obtain  tidings  of  gold  or  spices  I  shall  settle  what 
should  be  done.  I  am  still  resolved  to  go  to  the  main- 
land and  the  city  of  Guisay,2  and  to  deliver  the  letters  of 
your  Highnesses  to  the  Gran  Can,  requesting  a  reply  and 
returning  with  it" 


1  Bohio.— N. 

2  A  flourishing  port  of  China,  mentioned  in  the  letter  of  Toscanelli, 
and  more  fully  described  by  Marco  Polo,  who  calls  it  Kinsay  (see 
p.  8). 


56  NATIVES   OF    ISABELLA. 

Monday,  22nd  of  October. 

"  All  last  night  and  to-day  I  was  here,  waiting  to  see  if 
the  king  or  other  person  would  bring  gold  or  anything 
of  value.  Many  of  these  people  came,  like  those  of  the 
other  islands,  equally  naked,  and  equally  painted,  some 
white,  some  red,  some  black,  and  others  in  many  ways. 
They  brought  darts  and  skeins  of  cotton  to  barter,  which 
they  exchanged  with  the  sailors  for  bits  of  glass,  broken 
crockery,  and  pieces  of  earthenware.  Some  of  them  had 
pieces  of  gold  fastened  in  their  noses,  which  they  willingly 
gave  for  a  hawk's  bell  and  glass  beads.  But  there  was  so 
little  that  it  counts  for  nothing.  It  is  true  that  they  looked 
upon  any  little  thing  that  I  gave  them  as  a  wonder,  and 
they  held  our  arrival  to  be  a  great  marvel,  believing  that 
we  came  from  heaven.  We  got  water  for  the  ships  from  a 
lagoon  which  is  near  the  Cabo  del  Isleo  (Cape  of  the  Islet), 
as  we  named  it.  In  the  said  lagoon  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon, 
captain  of  the  Pinta,  killed  another  serpent  7  palmos  long, 
like  the  one  we  got  yesterday.  I  made  them  gather  here 
as  much  of  the  aloe  as  they  could  find." 

Tuesday,  23rd  of  October. 

"  I  desired  to  set  out  to-day  for  the  island  of  Cuba,  which 
I  think  must  be  Cipango,  according  to  the  signs  these 
people   make,  indicative  of  its  size  and  riches,  and   I  did 

not   delay  any  more  here  nor 1  round  this  island  to 

the  residence  of  this  King  or  Lord,  and  have  speech  with 
him,  as  I  had  intended.  This  would  cause  me  much  delay, 
and  I  see  that  there  is  no  gold  mine  here.  To  sail  round 
would  need  several  winds,  for  it  does  not  blow  here  as 
men  may  wish.  It  is  better  to  go  where  there  is  great 
entertainment,  so  I  say  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  wait, 

1  Gap  in  the  MS. 


DEPARTURE    FROM    ISABELLA.  57 

but  rather  to  continue  the  voyage  and  inspect  much  land, 
until  some  very  profitable  country  is  reached,  my  belief 
being  that  it  will  be  rich  in  spices.  That  I  have  no  per- 
sonal knowledge  of  these  products  causes  me  the  greatest 
sorrow  in  the  world,  for  I  see  a  thousand  kinds  of  trees, 
each  one  with  its  own  special  fruit,  all  green  now  as  in 
Spain  during  the  months  of  May  and  June,  as  well  as  a 
thousand  kinds  of  herbs  with  their  flowers  ;  yet  I  know 
none  of  them  except  this  aloe,  of  which  I  ordered  a  quan- 
tity to  be  brought  on  board  to  bring  to  your  Highnesses. 
I  have  not  made  sail  for  Cuba  because  there  is  no  wind, 
but  a  dead  calm  with  much  rain.  It  rained  a  great  deal 
yesterday  without  causing  any  cold.  On  the  contrary,  the 
days  are  hot  and  the  nights  cool,  like  May  in  Andalusia." 

Wednesday,  24th  of  October. 

"  At  midnight  I  weighed  the  anchors  and  left  the 
anchorage  at  Cabo  del  Isleo,  in  the  island  of  Isabella. 
From  the  northern  side,  where  I  was,  I  intended  to  go  to 
the  island  of  Cuba,  where  I  heard  of  the  people  who  were 
very  great,  and  had  gold,  spices,  merchandise,  and  large 
ships.  They  showed  me  that  the  course  thither  would  be 
W.S.W.,  and  so  I  hold.  For  I  believe  that  it  is  so,  as  all 
the  Indians  of  these  islands,  as  well  as  those  I  brought 
with  me  in  the  ships,  told  me  by  signs.  I  cannot  under- 
stand their  language,  but  I  believe  that  it  is  of  the  island 
of  Cipango  that  they  recount  these  wonders.  On  the 
spheres1  I  saw,  and  on  the  delineations  of  the  map  of  the 
world,2  Cipango  is  in  this  region.  So  I  shaped  a  course 
VV.S.W.  until  daylight,  but  at  dawn  it  fell  calm  and  began 
to  rain,  and  went  on  nearly  all  night.  I  remained  thus, 
with  little  wind,  until  the  afternoon,  when  it  began  to  blow 

1  The  globe  of  Martin  Behaim,  made  in  1492. 

2  The  map  of  Toscanelh. 


58  LAS   ISLÃS   DE   ARENA. 

fresh.  I  set  all  the  sails  in  the  ship,  the  mainsail  with 
two  bonnets,1  the  foresail,  spritsail,  mizen,  main  topsail, 
and  the  boat's  sail  on  the  poop.  So  I  proceeded  until 
nightfall,  when  the  Cabo  Verde  of  the  island  of  Fernandina, 
which  is  at  the  S.W.  end,  bore  N.W.  distant  y  leagues. 
As  it  was  now  blowing  hard,  and  I  did  not  know  how  far 
it  was  to  this  island  of  Cuba,  I  resolved  not  to  go  in  search 
of  it  during  the  night ;  all  these  islands  being  very  steep- 
to,  with  no  bottom  round  them  for  a  distance  of  two 
shots  of  a  lombard.  The  bottom  is  all  in  patches,  one  bit 
of  sand  and  another  of  rock,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  not 
safe  to  anchor  without  inspection  with  the  eye.  So  I 
determined  to  take  in  all  the  sails  except  the  foresail,  and 
to  go  on  under  that  reduced  canvas.  Soon  the  wind  in- 
creased, while  the  route  was  doubtful,  and  there  was  very 
thick  weather,  with  rain.  I  ordered  the  foresail  to  be  furled, 
and  we  did  not  make  two  leagues  during  that  night." 

Thursday,  2$th  of  October. 

"  I  steered  W.S.W.  from  after  sunset  until  9  o'clock, 
making  5  leagues.  Afterwards  I  altered  course  to  west, 
and  went  8  miles  an  hour  until  one  in  the  afternoon  ;  and 
from  that  time  until  three  made  good  44  miles.  Then 
land  was  sighted,  consisting  of  7  or  8  islands,  the  group 
running  north  and  south,  distant  from  us  5  leagues." 

Friday,  26th  of  October. 

"  The  ship  was  on  the  south  side  of  the  islands,  which 
were  all  low,  distant  5  or  6  leagues.  I  anchored  there. 
The  Indians  on  board  said  that  thence  to  Cuba  was  a 
voyage  in  their  canoes  of  a  day  and  a  half;  these  being 
small  dug-outs  without  a  sail.  Such  are  their  canoes.  I 
departed  thence  for  Cuba,  for  by  the  signs  the  Indians 

1  Pieces  of  canvas  laced  to  the  leeches  of  the  mainsail  on  both  sides. 


ARRIVAL  AT   CUBA.  59 

made  of  its  greatness,  and  of  its  gold  and  pearls,  I  thought 
that  it  must  be  Cipango." 

Saturday,  2jtJi  of  October. 

"  I  weighed  from  these  islands  at  sunrise,  and  gave  them 
the  name  of  Las  Islãs  de  Arena,1  owing  to  the  little  depth 
the  sea  had  for  a  distance  of  6  leagues  to  the  southward  of 
them.  We  went  8  miles  an  hour  on  a  S.S.W.  course  until 
one  o'clock,  having  made  40  miles.  Until  night  we  had 
run  28  miles  on  the  same  course,  and  before  dark  the  land 
was  sighted.  At  night  there  was  much  rain.  The  vessels, 
on  Saturday  until  sunset,  made  17  leagues  on  a  S.S.W. 
course." 

Sunday,  28t/i  of  October. 

"  I  went  thence  in  search  of  the  island  of  Cuba  on 
a  S.S.W.  coast,  making  for  the  nearest  point  of  it,  and 
entered  a  very  beautiful  river  without  danger  of  sunken 
rocks  or  other  impediments.  All  the  coast  was  clear  of 
dangers  up  to  the  shore.  The  mouth  of  the  river  was 
1 2  brazos  across,  and  it  is  wide  enough  for  a  vessel  to  beat 
in.  I  anchored  about  a  lombard-shot  inside."  The  Admiral 
says  that  "  he  never  beheld  such  a  beautiful  place,  with 
trees  bordering  the  river,  handsome,  green,  and  different 
from  ours,  having  fruits  and  flowers  each  one  according  to 
its  nature.  There  are  many  birds,  which  sing  very  sweetly. 
There  are  a  great  number  of  palm  trees  of  a  different  kind 
from  those  in  Guinea  and  from  ours,  of  a  middling  height, 
the  trunks  without  that  covering,2  and  the  leaves  very 
large,  with  which  they  thatch  their  houses.  The  country 
is  very  level."  The  Admiral  jumped  into  his  boat  and 
went  on  shore.     He  came  to  two  houses,  which  he  believed 


1  The  Ragged  Isles,  north  of  Cuba. 

2  Camisa. 


6o  BEAUTY   OF   CUBA. 

to  belong  to  fishermen  who  had  fled  from  fear.  In  one  of 
them  he  found  a  kind  of  dog  that  never  barks,  and  in  both 
there  were  nets  of  palm-fibre  and  cordage,  as  well  as  horn 
fish-hooks,  bone  harpoons,  and  other  apparatus  "  for  fish- 
ing, and  several  hearths.  He  believed  that  many  people 
lived  together  in  one  house.  He  gave  orders  that  nothing 
in  the  houses  should  be  touched,  and  so  it  was  done."  The 
herbage  was  as  thick  as  in  Andalusia  during  April  and 
May.  He  found  much  purslane  and  wild  amaranth.1  He 
returned  to  the  boat  and  went  up  the  river  for  some 
distance,  and  he  says  it  was  great  pleasure  to  see  the 
bright  verdure,  and  the  birds,  which  he  could  not  leave 
to  go  back.  He  says  that  this  island  is  the  most 
beautiful  that  eyes  have  seen,  full  of  good  harbours  and 
deep  rivers,  and  the  sea  appeared  as  if  it  never  rose ; 
for  the  herbage  on  the  beach  nearly  reached  the  waves, 
which  does  not  happen  where  the  sea  is  rough.  (Up 
to  that  time  they  had  not  experienced  a  rough  sea 
among  all  those  islands.)  He  says  that  the  island  is  full 
of  very  beautiful  mountains,  although  they  are  not  very 
extensive  as  regards  length,  but  high  ;  and  all  the  country 
is  high  like  Sicily.  It  is  abundantly  supplied  with  water, 
as  they  gathered  from  the  Indians  they  had  taKen  with 
them  from  the  island  of  Guanahani.  These  said  by  signs 
that  there  are  ten  great  rivers,  and  that  they  cannot  go 
round  the  island  in  twenty  days.  When  they  came  near 
land  with  the  ships,  two  canoes  came  out ;  and,  when  they 
saw  the  sailors  get  into  a  boat  and  row  about  to  find  the 
depth  of  the  river  where  they  could  anchor,  the  canoes 
fled.  The  Indians  say  that  in  this  island  there  are  gold 
mines  and  pearls,  and  the  Admiral  saw  a  likely  place  for 
them  and  mussel-shells,  which  are  signs  of  them.  He 
understood  that  large  ships  of  the  Gran  Can  came  here, 
and  that  from  here  to  the  mainland  was  a  voyage  of  ten 


1  Verdolagas  y  bledas. 


COAST    OF  CUBA.  6 1 

days.      The  Admiral   called   this   river  and   harbour  San 
Salvado}-.1 

Monday,  2gtk  of  October. 

The  Admiral  weighed  anchor  from  this  port  and  sailed 
to  the  westward,  to  go  to  the  city,  where,  as  it  seemed,  the 
Indians  said  that  there  was  a  king.  They  doubled  a  point 
six  leagues  to  the  N.W.,2  and  then  another  point,3  then 
east  ten  leagues.  After  another  league  he  saw  a  river 
with  no  very  large  entrance,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of 
Rio  de  la  Luna}  He  went  on  until  the  hour  of  Vespers. 
He  saw  another  river  much  larger  than  the  others,5  as  the 
Indians  told  him  by  signs,  and  near  he  saw  goodly  villages 
of  houses.  He  called  the  river  Rio  de  Mares?  He  sent 
two  boats  on  shore  to  a  village  to  communicate,  and  one 
of  the  Indians  he  had  brought  with  him,  for  now  they 
understood  a  little,  and  show  themselves  content  with 
Christians.  All  the  men,  women,  and  children  fled,  aban- 
doning their  houses  with  all  they  contained.  The  Admiral 
gave  orders  that  nothing  should  be  touched.  The  houses 
were  better  than  those  he  had  seen  before,  and  he  believed 
that  the  houses  would  improve  as  he  approached  the  main- 
land. They  were  made  like  booths,  very  large,  and  look- 
ing like  tents  in  a  camp  without  regular  streets,  but  one 
here  and  another  there.  Within  they  were  clean  and  well 
swept,  with  the  furniture  well  made.  All  are  of  palm 
branches  beautifully  constructed.     The)'  found  many  images 


1  Puerto  Naranjo.     Nipe,  according  to  Navarrete. 

2  Punta  de  Mulas. — N. 

3  Punta  de  Cabanas. — N. 

4  Puerto  de  Banes. — N. 

5  Puerto  de  las  Nuevitas  del  Principe. — N. 

c  Afterwards  Puerto  de  Baracoa,  called  by  the  Adelantado  of 
Cuba,  Diego  Velasquez,  Asumpcion.  (Herrera,  Dec.  /,  Lib.  II, 
cap.  xiv.) 


02  PUERTO    NARANJO. 

in  the  shape  of  women,  and  many  heads  like  masks,1  very- 
well  carved.  It  was  not  known  whether  these  were  used 
as  ornaments,  or  to  be  worshipped.  They  had  dogs  which 
never  bark,  and  wild  birds  tamed  in  their  houses.  There 
was  a  wonderful  supply  of  nets  and  other  fishing  imple- 
ments, but  nothing  was  touched.  He  believed  that  all  the 
people  on  the  coast  were  fishermen,  who  took  the  fish 
inland,  for  this  island  is  very  large,  and  so  beautiful,  that 
he  is  never  tired  of  praising  it.  He  says  that  he  found 
trees  and  fruits  of  very  marvellous  taste  ;  and  adds  that 
they  must  have  cows  or  other  cattle,  for  he  saw  skulls 
which  were  like  those  of  cows.  The  songs  of  the  birds 
and  the  chirping  of  crickets  throughout  the  night  lulled 
everyone  to  rest,  while  the  air  was  soft  and  healthy,  and 
the  nights  neither  hot  nor  cold.  On  the  voyage  through 
the  other  islands  there  was  great  heat,  but  here  it  is 
tempered  like  the  month  of  May.  He  attributed  the  heat 
of  the  other  islands  to  their  flatness,  and  to  the  wind 
coming  from  the  east,  which  is  hot.  The  water  of  the 
rivers  was  salt  at  the  mouth,  and  they  did  not  know 
whence  the  natives  got  their  drinking-water,  though  they 
have  sweet  water  in  their  houses.  Ships  are  able  to  turn 
in  this  river,  both  entering  and  coming  out,  and  there  are 
very  good  leading-marks.  He  says  that  all  this  sea 
appears  to  be  constantly  smooth,  like  the  river  at  Seville, 
and  the  water  suitable  for  the  growth  of  pearls.  He  found 
large  shells  unlike  those  of  Spain.  Remarking  on  the 
position  of  the  river  and  port,  to  which  he  gave  the  name 
of  San  Salvador,2  he  describes  its  mountains  as  lofty  and 
beautiful,  like  the  Pena  de  las  Enamoradas?  and   one   of 

1  The  word  is  Caratona.  Navarrete  suggests  Caratida,  Careta,  or 
Mascarilla. — N . 

2  The  description  applies  exactly  to  Puerto  Naranjo.  Casas 
suggests  Puerto  de  Baracoa,  while  Navarrete  is  confident  that  it  is 
Nipe.  3  Near  Granada. 


RIO  DE   MARES.  63 

them  has  another  little  hill  on  its  summit,  like  a  graceful 
mosque.  The  other  river  and  port,  in  which  he  now  was,1 
has  two  round  mountains  to  the  S.W.,  and  a  fine  low  cape 
running  out  to  the  W.S.W. 

Tuesday,  30th  of  October. 

He  left  the  Rio  de  Mares  and  steered  N.W.,  seeing  a 
cape  covered  with  palm  trees,  to  which  he  gave  the  name 
of  Cabo  de  Palmas?  after  having  made  good  1 5  leagues. 
The  Indians  on  board  the  caravel  Pinta  said  that  beyond 
that  cape  there  was  a  river,3  and  that  from  the  river  to 
Cuba  it  was  four  days'  journey.  The  captain  of  the  Pinta 
reported  that  he  understood  from  that,  that  this  Cuba  was 
a  city,  and  that  the  land  was  a  great  continent  trending  far 
to  the  north.  The  king  of  that  country,  he  gathered,  was 
at  war  with  the  Gran  Can,  whom  they  called  Caini,  and  his 
land  or  city  Fava,  with  many  other  names.  The  Admiral 
resolved  to  proceed  to  that  river,  and  to  send  a  present,  with 
the  letter  of  the  Sovereigns,  to  the  king  of  that  land.  For 
this  service  there  was  a  sailor  who  had  been  to  Guinea, 
and  some  of  the  Indians  of  Guanahani  wished  to  go  with 
him,  and  afterwards  to  return  to  their  homes.  The  Admiral 
calculated  that  he  was  forty-two4  degrees  to  the  north  of 
the  equinoctial  line  (but  the  handwriting  is  here  illegible). 
He  says  that  he  must  attempt  to  reach  the  Gran  Can, 
who  he  thought  was  here  or  at  the  city  of  Cathay,5  which 
belongs  to  him,  and  is  very  grand,  as  he  was  informed 
before  leaving  Spain.  All  this  land,  he  adds,  is  low  and 
beautiful,  and  the  sea  deep. 

1  Nuevitas  del  Principe. — N. 

2  "  Alto  de  Juan  Danue." — N. 

3  Rio  Maximo. — N. 

4  Wrongly  transcribed.     It  must  have  been  21  in  the  original  MS. 

5  In  his  letter,  Toscanelli  said  that  the  usual  residence  of  the  Grand 
Khan  was  Cathay  (see  p.  6). 


64  RIO  DE   MARES. 

Wednesday,  $\st  of  October. 

All  Tuesday  night  he  was  beating  to  windward,  and  he 
saw  a  river,  but  could  not  enter  it  because  the  entrance 
was  narrow.  The  Indians  fancied  that  the  ships  could 
enter  wherever  their  canoes  could  go.  Navigating  onwards, 
he  came  to  a  cape  running  out  very  far,  and  surrounded 
by  sunken  rocksf^  and  he  saw  a  bay  where  small  vessels 
might  take  shelter.  He  could  not  proceed  because  the 
wind  had  come  round  to  the  north,  and  all  the  coast  runs 
N.W.  and  S.E.  Another  cape  further  on  ran  out  still 
more.2  For  these  reasons,  and  because  the  sky  showed 
signs  of  a  gale,  he  had  to  return  to  the  Rio  de  Mares. 

Thursday,  November  the  ist. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  sent  the  boats  on  shore  to  the 
houses  that  were  there,  and  they  found  that  all  the  people 
had  fled.  After  some  time  a  man  made  his  appearance. 
The  Admiral  ordered  that  he  should  be  left  to  himself, 
and  the  sailors  returned  to  the  boats.  After  dinner,  one  of 
the  Indians  on  board  was  sent  on  shore.  He  called  out 
from  a  distance  that  there  was  nothing  to  fear,  because  the 
strangers  were  good  people  and  would  do  no  harm  to  any- 
one, nor  were  they  people  of  the  Gran  Can,  but  they  had 
given  away  their  things  in  many  islands  where  they  had 
been.  The  Indian  then  swam  on  shore,  and  two  of  the 
natives  took  him  by  the  arms  and  brought  him  to  a  house, 
where  they  heard  what  he  had  to  say.  When  they  were 
certain  that  no  harm  would  be  done  to  them  they  were 
reassured,  and  presently  more  than  sixteen  canoes  came 
to  the  ships  with  cotton-thread  and  other  trifles.  The 
Admiral  ordered  that  nothing  should  be  taken  from  them, 
that  they  might  understand   that   he   sought  for    nothing 

1  Boca  de  Carabelas  grandes. — N.         2  Punta  del  Maternillo. — N. 


NATIVES   AT   "  RIO   DE    MARES".  65 

but  gold,  which  they  call  nucay.  Thus  they  went  to  and 
fro  between  the  ships  and  the  shore  all  da)-,  and  they 
came  to  the  Christians  on  shore  with  confidence.  The 
Admiral  saw  no  gold  whatever  among  them,  but  he  says 
that  he  saw  one  of  them  with  a  piece  of  worked  silver 
fastened  to  his  nose.  They  said,  by  signs,  that  within 
three  days  many  merchants  from  inland  would  come  to 
buy  the  things  brought  by  the  Christians,  and  would  give 
information  respecting  the  king  of  that  land.  So  far  as 
could  be  understood  from  their  signs,  he  resided  at  a 
distance  of  four  days'  journey.  They  had  sent  many 
messengers  in  all  directions,  with  news  of  the  arrival  of 
the  Admiral.  "  These  people",  says  the  Admiral,  "  are  of 
the  same  appearance  and  have  the  same  customs  as  those 
of  the  other  islands,  without  any  religion  so  far  as  I  know, 
for  up  to  this  day  I  have  never  seen  the  Indians  on  board 
say  any  prayer  ;  though  they  repeat  the  Salve  and  Ave 
Maria  with  their  hands  raised  to  heaven,  and  they  make 
the  sign  of  the  cross.  The  language  is  also  the  same,  and 
they  are  all  friends  ;  but  I  believe  that  all  these  islands  are 
at  war  with  the  Gran  Can,  whom  they  called  Cavila,  and  his 
province  Bafan.  They  all  go  naked  like  the  others."  This 
is  what  the  Admiral  says.  "  The  river",  he  adds,  "  is  very 
deep,  and  the  ships  can  enter  the  mouth,  going  close  to  the 
shore.  The  sweet  water  does  not  come  within  a  league 
of  the  mouth.  It  is  certain,"  says  the  Admiral,  "that  this 
is  the  mainland,  and  that  I  am  in  front  of  Zayto1  and 
Guinsay'-  a  hundred  leagues,  a   little  more  or  less,  distant 


1  In  Toscanelli's  letter  it  is  stated  that  in  the  port  of  Zaiton  alone 
there  were  a  hundred  ships  laden  with  pepper  at  one  time,  without 
counting  those  laden  with  other  spices.  Zaiton  was  a  seaport  of  the 
province  of  Fokien  in  China,  now  called  Chwangchan-fu,  between 
Fuchau  and  Amoy.  The  statement  about  the  pepper  trade  was 
taken  by  Toscanelli  from  Marco  Polo  (c.  82)  (see  p.  6). 

'-'  Quinsay  of  Toscanelli  is  the  Kinsay  of  Marco  Polo  (c.  76,  yy),  who 

F 


66  TWO  SAILORS  SENT   AS   ENVOYS. 

the  one  from  the  other.  It  is  very  clear  that  no  one  before 
has  been  so  far  as  this  by  sea.  Yesterday,  with  wind  from 
the  N.W.,  I  found  it  cold." 

Friday,  2nd  of  November. 

The  Admiral  decided  upon  sending  two  Spaniards,  one 
named  Rodrigo  de  Jerez,  who  lived  in  Ayamonte,  and  the 
other  Luis  de  Torres,  who  had  served  in  the  household  of 
the  Adelantado  of  Murcia,  and  had  been  a  Jew,  knowing 
Hebrew,  Chaldee,  and  even  some  Arabic.  With  these 
men  he  sent  two  Indians,  one  from  among  those  he  had 
brought  from  Guanahani,  and  another  a  native  of  the 
houses  by  the  river-side.  He  gave  them  strings  of  beads 
with  which  to  buy  food  if  they  should  be  in  need,  and 
ordered  them  to  return  in  six  days.  He  gave  them 
specimens  of  spices,  to  see  if  any  were  to  be  found.  Their 
instructions  were  to  ask  for  the  king  of  that  land,  and  they 
were  told  what  to  say  on  the  part  of  the  Sovereigns  of 
Castille,  how  they  had  sent  the  Admiral  with  letters  and 
a  present,  to  inquire  after  his  health  and  establish  friend- 
ship, favouring  him  in  what  he  might  desire  from  them. 
They  were  to  collect  information  respecting  certain  pro- 
vinces, ports,  and  rivers  of  which  the  Admiral  had  notice, 
and  to  ascertain  their  distances  from  where  he  was. 

This  night  the  Admiral  took  an  altitude  with  a  quad- 
rant, and  found  that  the  distance  from  the  equinoctial  line 
was  42  degrees.1  He  says  that,  by  his  reckoning,  he  finds 
that  he  has  gone  over  1,142  leagues  from  the  island  of 
Hierro.2  He  still  believes  that  he  has  reached  the  main- 
land. 


fully  describes  it ;  now  called  Hangchau,  south  of  Shanghai.  Marco 
Polo  says  it  was  in  the  province  of  Mangi,  near  Catay,  and  that  the 
word  means  "  city  of  heaven"  (see  p.  8). 

1  An  erroneous  transcription.     It  should  be  22. 

-  The  true  distance  was  1,105  leagues. — N. 


EXPLORING  THE   COUNTRY.  67 

Saturday,  3rd  of  November. 

In  the  morning  the  Admiral  got  into  the  boat,  and,  as 
the  river  is  like  a  great  lake  at  the  mouth,  forming  a  very 
excellent  port,  very  deep,  and  clear  of  rocks,  with  a  good 
beach  for  careening  ships,  and  plenty  of  fuel,  he  explored 
it  until  he  came  to  fresh  water  at  a  distance  of  two  leagues 
from  the  mouth.  He  ascended  a  small  mountain  to  obtain 
a  view  of  the  surrounding  country,  but  could  see  nothing, 
owing  to  the  dense  foliage  of  the  trees,  which  were  very 
fresh  and  odoriferous,  so  that  he  felt  no  doubt  that  there 
were  aromatic  herbs  among  them.  He  said  that  all  he 
saw  was  so  beautiful  that  his  eyes  could  never  tire  of  gazing 
upon  such  loveliness,  nor  his  ears  of  listening  to  the  songs 
of  birds.  That  day  many  canoes  came  to  the  ships,  to 
barter  with  cotton  threads  and  with  the  nets  in  which  they 
sleep,  called  hamacas. 

Sunday,  ^tk  of  November. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  again  went  away  in  the  boat, 
and  landed  to  hunt  the  birds  he  had  seen  the  day  before. 
After  a  time,  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  came  to  him  with  two 
pieces  of  cinnamon,  and  said  that  a  Portuguese,  who  was 
one  of  his  crew,  had  seen  an  Indian  carrying  two  very 
large  bundles  of  it  ;  but  he  had  not  bartered  for  it,  because 
of  the  penalty  imposed  by  the  Admiral  on  anyone  who 
bartered.  He  further  said  that  this  Indian  carried  some 
brown  things  like  nutmegs.  The  master  of  the  Pinta  said 
that  he  had  found  the  cinnamon  trees.  The  Admiral 
went  to  the  place,  and  found  that  they  were  not  cinnamon 
trees.  The  Admiral  showed  the  Indians  some  specimens 
of  cinnamon  and  pepper  he  had  brought  from  Castille,  and 
they  knew  it,  and  said,  by  signs,  that  there  was  plenty  in 
the  vicinity,  pointing  to  the  S.E.  He  also  showed  them 
gold  and   pearls,  on  which  certain  old  men  said  that  there 

F  2 


68  PRODUCTS   OF  THE   COUNTRY. 

was  an  infinite  quantity  in  a  place  called  BoJiio}  and  that 
the  people  wore  it  on  their  necks,  ears,  arms,  and  legs,  as 
well  as  pearls.  He  further  understood  them  to  say  that 
there  were  great  ships  and  much  merchandise,  all  to  the 
S.E.  He  also  understood  that,  far  away,  there  were  men 
with  one  eye,  and  others  with  dogs'  noses  who  were 
cannibals,  and  that  when  they  captured  an  enemy  they 
beheaded  him  and  drank  his  blood. 

The  Admiral  then  determined  to  return  to  the  ship  and 
wait  for  the  return  of  the  two  men  he  had  sent,  intending 
to  depart  and  seek  for  those  lands,  if  his  envoys  brought 
some  good  news  touching  what  he  desired.  The  Admiral 
further  says  :  "  These  people  are  very  gentle  and  timid  ; 
they  go  naked,  as  I  have  said,  without  arms  and  without 
law.  The  country  is  very  fertile.  The  people  have  plenty 
of  roots  called  zanahorias  (yams),  with  a  smell  like  chesnuts  ; 
and  they  have  beans  of  kinds  very  different  from  ours. 
They  also  have  much  cotton,  which  they  do  not  sow,  as  it 
is  wild  in  the  mountains,  and  I  believe  they  collect  it 
throughout  the  year,  because  I  saw  pods  empty,  others 
full,  and  flowers  all  on  one  tree.  There  are  a  thousand 
other  kinds  of  fruits  which  it  is  impossible  for  me  to 
write  about,  and  all  must  be  profitable."  All  this  the 
Admiral  says. 

Monday,  $th  of  November. 

This  morning  the  Admiral  ordered  the  ship  to  be 
careened,  afterwards  the  other  vessels,  but  not  all  at  the 
same  time.  Two  were  always  to  be  at  the  anchorage,  as  a 
precaution  ;  although  he  says  that  these  people  were  very 
safe,  and  that  without  fear  all  the  vessels  might  have  been 
careened  at  the  same  time.     Things  being  in  this  state, 

1  Bohio  was  their  name  for  a  house.  The.  Admiral  cannot  have 
understood  what  they  were  saying.      {Las  Casas.) 


RETURN   OF  THE   ENVOYS.  6g 

the  master  of  the  NificD-  came  to  claim  a  reward  from  the 
Admiral  because  he  had  found  mastick,  but  he  did  not 
bring  the  specimen,  as  he  had  dropped  it.  The  Admiral 
promised  him  a  reward,  and  sent  Rodrigo  Sanchez  and 
master  Diego2  to  the  trees.  They  collected  some,  which 
was  kept  to  present  to  the  Sovereigns,  as  well  as  the  tree. 
The  Admiral  says  that  he  knew  it  was  mastick,  though  it 
ought  to  be  gathered  at  the  proper  season.  There  is 
enough  in  that  district  for  a  yield  of  1,000  quintals  every 
year.  The  Admiral  also  found  here  a  great  deal  of  the 
plant  called  aloe.  He  further  says  that  the  Puerto  de  Mares 
is  the  best  in  the  world,  with  the  finest  climate  and  the 
most  gentle  people.  As  it  has  a  high,  rocky  cape,  a 
fortress  might  be  built,  so  that,  in  the  event  of  the  place 
becoming  rich  and  important,  the  merchants  would  be  safe 
from  any  other  nations.  He  adds  :  "  The  Lord,  in  whose 
hands  are  all  victories,  will  ordain  all  things  for  his  service. 
An  Indian  said  by  signs  that  the  mastick  was  good  for 
pains  in  the  stomach." 

Tuesday,  6th  of  November. 

"Yesterday,  at  night",  says  the  Admiral,  "the  two  men 
came  back  who  had  been  sent  to  explore  the  interior. 
They  said  that  after  walking  12  leagues  they  came  to  a 
village  of  50  houses,  were  there  were  a  thousand  inhabitants, 
for  many  live  in  one  house.  These  houses  are  like  very 
large  booths.  They  said  that  they  were  received  with 
great  solemnity,  according  to  custom,  and  all,  both  men 
and  women,  came  out  to  see  them.  They  were  lodged  in 
the  best  houses,  and  the  people  touched  them,  kissing  their 

1  This  was  Juan  Nino,  Master,  who,  with  his  brother,  Pero  Alonso 
Nino,  the  pilot,  were  the  owners  of  the  caravel  Nina. 

2  Rodrigo  Sanchez  of  Segovia  was  the  royal  overseer  in  the 
Admiral's  ship,  and  Master  Diego  was  the  boatswain. 


JO  REPORT   OF  THE   ENVOYS. 

hands  and  feet,  marvelling  and  believing  that  they  came 
from  heaven,  and  so  they  gave  them  to  understand.  They 
gave  them  to  eat  of  what  they  had.  When  they  arrived, 
the  chief  people  conducted  them  by  the  arms  to  the  prin- 
cipal house,  gave  them  two  chairs  on  which  to  sit,  and  all 
the  natives  sat  round  them  on  the  ground.  The  Indian 
who  came  with  them  described  the  manner  of  living  of  the 
Christians,  and  said  that  they  were  good  people.  Presently 
the  men  went  out,  and  the  women  came  sitting  round  them 
in  the  same  way,  kissing  their  hands  and  feet,  and  looking 
to  see  if  they  were  of  flesh  and  bones  like  themselves. 
They  begged  the  Spaniards  to  remain  with  them  at  least 
five  days."  The  Spaniards  showed  the  natives  specimens 
of  cinnamon,  pepper,  and  other  spices  which  the  Admiral 
had  given  them,  and  they  said,  by  signs,  that  there  was 
plenty  at  a  short  distance  from  thence  to  S.E.,  but  that  there 
they  did  not  know  whether  there  was  any.1  Finding  that 
they  had  no  information  respecting  cities,  the  Spaniards 
returned  ;  and  if  they  had  desired  to  take  those  who  wished 
to  accompany  them,  more  than  500  men  and  women  would 
have  come,  because  they  thought  the  Spaniards  were 
returning  to  heaven.  There  came,  however,  a  principal 
man  of  the  village  and  his  son,  with  a  servant.  The 
Admiral  conversed  with  them,  and  showed  them  much 
honour.  They  made  signs  respecting  many  lands  and 
islands  in  those  parts.  The  Admiral  thought  of  bringing 
them  to  the  Sovereigns.  He  says  that  he  knew  not  what 
fancy  took  them  ;  either  from  fear,  or  owing  to  the  dark 
night,  they  wanted  to  land.  The  ship  was  at  the  time 
high  and  dry,  but,  not  wishing  to  make  them  angry,  he  let 
them  go  on  their  saying  that  they  would  return  at  dawn, 

1  This  passage  is  obscure,  no  doubt  owing  to  careless  transcription. 
Las  Casas  has  :  "  and  asked  them  if  they  had  any  there.  They 
answered  no,  but  made  signs  that  there  was  plenty  near,  towards  the 
S.E.»  (i,  p.  332). 


TOBACCO   AND   COTTON.  7 1 

but  they  never  came  back.  The  two  Christians  met  with 
many  people  on  the  road  going  home,  men  and  women 
with  a  half-burnt  weed  in  their  hands,  being  the  herbs  they 
are  accustomed  to  smoke.1  They  did  not  find  villages  on 
the  road  of  more  than  five  houses,  all  receiving  them  with 
the  same  reverence.  They  saw  many  kinds  of  trees,  herbs, 
and  sweet-smelling  flowers  ;  and  birds  of  many  different 
kinds,  unlike  those  of  Spain,  except  the  partridges,  geese, 
of  which  there  are  many,  and  singing  nightingales.  They 
saw  no  quadrupeds  except  the  dogs  that  do  not  bark.  The 
land  is  very  fertile,  and  is  cultivated  with  yams  and  several 
kinds  of  beans  different  from  ours,  as  well  as  corn.  There 
were  great  quantities  of  cotton  gathered,  spun,  and  worked 
up.  In  a  single  house  they  saw  more  than  500  arrobas, 
and  as  much  as  4,000  quintals  could  be  yielded  every  year. 
The  Admiral  said  that  "  it  did  not  appear  to  be  cultivated, 
and  that  it  bore  all  the  year  round.  It  is  very  fine,  and 
has  a  large  boll.  All  that  was  possessed  by  these  people 
they  gave  at  a  very  low  price,  and  a  great  bundle  of  cotton 
was  exchanged  for  the  point  of  a  needle  or  other  trifle. 
They  are  a  people",  says  the  Admiral,  "  guileless  and 
unwarlike.  Men  and  women  go  as  naked  as  when  their 
mothers  bore  them.  It  is  true  that  the  women  wear  a  very 
small  rag  of  cotton-cloth,  and  they  are  of  very  good  appear- 
ance, not  very  dark,  less  so  than  the  Canarians.  I  hold, 
most  serene  Princes,  that  if  devout  religious  persons  were 
here,  knowing  the  language,  they  would  all  turn  Christians. 

1  Tobacco.  Las  Casas  says  that  they  are  dried  leaves  rolled  up  in 
the  shape  of  the  squibs  made  by  the  boys  at  Easter.  Lighted  at  one 
end,  the  roll  is  chewed,  and  the  smoke  is  inhaled  at  the  other.  It  has 
the  effect  of  making  them  sleepy  and  almost  intoxicated,  and  in  using 
it  they  do  not  feel  tired.  These  rolls  of  dried  leaves  are  called  by 
them  tabacos.  Las  Casas  adds  that  he  knew  Spaniards  in  Espahola 
who  were  accustomed  to  smoke  it,  and  when  their  habit  was  repre- 
hended as  a  vice,  they  said  they  could  not  leave  off.  Las  Casas  did 
not  understand  what  pleasure  or  profit  they  found  in  it. 


72  DEPARTUREtFROM    RIO   DE   MARES. 

I  trust  in  our  Lord  that  your  Highnesses  will  resolve  upon 
this  with  much  diligence,  to  bring  so  many  great  nations 
within  the  Church,  and  to  convert  them  ;  as  you  have 
destroyed  those  who  would  not  confess  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  after  your  days,  all  of  us  being 
mortal,  may  your  kingdoms  remain  in  peace,  and  free  from 
heresy  and  evil,  and  may  you  be  well  received  before  the 
eternal  Creator,  to  whom  I  pray  that  you  may  have  long 
life  and  great  increase  of  kingdoms  and  lordships,  with  the 
will  and  disposition  to  increase  the  holy  Christian  religion 
as  you  have  done  hitherto.     Amen  !" 

"  To  day  I  got  the  ship  afloat,  and  prepared  to  depart  on 
Thursday,  in  the  name  of  God,  and  to  steer  S.E.  in  search 
of  gold  and  spices,  and  to  discover  land." 

These  are  the  words  of  the  Admiral,  who  intended  to 
depart  on  Thursday,  but,  the  wind  being  contrary,  he  could 
not  go  until  the  12th  of  November. 

Monday,  \2th  of  November. 

The  Admiral  left  the  port  and  river  of  Mares  before 
dawn  to  visit  the  island  called  Babeque}  so  much  talked  of 
by  the  Indians  on  board,  where,  according  to  their  signs, 
the  people  gather  the  gold  on  the  beach  at  night  with 
candles,  and  afterwards  beat  it  into  bars  with  hammers. 
To  go  thither  it  was  necessary  to  shape  a  course  E.  b.  S. 
After  having  made  8  leagues  along  the  coast,  a  river  was 
sighted,  and  another  4  leagues  brought  them  to  another 
river,  which  appeared  to  be  of  great  volume,  and  larger 
than  any  they  had  yet  seen.  The  Admiral  did  not  wish 
to  stop  nor  to  enter  any  of  these  rivers,  for  two  reasons  : 
the  first  and  principal  one  being  that  wind  and  weather 


1  The  Indians  called  the  "  Tierra  Firme",  or  coast  of  the  mainland, 
Babeque  or  Caiitaba. — N. 


KIDNAPPING   OF    NATIVES.  71 

were  favourable  for  going  in  search  of  the  said  island  of 
Babeque  ;  the  other,  that,  if  there  was  a  populous  and 
famous  city  near  the  sea,  it  would  be  visible,  while,  to  go 
up  the  rivers,  small  vessels  are  necessary,  which  those  of 
the  expedition  were  not.  Much  time  would  thus  be  lost ; 
moreover,  the  exploration  of  such  rivers  is  a  separate  enter- 
prise. All  that  coast  was  peopled  near  the  river,  to  which 
the  name  of  Rio  del  Sol  was  given. 

The  Admiral  says  that,  on  the  previous  Sunday,  the 
nth  of  November,  it  seemed  good  to  take  some  persons 
from  amongst  those  at  Rio  de  Mares,  to  bring  to  the 
Sovereigns,  that  they  might  learn  our  language,  so  as  to 
be  able  to  tell  us  what  there  is  in  their  lands.  Returning, 
they  would  be  the  mouthpieces  of  the  Christians,  and 
would  adopt  our  customs  and  the  things  of  the  faith.  "  I 
saw  and  knew"  (says  the  Admiral)  "  that  these  people  are 
without  any  religion,  not  idolaters,  but  very  gentle,  not 
knowing  what  is  evil,  nor  the  sins  of  murder  and  theft, 
being  without  arms,  and  so  timid  that  a  hundred  would 
fly  before  one  Spaniard,  although  they  joke  with  them.1 
They,  however,  believe  and  know  that  there  is  a  God  in 
heaven,  and  say  that  we  have  come  from  heaven.  At  any 
prayer  that  we  say,  they  repeat,  and  make  the  sign  of  the 
cross.  Thus  your  Highnesses  should  resolve  to  make 
them  Christians,  for  I  believe  that,  if  the  work  was  begun, 
in  a  little  time  a  multitude  of  nations  would  be  converted 
to  our  faith,  with  the  acquisition  of  great  lordships,  peoples, 
and  riches  for  Spain.  Without  doubt,  there  is  in  these 
lands  a  vast  quantity  of  gold,  and  the  Indians  I  have  on 
board  do  not  speak  without  reason  when  they  say  that  in 
these  islands  there  are  places  where  they  dig  out  gold,  and 
wear  it  on  their  necks,  ears,  arms,  and  legs,  the  rings  being 
very  large.     There  are  also  precious  stones,  pearls,  and  an 

1  "  aunque  burlen  con  ellos." 


74  MASTICK   TREES. 

infinity  of  spices.  In  this  river  of  Mares,  whence  we 
departed  to-night,  there  is  undoubtedly  a  great  quantity  of 
mastick,  and  much  more  could  be  raised,  because  the  trees 
may  be  planted,  and  will  yield  abundantly.  The  leaf  and 
fruit  are  like  the  mastick,  but  the  tree  and  leaf  are  larger. 
As  Pliny  describes  it,  I  have  seen  it  on  the  island  of  Chios 
in  the  Archipelago.  I  ordered  many  of  these  trees  to  be 
tapped,  to  see  if  any  of  them  would  yield  resin  ;  but,  as  it 
rained  all  the  time  I  was  in  that  river,  I  could  not  get  any, 
except  a  very  little,  which  I  am  bringing  to  your  High- 
nesses. It  may  not  be  the  right  season  for  tapping,  which 
is,  I  believe,  when  the  trees  come  forth  after  winter  and 
begin  to  flower.  But  when  I  was  there  the  fruit  was 
nearly  ripe.  Here  also  there  is  a  great  quantity  of  cotton, 
and  I  believe  it  would  have  a  good  sale  here  without 
sending  it  to  Spain,  but  to  the  great  cities  of  the  Gran  Can, 
which  will  be  discovered  without  doubt,  and  many  others 
ruled  over  by  other  lords,  who  will  be  pleased  to  serve 
your  Highnesses,  and  whither  will  be  brought  other  com- 
modities of  Spain  and  of  the  Eastern  lands  ;  but  these  are 
to  the  west  as  regards  us.  There  is  also  here  a  great 
yield  of  aloes,  though  this  is  not  a  commodity  that  will 
yield  great  profit.  The  mastick,  however,  is  important, 
for  it  is  only  obtained  from  the  said  island  of  Chios,  and 
I  believe  the  harvest  is  worth  50,000  ducats,  if  I  remember 
right.1  There  is  here,  in  the  mouth  of  the  river,  the  best 
port  I  have  seen  up  to  this  time,  wide,  deep,  and  clear  of 
rocks.  It  is  an  excellent  site  for  a  town  and  fort,  for  any 
ship  could  come  close  up  to  the  walls  ;  the  land  is  high, 
with  a  temperate  climate,  and  very  good  water. 

"  Yesterday  a  canoe  came  alongside  the  ship,  with  six 


1  The  ducat  being  gs.  2d.  In  the  seventeenth  century  the  value  of 
the  mastick  exported  from  Chios  was  30,000  ducats.  See  also  Letter 
to  San  tangei,  p.  15.     Chios  belonged  to  Genoa  from  1346  to  1566. 


KIDNAPPING   OF   NATIVES.  75 

youths  in  it.  Five  came  on  board,  and  I  ordered  them  to 
be  detained.  They  are  now  here.  I  afterwards  sent  to 
a  house  on  the  western  side  of  the  river,  and  seized  seven 
women,  old  and  young,  and  three  children.  I  did  this 
because  the  men  would  behave  better  in  Spain  if  they  had 
women  of  their  own  land,  than  without  them.  For  on 
many  occasions  the  men  of  Guinea  have  been  brought  to 
learn  the  language  in  Portugal,  and  afterwards,  when  they 
returned,  and  it  was  expected  that  they  would  be  useful  in 
their  land,  owing  to  the  good  company  they  had  enjoyed 
and  the  gifts  they  had  received,  they  never  appeared  after 
arriving.  Others  may  not  act  thus.  But,  having  women, 
they  have  the  wish  to  perform  what  they  are  required  to 
do ;  besides,  the  women  would  teach  our  people  their 
language,  which  is  the  same  in  all  these  islands,  so  that 
those  who  make  voyages  in  their  canoes  are  understood 
everywhere.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  a  thousand 
different  languages  in  Guinea,  and  one  native  does  not 
understand  another. 

"  The  same  night  the  husband  of  one  of  the  women  came 
alongside  in  a  canoe,  who  was  father  of  the  three  children 
— one  boy  and  two  girls.  He  asked  me  to  let  him  come 
with  them,  and  besought  me  much.  They  are  now  all 
consoled  at  being  with  one  who  is  a  relation  of  them  all. 
He  is  a  man  of  about  45  years  of  age."1  All  these  are  the 
words  of  the  Admiral.      He  also  says  that  he  had  felt 


1  Las  Casas  denounces  this  proceeding  as  a  breach  of  the  law  of 
nations,  which  is  not  excused  by  the  Admiral's  good  intentions  ;  for 
it  is  never  right  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come  of  it.  St.  Paul,  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  teaches  :  "  non  sunt  facienda  mala  ut  bona 
eveniant"  (Romans,  iii,  8).  "  Certainly  the  Admiral  acted  on  this 
occasion  inconsiderately,  though  in  other  things  he  was  prudent." 
But,  on  account  of  this  act  alone,  Las  Casas  considers  that  he  well 
merited  all  the  sorrows  and  misfortunes  which  he  suffered  during  the 
rest  of  his  life.     (Las  Casas,  i,  pp.  334-38.) 


y6  BEATING    UP   THE   COAST   OF   CUBA. 

some  cold,  and  that  it  would  not  be  wise  to  continue 
discoveries  in  a  northerly  direction  in  the  winter.  On  this 
Monday,  until  sunset,  he  steered  a  course  E.  b.  S.,  making 
1 8  leagues,  and  reaching  a  cape,  to  which  he  gave  the 
name  of  Cabo  de  Cuba. 


Tuesday,  13th  of  November. 

This  night  the  ships  were  on  a  bowline,  as  the  sailors 
say,  beating  to  windward  without  making  any  progress.  At 
sunset  they  began  to  see  an  opening  in  the  mountains, 
where  two  very  high  peaks1  were  visible.  It  appeared  that 
here  was  the  division  between  the  land  of  Cuba  and  that 
of  Bohio,  and  this  was  affirmed  by  signs,  by  the  Indians 
who  were  on  board.  As  soon  as  the  day  had  dawned,  the 
Admiral  made  sail  towards  the  land,  passing  a  point  which 
appeared  at  night  to  be  distant  two  leagues.  He  then 
entered  a  large  gulf,  5  leagues  to  the  S.S.E.,  and  there 
remained  5  more,  to  arrive  at  the  point  where,  between  two 
great  mountains,  there  appeared  to  be  an  opening ;  but  it 
could  not  be  made  out  whether  it  was  an  inlet  of  the  sea. 
As  he  desired  to  go  to  the  island  called  Babeque,  where, 
according  to  the  information  he  had  received,  there  was 
much  gold  ;  and  as  it  bore  east,  and  as  no  large  town 
was  in  sight,  the  wind  freshening  more  than  ever,  he 
resolved  to  put  out  to  sea,  and  work  to  the  east  with  a 
northerly  wind.  The  ship  made  8  miles  an  hour,  and  from 
ten  in  the  forenoon,  when  that  course  was  taken,  until 
sunset,  56  miles,  which  is  14  leagues  to  the  eastward  from 
the  Cabo  de  Cuba.  The  other  land  of  Bohio  was  left  to 
leeward.  Commencing  from  the  cape  of  the  said  gulf,  he 
discovered,  according  to  his  reckoning,  So  miles,  equal 
to  20  leagues,  all  that  coast  running  E.S.E.  and  W.N.W. 

1  Las  Sierras  del  Cristal  and  Las  Sierras  de  Moa. — N. 


COAST   OF   CUBA.  JJ 

Wednesday,  i^th  of  November. 

All  last  night  the  Admiral  was  beating  to  windward  (he 
said  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  navigate  among 
those  islands  during  the  night,  until  they  had  been 
explored),  for  the  Indians  said  yesterday  that  it  would 
take  three  days  to  go  from  Rio  de  Mares  to  the  island  of 
Babeque,  by  which  should  be  understood  days'  journeys  in 
their  canoes  equal  to  about  7  leagues.  The  wind  fell,  and, 
the  course  being  east,  she  could  not  lay  her  course  nearer 
than  S.E.,  and,  owing  to  other  mischances,  he  was  detained 
until  the  morning.  At  sunrise  he  determined  to  go  in 
search  of  a  port,  because  the  wind  had  shifted  from  north  to 
N.E.,  and,  if  a  port  could  not  be  found,  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  go  back  to  the  ports  in  the  island  of  Cuba,  whence 
they  came.  The  Admiral  approached  the  shore,  having 
gone  over  28  miles  E.S.E.  that  night.     He  steered  south 

miles  to  the   land,   where    he    saw  many  islets  and 

openings.  As  the  wind  was  high  and  the  sea  rough,  he  did 
not  dare  to  risk  an  attempt  to  enter,  but  ran  along  the  coast 
W.N:W.,  looking  out  for  a  port,  and  saw  many,  but  none 
very  clear  of  rocks.  After  having  proceeded  for  64  miles, 
he  found  a  very  deep  opening,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide, 
with  a  good  port  and  river.  He  ran  in  with  her  head 
S.S.W.,  afterwards  south  to  S.E.  The  port1  was  spacious 
and  very  deep,  and  he  saw  so  many  islands  that  he  could 
not  count  them  all,  with  very  high  land  covered  with  trees 
of  many  kinds,  and  an  infinite  number  of  palms.  He  was 
much  astonished  to  see  so  many  lofty  islands  ;  and  assured 
the  Sovereigns  that  the  mountains  and  isles  he  had  seen 
since  yesterday  seemed  to  him  to  be  second  to  none  in  the 
world  ;  so  high  and  clear  of  clouds  and  snow,  with  the  sea 
at  their  bases  so  deep.      He  believes  that  these  islands  are 

1  Puerto  de  Taxamo,  in  Cuba. 


7§  COAST   OF   CUBA. 

those  innumerable  ones  that  are  depicted  on  the  maps  of 
the  world  in  the  Far  East.1  He  believed  that  they  yielded 
very  great  riches  in  precious  stones  and  spices,  and  that 
they  extend  much  further  to  the  south,  widening  out  in  all 
directions.  He  gave  the  name  of  La  Mar  de  Nucstra 
Seilora,  and  to  the  haven,  which  is  near  the  mouth  of  the 
entrance  to  these  islands,  Puerto  del  Principe.  He  did  not 
enter  it,  but  examined  it  from  outside,  until  another  time, 
on  Saturday  of  the  next  week,  as  will  there  appear.  He 
speaks  highly  of  the  fertility,  beauty,  and  height  of  the 
islands  which  he  found  in  this  gulf,  and  he  tells  the  Sove- 
reigns not  to  wonder  at  his  praise  of  them,  for  that  he  has 
not  told  them  the  hundredth  part.  Some  of  them  seemed 
to  reach  to  heaven,  running  up  into  peaks  like  diamonds. 
Others  have  a  flat  top  like  a  table.  At  their  bases  the  sea 
is  of  a  great  depth,  with  enough  water  for  a  very  large 
carrack.     All  are  covered  with  foliage  and  without  rocks. 

Thursday,  i^th  of  November. 

The  Admiral  went  to  examine  these  islands  in  the  ships' 
boats,  and  speaks  marvels  of  them,  how  he  found  mastick, 
and  aloes  without  end.  Some  of  them  were  cultivated 
with  the  roots  of  which  the  Indians  make  bread  ;  and  he 
found  that  fires  had  been  lighted  in  several  places.  He  saw 
no  fresh  water.  There  were  some  natives,  but  they  fled. 
In  all  parts  of  the  sea  where  the  vessels  were  navigated  he 
found  a  depth  of  15  or  16  fathoms,  and  all  òasa,  by  which 
he  means  that  the  ground  is  sand,  and  not  rocks  ;  a  thing 
much  desired  by  sailors,  for  the  rocks  cut  their  anchor 
cables. 


1  A  group  of  innumerable  islands  was  usually  placed  in  the  ocean 
to  the  east  of  Asia  :  and  no  doubt  they  were  shown  on  the  map  of 
Toscanelli  which  Columbus  took  with  him,  as  they  certainly  are  on 
the  globe  of  Martin  Behaim,  drawn  in  1492. 


A   GOOD   HARBOUR.      SEARCH   FOR   PEARLS.  79 

Friday,  1 6th  of  November.  t 

As  in  all  parts,  whether  islands  or  mainlands,  that  he 
visited,  the  Admiral  always  left  a  cross  ;  so,  on  this  occa- 
sion, he  went  in  a  boat  to  the  entrance  of  these  havens, 
and  found  two  very  large  trees  on  a  point  of  land,  one 
longer  than  the  other.  One  being  placed  over  the  other, 
made  a  cross,  and  he  said  that  a  carpenter  could  not  have 
made  it  better.  He  ordered  a  very  large  and  high  cross  to 
be  made  out  of  these  timbers.  He  found  canes  on  the 
beach,  and  did  not  know  where  they  had  grown,  but 
thought  they  must  have  been  brought  down  by  some 
river,  and  washed  up  on  the  beach  (in  which  opinion  he 
had  reason).  He  went  to  a  creek  on  the  south-east  side  of 
the  entrance  to  the  port.  Here,  under  a  height  of  rock 
and  stone  like  a  cape,  there  was  depth  enough  for  the 
largest  carrack  in  the  world  close  in  shore,  and  there  was 
a  corner  where  six  ships  might  lie  without  anchors  as  in 
a  room.  It  seemed  to  the  Admiral  that  a  fortress  might 
be  built  here  at  small  cost,  if  at  any  time  any  famous  trade1 
should  arise  in  that  sea  of  islands. 

Returning  to  the  ship,  he  found  that  the  Indians  who 
were  on  board  had  fished  up  very  large  shells  found  in 
those  seas.  He  made  the  people  examine  them,  to  see  if 
there  was  mother-o'-pearl,  which  is  in  the  shells  where 
pearls  grow.  They  found  a  great  deal,  but  no  pearls,  and 
their  absence  was  attributed  to  its  not  being  the  season, 
which  is  May  and  June.  The  sailors  found  an  animal 
which  seemed  to  be  a  taso,  or  taxo?  They  also  fished  with 
nets,  and,  among  many  others,  caught  a  fish  which  was 


1  Resgate.    Rescate  (Las  Casas). 

2  Las  Casas  does  not  seem  to  know  the  meaning  of  this  word,  and 
complains  that  Columbus  does  not  say  whether  it  was  a  land  or 
marine  beast. 


SO  EXPLORING   PUERTO   DEL   PRINCIPE. 

exactly  like  a  pig,  not  like  a  tunny,  but  all  covered  with 
a  very  hard  shell,  without  a  soft  place  except  the  eyes. 
It  was  ordered  to  be  salted,  to  bring  home  for  the  Sovereigns 
to  see. 

Saturday,  ijth  of  November. 

The  Admiral  got  into  the  boat,  and  went  to  visit  the 
islands  he  had  not  yet  seen  to  the  S.W.  He  saw  many 
more  very  fertile  and  pleasant  islands,  with  a  great  depth 
between  them.  Some  of  them  had  springs  of  fresh  water, 
and  he  believed  that  the  water  of  those  streams  came  from 
some  sources  at  the  summits  of  the  mountains.  He  went 
on,  and  found  a  beach  bordering  on  very  sweet  water, 
which  was  very  cold.  There  was  a  beautiful  meadow, 
and  many  very  tall  palms.  They  found  a  large  nut  of 
the  kind  belonging  to  India,  great  rats,  and  enormous 
crabs.  He  saw  many  birds,  and  there  was  a  strong  smell 
of  musk,  which  made  him  think  it  must  be  there.  This 
day  the  two  eldest  of  the  six  youths  brought  from  the  Rio 
dc  Mares,  who  were  on  board  the  caravel  Nina,  made  their 
escape. 

Sunday.  lSt/i  of  November. 

The  Admiral  again  went  away  with  the  boats,  accom- 
panied by  many  cf  the  sailors,  to  set  up  the  cross  which  he 
had  ordered  to  be  made  out  of  the  two  large  trees  at  the 
entrance  to  the  Puerto  del  Principe,  on  a  fair  site  cleared  of 
trees,  whence  there  was  an  extensive  and  very  beautiful 
view.  He  says  that  there  is  a  greater  rise  and  fall  there 
than  in  any  other  port  he  has  seen,  and  that  this  is  no 
marvel,  considering  the  numerous  islands.  The  tide  is  the 
reverse  of  ours,  because  here,  when  the  moon  is  S.S.W.,  it 
is  low  water  in  the  port.  He  did  not  get  under  weigh, 
because  it  was  Sunday. 


RETURN    TO   PUERTO   DEL   PRINCIPE.  8l 

Monday,  igt/i  of  November. 

The  Admiral  got  under  weigh  before  sunrise,  in  a  calm. 
In  the  afternoon  there  was  some  wind  from  the  east,  and 
lie  shaped  a  N.N.E.  course.  At  sunset  the  Puerto  del 
Principe  bore  S.S.W.  y  leagues.  He  saw  the  island  of 
Babeque  bearing  due  east  about  60  miles.  He  steered 
N.E.  all  that  night,  making  60  miles,  and  up  to  ten  o'clock 
of  Tuesday  another  dozen  ;  altogether  18  leagues  N.E.  b.  W. 

Tuesday,  20th  of  November. 

They  left  Babeque,  or  the  islands  of  Babeque,  to  the 
E.S.E.,  the  wind  being  contrary ;  and,  seeing  that  no 
progress  was  being  made,  and  the  sea  was  getting  rough, 
the  Admiral  determined  to  return  to  the  Puerto  del  Prin- 
cipe, whence  he  had  started,  which  was  25  leagues  distant. 
He  did  not  wish  to  go  to  the  island  he  had  called  Isabella, 
which  was  twelve  leagues  off,  and  where  he  might  have 
anchored  that  night,  for  two  reasons  :  one  was  that  he  had 
seen  two  islands  to  the  south  which  he  wished  to  explore  ; 
the  other,  because  the  Indians  he  brought  with  him,  whom 
he  had  taken  at  the  island  of  Guanahani,  which  he  named 
San  Salvador,  eight  leagues  from  Isabella,  might  get  away, 
and  he  said  that  he  wanted  them  to  take  to  Spain.  They 
thought  that,  when  the  Admiral  had  found  gold,  he  would 
let  them  return  to  their  homes.  He  came  near  the  Puerto 
del  Principe,  but  could  not  reach  it,  because  it  was  night, 
and  because  the  current  drifted  them  to  the  N.W.  He 
turned  her  head  to  N.E.  with  a  light  wind.  At  three 
o'clock  in  the  morning  the  wind  changed,  and  a  course 
was  shaped  E.N.E.,  the  wind  being  S.S.W.,  and  changing 
at  dawn  to  south  and  S.E.  At  sunset  Puerto  del  Principe 
bore  nearly  S.W.  by  W.  48  miles,  which  are  12  leagues. 


82  DESERTION    OF   PINZON. 

Wednesday,  2\st  of  November. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  steered  east,  with  a  southerly 
wind,  but  made  little  progress,  owing  to  a  contrary  sea. 
At  vespers  he  had  gone  24  miles.  Afterwards  the  wind 
changed  to  east,  and  he  steered  S.  b.  E.,  at  sunset  having 
gone  12  miles.  Here  he  found  himself  forty-two  degrees1 
north  of  the  equinoctial  line,  as  in  the  port  of  Mares,  but 
he  says  that  he  kept»the  result  from  the  quadrant  in 
suspense  until  he  reached  the  shore,  that  it  might  be 
adjusted  (as  it  would  seem  that  he  thought  this  distance 
was  too  great,  and  he  had  reason,  it  not  being  possible,  as 
these  islands  are  only  in 2  degrees3). 

This  day  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  parted  company  with 
the  caravel  Pinta,  in  disobedience  to  and  against  the  wish 
of  the  Admiral,  and  out  of  avarice,  thinking  that  an  Indian 
who  had  been  put  on  board  his  caravel  could  show  him 
where  there  was  much  gold.  So  he  parted  company,  not 
owing  to  bad  weather,  but  because  he  chose.  Here  the 
Admiral  says  :  "  He  had  done  and  said  many  other  things 
to  me." 

Thursday,  22nd  of  November. 

On  Wednesday  night  the  Admiral  steered  S.S.E.,  with 
the  wind  east,  but  it  was  nearly  calm.  At  3  it  began  to 
blow  from  N.N.E.  ;  and  he  continued  to  steer  south  to  see 
the  land  he  had  seen  in  that  quarter.  When  the  sun  rose 
he  was  as  far  off  as  the  day  before,  owing  to  adverse 
currents,  the  land  being  40  miles  off.  This  night  Martin 
Alonso  shaped  a  course  to   the  east,  to  go  to  the  island 


1  An  erroneous  transcription.     It  should  be  21  °. 

-  A  gap  in  the  manuscript. 

3  Las  Casas  here  interpolates  some  further  remarks  about  the 
latitude,  which  are  of  no  interest,  as  the  figures  on  which  he  bases 
them  are  a  blunder  of  his  own  in  transcribing'. 


REPORTS  OF  BOHIO.  83 

of  Babeque,  where  the  Indians  say  there  is  much  gold. 
He  did  this  in  sight  of  the  Admiral,  from  whom  he 
was  distant  16  miles.  The  Admiral  stood  towards  the 
land  all  night.  He  shortened  sail,  and  showed  a  lantern, 
because  Pinzon  would  thus  have  an  opportunity  of  joining 
him,  the  night  being  very  clear,  and  the  wind  fair  to  come, 
if  he  had  wished  to  do  so. 

Friday,  23? d  of November. 

The  Admiral  stood  towards  the  land  all  day,  always 
steering  south  with  little  wind,  but  the  current  would 
never  let  them  reach  it,  being  as  far  off  at  sunset  as  in  the 
morning.  The  wind  was  E.N.E.,  and  they  could  shape  a 
southerly  course,  but  there  was  little  of  it.  Beyond  this 
cape  there  stretched  out  another  land  or  cape,  also  trending 
east,  which  the  Indians  on  board  called  BoJiio.  They  said 
that  it  was  very  large,  and  that  there  were  people  in  it  who 
had  one  eye  in  their  foreheads,  and  others  who  were 
cannibals,  and  of  whom  they  were  much  afraid.  When 
they  saw  that  this  course  was  taken,  they  said  that  they 
could  not  talk  to  these  people  because  they  would  be 
eaten,  and  that  they  were  very  well  armed.  The  Admiral 
says  that  he  well  believes  that  there  were  such  people,  and 
that  if  they  are  armed  they  must  have  some  ability.  He 
thought  that  they  may  have  captured  some  of  the  Indians, 
and  because  they  did  not  return  to  their  homes,  the 
others  believed  that  they  had  been  eaten.  They  thought 
the  same  of  the  Christians  and  of  the  Admiral  when 
some  of  them  first  saw  the  strangers. 

Saturday,  2\tJi  of  November. 

They  navigated  all  night,  and  at  3  they  reached  the 
island  at  the  very  same  point  they  had  come  to  the  week 
before,  when  they  started  for  the  island  of  Babeque.     At 

G  2 


84  AN  EXCELLENT  HARBOUR. 

first  the  Admiral  did  not  dare  to  approach  the  shore, 
because  it  seemed  that  there  would  be  a  great  surf  in  that 
mountain-girded  bay.  Finally  he  reached  the  sea  of 
Nuestra  Senora,  where  there  are  many  islands,  and  entered 
a  port  near  the  mouth  of  the  opening  to  the  islands.  He 
says  that  if  he  had  known  of  this  port  before  he  need  not 
have  occupied  himself  in  exploring  the  islands,  and  it 
would  not  have  been  necessary  to  go  back.  He,  however, 
considered  that  the  time  was  well  spent  in  examining  the 
islands.  On  nearing  the  land  he  sent  in  the  boat  to  sound  ; 
finding  a  good  sandy  bottom  in  6  to  20  fathoms.  He 
entered  the  haven,  pointing  the  ship's  head  S.W.  and  then 
west,  the  flat  island  bearing  north.  This,  with  another 
island  near  it,  forms  a  harbour  which  would  hold  all  the 
ships  of  Spain  safe  from  all  winds.  This  entrance  on  the 
S.W.  side  is  passed  by  steering  S.S.W.,  the  outlet  being  to 
the  west  very  deep  and  wide.  Thus  a  vessel  can  pass 
amidst  these  islands,  and  he  who  approaches  from  the 
north,  with  a  knowledge  of  them,  can  pass  along  the  coast. 
These  islands  are  at  the  foot  of  a  great  mountain-chain 
running  east  and  west,  which  is  longer  and  higher  than 
any  others  on  this  coast,  where  there  are  many.  A  reef  of 
rocks  outside  runs  parallel  with  the  said  mountains,  like  a 
bench,  extending  to  the  entrance.  On  the  side  of  the  fiat 
island,  and  also  to  the  S.E.,  there  is  another  small  reef,  but 
between  them  there  is  great  width  and  depth.  Within  the 
port,  near  the  S.E.  side  of  the  entrance,  they  saw  a  large 
and  very  fine  river,1  with  more  volume  than  any  they  had 
yet  met  with,  and  fresh  water  could  be  taken  from  it  as  far 
as  the  sea.  At  the  entrance  there  is  a  bar,  but  within  it  is 
very  deep,  19  fathoms.  The  banks  are  lined  with  palms 
and  many  other  trees. 

1  Rio  de  Moa. 


MATERIALS  FOR  REPAIRING  SHIPS.  85 

Sunday,  2$th  of  November. 

Before  sunrise  the  Admiral  got  into  the  boat,  and  went 
to  see  a  cape  or  point  of  land1  to  the  S.E.  of  the  flat  island, 
about  a  league  and  a  half  distant,  because  there  appeared 
to  be  a  good  river  there.  Presently,  near  to  S.E.  side  of 
the  cape,  at  a  distance  of  two  cross-bow  shots,  he  saw  a 
large  stream  of  beautiful  water  falling  from  the  mountains2 
above,  with  a  loud  noise.  He  went  to  it,  and  saw_some 
sfnnps  shining  in  its  hed_Hkg_gold.3  He  remembered  that 
in  the  river  Tejo,  near  its  junction  with  the  sea,  there  was 
gold  ;  so  it  seemed  to  him  that  this  should  contain  gold, 
and  he  ordered  some  of  these  stones  to  be  collected,  to  be 
brought  to  the  Sovereigns.  Just  then  the  sailor  boys  called 
out  that  they  had  found  large  pines.  The  Admiral  looked 
up  the  hill,  and  saw  that  they  were  so  wonderfully  large 
that  he  could  not  exaggerate  their  height  and  straightness, 
like  stout  yet  fine  spindles.  He  perceived  that  here  there 
was  material  for  great  store  of  planks  and  masts  for  the 
largest  ships  in  Spain.  He  saw  oaks  and  arbutus  trees, 
with  a  good  river,  and  the  means  of  making  water-power. 
The  climate  was  temperate,  owing  to  the  height  of  the 
mountains.  On  the  beach  he  saw  many  other  stones  of 
the  colour  of  iron,  and  others  that  some  said  were  like 
silver  ore,  all  brought  down  by  the  river.  Here  he  obtained 
a  new  mast  and  yard  for  the  mizen  of  the  caravel  Nina. 
He  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  entered  a  creek 
which  was  deep  and  wide,  at  the  foot  of  that  S.E.  part  of 
the  cape,  which  would  accommodate  a  hundred  ships  with- 
out any  anchor  or  hawsers.     Eyes  never  beheld  a  better 


1  Punta  del  Mangle  or  del  Guarico. 

2  Sierras  de  Moa. 

3  Las  Casas  says  these  were  probably  stones  called  margasita,  of 
which  there  are  many  in  these  streams. 


86  WONDERS  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD. 

harbour.  The  mountains  are  very  high,  whence  descend 
many  limpid  streams,  and  all  the  hills  are  covered  with 
pines,  and  an  infinity  of  diverse  and  beautiful  trees.  Two 
or  three  other  rivers  were  not  visited. 

The  Admiral  described  all  this,  in  much  detail,  to  the 
Sovereigns,  and  declared  that  he  had  derived  unspeakable 
joy  and  pleasure  at  seeing  it,  more  especially  the  pines, 
because  they  enable  as  many  ships  as  is  desired  to  be  built 
here,  bringing  out  the  rigging,  but  finding  here  abundant 
supplies  of  wood  and  provisions.  He  affirms  that  he  has 
not  enumerated  a  hundredth  part  of  what  there  is  here, 
and  that  it  pleased  our  Lord  always  to  show  him  one  thing 
better  than  another,  as  well  on  the  ground  and  among  the 
trees,  herbs,  fruits,  and  flowers,  as  in  the  people,  and  always 
something  different  in  each  place.  It  had  been  the  same 
as  regards  the  havens  and  the  waters.  Finally,  he  says 
that  if  it  caused  him  who  saw  it  so  much  wonder,  how  much 
more  will  it  affect  those  who  hear  about  it  ;  yet  no  one  can 
•believe  until  he  sees  it. 

Monday,  26th  of  November. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  weighed  the  anchors  in  the 
haven  of  Santa  Catalina,  where  he  was  behind  the  flat 
island,  and  steered  along  the  coast  in  the  direction  of  Cabo 
del  Pico,  which  was  S.E.  He  reached  the  cape  late, 
because  the  wind  failed,  and  then  saw  another  cape,  S.E. 
b.  E.  60  miles,  which,  when  20  miles  off,  was  named  Cabo 
de  Campana,  but  it  could  not  be  reached  that  day.  They 
made  good  32  miles  during  the  day,  which  is  8  leagues. 
During  this  time  the  Admiral  noted  nine  remarkable 
ports,1  which  all  the  sailors  thought  wonderfully  good,  and 
five  large  rivers  ;  for  the}/  sailed  close  along  the  land,  so  as 

1  Among  these  were  the  Bay  of  Yamanique,  and  the  ports  of  Jaragua, 
Taco,  Cayaganueque,  Nava,  and  Maravi. — N. 


TALES  ABOUT  THE  CARIBS.  87 

to  see  everything.  All  along  the  coast  there  are  very  high 
and  beautiful  mountains,  not  arid  or  rocky,  but  all  access- 
ible, and  very  lovely.  The  valleys,  like  the  mountains, 
were  full  of  tall  and  fine  trees,  so  that  it  was  a  glory  to 
look  upon  them,  and  there  seemed  10  be  many  pines. 
Also,  beyond  the  said  Cabo  de  Pico  to  the  S.E.  there  are 
two  islets,  each  about  two  leagues  round,  and  inside  them 
three  excellent  havens  and  two  large  rivers.  Along  the 
whole  coast  no  inhabited  places  were  visible  from  the  sea. 
There  may  have  been  some,  and  there  were  indications  of 
them,  for,  when  the  men  landed,  they  found  signs  of 
people  and  numerous  remains  of  fires.  The  Admiral  con- 
jectured that  the  land  he  saw  to-day  S.E.  of  the  Cabo  de 
Campana  was  the  island  called  by  the  Indians  Bokio :  it 
looked  as  if  this  cape  was  separated  from  the  mainland. 
The  Admiral  says  that  all  the  people  he  has  hitherto  met 
with  have  very  great  fear  of  those  of  Camba  or  Caninia. 
They  affirm  that  they  live  in  the  island  of  Bohio,  which 
must  be  very  large,  according  to  all  accounts.  The  Admiral 
understood  that  those  of  Caniba  come  to  take  people  from 
their  homes,  they  being  very  cowardly,  and  without  know- 
ledge of  arms.  For  this  cause  it  appears  that  these  Indians 
do  not  settle  on  the  sea-coast,  owing  to  being  near  the 
land  of  Caniba.  When  the  natives  who  were  on  board 
saw  a  course  shaped  for  that  land,  they  feared  to  speak, 
thinking  they  were  going  to  be  eaten  ;  nor  could  they  rid 
themselves  of  their  fear.  They  declared  that  the  Canibas 
had  only  one  eye  and  dogs'  faces.  The  Admiral  thought 
they  lied,  and  was  inclined  to  believe  that  it  was  people 
from  the  dominions  of  the  Gran  Can  who  took  them  into 
captivity. 

Tuesday,  2jth  of  November. 

Yesterday,  at  sunset,  they  arrived  near  a  cape   named 
Campana  by  the  Admiral  ;  and,  as  the  sky  was  clear  and 


88  NUMEROUS  RIVERS. 

the  wind  light,  he  did  not  wish  to  run  in  close  to  the  land  and 
anchor,  although  he  had  five  or  six  singularly  good  havens 
under  his  lee.  The  Admiral  was  attracted  on  the  one 
hand  by  the  longing  and  delight  he  felt  to  gaze  upon  the 
beauty  and  freshness  of  those  lands,  and  on  the  other  by 
a  desire  to  complete  the  work  he  had  undertaken.  For 
these  reasons  he  remained  close  hauled,  and  stood  off 
and  on  during  the  night.  But,  as  the  currents  had  set  him 
more  than  5  or  6  leagues  to  the  S.E.  beyond  where  he  had 
been  at  nightfall,  passing  the  land  of  Campana,  he  came 
in  sight  of  a  great  opening  beyond  that  cape,  which  seemed 
to  divide  one  land  from  another,  leaving  an  island  between 
them.  He  decided  to  go  back,  with  the  wind  S.E.,  steer- 
ing to  the  point  where  the  opening  had  appeared,  where 
he  found  that  it  was  only  a  large  bay1  ;  and  at  the  end  of 
it,  on  the  S.E.  side,  there  was  a  point  of  land  on  which 
was  a  high  and  square-cut  hill,2  which  had  looked  like  an 
island.  A  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  north,  and  the  Admiral 
continued  on  a  S.E.  course,  to  explore  the  coast  and  dis- 
cover all  that  was  there.  Presently  he  saw,  at  the  foot  of 
the  Cabo  de  Campana,  a  wonderfully  good  port,3  and  a  large 
river,  and,  a  quarter  of  a  league  on,  another  river,  and 
a  third,  and  a  fourth  to  a  seventh  at  similar  distances,  from 
the  furthest  one  to  Cabo  de  Campana  being  20  miles  S.E. 
Most  of  these  rivers  have  wide  and  deep  mouths,  with 
excellent  havens  for  large  ships,  without  sandbanks  or 
sunken  rocks.  Proceeding  onwards  from  the  last  of  these 
rivers,  on  a  S.E.  course,  they  came  to  the  largest  inhabited 
place  they  had  yet  seen,  and  a  vast  concourse  of  people 
came  down  to  the  beach  with  loud  shouts,  all  naked,  with 
their  darts  in  their  hands.  The  Admiral  desired  to  have 
speech  with  them,  so  he  furled  sails  and  anchored.     The 


1  The  port  of  Baracoa. — N.  2  Monte  del  Yunque. — N. 

3  Port  of  Maravi. — N. 


BEAUTIFUL   SCENERY.  89 

boats  of  the  ship  and  the  caravel  were  sent  on  shore,  with 
orders  to  do  no  harm  whatever  to  the  Indians,  but  to  give 
them  presents.  The  Indians  made  as  if  they  would  resist 
the  landing,  but,  seeing  that  the  boats  of  the  Spaniards 
continued  to  advance  without  fear,  they  retired  from  the 
beach.  Thinking  that  they  would  not  be  terrified  if  only 
two  or  three  landed,  three  Christians  were  put  on  shore, 
who  told  them  not  to  be  afraid,  in  their  own  language,  for 
they  had  been  able  to  learn  a  little  from  the  natives  who 
were  on  board.  But  all  ran  away,  neither  great  nor  small 
remaining.  The  Christians  went  to  the  houses,  which 
were  of  straw,  and  built  like  the  others  they  had  seen,  but 
found  no  one  in  any  of  them.  They  returned  to  the  ships, 
and  made  sail  at  noon  in  the  direction  of  a  fine  cape1  to  the 
eastward,  about  8  leagues  distant.  Having  gone  about  half 
a  league,  the  Admiral  saw,  on  the  south  side  of  the  same 
bay,  a  very  remarkable  harbour,2  and  to  the  S.E.  some 
wonderfully  beautiful  country  like  a  valley  among  the 
mountains,  whence  much  smoke  arose,  indicating  a  large 
population,  with  signs  of  much  cultivation.  So  he  resolved 
to  stop  at  this  port,  and  see  if  he  could  have  any  speech 
or  intercourse  with  the  inhabitants.  It  was  so  that,  if  the 
Admiral  had  praised  the  other  havens,  he  must  praise  this 
still  more  for  its  lands,  climate,  and  people.  He  tells 
marvels  of  the  beauty  of  the  country  and  of  the  trees, 
there  being  palms  and  pine  trees  ;  and  also  of  the  great 
valley,  which  is  not  flat,  but  diversified  by  hill  and  dale, 
the  most  lovely  scene  in  the  world.  Many  streams  flow 
from  it,  which  fall  from  the  mountains. 

As  soon  as  the  ship  was  at  anchor  the  Admiral  jumped 
into  the  boat,  to  get  soundings  in  the  port,  which  is  the 
shape  of  a  hammer.  When  he  was  facing  the  entrance  he 
found  the  mouth  of  a  river  on  the  south  side  of  sufficient 

1  Punta  de  Maici. — N.  2  Puerto  de  Baracoa. — N. 


90  ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  DISCOVERY. 

width  for  a  galley  to  enter  it,  but  so  concealed  that  it  is 
not  visible  until  close  to.  Entering  it  for  the  length  of 
the  boat,  there  was  a  depth  of  from  5  to  8  fathoms.  In 
passing  up  it  the  freshness  and  beauty  of  the  trees,  the 
clearness  of  the  water,  and  the  birds,  made  it  all  so  delightful 
that  he  wished  never  to  leave  them.  He  said  to  the  men 
who  were  with  him  that  to  give  a  true  relation  to  the 
Sovereigns  of  the  things  they  had  seen,  a  thousand  tongues 
would  not  suffice,  nor  his  hand  to  write  it,  for  that  it  was 
like  a  scene  of  enchantment.  He  desired  that  many  other 
prudent  and  credible  witnesses  might  see  it,  and  he  was 
sure  that  they  would  be  as  unable  to  exaggerate  the 
scene  as  he  was.  \ — -v 

The  Admiral  also  says  : — "  How  great  the  benefit  that 
is  to  be  derived  from  this  country  would  be,  I  cannot  say. 
It  is  certain  that  where  there  are  such  lands  there  must 
be  an  infinite  number  of  things  that  would  be  profitable. 
But  I  did  not  remain  long  in  one  port,  because  I  wished 
-to  see  as  much  of  the  country  as  possible,  in  order  to  make 
a  report  upon  it  to  your  Highnesses  ;  and  besides,  I  do 
not  know  the  language,  and  these  people  neither  under- 
stand me  nor  any  other  in  my  company  ;  while  the  Indians 
I  have  on  board  often  misunderstand.  Moreover,  I  have 
not  been  able  to  see  much  of  the  natives,  because  they 
often  take  to  flight.  But  now,  if  our  Lord  pleases,  I  will 
see  as  much  as  possible,  and  will  proceed  by  little  and 
little,  learning  and  comprehending  ;  and  I  will  make  some 
of  my  followers  learn  the  language.  For  I  have  perceived 
that  there  is  only  one  language  up  to  this  point.  After 
they  understand  the  advantages,  I  shall  labour  to  make 
all  these  people  Christians.  They  will  become  so  readily, 
because  they  have  no  religion  nor  idolatry,  and  your 
Highnesses  will  send  orders  to  build  a  city  and  fortress, 
and  to  convert  the  people.  I  assure  your  Highnesses  that 
it  does  not  appear  to  me  that  there  can  be  a  more  fertile 


ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  DISCOVERY.  9 1 

country  nor  a  better  climate  under  the  sun,  with  abundant 
supplies  of  water.  This  is  not  like  the  rivers  of  Guinea, 
which  are  all  pestilential.  I  thank  our  Lord  that,  up  to 
this  time,  there  has  not  been  a  person  of  my  company  who 
has  so  much  as  had  a  headache,  or  been  in  bed  from 
illness,  except  an  old  man  who  has  suffered  from  the  stone 
all  his  life,  and  he  was  well  again  in  two  days.  I  speak  of 
all  three  vessels.  If  it  will  please  God  that  your  Highnesses 
should  send  learned  men  out  here,  they  will  see  the  truth 
of  all  I  have  said.  I  have  related  already  how  good  a 
place  Rio  de  Mares  would  be  for  a  town  and  fortress,  and 
this  is  perfectly  true  ;  but  it  bears  no  comparison  with  this 
place,  nor  with  the  Mar  de  Nuestra  Senora.  For  here 
there  must  be  a  large  population,  and  very  valuable  pro- 
ductions, which  I  hope  to  discover  before  I  return  to  Cas- 
tille.  I  say  that  if  Christendom  will  find  profit  among  these 
people,  how  much  more  will  Spain,  to  whom  the  whole 
country  should  be  subject.  Your  Highnesses  ought  not  to 
consent  that  any  stranger  should  trade  here,  or  put  his 
foot  in  the  country,  except  Catholic  Christians,  for  this 
was  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  undertaking  ;  namely, 
the  increase  and  glory  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  that 
no  one  shojyld  come  to  these  parts  who  was  not  a  good 
Christian." 

All  the  above  are  the  Admiral's  words.  He  ascended 
the  river  for  some  distance,  examined  some  branches  of  it, 
and,  returning  to  the  mouth,  he  found  some  pleasant  groves 
of  trees,  like  a  delightful  orchard.  Here  he  came  upon  a 
canoe,  dug  out  of  one  tree,  as  big  as  a  galley  of  twelve 
benches,  fastened  under  a  boat-house  made  of  wood,  and 
thatched  with  palm-leaves,  so  that  it  could  be  neither 
injured  by  sun  nor  by  the  water.  He  says  that  here  would 
be  the  proper  site  for  a  town  and  fort,  by  reason  of  the 
good  port,  good  water,  good  land,  and  abundance  of  fuel. 


92  WALKS  IN  THE  INTERIOR. 

Wednesday,  28///  of  November. 

The  Admiral  remained  during  this  day,  in  consequence 
of  the  rain  and  thick  weather,  though  he  might  have  run 
along  the  coast,  the  wind  being  S.W.,  but  he  did  not  weigh, 
because  he  was  unacquainted  with  the  coast  beyond,  and 
did  not  know  what  danger  there  might  be  for  the  vessels. 
The  sailors  of  the  two  vessels  went  on  shore  to  wash  their 
clothes,  and  some  of  them  walked  inland  for  a  short 
distance.  They  found  indications  of  a  large  population, 
but  the  houses  were  all  empty,  everyone  having  fled. 
They  returned  by  the  banks  of  another  river,  larger  than 
that  which  they  knew  of,  at  the  port. 

Thursday \  2jtJi  of  November. 

The  rain  and  thick  weather  continuing,  the  Admiral 
did  not  get  under  weigh.  Some  of  the  Christians  went  to 
.another  village  to  the  N.W.,  but  found  no  one,  and  nothing 
in  the  houses.  On  the  road  they  met  an  old  man  who 
could  not  run  away,  and  caught  him.  They  told  him  they 
did  not  wish  to  do  him  any  harm,  gave  him  a  few  presents, 
and  let  him  go.  The  Admiral  would  have  liked  to  have 
had  speech  with  him,  for  he  was  exceedingly  satisfied  with 
the  delights  of  that  land,  and  wished  that  a  settlement 
might  be  formed  there,  judging  that  it  must  support  a 
large  population.  In  one  house  they  found  a  cake  of  wax, 
which  was  taken  to  the  Sovereigns,  the  Admiral  saying 
that  where  there  was  wax  there  were  also  a  thousand 
other  good  things.  The  sailors  also  found,  in  one  house, 
the  head  of  a  man  in  a  basket,  covered  with  another  basket, 
and  fastened  to  a  post  of  the  house.  They  found  the  same 
things  in  another  village.  The  Admiral  believed  that  they 
must  be  the  heads  of  some  founder,  or  principal  ancestor  of 
a  lineage,  for  the  houses  are  built  to  contain  a  great  number 


SHYNESS  OF  THE  NATIVES.  93 

of  people  in  each  ;  and  these  should  be  relations,  and  de- 
scendants of  a  common  ancestor. 


Friday,  $ot/i  of  November. 

They  could  not  get  under  weigh  to-day  because  the 
wind  was  east,  and  dead  against  them.  The  Admiral  sent 
8  men  well  armed,  accompanied  by  two  of  the  Indians  he 
had  on  board,  to  examine  the  villages  inland,  and  get 
speech  with  the  people.  They  came  to  many  houses,  but 
found  no  one  and  nothing,  all  having  fled.  They  saw  four 
youths  who  were  digging  in  their  fields,  but,  as  soon  as 
they  saw  the  Christians,  they  ran  away,  and  could  not  be 
overtaken.  They  marched  a  long  distance,  and  saw  many 
villages  and  a  most  fertile  land,  with  much  cultivation  and 
many  streams  of  water.  Near  one  river  they  saw  a  canoe 
dug  out  of  a  single  tree,  95  palmos  long,  and  capable  of 
carrying  150  persons. 

Saturday,  1st  of  December. 

They  did  not  depart,  because  there  was  still  a  foul  wind, 
with  much  rain.  The  Admiral  set  up  a  cross  at  the 
entrance  of  this  port,  which  he  called  Puerto  Santo,1  on 
some  bare  rocks.  The  point  is  that  which  is  on  the  S.E. 
side  of  the  entrance  ;  but  he  who  has  to  enter  should 
make  more  over  to  the  N.W.  ;  for  at  the  foot  of  both,  near 
the  rock,  there  are  12  fathoms  and  a  very  clean  bottom. 
At  the  entrance  of  the  port,  towards  the  S.E.  point,  there 
is  a  reef  of  rocks  above  water,2  sufficiently  far  from  the 
shore  to  be  able  to  pass  between  if  it  is  necessary ;  for  both 
on  the  side  of  the  rock  and  the  shore  there  is  a  depth  of 


1  Puerto  de  Baracoa. — N. 

2  This  reef  actually  exists  on  the  S.E.  side  of  the  entrance  to  this 
port,  which  is  described  with  great  accuracy  by  Columbus. — N. 


94  EXPLORING    EXPEDITION. 

12  to  15  fathoms  :  and,  on  entering,  a  ship's  head  should 
be  turned  S.W. 

Sunday,  2nd  of  December. 

The  wind  was  still  contrary,  and  they  could  not  depart. 
Every  night  the  wind  blows  on  the  land,  but  no  vessel 
need  be  alarmed  at  all  the  gales  in  the  world,  for  they  can- 
not blow  home  by  reason  of  a  reef  of  rocks  at  the  opening 
to  the  haven.1  A  sailor-boy  found,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river,  some  stones  which  looked  as  if  they  contained  gold  ; 
so  they  were  taken  to  be  shown  to  the  Sovereigns.  The 
Admiral  says  that  there  are  great  rivers  at  the  distance  of 
a  lombard  shot. 

Monday,  ^rd  of  December. 

By  reason  of  the  continuance  of  an  easterly  wind  the 
Admiral  did  not  leave  this  port.  He  arranged  to  visit  a 
very  beautiful  headland  a  quarter  of  a  league  to  the  S.E. 
of  the  anchorage.  He  went  with  the  boats  and  some 
armed  men.  At  the  foot  of  the  cape  there  was  the  mouth 
of  a  fair  river,  and  on  entering  it  they  found  the  width  to 
be  a  hundred  paces,  with  a  depth  of  one  fathom.  Inside 
they  found  12,  5,  4,  and  2  fathoms,  so  that  it  would  hold 
all  the  ships  there  are  in  Spain.  Leaving  the  river,  they 
came  to  a  cove  in  which  were  five  very  large  canoes,  so 
well  constructed  that  it  was  a  pleasure  to  look  at  them. 
They  were  under  spreading  trees,  and  a  path  led  from 
them  to  a  very  well-built  boat-house,  so  thatched  that 
neither  sun  nor  rain  could  do  any  harm.  Within  it  there 
was  another  canoe  made  out  of  a  single  tree  like  the  others, 
like  a  galley  with  17  benches.  It  was  a  pleasant  sight  to 
look   upon   such   goodly  work.     The  Admiral  ascended  a 


1  Here  Las   Casas  puts  "&c",  evidently  omitting  some  valuable 
sailing  directions. 


INTERCOURSE  WITH  THE  NATIVES.  95 

mountain,  and  afterwards  found  the  country  level,  and 
cultivated  with  many  things  of  that  land,  including  such 
calabashes,  as  it  was  a  glory  to  look  upon  them.  In  the 
middle  there  was  a  large  village,  and  they  came  upon  the 
people  suddenly  ;  but,  as  soon  as  they  were  seen,  men  and 
women  took  to  flight.  The  Indian  from  on  board,  who 
was  with  the  Admiral,  cried  out  to  them  that  they  need 
not  be  afraid,  as  the  strangers  were  good  people.  The 
Admiral  made  him  give  them  bells,  copper  ornaments,  and 
glass  beads,  green  and  yellow,  with  which  they  were  well 
content.  He  saw  that  they  had  no  gold  nor  any  other 
precious  thing,  and  that  it  would  suffice  to  leave  them  in 
peace.  The  whole  district  was  well  peopled,  the  rest 
having  fled  from  fear.  The  Admiral  assures  the  Sove- 
reigns that  ten  thousand  of  these  men  would  run  from  ten, 
so  cowardly  and  timid  are  they.  No  arms  are  carried  by 
them,  except  wands,  on  the  point  of  which  a  short  piece  of 
wood  is  fixed,  hardened  by  fire,  and  these  they  are  very 
ready  to  exchange.  Returning  to  where  he  had  left  the 
boats,  he  sent  back  some  men  up  the  hill,  because  he 
fancied  he  had  seen  a  large  apiary.  Before  those  he  had 
sent  could  return,  they  were  joined  by  many  Indians,  and 
they  went  to  the  boats,  where  the  Admiral  was  waiting 
with  all  his  people.  One  of  the  natives  advanced  into  the 
river  near  the  stern  of  the  boat,  and  made  a  long  speech, 
which  the  Admiral  did  not  understand.  At  intervals  the 
other  Indians  raised  their  hands  to  heaven,  and  shouted. 
The  Admiral  thought  he  was  assuring  him  that  he  was 
pleased  at  his  arrival  ;  but  he  saw  the  Indian  who  came 
from  the  ship  change  the  colour  of  his  face,  and  turn  as 
yellow  as  wax,  trembling  much,  and  letting  the  Admiral 
know  by  signs  that  he  should  leave  the  river,  as  they  were 
going  to  kill  him.  He  pointed  to  a  cross-bow  which  one 
of  the  Spaniards  had,  and  showed  it  to  the  Indians,  and 
the  Admiral   let  it  be  understood  that  they  would   all  be 


96  INTERCOURSE  WITH  THE  NATIVES. 

slain,  because  that  cross-bow  carried  far  and  killed  people. 
He  also  took  a  sword  and  drew  it  out  of  the  sheath,  show- 
ing it  to  them,  and  saying  the  same,  which,  when  they  had 
heard,  they  all  took  to  flight ;  while  the  Indian  from  the 
ship  still  trembled  from  cowardice,  though  he  was  a  tall, 
strong  man.  The  Admiral  did  not  want  to  leave  the  river, 
but  pulled  towards  the  place  where  the  natives  had 
assembled  in  great  numbers,  all  painted,  and  as  naked 
as  when  their  mothers  bore  them.  Some  had  tufts  of 
feathers  on  their  heads,  and  all  had  their  bundles  of 
darts. 

The  Admiral  says :  "  I  came  to  them,  and  gave  them 
some  mouthfuls  of  bread,  asking  for  the  darts,  for  which 
I  gave  in  exchange  copper  ornaments,  bells,  and  glass 
beads.  This  made  them  peaceable,  so  that  they  came  to 
the  boats  again,  and  gave  us  what  they  had.  The  sailors 
had  killed  a  turtle,  and  the  shell  was  in  the  boat  in  pieces. 
The  sailor-boys  gave  them  some  in  exchange  for  a  bundle 
of  darts.  These  are  like  the  other  people  we  have  seen, 
and  with  the  same  belief  that  we  came  from  heaven. 
They  are  ready  to  give  whatever  thing  they  have  in 
exchange  for  any  trifle  without  saying  it  is  little  ;  and  I 
believe  they  would  do  the  same  with  gold  and  spices  if 
they  had  any.  I  saw  a  fine  house,  not  very  large,  and 
with  two  doors,  as  all  the  rest  have.  On  entering,  I  saw 
a  marvellous  work,  there  being  rooms  made  in  a  peculiar 
way,  that  I  scarcely  know  how  to  describe  it.  Shells  and 
other  things  were  fastened  to  the  ceiling.  I  thought 
it  was  a  temple,  and  I  called  them  and  asked,  by  signs, 
whether  prayers  were  offered  up  there.  They  said  that 
they  were  not,  and  one  of  them  climbed  up  and  offered 
me  all  the  things  that  were  there,  of  which  I  took 
some." 


THE  EAST  END  OF  CUBA.  97 

Tuesday,  4.1/1  of  December. 

The  Admiral  made  sail  with  little  wind,  and  left  that 
port,  which  he  called  Puerto  Santo.  After  going  two 
leagues,  he  saw  the  great  river1  of  which  he  spoke  yester- 
day. Passing  along  the  land,  and  beating  to  windward  on 
S.E.  and  W.N.W.  courses,  they  reached  Cabo  Lindo-  which 
is  E.S.E.  5  leagues  from  Cabo  del  Monte.  A  league  and 
a  half  from  Cabo  del  Monte  there  is  an  important  but 
rather  narrow  river,  which  seemed  to  have  a  good  entrance, 
and  to  be  deep.  Three-quarters  of  a  league  further  on, 
the  Admiral  saw  another  very  large  river,  and  he  thought 
it  must  have  its  source  at  a  great  distance.  It  had  a  hun- 
dred paces  at  its  mouth,  and  no  bar,  with  a  depth  of 
8  fathoms.  The  Admiral  sent  the  boat  in,  to  take  sound- 
ings, and  they  found  the  water  fresh  until  it  enters  the  sea. 

This  river  had  great  volume,  and  must  have  a  large 
population  on  its  banks.  Beyond  Cabo  Lindo  there  is 
a  great  bay,  which  would  be  open  for  navigation  to  E.N.E. 
and  S.E.  and  S.S.W. 

Wednesday,  ^tli  of  December. 
All  this  night  they  were  beating  to  windward  off  Cape 
Lindo,  to  reach  the  land  to  the  east,  and  at  sunrise  the 
Admiral  sighted  another  cape,3  two  and  a  half  leagues  to 
the  east.  Having  passed  it,  he  saw  that  the  land  trended 
S.  and  S.W.,  and  presently  saw  a  fine  high  cape  in  that 
direction,  7  leagues  distant.4    He  would  have  wished  to  go 

1  Rio  Boma.— N.  2  Punta  del  Fraile.— N. 

3  Punta  de  los  Azules. — N. 

4  The  eastern  end  of  Cuba,  called  Punta  del  Maid. — N.  Las 
Casas  says  that  Punta  del  Maici  was  not  the  extreme  point.  It  was 
the  point  named  by  the  Admiral  "  Cabo  de  Cuba".  He  must  be 
correct,  for  he  had  the  chart  drawn  by  the  Admiral  himself,  in  his 
possession  (i,  p.  340).  The  Admiral  named  the  extreme  east  point  of 
Cuba  "Alpha  et  Omega"  ;  and  Las  Casas  says  that  in  his  time  it  had 
the  native  name  of  "  Punta  de  Bayatiquiri".  {Las  Casas,  i,  p.  360; 
ii,  p.  51.) 

H 


çS  DISCOVERY  OF  ESPANOLA. 

there,  but  his  object  was  to  reach  the  island  of  Babcque, 
which,  according  to  the  Indians,  bore  N.E.  ;  so  he  gave  up 
the  intention.  He  could  not  go  to  Babeque  either,  because 
the  wind  was  N.E.1  Looking  to  the  S.E.,  he  saw  land, 
which  was  a  very  large  island,  according  to  the  informa- 
tion of  the  Indians,  well  peopled,  and  called  by  them 
Bohio?  The  Admiral  says  that  the  inhabitants  of  Cuba,  or 
Juana,3  and  of  all  the  other  islands,  are  much  afraid  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Bohio,  because  they  say  that  they  eat  people. 
The  Indians  relate  other  things,  by  signs,  which  are  very 
wonderful  ;  but  the  Admiral  did  not  believe  them.  He 
only  inferred  that  those  of  Bohio  must  have  more  clever- 
ness and  cunning  to  be  able  to  capture  the  others,  who, 
however,  are  very  poor-spirited.  The  wind  veered  from 
N.E.  to  North,  so  the  Admiral  determined  to  leave  Cuba, 
or  Juana,  which,  up  to  this  time,  he  had  supposed  to  be 
the  mainland,  on  account  of  its  size,  having  coasted  along 
it  for  120  leagues.4  He  shaped  a  course  S.E.  b.  E.,  the 
land  he  had  sighted  bearing  S.E.  ;  taking  this  precaution 
because  the  wind  always  veered  from  N.  to  N.E.  again, 
and  thence  to  east  and  S.E.  The  wind  increased,  and  he 
made  all  sail,  the  current  helping  them  ;  so  that  they 
were  making  8  miles  an  hour  from  the  morning  until  one 
in  the  afternoon  (which  is  barely  6  hours,  for  they  say  that 
the  nights  were  nearly  15  hours).  Afterwards  they  went 
10  miles  an  hour,  making  good  88  miles  by  sunset, 
equal   to  22  leagues,  all  to  the  S.E.     As  night  was  coming 


1  Babeque  is  a  name  that  does  not  occur  again.  Probably  its  use 
by  the  Admiral  arose  from  some  word  that  had  been  misunderstood. 

2  Hayti,  orEspahola.   The  name  Bohio  is  a  mistake (LasCasas,\, 359). 

3  The  Admiral  gave  the  name  of  Juana  to  Cuba,  in  honour  of 
Prince  Juan,  only  son  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella. 

4  "  I  found  it  so  large  that  I  thought  it  must  be  the  mainland — the 
province  of  Cathay"  {Letter  to  Santangel,  d.  2).  Further  on  he  says  : 
"  I  learnt  from  Indians  whom  I  seized,  that  their  land  was  certainly 
an  island"  {ibid.,  p.  3).      But  he  remained  in  doubt. 


ARRIVAL  IN  ESPANOLA.  99 

on,  the  Admiral  ordered  the  caravel  Nina,  being  a  good 
sailer,  to  proceed  ahead,  so  as  to  sight  a  harbour  at  day- 
light. Arriving  at  the  entrance  of  a  port  which  was  like 
the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  while  it  was  still  dark,  a  boat  was  sent  in 
to  take  soundings,  which  showed  a  light  from  a  lantern. 
Before  the  Admiral  could  beat  up  to  where  the  caravel 
was,  hoping  that  the  boat  would  show  a  leading-mark  for 
entering  the  port,  the  candle  in  the  lantern  went  out. 
The  caravel,  not  seeing  the  light,  showed  a  light  to  the 
Admiral,  and,  running  down  to  him,  related  what  had 
happened.  The  boat's  crew  then  showed  another  light, 
and  the  caravel  made  for  it ;  but  the  Admiral  could  not 
do  so,  and  was  standing  off  and  on  all  night. 

Thursday,  6th  of  December. 

When  daylight  arrived  the  Admiral  found  himself  four 
leagues  from  the  port,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Puerto 
Maria,1  and  to  a  fine  cape  bearing  S.S.W.  he  gave  the 
name  of  Cabo  del  Estrella?  It  seemed  to  be  the  furthest 
point  of  the  island  towards  the  south,  distant  28  miles. 
Another  point  of  land,  like  an  island,  appeared  about  40 
miles  to  the  east.  To  another  fine  point,  54  miles  to  the 
east,  he  gave  the  name  of  Cabo  del  Elefante?  and  he  called 
another,  28  miles  to  the  S.E.,  Cabo  de  Cinquin.  There  was 
a  great  opening  or  bay,  which  might  be  the  mouth  of  a 
river,4  distant  20  miles.  It  seemed  that  between  Cabo  del 
Elefante  and  that  of  Cinquin  there  was  a  great  opening,5 
and  some  of  -the  sailors  said  that  it  formed  an  island,  to 
which  the  name  of  Isla  de  la  Tortuga  was  given.  The 
island  appeared  to  be  very  high  land,  not  closed  in  with 
mountains,  but  with  beautiful  valleys,  well  cultivated,  the 

1  The  port  of  St.  Nicholas  Mole,  in  Hayti. 

2  Cape  of  St.  Nicholas. 

3  Punta  Palmista.  4  Puerto  Escudo. 
5  The  channel  between  Tortuga  Island  and  the  main. 

II  2 


IOO  PORT  ST.  NICHOLAS. 

crops  appearing  like  the  wheat  on  the  plain  of  Cordova  in 
May.  That  night  they  saw  many  fires,  and  much  smoke, 
as  if  from  workshops,  in  the  day  time  ;  it  appeared  to  be  a 
signal  made  by  people  who  were  at  war.  All  the  coast  of 
this  land  trends  to  the  east. 

At  the  hour  of  vespers  the  Admiral  reached  this  port,  to 
which  he  gave  the  name  of  Puerto  de  San  Nicolas,  in  honour 
of  St.  Nicholas,  whose  day  it  was1;  and  on  entering  it  he 
was  astonished  at  its  beauty  and  excellence.  Although  he 
had  given  great  praise  to  the  ports  of  Cuba,  he  had  no 
doubt  that  this  one  not  only  equalled,  but  excelled  them, 
and  none  of  them  arc  like  it.  At  the  entrance  it  is  a 
league  and  a  half  wide,  and  a  vessel's  head  should  be 
turned  S.S.E.,  though,  owing  to  the  great  width,  she  may 
be  steered  on  any  bearing  that  is  convenient ;  proceeding 
on  this  course  for  two  leagues.  On  the  south  side  of  the 
entrance  the  coast  forms  a  cape,  and  thence  the  course  is 
almost  the  same  as  far  as  a  point  where  there  is  a  fine 
beach,  and  a  plain  covered  with  fruit-bearing  trees  of 
many  kinds  ;  so  that  the  Admiral  thought  there  must  be 
nutmegs  and  other  spices  among  them,  but  he  did  not 
know  them,  and  they  were  not  ripe.  There  is  a  river 
falling  into  the  harbour,  near  the  middle  of  the  beach. 
The  depth  of  this  port  is  surprising,  for,  until  reaching  the 

land,  for  a  distance  of 2  the  lead  did   not  reach  the 

bottom  at  40  fathoms ;  and  up  to  this  length  there  are 
15  fathoms  with  a  very  clean  bottom.  Throughout  the 
port  there  is  a  depth  of  1 5  fathoms,  with  a  clean  bottom, 
at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore  ;  and  all  along 
the  coast  there  are  soundings  with  clean  bottom,  and 
not   a   single   sunken    rock.       Inside,  at  the  length   of  a 


1  When  he  saw  it  at  a  distance  he  had  given  it  the  name  of  Puerto 
Maria,  but,  having  entered  it  on  St.  Nicholas's  Day,  he  changed  the 
name,  thinking  the  new  one  more  appropriate. 

2  A  gap  in  the  manuscript. — N. 


PORT  ST.  NICHOLAS.  IOI 

boat's  oar  from  the  land,  there  are  5  fathoms.  Beyond 
the  limit  of  the  port  to  the  S.S.E.  a  thousand  carracks 
could  beat  up.  One  branch  of  the  port  to  the  N.E.  runs 
into  the  land  for  a  long  half  league,  and  always  the  same 
width,  as  if  it  had  been  measured  with  a  cord.  Being  in  this 
creek,  which  is  25  paces  wide,  the  principal  entrance  to 
the  harbour  is  not  in  sight,  so  that  it  appears  land-locked.1 
The  depth  of  this  creek  is  1 1  fathoms  throughout,  all  with 
clean  bottom  ;  and  close  to  the  land,  where  one  might 
put  the  gangboards  on  the  grass,  there  are  eight  fathoms. 

The  whole  port  is  open  to  the  air,  and  clear  of  trees. 
All  the  island  appeared  to  be  more  rocky  than  any  that 
had  been  discovered.  The  trees  are  smaller,  and  many  of 
them  of  the  same  kinds  as  are  found  in  Spain,  such  as  the 
ilex,  the  arbutus,  and  others,  and  it  is  the  same  with  the 
herbs.  It  is  a  very  high  country,  all  open  and  clear,  with 
a  very  fine  air,  and  no  such  cold  has  been  met  with  else- 
where, though  it  cannot  be  called  cold  except  by  com- 
parison. Towards  the  front  of  the  haven  there  is  a 
beautiful  valley,  watered  by  a  river  ;  and  in  that  district 
there  must  be  many  inhabitants,  judging  from  the  number 
of  large  canoes,  like  galleys,  with  15  benches.  All  the 
natives  fled  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  ships.  The  Indians 
who  were  on  board  had  such  a  longing  to  return  to  their 
homes  that  the  Admiral  considered  whether  he  should  not 
take  them  back  when  he  should  depart  from  here.  They 
were  already  suspicious,  because  he  did  not  shape  a  course 
towards  their  country  ;  whence  he  neither  believed  what 
they  said,  nor  could  he  understand  them,  nor  they  him, 
properly.  The  Indians  on  board  had  the  greatest  fear  in 
the  world  of  the  people  of  this  island.  In  order  to  get 
speech  of  the  people  it  would  be  necessary  to  remain  some 
days  in  harbour ;  but  the  Admiral  did  not  do  so,  because 
he  had  to  continue  his  discoveries,  and  because  he  could 

1  This  is  the  "  Carenero",  within  the  port  of  St.  Nicholas.  — N. 


I02  COAST  OF  ESPANOLA. 

not  tell  how  long  he  might  be  detained.  He  trusted  in 
our  Lord  that  the  Indians  he  brought  with  him  would 
understand  the  language  of  the  people  of  this  island  ;  and 
afterwards  he  would  communicate  with  them,  trusting 
that  it  might  please  God's  Majesty  that  he  might  find 
trade  in  gold  before  he  returned. 


Friday,  yth  of  December. 

At  daybreak  the  Admiral  got  under  weigh,  made  sail, 
and  left  the  port  of  St.  Nicholas.  He  went  on  with  the 
wind  in  the  west  for  two  leagues,  until  he  reached  the 
point  which  forms  the  Carenero,  when  the  angle  in  the 
coast  bore  S.E.,  and  the  Cabo  de  la  Estrella  was  24  miles 
to  the  S.W.  Thence  he  steered  along  the  coast  eastward 
to  Cabo  Cinquin  about  48  miles,  20  of  them  being  on  an 
E.N.E.  coast.  All  the  coast  is  very  high,  with  a  deep  sea. 
Close  in  shore  there  are  20  to  30  fathoms,  and  at  the 
distance  of  a  lombard-shot  there  is  no  bottom  ;  all  which 
the  Admiral  discovered  that  day,  as  he  sailed  along  the 
coast  with  the  wind  S.W.,  much  to  his  satisfaction.  The 
cape,  which  runs  out  in  the  port  of  St.  Nicholas  the  length 
of  a  shot  from  a  lombard,  could  be  made  an  island  by 
cutting  across  it,  while  to  sail  round  it  is  a  circuit  of  3  or 
4  miles.  All  that  land  is  very  high,  not  clothed  with  very 
high  trees,  but  with  ilex,  arbutus,  and  others  proper  to  the 
land  of  Castille.  Before  reaching  Cape  Cinquin  by  two 
leagues,  the  Admiral  discovered  an  opening  in  the  moun- 
tains, through  which  he  could  see  a  very  large  valley, 
covered  with  crops  like  barley,  and  he  therefore  judged 
that  it  must  sustain  a  large  population.  Behind  there  was 
a  high  range  of  mountains.  On  reaching  Cabo  Cinquin, 
the    Cabo  de  la   Tortuga  bore  N.E.   32   miles.1     Off  Cabo 


It  should  be  north  11  miles. — N. 


COAST  OF  ESPANOLA.  IO3 

Cinquin,  at  the  distance  of  a  lombard-shot,  there  is  a  high 
rock,  which  is  a  good  landmark.  The  Admiral  being 
there,  he  took  the  bearing  of  Cabo  del  Elefante,  which  was 
E.S.E.  about  70  miles,1  the  intervening  land  being  very 
high.  At  a  distance  of  6  leagues  there  was  a  conspicuous 
cape,'2  and  he  saw  many  large  valleys  and  plains,  and  high 
mountains  inland,  all  reminding  him  of  Spain.  After 
8  leagues  he  came  to  a  very  deep  but  narrow  river,  though 
a  carrack  might  easily  enter  it,  and  the  mouth  without  bar 
or  rocks.  After  16  miles  there  was  a  wide  and  deep 
harbour,3,  with  no  bottom  at  the  entrance,  nor,  at  3  paces 
from  the  shore,  less  than  15  fathoms;  and  it  runs  inland 
a  quarter  of  a  league.  It  being  yet  very  early,  only  one 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  wind  being  aft  and 
blowing  fresh,  yet,  as  the  sky  threatened  much  rain,  and  it 
was  very  thick,  which  is  dangerous  even  on  a  known 
coast,  how  much  more  in  an  unknown  country,  the 
Admiral  resolved  to  enter  the  port,  which  he  called  Puerto 
de  la  Conception.  He  landed  near  a  small  river  at  the 
point  of  the  haven,  flowing  from  valleys  and  plains,  the 
beauty  of  which  was  a  marvel  to  behold.  He  took  fishing- 
nets  with  him  ;  and,  before  he  landed,  a  skate,  like  those  of 
Spain,  jumped  into  the  boat,  this  being  the  first  time  they 
had  seen  fish  resembling  the  fish  of  Castille.  The  sailors 
caught  and  killed  others.  Walking  a  short  distance  in- 
land, the  Admiral  found  much  land  under  cultivation,  and 
heard  the  singing  of  nightingales  and  other  birds  of  Cas- 
tille. Five  men  were  seen,  but  they  would  not  stop, 
running  away.  The  Admiral  found  myrtles  and  other 
Spanish  plants,  while  land  and  mountains  were  like  those 
of  Castille. 


1  This  is  another  error  of  the  transcriber.     It  should  be  11  miles. 

2  Puerto  Escudo. — N.  3  Bahia  Mosquito. — N. 


" 


I04  THE  HARBOUR  OF  CONCEPCION. 


Saturday,  8t/i  of  December. 

In  this  port  there  was  heavy  rain,  with  a  fresh  breeze 
from  the  north.  The  harbour  is  protected  from  all  winds 
except  the  north  ;  but  even  this  can  do  no  harm  whatever, 
because  there  is  a  great  surf  outside,  which  prevents  such 
a  sea  within  the  river  as  would  make  a  ship  work  on  her 
cables.  After  midnight  the  wind  veered  to  N.E.,  and  then 
to  East,  from  which  winds  this  port  is  well  sheltered  by 
the  island  of  Tortuga,  distant  36  miles.1 


Sunday,  gt/i  of  December. 

To-day  it  rained,  and  the  weather  was  wintry,  like 
October  in  Castille.  No  habitations  had  been  seen  except 
a  very  beautiful  house  in  the  Puerto  de  S.  Nicolas,  which 
was  better  built  than  any  that  had  been  in  other  parts. 
"  The  island  is  very  large,"  says  the  Admiral  :  "  it  would 
not  be  much  if  it  has  a  circumference  of  200  leagues.  All 
the  parts  he  had  seen  were  well  cultivated.  He  believed 
that  the  villages  must  be  at  a  distance  from  the  sea, 
whither  they  went  when  the  ships  arrived ;  for  they  all 
took  to  flight,  taking  everything  with  them,  and  they 
made  smoke-signals,  like  a  people  at  war."  This  port  has 
a  width  of  a  thousand  paces  at  its  entrance,  equal  to 
a  quarter  of  a  league.  There  is  neither  bank  nor  reef 
within,  and  there  are  scarcely  soundings  close  in  shore. 
Its  length,  running  inland,  is  3,000  paces,  all  clean,  and 
with  a  sandy  bottom  ;  so  that  any  ship  may  anchor  in  it 
without  fear,  and  enter  it  without  precaution.  At  the  upper 
end  there  are  the  mouths  of  two  rivers,  with  the  most 
beautiful  campaign  country,  almost  like  the  lands  of  Spain  : 

1  A  blunder  of  the  transcriber.     It  should  be  11  miles. 


NAME  OF  ESPANOLA  GIVEN.  I05 

these  even  have  the  advantage ;    for   which  reasons  the 
Admiral  gave  the  name  of  the  said  island  Isla  Espanola} 

Monday,  10th  of  December. 

It  blew  hard  from  the  N.E.,  which  made  them  drag  their 
anchors  half  a  cable's  length.  This  surprised  the  Admiral, 
who  had  seen  that  the  anchors  had  taken  good  hold  of  the 
ground.  As  he  saw  that  the  wind  was  foul  for  the  direc- 
tion in  which  he  wanted  to  steer,  he  sent  six  men  on  shore, 
well  armed,  to  go  two  or  three  leagues  inland,  and 
endeavour  to  open  communications  with  the  natives. 
They  came  and  returned  without  having  seen  either  people 
or  houses.  But  they  found  some  hovels,  wide  roads,  and 
some  places  where  many  fires  had  been  made.  They  saw 
excellent  lands,  and  many  mastick  trees,  some  specimens 
of  which  they  took  ;  but  this  is  not  the  time  for  collecting 
it,  as  it  does  not  coagulate. 

Tuesday,  nth  of  December. 
The  Admiral  did  not  depart,  because  the  wind  was  still 
east  and  S.E.  In  front  of  this  port,  as  has  been  said,  is 
the  island  of  La  Tortuga.  It  appears  to  be  a  large  island, 
with  the  coast  almost  like  that  of  Espanola,  and  the 
distance  between  them  is  about  ten  leagues.2  It  is  well 
to  know  that  from  the  Cabo  de  Cinquin,  opposite  Tortuga, 
the  coast  trends  to  the  south.  The  Admiral  had  a  great 
desire  to  see  that  channel  between  these  two  islands,  and 
to  examine  the  island  of  Espanola,  which  is  the  most 
beautiful  thing  in  the  world.  According  to  what  the 
Indians  said  who  were  on  board,  he  would  have  to  go  to 
the  island  of  Babeque.  They  declared  that  it  was  very 
large,  with  great  mountains,  rivers,  and  valleys  ;  and  that 

1  See  Letter  to  Santangel,  p.  3. 

2  One  of  the  commonest  blunders  of  the  careless  scribe  who  made 
the  copy  of  the  Journal  of  Columbus  was  to  write  leagues  instead  of 
miles.     The  distance  is  11  miles. 


IOÓ  DETAINED   IN    PORT. 

the  island  of  Bohio  was  larger  than  Juana,  which  they  call 
Cuba,  and  that  it  is  not  surrounded  by  water.  They  seem 
to  imply  that  there  is  mainland  behind  Espanola,  and 
they  call  it  Caritaba,  and  say  it  is  of  vast  extent.  They 
have  reason  in  saying  that  the  inhabitants  are  a  clever 
race,  for  all  the  people  of  these  islands  are  in  great  fear  of 
those  of  Caniba.  So  the  Admiral  repeats,  what  he  has  said 
before,  that  Caniba  is  nothing  else  but  the  Gran  Can,  who 
ought  now  to  be  very  near.  He  sends  ships  to  capture  the 
islanders  ;  and  as  they  do  not  return,  their  countrymen 
believe  that  they  have  been  eaten.  Each  day  we  under- 
stand better  what  the  Indians  say,  and  they  us,  so  that 
very  often  we  are  intelligible  to  each  other.  The 
Admiral  sent  people  on  shore,  who  found  a  great  deal  of 
mastick,  but  did  not  gather  it.  He  says  that  the  rains 
make  it,  and  that  in  Chios  they  collect  it  in  March.  In 
these  lands,  being  warmer,  they  might  take  it  in  January. 
They  caught  many  fish  like  those  of  Castille — dace,1 
salmon,  hake,2  dory,3  gilt  heads,4  skates,5  corbinas?  shrimps,7 
and  they  saw  sardines.     They  found  many  aloes. 

Wednesday,  \2th  of  December. 

The  Admiral  did  not  leave  the  port  to-day,  for  the  same 
reason  :  a  contrary  wind.  He  set  up  a  great  cross  on  the 
west  side  of  the  entrance,  on  a  very  picturesque  height, 
"  in  sign",  he  says,  "  that  your  Highnesses  hold  this  land 
for  your  own,  but  chiefly  as  a  sign  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  This  being  done,  three  sailors  strolled  into  the 
woods  to  see  the  trees  and  bushes.  Suddenly  they  came 
upon  a  crowd  of  people,  all  naked  like  the  rest.    They  called 


1  Albicres,  a  river  fish  :  roach  or  dace. 

2  Pijota,  a  word  in  the  Galician  dialect  for  a  cod  or  hake. 

3  Gallo.  4  Pâmpano.  5  Lisa. 

6  I  have  failed  to  find  the  English  equivalent  for  the  name  of  this 
fish.  '  Camaroncs. 


INTERCOURSE  WITH  NATIVES.  I07 

to  them,  and  went  towards  them,  but  they  ran  away.  At 
last  they  caught  a  woman  ;  for  I  had  ordered  that  some 
should  be  caught,  that  they  might  be  treated  well,  and 
made  to  lose  their  fear.  This  would  be  a  useful  event,  for 
it  could  scarcely  be  otherwise,  considering  the  beauty  of 
the  country.  So  they  took  the  woman,  who  was  very 
young  and  beautiful,  to  the  ship,  where  she  talked  to  the 
Indians  on  board  ;  for  they  all  speak  the  same  language. 
The  Admiral  caused  her  to  be  dressed,  and  gave  her  glass 
beads,  hawks'  bells,  and  brass  ornaments  ;  then  he  sent  her 
back  to  the  shore  very  courteously,  according  to  his 
custom.  He  sent  three  of  the  crew  with  her,  and  three  of 
the  Indians  he  had  on  board,  that  they  might  open  com- 
munications with  her  people.  The  sailors  in  the  boat,  who 
took  her  on  shore,  told  the  Admiral  that  she  did  not  want 
to  leave  the  ship,  but  would  rather  remain  with  the  other 
women  he  had  seized  at  the  port  of  Mares,  in  the  island  of 
Juana  or  Cuba.  The  Indians  who  went  to  put  the  woman 
on  shore  said  that  the  natives  came  in  a  canoe,  which  is 
their  caravel,  in  which  they  navigate  from  one  place  to 
another  ;  but  when  they  came  to  the  entrance  of  the  har- 
bour, and  saw  the  ships,  they  turned  back,  left  the  canoe, 
and  took  the  road  to  the  village.  The  woman  pointed  out 
the  position  of  the  village.  She  had  a  piece  of  gold  in  her 
nose,  which  showed  that  there  was  gold  in  that  island. 

Thursday,  15th  of  December. 

The  three  men  who  had  been  sent  by  the  Admiral  with 
the  woman  returned  at  3  o'clock  in  the  morning,  not 
having  gone  with  her  to  the  village,  because  the  distance 
appeared  to  be  long,  or  because  they  were  afraid.  They 
said  that  next  day  many  people  would  come  to  the  ships, 
as  they  would  have  been  reassured  by  the  news  brought 
them  by  the  woman.  The  Admiral,  with  the  desire  of 
ascertaining  whether  there  were  any  profitable  commodities 


IOS  INTERCOURSE  WITH  NATIVES. 

in  that  land,  being  so  beautiful  and  fertile,  and  of  having 
some  speech  with  the  people,  and  being  desirous  of  serv- 
ing the  Sovereigns,  determined  to  send  again  to  the  village, 
trusting  in  the  news  brought  by  the  woman  that  the 
Christians  were  good  people.  For  this  service  he  selected 
nine  men  well  armed,  and  suited  for  such  an  enterprise, 
with  whom  an  Indian  went  from  those  who  were  on 
board.  They  reached  the  village,1  which  is  4^  leagues  to 
the  S.E.,  and  found  that  it  was  situated  in  a  very  large 
and  open  valley.  As  soon  as  the  inhabitants  saw  the 
Christians  coming  they  all  fled  inland,  leaving  all  their 
goods  behind  them.  The  village  consisted  of  a  thousand 
houses,  with  over  three  thousand  inhabitants.  The  Indian 
whom  the  Christians  had  brought  with  them  ran  after  the 
fugitives,  saying  that  they  should  have  no  fear,  for  the 
Christians  did  not  come  from  Cariba,  but  were  from 
heaven,  and  that  they  gave  many  beautiful  things  to  all 
the  people  they  met.  They  were  so  impressed  with  what 
he  said,  that  upwards  of  two  thousand  came  close  up  to 
the  Christians,  putting  their  hands  on  their  heads,  which 
was  a  sign  of  great  reverence  and  friendship ;  and  they 
were  all  trembling  until  they  were  reassured.  The  Chris- 
tians related  that,  as  soon  as  the  natives  had  cast  off  their 
fear,  they  all  went  to  the  houses,  and  each  one  brought 
what  he  had  to  eat,  consisting  of  yams,2  which  are  roots 
like  large  radishes,  which  they  sow  and  cultivate  in  all 
their  lands,  and  is  their  staple  food.  They  make  bread  of 
it,  and  roast  it.  The  yam  has  the  smell  of  a  chesnut,  and 
anyone  would  think  he  was  eating  chesnuts.  They  gave 
their  guests  bread  and  fish,  and  all  they  had.  As  the 
Indians  who  came  in  the   ship  had   understood   that   the 


1  This  village  is  now  known  by  the  name  of  Gros  Morne.  It  is 
situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Rio  de  los  Tres  Reyes,  which  empties 
itself  into  the  sea  half-a-mile  west  of  Puerto  de  Paz. — N. 

2  "  Pan  de  niames." 


BEAUTY  OF  THE  COUNTRY.  109 

Admiral  wanted  to  have  some  parrots,  one  of  those  who 
accompanied  the  Spaniards  mentioned  this,  and  the  natives 
brought  out  parrots,  and  gave  them  as  many  as  they 
wanted,  without  asking  anything  for  them.  The  natives 
asked  the  Spaniards  not  to  go  that  night,  and  that  they 
would  give  them  many  other  things  that  they  had  in  the 
mountains.  While  all  these  people  were  with  the  Spaniards, 
a  great  multitude  was  seen  to  come,  with  the  husband  of 
the  woman  whom  the  Admiral  had  honoured  and  sent 
away.  They  wore  hair  over  their  shoulders,  and  came  to 
give  thanks  to  the  Christians  for  the  honour  the  Admiral 
had  done  them,  and  for  the  gifts.  The  Christians  reported 
to  the  Admiral  that  this  was  a  handsomer  and  finer  people 
than  any  that  had  hitherto  been  met  with.  But  the 
Admiral  says  that  he  does  not  see  how  they  can  be  a  finer 
people  than  the  others,  giving  to  understand  that  all  those 
he  had  found  in  the  other  islands  were  very  well  con- 
ditioned. As  regards  beauty,  the  Christians  said  there 
was  no  comparison,  both  men  and  women,  and  that  their 
skins  are  whiter  than  the  others.  They  saw  two  girls 
whose  skins  were  as  white  as  any  that  could  be  seen  in 
Spain.  They  also  said,  with  regard  to  the  beauty  of  the 
country  they  saw,  that  the  best  land  in  Castille  could  not 
be  compared  with  it.  The  Admiral  also,  comparing  the 
lands  they  had  seen  before  with  these,  said  that  there  was 
no  comparison  between  them,  nor  did  the  plain  of  Cordova 
come  near  them,  the  difference  being  as  great  as  between 
night  and  day.  They  said  that  all  these  lands  were 
cultivated,  and  that  a  very  wide  and  large  river  passed 
through  the  centre  of  the  valley,  and  could  irrigate  all  the 
fields.  All  the  trees  were  green  and  full  of  fruit,  and  the 
plants  tall  and  covered  with  flowers.  The  roads  were 
broad  and  good.  The  climate  was  like  April  in  Castille  ; 
the  nightingale  and  other  birds  sang  as  they  do  in  Spain 
during  that  month,  and  it  was  the  most  pleasant  place 
in  the   world.     Some   birds   sing  sweetly   at   night.      The, 


I  IO  ISLAND  OF  TORTUGA. 

crickets  and  frogs  are  heard  a  good  deal.  The  fish  are 
like  those  of  Spain.  They  saw  much  aloe  and  mastick, 
and  cotton-fields.  Gold  was  not  found,  and  it  is  not  wonder- 
ful that  it  should  not  have  been  found  in  so  short  a  time. 

Here  the  Admiral  calculated  the  number  of  hours  in  the 
clay  and  night,  and  from  sunrise  to  sunset.  He  found  that 
twenty  half-hour  glasses  passed,1  though  he  says  that  here 
there  may  be  a  mistake,  either  because  they  were  not 
turned  with  equal  quickness,  or  because  some  sand  may 
not  have  passed.  He  also  observed  with  a  quadrant,  and 
found  that   he  was  34  degrees  from  the  equinoctial  line.2 

Friday,   \\th  of  December. 

The  Admiral  left  the  Puerto  de  la  Conception  with 
the  land-breeze,  but  soon  afterwards  it  fell  calm  (and  this 
is  experienced  every  day  by  those  who  are  on  this  coast). 
Later  an  east  wind  sprang  up,  so  he  steered  N.N.E.,  and 
arrived  at  the  island  of  Tortuga.  He  sighted  a  point 
which  he  named  Punta  Pz'erna,  E.N.E.  of  the  end  of  the 
island  12  miles  ;  and  from  thence  another  point  was  seen 
and  named  Punta  Lanzada,  in  the  same  N.E.  direction  16 
miles.  Thus  from  the  end  of  Tortuga  to  Punta  Aguda 
the  distance  is  44  miles,  which  is  1 1  leagues  E.N.E.  Along 
this  route  there  are  several  long  stretches  of  beach.  The 
island  of  Tortuga  is  very  high,  but  not  mountainous,  and 
is  very  beautiful  and  populous,  like  Espahola,  and  the  land 
is  cultivated,  so  that  it  looked  like  the  plain  of  Cordova. 
Seeing  that  the  wind  was  foul,  and  that  he  could  not  steer 
for  the  island  of  Banequef  he  determined  to  return  to  the 
Puerto  de  la  Conception  whence  he  had  come  ;  but  he  could 
not  fetch  a  river  which  is  two  leagues  to  the  east  of  that 
port. 

1  Another  blunder  in  transcribing. 

2  Another  transcriber's  blunder.     It  should  be  20o. 

3  Elsewhere  called  Babeque. 


TIMIDITY  OF  THE  NATIVES.  I  1 1 

Saturday,  i^th  of  December. 

Once  more  the  Admiral  left  the  Puerto  de  la  Conception, 
but,  on  leaving  the  port,  he  was  again  met  by  a  contrary 
east  wind.  He  stood  over  to  Tortuga,  and  then  steered 
with  the  object  of  exploring  the  river  he  had  been  unable 
to  reach  yesterday  ;  nor  was  he  able  to  fetch  the  river  this 
time,  but  he  anchored  half  a  league  to  leeward  of  it,  where 
there  was  clean  and  good  anchoring  ground.  As  soon 
as  the  vessels  were  secured,  he  went  with  the  boats  to  the 
river,  entering  an  arm  of  the  sea,  which  proved  not  to 
be  the  river.  Returning,  he  found  the  mouth,  there  being 
only  one,  and  the  current  very  strong.  He  went  in  with 
the  boats  to  find  the  villagers  that  had  been  seen  the  day 
before.  He  ordered  a  tow-rope  to  be  got  out  and  manned 
by  the  sailors,  who  hauled  the  boats  up  for  a  distance 
of  two  lombard-shots.  They  could  not  get  further  owing 
to  the  strength  of  the  current.  He  saw  some  houses,  and 
the  large  valley  where  the  villages  were,  and  he  said  that 
a  more  beautiful  valley  he  had  never  seen,  this  river 
flowing  through  the  centre  of  it.  He  also  saw  people  at 
the  entrance,  but  they  all  took  to  flight.  He  further  says 
that  these  people  must  be  much  hunted,  for  they  live 
in  such  a  state  of  fear.  When  the  ships  arrived  at  any 
port,  they  presently  made  smoke  signals  throughout  the 
country  ;  and  this  is  done  more  in  this  island  of  Espahola 
and  in  Tortuga,  which  is  also  a  large  island,  than  in  the 
others  that  were  visited  before.  He  called  this  valley 
Valle  del  Paraíso,  and  the  river  Guadalquivir ;  because 
he  says  that  it  is  the  size  of  the  Guadalquivir  at  Cordova. 
The  banks  consist  of  shingle,  suitable  for  walking. 

Sunday,  let  A  0/ Beccmber. 

At  midnight  the  Admiral  made  sail  with  the  land-breeze 
to  get  clear  of   that  pulf.       Passing    along;    the    coast  of 


112  AN  INDIAN  CHIEF. 

Espanola  on  a  bowline,  for  the  wind  had  veered  to  the 
east,  he  met  a  canoe  in  the  middle  of  the  gulf,  with  a  single 
Indian  in  it.  The  Admiral  was  surprised  how  he  could 
have  kept  afloat  with  such  a  gale  blowing.  Both  the 
Indian  and  his  canoe  were  taken  on  board,  and  he  was 
given  glass  beads,  bells,  and  brass  trinkets,  and  taken  in 
the  ship,  until  she  was  off  a  village  17  miles  from  the 
former  anchorage,  where  the  Admiral  came  to  again.  The 
village  appeared  to  have  been  lately  built,  for  all  the  houses 
were  new.  The  Indian  then  went  on  shore  in  his  canoe, 
bringing  the  news  that  the  Admiral  and  his  companions 
were  good  people  ;  although  the  intelligence  had  already 
been  conveyed  to  the  village  from  the  place  where  the 
natives  had  their  interview  with  the  six  Spaniards. 
Presently  more  than  five  hundred  natives  with  their  king 
came  to  the  shore  opposite  the  ships,  which  were  anchored 
very  close  to  the  land.  Presently  one  by  one,  then  many 
by  many,  came  to  the  ship  without  bringing  anything  with 
them,  except  that  some  had  a  few  grains  of  very  fine  gold 
in  their  ears  and  noses,  which  they  readily  gave  away. 
The  Admiral  ordered  them  all  to  be  well  treated  ;  and  he 
says  :  "  for  they  are  the  best  people  in  the  world,  and  the 
gentlest  ;  and  above  all  I  entertain  the  hope  in  our  Lord 
that  your  Highnesses  will  make  them  all  Christians,  and 
that  they  will  be  all  your  subjects,  for  as  yours  I  hold 
them."  He  also  saw  that  they  all  treated  the  king  with 
respect,  who  was  on  the  sea-shore.  The  Admiral  sent  him 
a  present,  which  he  received  in  great  state.  He  was  a 
youth  of  about  2 1  years  of  age,  and  he  had  with  him  an 
aged  tutor,  and  other  councillors  who  advised  and  answered 
him,  but  he  uttered  very  few  words.  One  of  the  Indians 
who  had  come  in  the  Admiral's  ship  spoke  to  him,  telling 
him  how  the  Christians  had  come  from  heaven,  and  how 
the\-  came  in  search  of  gold,  and  wished  to  find  the  island 
of  Baneqtie.     He  said  that  it  was  well,  and  that  there  was 


YAMS.  113 

much  gold  in  the  said  island.  He  explained  to  the  alguazil 
of  the  Admiral1  that  the  way  they  were  going  was  the  right 
way,  and  that  in  two  days  they  would  be  there  ;  adding, 
that  if  they  wanted  anything  from  the  shore  he  would  give 
it  them  with  great  pleasure.  This  king,  and  all  the  others, 
go  naked  as  their  mothers  bore  them,  as  do  the  women 
without  any  covering,  and  these  were  the  most  beautiful 
men  and  women  that  had  yet  been  met  with.  They  are 
fairly  white,  and  if  they  were  clothed  and  protected  from 
the  sun  and  air,  they  would  be  almost  as  fair  as  people  in 
Spain.  This  land  is  cool,  and  the  best  that  words  can 
describe.  It  is  very  high,  yet  the  top  of  the  highest 
mountain  could  be  ploughed  with  bullocks  ;  and  all  is 
diversified  with  plains  and  valleys.  In  all  Castille  there 
is  no  land  that  can  be  compared  with  this  for  beauty  and 
fertility.  All  this  island,  as  well  as  the  island  of  Tortuga, 
is  cultivated  like  the  plain  of  Cordova.  They  raise  on 
these  lands  crops  of  yams,  which  are  small  branches,  at  the 
foot  of  which  grow  roots'2  like  carrots,  which  serve  as 
bread.  They  powder  and  knead  them,  and  make  them 
into  bread  ;  then  they  plant  the  same  branch  in  another 
part,  which  again  sends  out  four  or  five  of  the  same  roots, 
which  are  very  nutritious,  with  the  taste  of  chesnuts. 
Here  they  have  the  largest  the  Admiral  had  seen  in  any 
part  of  the  world,  for  he  says  that  they  have  the  same 
plant  in  Guinea.  At  this  place  they  were  as  thick  as  a 
man's  leg.  All  the  people  were  stout  and  lusty,  not  thin, 
like  the  natives  that  had  been  seen  before,  and  of  a  very 
pleasant  manner,  without  religious  belief.  The  trees  were 
so  luxuriant  that  the  leaves  left  off  being  green,  and  were 


1  Diego  de  Arana  of  Cordova,  a  near  relation  of  Beatriz  Henriquez, 
the  mother  of  the  Admiral's  son  Fernando. 

2  Dioscorea  alata.      The  stem  has  a  woody  tissue,  with  a   large 
farinaceous  tuber  attached,  which  sometimes  weighs  30  lbs. 

I 


114  VISIT  FROM  A  CHIEF. 

dark  coloured  with  verdure.  It  was  a  wonderful  thing  to 
see  those  valleys,  and  rivers  of  sweet  water,  and  the  culti- 
vated fields,  and  land  fit  for  cattle,  though  they  have  none, 
for  orchards,  and  for  anything  in  the  world  that  a  man 
could  seek  for. 

In  the  afternoon  the  king  came  on  board  the  ship, 
where  the  Admiral  received  him  in  due  form,  and  caused 
him  to  be  told  that  the  ships  belonged  to  the  Sovereigns 
of  Castille,  who  were  the  greatest  Princes  in  the  world. 
But  neither  the  Indians  who  were  on  board,  who  acted  as 
interpreters,  nor  the  king,  believed  a  word  of  it.  They 
maintained  that  the  Spaniards  came  from  heaven,  and  that 
the  Sovereigns  of  Castille  must  be  in  heaven,  and  not  in 
this  world.  They  placed  Spanish  food  before  the  king  to 
eat,  and  he  ate  a  mouthful,  and  gave  the  rest  to  his  coun- 
cillors and  tutor,  and  to  the  rest  who  came  with  him. 

"  Your  Highnesses  may  believe  that  these  lands  are 
so  good  and  fertile,  especially  these  of  the  island  of 
Espanola,  that  there  is  no  one  who  would  know  how  to 
describe  them,  and  no  one  who  could  believe  if  he  had 
not  seen  them.  And  your  Highnesses  may  believe  that 
this  island,  and  all  the  others,  are  as  much  yours  as 
Castille.  Here  there  is  only  wanting  a  settlement  and 
the  order  to  the  people  to  do  what  is  required.  For  I, 
with  the  force  I  have  under  me,  which  is  not  large,  could 
march  over  all  these  islands  without  opposition.  I  have 
seen  only  three  sailors  land,  without  wishing  to  do  harm, 
and  a  multitude  of  Indians  fled  before  them.  They  have 
no  arms,  and  are  without  warlike  instincts  ;  they  all  go 
naked,  and  are  so  timid  that  a  thousand  would  not  stand 
before  three  of  our  men.  So  that  they  are  good  to  be 
ordered  about,  to  work  and  sow,  and  do  all  that  may  be 
necessary,  and  to  build  towns,  and  they  should  be  taught 
to  go  about  clothed  and  to  adopt  our  customs." 


BARTERING  FOR  GOLD.  1 15 


Monday,   17th  of  December. 

It  blew  very  hard  during  the  night  from  E.N.E.,  but 
there  was  not  much  sea,  as  this  part  of  the  coast  is 
enclosed  and  sheltered  by  the  island  of  Tortuga.  The 
sailors  were  sent  away  to  fish  with  nets.  They  had  much 
intercourse  with  the  natives,  who  brought  them  certain 
arrows  of  the  Caribas  or  Canibales.  They  are  made  of 
reeds,  pointed  with  sharp  bits  of  wood  hardened  by  fire, 
and  are  very  long.  They  pointed  out  two  men  who 
wanted  certain  pieces  of  flesh  on  their  bodies,  giving  to 
understand  that  the  Canibales  had  eaten  them  by  mouth- 
fuls.  The  x^dmiral  did  not  believe  it.  Some  Christians 
were  again  sent  to  the  village,  and,  in  exchange  for  glass 
beads,  obtained  some  pieces  of  gold  beaten  out  into  fine 
leaf.  They  saw  one  man,  whom  the  Admiral  supposed  to 
be  Governor  of  that  province,  called  by  them  Cacique, 
with  a  piece  of  gold  leaf  as  large  as  a  hand,  and  it  appears 
that  he  wanted  to  barter  with  it.  He  went  into  his  house, 
and  the  other  remained  in  the  open  space  outside.  He 
cut  the  leaf  into  small  pieces,  and  each  time  he  came  out 
he  brought  a  piece  and  exchanged  it.  When  he  had 
no  more  left,  he  said  by  signs  that  he  had  sent  for  more, 
and  that  he  would  bring  it  another  day.  The  Admiral 
says  that  all  these  things,  and  the  manner  of  doing  them, 
with  their  gentleness  and  the  information  they  gave,  showed 
these  people  to  be  more  lively  and  intelligent  than  any 
that  had  hitherto  been  met  with.  In  the  afternoon  a 
canoe  arrived  from  the  island  of  Tortuga  with  a  crew 
of  forty  men  ;  and  when  they  arrived  on  the  beach,  all 
the  people  of  the  village  sat  down  in  sign  of  peace,  and 
nearly  all  the  crew  came  on  shore.  The  Cacique  rose 
by  himself,  and,  with  words  that  appeared  to  be  of  a 
menacing  character,  made  them  go  back  to  the  canoe  and 

I  2 


Il6  ENQUIRIES  AFTER  GOLD. 

shove  off.  He  took  up  stones  from  the  beach  and  threw 
them  into  the  water,  all  having  obediently  gone  back  into 
the  canoe.  He  also  took  a  stone  and  put  it  in  the  hands 
of  my  Alguazil,1  that  he  might  throw  it.  He  had  been 
sent  on  shore  with  the  Secretary2  to  see  if  the  canoe  had 
brought  anything  of  value.  The  Alguazil  did  not  wish  to 
throw  the  stone.  That  Cacique  showed  that  he  was  well 
disposed  to  the  Admiral.  Presently  the  canoe  departed, 
and  afterwards  they  said  to  the  Admiral  that  there  was 
more  gold  in  Tortuga  than  in  Espanola,  because  it  is 
nearer  to  Baneque.  The  Admiral  did  not  think  that  there 
were  gold  mines  either  in  Espanola  or  Tortuga,  but  that 
the  gold  was  brought  from  Baneque  in  small  quantities, 
there  being  nothing  to  give  in  return.  That  land  is  so 
rich  that  there  is  no  necessity  to  work  much  to  sustain 
life,  nor  to  clothe  themselves,  as  they  go  naked.  He 
believed  that  they  were  very  near  the  source,  and  that 
our  Lord  would  point  out  where  the  gold  has  its  origin. 
He  had  information  that  from  here  to  Baneque*  was  four 
days'  journey,  about  34  leagues,  which  might  be  traversed 
with  a  fair  wind  in  a  single  day. 

Tuesday,  iSt/i  of  December. 

The  Admiral  remained  at  the  same  anchorage,  because 
there  was  no  wind,  and  also  because  the  Cacique  had  said 
that  he  had  sent  for  gold.  The  Admiral  did  not  expect 
much  from  what  might  be  brought,  but  he  wanted  to 
understand  better  whence  it  came.  Presently  he  ordered 
the  ship  and  caravel  to  be  adorned  with  arms  and  dressed 
with  flags,  in  honour  of  the  feast  of  Santa  Maria  de  la 


1  Diego  de  Arana. 

2  Rodrigo  de  Escobedo. 

3  Las  Casas  suggests  that  this  name  Baneque  may  possibly  mean 
Jamaica  or  the  mainland. 


VISIT  FROM  THE  CHIEF.  1 17 

O ,x  or  commemoration  of  the   Annunciation,  which 

was  on  that  day,  and  many  rounds  were  fired  from  the 
lombards.  The  king  of  that  island  of  Espaiiola  had  got 
up  very  early  and  left  his  house,  which  is  about  five 
leagues  away,  reaching  the  village  at  three  in  the  morning. 
There  were  several  men  from  the  ship  in  the  village,  who 
had  been  sent  by  the  Admiral  to  see  if  any  gold  had 
arrived.  They  said  that  the  king  came  with  two  hundred 
men  ;  that  he  was  carried  in  a  litter  by  four  men  ;  and 
that  he  was  a  youth,  as  has  already  been  said.  To-day, 
when  the  Admiral  was  dining  under  the  poop,  the  king 
came  on  board  with  all  his  people. 

The  Admiral  says  to  the  Sovereigns :  "  Without  doubt, 
his  state,  and  the  reverence  with  which  he  is  treated  by  all 
his  people,  would  appear  good  to  your  Highnesses,  though 
they  all  go  naked.  When  he  came  on  board,  he  found 
that  I  was  dining  at  a  table  under  the  poop,  and,  at 
a  quick  walk,  he  came  to  sit  down  by  me,  and  did  not 
wish  that  I  should  give  place  by  coming  to  receive  him  or 
rising  from  the  table,  but  that  I  should  go  on  with  my 
dinner.  I  thought  that  he  would  like  to  eat  of  our  viands, 
and  ordered  them  to  be  brought  for  him  to  eat.  When  he 
came  under  the  poop,  he  made  signs  with  his  hand  that  all 
the  rest  should  remain  outside,  and  so  they  did,  with  the 
greatest  possible  promptitude  and  reverence.  They  all 
sat  on  the  deck,  except  the  men  of  mature  age,  whom 
I  believe  to  be  his  councillors  and  tutor,  who  came  and  sat 
at  his  feet.  Of  the  viands  which  I  put  before  him,  he  took 
of  each  as  much  as  would  serve  to  taste  it,2  sending  the 
rest  to  his  people,  who  all  partook  of  the  dishes.  The 
same  thing  in   drinking  :  he  just  touched   with  his  lips, 


1  The  Feast  of  the  Annunciation.     (Las  Casas.) 

2  "  Hacer  la  salva",  the  quantity  taken  by  the  taster  before  it  was 
eaten  by  guests. 


Tl8  VISIT  FROM  THE  CHIEF. 

giving  the  rest  to  his  followers.  They  were  all  of  fine 
presence  and  very  few  words.  What  they  did  say,  so  far 
as  I  could  make  out,  was  very  clear  and  intelligent.  The 
two  at  his  feet  watched  his  mouth,  speaking  to  him  and 
for  him,  and  with  much  reverence.  After  dinner,  an 
attendant  brought  a  girdle,  made  like  those  of  Castilie, 
but  of  different  material,  which  he  took  and  gave  to  me, 
with  pieces  of  worked  gold,  very  thin.  I  believe  they  get 
very  little  here,  but  they  say  that  they  are  very  near  the 
place  where  it  is  found,  and  where  there  is  plenty.  I  saw 
that  he  was  pleased  with  some  drapery  I  had  over  my 
bed,  so  I  gave  it  him,  with  some  very  good  amber  beads 
I  wore  on  my  neck,  some  coloured  shoes,  and  a  bottle  of 
orange-flower  water.  He  was  marvellously  well  content, 
and  both  he  and  his  tutor  and  councillors  were  very  sorry 
that  they  could  not  understand  me,  nor  I  them.  How- 
ever, I  knew  that  they  said  that,  if  I  wanted  anything,  the 
whole  island  was  at  my  disposal.  I  sent  for  some  beads 
of  mine,  with  which,  as  a  charm,  I  had  a  gold  excelente} 
on  which  your  Highnesses  were  stamped.  I  showed  it  to 
him,  and  said,  as  I  had  done  yesterday,  that  your  High- 
nesses ruled  the  best  part  of  the  world,  and  that  there 
were  no  Princes  so  great.  I  also  showed  him  the  royal 
standards,  and  the  others  with  a  cross,  of  which  he  thought 
much.  He  said  to  his  councillors  what  great  lords  your 
Highnesses  must  be  to  have  sent  me  from  so  far,  even 
from  heaven  to  this  country,  without  fear.  Many  other 
things  passed  between  them  which  I  did  not  understand, 
except  that  it  was  easy  to  see  that  they  held  everything  to 
be  very  wonderful." 

When    it   got   late,   and    the   king   wanted    to   go,   the 
Admiral  sent  him  on  shore  in  his  boat  very  honourably, 


1  A  coin  worth  two  castellanos.      The  castellano   was   worth   490 
maravedis. 


NEWS  RESPECTING  GOLD.  1 1 9 

and  saluted  him  with  many  guns.  Having  landed,  he  got 
into  his  litter,  and  departed  with  his  200  men,  his  son 
being  carried  behind  on  the  shoulders  of  an  Indian,  a 
man  highly  respected.  All  the  sailors  and  people  from 
the  ships  were  given  to  eat,  and  treated  with  much  honour 
wherever  they  liked  to  stop.  One  sailor  said  that  he  had 
stopped  in  the  road  and  seen  all  the  things  given  by  the 
Admiral.  A  man  carried  each  one  before  the  king,  and 
these  men  appeared  to  be  among  those  who  were  most 
respected.  His  son  came  a  good  distance  behind  the 
king,  with  a  similar  number  of  attendants,  and  the  same 
with  a  brother  of  the  king,  except  that  the  brother  went 
on  foot,  supported  under  the  arms  by  two  honoured  attend- 
ants. This  brother  came  to  the  ship  after  the  king,  and 
the  Admiral  presented  him  with  some  of  the  things  used 
for  barter.  It  was  then  that  the  Admiral  learnt  that 
a  king  was  called  Cacique  in  their  language.  This  day 
little  gold  was  got  by  barter,  but  the  Admiral  heard  from 
an  old  man  that  there  were  many  neighbouring  islands,  at 
a  distance  of  a  hundred  leagues  or  more,  as  he  under- 
stood, in  which  much  gold  is  found  ;  and  there  is  even  one 
island  that  was  all  gold.  In  the  others  there  was  so  much 
that  it  was  said  they  gather  it  with  sieves,  and  they  fuse  it 
and  make  bars,  and  work  it  in  a  thousand  ways.  They 
explained  the  work  by  signs.  This  old  man  pointed  out 
to  the  Admiral  the  direction  and  position,  and  he  deter- 
mined to  go  there,  saying  that  if  the  old  man  had  not 
been  a  principal  councillor  of  the  king  he  would  detain 
him,  and  make  him  go,  too  ;  or  if  he  knew  the  language 
he  would  ask  him,  and  he  believed,  as  the  old  man  was 
friendly  with  him  and  the  other  Christians,  that  he  would 
go  of  his  own  accord.  But  as  these  people  were  now  sub- 
jects of  the  King  of  Castille,  and  it  would  not  be  right  to 
injure  them,  he  decided  upon  leaving  him.  The  Admiral 
set  up  a  very  large  cross  in    the    centre    of   the   square 


120  BETWEEN  ESPANOLA  AND  TORTUGA. 

of  that  village,  the  Indians  giving  much  help  ;  they  made 
prayers  and  worshipped  it,  and,  from  the  feeling  they 
show,  the  Admiral  trusted  in  our  Lord  that  all  the  people 
of  those  islands  would  become  Christians. 

Wednesday,  igt/i  of  December. 

This  night  the  Admiral  got  under  weigh  to  leave  the 
gulf  formed  between  the  islands  of  Tortuga  and  Espanola, 
but  at  dawn  of  day  a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  east,  against 
which  he  was  unable  to  get  clear  of  the  strait  between  the 
two  islands  during  the  whole  day.  At  night  he  was  unable 
to  reach  a  port  which  was  in  sight.1  He  made  out  four 
points  of  land,  and  a  great  bay  with  a  river,  and  beyond 
he  saw  a  large  bay,2  where  there  was  a  village,  with 
a  valley  behind  it  among  high  mountains  covered  with 
trees,  which  appeared  to  be  pines.  Over  the  Two  Brothers3 
there  is  a  very  high  mountain-range  running  N.E.  and 
S.W.,  and  E.S.E.  from  the  Cabo  de  Torres  is  a  small  island 
to  which  the  Admiral  gave  the  name  of  Santo  Tomas, 
because  to-morrow  was  his  vigil.  The  whole  circuit  of 
this  island  alternates  with  capes  and  excellent  harbours,  so 
far  as  could  be  judged  from  the  sea.  Before  coming  to 
the  island  on  the  west  side,  there  is  a  cape  which  runs  far 
into  the  sea,  in  part  high,  the  rest  low  ;  and  for  this  reason 
the  Admiral  named  it  Cabo  alto  y  bajo.^  From  the  road5 
of  Torres  to  E.S.E.  60  miles,  there  is  a  mountain  higher 
than  any  that  reaches  the  sea,G  and  from  a  distance  it 
looks  like  an  island,  owing  to  a  depression  on  the  land 
side.     It  was  named  Monte  Caribata,  because  that  province 


1  El  Puerto  de  la  Granja. — N. 

2  The  bay  of  Puerto  Margot. — N. 

3  Las  Casas  says  there  was  no  such  name  used  in  his  time. 

4  Point  and  Island  of  Margot. — N. 

5  Camino  for  Cabo  (?).  u  Mountain  over  Guarico. 


SAILING  DIRECTIONS  FOR  ACUL.  121 

was  called  Caribata.  it  is  very  beautiful,  and  covered  with 
green  trees,  without  snow  or  clouds.  The  weather  was 
then,  as  regards  the  air  and  temperature,  like  March  in 
Castille,  and  as  regards  vegetation,  like  May.  The  nights 
lasted  14  hours. 

Thursday,  20th  of  December. 

At  sunrise  they  entered  a  port  between  the  island  of 
Santo  Tomas  and  the  Cabo  de  Caribata}  and  anchored. 
This  port  is  very  beautiful,  and  would  hold  all  the  ships  in 
Christendom.  The  entrance  appears  impossible  from  the 
sea  to  those  who  have  never  entered,  owing  to  some  reefs 
of  rocks  which  run  from  the  mountainous  cape  almost 
to  the  island.  They  are  not  placed  in  a  row,  but  one  here, 
another  there,  some  towards  the  sea,  others  near  the  land. 
It  is  therefore  necessary  to  keep  a  good  look-out  for  the 
entrances,  which  are  wide  and  with  a  depth  of  7  fathoms, 
so  that  they  can  be  used  without  fear.  Inside  the  reefs 
there  is  a  depth  of  12  fathoms.  A  ship  can  lie  with  a 
cable  made  fast,  against  any  wind  that  blows.  At  the 
entrance  of  this  port  there  is  a  channel  on  the  west  side  of 
a  sandy  islet  with  7  fathoms,  and  many  trees  on  its  shore. 
But  there  are  many  sunken  rocks  in  that  direction,  and  a 
look-out  should  be  kept  up  until  the  port  is  reached. 
Afterwards  there  is  no  need  to  fear  the  greatest  storm 
in  the  world.  From  this  port  a  very  beautiful  cultivated 
valley  is  in  sight,  descending  from  the  S.E.,  surrounded  by 
such  lofty  mountains  that  they  appear  to  reach  the  sky, 
and  covered  with  green  trees.  Without  doubt  there  are 
mountains  here  which  are  higher  than  the  island  of 
Tenerife  in  the  Canaries,  which  is  held  to  be  the  highest 
yet  known.     On  this  side  of  the  island  of  Santo  Tomas,  at 

1  Bahia  de  Acúl. 


122  PROOF  OF  THE  ADMIRAL'S  AGE. 

a  distance  of  a  league,  there  is  another  islet,  and  beyond  it 
another,  forming  wonderful  harbours ;  though  a  good  look- 
out must  be  kept  for  sunken  rocks.  The  Admiral  also 
saw  villages,  and  smoke  made  by  them. 

Friday,  21  si  of  December. 

To-day  the  Admiral  went  with  the  ship's  boats  to 
examine  this  port,  which  he  found  to  be  such  that  it  could 
not  be  equalled  by  any  he  had  yet  seen  ;  but,  having 
praised  the  others  so  much,  he  knew  not  how  to  express 
himself,  fearing  that  he  will  be  looked  upon  as  one  who 
goes  beyond  the  truth.  He  therefore  contents  himself 
with  saying  that  he  had  old  sailors  with  him  who  say  the 
same.  All  the  praises  he  has  bestowed  on  the  other  ports 
are  true,  and  that  this  is  better  than  any  of  them  is  equally 
true.  He  further  says :  "  I  have  traversed  the  sea  for 
23  years,1  without  leaving  it  for  any  time  worth  counting, 
and  I  saw  all  in  the  east  and  the  west,  going  on  the 
route  of  the  north,  which  is  England,  and  I  have  been  to 
Guinea,  but  in   all  those  parts    there  will   not  be    found 

perfection    of    harbours 2   always    found 3 

better  than  another,  that  I,  with  good  care,  saw  written  ; 
and  I  again  affirm  it  was  well  written,  that  this  one  is 
better  than  all  others,  and  will  hold  all  the  ships  of  the 
world,  secured  with  the  oldest  cables.  From  the  entrance 
to  the  end  is  a  distance  of  five  leagues.4  The  Admiral  saw 
some  very  well  cultivated  lands,  although  they  are  all  so, 

1  This  is  one  of  the  passages  which  fixes  the  date  of  the  great  dis- 
coverer's birth.  He  went  to  sea  at  14,  and  had  been  at  sea  23 
years  when  he  first  came  to  Spain  in  14S3,  which  makes  his  age  46. 
He  was,  therefore,  born  in  the  year  1447. 

2  A  gap  of  a  line  and  a  half  in  the  manuscript. 

3  Another  gap  in  the  manuscript. 

4  The  distance  is  six  miles.  This  is  another  instance  of  the  tran- 
scriber substituting  leagues  for  miles. 


THE  ADMIRAL  WITH  THE  NATIVES.  1 23 

and  he  sent  two  of  the  boat's  crew  to  the  top  of  a  hill  to 
see  if  any  village  was  near,  for  none  could  be  seen  from  the 
sea.  At  about  ten  o'clock  that  night,  certain  Indians 
came  in  a  canoe  to  see  the  Admiral  and  the  Christians,  and 
they  were  given  presents,  with  which  they  were  much 
pleased.  The  two  men  returned,  and  reported  that  they 
had  seen  a  very  large  village  at  a  short  distance  from  the 
sea.1  The  Admiral  ordered  the  boat  to  row  towards  the 
place  where  the  village  was  until  they  came  near  the  land, 
when  he  saw  two  Indians,  who  came  to  the  shore  apparently 
in  a  state  of  fear.  So  he  ordered  the  boats  to  stop,  and 
the  Indians  that  were  with  the  Admiral  were  told  to  assure 
the  two  natives  that  no  harm  whatever  was  intended  to 
them.  Then  they  came  nearer  the  sea,  and  the  Admiral 
nearer  the  land.  As  soon  as  the  natives  had  got  rid  of 
their  fear,  so  many  came  that  they  covered  the  ground, 
with  women  and  children,  giving  a  thousand  thanks. 
They  ran  hither  and  thither  to  bring  us  bread  made  of 
yams,  which  they  call  ajes,  which  is  very  white  and  good, 
and  water  in  calabashes,  and  in  earthen  jars  made  like 
those  of  Spain,  and  everything  else  they  had  and  that  they 
thought  the  Admiral  could  want,  and  all  so  willingly  and 
cheerfully  that  it  was  wonderful.  "  It  cannot  be  said  that, 
because  what  they  gave  was  worth  little,  therefore  they 
gave  liberally,  because  those  who  had  pieces  of  gold  gave 
as  freely  as  those  who  had  a  calabash  of  water ;  and  it  is 
easy  to  know  when  a  thing  is  given  with  a  hearty  desire 
to  give."  These  are  the  Admiral's  words.  "  These  people 
have  no  spears  nor  any  other  arms,  nor  have  any  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  whole  island,  which  I  believe  to  be  very 
large.  They  go  naked  as  when  their  mothers  bore  them, 
both  men  and  women.  In  Cuba  and  the  other  islands  the 
women  wear  a  small  clout  of  cotton  in  front,  as  well  as  the 


Acúl. 


124  PRAISE  OF  THE  NATIVES. 

men,  as  soon  as  they  have  passed  the  age  of  twelve  years, 
but  here  neither  old  nor  young  do  so.  Also,  the  men  in  the 
other  islands  jealously  hide  their  women  from  the  Christians, 
but  here  they  do  not."  The  women  have  very  beautiful 
bodies,  and  they  were  the  first  to  come  and  give  thanks  to 
heaven,  and  to  bring  what  they  had,  especially  things  to 
eat,  such  as  bread  of  ajes  (yams),  nuts,  and  four  or  five 
kinds  of  fruits,  some  of  which  the  Admiral  ordered  to  be 
preserved,  to  be  taken  to  the  Sovereigns.  He  says  that 
the  women  did  not  do  less  in  other  ports  before  they 
were  hidden  ;  and  he  always  gave  orders  that  none  of  his 
people  should  annoy  them  ;  that  nothing  should  be  taken 
against  their  wills,  and  that  everything  that  was  taken 
should  be  paid  for.  Finally,  he  says  that  no  one  could 
believe  that  there  could  be  such  good-hearted  people,  so 
free  to  give,  anxious  to  let  the  Christians  have  all  they 
wanted,  and,  when  visitors  arrived,  running  to  bring  every- 
thing to  them. 

Afterwards  the  Admiral  sent  six  Christians  to  the  village 
to  see  what  it  was  like,  and  the  natives  showed  them  all  the 
honour  they  could  devise, and  gave  them  all  they  had  ;  for  no 
doubt  was  any  longer  entertained  that  the  Admiral  and 
all  his  people  had  come  from  heaven  ;  and  the  same  was 
believed  by  the  Indians  wmo  were  brought  from  the  other 
islands,  although  they  had  now  been  told  what  they  ought 
to  think.  When  the  six  Christians  had  gone,  some  canoes 
came  with  people  to  ask  the  Admiral  to  come  to  their  village 
when  he  left  the  place  where  he  was.  Ca7ioa  is  a  boat  in 
which  they  navigate,  some  large  and  others  small.  Seeing 
that  this  village  of  the  Chief  was  on  the  road,  and  that  many 
people  were  waiting  there  for  him,  the  Admiral  went  there  ; 
but,  before  he  could  depart,  an  enormous  crowd  came  to  the 
shore,  men,  women,  and  children,  crying  out  to  him  not  to 
go,  but  to  stay  with  them.  The  messengers  from  the  other 
Chief,  who  had  come  to  invite  him,  were  waiting  with  their 


TRAISE  OF  THE  NATIVES.  1 25 

canoes,  that  he  might  not  go  away,  but  come  to  see  their 
Chief,  and  so  he  did.  On  arriving  where  the  Chief  was 
waiting  for  him  with  many  things  to  eat,  he  ordered  that  all 
the  people  should  sit  down,  and  that  the  food  should  be 
taken  to  the  boats,  where  the  Admiral  was,  on  the  sea-shore. 
When  he  saw  that  the  Admiral  had  received  what  he  sent, 
all  or  most  of  the  Indians  ran  to  the  village,  which  was 
near,  to  bring  more  food,  parrots,  and  other  things  they 
had,  with  such  frankness  of  heart  that  it  was  marvellous. 
The  Admiral  gave  them  glass  beads,  brass  trinkets,  and 
bells  :  not  because  they  asked  for  anything  in  return,  but 
because  it  seemed  right,  and,  above  all,  because  he  now 
looked  upon  them  as  future  Christians,  and  subjects  of  the 
Sovereigns,  as  much  as  the  people  of  Castille.  He  further 
says  that  they  want  nothing  except  to  know  the  language 
and  be  under  governance;  for  all  they  may  be  told  to  do  will 
be  done  without  any  contradiction.  The  Admiral  left  this 
place  to  go  to  the  ships,  and  the  people,  men,  women,  and 
children,  cried  out  to  him  not  to  go,  but  remain  with  them. 
After  the  boats  departed,  several  canoes  full  of  people 
followed  after  them  to  the  ship,  who  were  received  with 
much  honour,  and  given  to  eat.  There  had  also  come  before 
another  Chief  from  the  west,  and  many  people  even  came 
swimming,  the  ship  being  over  a  good  half-league  from  the 
shore.  I  sent  certain  persons  to  the  Chief,  who  had  gone 
back,  to  ask  him  about  these  islands.  He  received  them 
very  well,  and  took  them  to  his  village,  to  give  them 
some  large  pieces  of  gold.  They  arrived  at  a  large  river, 
which  the  Indians  crossed  by  swimming.  The  Christians 
were  unable,  so  they  turned  back.  In  all  this  district  there 
are  very  high  mountains  which  seem  to  reach  the  sky,  so 
that  the  mountain  in  the  island  of  Tenerife  appears  as 
nothing  in  height  and  beauty,  and  they  are  all  green  with 
trees.  Between  them  there  are  very  delicious  valleys,  and 
at  the  end  of  this  port,  to  the  south,  there  is  a  valley  so 


126  SAILING  DIRECTIONS. 

large  that  the  end  of  it  is  not  visible,  though  no  mountains 
intervene,  so  that  it  seems  to  be  15  or  20  leagues  long.  A 
river  flows  through  it,  and  it  is  all  inhabited  and  cultivated» 
and  as  green  as  Castille  in  May  or  June  ;  but  the  night 
contains  14  hours,  the  land  being  so  far  north.  This  port  is 
very  good  for  all  the  winds  that  can  blow,  being  enclosed 
and  deep,  and  the  shores  peopled  by  a  good  and  gentle 
race  without  arms  or  evil  designs.  Any  ship  may  lie  within 
it  without  fear  that  other  ships  will  enter  at  night  to 
attack  her,  because,  although  the  entrance  is  over  two 
leagues  wide,  it  is  protected  by  reefs  of  rocks  which  are 
barely  awash  ;  and  there  is  only  a  very  narrow  channel 
through  the  reef,  which  looks  as  if  it  had  been  artificially 
made,  leaving  an  open  door  by  which  ships  may  enter.  In 
the  entrance  there  are  7  fathoms  of  depth  up  to  the  shore 
of  a  small  flat  island,  which  has  a  beach  fringed  with  trees. 
The  entrance  is  on  the  west  side,  and  a  ship  can  come  with- 
out fear  until  she  is  close  to  the  rock.  On  the  N.W.  side 
there  are  three  islands,  and  a  great  river  a  league  from  the 
cape  on  one  side  of  the  port.  It  is  the  best  harbour  in  the 
world,  and  the  Admiral  gave  it  the  name  of  Puerto  de  la 
mar  de  Santo  Tomas,  because  to-day  it  was  that  Saint's 
day.      The  Admiral  called  it  a  sea,  owing  to  its  size. 

Saturday,  22nd  of  December. 

At  dawn  the  Admiral  made  sail  to  shape  a  course  in 
search  of  the  islands  which  the  Indians  had  told  him 
contained  much  gold,  some  of  them  having  more  gold 
than  earth.  But  the  weather  was  not  favourable,  so  he 
anchored  again,  and  sent  away  the  boat  to  fish  with  a  net. 
The  Lord  of  that  land,1  who  had  a  place  near  there,  sent  a 
large  canoe  full  of  people,  including  one  of  his   principal 

1  This  was  Guacangari,  Lord  of  Marien,  afterwards  the  tried  and 
steadfast  friend  of  the  Admiral, 


INVITATION  FROM  A  CHIEF.  1 27 

attendants,  to  invite  the  Admiral  to  come  with  the  ships  to 
his  land,  where  he  would  give  him  all  he  wanted.  The 
Chief  sent,  by  this  servant,  a  girdle  which,  instead  of  a  bag, 
had  attached  to  it  a  mask  with  two  large  ears  made  of 
beaten  gold,  the  tongue,  and  the  nose.  These  people  are 
very  open-hearted,  and  whatever  they  are  asked  for  they 
give  most  willingly  ;  while,  when  they  themselves  ask  for 
anything,  they  do  so  as  if  receiving  a  great  favour.  So 
says  the  Admiral.  They  brought  the  canoe  alongside  the 
boat,  and  gave  the  girdle  to  a  boy  ;  then  they  came  on 
board  with  their  mission.  It  took  a  good  part  of  the  day 
before  they  could  be  understood.  Not  even  the  Indians 
who  were  on  board  understood  them  well,  because  they 
have  some  differences  of  words  for  the  names  of  things.  At 
last  their  invitation  was  understood  by  signs.  The  Admiral 
determined  to  start  to-morrow,  although  he  did  not  usually 
sail  on  a  Sunday,  owing  to  a  devout  feeling,  and  not  on 
account  of  any  superstition  whatever.  But  in  the  hope 
that  these  people  would  become  Christians  through  the 
willingness  they  show,  and  that  they  will  be  subjects  of  the 
Sovereigns  of  Castille,  and  because  he  now  holds  them  to 
be  so,  and  that  they  may  serve  with  love,  he  wished  and 
endeavoured  to  please  them.  Before  leaving,  to-day,  the 
Admiral  sent  six  men  to  a  large  village  three  leagues  to  the 
westward,  because  the  Chief  had  come  the  day  before  and 
said  that  he  had  some  pieces  of  gold.  When  the  Christians 
arrived,  the  Secretary  of  the  Admiral,  who  was  one  of  them, 
took  the  Chief  by  the  hand.  The  Admiral  had  sent  him,  to 
prevent  the  others  from  imposing  upon  the  Indians.  As 
the  Indians  are  so  simple,  and  the  Spaniards  so  avaricious 
and  grasping,  it  does  not  suffice  that  the  Indians  should 
give  them  all  they  want  in  exchange  for  a  bead  or  a  bit  of 
glass,  but  the  Spaniards  would  take  everything  without  any 
return  at  all.  The  Admiral  always  prohibits  this,  although, 
with  the  exception  of  gold,  the  things  given  by  the  Indians 


128  MISSION  TO  A  CHIEF. 

are  of  little  value.  But  the  Admiral,  seeing  the  simplicity 
of  the  Indians,  and  that  they  will  give  a  piece  of  gold  in 
exchange  for  six  beads,  gave  the  order  that  nothing  should 
be  received  from  them  unless  something  had  been  given  in 
exchange.  Thus  the  Chief  took  the  Secretary  by  the 
hand  and  led  him  to  his  house,  followed  by  the  whole 
village,  which  was  very  large.  He  made  his  guests  eat, 
and  the  Indians  brought  them  many  cotton  fabrics,  and 
spun-cotton  in  skeins.  In  the  afternoon  the  Chief  gave 
them  three  very  fat  geese  and  some  small  pieces  of  gold. 
A  great  number  of  people  went  back  with  them,  carrying 
all  the  things  they  had  got  by  barter,  and  they  also  carried 
the  Spaniards  themselves  across  streams  and  muddy  places. 
The  Admiral  ordered  some  things  to  be  given  to  the  Chief, 
and  both  he  and  his  people  were  very  well  satisfied,  truly 
believing  that  the  Christians  had  come  from  heaven,  so  that 
they  considered  themselves  fortunate  in  beholding  them. 
On  this  day  more  than  120  canoes  came  to  the  ships,  all 
full  of  people,  and  all  bringing  something,  especially  their 
bread  and  fish,  and  fresh  water  in  earthen  jars.  They  also 
brought  seeds  of  good  kinds,  and  there  was  a  grain  which 
they  put  into  a  porringer  of  water  and  drank  it.  The 
Indians  who  were  on  board  said  that  this  was  very  whole- 
some. 

Sunday,  23rd  of  December. 

The  Admiral  could  not  go  with  the  ships  to  that  land 
whither  he  had  been  invited  by  the  Chief,  because  there 
was  no  wind.  But  he  sent,  with  the  three  messengers  who 
were  waiting  for  the  boats,  some  people,  including  the 
Secretary.  While  they  were  gone,  he  sent  two  of  the 
Indians  he  had  on  board  with  him  to  the  villages  which 
were  near  the  anchorage.  They  returned  to  the  ship  with 
a  chief,  who  brought  the  news  that  there  was  a  great 
quantity  of  gold   in   that    island    of   Espanola,   and    that 


REPORTS   ABOUT   GOLD.  120. 

people  from  other  parts  came  to  buy  it.  They  said  that 
here  the  Admiral  would  find  as  much  as  he  wanted. 
Others  came,  who  confirmed  the  statement  that  there  was 
much  gold  in  the  island,  and  explained  the  way  it  was 
collected.  The  Admiral  understood  all  this  with  much 
difficulty  ;  nevertheless,  he  concluded  that  there  was  a  very 
great  quantity  in  those  parts,  and  that,  if  he  could  find  the 
place  whence  it  was  got,  there  would  be  abundance  ;  and,  if 
not,  there  would  be  nothing.  He  believed  there  must  be 
a  great  deal,  because,  during  the  three  days  that  he  had 
been  in  that  port,  he  had  got  several  pieces  of  gold,  and 
he  could  not  believe  that  it  was  brought  from  another 
land.  "  Our  Lord,  who  holds  all  things  in  his  hands,  look 
upon  me,  and  grant  what  shall  be  for  his  service."  These 
are  the  Admiral's  words.  He  says  that,  according  to  his 
reckoning,  a  thousand  people  had  visited  the  ship,  all  of 
them  bringing  something.  Before  they  come  alongside, 
at  a  distance  of  a  crossbow-shot,  they  stand  up  in  the 
canoe  with  what  they  bring  in  their  hands,  crying  out, 
"  Take  it !  take  it !"  He  also  reckoned  that  500  came  to 
the  ship  swimming,  because  they  had  no  canoes,  the  ship 
being  near  a  league  from  the  shore.  Among  the  visitors, 
five  chiefs  had  come,  sons  of  chiefs,  with  all  their  families 
of  wives  and  children,  to  see  the  Christians.  The  Admiral 
ordered  something  to  be  given  to  all,  because  such  gifts 
were  all  well  employed.  "  May  our  Lord  favour  me  by 
his  clemency,  that  I  may  find  this  gold,  I  mean  the  mine 
of  gold,  which  I  hold  to  be  here,  many  saying  that  they 
know  it."  These  are  his  words.  The  boats  arrived  at 
night,  and  said  that  there  was  a  grand  road  as  far  as 
they  went,  and  they  found  many  canoes,  with  people 
who  went  to  see  the  Admiral  and  the  Christians,  at  the 
mountain  of  Caribatan.  They  held  it  for  certain  that, 
if  the  Christmas  festival  was  kept  in  that  port,1  all  the 

1  Port  of  Guarico. — N. 

K 


130  HOSPITALITY   OF   THE    NATIVES. 

people  of  the  island  would  come,  which  they  calcu- 
lated to  be  larger  than  England.  All  the  people  went 
with  them  to  the  village,1  which  they  said  was  the 
largest,  and  the  best  laid  out  with  streets,  of  any  they 
had  seen.  The  Admiral  says  it  is  part  of  the  Pimta  Santa,2 
almost  three  leagues  S.E.  The  canoes  go  very  fast  with 
paddles  ;  so  they  went  ahead  to  apprise  the  Cacique,  as 
they  call  the  chief.  They  also  have  another  greater  name 
— Nitayno  ;  but  it  was  not  clear  whether  they  used  it  for 
lord,  or  governor,  or  judge.  At  last  the  Cacique  came  to 
them,  and  joined  them  in  the  square,  which  was  clean- 
swept,  as  was  all  the  village.  The  population  numbered 
over  2,000  men.  This  king  did  great  honour  to  the  people 
from  the  ship,  and  every  inhabitant  brought  them  some- 
thing to  eat  and  drink.  Afterwards  the  king  gave  each 
of  them  cotton  cloths  such  as  women  wear,  with  parrots 
for  the  Admiral,  and  some  pieces  of  gold.  The  people 
also  gave  cloths  and  other  things  from  their  houses  to  the 
sailors ;  and  as  for  the  trifles  they  got  in  return,  they 
seemed  to  look  upon  them  as  relics.  When  they  wanted 
to  return  in  the  afternoon,  he  asked  them  to  stay  until  the 
next  day,  and  all  the  people  did  the  same.  When  they 
saw  that  the  Spaniards  were  determined  to  go,  they  accom- 
panied them  most  of  the  way,  carrying  the  gifts  of  the 
Cacique  on  their  backs  as  far  as  the  boats,  which  had  been 
left  at  the  mouth  of  the  river. 

Monday,  2\tJi  of  December. 

Before  sunrise  the  Admiral  got  under  weigh  with  the 
land-breeze.  Among  the  numerous  Indians  who  had 
come  to  the  ship  yesterday,  and  had  made  signs  that  there 

1  Guarico. 

2  Columbus  has  not  mentioned  this  point  before.  It  is  now  called 
San  Honorato. — N. 


PRAISE   OF   THE   COUNTRY  AND   PEOPLE.  131 

was  gold  in  the  island,  naming  the  places  whence  it  was 
collected,  the  Admiral  noticed  one  who  seemed  more  fully 
informed,  or  who  spoke  with  more  willingness,  so  he  asked 
him  to  come  with  the  Christians  and  show  them  the  position 
of  the  gold  mines.  This  Indian  has  a  companion  or  rela- 
tion with  him,  and  among  other  places  they  mentioned 
where  gold  was  found,  they  named  Cipango,  which  they 
called  Civao.  Here  they  said  that  there  was  a  great 
quantity  of  gold,  and  that  the  Cacique  carried  banners  of 
beaten  gold.  But  they  added  that  it  was  very  far  off  to 
the  eastward. 

Here  the  Admiral  addresses  the  following  words  to  the 
Sovereigns:  "Your  Highnesses  may  believe  that  there  is 
no  better  nor  gentler  people  in  the  world.  Your  High- 
nesses ought  to  rejoice  that  they  will  soon  become 
Christians,  and  that  they  will  be  taught  the  good  customs 
of  your  kingdom.  A  better  race  there  cannot  be,  and  both 
the  people  and  the  lands  are  in  such  quantity  that  I  know 
not  how  to  write  it.  I  have  spoken  in  the  superlative 
degree  of  the  country  and  people  of  Juana,  which  they 
call  Cuba,  but  there  is  as  much  difference  between  them 
and  this  island  and  people  as  between  day  and  night.  I 
believe  that  no  one  who  should  see  them  could  say  less 
than  I  have  said,  and  I  repeat  that  the  things  and  the 
great  villages  of  this  island  of  Espanola,  which  they  call 
Bohio,  are  wonderful.  All  here  have  a  loving  manner  and 
gentle  speech,  unlike  the  others,  who  seem  to  be  menacing 
when  they  speak.  Both  men  and  women  are  of  good 
stature,  and  not  black.  It  is  true  that  they  all  paint,  some 
with  black,  others  with  other  colours,  but  most  with  red. 
I  know  that  they  are  tanned  by  the  sun,  but  this  does  not 
affect  them  much.  Their  houses  and  villages  are  pretty, 
each  with  a  chief,  who  acts  as  their  judge,  and  who  is 
obeyed  by  them.  All  these  lords  use  few  words,  and  have 
excellent  manners.     Most  of  their  orders  are  given  by  a  sign 

K  2 


I32  SAILING   DIRECTIONS   TO   ACUL. 

with  the  hand,  which  is  understood  with  surprising  quick- 
ness."    All  these  are  the  words  of  the  Admiral. 

He  who  would  enter  the  sea  of  Santo  Tomé1  ought  to 
stand  for  a  good  league  across  the  mouth  to  a  flat  island 
in  the  middle,  which  was  named  La  Amiga}  pointing  her 
head  towards  it.  When  the  ship  is  within  a  stone's-throw 
of  it  the  course  should  be  altered  to  make  for  the  eastern 
shore,  leaving  the  west  side,  and  this  shore,  and  not  the 
other,  should  be  kept  on  board,  because  a  great  reef  runs 
out  from  the  west,  and  even  beyond  that  there  are  three 
sunken  rocks.  This  reef  comes  within  a  lombard-shot  of 
the  Amiga  island.  Between  them  there  are  seven  fathoms 
at  least,  with  a  gravelly  bottom.  Within,  a  harbour  will  be 
found  large  enough  for  all  the  ships  in  the  world,  which 
would  be  there  without  need  of  cables.  There  is  another 
reef,  with  sunken  rocks,  on  the  east  side  of  the  island  of 
Amiga,  which  are  extensive  and  run  out  to  sea,  reaching 
within  two  leagues  of  the  cape.  But  it  appeared  that 
between  them  there  was  an  entrance,  within  two  lombard- 
shots  of  Amiga,  on  the  west  side  of  Monte  Caribatan, 
where  there  was  a  good  and  very  large  port.3 

Tuesday,  2$t/i  of  December.     Christmas. 

Navigating  yesterday,  with  little  wind,  from  Santo  Tomé 
to  Punta  Santa,  and  being  a  league  from  it,  at  about  eleven 
o'clock  at  night  the  Admiral  went  down  to  get  some  sleep, 
for  he  had  not  had  any  rest  for  two  days  and  a  night.  As 
it  was  calm,  the  sailor  who  steered  the  ship  thought  he 
would  go  to  sleep,  leaving  the  tiller  in  charge  of  a  boy. 
The  Admiral  had  forbidden  this  throughout  the  voyage, 
whether  it  was  blowing  or  whether  it  was  calm.  The  boys 
were  never  to  be  entrusted  with  the  helm.     The  Admiral 


1  Entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Açul. — N.  2  Islã  de  Ratos. — N. 

3  Puerto  Frances. — N. 


SHIPWRECK.  I33 

had  no  anxiety  respecting  sand-banks  and  rocks,  because, 
when  he  sent  the  boats  to  that  king  on  Sunday,  they  had 
passed  to  the  east  of  Punt  a  Santa  at  least  three  leagues 
and  a  half,  and  the  sailors  had  seen  all  the  coast,  and  the 
rocks  there  are  from  Punta  Santa,  for  a  distance  of  three 
leagues  to  the  E.S.E.  They  saw  the  course  that  should  be 
taken,  which  had  not  been  the  case  before,  during  this 
voyage.  It  pleased  our  Lord  that,  at  twelve  o'clock  at 
night,  when  the  Admiral  had  retired  to  rest,  and  when  all 
had  fallen  asleep,  seeing  that  it  was  a  dead  calm  and  the 
sea  like  glass,  the  tiller  being  in  the  hands  of  a  boy,  the 
current  carried  the  ship  on  one  of  the  sand-banks.  If 
it  had  not  been  night  the  bank  could  have  been  seen,  and 
the  surf  on  it  could  be  heard  for  a  good  league.  But  the 
ship  ran  upon  it  so  gently  that  it  could  scarcely  be  felt. 
The  boy,  who  felt  the  helm  and  heard  the  rush  of  the  sea, 
cried  out.  The  Admiral  at  once  came  up,  and  so  quickly 
that  no  one  had  felt  that  the  ship  was  aground.  Presently 
the  master  of  the  ship,1  whose  watch  it  was,  came  on  deck. 
The  Admiral  ordered  him  and  others  to  launch  the  boat, 
which  was  on  the  poop,  and  lay  out  an  anchor  astern.  The 
master,  with  several  others,  got  into  the  boat,  and  the 
Admiral  thought  that  they  did  so  with  the  object  of 
obeying  his  orders.  But  they  did  so  in  order  to  take 
refuge  with  the  caravel,  which  was  half  a  league  to  leeward. 
The  caravel  would  not  allow  them  to  come  on  board, 
acting  judiciously,  and  they  therefore  returned  to  the  ship  ; 
but  the  caravel's  boat  arrived  first.  When  the  Admiral 
saw  that  his  own  people  fled  in  this  way,  the  water  rising 
and  the  ship  being  across  the  sea,  seeing  no  other  course, 
he  ordered  the  masts  to  be  cut  away  and  the  ship  to  be 


1  The  master,  who  was  also  the  owner,  of  the  Admiral's  ship  was 
Juan  de  la  Cosa  of  Santoha,  afterwards  well  known  as  a  draughtsman 
and  pilot 


134  HELP   FROM   THE   NATIVES. 

lightened  as  much  as  possible,  to  see  if  she  would  come  off. 
But,  as  the  water  continued  to  rise,  nothing  more  could  be 
done.  Her  side  fell  over  across  the  sea,  but  it  was  nearly- 
calm.  Then  the  timbers1  opened,  and  the  ship  was  lost. 
The  Admiral  went  to  the  caravel  to  arrange  about  the 
reception  of  the  ship's  crew,  and  as  a  light  breeze  was 
blowing  from  the  land,  and  continued  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  night,  while  it  was  unknown  how  far  the  bank 
extended,  he  hove  her  to  until  daylight.  He  then  went 
back  to  the  ship,  inside  the  reef;  first  having  sent  a  boat 
on  shore  with  Diego  de  Arana  of  Cordova,  Alguazil  of  the 
Fleet,  and  Pedro  Gutierrez,  Gentleman  of  the  King's  Bed- 
chamber, to  inform  the  king,  who  had  invited  the  ships  to 
come  on  the  previous  Saturday.  His  town  was  about  a 
league  and  a  half  from  the  sand-bank.  They  reported 
that  he  wept  when  he  heard  the  news,  and  he  sent  all  his 
people  with  large  canoes  to  unload  the  ship.  This  was 
done,  and  they  landed  all  there  was  between  decks  in  a 
very  short  time.  Such  was  the  great  promptitude  and 
diligence  shown  by  that  king.  He  himself,  with  brothers 
and  relations,  were  actively  assisting  as  well  in  the  ship  as 
in  the  care  of  the  property  when  it  was  landed,  that  all 
might  be  properly  guarded.  Now  and  then  he  sent  one  of 
his  relations  weeping  to  the  Admiral,  to  console  him, 
saying  that  he  must  not  feel  sorrow  or  annoyance,  for  he 
would  supply  all  that  was  needed.  The  Admiral  assured 
the  Sovereigns  that  there  could  not  have  been  such  good 
watch  kept  in  any  part  of  Castille,  for  that  there  was  not 
even  a  needle  missing.  He  ordered  that  all  the  property 
should  be  placed  by  some  houses  which  the  king  placed  at 
his  disposal,  until  they  were  emptied,  when  everything 
would  be  stowed  and  guarded  in  them.     Armed  men  were 


1  Conventos,  a  word  meaning  the  spaces  filled  with  timber,  between 
the  ribs.     See  Herrera,  Dec.  f,  Lib.  I,  cap.  18. — N. 


PRAISE   OF   THE    NATIVES.  135 

placed  round  the  stores  to  watch  all  night.  "  The  king 
and  all  his  people  wept.  They  are  a  loving  people,  without 
covetousness,  and  fit  for  anything ;  and  I  assure  your 
Highnesses  that  there  is  no  better  land  nor  people.  They 
love  their  neighbours  as  themselves,  and  their  speech  is 
the  sweetest  and  gentlest  in  the  world,  and  always  with  a 
smile.  Men  and  women  go  as  naked  as  when  their  mothers 
bore  them.  Your  Highnesses  should  believe  that  they 
have  very  good  customs  among  themselves.  The  king  is 
a  man  of  remarkable  presence,  and  with  a  certain  self- 
contained  manner  that  is  a  pleasure  to  see.  They  have 
good  memories,  wish  to  see  everything,  and  ask  the  use 
of  what  they  see."     All  this  is  written  by  the  Admiral.1 

Wednesday,  26th  of  December. 

To-day,  at  sunrise,  the  king  of  that  land  came  to  the 
caravel  Nina,  where  the  Admiral  was,  and  said  to  him, 
almost  weeping,  that  he  need  not  be  sorry,  for  that  he 
would  give  him  all  he  had  ;  that  he  had  placed  two  large 
houses  at  the  disposal  of  the  Christians  who  were  on  shore, 
and  that  he  would  give  more  if  they  were  required,  and  as 
many  canoes  as  could  load  from  the  ship  and  discharge  on 
shore,  with  as  many  people  as  were  wanted.  This  had  all 
been  done  yesterday,  without  so  much  as  a  needle  being 
missed.  "  So  honest  are  they,"  says  the  Admiral,  "  without 
any  covetousness  for  the  goods  of  others,  and  so  above  all 
was  that  virtuous  king."  While  the  Admiral  was  talking  to 
him,  another  canoe  arrived  from  a  different  place,  bringing 
some  pieces  of  gold,  which  the  people  in  the  canoe  wanted 
to  exchange  for  a  hawk's  bell;  for  there  was  nothing  they 


1  Fernando  Columbus,  in  the  Historie  (cap.  xxxii),  copies  this 
account  of  the  shipwreck  by  his  father,  the  Admiral.  His  version 
differs  somewhat  in  the  expressions,  but  is  the  same  in  substance  as 
the  text  from  the  copy  of  Las  Casas, — N. 


I36  FEAST  WITH   THE   INDIAN   CHIEF. 

desired  more  than  these  bells.  They  had  scarcely  come 
alongside  when  they  called  and  held  up  the  gold,  saying 
CJiuq  chuq  for  the  bells,  for  they  are  quite  mad  about  them. 
After  the  king  had  seen  this,  and  when  the  canoes  which 
came  from  other  places  had  departed,  he  called  the 
Admiral  and  asked  him  to  give  orders  that  one  of  the  bells 
was  to  be  kept  for  another  day,  when  he  would  bring  four 
pieces  of  gold  the  size  of  a  man's  hand.  The  Admiral 
rejoiced  to  hear  this,  and  afterwards  a  sailor,  who  came 
from  the  shore,  told  him  that  it  was  wonderful  what  pieces 
of  gold  the  men  on  shore  were  getting  in  exchange  for  next 
to  nothing.  For  a  needle  they  got  a  piece  of  gold  worth 
two  castellanos,  and  that  this  was  nothing  to  what  it  would 
be  within  a  month.  The  king  rejoiced  much  when  he  saw 
that  the  Admiral  was  pleased.  He  understood  that  his 
friend  wanted  much  gold,  and  he  said,  by  signs,  that  he  knew 
where  there  was,  in  the  vicinity,  a  very  large  quantity  ;  so 
that  he  must  be  in  good  heart,  for  he  should  have  as  much 
as  he  wanted.  He  gave  some  account  of  it,  especially 
saying  that  in  Cipango,  which  they  call  Cibao,  it  is  so  abun- 
dant that  it  is  of  no  value,  and  that  they  will  bring  it, 
although  there  is  also  much  more  in  the  island  of  Espaflola, 
which  they  call  Bohio,  and  in  the  province  of  Cantada. 
The  king  dined  on  board  the  caravel  with  the  Admiral 
and  afterwards  went  on  shore,  where  he  received  the 
Admiral  with  much  honour.  He  gave  him  a  collation 
consisting  of  three  or  four  kinds  of  yams,  with  shellfish 
and  game,  and  other  viands  they  have,  besides  the 
bread  they  call  cazavi.  He  then  took  the  Admiral  to 
see  some  groves  of  trees  near  the  houses,  and  they  were 
accompanied  by  at  least  a  thousand  people,  all  naked.  The 
Lord  had  on  a  shirt  and  a  pair  of  gloves,  given  to  him  by 
the  Admiral,  and  he  was  more  delighted  with  the  gloves 
than  with  anything  else.  In  his  manner  of  eating,  both 
as  regards  the  high-bred  air  and  the  peculiar  cleanliness 


INTERCOURSE   WITH   THE   CHIEF.  1 37 

he  clearly  showed  his  nobility.  After  he  had  eaten,  he 
remained  some  time  at  table,  and  they  brought  him  certain 
herbs,  with  which  he  rubbed  his  hands.  The  Admiral 
thought  that  this  was  done  to  make  them  soft,  and  they 
also  gave  him  water  for  his  hands.  After  the  meal  he  took 
the  Admiral  to  the  beach.  The  Admiral  then  sent  for  a 
Turkish  bow  and  a  quiver  of  arrows,  and  took  a  shot  at  a 
man  of  his  company,  who  had  been  warned.  The  chief, 
who  knew  nothing  about  arms,  as  they  neither  have  them 
nor  use  them,  thought  this  a  wonderful  thing.  He,  how- 
ever, began  to  talk  of  those  of  Cauiba,  whom  they  call 
Caribcs.  They  come  to  capture  the  natives,  and  have  bows 
and  arrows  without  iron,  of  which  there  is  no  memory  in 
any  of  these  lands,  nor  of  steel,  nor  any  other  metal  except 
gold  and  copper.  Of  copper  the  Admiral  had  only  seen 
very  little.  The  Admiral  said,  by  signs,  that  the  Sovereigns 
of  Castille  would  order  the  Caribs  to  be  destroyed,  and 
that  all  should  be  taken  with  their  heads  tied  together. 
He  ordered  a  lombard  and  a  hand-gun  to  be  fired  off,  and 
seeing  the  effect  caused  by  its  force  and  what  the  shots  pene- 
trated, the  king  was  astonished.  When  his  people  heard 
the  explosion  they  all  fell  on  the  ground.  They  brought 
the  Admiral  a  large  mask,  which  had  pieces  of  gold  for  the 
eyes  and  ears  and  in  other  parts,  and  this  they  gave,  with 
other  trinkets  of  gold  that  the  same  king  had  put  on  the 
head  and  round  the  neck  of  the  Admiral,  and  of  other 
Christians,  to  whom  they  also  gave  many  pieces.  The 
Admiral  received  much  pleasure  and  consolation  from 
these  things,  which  tempered  the  anxiety  and  sorrow  he 
felt  at  the  loss  of  the  ship.  He  knew  our  Lord  had 
caused  the  ship  to  stop  here,  that  a  settlement  might 
be  formed.  "  From  this",  he  says,  "  originated  so  many 
things  that,  in  truth,  the  disaster  was  really  a  piece  of 
good  fortune.  For  it  is  certain  that,  if  I  had  not  lost  the 
ship,  I   should  have  gone  on   without  anchoring  in  this 


I38  A   SETTLEMENT    FORMED. 

place,  which  is  within  a  great  bay,  having  two  or  three 
reefs  of  rock.  I  should  not  have  left  people  in  the  country 
during  this  voyage,  nor  even,  if  I  had  desired  to  leave  them, 
should  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  so  much  information,  nor 
such  supplies  and  provisions  for  a  fortress.  And  true  it  is  that 
many  people  had  asked  me  to  give  them  leave  to  remain. 
Now  I  have  given  orders  for  a  tower  and  a  fort,  both  well 
built,  and  a  large  cellar,  not  because  I  believe  that  such  de- 
fences will  be  necessary.  I  believe  that  with  the  force  I  have 
with  me  I  could  subjugate  the  whole  island,  which  I  believe 
to  be  larger  than  Portugal,  and  the  population  double.  But 
they  are  naked  and  without  arms,  and  hopelessly  timid. 
Still,  it  is  advisable  to  build  this  tower,  being  so  far  from 
your  Highnesses.  The  people  may  thus  know  the  skill  of 
the  subjects  of  your  Highnesses,  and  what  they  can  do ; 
and  will  obey  them  with  love  and  fear.  So  they  make 
preparations  to  build  the  fortress,  with  provision  of  bread 
and  wine  for  more  than  a  year,  with  seeds  for  sowing,  the 
ship's  boat,  a  caulker  and  carpenter,  a  gunner  and  cooper. 
Many  among  these  men  have  a  great  desire  to  serve  your 
Highnesses  and  to  please  me,  by  finding  out  where  the 
mine  is  whence  the  gold  is  brought.  Thus  everything  is 
got  in  readiness  to  begin  the  work.  Above  all,  it  was  so 
calm  that  there  was  scarcely  wind  nor  wave  when  the  ship 
ran  aground."  This  is  what  the  Admiral  says  ;  and  he 
adds  more  to  show  that  it  was  great  good  luck,  and  the 
settled  design  of  God,  that  the  ship  should  be  lost  in  order 
that  people  might  be  left  behind.  If  it  had  not  been  for 
the  treachery  of  the  master  and  his  boat's  crew,  who  were 
all  or  mostly  his  countrymen,1  in  neglecting  to  lay  out  the 
anchor  so  as  to  haul  the  ship   off  in    obedience  to   the 

1  Juan  de  la  Cosa,  the  master,  was  a  native  of  Santona,  on  the  north 
coast  of  Spain.  There  were  two  other  Santona  men  on  board,  and 
several  from  the  north  coast. 


ALL  STORES  SAVED  FROM  THE  SHIP.  1 39 

Admiral's  orders,  she  would  have  been  saved.  In  that 
case,  the  same  knowledge  of  the  land  as  has  been  gained 
in  these  days  would  not  have  been  secured,  for  the 
Admiral  always  proceeded  with  the  object  of  discovering, 
and  never  intended  to  stop  more  than  a  day  at  any 
one  place,  unless  he  was  detained  by  the  wind.  Still,  the 
ship  was  very  heavy  and  unsuited  for  discovery.  It  was 
the  people  of  Palos  who  obliged  him  to  take  such  a  ship, 
by  not  complying  "  with  what  they  had  promised  to  the 
King  and  Queen,  namely,  to  supply  suitable  vessels  for 
this  expedition.  This  they  did  not  do.  Of  all  that  there 
was  on  board  the  ship,  not  a  needle,  nor  a  board,  nor 
a  nail  was  lost,  for  she  remained  as  whole  as  when  she 
sailed,  except  that  it  was  necessary  to  cut  away  and  level 
down  in  order  to  get  out  the  jars  and  merchandise,  which 
were  landed  and  carefully  guarded."  He  trusted  in  God 
that,  when  he  returned  from  Spain,  according  to  his  inten- 
tion, he  would  find  a  ton  of  gold  collected  by  barter  by 
those  he  was  to  leave  behind,  and  that  they  would  have 
found  the  mine,  and  spices  in  such  quantities  that  the 
Sovereigns  would,  in  three  years,  be  able  to  undertake 
and  fit  out  an  expedition  to  go  and  conquer  the  Holy 
Sepulchre.  "  Thus",  he  says,  "  I  protest  to  your  High- 
nesses that  all  the  profits  of  this  my  enterprise  may  be 
spent  in  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem.  Your  Highnesses 
may  laugh,  and  say  that  it  is  pleasing  to  you,  and  that, 
without  this,  you  entertain  that  desire."  These  are  the 
Admiral's  words. 

Thursday,  2jtk  of  December. 

The  king  of  that  land  came  alongside  the  caravel  at 
sunrise,  and  said  that  he  had  sent  for  gold,  and  that  he 
would  collect  all  he  could  before  the  Admiral  departed  ; 
but  he  begged  him  not  to  go.     The  king  and  one  of  his 


140  BUILDING    OF   THE   FORT. 

brothers,  with  another  very  intimate  relation,  dined  with 
the  Admiral,  and  the  two  latter  said  they  wished  to  go  to 
Castille  with  him.  At  this  time  the  news  came  that  the 
caravel  Pinta  was  in  a  river  at  the  end  of  this  island. 
Presently  the  Cacique  sent  a  canoe  there,  and  the  Admiral 
sent  a  sailor  in  it.  For  it  was  wonderful  how  devoted  the 
Cacique  was  to  the  Admiral.  The  necessity  was  now 
evident  of  hurrying  on  preparations  for  the  return  to 
Castille. 

Friday ;  2§th  of  December. 

The  Admiral  went  on  shore  to  give  orders  and  hurry 
on  the  work  of  building  the  fort,  and  to  settle  what  men 
should  remain  behind.  The  king,  it  would  seem,  had 
watched  him  getting  into  the  boat,  and  quickly  went  into 
his  house,  dissimulating,  sending  one  of  his  brothers  to 
receive  the  Admiral,  and  conduct  him  to  one  of  the  houses 
that  had  been  set  aside  for  the  Spaniards,  which  was  the 
largest  and  best  in  the  town.  In  it  there  was  a  couch 
made  of  palm  matting,  where  they  sat  down.  Afterwards 
the  brother  sent  an  attendant  to  say  that  the  Admiral  was 
there,  as  if  the  king  did  not  know  that  he  had  come.  The 
Admiral,  however,  believed  that  this  was  a  feint  in  order 
to  do  him  more  honour.  The  attendant  gave  the  message, 
and  the  Cacique  came  in  great  haste,  and  put  a  large  soft 
piece  of  gold  he  had  in  his  hand  round  the  Admiral's  neck. 
They  remained  together  until  the  evening,  arranging  what 
had  to  be  done. 

Saturday,  29///  of  December. 

A  very  youthful  nephew  of  the  king  came  to  the  caravel 
at  sunrise,  who  showed  a  good  understanding  and  dis- 
position. As  the  Admiral  was  always  working  to  find  out 
the  origin  of  the  gold,  he  asked  everyone,  for  he  could 
now  understand  somewhat  by  signs.     This  youth  told  him 


RECEPTION    BY   CHIEFS.  14I 

that,  at  a  distance  of  four  days'  journey,  there  was  an 
island  to  the  eastward  called  Guarionex,  and  others  called 
Macorix,  Mayonic,  Fuma,  Cibao,  and  Coroay}  in  which 
there  was  plenty  of  gold.  The  Admiral  wrote  these  names 
down,  and  now  understood  what  had  been  said  by  a 
brother  of  the  king,  who  was  annoyed  with  him,  as  the 
Admiral  understood.  At  other  times  the  Admiral  had 
suspected  that  the  king  had  worked  against  his  knowing 
where  the  gold  had  its  origin  and  was  collected,  that  he 
might  not  go  away  to  barter  in  another  part  of  the  island. 
For  there  are  such  a  number  of  places  in  this  same  island 
that  it  is  wonderful.  After  nightfall  the  king  sent  a  large 
mask  of  gold,  and  asked  for  a  washhand  basin  and  jug. 
The  Admiral  thought  he  wanted  them  for  patterns  to  copy 
from,  and  therefore  sent  them. 

Sunday,  30///  of  December. 

The  Admiral  went  on  shore  to  dinner,  and  came  at  a 
time  when  five  kings  had  arrived,  all  with  their  crowns, 
who  were  subject  to  this  king,  named  Guacanagari.  They 
represented  a  very  good  state  of  affairs,  and  the  Admiral 
says  to  the  Sovereigns  that  it  would  have  given  them 
pleasure  to  see  the  manner  of  their  arrival.  On  landing, 
the  Admiral  was  received  by  the  king,  who  led  him  by  the 
arms  to  the  same  house  where  he  was  yesterday,  where 
there  were  chairs,  and  a  couch  on  which  the  Admiral  sat. 
Presently  the  king  took  the  crown  off  his  head  and  put  it 
on  the  Admiral's  head,  and  the  Admiral  took  from  his 
neck  a  collar  of  beautiful  beads  of  several  different  colours, 
which  looked  very  well  in  all  its  parts,  and  put  it  on  the 
king.  He  also  took  off  a  cloak  of  fine  material,  in  which 
he  had  dressed  himself  that  day,  and  dressed  the  king  in 

1  These  were  not  islands,  but  provinces  of  Espanola.     Guarionex 
was  the  chief  of  the  "  Ve^a  Real". 


142  FUTURE   PLANS. 

it,  and  sent  for  some  coloured  boots,  which  he  put  on  his 
feet,  and  he  put  a  large  silver  ring  on  his  finger,  because 
he  had  heard  that  he  had  admired  greatly  a  silver  orna- 
ment worn  by  one  of  the  sailors.  The  king  was  highly 
delighted  and  well  satisfied,  and  two  of  those  kings  who 
were  with  him  came  with  him  to  where  the  Admiral  was, 
and  each  gave  him  a  large  piece  of  gold.  At  this  time  an 
Indian  came  and  reported  that  it  was  two  days  since  he 
left  the  caravel  Pinta  in  a  port  to  the  eastward.  The 
Admiral  returned  to  the  caravel,  and  Vicente  Anes,1  the 
captain,  said  that  he  had  seen  the  rhubarb  plant,  and  that 
they  had  it  on  the  island  Amiga,  which  is  at  the  entrance 
of  the  sea  of  Santo  Tome,  six  leagues  off,  and  that  he  had 
recognised  the  branches  and  roots.  They  say  that  rhubarb 
forms  small  branches  above  ground,  and  fruit  like  green 
mulberries,  almost  dry,  and  the  stalk,  near  the  root,  is  as 
yellow  and  delicate  as  the  best  colour  for  painting,  and 
underground  the  root  grows  like  a  large  pear.2 

Monday,  31  st  of  December. 

To-day  the  Admiral  was  occupied  in  seeing  that  water 
and  fuel  were  taken  on  board  for  the  voyage  to  Spain, 
to  give  early  notice  to  the  Sovereigns,  that  they  might 
despatch  ships  to  complete  the  discoveries.  For  now  the 
business  appeared  to  be  so  great  and  important  that  the 
Admiral  was  astonished.  He  did  not  wish  to  go  until  he  had 
examined  all  the  land  to  the  eastward,  and  explored  the 
coast,  so  as  to  know  the  route  to  Castille,  with  a  view  to 
sending  sheep  and  cattle.  But  as  he  had  been  left  with 
only  a  single  vessel,  it  did  not  appear  prudent  to  encounter 
the  dangers  that  are  inevitable  in  making  discoveries.     He 


1  For  Yanez.     Vicente  Yaííez  Pinzon. 

2  See  Letter  to  Scuitangel,  p.  15. 


GOLD   AND   SPICES.  143 

complained  that  all  this  inconvenience  had  been  caused  by 
the  caravel  Pinta  having  parted  company. 

Tuesday,  1st  of  January  1493. 

At  midnight  the  Admiral  sent  a  boat  to  the  island 
Amiga  to  bring  the  rhubarb.  It  returned  at  vespers  with 
a  bundle  of  it.  They  did  not  bring  more  because  they  had 
no  spade  to  dig  it  up  with  ;  it  was  taken  to  be  shown  to 
the  Sovereigns.  The  king  of  that  land  said  that  he  had  sent 
many  canoes  for  gold.  The  canoe  returned  that  had  been 
sent  for  tidings  of  the  Pinta,  without  having  found  her. 
The  sailor  who  went  in  the  canoe  said  that  twenty  leagues 
from  there  he  had  seen  a  king  who  wore  two  large  plates 
of  gold  on  his  head,  but  when  the  Indians  in  the  canoe 
spoke  to  him  he  took  them  off.  He  also  saw  much  gold 
on  other  people.  The  Admiral  considered  that  the  King 
Guacanagari  ought  to  have  prohibited  his  people  from 
selling  gold  to  the  Christians,  in  order  that  it  might  all  pass 
through  his  hands.  But  the  king  knew  the  places,  as 
before  stated,  where  there  was  such  a  quantity  that  it  was 
not  valued.  The  spicery  also  is  extensive,  and  is  worth 
more  than  pepper  or  mancgueta.1  He  left  instructions  to 
those  who  wished  to  remain  that  they  were  to  collect  as 
much  as  they  could. 

Wednesday,  2?id  of  January. 
In  the  morning  the  Admiral  went  on  shore  to  take  leave  of 
the  King  Guacanagari,  and  to  depart  from  him  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  He  gave  him  one  of  his  shirts.  In  order  to 
show  him  the  force  of  the  lombards,  and  what  effect  they 
had,  he  ordered  one  to  be  loaded  and  fired  into  the  side  of 
the  ship  that  was  on  shore,  for  this  was  apposite  to  the  con- 
versation respecting  the  Caribs,  with  whom  Guacanagari 
was  at   war.      The   king   saw   whence   the   lombard-shot 

1  See  note  at  page  154. 


144 


THE   SETTLEMENT. 


came,  and  how  it  passed  through  the  side  of  the  ship 
and  went  far  away  over  the  sea.  The  Admiral  also 
ordered  a  skirmish  of  the  crews  of  the  ships,  fully  armed, 
saying  to  the  Cacique  that  he  need  have  no  fear  of  the 
Caribs  even  if  they  should  come.  All  this  was  done  that 
the  king  might  look  upon  the  men  who  were  left  behind  as 
friends,  and  that  he  might  also  have  a  proper  fear  of  them. 
The  king  took  the  Admiral  to  dinner  at  the  house  where  he 
was  established,  and  the  others  who  came  with  him.  The 
Admiral  strongly  recommended  to  his  friendship  Diego  de 
Arana,  Pedro  Gutierrez,  and  Rodrigo  Escovedo,  whom  he 
left  jointly  as  his  lieutenants  over  the  people  who  remained 
behind,  that  all  might  be  well  regulated  and  governed  for 
the  service  of  their  Highnesses.  The  Cacique  showed  much 
love  for  the  Admiral,  and  great  sorrow  at  his  departure, 
especially  when  he  saw  him  go  on  board.  A  relation  of 
that  king  said  to  the  Admiral  that  he  had  ordered  a  statue 
of  pure  gold  to  be  made,  as  big  as  the  Admiral,  and  that 
it  would  be  brought  within  ten  days.  The  Admiral 
embarked  with  the  intention  of  sailing  presently,  but  there 
was  no  wind. 

He  left  on  that  island  of  Espaiiola,  which  the  Indians 
called  Bo/no,  39  men1  with  the  fortress,2  and  he  says  that 


1  The  actual  number  was  44,  according  to  the  official  list,  namely : 


1.  Diego   de   Arana   of  Cordova 

(Alguazil  Mayor). 

2.  Rodrigo   de  Escobedo  {Secre- 

tary). 

3.  Pedro  Gutierrez  (Gentleman  of 

the  King's  Bedchamber). 
Bachiller  Bernardo   de  Tapia 

( Volunteer). 
Alonzo  Velez  of  Seville. 
Alonzo  Perez  Osório. 


4- 


7.  Castillo  of  Seville  (Assayer). 

8.  Antonio  of  Jaen. 

9.  Álvaro  Perez  Osório. 

10.  Cristoval  de  Alamo  of  Niebla. 

11.  Diego  Garcia  of  Xeres. 

12.  Diego  de  Tordoya  of  Cabeza 

de  Vaca. 

13.  Diego  de  Capilla  of  Almeden. 

14.  Diego  of  Mambles. 

15.  Diego  de  Mendoza. 


2  To  which  he  gave  the  name  of  "  Villa  de  la  Navidad",  because 
the  ship  was  lost  on  Christmas  Day. 


THE   SETTLEMENT   OF    NAVIDAD. 


H5 


they  were  great  friends  of  Guacanagari.  The  lieutenants 
placed  over  them  were  Diego  de  Arana  of  Cordova,  Pedro 
Gutierrez,  Gentleman  of  the  King's  Bedchamber,  and 
Rodrigo  de  Escovedo,  a  native  of  Seogvia,  nephew  of 
Fray  Rodrigo  Perez,  with  all  the  powers  he  himself  received 
from  the  Sovereigns.  He  left  behind  all  the  merchandise 
which  had  been  provided  for  bartering,  which  was  much, 
that  they  might  trade  for  gold.  He  also  left  bread  for  a 
year's  supply,  wine,  and  much  artillery.  He  also  left  the 
ship's  boat,  that  they,  most  of  them  being  sailors,  might  go, 
when  the  time  seemed  convenient,  to  discover  the  gold 
mine,  in  order  that  the  Admiral,  on  his  return,  might  find 
much  gold.  They  were  also  to  find  a  good  site  for  a  town, 
for  this  was  not  altogether  a  desirable  port ;  especially  as 
the  gold  the  natives  brought  came  from  the  east  ;  also,  the 
farther  to  the  east  the  nearer  to  Spain.  He  also  left  seeds 
for  sowing,  and  his  officers,  the  Alguazil  and  Secretary,  as 
well  as  a  ship's  carpenter,  a  caulker,  a  good  gunner  well 


16.  Diego  de  Montalvan  of  Jaen. 

17.  Domingo  de  Bermeo. 

18.  Francisco  de  Godoy  of  Seville. 

19.  Francisco  de  Vergara  of  Seville. 

20.  Francisco  of  Aranda. 

21.  Francisco  Henao  of  Avila. 

22.  Francisco  Jimenes  of  Seville. 

23.  Gabriel  Baraona  of  Belmonte. 

24.  Gonzalo   Fernandez  of    Sego- 

via. 

25.  Gonzalo  Fernandez  of  Leon. 

26.  Guillelmo     (Irish,     native    of 

Galway). 

27.  Jorge  Gonzales  of  Trigueros. 

28.  Juan  de  Cueva. 

29.  Juan  Patino  of  La  Sarena. 


30.  Juan  del  Barco  of  Avila. 

31.  Pedro  Carbacho  of  Cáceres. 

32.  Pedro  of  Tala  vera. 

33.  Sebastian  of  Majorca. 

34.  Tallarte     (Alard?)    of    Lajes 

(an  Englishman). 

35.  Diego  de  Torpa. 

36.  Francisco  Fernandez. 

37.  Hernando  de  Porcuna. 

38.  Juan  de  Urminga. 

39.  Juan  de  Morcillo. 

40.  Juan  de  Villar. 

41.  Juan  de  Mendoza. 

42.  Martin  de  Logrosan. 

43.  Pedro  de  Foronda. 

44.  Tristan  de  San  Jorge. 


The  names  are  given  in  a  document  printed  by  Navarrete  ;  which 
is  a  notice  to  the  next  of  kin  to  apply  for  wages  due,  dated  Burgos, 
December  20th,  1507.  Oviedo  and  Herrera  say  that  a  surgeon  named 
Maestre  Juan  was  also  left  behind 

L 


I46     MISCONDUCT  OF  THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  "PINTA". 

acquainted   with   artillery,  a   cooper,  a   physician,  and    a 
tailor,  all  being  seamen  as  well.1 

Thursday,  3rd  of  January. 

The  Admiral  did  not  go  to-day,  because  three  of  the 
Indians  whom  he  had  brought  from  the  islands,  and  who 
had  staid  behind,  arrived,  and  said  that  the  others  with 
their  women  would  be  there  at  sunrise.2  The  sea  also  was 
rather  rough,  so  that  they  could  not  land  from  the  boat. 
He  determined  to  depart  to-morrow,  with  the  grace  of  God. 
The  Admiral  said  that  if  he  had  the  caravel  Pinta  with 
him  he  could  make  sure  of  shipping  a  ton  of  gold,  because 
he  could  then  follow  the  coasts  of  these  islands,  which  he 
would  not  do  alone,  for  fear  some  accident  might  impede 
his  return  to  Castille,  and  prevent  him  from  reporting  all 
he  had  discovered  to  the  Sovereigns.  If  it  was  certain 
that  the  caravel  Pinta  would  arrive  safely  in  Spain  with 
Martin  Alonso  Pinzon,  he  would  not  hesitate  to  act  as  he 
desired  ;  but  as  he  had  no  certain  tidings  of  him,  and  as 
he  might  return  and  tell  lies  to  the  Sovereigns,  that  he 
might  not  receive  the  punishment  he  deserved  for  having 
done  so  much  harm  in  having  parted  company  without 
permission,  and  impeded  the  good  service  that  might  have 
been  done ;  the  Admiral  could  only  trust  in  our  Lord  that 
he  would  grant  favourable  weather,  and  remedy  all  things. 

Friday,  ^th  of  January. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  weighed  the  anchor,  with  little 
wind,  and  turned  her  head  N.W.  to  get  clear  of  the  reef, 
by   another   channel    wider   than    the    one   by   which    he 


1  Herrera  gives  the  farewell  speech  of  the  Admiral  to  those  who 
were  left  behind  at  Navidad.     {Dec.  I,  Lib.  I,  cap.  xx.) 

2  Las  Casas  says  that  the  Admiral  brought  ten  or  twelve  Indians  to 
Castille  with  him.     {Ibid.,  I,  p.  419.) 


MONTE   CRISTI.  147 

entered,  which,  with  others,  is  very  good  for  coming  in 
front  of  the  Villa  de  la  Navidad,  in  all  which  the  least 
depth  is  from  3  to  9  fathoms.  These  two  channels  run 
N.W.  and  S.E.,  and  the  reefs  are  long,  extending  from  the 
Cabo  Santo  to  the  Cabo  de  Sicrpe  for  more  than  six 
leagues,  and  then  a  good  three  leagues  out  to  sea.  At  a 
league  outside  Cabo  Santo  there  are  not  more  than  8 
fathoms  of  depth,  and  inside  that  cape,  on  the  east  side, 
there  are  many  sunken  rocks,  and  channels  to  enter  between 
them.  All  this  coast  trends  N.W.  and  S.E.,  and  it  is  all 
beach,  with  the  land  very  level  for  about  a  quarter  of  a 
league  inland.  After  that  distance  there  are  very  high 
mountains,  and  the  whole  is  peopled  with  a  very  good 
race,  as  they  showed  themselves  to  the  Christians.  Thus 
the  Admiral  navigated  to  the  east,  shaping  a  course  for  a 
very  high  mountain,  which  looked  like  an  island,  but  is 
not  one,  being  joined  to  the  mainland  by  a  very  low  neck. 
The  mountain  has  the  shape  of  a  very  beautiful  tent.1  He 
gave  it  the  name  of  Monte  Cristi.  It  is  due  east  of  Cabo 
Santo,  at  a  distance  of  18  leagues.2  That  day,  owing  to 
the  light  wind,  they  could  not  reach  within  six  leagues  of 
Monte  Cristi.  He  discovered  four  very  low  and  sandy 
islets,3  with  a  reef  extending  N.W.  and  S.E.  Inside,  there 
is  a  large  gulf,4  which  extends  from  this  mountain  to  the 
S.E.  at  least  twenty  leagues,5  which  must  all  be  shallow, 
with  many  sand-banks,  and  inside  numerous  rivers  which 
are  not  navigable.  At  the  same  time  the  sailor  who  was 
sent  in  the  canoe  to  get  tidings  of  the  Pinta  reported  that ' 


1  Alfaneque ;  which  Las  Casas  explains  as  Tie7ida  de  Campo. 
Hazard  {Santo  Domingo,  1873,  p.  352)  says  it  is  called  the  Morro, 
and  La  Grange  (the  barn),  "name  given  by  Columbus".  Alfaneque 
means  a  booth  or  tent,  not  a  barn. 

2  It  is  N.  80°  E.  70  leagues. — N. 

3  Los  siete  Hermanos. — N.  4  Bahia  de  Manzanillo. — N. 


5  Should  be  S.W.  three  leagues. 


L  2 


148  MONTE   CRISTI. 

he  saw  a  river1  into  which  ships  might  enter.  The  Admiral 
anchored  at  a  distance  of  six  leagues'2  from  Monte  Cristi,  in 
19  fathoms,  and  so  kept  clear  of  many  rocks  and  reefs. 
Here  he  remained  for  the  night.  The  Admiral  gives 
notice  to  those  who  would  go  to  the  Villa  de  la  Navidad 
that,  to  make  Monte  Cristi,  he  should  stand  off  the  land 
two  leagues,  etc.  (But  as  the  coast  is  now  known  it  is  not 
given  here.)  The  Admiral  concluded  that  Cipango  was 
in  that  island,  and  that  it  contained  much  gold,  spices, 
mastick,  and  rhubarb. 

Saturday,  $t/i  of  January. 

At  sunrise  the  Admiral  made  sail  with  the  land-breeze, 
and  saw  that  to  the  S.S.E.3  of  Monte  Cristi,  between  it 
and  an  island,  there  seemed  to  be  a  good  port  to  anchor 
in  that  night.  He  shaped  an  E.S.E.  course,  afterwards 
S.S.E.,  for  six  leagues  round  the  high  land,  and  found 
a  depth  of  17  fathoms,  with  a  very  clean  bottom,  going  on 
for  three  leagues  with  the  same  soundings.  Afterwards  it 
shallowed  to  12  fathoms  up  to  the  morro  of  the  mountain, 
and  off  the  morro,  at  one  league,  the  depth  of  9  fathoms 
was  found,  the  bottom  clean,  and  all  fine  sand.  The 
Admiral  followed  the  same  course  until  he  came  between 
the  mountain  and  the  island,4  where  he  found  3  J  fathoms 
at  low  water,  a  very  good  port,  and  here  he  anchored.5 
He  went  in  the  boat  to  the  islet,  where  he  found  remains  of 
fire  and  footmarks,  showing  that  fishermen  had  been  there. 


1  Rio  Tapion,  in  the  Bahia  de  Manzanillo. — N. 

2  A  mistake  for  three  leagues. 

3  Should  be  W.S.W. 

4  Islã  Cabra. 

5  Anchorage  of  Monte  Cristi.  It  is  now  a  depot  for  receiving 
mahogany  and  other  woods  from  the  neighbouring  country,  to  be 
shipped  in  small  schooners  to  Puerto  Plata.  At  one  time  it  was  a 
much  more  important  place.     {Hazard,  p.  353.) 


MONTE   CRISTI.  149 

Here  they  saw  many  stones  painted  in  colours,  or  a 
quarry  of  such  stones,  very  beautifully  worked  by  nature, 
suited  for  the  building  of  a  church  or  other  public  work, 
like  those  he  found  on  the  island  of  San  Salvador.  On  this 
islet  he  also  found  many  plants  of  mastick.  He  says  that 
this  Monte  Cristi  is  very  fine  and  high,  but  accessible,  and 
of  a  very  beautiful  shape,  all  the  land  round  it  being  low, 
a  very  fine  plain,  from  which  the  height  rises,  looking  at  a 
distance  like  an  island  disunited  from  other  land.1  Beyond 
the  mountain,  to  the  east,  he  saw  a  cape  at  a  distance  of 
24  miles,  which  he  named  Cabo  del  Beeerro,2  whence  to  the 
mountain  for  two  leagues  there  are  reefs  of  rocks,  though 
it  appeared  as  if  there  were  navigable  channels  between 
them.  It  would,  however,  be  advisable  to  approach  in 
daylight,  and  to  send  a  boat  ahead  to  sound.  From  the 
mountain  eastward  to  Cabo  del  Becerro,  for  four  leagues, 
there  is  a  beach,  and  the  land  is  low,  but  the  rest  is  very 
high,  with  beautiful  mountains  and  some  cultivation.  In- 
land, a  chain  of  mountains  runs  N.E.  and  S.W.,  the  most 
beautiful  he  had  seen,  appearing  like  the  hills  of  Cordova. 
Some  other  very  lofty  mountains  appear  in  the  distance 
towards  the  south  and  S.E.,  and  very  extensive  green 
valleys  with  large  rivers  :  all  this  in  such  quantity  that  he 
did  not  believe  he  had  exaggerated  a  thousandth  part. 
Afterwards  he  saw,  to  the  eastward  of  the  mountain, 
a  land  which  appeared  like  that  of  Monte  Cristi  in  size 
and  beauty.  Further  to  the  east  and  N.E.  there  is  land 
which  is  not  so  high,  extending  for  some  hundred  miles 
or  near  it. 

Sunday,  6t/i  of  January. 

That  port  is  sheltered  from  all  winds,  except  north   and 
N.W.,  and  these  winds  seldom  blow  in  this  region.     Even 

1  Las  Casas  says  that  this  is  an  accurate  description. 
-  Punta  Rucia. 


I50  THE  "PINTA"  REJOINS. 

when  the  wind  is  from  those  quarters,  shelter  may  be 
found  near  the  islet  in  3  or  4  fathoms.  At  sunset  the 
Admiral  made  sail  to  proceed  along  the  coast,  the  course 
being  east,  except  that  it  is  necessary  to  look  out  for 
several  reefs  of  stone  and  sand,  within  which  there  are 
good  anchorages,  with  channels  leading  to  them.  After 
noon  it  blew  fresh  from  the  east.  The  Admiral  ordered 
a  sailor  to  go  to  the  mast-head  to  look  out  for  reefs,  and 
he  saw  the  caravel  Pinta  coming,  with  the  wind  aft,  and 
she  joined  the  Admiral.  As  there  was  no  place  to  anchor, 
owing  to  the  rocky  bottom,  the  Admiral  returned  for  ten 
leagues  to  Monte  Cristi,  with  the  Pinta  in  company. 
Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  came  on  board  the  caravel  Nina, 
where  the  Admiral  was,  and  excused  himself  by  saying 
that  he  had  parted  company  against  his  will,  giving 
reasons  for  it.  But  the  Admiral  says  that  they  were  all 
false  ;  and  that  on  the  night  when  Pinzon  parted  company 
he  was  influenced  by  pride  and  covetousness.  He  could 
not  understand  whence  had  come  the  insolence  and  dis- 
loyalty with  which  Pinzon  had  treated  him  during  the 
voyage.  The  Admiral  had  taken  no  notice,  because  he 
did  not  wish  to  give  place  to  the  evil  works  of  Satan,  who 
desired  to  impede  the  voyage.  It  appeared  that  one  of 
the  Indians,  who  had  been  put  on  board  the  caravel  by 
the  Admiral  with  others,  had  said  that  there  was  much 
gold  in  an  island  called  Baneque,  and,  as  Pinzon's  vessel 
was  light  and  swift,  he  determined  to  go  there,  parting 
company  with  the  Admiral,  who  wished  to  remain  and 
explore  the  coasts  of  Juana  and  Espaiiola,  with  an  easterly 
course.  When  Martin  Alonso  arrived  at  the  island  of 
Baneqtie  he  found  no  gold.  He  then  went  to  the  coast  of 
Espaiiola,  on  information  from  the  Indians  that  there  was 
a  great  quantity  of  gold  and  many  mines  in  that  island  of 
Espaiiola,  which  the  Indians  call  BoJiio.  He  thus  arrived 
near   the    Villa   dc  Navidad,  about    1 5    leagues    from    it, 


NEWS  OF  OTHER  ISLANDS.  151 

having  then  been  absent  more  than  twenty  days,  so  that 
the  news  brought  by  the  Indians  was  correct,  on  account 
of  which  the  King  Guacanagari  sent  a  canoe,  and  the 
Admiral  put  a  sailor  on  board  ;  but  the  Pinta  must  have 
gone  before  the  canoe  arrived.  The  Admiral  says  that 
the  Pinta  obtained  much  gold  by  barter,  receiving  large 
pieces  the  size  of  two  ringers  in  exchange  for  a  needle. 
Martin  Alonso  took  half,  dividing  the  other  half  among 
the  crew.  The  Admiral  then  says :  "  Thus  I  am  con- 
vinced that  our  Lord  miraculously  caused  that  vessel  to 
remain  here,  this  being  the  best  place  in  the  whole  island 
to  form  a  settlement,  and  the  nearest  to  the  gold  mines." 
He  also  says  that  he  knew  "  of  another  great  island,1  to 
the  south  of  the  island  of  Juana,  in  which  there  is  more 
gold  than  in  this  island,  so  that  they  collect  it  in  bits  the 
size  of  beans,  while  in  Espanola  they  find  the  pieces  the 
size  of  grains  of  corn.2  They  call  that  island  Yaniaye. 
The  Admiral  also  heard  of  an  island  further  east,  in  which 
there  were  only  women,  having  been  told  this  by  many 
people.  He  was  also  informed  that  Yaniaye  and  the 
island  of  Espanola  were  ten  days'  journey  in  a  canoe  from 
the  mainland,  which  would  be  about  70  or  80  leagues,  and 
that  there  the  people  wore  clothes. 

Monday,  Jth  of  January. 

This  day  the  Admiral  took  the  opportunity  of  caulking 
the  caravel,  and  the  sailors  were  sent  to  cut  wood.  They 
found  mastick  and  aloes  in  abundance. 


1  Jamaica. 

2  Las  Casas  says  that  the  pieces  were  even  as  large  as  a  loaf  of 
bread  of  Alcalá,  or  as  a  quarter  loaf  of  Valladolid,  and  that  he  had 
seen  them  of  that  size.  He  adds  that  many  are  found  weighing  a 
pound  to  eight  pounds  in  Espanola 


152  INSUBORDINATION   OF   THE   PINZONS. 

Tuesday,  Zth  of  January. 

As  the  wind  was  blowing  fresh  from  the  east  and  S.E., 
the  Admiral  did  not  get  under  weigh  this  morning.  He 
ordered  the  caravel  to  be  filled  up  with  wood  and  water 
and  with  all  other  necessaries  for  the  voyage.  He  wished 
to  explore  all  the  coast  of  Espanola  in  this  direction.  But 
those  he  appointed  to  the  caravels  as  captains  were 
brothers,  namely,  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  and  Vicente 
Anes.  They  also  had  followers  who  were  filled  with  pride 
and  avarice,  considering  that  all  now  belonged  to  them, 
and  unmindful  of  the  honour  the  Admiral  had  done  them. 
They  had  not  and  did  not  obey  his  orders,  but  did  and  said 
many  unworthy  things  against  him  ;  while  Martin  Alonso 
had  deserted  him  from  the  21st  of  November  until  the  6th 
of  January  without  cause  or  reason,  but  from  disaffection. 
All  these  things  had  been  endured  in  silence  by  the 
Admiral  in  order  to  secure  a  good  end  to  the  voyage.  He 
determined  to  return  as  quickly  as  possible,  to  get  rid  of 
such  an  evil  company,  with  whom  he  thought  it  necessary 
to  dissimulate,  although  they  were  a  mutinous  set,  and 
though  he  also  had  with  him  many  good  men  ;  for  it  was 
not  a  fitting  time  for  dealing  out  punishment. 

The  Admiral  got  into  the  boat  and  went  up  the  river1 
which  is  near,  towards  the  S.S.W.  of  Monte  Cristi,  a  good 
league.  This  is  where  the  sailors  went  to  get  fresh  water 
for  the  ships.  He  found  that  the  sand  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river,  which  is  very  large  and  deep,  was  full  of  very  fine 
gold,  and  in  astonishing  quantity.  The  Admiral  thought 
that  it  was  pulverized  in  the  drift  down  the  river,  but  in  a 


1  This  is  the  large  river  Yaqui,  which  contains  much  gold  in  its 
sand.  It  was  afterwards  called  the  "  Santiago".  Las  Casas  thinks 
that  Columbus  may  have  found  gold  on  this  occasion,  but  that  much 
of  what  he  saw  was  margasita.     (Las  Casas,  i,  p.  428.) 


RIVER   OF   GOLD.  153 

short  time  he  found  many  grains  as  large  as  horse-beans, 
while  there  was  a  great  deal  of  the  fine  powder. 

As  the  fresh  water  mixed  with  the  salt  when  it  entered 
the  sea,  he  ordered  the  boat  to  go  up  for  the  distance  of  a 
stone's-throw.  They  filled  the  casks  from  the  boat,  and 
when  they  went  back  to  the  caravel  they  found  small 
bits  of  gold  sticking  to  the  hoops  of  the  casks  and  of  the 
barrel.  The  Admiral  gave  the  name  of  Rio  del  Oro  to  the 
river.1  Inside  the  bar  it  is  very  deep,  though  the  mouth  is 
shallow  and  very  wide.  The  distance  to  the  Villa  de  la 
Navidad  is  17  leagues,2  and  there  are  several  large  rivers 
on  the  intervening  coast,  especially  three  which  probably 
contain  much  more  gold  than  this  one,  because  they  are 
larger.  This  river  is  nearly  the  size  of  the  Guadalquivir  at 
Cordova,  and  from  it  to  the  gold  mines  the  distance  is  not 
more  than  20  leagues.3  The  Admiral  further  says  that 
he  did  not  care  to  take  the  sand  containing  gold,  be- 
cause their  Highnesses  would  have  it  all  as  their  property 
at  their  town  of  Navidad  ;  and  because  his  first  object  was 
now  to  bring  the  news  and  to  get  rid  of  the  evil  company 
that  was  with  him,  whom  he  had  always  said  were  a 
mutinous  set. 

Wednesday,  gt/i  of  January. 

The  Admiral  made  sail  at  midnight,  with  the  wind  S.E., 
and  shaped  an  E.N.E.  course,  arriving  at  a  point  named 
Punta  Rojaf  which  is  60  miles5  east  of  Monte  Cristi, 
and   anchored   under  its  lee  three  hours  before  nightfall. 


1  Afterwards  called  the  Rio  de  Santiago. 
-  This  should  be  8  leagues. 

3  Las  Casas  says  the  distance  to  the  mines  is  not  4  leagues. 

4  Punta  Isabelica. 

5  The  distance  is   \o\  leagues,  or  42  of  the  Italian  miles  used  by 
Columbus. 


154  MERMAIDS. 

He  did  not  venture  to  go  out  at  night,  because  there  are 
many  reefs,  until  they  are  known.  Afterwards,  if,  as  will 
probably  be  the  case,  channels  are  found  between  them, 
the  anchorage,  which  is  good  and  well  sheltered,  will  be 
profitable.  The  country  between  Monte  Cristi  and  this 
point  where  the  Admiral  anchored  is  very  high  land,  with 
beautiful  plains,  the  range  running  east  and  west,  all  green 
and  cultivated,  with  numerous  streams  of  water,  so  that  it 
is  wonderful  to  see  such  beauty.  In  all  this  country  there 
are  many  turtles,  and  the  sailors  took  several  when  they 
came  on  shore  to  lay  their  eggs  at  Monte  Cristi,  as  large 
as  a  great  wooden  buckler. 

On  the  previous  day,  when  the  Admiral  went  to  the 
Rio  del  Oro,  he  saw  three  mermaids,1  which  rose  well  out 
of  the  sea  ;  but  they  are  not  so  beautiful  as  they  are  painted, 
though  to  some  extent  they  have  the  form  of  a  human 
face.  The  Admiral  says  that  he  had  seen  some,  at  other 
times,  in  Guinea,  on  the  coast  of  the  Manequeta.2 

1  The  mermaids  of  Columbus  are  the  maizatis,  or  sea-cows  of  the 
Caribean  Sea  and  great  South  American  rivers.  They  are  now 
scarcely  ever  seen  out  at  sea.  Their  resemblance  to  human  beings, 
when  rising  in  the  water,  must  have  been  very  striking.  They  have 
small  rounded  heads,  and  cervical  vertebras  which  form  a  neck, 
enabling  the  animal  to  turn  its  head  about.  The  fore-limbs  also, 
instead  of  being  pectoral  fins,  have  the  character  of  the  arm  and  hand 
of  the  higher  mammalia.  These  peculiarities,  and  their  very  human 
way  of  suckling  their  young,  holding  it  by  the  forearm,  which  is 
movable  at  the  elbow-joint,  suggested  the  idea  of  mermaids.  The 
congener  of  the  manali,  which  had  been  seen  by  Columbus  on  the 
coast  of  Guinea,  is  the  dugong. 

2  Las  Casas  has  "  en  la  costa  de  Guinea,  donde  se  coja  la  mane- 
quettC  (i,  430).  Amomum  Melequeta,  an  herbaceous,  reed-like  plant, 
three  to  five  feet  high,  is  found  along  the  coast  of  Africa,  from  Sierra 
Leone  to  the  Congo.  Its  seeds  were  called  "  Grains  of  Paradise",  or 
maniguctta,  and  the  coast  alluded  to  by  Columbus,  between  Liberia 
and  Cape  Palmas,  was  hence  called  the  Grain  Coast.  The  grains 
were  used  as  a  condiment,  like  pepper,  and  in  making  the  spiced 
wine  called  hippocras.     At  present,  about   1,705  cwts.  are  exported, 


CONDUCT   OF   PINZON.  155 

The  Admiral  says  that  this  night,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord,  he  would  set  out  on  his  homeward  voyage  without 
any  further  delay  whatever,  for  he  had  found  what  he 
sought,  and  he  did  not  wish  to  have  further  cause  of  offence 
with  Martin  Alonso  until  their  Highnesses  should  know 
the  news  of  the  voyage  and  what  had  been  done.  After- 
wards he  says,  "  I  will  not  suffer  the  deeds  of  evil-disposed 
persons,  with  little  worth,  who,  without  respect  for  him  to 
whom  they  owe  their  positions,  presume  to  set  up  their 
own  wills  with  little  ceremony." 

Thursday,  loth  of  January. 

He  departed  from  the  place  where  he  had  anchored,  and 
at  sunset  he  reached  a  river,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of 
Rio  de  Gracia,  three  leagues  to  the  S.E.  He  came  to  at 
the  mouth,1  where  there  is  good  anchorage  on  the  east 
side.  There  is  a  bar  with  no  more  than  two  fathoms  of 
water,  and  very  narrow  across  the  entrance.  It  is  a  good 
and  well-sheltered  port,  except  that  there  it  is  often  misty, 
owing  to  which  the  caraval  Pinta,  under  Martin  Alonso, 
received  a  good  deal  of  damage.  He  had  been  here 
bartering  for  16  days,  and  got  much  gold,  which  was 
what  Martin  Alonso  wanted.  As  soon  as  he  heard  from 
the  Indians  that  the  Admiral  was  on  the  coast  of  the  same 
island  of  Espanola,  and  that  he  could  not  avoid  him, 
Pinzon  came  to  him.  He  wanted  all  the  people  of  the 
ship  to  swear  that  he  had  not  been  there  more  than  six 
days.  But  his  treachery  was  so  public  that  it  could  not  be 
concealed.  He  had  made  a  law  that  half  of  all  the  gold 
that  was  collected   was  his.     When   he  left   this  port  he 


chiefly  from  Cape  Coast  Castle  and  Accra  ;  used  in  cattle  medicines 
and  to  give  pungency  to  cordials.  See  H anbury's  Pharmacographia, 
p.  590. 

1  Rio  Chuzona  chica. — N. 


156  MONTE   DE   PLATA. 

took  four  men  and  two  girls  by  force.  But  the  Admiral 
ordered  that  they  should  be  clothed  and  put  on  shore  to 
return  to  their  homes.  "  This",  the  Admiral  says,  "  is  a 
service  of  your  Highnesses.  For  all  the  men  and  women 
are  subjects  of  your  Highnesses,  as  well  in  this  island  as  in 
the  others.  Here,  where  your  Highnesses  already  have  a 
settlement,  the  people  ought  to  be  treated  with  honour  and 
favour,  seeing  that  this  island  has  so  much  gold  and  such 
good  spice-yielding  lands." 


Friday,  1 1  th  of  January. 

At  midnight  the  Admiral  left  the  Rio  de  Gracia  with 
the  land-breeze,  and  steered  eastward  until  he  came  to  a 
cape  named  Belprado,  at  a  distance  of  four  leagues.  To 
the  S.E.  is  the  mountain  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of 
Monte  de  Plata}  eight  leagues  distant.  Thence  from  the 
cape  Belprado  to  E.S.E.  is  the  point  named  Angel,  eighteen 
leagues  distant ;  and  from  this  point  to  the  Monte  de 
Plata  there  is  a  gulf,  with  the  most  beautiful  lands  in  the 
world,  all  high  and  fine  lands  which  extend  far  inland. 
Beyond  there  is  a  range  of  high  mountains  running  east  and 
west,  very  grand  and  beautiful.  At  the  foot  of  this  mountain 
there  is  a  very  good  port,2  with  14  fathoms  in  the  entrance. 
The  mountain  is  very  high  and  beautiful,  and  all  the  country 
is  well  peopled.  The  Admiral  believed  there  must  be  fine 
rivers  and  much  gold.     At  a  distance  of  4  leagues  E.S.E. 


1  So  called  because  the  summit  is  always  covered  with  white  or 
silver  clouds.  A  monastery  of  Dominicans  was  afterwards  built  on 
Monte  de  Plata,  in  which  Las  Casas  began  to  write  his  history  of  the 
Indies  in  the  year  1527.      {Las  Casas,  iv,  p.  254.) 

2  Puerto  de  Plata,  where  a  flourishing  seaport  town  was  afterwards 
established  ;  founded  by  Ovanda  in  1502.  It  had  fallen  to  decay  in 
1606.  In  1822  it  was  again  a  flourishing  place,  but  was  destroyed  by 
the  Spaniards  in  1865. 


SAMANA   IN    SIGHT.  157 

of  Catib  del  Angel  there  is  a  cape  named  Punia  del  Hierro} 
and  on  the  same  course,  4  more  leagues,  a  point  is  reached 
named  Punia  Secar  Thence,  6  leagues  further  on,  is  Cabo 
Redondo?  and  further  on  Cabo  Frances,  where  a  large  bay4 
is  formed,  but  there  did  not  appear  to  be  anchorage  in  it. 
A  league  further  on  is  Cabo  del  Buen  Tiempo,  and  thence, 
a  good  league  S.S.E.,  is  Cabo  Tajado.5  Thence,  to  the 
south,  another  cape  was  sighted  at  a  distance  of  about 
15  leagues.  To-day  great  progress  was  made,  as  wind  and 
tide  were  favourable.  The  Admiral  did  not  venture  to 
anchor  for  fear  of  the  rocks,  so  he  was  hove-to  all  night. 


Saturday,  \2tJ1  of  January. 

Towards  dawn  the  Admiral  filled  and  shaped  a  course 
to  the  east  with  a  fresh  wind,  running  20  miles  before  day- 
light, and  in  two  hours  afterwards  24  miles.  Thence  he  saw- 
land  to  the  south,6  and  steered  towards  it,  distant  48  miles. 
During  the  night  he  must  have  run  28  miles  N.N.E.,  to 
keep  the  vessels  out  of  danger.  When  he  saw  the  land,  he 
named  one  cape  that  he  saw  Cabo  de  Padre  y  Hijo,  because 
at  the  east  point  there  are  two  rocks,  one  larger  than  the 
other."  Afterwards,  at  two  leagues  to  the  eastward,  he  saw 
a  very  fine  bay  between  two  grand  mountains.  He  saw 
that  it  was  a  very  large  port  with  a  very  good  approach  ;  but, 
as  it  was  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  as  the  greater  part 
of  the  time  it  was  blowing  from  the  east,  and  then  they 
had  a  N.N.W.  breeze,  he  did  not  wish  to  delay  any  more. 


1  Punta  Macuris.     The  distance  is  3,  not  4  leagues. — N. 

2  Punta  Sesua.     The  distance  is  only  one  league. — N. 

3  Cabo  de  la  Roca.     It  should  be  5,  not  6  leagues. — N. 

4  Bahia  Escocesa. 

5  Las  Casas  says  that  none  of  these  names  were  retained,  even  in 
his  time. 

6  This  was  the  Peninsula  of  Samana.  7  Isla  Yazual. — N. 


158  BAY   OF   SAMANA. 

He  continued  his  course  to  the  east  as  far  as  a  very  high 
and  beautiful  cape,  all  of  scarped  rock,  to  which  he  gave 
the  name  of  Cabo  del  Enamorado}  which  was  32  miles  to 
the  east  of  the  port  named  Puerto  Sacro?  On  rounding 
the  cape,  another  finer  and  loftier  point  came  in  sight,3 
like  Cape  St.  Vincent  in  Portugal,  12  miles  east  of  Cabo 
del  Enamorado.  As  soon  as  he  was  abreast  of  the  Cabo 
del  Enamorado,  the  Admiral  saw  that  there  was  a  great 
bay4  between  this  and  the  next  point,  three  leagues  across, 
and  in  the  middle  of  it  a  small  island.''  The  depth  is 
great  at  the  entrance  close  to  the  land.  He  anchored 
here  in  twelve  fathoms,  and  sent  the  boat  on  shore  for 
water,  and  to  see  if  intercourse  could  be  opened  with  the 
natives,  but  they  all  fled.  He  also  anchored  to  ascertain 
whether  this  was  all  one  land  with  the  island  of  Espanola, 
and  to  make  sure  that  this  was  a  gulf,  and  not  a  channel, 
forming  another  island.  He  remained  astonished  at  the 
great  size  of  Espanola. 

Sunday,  \^th  of  January. 

The  Admiral  did  not  leave  the  port,  because  there  was 
no  land-breeze  with  which  to  go  out.  He  wished  to  shift 
to  another  better  port,  because  this  was  rather  exposed. 
He  also  wanted  to  wait,  in  that  haven,  the  conjunction  of 
the  sun  and  moon,  which  would  take  place  on  the  17th  of 
this  month,  and  their  opposition  with  Jupiter  and  conjunc- 
tion with  Mercury,  the  sun  being  in  opposition  to  Jupiter,6 


1  Cabro  Cabron,  or  Lover's  Cape  ;  the  extreme  N.E.  point  of  the 
sland,  rising  nearly  2,000  feet  above  the  sea. 

2  Puerto  Yaqueron. 

3  Cabo   Samana ;    called   Cabo   de   San   Theramo   afterwards   by 
Columbus. 

4  The  Bay  ol  Samana.  5  Cayo  de  Levantados. 

6  Las  Casas  thinks  that  the  text  is  here   corrupt,  owing  to   the 
mistakes  of  the  transcriber  from  the  book  of  the  navigation  of  the 


NATIVES   OF   SAMANA.  I  59 

which  is  the  cause  of  high  winds.  He  sent  the  boat  on 
shore  to  a  beautiful  beach  to  obtain  yams  for  food.  They 
found  some  men  with  bows  and  arrows,  with  whom  they 
stopped  to  speak,  buying  two  bows  and  many  arrows  from 
them.  They  asked  one  of  them  to  come  on  board  the 
caravel  and  see  the  Admiral  ;  who  says  that  he  was  very 
wanting  in  reverence,  more  so  than  any  native  he  had  yet 
seen.  His  face  was  all  stained  with  charcoal,  but  in  all 
parts  there  is  the  custom  of  painting  the  body  different 
colours.  He  wore  his  hair  very  long,  brought  together  and 
fastened  behind,  and  put  into  a  small  net  of  parrots' 
feathers.1  He  was  naked,  like  all  the  others.  The  Admiral 
supposed  that  he  belonged  to  the  Caribs,2  who  eat  men, 
and  that  the  gulf  he  had  seen  yesterday  formed  this  part 
of  the  land  into  an  island  by  itself.  The  Admiral  asked 
about  the  Caribs,  and  he  pointed  to  the  east,  near  at  hand, 
which  means  that  he  saw  the  Admiral  yesterday  before  he 
entered  the  bay.  The  Indian  said  there  was  much  gold  to 
the  east,  pointing  to  the  poop  of  the  caravel,  which  was  a 
good  size,  meaning  that  there  were  pieces  as  large.  He 
called  gold  tuob,  and  did  not  understand  caoua,3  as  they 
call  it  in  the  first  part  of  the  island  that  was  visited,  nor 
nozay,  the  name  in  San  Salvador  and  the  other  islands. 
Copper   is    called  tuob  in   Espanola.     He   also    spoke    of 


Admiral  (i,  p.  433).  Doubtless,  stormy  weather  was  predicted  under 
the  above  conditions  in  the  Old  World,  in  some  almanack  on  board, 
and  Columbus  prudently  considered  whether  he  would  wait  a  few 
days  to  see  if  similar  causes  produced  like  effects  in  the  New  World. 
He,  however,  did  not  wait  until  the  17th. 

1  Las    Casas    says   that    the    Ciguayos   wore    their    hair    in    this 
way. 

2  According  to  Las  Casas,  these  were  not  Caribs,  for  no  Caribs 
were  ever  settled  in  Espanola. 

3  Caona  is  the  name  for  gold  in  the  greater  part  of  Espanola,  but 
there  were  two  or  three  dialects. 


1 6o  NATIVES   OF   SAM  AN  A. 

the  island  of  Goam'n,1  where  there  was  much  tuob.  The 
Admiral  says  that  he  had  received  notices  of  these  islands 
from  many  persons  ;  that  in  the  other  islands  the  natives 
were  in  great  fear  of  the  Canos,  called  by  some  of  them 
Canzba,  but  in  Espanola  Carib.  He  thought  they  must  be 
an  audacious  race,  for  they  go  to  all  these  islands  and  eat 
the  people  they  can  capture.  He  understood  a  few  words, 
and  the  Indians  who  were  on  board  comprehended  more, 
there  being  a  difference  in  the  languages  owing  to  the 
great  distance  between  the  various  islands.  The  Admiral 
ordered  that  the  Indian  should  be  fed,  and  given  pieces  of 
green  and  red  cloth,  and  glass  beads,  which  they  like  very 
much,  and  then  sent  on  shore.  He  was  told  to  bring  gold 
if  he  had  any,  and  it  was  believed  that  he  had,  from  some 
small  things  he  brought  with  him.  When  the  boat  reached 
the  shore  there  were  fifty-five  men  behind  the  trees,  naked, 
and  with  very  long  hair,2  as  the  women  wear  it  in  Castille. 
Behind  the  head  they  wore  plumes  of  feathers  of  parrots 
and  other  birds,  and  each  man  carried  a  bow.  The  Indian 
landed,  and  signed  to  the  others  to  put  down  their  bows 

and  arrows,  and  a  piece  of  a  staff,  which  is  like ,3 

very  heavy,  carried  instead  of  a  sword.4  As  soon  as  they 
came  to  the  boat  the  crew  landed,  and  began  to  buy  the 
bows  and  arrows  and  other  arms,  in  accordance  with  an 
order  of  the  Admiral.     Having  sold  two  bows,  they  did 


1  Las  Casas  says  that  Goani?i  was  not  the  name  of  an  island,  but 
the  word  for  base  gold  {oro  bajo  ?). 

2  These  were  the  Ciguayos,  according  to  Las  Casas,  who  inhabited 
the  mountains  and  coasts  of  the  north  of  Espanola  from  nearly  as  far 
as  Puerto  de  Plata  to  Higney. 

3  A  gap  in  the  original  manuscript. 

4  This  is  the  maçaria,  made  of  palm-wood,  and  very  hard.  Las 
Casas  says  that  these  wooden  swords  are  very  hard  and  heavy.  They 
are  not  sharp,  but  two  fingers  thick  on  all  sides,  and  with  one  blow 
they  will  cleave  through  a  helmeted  head  to  the  brain  (i  p.  455). 


ENCOUNTER  WITH   SAM  ANA   NATIVES.  l6l 

not  want  to  give  more,  but  began  to  attack  the  Spaniards, 
and  to  take  hold  of  them.  They  were  running  back  to 
pick  up  their  bows  and  arrows  where  they  had  laid  them 
aside,  and  took  cords  in  their  hands  to  bind  the  boat's 
crew.  Seeing  them  rushing  down,  and  being  prepared — ■ 
for  the  Admiral  always  warned  them  to  be  on  their  guard 
— the  Spaniards  attacked  the  Indians,  and  gave  one  a  stab 
with  a  knife  in  the  buttocks,  wounding  another  in  the 
breast  with  an  arrow.  Seeing  that  they  could  gain  little, 
although  the  Christians  were  only  seven  and  they  num- 
bered over  fifty,  they  fled,  so  that  none  were  left,  throwing 
bows  and  arrows  away.  The  Christians  would  have  killed 
many,  if  the  pilot,  who  was  in  command,  had  not  pre- 
vented them.  The  Spaniards  presently  returned  to  the 
caravel  with  the  boat.  The  Admiral  regretted  the  affair 
for  one  reason,  and  was  pleased  for  another.  They  would 
have  fear  of  the  Christians,  and  they  were  no  doubt 
an  ill-conditioned  people,  probably  Caribs,  who  eat  men. 
But  the  Admiral  felt  alarm  lest  they  should  do  some 
harm  to  the  39  men  left  in  the  fortress  and  town  of 
Navidad,  in  the  event  of  their  coming  here  in  their  boat. 
Even  if  they  are  not  Caribs,  they  are  a  neighbouring 
people,  with  similar  habits,  and  fearless,  unlike  the  other 
inhabitants  of  the  island,  who  are  timid,  and  without  arms. 
The  Admiral  says  all  this,  and  adds  that  he  would  have 
liked  to  have  captured  some  of  them.  He  says  that  they 
lighted  many  smoke  signals,  as  is  the  custom  in  this 
island  of  Espanola. 

Monday,  14Í/1  of  January. 

This  evening  the  Admiral  wished  to  find  the  houses  of 
the  Indians  and  to  capture  some  of  them,  believing  them 
to  be  Caribs.  For,  owing  to  the  strong  east  and  north-east 
winds  and  the  heavy  sea,  he  had  remained  during  the  day. 
Many  Indians  were  seen  on  shore.     The   Admiral,  thcrc- 

M 


1 62  THE   VESSELS   LEAKING. 

fore,  ordered  the  boat  to  be  sent  on  shore,  with  the  crew 
well  armed.  Presently  the  Indians  came  to  the  stern  of 
the  boat,  including  the  man  who  had  been  on  board  the 
day  before,  and  had  received  presents  from  the  Admiral. 
With  him  there  came  a  king,  who  had  given  to  the  said 
Indian  some  beads  in  token  of  safety  and  peace  for  the 
boat's  crew.  This  king,  with  three  of  his  followers,  went 
on  board  the  boat  and  came  to  the  caravel.  The  Admiral 
ordered  them  to  be  given  biscuit  and  treacle  to  eat,  and 
gave  the  chief  a  red  cap,  some  beads,  and  a  piece  of  red 
cloth.  The  others  were  also  given  pieces  of  cloth.  The 
chief  said  that  next  day  he  would  bring  a  mask  made  of 
gold,  affirming  that  there  was  much  here,  and  in  Carib1 
and  Matininor  They  afterwards  went  on  shore  well 
satisfied. 

The  Admiral  here  says  that  the  caravels  were  making 
much  water,  which  entered  by  the  keel ;  and  he  complains 
of  the  caulkers  at  Palos,  who  caulked  the  vessels  very 
badly,  and  ran  away  when  they  saw  that  the  Admiral  had 
detected  the  badness  of  their  work,  and  intended  to  oblige 
them  to  repair  the  defect.  But,  notwithstanding  that  the 
caravels  were  making  much  water,  he  trusted  in  the  favour 
and  mercy  of  our  Lord,  for  his  high  Majesty  well  knew 
how  much  controversy  there  was  before  the  expedition 
could  be  despatched  from  Castille,  that  no  one  was  in  the 
Admiral's  favour  save  Him  alone  who  knew  his  heart,  and 
after  God  came  your  Highnesses,  while  all  others  were 
against  him  without  any  reason.  He  further  says  :  "And 
this  has  been  the  cause  that  the  royal  crown  of  your 
Highnesses  has  not  a  hundred  cuentos  of  revenue  more 
than  after  I  entered  your  service,  which  is  seven  years  ago 
in  this  very  month,  the  20th  of  January.3     The  increase 

1  Puerto  Rico.  2  Probably  Martinique  or  Guadaloupe. 

3  By  this  calculation  the  Admiral  entered  the  service  of  the  Catholic 
Sovereigns  on  January  20th,  i486. 


INTENDED  VISIT  TO   OTHER   ISLANDS.  l6$ 

will  take  place  from  now  onwards.     For  the  almighty  God 
will  remedy  all  things."     These  are  his  words, 

Tuesday,  i^tli  of  January. 

The  Admiral  now  wished  to  depart,  for  there  was  nothing 
to  be  gained  by  further  delay,  after  these  occurrences  and 
the  tumult  with  the  Indians.  To-day  he  had  heard  that 
all  the  gold  was  in  the  district  of  the  town  of  Navidad, 
belonging  to  their  Highnesses;  and  that  in  the  island  of 
Caribx  there  was  much  copper,  as  well  as  in  Matinino. 
The  intercourse  at  Carib  would,  however,  be  difficult, 
because  the  natives  are  said  to  eat  human  flesh.  Their 
island  would  be  in  sight  from  thence,  and  the  Admiral 
determined  to  go  there,  as  it  was  on  the  route,  and  thence 
to  Matinino,  which  was  said  to  be  entirely  peopled  by 
women,  without  men.  He  would  thus  see  both  islands,  and 
might  take  some  of  the  natives.  The  Admiral  sent  the  boat 
on  shore,  but  the  king  of  that  district  had  not  come,  for  his 
village  was  distant.  He,  however,  sent  his  crown  of  gold, 
as  he  had  promised  ;  and  many  other  natives  came  with 
cotton,  and  bread  made  from  yams,  all  with  their  bows  and 
arrows.  After  the  bartering  was  finished,  four  youths 
came  to  the  caravel.  They  appeared  to  the  Admiral  to 
give  such  a  clear  account  of  the  islands  to  the  eastward, 
on  the  same  route  as  the  Admiral  would  have  to  take,  that 
he  determined  to  take  them  to  Castille  with  him.  He 
says  that  they  had  no  iron  nor  other  metals  ;  at  least  none 
was  seen,  but  it  was  impossible  to  know  much  of  the  land 
in  so  short  a  time,  owing  to  the  difficulty  with  the  language, 
which  the  Admiral  could  not  understand  except  by 
guessing,  nor  could  they  know  what  was  said  to  them,  in 
such  .a  few  days.  The  bows  of  these  people  are  as  large 
as  those  of  France  or  England.     The  arrows  are  similar  to 

1  Puerto  Rico. 

M  2 


1 64  ARMS   OF   THE   NATIVES. 

the  darts  of  the  natives  who  have  been  met  with  previously, 
which  are  made  of  young  canes,  which  grow  very  straight, 
and  a  vara  and  a  half  or  two  varas  in  length.  They  point 
them  with  a  piece  of  sharp  wood,  a  palmo  and  a  half  long, 
and  at  the  end  some  of  them  fix  a  fish's  tooth,  but  most  of 
them  anoint  it  with  an  herb.  They  do  not  shoot  as  in 
other  parts,  but  in  a  certain  way  which  cannot  do  much 
harm.  Here  they  have  a  great  deal  of  fine  and  long 
cotton,  and  plenty  of  mastick.  The  bows  appeared  to  be 
of  yew,  and  there  is  gold  and  copper.  There  is  also  plenty 
of  aji}  which  is  their  pepper,  which  is  more  valuable  than 
pepper,  and  all  the  people  eat  nothing  else,  it  being  very 
wholesome.  Fifty  caravels  might  be  annually  loaded  with 
it  from  Espanola.  The  Admiral  says  that  he  found  a 
great  deal  of  weed  in  this  bay,  the  same  as  was  met  with 
at  sea  when  he  came  on  this  discovery.  He  therefore 
supposed  that  there  were  islands  to  the  eastward,  in  the 
direction  of  the  position  where  he  began  to  meet  with  it; 
for  he  considers  it  certain  that  this  weed  has  its  origin  in 
shallow  water  near  the  land,  and,  if  this  is  the  case,  these 
Indies  must  be  very  near  the  Canary  Islands.  For  this 
reason  he  thought  the  distance  must  be  less  than  400 
leagues. 

Wednesday,  16th  of  January. 

They  got  under  weigh  three  hours  before  daylight,  and 
left  the  gulf,  which  was  named  Golfo  de  las  Flechas?  with 
the  land-breeze.  Afterwards  there  was  a  west  wind,  which 
was  fair  to  go  to  the  island  of  Carlo  on  an  E.N.E.  course. 
This  was  where  the  people  live  of  whom  all  the  natives  of 
the  other  islands  are  so  frightened,  because  they  roam 
over  the  sea  in  canoes  without  number,  and  eat  the  men 


1  Capsicum.     In  Quichua  it  is  called  uchii. 

-  Gulf  of  the  Arrows.     This  was  the  Bay  of  Samafta,  into  which  the 
river  Yuna  flows. 


HOMEWARD  BOUND.  I 6$ 

they  can  capture.  The  Admiral  steered  the  course  indi- 
cated by  one  of  the  four  Indians  he  took  yesterday  in  the 
Puerto  de  las  Flechas.  After  having  sailed  about  64  miles, 
the  Indians  made  signs  that  the  island  was  to  the  S.E.1 
The  Admiral  ordered  the  sails  to  be  trimmed  for  that 
course,  but,  after  having  proceeded  on  it  for  two  leagues, 
the  wind  freshened  from  a  quarter  which  was  very  favour- 
able for  the  voyage  to  Spain.  The  Admiral  had  noticed 
that  the  crew  were  downhearted  when  he  deviated  from 
the  direct  route  home,  reflecting  that  both  caravels  were 
leaking  badly,  and  that  there  was  no  help  but  in  God. 
He  therefore  gave  up  the  course  leading  to  the  islands, 
and  shaped  a  direct  course  for  Spain  E.N.E.  He  sailed 
on  this  course,  making  48  miles,  which  is  12  leagues,  by 
sunset.  The  Indians  said  that  by  that  route  they  would 
fall  in  with  the  island  of  Matiniiw,  peopled  entirely  by 
women  without  men,  and  the  Admiral  wanted  very  much 
to  take  five  or  six  of  them  to  the  Sovereigns.  But  he 
doubted  whether  the  Indians  understood  the  route  well, 
and  he  could  not  afford  to  delay,  by  reason  of  the  leaky 
condition  of  the  caravels.  He,  however,  believed  the  story, 
and  that,  at  certain  seasons,  men  came  to  them  from  the 
island  of  Carib,  distant  ten  or  twelve  leagues.  If  males 
were  born,  they  were  sent  to  the  island  of  the  men  ;  and  if 
females,  they  remained  with  their  mothers.  The  Admiral 
says  that  these  two  islands  cannot  have  been  more  than 
1 5  or  20  leagues  to  the  S.E.  from  where  he  altered  course, 
the  Indians  not  understanding  how  to  point  out  the  direc- 
tion. After  losing  sight  of  the  cape,  which  was  named 
San  Theramo?  which  was  left  16  leagues  to  the  west,  they 
went  for  12  leagues  E.N.E.     The  weather  was  very  fine. 


1  Puerto  Rico.     It  would  have  been  distant  about  30  leagues. 

2  Now   called   Cabo    del  Engano,   the    extreme   eastern    point   of 
Espahola.     It  had  the  same  name  when  Las  Casas  wrote. 


1 66  HOMEWARD   BOUND. 

Thursday,  lyth  of  January. 

The  wind  went  down  at  sunset  yesterday,  the  caravels 
having  sailed  14  glasses,  each  a  little  less  than  half-an- 
hour,  at  4  miles  an  hour,  making  28  miles.  Afterwards 
the  wind  freshened,  and  they  ran  all  that  watch,  which 
was  10  glasses.  Then  another  six  until  sunrise  at  8  miles 
an  hour,  thus  making  altogether  84  miles,  equal  to  21 
leagues,  to  the  E.N.E.,  and  until  sunset  44  miles,  or  1 1 
leagues,  to  the  east.  Here  a  booby  came  to  the  caravel, 
and  afterwards  another.  The  Admiral  saw  a  great  deal  of 
gulf-weed. 

Friday,  iStk  of  January. 

During  the  night  they  steered  E.S.E.,  with  little  wind, 
for  40  miles,  equal  to  10  leagues,  and  then  30  miles,  or 
yh  leagues,  until  sunrise.  All  day  they  proceeded  with 
little  wind  to  E.N.E.  and  N.E.  by  E.,  more  or  less,  her 
head  being  sometimes  north  and  at  others  N.N.E.,  and, 
counting  one  with  the  other,  they  made  60  miles,  or  15 
leagues.  There  was  little  weed,  but  yesterday  and  to-day 
the  sea  appeared  to  be  full  of  tunnies.  The  Admiral 
believed  that  they  were  on  their  way  to  the  tunny-fisheries 
of  the  Duke,  at  Conil  and  Cadiz.1  He  also  thought  they 
were  near  some  islands,  because  a  frigate-bird  flew  round 
the  caravel,  and  afterwards  went  away  to  the  S.S.E.  He 
said  that  to  the  S.E.  of  the  island  of  Espanola  were  the 
islands  of  Caria,  Matinino,  and  many  others. 

1  The  Duke  here  alluded  to  was  the  redoubtable  warrior,  Don 
Rodrigo  Ponce  de  Leon,  conqueror  of  Zahara  and  Alhama,  and  one 
of  the  chief  leaders  in  the  war  with  Granada.  Henry  IV  created  him 
Marquis  of  Cadiz  in  1470,  and  he  was  also  made  Duke  of  Cadiz.  He 
died  in  the  end  of  August  1492.  soon  after  the  departure  of  Columbus. 
The  Crown  then  resumed  the  dukedom  of  Cadiz,  and  his  grandson 
and  successor  was  created  Duke  of  Arcos  instead.  The  almadrai'as, 
or  tunny  fisheries  of  Rota,  near  Cadiz,  were  inherited  by  the  Duke, 
as  well  as  those  of  Conil,  a  little  fishing  town  6  leagues  east  of  Cadiz. 


HOMEWARD   BOUND.  1 67 

Saturday,  igt/i  of  January. 

During  the  night  they  made  good  56  miles  N.N.E.,  and 
64  N.E.  by  N.  After  sunrise  they  steered  N.E.  with  the 
wind  fresh  from  S.W.,  and  afterwards  W.S.W.  84  miles, 
equal  to  21  leagues.  The  sea  was  again  full  of  small 
tunnies.     There  were  boobies,  frigate-birds,  and  terns. 

Sunday,  20th  of  January. 

It  was  calm  during  the  night,  with  occasional  slants  of 
wind,  and  they  only  made  20  miles  to  the  N.E.  After 
sunrise  they  went  1 1  miles  S.E.,  and  then  36  miles 
N.N.E.,  equal  to  9  leagues.  They  saw  an  immense 
quantity  of  small  tunnies,  the  air  very  soft  and  pleasant, 
like  Seville  in  April  or  Ma}-,  and  the  sea,  for  which  God 
be  given  many  thanks,  always  very  smooth.  Frigate- 
birds,  sandpipers,  and  other  birds  were  seen. 

Monday,  21st  of  January. 

Yesterday,  before  sunset,  they  steered  N.E.  b,  E.,  with 
the  wind  east,  at  the  rate  of  8  miles  an  hour  until  mid- 
night, equal  to  56  miles.  Afterwards  they  steered  N.N.E. 
8  miles  an  hour,  so  that  they  made  104  miles,  or  26 
leagues,  during  the  night  N.E.  by  N.  After  sunrise  they 
steered  N.N.E.  with  the  same  wind,  which  at  times  veered 
to  N.E.,  and  they  made  good  88  miles  in  the  eleven  hours 
of  daylight,  or  21  leagues:  except  one  that  was  lost  by 
delay  caused  by  closing  with  the  Pinta  to  communicate. 
The  air  was  colder,  and  it  seemed  to  get  colder  as  they 
went  further  north,  and  also  that  the  nights  grew  longer 
owing  to  the  narrowing  of  the  sphere.  Many  boatswain- 
birds  and  terns  were  seen,  as  well  as  other  birds,  but  not 
so  many  fish,  perhaps  owing  to  the  water  being  colder. 
Much  weed  was  seen. 


168  BAD   SAILING   OF   THE  "  PINTA". 

Tuesday,  22nd  of  January. 

Yesterday,  after  sunset,  they  steered  N.N.E.  with  an 
east  wind.  They  made  8  miles  an  hour  during  five  glasses, 
and  three  before  the  watch  began,  making  eight  glasses, 
equal  to  72  miles,  or  18  leagues.  Afterwards  they  went 
N.E.  by  N.  for  six  glasses,  which  would  be  another  18 
miles.  Then,  during  four  glasses  of  the  second  watch  N.E. 
at  six  miles  an  hour,  or  three  leagues.  From  that  time  to 
sunset,  for  eleven  glasses,  E.N.E.  at  6  leagues  an  hour,1 
equal  to  seven  leagues.  Then  E.N.E.  until  11  o'clock,  32 
miles.  Then  the  wind  fell,  and  they  made  no  more  during 
that  day.  The  Indians  swam  about.  They  saw  boat- 
swain-birds and  much  weed. 

Wednesday,  2yd  of  January. 

To-night  the  wind  was  very  changeable,  but,  making  the 
allowances  applied  by  good  sailors,  they  made  84  miles,  or 
21  leagues,  N.E.  by  N.  Many  times  the  caravel  Nina  had 
to  wait  for  the  Pinta,  because  she  sailed  badly  when  on  a 
bowline,  the  mizen  being  of  little  use  owing  to  the  weak- 
ness of  the  mast.  If  her  captain,  Martin  Alonso  Pinzon, 
had  taken  the  precaution  to  provide  her  with  a  good  mast 
in  the  Indies,  where  there  are  so  many  and  such  excellent 
spars,  instead  of  deserting  his  commander  from  motives  of 
avarice,  he  would  have  done  better.  They  saw  many 
boatswain-birds  and  much  weed.  The  heavens  have  been 
clouded  over  during  these  last  days,  but  there  has  been  no 
rain.  The  sea  has  been  as  smooth  as  a  river,  for  which 
many  thanks  be  given  to  God.     After  sunrise  they  went 


1  An  error  of  the  transcriber  for  miles.  Other  figures  have  been 
wrongly  copied.  Each  glass  being  half-an-hour,  going  six  miles  an 
hour,  they  would  have  made  35  miles  in  five  hours  and  a  halfi— N. 


HOMEWARD   BOUND.  169 

free,  and  made  30  miles,  or  7I-  leagues  N.E.     During  the 
rest  of  the  day  E.N.E.  another  30  miles. 

Thursday,  2<\tli  of  January. 

They  made  44  miles,  or  1 1  leagues,  during  the  night, 
allowing  for  many  changes  in  the  wind,  which  was 
generally  N.E.  After  sunrise  until  sunset  E.N.E.  14 
leagues. 

Friday,  2$th  of  January. 

They  steered  during  part  of  the  night  E.N.E.  for  13 
glasses,  making  g}£  leagues.  Then  N.N.E.  6  miles.  The 
wind  fell,  and  during  the  day  they  only  made  28  miles 
E.N.E.,  or  7  leagues.  The  sailors  killed  a  tunny  and  a 
very  large  shark,  which  was  very  welcome,  as  they  now 
had  nothing  but  bread  and  wine,  and  some  yams  from  the 
Indies. 

Saturday,  26th  of  January. 

This  night  they  made  56  miles,  or  14  leagues,  E.S.E. 
After  sunrise  they  steered  E.S.E.,  and  sometimes  S.E., 
making  40  miles  up  to  n  o'clock.  Afterwards  they  went 
on  another  tack,  and  then  on  a  bowline,  24  miles,  or 
6  leagues,  to  the  north,  until  night. 

Sunday,  27th  of  January. 

Yesterday,  after  sunset,  they  steered  N.E.  and  N.E. 
by  N.  at  the  rate  of  five  miles  an  hour,  which  in  thirteen 
hours  would  be  65  miles,  or  \6\  leagues.  After  sunrise 
they  steered  N.E.  24  miles,  or  6  leagues,  until  noon,  and 
from  that  time  until  sunset  3  leagues  E.N.E. 

Monday,  2%th  of  January. 

All  night  they  steered  E.N.E.  36  miles,  or  9  leagues. 
After  sunrise  until  sunset  E.N.E.  20  miles,  or  5  leagues. 


I/O  HOMEWARD   BOUND. 

The  weather  was  temperate  and  pleasant.     They  saw  boat- 
swain-birds, sandpipers,  and  much  weed. 

Tuesday,  2gth  of  January. 

They  steered  E.N.E.  39  miles,  or  gl  leagues,  and  during 
the  whole  day  8  leagues.  The  air  was  very  pleasant,  like 
April  in  Castille,  the  sea  smooth,  and  fish  they  call 
dorados  came  on  board. 

Wednesday,  ystli  of  January. 

All  this  night  they  made  6  leagues  E.N.E. ,  and  in  the 
day  S.E.  by  S.  13A  leagues.  Boatswain-birds,  much  weed, 
and  many  tunnies. 

Thursday,  31st  of  January. 

This  night  they  steered  N.E.  by  N.  30  miles,  and  after- 
wards N.E.  35  miles,  or  16  leagues.  From  sunrise  to 
night  E.N.E.  1 3 J  leagues.  They  saw  boatswain-birds  and 
terns. 

Friday,  1st  of  February. 

They  made  16Í  leagues  E.N.E.  during  the  night,  and 
went  on  the  same  course  during  the  day  2g\  leagues. 
The  sea  very  smooth,  thanks  be  to  God. 

Saturday,  2nd  of  February. 

They  made  40  miles,  or  10  leagues,  E.N.E.  this  night. 
In  the  daytime,  with  the  same  wind  aft,  they  went  7  miles 
an  hour,  so  that  in  eleven  hours  they  had  gone  yy  miles,  or 
\  gl  leagues.  The  sea  was  very  smooth,  thanks  be  to  God, 
and  the  air  very  soft.  They  saw  the  sea  so  covered  with 
weed  that,  if  they  had  not  known  about  it  before,  they 
would  have  been  fearful  of  sunken  rocks.  They  saw 
terns. 


HOMEWARD  BOUND.  171 

Sunday,  yd  of  February. 

This  night,  the  wind  being  aft  and  the  sea  very  smooth, 
thanks  be  to  God,  they  made  29  leagues.  The  North  Star 
appeared  very  high,  as  it  does  off  Cape  St.  Vincent.  The 
Admiral  was  unable  to  take  the  altitude,  either  with  the 
astrolabe  or  with  the  quadrant,  because  the  rolling  caused 
by  the  waves  prevented  it.  That  day  he  steered  his  course 
E.N.E.,  going  10  miles  an  hour,  so  that  in  eleven  hours  he 
made  27  leagues. 

Monday,  ^th  of  February. 

During  the  night  the  course  was  N.E.  by  E.,  going  twelve 
miles  an  hour  part  of  the  time,  and  the  rest  ten  miles. 
Thus  they  made  130  miles,  or  32  leagues  and  a  half.  The 
sky  was  very  threatening  and  rainy,  and  it  was  rather  cold, 
by  which  they  knew  that  they  had  not  yet  reached  the 
Azores.  After  sunrise  the  course  was  altered  to  east. 
During  the  whole  day  they  made  JJ  miles,  or  19J  leagues. 

Tuesday,  $th  of  February. 

This  night  they  steered  east,  and  made  55  miles,  or  13Í 
leagues.  In  the  day  they  were  going  ten  miles  an  hour, 
and  in  eleven  hours  made  1 10  miles,  or  27^-  leagues.  They 
saw  sandpipers,  and  some  small  sticks,  a  sign  that  they 
were  near  land. 

Wednesday,  6th  of  February. 

They  steered  east  during  the  night,  going  at  the  rate  of 
eleven  miles  an  hour,  so  that  in  the  thirteen  hours  of  the 
night  they  made  143  miles,  or  35}  leagues.  They -saw 
many  birds.  In  the  day  they  went  14  miles  an  hour,  and 
made  154  miles,  or  38}  leagues;  so  that,  including  night 
and  day,  they  made  74  leagues,  more  or  less.     Vicente 


172  HOMEWARD   BOUND. 

Anes1  said  that  they  had  left  the  island  of  Flores  to  the 
north  and  Madeira  to  the  east.  Roldan  said  that  the 
island  of  Fayal,  or  San  Gregório,  was  to  the  N.N.E.  and 
Puerto  Santo  to  east.     There  was  much  weed. 

Thursday,  Jth  of  February. 

This  night  they  steered  east,  going  ten  miles  an  hour, 
so  that  in  thirteen  hours  they  made  130  miles,  or  32^ 
leagues.  In  the  daytime  the  rate  was  eight  miles  an 
hour,  in  eleven  hours  88  miles,  or  22  leagues.  This 
morning  the  Admiral  found  himself  65  leagues  south  of 
the  island  of  Flores,  and  the  pilot  Pedro  Alonso,  being 
further  north,  according  to  his  reckoning,  passed  between 
Terceira  and  Santa  Maria  to  the  east,  passing  to  windward 
of  the  island  of  Madeira,  twelve  leagues  further  north. 
The  sailors  saw  a  new  kind  of  weed,  of  which  there  is 
plenty  in  the  islands  of  the  Azores. 

Friday,  8///  of  February. 

They  went  three  miles  an  hour  to  the  eastward  for  some 
time  during  the  night,  and  afterwards  E.S.E.,  going  twelve 
miles  an  hour.  From  sunrise  to  noon  they  made  27  miles, 
and  the  same  distance  from  noon  till  sunset,  equal  to 
13  leagues  S.S.E. 

Saturday,  gt/i  of  February. 

For  part  of  this  night  they  went  3  leagues  S.S.E. ,  and 
afterwards  S.  by  E.,  then  N.E.  5  leagues  until  ten  o'clock 
in  the  forenoon,  then  9  leagues  east  until  dark. 

Sunday,  10th  of  February. 

From  sunset  they  steered  east  all  night,  making  130 
miles,    or    32  J    leagues.      During    the    day   they   went    at 

1  1 1  should  be  Yanez. 


RECKONINGS   OF   THE    PILOTS.  173 

the  rate  of  nine  miles  an  hour,  making  99  miles,  or 
24I  leagues,  in  eleven  hours. 

In  the  caravel  of  the  Admiral,  Vicente  Yanez  and 
the  two  pilots,  Sancho  Ruiz  and  Pedro  Alonso  Nino, 
and  Roldan,1  made  charts  and  plotted  the  route.  They 
all  made  the  position  a  good  deal  beyond  the  islands 
of  the  Azores  to  the  east,  and,  navigating  to  the  north, 
none  of  them  touched  Santa  Maria,  which  is  the  last 
of  all  the  Azores.  They  made  the  position  five  leagues 
beyond  it,  and  were  in  the  vicinity  of  the  islands  of 
Madeira  and  Puerto  Santo.  But  the  Admiral  was  very 
different  from  them  in  his  reckoning,  finding  the  position 
very  much  in  rear  of  theirs.  This  night  he  found  the 
island  of  Flores  to  the  north,  and  to  the  east  he  made 
the   direction    to  be   towards   Nafe  in  Africa,  passing  to 

leeward   of  the   island    of  Madeira   to  the    north 

leagues.2  So  that  the  pilots  were  nearer  to  Castille  than 
the  Admiral  by  150  leagues.  The  Admiral  says  that,  with 
the  grace  of  God,  when  they  reach  the  land  they  will  find 
out  whose  reckoning  was  most  correct.  He  also  says  that 
he  went  263  leagues  from  the  island  of  Hierro  to  the 
place  where  he  first  saw  the  gulf-weed. 

Monday,  wtJi  of  February. 

This  night  they  went  twelve  miles  an  hour  on  their 
course,  and  during  the  day  they  ran  16^  leagues.  They 
saw  many  birds,  from  which  they  judged  that  land  was 
near. 


1  Las  Casas  says  that  the  pilot  Roldan  afterwards  lived  for  many 
years  in  the  city  of  San  Domingo,  owning  several  houses  in  the  prin- 
cipal streets. 

2  A  gap  in  the  original  manuscript. 


174  BAD   WEATHER. 

Tuesday,  \2th  of  February. 

They  went  six  miles  an  hour  on  an  east  course  during 
the  night,  altogether  JZ  miles,  or  18}  leagues.  At  this 
time  they  began  to  encounter  bad  weather  with  a  heavy 
sea ;  and,  if  the  caravel  had  not  been  very  well  managed, 
she  must  have  been  lost.  During  the  day  they  made  1 1  or 
12  leagues  with  much  difficulty  and  danger. 

Wednesday,  \$th  of  February. 

From  sunset  until  daylight  there  was  great  trouble  with 
the  wind,  and  the  high  and  tempestuous  sea.  There  was 
lightning  three  times  to  the  X.N.E. — a  sign  of  a  great  storm 
coming  either  from  that  quarter  or  its  opposite.  They 
were  lying-to  most  of  the  night,  afterwards  showing  a  little 
sail,  and  made  52  miles,  which  is  13  leagues.  In  the  day 
the  wind  moderated  a  little,  but  it  soon  increased  again. 
The  sea  was  terrific,  the  waves  crossing  each  other,  and 
straining  the  vessels.  They  made  55  miles  more,  equal  to 
13I  leagues. 

Thursday,  i^th  of  February. 

This  night  the  wind  increased,  and  the  waves  were 
terrible,  rising  against  each  other,  and  so  shaking  and 
straining  the  vessel  that  she  could  make  no  headway,  and 
was  in  danger  of  being  stove  in.  They  carried  the  main- 
sail very  closely  reefed,  so  as  just  to  give  her  steerage- 
way,  and  proceeded  thus  for  three  hours,  making  20  miles. 
Meanwhile,  the  wind  and  sea  increased,  and,  seeing  the 
great  danger,  the  Admiral  began  to  run  before  it,  there 
being  nothing  else  to  be  done.  The  caravel  Pinta  began 
to  run  before  the  wind  at  the  same  time,  and  Martin 
Alonso  ran  her  out  of  sight,1  although  the  Admiral  kept 

1   Martin  Alonso  Pinzon  succeeded  in  bringing  the  caravel  Pi/ita 


VOWS   OF   PILGRIMAGES.  175 

showing  lanterns  all  night,  and  the  other  answered.  It 
would  seem  that  she  could  do  no  more,  owing  to  the  force 
of  the  tempest,  and  she  was  taken  far  from  the  route  of 
the  Admiral.  He  steered  that  night  E.N.E.,  and  made 
54  miles,  equal  to  13  leagues.  At  sunrise  the  wind  blew 
still  harder,  and  the  cross  sea  was  terrific.  They  continued 
to  show  the  closely-reefed  mainsail,  to  enable  her  to  rise 
from  between  the  waves,  or  she  would  otherwise  have  been 
swamped.  An  E.N.E.  course  was  steered,  and  afterwards 
N.E.  by  E.  for  six  hours,  making  J\  leagues.  The  Admiral 
ordered  that  a  pilgrimage  should  be  made  to  Our  Lady  of 
Guadaloupe,  carrying  a  candle  of  6  lbs.  of  weight  in  wax, 
and  that  all  the  crew  should  take  an  oath  that  the  pilgrim- 
age should  be  made  by  the  man  on  whom  the  lot  fell.  As 
many  beans  were  got  as  there  were  persons  on  board,  and 
on  one  a  cross  was  cut  with  a  knife.  They  were  then  put 
into  a  cap  and  shaken  up.  The  first  who  put  in  his  hand 
was  the  Admiral,  and  he  drew  out  the  bean  with  a  cross, 
so  the  lot  fell  on  him  ;  and  he  was  bound  to  go  on  the 
pilgrimage  and  fulfil  the  vow.  Another  lot  was  drawn,  to 
go  on  pilgrimage  to  Our  Lady  of  Loreto,  which  is  in  the 
march  of  Ancona,  in  the  Papal  territory,  a  house  where 
Our  Lady  works  many  and  great  miracles.  The  lot  fell  on 
a  sailor  of  the  port  of  Santa  Maria,  named  Pedro  de  Villa, 
and  the  Admiral  promised  to  pay  his  travelling  expenses. 
Another  pilgrimage  was  agreed  upon,  to  watch  for  one 
night  in  Santa  Clara1  at  Moguer,  and  have  a  Mass  said, 
for  which  they  again  used  the  beans,  including  the  one 
with  a  cross.     The  lot  ae;ain  fell  on  the  Admiral.     After 


into  port  at  Bayona  in  Galicia.  He  went  thence  to  Palos,  arriving  in 
the  evening  of  the  same  day  as  the  Nifia  with  the  Admiral.  Pinzon 
died  very  soon  afterwards.  Oviedo  says  :  "  Fuesse  a  Palos  a  su  casa, 
é  murió  desde  a  poças  dias,  porque  yba  muy  doliente"  (11,  cap.  vi). 

1  Las  Casas  says  that  this  was  a  church  much  frequented  by  sailors 
(i,  p.  446). 


176  REFLECTIONS  IN   THE  STORM. 

this  the  Admiral  and  all  the  crew  made  a  vow  that,  on 
arriving  at  the  first  land,  they  would  all  go  in  procession, 
in  their  shirts,  to  say  their  prayers  in  a  church  dedicated 
to  Our  Lady. 

Besides  these  general  vows  made  in  common,  each 
sailor  made  a  special  vow;  for  no  one  expected  to  escape, 
holding  themselves  for  lost,  owing  to  the  fearful  weather 
from  which  they  were  suffering.  The  want  of  ballast 
increased  the  danger  of  the  ship,  which  had  become  light, 
owing  to  the  consumption  of  the  provisions  and  water. 
On  account  of  the  favourable  weather  enjoyed  among  the 
islands,  the  Admiral  had  omitted  to  make  provision  for 
this  need,  thinking  that  ballast  might  be  taken  on  board 
at  the  island  inhabited  by  women,  which  he  had  intended 
to  visit.  The  only  thing  to  do  was  to  fill  the  barrels  that 
had  contained  wine  or  fresh  water  with  water  from  the  sea, 
and  this  supplied  a  remedy. 

Here  the  Admiral  writes  of  the  causes  which  made  him 
fear  that  he  would  perish,  and  of  others  that  gave  him 
hope  that  God  would  work  his  salvation,  in  order  that 
such  news  as  he  was  bringing  to  the  Sovereigns  might  not 
be  lost.  It  seemed  to  him  that  the  strong  desire  he  felt 
to  bring  such  great  news,  and  to  show  that  all  he  had  said 
and  offered  to  discover  had  turned  out  true,  suggested  the 
fear  that  he  would  not  be  able  to  do  so,  and  that  each 
stinging  insect  would  be  able  to  thwart  and  impede  the 
work.  He  attributes  this  fear  to  his  little  faith,  and  to  his 
want  of  confidence  in  Divine  Providence.  He  was  com- 
forted, on  the  other  hand,  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  having 
vouchsafed  him  such  a  victory,  in  the  discoveries  he  had 
made,  and  in  that  God  had  complied  with  all  his  desires 
in  Castille,  after  much  adversity  and  many  misfortunes. 
As  he  had  before  put  all  his  trust  in  God,  who  had 
heard  him  and  granted  all  he  sought,  he  ought  now  to 
believe   that  God  would  permit  the  completion  of  what 


REFLECTIONS  IN  THE  STORM.  177 

had  been  begun,  and  ordain  that  he  should  be  saved. 
Especially  as  he  had  freed  him  on  the  voyage  out,  when 
he  had  still  greater  reason  to  fear,  from  the  trouble 
caused  by  the  sailors  and  people  of  his  company,  who 
all  with  one  voice  declared  their  intention  to  return, 
and  protested  that  they  would  rise  against  him.  But 
the  eternal  God  gave  him  force  and  valour  to  with- 
stand them  all,  and  in  many  other  marvellous  ways  had 
God  shown  his  will  in  this  voyage  besides  those  known  to 
their  Highnesses.  Thus  he  ought  not  to  fear  the  present 
tempest,  though  his  weakness  and  anxiety  prevent  him 
from  giving  tranquillity  to  his  mind.  He  says  further  that 
it  gave  him  great  sorrow  to  think  of  the  two  sons  he  had 
left  at  their  studies  in  Cordova,  who  would  be  left  orphans, 
without  father  or  mother,  in  a  strange  land  ;  while  the 
Sovereigns  would  not  know  of  the  services  he  had  per- 
formed in  this  voyage,  nor  would  they  receive  the  pros- 
perous news  which  would  move  them  to  help  the  orphans. 
To  remedy  this,  and  that  their  Highnesses  might  know 
how  our  Lord  had  granted  a  victory  in  all  that  could 
be  desired  respecting  the  Indies,  and  that  they  might 
understand  that  there  were  no  storms  in  those  parts, 
which  may  be  known  by  the  herbs  and  trees  which 
grow  even  within  the  sea1 ;  also  that  the  Sovereigns 
might  still  have  information,  even  if  he  perished  in  the 
storm,  he  took  a  parchment  and  wrote  on  it  as  good 
an  account  as  he  could  of  all  he  had  discovered,  entreat- 
ing anyone  who  might  pick  it  up  to  deliver  it  to  the 
Sovereigns.  He  rolled  this  parchment  up  in  waxed  cloth, 
fastened  it  very  securely,  ordered  a  large  wooden  barrel  to 

1  The  Admiral  thought  that  there  could  be  no  great  storms  in  the 
countries  he  had  discovered,  because  trees  (mangroves)  actually  grew 
with  their  roots  in  the  sea.  The  herbage  on  the  beach  nearly  reached 
the  waves,  which  does  not  happen  when  the  sea  is  rough.  See  ante, 
p.  60. 

N 


178  LAND  SIGHTED. 

be  brought,  and  put  it  inside,  so  that  no  one  else  knew 
what  it  was.  They  thought  that  it  was  some  act  of 
devotion,  and  so  he  ordered  the  barrel  to  be  thrown 
into  the  sea.1  Afterwards,  in  the  showers  and  squalls, 
the  wind  veered  to  the  west,  and  they  went  before  it,  only 
with  the  foresail,  in  a  very  confused  sea,  for  five  hours. 
They  made  2\  leagues  N.E.  They  had  taken  in  the  reefed 
mainsail,  for  fear  some  wave  of  the  sea  should  carry  all 
away, 

Friday,  i^tli  of  February. 

Last  night,  after  sunset,  the  sky  began  to  clear  towards 
the  west,  showing  that  the  wind  was  inclined  to  come  from 
that  quarter.  The  Admiral  added  the  bonnet2  to  the 
mainsail.  The  sea  was  still  very  high,  although  it  had 
gone  down  slightly.  They  steered  E.N.E.,  and  went  four 
miles  an  hour,  which  made  13  leagues  during  the  eleven 
hours  of  the  night.  After  sunrise  they  sighted  land.  It 
appeared  from  the  bows  to  bear  E.N.E.  Some  said  it  was 
the  island  of  Madeira,  others  that  it  was  the  rock  of  Cintra, 
in  Portugal,  near  Lisbon.  Presently  the  wind  headed  to 
E.N.E. ,  and  a  heavy  sea  came  from  the  west,  the  caravel 
being  5  leagues  from  the  land.  The  Admiral  found  by  his 
reckoning  that  he  was  close  to  the  Azores,  and  believed 

1  It  is  stated,  in  the  Vita  dell  Ammiraglio,  by  his  son  Fernando 
Columbus,  that  the  Admiral  wrote  a  duplicate  of  this  letter,  and  placed 
it  in  a  second  barrel,  which  was  kept  on  board  until  the  ship  should 
sink  {Historic,  cap.  xxxvi).  Lamartine  {Christophc  Colomb.,  N.  xlvii) 
has  a  curious  but  unauthenticated  story,  that  several  casks  with  docu- 
ments were  thrown  overboard,  and  that  one  was  picked  up  three 
centuries  afterwards.  Lafuente  {Historia  General  de  Espana,  vol.  ix, 
p.  463)  even  gives  the  name  of  the  vessel  that  picked  up  one  of  the 
documents  of  Columbus,  and  the  date,  27  Aug.  1852.  But  the  story 
is  unworthy  of  credit. 

2  The  bonnet  was  a  small  sail,  usually  cut  to  a  third  the  size  of 
the  mizen,  or  a  fourth  of  the  mainsail.  It  was  secured  through  eyelet- 
holes  to  the  leech  of  the  mainsail,  in  the  manner  of  a  studding  sail. 


LAND  SIGHTED.  179 

that  this  was  one  of  them.     The  pilots  and  sailors  thought 
it  was  the  land  of  Castille,1 


Saturday,  16th  of  February. 

All  that  night  the  Admiral  was  standing  off  and  on  to 
keep  clear  of  the  land,  which  they  now  knew  to  be  an 
island,  sometimes  standing  N.E.,  at  others  N.N.E.,  until 
sunrise,  when  they  tacked  to  the  south  to  reach  the 
island,  which  was  now  concealed  by  a  great  mist.  Another 
island  was  in  sight  from  the  poop,  at  a  distance  of  eight 
leagues.  Afterwards,  from  sunrise  until  dark,  they  were 
tacking  to  reach  the  land  against  a  strong  wind  and  head- 
sea.  At  the  time  of  repeating  the  Salve,  which  is  just 
before  dark,  some  of  the  men  saw  a  light  to  leeward,  and 
it  seemed  that  it  must  be  on  the  island  they  first  saw 
yesterday.  All  night  they  were  beating  to  windward,  and 
going  as  near  as  they  could,  so  as  to  see  some  way  to  the 
island  at  sunrise.  That  night  the  Admiral  got  a  little  rest, 
for  he  had  not  slept  nor  been  able  to  sleep  since  Wednes- 
day, and  his  legs  were  ver}-  sore  from  long  exposure  to  the 


1  On  this  day  the  Admiral  dated  the  letter  to  Santangel,the  Escribano 
de  Racion  ;  which  was  translated  by  Air.  Major  for  the  Hakluyt  Society 
{Select  Letters  of  Columbus,  1870).  A  copy  of  this  letter  was  made,  a 
few  days  afterwards,  to  be  sent  to  Gabriel  Sanchez,  the  Treasurer  of 
Aragon.  These  letters  are  very  brief  compendia  of  the  Journal.  The 
Santangel  Letter  was  first  printed  at  Barcelona  in  April  1493  (unique 
copy  in  possession  of  Mr.  Quaritch,  folio,  two  leaves\  The  next 
edition,  also  printed  in  April  1493,  at  Seville,  is  represented  by  a 
unique  copy  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan  (quarto,  four  leaves). 
There  is  a  manuscript  copy  at  Simancas,  which  is  a  transcript  made 
about  70  years  ago,  but  it  is  not  known  from  what  original.  A  manu- 
script transcript  of  the  Saiichez  Letter,  written  about  1600,  was  bought 
by  Varnhagen  at  Valencia,  and  printed  there  by  him  in  1858.  A 
Latin  translation  of  it,  by  Leander  de  Cosco,  had  been  printed  three 
times,  in  1493,  at  Rome  ;  and  a  fourth  edition  exists,  probably  printed 
at  Naples. 

N  2 


1 80  RECKONING  OF  THE  ADMIRAL. 

wet  and  cold.  At  sunrise1  he  steered  S.S.W.,  and  reached 
the  island  at  night,  but  could  not  make  out  what  island  it 
was,  owing  to  the  thick  weather. 

Monday,  iStã  of  February. 
Yesterday,  after  sunset,  the  Admiral  was  sailing  round 
the  island,  to  see  where  he  could  anchor  and  open  com- 
munications. He  let  go  one  anchor,  which  he  presently 
lost,  and  then  stood  off  and  on  all  night.  After  sunrise 
he  again  reached  the  north  side  of  the  island,  where  he 
anchored,  and  sent  the  boat  on  shore.  They  had  speech 
with  the  people,  and  found  that  it  was  the  island  of  Santa 
Maria,  one  of  the  Azores.  They  pointed  out  the  port2  to 
which  the  caravel  should  go.  They  said  that  they  had 
never  seen  such  stormy  weather  as  there  had  been  for  the 
last  fifteen  days,  and  they  wondered  how  the  caravel 
could  have  escaped.  They  gave  many  thanks  to  God,  and 
showed  great  joy  at  the  news  that  the  Admiral  had  dis- 
covered the  Indies.  The  Admiral  says  that  his  naviga- 
tion had  been  very  certain,  and  that  he  had  laid  the 
discoveries  down  on  the  chart.  Many  thanks  were  due  to 
our  Lord,  although  there  had  been  some  delay.  But  he 
was  sure  that  he  was  in  the  region  of  the  Azores,  and  that 
this  was  one  of  them.  He  pretended  to  have  gone  over 
more  ground,  to  mislead  the  pilots  and  mariners  who 
pricked  off*  the  charts,  in  order  that  he  might  remain 
master  of  that  route  to  the  Indies,  as,  in  fact,  he  did.  For 
none  of  the  others  kept  an  accurate  reckoning,  so  that  no 
one  but  himself  could  be  sure  of  the  route  to  the  Indies. 

Tuesday,  igth  of  February. 
After  sunset  three  natives  of  the  island  came   to   the 

1  This  was  on  Sunday,  17th  of  February. 

2  The  port  of  San  Lorenzo. 


PORTUGUESE  TREACHERY.  I  Si 

beach  and  hailed.  The  Admiral  sent  the  boat,  which 
returned  with  fowls  and  fresh  bread.  It  was  carnival 
time,  and  they  brought  other  things  which  were  sent 
by  the  captain  of  the  island,  named  Juan  dc  Castaricda, 
saying  that  he  knew  the  Admiral  very  well,  and  that 
he  did  not  come  to  see  him  because  it  was  night,  but 
that  at  dawn  he  would  come  with  more  refreshments, 
bringing  with  him  three  men  of  the  boat's  crew,  whom 
he  did  not  send  back  owing  to  the  great  pleasure  he 
derived  from  hearing  their  account  of  the  voyage.  The 
Admiral  ordered  much  respect  to  be  shown  to  the  mes- 
sengers, and  that  they  should  be  given  beds  to  sleep  in 
that  night,  because  it  was  late,  and  the  town  was  far  off. 
As  on  the  previous  Thursday,  when  they  were  in  the  midst 
of  the  storm,  they  had  made  a  vow  to  go  in  procession  to 
a  church  of  Our  Lady  as  soon  as  they  came  to  land,  the 
Admiral  arranged  that  half  the  crew  should  go  to  comply 
with  their  obligation  to  a  small  chapel,  like  a  hermitage, 
near  the  shore  ;  and  that  he  would  himself  go  afterwards 
with  the  rest.  Believing  that  it  was  a  peaceful  land,  and 
confiding  in  the  offers  of  the  captain  of  the  island,  and 
in  the  peace  that  existed  between  Spain  and  Portugal, 
he  asked  the  three  men  to  go  to  the  town  and  arrange 
for  a  priest  to  come  and  say  Mass.  The  half  of  the  crew 
then  went  in  their  shirts,  in  compliance  with  their  vow. 
While  they  were  at  their  prayers,  all  the  people  of  the 
town,  horse  and  foot,  with  the  captain  at  their  head,  came 
and  took  them  all  prisoners.  The  Admiral,  suspecting 
nothing,  was  waiting  for  the  boat  to  take  him  and  the 
rest  to  accomplish  the  vow.  At  1 1  o'clock,  seeing  that 
they  did  not  come  back,  he  feared  that  they  had  been 
detained,  or  that  the  boat  had  been  swamped,  all  the  island 
being  surrounded  by  high  rocks.  He  could  not  see  what 
had  taken  place,  because  the  hermitage  was  round  a  point. 
He  got  up  the  anchor,  and  made  sail  until  he  was  in  full 


1 82  PORTUGUESE  TREACHERY. 

view  of  the  hermitage,  and  he  saw  many  of  the  horsemen 
dismount  and  get  into  the  boat  with  arms.  They  came  to 
the  caravel  to  seize  the  Admiral.  The  captain  stood  up  in 
the  boat,  and  asked  for  an  assurance  of  safety  from  the 
Admiral,  who  replied  that  he  granted  it ;  but,  what  out- 
rage was  this,  that  he  saw  none  of  his  people  in  the 
boat  ?  The  Admiral  added  that  they  might  come  on 
board,  and  that  he  would  do  all  that  might  be  proper. 
The  Admiral  tried,  with  fair  words,  to  get  hold  of  this 
captain,  that  he  might  recover  his  own  people,  not 
considering  that  he  broke  faith  by  giving  him  security, 
because  he  had  offered  peace  and  security,  and  had  then 
broken  his  word.  The  captain,  as  he  came  with  an  evil 
intention,  would  not  come  on  board.  Seeing  that  he  did 
not  come  alongside,  the  Admiral  asked  that  he  might  be 
told  the  reason  for  the  detention  of  his  men,  an  act  which 
would  displease  the  King  of  Portugal,  because  the  Portu- 
guese received  much  honour  in  the  territories  of  the  King 
of  Castille,  and  were  as  safe  as  if  they  were  in  Lisbon. 
He  further  said  that  the  Sovereigns  had  given  him  letters 
of  recommendation  to  all  the  Lords  and  Princes  of  the 
world,  which  he  would  show  the  captain  if  he  would  come 
on  board  ;  that  he  was  the  Admiral  of  the  Ocean  Sea,  and 
Viceroy  of  the  Indies,  which  belonged  to  their  Highnesses, 
and  that  he  would  show  the  commissions  signed  with  their 
signatures,  and  attested  by  their  seals,  which  he  held  up 
from  a  distance.  He  added  that  his  Sovereigns  were  in 
friendship  and  amity  with  the  King  of  Portugal,  and  had 
ordered  that  all  honour  should  be  shown  to  ships  that 
came  from  Portugal.  Further,  that  if  the  captain  did  not 
surrender  his  people,  he  would  still  go  on  to  Castille,  as  he 
had  quite  sufficient  to  navigate  as  far  as  Seville,  in  which 
case  the  captain  and  his  followers  would  be  severely 
punished  for  their  offence.  Then  the  captain  and  those 
with  him  replied  that  they  did   not  know  the  King  and 


BAD  WEATHER  AMONG  THE  AZORES.  1 83 

Queen  of  Castille  there,  nor  their  letters,  nor  were  they 
afraid  of  them,  and  they  would  give  the  Admiral  to  under- 
stand that  this  was  Portugal,  almost  menacing  him.  On 
hearing  this  the  Admiral  was  much  moved,  thinking  that 
some  cause  of  disagreement  might  have  arisen  between 
the  two  kingdoms  during  his  absence,  yet  he  could  not 
endure  that  they  should  not  be  answered  reasonably. 
Afterwards  he  turned  to  the  captain,  and  said  that  he 
should  go  to  the  port  with  the  caravel,  and  that  all  that 
had  been  done  would  be  reported  to  the  King  his  Lord. 
The  Admiral  made  those  who  were  in  the  caravel  bear 
witness  to  what  he  said,  calling  to  the  captain  and  all  the 
others,  and  promising  that  he  would  not  leave  the  caravel 
until  a  hundred  Portuguese  had  been  taken  to  Castille, 
and  all  that  island  had  been  laid  waste.  He  then  returned 
to  anchor  in  the  port  where  he  was  first,  the  wind  being 
very  unfavourable  for  doing  anything  else. 

Wednesday,  20th  of  February. 

The  Admiral  ordered  the  ship  to  be  repaired,  and  the 
casks  to  be  filled  alongside  for  ballast.  This  was  a  very 
bad  port,  and  he  feared  he  might  have  to  cut  the  cables. 
This  was  so,  and  he  made  sail  for  the  island  of  San  Miguel ; 
but  there  is  no  good  port  in  any  of  the  Azores  for  the 
weather  they  then  experienced,  and  there  was  no  other 
remedy  but  to  go  to  sea. 

Thursday,  2\st  of  February. 

Yesterday  the  Admiral  left  that  island  of  Santa  Maria 
for  that  of  San  Miguel,  to  see  if  a  port  could  be  found  to 
shelter  his  vessel  from  the  bad  weather.  There  was  much 
wind  and  a  high  sea,  and  he  was  sailing  until  night  with- 
out being  able  to  see  either  one  land  or  the  other,  owing  to 
the  thick  weather  caused  by  wind  and  sea.      The  Admiral 


1 84  THE  PORTUGUESE  MORE  REASONABLE. 

says  he  was  in  much  anxiety,  because  he  only  had  three 
sailors  who  knew  their  business,  the  rest  knowing  nothing 
of  seamanship.  He  was  lying-to  all  that  night,  in  great 
danger  and  trouble.  Our  Lord  showed  him  mercy  in  that 
the  waves  came  in  one  direction,  for  if  there  had  been  a 
cross  sea  they  would  have  suffered  much  more.  After  sun- 
rise the  island  of  San  Miguel  was  not  in  sight,  so  the 
Admiral  determined  to  return  to  Santa  Maria,  to  see  if  he 
could  recover  his  people  and  boat,  and  the  anchors  and 
cables  he  had  left  there. 

The  Admiral  says  that  he  was  astonished  at  the  bad 
weather  he  encountered  in  the  region  of  these  islands.  In 
the  Indies  he  had  navigated  throughout  the  winter  without 
the  necessity  for  anchoring,  and  always  had  fine  weather, 
never  having  seen  the  sea  for  a  single  hour  in  such  a  state 
that  it  could  not  be  navigated  easily.  But  among  these 
islands  he  had  suffered  from  such  terrible  storms.  The 
same  had  happened  in  going  out  as  far  as  the  Canary 
Islands,  but  as  soon  as  they  were  passed  there  was  always 
fine  weather,  both  in  sea  and  air.  In  concluding  these 
remarks,  he  observes  that  the  sacred  theologians  and  wise 
men  said  well  when  they  placed  the  terrestrial  paradise  in 
the  Far  East,  because  it  is  a  most  temperate  region.  Hence 
these  lands  that  he  had  now  discovered  must,  he  says,  be  in 
the  extreme  East. 

Friday,  22ud  oj  February. 

Yesterday  the  Admiral  came-to  off  Santa  Maria,  in  the 
place  or  port  where  he  had  first  anchored.  Presently  a 
man  came  down  to  some  rocks  at  the  edge  of  the  beach, 
hailing  that  they  were  not  to  remain  there.  Soon  after- 
wards the  boat  came  with  five  sailors,  two  priests,  and  a 
scrivener.  They  asked  for  safety,  and  when  it  was  granted 
by  the  Admiral,  they  came  on  board,  and,  as  it  was  night 


THE  SPANIARDS  RELEASED.  1 85 

they  slept  on  board,  the  Admiral  showing  them  all  the 
civility  he  could.  In  the  morning  they  asked  to  be  shown 
the  authority  of  the  Sovereigns  of  Castille,  by  which  the 
voyage  had  been  made.  The  Admiral  felt  that  they  did 
this  to  give  some  colour  of  right  to  what  they  had  done, 
and  to  show  that  they  had  right  on  their  side.  As  they 
were  unable  to  secure  the  person  of  the  Admiral,  whom 
they  intended  to  get  into  their  power  when  they  came  with 
the  boat  armed,  they  now  feared  that  their  game  might  not 
turn  out  so  well,  thinking,  with  some  fear,  of  what  the 
Admiral  had  threatened,  and  which  he  proposed  to  put  into 
execution.  In  order  to  get  his  people  released,  the  Admiral 
displayed  the  general  letter  of  the  Sovereigns  to  all  Princes 
and  Lords,  and  other  documents,  and  having  given  them  of 
what  he  had,  the  Portuguese  went  on  shore  contented,  and 
presently  released  all  the  crew  and  the  boat.  The  Admiral 
heard  from  them  that  if  he  had  been  captured  also,  they 
never  would  have  been  released,  for  the  captain  said  that 
those  were  the  orders  of  the  King  his  Lord. 

Saturday,  2yd  of  February. 

Yesterday  the  weather  began  to  improve,  and  the 
Admiral  got  under  weigh  to  seek  a  better  anchorage, 
where  he  could  take  in  wood  and  stones  for  ballast  ;  but 
he  did  not  find  one  until  late. 

Sunday,  24th  of  February. 

He  anchored  yesterday  in  the  afternoon,  to  take  in  wood 
and  stones,  but  the  sea  was  so  rough  that  they  could  not 
land  from  the  boat,  and  during  the  first  watch  it  came  on 
to  blow  from  the  west  and  S.W.  He  ordered  sail  to  be 
made,  owing  to  the  great  danger  there  is  off  these  islands  in 
being  at  anchor  with  a  southerly  gale,  and  as  the  wind 
was  S.W.  it  would  ço  round  to  south.      As  it  was  a  good 


1 86  VOYAGE  TO  LISBON. 

wind  for  Castille,  he  gave  up  his  intention  of  taking  in 
wood  and  stones,  and  shaped  an  easterly  course  until  sun- 
set, going  seven  miles  an  hour  for  six  hours  and  a  half, 
equal  to  45J  miles.  After  sunset  he  made  six  miles  an 
hour,  or  66  miles  in  eleven  hours,  altogether  1 1 1  miles, 
equal  to  28  leagues. 

Monday,  2^th  of  February. 

Yesterday,  after  sunset,  the  caravel  went  at  the  rate  ot 
five  miles  an  hour  on  an  easterly  course,  and  in  the  eleven 
hours  of  the  night  she  made  65  miles,  equal  to  16^-  leagues. 
From  sunrise  to  sunset  they  made  another  \6\  leagues 
with  a  smooth  sea,  thanks  be  to  God.  A  very  large  bird, 
like  an  eagle,  came  to  the  caravel. 

Tuesday,  26th  of  February. 
Yesterday  night  the  caravel  steered  her  course  in  a 
smooth  sea,  thanks  be  to  God.  Most  of  the  time  she  was 
going  eight  miles  an  hour,  and  made  a  hundred  miles,  equal 
to  25  leagues.  After  sunrise  there  was  little  wind  and  some 
rain-showers.     They  made  about  8  leagues  E.N.E. 

Wednesday,  2Jth  of  February. 
During  the  night  and  day  she  was  off  her  course,  owing 
to  contrary  winds  and  a  heavy  sea.  She  was  found  to  be 
125  leagues  from  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  80  from  the  island 
of  Madeira,  106  from  Santa  Maria.  It  was  very  trouble- 
some to  have  such  bad  weather  just  when  they  were  at  the 
very  door  of  their  home. 

Thursday,  2$th  of  February. 
The  same  weather  during  the  night,  with  the  wind  from 
south  and  S.E.,  sometimes  shifting  to  N.E.  and  E.N.E.,  and 
it  was  the  same  all  day. 


VOYAGE  TO  LISBON.  1 87 

Friday,  \st  of  March. 

To-night  the  course  was  E.N.E.,  and  they  made  twelve 
leagues.  During  the  day,  23.}  leagues  on  the  same 
course. 

Saturday,  2nd  of  March. 

The  course  was  E.N.E.,  and  distance  made  good  28 
leagues  during  the  night,  and  20  in  the  day. 

Sunday,  yd  of  March. 

After  sunset  the  course  was  east;  but  a  squall  came 
down,  split  all  the  sails,  and  the  vessel  was  in  great  danger; 
but  God  was  pleased  to  deliver  them.  They  drew  lots  for 
sending  a  pilgrim  in  a  shirt  to  Santa  Maria  de  la  Cinta  at 
Huelva,  and  the  lot  fell  on  the  Admiral.  The  whole  crew 
also  made  a  vow  to  fast  on  bread  and  water  during  the 
first  Saturday  after  their  arrival  in  port.  They  had  made 
60  miles  before  the  sails  were  split.  Afterwards  they  ran 
under  bare  poles,  owing  to  the  force  of  the  gale  and  the 
heavy  sea.  They  saw  signs  of  the  neighbourhood  of 
land,  finding  themselves  near  Lisbon. 

Monday,  4th  of  March. 

During  the  night  they  were  exposed  to  a  terrible  storm, 
expecting  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  cross-seas,  while  the 
wind  seemed  to  raise  the  caravel  into  the  air,  and  there 
was  rain  and  lightning  in  several  directions.  The  Admiral 
prayed  to  our  Lord  to  preserve  them,  and  in  the  first 
watch  it  pleased  our  Lord  to  show  land,  which  was  re- 
ported by  the  sailors.  As  it  was  advisable  not  to  reach  it 
before  it  was  known  whether  there  was  any  port  to  which 
he  could  run  for  shelter,  the  Admiral  set  the  mainsail,  as 
there  was  no  other  course  but  to  proceed,  though  in  great 
danger.  Thus  God  preserved  them  until  daylight,  though 
all  the  time  they  were  in  infinite  fear  and  trouble.     When 


1 88  ARRIVAL  IN  THE  TAGUS. 

it  was  light,  the  Admiral  knew  the  land,  which  was  the 
rock  of  Cintra,  near  the  river  of  Lisbon,  and  he  resolved 
to  run  in  because  there  was  nothing  else  to  be  done.  So 
terrible  was  the  storm,  that  in  the  village  of  Cascaes,  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  the  people  were  praying  for  the 
little  vessel  all  that  morning.  After  they  were  inside,  the 
people  came  off,  looking  upon  their  escape  as  a  miracle. 
At  the  third  hour  they  passed  Rasteio,  within  the  river  of 
Lisbon,  where  they  were  told  that  such  a  winter,  with  so 
many  storms,  had  never  before  been  known,  and  that 
25  ships  had  been  lost  in  Flanders,  while  others  had  been 
wind-bound  in  the  river  for  four  months.  Presently  the 
Admiral  wrote  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  who  was  then  at 
a  distance  of  nine  leagues,  to  state  that  the  Sovereigns  of 
Castille  had  ordered  him  to  enter  the  ports  of  his  High- 
ness, and  ask  for  what  he  required  for  payment,  and 
requesting  that  the  King  would  give  permission  for  the 
caravel  to  come  to  Lisbon,  because  some  ruffians,  hearing 
that  he  had  much  gold  on  board,  might  attempt  a  robbery 
in  an  unfrequented  port,  knowing  that  they  did  not  come 
from  Guinea,  but  from  the  Indies.1 

Tuesday,  $ih  of  March. 
To-day  the  great  ship  of  the  King  of  Portugal  was  also 
at  anchor  off  Rasteio,  with  the  best  provision  of  artillery 
and  arms  that  the  Admiral  had  ever  seen.  The  master  of  her, 
named  Bartolomé  Diaz,  of  Lisbon,  came  in  an  armed  boat 
to  the  caravel,  and  ordered  the  Admiral  to  get  into  the 
boat,  to  go  and  give  an  account  of  himself  to  the  agents  of 
the  king  and  to  the  captain  of  that  ship.  The  Admiral 
replied  that  he  was  the  Admiral  of  the  Sovereigns  of 
Castille,  and  that  he  would  not  give  an  account  to  any 
such  persons,  nor  would  he  leave  the  ship  except  by  force, 

1  On  this  clay  the  Admiral  dated  the  postscript  to  his  letter  to  the 
Escribano  de  Racion,  which  was  written  at  sea  on  February  15th. 


VISITORS  FROM  LISBON.  1 89 

as  he  had  not  the  power  to  resist.  The  master  replied 
that  he  must  then  send  the  master  of  the  caravel.  The 
Admiral  answered  that  neither  the  master  nor  any  other 
person  should  go  except  by  force,  for  if  he  allowed  anyone 
to  go,  it  would  be  as  if  he  went  himself;  and  that  such 
was  the  custom  of  the  Admirals  of  the  Sovereigns  of 
Castille,  rather  to  die  than  to  submit,  or  to  let  any  of 
their  people  submit.  The  master  then  moderated  his 
tone,  and  told  the  Admiral  that  if  that  was  his  determina- 
tion he  might  do  as  he  pleased.  He,  however,  requested 
that  he  might  be  shown  the  letters  of  the  Kings  of  Cas- 
tille, if  they  were  on  board.  The  Admiral  readily  showed 
them,  and  the  master  returned  to  the  ship  and  reported 
what  had  happened  to  the  captain,  named  Álvaro  Dama. 
That  officer,  making  great  festival  with  trumpets  and  drums, 
came  to  the  caravel  to  visit  the  Admiral,  and  offered  to 
do  all  that  he  might  require. 

Wednesday,  6th  of  March. 

As  soon  as  it  was  known  that  the  Admiral  came  from 
the  Indies,  it  was  wonderful  how  many  people  came  from 
Lisbon  to  see  him  and  the  Indians,  giving  thanks  to 
our  Lord,  and  saying  that  the  heavenly  Majesty  had  given 
all  this  to  the  Sovereigns  of  Castille  as  a  reward  for  their 
faith  and  their  great  desire  to  serve  God. 

Thursday,  Jth  of  March. 
To-day  an  immense  number  of  people  came  to  the 
caravel,  including  many  knights,  and  amongst  them  the 
agents  of  the  king,  and  all  gave  infinite  thanks  to  our 
Lord  for  so  wide  an  increase  of  Christianity  granted 
by  our  Lord  to  the  Sovereigns  of  Castille ;  and  they 
said  that  they  received  it  because  their  Highnesses  had 
worked  and  laboured  for  the  increase  of  the  religion  of 
Christ. 


190  COLUMBUS  AND  THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL. 

Friday,  8t/i  of  March. 

To-day  the  Admiral  received  a  letter  from  the  King  of 
Portugal,1  brought  by  Don  Martin  de  Norona,  asking  him 
to  visit  him  where  he  was,  as  the  weather  was  not  suitable 
for  the  departure  of  the  caravel.  He  complied,  to  prevent 
suspicion,  although  he  did  not  wish  to  go,  and  went  to 
pass  the  night  at  Sacanben.  The  king  had  given  orders 
to  his  officers  that  all  that  the  Admiral,  his  crew,  and  the 
caravel  were  in  need  of  should  be  given  without  payment, 
and  that  all  the  Admiral  wanted  should  be  complied  with. 

Saturday,  gtk  of  March. 

To-day  the  Admiral  left  Sacanben,  to  go  where  the 
king  was  residing,  which  was  at  Valparaiso,  nine  leagues 
from  Lisbon.  Owing  to  the  rain,  he  did  not  arrive  until 
night.  The  king  caused  him  to  be  received  very  honourably 
by  the  principal  officers  of  his  household  ;  and  the  king 
himself  received  the  Admiral  with  great  favour,  making 
him  sit  down,  and  talking  very  pleasantly.2  He  offered  to 
give  orders  that  everything  should  be  done  for  the  service 
of  the  Sovereigns  of  Castille,  and  said  that  the  successful 
termination  of  the  voyage  had  given  him  great  pleasure. 
He  said  further  that  he  understood  that,  in  the  capitulation 
between  the  Sovereigns  and  himself,  that  conquest  belonged 
to  him.  The  Admiral  replied  that  he  had  not  seen  the 
capitulation,  nor  knew  more  than  that  the  Sovereigns  had 
ordered  him   not  to  go  either  to  Lamina  or  to  any  other 

1  This  was  João  II,  son  of  Affbnso  V,  who  had  the  correspondence 
with  Toscanelli.  João  II  succeeded  in  1481,  and  died  in  1495,  when 
he  was  succeeded  by  his  cousin  Manoel,  Duke  of  Bejar. 

2  Las  Casas,  quoting  from  the  Portuguese  historian,  Garcia  de 
Resende,  says  that  the  courtiers  proposed  to  pick  a  Quarrel  with 
Columbus,  and  to  kill  him  ;  but  that  the  King  João  II  would  not 
allow  it  (i,  p.  465). 


INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  QUEEN.  191 

port  of  Guinea,  and  that  this  had  been  ordered  to  be 
proclaimed  in  all  the  ports  of  Andalusia  before  he  sailed. 
The  king  graciously  replied  that  he  held  it  for  certain  that 
there  would  be  no  necessity  for  any  arbitrators.  The 
Admiral  was  assigned  as  a  guest  to  the  Prior  of  Crato, 
who  was  the  principal  person  present,  and  from  whom  he 
received  many  favours  and  civilities. 

Sundav,  10th  of  March. 

To-day,  after  Mass,  the  king  repeated  that  if  the 
Admiral  wanted  anything  he  should  have  it.  He  con- 
versed much  with  the  Admiral  respecting  his  voyage, 
always  ordering  him  to  sit  down,  and  treating  him  with 
great  favour. 

Monday,  nth  of  March. 

To-day  the  Admiral  took  leave  of  the  king,  who  entrusted 
him  with  some  messages  to  the  Sovereigns,  and  always 
treating  him  with  much  friendliness.  He  departed  after 
dinner,  Don  Martin  de  Noroha  being  sent  with  him,  and 
all  the  knights  set  out  with  him,  and  went  with  him  some 
distance,  to  do  him  honour.  Afterwards  he  came  to  a 
monastery  of  San  Antonio,  near  a  place  called  Villafranca, 
where  the  Queen  was  residing.1  The  Admiral  went  to  do 
her  reverence  and  to  kiss  her  hand,  because  she  had  sent 
to  say  that  he  was  not  to  go  without  seeing  her.  The 
Duke2  and  the  Marquis  were  with  her,  and  the  Admiral 
was  received  with  much  honour.  He  departed  at  night, 
and  went  to  sleep  at  Llandra. 


1  The  Queen  of  João  II  was  his  cousin  Leonor,  daughter  of  Don 
Fernando,  Duke  of  Viseu,  his  uncle.  The  Queen's  brother  had  been 
killed  by  her  husband  the  King  with  his  own  hand,  as  a  traitor.  Her 
other  brother,  Manoel,  succeeded  her  husband  as  king  in  1495. 

-  This  may  have  been  her  brother,  the  Duke  of  Bejar,  afterwards 
Kins  Manoel. 


192  RETURN  TO  PALOS. 

Tuesday,  12  th  of  March. 

To-day,  as  he  was  leaving  Llandra  to  return  to  the 
caravel,  an  esquire  of  the  king  arrived,  with  an  offer  that  if 
he  desired  to  go  to  Castille  by  land,  that  he  should  be 
supplied  with  lodgings,  and  beasts,  and  all  that  was  neces- 
sary. When  the  Admiral  took  leave  of  him,  he  ordered  a 
mule  to  be  supplied  to  him,  and  another  for  his  pilot,  who 
was  with  him,  and  he  says  that  the  pilot  received  a  present 
of  twenty  espadi)ics.  He  said  this  that  the  Sovereigns 
might  know  all  that  was  done.  He  arrived  on  board  the 
caravel  that  night. 

Wednesday,  i$th  of  March. 

To-day,  at  8  o'clock,  with  the  flood  tide,  and  the  wind 
N.N.W.,  the  Admiral  got  under  weigh  and  made  sail  for 

Seville. 

Thursday,  1 4th  of  Marcli. 

Yesterday,  after  sunset,  a  southerly  course  was  steered, 
and  before  sunrise  they  were  off  Cape  St.  Vincent,  which 
is  in  Portugal.  Afterwards  he  shaped  a  course  to  the  east 
for  Saltes,  and  went  on  all  day  with  little  wind,  "  until  now 
that  the  ship  is  off  Furon". 

Friday,  i$th  of  March. 

Yesterday,  after  sunset,  she  went  on  her  course  with 
little  wind,  and  at  sunrise  she  was  off  Saltes.  At  noon, 
with  the  tide  rising,  they  crossed  the  bar  of  Saltes,  and 
reached  the  port  which  they  had  left  on  the  3rd  of 
August  of  the  year  before.1  The  Admiral  says  that  so 
ends  this  journal,  unless  it  becomes  necessary  to  go  to 

1  Having  been  absent  225  days. 


CONCLUSION. 


193 


Barcelona  by  sea,  having  received  news  that  their  High- 
nesses are  in  that  city,  to  give  an  account  of  all  his  voyage 
which  our  Lord  had  permitted  him  to  make,  and  saw  fit  to 
set  forth  in  him.  For,  assuredly,  he  held  with  a  firm  and 
strong  knowledge  that  his  high  Majesty  made  all  things 
good,  and  that  all  is  good  except  sin.  Nor  can  he  value 
or  think  of  anything  being  done  without  His  consent.  "  I 
know  respecting  this  voyage",  says  the  Admiral,  "that  he 
has  miraculously  shown  his  will,  as  may  be  seen  from  this 
journal,  setting  forth  the  numerous  miracles  that  have  been 
displayed  in  the  voyage,  and  in  me  who  was  so  long  at  the 
court  of  your  Highnesses,  working  in  opposition  to  and 
against  the  opinions  of  so  many  chief  persons  of  your 
household,  who  were  all  against  me,  looking  upon  this 
enterprise  as  folly.  But  I  hope,  in  our  Lord,  that  it  will  be 
a  great  benefit  to  Christianity,  for  so  it  has  ever  appeared." 
These  are  the  final  words  of  the  Admiral  Don  Cristoval 
Colon  respecting  his  first  voyage  to  the  Indies  and  their 
discovery. 


DOCUMENTS 


RELATING  TO 


THE    VOYAGES    OF    DISCOVERY 


JOHN    CABOT. 


O  2 


DOCUMENTS 


RELATING   TO 


JOHN    CABOT. 


Letters  Patent  granted  to  John  Cabot  and 
his  Sons.1 

For  John  Cabot  and  his  sons,  touching  discovery  of 
unknown  land. 

Henrie,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England  and 
France,  and  Lord  of  Ireland,  to  all  to  whom  these 
presents  shall  come  greeting. 


ET   it   be  known  and   made  manifest  ' 


that  we  have  given  and  conceded, 
and  by  these  presents  do  give  and 
concede,  for  us  and  our  heirs,  to  our 
well-beloved  John  Cabottus,  citizen  of 
Venice,  and  to  Ludovicus,  Sebas- 
tianus,  and  Sanctus,  sons  of  the  said  John,  and  to  the 
heirs  and  assigns  of  them  and  each  of  them  and  their  • 
deputies,  full  and  free  authority,  faculty,  and  power  of 
navigating  to  all  parts,  countries,  and  seas  of  the  east, 
west,  and  north,  under  our  banners,  flags,  and  ensigns,  with 
five  ships  or  vessels  of  what  burden  or  quality  soever,  and 


5  March. 


1  Rymer,  xii,  p.  595. 


I98  FIRST  LETTERS  PATENT. 

with  as  many  mariners  or  men  as  they  will  have  with  them 
in  the  said  ships,  upon  their  own  proper  costs  and  charges  : 
to  seek  out,  discover,  and  find  whatsoever  islands,  countries, 
regions,  or  provinces  of  heathens  or  infidels,  in  whatever 
part  of  the  world  they  be,  which  before  this  time  were 
unknown  to  all  Christians. 

We  also  concede  to  them  and  each  of  them,  and  to  their 
heirs  and  assigns,  and  their  deputies,  and  we  give  licence 
to  fly  the  said  our  banners  and  ensigns  on  whatever  towns, 
cities,  camps,  islands,  or  mainlands  may  be  newly  found 
by  them. 

And  the  before-named  John  and  his  sons,  their  heirs  and 
assigns,  may  occupy  and  possess  whatever  towns,  camps, 
cities,  or  islands  may  be  discovered  by  them,  that  they 
may  be  able  to  conquer,  occupy,  and  possess,  as  our  vassals 
and  governors,  lieutenants  or  deputies,  acquiring  for  us 
the  dominion,  title,  and  jurisdiction  over  these  towns,  camps, 
cities,  islands,  and  mainlands  so  discovered.  Providing 
that  the  said  John  and  his  sons,  their  heirs  and  assigns, 
and  their  deputies,  shall  be  bound  and  under  obligation  to 
us,  from  all  the  fruits,  profits,  emoluments,  advantages, 
gains,  and  incomes  accruing  from  this  voyage,  for  every 
their  voyage  as  often  as  they  shall  arrive  at  our  port  of 
Bristol  (at  the  which  port  they  shall  be  bound  and  holden 
only  to  arrive),  to  deduct  a  fifth  part  of  the  whole  capital, 
whether  in  goods  or  in  money,  for  our  use. 

We  give  and  concede  to  them,  their  heirs  and  assigns, 
and  deputies,  that  they  shall  be  free  from  all  payments  of 
customs  on  all  and  singular  the  goods  and  merchandize 
that  they  may  bring  from  those  newly-discovered  places. 

And  we  further  give  and  concede  to  them,  their  heirs 
and  assigns,  and  their  deputies,  that  all  mainlands,  islands, 
cities,  towns,  camps,  and  other  places  whatsoever  by  them 
discovered,  shall  not  be  frequented  or  visited  by  any 
others  of  our  subjects  without  the  licence  of  the  said  John 


CHRONICLES.  1 99 

and  his  sons,  or  of  their  heirs  and  assigns,  on  pain  of 
forfeiting  as  well  the  ships  or  vessels,  as  all  goods  whatso- 
ever. 

We  further  will,  and  strictly  command  all  and  singular 
our  subjects,  as  well  by  land  as  by  sea,  that  they  shall 
render  good  assistance  to  the  aforesaid  John,  his  sons, 
their  heirs  and  assigns ;  and  that  they  shall  give  them 
all  favour  and  help,  as  well  in  arming  their  ships  or 
vessels,  as  in  supplying  them  with  stores  and  victuals  paid 
for  by  their  money. 

Witnessed  by  the  King  at  Westminster,  on  the 

5th  day  of  March,  in  the  eleventh  year  of  his 

reign. 

By  the  King  himself. 


Name  of  the  Ship. 

History  and  Antiquities  of  Br is tol  (Bristol,  1789,  p.  172),  by 

W.  Barrett. 

"  In  the  year  1497,  the  24th  of  June,  on  St.  John's  Day, 
was  Newfoundland  found  by  Bristol  men  in  a  ship  called 
the  Matthew? 


First  Voyage  of  John  Cabot. 

Date  of  Sailing. 

This  yeere  the  King  (by  meanes  of  a  Venetian  which  Inthef|â 
made  himselfe  very  expert  and  cunning  in  the  Knowledge  viT.T^ 
of  the  circuit  of  the  worlde,  and  ilandes  of  the  same,  as  by 
a  carde  and  other  demonstrations  reasonable  hee  shewed) 
caused  to  man  and  victuall  a  shippe  at  Bristow,  to  search 
for  an  ilande,  which  hee  saide  hee  Knewe  well  was  riche 
and  replenished  with  riche  commodities.  Which  Ship, 
thus  manned  and  victualled  at  the  Kinges  cost,  divers  mar- 


200  THE  LANDFALL. 

chants  of  London  ventured  in  her  small  stockes,  being  in 
her  as  chiefe  Patrone,  the  saide  Venetian.  And  in  the 
companie  of  the  saide  shippe  sayled  also  out  of  Bristowe 
three  or  foure  small  ships  fraught  with  sleight  and  grosse 
merchandizes,  as  course  cloth,  Caps,  laces,  points,  and 
other  trifles,  and  so  departed  from  Bristowe  in  the  begin- 
ning of  May  :  of  whom,  in  this  Maiors  time,  returned  no 
tidines.1 


The  Landfall  of  John  Cabot. 

Legend  on  the  Map  of  Sebastian  Cabot  of  1 544. 

No.  8.  This  land  was  discovered  by  Joan  Caboto  Vene- 
ciano,  and  Sebastian  Caboto  his  son,  in  the  year  from  the 
birth  of  our  Saviour  Jesu  Christ  MCCCCXCIIII,2  on  the  24th 
of  June  in  the  morning,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of 
"Prima  Tierra  Vista',  and  to  a  large  island  which  is  near 
the  said  land  they  gave  the  name  of  St.  John,  because  it 
was  discovered  the  same  day.  The  natives  of  it  go  about 
dressed  in  skins  of  animals  ;  in  their  wars  they  use  bows 
and  arrows,  lances  and  darts,  and  clubs  of  wood,  and  slings. 
This  land  is  very   sterile.      There  are   in  it  many  white 


1  From  Haklnyfs  Divers  Voyages:  "taken  out  of  Fabian's  Chro?iicle, 
which  is  in  the  custodie  of  John  Stowe,  Citizen,  a  diligent  searcher 
and  preserver  of  antiquities."  Also  printed  in  the  Principal  Naviga- 
tions, where  Hakluyt  inserted  the  name  of  "one  John  Cabot"  before 
"  a  Venetian". 

Fabyan  died  in  151 1.  His  Chronicle  was  published  down  to  10 
Henry  VII,  in  1516,  and  a  new  edition,  with  the  continuation,  was 
published  by  Rastell  in  1533.  It  does  not  contain  the  above  entry, 
nor  any  allusion  to  Cabot.  There  is  a  similar  passage  in  Stow,  but 
without  the  date  of  sailing,  and  the  explorer  is  not  called  John,  but 
"  Sebastian  Gaboto,  a  Genoa's  sonne  borne  in  Bristow". 

2  This  is  an  obvious  error.  It  should  be  1497.  Mr.  Major  has 
suggested  that  the  first  two  lines  were  badly  printed  in  the  original, 
being  slightly  separated  instead  of  being  joined  at  the  bottom,  thus 
making  "U"  instead  of  "v" 


LETTER  OF  PASQUALIGO.  201 

bears,  and  very  large  stags,  like  horses,  and  many  other 
animals.  And  in  like  manner  there  are  immense  quantities 
of  fish — soles,  salmon,  very  large  cods,  and  many  other 
kinds  of  fish.  They  call  the  great  multitude  of  them 
baccallaos  ;  and  there  are  also  in  this  country  dark-coloured 
falcons  like  crows,  eagles,  partridges,  sandpipers,  and  many 
other  birds  of  different  kinds. 


Reward  for  John  Cabot. 
ioth  Aug.  1497.     To  hym  that  founde  the  new  isle,  ,£io. 
{Extract  from  the  Privy  Purse  Accounts,  Henry  VII.) 


Accounts  of  the  First  Voyage  of  John  Cabot. 

Letter  from  Lorenzo  Pasgualigo  to  his  brotJiers  Alvise  and 

Francesco} 

London,  23rd  August  1497. 

Our  Venetian,  who  went  with  a  small  ship  from  Bristol 
to  find  new  islands,  has  come  back,  and  says  he  has 
discovered,  700  leagues  off,  the  mainland  of  the  country 
of  the  Gran  Cam,  and  that  he  coasted  along  it  for  300 
leagues,  and  landed,  but  did  not  see  any  person.  But 
he  has  brought  here  to  the  king  certain  snares  spread 
to  take  game,  and  a  needle  for  making  nets,  and  he  found 
some  notched  trees,  from  which  he  judged  that  there  were 
inhabitants.  Being  in  doubt,  he  came  back  to  the  ship. 
He  has  been  away  three  months  on  the  voyage,  which  is 
certain,  and,  in  returning,  he  saw  two  islands  to  the  right, 
but  he  did  not  wish  to  land,  lest  he  should  lose  time,  for 

1  Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Venice),  i,  p.  262,  No.  752. 


202  LETTER  OF  PASQUALIGO. 

he  was  in  want  of  provisions.  This  king  has  been  much 
pleased.  He  says  that  the  tides  are  slack,  and  do  not 
make  currents  as  they  do  here.  The  king  has  promised 
for  another  time,  ten  armed  ships  as  he  desires,  and  has 
given  him  all  the  prisoners,  except  such  as  are  confined  for 
high  treason,  to  go  with  him,  as  he  has  requested  ;  and  has 
granted  him  money  to  amuse  himself  till  then.  Mean- 
while, he  is  with  his  Venetian  wife  and  his  sons  at  Bristol. 
His  name  is  Zuam  Talbot,1  and  he  is  called  the  Great 
Admiral,  great  honour  being  paid  to  him,  and  he  goes 
dressed  in  silk.  The  English  are  ready  to  go  with  him, 
and  so  are  many  of  our  rascals.  The  discoverer  of  these 
things  has  planted  a  large  cross  in  the  ground  with  a 
banner  of  England,  and  one  of  St.  Mark,  as  he  is  a 
Venetian  ;  so  that  our  flag  has  been  hoisted  very  far 
away. 

First  Despatch  of  Raimondo  di  Soncino  to  the  Duke  of 
Milan?     {Extract?) 

24th  August  1497. 
Some  months  afterwards  His  Majesty  sent  a  Venetian, 
who  is  a  distinguished  sailor,  and  who  was  much  skilled  in 
the  discovery  of  new  islands,  and  he  has  returned  safe, 
and  has  discovered  two  very  large  and  fertile  islands, 
having,  it  would  seem,  discovered  the  seven  cities  400 
leagues  from  England  to  the  westward.  These  successes 
led  His  Majesty  at  once  to  entertain  the  intention  of 
sending  him  with  fifteen  or  twenty  vessels. 


1  A  misprint:  "T"for  "C". 

2  Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Venice),  iii,  p.  260,  No.  750. 


LETTER  OF  SONCINO.  203 

Second  Despatch  of  Raimondo  di  Soncino  to  the  Duke  of 

Milan.1 

1 8th  December  1497. 

My  most  illustrious  and  most  excellent  Lord, 

Perhaps  amidst  so  many  occupations  of  your  Excellency 
it  will  not  be  unwelcome  to  learn  how  this  Majesty  has 
acquired  a  part  of  Asia  without  drawing  his  sword.  In 
this  kingdom  there  is  a  certain  Venetian  named  Zoanne 
Caboto,  of  gentle  disposition,  very  expert  in  navigation, 
who,  seeing  that  the  most  serene  Kings  of  Portugal  and 
Spain  had  occupied  unknown  islands,  meditated  the 
achievement  of  a  similar  acquisition  for  the  said  Majesty. 
Having  obtained  royal  privileges  securing  to  himself  the 
use  of  the  dominions  he  might  discover,  the  sovereignty 
being  reserved  to  the  Crown,  he  entrusted  his  fortune  to  a 
small  vessel  with  a  crew  of  18  persons,  and  set  out  from 
Bristo,  a  port  in  the  western  part  of  this  kingdom. 
Having  passed  Ibernia,  which  is  still  further  to  the  west, 
and  then  shaped  a  northerly  course,  he  began  to  navigate 
to  the  eastern  part,  leaving  (during  several  days)  the  North 
Star  on  the  right  hand  ;  and  having  wandered  thus  for  a 
long  time,  at  length  he  hit  upon  land,2  where  he  hoisted 
the  royal  standard,  and  took  possession  for  this  Highness, 
and,  having  obtained  various  proofs  of  his  discovery,  he 
returned.  The  said  Messer  Zoanne,  being  a  foreigner  and 
poor,  would  not  have  been  believed  if  the  crew,  who  are 
nearly   all    English,   and   belonging   to    Bristo,   had    not 


1  A?viuario  Scientifico,  Milan,  1866,  p.  700  ;  Archiv  d'Etat  Milan, 
reprinted  by  Harrisse,  p.  324,  from  the  Intorno  of  Desimoni,  and 
translated  from  his  text  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  with  his  permission. 
Also  Tarducci,  p.  351.  2  "Terra  ferma." 


204  LETTER  OF  SONCINO. 

testified  that  what  he  said  was  the  truth.  This  Messer 
Zoanne  has  the  description  of  the  world  on  a  chart, 
and  also  on  a  solid  sphere  which  he  has  constructed,  and 
on  which  he  shows  where  he  has  been  ;  and,  proceeding 
towards  the  east,  he  has  passed  as  far  as  the  country 
of  the  Tanais.  And  they  say  that  there  the  land  is 
excellent  and  (the  climate  ?)  temperate,  suggesting  that 
brasil  and  silk  grow  there.  They  affirm  that  the  sea 
is  full  of  fish,  which  are  not  only  taken  with  a  net,  but 
also  with  a  basket,  a  stone  being  fastened  to  it  in  order  to 
keep  it  in  the  water ;  and  this  I  have  heard  stated  by  the 
said  Messer  Zoanne. 

The  said  Englishmen,  his  companions,  say  that  they 
took  so  many  fish  that  this  kingdom  will  no  longer  have 
need  of  Iceland,  from  which  country  there  is  an  immense 
trade  in  the  fish  they  call  stock-fish.  But  Messer  Zoanne 
has  set  his  mind  on  higher  things,  for  he  thinks  that,  when 
that  place  has  been  occupied,  he  will  keep  on  still  further 
towards  the  east,  where  he  will  be  opposite  to  an  island 
called  Cipango,  situated  in  the  equinoctial  region,  where 
he  believes  that  all  the  spices  of  the  world,  as  well  as  the 
jewels,  are  found.  He  further  says  that  he  was  once  at 
Mecca,  whither  the  spices  are  brought  by  caravans  from 
distant  countries  ;  and  having  inquired  from  whence  they 
were  brought  and  where  they  grow,  they  answered  that 
they  did  not  know,  but  that  such  merchandize  was  brought 
from  distant  countries  by  other  caravans  to  their  home  ; 
and  they  further  say  that  they  are  also  conveyed  from 
other  remote  regions.  And  he  adduced  this  argument, 
that  if  the  eastern  people  tell  those  in  the  south  that  these 
things  come  from  a  far  distance  from  them,  presupposing 
the  rotundity  of  the  earth,  it  must  be  that  the  last  turn 
would  be  by  the  north  towards  the  west ;  and  it  is  said 
that  in  this  way  the  route  would  not  cost  more  than  it 
costs  now,  and  I  also  believe  it.     And  what  is  more,  this 


LETTER  OF  SONCINO.  205 

Majesty,  who  is  wise  and  not  prodigal,  reposes  such  trust 
in  him  because  of  what  he  has  already  achieved,  that  he 
gives  him  a  good  maintenance,  as  Messer  Zoanne  has  himself 
told  me.  And  it  is  said  that  before  long  his  Majesty  will 
arm  some  ships  for  him,  and  will  give  him  all  the  malefac- 
tors to  go  to  that  country  and  form  a  colony,  so  that  they 
hope  to  establish  a  greater  depot  of  spices  in  London  than 
there  is  in  Alexandria.  The  principal  people  in  the  enter- 
prise belong  to  Bristo.  They  are  great  seamen,  and,  now 
that  they  know  where  to  go,  they  say  that  the  voyage 
thither  will  not  occupy  more  than  1 5  days  after  leaving 
Ibernia.  I  have  also  spoken  with  a  Burgundian, 
who  was  a  companion  of  Messer  Zoanne,  who  affirms 
all  this,  and  who  wishes  to  return  because  the  Admiral 
(for  so  Messer  Zoanne  is  entitled)  has  given  him  an 
island,  and  has  given  another  to  his  barber  of  Castione,1 
who  is  a  Genoese,  and  both  look  upon  themselves  as 
Counts  ;  nor  do  they  look  upon  my  Lord  the  Admiral 
as  less  than  a  Prince.  I  also  believe  that  some  poor 
Italian  friars  are  going  on  this  voyage,  who  have  all 
had  bishopricks  promised  to  them.  And  if  I  had  made 
friends  with  the  Admiral  when  he  was  about  to  sail,  I 
should  have  got  an  archbishoprick  at  least ;  but  I  have 
thought  that  the  benefits  reserved  for  me  by  your  Excel- 
lency will  be  more  secure.  I  would  venture  to  pray  that, 
in  the  event  of  a  vacancy  taking  place  in  my  absence,  I 
may  be  put  in  possession,  and  that  I  may  not  be  super- 
seded by  those  who,  being  present,  can  be  more  diligent 
than  I,  who  am  reduced  in  this  country  to  eating  at 
each  meal  ten  or  twelve  kinds  of  victuals,  and  to  being 
three  hours  at  table  every  day,  two  for  love  of  your 
Excellency,     to    whom     I    humbly    recommend    myself. 

1  Perhaps  Castiglione,  near  Chiavari. 


20Ó  SECOND  LETTERS  TATENT. 

London,   18  Dec.    1497,  your  Excellency's   most   humble 

servant, 

Raimundus. 


Second  Letters  Patent  granted  to  John  Cabot.1 

H.   R. 

To  all  men  to  whom  thies  presentis  shall  come  send 
gretings  ;  knowe  ye  that  we  of  our  grace  especiall  and  for 
dyvers  causis  us  moving,  we  have  given  and  graunten,  and 
by  thies  presentis  yeve  and  graunte  to  our  well-beloved 
John  Kabotto,  Venician,  sufficiente  auctorite  and  power 
that  he  by  hym,  his  deputie  or  deputies,  sufficient  may 
take  at  his  pleasure  vi  Englisshe  shippes  in  any  poorte  or 
portes  or  other  place  within  our  realme  of  Ingland  or 
obeisaunce  to  that,  and  if  the  said  shippes  be  of  the  bour- 
deyn  of  c  C  tonnes  or  under  with  their  apparaill  requisite 
and  necessarie  for  the  safe  conduct  of  the  seid  shippes,  and 
theym  convey  and  lede  to  the  Londe  and  lies  of  late 
founde  by  the  seid  John  in  oure  name  and  by  oure  com- 
maundemente,  payng  for  theym  and  every  of  theym  as 
and  if  we  should  in  or  for  our  owen  cause  paye  and 
noon  otherwise. 

And  that  the  seid  John  by  hym,  his  deputie  or  deputies, 
sufficiente  maye  take  and  receyve  into  the  seid  shippes  and 
every  of  theym  all  suche  maisters,  maryners,  pages,  and 
our  subjects  as  of  theyr  owen  free  wille  woll  goo  and 
passe  with  hym  in  the  same  shippes  to  the  seid  Londe 
or  lies,  withoute  any  impedymente,  lett,  or  perturbance 
of  any  of  our  officeis  or  ministres   or    subjectes   whatso- 


1  Public  Record  Office,  13  Hen.  VII,  No.  6.  First  discovered  and 
published  by  Biddle,  pp.  76-77.  Afterwards  by  Desimoni,  p.  56;  and 
Harrisse,  p.  328. 


LETTER  OF  AMBASSADOR  PUEBLA.         207 

evir  they  be  by  theym  to  the  seid  subjectes  or  any  of 
theym  passing  with  the  seid  John  in  the  seid  shippes 
to  the  seid  Londe  or  lies  to  be  doon  or  suffer  to  be  doon 
or  attempted.  Yeving  in  commaundement  to  all  and 
every  our  officers,  ministres,  and  subjectes  seying  or 
herying  thies  our  lettres  patents,  withoute  anye  ferther 
commaundement  by  us  to  theym  or  any  of  theym  to 
be  geven,  to  perfourme  and  socour  the  seid  John,  his 
deputie  and  all  our  seid  subjectes  to  passynge  with  him 
according  to  the  tenor  of  thies  our  lettres  patentis.  Any 
statute,  acte,  or  ordenaunce  to  the  contrarye  made,  or  to 
be  made,  in  any  wise  notwithstanding. 


Spanish  Ambassadors  on  the  Second  Voyage  of 
John  Cabot. 

Despatch  from  Rny  Gonzalez  de  Puebla  to  the  Catholic 
Sovereigns} 

25th  July  (?)  1498. 

The  King  of  England  sent  five  armed  ships  with  another 
Genoese  like  Columbus  to  search  for  the  island  of  Brasil, 
and  others  near  it.2  They  were  victualled  for  a  year. 
They  say  that  they  will  be  back  in  September.  By  the 
direction  they  take,  the  land  they  seek  must  be  the 
possession  of  your  Highnesses.  The  king  has  sometimes 
spoken  to  me  about  it,  and  seems  to  take  very  great 
interest  in  it.  I  believe  that  the  distance  from  here  is  not 
400  leagues. 


1  Public  Record  Office.     Printed  in  Harrisse's  Cabot,  p.  328. 

2  Desimoni  suspects  that  the  true  reading  is  not  vicinidades,  but 
septe  citades.     (In torno  a  Giovanni  Caboto,  Pref.,  p.  15.) 


208  LETTER  OF.  AMBASSADOR  AVALA. 


Despatch  from  Pedro  de  Ay  ala  to  the  Catholic  Sovereigns.1 
(Extract  from  a  long  Despatch  on  several  subjects^) 

25th  July  1498. 

I  well  believe  that  your  Highnesses  have  heard  how  the 
King  of  England  has  equipped  a  fleet  to  discover  certain 
islands  and  mainland  that  certain  persons  who  set  out 
last  year  for  the  same  have  testified  that  they  have  found. 
I  have  seen  the  chart  which  the  discoverer  has  drawn,  who 
is  another  Genoese  like  Columbus,  and  has  been  in  Seville 
and  in  Lisbon,  procuring  to  find  those  who  would  help  him 
in  this  enterprise.  It  is  seven  years  since  those  of  Bristol 
used  to  send  out,  every  year,  a  fleet  of  two,  three,  or  four 
caravels  to  go  and  seek  for  the  isle  of  Brasil  and  the  seven 
cities,  according  to  the  fancy  of  this  Genoese.  The  king 
determined  to  despatch  an  expedition,  because  he  had  the 
certainty  that  they  had  found  land  last  year.  The  fleet 
consisted  of  5  ships  provisioned  for  one  year.  News  has 
come  that  one,  on  board  of  which  there  was  one  friar  Buil, 
has  returned  to  Ireland  in  great  distress,  having  been 
driven  back  by  a  great  storm. 

The  Genoese  went  on  his  course.  I,  having  seen  the 
course  and  distance  he  takes,  think  that  the  land  they 
have  found  or  seek  is  that  which  your  Highnesses  possess, 
for  it  is  at  the  end  of  that  which  belongs  to  your  High- 
nesses by  the  convention  with  Portugal.  It  is  hoped  that 
they  will  return  by  September.  I  send  the  knowledge  of 
it  to  your  Highnesses.  The  King  of  England  has  spoken 
to  me  about  it  several  times,  and  he  thinks  that  your 
Highnesses  will  take  great  interest  in  it.     I  believe  the 


1  Public  Record  Office,  Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Spain),  i,  p.  176, 
No  210.     The  original  despatch  was  in  cipher. 


ACCOUNT  OF  PETER  MARTYR.  20Q. 

distance  is  not  400  leagues.  And  I  told  him  that  I 
thought  they  were  the  islands  discovered  by  your  High- 
nesses, and  I  even  gave  him  a  reason  ;  but  he  would  not 
hear  it.  As  I  believe  that  your  Higl  messes  now  have 
intelligence  of  all,  as  well  as  the  chart  or  mappe-monde 
that  this  Genoese  has  made,  I  do  not  send  it  now,  though 
I  have  it  here  ;  and  to  me  it  seems  very  false  to  give 
out  that  they  are  not  the  said  islands. 


Account  of  Sebastian  Cabot. 

From  the  "Decades"  of  Peter  Martyr1  (published  15 16). 

These  north  seas  have  been  searched  by  one  Sebastian  Sebastian 

J  Cabot. 

Cabot,  a  Venetian  borne,  whom  beyng  yet  but  in  maner 
an  infant,2  his  parentes  caryed  with  them  into  Englande, 
havyng  occasion  to  resort  thither  for  trade  of  marchandizc, 
as  is  the  maner  of  the  Venetians,  to  leave  no  part  of  the 
worlde  unsearched  to  obtaine  rychesse.  He  therefore 
furnished  two  shyppes  in  England  at  his  own  charges  ; 
and  fyrst,  with  three  hundreth  men,  directed  his  course  so  Thevoyag 

•  1  1  °^  ^bastia 

farre  towarde  the  north  pole  that,  even  in  the  moneth  of  cabotfrom 

Englande  t 

July,  he  founde  monstrous  heapes  of  Ise  swymming  on^'Iozen 
the  sea,  and,  in  maner,  continuall  daylyght :  yet  sawe  he 
lande  in  that  tract  free  from  Ise  (whiche  had  been  moulten 
by  heat  of  the  Sonne3).  Thus,  seeyng  suche  heapes  of 
Ise  before  hym,  he  was  enforced  to  turne  his  sayles  and 
folowe  the  west,  so  coastynge  styll  by  the  shore,  that  he 
was  thereby  brought  so  farre  into  the  south,  by  reason  of 
the  lande  bending  so  muche  southwarde,  that  it  was  there 


1  From  Eden's   translation  (Willes'   ed.,   1577,  f.    125).      De  Orbe 
Novo  Decades,  Dec.  Ill,  Lib.  VI. 

2  Pcnc  infans,  3  Interpolation. 

P 


2 IO  ACCOUNT  FROM  PETER  MARTYR. 

almost  equall  in  latitude  with  the  sea  called  Fretum 
Herculeum,  havyng  the  north  pole  elevate  in  maner  the 
same  degree.  He  sayled  lykevvyse  in  this  tract  so  farre 
towarde  the  west,  that  he  had  the  I  lande  of  Cuba  on  his 
left  hande,  in  maner  in  the  same  degree  of  longitude.  As 
he  traveyled  by  the  coastes  of  this  great  lande  (which  he 
named  Baccallaos),  he  sayth  he  founde  the  lyke  course  of 
the  waters  toward  the  west,  but  the  same  to  runne  more 
softly  and  gentelly,  then  the  swifte  waters  which  the 
Spanyardes  found  in  their  navigations  southwards  Where- 
fore, it  is  not  onely  more  lyke  to  be  true,  but  ought  also  of 
necessitie  to  be  concluded,  that  betwene  both  the  landes 
hitherto  unknowen  there  shoulde  be  certayne  great  open 
places,  wherby  the  waters  should  thus  continually  passe 
from  the  east  into  the  west :  whiche  waters  I  suppose  to 
be  dryven  about  the  globe  of  the  earth  by  the  uncessaunt 
movyng  and  impulsion  of  the  heavens,  and  not  to  be 
swalowed  up  and  cast  out  agayne  by  the  breathyng  of 
mogot-     Demogorgon,   as   some  have  imagined,   bycause  they   see 

l  is  the  .  ..  nin 

nte  of  the  the   seas    by  increase   and    decrease   to   now  and  renow. 
th.  ' 

Sebastian  Cabot  hymselfe  named  those  landes  Baccallaos, 

bycause   that   in   the  seas  therabout  he  founde  so  great 

multitudes  of  certayne  bygge  fyshes,much  like  unto  Tunnies1 

(which  the  inhabitants  cal  Baccallaos),  that  they  somtymes 

stayed  his  shyppes.     He  founde  also  the  people  of  those 

°ePredwith  regi°ns  covered   with  beastes  skynnes,  yet  not  without  the 

use  of  reason.      He  also  sayth  there  is  great  plentie  of 

Bearcs  in   those  regions,  whiche  use  to  eate    fyshe  ;  for, 

plungeing  themselves  into  the  water  where  they  perceive 

a   multitude   of    these    fyshes    to   lye,    they   fasten    theyr 

clawes  in  theyr  scales,  and  so  drawe  them  to  lande  and 

eate  them  :  so  that  (as  he  sayth)  the  Beares,  beyng  thus 

satisfied  with  fyshe,  are  not  noysome  to  men.     He  declareth 

1  Tynnos. 


IStcS 

rnnes. 


ACCOUNT  FROM  RAMUSIO.  211 

further  that,  in  many  places  of  these  regions,  he  saw  great 
plentie  of  laton1  among  the  inhabitants.  (Cabot  is  my 
very  frend,  whom  I  use  familierlye,  and  delyte  to  have 
hym  sometymes  keepe  me  company  in  my  owne  house2 :) 
so  beyng  called  out  of  Englande  by  (commandement  of3) 
the  catholyque  kyng  of  Castile,  after  the  death  of  Henry 
kyng  of  Englande4  (the  seventh  of  that  name3),  he  was 
made  one  of  our  counsayle  (and  assistance  as  touching  the 
affayres  of  the  new  Indies3),  lookyng  dayly  for  shyppes  to 
be  furnished  for  hym  to  discover  this  hyd  secret  of  nature. 
This  voyage  is  appoynted  to  be  begunne  in  the  Marche  in 
the  yeere  next  folowyng,  beyng  the  yeere  of  Christ  1516. 
What  shall  succeede  your  holynesse  shalbe  advertysed  by 
my  letters,  yf  God  graunt  me  Jyfe.5  Some  of  the  Spaniardes 
denye  that  Cabot  was  the  fyrst  fynder  of  the  lande  of 
BacaHaos,  and  affirme  that  he  went  not  so  farre  weste- 
warde  :  (But  it  shall  suffice  to  have  sayde  thus  muche  of 
the  gulfes  and  strayghtes,  and  of  Sebastian  Cabot0). 


Ramusio's  Recollection  of  a  Letter  from 
Sebastian  Cabot. 

(Vol.  iii,  Preface,  p.  4 ;  ed.  1556.) 

It  is  not  yet  thoroughly  known  whether  the  lande  set  in 
fiftie  degrees  of  latitude  to  the  north  be  separated  and 
divided  by  the  sea  as  islands,  and  whether  by  that  way  one 
may  goe  by  Sea  unto  the  Country  of  Cathaio  :  as  many 
yeeres  past  it  was  written  unto  me  by  Sebastian  Gabotto, 


1  Orichalcum  (copper  ore). 

-  "  Familiarem   habeo   domi   Cabottum   ipsum    et   contubernalem 
interdum."  3  Interpolation. 

4  "  Majoris  Britannise."  5  "  Modo  vivere  detur." 

G  "  De  fascibus  et  Cabotto  jam  satis." 

P  2 


212  ACCOUNT  BY  THE  GUEST  OF  FRACASTOR. 

our  (countrie  man1)  Venetian,  man  of  great  experience,  and 
very  rare  in  the  art  of  Navigation  and  the  knowledge  of 
Cosmographic,  who  sayled  along  and  beyond  the  lande  of 
Newe  Fraunce  at  the  charges  of  King  Henrie  the  seventh, 
King  of  England.  And  he  told  me  that  having  sayled  a 
long  time  West  and  by  North2  beyonde  these  Hands  unto 
the  latitude  of  6j  degrees  and  a  halfe  under  the  North 
Pole,  and,  at  the  1 1  day  of  June,  finding  still  open  Sea 
without  any  manner  of  impediment,  hee  thought  verily  by 
that  way  to  have  passed  on  still  the  way  to  Cathaio, 
which  is  in  the  East,  and  would  have  done  it,  if  the 
mutinie3  of  the  shipmasters  and  marriners  had  not  rebelled 
and  made  him  to  returne  homewards  from  that  place.4 


Account  of  Sebastian  Cabot  by  the  Anonymous 
Guest5  at  the  House  of  Hieroni.mus  Fracastor. 

(Ramusw,  ed.  Ven.,  1550-53,  i,  f.  414.) 

During  a  short  pause  he  turned  towards  us  and  said: 
"  Do  you  not  know,  with  reference  to  this  business  of  going 
in  search  of  India  by  the  north,  what  was  done6  by  your 
Venetian  fellow-citizen,  who  was  so  learned  and  experienced 
in  matters  relating  to  navigation  and  cosmography  that  he 


1  Interpolated  by  Hakluyt. 

2  "  Ponente  e  quarto  di  Maestro."  3  "  Malignita." 

4  This  is  the  source  from  which  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  derived  his 
very  inaccurate  information  about  Sebastian  Cabot,  in  his  Discourse 
of  a  Discoverie  of  a  New  Passage  to  Cataia.  He  also  has  the  date 
June  nth,  found  nowhere  else,  the  latitude  67"  30'  and  the  open  sea, 
with  the  mutiny. 

5  Ramusio  withholds  the  name  of  the  guest.  Mr.  Harrisse  has 
shown  that  it  was  not  the  legate  Galeatius  Butrigarius,  as  affirmed  by 
Fox  (p.  13)  and  others  :  copying  Eden.  For  Galeas  Butrigari  had 
long  been  dead  (p.  338). 

0  Hakluyt  has  "as  did  of  late",  instead  of  "what  was  done  by". 


ACCOUNT  BY  THE  GUEST  OF  FRACASTOR.  213 

has  not  now  his  equal  in  Spain.     His  attainments  have 
caused  him  to  be  preferred  to  all  the  pilots  who  navigate 
to  the  western   Indies,  who  are  not  able  to  exercise  their 
employments  without  his  licence,  and  for  this  reason  his 
title  is  "  Chief  Pilot."     We  answered  that  we  did  not  know 
it,  and  he  continued,  saying  that  finding  himself  in  the  city 
of  Seville  a  few  years  ago,1  and  desiring  to  know  about 
those  navigations  of  the  Castillians,  he  was  told  that  a 
distinguished  Venetian  was  there  who  had  knowledge  of 
them,  named  Sebastian  Caboto,  who  knew  how  to  make 
marine  charts  with  his  own  hands,  and  understood  the  art 
of  navigation    better  than   anyone  else.     He  soon  found 
himself  in    company  with    the  Venetian,   and    said    that 
he  was  a  most  gentle  and  courteous  person  who  was  very 
kind,    showing   him    many   things,  and,  among  others,  a 
great  mappe-monde  with  the  special  navigations  as  well 
of  the   Portuguese   as  of  the   Castillians.     Caboto   said  : 
"  My  father  having  left  Venice  many  years,  and  having 
come   to   live  in   England   as  a  merchant  in   the  city  of 
London,  I  being  then  very  young,  yet  had  I  already  learnt 
the  humanities   and   the  sphere.     My  father  died  at  the 
time  when  the  news  came  that  the  Genoese  Christopher 
Columbus  had  discovered  the  coast  of  the    Indies,   and 
it  was  much  discussed  by  everyone  at  the  court  of  King 
Henry  VII,  who  then  reigned,  saying  that  it  was  a  thing 
more  divine  than  human2  to  have  found  that  way  never 
before  known  to  go  to  the  east  where  the  spices  grow.     In 
this  way  a  great  and  heartfelt  desire  arose  in  me  to  achieve 
some  signal  enterprise.     Knowing  by  a  study  of  the  sphere 
that  if  I  should  navigate  to  the  west  I  would  find  a  shorter 
route  to  the  Indies,  I  quickly  made  known  my  thought  to 
his  Majesty  the  King,  who  was  well  content,  and  fitted  out 


1  Hakluyt  has  :  "being  certain  years  in  the  city  of  Seville". 

2  "  Dicendosi  che  era  stata  cosa  piutosto  divina  che  humana.' 


214  ACCOUNT  BY  THE  GUEST  OF  FRACASTOR. 

two  caravels  for  me  with  everything  needful.     This  was1  in 
1496,  in  the  commencement  of  the  summer.     I  began  to 
navigate  towards   the  west,   expecting   not   to   find   land 
until    I    came   to    Catay,   whence  I  could   go   on    to  the 
Indies.     But,  at  the  end  of  some  days,  I  discovered  that 
the   land    trended    northwards,  to    my  great    disappoint- 
ment; so   I   sailed  along  the  coast  to  see  if  I  could  find 
some   gulf  where   the  land    turned,  until    I    reached    the 
height  of  56 '  under  our  pole,  but,  finding  that  the  land 
turned   eastward,  I   despaired  of  finding  an  opening.      I 
turned  to  the  right  to  examine  again  to  the  southward, 
always  with  the  object  of  finding  a  passage  to  the  Indies, 
and    I    came  to  that  part  which  is    now  called    Florida. 
Being  in  want  of  victuals,  I  was  obliged  to  return  thence 
to  England,  where  I   found  great  popular  tumults  among 
the  rebels,  and  a  war  with  Scotland.     So  that  there  was 
no  chance    of    further   navigation    to   those   parts   being 
considered,  and  I  therefore  went  to  Spain  to  the  Catholic 
King  and  Queen  Isabella,2  who,  having  heard  what  I  had 
done,   took    me  into   their  service,  and    provided  for  me 
well,  sending  me  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  to  the  coast  of 
Brazil.     I  found  a  very  wide  river,  now  called  La  Plata, 
which  I  navigated  for  200  leagues,  always  finding  it  very 
beautiful  and  populous,  the  people  coming  to  see  me  full 
of  wonder.      There   were   so   many   rivers  that    it    could 
hardly  be  believed.     I    made  many  other  voyages,  which 
I  do  not  mention,  and  at  last,  finding  that  I  was  growing 
old,    I   wished    to   rest,  after   having  instructed  so  many 
practical  and  valiant  young  seamen,  by  whose  forwardness 
I  do  rejoice  in  the  fruit  of  my  labour,  and  rest  with  the 


1  Hakluyt  has  interpolated  :  "  so  farre  as  I  remember". 
-  This  cannot  be  true.     Isabella  died  in  1504,  and  Sebastian  Cabot 
came  to  Spain  in  15 12. 


ACCOUNT  FROM  GOMARA.  21  5 

charge  of  this  office  as  you  see."     This  is  what  I  learnt 
from  Sebastian  Caboto.1 


Account  of  Sebastian  Cabot  from  Gomara.2 

(1552.) 

He  who  obtained  the  most  news  of  this  land  was  Sebas- 
tian Gaboto,  a  Venetian.  He  armed  two  vessels  in  Eng- 
land (where  he  had  been  brought  up  from  a  child)  at  the 
cost  of  King  Henry  VII,  who  desired  to  trade  with  the 
spice  country  like  the  King  of  Portugal.  Others  say  that 
it  was  at  his  own  cost,  and  that  he  promised  the  King  of 
England  to  go  by  the  north  to  Catay,  and  to  bring  spices 
thence  in  a  shorter  time  than  the  Portuguese  brought 
them  from  the  south.  He  also  went  to  ascertain  what 
land  of  the  Indies  could  be  settled.  He  took  300  men, 
and  went  in  the  direction  of  Iceland  to  the  cape  of 
Labrador,  reaching  58 °,3  although  he  says  much  more. 
He  relates  how  that,  in  the  month  of  July,  it  was  so  cold, 
and  there  were  such  great  pieces  of  ice,  that  he  could  get 
no  further,  that  the  days  were  very  long  and  almost  without 
night,  and  that  the  nights  were  very  clear.  It  is  certain 
that  in  60  the  days  have  18  hours.  Considering  the  cold 
and  the  forbidding  nature  of  the  country,  he  turned  to  the 
south,  and,  passing  the  Baccalaos,  he  proceeded  as  far  as 
38o,  returning  thence  to  England. 


1  With  reference  to  this  conversation,  Ramusio  says  he  does  not 
pretend  to  be  able  to  relate  it  exactly  as  he  heard  it,  for  that  would 
require  a  better  memory  than  his,  but  he  will  strive  briefly  to  give 
what  he  is  able  to  recollect. 

-  Historia  General  de  las  índias.  Parte  I  :  Cap.  de  los  Bacallaos. 

3  "  Hasta  se  poner  en  58V 


216  account  from  galvão. 

Account  of  Sebastian  Cabot  from  the  Tratado 
of  Antonio  Galvão.     1550.1 

In  the  yecre  1496  there  was  a  Venetian  in  England 
called  John  Cabota,  who  having  knowledge  of  such  a  new 
discoverie  as  this  was,  and  perceiving  by  the  globe  that 
the  islands  before  spoken  of  stood  about  in  the  same 
latitude  with  his  countrey,  and  much  neerer  to  England 
than  to  Portugal  1  or  to  the  Castile,  he  acquainted  King 
Henrie  the  seventh,  then  King  of  England,  with  the  same, 
wherewith  the  saide  king  was  greatly  pleased,  and  furnished 
him  out  with  two  ships  and  three  hundred  men  :  which 
departed  and  set  saile  in  the  spring  of  the  yeare,  and  they 
sailed  westward  til  they  came  in  sight  of  land,  in  45  degrees 
of  latitude  towards  the  north,  and  then  went  straight 
northwards  till  they  came  into  sixty  degrees  of  latitude, 
where  the  day  is  18  howers  long,  and  the  night  is  very 
cleere  and  bright.  There  they  found  the  aire  cold,  and 
great  islands  of  ice,  but  no  ground  in  seventy,  eight)',  or 
hundred  fathoms  sounding,  but  found  much  ice,  which 
alarmed  them  :  and  so  from  thence,  putting  about,  finding 
the  land  to  turne  eastwards,  they  trended  along  by  it, 
discovering  all  the  bay  and  river  named  Deseado,2  to  see 
if  it  passsd  on  the  other  side  ;  then  they  sailed  back  again 
till  they  came  to  38  degrees  towards  the  equinoctial  line, 
and  from  thence  returned  into  England.  There  be  others 
which  say  that  he  went  as  far  as  the  Cape  of  Florida, 
which  standeth  in  25  degrees. 


1  From  the  translation  published  by  the  Hakluyt  Society  with  the 
Portuguese  text,  p.  88. 

2  "  Descobrindo  toda  a  baya,  rio,  enseada." 


intrigues  with  venice.  217 

Sebastian  Cabot's  Intrigues  with  Venice. 
Despatch  of  the  Council  of  Ten  to    Gaspar  Contarini.1 

27th  September  1522. 

To  our  Orator  near  the  Caesarean  and  Catholic  Majesty. 

Since  the  other  day  one  Don  Hierolamo  di  Marin  de 
Bucignolo,  a  Ragusan,  who  came  before  the  presence  of 
the  Chiefs  of  our  Council  of  Ten,  said  that  he  was  sent  by 
one  Sebastian  Cabotto,  who  declares  that  he  belongs  to 
this  our  city,  and  now  resides  in  Seville,  where  he  has  the 
appointment,  from  that  Caesarean  and  Catholic  Majesty,  of 
his  Chief  Pilot  for  the  discovery  and  navigation  of  new 
lands.  And  in  his  name  he  referred  to  an  accompanying 
deposition  as  his  credential,  touching  which,  although  we 
do  not  see  that  we  can  place  much  trust  in  it,  yet,  as  there 
may  be  some  importance  in  it,  we  have  not  thought  fit 
to  reject  the  offer  of  the  same  Sebastian  to  come  to  our 
presence,  to  say  what  he  has  in  his  mind  respecting  this 
matter.  Hence  we  are  content  that  the  said  Hierolamo 
should  write  to  him  according  to  the  tenor  of  what  you 
will  see  in  the  enclosed.  We  therefore  desire,  and  we,  the 
said  Heads  of  our  Council  of  Ten,  instruct  you  that,  with 
all  diligence  but  with  due  caution,  you  shall  take  means  to 
find  out  if  the  aforesaid  Sebastian  is  in  the  court  or  about 
to  come  there  shortly,  in  which  case  you  are  to  procure 
that  he  shall  come  to  you,  and  you  are  to  deliver  to  him 
the  said  letter  which  we  have  arranged  to  send  by  another 
way  to  your  very  faithful  servant,  that  it  may  reach  you 
presently.     You  should  endeavour  to  find  out  something  of 


1  This  correspondence  with  the  Venetian  Ambassador  in  Spain  is 
preserved  at  Venice.  It  was  printed  by  Mr.  Harrisse  for  his  work  on 
the  Cabots,  and  it  has  been  translated  from  his  text  for  the  Hakluyt 
Society,  with  his  permission. 


2l8  INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE. 

the  matter  in  hand  in  the  event  of  his  being  disposed  to  be 
open  with  you,  in  which  case  we  are  well  content  to  leave 
it  to  you  to  ascertain  his  sentiments.  When  you  see  him 
you  should  move  him  with  sound  reasoning,  and  encourage 
him  to  come  here,  for  we  are  not  only  desirous  but  anxious 
that  he  should  come  to  us  securely.  If  he  should  not  be 
at  court,  nor  about  to  come,  but  returned  to  Seville,  take 
care  to  send  all  letters  by  a  safe  channel,  so  that  they  may 
reach  him.  Let  him  know  by  whom  they  are  sent,  that 
they  come  from  his  own  friends  here,  and  under  any 
circumstances  report  everything  to  the  said  Heads  of  our 
Council  of  Ten.  Having  just  received  letters  from  the 
Captain-General  of  Cândia,  with  news  touching  the  affairs 
of  Rhodes,  we  send  you  a  summary,  that  you  may  com- 
municate it  to  that  Csesarean  and  Catholic  Majesty,  to  the 
magnificent  Grand  Chancellor,  to  the  reverend  Bishop  of 
Valencia,  and  to  others  in  your  discretion. 

JULIANUS   GrADOVICO,   C.  C. 

Andreus  Mudesco,  C.  C. 
Dominicus  Capelo,  C.  C. 


Recompense  granted  to  tJie  Ragnsan. 

1522,  September  27.     In  the  college  of  the  Lords  the 
Heads  of  the  most  illustrious  Council  of  Ten. 

That  it  ma\-  be  ordered  to  the  Chamberlain  of  our 
Council  of  Ten  that  from  the  moneys  of  their  treasury 
there  be  disbursed  a  gift  of  20  ducats  to  the  Lord  Hieronimo 
de  Marin,  a  Ragusan,  for  good  cause. 

The  order  given. 


INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE.  2IO. 

Despatch  from  Contarini  to  the  Senate  of  Venice. 

Valladolid,  31st  December  1522. 
Most  Serene  Prince  and  most  excellent  Lords, — 

On  the  third  vigil  of  the  Nativity,  with  due  reverence, 
I  received  the  letter  from  your  Lordships  dated  the  27th 
of  September  ;  by  which  is  explained  to  me  the  proposal 
of  Hieronimo,  the  Ragusan,  in  the  name  of  Sebastian 
Caboto,  and  I  am  instructed,  if  he  is  at  the  Court,  to  give 
him  that  letter  and  to  make  certain  proposals  to  him, 
opening  the  whole  business,  and  exhorting  him  to  come 
to  the  feet  of  your  Serenity.  In  order  to  execute  these 
instructions,  I  dexterously  ascertained  whether  he  was  at 
the  Court,  and,  this  being  so,  I  sent  to  say  that  my 
secretary  had  to  deliver  a  letter  sent  by  a  friend  of  his,  and 
that,  if  he  wished  to  receive  it,  he  should  come  to  my 
lodgings. 

He  understood  this  from  my  servant  who  went  to  him, 
and  came  on  Christmas  Eve  at  the  hour  of  dinner.  I 
withdrew  with  him,  and  gave  him  the  letter,  which  he 
read,  and,  in  reading  it,  he  lost  all  colour.  Having  read  it, 
he  put  it  in  his  pocket  without  speaking  to  me,  and 
looking  frightened  and  amazed.  I  then  said  to  him  that, 
when  he  should  desire  to  answer  that  letter,  he  should  tell 
me  what  he  wished,  and  that  I  would  write  to  those  who 
had  sent  it,  for  that  1  should  be  prompt  in  making  the 
business  end  well.  Having  been  reassured,  he  spoke  to 
me  :  "  I  had  already  spoken  to  the  Ambassador  of  the 
most  illustrious  Seigneury  in  England,  owing  to  the  affec- 
tion I  have  for  the  fatherland,  when  those  newly-found 
lands  could  be  made  of  such  great  utility  to  my  country ; 
and  now,  as  regards  what  has  been  written  to  me,  you 
ought  to  know  all ;  but  I  pray  you  that  it  may  be  kept 
secret,  for  it  is  a  matter  on  which  my  life  depends."    I  then 


220  INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE. 

told  him  that  I  knew  all  about  it  very  well,  and  how  the 
Ragusan  was  brought  before  the  most  excellent  Chief 
Lords,  and  that  I  have  received  intelligence  of  all  that  was 
sent  in  that  letter  from  the  most  secret  magistrate.  But, 
as  some  gentlemen  were  coming  to  dine  with  me,  it  was 
not  convenient  to  discuss  the  business  further  at  that  time. 
It  would  be  better  if  he  would  return  in  the  afternoon, 
when  we  might  confer  more  fully.  He  then  went  away 
and  returned  at  night,  when  I  received  him  alone  in  my 
room.  He  said  to  me  :  "  Lord  Ambassador,  to  tell  you 
all,  I  was  born  in  Venice,  but  was  brought  up  in  England, 
and  afterwards  entered  the  service  of  this  Catholic  King  of 
Spain,  and  was  made  captain  by  King  Ferdinand,  with 
a  salary  of  50  m.  maravedis.  I  was  then  made  Chief 
Pilot  by  this  King,  with  another  50  m.  maravedis,  and,  to 
help  my  expenses,  was  given  25  m.  maravedis,  making  in 
all  125  m.  maravedis,  which  may  be  reckoned  at  nearly 
300  ducats.  Having  returned  to  England  three  years  ago, 
that  most  reverend  Cardinal  wished  that  I  would  under- 
take the  command  of  a  fleet  of  his  to  discover  countries, 
which  fleet  was  nearly  ready,  he  being  prepared  to  expend 
upon  it  30  m.  ducats.  I  replied  that,  being  in  the  service  of 
this  Majesty,  I  was  not  able  to  undertake  it  without  his 
permission.  At  that  time,  conversing  with  a  Venetian 
friar  named  Stragliano  Collona,  with  whom  I  had  a  great 
friendship,  he  said  to  me  :  '  Messer  Sebastian,  you  are 
very  anxious  to  do  great  things  for  foreigners  ;  do  you  not 
remember  your  own  country?  Is  it  not  possible  that  you 
might  also  be  useful  to  it  ?'  I  felt  this  in  my  heart  at  the 
time,  and  replied  that  I  would  think  over  it.  Having 
returned  to  him  on  the  following  da}-,  I  said  that  I  had 
a  way  by  which  that  city  might  participate  in  these 
voyages,  and  I  showed  him  a  way  which  would  be  of 
great  utility.  As  by  serving  the  King  of  England  I  should 
not  be  able  to  serve  my  country,  I  wrote  to  the  Caesarean 


INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE.  221 

Majesty  that  he  should  not,  on  any  account,  give  me 
permission  to  serve  the  King  of  England,  because  there 
would  be  great  injury  to  his  service,  but  that  he  should 
recall  me.  Having  returned  to  Seville,  I  formed  a  great 
friendship  with  this  Ragusan  who  now  writes  to  me,  telling 
me  that  I  ought  to  transfer  my  services  to  Venice.  I  have 
opened  myself  to  him,  and  I  charged  him  that  the  affair 
should  not  be  made  known  to  anyone  but  the  Heads  of  the 
Ten,  and  he  swore  this  to  me  on  the  sacrament."  I  answered 
him  first  by  praising  his  affection  for  his  native  land,  and 
then  said  that  the  Ragusan  had  been  to  the  most  excellent 
Chief  Lords,  had  received  letters  on  the  subject,  and  that  now 
they  should  be  informed  of  the  details  of  his  plan,  and  that 
the  time  was  come  for  him  to  present  himself  before 
your  most  excellent  Lordships  in  person.  But  he  replied 
that  as  he  could  not  explain  his  thought  to  any  others  than 
the  most  excellent  Chief  Lords,  and  that  he  must  there- 
fore proceed  to  Venice,  it  would  first  be  necessary  to 
obtain  permission  from  the  Emperor,  on  the  plea  that  he 
wished  to  recover  the  dowry  of  his  mother,  on  which  affair 
he  would  speak  to  the  magnificent  Chancellor  and  the 
Bishop  of  Burgos,  if  I  would  write  in  his  favour  to  your 
serenity.  I  answered  that,  as  he  wished  to  go  to  Venice,  I 
commended  the  way  in  which  he  proposed  to  obtain  leave. 
As  I  did  not  wish  to  expose  his  scheme,  not  wishing  to  do 
more  than  he  desired,  I  thought  it  well  to  say  this  much, 
adding  that  in  any  deliberation  he  ought  to  consider  two 
things:  one  was  that  the  proposal  should  be  useful, and  the 
other  that  its  utility  could  be  secured.  But  with  regard  to 
the  possibility  of  such  an  issue  I  am  very  doubtful.  For  I 
have  some  slight  knowledge  of  geography,  and,  considering 
the  position  of  Venice,  I  can  see  no  way  whatever  by 
which  she  can  undertake  these  voyages.  It  would  be 
necessary  to  sail  in  vessels  built  at  Venice,  or  else  they 
must   be   built    outside   the  strait.     If  they  are  built  at 


222  INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE. 

Venice  they  will  have  to  pass  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  to 
reach  the  ocean,  which  would  not  be  possible  in  face  of 
the  opposition  of  the  King  of  Portugal  and  the  King 
of  Spain.  If  they  are  not  built  at  Venice  they  can  only 
be  built  on  the  shore  of  the  western  ocean  ;  for  they 
cannot  be  constructed  in  the  Red  Sea  without  infinite 
trouble.  First  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  an  agree- 
ment with  the  Turk  ;  and,  secondly,  the  scarcity  of  timber 
would  make  it  impossible  to  build  ships.  Even  if  they 
were  built,  the  forts  and  armed  vessels  of  the  Portuguese 
would  make  it  impossible  to  continue  that  navigation. 
Nor  can  I  see  any  possibility  of  building  ships  on  the 
western  ocean,  Germany  being  subject  to  the  Emperor. 
So  that  I  can  perceive  no  way  whatever  by  which  mer- 
chandise could  be  brought  to  Venice  from  those  ships,  or 
from  the  ships  to  Venice  ;  but,  being  an  inexpert  person  in 
such  matters,  I  merely  made  these  observations  to  him. 
He  replied  that  there  was  much  in  what  I  said,  and  that 
truly  nothing  could  be  done  with  vessels  built  in  Venice 
or  in  the  Red  Sea.  But  that  there  was  another  way,  which 
was  not  only  possible  but  easy,  by  which  ships  might  be 
built,  and  merchandize  be  carried  from  the  port  to  Venice, 
and  from  Venice  to  the  port,  as  well  as  gold  and  other 
things.  He  added  :  "  I  know,  because  I  have  navigated  to 
all  those  countries,  and  am  familiar  with  all.  I  told  you 
that  I  would  not  undertake  the  voyage  for  the  King  of 
England,  because  that  enterprise  would  in  no  way  benefit 
Venice."  I  shrugged  my  shoulders,  and,  although  the 
thing  appeared  to  me  to  be  impossible,  I  would  not  dis- 
suade him  further,  so  as  not  to  discourage  him  from 
presenting  himself  to  your  Highnesses,  and  I  considered 
that  the  possibilities  are  much  more  ample  than  is  often 
believed.  This  man  has  great  renown,  and  so  for  the 
present  we  parted.  On  the  day  of  St.  John  he  came  to  see 
me,  to   look  at  some  words  in  the  letter  of  the  Ragusan, 


INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE.  223 

doubting  whether  they  might  arouse  suspicion,  and  so  the 
letter  was  rewritten  and  corrected.  He  then  discussed 
many  geographical  points  with  me,  and  told  me  of  a 
method  he  had  observed  of  finding  the  distance  between 
two  places  east  and  west  of  each  other,  by  means  of  the 
needle.  It  is  a  beautiful  discovery,  never  observed  by  any 
one  else,  as  he  will  be  able  to  explain  when  he  comes 
before  your  serenity.  And  reasoning  with  him  on  the 
principal  business,  I  dexterously  repeated  my  objections  ; 
but  he  repeated  that  the  way  was  easy.  "  I  will  go  to 
Venice,  at  my  expense",  he  said  ;  "  they  will  hear  and  be 
pleased  with  the  plan  I  have  devised  ;  I  will  return  at  my 
own  expense,"  and  he  urged  me  to  keep  the  matter  secret. 
Such  is  the  arrangement  that  I  have  made.  Your  serenity 
will  hear,  and  your  wisdom  will  decide  on  what  shall 
appear  best. 

Despatch  of  Contarini  to  the  Senate  of  Venice. 

Valladolid,  March  7th,  1523. 
Most  serene  Prince  and  most  excellent  Lords, — 

That  Sebastian  Cabot,  with  whom  your  Excellencies 
instructed  me  to  speak  on  the  subject  of  the  spice-countries, 
and  respecting  whom  I  reported,  has  been  to  me  several 
times,  always  giving  me  to  understand  that  his  wish  is  to 
come  to  Venice,  and  to  work  in  the  interests  of  your 
Highnesses  in  that  matter  of  the  spiceries.  At  length  he 
sought  me  to  say  that  he  could  not  now  seek  permission 
to  go,  doubting  whether  it  might  not  be  suspected  that  he 
wished  to  go  to  England,  and  that  he  would  be  absent 
three  months.  After  that  he  would  come  to  the  feet  of  your 
most  illustrious  Lordships,  praying  that  meanwhile  a  letter 
might  be  written  in  the  form  of  the  other  that  was  sent, 
asking  him  to  come  to  Venice  to  expedite  his  private 
affairs,  thus  leave  would  be  more  easily  obtained.     I  write 


224  INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE. 

to  your  Highnesses  to  report  what  this  Sebastian  has 
said,  respecting  which  steps  will  be  taken  as  seems  desir- 
able. 

The  Council  of  Ten  to  Contarini. 

Lord  Gasparo  Contarini,  our  Orator  near  the  Caesarean 

Majesty. 

28th  April  1523. 

We  have  received,  a  few  days  since,  your  despatches 
addressed  to  the  Chiefs  of  our  Council  of  Ten,  dated  the 
last  of  December,  in  which  you  report  all  the  intercourse 
you  have  had  with  Sebastian  Cabotto  on  the  subject  of 
the  spices,  and  we  cannot  refrain  from  highly  commending 
the  prudence  and  judgment  with  which  you  have  con- 
ducted the  negotiation.  We  have  also  received  your 
despatch  of  March  7th,  from  which  we  learn  the  resolu- 
tion of  the  said  Sebastian  not  to  come  here  for  three 
months ;  and  that  he  requests  a  letter  may  be  written  on 
the  subject  of  his  own  affairs,  whereby  leave  may  be  more 
easily  obtained.  We  have  therefore  caused  another  letter 
to  be  prepared  in  the  name  of  that  Hieronimo  de  Marino 
from  Ragusa,  who  came  here  to  make  the  proposal,  and 
we  have  ordered  that  it  be  placed  in  the  bundle  of  your 
circumspect  Secretary  like  the  last,  to  be  delivered  to  the 
said  Caboto,  telling  him  that  he  should  come  here  in 
accordance  with  his  promise,  as  he  will  always  be  wel- 
comed by  us.  Let  the  said  Caboto  be  informed  of  this, 
and,  if  he  is  not  at  Court,  the  letter  should  be  forwarded  to 
him.  Take  care  that  it  reaches  him.  The  said  Hieronimo 
Marino  is  not  now  to  be  found  here  in  Venice,  nor  do  we 
know  where  he  is  ;  but  the  letters  of  this  Hieronimo  arrive 
here.     Receive  what  we  say  as  your  instructions. 

Andreas  Foscarenus,  C.  C. 
Jacobus  Michael,  C.  C. 
Andreas  Fosculus,  C.  C. 


INTRIGUES  WITH  VENICE.  225 

Letter  from  the  Ragusan  to  Cabot. 

Venice,  April  2SU1,  1523. 
Respectable  Master  Sebastian, — 

It  is  some  months  since  I  came  to  Venice,  and  I 
wrote  to  you  an  account  of  what  I  had  done  to  inquire 
where  your  goods  are  to  be  found,  that  I  received  good 
words  on  all  hands,  and  was  given  good  hope  that  I  should 
recover  the  dower  of  your  mother,1  so  that  I  have  no 
doubt,  if  you  could  come,  you  would  obtain  all  your  desires. 
For  the  love  I  bear  you,  and  for  your  own  welfare  and 
benefit,  I  exhort  you  not  to  be  false  to  yourself,  but 
to  come  here  to  Venice,  where,  I  doubt  not,  you  will 
obtain  everything ;  so  do  not  delay  in  coming  here,  for 
your  anieda  is  very  old,  and  failing  her  there  will  be  very 
great  trouble  in  recovering  your  property.  Set  out  as 
soon  as  possible  ;  so  no  more  at  present. 

I  am,  always  yours, 

HlERONIMO  DE   MARINO. 

Despatch  of  Contarini. 

Valladolid,  July  26th,  1523. 

Most  serene  Prince  and  most  excellent  Lords, — 

By  the  post  arrived  from  Italy,  coming  by  way  of  Rome, 
I  received  with  due  reverence  your  letter  of  April  23rd,  in 
which  your  serenity  informed  me  of  the  receipt  of  my 
letters  reporting  the  negotiation  with  Sebastian  Cabot ; 
and  adding  that  other  letters  have  been  sent  to  Sebastian 
in  the  name  of  that  Hieronimo  of  Ragusa  with  reference 
to  his  request.  By  good  luck  Sebastian  was  in  Seville 
when  he  received  the  letters,  and  he  returned  here  on 
being  exhorted  to  come.  He  told  me  that  he  had  no 
other  thought,  and  with  that  object  he  had  come ;  adding 

I  "  Et  ameda"  (?). 


226  INTRIGUES  WITH   VENICE. 

that  he  had  sought  permission  from  the  Cesarean  Council 
to  confer  with  me,  and  they  have  also  spoken  to  me  in  his 
commendation.  I  will  advise  your  serenity  of  what  may 
happen  next. 

Despatch  of  the  Council  of  Ten  to  Giacomo  Soranco, 
Venetian  Ambassador  in  England} 

1 2th  September  1 5 5 1. 
By  your  letters  of  the  17th  of  last  month  to  the  Heads 
of  our  Council  of  Ten,  we  have  understood  what  you  have 
deemed  it  necessary  to  report  respecting  our  most  faithful 
Sebastian  Gaboto,  which  has  been  very  agreeable  to  us, 
and  we  approve  of  your  diligence  in  obtaining  special 
information  respecting  his  quality  and  condition.  In 
reply,  we  say  that  you  should  inform  him  that  this  his 
offer  is  most  gratifying,  using  the  best  words  that  your 
judgment  suggests.  As  to  the  request  that  has  been  made 
to  you  by  those  Lords,  touching  the  credit  he  claims  and 
the  recovery  of  goods,  you  can  reply  that  we  desire  to  do 
all  we  can  to  make  things  agreeable  to  that  Majesty  and 
to  their  Lordships  ;  but,  as  Gaboto  is  not  known  to  anyone 
here,  it  will  be  necessary  that  he  himself  should  come  per- 
sonally to  justify  his  claim,  the  matters  of  which  he  speaks 
being  of  very  old  date,  and  we  have  now  replied  to  the 
magnificent  Ambassador  of  that  Majesty  in  conformity 
with  your  letter ;  therefore  explain  all  this  to  Gaboto.  On 
this  ground  he  might  ask  and  obtain  permission  to  come, 
and  you  should  see  that  he  has  the  means  to  come  here  as 
soon  as  possible.  You  should  endeavour,  using  the  same 
method,  to  gather  further  information  from  him  respecting 
those  important  particulars  that  you  have  been  able  to 
report  hitherto,  as  well  as  his  designs  touching  this  navi- 
gation, transmitting  full  details  to  the  Heads. 

1  Calendar  of  State  Papers  (Venice),  v,  No.  711,  p.  264. 


DOCUMENTS 


RELATING  TO 


THE     VOYAGES 


GASPAR     CORTE     REAL 


Q2 


DOCUMENTS 


RELATING   TO 


GASPAR    CORTE     REAL. 


From  the  "Tratado"  of  Antonio  Galvam. 
(Extract.) 


1563. 


N  this  same  year,  1500,  it  is  reported 
that  Gaspar  Corte  Real  craved  a  gene- 
ral licence  of  the  King  Dom  Manoel 
to  go  and  discover  a  new  land.  He 
departed  from  the  island  of  Terceira 
with  two  ships,  armed  at  his  own 
cost,  and  went  to  that  region  which  is  under  the  50th 
degree  of  north  latitude,  a  land  now  called  by  his  name. 
He  returned  safely  to  the  city  of  Lisbon.  Taking  this 
route  once  more,  the  ship  in  which  he  went  was  lost,  and 
the  other  returned  to  Portugal.  For  this  cause  his  brother, 
Miguel  Corte  Real,  went  in  search  of  him,  with  three  ships, 
armed  at  his  own  cost.  Arrived  on  that  coast,  as  there 
were  so  many  bays  and  estuaries,  each  ship  entered  into 
her  own  port,  with  this  rule,  that  they  should  all  meet  again 
on  the  20th  of  August.  The  two  other  ships  did  so;  and 
seeing  that  the  ship  with  Miguel  Corte  Real  did  not  come 
at  the  appointed  time,  after  some  time  they  returned  to 


230  ACCOUNT  FROM  THE  CHRONICLES. 

this  kingdom,  and  never  more  had  tidings  of  him.  nor  did 
other  memory  of  him  abide.  The  country  is  called  the 
land  of  the  Corte  Reals  to  this  day. 


From   the  u  Chronica   do   Felicíssimo   Rei  dom  Emanuel'', 
compósita  per  Damiam  de  Goes  (Lisboa,  1566,  foi.  65). 

Gaspar  Corte  Real,  son  of  Joam  Vaz  Corte  Real,  was  an 
enterprising  man,  valorous,  and  eager  to  gain  honour.  He 
proposed  to  undertake  the  discovery  of  lands  towards  the 
north,  because  many  discoveries  had  been  made  to  the 
south.  Thus  he  obtained  favour  for  his  undertaking  from 
the  king,  whose  servant  he  was  when  Duke  of  Beja,  and 
armed  one  ship,  which  was  well  supplied  with  men  and  all 
necessaries.  He  sailed  from  the  port  of  Lisbon  in  the 
beginning  of  the  summer  of  1500.  In  this  voyage  he 
discovered,  in  that  direction  of  the  north,  a  land  which  was 
very  cool  and  with  great  woods,  as  are  all  lands  that  lie  in 
that  direction.  He  gave  it  the  name  of  Green  Land.1 
The  people  are  very  barbarous  and  wild,  almost  like  those 
of  the  land  of  Sancta  Cruz.2  At  first  they  are  white,  but 
they  are  so  cut  up  by  the  cold  that  they  lose  their  white- 
ness with  age,  and  remain  brown.  They  are  of  medium 
height,  very  agile,  and  great  archers,  using  sticks  hardened 
by  fire  instead  of  darts,  with  which  they  make  as  good 
a  cast  as  if  it  was  tipped  with  fine  steel.  They  dress  in 
the  skins  of  animals  which  abound  in  that  land.  They 
live  in  caverns  of  the  rocks  and  in  huts.  They  believe 
much  in  diviners  ;  they  practise  matrimony,  and  are  very 
jealous  of  their  women  :  in  which  things  they  resemble 
the  Lapps,  who  also  live  in  the  north  from  70  to  85  degrees, 
fugitives  from  the  Kings  of  Norway  and  Sweden,  to  whom 

1  The  east  coast  of  Newfoundland»  2  Brazil. 


FROM  THE  CHRONICLE  OF  DAMIAM  DE  GOES.       23 1 

they  pay  tribute,  always  remaining  in  their  heathen  state 
from  want  of  teaching.  In  the  book  that  treats  of  the 
faith,  customs,  and  religion  of  the  Ethiopians,  Abexis  in 
the  Latin  language,  dedicated  to  Pope  Paul  III,  towards 
the  end  there  is  a  lamentation,  in  which  it  is  explained  in 
detail  whence  so  great  an  evil  proceeds.  Returning  to 
Gaspar  Corte  Real,  after  he  had  discovered  that  land,  and 
coasted  along  a  great  part  of  it,  he  returned  to  this  king- 
dom. Presently,  in  the  year  1501,  being  desirous  of  dis- 
covering more  of  this  province,  and  of  becoming  better 
acquainted  with  its  advantages,  he  departed  from  Lisbon 
on  the  15th  of  May;  but  it  is  not  known  what  happened 
to  him  in  this  voyage,  for  he  never  more  appeared,  nor 
were  there  any  tidings  of  him.  The  delay  and  the  sus- 
picion that  began  to  arise  of  his  fate  caused  Miguel  Corte 
Real,  Chief  Porter  of  the  King,  for  the  great  love  he  bore 
his  brother,  to  determine  to  go  in  search  of  him.  He  left 
Lisbon  on  the  10th  of  May  1502  with  two  ships,  but  there 
were  never  any  tidings  of  them.  The  king  felt  the  loss  of 
these  two  brothers  very  much,  and,  of  his  own  royal  and 
pious  motion,  in  the  year  1503,  he  ordered  two  armed 
ships  to  be  fitted  out  at  his  own  cost,  to  go  in  search  of 
them.  But  it  could  never  be  ascertained  how  either  the 
one  or  the  other  was  lost.  To  that  part  of  the  province  of 
Green  Land  where  it  was  believed  that  the  brothers  were 
lost  the  name  was  given  of  the  Land  of  the  Corte  Reals. 
These  two  brothers,  Gaspar  and  Miguel  Corte  Real,  had 
another  brother,  whose  name  was  Vasque  Anes  Corte  Real, 
who  was  Controller  of  the  King's  Household,  of  his  Council, 
Captain-Governor  of  the  Islands  of  St.  George  and  Ter- 
ceira, and  Alcalde  Mayor  of  the  city  of  Tavilla.1  He  was 
a  very  good  knight  and  Christian,  a  man  of  exemplary  life, 
and  one  who  dispensed   many  charities,  both  publicly  and 

1  Tavira  in  Algarve. 


232  LETTER  FROM  CANTINO. 

in  secret.  His  son  and  heir  is  Emanuel  Corte  Real,  also  of 
the  King's  Council  and  Captain  of  the  same  islands,  who 
now  lives.  This  Vasque  Anes  Corte  Real,  unable  to  per- 
suade himself  that  his  brothers  were  dead,  determined  to  fit 
out  ships  at  his  own  cost,  and  go  in  search  of  them,  in  the 
year  1503.  But,  on  requesting  the  king  to  excuse  his 
absence,  his  Majesty  could  not  consent  that  he  should 
proceed  further  in  that  business,  holding  that  it  was 
useless,  and  that  all  had  been  done  that  could  be 
done. 


A  Letter  from  Alberto  Cantino  to  Hercules  d  Este, 
Duke  of  Ferrara.      {Extract.) 

Most  Illustrious  and  Most  Excellent  Prince,  and  my  very 
singular  good  Lord. 

Lisbon,  October  17th,  1501. 
It  is  now  nine  months  since  this  most  serene  king  sent 
to  the  northern  part  two  well-armed  ships,  to  ascertain 
if  it  would  be  possible  to  discover  land  or  some  islands  in 
that  direction.  On  the  nth  of  the  present  month  one  of 
them  returned,  and  has  brought  people  and  tidings,  which 
it  appeared  to  me  ought  not  to  pass  without  the  know- 
ledge of  your  Excellence.  Therefore  all  that  was  related 
by  the  captain  to  the  king,  I  being  present,  is  here  clearly 
written  down.  First  they  stated  that,  after  leaving  Lisbon, 
they  always  went  on  that  course  and  towards  that  pole 
for  four  months,  nor  during  all  that  time  did  they  see 
anything.  In  the  fifth  month,  still  wishing  to  push  on, 
they  say  that  they  came  upon  enormous  masses  of  con- 
gealed snow  floating  upon  the  sea,  and  moving  under  the 
influence  of  the  waves.  Owing  to  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
sweet  and  clear  water  is  melted   on  their  summits,  and, 


LETTER  FROM  CANTING». 


*Ó5 


descending  by  small  channels  formed  by  the  water  itself, 
it  eats  away  at  the  base  where  it  falls.  The  ships  now 
being  in  want  of  water,  the  boats  were  sent  in,  and  in  that 
way  as  much  was  taken  as  was  needed.  Fearing  to 
remain  in  that  place  by  reason  of  their  danger,  they 
intended  to  turn  back  ;  but  they  consulted  what  was  their 
best  course,  and,  aided  by  hope,  they  resolved  to  go 
forward  for  some  days.  Proceeding  on  the  voyage,  they 
arrived  at  the  frozen  sea  on  the  second  day,  and  were 
forced  to  abandon  their  intention.  So  they  began  to  turn 
towards  the  north-west  and  west,  and  were  three  months 
continuing  in  that  direction,  always  with  fine  weather.  On 
the  first  day  of  the  fourth  month  they  came  in  sight, 
between  these  two  courses,  of  a  very  great  country,  which 
they  approached  with  the  greatest  joy.  Many  large  rivers 
of  fresh  water  flowed  through  this  region  into  the  sea,  one 
of  them  sending  its  waters  for  perhaps  a  league  from  the 
land.  When  they  landed  they  found  delicious  fruits  of 
various  kinds,  trees  and  pines  of  marvellous  height  and  girth, 
suited  for  masts  of  the  largest  ships  that  float  in  the  sea. 
Here  there  is  no  corn  of  any  kind,  but  the  men  of  that 
country  say  that  they  only  live  by  fishing  and  hunting 
animals,  in  which  the  land  abounds.  There  are  very  large 
stags  with  long  hair,  the  skins  of  which  they  use  for 
clothes,  and  make  houses  and  boats  of  them.  There  are 
also  wolves,  foxes,  tigers,  and  sables.  They  affirm  that  the 
peregrine  falcons  are  so  numerous  that  it  appears  to  me  to 
be  a  miracle,  like  those  in  our  country.  I  have  seen  them, 
and  they  are  very  fine.  They  kidnapped  nearly  50  of  the 
men  and  women  of  that  land  by  force,  and  brought  them 
to  the  king.  I  have  seen  them,  touched  and  examined 
them.  Beginning  with  their  size,  I  say  they  are  bigger 
than  our  people,  with  well-formed  limbs  to  correspond. 
The  hair  of  the  men  is  long,  as  we  wear  it,  letting  it  hang 
in  plaited   rings.     They  have  the  face  marked  with  great 


234  LETTER  FROM  CANTINO. 

signs,  like  those  of  the  Indians.  Their  eyes  incline  to 
green,  and  when  they  look  from  them  it  gives  a  great 
fierceness  to  the  whole  countenance.  Their  speech  cannot 
be  understood,  but,  however,  there  is  no  sharpness  in  it,  and 
it  is  altogether  human.  Their  behaviour  and  gestures  are 
very  gentle  ;  they  laugh  a  good  deal,  and  show  great 
delight.  So  much  for  the  men.  The  woman  has  small 
breasts  and  a  very  beautiful  body.  She  has  a  very 
gentle  countenance,  and  its  colour  may  be  said  to  be  more 
white  than  any  other  tint,  but  that  of  the  men  is  much 
darker.  In  fine,  except  for  the  fierce  look  of  the  men, 
they  are  very  like  ourselves.  They  are  naked  except  for 
a  small  covering  made  of  deer-skin.  They  have  no  arms 
nor  iron,  but  for  working  or  fashioning  anything,  they  use 
a  very  hard  and  sharp  stone,  with  which  there  is  nothing 
so  hard  as  that  they  cannot  cut  it.  This  ship  has  come 
from  thence  to  this  place  in  a  month,  and  they  say  that 
the  distance  is  2,Soo  miles.  The  other  consort  has  decided 
to  go  so  far  along  the  coast,  with  the  desire  of  ascertaining 
whether  it  is  an  island  or  mainland.  The  king  awaits  the 
arrival  of  the  others  with  much  anxiety,  and  as  soon  as 
they  come,  bringing  news  worthy  of  your  Excellency's 
attention,  I  will  at  once  send  the  particulars.1 

Servant, 

Alberto  Cantino. 

To  the  most  illustrious  Prince  and  most 
excellent  Lord  Hercules  d'Estc, 
Duke  of  Ferrara,  my  most  worthy 
and  singular  eood  Lord. 


1  First  printed  by  Mr.  Harrisse  in  his  work  on  Corte  Real,  p.  204, 
from  the  MS.  in  the  State  Archives  at  Modena.  The  letter  has  been 
translated  from  Mr.  Harrisse's  text  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  with 
his  permission. 


LETTER  FROM  PASQUALIGO.  235 

Letter  from  Pietro  Pasqualigo  to  the  Seigneury  of  Venice. 

Lisbon,  October  18th,  1501. 
On  the  ninth  of  the  present  month  there  arrived  here 
one  of  the  two  caravels  which  the  Majesty  of  the  said 
king  sent  to  discover  towards  the  north-western  part  in 
the  past  year.  It  has  brought  seven  natives,  men,  women, 
and  children,  from  that  discovered  land.  The  country  is 
at  a  distance  of  1,800  miles  to  north  and  west.  These 
men,  in  their  aspect,  figure,  and  stature,  are  like  gipsies. 
They  are  marked  on  the  face  in  several  places,  some  with 
more,  others  with  fewer  lines.  They  are  dressed  in  skins 
of  different  animals,  but  chiefly  of  otters.  Their  speech  is 
entirely  different  from  any  that  has  ever  been  heard  in 
this  kingdom,  and  no  one  understands  it.  Their  limbs  are 
exceedingly  well  made,  and  they  have  very  gentle  coun- 
tenances ;  but  their  habits  are  filthy,  like  wild  men.  The 
people  of  the  caravel  believe  that  the  above  land  is  the 
mainland,  and  that  it  joins  to  the  other  land  that,  in  the 
previous  year,  was  discovered  to  the  north  by  another 
caravel  of  his  Majesty.  But  they  were  not  able  to  reach  it, 
because  the  sea  was  frozen  over  with  vast  quantities  of 
snow  like  mountains  on  the  land.  They  also  think  that  it 
is  joined  to  the  Andilie,1  which  were  discovered  by  the 
Sovereigns  of  Spain,  and  with  the  land  of  Papagà,  lately 
discovered  by  the  ship  of  this  king  when  on  its  way  to 
Calicut.2  This  belief  is  caused,  in  the  first  place,  because, 
having  coasted  along  the  said  land  for  a  distance  of  600 
miles  and  more,  they  did  not  come  to  any  termination  ; 
also  because  they  report  the  discovery  of  many  very  large 
rivers  which  fall  into  the  sea.     The  other  caravel  (Capitana) 

1  Antilles.     The  Portuguese  were  the  first  to  give  this  name  to  the 
West  Indian  Islands. 

2  Brazil  visited  in  1500  by  Cabral,  but  not  discovered.      Pinzon 
had  been  there  in  the  previous  year. 


236  LETTER  FROM  PASQUALIGO. 

is  expected  from  day  to  day,  from  which  the  quality  and 
condition  of  the  said  land  will  be  clearly  understood,  as 
she  has  gone  further  along  that  coast,  to  discover  as  much 
as  possible.  This  royal  Majesty  has  derived  great  satis- 
faction from  the  news,  because  he  considers  that  this  land 
will  be  very  useful  to  his  affairs  in  many  respects,  but 
principally  because,  being  very  near  to  this  kingdom,  it 
will  be  easy,  in  a  short  time,  to  obtain  abundant 
supplies  of  wood  for  making  the  masts  and  yards  of  ships, 
and  slaves  fit  for  any  work  ;  for  they  say  that  the  land  is 
very  populous,  and  also  full  of  pines  and  other  excellent 
timber.  This  news  has  given  such  pleasure  to  his  Majesty 
that  he  has  issued  orders  for  ships  to  go  there,  and  also  for 
the  increase  of  his  Indian  fleet,  to  conquer  it  as  quickly  as 
it  was  discovered  ;  for  there  it  appears  that  God  is  with 
his  Majesty  and  his  works,  and  favours  his  designs.1 

Letter  from  Pietro  Pasqualigo  to  his  Brothers. 

Lisbon.  October  19th,  1501. 

jfc  2}fc  3ÊL  £fe  A.  '  JjL  jk 

On  the  8th  of  the  present  month  there  arrived  here  one 
of  the  two  caravels  which  this  most  serene  king  sent  on  a 
voyage  of  discovery  towards  the  north  in  the  past  year, 
under  Captain  Gaspar  Corterat  {sic).  It  reports  having 
discovered  land  two  thousand  miles  from  here  towards  the 
north-west  and  west,  which  was  before  not  known  to  any 
one.  They  discovered  from  6co  to  7C0  miles  of  coast- 
line, without  finding  the  end  of  it.  They,  therefore,  believe 
that  it  is  mainland,  which  is  continuous  with  another  land 

1  Printed  by  Mr.  Harrisse  in  his  work  on  Corte  Real,  p.  209,  from 
the  Diatii  di  Marino  Sam/ to,  published  at  Venice,  1 880-1 881,  in 
quarto,  torn,  iv,  Fascicule  24,  pp.  200-201.  The  letter  has  been  trans- 
lated for  the  Hakluyt  Society  from  Mr.  Harrisse's  text,  with  his 
permission. 


LETTER  FROM  PASQUALIGO.  237 

discovered  in  the  previous  year  to  the  north.  The  caravel 
could  not  reach  the  end  of  the  land  because  the  sea  was 
frozen  over  with  a  vast  quantity  of  snow.  This  is  also 
believed  because  of  the  multitude  of  very  large  rivers  they 
discovered  there,  for  certainly  there  would  not  be  so  many 
nor  such  large  ones  on  an  island.  They  say  that  this  land 
is  very  populous,  and  the  houses  of  the  inhabitants  are  of 
wood,  very  large,  and  covered  outside  with  skins  of  fish. 
They  have  brought  here  seven  of  the  natives,  men,  women, 
children,  and  fifty  others  will  come  in  the  other  caravel, 
which  is  expected  from  hour  to  hour.  These  are  like 
gipsies  in  figure,  stature,  and  appearance,  and  are  dressed 
in  the  skins  of  divers  animals,  but  chiefly  of  otters.  In 
summer  they  turn  the  skin  inside,  and  in  winter  the  other 
way.  These  skins  are  not  sewn  together  in  any  way,  nor 
tanned,  but  are  thrown  over  the  shoulders  and  arms  just 
as  they  are  taken  from  the  animals.  The  loins  are  fastened 
with  some  cord  made  of  the  very  strong  sinews  of  a  fish. 
Although  they  appear  to  be  wild  men,  yet  they  are  modest 
and  gentle,  and  their  arms,  shoulders,  and  legs  so  well 
proportioned  that  I  cannot  describe  them.  Their  faces 
are  marked  in  the  fashion  of  the  Indians,  some  with  six, 
some  with  eight,  some  with  no  lines.  They  talk,  but  they 
are  not  understood  by  anyone.  I  believe  they  have  been 
addressed  in  every  possible  language.  They  have  no  iron 
in  their  country,  but  make  knives  of  some  stones,  and  in 
like  manner  the  points  for  their  arrows.  They  have 
brought  from  thence  a  piece  of  a  broken  sword,  gilded, 
which  was  certainly  made  in  Italy.  A  native  boy  had  two 
silver  rings  in  his  ears,  which  without  doubt  seem  to  have 
been  manufactured  at  Venice.1  This  made  me  believe 
that  it  was  the  mainland,  because  it  is  not  possible  that 

1  These  must  have  been  relics  of  the  expedition  of  John  Cabot  in 
1498. 


238  PAYMENT  FOR  THE  CANTINO  MAP. 

a  ship  could  ever  have  reached  that  place  without  having 
been  heard  of.  There  is  a  very  great  abundance  of  salmon, 
herrings,  cod,  and  similar  fish.  There  is  also  plenty 
of  wood,  and,  above  all,  fine  trees  for  making  masts  and 
yards  of  ships.  This  most  serene  king  hopes  to  derive 
very  great  profit  from  the  new  land,  both  from  the  wood 
for  ships,  of  which  they  have  need,  and  from  the  men,  who 
will  be  excellent  for  labour,  and  the  best  slaves  that  have 
hitherto  been  obtained.  It  appears  to  me  a  matter  worthy 
of  being  brought  to  your  notice,  and  if  I  shall  learn  more 
on  the  arrival  of  the  caravel  (Capitana),  I  will  let  you 
know.1 


Payment  for  the  Cantino  Map. 

To  the  most  illustrious  and  most  excellent 
Duke  and  Lord,  the  Lord  Hercules 
d'Este,  Duke  of  Ferrara,  and  my  Lord 
and  most  respected  benefactor. 

Rome,  November  19th,  1502. 
Most  illustrious  and  most  excellent  Duke  and  Lord, — 

I  understood  what  your  Excellency  desired  of  me,  by  the 
letter  sent  to  me  in  reply  to  one  that  I  had  previously 
addressed,  especially  as  touching  the  nautical  chart. 

By  that  humble  reply  I  apprised  your  Excellency  that 
I  had  left  the  said  chart  at  Genoa,  in  the  hands  of  Master 
Francesco  Catanio,  who  has  paid  to  me  20  ducats  (striti) 
that  is  to  say,  of  three  pounds  each. 

In  truth,  that  chart  cost  me  in  Portugal,  by  contract, 
12  golden  ducats  ;  but,  constrained  by  need,  and  having 

1  First  published  in  Paesi  Novamente  Retrovati  (Vicenza,  1507, 
cap.  exxvi),  and  reprinted  by  Mr  Harrisse  in  his  work  on  Corte  Real, 
p.  211.  It  has  been  translated  from  Mr.  Harrisse's  text,  with  his 
permission. 


LEGEND  ON  THE  CANTING  MAT.  239 

no  one  to  whom  to  apply,  I  was  obliged  to  accept  that 
sum,  and  to  do  what  I  have  explained  to  your  Excel- 
lency. 

The  chart  is  of  such  a  sort  that  I  trust  it  will  be  pleas- 
ing to  your  Excellency,  and  that  your  Excellency  will  not 
regret  having  disbursed  that  sum,  and  that  your  Excel- 
lency will  further  pay  the  twelve  ducats  that  the  said  chart 
cost  me  ;  it  will  make  me  your  Excellency's  debtor. 

Your  Excellency  will  please  to  advise  me  what  I  ought 
to  do  in  this  matter;  meanwhile,  holding  me  to  be  of  the 
number  of  the  faithful  servants 

of  the  most  illustrious  and  most  excellent 
Duke,  the  undersigned  servant, 

Alberto  Cantino.1 


Legends  on  the  Cantino  Map. 

Legend  by   tJie    Coast  of  Newfoundland. 
Land  of  the  King  of  Portugal. 

This  land  was  discovered  by  order  of  the  very  high  and 
most  excellent  Prince,  the  King  Dom  Manoel,  King  of 
Portugal.  It  was  discovered  by  Gaspar  de  Corte  Real, 
Gentleman  of  the  Household  of  the  said  king,  who,  when 
he  had  discovered  it,  sent  thence  a  ship  with  certain  men 
and  women  found  in  that  country,  and  he  remained  with 
the  other  ship,  and  never  more  was  seen.  It  is  believed 
that  he  perished.     Here  there  are  many  masts.2 


1  Printed  by  Mr.  Harrisse  in  his  work  on  Corte  Real,  p.  216,  from  a 
manuscript  in  the  Archives  of  the  House  of  Este  at  Modena.  It  has 
been  translated  from  Mr.  Harrisse's  text,  with  his  permission. 

2  Trees  for  making  masts  (?). 


240  LEGEND  OX  THE  CANTINO  MAP. 

Legend  on  tJie  East  Coast  of  Greenland  between  tico 
Portuguese  Flags. 

A  ponta  d.  (assia). 

This  land  was  discovered  by  order  of  the  very  excellent 
Prince  Dom  Manoel,  King  of  Portugal,  which  it  is  believed 
is  a  point  of  Asia.  Those  who  discovered  it  did  not  land, 
but  they  saw  very  serrated  mountains ;  it  is  for  this  reason, 
according  to  the  opinion  of  cosmographers,  that  it  is 
believed   that  this   is   the  extremity  of  Asia. 


g-rji  ^?;Hjt-^§ 

^^^ 

f\V^ 

SIISP^' 

fillip 

If? 

T//N 

/////^'N 

g£-a# — ~~^ff 

^^^r——-5 

f\—i  fs^/y/  \ 

\\V\\\/ 

\\V\i 

/  rSn    / 

u~i      / 

\\\l 

.w 

/  \   ' 

ft 

Hr^vD 

\/  íAÁ 

\ 

I 

< 

X 
o 

o 

< 

o 


INDEX 


JOURNAL    OF    COLUMBUS. 


Açul    Bay,    sailing    directions    for, 

121 
Admiral    of   the    Ocean    Sea    (see 

Columbus),    17 
Affonso  V  (see  Portugal,  King  of) 
Aguda,  Pt.,  no 
Aji,  native  pepper,  164 
Alamo,  Cristoval  de,  of  Niebla,  left 

at  Navidad,  144  n, 
Alard  (see  Tallarte) 
Alguazil  (see  Arana) 
Almanack,     prediction    mentioned, 

158,  159;/. 
Aloes    growing  on    Isabella   Island, 

51,  57;  at  Rio  de  Mares,  69,   74, 

78  ;  in  Espanola,  106,  HO 
Altitude  could  not  betaken  owing  to 

rough  sea,  1 71 
Alto  y  Bajo,  Cape,  120 
Amaranth  in  Cuba,  60 
Amiga    Island,    132 ;   rhubarb   on, 

142,  143 
Anchorage   ground,    selection    of, 

45,  58  _ 

Andalusia,  weather  in  Atlantic  like, 
in  April  or  May,  24,  34,  49,  57, 
60 

Angel  Point,  156,  157 

Annunciation,  feast  of,  celebrated, 
117 

Antilia  Island,  8,  8  n.  ;  reports  re- 
specting, 20,  21  11. 

Antonio  of  Jaen,  left  at  Navidad, 
J  44  »• 


Aragon,  Juan  de,  of  Moguer,  his  evi- 
dence respecting  the  expulsion  of 
the  Jews  from  Palos,  when  Colum- 
bus was  fitting  out,  16  n. 

Arana,  Diego  de  (Alguazil  Mayor), 
116  n. ;  sent  on  shore  for  help 
when  the  Santa  Maria  grounded, 
134;  left  at  Navidad,  144;  in 
jo'nt  command,   145 

Arena,  Isleo  de,  50,  57 

Arrows  of  the  natives,  115,  159 

Asensio,  Life  of  Columbus,  Latin 
text  of  Toscanelli  letter,  iv,  4  n.  ; 
original  sketch  of  the  vessels  of 
Columbus  given  by,  iv 

Assayer  (see  Castillo) 

Astrolabe  could  not  be  used,  owing 
to  rough  sea,  171 

Azores,  land  teen  to  the  west  of,  20 
(see  Flores)  ;  reckoning  on  return 
voyage,  171,  172,  173,  178,  180; 
inhospitable  conduct  of  Portuguese 
at,  181-183 


Babeque  or  Baneque,  reported  is'and 

yielding  gold,  76,   77,    81,    83,  98, 

105,  no,  112,  116,  150 
Bafan,    suppo-ed   province   of   the 

Gran  Can.  65 
Baraona,  Gabriel  de,  of  Belmonte, 

left  at  Navidad,  145  ;/. 
Barcelona,  sovereigns  reported  to  be 

at,  193 

1< 


p 

is 

b 

a< 

Lv 


INDEX 


JOURNAL    OF    COLUMBUS. 


Açul    Bay,    sailing    direction-;    f. >r, 
I  21 

Admiral    of   the    Ocean    Sea    (see 

Columbus1,    i- 
Affonso  V  (see  Portugal,  King  of) 
Aguda,  Pt.,  no 
Aji,  native  pepper,  164. 
Alamo,  Cristoval  de,  of  Xiebla,  left 

a'  Navidad,  144  >/. 
Alard  (see  Tallarte) 
Alguazil  (see  Arana) 
Almanack,     prediction    mentioned, 

158,  159//. 
Aloes  growing  on    Isabella   Island, 

51,  57  :  at  Rio  de  Mares,  69,   74. 

7S  j  in  E-tpaftola,  106,  no 
Altitude  could  not  be  taken  owing  to 

rough  sea.  171 
Alto  y  Bajo,  Cape,  120 
Amaranth  in  Cuba,  60 
Amiga    Island,    132  ;    rhubarb   on, 

142,  143 
Anchorage   ground,    selection    of, 

45,  58 
Andalusia,  weather  in  Atlantic  like, 

in   April   or   .May,   24,  34,  40,  57. 

DO 
Angel  Point,  150,  157 
Annunciation,   feast   of,  celebrated, 

117 
Antilia  Island,   S,   S  ;;.  ;  reports  re- 

Cting,  20.  21  ;:. 
Antonio  of  Jaen,    left  at    Navidad, 

14;  >i. 


Aragon,  Juan  de,  of  Moguer,  his  evi- 
dence respecting  the  expulsion  of 
the  Jews  from  Palos,  when  Colum- 
bus was  fitting  out,  ió  n. 

Arana,  Diego  de  (Alguazil  Mayor». 
11Õ  n.  :  sent  on  shore  for  help 
when  the  Samta  Maria  grounded, 
134:  left  at  Navidad,  144;  in 
jo'nt  command,    14; 

Arena,  Isleo  de,  50.  57 

Arrows  of  the  natives,  115,  159 

Asensio,  Life  of  Columbus,  Latin 
text  of  Toscanelli  letter,  iv,  4//.  ; 
original  sketch  of  the  vessels  of 
Columbus  j^iven  by,  iv 

Assayer^see  Castillo! 

Astrolabe  could  not  be  used,  owing 
to  rough  sea,  1  71 

Azores,  land  seen  to  the  west  of,  20 

^ee  Flores»  :  reckoning  on  return 

,   .   1 71 .    17*1    173,    1 7-\    180  : 

inhospitable  conduct  of  Portuguese 

at,  iSi - 1  S3 


Babeque  or  Baneque,  reported  is'and 

yielding  83,  9S, 

105,  no,  112,  1 16,  150 
Bafan,    supposed    province   of    the 

Gran  Car 
Baraona,  Gabriel  de,  of  Belmonte, 

left  at  Navidad,  145  n. 
Barcelona,  sovereigns  reported  to  be 

at.   1     ; 


142 


INDEX. 


Barco,  Juan  del,  of  Avila,  left  at 
Navidad,  145  n. 

Bartering  at  Guanahani,  37,  40;  at 
Fernandina,  49  ;  in  Cuba,  71  ; 
forbidden,  67  (see  Gold) 

Bathing'  alongside,  sailors,  during 
voyage  out,  29 ;  Indians,  when 
homeward  bound,    168 

Becerro,  Cape,  149 

Behaim,  Martin,  globe,  iv,  21  «., 
29  ».,  59  71. 

Belmonte,  Don  Fernando,  his  dis- 
covery of  a  document  at  Seville 
relating  to  the  expulsion  of  the 
Jew?,  16  n. 

Belprado,  Cape,  156 

Bermeo,  Domingo  de;  left  at  Navi- 
dad, 145  n. 

Bernaldez  (historian),  had  access  to 
the  Journal  of  Columbus,  v 

Birardi,  Lorenzo,  bearer  of  the  letter 
of  Colimbus  to  Toscanelli,  iii 

Bird  Rock,  54  «. 

Birds  seen  on  the  voyage  out:  Terns. 
167 ;  Boatswain-birds,  23,  25, 
30,  31  ;  on  voyage  home,  168 ; 
Duck..  39  ;  Boobies  26,27,  2&>  3°> 
34,  166,  167  ;  a  boy  hit  ore  with  a 
si  one,  32  ;  Sandpipers,  27,  28, 
32j  35  ;  Man-o'-War  birds,  3c. 
32  ;  Frigate-bird,  167  ;  absence 
of  Nightingales  regretted,  24, 
30,  103  ;  Parrots,  37,  38,  39,  47, 
54,  124;  land  discovered  by  flight 
of,  33 ;  variety  o(,  at  Isabella 
Island,  54  ;  in  Cuba,  59  ;  song 
of,    in    Cuba,   62 

Boatswain-birds  (ee  Birds) 

Bohio  or  Bosio.  55  :  gold  reported 
at,  68,  76,  83,  98,  106,  131,  136, 
144,  150 

Bonnet  sai'.  58,  178 

Booby  '>ee  Birds) 

Buen  Tiempo.  Cape,  157 

Cacique,  name  first  heard,  115,  118, 
130  ;  entertained  by  the  Admiral, 


118,  119;  his  procession,  119  (see 

Guacanagari) 
Cadiz,  Port  S1'.  Nicholas  compared 

to  it,  98  n.  ;  tunny  fishery  of,  166  ; 

Duke  of,  166  m. 
Calabashes,  great  size,  95 
Cami,  supposed  name  of  the  Grand 

Kan  in  Cuba,  63 
Campana.  Cape,  86,  87,  88 
Can  (^ee  Kan) 

Canada,  17  ;  Pinta  refitted  at,  20 
Canaries,  28  ;  Pinta  refitted  at,  20  ; 

distance  from,   25,  26  ;    colour  of 

natives,  39 
Caniba  (see  Cariba) 
Canoes  of  Guanahari,    39  ;    escape 

of,  43  ;  rate  of,  58  ;    at  Cuba,  91, 

93,  94;    man  picked   up  íd,   112; 

from  Tortuga,  115;  described,  124; 

many  round  the  ship,  128 
Caona,  native  r.ame  for  gold,  159 
Cape  Verdes,  30 
Capes  : 

Alpha  et  Omega,  97  n. 

Alto  y  Bajo,  120 

Aguda,  no 

Angel.  156,  157 

Becerro.  149 

Belprado,  156 

Buen  Tiempo,  157 

Campana,  S6,  87,  SS 

Caribata,  121 

Cinquin,  99,  102,  105 

Cuba,  76 

Elefante,  99  103 

Enamorado,  158 

Estrella,  99 

Frances,  157 

Hermoso,  51,  52 

Hierro,  157 

Isleo,  56,  57 

Laguna,  53 

Lanzada,  no 

Lindo,  97 

Del  Monte,  97 

Padre  y  Hijo,  157 

Palmas,  63 


INDEX. 


243 


Capes  : 

Del  Pico,  86,  S7 
Pierna,  110 
Redonda,  157 
Roja,  153 

Santa,  130,  133    147 
San  Theramo,  166 
Seca,  157 
Sierpe,  147 
Tajado,  157 
De  Torres,  120 
Verde,  58 
Capilla,     Dieço    He,    of    Almeden, 

left  at  Navidad,  144». 
Caravels  (see  Nina,  Pinta) 
Carbacho,  Pedro,  of  Cáceres,  left  at 

Navidad,  145  n. 
Carenero  at  Port  St.  Nicholas,  101, 

102 
Cariba  believed  to  be  nothing  but 

the  Grand  Kan,  106 
Caribata,  Mount,  120,  129,  132 
Carib  Island,  162,  163,  166 
Caribs,  reports  abou%  87  ;  arrows  of, 
115  ;    mentioned,    137,    143,    144, 
159.  160,  161 
Cascaes  nt  mouth  of  the  Tagus,  187 
Castaneda,  Juan,  Portuguese  Gover- 
nor of  Sta.  Maria,  his  inhospitable 
conduct,  181,  182 
Castillo,  an  assayer  of  Seville,    left 

at  Navidad,  144 
Cathay,  6,  8,  63 
Caulkers  at  Palos,  their  negligence, 

162 
Cavila,  supposed  name  of  the  Grand 

Can,  65 
Chart  sent  by  Toscanelli,  4  ;  in  the 
hands  of  Las    Casas,    4  n.  ;    de- 
scription of   Toscanelli   chart,    5 
28  n.,  59  n.  ;  intention  of  Columbus 
to  draw  one,  18  ;  conversation  be- 
tween   Columbus  and    Pinzon  re- 
specting, 28  ;  plotting  the  position 
on,  29,  173 
Chief,     112,     116,     117,     118     (see 
Cacique,  Guacanagari) 


Chios  Island,  mastick  trade  at,    74, 

106 
Chipangu,  account  by  Marco  Polo, 
9  11.  ;    search   for,    ^,    40  ;    Cuba 
thought    to   be,   55,   56,   57  ;    con- 
fused with  Cibao,  vii,  131,  136 
Cibao,    supposed    to   be   Chipangu, 

vii,  131,  136,  141 
Cinnamon  trees   alleged    to    have 

been  found  by  Pinzon,  67 
Cinquin,  Cape,  99,  102,  105 
Cintra,  178;  rock  of,  sighted,  187 
Cipango  and  Cippongue  (see  Chi- 
pangu) 
Clarence  Port  in  Long  Island,  48  «. 
Columbine  Library  (see  Velasco) 
Columbus,  Christopher  : 
Journal,  i,  and  v  to  ix 
Original  sketch  of  his  vessels,  iv,  v 
Correspondence  with  Toscanelli,  ii, 

ii',  3»  11 
Extent  of  the  discoveries  due  to, 

viii 
Date  of  his  letter  to  Toscanelli,  3  n. 
Address  to  the  Sovereigns,  15 
His  mission,  16 
Concessions  to,  17 
Intention   to  write   a  journal  and 

draw  a  chart,  18 
Heard  of  land  seen  west  of  Madeira 

and  Azores,  20,  21 
His  double  reckoning,  22,  29,  31 
Explanation  of  the  cause  of  varia- 
tion, 24,  25  n.,  31 
Murmurs  of  his  crew,  24,  28 
Conversation  with  Pinzon  respect- 
ing the  chart,  28 
Speech  to  the  sailors,  34 
Sees  the  light,  35,  36 
Lauds  at  Guanahani,  37 
Describes    the    natives    of   Guana- 
hani, 37-40 
Explores  the  east  coast  of  Guana- 
hani, 41 
Leaves  Guanahani,  42 
Policy  with    the    natives,    43,    44, 
45,  55 

R  2 


244 


INDEX. 


Columbus,  Christopher  : 

Intention  to  sail  round  Fernandina 

48 
Remarks  on  the  vegetation  of  Fer- 
nandina, 50 
Orders   a   rendezvous    at    Isabella 

Island,  51 
Remarks  on  beautiful  scenery,  viii, 

52,  54,  60,  67,  86,  87,  89,   90, 

122 
E<pedition    into    the    interior    of 

Isabella  Island,  54 
Seizure  of  natives  by,  38,  43,  44, 

75,  163,  164 
Regrets  his  ignorance  of  botany,  57 
Lands  in  Cuba,  59 
Explores  Rio  de  Mares,  67 
Careened  the  ships,  68 
Expio  es  Puerto  del  Principe,  78, 

79,80 
His    remarks    on   the   conduct   of 

Pinzon,  82,   142,  146,  150,   15  r, 

152,  155 
Reflection  on  the  advantages  of  his 

discovery,  90 
Entertained  a  chief  at  dinner,  118, 

119 
His  statement,  proving  his  age,  122 
Fear  of  being  thought  to    exagge- 
rate, 122 
Orders  that  everything  is  to  be  paid 

for,  124 
His  high  opinion   of  the  natives, 

123,  124,  131,  135 
Resting    below,    when     the     ship 

grounded,  132 
His  measures  for  saving  the  ship, 

133 
Praise  of  the   Chief  Guacanagari, 

135.  137 
His    orders    to    form   a  settlement 

called  Navidad,  138,  140 
His  reception  by  Guacanagari,  141 
Takes  leave  of  Navidad,  144 
Restored  the  natives  kidnapped  by 

Pinzon,  156 
In  the  Bay  of  Samana,  158,  159 


Columbus,  Christopher  : 

Predict  ons  of  his  almanac,  158 

Reflections  on  the  encounter  wi;h 
natives,  161 

Expectations  of  increased  revenues 
for  the  Crown,  162 

Intentiors  to  visit  island  to  east- 
ward, 163 

Resolves  to  shape  a  course  for 
Spain.   165 

His  reckoning  on  the  homewaid 
voyage,  173,  178 

Vows  of  pilgrimage  in  the  stonr , 

175 
Reflections  in  the  storm,  176,  177 
Anxiety  about  his  sons,  177 
Throws  a  document  overboard  in  a 

ca>k,  177,  178 
Needful  rest  after  long  watching, 

179 
Remonstrance  with   the  Governor 

of  Sta.  Maria,  182 
Leaves  Santa  Maria  for  Spain,  185 
Arrival  in  the  Tagus,  187 
His  letter  to  the  King  of  Portugal, 

187 
Refused  to  go  on  board  a  Portu- 
guese ship,  188 
Interviews    with    the    King     and 

Queen  of  Portugal,  190,  196 
Concluding  remarks  in  his  Journal, 

193 
Columbus,  Fernando,  his  account  of 
the    light    seen   by   the   Admira', 
36  n. ;  his  fuller  account  of  the  pro- 
ceedings  connected  with  prepara- 
tion of  documents  during  the  storm, 
v,  1 78  n. 
Compass,  variation  of,  23,  24,  31 
Conception,  Port  of,  103,  no 
Copper,  little  seen,  137,  159 
Cordova,  valleys  in  Espanola  com- 
pared  to   vcga  of,    99,    113,   149; 
anxiety  of  Columbus  about  his  sous 
at,  177 
Coroay,  in  Espanola,  141 
Cosa,  Juan  de  la,  map  of,  ii ;  ship 


INDEX. 


^45 


Santa  Maria  owned  by,  17  ;  his 
misconduct  at  the  shipwrt  ck,  133»., 
138  «. 

Cotton  at  Guanahani,  40,  43 ;  at 
Cuba,  6S,  71;  fields  of,  no;  fab- 
rics, 1 28,  130 

Course  across  the  Atlantic  taken  by 
Columbia,  22,  23  ;   altered,  29,  33 

Covil,  tunny  fishery  at,  166 

Crabs  on  the  gulf-weed,  25,  28 

Crato,  Prior  of,  host  of  Columbus 
iu  Portugal,  191 

Crew  (see  Sailors) 

Crickets,  chirping  of,  62,  no 

Crosses  set  up,  79,  80,  106 

Cuba,  Cape  of,  76 

Cuba  first  hea>d  of,  55,  56,  57  ; 
ariival  at,  59  ;  reported  to  he  a 
city,  63  ;  believed  to  be  mainlai  d. 
65  ;  envoys  sent  into  the  interior, 
66 ;  on  the  coast  of,  76  to  97  ; 
intercourse  with  natives,  SS,  95,  96, 
131  ;  name  of  cape  at  the  easttro 
end,  97  ;  name  of  /nana  given 
to,  98,  131  ;  departure  from,  98 

Cueva,  Juan  de,  left  at  Navidad, 
145  n. 

Cultivation  (see  Cotton,  Yams) 

Dama,  Álvaro,  Captain  of  a  Portu- 
guese ship  in  the  Tagus,  visited 
Columbus,  1S9 

Darts  of  the  natives,  38,  49,  95 

Diaz,  Bartolomé,  beaten  in  an  at- 
tempt to  humiliate  Columbus,  188 

Diego,  boatswain  of  \\\t  Santa  Maria, 
sent  to  find  the  mastick  trees,  69 

Diego  de  Mambles  left  at  Navidad, 
144  ». 

Dogs  at  Fernandina,  50  ;  at  Cuba, 
62 

Dorado  (see  Fish) 

Elefante,  Cape,  99 

Enamorados  Rock,  62  ;  Cape,  158 

England,  lhe  Admiral  had  been  to, 


122  ;  size,  compared  with  Esj  aii  >la, 

130 
Englishman  with  Columbu*,  145  n. 
Envoys,  two  seaniensent  as,  into  the 

inteiior  of  Cuba,  66  ;  return  of,  69 
Escovedo,       Rodrigo,       Secretaty, 

landed     at     Guanahani,    37  ;      at 

Espanola,  1 16  w. ;  left  at  Navidad, 

144  ;  nephew  of  Fray  Perez,  145 
Espanola,  name  given,    105  ;    fir  t 

intercourse  with  natives,  106,  107  ; 

scenery,    109 ;    Spaniards   left   at, 

144, 145  ;  coasting  along,  145  to  158 
Estrella,  Cape,  99 
Eugenius,  Pope,  embassy  from  the 

Grand  Kaan  to,  7,  7  «. 


Fava,  supposed  city  of  Cuba,  63 
Fayal  in  lhe  Azores,  172 
Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  address  of 

Columbus  to,  15  ;  their  concessions 

to  Columbus,  16 
Fernandez,  Gonzalo,  of  Segovia,  left 

at    Navidad,    145    n. ;  Gonzalo  of 

Leon,    left   at   Navidad,    145    n.  ; 

Francisco,  left  at  Navidad,  145  11. 
Fernandina  Isle,  description,  44,  46 

47  ;     name    given,     50  ;     peculiar 

vege!ation,   47,   49  ;    harbour  dis- 
covered, 48  ;  natives,  49,  50,  58 
Fierro  (see  Hierro) 
Fish-hooks,  60,  61 
Fish  of  various  colours  oft  Fernan- 
dina, 47 

Camarones,  106 

Corbinas,  106 

Dace,  106 

Dorado,  29,  30,  170 

Dory,  47,  106 

Flying  Fish,  32 

Gilt-head,  106 

Hake,  106 

Salmon,  106 

Shrimps,  106 

Skate,  103,  106 

Tunny,  25,  166,  167 


246 


INDEX. 


Flechas,  Golfo  de  las,  164,  165 

Flores  in  the  Azores,  25,  172,  173 

Flying-  fish,  32 

Foronda,  Pedro  de,  left  at  Navidad, 
145  n. 

Frances,  Cape,  157 

Francisco,  of  Aranda,  left  at  Navi- 
dad, 145  ti. 

Frogs,  no 

Fuma  in  Esprnila,  141 

Furon,  the  Nina  off,  192 

Gallega,  nime  given  by  Oviedo,  for 
thi  ship  of  Columbus.  17  11. 

Garcia,  Diego,  of  Xeres,  left  at 
Navidid,  144  11. 

Garjao,  or  Tern  (see  Birds) 

Glasses,  24  hour,  no,  166,  168 

Globe  (see  Behaim) 

Gloria  in  excelsis,  sung  when  land 
was  thought  to  be  in  sight,  29 

Goanin,  supposed  name  of  an  island, 
160 

Godoy,  Francisco  de,  of  Seville, 
left  at  Navidad,  145  n. 

Gold,  vii ;  inquiries  at  Guanahani, 
39  ;  reported  at  Samoet,  46,  48  ; 
ornamtnt  at  Fernandina,  50;  at 
Isabella,  56  ;  sought  for  at  Cuba, 
65  ;  native  names  :  Nucay,  65  ; 
Tuob,  Caona,  Nozay,  1 59  ;  reported 
at  Bohio,  68,  73  ;  at  Babeque,  76, 
77,  81  ;  stones  resembling,  85,  94  ; 
mines  inquired  after,  116,  1 19; 
birterfor,  119,  128,  136;  news  of, 
129  ;  mark  of,  137  ;  gold  dust  in 
the  river  Yaqui,  152,  153 

Gomera  (Canaries), Columbus  arrived 
at,  19,  20;  report  of  land  seen  to 
the  west,  20  ;  Guillen  Peraza,  first 
Count  of,  20;  supplies  at  departure 
from,  21  ;  becalmed  near,  22 

Gonzalez,  Joige,  of  Trigueros,  left 
at  Navidad,  145  w. 

Gracia,  Rio  de,  155 

Gran  Canária  (sec  Canária) 

Gran  Kan  (see  Kan) 


Granada,  16,  17 

Guacanagari,  chief  of  Marien,  his 
iuvitati  n  to  Columbus,  I2Ó«.,I27; 
help  given  by,  at  the  shipwreck, 
134;  his  dignified  manner,  135; 
feast  given  by,  136,  137  ;  his  sub- 
ject chiefs,  141  ;  promises  of  gold, 
143  ;  Spaniards  at  Navidad  recom- 
mended to,  144 ;  lhe  Admiral 
takes  leave  of,  144,  145 

Guadalquivir,  river  so  named  in 
Espaiiola,  III  ;  River  Yaqui  com- 
pared to,  153 

Guanahani  discovered,  36 ;  land- 
ing of  the  Admiral,  37  ;  natives, 
37-40 ;  east  coast  explored,  41  ; 
natives  who  were  kidnapped,  38, 
43,  44,  48,  50,  60,  63,  66,  81 

Guardiãs  (>ee  Pointers) 

Guarionex,  a  chief  in  Espaiiola,  141 

Guillelmo,  Irishman  of  Galway,  left 
at  Navidad,  145  n. 

Guinea,  palms  in  Cuba  compared 
with  those  of,  59  ;  sailor  who  bad 
been  to,  62  ;  natives  of,  75  ;  pesti- 
lential rivers  of,  9 1  ;  yams  in,  1 13  ; 
the  Admiial  bad  been  to,  122  ; 
Manequeta  coast,  154  n.  ;  Spanish 
ships  ordered  not  to  go  to,  191 

Guisay,  Guinsay  (see  Kinsay) 

Gulf-weed,  24,  25,  26,  31,  164,  166, 
167 

Gutierrez,  Pedro,  saw  the  light,  35  ; 
sent  on  shore  for  help  when  the 
sh-p  grounded,  134;  left  at  Navi- 
dad in  joint  command,  145 

Hammocks,  or  Hamacas,  49,  67 
Harrisse,   H.,  on  the  date  of  Tos- 

canelh's  letter,  3  71.  ;  on  words   of 

Columbus    respecting    the    chart, 

29  n. 
Henao,    France co,   of  Avila,  left  at 

Navidad,  145  v. 
Hermoso,  Cape,  51,  52 
Herrera,    his  account   of    the    first 

voyage   of    Columbus    from    Las 


INDEX. 


247 


Casas,  v ;  gives  Santa  Maria  as 
the  name  of  ihe  ship  of  Columbus, 
17  n.  ;  on  the  rig  of  the  caravels, 
20  n.  ;  on  the  variation,  23  n. 

Hierro  Inland,  reports  of  land  seen 
to  the  west,  21  ;  news  of  Portu- 
guese caravel  brought  from,  21  ; 
distance  from,  26,  31,  66,  173 

Hierro,  Point,  157 

Holy  Sepulchre,  scheme  for  recovery 
of,  139 

Huelva,  hermitage  at,  a  relic  of 
church  at  Saltes,  18  n.  ;  pilgrim- 
age vowed  to  Santa  Maria  de  la 
Cinta  at,  187 

Iguana,  47,  54,  56 

Indians  (see  Natives). 

Infantado,  Duke  of,  Journal  of 
Columbus  in  archives  of,  v 

Irishman  with  Columbus,  145,  iu 

Isabella  Island  discovered,  51 ;  de- 
scribed, 52,  55  ;  natives,  55  ;  de- 
parture from,  57  ;  reasons  for  not 
returning,  8 1 

Isabella,  Queen  (^ee  Ferdinand) 

Islands,  fabulous  (see  Antilia,  San 
Borondon),  supposed,  24,  29,  32 

Jamaica  (see  Yamaye) 

Jerez,  Rodrigo  de,  of  Ayamonte, 
sent  on  a  mission  into  the  interior 
of  Cuba,  66 

Jews,  expulsion  from  Spain,  16 

Jimenes,  Francisco,  of  Seville,  left 
at  Navidad,  145  n. 

Joao  II,  King  of  Portugal,  received 
Columbus,  190  )!.,  191 

Journal  of  Columbus  commenced,  17 

Juan,  Maestie,  surgeon,  left  at  Navi- 
dad, 145  n. 

Juana,  name  given  to  Cuba,  98,  131 

Kan  or  Kaan,  the  Grand,  mentioned 
by  Toscanelli,  6  ;  meaning  of  the 
word,  6  n.  ;  mentioned  by  Co'.um 


bus,   16  ;    supposed  tidings  of,  60, 

61,  64,  65,  74,  S7,  106 
Katay,  6,  6  «.,  8,  63 
Kinsay  or  Quinsay,    mentioned  by 

Toscanelli,   8  ;  by  Columbus,   65  ; 

account  of,  8  ;/.  (see  Quinsay) 

Laguna,  Cape,  53 

Lamina,  in  Guinea,  Spanish  ships 
not  to  visit,  190 

Lanzada,  Point,  no 

Lanzarote,  one  of  the  Canaries,  19 

Las  Casas,  Journal  of  Columbus  in 
handwriting  of,  v;  interpolations 
of,  in  brackets,  ix  ;  fuil  abstract  of 
Journal  of  Columbus  given  by,  v  ; 
version  of  Toscanelli  letter,  iii,  3  «. ; 
map  of  Toscanelli  belonged  to,  4». ; 
denunciatioa  of  the  kidnapping  of 
natives,  75  n. 

Latitude,  observations  for,  63,  66, 
82,  no 

Leagues,  lergth  of,  18  n.  ;  substi- 
tuted by  the  transcriber  for  miles, 
42,  122 

Lepe,  sailor  from,  who  saw  the  light, 

35"- 

Light  seen  by  the  Admiral,  35,  36  ; 
shown  by  the  Admiral  to  Pmzon, 
S3,  175;  shown  by  boat  of  Nina,  99 

Lindo,  Cape,  97 

Lisa,  a  fish  (Skate),  106  «. 

Lisbon,  river  of,  reached  by  Colum- 
bus, 187 

Lizards,  47  (see  Iguana) 

Llandra,  in  Portugal,  Columbus  at, 
191,  192 

Logrosan,  Martin  de,  left  at  Navi- 
dad, 145  n. 

Long  Island,  modern  name  of 
Ftrnandina,  45  n. 

Loreto,  vow  of  pilgrimage  to,  175 

Lucayos  Islands,  36 

Luna,  Rio  de  la,  in  Cuba,  61 

Macana,  orwoodtn  sword,  described, 
160 


248 


INDEX. 


Macorin,  in  Espa&ola,  141 
Madeira,  land  seen  to  the  west  of, 
20,  21  n.  ;  reckoning  for,  172,  173, 
178,  186 
Major,  R.  H.,  reference  to  his  Select 

Letters  of  Columbus,  22 
Manequeta,  143  ;  coast  of,  154  n. 
Mangi,  Province  of,  S 
Manoel,  King  of  Portugal,  191  n. 
Man-o'-War  birds  (see  Birds) 
Map  of  Toscanelli  (see  Charts) 
"  Mar  de  Nuestra  Senora",  78 
"  Mar  de  Santo  Tornas",  port  of, 

126 
Mares   Rio  de,  in  Cuba,  61  ;  return 

to,    64 ;    port   described,    69,    91  ; 

departure  from,  72,  82 
Maria,   Pueito,   first  name  given  to 

Si.  Nicholas,  99 
Martius,  Fernando,  Canonat  Lisbon, 

copy  of  ktter  from  Toscanelli  to,  ii, 

4,  7 
Mastick,    reward    claimed    by    the 

master  of  the  Nina  for  finding,  69  ; 

supply,  74,  78,  105,  106,  no 
Matheos,     Hernan     Perez,   gossips 

with  Oviedo,  36  ». 
Matinino  Island,    162;    said  to  be 

peopled  by  women,  163,  165,  166 
Mayonix,  in  Espanola,  141 
Medina,   Pedro  de,  reports  respect- 
ing Antilia,  21 
Mendoza,  Diego  de,  left  at  Navidad, 

144;?. 
Mendoza,  Juan  de,  left  at  Navidad, 

144  n. 
Mermaids  seen,  154 
Moguer,  evidence  given  at,  respect- 
ing the  explosion  of  the  Jews,  16  ; 

vow  of  pilgrimage  to  Santa  Clara 

at,   175 
Montai  van,  Diego,  of  Jaen,  left  at 

Navidad,  145  n. 
Monte  Cristi,    147  ■    sailing  direc- 
tions for,  148,  149  ;  return  to,  with 

lhe  Pinta,  150 
Monte  de  Plata,  156 


Moors,    defeat    by    Ferdinand  and 

Isabella,  15,  16 
Moreillo,  Juan  de,  left  at  Navidad, 

145  n, 
Munoz,  Juan  Bautista,  vi 
Musk,  smell  of,  80 
Mussel  shells,  a  sign  of  pearls,  60 

Nafa,  in  Africa,  173 
Narango,  Port,  in  Cuba,  62 
Natives  of  Guanahani,  37-40  ;  their 
canoes,  39  ;  their  colour,  38  ;  of 
Fernandina.  46,  49,  50;  of  Isabella, 
54,  56  ;  of  Cuba,  88,  95,  96 ;  of 
Espaiiola,  106,  107,  108,  112,  129; 
praise  of,  115,  123,  124,  131,  135  ; 
hospitality,  130  ;  honesty,  135, 
139  ;  conversion  su^geste^,  71,  72; 
their  nakedness,  38,  43,  49,  68, 
71,  113,  125,  129;  custom  of 
painting,  38,  131,  159;  their 
timidity,  61,  64,  95,  96,  III,  1 14  ; 
absence  of  arms,  3S,  68,  123  ; 
darts,  38,  49,  95 ;  arrows,  164 ; 
wooden  swoid,  164;  canoes,  39, 
43>  45>  58>  91»  93>  94  J  no  religion, 
65  ;  policy  of  Columbus  regarcinj_, 
43,  44,  45  ;  believed  the  Spaniaids 
came  from  heaven,  41,  114  ;  human 
heads  found  in  houses,  in  Cuba, 
92  ;  encounter  with,  at  San.ana, 
160,  161  ;  kidnaptirg  of,  at 
Guanahani,  38,  44,  48,  50,  60,  63, 
66,  81  ;  at  Rio  de  Wares,  73,  75, 
80;  at  Samana,  163,  164;  by 
Pinzon,  155 
Navarrete,  Journal    of     Columbus 

published  by,  vi 
Navidad  settlement,  138,  140,  144;/.; 
hit  of   Spaniaids  left  at,    144  «., 
145  n.;    stores  and  supplies,   145  ; 
sailing  directions   for,  147  ;    alarm 
lest  encounter  at  Samana  should  be 
prejudicial  to  settlers,  161 
Needle  (see  Compass  Variation) 
Nightingales,  24,  30,  103 
Nina,  caravel   owned  by  the   Nifio 


INDEX. 


249 


fam'ly,  17  ti.',  her  rig,  20  n.;  re- 
ported seeing  b  rds,  23  ;  position 
according  to  pilot  of,  26 ;  false 
alarm  of  land,  29,  33  ;  signs  of 
land  seen  from,  35  ;  canoe  along- 
side, 43  ;  course  to  Isabella  I»le, 
51  ;  escape  of  kidnapped  boys 
from,  80  ;  new  mast  and  yard  for 
mizen,  85  ;  sent  ahead  to  Espan  >la, 
98,  99 ;  in  company  when  Santa 
Maria  was  wrecked,  133  ;  leaky 
condition,  162,  165  ;  had  to  wait 
for  the  Pinta,  168  ;  in  the  storm, 
175  1S0;  in  the  Tagus,  1S9  ; 
crosses  Saltes  Bar,  homeward 
bound,  192 

Nino  family,  17».;  Pilot,  172,173 

Nitayno,  name  for  a  chief  in 
Espaiiola,    130 

Norona,  Don  Martin  de,  brought  a 
mes-sage  from  ihe  King  of  Purtug  1 
to  Columbus,  190;  goes  back  to 
the  Tagus  with  Columbus,  191 

North  Star,  altitude  equal  to  that 
which  it  has  at  Cape  St.  Vincent, 
171 

Nucay  (see  Gold) 

Nuestra  Senora,  sea  of,  78,  84,  91 

Oro,  Rio  del,  153 

Osório,  Aloi  zo  Perez,  left  at  Navi- 

dad,  144;/. 
Osório,  Álvaro  Perez,  left  at  Navi- 

dad,  144  n. 
Oviedo,  historian,  never  saw  journal 

of  Columbus,  v  ;  gave  Gallega  as 

name  of  ship  of  Columbus,  17  k.; 

story  about  the  sailor  who  saw  the 

light,  35  «.;    gossip  with  Vicente 

Pinzon  and  Matheos,  36 

Palmas,  Cape  of,  63 

Palm  trees,  59,  77,  89 

Palos,  iv  ;  expukion  of  Jews  from, 

16  11.  ;  Columbus  fitting  out  at,  1 7  ; 

Nina  and  Pinta,  caravels  of,  1 7  n.  ; 

bad  condition  of  vessels   supplied 


at,  139;  misconduct  of  caulkers  at, 
162 

Parrots,  37,  38,  39,  47,  54,  124 

Patino,  Juan,  of  La  Serena,  left  at 
Navidad,  145  n. 

Pearls,  sea  su  table  for,  60,  62  ; 
reported,  68 

Pedro,  of  Talavera,  left  at  Navidad, 
145  n. 

Pension,  for  first  sighting  land,  36 

Pepper  (native),  143,  164 

Perez,  Fray  Rodrigo,  uncle  of  Esco- 
»edo,  145 

Pico,  Cape  of,  86 

Pierna,  Cape,  no 

Pilgrimages,  vows  during  the  storm, 
175,  176,  187 

Pilots,  opinions  as  to  position,  19, 
26,  29 ;  when  homeward  bound, 
172>  x73  '■>  tne  true  positions  kept 
from  them  by  the  Admiral,  180 

Pine  trees,  85,  89 

Pinta  caiavel,  17  n.  ;  accident  to 
her  rudder,  19 ;  owners,  19 ; 
refitted  at  Giau  Canana,  20; 
position  according  to  pilot  of,  26, 
28  ;  signs  of  land  seen  from,  35  ; 
sighted  land,  35,  36  ;  her  course 
for  l:-abella  Island,  51  >  informa- 
tion from  natives  on  board,  63  ; 
parts  company,  82  ;  news  of,  140, 
142,  143,  146  ;  rejoins,  150  ; 
kaky  condition,  162,  165  ;  delay 
caused  by  communicating  with, 
167  ;  bad  sailing  owing  to  weak 
mizen-mast,  168;  finally  parttd 
company,  174,  175  n. 

Finzon,  Martin  Alonzo,  16  n.  ;  com- 
manded Pinta,  17  n.  ;  the  Admi- 
ral's first  opinion  of,  19  ;  retittii  g 
at  Gran  Canária,  20,  21  ;  expect- 
ing land,  25,  28,  29  ;  advice  as  to 
the  comse,  33;  landed  at  Guana- 
hani,  37  ;  as  to  sailing  round 
Fernandina,  48  ;  killed  an  iguana 
at  Isabella  Island,  56 ;  reported 
the    statements    of    natives,    63 ; 


250 


INDEX. 


thought  he  had  found  a  cinnamin- 
tree,  67  ;  deserted  the  Admiral,  82, 
143  ;  evil  consequences  of  his 
conduct,  146 ;  rejoined  the  Ad- 
miral, 150  ;  his  excuses  for  desert- 
ing, 150,  151  ;  insubordination, 
152,  155  ;  kidnapped  natives  at 
Rio  de  Gracia,  155  ;  neglect  in 
not  getting  a  new  mizen-mas% 
168  ;  finally  parted  company,  174  ; 
death,  175  n. 

Pinzon,  Vicente  Yanez,  captain  of 
ihi  Nina,  17  n.  ;  gossip  with 
Oviedo,  36  n.  ;  landed  at  Guana- 
hmi,  37;  reported  that  rhubarb 
grew  on  Amigi  Island,  142  ;  in- 
subordination, 152;  his  reckoning 
on  the  homeward  voyage,  172,  173 

Plants  (see  Aloe,  Amaranth,  Ar- 
bu'.us,  Cotton,  Mastick,  Palms, 
Pine,  Purslane,  Rhubarb, Trees) 

Pointers  or  Guardiãs,  stars  in  the 
Oreat  Bear,  bearing,  31 

Pole  Star,  variation  acc<  unted  for 
by  motion  of,  23  n.,  24,  25  ;/. 

Polo,  Nicolo  and  Maffeo,  journeys, 
7». 

Polo,  Marco,  referred  to,  6  n.,  7  n., 
28;/. 

Porcuna,  Hernando  de,  left  at  Navi- 
dad,  145  n. 

Portugal,  King  of,  Affonso  V,  seeks 
information  from  Toscanelli,  ii, 
4  n.  ;  reception  of  Columbus  by 
the  King,  190,  191  ;  caravels 
of,  lying  in  wait  for  Columbus,  21 

Portuguese,  discoveries  by,  through 
observing  flights  of  birds,  33 ; 
their  inhospitable  conduct  at  Santa 
Maiia,  1S1,  1S2;  treatment  of 
Columbus  by,  in  the  Tagus,  188, 
189 

Principe,  Puerto  del,  in  Cuba,  78, 
81 

Puerto  Santo,  in  Cuba,  93,  97 ; 
i.-land  near  Madeira,  172 

Purslane,  in  Cuba,  60 


Quadrant,  observations  with,  66,  82, 
no,  171 

Quinsay,  city  of,  described  in  Tos- 
canelli letter,  8,  8  ?t.  ;  mentioned 
by  Columbus,  65  (see  Kinsay) 

Quintero,  Cristoval,  part  owner  of 
the  Pinta,  19 

Rabiforcado,  or  man-o'-warbird,  30 
Rabo  de  junco,  or    boatswain-bird 

(see  Birds),  23 
Ragged  Isles,  59  «. 
Rascon,  Gomes,  part  owner  of  the 

Pinta,  19 
Reckonings,  two  kept  by  Columbus 

on   voyage   out,    22,    29,    31  ;    on 

homeward  voyage,    171,  172,  173, 

180 
Redondo,  Cape,  157 
Rhubarb  on  Amiga  Island,  142,  143 
Roja,  Point,  153 

Roldan,  lhe  pilot,  his  reckoning,  172 
Rudder   of  the   Pima,   accident  to, 

19  ;  boy  in  charge,  132 
Ruiz,    Sancho,   pilot   in   the    Nina, 

reckoning,  173 
Rum  Cay,   modem  name  of  Santa 

Maria    de  la  Concepcion    Island, 

42  n. 

Sacanben,  in  Portugal,  Columbus 
at,  190 

Sacro,  Port,  158 

Sails  of  Santa  Maria  enumerated, 
38  (^ee  Bonnet) 

Sailing  Directions,  121,  126 

Sailors  with  Columbus,  17;  false 
reckoning  kept  for,  22,  29,  30,  31, 
34  ;  bad  steering,  22  ;  catch  fish, 
25  ;  alarmed  at  the  variation,  24  ; 
alarmed  at  coustant  east  wind,  27, 
28 ;  look  out  for  land,  and  sing 
Gloria  in  excelsis,  29  ;  bathing 
aloi  gside,  29 ;  murmurs  at  the 
length  of  the  voyage,  34  ;  speech 
of  the  Admiral  to,  34,  36  ;  jump 
overboard  to  seize   a   native,    43 ; 


INDEX. 


251 


taking  soundings,  60,  84,  97,  99  ; 
excellent  healih  of,  91  ;  on  shore 
to  wash  clothes,  92  ;  boys  never  to 
take  the  helm,  132  ;  left  at  Navi- 
dad,  144,  145;  cutting  wood,  151, 
152;  catch  a  turtle,  154;  encoun- 
ter with  natives  at  Samana,  161  ; 
kill  a  shark,  169  ;  vows  of  pilgrim- 
age during  the  storm,  175,  176, 
187  ;  seized  by  Portuguese,  181  ; 
released,  185  (see  Jerez,  Triana, 
Torres,  Villa) 

Salcedo,  Admiral's  servant,  35  n. 

Saltes,  Bar  of,  expedition  crosses, 
18;  account  of  former  town  aijd 
church  on  Isle  of,  18  n.  ;  course 
shaped  for,  192 ;  Ntna  crosses 
homeward  bound,  192 

Samana,  158;  encounter  with  natives, 
160,  161 

Samaot,  Samoet,  or  Samoate  Isle, 
gold  reported  at,  46,  48,  50,  5 1 

San  Antonio  monastery  (see  Villa- 
franca) 

San  Borondon,  fabulous  isle,  20  n. 

San  Gregório,  or  Fayal,  172 

San  Jorge,  Tnstan  de,  lelt  at  Navi- 
dad,  145  n. 

San  Miguel,  183 

San  Nicolas,  Port,  100,  101,  102 

San  Salvador,  name  of  Guaiiahani, 
42,  43,  Si  ;  river  in  Cuba,  61,  62 

San  Theramo,  Cape,  166 

Santo   Tomas  Isle,  120,  121  ;  Sea, 

133 
Santa  Catalina  harbour,  86 
Santa  Clara  (see  Moguer) 
Santa    Maria,    ship    of    Columbus, 

owned  by  Juan  de  la  Cosa,  17  ;/.  ; 

name  given  in  Herrera,  17  n.;  sails 

enumerated,    58  ;   shipwreck,    132, 

133,  134 
Santa  Maria,  Poit,  175 
Santa    Maria   de   la  Concepcion 

Island,    42 ;    Fernandina    in   sight 

from,  42 
Santa   Maria,  in   the  Azores,  172, 


173.  186  ;  reached  by  Columbus, 
1  So  ;  inhospitable  conduct  of  Por- 
tuguese at,  180,  184,  1S5 

Santa  Maria  de  la  Cinta,  pilgrim- 
age vowed  to,  187 

Santo,  Cape,  130,  133,  147 

St.  Vincent,  Cape,  171,  186,  192 

Sanchez,  Rodrigo,  of  Segovia,  could 
not  see  the  light,  36  ;  sent  to  see 
the  mastick  trees,  69 

Santona,  native  place  of  Juan  de  la 
Cosa,  17  n.;  men  of,  138  n. 

Sebastian,  of  Majorca,  left  at  Navi- 
dad,  145  n. 

Seca,  l\,int,  157 

Serpents,  Iguanas  mistaken  for,  47, 
54,  56 

Seville,  sea  as  smooth  as  the  river 
at,  25,  34,  62 

Shark  killed,  169 

Sicily,  muuntains  in  Cuba  compared 
to,  60 

Sierpe,  Cape,  147 

Silver  ornament,  65 

Smoke  signals,  100,  in.  161 

Sol,  Rio  del,  in  Cuba,  73 

Soundings  taken,  6c,  84,  97,  99 

Spices,  country  ol,  in  Toscanelli 
letter,  4,  5  ;  specimens  g.ven  to 
envoys  into  the  interior  oi  Cuba,  66 ; 
inquiries  after,  70,  143  (see  Mane- 
queta) 

Storm  in  homeward  voyage,  174  to 
178 

Sword,  wooden  (ste  Macana) 

Tagus  reached  by  Columbus,  187, 
18S 

Tajado,  Cape,  157 

Tallarte  (or  Alard),  of  Lajes,  Eng- 
lishman, left  at  Navidad,  145  «. 

Tapia,  Bachiller  Bemardo  de,  left  at 
Navidad,  144  n. 

Tejo  river,  gold  in,  85 

Tenerife,  irruption  seen,  20 ;  be- 
calmed near,  22 

Terceira,  in  the  Azores   172 


252 


INDEX. 


Terns  (see  Birds) 

Tiller, 'hoy  in  charge  of,  when  Santa 
Mai-: a  grounded,  132 

Tobacco  first  seen,  71 

Tordoya,  Diego,  of  Cabezi  de  Vaca, 
left  at  Navidad,  144  n. 

Torpa,  Diego  de,  left  at  Navidad, 
145  n. 

Torres,  Cape,  120 

Torres,  Luis  de,  converted  Jew  in- 
terpreter, sent  on  a  mission  into 
Cuba.  66 

Tortuga  IsUnd,  99,  104,  105,  no; 
canoe  from,  115 

Toscanelli,  Paolo,  letters  to  Colum- 
bus, ii,  vii,  3,  10  ;  date  of  1-tters, 
3  «.,  4  n.  ;  where  published,  iii  ; 
discovery  of  Latin  text  of  letter, 
iii  ;  reproduction  of  map,  iv  (see 
Chart) 

Trees  (see  Vegetation)  :  Palms, 
59»  77>  89  ;  Pines,  85,  89  ;  Oaks 
ai.d  Arbutus,  85  ;  growing  il<>se 
to  the  sea,  a  sign  of  fine  weather, 
60,  77 

Triana,  Rodrigo  de,  sighted  land,  35 

Tunny  fish,  25,  166,  167 

Tunny  fishery  at  Cadiz  and  Conil, 
166 

Tuob,  name  for  gold,  159 

Turtle,  96,  154 

Urminga,  Juan  de,  left  at  Navidad, 
145  «. 

Valle  del  Paraiso,  1 1 1 

Valparaiso,  visit  of  Columbus  to 
Kir  g  of  Portugal  at,  190 

Variation  (see  Compass) 

Vegetation,  variety  and  beauty  of, 
47,  49,  54  (see  Aloes,  Mastick, 
Trees,  Purslane,  Rhubarb) 


Velasco,  Don  José  Mat  ia  Fernandez, 

librarian  of  the  Columbian  Library, 

discovered    lhe    Latin    text  of   the 

Toscanelli  letter,  iii,  4  n, 
Velez,    Alonzo,    of    Seville,    left   at 

Navidad,  144  n. 
Vergara,    Francisco  de,   of  Seville, 

Jeft  at  Navidad,  145  n. 
Villa,  Pedro  de,  sailor  in  the  Nina, 

drew  the  lot  to  go  on  pilgrimage  to 

Loreto,  175 
Villafranca,  interview  of  Columbus 

wiih  the  Queen  of  Portugal  at  the 

monastery  of  San  Antonio  at,  191 
Villar,    Juan    de,    left   at   Navidad 

145  »• 

Watering  ship,  46 

Watling  Island,  modern  name  of 
Guanahani,  36  n.  (see  Guanahani) 

Wax  found  in  the  houses  at  Cuba,  92 

Weed  (see  Gulf  Weed) 

Whale  seen,  27,  47 

Women,  only  one  seen  at  Guana- 
tiani,  38  ;  kidnapped  at  Rio  de 
Mares,  75  ;  woman  caught  in 
tspa&ula  and  kindly  treated,  107  ; 
giils  kidnapped  by  Pinzon,  156  ; 
island  peopled  by,  163 


Yamaye,  probably  Jamaica,  151 
Yams,  68,  108,  113,  123,  124 
Yaqui  river,  152  n. 
Yule,    Sir   Henry,    his   Maico  Polo 
reitired  to,  6  11.,  8  n.,  9  n. 

Zaitun,  city  in  China,  mentioned  by 
Toscanelli,  6  ;  account  of  6  n. ; 
mentioned  by  Columbus,  65 

Zanahorias  (see  Yams) 


INDEX. 


253 


INDEX 


Documents  relating  to  the  Voyages  of  John 
Cabot  and  Gaspar  Corte  Real. 


Adams,  Clement,  his  engraved  copy 
of  lhe  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot  at 
Whitehall,  xxxv 

Admiral,  tiile  given  to  John  Cabot, 
xvii,  202,  205 

Algarve,  country  of  the  Corte  Reals, 
xlv 

American  coasts  (NeeNorthAmerica) 

Andilia,  235  (see  Antilla) 

Angra,  capital  of  Terceira,  xlv 

Animals  in  lands  discovered  by 
Cab  it,  201  ;  by  Corte  Real,  233 

Antilla,  idea  of  Cabot  respecting, 
x\i ;  name  given  by  the  Portuguese 
to  the  West  Indian  Islands,  235 

Apianus,  Petrus,  map  of,  liii 

Ashurst  (see  Bristol) 

Asia,  Greenland  believed  to  be  a 
point  of,  xlviii,  240 

Ayala,  Pedro  de,  Spanish  Ambas- 
sador in  England,  his  despatch 
respecting  John  Cabot,  208 

Azores,  two  natives  of,  granted 
letters  patent,  xxii 

Bacallaos,  name  of  fish,  xx,  201, 
210  ;  name  said  to  have  been  given 
to  Newfoundland  by  Cabot,  210 

Badajoz  conference,  Sebastian  Cabot 
at,  xxx 

Barber  (see  Castione) 

Barrett,  History  of  Bristol,  name  of 
the  ship  of  Cabot  given  in,  199 

Bears  seen  by  Cabot,  210 

Bedford,  Earl  of,  in  possession  of  a 


copy  of  the  map  of  Sebastian 
Cabot  at  Cheynies,  xxxv  n. 

Besson,  Jacob,  his  Cosmolibe,  xxxix 

Biddle,  John,  memoir  of  Sebastian 
Cabot,  xlii  n. 

Boni,  Signor,  of  Modena.his  recovery 
of  the  Cantino  map,  xlvi 

Bradley,  Thomas,  with  Cabot  in  the 
second  voyage,  xix 

Brazil,  Bristol  men  search  for  isle  of, 
207,  208;  Sebastian  Cabot  beached 
his  captains  on  coast  of,  xxx 

Bristol,  expedition  of  Cabot  fitted 
out  at,  xiv,  199,  203  ;  Cabot  living 
at,  202  ;  name  of  Cabot's  ship 
given  in  the  History  of  ,  199;  date 
of  Cabot's  sailing  from,  200  ;  neail/ 
all  Bristol  men  in  Caboi's  sh-p, 
xiv,  230  ;  searches  of  citizens  for 
Brazil  LI-,  207,  208  ;  cit  zens  in- 
terested in  Cabot's  voyage,  205  ; 
second  expedition  of  Cabot  sailed 
from,  xix  ;  letters  patent  to 
merchants  of,  Ashurst,  Warde,  and 
Thomas,  xxii ;  Sebastian  Cabot 
told  Eden  he  was   born  at,  xxiii 

Bucignolo  (see  Ragusan) 

Buil,  Friar,  who  sailed  with  Cabot, 
la>  ded  in  Ireland,  208 

Burgundian  with  Cabot  in  the  fir-;t 
voyage,  xviii,  205 

Burrough,  Stephen,  voyage  in  the 
S<archthrift,  the  fitting-out  super- 
intended     by     Sebastian     Cabot, 


254 


INDEX. 


Cabot,      Elizibe'h,      daughter      of 
Stbastian,   xxv  ;    death,    xxxi  n. 

Cabot,  John,  first  letters  patent 
granted  to,  xiii,  197  ;  fitting  out. 
xiv,  199,  203  ;  name  of  his  ship, 
xiv,  199;  second  letters  patent, 
xviii,  206,  207  ;  called  a  Venetian, 
xi,  197,  199,  200,  201.  206  ;  a 
Genoese,  207,  208,  209  ;  date  of 
sailing  from  Bristol,  xv,  200 ;  his 
landfall,  xv,  xvi,  200  ;  course  across 
the  Atlantic,  xv,  xvi ;  reception  on 
return,  xvii  ;  grant  to,  201  ;  dis- 
covery described  by  Pasqualigo, 
xvi,  201,  202  ;  by  Soncino,  203  ; 
wife  a  Venetian,  202  ;  dressed  in 
silk,  202  ;  called  Admiral,  202, 
205  ;  an  exoert  navigator,  203  ; 
living  at  Bristol,  202  ;  his  chart 
and  solid  sphere,  xviii,  204,  208, 
209  ;  remarks  on  caravans  seen  at 
Mecca,  204  ;  second  voyage,  xix, 
207,  208  ;  account  by  Peter  Martyr, 
209,  210;  by  the  Guest  of  Fracastor, 
212,  217;  by  Gomara.  216;  by 
Galvano.  217;  false  statements  of 
his  son  respecting,  213  ;  vestiges  of, 
found  by  Corte  Real,  li,  237  ;  his 
meri's,  xxi,  xliv 
Cabot.  Lewis,  xi,  xiii  n..  197,  198 
Cabot,  Saneio,  xi,  xiii».,  197,  198 
Cabot,  Sebastian,  xi,  197,  198  ;  born 
in  Venice,  xxiii,  209,  220 ;  said 
he  was  born  at  Bristol,  xxiii ;  map 
of,  showing  his  father's  landfall, 
200  ;  account  of,  by  Peter  Martyr, 
209,  211  ;  probably  accompanied 
his  father,  xiv,  xix,  xxiii ;  on  a  voy- 
age in  1502,  xxiv  ;  false  statements 
of,  214,  215  ;  statements  about  his 
voyages,  214,  220  ;  intrigues  with 
Venice,  xxvii,  xxviii,  217  to  224; 
chief  pilot  in  Spain,  xxvii,  220  ; 
urged  by  his  agent  to  come  to 
Venice,  225  ;  intrigue  with  Vene- 
tian Ambassador  in  England,  226  ; 


refused  to  undertake  a  voyage  for 
the  King  of  England,  222  ;  em- 
ployed to  make  a  map  of  Gascony, 
xxiv  ;  in  Spanish  service,  marriage, 
xxv  ;  at  the  funeral  of  Sir  T.  Lovell, 
xxix  ;  at  the  conference  of  Badajoz, 
xxx ;  alleged  expeditions  from  Eng- 
land, xxv,  xxvi ;  expedition  to  the 
River  Plate,  xxx,  xxxi ;  condemned 
to  exile  at  Oran,  xxxi  ;  method  of 
finding  longitude  by  variation,  xxix, 
xxxix,  223  ;  his  map,  description, 
xxxii,  xxxiii  ;  opinion  of  Mr.  Har- 
risse  as  to  map,  xxx'ii,  xxxiv  ;  dis- 
covery of  the  map,  xxxv  n.  ;  last 
employment  in  Spain,  xxxv  ;  return 
to  Er. gland,  xxxv  ;  pension  from 
Edward  VI,  demand  from  Charles 
V,  xxxvi ;  Governor  of  Merchant 
Adventurers,  xxxviii  ;  death,  loss 
of  papers,  xl  ;  character,  xlitoxliv  ; 
wife  (see  Medrano,  Catalina) 

Calicut,  235 

Canerio,  map  of,  Hi 

Cantino,  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Fer- 
rara on  the  voyages  of  Corte  Real, 
xlvi,  232  ;  map  ordered  by,  for  the 
Duke  of  Ferrara,  xlvi,  238  ;  Map, 
legends  on,  239,  240  ;  history  and 
description,  xlvi,  xlvii  ;  construc- 
tion, Hi  ;  coast  of  North  America 
on,  xlix  ;  confused  first  and  second 
voyages  of  Corte  Real,  xlviii  n. ; 
account  of  second  voyage  of  Corte 
Real,  xlix  ;  account  of  natives 
brought  home  in  ships  of  Corte 
Real,  233,  234 

Cape  Breton,  landfall  of  Cabot,  xv, 
xvi,  xxxiii,  xxxiv  ;  Corte  Real  at, 
li 

Cape  Verde  Isles,  distance  of 
Papal  line  from,  xiv 

Carter,  John,  in  second  voyage  of 
Cabot,  xix 

Cartier,  Jacques,  discoveries  shown 
on  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot, 
xxxii,  xxxiv 


INDEX. 


255 


Castione,  barber  of,  to  go  with 
Cabot,  xviii,  205 

Catanio,  Francisco,  Cantino  map  in 
1  he  hands  of,  238 

Catay,  214 

Chancellor  (see  Willoughby) 

Charles  V  valued  services  of  Sebas- 
tian Cabot,  xxxi,  xliii ;  demand  for 
the  return  of  Cabot,  xxxvi 

Chart  of  John  Cabot,  202,  208,  209 

Chaves,  Alonzo,  xxxv 

Chesapeake  Bay  reached  by  CorU 
Real  in  his  second  voyage,  1 

Cheyne,  Sir  Thomas,  xxxvi 

Cheynies  (see  Bedford,  Earl  of) 

Chipango,  xii,  xviii,  204 

Cisneros,  Cardinal,  Sebastian  Cabot 
in  England  during  the  rule  of, 
xxvi 

Collona,  Stragliano,  conversation  of 
Sebastian  Cabot  with,  xxvi,  220 

Columbus,  Christopher,  Cabot  com- 
pared to,  xliv,  207,  208  ;  great- 
ness of  his  discovery,  213 

Columbus,  Fernando,  loyalty  to  his 
father,  xlii 

Compass  (see  Needle) 

Contarini,  Gaspar,  Venetian  Ambas- 
sador in  Spain  (see  Venice),  xxvii, 
xliii  ;  told  by  Sebastian  Cabot  that 
he  was  born  at  Venice,  xxiii ;  con- 
versation with  Sebastian  Cabot 
about  finding  longitude  by  varia- 
tion, xxxix,  223 
Coote,  C.  H.,  editor  of  Stevens' 
work  on  the  Schoner  globe?,  1  «., 
liv  71. 

Copper  ore  (see  Laton) 

Corte  Real,  land  of,  230 

Corte  Real,  Gaspar,  his  first  voyage, 
xlviii,  229  ;  servant  of  the  Duke  of 
Peja,  230 ;  reached  ihe  coast  of 
Greenland,  xlviii  ;  visit  to  New- 
foundland, xlviii,  230  ;  second 
voyage,  xlix  ;  fate  unknown,  231  ; 
waters  his  ship  from  an  iceberg, 
233  ;   discoveries,   233,   236  ;    ves- 


tiges of  voyage  of  Cabot  found  by, 
237 ;  course  taken  on  the  second 
voyage,  xlix,  1,  li  ;  search  for,  liv 

Corte  Real,  João  Vaz,  father  of 
Gaspa*-,  lxv 

Corte  Real,  Manoel,  last  of  the 
familv,  liv 

Corte  Real,  Miguel,  went  in  search 
of  his  brother,  liv,  229,  231 

Corte  Real,  Vasque  Anes,  prevented 
from  going  in  search  of  his  brother, 
liv,  231 

Cosa,  Juan  de  la,  map,  xix  ;  dis- 
coveries of  Cabot  shown  on  map 
of,  xx,  xxxiii  ;  p'aced  West  India 
Islands  too  far  north,  xxi,  1  ;/., 
xxxiii 

Council  of  Ten  (see  Venice) 

Damiande  Goes,  Chronicle,  account 

of  Corte  Real  voyages,  xlv,  230  ; 

date  of  departure  of  Corte  Real  on 

second  voyage,  xlix  n.,  231 
Deane,   Mr.  Charles,  account  of  the 

Cabot  voyages,  x 
Delaware  Bay,    reached   by  Corte 

Real,  on  his  second  voyage,  1 
Desimoni,  work  on  John  Cabot,  x 
Drapers'    Company,    their    doubt 

whether  Sebastian  Cabot  ever  went 

with  his  father,  xxiii  ;/. 

Eden,  Richard,  told  by  Sebastian 
Cabot  that  be  was  born  at  Bristol, 
xxiii  ;  his  statement  respecting  a 
proposed  expedition  under  Sir 
Thomas  Perte,  xxv,  xxvi  ;  account 
of  Cabot's  ideas  respecting  varia- 
tion, xxxix  ;  on  death  of  Cabot,  xl 

Edward  VI,  pension  and  gratuity  to 
Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxvi  ;  Cabot 
explained  variation  of  the  compass 
to,  xxxix 

Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Sebastian 
Cabot,  xxv,  xxxi  n. 

England,  Sebastian  Cabot  declined 
to    serve,    220,    222 ;    intrigue   of 


256 


INDEX. 


Cabot  with  Venetian    ambassador 
in,  226;  return  of  Cabot  to,  xxv 

Fabyan,  referred  to,  x,  200  n. 
Falcons  in  the  land  discovered  by 

Corte  Real,  233 
Farewell,  Cape,  xlviii 
Ferdinand  V,  expedition  against  the 
south   of    France  in    concert    with 
Henry   VI  r,    Xxiv ;    obtained   the 
services  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxv 
Ferrara,  Duke  of  (see  Cantino) 
Fish,     many    taken     in    voyage    of 
Cabot,    204 ;    trade   in    stock    fish 
with     Iceland,    204 ;      a1  undance 
found     by    Corte    Real,    238    (see 
Bacallaos) 
Florida,  xxxiii,  217  ;  theory  that  the 
coast-line  on  the  Cantino  map  was, 
xlix  n. 
Fracastor,   Hieronimo,  guest  of,  in 
Ramusio,  his  account  of  Sibastian 
Cabot,  xx  xi,  112 
Fruits   on   the   land   discovered   by 
Corte  Real,  233 

Galvão,  xix  ;  on  the  second  voyage 

of  Cabot,  xlv,  216  ;  account  of  the 

voyage  of  Corte  Real,  229  ;  latitude 

reached  by  Cabot,  xx,  216 

Genoese,    Cabot  said  to  be,  xi  ;/., 

207,  208 
Gianetti  da  Fano,   Guido,  account 
of  studies  of  Sebastian  Cabot  con- 
nected  with   the   variation  of  the 
compass,  xxxix 

Gilbert,  Sir  Humphrey,  latitude 
reached  by  Cabot,  xx  ;  had  seen 
the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxv, 
«.  ;  misled,  respecting  Sebastian 
Cabot,  by  Ramusio,  xli 

Globe  made  by  John  Cabot,  xviii, 
204 

Goes  (see  Damian  de  Goes) 

Gomara,  xix  ;  en  second  voyage  of 
Cabot,  215  ;  latitude  reached  by 
Cabot,  xx 


Greenland,  legend  respecting-,  on  the 
Cantino  map,  xlvii,  240  ;  joined  to 
Asia  by  Ruysch,  xlviii  «, 

Grynceus,  map,  liii 

Gutierrez,  Diego,  xxxv 

Hakluyt,  Divers  Voyages,  Cabot's 
first  voyage,  x,  200  «.;  had  seen 
the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxv  ; 
as  to  the  papers  of  Cabot,  xl 
Harrisse,  Mr.,  works  on  the  voyages 
of  Cabot,  x  ;  permission  to  trans- 
late documents  from  his  texts,  i, 
xlvi,  203  «.,217  «.,  234  «.,  236 
w->  239  n-\  opinion  on  the  map  of 
Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxiii,  xxxiv  ; 
date  of  departure  of  Corte  Real  on 
second  voyage,  xlix  11.  ;  opinion 
respecting  new  coast-line  on  the 
Cantino  map,  liii  n. 
Hatteras,   Cape,  reached  by  Cabot 

in  second  voyage,  xx 
Henry  VII,    Privy  Purse  Accounts, 
ix  ;    Cabot   at  the  Court  of,  xiii, 
xxi  ;    grant    of    letters     patent    to 
Cabot,    197,  206  ;  grant  of  money 
to  Cabot,  201,  202;  conversations 
about    Cabot    with    the    Spanish 
ambassadors,  207,  208,  211  ;  state- 
ment of  Sebastian  Cabot  respecting 
his  relations  with,  213 
Henry    VIII,     expedition    sent    to 
south  of  France,  xxiv  ;  expeditions 
in  time  of,  xxv 
Hercules  d'Este,  Duke  of  Ferrara, 

(see  Cantino) 
Hoby,  Sir  Philip,  xxxvi 

Ibernia  passed  by  Cabot,  203,  205  ; 

one  of  Cabot's  .-hips   returned  to, 

20S 
Ice  edge  of,  reached  by  Corte  Real, 

233 
Icebergs  seen  by  Cabot,  xx  ;  Corte 

Real  watered  his  ships  from,  xlviii, 


INDEX 


257 


Ice'and,    trade   in    stock-fish,   xvii", 

204 
Indians  of  Newfoundland,  account 

of,  230  ;  brought  home  in  ships  of 

Corte  Real,  233,  234,  237 
Ireland  (see  Ibernia) 
Isabella,  Queen,  214 

Kaan,   the   Great,   ideas    of   Cabot 

Tespecting,  xii,  xv,  xltv 
Kasr  el  Kebir,  Manoel  Corte  Real 

slain  at,  with  King  Sebastian,  liv 

Labrador    on    map     of     Sebastian 

Cabot,  xxxiii  ;  name,  1  n. 
La  Cosa  (see  Cosa) 
Landfall  of  Cabot,  200,  xvi,  xxxiii 
Latitude  reached  by  Cabot,  xx  n., 

xxxiii 
Laton,  or  copper  ore,  211 
Letters    patent    granted     to    John 

Cabot,  xi,    197-199,    206-207;    t0 

merchants  of  Bristol,  xxii 
Lisbon,   John  Cabot  went  to,    xii, 

208  ;  return  of  Corte  Real  to,  229  ; 

of  ship,  1  ;  Corte  Real  sailed  from, 

xlv,  xlix,  230,  231  ;  Italian    news- 
letters sent  from,  xlv 
Longitude  by  variation  of  the  com- 

pass,  xxxix,  223 
Lovell,   Sir  T.,    Sebastian  Cabot  at 

mneral  of,  xxix 

Magdalen  Isles,  the  Saint  John 
Isle  of  Cabot,  xv,  xxxii 

Major,  Mr.  R.  H.,  suggested  expla- 
nation of  the  erroneous  date  on 
the  Cabot  map,  200  n. 

Manoel,  King  of  Portugal,  chronicle 
of,  xlv  ;  Corte  Real  a  servant  of, 
230 ;  licence  to  Corte  Real  to 
discover  new  lands,  229  ;  satisfac- 
tion at  the  discoveries,  236 

Map  (see  Cabot,  Cantino,  Cosa) 

Martyr,  Peter,  xix  ;  account  of  Se- 
bast'an  Cabot,  xxv,  xxxiii,  209 


Mary,  Queen,  application  of  Charles 
V  to,  for  the  return  of  Sebastian 
Cabot,  xxxvii 

Masts,  fine  timber  for,  in  lands  dis- 
covered by  Corte  Real,  233,  239 

Matthew,  name  of  Cabot's  ship,  xii, 
xvi,  199 

Mecca,  John  Cabot  at,  caravans  seen 
there,  xii,  204 

Medina,  Pedro  de,  Arte  de  Navegar 
reported  upon  by  Cabot,  xxxv 

Medrano,  Catalina,  wife  of  Sebas- 
tian Cabot,  xxv,  xxx  n.  ;  illness  of, 
xxxi 

Mendez,  Maitin,  captain  in  the  ex- 
pedition of  Cabot  to  the  river 
Plate,  xxx 

Merchant  Adventurers,  Company 
of,  xxxviii 

Mexia,  Pedro,  xxxv 

Milan,  Duke  of,  letters  of  Soncino  to, 
xviii,  202,  206 

Modena,  Cantino  map  at,  xlvi 


Natives,  account  of,  by  Sebastian 
Cabot,  200  ;  brought  to  Lisbon  in 
ships  of  Corte  Real,  235,  236,  237 
(see  Indians) 

Needle,  Cabot  alleged  that  he  knew 
a  way  of  finding  the  longitude  by, 
xxix,  xxxix,  223 

Newfoundland,  233  ;  called  Green 
Land  by  Corte  Real,  li,  230; 
Indians  of,  230,  231,  238  ;  fish  on 
the  banks  of,  xviii,  xx ;  viiits  to, 
after  Cabot,  xxii  «.;  shown  as  a 
group  of  islands  on  the  map  of 
Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxii  ».j  made 
part  of  Asia  by  Ruysch,  Hi ;  placed 
too  far  east  on  Cantino  map,  xlvii, 
liii  «. 

North  American  Coast  on  map  of 
Juan  de  la  Cosa,  xxi ;  on  map  of 
Sebastian  Cabot,  xxiii ;  on  Can- 
tino map,  xlvii,  xlix,  liii  n. 

North  Pole,  voyage  of  Cabot  to- 
S 


258 


INDEX. 


wards,      209  ;      highest     latitude, 

Ramusio,  212,  214 
North  Star  kept  on  the  right  hand 

by  Cabot,  203 
Nova  Scotia,  li 

Oran,  Sebastian  Cabot  condemned 
to  exile  at,  xxxi 

Ortelius  had  seen  the  map  of  Sebas- 
tian Cabot,  xxxv  ;  influence  of  the 
Cantino  map  felt  nearly  to  the  time 
of,  liii 

Otter  skins,  235 

Papaga,  land  of,  235 

Parana  and  Paraguay,  river  Plate 

explored  by    Sebastian   Cabot,  to 

junction  of,  xxxi 
Parias  on  Schoner  globes,  liii 

Pasqualigo,  Lorenzo,  letter  to  his 
brother  on  the  voyage  of  John 
Cabot,  201  ;  fixed  the  date  of 
Cabot's  return,  xvii 

Pasqualigo,  Pietro,  Venetian  Am- 
bassador at  Lisbon,  account  of  the 
voyages  of  Corte  Real,  235  ;  course 
taken  by  Corte  Real  in  second 
voyage,  xlix  ;    account  of  natives, 

235-  237 

Peckham,  payment  to,  for  bringing 
Cabot  to  England,  xxxvi 

Perte,  Sir  Thomas,  failure  of  his  ex- 
pedition, xxv,  xxvi 

Pines  en  land,  discovered  by  Corte 
Real,  li,  233 

Plate,  river,  expedition  of  Sebastian 
Cabot  to,  xxx 

Prima  Tierra  Vista,  xxxii,  xxxiii, 
xxxiv,  201  (see  Landfall  of 
Cabot) 

Ptolemy  of  1513,  liv«.  (see  Wald- 
seemiiller) 

Puebla,  Dr.  Ruy  Gonzalez,  Spanish 
Ambassador  in  England,  letter  re- 
specting Cabot,  207 


Purchas  had  seen  the  map  of  Sebas- 
tian Cabot,  xxxv  n. 

Ragusan,  Hierolamo  di  Marin  di 
Bucignolo,  agent  of  Sebastian 
Cabot,  xxvii,  217  ;  his  proposals, 
219,  221,  224  ;  letter  to  Cabot,  225 

Ramusio,  xix  ;  his  recollections  of 
the  contents  of  a  letter  from  Sebas- 
tian Cabot,  211  j  his  account  of 
what  a  guest  at  the  villa  of  Fra- 
castor  said  about  Cabot,  xxxi,  212, 
213 ;  latitude  reached  by  Cabot, 
xx  n„  xxxiii  ;  agent  of  Sebastian 
Cabot  at  Venice,  xxxvii  n. 

Rivers,  mouths  of,  discovered  by 
Corte-Real,  1,  233 

Rodas,  Miguel  de,  volunteer  in  the 
expedition  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxx 

Rojas,  Francisco  de,  captain  of  a  ship 
in  the  expedition  of  Sebastian 
Cabot,   xxx,  xxxi 

Ruysch,  Johann,  his  map,  Hi, 
xlviii  n. 

Samano,  Juan  de,  letter  of  Sebastian 
Cabot  to,  xxxi 

San  Brandon  Island,  on  map  of 
Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxiii 

Sancta  Cruz,  or  Brazil,  people  com- 
pared to  those  of  Newfoundland, 
230 

S.  George,  in  the  Azores,  xlv 

St.  John  Island,  named  by  Cabot, 
xv,  xxxii,  200 

St.  John's  Day,  landfall  of  Cabot  on, 
xv,  200 

St.  Lawrence,  Gulf  of,  discovered 
by  Cartier,  xxxii,  xxxiv 

St.  Mark,  flag  of,  hoisted  by  Cabot, 
202 

Sanuto,  Livio,  had  seen  the  map 
of  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxv ;  his 
account  of  Cabot's  study  of  the 
variation  of  the  compass,  xxxviii 

Schõner  globes,  liii  (see  Coote, 
Stevens) 


INDEX. 


259 


Searchthrift  (see  Burrough) 

Sebastian,  King  of  Portugal,  liv 

Seville,  John  Cabot  at,  xi',  208  ; 
Guest  of  Fracastor  at,  213  ;  Se- 
bastian Cabot  at,  xxvii ;  hydro- 
graphic  department  at,  xxxiii 

Soncino,  letters  to  the  Duke  of 
Milan  on  the  voyage  of  Cabot, 
xviii,  202  206 

Soranzo,  Giacomo,  Venetian  Am- 
bassador in  England,  his  intrigue 
with  Cabot,  xxxvii,  xliii,  226 

Sphere,  solid  (see  Globe) 

Stevens',  Mr.,  theory  respecting  the 
coast-line  on  the  Cantino  map,  1 11., 
liv  n. 

Stock-fish,  trade  with  Iceland, 
204 

Stow,  Chronicle,  date  of  Cabot's  first 
voyage,  200  n. 

Sydney,  land  near,  sighted  by  John 
Cabot,  xvii 


Tanais  shown  on  globe  of  Cabot, 
204 

Tarducci,  work  on  the  Cabots,  xi 

Tavilla  (Tavira),  in  Algarve,  Vasqae 
Anes  de  Corte  Real  the  Alcalde 
Mayor  of,  231 

Terceira,  Gaspar  Corte  Real  sailed 
from,  xlv,  229,  231 ;  granted  to  the 
Corte  Reals,  xlv 

Terra  Verde,  name  given  to  New- 
foundland by  Corte  Real,  xlviii 

Thirkhill,  Lancelot,  in  second  voy- 
age of  Cabot,  xix 

Thomas,  xxii  (see  Bristol) 

Tides,  remark  of  Cabot  on,  202 

Timber  (see  Trees) 

Tordesillas,  treaty  of,  dividing  lines 


between  dominions  of  Spain  and 
Portugal,  xliv 
Trees  on  lands  discovered  by  Corte 
Real,  xlviii,  233,  234 

Vannes,  Dr.  Peter,  English  Ambas- 
sador at  Venice,  xxxvii 

Variation  of  the  compass  (see 
Needle) ;  explained  by  Cabot  to 
Edward  VI,  xxxix 

Varnhagen,  theory  respecting  the 
new  coast-line  on  the  Cantino  map, 

1ÍV  71. 

Venice,  intrigues  of  Sebastian  Cabot 
with,  xxvii,  217  to  224;  instruc- 
tions of  the  Council  of  Ten  to  Con- 
tarini,  217  ;  Cabot  urged  by  his 
agent  to  come  to,  225 ;  Soranzo's 
intrigue  with  Cabot,  xxxvii,  226  ; 
John  Cabot  called  a  Venetian,  xi, 
I97>  IQ95  Sebastian  Cabot  born  at, 
xxiii,  209,  220 

Waldseemuller,  map  in  Ptolemy  of, 

1513.  lii 

Ward  (see  Bristol) 

Whitehall,  map  of  Clement  Adams 
in  the  privy  gallery  at,  xxxv 

Willoughby  de  Broke,  Lord,  led  an 
expedition  to  the  south  of  France, 
xxiv ;  Ferdinand  applied  to,  for 
the   services   of  Sebastian    Cabot, 

XXX 

Willoughby  and  Chancellor,  in- 
structions for  the  voyage  prepared 
by  Sebastian  Cabot,  xxxviii 

Worthington,  Mr.,  associated  with 
Cabot,  xxxviii ;  in  possession  of 
papers  of  Cabot,  xl ;  account  of, 
xl  71. 


LONDON:    CHAS.  J.  CLARK,  4,  LINCOLN'S   INN   FIELDS,  W.C. 


Haklaçt  <&òítín$. 


A    CORRECTION. 


In  1882  the  late  Gen.  Sir  John  Henry  Lefroy  edited  for 
the  Hakluyt  Society  a  volume  entitled  "Tke  Historye  of  the 
Bermudas  or  Summer  Islands"  from  MS.  750  of  the  Sloane 
Collection  at  the  British  Museum.  In  his  introductory 
remarks  our  lamented  colleague  discussed  the  authorship 
of  this  MS.,  and  from  internal  evidence  attributed  it  to 
Capt.  John  Smith,  the  historian  of  Virginia. 

Ten  years  have  elapsed  since  the  publication  of  Lefroy 's 
work,  and  his  conclusions  have  not,  as  far  as  I  am  aware, 
been  questioned.  It  was  only  quite  recently  that  Mr. 
Edward  Scott,  Keeper  of  MSS.  in  the  Museum,  while 
cataloguing  the  Sloane  Collection,  came  upon  a  MS.  in  the 
same  handwriting  as  750,  signed  by  Nathaniel  Butler. 
This  MS.,  numbered  758,  is  described  by  Sir  F.  Madden  in 
his  Catalogue,  as  follows:  "  1.  Memda  for  12  heads  of 
Letters  written  by  Capt.  Nath.  Butler  while  Governor  of 
the  Bermudas  [autogr.].  2.  A  dialogicall  discourse  of 
Marine  affairs  between  the  High  Admirall  and  a  Captaine 
att  sea,  written  in  six  dialogues  by  Capt.  N.  Butler  in  1634, 
with  a  table  of  contents  prefixed.  3.  A  diary  of  my  per- 
sonall  employments  from  10  Feb.  1639  to  2  May  1640,  by 
the  same  Capt.  N.  Butler  [autogr.]." 

A  comparison  of  the  two  MSS.  establishes  the  fact  of 
the  identity  of  the  handwriting,  though  one  is  a  fair  copy, 
the  other  a  rough  draft.     Both,  however,  are  written  by  the 


same  educated  hand,  and  the  signature  at  the  end  of  758, 
"  Xath.  Butler",  is  genuine. 

Had    General    Lefroy  seen    the    Madden  Catalogue  he 
could    not    have    fallen    into    the  error  of  attributing  the 
History  of  the  Bermudas  to  Capt.  John  Smith,  for  Madden 
expressly  states  that  its  author  was  Butler.     But  at  the 
time  Gen.  Lefroy  edited  his  book,  the  Madden  Catalogue, 
which  only  went  as  far  as  1100  of  the  Sloane  MSS.,  had 
been  suppressed.     The  Ayscough  Catalogue,  then  and  still 
in   use,  is    arranged   according    to  subjects,    and   our  two 
MSS.     fall     under     separate     headings — "  Bermuda"    and 
11  Butler"  occurring  in  different  vols.    General  Lefroy,  basing 
his  arguments  on  750,  the  only  MS.  known  to  him,  found 
several  passages  in  his  History  of  the  Bermudas  identical 
with   Smith's  Hist,  of  Virginia,   Bk.  5,   and    came  to  the 
conclusion  that  Smith  was  the  author  of  both  books.      But 
Capt.  Smith  was  never  at  Bermuda,  and  there  is  reasonable 
ground  for  believing  that   many  of  the  materials  for  the 
Bermuda  portion  of  his  work  were  supplied  by  Butler.    At 
all  events  he  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  authorities  quoted 
by  that  author  under  his  initials  X.  B.,  and  as  he  is  known 
to  have  visited  Virginia  in  1623,  soon  after  his  governor- 
ship   of  the    Bermudas    was    at    an    end,  he    would   most 
probably  have  met  with  Smith,  who  had  returned  to  New 
England   the  previous  year  to   lend  his  assistance  in  re- 
storing the  fortunes  of  that  young  colony,  then  at  a  low 
ebb.     But  even  more  conclusive  proof  is  afforded  by  the 
date,  for  according  to  Gen.  Lefroy,  Capt.  John  Smith  died 
in  1 63 1,  while  the  writer  of  MS.  758,  and  consequently  of 
750,  was  living  in  1640. 

It  may  be  worth  mentioning  that  this  Captain  Nathaniel 
Butler,  who  did  good  service  as  Governor  of  Bermuda  from 
1619  to  1622,  and  was  afterwards  (1638-41)  Governor  of 
(Old)  Providence  Island,  is  one  of  England's  forgotten 
worthies,   being   passed    over   even   by  the  Dictionary  of 


National  BiograpJiy.  He  appears,  too,  to  be  the  individual 
committed  to  Newgate  in  June  1649  by  the  Council  of 
State  for  dispersing  treasonable  and  scandalous  books 
{Cal.  of  State  Papers,  Domestic),  by  no  means  a  singular 
instance  of  the  way  justice  was  administered  in  those 
days. 

E.  Delmar  Morgan, 

Hon,  Sec.  Hakluyt  Society. 


P.S. — Since  the  above  was  written  and  published  in  the 
AtJicniTum,  Academy,  and  Nation  of  New  York,  my  atten- 
tion has  been  called  to  the  fact  that  Butler  does  appear 
in  the  Diet,  of  Nat.  Biogr.  under  "  Boteler".  The  article  is 
by  Prof.  J.  K.  Laughton,  who  writes  me  that  he  hopes 
for  the  opportunity  of  improving  it  in  the  Addenda  et 
Corrigenda. 


7> 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 

University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
Bldg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 
University  of  California 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 

(510)642-6753 
1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  NRLF 
Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days 

prior  to  due  date 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


jAmaja95 

FEB  2  8  19'- 

Santa  OMJW 

JUL  1  7  2007 


_UQ\L 


V,  a  1006 


LEY 


GENERAL  LIBRARY  -  U.C.  BERKELEY 


BDDcnaabTi 


. 

„,« 

*&\ 

I0-724S' 

U/ 

Hz 
V.H 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 

University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
Bldg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 
University  of  California 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 

(510)642-6753 
1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  NRLF 
Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days 

prior  to  due  date 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


JAN  19*1395 

FEB  2  3  155- 


Santa  Cruz 


Jin,' 


JUL  1  7  2007 


im 


u  I  lM* 


GENERAL  LIBRARY  -  U.C.  BERKELEY 


BDDDISDbll 


m 


/0-724ST- 


o' 

Hz 
V.H 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY
