A System of Phrenology
George Combe, 1830
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Combe's 1830 System — phrenology's bible: the Edinburgh lawyer's codification that made head-reading the Victorian era's mass psychology. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/asystemphrenolo07combgoog). This 1830 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


atjhttp  :  //books  .  qooqle  .  com/


5^.  Qsyj^e


vc


-4L.


v_       <r#vL/}^<i  ^^


/  M'>


H  -


C^'t^


/^  /v  s* A"  '-


*c*-  <-*-


1^    ^y^-^


y///^^


s

k


i


r


f


**.


•C*M-4ru*«».


fa


fiaxsu^  of  the  ^bttttokgtm  Jt^anjT


a    r    F   B


I   5T

B    L  L

e  r  t  r  a  h

i*j*n ofMir* rT i x.v           if,  amjrTMMBJmr              i.  mkcm^tzta

•  u.iurF'xjrcrxm

1   Jmafomess  !*€%*>  220

20    Se/f-Artam            231

22  IhdJyubtaUti/

3<W

34   CnntptTnAm.     466

2  Ifabprvymttawiess  222

21    Ltme-ofiffm&atinn.  213

23  JRrrm

385

35    fausalrti/          474

3    timaadntiirmess     234

22    (kutitwsrwss        2*2

24   Sizs

38P

4   Jdhsswmecs           152

13    2bn*vlaur            201

23    WapM

3P3

5   Ctvni>atirme$s        157

24    Vm/rntiM           274

26   frlwirtng

3PP

€  Jkstnutvmtsss        205

1*    Fimmtss              286

27  ZomAA/

414

+    Jhnuntirma&s         284

26    ftmsi%mti0ttsw!s&288

28    Manner

420

\            7   Seav&mtss  -  ,      2PO

27   My*,                    304

29    (W/r

424

\            8  Japusitxrm&s        203

IS    Wbndtr                 30P

30  HHnfiialtQ/

425

j            P    GmstructiveMss  -     227

IP  20a0ito                322

32    low

.   4W

1

?     ffnas&rtnmed         XW

32    2kns

430

20   m  ivUtrthOdruss  340

33   Zdinfuagr

440

1

27   2mUalM7v             353

SYSTEM


OF


PHRENOLOGY.


BY


GEORGE  COMBE,

LATE    PRESIDENT  OF   THE   PHRENOLOGICAL  SOClEtt,


&HIRD  EDITION.

*


Res  non  verba  quaeso.


JOHR  ANDERSON  jun.  EDINBURGH,

66.   NORTH  BRIDGE   STREET,

AND  LONGMAN  &  CO,  LOJ«>ON.

MDCCCXXX.


NEILL  &  GO.  PRINTER*.


BOSTON  MEDICAL  LIBRARY

MINE

HWWW  A.  COUNTWAY

UBRARYOFMEOCWE


PREFACE.


The  following  are  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the
publication  of  the  present  Work.

My  first  information  concerning  the  System  of  Dre
Gall  and  Spurzheim,  was  derived  from  No.  49*  of
the  Edinburgh  Review.  Lfi}  myav  by  the  boldness
of  that  piece  of  criticism,  I  regarded  their  doctrines  as
contemptibly  abfltid,  and  their  authors  as  the  most
disingenuous  of  men.  In  1816,  however,  shortly  after
the  publication  of  the  Review,  my  friend  Mr  Brown-
lee  invited  me  to  attend  a  private  dissection  of  a  re-
cent brain,  to  be  performed  in  his  house  by  Dr  Spurz-
heim. The  subject  was  not  altogether  new,  as  I
had  previously  attended  a  Course  of  Demonstrative
Lectures  on  Anatomy  by  Dr  Barclay.  Dr  Spurz-
heim exhibited  the  structure  of  the  brain  to  all  pre-
sent, among  whom  were  several  gentlemen  of  the  me-
dical profession,  and  contrasted  it  with  the  bold  aver-
ments of  the  Reviewer.  The  result  was  a  complete
conviction  in  the  minds  of  the  observers,  that  the  asser-
tions of  the  Reviewer  were  refitted  by  physical  demon*
stratton.


IV  PREFACE.

.  The  faith  placed  in  the  Review  being  thus  shaken,
I  attended  the  next  course  of  Dr  Spurzheim's  Lec-
tures, for  the  purpose  of  hearing  from  himself  a  cor-
rect account  of  his  doctrines.  The  Lectures  satisfied
me,  that  the  system  was  widely  different  from  the  re-
presentations given  of  it  by  the  Reviewer,  and  that,  if
true,  it  would  prove  highly  important ;  but  the  evi-
dence was  not  conclusive.  I  therefore  appealed  to
Nature  by  observation,  and  at  last  arrived  at  complete
yonvictipn  of  ih$  truth  tf  Phrenology .

In  1818,  the  Editor  of  the  "  Literary  and  Statisti-
cal Magazine  for  Scotland,"  invited  me  to  a  free  discus-
sion of  the  merits  of  the  system  in  his  work,  and  I  was
induced  to  offer  him  some  Essays  on  the  subject.  The
notice  these  attracted  led  to  their  publication  in  1819,
in  a  separate  volume,  under  the  title  of  "  Essays  on
Phrenology."  A  second  edition  of  these  Essays  has
since  been  called  for,  and  the  present  volume  is  offered
in  compliance  with  that  demand.  In  the  present
Work,  I  have  adopted  the  title  of  a  "  System  of  Phre-
nology," on  account  of  the  wider  scope,  and  closer  con-
nexion, of  its  parts;  but  pretend  to  no  novelty  in
principle,  and  to  no  rivalry  with  the  great  founders  of
the  science.

The  controversial  portions  of  the  first  edition  are
here  almost  entirely  omitted.    As  the  opponents  have


PREFACE.  V

quitted  the  field,  these  appeared  no  longer  necessary,
and  their  place  is  supplied  by  what  I  trust  will  be
found  more  interesting  matter.  Some  readers  may
think  that  retributive  justice  required  the  continued
republication  of  the  attacks  of  the  opponents,  that  the
public  mind,  when  properly  enlightened,  might  express
a  just  disapprobation  of  the  conduct  of  those  who  so
egregiously  misled  it ;  but  Phrenology  teaches  us  for-
bearance ;  and,  besides,  it  will  be  misfortune  enough
to  the  individuals  who  have  distinguished  themselves
in  the  work  of  misrepresentation,  to  have  their  names
handed  down  to  posterity,  as  the  enemies  of  the  great-
est and  most  important  discovery  ever  communicated
to  mankind.

In  this  work,  the  talents  of  several  living  characters
are  adverted  to,  and  compared  with  the  development
of  their  mental  organs,  which  is  a  new  feature  in  phi-
losophical discussion,  and  might,  without  explanation,
appear  to  some  readers  to  be  improper :  But  I  have
founded  such  observations  on  the  printed  works,  and
published  busts  or  casts,  of  the  individuals  alluded
to ;  and  both  of  these  being  public  property,  there  ap-
peared no  impropriety  in  adverting  to  them.  In  in-
stances in  which  reference  is  made  to  the  cerebral  de-
velopment of  persons,  whose  busts  or  casts  are  not  pub-
lished, I  have  ascertained  that  the  observations  will
not  give  offence.
1825.


ADVERTISEMENT


TO  THE


THIRD    EDITION.


The  call  for  a  third  edition  of  tins  work,  notwith-
standing the  strenuous  opposition  of  a  highly  influ-
ential part  of  the  periodical  press,  and  the  continued
neglect  of  another  portion  of  it,  is  a  proof  that  the
public  continues  to  take  an  interest  in  the  subject  of
which  it  treats.  In  this  edition,  a  full  exposition  of
the  principles  on  which  Phrenology  is  founded,  is  given
in  the  introduction ;  and  I  respectfully  solicit  reflecting
individuals,  whose  prejudices  give  them  a  dislike  to  the
study,  to  peruse  this  portion  of  the  work,  before  yield-
ing finally  to  their  prepossessions.  It  has  been  written
expressly  for  readers  in  this  condition.  In  other  parts
of  the  work,  considerable  additions,  and  I  hope  some
improvements,  have  been  made.  Figures  have  been
introduced  to  illustrate  the  forms  of  several  of  the  heads
described.  These,  although  far  from  being  sufficient
to  convey  complete  and  correct  notions  of  the  objects
represented,  will  be  useful  in  giving  more  precision  to


Vlll  ADVERTISEMENT.

the  reader's  conceptions,  and  may  induce  him  to  resort
to  nature.  It  was  my  wish  to  have  had  all  the  figures
drawn  to  a  scale,  hut  the  engraver  has  not  heen  suc-
cessful in  realizing  this  intention.  The  outline  is  ac-
curate, and  there  is  an  approximation  to  one  standard
of  proportion  in  the  different  figures ;  hut  it  is  not
such  as  enables  me  to  exhibit  a  scale.

Two  subjects  treated  of  in  the  second  edition,  are
omitted  in  this,  1st,  "  On  the  Harmony  of  the  Mental
Faculties  with  each  other,  and  with  the  Laws  of  Physical
Nature;"  and  2dly,  "On  Insanity  and  Criminal  Legisla-
tion." The  first  is  now  embraced  in  my  work,  "  On
the  Constitution  of  Man  and  its  relations  to  external
objects,"  in  which  the  practical  application  of  Phreno-
logy to  conduct,  education,  and  the  science  of  morals,
is  treated  of ;  and  the  second  is  more  amply  discussed
in  Dr  Spurzheim's  work  on  Insanity,  and  in  Dr
Andrew  Combe's  treatise  on  the  same  subject.

Since  the  publication  of  the  second  edition,  some
opponents,  who  deny  the  truth  of  Phrenology,  have  as-
cribeZtus success,  which  on  the  principle  of  its  being
false  is  anomalous,  not  to  its  inherent  merits,  but  to
the  talent  with  which,  »6  they  are  pleased  to  say,  I
have  advocated  its  cause  ;  and  they  have  reminded  the
public,  that  I  am  kiiown  in  the  literary.world  only


ADVERTISEMENT  IX

Few  words  will  suffice  in  answer  to  these  observa-
tions. Such  critics  greatly  overrate  the  extent  of  my
ability ;  for  my  strength  lies  in  the  goodness  of  my
cause.  I  have  studied  Phrenology,  and  read  its  doc-
trines directly  in  the  page  of  nature.  What  I  assert
in  point  of  fact,  I  have  seen  and  handled ;  and  what  I
maintain  in  argument,  I  have  found  confirmed  by  prac-
tical results.  Those  who  have  attacked  the  doctrines,
on  the  other  hand,  have  not  studied  them  as  science  ;
they  have  not  read  the  facts,  on  which  they  found  their
objections,  in  the  book  of  nature  ;  and  they  have  not
tried  how  their  arguments  would  harmonize  with  other
ascertained  truths,  nor  how  they  would  issue  if  carried
into  practical  effect.  Full  of  confidence  in  themselves,
and  of  contempt  for  their  adversary,  each  has  come  to
the  combat  without  arms  and  without  armour ;  and  if
in  some  instances  the  assailant  has  reeled  back  from
the  shock  of  the  encounter,  the  result  must  be  ascribed
to  the  inherent  weakness  of  his  cause,  which  deprived
him  of  the  advantages  of  his  talents,  while  truth  add-
ed to  the  strength  of  him  whom  he  assailed.

I  plead  guilty  of  being  known  to  the  world  only  as
a  Phrenologist.  Believing,  as  I  do,  that  the  same
Divine  Wisdom  which  ordained  the  universe,  presided
also  at  the  endowment  of  the  brain  with  its  functions ;
that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  the  mind,  and  that  mind
is  the  noblest  work  of  God  ;  convinced,  also,  that  this


X  ADVERTISEMENT.

discovery  carries  in  its  train  the  most  valuable  improve-
ments in  education,  morals,  and  in  civil  and  religious
institutions,— -I  cannot  conceive  a  nobler  employment
than  that  of  vindicating  its  claims  to  consideration,  and
stemming,  to  the  extent  of  my  feeble  ability,  the  •
mighty  flood  of  prejudice  and  injustice  with  which,
like  all  other  important  discoveries,  it  has  been  deluged.
These  sentiments  are  not  the  ebullitions  of  mere  ex-
cited enthusiasm.  They  are  stated  in  sober  calmness
in  the  work  on  the  Constitution  of  Man  above  referred
to.  To  be  recognised,  hereafter,  by  impartial  and  en-
lightened men,  as  having  been  in  any  degree  instru-
mental in  braving  the  storm  of  popular  derision  with
which  Phrenology  was  at  first  assailed,  will  more  than
satisfy  all  the  ambition  for  posthumous  fame  which
ever  fired  my  bosom  ;  and  I  never  was  so  extravagant
as  to  expect,  while  alive,  any  reward  from  "  the  great
in  science  and  philosophy"  except  ridicule  and  dislike.
They  have  chosen  their  part,  and  I  have  chosen  mine :
the  long  day  will  do  justice  to  all.


CONTENTS.


Page

Introduction,   .               1

Opposition  to  Discoveries,           ....  2

The  Brain  the  Organ  of  the  Mind,       ...  7

Plurality  of  Faculties  and  Organs,       ...  14

Influence  of  Size  on  the  power  of  Organs,    .  23

Temperament  and  Disease  modify  the  effects  of  Size,  32

Connexion  of  particular  Faculties  and  Organs,  36

Efforts  of  Metaphysicians,            ....  37

of  Moralists,  Poets,  and  Divines,              .  41

of  Physiologists,      .....  43

History  of  Dr  Gall's  discovery, ....  47

Functions  of  the  Nerves  and  Spinal  Marrow,        .  56

Principles  of  Phrenology, 65

Discrimination  of  Mental  Dispositions  aud  Talents,  67

The  Brain,  Cerebellum,  and  Skull,       ...  70

Integuments  of  the  Brain, 76

Bones  of  the  Skull, 78

Frontal  Sinus, 81

Practical  application  of  the  Principles,          .        .  85

Length  and  breadth  of  organs,     ....  89

Phrenological  Bust, 91

Forms  of  Organs, 93

Terms  used,         .......  95

Absolute  Size  no  criterion,           ....  97

Brains  of  Lower  Animals, 99

Temperaments, 101

Power  and  Activity, 103

What  is  a  Faculty  ? 107

Division  of  the  Faculties, 113


Xll                                       CONTENTS.

ORGANS.

Page

Order  L— FEELINGS, 116

Genus  I. — Propensities,

ib.

/                         1.  Amativeness,

ib.

2.  Philoprogenitiveness,

121

3.  Concentrativeness,

134

4.  Adhesiveness,

151

5.  Combativeness,     .

157

6.  Destructiveness,

165

Alimentiveness,     •

184

Love  of  Life,

188

7.  Secretiveness,

190

8.  Acquisitiveness,    .

203

9.  Constructiveness,

217

Genus  II. — Sentiments  common  to  Man  with  the

Lower  Animals,     .        .        .        .        230

10.  Self-Esteem,         ....

231

11.  Love  of  Approbation,

243

12.  Cautiousness,        ....

252

Genus  III. — Superior  Sentiments,

260

13.  Benevolence,

261

.     14.  Veneration,

274

15.  Firmness,

285

16.  Conscientiousness,

288

17.  Hope,

304

18.  Wonder,

309

19.  Ideality,

322

20.  Wit  or  Mindfulness,    .

340

21.  Imitation,

353

Order  IL— INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES,

359

Genus  I. — External  Senses,         ....

ib.

Feeling  or  Touch,

.

371

Taste,         ....

•

372

Smell,         ....

>         •

ib.

Hearing,

>         •

373

Sight,          ....

•

375

CONTENTS.  Xlll

Page
Genu*  II.— Intellectual  faculties  which  perceive

EXISTENCE  AND  PHYSICAL  QUALITIES,  379

22.  Individuality, 380

23.  Form, 385

24.  Size, 389

25.  Weight, 393

26.  Colouring, 399


Genus  III. — Intellectual  Faculties  which  perceive

RELATIONS  OF  EXTERNAL  OBJECTS,      .

27.  Locality,  .        .  .        .

28.  Number,     .         .         .  .

29.  Order,

30.  Eventuality,

31.  Time,

32.  Tune,

33.  Language,

General  Observations  on  the  Perceptive  Faculties,

Genus  IV. — Reflecting  Faculties,

34.  Comparison,        ....

35.  Causality,  ....


Modes  of  Activity  of  the  Faculties,  .
Of  the  Propensities  and  Sentiments, .
Of  the  Knowing  and  Reflecting  Faculties,
Perception,        ..*...


Conception,

Dreaming,

Imagination,

Memory,

Judgment,

Consciousness,

Attention,

Association,

Passion,    .

Pleasure  and  Pain,

Patience  and  Impatience,


414

ib.
420
424
425
434
436
446
462

465

466
474

489
490
497
498
500
509
512
515
522
528
531
ib.


540

ib.

541


vix  CONTENTS.

Page

Joy  and  Grief, 541

Sympathy, 545

Habit,       .......  553

Taste, .  556

Effects  of  Size  on  the  Manifestations,           .        .        .  562

Combinations  in  Sice,           .        .         ...         .        .  571

Activity,            585

Practical  application  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Combinations,  591

National  Character  and  Development  of  Brain,            .  599

Objections  to  Phrenology,           .....  622

Materialism, 631

Injuries  of  the  Brain,           ......  638

Conclusion, 664

Names  of  Organs  adopted  by  Dr  Gall,       .  668

Organs  in  previous  Edition  of  this  Work,    .         .  670


APPENDIX.

No.  I.  Faculties  of  Dr  Gall,  .        .        .        672

Index, 673


(     xv     )


LIST  OF  FIGURES*.


P»ge
A.,  head,  with  large  Self-

Esteem,  -  -  -  -  233
Alexander  VI.,  Pope,  head,  (I)  572
Bellingham,  murderer,  skull,  -  177
Brain,  upper  surface,  -  -  71
—  lower  surface  -f,  -  -72
Brazil  Indian,  skull,  -  -  613
Burk,  murderer,  head,  -  -  87
Ceylonese,  skulls,  -  -  161,  202
Charib,  skull,  130,  261,  572,  607
Chaucer,  head,  (1)  -  -  -330
Cobbett,  head,  (1)  -  -  -  330
Cordonnier,  poet,  head,  (2)  -  233
Curran,  head,  -       -  -  380

Fisher,  Miss  Clara,  head,        -  358
Frenchman,  skull,   -  252

Frontal  bone,  section  o£  shew-
ing the  Frontal  sinus,
Qeorge  III,  head,  (2)
Gibson,  John,  head,
Greek,  ancient,  skull,


Page
M.,  Rev.  Mr,  head,  -  87,  117
MaxweU,  robber,  head,  -  -  584
Melancthon,  head,  (1)  -  -  572
Mitchell,  murderer,  head  (large


H.,  Mrs,  head,
Haggart,  murderer,  head.
Handel,  head,  (I)    -
Hare,  murderer,  head,
Head  divided  into  regions  by

Dold,  -       -
Hette,  Dr,  skull,     -
Hindoos,  skulls,  177,202.
Jervis,  head,    -
Locke,  head,  (1)      -


81
380
290
610
299

ib.
446

87


-  22

-  274
,  252,  606

261,358

-  330


No.  1.),  -  -  -  -  117
Moore,  profile,  -  -  -  425
Negro,  skull,  ....  615
Nerve,  magnified,  -  -  -  57
New  Hollander,  skull,  -  35,  608
New  Zealander,  skull,  .  -  611
North  American  Indian,  skull,  ib.
Ormerod,  Ann,  ...  446
Parry,  Captain,  head,  -  -  565
Peruvian,  skull  (small  No.  2.),  133
Pitt,  profile,  (2)  425
Raphael,  skull,  .  .35, 572
Rousseau,  J.  B.,  head,  (1)  -  330
Sandwich  Islander,  skull,  -  617
Shakspeare,  head,  (1)  -  -  330
Sheridan,  profile,  ...  425
Skull  at  birth,  ...  77
adult,                             -    ib.

—  open,   shewing  falciform
process,  &c 78

—  with  large  Philoprogeni-
tlveness,      ....  133

with  large  Veneration,    -  274

Spinal  marrow  and  nerves,  -  61
Swiss,  skull,  -  .  .  -618
Tasso,  head,  (1)  313

Wurmser,  General,  skull,        .161


•  The  figure*  marked  (1)  are  copied  from  engraved  portrait*  in  general  circulation  ;
those  marked  (2)  am  from  modelled  butts;— the  other*  ere  taken  from  real  skull*,  or  from
casta  from  nature,  m  the  collection  of  the  Phrenological  Society.

The  whole  figure*  were  Intended  to  be  drawn  to  a  scale ;  but  the  engraver  has  neglected
thism  the  case  of  those  havliig  a  black  ground.  The  outlines,  however,  accurately  exhibit  the
jbrms,  which  are  iipueemcd  at  they  exist  in  the  originals,  without  foreshortening.

t  This  figure  was  copied  by  the  engraver,  by  mistake,  from  an  old  plate,  put  into  his
hands  merary^o  shew  the  manner  in  which  the  brain  was  to  be  represented.  The  minute  details
an  not  perfectly  correct,  and  the  figure  is  too  long;  but  it  exhibits  the  general  appearance  of
the  parts  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  the  purpose  mentioned  on  p.  70.


#  ERRATA.  *

Page  94,  line  18,  Jbr  the  organ  being  much  larger  in  the  former  than  In  the  latter  rtad
the  organ  being  much  larger  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former.
311,  4,  /or  lays  read  say

380,  6,  for  requires  read  require

472,  11,  defo  that

—  34,  Jtr  in  this  respect,  that  Pope  6c  read  in  this  respect  Pope  &c


DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  BINDER.

The  Plate  of  the  Phrenological  Bust  faces  the  Title-Page.
The  Plate,  representing  Ideality  in  Chaucer,  Scc^  faces  p.  330.


SYSTEM


OP


PHRENOLOGY.


INTRODUCTION.

i  hrenology,  derived  from  Qp*  mind,  and  *•>**  discourse,
professes  to  be  a  system  of  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,
and,  as  such,  it  ought  to  throw  light  on  the  primitive  pow-
ers of  feeling  which  incite  us  to.  action,  and  the  capacities
of  thinking  that  guide  our  exertions  till  we  have  attained
the  object  of  our  desires.  It  was  first  presented  to  public
consideration  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  in  1796,  and  in
Britain  in  the  year  1814.  It  has  met  with  strenuous  sup-
port from  some  individuals,  and  determined  opposition  from
others,  while  the  great  body  of  the  public  remain  uninstruct-
ed  in  its  merits.  On  this  account,  it  may  be  useful  to
present,  in  an  introductory  form,  1st,  A  short  notice  of  the
reception  which  other  discoveries  have  met  with  on  their
first  announcement ;  2dlyf  A  brief  outline  of  the  principles
involved  in  Phrenology;  Sdly,  An  inquiry  into  the  pre-
sumptions for  and  against  these  principles,  founded  on  the
known  phenomena  of  human  nature;  and,  \tidyy  A  histo-
rical sketch  of  their  discovery.

I  shall  follow  this  course,  not  with  a  view  of  convincing
the  reader  that  Phrenology  is  true,  because  nothing  short  of
patient  study  and  extensive  personal  observation  can  pro-


2  OPPOSITION  TO  DISCOVERIES.

duce  this  conviction,  but  for  the  purpose  of  presenting  him
with  motives  to  prosecute  the  investigation  for  his  own  sa-
tisfaction.

1st,  Then,  one  great  obstacle  to  the  reception  of  a  discov-
ery is  the  difficulty  which  men  experience  of  at  once  part-
ing with  old  notions  which  have  been  instilled  into  their
minds  from  infancy,  and  become  the  stock  of  their  under-
standings. Phrenology  has  encountered  this  impediment,
but  not  in  a  greater  degree  than  other  discoveries  which
have  preceded  it.  Mr  Locke,  in  speaking,  of  the  common
reception  of  new  truths,  says,  "  Who  ever,  by  the  most  co-
gent arguments,  will  be  prevailed  upon  to  disrobe  himself
at  once  of  all  his  old  opinions  and  pretensions  to  knowledge
and  learning,  which,  with  hard  study,  he  hath  all  his  life-
time been  labouring  for,  and  turn  himself  out  stark  naked
in  quest  of  fresh  notions  ?  All  the  arguments  that  can  be
used,  will  be  as  little  able  to  prevail  as  the  wind  did  with
the  traveller  to  part  with  his  cloak,  which  he  held  only  the
faster."     (Book  iv.  c.  20.  §  11.)

Professor  Playfair,  in  his  historical  notice  of  discove-
ries in  physical  science,  published  in  the  Supplement  to  the
Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  observes,  that  "  in  every  society
there  are  some  who  think  themselves  interested  to  maintain
things  in  the  condition  wherein  they  have  found  them.
The  considerations  are  indeed  sufficiently  obvious,  which,
in  the  moral  and  political  world,  tend  to  produce  this  effect,
and  to  give  a  stability  to  human  institutions  often  so  little
proportionate  to  their  real  value,  er  to  their  general  utility.
Even  ht  matters  purely  intellectual,  and  in  which  the  ab-
stract truths  of  arithmetic  and  geometry  seem  alone  con-
cerned, the  prejudices,  the  selfishness,  or  the  vanity  of  those
who  pursue  them,  not  unfrequently  combine  to  resist  im-
provement, and  often  engage  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  ta-
lent in  drawing  back,  instead  of  pushing  forward,  the  ma-
chine of  science.  The  introduction  of  methods  entirely
new,  must  often  change  the  relative  place  of  the  men  en-
gaged in  scientific  pursuits,  and  must  oblige  many,  after


OPPOSITION  TO  DISCOVERIES.  3

descending  from  the  stations  they  formerly  occupied,  to
take  a  lower  position  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  improve-
ment. The  enmity  of  such  men,  if  they  be  not  animated
by  a  spirit  of  real  candour  and  the  love  of  truth,  is  likely  to
be  directed  against  methods  by  which  their  vanity  is  morti-
fied, and  their  importance  lessened." — Dissertation,  part  ii*
p.  27.

Every  age  has  afforded  proofs  of  the  justness  of  these
observations.  "  The  disciples  of  the  various  philosophical
schools  of  Greece  inveighed  against  each  other,  and  made
reciprocal  accusations  of  impiety  and  perjury.  The  people,
in  their  turn,  detested  the  philosophers,  and  accused  those
who  investigated  the  causes  of  things,  of  presumptuously  in-
vading the  rights  of  the  Divinity.  Pythagoras  was  driven
from  Athens  on  account  of  his  novel  opinions ;  and  for  the
same  reason  Anaxagoras  was  confined  in  prison.  Demo-
critus  was  treated  as  a  fool  by  the  Abderites  for  endeavour-
ing to  find  out  the  cause  of  madness  by  dissections ;  and
Socrates,  for  having  demonstrated  the  unity  of  Ood,  was
forced  to  drink  the  juice  of  hemlock." — Dr  SpuRZHEiris
Physiog.  Syst.

But  let  us  attend  in  particular  to  the  reception  of  the
three  greatest  discoveries  that  have  adorned  the  annals  of
philosophy,  and  mark  the  spirit  with  which  they  were
hailed

Mr  Playfair,  speaking  of  the  treatment  of  Galileo,
sayB :  "  Galileo  was  twice  brought  before  the  Inquisition.
The  first  time,  a  council  of  seven  cardinals  pronounced  a
sentence  which,  for  the  sake  of  those  disposed  to  believe
that  power  can  subdue  truth,  ought  never  to  be  forgotten ;
vis.  That  to  maintain  the  sun  to  be  immoveable,  and  with-
out local  motion,  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  is  an  absurd
proposition,  false  in  philosophy,  heretical  in  religion,  and
contrary  to  the  testimony  of  Scripture ;  and  it  is  equally
absurd  and  false  in  philosophy  to  assert,  that  the  earth  is
not  immoveable  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  and,  considered
theologically,  equally  erroneous  and  heretical."

a2


4  OPPOSITION  TO  DISCOVERIES.

Mr  Hume,  the  historian,  mentions  the  fact  that  Harvey
was  treated  with  great  contumely  on  account  of  his  discove-
ry of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  in  consequence  lost
his  practice.  An  eloquent  writer,  in  the  94th  Number  of  the
Edinburgh  Review,  when  adverting  to  the  treatment  of  Har-
vey, observes,  that  "  the  discoverer  of  the  circulation  of  the
blood — a  discovery  which,  if  measured  by  its  consequences
on  physiology  and  medicine,  was  the  greatest  ever  made
since  physic  was  cultivated — suffers  no  diminution  of  his
reputation  in  our  day,  from  the  incredulity  with  which  his
doctrine  was  received  by  some,  the  effrontery  with  which
it  was  claimed  by  others,  or  the  knavery  with  which  it  was
attributed  to  former  physiologists,  by  those  who  could  not
deny  and  would  not  praise  it.  The  very  names  of  these
envious  and  dishonest  enemies  of  Harvey  are  scarcely  re-
membered; and  the  honour  of  this  great  discovery  now
rests,  beyond  all  dispute,  with  the  great  philosopher  who
made  it."  This  shews  that  Harvey,  in  his- day,  was  treated
exactly  as  Dr  Gall  has  been  in  ours ;  and  if  Phrenology
be  true,  these,  or  similar  terms,  may  one  day  be  applied  by
posterity  to  him  and  his  present  opponents.

Again,  Professor  Play  fair,  speaking  of  the  discovery  of
the  composition  of  light  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  says,
"  Though  the  discovery  now  communicated  had  every  thing
to  recommend  it  which  can  arise  from  what  is  great,  new,
and  singular ;  though  it  was  not  a  theory  or  system  of  opi-
nions, but  the  generalization  of  facts  made  known  by  ex-
periments, and  though  it  was  brought  forward  in  a  most
simple  and  unpretending  form,  a  host  of  enemies  appeared,.
each  eager  to  obtain  the  unfortunate  pre-eminence  of  being
the  first  to  attack  conclusions  which  the  unanimous  voice
of  posterity  was  to  confirm."  (P.  56.)  "  Among  them,
one  of  the  first  was  Father  Pardies,  who  wrote  against  the
experiments,  and  what  he  was  pleased  to  call  the  Hypo-
thesis of  Newton.  A  satisfactory  and  calm  reply  convin-
ced him  of  his  mistake,  which  he  had  the  candour  very
readily  to  acknowledge.    A  countryman  of  his,  Mariotte,


OPPOSITION  TO  DISCOVERIES.  5

'was  more  difficult  to  be  reconciled,  and  though  very  con-
versant with  experiment,  appears  never  to  have  succeeded
in  repeating  the  experiments  of  Newton/'

Here,  then,  we  see  that  persecution,  condemnation,  and
ridicule,  awaited  Galileo,  Harvey,  and  Newton,  for  an-
nouncing three  great  physical  discoveries.  In  mental  phi-
losophy, the  conduct  of  mankind  has  been  similar.

Aristotle  and  Des  Cartes  "  may  be  quoted  as  ex-
amples of  the  good  and  bad  fortune  of  new  doctrines.  The
ancient  antagonists  of  Aristotle  caused  his  books  to  be
burned.  Afterwards,  these  books  were  received  with  a  ve-
neration equal  to  that  due  to  inspiration  itself;  and  even
so  late  as  the  time  of  Francis  I.,  the  writings  of  Ramus
against  Aristotle  were  publicly  burned,  his  adversaries
were  declared  heretics,  and,  under  pain  of  being  sent  to  the
galleys,  philosophers  were  prohibited  from  combating  his
■opinions.  At  the  present  time  the  philosophy  of  Aristo-
tle is  no  longer  spoken  of.  Again,  Des  Cartes  was  per-
secuted for  teaching  the  doctrine  of  innate  ideas ;  he  was
accused  of  Atheism,  though  he  had  written  on  the  existence
of  God ;  and  his  books  were  burnt  by  order  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Paris.  A  short  time  after,  the  same  University
adopted  the  doctrine  of  Des  Cartes  in  favour  of  innate
ideas ;  and  when  Locke  and  Condillac  attacked  it,  there
was  a  general  cry  of  materialism  and  fatalism.  Thus,  the  i
same  opinions  were  considered  at  one  time  as  dangerous  be-  /
cause  they  were  new,  and  at  another  as  useful  because  they
were  ancient.  What  is  to  be  inferred  from  this,  but  that
man  deserves  pity;  that  the  opinions  of  contemporaries,  in
respect  to  the  truth  or  falsehood,'  and  the  good  or  bad  con-  }
sequences  of  a  new  doctrine,  are  altogether  suspicious ;  and
that  the  only  object  of  an  author  ought  to  be  that  of  point-  ,
ing  out  the  truth?' — Dr  Spurzheim's  Physiog.  Syst  '
p.  488.

To  these  extracts  many  more  might  be  added  of  a  simi-
lar nature  ;  but  enough  has  been  said  to  demonstrate,  that,
by  the  ordinary  practice  of  mankind,  great  discoveries  are


6  OPPOSITION  TO  DISCOVERIES.

treated  with  hostility  by  the  generation  to  whom  they  are
addressed.

If,  therefore,  Phrenology  be  a  discovery  at  all,  and  espe-
cially if  it  be  also  important,  it  must  of  necessity  come  in-
to collision,  on  the  most  weighty  topics,  with  the  opinions
of  men  hitherto  venerated  as  authorities  in  physiology  and
the  philosophy  of  mind ;  and,  according  to  the  custom  of
the  world,  nothing  except  opposition,  ridicule,  and  abuse,
could  be  expected  on  its  first  announcement.  If  we  are  to
profit,  however,  by  the  lessons  of  history,  we  ought,  after
surveying  these  mortifying  examples  of  human  weakness  and
wickedness,  todismissfTomourmindseveryprejudiceagainst
our  present  subject,  founded  on  its  hostile  reception  by  men
of  established  reputation  of  the  present  day.  He  who  does
not  perceive  that  if  Phrenology  shall  prove  to  be  true,  pos-
terity will  view  the  contumelies  heaped  by  the  philosophers
of  this  generation  on  its  founders  as  another  dark  speck  in
the  history  of  scientific  discovery,  and  he  who  does  not
feel  anxious  to  avoid  all  participation  in  this  ungenerous
treatment,  has  reaped  no  moral  improvement  from  the  re-
cords of  intolerance  which  we  have  now  contemplated :  but
every  enlightened  individual  will  say,  Let  us  dismiss  preju-
dice, and  calmly  listen  to  evidence  and  reason ;  let  us  not
encounter  even  the  chance  of  adding  our  names  to  the  me-
lancholy list  of  the  enemies  of  mankind,  by  refusing,  on
the  strength  of  mere  prejudice,  to  be  instructed  in  the  new
doctrines  when  submitted  to  our  consideration ;  let  us  en-
quire, examine,  and  decide.

These,  I  trust,  are  the  sentiments  of  the  reader ;  and  on
the  faith  of  their  being  so,  I  shall  proceed,  in  the  second
place,  to  state  very  briefly  the  principles  of  Phrenology  it-
self.

It  is  a  notion  inculcated,  often  indirectly  no  doubt,  but
pot  less  strongly,  by  highly  venerated  teachers  of  intellec-
tual philosophy,  that  we  are  acquainted  with  Mind  and  with
Body,  as  two  distinct  and  separate  entities.  The  anatomist
treats  of  the  body,  and  the  logician  and  moral  philosopher  of


THE  BRAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  MIND.     7

the  mind,  as  if  they  were  separate  subjects  of  investigation,
either  not  at  all,  or  only  in  a  remote  and  unimportant  de-
gree connected.  In  common  society,  too,  men  speak  of  the
dispositions  and  faculties  of  the  mind,  without  its  occurring
to  them  that  they  are  in  dose  connexion  with  the  body.

But  the  Human  Mind,  as  it  exists  in  this  world,  cannot,
by  it$elf9  become  an  object  of  philosophical  investigation.
Placed  in  a  material  world,  it  cannot  act  or  be  acted  upon,
but  through  the  medium  of  anorganic  apparatus.  The  soul
sparkling  in  the  eye  of  beauty  does  not  transmit  its  sweet
influence  to  a  kindred  spirit,  but  through  the  filaments  of
an  optic  nerve;  and  even  the  bursts  of  eloquence  which  flow
from  the  lips  of  the  impassioned  orator,  when  mind  appears
to  transfuse  itself  almost  directly  into  mind,  emanate  from,
and  are  transmitted  to,  corporeal  beings,  through  a  volumi-
nous apparatus  of  organs.  If  we  trace  the  mind's  progress
from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  every  appearance  which  it  pre-
sents reminds  us  of  this  important  truth.  In  earliest  life
the  mental  powers  are  feeble  as  the  body,  but  when  man-
hood comes,  they  glow  with  energy,  and  expand  with  power ;
till,  at  last,  the  chill  of  age  makes  the  limbs  totter,  and  the
limey's  fire  decay.

Nay,  not  only  the  great  stages  of  our  infancy,  vigour,  and
decline,  but  the  experience  of  every  hour,  remind  us  of  our
alliance  with  the  dust.  The  lowering  clouds  and  stormy
skydepress  the  spirits  and  enervethe  mind; — after  short  and
stated  intervals  of  toil,  our  wearied  faculties  demand  repose  in
sleep;  famine  or  disease  is  capable  of  levelling  the  proudest
energies  in  the  earth ;  and  even  the  finest  portion  of  our
compound  being,  the  Mind  itself,  apparently  becomes  dis-
eased, and,  leaving  Nature's  course,  flies  to  self-destruction
to  escape  from  pain.

These  phenomena  must  be  referred  to  the  organs  with
which,  in  this  life,  the  mind  is  connected;  but  if  the  organs
exert  so  great  an  effect  over  the  mental  manifestations,  no
system  of  philosophy  is  entitled  to  consideration,  which
would  neglect  their  influence,  and  treat  the  thinking  prin-


8     THE  BRAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  MIND.

ciple  as  a  disembodied  spirit.  The  phrenologist,  therefore,
regards  man  as  he  exists  in  this  sublunary  world ;  and  de-
sires to  investigate  the  laws  which  regulate  the  connexion
betwixt  the  organs  and  the  mind,  but  without  attempting  to
discover  the  essence  of  either,  or  the  manner  in  which  they
are  united.

It  may  be  demonstrated,  therefore,  that  the  popular  no-
tions are  founded  on  an  illusion,  that,  in  point  of  fact,  we
do  not  in  this  life  know  mind  as  one  entity,  and  body  as
another;  but  that  we  are  acquainted  only  with  the  compound
existence  of  mind  and  body,  which  act  constantly  together,'
and  are  so  intimately  connected  that  every  state  of  the  mind
involves  a  corresponding  state  of  certain  corporeal  organs,
and  every  state  of  these  organs  involves  a  certain  condition
of  the  mind.  A  few  remarks  will  suffice  to  place  this  doc-
trine in  its  proper  light.

1st,  We  are  not  conscious  of  the  existence  and  functions
of  the  organs  by  which  the  mind  operates  in  this  life,  and,
in  consequence,  many  acts  appear  to  us  to  be  purely  men-
tal, which  experiment  and  observation  prove  incontestibly
to  depend  on  corporeal  organs.  For  example,  in  stretching
out  or  withdrawing  the  arm,  we  are  conscious  only  of  an
act  ef  the  will,  and  of  the  consequent  movement  of  the  arm,
but  have  no  consciousness  of  the  apparatus  by  means  of
which  the  volition  is  carried  into  execution.  Experiment
and  observation,  however,  demonstrate  the  existence  of
bones  of  the  arms  curiously  articulated  and  adapted  to  mo-
tion, of  muscles  endowed  with  powers  of  contraction,  and
attached  with  infinite  skill  to  the  bones  so  as  to  put  them
In  motion  with  the  least  effort,  and  in  the  most  beneficial
manner;  and,  lastly,  three  sets  of  nervous  fibres  all  run-
ning in  one  sheath,  namely,  one  which  communicates  feel-
ing, a  second  which  transmits  motion,  and  a  third  which
communicates  to  the  mind  information  of  the  state  of  the
muscles  when  acted  on  by  the  other  two;  and  all  these  or-
gans must  combine  and  act  harmoniously  before  the  arm
jean  be  moved  by  the  will  on  any  one  occasion.    All  that  a


THE  BRAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  HIND.     9

person  uninstructed  in  anatomy  knows  is,  that  he  wills  the
motion,  and  that  it  takes  place ;  the  whole  act  appears  to
him  to  be  purely  mental,  and  only  the  thing  moved,  name-
ly, the  arm,  is  conceived  to  be  corporeal.  Nevertheless,  it
is  positively  established  by  anatomical  and  physiological  in-
vestigation, that  this  conclusion  is  erroneous — that  the  act  is
not  purely  mental,  but  is  accomplished  by  the  instrumen-
tality of  the  various  organs  now  enumerated.  In  like  man-
ner, every  act  of  vision  is  connected  with  a  certain  state  of
the  optic  nerve,  and  every  act  of  hearing,  with  a  certain
state  of  the  tympanum,  and  other  parts  of  the  auditory  ap-
paratus, of  the  existence  and  functions  of  which  we  are  al-
together uninformed  by  consciousness.

Now,  I  go  one  step  farther  in  the  same  path,  and  state,
that  every  act  of  the  will,  every  flight  of  imagination,  every
glow  of  affection,  and  every  effort  of  the  understanding  in
this  life,  is  performed  by  means  of  an  apparatus  of  organs
unknown  to  us  through  consciousness,  but  which  are  capa-
ble of  demonstration  by  experiment  and  observation ;  in
other  words,  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  the  mind.  The
greatest  anatomists  admit  this  proposition  without  hesita-
tion. The  celebrated  Dr  Cullen  of  Edinburgh  states,  that
"  the  part  of  our  body  more  immediately  connected  with
the  mind,  and  therefore  more  especially  concerned  in  every
affection  of  the  intellectual  functions,  is  the  common  origin
of  the  nerves ;  which  I  shall,  in  what  follows,  speak  of  un-
der the  appellation  of  the  Brain."  Again,  the  same  author
says,  "  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  operations  of  our  intellect
always  depend  upon  certain  motions  taking  place  in  the
brain."  The  late  Dr  Gregory,  when  speaking  of  memory,
imagination,  and  judgment,  observes,  that  "  Although  at
first  sight  these  faculties  appear  to  be  so  purely  mental  as
to  have  no  connexion  with  the  body,  yet  certain  diseases
which  obstruct  them  prove,  that  a  certain  state  of  the  brain
is  necessary  to  their  proper  exercise,  and  that  the  brain  is
the  primary  organ  of  the  internal  powers."  The  great
physiologist  of  Germany,  Blumenbach,  says,  "  That  the


10    THE  BRAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  MIND.

mmd  is  closely  connected  with  the  brain,  is  demonstrated
by  our  consciousness,  and  by  the  mental  disturbances  which
«nsue  upon  affections  of  the  brain."  (Elliotson's  transla-
tion, 4th  edit  vol.  i.  p.  196.)  Magendie,  a  celebrated
French  physiologist,  says,  "  The  brain  is  the  material  in-
strument of  thought.  This  is  proved  by  a  multitude  of  ex-
periments and  facts."

Dr  Neil  Arnott,  in  his  recent  work  on  Natural  Philo-
sophy, writes  thus :  "  The  laws  of  mind  which  man  can  dis-
cover by  reason,  are  not  laws  of  independent  mind,  but  of
mind  in  connexion  with  body,  and  influenced  by  the  bodily
condition.  It  has  been  believed  by  many,  that  the  nature  of
mind  separate  from  body,  is  to  be  at  once  all-knowing  and
intelligent,  But  mind  connected  with  body,  can  only  ac-
quire knowledge  slowly,  through  the  bodily  organs  of  sense,
and  more  or  less  perfectly,  according  as  these  organs  and
the  central  brain  are  perfect.  A  human  being  born  blind
and  deaf,  and  therefore  remaining  dumb,  as  in  the  noted
case  of  the  boy  Mitchell,  grows  up  closely  to  resemble
an  automaton ;  and  an  originally  mis-shapen  or  deficient
brain,  causes  idiocy  for  life.  Childhood,  maturity,  dotage,
which. have  such  differences  of  bodily  powers,  have  corres-
ponding differences  of  mental  faculty  :  and  as  no  two
bodies,  so  no  two  minds,  in  their  external  manifestation,
are  quite  ali&e.  Fever,  or  a  blow  on  the  head,  will  change
the  most  gifted  individual  into  a  maniac,  causing  the  lips
of  virgin  innocence  to  utter  the  most  revolting  obscenity,
and  those  of  pure  religion,  to  speak  the  most  horrible  blas-
phemy :  and  most  cases  of  madness  and  eccentricity  can
now  be  traced  to  a  peculiar  state  of  the  brain."  (Introduc-
tion, p.  xxiii.)  Let  it  be  observed  that  these  authors  are
nowise  inclined  to  support  Phrenology.

The  fact  that  tfee  mental  phenomena  of  which  we  are
conscious  are  the  result  of  mind  and  brain  acting  together,
is  farther  established,  by  the  effects  of  swooning,  of  compres-
sion of  the  brain,  and  of  deep.  In  profound  sleep,  con-
sciousness is  entirply  suspended :  this  fact  is  explicable  on
the  principle  of  the  organ  of  the  mind  being  then  in  a  state


THE  BRAIN  THE  OEGAN  OF  THE  MIND.         11

of  repose ;  but  altogether  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  the
immaterial  principle,  or  the  mind  itself,  being  oapable  of
acting  independently  of  the  brain ;  for  if  this  were  the  case,
thinking  should  never  be  interrupted  by  any  material  cause.
In  a  swoon,  blood  is  rapidly  withdrawn  from  the  brain,
aad  consciousness  is  for  the  moment  obliterated ;  again,
where  part  of  the  brain  has  been  laid  bare  by  an  injury  in*
dieted  on  the  skull,  it  has  been  found  that  consciousness
could  be  suspended  at  the  pleasure  of  die  surgeon,  by  mere-
ly pressing  on  the  brain  with  his  fingers,  and  that  it  could
be  restored  by  withdrawing  the  pressure*

A  valuable  authority  on  this  point  is  furnished  by  the
Edinburgh  Review.  The  author  of  the  article  on  the  ner-
vous system  in  the  94th  Number  of  that  work,  says,  "  Almost
from  the  first  casual  inspection  of  animal  bodies,  the  brain
was  regarded  as  an  organ  of  primary  dignity,  and  more
particularly  in  the  human  subject — the  seat  of  thought  and
feeling,  the  centre  of  all  sensation,  the  messenger  of  intel-
lect, the  presiding  organ  of  the  bodily  frame."  "  All  this
superiority  (of  man  over  the  brutes),  all  these  faculties
which  elevate  and  dignify  him,  this  reasoning  power,  this
moral  sense,  these  capacities  of  happiness,  these  high  as-
piring hopes,  art  felt,  aad&t^ed,  and  manifested,  by  means
of  his  superior  nervous  system.  Its  injury  weakens,  its
imperfection  limits,  its  destruction  (humanly  speaking)  ends
them."

In  addition  to  these  authorities,  I  may  remark,  that  con-
sciousness or  feeling  localizes  the  mind  in  the  head,  and  gives
us  a  full  conviction  that  it  is  situated  there;  but  it  does  not
reveal  what  substance  is  in  the  interior  of  the  skull.  It  does
not  tell  whether  the  mind  occupies  an  airy  dome ;  a  richly
furnished  mansion;  one  apartment,  or  many;  or  in  what
•late  or  condition  it  resides  in  its  appointed  place.  It  is
only  on  opening  the  head  that  we  discover  the  skull  to  con*
tain  brain ;  and  then,  by  an  act  of  the  understanding,  we
infer  that  the  mind  must  have  been  connected  with  it  in  its
operations.

l


12        THE  BRAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  MIND.

It  is  worthy  of  observation  also,  that  the  popular  notions
of  the  independence  of  the  mind  on  the  body  are  modern,
and  the  offspring  of  philosophical  theories  that  have  sprang
up  chiefly  since  the  days  of  Locke.  In  Shaksfeare,  and
our  older  writers,  the  brain  is  frequently  used  as  implying
the  mental  functions ;  and,  even  in  the  present  day,  the  lan-
guage of  the  vulgar,  which  is  less  affected  by  philosophical
theories  than  that  of  polite  scholars,  is  more  in  accordance
with  nature.  "  A  stupid  person  is  vulgarly  called  a  numb-
skuUy  a  thick-head,  or  said  to  be  addle-jpofetf  ;  badly  fur-
nished in  the  upper-storey ;  while  a  clever  person  is  said
to  be  strong-headed,  to  have  plenty  of  brains ;  a  madman
is  called  wrong  in  the  head,  touched  in  the  noddle,  &c.
When  a  catarrh  chiefly  affects  the  head,  we  complain  of
stupidity,  because  we  have  such  a  cold  in  the  head,"  &c.
(Elliotson's  Btumenbach,  4th  edit  p.  66).

The  principle  which  I  have  so  much  insisted  on,  that  we
are  not  conscious  of  the  existence  and  functions  of  the  or-
gans by  which  the  mind  acts,  explains  the  source  of  the  meta-
physical notion  which  has  affected  modern  language,  that
we  know  the  mind  as  an  entity  by  itself.  The  acts  which
really  result  from  the  combined  action  of  the  mind  and  its
organs,  appear,  previous  to  anatomical  and  pathological  in-
vestigation, to  be  produced  by  the  mibd  exclusively ;  and
hence  have  arisen  the  neglect  and  contempt  with  winch  the
organs  have  been  treated,  and  the  ridicule  cast  upon  those
who  have  endeavoured  to  speak  of  them  as  important  to
the  philosophy  of  mind.  After  the  explanations  now  given,
the  reader  will  appreciate  the  real  value  of  the  following
statement  by  Mr  Jeffrey,  in  his  celebrated  review  of  the
System  of  Phrenology.  His  words  are,  "  The  truth  is,  we
do  not  scruple  to  say  it,  that  there  is  not  the  smallest  rea-
son for  supposing  that  the  mind  ever  operates  through  the
agency  of  any  material  organs,  except  in  its  perception  of
material  objects,  or  in  its  spontaneous  movements  of  the
body  which  it  inhabits/'  And,  "  There  is  not  the  least
reason  to  suppose  that  any  of  our  faculties,  but  those  which


THE  BBAIN  THE  ORGAN  OF  THE  MIND.    IS

connect  us  with  external  objects,  or  direct  the  movements
of  our  bodies,  act  by  material  organs  at  all;"  that  is  to  say,
that  fading,  fancy,  and  reflection,  are  acts  so  purely  men-
tal, that  they  have  no  connexion  with  organisation.

Long  before  Mr  Jeffrey  penned  these  sentences,  how-
ever, Dr  Thomas  Brown  had  written,  even  in  the  Edin-
burgh Review,  that  "  Memory,  imagination,  and  judgment,
may  be  all  set  to  sleep  by  a  few  grains  of-  a  very  common
and  simple  drug;"  and  Dr  Cullen,  Blumenbach,  Dr
Gregory,  Magendie,  and,  in  short,  all  physiological  au-
thors, had  published  positive  statements  that  the  mental
faculties  are  connected  with  the  brain.

What,  then,  does  the  proposition  that  the  brain  is  the  or-
gan of  the  mind  imply  ?  Let  us  take  the  case  of  the  eye  as
somewhat  analogous.  If  the  eye  be  the  organ  of  vision,  it
will  be  conceded,  first,  That  sight  cannot  be  enjoyed  with-
out its  instrumentality ;  secondly,  That  every  act  of  vision
must  be  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  state  of  the  organ ;
and,  vice  versa,  that  every  change  of  condition  in  the  organ
must  influence  sight;  and,  thirdly,  That  the  perfection  of
vision  will  be  in  relation  to  the  perfection  of  the  organ.  In
like  manner,  if  the  brain  be  the  organ  of  the  mind,  it  will
follow  that  the  mind  does  not  act  in  this  life  independently
of  its  organ;  and  hence,  that  every  emotion  and  judgment
of  which  we  are  conscious^are  the  result  of  mind  and  its  or-
gan acting  together.  Secondly,  That  every  mental  affec-
tion must  be  accompanied  with  a  corresponding  state  of  the
organ ;  and,  vice  versa,  every  state  of  the  organ  must  be  at-
tended by  a  certain  condition  of  the  mind.  And,  thirdly,
That  the  perfection  of  the  manifestations  of  the  mind  will
bear  a  relation  to  the  perfection  of  its  organ,  just  as  perfec-
tion of  vision  bears  a  relation  to  the  perfection  of  the  eye.
These  propositions  appear  to  be  incontrovertible;  and  to
follow  as  necessary  consequences,  from  the  simple  fact  that
the  mind  acts  by  means  of  organization.  But  if  they  be
well-founded,  how  important  a  study  does  that  of  the  organ
of  the  mind  become !     It  is  the  study  of  mind  itself,  in  the


14      PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS

only  condition  in  which  it  is  known  to  us.  And  the  vary
fact  that  in  past  ages,  mind  has  been  studied  without  refer-
ence to  organisation,  accounts  for  the  melancholy  truth,  that
up  to  die  present  day  no  philosophy  of  mind  suited  to  prac-
tical purposes  eJdste*

Holding  it  then  as  established  by  the  evidence  of  the
most  esteemed  physiologists*  and  also  by  observation,  that
the  brain  is  die  organ  of  the  mind,  and  that  the  state  of  the
brain  influences  its  state,  the  next  question  which  presents
itself  is,  Whether  the  mind  in  every  act  employs  the  whole
brain  as  one  organ,  or  whether  separate  faculties  of  the
mind  are  connected  with  distinct  portions  of  the  brain  as
their  respective  organs  ?  The  following  considerations  may
enable  us  to  solve  this  question :

1st,  In  all  ascertained  instances,  different  functions  are
never  performed  by  thes  ame  organ,  but,  the  reverse :  each
function  has  an  organ  for  itself:  thus,  the  stomach  digests
food,  the  liver  secretes  bile,  the  heart  propels  the  blood,  the
eyes  see,  the  ears  hear,  the  tongue  tastes,  and  the  nose
smells.  Nay,  on  analysing  these  examples,  it  is  found  that
wherever  the  function  is  compound*  each  element  of  it  is
performed  by  means  of  a  distinct  organ ;  thus,  to  accom-
plish taste  there  is  one  nerve,  whose  office  is  to  move  the
tongue,  another  nerve  whose  duty  it  is  to  communicate  the
ordinary  sense  of  feeling  to  the  tongue*  and  a  third  nerve
which  conveys  the  sensations  of  taste.  A  similar  combina-
tion of  nerves  takes  place  in  the  hands,  arms,  and  other
parts  of  the  body,  which  are  the  organs  of  feeling ;  namely,
one  nerve  gives  motion,  another  feeling,  and  a  third  con-
veys to  the  mind  a  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  organ ;
and,  except  in  the  case  of  the  tongue,  all  these  nerves  are
blended  in  one  common  sheath.

In  the  economy  of  the  human  frame,  there  is  no  ascer-
tained example  of  one  nerve  performing  two  functions,  such
as  feeling  and  communicating  motion,  or  seeing  and  hear-
ing, or  tasting  and  smelling.  In  the  case  of  the  brain,
therefore,  analogy  would  lead  us  to  expect,  that  if  reason-


•


PLUBALITY  OP  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.  IS


tag  be  an  act  different  from  loving  or  bating,  there  will  W
one  organ  for  reasoning,  another  for  loving,  and-  a  third  for
hating.

2dtyy  *  It  is  an  indisputed  truth,  that  the  varieus  mental
powers  of  man  appear  in  succession,  and,  a»  a  general  rule,
that  die  reflecting  or  reasoning  faculties  am  thoee  which
arrive  latest  at  perfection*  In  the  child,  the  powers  ef  ob-
serving the  existence  and  qualities  of  external  okjectt  arrive
much  sooner  at  their  maturity  than  the  reasoning  faculties.
Daily  observation  shows  that  the  brain  undergoes  a  corres-
ponding change ;  whereas  we  have  no  evidence  that  the
immaterial  principle  varies  in  its  powers  from  year  to  year.
If  the  brain,  as  a  whole,  is  the  organ  of  the  mind,  this  suc-
cessive development  of  faculties  is  utterly  at  variance  with
what  we  should  expect  a  priori;  because,  if  the  general  or-
gan is  fitted  for  manifesting  with  success  one  mental  facul-
ty, it  ought  to  be  equally  so  for  the  operation  of  all,  which
we  see  is  not  the  case.  Observation,  indeed,  shows  that  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  brain  are  really  developed  at  different
periods  of  life.  In  infancy,  according  to  Chaussier,  the
cerebellum  forms  one-fifteenth  of  the  encephalic  mass ;  and
in  adult  age,  from  one-sixth  to  one-eighth,  its  rase  being
thus  in  strict  accordance  with  the  energy  of  the  propensity
of  which  it  is  the  organ.  In  childhood,  the  middle  part  of
the  forehead  generally  predominates ;  in  later  life,  the  up-
per lateral  parts  become  more  prominent,  which  facts  aim
are  in  strict  accordance  with  the  periods  of.  unfolding  of
the  knowing  and  reasoning  powers.

Sdfy,  Genius  is  almost  always  partial,  which  it  ought  net
to  be,  if  the  organ  of  the  mind  were  single.  A  genius  for
poetry,  for  mechanics,  for  drawing,  for  music,  of  for  mathe-
matics, sometimes  appears  at  a  very  early  age  in  indivi-
duals, who,  in  regard  to  all  other  pursuits,  are  mere  ordi-

*  The  following  instances  are  taken  from  Dr  Andrew  Combk's  Obser-
▼ationa  on  Dr  Barclay's  Objections  to  Phrenology,  published  in  the
Transactions  of  the  Phrenological  Society,  page  413.


16   PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.

nary  men,  and  who,  with  every  effort,  can  never  attain  to
any  thing  above  mediocrity.

4ithly9  The  phenomena  of  dreaming  are  at  variance  with
the  supposition  of  the  mind  manifesting  all  its  faculties  by
means  of  a  single  organ,  while  they  are  quite  consistent
with,  and  explicable  by,  that  of  a  plurality  of  organs.  In
dreaming,  the  mind  experiences  numerous  vivid  emotions,
such  as  those  of  fear,  joy,  affection,  arising,  succeeding  one
another,  and  departing  without  control  from  the  intellectual
powers; — or,  it  is  filled  with  a  thousand  varied  Conceptions,
sometimes  connected  and  rational,  but  more  frequently  dis-
jointed and  absurd,  and  all  differing  widely  from  the  wak-
ing operations  of  the  mind,  in  wanting  harmony,  consist-
ency, and  sense.  These  phenomena  harmonize  remarkably
with  the  notion  of  a  variety  of  faculties  and  organs,  some  of
which,  being  active,  would  communicate  these  ideas  and
feelings  which  constitute  a  dream,  while  others  remaining
asleep  would,  by  their  inactivity,  permit  that  disordered  ac-
tion which  characterizes  the  pictures  formed  by  the  fancy
during  sleep.

Were  the  organ  of  mind  single,  it  is  clear  that  all  the  fa-
culties should  be  asleep  or  awake  to  the  same  extent  at  the
same  time ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  no  such  thing  as  dream-
ing could  take  place.

Sthfy9  The  admitted  phenomena  of  Partial  Idiocy  and  Par-
tial Insanity,  are  so  plainly  and  strongly  in  contradiction
with  the  notion  of  a  single  organ  of  mind,  that  Pin  el  him-
self, no  friend  to  Phrenology,  asks  if  their  phenomena  can
be  reconciled  to  such  a  conception.

Partial  Idiocy  is  that  state  in  which  an  individual  mani-
fests one  or  several  powers  of  the  mind  with  an  ordinary
degree  of  energy,  while  he  is  deprived  to  a  greater  or  less
extent  of  the  power  of  manifesting  ail  the  others.  Pinel,
Haslam,  Rush,  Esquirol,  and,  in  short,  every  writer  on
insanity,  speaks  of  the  partial  development  of  certain  men-
tal powers  in  idiots ;  and  Rush  in  particular  not  only  al-
ludes to  the  powers  of  intellect,  but  also  to  the  partial  pos-

3


PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.      17

session  of  the  moral  faculties.  Soma  idiots,  he  observes)
are  as  remarkable  for  correct  moral  feelings  as  some  great
geniuses  are  for  the  reverse.  In  his  Trait6  du  Goitre  et  de
la  Cr6tinisme,  Foderk'  thus  speaks,  p.  133 : — "  It  is  re-
marked, that,  by  an  inexplicable  singularity,  some  of  these
individuals  (cretins),  endowed  with  so  weak  minds,  are
born  with  a  particular  talent  for  copying  paintings,  for
rhyming,  or  for  music.  I  have  known  several  who  taught
themselves  to  play  passably  on  the  organ  and  harpsichord ;
others  who  understood,  without  ever  having  had  a  master,
the  repairing  of  watches,  and  the  construction  of  some
pieces  of  mechanism/'  He  adds,  that  these  powers  could
not  be  attributed  to  the  intellect,  "  for  these  individuals
not  only  could  not  read  books  which  treated  of  the  princi-
ples of  mechanics,  but  Us  etaient  derouUs  lorsqu'on  en  parlait
et  ne  se  perfectionnaient  jamais."  It  must  be  observed  also,
that  these  unfortunate  individuals  differ  very  much  in  the
hind  as  well  as  quantity  of  mental  power  possessed.  For
example,  an  instance  is  given  by  Pinel  of  an  idiot  girl  who
manifested  a  most  wonderful  propensity  to  imitate  whatever
she  heard  or  saw,  but  who  displayed  no  other  intellectual
faculty  in  a  perceptible  degree,  and  never  attached  an  idea
to  the  sound  she  uttered.  Dr  Rush  particularizes  one  man
who  was  remarkable  for  his  religious  feelings,  although  ex-
ceedingly deficient  in  intellectual  power,  and  other  moral
sentiments ;  and,  among  the  cretins,  many  are  to  be  found
who  scarcely  manifest  any  other  faculty  of  the  mind  except
that  of  Amativeness.  One  is  all  kindness  and  good  nature,
another  quarrelsome  and  mischievous.  One  has  a  lively
perception  of  harmony  in  music,  while  another  has  none.

It  ought  also  to  be  observed,  that  the  characteristic  fea-
tures of  each  particular  case  are  strictly  permanent  The
idiot,  who  to-day  manifests  the  faculty  of  Tune,  thct  feeling
of  Benevolence,  of  Veneration,  or  of  Self-esteem,  will  not
to-morrow,  nor  in  a  year,  change  the  nature  of  his  predomi-
nant manifestations.  Were  the  deficiency  of  the  single  or-
gan the  cause  of  idiocy,  these  phenomena  ought  not  to  ap-

B


18   PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.

pear;  for  the  general  organ  being  able  to  manifest  one  fa-
culty, ought,  according  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
individual  is  placed,  to  be  equally  able  to  manifest  all  others,
whose  activity  may  be  required,  and  thus  the  character  of
the  idiocy  ought  to  change  with  every  passing  event,  which
it  never  does.  Fodere'  calls  these  "  inexplicable  singula*
rities,"  and,  no  doubt,  on  his  theory  they  truly  are  so.  To
the  Phrenologist,  however,  they  offer  no  difficulty,  for  they
are  in  perfect  harmony  with  his  views.  The  difference  in
the  kind  of  powers  manifested  in  cases  of  partial  idiocy,  be-
tween the  capacity  for  mechanics,  for  instance,  and  the
sentiment  of  Veneration,  Self-esteem,  or  Benevolence,  is  as
great  as  between  the  sensations  excited  by  the  perception
of  a  sound,  a  taste,  or  a  smell.  To  infer,  therefore,  that
one  organ  serves  for  the  manifestation  of  aU  these  faculties*
is  really  much  the  same  in  point  of  logic  as  if  we  were  to
suppose  all  the  external  senses  to  communicate  with  the
mind  through  the  medium  of  only  one  nerve,  in  spite  of  the
facts  of  many  individuals  being  blind  who  are  not  deaf,  or
deaf  and  still  able  to  see  and  smell.

Partial  insanity,  or  that  state  in  which  one  or  more  fa-
culties of  the  mind  are  diseased,  without  affecting  the  in-
tegrity of  the  remainder,  is  known  by  the  name  of  Mono-
mania, and  appears  equally  with  the  former  to  exclude  the
possibility  of  one  organ  executing  the  functions  of  all  the
mental  faculties;  for  the  argument  constantly  recurs,  that
if  the  organ  be  sufficiently  sound  to  manifest  one  faculty  in
its  perfect  state,  it  ought  to  be  equally  capable  of  taanifest-
ing  all, — which,  however,  is  known  to  be  in  direct  opposi-
tion to  fact.  On  this  subject*  I  shall  confine  myself  to  the
statement  of  a  very  few  instances*  merely  in  illustration.

Of  folie  raisomumte  Pinei  thus  speaks : — "  Hospitals  for
die  insane  are  never  without  some  example  of  mania  mark-
ed by  acts  of  extravagance,  or  even  of  fury,  with  a  kind  of
judgment  preserved  in  all  its  integrity,  if  we  judge  of  it  by
the  conversation ;  the  lunatic  gives  the  most  just  and  pre-
f  ise  answers  to  the  questions  of  the  curious ;  no  incohe-


PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS,       Iff

renee  of  ideas  is  discernible ;  he  reads  and  writes  letters  as
if  his  understanding  were  perfectly  sound;  and  yet,  by  a
singular  contrast,  be  tears  in  pieces  his  clothes  and  bed-
covers,  and  always  finds  some  plausible  reason  to  justify  his
wandering  and  his  fury.  This  sort  of  mania  is  so  far  from
rare,  that  the  vulgar  name  offolie  raisonnaate  has  been
given  to  it" — P.  93.  Another  equally  interesting  case
from  the  same  author  may  be  cited.  "  It  is  difficult  to
conceive,"  says  he,  "  the  nature  of  one  species  of  alienation
of  mind.  It  consists,  as  it  were,  of  a  combination  of  rea-
son and  extravagance,  of  discernment  and  actual  delirium,
which  appear  so  inconsistent  as  reciprocally  to  exclude
each  other."  "  One  lunatic,"  he  continues,  "  whose  ma-
lady is  of  seven  years'  standing,  is  perfectly  aware  of  his
state,  and  forms  as  sound  a  judgment  of  it  as  if  it  were  a
thing  which  did  not  immediately  concern  himself.  He  tries
to  make  efforts  to  free  himself  from  it;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  he  is  convinced  that  it  is  incurable.  If  any  one  re-
marlp  the  incoherence  in  his  ideas  in  his  talking,  he  read-
ily acknowledges  it,  but  answers,  that  this  inclination  over-
powers him  so  much,  that  he  cannot  but  submit.  He  adds,
that  he  does  not  guarantee  the  soundness  of  the  judgments
which  he  forms,  but  that  it  is  not  in  his  power  to  rectify
them.  He  believes,  for  example,  that  if  he  wiped  his  nose,
that  organ  would  remain  in  his  handkerchief;  that  ff  he
shaved  himself  he  must  of  necessity  cut  his  throat,  and
that,  at  the  first  attempt  to  walk,  his  legs  would  break  like
glass.  He  sometimes  subjects  himself  to  rigorous  absti-
nence for  several  days,  under  the  impression,  that  if  he
took  aliments,  they  would  suffocate  him.  Wha^  *re  We  to
think  of  an  aberration  of  intellect  so  regular  and  so  singu-
lar?"—P.  94.

It  would  be  easy  for  me  to  multiply  such  instances  as
these  of  the  partial  affection  of  the  mental  faculties,  but  it
is  needless  to  occupy  time  with  more,  and  the  above  are
amply  sufficient  to  show  the  nature  and  bearing  of  such
eases.  Here  again  the  difficulty  recurs  of  reconciling  such
2  b  2


20      PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.

facts  with  the  idea  of  one  organ  executing  all  the  functions
of  the  mind.  How  comes  that  organ  to  be  able  to  mani-
fest one,  but  not  att  the  faculties  ?

(tthiy,  Besides  the  phenomena  of  idiocy  and  insanity,
there  is  also  another  class  of  facts  (to  which,  however,  I
shall  only  allude)  equally  at  variance  with  the  supposition
of  a  single  organ  of  mind,  viz.  partial  injuries  of  the  brain,
which  are  said  to  have  occurred  without  injury  to  the  men-
tal faculties.  I  merely  observe,  that  if  every  part  of  the
brain  is  concerned  in  every  mental  act,  it  appears  strange
that  all  the  processes  of  thought  should  be  manifested  with
equal  success,  when  a  great  part  of  the  brain  is  injured  or
destroyed,  as  when  its  whole  structure  is  sound  and  entire.
If  the  fact  were  really  as  here  stated,  the  brain  would  form
an  exception  to  the  general  laws  of  organic  structure ;  for
although  a  part  of  the  lungs  may  be  sufficient  to  maintain
respiration,  or  a  part  of  the  stomach  to  execute  digestion,
in  such  a  way  as  to  support  life,  there  is  no  instance  hi
which  these  functions  have  been  as  successfully  performed
by  impaired  organs  as  they  would  have  been  by  lungs  and  a
stomach  in  their  natural  state  of  health  and  activity.  The
Phrenologists  are  reduced  to  no  such  strait  to  reconcile  the
occurrence  of  such  cases  with  their  sjrstem ;  for  as  soon  as
the  principle  of  a  plurality  of  organs  is  acknowledged,  they
admit  of  an  easy  and  satisfactory  explanation.

From  the  preceding  considerations,  then,  it  appears
that  any  theory,  founded  upon  the  notion  of  a  single  organ,
is  uniformly  at  variance  with  all  that  is  ascertained  to  be
fact  in  the  philosophy  of  mind :  and  that,  on  the  other
hand,  the  principle  of  a  plurality  of  organs,  while  it  satis*
factorily  explains  most  of  these  facts,  is  consistent  with  all
of  them.  Its  truth  is  thus  almost  demonstrated,  not  by  far-
fetched or  pretended  facts,  which  few  can  verify,  but  by
facts  which  daily  "  obtrude  themselves  upon  the  notice  of
the  senses."  This  principle,  indeed,  bears  on  the  face  of  it
■o  much  greater  a  degree  of  probability  than  the  opposite
one,,  as  to  have  long  since  forced  itself  on  the  minds  of


PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.      21

many  inquirers.  Fodere'  himself  a  very  zealous  opponent
of  Phrenology,  after  recapitulating  a  great  many  reasons
similar  to  those  already  mentioned,  which  had  been  em-
ployed by  philosophers  antecedent  to  Drs  Gall  and  Spurz-
heim,  for  believing  in  a  plurality  of  mental  organs,  is  con-
strained to  admit,  that  "  this  kind  of  reasoning  has  been
employed  by  the  greater  number  of  anatomists,  who,  from
the  time  of  Galen,  down  to  those  of  our  own  day,  and
even  by  the  great  Haller,  who  experienced  a  necessity
for  assigning  a  function  to  each  department  of  the  brain.
Pinel  also  (in  the  article  Manie  in  the  Encyclopedic  Me-
thodique)  after  relating  some  cases  of  partial  insanity,  asks,
whether  all  this  collection  of  facts  can  be  reconciled  with
the  opinion  of  a  single  faculty  and  a  single  oigan  of  the
understanding?9  Farther,  the  Edinburgh  Reviewer, ako  al-
ready referred  to,  commends  Mr  Charles  Bell  for  "  attack-
ing the  common  opinion,  that  a  separate  sensation  and  voli-
tion are  conveyed  by  the  same  nerves,  and  for  asserting
4  the  different  functions  of  different  parts  of  the  cerebrum
and  cerebellum.' "

These  considerations  early  impressed  reflecting  men  with
the  conviction,  that  particular  mental  powers  must  be  con-
nected with  particular  parts  of  the  brain  ;  and  accordingly,
before  the  eighteenth  century,  when  modern  metaphysics
sprung  up,  we  find  traces  of  this  opinion  common,  not  on-
ly among  eminent  anatomists  and  physiologists,  but  among
authors  on  human  nature  in  general.  Burton,  in  his  Ana-
tomy of  Melancholy,  says,  "  Inner  senses  are  three  in  num-
ber, so  called,  because  they  be  within  the  brain-pan,  as
common  sense,  phantasie,  and  memory :"  of  common  sense,
"  the  fore  part  of  the  brain  is  his  organ  or  seat ;"  of  phan-
tasie or  imagination,  which  some  call  eestimative  or  cogita-
tive, his  "  organ  is  the  middle  cell  of  the  brain ;"  and  of
memory,  "  his  seat  and  organ,  the  back  part  of  the  brain/'
This  was  the  account  of  the  faculties  given  by  Aristotle,
and  repeated,  with  little  variation,  by  the  writers  of  the
middle  ages.     In  the  thirteenth  century,  a  head  divided  in-


22      PLURALITY  OP  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.


to<  regions,  according  to  these  opinions,  was  designed  by
Albert  the  Great,  bishop  of  Ratisbon ;  and  another  was
published  by  Petrus  Montagnana,  in  1491.  One  pub-
lished at  Venice,  in  1562,  by  Ludovico  Dolci,  a  Venetian,
in  a  work  upon  strengthening  and  preserving  the  memory,
is  here  represented : —


REFERENCES  TO  FIGURE.

1  Fantasia.

2  Cogitative

3  Vermis.

4  Sensus  Communis.

5  Imagina.

6  ASstimativa.

7  Memorativa.

8  Olfectus.

9  Gustus.


In  the  British  Museum  is  a  chart  of  the  universe  and
the  elements  of  all  sciences,  in  which  a  large  head  so  deli-
neated is  conspicuous.  It  was  published  at  Rome  so  late
as  1632  *.

If,  then,  the  majority  of  anatomists,  for  the  last  two  thou-
sand years,  and  such  illustrious  physiologists  as  Halle r,
and  the  others  above  referred  to,  were  led  to  the  belief  of  a
plurality  of  mental  organs,  by  a  perception  of  the  contradic-
tion and  inconsistency  existing  between  the  phenomena,  and
the  supposition  of  the  whole  brain  being  the  single  organ
of  mind,  I  cannot  be  far  wrong  in  saying,  that  the  lat-
ter notion,  so  far  from  being  self-evident,  appears  so  impro-
bable as  to  require  even  stronger  facts  to  prove  it  than  the
opposite  view;  and  that  the  presumptions  are  all  in  favour
of  a  plurality  of  mental  faculties,  manifesting  themselves
by  means  of  a  plurality  of  organs.

I  have  now  endeavoured  to  shew,  first,  That  the  ridicule

•  Elliotsok's  Blumenbach,  p.  205.


PLURALITY  OF  FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.       S3

and  abuse  with  which  Phrenology  was  treated  at  its  first
announcement,  and  its  continued  rejection  by  men  of  es-
tablished reputation,  whose  opinions  it  contradicts,  afford
no  presumption  that  it  is  untrue,  for  all  great  discoveries
have  met  with  a  similar  fate :  Secondly,  That  we  are  really
uiiacquainted  with  the  mind,  as  an  entity  distinct  from  the
body,  and  that  it  is  owing  to  the  mind  not  being  conscious
of  its  organs,  that  metaphysicians  have  supposed  their  feel-
ings  and  intellectual  perceptions  to  be  emanations  of  pure
mind,  whereas  they  are  die  results  of  mind  and  its  organs
Acting  in  combination*  Thirdly,  That  the  greatest  anato-
mists and  physiologists  admit  the  brain  to  be  the  organ  of
the  mind,  and  common  feeling  localizes  the  mind  in  the
head,  although  it  does  not  inform  us  what  substance  occu-
pies the  interior  of  die  skull :  Farther,  That  the  very  idea
of  the  mind  having  an  organ,  implies  that  every  mental
act  is  accompanied  with  an.  affection  of  the  organ,  and
vice  versa  ;  so  that  the  true  philosophy  of  the  mind  cannot
be  discovered  without  taking  the  influence  of  the  organs  in-
to account  at  every  step.  Fourthly,  That  the  analqgy  of
the  nerves  of  feeling  and  motion,  of  the  five  senses,  and
other  parts  of  the  body,  ail  of  which  perform  distinct  func-
tions by  separate  organs ;  also  the  successive  appearance  of
the  faculties  in  youth ;  the  phenomena  of  partial  genius,  of
dreaming,  of  partial  insanity,  of  monomania,  and  of  partial
injuries  of  the  brain,  furnish  presumptive  evidence  that  the
mind  manifests  a  variety  of  faculties  by  means  of  a  variety
of  organs,  and  exclude  the  supposition  of  a  single  power
operating  by  a  single  organ*  The  next  inquiry,  therefore,
naturally  i%  What  effect  does  the  condition  of  the  organs
produce  on  the  states  of  the  mind?  Is  it  indifferent  whe-
ther the  organs  be  large  or  small,  well  or  ill  constituted,  in
health  or  in  disease  ?

I  submit  the  following  facts  to  prove  that  in  other  de-
partments of  organised  nature,  size  in  an  organ,  other  con-
ditions being  equal,  is  a  measure  of  power  in  its  function,


26  INFLUENCE  OF  SIZE

and  the  part  on  which  it  is  ramified  is  merely  a  medium
far  patting  it  in  relation  with  the  specific  qualities  which  it
is  destined  to  recognize.

To  shew  the  effect  of  size  in  regard  to  these  nerves,  the
following  cases  may  he  mentioned,  and  they  are  stated  on
the  authority  of  Desmoulins,  a  celebrated  Freneh  physio-
logist, when  no  other  authority  is  given.  The  horse  and
ox  have  much  greater  muscular  power,  and  much  less  in-
tensity of  sensation  in  their  limbs  than  man;  and,  in  con-
formity with  the  principle  now  under  discussion,  the  nerves
of  motion  going  to  the  four  limbs  in  the  horse  and  ox  are
at  least  one-third  more  numerous  than  the  nerves  of  sensa-
tion going  to  the  same  parts ;  whereas  in  man  the  nerves  of
motion  going  to  the  legs  and  arms  are  a  fifth  or  a  sixth
part  less  than  the  nerves  of  sensation  distributed  on  the
same  parts.  In  like  manner,  in  birds  and  reptiles  which
have  scaly  skins  and  limited  touch,  but  vigorous  powers  of
motion,  the  nerves  of  sensation  are  few  and  small,  and  the
nerves  of  motion  numerous  and  large.  Farther,  wherever
nature  has  given  a  higher  degree  of  sensation  or  touch  to
any  particular  part  than  to  the  other  parts  of  an  animal,
there  the  nerve  of  sensation  is  invariably  increased ;  for  ex-
ample; die  single  nerve  of  feeling  ramified  on  the  tactile
extremity  of  the  proboscis  of  the  elephant  exceeds  in  size  the
united  volume  of  all  the  muscular  nerves  of  that  organ.
Some  species  of  monkeys  possess  great  sensibility  in  the
tail?  and  some  species  of  bats  possess  grqat  sensibility  in
tfteir  wings,  and  in  these  parts  the  nerves  of  sensation  are
increased  in  size  in  proportion  to  the  increased  function.
Birds  require  to  rise  in  the  air,  which  is  a  medium  much
lighter  than  their  own  bodies.  To  have  enlarged  the  size
of -their  muscles  would  have  added  to  their  weight,  and  in-
•eTeased  their  difficulty  in  rising.  Nature,  to  avoid  this  dis-
advantage, >  ha*  bestowed  on  them  large  nerves  of  motion
-which  infuse  a  very  powerful  stimulus  into  the  muscles,
and  increase  their  power  of  motion.  Fishes  live  in  water
which  is  almost  in  equilibrium  with  their  bodies.    To  them


ON  THE  POWER  OF  ORGANS.  27

Nature  has  given  large  miisoies,  in  order  to  increase  their
locomotive  powers*  and  in  them  the  nerves  of  motion  are
lees.  In  these  instances,  nature  curiously  adds  to  the  pow-
er of  motion,  by  increasing  the  sice  of  that  part  of  the  loco-
motive apparatus  which  may  be  enlarged  most  conveniently
for  the  animal;  but  either  the  muscle  or  the  nerve  must  be
enlarged,  otherwise  there  is  no  increase  of  power.

In  regard  to  the  external  senses*  it  is  proper  to  observe
that  every  external  sense  is  composed,  first,  Of  an  instru-
ment or  medium  on  which  the  impression  is  made ;  the
eye  for  example ;  and,  secondly,  A  nerve  to  conduct  that
impression  to  the  mind  or  brain.  The  same  law  of  size
holds  as  to  them;  a  large  eye  will  collect  more  rays  of
light ;  a  farge  ear  more  vibrations  of  sound ;  and  large  nos-
trils more  odorous  particles  than  small  ones.  This  is  bo
obvious,  that  it  scarcely  requires  proof;  yet,  as  Mr  Jeffrey
has  ridiculed  the  idea,  I  may  mention  that  Monro,  Blu-
menbach,  Soemmering,  Cuvier,  Magendie,  Geokget,
and  a  whole  host  of  physiologists,  support  it.  Blumen-
bach,  when  treating  of  smell,  says,  "  While  animals  of  the
most  acute  smell  have  the  nasal  organs  most  extensively
evolved,  precisely  the  same  holds  in  regard  to  some  bar-
barous nations.  For  instance,  in  the  head  of  a  North  Ame-
rican Indian  (represented  in  one  of  his  plates),  the  internal
nostrils  are  of  an  extraordinary  si4e,"  &c.  And  again,  "  The
nearest  to  this  in  point  of  magnitude,  are  the  internal  nos-
trils of  the  Ethiopians,  from  among  whom  I  have  seen  heads
very  different  from  each  other,  but  each  possessing  bL  nasal
organ  much  larger  than  that  described  by  Soemmering.
These  anatomical  observations  accord  with  the  accounts
£iven  by  the  most  respectable  travellers,  concerning  the
wonderful  acuteness  of  smell  possessed  by  these  savages/'

In  like  manner,  Dr  Monro  primus,  no  mean  authority,
in  treating,  in  his  Comparative  Anatomy,  of  the  large  or-
gan of  smell  in  the  dog,  says,  "  The  sensibility  fof  smell)
seems  to  be  increased  in  proportion  to  the  surface ;  and
this  will  also  be  found  to  take  place  in  all  the  other  senses."


28  INFLUENCE  OF  SIZE

The  same  author  states,  "  that  the  external  ear  in  different
quadrupeds  is  differently  framed,  but  always  calculated  to
the  creature's  manner  of  life;  thus  hares  and  such  other
animals  as  are  daily  exposed  to  insults  from  beasts  of  prey,
hare  large  ears  directed  backwards,  their  eyes  warning
them  of  danger  before."

These  observations  apply  to  the  external  portion  of  the
organs  of  sense.  The  inner  parts  or  nerves  are  likewise
subject  to  the  same  law  of  size.  Georget,  a  late  physio-
logical writer,  in  treating  of  the  nerves,  says,  "  The  vo-
lume of  these  organs  bears  a  uniform  relation,  in  all  the
different  animals,  to  the  extent  and  force  of  the  sensations
and  movements  over  whidi  they  preside.  Thus,  the  nerve
of  smell  in  the  dog  is  larger  than  the  five  nerves  of  the  ex-
ternal senses  in  man."  The  nerve  of  smell  is  small  in  man
and  in  the  monkey  tribe ;  scarcely,  if  at  all,  perceptible  in
the  dolphin ;  large  in  the  dog  and  the  horse,  and  altogether
enormous  in  the  whale  and  the  skate,  in  which  it  actually
exceeds  in  diameter  the  spinal  marrow  itself.  In  the  mole
it  is  of  extraordinary  size,  while  the  optic  nerve  is  very
small.  In  the  eagle  the  reverse  is  observed,  the  optic
nerve  being  very  large,  and  the  olfactory  small.  Most  of
the  quadrupeds  excel  man  in  the  acutenees  of  their  hearing,
and  accordingly  it  is  a  fact  that  the  auditory  nerve  in  the
sheep,  the  cow,  the  horse,  &c,  greatly  exceeds  the  size  of
the  same  nerve  in  man.  In  some  birds  of  prey,  which  are
known  to  possess  great  sensibility  of  taste,  the  palate  is
found  to  be  very  copiously  supplied  with  nervous  fila-
ments.

But  the  organ  of  sight  affords  a  most  interesting  exam-
ple of  the  influence  of  size.  The  office  of  the  eye-ball  is
to  collect  the  rays  of  light.  A  large  eye,  therefore,  will
take  in  more  rays  of  light,  or,  in  other  words,  command  a
greater  sphere  of  vision,  than  a  small  one.  But  to  give  in-
tensity or  power  to  vision,  the  optic  nerve  is  also  necessary.
Now,  the  ox  placed  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  of  a
heavy  structure  and  ill  fitted  for  motion,  but  he  has  a  larg^


ON  THE  POWER  OF  OEGANS.  29

eye-ball  which  enables  him  to  take  in  a  large  field  of  vision
without  turning ;  but  as  he  does  not  require  very  keen  vision
to  see  his  provender  on  which  he  almost  treads,  the  optic
nerve  is  not  large  in  proportion  to  the  eyeball.     The  eagle,
on  the  other  hand,  by  ascending  to  a  great  height  in  the
air,  enjoys  a  wide  field  of  vision  from  its  mere  physical  po-
sition.    It  looks  down  from  a  point  over  an  extensive  sur-
face.   It  has  no  need,  therefore,  of  a  large  eyeball  to  in-
crease artificially  its  field  of  vision ;  and,  accordingly,  the
ball  of  its  eye  is  comparatively  small,  but  it  requires,  from
that  height,  to  discern  its  prey  upon  the  surface  of  the
earth,  and  not  only  is  the  distance  great,  but  its  prey  often
resembles  in  colour  the  ground  on  which  it  rests.  '  Great
intensity  of  vision,  therefore,  is  necessary  to  its  existence.
Accordingly,  in  it  the  optic  nerve  is  increased  to  an  enor-
mous extent.     Instead  of  forming  a  single  membrane  lin-
ing only  the  inner  surface  of  the  posterior  chamber  of  the
eye,  as  in  man  and  animals  of  ordinary  vision,  and  conse-
quently only  equalling  in  extent  the  sphere  of  the  eye  to
which  it  belongs,  the  retina  or  nerve  of  vision  in  these
quick-sighted  birds  of  prey  is  found  to  be  composed  of  a
great  number  of  folds,  each  hanging  loose  into  the  eye,  and
augmenting,  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  ndt  only  the  ex-
tent of  nervous  surface,  but  the  mass  of  nervous  matter,
and  giving  rise  to  that  intensity  of  vision  which  distin-
guishes the  eagle,  falcon,  hawk,  and  similar  animals.    In  the
case  of  all  the  senses,  then,  the  law  holds,  that  power  of
function  is  in  proportion  to  size  of  the  organ,  other  circum-
stances being  equal.

Let  us  now  attend  to  the  brain.  Were  I  to  affirm  that
difference  of  size  in  the  brain  would  produce  no  effect  on
the  vigour  of  its  functions, — or  that  a  small  brain  in  per-
fect health,  and  of  a  sound  constitution,  is  equal  in  func-
tional power  and  efficiency  to  a  large  one  in  similar  condi-
tion, Would  the  reader,  after  the  evidence  which  has  been
laid  before  him  of  the  influence  of  size  in  increasing  the
power  of  function  in  all  other  parts  of  the  body,  be  dispoa-


80  INFLUENCE  OF  SIZE

ed  to  credit  the  assertion  ?  He  would  have  the  utmost
difficulty  in  believing  it,  and  would  say  that  if  such  were
the  feet,  the  brain  must  form  an  exception  to  a  law  which
appears  general  over  organized  nature ;  and  yet  the  phre-
nologists have  been  assailed  with  every  species  of  vitupera-
tion, for  maintaining  that  the  brain  does  not  form  an  ex-
ception to  this  general  law,  but  that  in  it  also  vigour  of
function  is  in  proportion  to  size,  other  conditions  being
equal*  I  shall  proceed  to  shew  some  evidence  in  proof  of
this  fact ;  but  the  reader  is  requested  to  observe  that  I  am
here  expounding  only  general  principles  in  an  introductory
discourse.  The  conditions  and  modifications  under  which
these  principles  fall  to  be  applied  in  practice,  will  be  stated
in  a  subsequent  chapter.

First,  The  brain  of  a  child  is  small,  and  its  mental  vigour
weak,  compared  with  the  brain  and  mental  vigour  of  an
adult  *.  Secondly,  Small  size  in  the  brain  is  an  invariable
cause  of  idiocy.  Phrenologists  have  in  vain  called  upon
their  opponents  to  produce  a  single  instance  of  the  mind
being  manifested  vigorously  by  a  very  small  brain.  De-
ficiency of  size,  however,  in  the  brain  is  not  the  only
cause  of  idiocy.  A  brain  may  be  large  and  diseased,  and
mental  imbecility  arise  from  the  disease ;  but,  although  dis-
ease be  absent,  if  the  size  be  very  deficient,  idiocy  will  be
invariable.  Thirdly,  Men  who  have  been  remarkable,  not
for  mere  cleverness,  but  for  great  force  of  character,  such
as  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  have  had  large  heads.  Fourth-
ly, It  is  an  ascertained  fact,  that  nations  in  whom  the  brain
is  large,  possess  so  great  a  mental  superiority  over  those  in
whom  that  organ  is  small,  that  they  conquer  and  oppress

•  It  is  certified  by  practical  hatters,  that  the  lower  classes  of  the  com-
munity, who  are  distinguished  for  muscular  vigour  much  more  than  men-
tal capacity,  require  a  smaller  size  of  hat  than  those  classes  whose  occu-
pations are  chiefly  mental,  and  in  whom  vigour  of  mind  surpasses  that  of
body.  But  the  Phrenologist  does  not  compare  mental  power  in  general
with  size  of  brain  in  general ;  and,  besides,  the  hat  does  not  indicate  the
size  of  the  whole  head.  The  reader  will  find  details  on  this  point  in  the
4th  volume  of  the  Phrenological  Journal


ON  THE  POWER  OF  ORGANS.  31


them  at  pleasure.  The  Hindoo  brain,  for  example*  w  <
siderably  smaller  than  the  European,  and  it  is  wetL  known
that  a  few  thousands  of  Europeans  have  tiubdued  and  keep
in  subjection  millions  of  Hindoos.  The  Native  American
brain  is  smaller  also  than  the  European,  and  die  same  n*
suit  has  been  exemplified  in  that  country.  Lastly,  The  in-
fluence of  size  is  now  admitted  by  the  most  eatinent  physi-
ologists. Magendik  says,  "  the  volume  of  the*  brain  is  ge-
nerally in  direct  proportion  to  the  capacity  of  the  mind.
We  ought  not  to  suppose,  however,  that  every  man  having
a  large  head  is  necessarily  a  person  of  superior  intelligence,
for  there  are  many  cases  of  an  augmentation  of  the  volume
of  the  head  beside  the  size  of  the  brain,  bnt  it  is  rarely
found  that  a  man  distinguished  by  his  mental  faculties  has
not  a  large  head.  The  only  way  of  estimating  the  volume
of  the  brain,  in  a  living  person,  is  to  measure  the  dimen-
sions of  the  skull ;  every  other  means,  even  that  proposed
by  Camper,  is  uncertain." — (Compendium  of  Physiology,
p.  104.  edition  1826).  The  following  passage  which  occurs
in  the  94th  Number  of  die  Edinburgh  Review,  also  im-
plies not  only  that  different  parts  of  the  nervous  system,
including  the  brain,  have  different  functions,  but  that  an
increase  of  volume  in  the  brain  is  marked  by  some  addition
to,  or  amplification  of,  the  powers  of  the  animal.  "  It  is
in  the  nervous  system  alone  thai  we  can  trace  a  gradual
progress  in  the  provision  for  the  subordination  of  one  (ani-
mal) to  another,  and  of  all  to  man ;  and  are  enabled  to  as-
sociate every  faculty  which  gives  superiority  with  some  ad-
dition to  the  nervous  mass,  even  from  the  smallest  indica-
tions of  sensation  and  will,  up  to  the  highest  degree  of  sen-
sibility, judgment,  and  expression.  The  brain  is  observed
progressively  to  be  improved  in  its  structure,  and,  with  re-
ference to  the  spinal  marrow  and  nerves,  augmented  in
volume  more  and  more,  until  we  reach  the  human  brain,
each  addition  being  marked  by  some  addition  to,  or  ampli-
fication o£  the  powers  of  the  animal, — until  in  man  we  be-
hold it  possessing  some  parts  of  which  animals  are  desti-


I


32  TEMPERAMENT  AND  DISEASE

tute,  and  wanting  none  which  theirs  possess."  There  is
here,  then,  pretty  strong  evidence  and  authority  for  the  as-
sertion, that  the  brain  does  not  form  an  exception  to  the  ge-
neral law  of  organized  nature,  that  other  conditions  being
equal,  size  of  organ  is  a  measure  of  power  of  function.

The  circumstances  which  modify  the  effects  of  size  fall
next  to  be  considered.     These  are  constitution  and  health.

The  question  naturally  presents  itself,  Do  we  possess  any
index  to  constitutional  qualities  of  brain  ?  The  tempera-
ments indicate  them  to  a  certain  extent.  There  are  four
temperaments,  accompanied  with  different  degrees  of  acti-
vity in  the  brain — the  Lymphatic,  the  Sanguine,  the  Bi-
lious, and  the  Nervous.  The  temperaments  are  supposed  to
depend  upon  the  constitution  of  particular  systems  of  the
body;  the  brain  and  nerves  being  predominantly  active
from  constitutional  causes,  produce  the  nervous  tempera-
ment; the  lungs,  heart,  and  bloodvessels  being  constitu-
tionally predominant,  give  rise  to  the  sanguine ;  the  muscu-
lar and  fibrous  systems,  to  the  bilious ;  and  the  glands  and
assimilating  organs,  to  the  lymphatic.

The  different  temperaments  are  indicated  by  external
signs,  which  ar$  open  to  observation.  The  first,  or  Lym-
phatic, is  distinguishable  by  a  round  form  of  the  body,  soft-
ness of  the  muscular  system,  repletion  of  the  cellular  tissue,
fair  hair,  and  a  pale  clear  skin.  It  is  accompanied  by  lan-
guid vital  actions,  with  weakness,  and  slowness  in  the  cir-
culation. The  brain,  as  part  of  the  system,  is  also  slow,
languid,  and  feeble  in  its  action,  and  the  mental  manifesta-
tions are  proportionally  weak.

The  second,  or  sanguine  constitution,  is  indicated  by  well
defined  forms,  moderate  plumpness  of  person,  tolerable
firmness  of  flesh,  light  hair,  inclining  to  chesnut,  blue  eyes,
and  fair  complexion,  with  ruddiness  of  countenance.  It  is
marked  by  great  activity  of  the  bloodvessels,  fondness  for
exercise,  and  an  animated  countenance.  The  brain  par-
takes of  the  general  state,  and  is  active.


MODIFY  THE  EFFECTS  OF  SIZE.  88

The  Bilious  temperament  is  recognised  by  black  hair,
dark  skin,  moderate  fulness,  and  much  firmness  of  flesh,
with  harshly  expressed  outline  of  the  person.  The  func-
tions partake  of  great  energy  of  action,  which  extends  to
the  brain,  and  the  countenance,  in  consequence,  shews
strong,  marked,  and  decided  features.

The  Nervous  temperament  is  recognised  by  fine  thin  hair,
thin  skin,  small  thin  muscles,  quickness  in  muscular  mo-
tion, paleness  of  countenance,  and  often  delicate  health.
The  whole  nervous  system,  including  the  brain,  is  predo-
minantly active,  and  the  mental  manifestations  are  propor-
tionally vivacious.

It  is  thus  clearly  admitted,  that  constitution  or  quality  of
brain  has  a  great  influence  on  the  mental  effects  of  size ;
but  let  us  attend  to  the  consequences.  As  a  general  rule,
all  the  parts  of  the  same  brain  have  the  same  constitution,
•and  if  size  be  a  measure  of  power,  then  in  each  head  the
large  organs  will  be  more  powerful  than  the  small  ones.
This  enables  us  to  judge  of  the  strong  and  the  weak  points
in  each  head.  But  if  we  compare  two  separate  brains,  then
we  must  recollect  that  the  size  of  the  two  may  be  equal ;
and,  nevertheless,  the  one  from  possessing  the  finest  tex-
ture, and  most  vigorous  constitution,  may  be  exceedingly
active,  while  another,  from  being  inferior  in  quality,  may
be  naturally  inert.  The  consequence  will  be,  that  the  best
constituted  brain  will  manifest  the  mind  with  most  vigour.
That  size  is  nevertheless  the  measure  of  power,  may  be
proved  by  contrasting  the  manifestations  of  a  small  and  of
a  large  brain,  possessing  the  same  combination  of  organs,
and  equally  well  constituted;  the  power  or  energy  will
then  be  found  greatest  in  the  latter.  This  is  what  is  meant
by  other  natural  conditions  being  equal.  As  the  tempera-
moats  are  distinguishable  by  the  countenance,  and  the  gene-
ral make  of  the  body,  and  as  the  brain  partakes  of  the  ge-
neral constitution,  we  possess  an  index  to  its  natural  quali-
ties.   I  repeat  that  these  remarks  apply  only  to  the  case  of


34  TEMPERAMENT  AND  DISEASE.

comparing  one  brain  with  another.  The  same  brain  ha*
in  general  the  same  constitution,  and  on  the  principle  that
size  is  a  measure  of  power,  the  largest  organs  in  each  indi-
vidual will  be  naturally  the  meet  vigorous.  If  the  tempe-
rament be  lymphatic,  all  the  organs  will  act  slowly,  but
the  largest  will  be  most  powerful  and  most  active,  on  ac-
count of  their  superior  size.  If  the  temperament  be  active,
all  will  be  active,  but  the  largest  will  still  take  the  lead.
It'  is  on  this  account  that  a  student  of  Phrenology  in  search
ef  evidence,  should  not  compare  the  same  organ  in  differ-
ent brains.

Further,  the  brain  must  possess  a  healthy  constitution,
and  that  degree  of  activity  which  is  the  usual  accompani-
ment of  health.  Now,  the  brain,  like  other  parts  of  the
body,  may  be  affected  with  certain  diseases  which  do  not
diminish  or  increase  its  magnitude,  and  yet  impair  its  func-
tions. The  Phrenologist  ascertains  the  health  by  inquiry.
In  cases  of  disease,  great  size  maybe  present,  and  very  im-
perfect manifestations  appear ;  or  it  may  be  attacked  with
ether  diseases,  such  as  inflammation,  or  any  of  those  parti-
cular affections  whose  nature  is  unknown,  but  to  which  the
name  of  Mania  is  given  in  nosology,  and  which  greatly  ex-
alt its  action ;  and  then  very  forcible  manifestations  may
proceed  from  a  brain  comparatively  small ;  but  it  is  no  less
true,  that  when  a  larger  brain  is  excited  to  the  same  degree
by  the  same  causes,  the  manifestations  become  increased
in  energy,  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  size.  These
eases,  therefore,  form  no  valid  objection  to  Phrenology ;
for  the  phrenologist  ascertains,  by  previous  inquiry,  that
the  brain  is  in  a  state  of  health.  If  it  is  not,  he  makes
the  necessary  limitations  in  drawing,  his  conclusions.

Let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the  point  of  the  argument
at  which  we  are  now  arrived.  We  have  seen  that  the  brain
is  the  organ  of  the  mind, — that  it  is  not  a  single  organ,  but
that  the  analogy  of  all  the  other  organs,  the  successive  deve-
lopment of  the  faculties, — the  phenomena,  of  partial  genius,—


WHAT  ORGANS  AND  FACULTIES  CONNECTED.   85

partial  insanity, — monomania,— dreaming,-— *uid  partial  in*
juries  of  the  brain,  indicate  that  it  is  a  congeries  of  organs
manifesting  a  plurality  of  faculties ;  we  have  seen  also,  that*
in  the  case  of  the  bones,  muscles,  nerves  of  motion,  nerves
of  sensation,  and  nerves  of  the  five  senses,  size  has  an  in-
fluence on  vigour  of  function ;  and  from  the  analogy  of
these  organs,  and  also  from  direct  facts  and  physiological
authorities,  we  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion  regarding
die  brain,  that  vigour  of  function  bears  a  relation,  other
circumstances  being  equal,  to  size  in  the  organ.  From
these  premises,  it  follows  as  a  necessary  conclusion,  that,  in
the  manifestation  of  the  mental  faculties,  it  will  not  be  in*
different  in  what  direction  the  brain  is  most  or  least  de-
veloped ;  for  example,  if  different  parts  of  the  brain  possess
different  Junctions,  and  if  the  strength  of  function  be  in
proportion  to  the  size  of  the  part,  the  vigour  of  the  facul-
ties connected  with  a  brain  in  which  the  frontal  region
predominates  in  size,  must  necessarily  be  different  from
that  which  would  proceed  from  a  brain  in  which  the  pre-
dominance of  size  was  in  the  posterior  portion ;  and  a  differ-
ence would  hold  also  in  cases  of  preponderance  in  the  su-
perior or  inferior  portions.

Raphael.  New  Hollands*.


pP^I


Here  we  have  a  representation  of  the  skull  of  Raphael,
and  of  the  skull  of  a  native  of  New  Holland ;  both  taken
from  casts  in  the  collection  of  the  Phrenological  Society.
The  difference  in  the  forehead  is.  very  conspicuous.  If
the  part  of  the  brain  lying  in  that  region  have  any  func-
tion^ connected  with  intellect,  and  if  size  be  a  measure

c2


36  CONNECTION  OF  PARTICULAR

of  power,  the  two  beings  should  form  a  strong  contrast
of  power  and  weakness  in  that  department.  And,  ac-
cordingly, the  case  is  so.  Raphael  died  at  thirty-three
years  of  age,  and  has  left  an  imperishable  memory  on
account  of  his  genius  in  art.  Sir  Walter  Scott  describes
die  other  as  follows : — "  The  natives  of  New  Holland  are,
even  at  present,  in  the  very  lowest  scale  of  humanity,  and
ignorant  of  every  art  which  can  add  comfort  or  decency  to
human  life.  These  unfortunate  savages  use  no  clothes,
construct  no  cabins  or  huts,  and  are  ignorant  even  of  the
manner  of  chasing  animals,  or  catching  fish,  unless  such  of
the  latter  as  are  left  by  the  tide,  or  which  are  found  on  the
rocks;  they  feed  upon  the  most  disgusting  substances,
snakes,  worms,  maggots,  and  whatever  trash  falls  in  their
way.  They  know,  indeed,  bow  to  kindle  a  fire ;  in  that  re-
spect only  they  have  stepped  beyond  the  deepest  ignorance
to  which  man  can  be  subjected ;  but  they  have  not  learned
how  to  boil  water ;  and  when  they  see  Europeans  perform
this  ordinary  operation,  they  have  been  known  to  run  away
in  great  terror."

We  have  now  arrived,  by  a  fair  and  legitimate  induction,
at  strong  presumptive  proof  in  favour  of  the  grand  princi-
ples of  Phrenology,  viz.  that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  the
mind,  that  different  parts  of  it  are  connected  with  different
faculties,  and  that  the  size  of  the  organ,  other  conditions
being  equal,  exerts  an  influence  on  the  power  of  manifesta-
tion. Here,  then,  the  inquiry  presents  itself,  What  faculties
and  what  parts  of  the  brain  are  mutually  connected  ?  This
is  the  grand  question  remaining  to  be  solved,  in  order  to
render  our  knowledge  of  the  functions  of  the  brain  and  the
oigans  of  the  mind  precise  and  practically  useful.  Let  us
inquire  what  progress  the  metaphysician  and  anatomist
have  made  in  elucidating  this  point.  It  is  of  importance
to  take  a  view  of  the  past  efforts  of  philosophers  in  the
science  of  mind  on  this  subject,  that  we  may  be  able  cor-
rectly to   appreciate  both  what   remains  to  be  accom-


FACULTIES  AND  ORGANS.  37

plished,  and  how  far  Phrenology  presents  means  capable  of
attaining  it.

The  mind  has  been  studied,  by  one  set  of  philosophers,
with  too  little  reference  to  the  body ;  and  the  laws  of  thought
have  been  expounded  with  as  much  neglect  of  organization
as  if  we  had  already  "  shuffled  off  this  mortal  coil."  From
this  erroneous  practice  of  many  distinguished  authors,  such
as  Locke,  Hume,  Reid,  Stewart  and  Brown,  a  prejudice
has  arisen  against  the  physiology  of  man,  as  if  the  mind
were  degraded  by  contemplating  it  in  connexion  with  mat*
ter ;  but  man  is  the  work  of  the  Creator  of  the  world,  and
no  part  of  his  constitution  can  be  unworthy  of  regard  and
admiration.  The  whole  phenomena  of  life  are  the  result  of
mind  and  body  joined,  each  modifying  each ;  and  how  can
we  explain  a  result,  without  attending  to  all  the  causes  which
combine  towards  its  production  ?

Another  set  of  philosophers,  in  avoiding  Scylla,  have
thought  it  necessary  to  dash  into  Charybdis,  and  have
taught,  that  the  mind  is  nought  but  a  combination  of  mat-
ter ;  and  have  endeavoured  to  explain  its  functions  by  sup*
posed  mechanical  motions  in  its  parts;  but,  as  we  shall
hereafter  see,  this  course  of  proceeding  is  equally  erroneous
as  the  other.

In  surveying  the  phenomena  of  mind,  we  are  struck  with
the  variety  of  faculties  with  which  it  appears  to  be  en-
dowed Philosophers  and  the  vulgar  equally  admit  it  to
be  possessed  of  different  powers.  Thus  it  is  by  one  faculty
that  it  reasons ;  by  another  that  it  imagines,  and,  by  a  third,
that  it  discriminates  between  right  and  wrong.

If,  however,  we  inquire  what  progress  has  hitherto  been
made  by  metaphysicians  in  ascertaining  the  primitive  mental
powers,  and  rendering  the  philosophy  of  man  interesting  and
practically  useful  to  persons  of  ordinary  understanding,  we
shall  find  a  lamentable  deficiency  indeed.  From  the  days  of
Aristotle  to  the  present  time,  the  most  powerful  intellects


88  EFFORTS  OF  METAPHYSICIANS,

have  been  directed,  with  the  most  persevering  industry,  to
this  department  of  science, — and  system  after  system  has
flourished,  fallen,  and  been  forgotten,  in  rapid  and  melan-
choly succession.  To  confine  our  attention  to  modern  tjjnes,
Dr  Reid  overturned  the  philosophy  of  Locks  and  Hume  ;
Mr  Stewart,  while  he  illustrated  Reid,  yet  differed  from
him  in  many  important  particulars;  and,  recently,  Dr
Thomas  Brown  has  attacked,  with  powerful  eloquence  and
philosophical  profundity,  the  fabric  of  Stewart,  and  it  al-
ready totters  to  its  fall.  The  very  existence  of  even  the
most  common  and  familiar  faculties  of  the  mind  is  still
in  debate  among  these  philosophers.  Mr  Stewart  main-
tains Attention  to  be  a  faculty,  which  these  other  philo*
sophers  deny.  They,  again,  state  Imagination  to  be  a  pri-
mitive power  of  the  mind,  while  Mr  Stewart  informs
us,  that  "  what  we  call  the  power  of  Imagination,  is  not
the  gift  of  nature,  but  the  result  of  acquired  habits,  aided
by  favourable  circumstances."  {Elements,  Chap.  7.  §  1.)
Common  observation  informs  us,  that  a  taste  for  music,
and  a  genius  for  poetry  and  painting,  are  gifts  of  nature,
bestowed  only  on  a  few;  but  Mr  Stewart,  by  dint  of
his  philosophy,  has  discovered  that  these  powers,  and  also
a  genius  for  mathematics,  "  are  gradually  formed  by  par-
ticular habits  of  study,  or  of  business."  (Outlines,  p.  16.)
On  the  other  hand,  he  treats  of  Perception,  Conception,
and  Memory,  as  original  powers ;  while  Dr  Thomas  Brown
denies  them  to  be  entitled  to  that  appellation.  Reid,  Stew-
art, and  Brown,  admit  the  existence  of  moral  emotions ;
but  Hobbes,  Mandeville,  Dr  Paley,  and  many  others,
resolve  the  sentiment  of  Right  and  Wrong  into  a  regard  to
our  own  good,  into  perceptions  of  utility,  obedience  to  the
laws,  or  to  the  Divine  command.  Thus,  after  the  lapse  and
labour  of  more  than  two  thousand  years,  philosophers  are
not  yet  agreed  concerning  the  existence  of  many  of  the
most  important  principles  of  action,  and  intellectual  powers
of  man.     While  the  philosophy  of  mind  shall  remain  in  this


EFFORTS  OF  METAPHYSICIANS.  39

uncertain  condition,  it  will  be  impossible  to  give  to  morals
and  natural  religion  a  scientific  foundation ;  and  Until  these
shall  assume  the  staUeness  and  precision  of  sciences,  edu-
cation, political  economy  and  legislation,  must  continue
empirical  in  their  principles  and  application.  If,  therefore,
Phrenology  could  introduce  into  the  philosophy  of  mind
even  a  portion  of  the  certainty  and  precision  which  attend
physical  investigations,  it  would  confer  no  small  benefit  on
tins  interesting  department  of  science;  and  that  it  is  fully
competent  to  do  so,  shall  be  shewn  after  we  have  attended
to  a  few  preliminary  points  requiring  consideration.

In  the  next  place,  supposing  the  number  and  nature  of
the  primitive  faculties  to  be  ascertained,  it  is  to  be  remarked,
that,  in  actual  life,  they  are  successively  developed.  The
infant  feels  fear,  love,  attachment,  before  it  is  alive  to  the
sublime  or  the  beautiful ;  and  it  observes  occurrences  long
before  it  reasons.  A  correct  theory  of  mind  ought  to  unfold
principles  to  which  these  facts  also  may  be  referred

Farther,  even  after  the  full  maturity  of  age  is  attained,
how  different  the  degrees  in  which  we  are  endowed  with  the
various  mental  powers.  Admitting  each  individual  to  pos~
sess  all  the  faculties,  the  assemblage  of  which  constitutes
the  human  mind,  in  what  a  variety  of  degrees  of  relative
strength  do  they  appear  in  different  persons  ?  In  one,  the
love  of  glory  is  the  feeling  which  surpasses  all ;  another  is
deaf  to  the  voice  of  censure,  and  callous  to  the  accents  of
applause.  The  soul  of  one  melts  with  softest  pity  at  a  tale
of  woe ;  while  the  eye  of  another  never  shed  a  sympathetic
tear.  One  individual  spends  his  life  in  an  ardent  chace  of
wealth,  which  he  stops  not  to  enjoy;  another  scatters  in
wasteful  prodigality  the  substance  of  his  sires,  and  perishes
for  want  from  a  mere  incapacity  to  retain.  One  vast  intel-
lect, like  Newton's,  fathoms  the  profundities  of  science ;
while  another  feeble  mind  scarcely  gropes  its  way  through
the  daily  occurrences  of  life.  The  towering  imagination  of
a  Shakspeare,  or  a  Milton,  soars  beyond  the  boundaries


40  EFFORTS  OF  METAPHYSICIANS.

of  sublunary  space ;  while  the  sterile  fancy  of  another  sees
no  glory  in  the  heavens,  and  no  loveliness  on  earth.

A  system  of  mental  philosophy,  therefore,  pretending  to
the  truth  of  nature,  ought  not  only  to  unfold  the  simple  ele-
ments of  thought  and  of  feeling,  but  to  enable  us  to  dis-
cover in  what  proportions  they  are  combined  in  different  in-
dividuals. In  chemical  science,  one  combination  of  element-
ary ingredients  produces  a  medicine  of  sovereign  virtue  in
removing  pain ;  another  combination  of  the  same  materials,
but  differing  in  their  relative  proportions,  brings  forth  a
mortal  poison.  In  human  nature,  also,  one  combination  of
faculties  may  produce  the  midnight  murderer  and  thief;  and
another,  a  Franklin,  a  Howard,  or  a  Fry,  glowing  with
charity  to  man.

If,  however,  we  inquire  at  the  philosophers  on  the  mind,
for  rules  by  which  to  discriminate  the  effects  upon  the  char-
acter and  conduct  of  individuals,  produced  by  different  com-
binations of  the  mental  powers,  what  information  do  we  re-
ceive ?  Instead  of  light  upon  this  interesting  subject,  we
find  in  their  works  only  disputes,  whether  such  differences
exist  in  nature,  or  are  the  result  of  education  and  other  ad-
ventitious circumstances ;  many  maintaining  the  one  opi-
nion, while  some  few  advocate  the  other.  This  department
of  the  philosophy  of  man,  in  short,  is  a  perfect  waste.  Mr
Stewart  is  aware  equally  of  its  importance  and  forlorn  con-
dition. The  varieties  of  intellectual  character  among  men,
says  he,  present  another  very  interesting  object  of  study,
which,  "  considering  its  practical  utility,  has  not  yet  excited,
so  much  as  might  have  been  expected,  the  curiosity  of  our
countrymen."  (Dissert.  Part  ii,  p.  198),  The  reason  ap-
pears sufficiently  obvious.  The  common  modes  of  study-
ing man  afforded  no  clew  to  the  discovery  desired.

In  thus  surveying  the  philosophy  of  man,  as  at  present
exhibited  to  us  in  the  writings  of  philosophers,  we  perceive,
jirst>  That  no  account  is  given  of  the  influence  of  the  ma-
terial organs  on  the  manifestations  of  the  mental  powers ;


EFFORTS  OF  MORALISTS.  41

that  the  progress  of  the  mind  from  youth  to  age,  and  the
phenomena  of  sleep,  dreaming,  idiocy  and  insanity,  are  left
unexplained  or  unaccounted  for,  by  any  principles  admitted
in  their  system :  Secondly,  That  the  existence  and  functions
of  some  of  the  most  important  primitive  faculties  are  still
in  dispute ;  and,  thirdly,  That  no  light  whatever  has  been
thrown  on  the  nature  and  effects  of  combinations  of  the
primitive  powers,  in  different  degrees  of  relative  proportion.
It  is  with  great  truth,  therefore,  that  Monsieur  De  Bonald,
quoted  by  Mr  Stewart,  observes,  that  "  diversity  of  doc-*
trine  has  increased  from  age  to  age,  with  the  number  of
masters,  and  with  the  progress  of  knowledge ;  and  Europe,
which  at  present  possesses  libraries  filled  with  philosophical
works,  and  which  reckons  up  almost  as  many  philosophers
as  writers ;  poor  in  the  midst  of  so  much  riches,  and  uncer-
tain with  the  aid  of  all  its  guides,  which  road  it  should  fol-
low; Europe,  the  centre  and  focus  of  all  the  lights  of  the
world,  has  yet  its  philosophy  only  in  expectation."

While  philosophers  have  been  thus  unsuccessfully  engaged
in  the  study  of  mental  science,  human  nature  has  been  in-
vestigated by  another  set  of  observers, — Moralists,  Poets
and  Divines.  These  have  looked  upon  the  page  of  life
merely  to  observe  the  characters  there  exhibited,  with  the
view  of  tracing  them  anew  in  their  compositions :  and  cer-
tainly they  have  executed  their  design  with  great  felicity
and  truth.  In  the  pages  of  Shakspeare,  Addison,  John-
son, Tillotson  and  Blair,  we  have  the  lineaments  of
mind  traced  with  a  perfect  tact,  and  exhibited  with  match-
less beauty  and  effect :  But  these  authors  had  no  systematic
object  in  view,  and  did  not  aim  at  founding  their  observa-
tions on  principles  which  might  render  them  subservient
to  the  practical  purposes  of  life.  Hence,  although  in  their
compositions  we  find  ample  and  admirable  materials  for  the
elucidation  of  a  true  system  of  the  philosophy  of  man,  yet,
without  other  aids  than  they  supply,  we  cannot  arrive  at
fundamental  principles  sufficient  to  guide  us  in  our  inter-
course with  the  world.     The  charge  against  their  represent


42  EFFORTS  OF  POETS.

tations  of  human  nature  is,  not  that  they  are  incorrect,  but
that  they  are  too  general  to  be  useful.  They  draw  strik-
ing pictures  of  good  men  and  of  bad  men,  but  do  not  enable
us  to  discover,  prior  to  experience,  whether  any  particular  in-
dividual with  whom  we  may  wish  to  connect  our  fortunes,
belongs  to  the  one  class  or  the  other,  a  matter  of  the  last  im-
portance, because,  in  the  course  of  gaining  experience,  we  en-
counter the  risk  of  suffering  the  greatest  calamities*  In  short,
Poets  and  Novelists  describe  men  as  they  do  the  weather ;  in
their  pages  they  make  the  storm  to  rage  with  terrific  energy,
or  the  sun  to  shine  with  the  softest  radiance,  but  do  not  en-
able us  to  discover  whether,  to-morrow,  the  elements  will
war,  or  the  zephyrs  play ;  and  without  this  power,  we  can-
not put  to  sea  with  the  certainty  of  favouring  gales,  nor
stay  in  port  without  the  risk  of  losing  winds  that  would
have  wafted  us  to  the  wished-for  shore.  Phrenology,  there-
fore, if  a  true  system  of  human  nature,  ought  not  only  to  fur-
nish to  the  popular  reader  the  key  of  philosophy,  to  unlock  the
stores  of  intellectual  wealth  contained  in  the  volumes  of  our
most  gifted  authors,  but  also  to  render  their  representations
of  human  character  practically  useful,  by  enabling  him  to
discover  the  natural  qualities  of  living  individuals  prior  to
experience  of  their  conduct,  and  thus  to  appreciate  their  ten-
dencies before  becoming  the  victim  of  their  incapacity  or
passions.

The  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  metaphysician  are  easily
recognised.  He  studied  the  mind  chiefly  by  reflecting  on
his  own  consciousness ;  he  turned  his  attention  inwards,
observed  the  phenomena  of  his  own  faculties,  and  recorded
these  as  metaphysical  science.  But  the  mind  is  not  con-
scious of  organs  at  all ;  we  are  not  informed  by  feeling  of
the  existence  of  muscles,  of  nerves  of  motion,  nerves  of  taste,
nerves  of  smell,  of  an  auditory  apparatus,  of  optic  nerves,
or  of  any  mental  organs  whatever.  All  that  consciousness
reveals  is,  thatrfhe  mind  inhabits  the  head ;  but  it  does  not
inform  u&wfcat  material  substances  the  head  contains ;  and
hence  it  was  impossible  for  the  metaphysician  to  discover


LABOURS  OF  PHYSIOLOGISTS.  48

the  organs  of  the  mind  by  his  method  of  philosophising,
and  no  metaphysical  philosopher  pretends  to  have  discover-
ed them.  The  imperfection  of  this  mode  of  investigation
accounts  for  the  contradictory  results  obtained  by  different
metaphysicians.  Suppose  an  individual  possessed  of  a  brain
like  a  New  Hollander,  to  turn  philosopher ;  he  would  never,
by  reflecting  on  his  own  consciousness,  find  an  instinctive  fa-
culty for  art ;  and,  therefore,  he  would  exclude  it  from  his
system.  Another  philosopher,  constituted  like  Raphael,
en  the  other  hand,  would  feel  it  strongly,  and  give  it  a  pro-
minent place.

When  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  works  of  Physiolo-
gists, we  discover  the  most  ceaseless,  but  fruitless,  endeav-
ours to  ascertain  and  determine  the  parts  of  the  body,  with
which  die  several  mental  powers  are  most  closely  connected.
Some  of  them  have  dissected  the  brain,  in  the  hope  of  dis-
covering in  its  texture  an  indication  of  the  functions  which
it  performs  in  relation  to  the  mind;  but  success  has  not
hitherto  crowned  their  effort*.  When  we  examine,  with
the  most  scrupulous  minuteness,  the  form,  colour,  and  tex-
ture of  the  brain,  no  sentiment  can  be  perceived  slumber-
ing in  its  fibres,  nor  half-formed  ideas  starting  from  its  folds*
It  appears  to  the  eye  only  as  a  mass  of  curiously  convoluted'
matter ;  and  die  understanding  declares  its  incapacity  to
penetrate  the  purposes  ef  its  parts.

In  short,  we  cannot,  by  merely  dissecting  any  organ  of
the  body,  discover  its  functions.  For  example,  anatomists,
for  many  centuries,  dissected  the  nerves  of  motion  and  feel-
ing, and  saw  nothing  in  their  structure  that  indicated  the
difference  of  their  functions ;  and,  at  this  moment,  if  the
nerves  of  taste  and  of  hearing  were  presented  together  on
the  table,  we  might  look  at  them  for  ages  without  discover-
ing any  traces  of  their  functions  from  their  structure  alone.
Simple  dissection  of  the  brain,  therefore,  oouM  not  lead  to
the  discovery  of  the  functions  of  its  different  parts.

The  obstacles  which  have  hitherto  opposed  the  attain*
ment  of  this  information  have  been  many.


44  LABOURS  OF  PHYSIOLOGISTS.

Imagination  has  been   called  in   to  afford  information
which  philosophy  withheld,   and  theories  have  been  in-
vented to   supply   the   place  of  knowledge    founded  on
fact  and  legitimate  induction.     "  The  greater  number  of
physiologists,  physicians  and  philosophers,"  saysDr  Spurz-
heim,   "  derive   the  moral   sentiments  from  various  vis-
cera, or  from  the  nervous  plexus  and  ganglia  of  the  great
sjpnpathetic  nerve,  that  is,  from  the  nerves  of  the  abdomen
and  thorax;  but,  comparative  anatomy  and  physiology  en-
tirely contradict  this  opinion.     There  are  animals  endowed
with  faculties  attributed  to  certain  bowels  or  viscera,  which
do  not  possess  these  viscera.     Insects,  for  instance,  become
angry,  and  have  neither  liver  nor  bile.     Oxen,  horses,  hogs,
&c.  have  many  viscera  in  structure  analogous  to  those  of
man,  and  yet  they  want  many  faculties  which  are  attributed
to  these  viscera,  and  with  which  man  is  endowed."     The
heart  is  supposed  to  be  the  seat  of  the  tender  affections ;
but  the  heart  of  the  tiger  and  of  the  lamb  are  alike  in
structure,  and  the  one  ought  to  be  the  organ  of  cruelty,
and  the  other  of  meekness,  if  this  supposition  were  true.
(New  Phya.   Syst.    p.    133).       Other   physiologists    have
compared  the  size  of  the  brain  of  man   with   that  of
the  lower  animals;   contrasting  at  the  same  time  their
mental  powers;    and  have  been  led   to  the    conclusion
that  it  is  the  organ  of  the  mind,  and  that  its  superior  de-
velopment in  man  indicates  his  mental  superiority  over  the
brutes;  but  these  philosophers  have  not  succeeded  in  de-
termining the  functions  of  the  different  parts  of  this  organ,
and  have  not  been  able,  in  any  important  degree,  to  connect
their  discoveries  with  the  philosophy  of  mind.     Camper,
in  order  to  measure  the  extent  of  the  brain,  and,  as  he  ima-
gined, the  corresponding  energy  of  the  intellectual  faculties,
drew  a  vertical  line,  touching  the  upper  lip  and  the  most
prominent  part  of  the  forehead ;  and  also  a  horizontal  line,
crossing  the  former,  and  touching  the  tips  of  the  upper  front
teeth,  and  the  external  opening  of  the  ear,  or,  at  least,  cor**
responding  to  these  points  in  its  direction ;  and  he  thought


LABOURS  OF  PHYSIOLOGISTS.  45

that  man  and  animals  have  more  understanding,  the  more
the  upper  and  inner  angle  formed  by  the  two  lines,  or  that
including  the  upper  jaw,  nose,  &c.  is  obtuse ;  and,  on  the
contrary,  that  man  and  animals  are  more  stupid,  the  more
this  facial  angle  is  acute.  But  this  manner  of  measuring
the  intellectual  faculties  is  not  more  correct  than  those  pre-
viously mentioned.  The  facial  angle  applies  only  to  the
interior  parts  of  the  brain  situated  in  the  forehead,  and  is
inapplicable  to  all  the  lateral  and  posterior  parts ;  hence  it
could,  even  if  there  were  no  other  objection,  indicate  only
those  faculties  whose  organs  constitute  the  forehead.  Be-
sides, in  many  Negroes,  the  jaw-bones  are  extremely  promi-
nent, and  the  facial  angle  acute;  while  their  foreheads
are  in  fact  largely  developed,  and  their  intellectual  faculties
powerful,  although,  by  Camper's  rule,  they  ought  to  be  in-
ferior to  many  stupid  Europeans,  whose  foreheads  are  de-
ficient, but  whose  jaws  recede.  Hence,  the  facial  angle
cannot  serve  as  a  means  of  measuring  the  moral  sentiments
and  intellectual  faculties.  (New  Phys.  Syst.  p.  197,  198,
199.)

"  Some  physiologists,  as  Scemmering  and  Cuvier,  have
compared  the  size  of  the  brain  in  general  with  that  of  the
face ;  and,  according  to  them,  animals  are  more  stupid  as
the  face  is  larger  in  proportion  to  the  brain/'  But  that
this  rule  is  not  infallible,  is  easily  proved,  because  Leo,
Montaigne,  Leibnitz,  Haller,  and  Mirabeau,  had
large  faces  and  very  considerable  brains.  Bossuet,  Vol-
taire, and  Kant,  had,  on  the  contrary,  small  faces  and
also  large  brains.     (New  Phys.  Syst.  p.  200.)

The  cerebral  parts  have  likewise  been  compared  with
each  other,  in  order  to  ascertain  their  functions,  as,  the
brain  with  the  cerebellum,  the  brain  with  the  medulla  ob-
longata, with  the  nerves,  &c.,  but  these  modes  also  have
led  to  no  satisfactory  results.  The  elder  writers,  such  as
Aristotle  and  his  followers,  who  assigned  different  facul-
ties to  different  parts  of  the  brain,  proceeded  on  fancy,  or  on
Botiops  of  supposed  suitableness  of  the  place  in  the  head  to


46  LABOURS  OF  PHYSIOLOGISTS.

the  nature  of  the  power ;  and  their  views  have  been  entirely
abandoned  both  by  physiologists  and  metaphysicians.  In
shorty  it  is  well  known,  that  no  theory  of  the  functions  of
the  brain  is  yet  admitted  and  taught  as  certain  science,
such  as  the  doctrine  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  the
functions  of  the  muscles,  nerves,  and  bones*

Dr  Roget,  an  opponent  of  Phrenology,  freely  confesses
that  "  the  brain  is  still  as  incomprehensible  in  its  func-
tions, as  it  is  subtle  and  complex  in  its  anatomy/9  (Cranio*.
Sup.  to  Enc.  Brit.);  and  the  writer  in  the  04th  Num«-
ber  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  says, — "  Even  within  our
own  time,  although  many  great  anatomists  had  devoted
themselves  almost  exclusively  to  describing  the  brain,  this
organ  used  to  be  demonstrated  by  the  greater  number  of
teachers,  in  a  manner  which,  however  invariable,  was  as-
suredly not  particularly  useful.  It  was  so  mechanically
cut  down  upon,  indeed,  as  to  constitute  a  sort  of  exhibition
connected  with  nothing.  The  teacher  and  the  pupil  were
equally  dissatisfied  with  the  performance,  and  the  former
probably  the  most ;  the  latter  soon  gave  up  the  painful  at*
tempt  to  draw  any  kind  of  deductions  from  what  he  wit-
nessed, and  disposed  of  the  difficulty  as  he  best  could,  when
he  had  to  render  an  account  of  what  he  had  seen.  Up  to
this  day,  our  memory  is  pained  by  the  recollection  of  the
barbarous  names  and  regular  sections  of  what  was  then  the
dullest  part  of  anatomical  study ;  which,  although  often  re-
peated, left  no  trace  but  of  its  obscurity,  or  its  absurdity.
Here  an  oval  space  of  a  white  colour,  and  there  a  line  of
grey  or  curve  of  red,  were  displayed ;  here  a  cineritious,
there  a  medullary  mass ;  here  a  portion  white  without  and
grey  within ;  there  a  portion  white  within  and  grey  without ;
here  a  glandr  pituitary ;  there  a  gland  like  grains  of  sand ;
here  a  ventricle ;  there  a  cul-de-sac ;  with  endless  fibres*
and  lines,  and  globules,  and  .simple  marks,  with  appella-
tions no  less  foncifol  than  devoid  of  meaning."

"  The  anatomist  dissected,  and  toiled  on  in  this  unpro-
mising territory,  and  entangled  himself  more  in  proportion


LABOURS  OF  PHYSIOLOGISTS.


47


to  his  unwillingness  to  be  defeated ;  and  he  succeeded,  no
doubt,  in  making  out  a  clear  display  of  all  these  complicate
ed  parts,  which  few,  however,  could  remember,  and  fewer
still  could  comprehend.  Then  came  the  physiologist  in
still  greater  perplexity,  and  drew  his  conclusions,  and  as-
signed offices  to  the  multiplied  portions  and  ramifications
of  nervous  substance,  by  arbitrary  conjecture  for  the  most
part,  and  often  with  manifest  inconsistency.  Although  the
brain  was  generally  allowed  to  be  the  organ  of  the  intellec-
tual faculties,  it  was  supposed  to  give  out,  from  particular
portions  of  the  mass,  but  quite  indifferently,  nerves  of  sen-
sation, general  and  specific,  nerves  of  motion,  and  nerves
of  volition ;  the  single,  double,  or  muhipled  origin  of  nerves,
which  had  not  escaped  notice,  not  being  supposed  to  be
connected  with  these  separate  offices."

"  Such,  so  vague,  so  obscure,  so  inexact,  so  unsatisfac-
tory, was  the  kind  of  knowledge  communicated  to  the  stu-
dent, until  a  very  recent  period ;  and  the  impression  left
by  it  was  that  of  confused  and  unintelligible  profusion  in
the  distribution  of  nerves,  of  intricacy  without  meaning,  of
an  expenditure  of  resources  without  a  parallel  in  the  other
works  of  nature."     Pages  447,  448.

Unless,  then,  Dr  Gall  could  boast  of  some  other  method
of  investigation  than  those  of  the  ordinary  physiologist  and
metaphysician,  he  could  offer  no  legitimate  pretensions  to
die  solution  of  the  question,  What  parts  of  the  brain,  and
what  mental  faculties,  are  connected  ?  but  he,  by  great
good  fortune,  was  led  to  adopt  a  different  and  superior
mode  of  inquiry ;  and  this  leads  we  to  state  shortly  a  few
particulars  of  the  history  of  the  science  which  is  now  to  he


Dr  Gall,  a  physician  of  Vienna,  afterwards  resident  in
Paris  *,  was  the  founder  of  the  system.  From  an  early  age
be  was  given  to  observation,  and  was  struck  with  the  fact,
that  each  of  his  brothers  and  sisters,  companions  in  play,

•  Born  at  Tiefenbrun,  in  Suabia,  on  9th  March  17»7,  died  at  Paris  22d
August  18*8.


^


48  HISTORY  OF  DR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY.

and  schoolfellows,  was  distinguished  from  other  individuals
by  some  peculiarity  of  talent  or  disposition.  Some  of  his
schoolmates  were  characterized  by  the  beauty  of  their  pen-
manship, some  by  their  success  in  arithmetic,  and  others
by  their  talent  for  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  natural  history,
or  languages.  The  compositions  of  one  were  remarkable
for  elegance ;  the  style  of  another  was  stiff  and  dry ;  while
a  third  connected  his  reasonings  in  the  closest  manner,  and
clothed  his  argument  in  the  most  forcible  language.  Their
dispositions  were  equally  different ;  and  this  diversity  ap-
peared also  to  determine  the  direction  of  their  partialities
and  aversions.  Not  a  few  of  them  manifested  a  capacity
for  employments  which  they  were  not  taught ;  they  cut  fig-
ures in  wood,  or  delineated  them  on  paper ;  some  devoted
their  leisure  to  painting,  or  the  culture  of  a  garden ;  while
their  comrades  abandoned  themselves  to  noisy  games,  or
traversed  the  woods  to  gather  flowers,  seek  for  bird-nests,
or  catch  butterflies.  In  this  manner,  each  individual  pre-
sented a  character  peculiar  to  himself,  and  Dr  Gall  never
observed,  that  the  individual,  who  in  one  year  had  dis-
played selfish  or  knavish  dispositions,  became  in  the  next  a
good  and  faithful  friend.

The  scholars  with  whom  Dr  Gall  had  the  greatest  dif-
ficulty in  competing,  were  those  who  learned  by  heart  with
great  facility ;  and  such  individuals  frequently  gained  from
him  by  their  repetitions  the  places  which  he  had  obtained
by  the  merit  of  his  original  compositions.

Some  years  afterwards,  having  changed  his  place  of  re-
sidence, he  still  met  individuals  endowed  with  an  equally
great  talent  of  learning  to  repeat.  He  then  observed,  that
his  school-fellows,  so  gifted,  possessed  prominent  eyes,  and
recollected,  that  his  rivals  in  the  first  school  had  been  dis-
tinguished by  the  same  peculiarity.  When  he  entered  the
University  he  directed  his  attention,  from  the  first,  to  the
students  whose  eyes  were  of  this  description,  and  found  that
they  all  excelled  in  getting  rapidly  by  heart,  and  giving  cor-
rect recitations,  although  many  of  them  were  by  no  means


HISTORY  OF  DR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY.  49

distinguished  in  point  of  general  talent.  This  observation
was  recognized  also  by  the  other  students  in  the  classes ;
and  although  the  connexion  betwixt  talent  and  external
sign  was  not  at  this  time  established  upon  such  complete
evidence  as  is  requisite  for  a  philosophical  conclusion,  Dr
Gall  could  not  believe  that  the  coincidence  of  the  two  cir-
cumstances was  entirely  accidental.  From  this  period,
therefore,  he  suspected  that  they  stood  in  an  important  re-
lation to  each  other*  After  much  reflection,  he  conceived,
that  if  memory  for  words  was  indicated  by  an  external  sign,
the  same  might  be  the  case  with  the  other  intellectual  pow-
ers ;  and,  thereafter,  all  individuals  distinguished  by  any  re-
markable faculty  became  the  objects  of  his  attention.  By
degrees,  he  conceived  himself  to  have  found  external  cha-
racteristics, which  indicated  a  decided  disposition  for  Paint-
ing, Music,  and  the  Mechanical  Arts.  He  became  ac-
quainted also  with  some  individuals  remarkable  for  the  de-
termination of  their  character,  and  he  observed  a  particu-
lar part  of  their  heads  to  be  very  largely  developed.  This
fact  first  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  looking  to  the  head
for  signs  of  the  Moral  Sentiments.  But  in  making  these
observations,  he  never  conceived,  for  a  moment,  that  the
skull  was  the  cause  of  the  different  talents,  as  has  been  er-
roneously represented ;  for,  from  the  first,  he  referred  the
influence,  whatever  it  was,  to  the  Brain.

In  following  out,  by  observations,  the  principle  which  ac-
cident had  thus  suggested,  he,  for  some  time,  encountered
difficulties  of  the  greatest  magnitude.  Hitherto  he  had
been  altogether  ignorant  of  the  opinions  of  Physiologists
touching  the  brain,  and  of  Metaphysicians  respecting  the
mental  faculties.  He  had  simply  observed  nature.  When,
however,  he  began  to  enlarge  his  knowledge  of  books,  he
found  the  most  extraordinary  conflict  of  opinions  every
where  prevailing,  and  this,  for  the  moment,  made  him  hesi-
tate about  the  correctness  of  his  own  observations.  He
found  that  the  moral  sentiments  had,  by  an  almost  general
consent,  been  consigned  to  the  thoracic  and  abdominal  vis-


50  HISTORY  OF  DR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY,

cera:  and  that  while  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Galen,  Hal-
ler,  and  some  other  Physiologists,  placed  the  sentient  soul
or  intellectual  faculties  in  the  brain,  Aristotle  placed  it
in  the  heart,  Van  Helmont  in  the  stomach,  Des  Cartes
and  his  followers  in  the  pineal  gland,  and  Drelincourt
and  others  in  the  cerebellum.

He  observed  also,   that  a  great  number  of  Philoso-
phers and  Physiologists  asserted,  that  all  men  are  born
with    equal   mental   faculties;   and   that   the   differences
observable  among  them  are  owing  either  to  education,
or    to  the  accidental  circumstances  in  which  they  are
placed.    If  differences  were  accidental,  he-  inferred,  that
there  could  be  no  natural  signs  of  predominating  facul-
ties;  and  consequently  that  the  project  of  learning,  by
observation,  to  distinguish  the  functions  of  the  different
portions  of  the  brain,  must  be  hopeless.     This  difficulty  he
combated  by  the  reflection,  that  his  brothers,  sisters,  and
*%*f^  schoolfellows^  had  all  received  very  nearly  the  same  educa-
tion, but  that  he  had  still  observed  each  of  them  unfolding
s*'\    a  distinct  character,  over  which  circumstances  appeared  to
exert  only  a  limited  controul.   He  observed  also,  that  not  un-
frequently  those  whose  education  had  been  conducted  with
the  greatest  care,  and  on  whom  the  labours  of  teachers  had
been  most  assiduously  bestowed,  remained  far  behind  their
companions  in  attainments.     "  Often,"  says  Dr  Gall,  "  we
were  accused  of  want  of  will,  or  deficiency  in  zeal ;  but
many  of  us  could  not,  even  with  the  most  ardent  desire,  fol-
lowed out  by  the  most  obstinate  efforts,  attain,  in  some  pur-
suits, even  to  mediocrity ;  while  in  some  other  points,  some
of  us  surpassed  our  schoolfellow  without  an  effort,  and  al-
most, it  might  be  said,  without  perceiving  it  ourselves*
But,  in  point  of  fact,  our  masters  did  not  appear  to  attach
much  faith  to  the  system  which  taught  equality  of  men-
tal Acuities ;  for  they  thought  themselves  entitled  to  exact
more  from  one  scholar,  and  less  from  another.    They  spoke
frequently  of  natural  gifts,  or  of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  con-
soled their  pupils  in  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  by  assuring


HISTORY  OF  DR  GALl/S  DISCOVERY.  51

them  that  each  would  be  required  to  render  an  account,
only  in  proportion  to  the  gifts  which  he  had  received  *."

Being  convinced  by  these  facts,  that  there  is  a  natural
and  constitutional  diversity  of  talents  and  dispositions,  he
encountered  in  books  still  another  obstacle  to  his  success
in  determining  the  external  signs  of  the  mental  powers.
^  He  found  that,  instead  of  faculties  for  languages,  drawing,

distinguishing  places,  music,  and  mechanical  arts,  corres*-
ponding  to  the  different  talents  which  he  had  observed  in
his  schoolfellows,  the  metaphysicians  spoke  only  of  general
powers,  such  as  perception,  conception,  memory,  imagina-
tion, and  judgment ;  and  when  he  endeavoured  to  discover
external  signs  in  the  head,  corresponding  to  these  general
faculties,  or  to  determine  the  correctness  of  the  physiologi-
cal doctrines  taught  by  the  authors  already  mentioned,  re-
garding the  seat  of  the  mind,  he  found  perplexities  without
end,  and  difficulties  insurmountable.

Dr  Gall,  therefore,  abandoning  every  theory  and  pre-
conceived opinion,  gave  himself  up  entirely  to  the  observa-
tion of  nature*  Being  a  friend  to  Dr  Nord,  Physician  to
a  Lunatic  Asylum  in  Vienna,  he  had  opportunities,  of  which
he  availed  himself  of  making  observations  on  the  insane.
He  visited  prisons,  and  resorted  to  schools ;  he  was  intro-
duced to  the  courts  of  princes,  to  colleges,  and  the  seats  of
justice;  and  wherever  he  heard  of  an  individual  distin-
guished in  any  particular  way,  either  by  remarkable  en-
dowment or  deficiency,  he  observed  and  studied  the  de-
velopment of  his  head  In  this  manner*  by  an  almost  imper-
ceptible induction,  he  at  last  conceived  himself  warranted
in  believing,  that  particular  mental  powers  are  indicated  by
particular  configurations  of  the  head

Hitherto  he  had  resorted  only  to  physiognomical  indica-
tions, as  a  means  of  discovering  the  functions  of  the  brain.
On  reflection,  however,  he  was  convinced  that  Physiology
is  imperfect  whin  separated  from  Anatomy.    Having  ob-

*■  Pre&ce  by  Br  0ai/l  to  the  M  Anatoraie,  Sec.  du  Cerveau,"  from  which
other  facte  in  this  work  are  taken

D2


52  HISTOEY  OF  DR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY.

served  a  woman  of  fifty-four  years  of  age,  who  had  been  af-
flicted with  hydrocephalus  from  her  youth,  and  who,  with
a  body  a  little  shrunk,  possessed  a  mind  as  active  and  in-
telligent as  that  of  other  individuals  of  her  class,  Dr  Gall
declared  his  conviction,  that  the  structure  of  the  brain  must
be  different  from  what  was  generally  conceived, — a  remark
which  Tulpius  also  had  made,  on  observing  a  hydrocepha-
lic patient  who  manifested  the  mental  faculties.  He  there-
fore felt  the  necessity  of  making  anatomical  researches  into
the  structure  of  the  brain.

In  every  instance,  when  an  individual,  whose  head  he
had  observed  while  alive,  happened  to  die,  he  used  every
means  to  be  permitted  to  examine  the  brain,  and  frequently
did  so ;  and  found,  as  a  general  fact,  that,  on  removal  of  the
skull,  the  brain,  covered  by  the  dura  mater,  presented  a
form  corresponding  to  that  which  the  skull  had  exhibited
in  life.

The  successive  steps  by  which  Dr  Gall  proceeded  in  his
discoveries,  are  particularly  deserving  of  attention.  He  did
not,  as  many  have  imagined,  first  dissect  the  brain,  and  pre-
tend, by  that  means,  to  discover  the  seats  of  the  mental
powers ;  neither  did  he,  as  others  have  conceived,  first  map
out  the  skull  into  various  compartments,  and  assign  a  fa-
culty to  each,  according  as  his  imagination  led  him  to  con-
ceive the  place  appropriate  to  the  power.  On  the  contrary,
he  first  observed  a  concomitance  betwixt  particular  talents
and  dispositions,  and  particular  forms  of  the  head ;  he  next
ascertained,  by  removal  of  the  skull,  that  the  figure  and
size  of  the  brain  are  indicated  by  these  external  forms ;  and
it  was  only  after  these  facte  had  been  determined,  that  the
brain  was  minutely  dissected,  and  light  thrown  upon  its
structure.

At  Vienna,  in  1796,  Dr  Gall,  for  the  first  time,  delivered
lectures  on  his  system.

In  1800,  Dr  J.  G.  Spurzheim  *  began  the  study  of  Phre-
nology under  him,  having  in  that  year  assisted,  for  the  first

•  Born  at  Longuich,  near  Trevea,  on  the  Motelle,  31st  December  1776.


HISTORY  OF  OR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY.  53

time,  at  one  of  his  lectures.  In  1804,  be  was  associated
with  him  in  his  labours ;  and,  since  that  period,  has  not
only  added  many  valuable  discoveries  to  those  of  Dr  Gall,
in  the  anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  brain,  but  formed  the
truths  brought  to  light,  by  their  joint  observations,  into  a
beautiful  and  interesting  system  of  mental  philosophy.  In
Britain  we  are  indebted  chiefly  to  his  personal  exertions
and  printed  works  for  a  knowledge  of  the  science.

In  the  beginning  of  his  inquiries,  Dr  Gall  did  not,  and
could  not,  foresee  the  result  to  which  they  would  lead,  or  the
relation  which  each  successive  fact,  as  it  was  discovered,
would  bear  to  the  whole  truths  which  time  and  experience
might  bring  into  view.  He  perceived,  for  instance,  that
the  intensity  of  the  desire  for  property,  bore  a  relation
to  the  size  of  one  part  of  the  brain ;  he  announced  this
fact  by  itself,  and  called  the  part  the  organ  of  Theft,  be-
cause he  had  found  it  largest  in  thieves.  When  he  had
discovered  that  the  propensity  to  destroy  was  in  connexion
with  another  part  of  the  brain,  he  announced  this  fact  also
as  an  isolated  truth,  and  named  the  part  the  organ  of  Mur-
der, because  he  had  found  it  largest  in  criminals  condemned
for  that  crime.  In  a  similar  way,  when  he  had  discovered
the  connexion  between  the  sentiment  of  Benevolence  and
another  portion  of  the  cerebral  mass,  he  called  the  part  the
organ  of  Benevolence ;  and  so  on  in  regard  to  the  other  or-
gans. This  mode  of  proceeding  has  nothing  in  common
with  the  formation  of  an  hypothesis;  and,  so  far  from  a  dis-
position to  invent  a  theory  being  conspicuous,  there  appears,
in  the  disjointed  items  of  information  which  Dr  Gall  at
first  presented  to  the  public,  a  want  of  even  an  ordinary
regard  for  systematic  arrangement.  His  only  object  seems
to  have  been  to  furnish  a  candid  and  uncoloured  statement
of  the  facts  in  nature  which  he  had  observed ;  leaving  their
value  to  be  ascertained  by  time  and  farther  investigation.

As  soon,  however,  as  observation  had  brought  to  light
the  great  body  of  the  facts,  and  the  functions  of  the  facul-
ties had  been  contemplated  with  a  philosophical  eye,  a  sys-


54  HISTORY  OF  DB  G ALL'S  DISCOVERY.

tern  of  mental  philosophy  appeared  to  emanate  almost  spon-
taneously from  the  previous  chaos.

When  the  process  of  discovery  had  proceeded  a  certain
length,  the  facts  were  found  to  be  connected  by  relations,
which  it  was  impossible  sooner  to  perceive.  Hence,  at
first,  the  doctrines  appeared  as  a  mere  rude  and  undigest-
ed mass,  of  rather  unseemly  materials ;  the  public  mirth
was,  not  unnaturally,  excited,  at  the  display  of  organs  of
Theft,  Murder,  and  Cunning,  as  they  were  then  named;
and  a  degree  of  obloquy  was  brought  upon  the  science,  from
which  it  is  only  now  recovering.  At  this  stage  the  doc-
trines were  merely  a  species  of  physiognomy,  and  the  ap-
parent results  were  neither  very  prominent  nor  inviting.
When,  however,  the  study  had  been  pursued  for  years,
and  the  torch  of  philosophy  had  been  applied  to  the  facts
discovered  by  observation,  its  real  nature,  as  the  science  of
the  human  mind,  and  its  high  utility,  became  apparent ;  and
its  character  and  name  changed  as  it  advanced.  The  fol-
lowing observations  of  Mr  Locke  are  peculiarly  applicable
to  its  history  and  prospects.  "  Truth  (says  he)  scarce  ever
yet  carried  it  by  vote  any  where*  at  its  first  appearance.
New  opinions  are  always  suspected,  and  usually  opposed
^without  any  other  reason,  than  because  they  are  not  common.
Bat  truth,  like  gold,  is  not  the  less  so,  for  being  newly
brought  out  of  the  mine.  'Tis  trial  and  examination  must
give  it  price,  and  not  any  antique  fashion ;  and,  Chough  it
be  not  yet  current  by  the  public  stamp,  yet  it  may,  for  all
that,  be  as  old  as  nature,  and  is  certainly  not  the  less  ge-


Having  now  unfolded  the  principles  and  method  of  in-
wetigation  of  Phrenology,  I  solicit  the  attention  of  Ae  rea-
der to  one  question*  We  have  heard  much  of  Antiphrenolo-
gtets  5  and  I  would  ask,  What  does  Antiphrenologist  mean  ?
Does  it  mean  a  person  who,  like  Mr  Jeffrey,  denies  that
the  mind  in  feeling  and  reflecting  uses  organs  at  all  ?  To
larch  a  one  I  reply,  that  he  o*gh*  to  call  himself  an  witiphy-
aiologist;  beca*»e>  as  already  in«tttk»ei,ev^^y4ologkal


HISTORY  OF  DR  GALL'S  DISCOVERY.  55

writer  of  eminence,  in  Europe,  maintains,  that  the  brain  k
the  organ  of  the  mind,  and  that  injuries  of  it  impair  the
mental  functions.  Or  does  Antiphrenologist  mean  one  who
admits  the  brain  to  be  the  organ  of  the  mind,  but  contends
that  the  whole  of  it  is  essential  to  every  mental  act  ?  then
I  request  of  him  to  reconcile  with  his  theory  the  phenomena
of  dreaming,  partial  genius,  partial  idiocy,  partial  insanity,
partial  lesion  of  mental  functions  arising  from  partial  in-
juries  of  the  brain,  and  the  successive  development  of  the
mental  powers  in  youth.  If  Antiphrenologist  means  a
person  who  admits  the  mind  to  manifest  a  plurality  of  fa-
culties by  a  plurality  of  organs,  but  denies  that  Phrenolo-
gists have  ascertained  any  of  them,  I  ask  him,  Whether  he
disputes  the  three  grand  propositions,  first,  That  dissection
alone  does  not  reveal  functions ;  second,  That  reflection  on
consciousness  does  not  reveal  organs ;  and,  thirdly,  That
mental  manifestations  may  be  compared  with  development
of  brain?  If  he  denies  these  principles,  then  he  is  beyond
the  reach  of  reason ;  while,  if  he  admits  them,  I  would  ask
him  to  state  what  forms  of  brain,  and  what  mental  mani-
festations he  found  concomitant  in  his  observations  ?  be-
cause, until  he  shall  make  such  a  statement,  his  denial  of
the  correctness  of  the  observations  of  others  is  entitled  to
no  consideration.  But  an  Antiphrenologist,  in  any  of  these
senses,  has  never  yet  appeared.  The  word,  in  its  common
signification,  seems  to  indicate  only  an  individual  who  is
pleased  to  deny  that  Phrenologists  are  right,  without  know-
ing either  their  principles  or  facts,  or  having  any  preten-
sions to  advance  the  cause  of  truth,  by  propounding  sounder
data  or  corrector  observations  of  his  own.


(.  56     )


GENERAL    VIEW    OF    THE    FUNCTIONS   OF   THE
SPINAL  MARROW  AND  NERVES.

Betore  entering  on  the  discussion  of  the  Brain,  it  may
be  useful  to  give  a  brief  account  of  Mr  Charles  Bell's
discoveries  of  the  functions  of  the  Nerves.  Dr  Spurzheim,
and  many  authors  before  him,  very  early  published  the
conjecture,  that  there  must  be  different  nerves  for  sensibi-
lity and  motion,  because  one  of  the  powers  is  occasionally
impaired,  while  the  other  remains  entire.  Mr  Bell  has
furnished  demonstrative  evidence  of  this  being  actually  the
fact.  He  has  also  given  due  prominence  to  the  philoso-
phical principle,  so  urgently  insisted  on  by  Phrenolo-
gists, That,  in  all  departments  of  the  animal  economy,  each
organ  performs  only  one  function ;  and  that  wherever  com-
plex functions  appear,  complex  organs  may  be  safely  pre-
dicated, even  anterior  to  the  possibility  of  demonstrating
them.  The  present  section  is  derived  from  Mr  Bell's
Anatomy  and  Physiology  of  the  Human  Body,  vol.  ri.,  7th
edition,  1829 ;  and,  in  as  far  as  possible,  I  have  adhered  to
his  own  expressions.  My  object  is  to  introduce  general
readers  to  a  knowledge  of  his  discoveries,  which  form  parts  of
an  extensive  System  of  Anatomy,  or  of  Philosophical  Trans-
actions, or  of  professional  publications,  which  they  seldom
peruse.  I  shall  omit  all  details  necessary  only  for  medical  stu-
dents, as  Mr  Bell's  work  is  the  proper  source  of  instruc-
tion for  them.  Even  the  general  reader  will  probably  re-
sort to  Mr  Bell's  pages,  after  being  informed  of  their  in-
teresting contents;  he  will  find  them  clear,  instructive,
and  most  ably  supported  by  evidence.  Any  errors  or  in-
accuracies in  the  following  condensed  abstract,  are  charge-
able against  myself;  for  although  in  general  I  have  follow-
ed Mr  Bell's  own  expressions,  the  arrangement  is  greatly
altered,  and,  occasionally,  sentences  of  my  own  are  intro-
duced.


OF  THE  SPINAL  MABllOW  AND  NERVES.        57

A  nerve,  says  Mr  Bell,  is  a  firm  white  cord,  composed
of  nervous  matter  and  cellular  substance.  The  nervous
matter  exists  in  distinct  threads,  which  are  bound  toge-
ther by  the  cellular  membrane.  They  may  be  likened  to  a
bundle  of  hairs  or  threads,  inclosed  in  a  sheath  composed
of  the  finest  membrane.


The  figure  represents  a  nerve  greatly  magnified,  for  the
sake  of  illustration,  and  consisting  of  distinct  filaments ;
A,  the  nerve,  enveloped  in  its  membranous  sheath ;  B,  one
of  the  threads  dissected  out.  The  nerves  in  thickness  vary
from  the  diameter  of  a  small  thread  to  that  of  a  whip-cord.
They  are  dispersed  through  the  body,  and  extend  to  every
part  which  enjoys  sensibility  or  motion,  or  which  has  a
^concatenated  action  with  another  part.

The  matter  of  a  nerve  in  health,  and  in  the  full  exercise
of  its  influence,  is  of  an  opaque  white ;  it  is  soft  and  pulpy,
betwixt  fluid  and  solid,  and  drops  from  the  probe.  When
putrid,  it  acquires  a  green  colour ;  when  driedpit  is  trans-
parent Corrosive  sublimate  and  muriate  of  soda  harden
it ;  alkalis  dissolve  it.  Each  fibril  of  a  nerve  is  convolut-
ed, and  runs'  not  in  a  straight  line,  but  zig-zag,  like  a
thread  drawn  from  a  worsted  stocking,  which  has  by  its
form  acquired  elasticity  that  it  would  not  otherwise  have
possessed.  By  want  of  use,  the  matter  of  a  nerve  is  either
not  secreted  in  due  proportion,  or  it  changes  its  appear-
ance ;  for  the  nerve  then  acquires  a  degree  of  transpa-
rency.

There  is  no  evidence  that  any  fluid  or  spirit  circulates
in  the  nerves ;  nor  is  there  any  that  the  nervous  fibrils  are
tubes.


58  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  FUNCTIONS

Nerves  ere  supplied  with  arteries  and  veins,  and  their
dependence  on  the  supply  of  blood  is  proved  by  the  fact,
that  if  a  limb  be  deprived  of  Mood,  the  nerves  lose  their
powers,  and  sensibility  is  lost  If  a  nerve  be  partially  com-
pressed, so  as  to  interrupt  the  free  entrance  of  the  blood
into  it,  both  the  power  over  the  muscles  and  the  reception
of  sensation  through  it  are  interrupted ;  and  when  the  blood
is  admitted  again,  painful  tingling  accompanies  the  change.
It  is  not  the  compression  of  the  tubes  of  a  nerve,  but  the  ob-
struction of  its  bloodvessels,  which  produces  the  loss  of  power
consequent  on  tying  it.  The  brain,  the  nerve  of  the  eye,
the  ear,  the  nerves  of  sense  and  motion,  are  all  affected  by
the  change  of  circulation ;  and  each  organ,  according  to  its
natural  function,  is  variously  influenced  by  the  same  cause
— the  rushing  of  blood  into  it,  or  the  privation  of  its  pro-
per quantity*

A  nerve  consists  of  distinct  filaments ;  but  there  is  no-
thing perceptible  in  these  filaments  to  distinguish  them  from
each  other.  One  filament  serves  for  the  purpose  of  sensa-
tion ;  another  for  muscular  motion;  a  third  for  combining
the  muscles,  when  in  the  act  of  respiration*  But  the  sub-
serviency of  any  of  all  these  filaments  to  its  proper  office,
must  be  discovered  by  following  it  out,  and  observing  its
relations,  epd  especially  its  origin  in  the  brain  and  spinal
marrow.  In  their  substance  there  is  nothing  particular.
They  all  seem  equally  to  contain  a  soft  pulpy  matter,  en-
veloped in  cellular  membrane,  and  so  surrounded  with  a
tube  of  this  membrane  as  to  present  a  continuous  track  of
pulpy  nervous  matter,  from  the  nearest  extremity  in  the
brain  to  the  extremity  which  ends  in  a  muscle  or  in  the
skin.

The  key  to  the  system  will  be  found  in  the  simple  pro-
position, that  each  filament  or  track  of  nervous  matter  has
its  peculiar  endowment,  independently  of  the  others  which
are  bound  up  along  with  it ;  and  that  it  continues  to  have
the  same  endowment  throughout  its  whole  length.  There
is  no  interchange  of  powers  betwixt  the  different  filaments ;


OP  THE  SPINAL  MARROW  AND  NERVES.        *9

but  a  minute  filament  of  one  kind  may  be  found  accom-
panying a  filament  of  a  different  kind,  each  giving  a  parti-
cular power  to  the  part  in  which  it  is  ultimately  distributed.

Some  nerves  give  sensibility;  bat  there  are  others,  as
perfectly  and  delicately  constituted,  which  possess  no  sen-
sibility whatever.  Sensibility  results  from  the  particular
part  of  the  brain  which  is  affected  by  the  nerve.  If  the
eye-ball  is  pressed,  the  outward  integuments  feel  pain,  but
the  retina  gives  no  pain,  only  rings  of  light  or  fire  appear
before  the  eye.  In  the  operation  of  couching  the  cataract,
the  needle  must  pierce  the  retina;  the  effect,  however,  is
not  pain,  but  to  produce,  as  it  were,  a  spark  of  fire ;  and
so,  an  impression  on  th£  nerve  of  hearing,  the  papillae  of
taste,  or  any  organ  of  sense,  does  not  produce  pain.  Hie
sensation  excited  has  its  character  determined  by  the  part
of  the  brain  to  which  the  nerve  is  related  at  its  root.  But
there  are  nerves  which  have  no  relation  to  outward  im-
pression. There  are  nerves  purely  for  governing  the  mus-
cular frame,  these  being  constituted  for  conveying  the  man-
date of  the  will,  do  not  stand  related  to  an  organ  of  sense  in
the  brain ;  hence  no  sensibility  and  no  pain  will  be  produced
by  them.  Bach  of  these  may  be  said  to  be  a  nerve  of  exqui-
site feeling  in  one  sense,  that  is,  it  may  be  a  cord  which
unites  two  organs  in  intimate  sympathies,  so  as  to  cause
them  to  act  in  unison ;  yet,  being  bruised  or  injured,  it
wiO  give  rise  to  no  perception  of  way  kind,  because  it  does
not  stand  related  to  a  part  of  the  brain,  whose  office  it
is  to  produce  either  the  general  impression  of  pain,  or  heat,
or  cold,  or  vision,  or  hearing :  It  is  not  the  office  of  that
part  of  the  brain  to  which  it  is  related  to  produce  percep-
tion at  all.

At  the  conflux  of  the  nervous  filaments,  email  reddish
tumours  appear,  which  are  named  ganglions  (See  D  in
fig.  p.  61).  A  ganglion  resembles  in  form  the  circular
swellings  which  appear  on  the  stalk  of  a  straw  or  of  a  cane ;
but  ganglions  do  not  rise  at  regular  intervals  on  the  nerves


60  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  FUNCTIONS

like  these  swellings.  Ganglions  are  laid  in  a  regular  suc-
cession in  the  whole  length  of  the  body,  and,  in  the  verte-
bral animals,  form  a  regular  series  down  each  side  of  the
spinal  marrow ;  the  nerve  of  communication  among  them
is  the  great  sympathetic  nerve.  There  are  other  ganglions
seated  in  the  head,  neck,  and  cavities  of  the  chest  and
belly,  which  are  very  irregular  in  their  situation  and  form.

The  colour  of  the  ganglions  differs  from  that  of  the  nerves ;
it  is  redder,  which  is  owing  to  the  greater  number  of  blood-
vessels :  They  consist  of  the  same  matter  with  the  brain.

Wherever  we  trace  nerves  of  motion,  we  find  that,  be-
fore entering  the  muscles,  they  interchange  branches,  and
form  an  intricate  mass  of  nerves,  which  is  termed  a
plexus.  A  plexus  is  intricate  in  proportion  to  the  number
of  muscles  to  be  supplied,  and  the  variety  of  combinations
into  which  they  enter.  The  filaments  of  nerves  which
go  to  the  skin,  and  have  the  simple  function  of  sensation,
regularly  diverge  to  their  destination,  without  forming  a
plexus.  From  the  fin  of  a  fish  to  the  arm  of  a  man,  the
plexus  increases  in  complexity,  in  proportion  to  the  variety
or  extent  of  motions  to  be  performed  in  the  extremity.  It
is  by  the  interchange  of  filaments  that  combination  among
the  muscles  is  formed.

Different  columns  of  nervous  matter  combine  to  form
the  spinal  marrow,  (AB,  p.  61.).  Each  lateral  portion
q{  the  spinal  marrow  consists  of  three  tracks  or  columns »
one  for  voluntary  motion,  one  for  sensation,  and  one  for  the
act  of  respiration.  So  that  the  spinal  marrow  comprehends
in  all  six  rods,  intimately  bound  together,  but  distinct  in
office ;  and  the  capital  of  this  compound  column  is  the
medulla  oblongata.

The  anterior  column  of  each  lateral  division  of  the  spinal
marrow  is  for  motion ;  the  posterior  column  is  for  sensa-
tion ;  and  the  middle  one  is  for  respiration.  The  two  for-
mer extend  up  into  the  brain,  and  are  dispersed  or  lost  in
it;  for  their  functions  stand  related  to  the  sensorium:  but

t


OF  THE  SPINAL  MARROW  AND  NERVES.


61


the  last  stops  short  in  the  medulla  oblongata,  being  in  func-
tion independent  of  reason,  and  capable  of  its  office  inde-
pendently of  the  brain,  or  when  separated  from  it.


A  B  the  spinal  marrow  seen  in  front ;  the  division  into  lateral  portions
appearing  at  the  line  A  B.    The  nervous  cord  C  arises. from  the  pos-

.  terior  lateral  division,  and  gives  sensibility.  The  swelling  D  is  its
ganglion.  The  nervous  cord  E  arises  from  the  anterior  lateral  divi-
sion, and  gives  motion.  It  has  no  ganglion.  These  two  cords  combine
at  F,  and  proceed  under  one  sheath  to  their  destinations.


Mr  Bell  struck  a  rabbit  behind  the  ear,  so  as  to  deprive
it  of  sensibility  by  the  concussion,  and  then  exposed  the
spinal  marrow.  On  irritating  the  posterior  roots  of  the
nerve,  he  could  perceive  no  motion  consequent  on  any  part
of  the  muscular  frame ;  but  on  irritating  the  anterior  roots
of  the  nerve,  at  each  touch  of  the  forceps  there  was  a  cor-
responding motion  of  the  muscles  to  which  the  nerve  was
distributed.  These  experiments  satisfied  him  that  the  dif-
ferent roots  and  different  columns  from  which  those  roots
arose,  were  devoted  to  distinct  offices,  and  that  the  notions
drawn  from  the  anatomy  were  correct.

Mr  Bell  performed  certain  interesting  experiments  on
the  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  which  originates  from  the  brain.  In
his  Plate  I.  he  represents  this  nerve  rising  from  two  roots,
one  of  them  coming  from  the  crus  cerebri,  corresponding  to
the  anterior  column  of  the  spinal  marrow ;  and  the  other
from  the  crus  cerebelli,  corresponding  to  the  posterior  co-
lumn of  the  spinal  marrow.    There  is  a  ganglion  on  the


6S  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  FUNCTIONS

latter  branch,  and  none  on  the  former ;  which  circumstance
also  it  in  exact  correspondence  with  the  nerves  rising  from
the  spinal  marrow.  The  two  branches  combine  at  a  short
distance  from  their  origin,  and  are  universally  distributed
to  the  head  and  face.  Mr  Bell  conceived  that  this  nerve
is  the  uppermost  of  those  nerves  which  confer  motion  and
bestow  sensibility.  To  confirm  this  opinion,  he  cut  across
the  posterior  branch,  or  that  which  has  a  ganglion,  on  the
face  of  an  ass,  and  it  was  found  that  the  sensibility  of  the
parts  to  which  it  was  distributed  was  entirely  destroyed.
Again,  he  exposed  the  anterior  branch  of  the  fifth  pair  at
its  root,  in  an  ass,  the  moment  the  animal  was  killed;  and
on  irritating  the  nerve,  the  muscles  of  the  jaw  acted,  and
the  jaw  was  closed  with  a  snap.  On  dividing  the  root  of
the  nerve  in  a  living  animal,  the  jaw  fell  relaxed.  Thus
its  functions  were  no  longer  matter  of  doubt :  it  was  fit
once  a  muscular  nerve  and  a  nerve  of  sensibility.  And
thus  the  opinion  was  confirmed*  that  the  fifth  nerve  was  to
the  head,  what  the  spinal  nerves  were  to  the  other  parts  of
the  body*

The  muscles  have  two  nerves,  which  feet  had  not  been
noticed  previously  to  Mr  Bell's  investigations,  because
they  are  commonly  bound  up  together;  but  whenever  the
nerves,  as  about  the  head*  go  in  a  separate  course,  we  find
that  there  is  a  sensitive  nerve  and  a  motor  nerve  distribut-
ed to  the  muscular  fibre,  and  we  have  reason  to  conclude
thai  those  branches  of  the  spinal  nerves  which  go  to  the
muscles,  consist  of  a  motor  and  a  sensitive  filament  The
nerve  of  touch  or  feeling,  ramified  on  the  skin,  k  distinct
from  both.

It  was  formerly  supposed  that  the  office  of  a  muscular
nerve  is  only  to  carry  out  the  mandate  of  the  will,  and  to
excite  the  muscle  to  action;  but  this  betrays  a  very  inac-
curate knowledge  of  the  action  of  the  muscular  system;
for  before  the  muscular  system  can  be  controlled  under  the
influence  of  the  will,  there  must  be  a  consciousness  or  know-
ledge of  the  condition  of  the  muscle.

When  we  admit  that  the  various  conditions  of  the  muscle


OF  THE  SPINAL  MARROW  AND  NERVES.         68

must  be  estimated  or  perceived,  in  order  to  be  under  the
due  controul  of  the  will,  the  natural  question  arises.  Is  that
nerve  which  carries  out  the  mandate  of  the  will,  capable  of
conveying,  at  the  same  moment,  an  impression  retrograde  to
the  course  of  that  influence*  which,  obviously,  is  going  from
the  brain  towards  the  muscle  ?  If  we  had  no  facts  of  ana-
tomy to  proceed  upon,  still  reason  would  declare  to  us,  that
the  same  filament  of  a  nerve  could  not  convey  a  motion,  of
whatever  nature  that  motion  may  be,  whether  vibration  or
motion  of  spirits,  in  opposite  directions,  at  the  same  moment
of  time.

Mr  Bkll  has  found,  that,  to  the  full  operation  of  the
muscular  power,  two  distinct  filaments  of  nerves  are  neces-
sary, and  that  a  circle  is  established  between  the  sensorium
and  the  muscle :  that  one  filament  or  simple  nerve  carries
the  influence  of  the  will  towards  the  muscle,  which  nerve
has  no  power  to  convey  an  inpreseion  backwards  to  the
brain ;  and  that  another  nerve  connects  the  muscle  with  the
brain,  and,  acting  as  a  sentient  nerve,  conveys  the  impres-
sion of  the  condition  of  the  muscle  to  the  mind,  but  has  do
operation  in  a  direction  outward  from  the  brain  towards  the
muscle,  and  does  not  therefore  excite  the  muscle,  however
irritated.

There  are  four  nerves  coming  out  of  a  track  or  column
of  the  spinal  marrow,  from  which  neither  the  nerves  of
sensation,  nor  of  common  voluntary  motion,  take  their  de-
parture. Experiment  proves  that  these  nerves  excite  mo*
tions  dependent  on  the  act  of  respiration*

Under  the  class  of  respiratory  motions,  we  have  to  dis-
tinguish two  kinds:  first,  the  involuntary,  or  instinctive ;
secondly,  those  whioh  accompany  an  act  of  volition.  We
are  unconscious  of  that  state  of  alternation  of  activity  and
rest  which  characterises  the  instinctive  act  of  breathing  in
sleep ;  and  this  condition  of  activity  of  the  respiratory  or-
gans, we  know  by  experiment,  is  independent  of  the  brain.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  see  that  the  act  of  respiration  is
sometimes  an  act  of  volition,  intended  to  accomplish  some
other  operation,  as  that  of  smelling  or  speaking.    Mr  Bell


64  GENERAL   VIEW  OF  THE  FUNCTIONS

apprehends  that  it  is  this  compound  operation  of  the  organs
of  breathing  which  introduces  a  certain  degree  of  complexity
into  the  system  of  respiratory  nerves.  A  concurrence  of
the  nerves  of  distinct  systems  will  be  found  necessary  to
actions,  which,  at  first  sight,  appear  to  be  very  simple*

If  we  cut  the  division  of  the  fifth  nerve,  which  goes  to
the  lips  of  an  ass,  we  deprive  the  lips  of  sensibility ;  so  that,
when  the  animal  presses  the  lips  to  the  ground,  and  against
the  oats  lying  there,  it  does  not  feel  them ;  and  consequently
there  is  no  effort  made  to  gather  them.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  we  cut  the  seventh  nerve,  where  it  goes  to  the  lips,
the  animal  feels  the  oats,  but  it  can  make  no  effort  to  gather
them,  the  power  of  muscular  motion  being  cut  off  by  the
division  of  the  nerve.  Thus  we  perceive  that,  in  feeding,
just  as  in  gathering  any  thing  with  the  hand,  the  feeling
directs  the  effort ;  and  two  properties  of  the  nervous  system9
are  necessary  to  a  very  simple  action.

After  the  investigation  of  the  regular  system  of  nerves
of  sensation  and  voluntary  motion,  the  question  that  had
so  long  occupied  Mr  Bell,  viz.  What  is  the  explanation  of
the  excessive  intricacy  of  the  nerves  of  the  face,  jaws,
throat,  and  breast?  became  of  easy  solution.  These  nerves
are  agents  of  distinct  powers,  and  they  combine  the  muscles
in  subserviency  to  different  functions.

As  animals  rise  in  the  scale  of  being,  new  organs  are  be-
stowed upon  them;  and,  as  new  organs  and  new  functions
are  superadded  to  the  original  constitution  of  the  frame,
new  nerves  are  given  also,  and  new  sensibilities,  and  new
powers  of  activity.

Mr  Bell  remarks,  that  we  understand  the  use -of  all  the
intricate  nerves  of  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the  sixth
nerve,  which  stands  connected  with  another  system  of  nerves
altogether,  namely,  the  system  hitherto  called  the  Sympa-
thetic, or  sometimes  the  Ganglionic  System  of  Nerves ;  and
of  this  system  we  know  so  little,  that  it  cannot  be  matter  of
surprise,  if  we  reason  ignorantly  of  the  connection  of  the
sixth  with  it.


PRINCIPLES


OF


PHRENOLOGY


In  the  Introduction,  I  have  shewn  that  the  Brain  is  ad-
mitted by  Physiologists  in  general,  to  be  the  organ  of  the
Mind;  but  that  two  obstacles  have  impeded  the  discovery
of  the  uses  of  its  particular  parts.  1st,  Dissection  alone  does
not  reveal  the  functions  of  any  organ.  No  person,  by  dis-
secting the  optic  nerve,  could  predicate  that  its  office  is  to
minister  to  vision ;  or,  by  dissecting  the  tongue,  could  dis-
cover that  it  is  the  organ  of  taste.  Anatomists,  therefore,
could  not,  by  the  mere  practice  of  their  art,  discover  the
functions  of  the  different  portions  of  the  brain.  2dly,  The
mind  is  not  directly  conscious  of  acting  by  means  of  organs ;
and  hence  the  material  instruments,  by  means  of  which  it
performs  its  operations  in  this  life,  and  communicates  with
the  external  world,  cannot  be  discovered  by  reflection  on
conseiousi)4B8.

The  phrenologist  compares  development  of  brain  with
manifestations  of  mental  power,  for  the  purpose  of  dis-
covering the  functions  of  the  brain,  and  the  organs  of  the
mind*  This  course  is  adopted,  in  consequence  of  the  acci-
dental discovery  made  by  Dr  Gall,  that  certain  mental
powers  are  vigorously  manifested,  when  certain  portions  of
the  brain  are  large,  and  vice  versa,  as  detailed  in  the  Intro-

B


66  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES

duction.  It  is  free  from  the  objections  attending  the  ana-
tomical and  metaphysical  modes  of  research,  and  conform
to  the  principles  of  inductive  philosophy.

No  inquiry  is  instituted  into  the  substance  of  the  Mind,
or  into  the  question,  Whether  the  mind  fashions  the  organs,
or  the  organs  constitute  the  mind  ?  If  dissection  of  organs
does  not  reveal  their  functions,  and  if  reflection  on  con-
sciousness does  not  disclose  the  nature  of  the  mind's  con-
nection with  matter,  no  means  remain  of  arriving  at  phi-
losophical conclusions  on  these  points;  and  speculative  rea-
soning concerning  them,  although  it  may  amuse  the  fancy,
cannot  instruct  the  judgment.  Mr  Stewart  justly  ob-
serves, "  that  the  metaphysical  opinions  which  we  may  hap-
pen to  have  formed  concerning  the  nature  either  of  body  or
of  mind,  and  the  efficient  causes  by  which  their  phenomena
are  produced,  have  no  necessary  connection  with  our  in-
quiries concerning  the  laws  according  to  which  the  phe-
nomena take  place."  "  Whether,  for  example,  the  cause
of  gravitation  be  material  or  immaterial,  is  a  point  about
which  two  Newtonians  may  differ,  while  they  agree  per-
fectly in  their  physical  opinions.  It  is  sufficient  if  both
admit  the  general  fact,  that  bodies  tend  to  approach  each
other,  with  a  force  varying  with  their  mutual  distance,
according  to  a  certain  law.  In  like  manner,  in  the  study
of  the  human  mind,  the  conclusions ,  to  which  we  are  led
by  a  careful  examination  of  the  phenomena  it  exhibit*
have  no  necessary  connection  with  our  opinions  concerning
its  nature  and  essence" — Elements,  vol. i.  Introduction.  Thp
object  of  phrenology  is  to  discover  the  Faculties  of  the
Human  Mind;  the  organs  by  means  of  which  they  are
manifested ;  and  the  influenced  the  organs  on  the  manifes-
tations.   It  does  not  enable  us  to  predict  actions,

A  mental  organ  is  a  material  instrument,  by  means  .of
which  the  Mind  in  this  life  manifests  a  particular  pow«r.  Br
Gall's  discovery  leads  us  to  view  the  Brain  as  a  congeries
of  such  organs,  and  in  the  Introduction,  reasons  have  been
assigned  for  regarding  this  proposition  as  sufficiently  pro-


OF  THE  SYSTEM.  67

fable,  to  justify  an  inquiry  into  the  direct  evidence  by
which  it  is  supported*  For  the  purpose  of  comparing  men-
tal faculties  with  cerebral  development,  it  is  necessary  to
shew,  1st,  That  the  mental  qualities  of  individuals  can  be
discovered;  and,  2dfy,  That  the  size  of  different  parts  of
the  brain  can  be  ascertained  during  life.

1st,  Discrimination  of  mental  Dispositions  and  Talents.—
In  regard  to  the  Feelings,  men  practised  in  the  business  of     c
life  have  observed,  that  one  individual  is  strongly  addicted
to  covetousness,— another  to  cruelty, — another  to  benevo-
lence,—another  to  pride,— another  to  vanity;  and  they  are
accustomed  to  regard  these  dispositions  as  natural,  uniform,
and  permanent    They  have  never  believed,  that  a  man,
by  as  effort  of  the  will,  can  totally  change  his  nature,  or
that  the  true  character  is  so  little  manifested,  that  a  person
may  be  prone  to  benevolence  to-day,  who  yesterday  was
addicted  to  avarice;  that  one  who  is  now  sinking  in  the
lowest  abasement  of  self-humiliation  in  his  own  eyeL,  may
to-morrow  become  conceited,  confident  and  proud ;  or  that
to-day  an  individual  may  be  deaf  to  the  voice  of  censure  or
of  fame,  who  yesterday  was  tremblingly  alive  to  every
breath  that  was  blown  upon  his  character.    Nay,  they  have
even  regarded  these  dispositions  as  independent  of  one  an*
other,  and  separable;  for  they  have  often  found  that  the
possession  of  one  was  not  accompanied  with  the  presence
of  the  whole.  Hence,  in  addressing  any  individual,  they  have
been  iit  the  custom  of  modifying  their  conduct,  according  to
their  previous  knowledge  of  his  dispositions  or  genius,  ob-
tained by  observing  his  actions.    To  the  covetous  man  they
address  one  motive;  to  the  benevolent  another;  to  the
proud  a  third;  and  to  the  vain  a  fourth.    When  they  wish
to  move  tuch  individuals  to  act,  they  apeak  to  the  first,  of
his  personal  interest ;  to  the  second,  of  the  pleasure  of  doing
good;  to  the  third,  qfthe  necessity  qf  preserving  his  own  dig*
nity  ;  Mid  to  the  fourth,  of  ike  great  praise  that  will  attend
the  performance  of  the  action  recommended.

£2


68  ON  THE  PRINCIPLES

As  to  intellectual  endowments,  a  person  who  has  heard,
for  the  most  fleeting  moment,  the  bursts  of  melody  which
flow  from  the  throat  of  Catalani,  cannot  be  deceived  as
to  the  fact  of  her  possessing  a  great  endowment  of  the  fa-
culty of  Tune ;  he  who  has  listened  but  for  a  few  minutes
to  the  splendid  eloquence  of  Chalmers,  can  have  no  doubt
that  he  is  gifted  with  Ideality;  and  he  who  has  studied  the
writings  of  Dr  Thomas  Brown,  cannot  hesitate  as  to  his
having  manifested  profound  discriminative  and  analytic
talent.  In  surveying  the  prodigies  performed  by  some  in-
dividuals in  mechanics,  poetry,  painting,  and  sculpture,  it
is  equally  impossible  to  doubt  the  existence  of  particular
powers,  conferring  capacities  for  excelling  in  these  different
branches  of  art.  It  is  equally  easy  to  find  individuals,  in  whom
these  various  powers  are  as  indubitably  deficient.  Hence
the  difficulties  of  determining  the  existence  of  particular
intellectual  talents,  and  their  degrees  of  strength,  are  not  un-
surmoun table ;  especially  if  extreme  cases  be  sought  for,
and  these,  as  the  instcmtia  ostentiva,  ought  to  be  first  re-
sorted to.  Men  of  observation  have  acted  on  these  prin-
ciples without  hesitation,  and  without  injury  to  themselves.
Tbey  have  not  designed  for  the  orchestra,  the  individual
whom  they  found  incapable  of  distinguishing  betwixt  a
rude  noise  and  a  melodious  sound,  on  the  notion,  that  "  a
genius  for  music"  might  be  "  acquired  by  habits  of  study
or  of  business."  They  do  not  place  in  difficult  situations,
requiring  great  penetration  and  much  sagacity,  individuals
who  cannot  trace  consequences  beyond  the  stretch  of  three
ideas :  nor  do  they  conceive,  that  a  man,  who  has  no  intel-
lectual capacity  to-day,  may  become  a  genius  to-morrow,
or  in  ten  years  hence,  by  an  effort  of  the  wilL

They,  no  doubt,  have  always  observed,  that  the  faculties
are  developed  in  succession ;  that  the  child  is  not  in  posses-
sion of  the  powers  of  the  full  grown  man ;  and  that,  hence,
a  boy  may  be  dull  at  ten,  who  may  turn  out  a  genius  at
twenty  years  of  age,  when  his  powers  are  fully  unfolded  by
time.     But  they  do  not  imagine  that  every  boy  may  be


OF  THE  SYSTEM.  69

made  a  genius,  by  habits  of  study  or  of  business ;  nor  be*
lieve,  that,  after  the  faculties  are  fully  developed,  any  indi-
vidual may,  by  exertions  of  the  will,  become  great  in  a  de-
partment of  philosophy  or  science,  for  which  he  had  pre-
viously no  natural  capacity.  They  have  observed,  that
cultivation  strengthens  powers,  in  themselves  vigorous;
but  they  have  not  found  that  education  can  render  emi-
nently energetic,  dispositions  or  capacities  which  nature
has  created  feeble.  On  the  other  hand,  they  have  remarked,
that,  where  Nature  has  bestowed  a  powerful  disposition  or
capacity  of  a  particular  kind,  it  will  hold  the  predominant
sway  in  the  character  during  life,  notwithstanding  every
effort  to  eradicate  or  subdue  it  They  have  noticed,  too,
that  where  Nature  has  bestowed,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the
faculties  which  constitute  genius,  the  individual  will  mani-
fest his  native  superiority,  in  spite  of  great  obstacles  aris-
ing from  circumstances  or  situation.  The  lives  of  poets,
painters,  and  artists,  in  every  age,  display  examples  of  the
truth  of  this  observation.

An  individual,  no  doubt,  may  do  particular  actions,  or
even  for  a  time  follow  a  course  of  action,  the  same  in  ex-
ternal appearance,  from  different  internal  motives.  But
few  men  can  pass  their  whole  lives  in  disguise,  or  acquire
the  art  of  acting  in  the  business  and  enjoyments  of  life,  so
habitually  and  so  skilfully,  as  not  to  allow  their  true  cha-
racters to  appear  to  those  who  are  placed  in  a  favourable  si-
tuation to  observe  them;  or,  if  there  be  persons  who  do  pos-
sess this  power  of  dissimulation,  it  forms  the  predominant
feature  in  their  mental  constitution ;  and,  as  will  afterwards
be  shewn,  it  is  indicated  by  a  particular  form  of  organization.
But,  farther,  let  it  be  observed,  that  it  is  only  in  so  far  as
the  propensities  and  sentiments  of  our  nature  are  concerned,
•that  disguise  is  possible,  even  in  a  single  case.  In  every
act  that  depends  on  the  knowing  and  reflecting  faculties,
it  is  absolutely  impracticable.  No  man  can  either  write
logical  discourses,  or  trace  profoundly  an  abstract  prin-
ciple, who  has  not  powerful  reflecting  faculties.     No  one


70     ON  THE  PRINCIPLES    OP  THE  SYSTEM.

can  compote  exquisite  music,  who  has  not  the  faculty  of
Tune,  or  write  exquisite  poetry,  who  has  not  the  sentiment
of  Ideality.  When,  therefore,  we  perceive,  even  with  the
most  transient  glance,  such  acts  to  be  performed,  we  have
evidence,  insuperable  and  irresistible,  of  the  existence  of
the  faculties  which*  produce  them.

These  opinions  have  been  entertained  by  persons  conver-
sant with  society,  not  in  consequence  of  logical  deduction
or  metaphysical  investigations,  but  from  .the  observation  of
plain  facts,  presented  to  the  cognisance  of  their  understand-
ings.

Thus  fortified,  I  venture  to  conclude  that  the  first  point
is  established  in  favour  of  Phrenology,  viz.  that  it  is  possi-
ble, by  accurate,  patient,  and  continued  observation  of  ac-
tions, to  discover  the  true  dispositions  and  capacities  which
individuals  possess.  As  this  philosophy  is  founded  on  a
comparison  betwixt  the  manifestations  of  these  faculties,
and  the  development  of  the  brain,  the  second  point  to  be
ascertained  is,  Whether  it  be  possible,  in  general,  to  dis-
cover the  true /arm  qf  the  brainy  by  observing  the  figure  of
the  head.

OF  THE  BBAIN,  CEREBELLUM,  AND  SKULL.

The  Anatomy  of  the  Brain  is  minutely  described  by  Dr
Spurzheim,  in  his  anatomical  work.  It  is  not  indispen-
sably necessary,  although  highly  advantageous,  to  become
acquainted  with  it,  in  order  to  become  a  practical  phreno-
logist. A  brief  description  of  its  general  appearance  will
suffice  to  convey  an  idea  of  it  to  the  non-medical  reader.
The  proper  subjects  for  observation  are  healthy  individuals
below  the  middle  period  of  life.  The  brain,  stript  of  its
outer  covering  the  dura  mater,  is  represented  in  figures  1.
and  2.  These  figures  and  the  accompanying  descriptions,
are  not  intended  for  anatomical  purposes ;  the  sole  object  of
them  is  to  convey  some  conception  of  the  appearance  of  the
brain,  to  readers  who  have  no  opportunity  of  seeing  it  in
nature.


OF  THE  BRAIN,  CEREBELLUM,  AND  SKULL.     71


Figure  1.  represent!  the  upper  surface  of  the  brain,  stript  of  mem*
brane  t  the  skull,  through  the  middle  part  of  which  a  horizontal  sec*
ties  is  made,  surrounds  it.  The  front  is  at  A  *  and  the  line  A  Bis  the
division  between  the  two  hemispheres.  A  strong  membrane  called
the  falciform  process  of  the  dura  mater,  represented  on  page  78,  de.
soends  into  it ;  and  forms  the  partition.  It  goes  down  only  about
two-thirds  of  the  depth ;  below  which  the  two  hemispheres  are
joined  together  by  fibres  which  cross,  forming  what  is  called  the  opt-
pmt  <mtt0$tm.  The  waving  lines  are  the  convolutions,  the  furrows
between  which  descend  from  half  an  inch  to  an  inch  in  depth.
When  water  collects  in  the  internal  parts  they  are  unfolded,  and  the
brain  presents  a  uniform  surface  of  great  extent  The  parts  seen
in  this  figure  are  all  composed  externally  of  dneritious  substance.

2


72


OF  THE  BRAIN,  CEREBELLUM,


Fig.  2.


Figure  2.  represents  the  base  of  the  brain  taken  out  of  the  skulL
This  figure  has  been  copied  from  a  different  brain  from  that  repre-
sented in  figure  1.  It  is  longer  and  narrower.  The  division  Into
hemispheres  does  not  descend  to  the  base.  Anatomists,  for  the
sake  of  giving  precision  to  descriptions,  divide  the  brain  into  three
lobes,  called  the  anterior,  middle,  and  posterior.  The  parts  before
AA  are  called  the  frontal  or  anterior  lobe;  the  parts  behind  CC,  the
posterior  lobe ;  and  the  parts  between  them,  the  middle  lobe.  Ana-
tomists draw  lines  from  AA  and  CC  directly  up  the  sides,  and  over
the  upper  surface  of  the  brain,  till  they  meet  at  the  top,  and  in-
clude in  the  different  lobes  the  whole  parts  so  mapped  out ;  but  the
lines  are  imaginary,  and  like  those  of  latitude  and  longitude  on  a
globe,  are  introduced  merely  to  indicate  the  localities  of  the  parts*
The  convolutions  before  AA  lie  chiefly  on  the  bones  which  form
the  roofs  of  the  sockets  of  the  eye-balls.  The  convolutions  be-
tween A  and  C  lie  chiefly  above  the  ear.     D  D  is  the  cerebellum*


AND  SKULL.  7*

%\a  the  mtduBa  oblongata,  which  during  life  descends  almost  perpen*
dicularly  from  the  brain,  and  joins  with  the  top  of  the  spinal  i


The  brain  is  a  mass  of  soft  matter,  not  homogeneous,  but
presenting  different  appearances.  Part  of  it  is  white  in
colour,  fibrous  or  striated  in  texture,  arranged  in  lines  dis-
tantly resembling  the  outer  surface  of  a  cockle-shell.  This
is  generally  named  medullary  substance,  and  abounds  most  in
the  interior.  The  other  matter  is  of  a  grey  colour,  and
has  no  fibrous  appearance.  It  is  called  cineritious,  from
the  similarity  of  its  hue  to  that  of  ashes,  and  sometimes
cortical,  from  its  supposed  resemblance  to  bark.  It  forms
the  outer  part  of  the  brain.  The  cineritious  substance  does
not  blend  gradually  with  the  white  medullary  matter,  but,
on  the  contrary,  the  line  of  distinction  is  abrupt.  The  ci-
neritious seems  to  have  a  greater  proportion  of  blood  cir-
culating in  it  than  the  medullary.  There  is  no  fat  or  adi-
pose substance  within  the  skull,  although  it  pervades  every
other  parfrjgf  ftfag  fariy-

The  brain  consists  of  two  hemispheres,  separated  by  a
strong  membrane,  called  the  Falciform  process  of  the  dura
mater.  Each  hemisphere  is  divided  into  three  lobes,  the
anterior,  middle,  and  posterior.  The  cerebellum  is  dis-
tinct from,  but  connected  with,  the  brain.  Mr  Bell  ob-
serves *,  that  "  whatever  we  observe  on  one  side  has  a  cor-
responding part  on  the  other ;  and  an  exact  resemblance  and
symmetry  <f*  is  preserved  in  all  the  lateral  divisions  of  the
brain.  And  so,  if  we  take  the  proof  of  anatomy,  we  must
admit,  that,  as  the  nerves  are  double,  and  the  organs  of
sense  double,  so  is  the  brain  double ;  and  every  sensation

•  Anatomy  of  the  Brain,  ii  381.

f  This  statement  of  Mr  Bell  is  not  rigidly  correct  There  is  a  gene-
ral  correspondence  between  the  parts  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the  brain,
but  not  u  an  exact  symmetry,"  in  the  strict  sense  of  these  words.  The
approximation  to  symmetry  is  about  as  great  as  between  the  bloodvessels
in  the  right  and  left  arms.


74  OF  THE  BRAIN,  CEREBELLUM,

conveyed  to  the  brain  is  conveyed  to  the  two  lateral  parts,
and  the  operations  performed  must  be  done  in  both  lateral
portions  at  the  same  moment."

The  two  hemispheres,  and  of  course  the  organs  of  each
side,  are  brought  into  communication  and  co-operation  by
fibres  running  transversely;  these  are  called  the  coqm$
caUasum,  and  die  Anterior  and  Posterior  commissures.
The  cerebellum  and  brain  are  only  slightly  and  indirectly
connected.

The  greater  part  of  the  brainjs  destitute  of  sensibility  :
Itjnay  be  jgierced  or  cut  without  the  patient  being  aware,
from  any  feeling  of  pain,  that  it  is  suffering,  injury*.  Mr
Bell"  mentions,  that  he  "  had  his  finger  deep  in  the  ante-
rior lobes  of  the  brain,  when  the  patient,  being  at  the  same
time  acutely  sensible,  and  capable  of  expressing  himself
complained  only  of  the  integument."  So  far  from  thinking
the  parts  of  the  brain  which  are  insensible,  to  be  parts  in-
ferior in  function  (as  every  part  has  its  use),  Mr  Bell
states,  that,  even  from  this,  he  should  be  led  to  imagine
that  they  had  a  higher  office,  namely,  that  they  were  more
allied  to  intellectual  operations.  The  wide  difference  of
function  betwixt  a  part  destined  to  receive  impressions,
and  a  part  which  is  the  seat  of  thought,  is  in  accordance
with  the  presence  of  sensibility  in  some  parts  of  the  brain,
and  its  absence  in  others.

The  external  substance  of  the  brain  is  arranged  in  con-
volutions or  folds.  The  convolutions  appear  .intended  for
the  purpose  of  increasing  the  superficial  extent  of  the  brain,
with  the  least  possible  enlargement  of  its  absolute  size ;
an  arrangement  analogous  to  that  employed  in  the  eye  of
the  eagle  and  falcon,  in  which  the  retina  does  not  form  a
continuous  line,  as  in  man  and  quadrupeds,  but  is  present-
ed in  folds  to  the  rays  of  light,  whereby  the  intensity  of
vision  is  increased  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  nervous
surface  exposed  to  their  influence.  The  rolling  up  of  the
substance  of  the  brain  in  folds  in  a  similar  manner,  strong-


AND  SKULL.  75

ly  indicate*  thai  extent  of  surface  is  highly  important
to  its  functions.  In  certain  low  classes  of  the  inferior
animals,  there  are  no  convolutions.  As  we  ascend  in  the
scale  of  beings,  they  increase,  "  and  in  man  above  all
other  animals,  are  the  convolutions  numerous,  and  the
sulci  (or  furrows)  deep,  and,  consequently,  the  cineritious
mast  great,  and  its  extension  of  surface  far  beyond  that  of
all  other  creatures.99— Belts  AnaL  ii.  886.

The  cineritious  matter  is  extended  over  all  the  upper,
lateral,  and  over  part  of  the  inferior  surfaces  of  the  brain :
the  white  or  medullary  matter  lies  within  it,  and  in  some
places  in  intimate  combination  with  it.  Medullary  fibres
run  from  the  convolutions  of  the  brain  upon  one  side  to
the  convolutions  on  the  other.  These  are  called  commis-
sures. "  Unless,99  says  Mr  Bell,  "  the  cineritious  masses
were  important  organs,  why  should  there  be  commissures
or  nerves  forming  a  distinct  system,  arising  and  terminat-
ing in  nothing?  But  if  we  take  them  as  commissures,  i.  e.
bonds  of  union  betwixt  the  corresponding  sides  of  the  great
organ  of  the  mind,  we  at  once  perceive  how  careful  nature
is  to  unite  the  two  lateral  organs  together,  and  out  of  two
organs  to  make  one  more  perfect/9 — P.  386.

Each  side  of  the  brain,  and  also  the  cerebellum,  are  sup-
plied with  separate  arteries  conveying  the  blood  to  them ;
but  the  sinuses  or  canals,  by  means  of  which  the  blood  is
returned  to  4he  heart,  are  common  to  them  all.

Hie  cerebellum  is  composed  of  the  same  nervous  mat-
ter with,  the  brain,  and  presents  both  cineritious  and  me-
dullary matter ;  but,  in  form  and  internal  arrangement,  it
is  quite  unlike  the  bmin.  The  cerebellum  is  separated
from  the  brain  by  a  strong  membrane,  called  the  tentorium:
in  annuals  which  leap,  as  the  cat  and  tiger,  the  separation
is  produced  by  a  thin  plate  of  bone.  Its  fibres,  however,
originate  in  that  part  of  the  medulla  oblongata  called  the
corpora  rerti/brmia,  from  which  also  the  organs  of  several
feelings  or  propensities  arise ;  so  that  the  brain  and  cere-


76  OF  THE  INTEGUMENTS

bellum,  although  separated  by  the  tentorium,  are  both  con-
nected with  the  medulla  oblongata,  and  through  it  with  each
other.

The  medulla  oblongata  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  one
of  the  three  great  divisions  of  the  brain.  It  is,  in  fact,
the  part  from  which  the  fibrous  matter  of  the  brain  and
cerebellum  proceeds,  and  it  forms,  as  it  were,  the  capital
of  the  column  of  the  spinal  marrow.


OF  THE  INTEGUMENTS  OF  THE  DRAIN.

The  brain  is  formed  before  the  bones  which  invest  it
The  ossification  of  the  bones  of  the  skull  is  a  gradual  pro-
cess. The  brain  already  formed  is  invested  with  strong
membranes,  and  betwixt  the  coats  of  the  outer  membrane
the  points  of  ossification  commence,  which  process  is  not
completed  until  the  ninth  year.

During  life,  the  brain  is  embraced  in  its  whole  periphe-
ral extent  by  a  very  thin  transparent  and  delicate  mem-
brane called  the  pia  mater,  which  sinks  down  into  its  fur-
rows, and  serves  to  convey  the  bloodvessels  to  its  different
parts.  Immediately  above  the  pia  mater,  is  an  extremely
thin  membrane,  named  the  tunica  aracAnoidea,  on  account
of  its  extreme  tenuity,  resembling  a  spider's  web.  It  covers
the  surface  of  the  brain  uniformly  without  passing  into  its
folds  or  cavities.  It  secretes  matter,  to  lubricate  the  sur-
faces of  the  pia  and  dura  mater.  The  dura  mater  is  also  a
thin  but  strong  opaque  membrane  lining  and  strongly
adhering  to  the  inner  surface  of  the  skull,  and  which
embraces  the  outer  surface  of  the  brain  above  the  mem-
brane last  mentioned.  When  in  health  it  does  not  pos-
sess sensibility,  and  has  been  pricked  without  causing
pain.  All  these  membranes  are  pliant  in  the  highest  de-
gree, and  accommodate  themselves  precisely  to  the  figure  of


OF  THE  BRAIN.  77

the  brain.  The  brain,  enclosed  in  them,  fills  exactly  the
interior  of  the  skull ;  so  that  a  cast,  in  plaster,  of  the  in-
terior of  the  skull,  is  a  fac  simile  of  the  brain,  covered
by  the  dura  mater.  Between  the  dura  mater  and  brain  a
very  small  quantity  of  fluid  is  said  to  exist ;  but  not  ex-
ceeding a  line  in  thickness.  This  fluid  does  not,  in  any
degree  that  can  be  distinguished  by  the  hand  or  eye,  cause
the  form  of  the  interior  of  the  skull  to  differ  from  the  form
of  the  exterior  of  the  brain  enveloped  by  the  dura  mater.
The  skull  is  not  an  adamantine  barrier,  confining  the  brain
within  specific  boundaries ;  but  a  strong,  yet  yielding  cover-
ing, shielding  it,  and  accommodating  itself  to  its  size,  while
in  the  progress  of  its  growth.  It  resembles,  in  this  respect,
the  shell  of  a  crab  or  of  a  snail.  At  birth,  it  is  small ;  it
increases  as  the  brain  increases;  and  it  stops  in  develop-
ment, when  the  brain  has  attained  its  full  size.  A  process
of  absorption  and  deposition  goes  continually  on  in  its  sub-
stance; so  that,  if  the  brain  presses  from  within,  the  reno-
vating particles  arrange  themselves  according  to  this  pres-
sure, and  thus  the  figure  of  the  skull  and  of  the  brain  in
general  correspond.  The  figures  represent  the  skull  at
birth  and  at  maturity  respectively.

Skull  at  Birth.  Adult  Skull.

A


"K


B


AA  sutures.    B  mastoid  process  or  bony  projection  behind  the  ear.
C  process  of  the  occipital  spine.


78  OF  THE  INTEGUMENTS

The  skull  is  composed  of  eight  bones,  for  the  most  port
joined  by  indented  edges  (AA  in  figures  p.  77),  like  dove-
tailing in  carpenter-work.    The  lines  of  junction  are  named

Sutures  *.

A


B

This  figure  represents  the  two  sides  of  the  skull  cut  away,  down
nearly  to  the  level  of  the  eyebrow,  leaving  a  narrow  ridge  in  the
middle  of  the  top  standing.  AAA  is  the  edge  of  the  skull,  resem-
bling an  arch.  The  outer  surface  is  called  the  outer  table,  the
inner  surface  the  inner  table ;  the  fine  waving  lines  or  net-work
between  them,  like  cells  in  a  marrow-bone,  is  the  diploS.  The  sub-
stance hanging  down  from  the  skull,  having  delicate  lines  traced
on  it,  like  the  sap-vessels  in  leaves,  is  the  membrane  which  sepa-
rates the  two  halves  of  the  brain.  It  is  called  the  falciform  process
of  the  dura  mater,  from  its  resemblance  to  a  scythe.  The  lines  are
the  bloodvessels ;  the  blood  returning  from  the  brain  to  the  heart,
goes  up  these  vessels  into  a  canal  formed  by  the  membrane  all
along  the  line  of  its  attachment  to  the  skulL  The  course  of  the
blood  through  the  canal  is  from  the  front  backwards,  and  then  down-
wards. The  two  hemispheres  of  the  brain  are  completely  sepa-
rated, as  far  as  this  membrane  extends  in  the  cut :  At  the  lower
edge  of  it  a  white  space  appears,  and  the  commissure,  or  collection
of  fibres'  which*  Unites  the  two  sides,  goes  through  that  space.  The
cerebellum  lies  at  C,  in  a  part  of  the  skull  not  opened.  The  mem-
brane' qn  reaching  the  point  at  C,  spreads  out  to  the  right  and
left,'  anrl.  funs  rorward,  and  separates  the  cerebellum  from  the
brain ;  the  brain  lying  above,  and  the  cerebellum  below  it.  B  is
the  mastoid  process,  or  bone  to  which  the  mastoid  muscles  of  the
neck  are  attached*  It  lies  immediately  behind  the  opening  of  the
ear,  and  is  not  connected  with  the  brain.

The  external  and  internal  smooth  surfaces  of  the  bones

*  Mr  Lukx  O'Neill  sells  a  cast  of  the  skull,  accompanied  by  an  ex-
planatory card,  pointing  out  all  the  bones,  sutures,  and  processes,  with
their  names ;  which  will  render  the  subject  more  intelligible  than  any  de-
scription.


OF  THE  BRAIN.  79

of  the  skull,  are  called  their  external  and  internal  tables,
or  plates,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  intermediate  part
called  the  diploe',  which  is  of  a  looser  and  somewhat  cellular
texture,  resembling  the  internal  structure  of  the  bones.
As  the  diploe  is  nearly  equally  thick  in  every  part,  it  fol-
lows that  the  two  tables  of  the  skull  are  nearly  parallel  to
each  other.  The  internal,  indeed,  bears  some  slight  im-
pressions of  bloodvessels,  glands,  &c.,  which  do  not  appear
externally,  but  these  are  so  small  as  not  to  interfere  with
phrenological  observations.  The  departure  from  perfect
parallelism,  where  it  occurs,  is  limited  to  a  line,  T^th  or  Jth
of  an  inch,  according  to  the  age  and  health  of  the  indivi-
dual. The  difference  in  development  between  a  large  and
a  small  organ  of  the  propensities  and  some  of  the  senti-
ments, amounts  to  an  inch  and  upwards;  and  to  a  quarter
of  an  inch  in  the  organs  of  intellect,  which  are  naturally
smaller  than  die  others.

The  integuments  which  cover  the  skull  on  the  outside,
indisputably  lie  close  upon  its  surface,  and  are  so  complete-
ly parallel,  as  to  exhibit  its  true  figure.  Thus,  then,  there
is  no  obstacle  in  general  to  the  discovery  of  the  figure  of
the  brain,  by  observations  on  the  form  of  the  skull.

.  This  doctrine  has  been  disputed  by  many  opponents  of
phrenology;  but  the  greatest  anatomists  have  taught  it.
Magendie,  in  his  Compendium  of  Physiology,  says,  that
"  the  only  way  of  estimating  the  volume  of  the  brain  in  a
living  person,  is  to  measure  the  dimensions  of  the  skull;  every
other  means,  even  that  proposed  by  Camper,  is  uncertain."
—MilUgaris  Translation,  p.  104.

Mr  Charles  Bell  also  observes,  "  Thus,  we  find  that  the
bones  of  the  head  are  moulded  to  the  brain,  and  the  peculiar
shapes  of  the  bones  of  the  head  are  determined  by  the  original
peculiarity  in  the  shape  of  the  brain  #.    Dr  Gordon,  also,

•  BdriAntiL&O.  Mt  Bell  adds  in  foot  note, "  Certainly  the  skull
k  adapted  to  the  form  of  the  brain,  but  there  is  a  deeper  question,  which
our  craaiologisU  hare  fbrgotten^-Is  the  brain  constituted  in  shape  with
a  reference  to  the  future  form  of  the  head  ?"    It  is  difficult  to  see  the


80  OF  THE  INTEGUMENTS.

in  the  49th  Number  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  hag  the  fol-
lowing words :  "  But  we  will  acquiesce  implicitly  for  the
present  in  the  proposition  (familiar  to  physiologists  long
before  the  age  of  Gall  and  Spurzheim),  that  there  is,  in
most  instances,  a  general  correspondence  between  the  size
of  the  cranium  and  the  quantity  of  cerebrum ;  that  large
heads  usually  contain  large  brains,  and  small  heads  small
brains."— P.  246.

There  are,  Aowever,  cases  in  which  it  is  no*  possible  to
discover  the  form  of  the  brain  by  examining  the  skull.
These  are  instances  of  disease  and  old  age.  In  disease,  the
skull  may  be  enlarged  or  diminished  in  volume,  by  causes
other  than  the  development  of  the  brain ;  and  in  old  age,
the  inner  table  of  the  skull  sometimes  sinks,  while  the  outer
table  preserves  its  original  size ;  in  such  individuals,  the
true  development  of  the  brain  cannot  be  accurately  infer-
red from  the  development  of  the  head.

There  are  parts  at  the  base  of  the  brain,  in  the  middle  and
posterior  regions,  the  size  of  which  cannot  be  discovered  du-
ring life,  and  whose  functions  in  consequence  are  still  un-
known* From  analogy,  and  from  some  pathological  facts,
they  are  supposed  to  be  the  organs  of  the  sensations  of
Hunger  and  Thirst,  Heat  and  Cold,  and  of  some  other  men-
tal affections,  for  which  cerebral  organs  have  not  been  dis-
covered; but  demonstrative  evidence  to  this  effect  being
wanting,  this  conjecture  is  merely  stated  to  incite  to  farther
investigation.

The  sutures  also  interrupt  the  absolute  parallelism ;  but

importance  of  this  question.  Phrenologists  maintain  that,  de  facto,  at  every
period  previous  to  the  decline  of  life,  the  skull  is  adapted  to  the  form  of
the  brain ;  thai  it  increases  in  size  when  the  brain  enlarges,  and  de-
creases when  it  diminishes.  I  have  seen  one  striking  instance  of  the
skull  decreasing  with  the  brain ;  it  occurred  in  an  individual  who  died  at
the  age  of  thirty-two,  after  having  laboured  under  chronic  insanity  for
upwards  of  ten  years,  and  whose  mental  weakness  augmented  in  propor-
tion to  the  diminution  of  his  brain  and  shrinking  of  the  skull.  The  di-
minution of  his  head  in  size  attracted  his  own  attention  during  life.  His
brain  was  dissected  by  Dr  A.  Combs  after  death. —See  this  case  fully  re*
parted  in  the  Phren.  Journ.  voL  ir.  4fl|6.


SUTURES — FRONTAL  SINUS.  81

their  situation  is  known,  and  only  one  of  them,  called  the
Lambdoidal,  where  it  passes  over  the  organ  of  Concentra-
tiveness,  presents  any  difficulty  to  the  student.  The  sagittal
suture,  which  runs  longitudinally  from  the  middle  of  the
crown  of  the  head  forwards  and  downwards,  sometimes  so
low  as  the  top  of  the  nose,  occasionally  presents  a  narrow
prominent  ridge,  which  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  develop-
ment of  the  organs  of  Benevolence,  Veneration,  Firmness,
and  Self-esteem.  It  may,  however,  be  easily  distinguished
by  its  narrowness  and  isolation,  from  the  full  broad  swell  of
cerebral  development.  In  anatomy,  projecting  bony  points
are  called  Processes.  The  mastoid  process  of  the  temporal
bone,  B  in  figure,  p.  77.,  which  is  a  small  knob  immediately
behind  the  ear,  serving  for  the  attachment  of  a  muscle,  is
sometimes  mistaken  for  the  indication  of  large  Combative-
ness.  It  is,  however,  merely  a  bony  prominence,  and  is  to
be  found  in  every  head,  and  does  not  indicate  development
of  brain  at  all.  Another  process  C,  called  in  anatomy  the
spinous  process  of  the  transverse  ridge  of  the  occipital  bone,
requires  to  be  known.  Phrenologists  generally  name  it
shortly  the  occipital  spine,  and  its  situation  is  indicated  by
C  in  the  figure,  p.  77.

There  is  one  part  of  the  skull  where  the  external  configu-
ration does  not  always  indicate  exactly  the  size  of  the  subja-
cent parts  of  the  brain,  and  upon  which  objections  have
been  raised,  viz.  at  the  top  of  the  nose.

THB  FRONTAL  SINU8.


The  frontal  sinus  is  the  dark  hole  above  the  nose.    This  represents
it  in  one  individual.    It  is  sometimes  larger  and  sometimes  smaller.

At  the  part  of  the  frontal  bone  immediately  above  the
top  of  the  nose,  a  divergence  from  parallelism  is  some-
times produced  by  the  existence  of  a  small  cavity  called


82  FRONTAL  SINUS.

the  frontal  sinus.  It  is  formed  between  the  two  plates  or
tables  of  the  bone,  either  by  the  external  table  swelling
out  a  little,  without  being  followed  by  the  internal,  and
presenting  an  appearance  like  that  of  a  blister  on  a  bis-
cuit, or  by  the  internal  table  sinking  in  without  being  fol-
lowed by  the  external ;  and  hence,  as  the  outer  surface  does
not  indicate  the  precise  degree  of  development  of  brain  be-
neath, it  has  been  argued  that  the  existence  of  a  frontal  si-
nus is  an  insuperable  objection  to  Phrenology  in  general,
because  it  throws  so  much  uncertainty  in  the  way  of  our.
observations  as  completely  to  destroy  their  value;  other
opponents,  however,  more  rationally,  confine  their  objection
to  those  organs  only  over  which  the  sinus  extends.

The  first  objection  is  manifestly  untenable.  Even  grant-
ing the  sinus  to  be  an  insuperable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  as-
certaining the  development  of  the  organs  over  which  it  is  si-
tuated, it  may  be  observed,  first.  That,  in  ordinary  cases,  it
interferes  with  only  a  few,  viz.  Form,  Size,  Weight,  Indi-
viduality, and  Locality ;  and,  2dly9  It  cannot  interfere  with
the  other  thirty  or  thirty-one  organs,  the  whole  external
appearances  of  which  it  leaves  as  unaltered  as  if  it  did  not
at  all  exist.  It  would  be  quite  as  logical  to  speak  of  a
snow-storm  in  Norway  obstructing  the  high  road  from  Edin-
burgh to  London,  as  of  a  small  sinus  at  the  top  of  the  nose
concealing  the  developments  of  Benevolence,  Firmness,  or
Veneration,  on  the  crown  of  the  head.

To  enable  the  reader  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the
value  of  the  objection  as  applicable  to  the  individual  or-
gans particularly  referred  to,  I  subjoin  a  few  observations.
In  the  first  place,  Below  the  age  of  twelve  or  fourteen,
the  sinus,  if  it  exists  at  all,  rarely  extends  so  high  as  the
base  of  the  brain ;  2dly9  In  adult  age,  it  frequently  oc-
curs to  the  extent  above  admitted4 ;  and,  Sdly,  In  old  age,

•  This  may  seem  at  variance  with  a  statement  given  in  the  first  edition
of  this  work,  on  the  authority  of  a  friend  in  Paris,  who,  in  the  course  of
many  months9  dissections,  had  never  found  a  frontal  sinus  except  in  old
age  and  in  disease.    In  sawing  open  the  skull  for  anatomical  purposes,


FRONTAL  SINUS.  86

and  in  disease,  as  chronic  idiocy  and  insanity,  it  is  often  of
very  great  extent,  owing  to  the  brain  diminishing  in  riae,
and  the  inner  table  of  the  skull  following  it,  while  the
outer  remains  stationary.  Now,  the  first  cases  present  no
objection,  for  in  them  the  sinus  does  not  exist  so  as  to  in-
terfere with  the  observation  of  the  size  of  the  brain ;  the
third  are  instances  of  disease,  which  are  uniformly  excluded
in  phrenological  observations;  and  thus  our  attention  is
limited  solely  to  the  cases  forming  the  second  class.  In  re-
gard to  them  the  objection  is,  that  large  development  of
brain,  and  large  frontal  sinus,  present  so  nearly  the  same
appearance  that  we  cannot  be  sure  which  is  which,  and,
therefore,  that  our  observations  must  be  inconclusive.

To  this  the  following  answer  is  given : — 1#,  We  must
distinguish  between  the  possibility  ot  discovering  the  functions
of  an  organ,  and  of  applying  this  discovery  practically  in  all
cases,  so  as  to  be  able,  in  every  instance,  to  predicate  the
4&act  degrees  in  which  every  particular  mental  power  is
present  in  each  individual  •  The  sinus  does  not  in  general
extend  as  high  as  the  base  of  the  brain  until  after  the  age  of
twelve  or  fourteen,  before  which  is  precisely  the  period
when  Individuality  is  most  conspicuously  active  in  the
mind.  If,  then,  in  children,  in  whom  no  sinus  exists,  that
mental  power  is  observed  to  be  strong  when  the  part  of  the
head  is  large,  and  weak  when  it  is  small,  we  ascertain  the
function,  whatever  may  subsequently  embarrass  us.  If,
in  after-life,  the  sinus  comes  to  exist,  this  throws  a  certain
impediment  in  the  way  of  the  practical  application  of  our
knowledge ;  and,  accordingly,  phrenologists  admit  a  diffi-
culty in  determining  the  exact  degree  of  mental  power,
which,  in  adult  age,  will  accompany  any  particular  develop-

the  section  is  almost  always  made  horizontally  through  the  middle  of  the
forehead,  or  ©wr  the  organs  of  Tune,  Time,  and  EvenhtaKfy;  and  in  all
the  cases  alluded  to  by  the  gentleman  in  Paris,  this  line  was  followed,  and
as  the  sinus  rarely  extends  so  high  up,  he  could  not,  and  did  not,  meet
with  it  On  examining  vertical  sections,  however,  for  the  purpose  of  see-
ing the  sinus,  he  has  since  frequently  found  it  to  the  extent  mentioned  in
the  text.

F  2


84r  FRONTAL  SINUS-

ment  of  the  organs  lying  immediately  above  the  top  of  the
nose,  except  in  extreme  instances,  in  which  even  the  sinus
itself  will  form  but  a  small  fraction  of  the  difference  between
great  development  and  deficiency.  In  the  next  place,  the
objection  applies  only  to  one  set  of  cases.  If  there  be  a
hollow  or  depression  in  the  external  surface  of  the  skull  at
the  situation  of  the  organs  in  question,  and  the  sinus  be  ab-
sent, then  the  organ  must  necessarily  be  deficient  in  pro-
portion to  the  depression*  If,  with  such  an  external  appear-
ance, the  sinus  be  present,  which  is  not  generally  the  case,
but  which,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  I  shall  suppose,  then
it  must  be  formed  by  the  inner  table  receding  more  than
the  outer  table ;  and  hence  a  greater  deficiency  of  prgan  will
actually  exist  than  is  externally  indicated ;  and,  of  course,
the  deficiency  of  mental  power  will  be  at  least  equal  to  the
external' indication  of  deficiency  in  the  organ.  In  cases  of
this  kind,  therefore,  the  sinus  forms  no  objection.  Thus
the  only  instances  in  which  it  can  occasion  embarrassment
are  those  in  which  H  causes  a  swelling  of  the  parts  of  the
skull  in  question  outward,  to  which  there  is  no  correspond-
ing development  of  brain  within.  Now  if,  in  all  cases  in
youth,  when  no  sinus  exists,  and  in  all  cases  in  mature  age
in  which  a  depression  is  found,  the  mental  power  is  ascer-
tained to  correspond' with  the  external  development;  and
if,'  in  certain  cases,  in  adult  age,  an  external  indication
appears  to  which  the  mental  power  does  not  correspond,
what  conclusion  falls  to  be  drawn  according  to  the  rules  of
a  correct  logic?  Not  that  the  functions  of  the  parts  are
uncertain ;  because  they  have  been  ascertained  in  cases  not
liable  to  impediment  or  objection  ;  but  only  that,  in  the  par-
ticular cases  in  mature  age,  in  which  the  external  develop-
ment is  large,  and  the  corresponding  power  absent,  there
muet  be  a  frontal  sinue.

Finally,  by  practice  in  observing,  it  i»  possible,  in  gene-
ral, to  distinguish  between  external  appearances  produced
by  frontal  sinus,  and  those  indicating  a  large  development
of  organs.  In  the  first  instance,  the  forms  of  the  elevations


APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.  85

are  irregular ;  in  the  second,  they  are  symmetrical,  and  cor-
respond to  the  shapes  of  the  organs  delineated  on  the  busts.

If,  then,  men  in  general  manifest  their  true  and  natural
sentiments  and  capacities  in  their  actions;  and  if,  in  healthy
individuals,  the  form  of  the  brain  may  be  discovered,  by
observing  the  figure  of  the  head,  it  follows  that  the  true
faculties,  and  the  true  development,  may  be  compared  in
living  subjects ;  and,  on  these  grounds,  the  proposition  is
established,  That  the  Phrenological  mode  of  philosophising
is  competent  to  enable  us  to  attain  the  results  sought  for.


PRACTICAL  APPLICATION   OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF
PHRENOLOGY-

It  has  already  been  mentioned,  that  there  are  two  he-
mispheres of  the  brain,  corresponding  in  form  and  func-
tions. There  are,  therefore,  two  organs  for  each  mental
power ;  one  in  each  hemisphere.  Each  organ  extends  from
the  medulla  oblongata,  or  top  of  the  spinal  marrow,  to  the
surface  of  the  brain  or  cerebellum.;  and  every  individual
possesses  all  the  organs  in  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  When
the  two  organs  of  a  faculty  are  situated  immediately  on
the  sides  of  the  middle  line  separating  the  hemispheres,
they  are  included  in  one  space  on  the  busts  and  plates.
To  save  circumlocution,  the  expression,  "  organ"  of  a
faculty  will  be  used,  but  both  organs  will  be  thereby
meant.

The  brain  is  not  divided  by  lines  corresponding  to  those
delineated  on  the  busts ;  but  the  forms  assumed  by  its  diffe-
rent parts,  when  extremely  large  or  small,  exactly  resemble
those  there  represented.  Each  part  is  inferred  to  be  a  se-
parate organ;  because^*  size,  ccBteris  paribus, bears  a  regu-
lar proportion  to  the  energy  of  a  particular  mental  power-
As  size,  cateris  paribus,  is  a  measure  of  power  #,  the  first

*  See  Introduction,  p.  23,  24,  2ft,  26,  Ac


86  "    APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

object  ought  to  be  to  distinguish  the  size  of  the  brain  ge-
nerally, so  as  to  judge  whether  it  be  large  enough  to  ad-
mit of  manifestations  of  ordinary  vigour ;  for  if  it  be  too
small,  idiocy  is  an  invariable  consequence.  The  second
object  should  be  to  ascertain  the  relative  proportions  of  the
different  parts,  so  as  to  determine  the  direction  in  which
the  power  is  greatest.

It  is  proper  to  begin  with  observation  of  the  more  pal-
pable differences  in  size,  and  particularly  to  attend  to  the
relative  proportions  of  the  different  lobes.  The  size  of  the
anterior  lobe  is  the  measure  of  intellect.  In  the  brain  it  is
easily  distinguished,  and  in  the  living  head  it  is  indicated
by  the  portion  lying  before  Constructiveness  and  Benevo-
lence. Sometimes  the  lower  part  of  the  frontal  lobe,  con-
nected with  the  perceptive  faculties,  is  the  largest,  and  this
is  indicated  by  the  line  before  Constructiveness,  extending
farthest  out  at  the  base ;  sometimes  the  upper  part,  con-
nected with  the  reflecting  powers,  is  the  most  amply  de-
veloped, which  occurs  when  the  line  extends  farthest  in
the  upper  region ;  sometimes  both  are  equally  developed.
The  student  is  particularly  requested  to  resort  invariably
to  this  mode  of  estimating  the  size  of  the  anterior  lobe,  as
the  best  for  avoiding  mistakes.  In  some  individuals,  and
in  some  Peruvian  skulls  in  particular,  the  forehead  is  tole-
rably perpendicular,  so  that,  seen  in  front,  and  judged  of
without  attending  to  depth,  it  appears  to  be  largely  de-
veloped ;  whereas,  when  viewed  in  the  way  now  pointed
out,  it  is  seen  to  be  extremely  shallow ;  in  other  words,
the  mass  is  not  large,  and  the  intellectual  manifestations
will  be  proportionately  feeble.

The  posterior  lobe  is  devoted  chiefly  to  the  animal  pro-
pensities. In  the  brain  its  size  is  easily  distinguished ;  and
in  the  living  head  a  line  may  be  drawn  perpendicularly
to  the  mastoid  process,  and  all  behind  will  belong  to  the
posterior  lobe.  Wherever  this  and  the  basilar  region  are
large,  the  animal  feelings  will  be  strong,  and  vice  versa.


REGIONS  OF  THE  BRAIN.


87


The  coronal  region  of  the  brain  is  the  seat  of  the  moral
sentiments ;  and  its  size  may  be  estimated  by  the  extent  of
elevation  and  expansion  of  the  head  above  the  organs  of
Causality  in  the  forehead,  and  of  Cautiousness  in  the  middle
of  the  parietal  bones.  When  the  whole  region  of  the  brain
rising  above  these  organs  is  shallow  or  narrow,  the  moral
feelings  will  be  weakly  manifested ;  when  high  and  expand-
ed, they  will  be  vigorously  displayed.


FBOFILX  OF  HABI.


88


APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.


PBOFILB  OF  BEV.  MB  M.

All  that  lies  before  line  AA  is  the  anterior  lobe,  or  organs  of  the  intellec-
tual ftculties.  It  is  larger  in  the  Reverend  Mr  M.  than  in  the  other
two.  The  space  above  the  horizontal  dotted  line  B  marks  the  region
of  the  moral  sentiments :  The  space  from  A  backwards,  below  B,  in-
dicates  the  region  of  the  propensities,  which  in  Burks  and  Hark
is  much  larger  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  moral  and  intellectual
regions  than  in  the  Reverend  Mr  M.  These  figures  were  drawn  by
Mr  Joseph,  by  the  Camera  ludda,  from  casts  from  nature.  If  de-
duction be  made  for  the  thickness  of  the  integuments  and  skull  in  all
the  three,  the  proportion  of  the  moral  regions  in  Burks  and  Hare  to
the  animal  region  will  be  very  small.

By  observing  the  proportions  of  the  different  regions,  it
will  be  discovered,  that,  in  some  instances,  the  greater
mass  of  the  brain  lies  between  the  ear  and  the  forehead ;
in  others  between  the  ear  and  the  occiput;  and  in  others
above  the  ear.  in  perpendicular  height.  Great  differences
in  breadth  are  also  remarkable ;  some  heads  being  narrow
throughout,  and  some  broad*  Some  are  narrow  before,
and  broad  behind,  and  vice  versa.  The  busts  of  the  Re-
verend Mr  M.,  Mary  Macinnes,  Pallet,  and  Haggart,
may  be  contrasted  with  this  view  *.

*  The  Casts  and  Skulls,  referred  to  in  the  subsequent  pages,  as  illustrat-
ive of  particular  organs,  are  to  be  found  in  the  collection  of  the  Phreno-


LENGTH  AND  BREADTH  OF  ORGANS.     89

After  becoming  familiar  with  the  general  size  and  con-
figuration of  heads,  the  student  may  proceed  to  the  observa-
turn  of  individual  organs;  and,  in  studying  them,  the  real
dimensions,  including  both  length  and  breadth,  and  not  the
mere  prominence  of  each  organ,  should  be  looked  for.

In  estimating  the  size  of  the  organs,  both  length  and
breadth  must  be  attended  to.  The  length  of  an  organ  is  as-
certained by  the  distance  from  the  medulla  oblongata  to  the
peripheral  surface.  A  line  passing  through  the  head  from
one  ear  to  the  other,  would  nearly  touch  the  medulla  oblonga-
tOy  anj}  hence  the  external  opening  of  the  ear  is  assumed
as  a  convenient  point  from  which  to  estimate  length.
The  breadth  of  an  organ  is  judged  of  by  its  peripheral
expansion ;  and  it  is  a  general  law  of  physiology,  that  the
breadth  of  any  organ  throughout  its  whole  course,  bears  a
relation  to  its  expansion  at  the  surface :  the  optic  and  ol-
factory nerves  are  examples  in  point.  It  has  been  objected
that  the  breadth  of  the  organs  cannot  be  ascertained,  be-
cause the  boundaries  of  them  are  not  sufficiently  determi-
nate.

In  answer,  I  observe,  that  although  the  boundaries  of  the
different  organs  cannot  be  determined  with  mathematical
precision,  like  those  of  a  triangle,  a  square,  or  rhomboid;
yet,  in  a  single  case,  an  accurate  observer  may  make  a  very
near  approximation  to  the  truth ;  and,  in  a  great  multitude
of  cases,  the  very  doctrine  of  chances,  and  of  the  compen-
sation of  errors,  must  satisfy  any  one  that  these  boundaries
may  be  defined  with  sufficient  precision  for  all  practical
purposes.  Even  in  the  exact  sciences  themselves,  an  ap-
proximate solution  is  frequently  all  that  is  attainable ;  and
if  the  opponents  would  only  make  themselves  masters  of

logical  8odety,  which,  by  the  liberality  of  the  Society,  is  open  to  public
inspection,  in  their  Hall,  Clyde  Street,  Edinburgh,  every  Saturday  from
One  to  Three  o'clock.

Duplicates  of  most  of  these  easts  and  skulls  are  exhibited  and  sold  by
Mr  James  dk  Villi,  Strand,  London ;  by  Messrs  Luke  O'Neill  and
Sow,  Canongate,  Edinburgh  ;  and  by  their  agents.


90  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES,

the  binomial  theorem,  or  pay  a  little  attention  to  the  ex*
pansion  of  infinite  series,  they  would  not  persist  in  calling
for  a  degree  of  accuracy  which  is  impossible,  or  in  neglect-
ing an  important  element  in  a  calculation,  because  it  is  in-
volved in  a  certain  liability  to  error  within  very  narrow  li-
mits.   The  absurdity  of  the  reason  assigned  for  this  omis-
sion, is  rendered  still  more  apparent  by  the  case  of  the
prismatic  spectrum,  which  I  conceive  to  be  exactly  in
point.     Now,  what  is  it  that  this  beautiful  phenomenon
displays  ?  The  seven  primary  colours,  arranged  in  a  pecu-
liar order,  and  glowing  with  an  almost  painful  intensity.
But  each  of  these  colours  occupies  a  certain  space  in  rela-
tion to  the  whole,  the  boundaries  of  which  it  may  be  im-
possible for  the  hand  or  eye  to  trace  with  geometrical  preci-
sion, although  the  relative  space  in  question  has  neverthe-
less been  made  the  subject  of  measurement,  and  a  very
close  approximation  obtained  from  the  mean  of  a  vast
number  of  trials.    According  to  the  principle  followed  by
some  antiphrenologists,  however,  breadth  should  be  alto-
gether neglected,  because  the  boundaries  of  the  respective
colours  are,  forsooth,  "  purely  ideal,"  as  if  a  mathematical
line  were  not  the  most  perfect  idealism  or  abstraction  which
the  mind  of  man  can  possibly  form.    This  idealism  or  ab-
straction, however,  has  no  more  to  do  with  those  approxi-
mations which  may  be  obtained  practically  by  repeated
trials,  than  the  mathematical  definition  of  a  line  with  a  me-
tallic rod ;  and  it  is  a  mere  quibble  to  pretend,  for  example,
that  we  ought  not  to  measure  the  length  of  the  rod,  be-
cause it  may  not  correspond  with  the  definition  of  the  line.
Upon  the  strange  principle  which  some  opponents  have
adopted,  they  must  be  prepared  to  maintain,  that  the  boun-
daries of  a  hill  or  hillock  are  purely  ideal,  and  depend  in
every  instance  on  the  fancy  of  the  measurer  *

An  organ  may  thus  be  likened  to  an  inverted  cone,  with
its  apex  in  the  medulla,  and  its  base  at  the  surface  of  the
brain ;  the  broader  the  base  and  longer  the  distance  between
*  Caledonian  Mercury,  11  th  June  1829*


PHRENOLOGICAL  BUST.  91

it  and  the  apex,  the  greater  will  be  the  size,  or  the  quantity
of  matter  which  it  will  contain  *.  This  simile,  however,
is  introduced  merely  as  an  illustration,  and  I  do  not  assert
that  the  organs  may  be  seen  regularly  disposed  in  the  brain
in  the  shape  of  cones.  Hence,  if  the  line  from  the  ear  to
the  forehead  be  much  larger  than  from  the  ear  backward,
and  the  breadth  nearly  the  same,  we  infer  that  the  organs
in  the  forehead  predominate*  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
forehead  be  very  narrow,  as  in  Thurtell,  and  the  hind-
head  very  broad,  we  hold  the  posterior  organs  to  predo-
minate, although  the  length  be  the  same  in  both  directions.
The  whole  organs  in  a  head  should  be  examined,  and
their  relative  proportions  noted.  Errors  may  be  committed
at  first;  but  without  practice,  there  will  be  no  expertness.
Practice,  with  at  least  an  average  endowment  of  the  organs
of  Form,  Size,  and  Locality,  are  necessary  to  qualify  a  person
to  make  observations  with  success.  Individuals  whose
heads  are  very  narrow  between  the  eyes,  and  little  de-
veloped at  the  top  of  the  nose,  where  these  organs  are  placed,

*  u  There  are  many  convolutions,"  says  Dr  Spubzhiim,  "  in  the  mid-
die  line  between  the  two  hemispheres  of  the  brain,  and  others  at  the  basis
and  between  the  anterior  and  middle  lobes,  which  do  not  appear  on  the
surface*  but  it  seems  to  me  that  a  great  part,  at  least,  of  every  organ  does
present  itself  there,  and  further,  that  all  the  parts  of  each  organ  are
equally  developed,  so  that,  though  a  portion  only  appear,  the  state  of  the
whole  may  be  inferred.  The  whole  cerebellum  does  not  reach  the  skull,
yet  its  functions  may  be  determined  from  the  part  which  does.  The
cerebral  parts,  situated  in  the  middle  line  between  the  hemispheres,  seem
proportionate  to  the  superincumbent  convolutions ;  at  least  I  have  al-
ways observed  a  proportion  in  the  vertical  direction  between  them."—
Phrtmkgy,  p.  116.

The  cerebral  parts,  situated  around  u  and  behind  the  orbit,  also  re*
quire  some  care  and  experience  on  the  part  of  the  phrenologist,  to  be
judged  of  accurately.  Their  development  is  discoverable  from  the  posi-
tion of  the  eye-ball,  and  from  the  figure  of  the  superciliary  ridge.  Ac-
cording as  the  eye-ball  is  prominent  or  hidden  in  the  orbit,  depressed  or
pushed  sideward,  inward,  or  outward,  we  may  judge  of  the  development
of  the  organs  situated  around  and  behind  it"— /6tt  Particular  directions
lor  observing  the  parte  there  situated  will  be  given,  when  treating  of  the
relative  organs.


92  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

experience  great  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the  situations
and  minute  shades  in  the  proportions  of  different  organs.
(See  Note  as  to  Dr  Gall,  No.  L  of  Appendix).  If  one
organ  he  much  developed,  and  the  neighbouring  organs
very  little,  the  developed  organ  will  present  an  elevation  or
protuberance;  but  if  the  neighbouring  organs  be  developed
in  proportion,  no  protuberance  can  be  perceived,  and  the
surface  is  smooth.  The  student  should  learn  from  books,
plates,  and  casts,  or  personal  instruction  (and  the  last  is  by
far  the  best),  to  distinguish  iheform  of  each  organ,  and  its
appearance,  when  developed  in  different  proportions  to  the
others,  because  there  are  slight  modifications  in  the  position
of  them  in  each  head.

The  phrenological  bust  shews  the  situations  of  the  organs,
and  their  proportions,  only  in  one  head ;  and  it  is  impossible
by  it  to  communicate  more  information  *.     The  different

•  Attempts  have  been  made  by  opponents  to  represent  certain  changes,
in  the  numbering  and  narking  of  the  organs  in  busts  recently  published,
as (C  a  Revolution  in  Phrenology."  A  brief  explanation  will  place  this
matter  in  its  true  light.  The  phrenological  bust  sold  in  the  shops  is
an  artificial  head,  the  utility  of  which  depends  on  the  degree  in  which  the
delineation  of  the  organs  on  it  approaches  to  the  appearances  mott  generally
presented  by  the  organs  in  nature.  The  first  bust  sold  in  this  country
exhibited  the  organs  as  they  would  be  found  in  a  particular  head,  not
Tery  common  in  this  country,  the  bust  having  been  imported  from  the
Continent,  and  national  heads  being  modified  as  much  as  national  features.
On  1st  October  1824,  a  new  bust  was  published  in  Edinburgh,  in  which
the  delineation  approached  nearer  to  the  appearances  and  relative  propor-
tions presented  by  the  organs  in  this  country.  Subsequent  observations
shewed  that  this  bust  might  be  brought  still  more  closely  to  resemble  the
most  common  proportions  of  the  organs  in  Britain ;  and,  on  1st  April
1899,  certain  modifications  were  made  on  it  accordingly.  The  nature  of
this  operation  may  be  explained  by  a  simple  illustration.  Suppose  that,
in  1619,  an  artist  had  modelled  a  bust,  resembling,  as  closely  as  his  skill
could  reach,  the  face,  most  commonly  met  with  in  Scotland,  and  that,  to
save  the  trouble  of  referring  to  the  different  features  by  name,  he  had  at-
tached numbers  to  them,  beginning  at  the  chin,  and  calling  it  No.  1.,
and  so  on  up  to  the  brow,  which  we  may  suppose  to  be  No.  S3L  In  this  bust
he  would  necessarily  give  certain  proportions  to  the  eyes,  nose,  cheek,
mouth>  and  chin.  But  suppose  he  were  to  continue  his  observations  for  five
years,  it  it  quite  conceivable  he  might  come  to  be  of  opinion  that,  d*


FORMS  OF  ORGANS.  93

appearances  in  all  the  varieties  of  relative  size,  must  be  dis-
covered by  inspecting  a  number  of  heads;  and  especially  by
contrasting  instances  of  extreme  development  with  others
of  extreme  deficiency.  No  adequate'  idea  of  the  foundation
of  the  science  can  be  formed  until  this  is  done.  In  cases  of
extreme  size  of  single  organs,  the  form  delineated  m  the
bust  is  distinctly  perceived*

The  question  will  perhaps  occur,  If  the  relative  pro-
portions of  the  organs  differ  in  each  individual,  and  if  the
phrenological  bust  represents  only  their  most  common  pro-
portion^  how  are  their  boundaries  to  be  distinguished  in
any  particular  living  head  ?  The  answer  is,  By  their  forms
and  appearances.  Each  organ  has  a  form,  appearance,  and
situation,  which  it  is  possible,  by  practice,  to  distinguish,
in  the  living  head,  otherwise  Phrenology  cannot  have  any
foundation.

making  the  nose  a  little  shorter,  the  mouth  a  little  longer,  the  cheeks  a
little  broader,  and  the  chin  a  little  sharper,  he  could  bring  the  artificial
lace  nearer  to  the  matt  general  form  of  the  Scottish  countenance ;  and  that
he  might  arrange  the  numbert  of  the  features  with  greater  philosophical  accu-
racy;  and  suppose  he  were  to  publish  a  new  edition  of  his  bust  with  these
modifications  of  the  features,  and  with  the  numeration  changed  so  that
the  mouth  should  be  No.  1.,  and  the  chin  No.  &,  and  the  brow  No.  3&,
what  should  we  think  of  a  critic  who  should  announce  these  alterations  as
44  a  revolution"  in  human  physiognomy,  and  assert  that,  because  the  num.
ben  were  changed,  the  nose  had  obliterated  the  eyes,  and  the  chin  had
extinguished  the  mouth  ?  This  is  what  the  opponents  have  done  in  re-
gard to  the  new  phrenological  bust.  In  the  modifications  which  have  been
made  on  it,  the  essential  forms  and  relative  situations  of  all  the  organs
have  been  preserved,  and  there  is  no  instance  of  the  organ  of  Benevolence
being  turned  into  that  of  Veneration,  or  Veneration  into  Hope,  any  more
than,  in  the  supposed  new  modelled  face,  the  nose  would  be  converted  into
the  eyes,  or  the  eyes  into  the  mouth.

In  regard  to  the  numeration,  again,  the  changes  are  exactly  analogous
to  those  which  are  before  supposed  to  take  place  in  regard  to  the  features :
The  organ  of  Ideality  formerly  was  numbered  16,  and  now  it  is  numbered
19,  but  the  organ  and  function  are  nothing  different  on  this  account  Br
Spurzhkim  adopted  a  new  order  of  numbering,  from  enlarged  observa-
tion of  the  anatomical  relation  of  the  organs,  and  his  improvements  have
been  adopted  in  Edinburgh  and  Dublin.

S


94  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

When  one  organ  is  very  largely  developed,  it  encroaches
on  the  space  usually  occupied  by  the  neighbouring  organs,
the  relative  situations  of  which  are  thereby  slightly  altered.
When  this  occurs,  it  may  be  distinguished  by  the  greatest
prominence  being  near  the  centre  of  the  large  organ,  and
the  swelling  extending  over  a  portion  only  of  the  other.
In  these  cases  the  shape  should  be  attended  to ;  for  the  form
of  the  organ  is  then  easily  recognised,  and  is  a  sure  indica-
tion of  the  particular  one  which  is  largely  developed.  The
observer  should  learn,  by  inspecting  a  skull,  to  distinguish
the  mastoid  process  behind  the  ear,  as  also  bony  excrescen-
ces sometimes  formed  by  the  sutures,  several  bony  promi-
nences which  occur  in  every  head,  from  elevations  produced
by  development  of  brain.

In  observing  the  appearance  of  individual  organs,  it  is
proper  to  begin  with  the  largest,  and  select  extreme  cases.
The  mask  of  Mr  Joseph  Hume  may  be  contrasted  with
that  of  Dr  Chalmers  for  Ideality ;  the  organ  being  much
larger  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.  The  casts  of  the
skulls  of  Raphael  and  Haggart  may  be  compared  at  the
same  part ;  the  difference  being  equally  conspicuous.  The
cast  of  the  Reverend  Mr  M.  maybe  contrasted  with  that  of
Dempsey,  in  the  Love  of  Approbation ;  the  former  having
this  organ  large,  and  the  latter  small.  Self-Esteem  in  the
latter  being  exceedingly  large,  may  be  compared  with  the
same  organ  in  the  skull  of  Dr  Hette,  in  whom  Love  of
Approbation  is  much  larger  than  Self-Esteem.  The  organ
of  Constructiveness  in  Raphael  may  be  compared  with  the
same  organ  in  the  New  Holland  skulls.  Destructiveness
in  Bellingham  may  be  compared  with  the  same  organ  in
the  skulls  of  the  Hindoos ;  the  latter  people  being  in  gene-
ral tender  of  life.  Firmness  large,  and  Conscientiousness
deficient,  in  King  Robert  Bruce,  may  be  compared  with
the  same  organs  reversed  in  the  cast  of  the  head  of  a  lady
(Mrs  H.),  which  is  sold  as  illustrative  of  these  organs.
The  object  of  making  these  contrasts  is  to  obtain  an  idea  of


TERMS  DENOTING  SIZE.  95

the  different  appearances  presented  by  organs,  when  very
large  and  very  small

The  terms  used  to  denote  the  gradations  of  size  in  the
different  organs,  in  an  increasing  ratio,  are


Very  small

Moderate

Rather  large

Small

Rather  full

Large

Rather  small

Full

Very  large.

Captain  Ross  has  suggested,  that  numerals  may  be  ap-
plied with  advantage  to  the  notation  of  development.  He
uses  decimals ;  but  these  appear  unnecessarily  minute.
The  end  in  view  may  be  attained  by  such  a  scale  as  the
following :


1.

8.  Rather  small

15.

2.  Idiocy
3.

9.

10.  Moderate

16.  Rather  large
17.

4.  Very  small
5.

11.

12.  Rather  full

18.  Large
19.

0.  Small
7.

13.

14.  Full

20.  Very  large

The  intermediate  figures  denote  intermediate  degrees  of
sice,  for  which  we  have  no  names.  The  advantage  of  adopt-
ing numerals  would  be,  that  the  values  of  the  extremes
being  known,  we  could  judge  accurately  of  the  dimensions
denoted  by  the  intermediate  numbers ;  whereas  it  is  difficult
to  apprehend  precisely  the  degrees  of  magnitude  indicated
by  die  terms  small,  full,  large,  &c.  except  we  have  seen
them  applied  by  the  individual  who  uses  them.

The  terms  small,  moderate,  full,  &c.  indicate  the  rela-
tive proportions  of  the  organs  to  each  other  in  the  same
head ;  but  as  the  different  organs  may  bear  the  same  pro-
portions in  a  smaU  and  in  a  large  head,  these  terms  do  not
enable  the  reader  to  discover,  whether  the  head  treated  of
be  in  its  general  magnitude  small,  moderate,  or  large.  To
supply  this  information,  measurements  by  callipers  are  re-
sorted to ;  but  these  are  used  not  to  indicate  the  dimensions
of  particular  organs,  for  which  purpose  they  are  not  adapt-
ed, but  merely  to  designate  the  general  size  of  the  head.


96


APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.


The  following  are  a  few  measurements  from  nature  taken
promiscuously  from  many  more  in  my  possession.


Table  of  Measurements  by  Callipers.


Males

between

25

and

60.

From  Occipital
Spine  to  Lower
Individuality.

From  Occipital
Spine  to  Ear.

From  Ear  to
Lower  Indivi-
duality.

o

U

fat,

From  Destruc    [
tiveness  to  De-   1
structireness.      1

From  Cautious-
ness to  Cautious-
ness.

5

1

11

1.

7|

4f

4|

53

5J

5J

5£

2.

n

3$

4|

5!

5«

5J

4|

3.

8f

4?

5f

6|

6|

6

5|

4.

*f

4

5

5J

6

5£

5|

5,

8

43

*f

6f

«I

6

5|

6.

8

4J

4J

5?

5f

5|

5f

7.

It

4?

4?

5S

6*

53

5|

8.

»*

*t

4f

5f

5.7

5|

5J

9.

7*

4f

n

6

5}

5$

5i

10.

8f

5

H

53

«!

5*

5J

11.
12.
13.
14.

7f

4!
4!
4i
3?

5
5
4}
4J

5?
6

51

5j}

5J
6»

5f

53
5j
5S

4S
4?
5|
5

15.

n

4*

43

«i

68

0

6

5

16.

71

4f

«

6

5«

5$

5f

17.
18.

7*

4|

5i
5

6}

53

6J
53

6|
43

19.

8

4|

5$

6J

6

6

43

20.

Total  di-

7

4|

4|

5$

5|

5|

4.

151f

86J

99*

118  J

H9|

1133

108f

•)

vided  by
20  gives

J- 7}

4|

4J8

°J5

6JS

°so

*A

average.

J

These  measurements  are  taken  above  the  muscular  inte-
guments, and  shew  the  sizes  of  the  different  heads  in  these
directions;  but  I  repeat  that  they  are  not  given  as  indica-


ABSOLUTE  SIZE  NO  CRITERION.  97

tions  of  the  dimensions  of  any  particular  organs.  The  cal-
lipers are  not  suited  for  giving  this  latter  information,  for
they  do  not  measure  length  from  the  medulla  oblongata,
nor  do  they  indicate  breadth,  both  of  which  dimensions
must  be  attended  to,  in  estimating  the  size  of  individual
organs.  The  new  Craniometer  is  preferable  for  ascertain-
ing length,  and  the  breadth  may  be  judged  of  by  means  of
the  hand  or  eye.  The  average  of  these  twenty  heads  will
be  higher  than  that  of  the  natives  of  Britain  generally,  be-
cause there  are  several  large  beads  among  them,  and  none
small.

It  ought  to  be  kept  constantly  in  view,  in  the  practical
application  of  Phrenology,  that  it  is  the  size  of  each  organ
in  proportion  to  the  others  in  the  head  of  the  individual  ob-
served, and  not  their  absolute  size,  or  their  size  in  refe-
rence to  any  standard  head,  that  determines  the  predomi-
nance in  him  of  particular  talents  or  dispositions.  Thus,  in
the  head  of  Belli  ngh  am,  Destructiveness  is  very  large,
and  the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments  aud  intellect  are
small  in  proportion;  and  according  to  the  rule,  that,  cateris
paribus,  size  determines  energy,  Bellingham's  most  power-
ful tendencies  are  inferred  to  have  been  towards  cruelty  and
rage.  In  the  skulls  of  several  Hindoos,  the  organ  of  De-
structiveness is  small  in  proportion  to  the  others,  and  we
conclude,  that  the  tendency  of  such  individuals  would  be
weakest  towards  the  foregoing  passions.  But  in  the  head
of  Gordon,  the  murderer  of  the  pedlar  boy,  the  absolute
size  of  Destruetiveness  is  less  than  in  the  head  of  Raphael  ;
yet  Raphael  was  an  amiable  man  of  genius,  and  GordoW
an  atrocious  murderer.  This  illustrates  the  rule,  that  we
ought  not  to  judge  by  absolute  size.  In  Gordon,  the  or-
gans of  the  moral  sentiments  and  intellectual  faculties
are  small  in  proportion  to  that  of  Destructiveness,  which
is  the  largest  in  the  brain ;  while  in  Raphael,  the  mo-
ral and  intellectual  organs  are  large  in  proportion  to
Destructiveness.  On  the  foregoing  principle,  the  most
powerful  manifestations  of  Raphael's  mind  ought  to  have


98  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES,

been  in  the  department  of  sentiment  and  intellect,  and
those  of  Gordon's  mind  in  Destrucfttveness  and  animal
passion ;  and  their  actual  dispositions  corresponded*  Still
the  dispositions  of  Raphael  would  be  characterised  by
the  large  size  of  this  organ.  It  would  communicate  that
warmth  and  vehemence  of  temper,  which  are  found  only
when  it  is  large,  although  the  higher  powers  might  re-
strain it  from  abuse.

It  is  one  object  to  prove  Phrenology  to  be  true,  and  an-
other to  teach  a  beginner  how  to  observe  organs.  For  the
first  purpose,  we  never  compare  an  organ  in  one  head  with
the  same  organ  in  another ;  because,  it  is  the  predominance
of  particular  organs  in  the  same  heady  that  gives  ascendency
to  particular  faculties  in  the  individuals ;  and,  therefore,  in
proving  phrenology^  we  compare  the  different  organs  of  the
same  head.  But  in  learning  to  observe,  it  is  useful  to  con-
trast the  same  organ  in  different  heads,  in  order  to  become
familiar  with  its  appearance  in  different  sixes  and  combi-
nations.

With  this  view,  it  is  proper  to  begin  with  the  larger  or-
gans ;  and  two  persons  of  opposite  dispositions,  in  the  parti-
cular points  to  be  compared,  ought  to  be  placed  in  juxtar
position,  and  their  heads  observed.  Thus,  if  we  take  the
organ  of  Cautiousness,  we  should  examine  its  development
in  those  whom  we  know  to  be  remarkable  for  timidity,  doubts
and  hesitation.  We  should  contrast  the  appearance  of  the
organ  in  such  cases  with  that  which  it  presents  in  indi-
viduals remarkable  for  precipitancy,  and  into  whose  minds
doubt  or  fear  rarely  enters :  or  a  person  who  is  unable  to
distinguish  one  note  from  another,  may  be  compared,  in  re-
gard to  the  organ  of  Tune,  with  another  who  has  a  high
natural  genius  for  music.  No_error  is  more  to  be  avoided,
than  beginning  with  the  observation  of  the  smaller  organs,
and  examining  these  without  a  contrast.

An  objection  is  frequently  stated,  that  persons  having
large  heads  have  "  little  wit,"  while  others  with  small  heads
are  "  very  clever."  The  phrenologist  never  compares
mental  ability  in  general  with  size  of  brain  in  general ;  for


BRAINS  OF  LOWER  ANIMALS.  99

the  fundamental  principle  of  the  science  is,  that  different
parts  of  the  brain,  have  different  functions,  and  that  hence
the  same  absolute  quantify  of  brain,  if  consisting  of  intel-
lectual organs,  may  be  connected  with  the  highest  genius ;
while,  if  consisting  of  the  animal  organs,  lying  imme-
diately above  and  behind  the  ears,  may  indicate  the  most
fearful  energy  of  the  lower  propensities.  The  brains  of
Charibs  seem  to  be  equal  in  absolute  size  to  those  of  ave-
rage Europeans,  but  the  chief  development  of  the  former
is  in  the  animal  organs,  and  of  the  latter  in  the  organs  of
sentiment  and  intellect;  and  no  phrenologist  would  ex-
pect the  one  to  be  equal  in  intelligence  and  morality  to  the
other,  merely  because  their  brains  are  equal  in  absolute
magnitude*  The  proper  test  is  to  take  two  heads,  in  sound
health,  and  of  similar  temperament  and  ages,  in  each  of
which  the  several  organs  are  similar  in  their  proportions,  but
the  one  of  which  is  large,  and  the  other  small ;  and  then,  if
the  preponderance  of  power  of  manifestation  is  not  in  favour
of  the  first,  Phrenology  must  be  abandoned  as  destitute  of
foundation.

In  comparing  the  brains  of  the  lower  animals  with  the
human  brain,  the  phrenologist  looks  solely  for  the  reflected
light  of  analogy,  to  guide  him  in  his  researches,  and  never
founds  a  direct  argument  in  favour  of  the  functions  of  the
different  parts  of  the  human  brain  from  any  facts  observed
in  regard  to  the  lower  animals ;  and  the  reason  is,  that  such
different  genera  of  animals  are  too  dissimilar  in  constitu-
tion and  external  circumstances,  to  authorise  him  to  draw
positive  results  from  comparing  them.  Many  philosophers,
being  convinced  that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  mind,  and
having  observed  that  the  brain  of  a  man  is  larger  than  that
of  the  majority  of  tame  animals,  as  the  horse,  dog,  ox,  have
attributed  the  mental  superiority  of  man  to  the  superiority
in  absolute  size  of  his  brain;  but  the  phrenologist  does
not  acknowledge  this  conclusion  as  in  accordance  with  the
principles  of  his  science.  The  brain  in  one  of  the  lower
creatures  may  be  very  large,  and,  nevertheless,  if  it  be

o  2


100  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

composed  of  parts  appropriated  to  the  exercise  of  mus-
cular energy,  or  the  manifestation  of  animal  propensities,
its  possessor  may  be  far  inferior  in  understanding  or  saga-
city to  another  animal,  having  a  smaller  brain,  but  com-
posed chiefly  of  parts  destined  to  manifest  intellectual
power  *.  Whales  and  elephants  have  a  brain  larger  than
that  of  man,  and  yet  their  sagacity  is  not  equal  to  his;  but
nobody  pretends  that  the  parts  destined  to  manifest  intel-
lect are  larger,  in  proportion  to  the  convolutions  intended
to  manifest  propensity,  in  these  animals  than  in  man ;  and
hence  the  superior  intelligence  of  the  human  species  is  no
departure  from  the  general  analogy  of  nature.

In  like  manner,  the  brains  of  the  monkey  and  dog  are
smaller  than  those  of  the  ox,  ass,  and  hog,  and  yet  the
former  approach  nearer  to  man  in  regard  to  their  intel-
lectual faculties.  To  apply  the  principles  of  Phrenology
to  them,  it  would  be  necessary  to  discover  what  parts  ma-
nifest intellect,  and  what  propensity,  in  each  species;  and
then  to  compare  the  power  of  manifesting  each  faculty
with  the  size  of  its  appropriate  organ.  If  size  were  found
not  to  be  a  measure  of  power,  then,  in  that  species,  the
rule  under  discussion  would  fail ;  but  even  this  would  not
authorise  us  to  conclude  that  it  did  not  hold  good  in  re-
gard to  man ;  for  human  Phrenology  is  founded,  not  on
analogy,  but  on  positive  observations.  Some  persons  are
pleased  to  affirm,  that  the  brains  of  the  lower  animals  con-
sist of  the  same  parts  as  the  human  brain,  only  on  a  smal-
ler scale ;  but  this  is  highly  erroneous.  If  the  student  will
procure  brains  of  the  sheep,  dog,  fox,  calf,  horse,  or  hog,
and  compare  them  with  the  human  brain,  or  the  casts  of
it  sold  in  the  shops,  he  will  find  a  variety  of  parts,  espe-
cially in  the  convolutions  which  form  the  organs  of  the
moral  sentiments  and  the  reflecting  faculties,  wanting  in
the  animals.

In  commencing  the  study  of  Phrenology,  it  is  of  great
importance  to  have  a  definite  object  in  view.     If  the  stu-

•  Spubzheim's  Physiognomical  System,  chap.  4.


TEMPERAMENTS.  101

dent  desire  to  find  the  truth,  he  will  consider  first  the  ge-
neral principles,  developed  in  the  introduction,  and  the
presumptions  for  and  against  them,  arising  from  admitted
facts  in  mental  Philosophy  and  Physiology.  He  will  next
proceed  to  make  observations  in  nature,  qualifying  himself
by  previous  instruction  in  the  forms,  situations,  appearances,
and  functions  of  the  organs.

The  circumstances  which  modify  the  effects  of  size,  are
constitution,  health,  and  exercise ;  and  the  student  ought
never  to  omit  the  consideration  of  these,  for  they  are  high-
ly important     The  first  and  second  have  already  been  con-
sidered on  pages  32,  33,  and  34,  to  which  I  beg  leave  to
refer.     In  addition  to  what  is  there  stated,  I  observe  that
the  temperaments  rarely  occur  simple  in  any  individual,
two  or  more  being  generally  combined.     The  bilious  and
nervous  is  a  common  combination,  which  gives  strength
and  activity;  the  lymphatic  and  nervous  is  also  common,
and  produces^sensitive  delicacy  of  mental  constitution,  con-
joined with  indolence.     The  nervous  and  sanguine  com-
bined give  extreme  vivacity,   but  without  corresponding
vigour.     Dr  Thomas  of  Paris  has  published  a  theory  of
the  temperaments  to  the  following  effect.     When  the  di-
gestive organs  filling  the  abdominal  cavity  are  large,  and
the  lungs  and  brain  small,   the  individual  is  lymphatic ;
he  is  fond  of  feeding,  and  averse  to  mental  and  muscular
exertion.     When  the  heart  and  lungs  are  large,  and  the
brain  and  abdomen  small,  the  individual  is  sanguine ;  blood
abounds  and  is  propelled  with  vigour :  he  is  therefore  fond
of  muscular  exercise,  but  averse  to  thought.     When  the
brain  is  large,  and  the  abdominal  and  thoracic  viscera  small,
great  mental  energy  is  the  consequence.     These  propor-
tions may  be  combined  in  great  varieties,  and  modified  re-
sults will  ensue.

In  some  individuals  the  brain  seems  to  be  of  a  finer  tex-
ture than  in  others ;  and  there  is  then  a  delicacy  and  fine-
ness of  manifestation,  which  is  one  ingredient  in  genius.
A  harmonious  combination  of  organs  gives  justness  and


102  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

soundness  of  perception,  but  there  is  a  quality  of  fineness
distinguishable  from  this*  Byron  possessed  this  quality
in  a  high  degree.

If,  in  eaeh  of  two  individuals,  the  organs  of  propensity,
sentiment,  and  intellect,  are  equally  balanced,  the  general
conduct  of  one  may  be  vicious,  and  that  of  another  moral
and  religious.  But  the  question  here  is  not  one  of  power  y
for  as  much  energy  may  be  displayed  in  vice  as  in  virtue,
but  it  is  one  of  directum  merely.  Now,  in  cases  where  an
equal  development  of  off  the  organs  exists,  direction  de-
pends on  external  influences,  and  no  phrenologist  pre-
tends to  tell  to  what  objects  the  faculties  have  been  direct-
ed, by  merely  observing  the  size  of  the  organs.

Suppose  that  two  individuals  possess  an  organization  ex-
actly similar,  but  that  one  is  highly  educated,  and  the
other  left  entirely  to  the  impulses  of  nature ;  the  former
will  manifest  his  faculties  with  higher  power  than  the  lat-
ter ;  and  hence  it  is  argued,  that  size  is  not  in  all  cases  a
measure  of  energy.

Here,  however,  the  requisite  of  cateris  paribus  does  not
hold.  An  important  condition  is  altered,  and  the  phreno-
logist uniformly  allows  for  the  effects  of  education,  before
drawing  positive  conclusions  #.  It  may  be  supposed,  that,
if  exercise  thus  increases  power,  it  is  impossible  to  draw
the  line  of  distinction  between  energy  derived  from  this
cause,  and  that  which  proceeds  from  size  in  the  organs,
and  hence  that  the  real  effects  of  size  can  never  be  deter-
mined. The  answer  to  this  objection  is,  that  education
may  cause  the  faculties  to  manifest  themselves  with  the
highest  degree  of  energy  which  the  size  of  the  organs  will
permit,  but  that  size  fixes  a  limit  which  education  cannot
surpass.  Dennis,  we  may  presume,  received  some  im-
provement from  education,  but  it  did  not  render  him  equal
to  Pope,  much  less  to  Shakspeare  or  Milton  :  there-
fore, if  we  take  two  individuals  whose  brains  are  equally
healthy,  but  whose  organs  differ  in  size,  and  educate  them

"  Phrenological  Transactions,  p.  308.


POWER  AND  ACTIVITY.  103

alike,  the  advantages  in  power  and  attainment  will  be
greatest  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  size,  in  favour  of  the
largest  brain.  Thus  the  objection  ends  in  this,— that  if  we
compare  brains  in  opposite  condition*,  we  may  be  led  into
error — which  is  granted;  but  this  is  not  in  opposition  to
the  doctrine  that,  cateris  paribus,  size  determines  power.
Finally-^extreme  deficiency  in  size  produces  incapacity  for
education,  as  in  idiots;  while  extreme  development,  if
healthy,  as  in  Shaksfeare,  Burns,  Mozart,  antici-
pates its  effects,  in  so  far  that  the  individuals  educate
themselves.

In  saying,  then,  that,  cmteris  paribus,  size  is  a  measure
of  power,  phrenologists  demand  no  concessions  which  are
not  made  to  physiologists  in  general ;  among  whom,  in  this
instance,  they  rank  themselves.

Here^J^jDUESftt^  distinction  between  fewer  and  activity
of  mind ;  and,  as  size  in  the  organs  is  an  indication  of  the
former  only,  it  is  proper  to  keep  this  difference  in  view.
In  physics,  pow^Jmjj^e  distinguishable  from  activity.
The  balance-wheel  of  a  watch  moves  with  much  rapidity ;
but  so  slight  is  its  impetus,  that  a  hair  would  suffice  to
stop  it ;  the  beam  of  a  steam-engine  traverses  slowly  and
ponderously  through  space,  but  its  power  is  prodigiously
great

In  muscular  action,  these  qualities  are  recognized  with
equal  facility  as  different  The  greyhound  bounds  over
hill  and  dale  with  animated  agility ;  but  a  slight  obstacle
would  counterbalance  his  momentum,  and  arrest  his  pro-
gress. The  elephant,  on  the  other  hand,  rolls  slowly  and
heavily  along ;  but  the  impetus  of  his  motion  would  sweep
away  an  impediment  sufficient  to  resist  fifty  greyhounds  at
the  summit  of  their  speed.

In  mental  manifestations  (considered  apart  from  organi-
zation) the  distinction  between  power  and  activity  is  equal-
ly palpable.  On  the  stage,  Mrs  Siddons  senior  and  Mr
John  Kemble  were  remarkable  for  the  solemn  delibera-
tion of  their  manner,  both  in  declamation  and  action,  and


104  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

yet  they  were  splendidly  gifted  in  power.  They  carried
captive  at  once  the  sympathies  and  understanding  of  the
audience,  and  made  every  man  feel  his  faculties  expanding,
and  his  whole  mind  becoming  greater  under  the  influence
of  their  energies.  This  was  a  display  of  power.  Other
performers,  again,  are  remarkable  for  vivacity  of  action  and
elocution,  who,  nevertheless,  are  felt  to  be  feeble  and  inef-
fective in  rousing  an  audience  to  emotion.  Activity  is  their
distinguishing  attribute,  with  an  absence  of  power.  At  the
bar,  in  the  pulpit,  and  in  the  senate,  the  same  distinction
prevails.  Many  members  of  the  learned  professions  dis-
play great  felicity  of  illustration,  and  fluency  of  elocution,
surprising  us  with  the  quickness  of  their  parts,  who,  ne-
vertheless, are  felt  to  be  neither  impressive  nor  profound.
They  possess  acuteness  without  power,  and  ingenuity  with-
out comprehensiveness  and  depth  of  understanding.  This
also  proceeds  from  activity  with  little  vigour.  There  are
other  public  speakers,  again,  who  open  heavily  in  debate,
their  faculties  acting  slowly,  but  deeply,  like  the  first  heave
of  a  mountain-wave.  Their  words  fall  like  minute-guns
upon  the  ear,  and  to  the  superficial  they  appear  about  to
terminate  ere  tbey  have  begun  their  efforts.  But  even
their  first  accent  is  one  of  power,  it  rouses  and  arrests  at-
tention; their  very  pauses  are  expressive,  and  indicate  ga-
thering energy  to  be  embodied  in  the  sentence  that  is  to
come.  When  fairly  animated,  they  are  impetuous  as  the
torrent,  brilliant  as  the  lightning's  beam,  and  overwhelm
and  take  possession  of  feebler  minds,  impressing  them  irre-
sistibly with  a  feeling  of  gigantic  power.

ACTIVITY  means  the  rapidity  with  which  the  facul-
ties may  be  manifested.  The  largest  organs  in  each  head
have  the  greatest,  and  the  smallest  the  least,  tendency  to
natural  activity.

The  temperaments  also  indicate  activity.  The  nervous
is  the  most  active,  next  the  sanguine,  then  the  bilious,
while  the  lymphatic  is  characterized  by  inactivity.

In  a  lymphatic  brain,  great  size  may  be  present,  and  few


POWER  AND  ACTIVITY.  105

manifestations  occur  through  inactivity ;  but  present  an  ex-
ternal stimulus,  and  the  power  will  appear.  If  the  brain
be  very  small,  any  degree  of  stimulus  may  be  presented
external  or  internal,  and  great  power  will  not  be  mani-
fested.

A  certain  combination  in  size,  namely,  Combativeness,
Deetructiveness,  Hope,  Firmness,  Acquisitiveness,  and
Love  of  Approbation,  all  large,  is  favourable  to  ge-
neral activity;  and  another  combination,  namely  Comba-
tiveness, Deetructiveness,  Firmness,  and  Acquisitiveness,
small  or  moderate,  with  Hope,  Veneration,  and  Benevo-
lence, all  large,  is  frequently  attended  with  inactivity  in
the  mental  character ;  but  the  activity  of  the  whole  brain
is  constitutionally  greater  in  some  individuals  than  in
others,  as  already  explained.  It  may  even  happen,  that,
in  the  same  individual,  one  organ  is  naturally  more  active
than  another,  without  reference  to  size;  just  as  the  optic
nerve  is  sometimes  more  irritable  than  the  auditory ;  but
this  is  by  no  means  a  common  occurrence.  Exercise
greatly  increases  activity ;  and  hence  arise  the  benefits  of
education.  Dr  Spurzheim  thinks  that  "  long  fibres  pro-
duce more  activity,  and  thick  fibres  more intensity."

xhe  doctrine  that  size  is  a  measure  of  power,  is  not  to
be  held  as  implying,  that  power  is  the  only,  or  even  the
most  valuable  quality,  which  a  mind  in  all  circumstances
can  possess.  To  drag  artillery  over  a  mountain,  or  a  pon-
derous car  through  the  streets  of  London,  we  would  prefer
an  elephant,  or  a  horse  of  great  size  and  muscular  power ;
while,  for  graceful  motion,  agility  and  nimbleness,  we
would  select  an  Arabian  palfrey.  In  like  manner,  to  lead
men  in  gigantic  and  difficult  enterprises, — to  command  by
native  greatness,  in  perilous  times,  when  law  is  trampled
under  foot, — to  call  forth  the  energies  of  a  people,  and  di-
rect them  against  a  tyrant  at  home,  or  an  alliance  of  ty-
rants abroad, — to  stamp  the  impress  of  a  single  mind  upon
an  age, — to  infuse  strength  into  thoughts,  and  depth  into
feelings,  which  shall  command  the  homage  of  enlightened
men  in  every  period  of  time, — in  short,  to  be  a  Bruce,


106  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.

Buonaparte,  Luther,  Knox,  Demosthenes,  Shak-
speare  or  Milton,  a  large  brain  is  indispensably  requi-
site ;  but  to  display  skill,  enterprise,  and  fidelity,  in  the
various  professions  of  civil  life, — to  cultivate,  with  success,
the  less  arduous  branches  of  philosophy, — to  excel  in  acute-
ness,  taste,  and  felicity  of  expression,— to  acquire  extensive
erudition  and  refined  manners,  a  brain  of  a  moderate  size  is
perhaps  more  suitable  than  one  that  is  very  large ;  for  where-
ever  the  energy  is  intense,  it  is  rare  that  delicacy,  refine-
ment, and  taste,  are  present  in  an  equal  degree.  Indivi-
duals possessing  moderate-sized  brains  easily  find  their
proper  sphere,  and  enjoy  in  it  scope  for  all  their  energy.
In  ordinary  circumstances,  they  distinguish  themselves;
but  sink  when  difficulties  accumulate  around  them.  Per-
sons with  large  brains,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  readily
attain  their  appropriate  place ;  common  occurrences  do  not
rouse  or  call  them  forth ;  and,  while  unknown,  they  are  not
trusted  with  great  undertakings.  Often,  therefore,  such
men  pine  and  die  in  obscurity.  When,  however,  they  at-
tain their  proper  element,  they  feel  conscious  greatness,  and
they  glory  in  the  expansion  of  their  powers.  Their  mental
energies  rise  in  proportion  to  the  obstacles  to  be  sur-
mounted, and  blaze  forth  in  all  the  magnificence  of  ge-
nius on  occasions  when  feebler  minds  would  expire  in  de-
spair.

The  term  Faculty  is  used  to  denote  a  particular  power
of  feeling  or  thinking,  connected  with  a  particular  part  of
the  brain.  Phrenologists  consider  Man  by  himself,  and
also  compare  him  with  other  animals.  When  the  lower
animals  manifest  the  same  propensities  and  feelings  as
those  displayed  by  man,  the  faculties  which  produce  them
are  held  to  be  common  to  both.  A  faculty  is  admitted  as
primitive,

1.  Which  exists  in  one  kind  of  animals,  and  not  in  an-
other ;

2.  Which  varies  in  the  two  sexes  of  the  same  species ;


WHAT  IS  A  FACULTY  ?  107

3.  Which  is  not  proportionate  to  the  other  faculties  of
the  same  individual ;

4.  Which  does  not  manifest  itself  simultaneously  with
the  other  faculties ;  that  is,  which  appears  and  disappears
earlier  or  later  in  life  than  other  faculties ;

5.  Which  may  act  or  rest  singly ;

6.  Which  is  propagated  in  a  distinct  manner  from  pa-
rrots to  children;  and,

7.  Which  may  singly  preserve  its  proper  state  of  health
or  disease  #.

As  phrenological  observation  establishes  the  existence  of  a
plurality  of  mental  faculties,  each  connected  with  a  par-
ticular part  of  the  brain,  the  question  occurs,  Is  the  mind
simple,  or  an  aggregate  of  separate  powers  f  ?  It  is  ex-
tremely difficult  to  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  this  in-
quiry. Looking  at  the  facts  presented  to  us  by  observa-
tion, the  most  obvious  inference  seems  to  be,  that  the  mind
consists  of  an  aggregate  of  powers,  and  that  one  of  them
supplies  the  feeling  of  personal  Identity,  or  the  /  of  Con-
sciousness, to  which,  as  their  substance,  all  the  other  feel-
ings and  capacities  bear  reference.  This  view  is  strongly
supported  by  some  of  the  phenomena  of  insanity;  for  pa-
tients are  sometimes  insane  in  the  feeling  of  personal  iden-
tity, and  in  no  other  faculty  of  the  mind.  Such  indivi-
duals lose  all  consciousness  of  their  past  and  proper  per-
sonality, and  imagine  themselves  different  persons  alto-
gether ;  while,  with  the  exception  of  this  erroneous  impres-
sion, they  feel  and  think  correctly.  Under  the  head  of
Memory,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  work,  an  abstract
will  be  found  of  a  case  of  divided  personality,  occurring
through  disease,  reported  by  Dr  Dvce  of  Aberdeen  to  Dr
Henry  Dewar,  and  by  him  published  in  the  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.  A  similar  case  is
stated  in  "  The  Medical  Repository,"  communicated  by  Dr
Mitchell  to  the  Reverend  Dr  Nott,  dated  January  1816.
"  When  I  was  employed,"  says  he,  early  in  December

•  Phrenology  by  DrSpuftZHSiM,  p.  126.
f  See  Phren.  Jour.  vol.  i.  p.  206.


108  APPLICATION  OF  PRINCIPLES.  >

1815,  with  several  other  gentlemen,  in  doing  the  duty  of  a
visitor  to  the  United  States  Military  Academy  at  West
Point,  a  very  extraordinary  case  of  Double  Consciousness
in  a  woman,  was  related  to  me  by  one  of  the  professors.
Major  Ellicott,  who  so  worthily  occupies  the  mathematical
chair  in  that  seminary,  vouched  for  the  correctness  of  the
following  narrative,  the  subject  of  which  is  related  to  bim
by  blood,  and  an  inhabitant  of  one  of  the  western  counties
of  Pennsylvania: — Miss  R  possessed,  naturally,  a

very  good  constitution,  and  arrived  at  adult  age  without
having  it  impaired  by  disease.  She  possessed  an  excellent
capacity,  and  enjoyed  fair  opportunities  to  acquire  know-
ledge. Besides  the  domestic  arts  and  social  attainments,
she  had  improved  her  mind  by  reading  and  conversation,
and  was  well  versed  in  penmanship.  Her  memory  was
capacious,  and  stored  with  a  copious  stock  of  ideas.  Un-
expectedly, and  without  any  forewarning,  she  fell  into  a
profound  sleep,  which  continued  several  hours  beyond  the
ordinary  term.  On  waking,  she  was  discovered  to  have
lost  every  trait  of  acquired  knowledge.  Her  memory  was
tabula  ra&ty — all  vestiges,  both  of  words  and  things,  were
obliterated  and  gone.  It  was  found  necessary  for  her  to
learn  every  thing  again.  She  even  acquired,  by  new
efforts,  the  art  of  spelling,  reading,  writing,  and  calculat-
ing, and  gradually  became  acquainted  with  the  persons  and
objects  around,  like  a  being  for  the  first  time  brought  into
the  world.  In  these  exercises  she  made  considerable  profi-
ciency. But,  after  a  few  months,  another  fit  of  somno-
lency invaded  her.  On  rousing  from  it,  she  found  herself
restored  to  the  state  she  was  in  before  the  first  paroxysm ;
but  was  wholly  ignorant  of  every  event  and  occurrence  that
had  befallen  her  afterwards.  The  former  condition  of  her
existence,  she  now  calls  the  Old  State,  and  the  latter  the
New  State ;  and  she  is  as  unconscious  of  her  double  character
as  two  distinct  persons  are  of  their  respective  natures.  For
example,  in  her  old  state,  she  possesses  all  her  original
knowledge ;  in  her  new  state  only  what  she  acquired  since.


WHAT  IS  A  FACULTY  ?  109

If  a  gentleman  or  lady  be  introduced  to  her  in  the  old  state,
and  vice  versa,  (and  so  of  all  other  matters),  to  know  them
satisfactorily  she  must  learn  them  in  both  states.  In  the
old  state,  she  possesses  fine  powers  of  penmanship,  while
in  the  new,  she  writes  a  poor  awkward  hand,  having  not
had  time  or  means  to  become  expert  During  four  years
and  upwards,  she  has  undergone  periodical  transitions
from  one  of  these  states  to  the  other.  The  alterations  are
always  consequent  upon  a  long  and  sound  sleep.  Both  the
lady  and  her  family  are  now  capable  of  conducting  the
affair  without  embarrassment.  By  simply  knowing  whe-
ther she  is  in  the  old  or  new  state,  they  regulate  the  inter-
course, and  govern  themselves  accordingly.  A  history  of
her  curious  case  is  drawing  up  by  the  Reverend  Timothy
Aldin  of  Meadville."  Such  cases  as  the  foregoing,  have
led  some  persons  to  the  inference,  that  the  feeling  of  per-
sonal Identity  is  a  primitive  mental  affection,  connected
with  a  particular  organ,  and  hence  liable  separately  to  dis-
ease; and  because  we  have  ascertained  that  each  of  the
other  primitive  feelings  and  intellectual  powers  is  also  ma-
nifested by  a  separate  organ,  the  mind  has  appeared  to  them
toconsistofanaggregateof  powers  acting  together.  This  view
corresponds  with  the  apprehension  of  mankind  in  general,
for  popular  language  is  framed  on  the  principle  of  the  /  of
Consciousness  being  distinct  from  the  other  mental  affec-
tions. We  speak  of  evil  thoughts  intruding  themselves  into
our  mind ;  and  of  our  having  strong  desires  which  we  for-
bear to  indulge.  In  such  expressions,  the  our  and  we  seem
to  mean  the  principle  of  personal  identity;  and  the  evil
thoughts  and  desires  appear  to  be  regarded  as  affections  of
that  principle,  originating  in  sources  distinct  from  it,  and
different  from  one  another.

The  more  general  opinion  of  philosophers  is,  that  the
mind  is  a  simple  and  indivisible  substance,  and  that  the  se-
veral faculties  are  merely  different  states  of  it.  This  view
is  espoused  by  my  excellent  friend  the  Reverend  David
Welsh,  who  successfully  shews,  that  it  is  consistent  with


Ill  APPLICATION   OF   PRINCIPLES.

the  phrenological  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  organs.  "  The
leading  doctrine,"  says  he, "  of  Phrenology  is,  that  different
portions  or  organs  of  the  brain  are  connected  with  the  pri-
mitive feelings  of  the  mind.  The  truth  of  this  position  can
obviously  be  ascertained  only  by  observation.  But  taking
it  for  granted  that  it  is  true,  it  may  be  asked,  how  it  can
be  reconciled  with  the  great  principle  to  which  so  frequent
reference  has  been  made,  that  the  powers,  thoughts,  and
feelings  of  the  mind  are  not  different  from  the  mind,  but
merely  the  mind  itself  existing  in  different  states  ?

"  It  requires  but  little  reflection  to  be  satisfied  that  the  in-
troduction of  cerebral  organs  does  not  in  any  degree  affect
Dr  Brown's  leading  principle.  The  cerebral  organs  are
not  the  mind — nor  is  any  state  of  these  organs  the  mind.
The  mind  we  believe  to  be  a  simple  and  indivisible  sub-
stance. And  the  only  difference  that  the  doctrines  of
Phrenology  introduce  in  regard  to  Dr  Brown's  principle
is,  that,  instead  of  the  feelings  and  thoughts  being  merely
the  relations  of  the  simple  substance  mind,  to  its  own
former  states  or  to  external  objects,  they  are  the  relations
of  the  simple  substance  mind  to  certain  portions  of  the
encephalon.

"  In  looking  upon  any  object — as  snow — we  have  the  no-
tion of  a  certain  colour.  Now,  the  notion  is  not  in  the
snow  but  in  the  mind.  That  is,  the  notion  of  colour  is  the
mind  existing  in  a  certain  relation  to  an  external  object.
But  it  is  allowed  on  all  hands,  that  there  is  an  intervening
step  between  the  snow  and  the  mind.  There  is  an  affec-
tion of  the  optic  nerve.  The  notion  of  colour,  then,  is  the
mind  existing  in  a  certain  relation  to  the  optic  nerve.  It
will  be  conceded,  that  this  does  not  alter  the  question  as  to
the  simplicity  of  the  mind.  And  if  this  is  conceded,  it  is
abundantly  obvious,  that  another  step  in  the  process  might
be  conoeived,  without  taking  away  from  the  simplicity  of
the  immaterial  part,  and  that,  instead  of  an  affection  6f  the
optic  nerve  being  the  immediate  antecedent  of  the  notion
of  colour,  it  might  be  a  particular  portion  of  the  encepha-


WHAT  IS  A  FACULTY  ?  Ill

Ion.  As  the  notion  of  colour,  upon  this  supposition,  is  a  re-
lation of  the  mind  to  the  organ  of  colour,  it  follows,  that,  if
that  organ  were  changed  in  any  respect,  the  state  of  the
mind  would  also  be  changed.  Thus,  if  it  were  laiger,  or
of  a  finer  structure,  or  more  active,  the  perception  of  co-
lour would  be  more  delicate,  or  quick,  or  pleasing.  The
same  remarks  might  be  extended  to  all  the  organs*  Where
the  organ  of  Causality  is  large,  as  in  the  case  of  Dr  Brown
himself,  then  there  will  be  a  tendency  to  reason ;  which
tendency  is  a  state  of  the  mind  in  relation  to  a  material  or-
gan, which  state  would  have  been  different  had  the  organ
been  different

"  A  multitude  of  organs  may  all  be  affecting  the  mind
at  the  same  instant,  and  in  that  case  a  variety  of  feelings
will  be  experienced.  But  still  the  mind  is  simple,  and
it  is  only  its  relations  to  these  different  organs  that  are
complex.

"  When  we  say,  then,  that  when  we  have  any  power,  as,
for  example,  of  reasoning,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the
power  is  different  from  the  mind.  There  is  a  material  or-
gan which  is  separate  from  the  mind,  but  the  perception  of
relation  is  a  state  wholly  mental.  One  state  of  the  organ
may  give  the  perception  of  relation,  another  the  desire  to
perceive  or  discover  it ;  but  the  perception  and  desire  are
both  attributes,  not  of  matter  but  of  mind. — The  effect  of
die  organ  being  large  or  small,  active  or  inactive,  in  diffe-
rent individuals,  or  upon  the  same  individual  at  different
times,  is  the  subject  to  which  I  alluded  in  the  chapter  on
Cause  and  Effect,  as  that  which  Dr  Brown  bad  not  con-
sidered."

It  is  not  necessary  in  studying  Phrenology  to  decide
which  of  these  views  is  the  correct  interpretation  of  nature,
because  the  effects  of  the  organs  on  the  mind  is  the  same,
whichever  of  them  be  adopted.  Holding  the  mind  to  con-
sist pf  an  aggregate  of  powers, — then  each  acts  by  means  of
a  particular  organ,  and  is  manifested  with  a  degree  of  energy
in  proportion  to  its  size.   Viewing  it  as  a  simple  substance,


112  APPLICATION  OF    PRINCIPLES.

capable  of  existing  in  a  variety  of  states,  it  enters  into  each
state  by  means  of  a  separate  organ :  when  the  organs  are
spontaneously  active,  they  induce  their  relative  states;
without  their  influence  these  cannot  take  place :  when  they
are  large,  the  states  are  excited  vigorously  ;  when  they  are
small,  they  exist  feebly.  The  reader  may  therefore  adopt
whichever  theory  appears  to  himself  preferable.  In  the  fol-
lowing pages  the  faculties  will  be  treated  of  as  distinct
mental  powers,  connected  with  separate  organs,  because
this  view  enables  me  to  bring  out  the  doctrine  more  simply
and  luminously,  than  by  considering  them  as  merely  par-
ticular states  of  the  general  power — the  Mind;  and  this
language,  moreover,  is  correct  even  on  the  latter  hypothe-
sis, because,  according  to  this  view,  when  the  organ  of
Causality,  for  example,  is  largely  possessed,  the  individual
is  capable  of  reasoning  logically  and  acutely;  of  which
mental  acts  he  is  incapable,  when  that  organ  is  greatly  de-
ficient. The  word  faculty  or  power,  therefore,  is  used  to
express  the  quality  which  is  possessed  in  the  one,  and  not  *
in  the  other  case,  and  which,  being  active,  is  legitimately
designated,  and  universally  recognised,  by  either  of  these
terms.

"  It  has  occurred  to  me,"  continues  Mr  Welsh,  "  that
another  difficulty  of  a  metaphysical  nature  may  suggest  it-
self in  regard  to  the  principles  of  Phrenology.  It  may  be
asked,  What  is  the  soul  when  deprived  of  the  cerebral  or-
gans ?  But  the  system  of  Dr  Brown  affords  us  no  more
light  upon  this  point,  than  the  system  of  Dr  Gall.  In-
deed, a  passage  which  I  have  quoted  from  his  Lectures
shews,  that  he  considered  that  those  who  engaged  in  such
inquiries  were  ignorant  of  the  limits  of  our  faculties.  It  is
only  experience  that  can  teach  us  in  what  state  the  soul
exists  when  separated  from  the  body.  And  in  this  sense
the  precept  of  the  poet  holds  equally  in  a  scientific  and  in
a  religious  point  of  view,

"  Wait  the  great  teacher  Death,  and  God  adore."


(     "3     )


DIVISION  OF  THE  FACULTIES.

Dr  Spurzheim  divides  the  faculties  into  two  orders,
Feelings  and  Intellect,  or  into  affective  and  intellectual
faculties.  The  feelings  are  subdivided  into  two  genera,
Propensities  and  Sentiments.  He  applies  the  name
propensities  to  indicate  internal  impulses,  which  invite  only
to  certain  actions;  and  Sentiments  designate  other  feelings,
not  limited  to  inclination  alone,  but  which  have  an  emo-
tion of  a  peculiar  kind  superadded.  Acquisitiveness,  for
example,  is  a  mere  impulse  to  acquire ;  Veneration  gives  a
tendency  to  worship,  accompanied  with  a  particular  emo-
tion, which  latter  quality  is  the  reason  of  its  being  deno-
minated a  Sentiment.

The  second  order  of  faculties  makes  us  acquainted  with
objects  which  exist,  their  qualities  and  relations ;  and  they
are  called  intellectual.  They  are  subdivided  by  Dr  Spurz-
heim into  four  genera.  The  first  includes  the  external
senses  and  voluntary  motion ;  the  second,  those  internal
powers  which  perceive  existence;  or  make  man  and  ani-
mals acquainted  with  external  objects,  and  their  physical
qualities ;  and  the  third,  the  powers  which  perceive  the  re-
lations of  external  objects.  These  three  genera  are  named
perceptive  faculties.  The  fourth  genus  comprises  the  facul-
ties which  act  on  all  the  other  powers,  which  compare,
judge,  and  discriminate ;  and  these  are  named  reflective
faculties.

The  names  of  the  faculties  employed  in  this  work  are,
with  few  exceptions,  those  suggested  by  Dr  Spurzheim.  To
designate  propensity,  the  termination  we  is  added  to  a  root  or
fundamental  word,  and  indicates  the  quality  of  producing ;
and  nessf  the  abstract  state,  as  Destructiveness.  The  ter-
mination ouSj  characterizes  a  sentiment,  as  Cautious,  Consci-
entious.    To  these  is  added  ness9  to  express  the  abstract

H


114  DIVISION  OF  THt:  FACULTIES.

state,  as  Cautiousness,  Conscientiousness.  The  names  of
the  intellectual  faculties  are  easily  understood,  and  do  not
require  any  particular  explanation.

Considerable  difficulty  attends  the  arrangement  of  the
faculties  and  organs.  In  the  first  and  second  editions  of
this  work,  they  were  arranged  and  numbered  according
to  the  order  adopted  in  Dr  Spurzheim's  New  Physiogno-
mical System,  published  in  1815.  The  principle  of  that
arrangement  was,  as  far  as  possible,  philosophical*  The
organs  common  to  man  and  the  lower  animals  came  first,
beginning  with  the  lowest,  and  ascending.  The  organs  of
th?  moral  sentiments  were  next  treated  of;  and,  lastly,  the
organs  of  intellect.  Since  1815,  the  grtat  divisions  of  this
classification  have  been  retained,  but  repeated  alterations
have  been  made  by  Dr  Spurzheim  in  the  arrangement  of
the  details.  It  appears  impossible  to  arrive  at  a  correct
classification  until  all  the  organs,  and  also  the  primitive
faculty  or  ultimate  function  of  each,  shall  be  definitely  as-
certained, which  is  not  at  present  the  case.  Till  this  end
shall  be  accomplished,  every  interim  arrangement  will  be
in  danger  of  being  overturned  by  subsequent  discoveries.
In  the  mean  time,  however,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity,  I
adopt  Dr  Spurzheim's  last  order  of  arrangement.  Du-
ring his  visit  to  Edinburgh  in  1828,  he  demonstrated
the  anatomy  of  the  brain,  and  traced  out  the  connexion
between  the  organs  in  a  manner  6o  clear  and  satisfactory,
that  the  basis  of  his  arrangement  appeared  founded  in  na-
ture. Dr  Gall  seems  not  to  have  adopted  any  philosophi-
cal principle  of  classification;  but  it  is  proper  that  his
names  and  order  should  be  known.  I  shall,  therefore,  add
to  the  present  work  a  table  of  his  order.

In  the  case  of  many  of  the  organs,  observations  have
been  made  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  functions  are  held
to  be  ascertained  ;  and  in  regard  to  others,  where  the  ob-
servations have  been  fewer,  the  functions  are  stated  as  pro-
bable. There  is  no  difference  of  opinion  among  phrenolo-
gists in  regard  to  the  kind  of  manifestations  which  ac-


DIVISION  OF  THE  FACULTIES.  115

company  the  organs  set  down  as  established;  their  differ-
ences touch  only  the  result  of  the  metaphysical  analysis  of
the  feelings  and  intellectual  powers,  and  the  order  of  their
arrangement.

I  shall  notice  briefly  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  each
organ,  and  state  a  few  cases  in  illustration  of  its  function  •
but  the  reader  is  respectfully  informed,  that  I  do  not  pre-
tend to  bring  forward  the  evidence  on  which  Phrenology
is  founded.  I  beg  to  refer  those  readers  who  are  fond  of
perusing  cases,  to  Dr  Gall's  quarto  work,  in  4  volumes*
entitled,  "  Physiologic  du  Cerveau ;"  to  Dr  Spurzheim's
work,  "  Phrenology ;"  to  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Phre-
nological Society;'9  and  to  the  "  Phrenological  Journal  and
Miscellany."  Those  persons  who  desire  philosophical  con-
viction, are  requested  to  resort  directly  to  Nature,  which  is
always  within  their  reach;  for  self-conviction  can  be

OBTAINED  ONLY  BY  SELF-OBSERVATION.


H  2


(     116    )
Oedee  I.— FEELINGS.

Genus  L— PROPENSITIES.

The  faculties  falling  under  this  genus  do  not  form  ideas;
their  sole  function  is  to  produce  a  propensity  of  a  specific
kind*    These  faculties  are  common  to  Man  with  Animals.

1. — AMATIVENESS.

The  cerebellum  is  the  organ  of  this  propensity,  and  it  is
situated  between  the  mastoid  process  on  each  side,  and  the
projecting  point  in  the  middle  of  the  transverse  ridge  of
the  occipital  bone.  The  size  is  indicated  during  life  by  the
thickness  of  the  neck  at  these  parts  *,  or  between  the  ears.
In  some  individuals  the  lobes  of  the  cerebellum  descend
downwards,  enlarging  the  base  of  the  occipital  bone,  rather
than  increasing  its  expansion  between  the  ears.  In  such
cases  the  projection  may  be  felt  by  the  hand,  if  pressed
firmly  on  the  neck.

There  is  nearly  half  an  inch  of  space  between  the  cere-
bellum and  the  commencement  of  the  posterior  lobe  of  the
brain,  at  the  insertion  of  what  is  called  the  Tentorium.

*  Partes  genitales,  aive  testes  hominibus  et  feeminis  utems,  propensio-
nem  ad  venerem  excitare  nequeunt  Nam  in  pueris  veneris  stimulus
seminis  secretioni  ssepd  antecedit.  Plures  eunuchi,  quanquam  testibus
privati,  hanc  inclination  em  conservant.  Sunt  etiam  fceminae  quae  sine
utero  natae,  hunc  stimulum  manifestant.  Hinc  quidam  ex  doctrinse  nostne
inimicis,  harum  rerum  minime  inscii,  seminis  prsesentiam  in  sanguine  con-
tendunt,  et  hanc  causam  sufficientem  existimant.  Attamen  argumenta
hujus  generis  vert  physiologii  long&absunt,  et  vix  citatione  digna  videntur.
Nonnulli  etiam  hujus  inclinationis  causam  in  liquore  prostatico  quserunt ;
sed  in  senibus  aliquando  fluidi  prostaiiei  secretio,  sine  ulla  veneris  inclina-
tione,  copiosisaima  eeUSptirMheim's  Phrenology,  p.  123.


AMATIVENESS.  117


SMALL  AMATIVENeaS.  LARGE  AXATIVXNE8S.

The  Tentorium  is  a  strong  membrane,  which  separates  the
cerebellum  from  the  brain ;  in  animals  which  leap,  as  the  cat
and  tiger,  the  separation  is  produced  by  a  thin  plate  of  bone.
The  cerebellum  is,  however,  connected  with  the  braia;  for
its  fibres  originate  in  the  corpora  restiformuz,  from  which  also
the  organs  of  die  other  animal  propensities  arise.  Certain
fibres  originating  in  that  source,  after  passing  through  the
optic  thakum,  expand  into  the  organs  of  Philoprogenitive-
ness,  Adhesiveness,  Combattveness,  Destructiveness,  &c.
The  nerves  of  sight  can  be  traced  into  the  nates,  lying  very
near  the  same  parts ;  while  the  nerves  of  hearing  spring
from  the  medullary  streaks  on  the  surface  of  the  fourth
ventricle,  lying  immediately  under  the  cerebellum.  These
arrangements  of  structure  correspond  with  the- facts,  that
the  eyes  express  move  powerfully  than  the  other  senses,  the
passion  of  love;  that  abuses  of  this  propensity  produce
blindness  and  deafness;  and,  that  this  feeling  frequently
excites  Adhesiveness,  Combotiveness  and  Destructiveness,
into  vivid  action,  rendering  attachment  irresistibly  strong,
and  inspiring  even  females,  who,  in  ordinary  circumstan-
ces, are  timid  and  retiring,  with  courage  and  determination
when  under  its  influence.  The  cerebellum  consists  of  three
portions,  a  central  and  two  lateral.  The  central  is  in  di-
rect communication  with  the  corpora  resttfbrmia,  and  the


118  AMAT1VEN1SSS.

two  lateral  portions  are  brought  into  communication  with
each  other  by  the  pons  Vcaroliu

Dr  Gall  was  led  to  the  discovery  of  this  organ  in  the  fol-
lowing manner*  He  was  physician  to  a  widow  of  irre-
proachable character,  who  was  seized  with  nervous  affec-
tions, to  which  succeeded  severe  nymphomania.  In  the
violence  of  a  paroxysm,  he  supported  her  head,  and  was
struck  with  the  large  size  and  heat  of  the  neck.  She  stated,
that  heat  and  tension  of  these  parts  always  preceded  a  pa-
roxysm. He  followed  out,  by  numerous  observations,  the
idea  suggested  by  this  occurrence,  of  connexion  betwixt  the
propensity  and  the  cerebellum,  and  he  soon  established  the
point  to  his  own  satisfaction.

The  faculty  gives  rise  to  the  sexual  feeling.  In  new-
born children,  the  cerebellum  is  the  least  developed  of  all
the  cerebral  parts.  At  this  period,  the  upper  and  posterior
part  of  the  neck,  corresponding  to  the  small  cerebellum,
appears  attached  almost  to  the  middle  of  the  base  of  the
skull.  The  cerebellum  is  then  to  the  brain  as  one  to  thir-
teen, fifteen  or  twenty.  In  adults,  it  is  as  one  to  six,  seven
or  eight.  It  attains  its  foil  size  between  the  age  of  eighteen
and  twenty-six.  The  neck  then  appears  greatly  more  ex-
panded behind.  The  cerebellum  is  less  in  females,  in  gene-
ral, than  in  males.  In  old  age  it  frequently  diminishes.
There  is  no  constant  proportion  betwixt  the  brain  and  it  in  all
individuals,  just  as  there  is  no  invariable  proportion  betwixt
this  feeling  and  the  other  powers  of  the  mind.  Sometimes,
however,  the  cerebellum  is  largely  developed  before  the
age  of  puberty.  This  was  the  case  in  a  child  of  three  years
of  age,  in  a  boy  of  five,  and  in  one  of  twelve;  and  they  all
manifested  the  feeling  strongly.  In  the  cast  of  the  skull
of  Dr  Hette,  sold  in  the  shops,  the  development  is  small,
and  the  feeling  corresponded  In  the  casts  of  Mitchell,
Dean,  and  Raphael,  it  is  very  large,  and  the  manifesta-
tions were  in  proportion.  Farther  evidence  of  the  func-
tions of  this  organ  will  be  found  in  Dr  Gall's  "  Physio-
logic du  Cerveau ;"  and  several  cases  are  mentioned  in  the


AMATIVENESS.  119

following  works,  via.  "  Journal  of  Pathological  Observa-
tions kept  at  the  Hospital  of  the  Ecole  de  MeVlecine,
No.  108,  15th  July  1817/'  case  of  Jean  Michel  Brigand;
"  Journal  of  the  Hotel  Dieu,"  case  of  Fbrat,  19th  March
1819,  and  of  a  woman,  11th  November  1818;  "  Wepfe-
RU8,  Historiae  apoplecticorum,"  edit.  1724,  page  487;
«  Philosophical  Transactions,'9  No.  228,  case  by  Dr  Ty-
son ;  u  Memoires  de  Ghirurgie  MDitaire,  et  Campagnes,"
by  Baron  Larrby,  vol.  ii.  p.  150,  voL  iiL  p.  262 ;  "  Sebres
on  Apoplexy ;"  "  Richerand's  Elements  of  Physiology,9'
pp.  379,  880,  Kerrison's  Translation ;  "  Dr  Spurzheim's
Phrenology,"  p.  180.

"  It  is  impossible,"  says  Dr  Spurzheim,  "  to  unite  a
greater  number  of  proofs  in  demonstration  of  any  natural
truth,  than  may  be  presented  to  determine  die  function  of
the  cerebellum ;"  and  in  this  I  completely  agree  with  him.
Those  who  have  not  read  Dr  Gall's  section  on  this  organ,
can  form  no  adequate  conception  of  the  force  of  the  evi-
dence which  he  has  collected.

M.  Flourens  has  lately  performed  some  experiments  on
the  lower  animals,  chiefly  by  inflicting  injuries  on  their  ce-
rebella,  and  contends  that  these  experiments  shew  that  the
cerebellum  serves  for  the  regulation  of  muscular  motion.
"  On  removing  the  cerebellum,"  says  he,  "  the  animal
loses  the  power  of  executing  combined  movements."  Ma-
gendie  performed  similar  experiments  on  the  cerebellum,
and  found  that  they  only  occasion  an  irresistible  tendency  in
the  animal  to  run,  walk,  or  swim,  backwards.  He  made  ex-
periments, also,  on  the  corpora  striata  and  tvbercula  qmar
drigemina,  with  the  following  results :  When  one  part  of
these  was  cut,  the  animal  rolled ;  when  another,  it  went
forward,  and  extended  its  head  and  extremities  ;  when  ano-
ther, it  bent  all  these :  so  that,  according  to  this  mode  of
determining  the  cerebral  functions,  these  parts  of  the  brain
possess  an  equal  claim  with  die  cerebellum,  to  be  regarded
as  the  regulators  of  motion.  The  fact  is,  that  all  parts  of
the  nervous  system  are  so  intimately  connected,  that  the


120  AMATIVENESS.

infliction  of  injuries  is  not  the  way  to  determine  the  func-
tions of  any,  even  its  least  important  parts.

The  great  size  of  the  cerebellum,  however, — the  cir-
cumstance of  its  lateral  portions  not  bearing  the  same  re-
lation to  the  middle  part  in  all  animals,— and  also  the  re-
sults of  some  late  experiments,  have  suggested  the  no-
tion that  it  may  not  be  a  single  organ,  but  that,  although
Amativeness  is  unquestionably  connected  with  the  largest
portion  of  it,  other  functions  may  be  connected  by  the
other  parts.  This  seems  not  improbable,  but  as  we  have
no  direct  evidence  in  proof  of  the  fact,  or  in  illustration  of
the  nature  of  these  supposed  functions,  it  is  unnecessary  to
do  more  than  announce  the  proposition  as  one  worthy  of
investigation.

Mr  Scott,  in  an  excellent  essay  on  the  influence  of  this
propensity  on  the  higher  sentiments  and  intellect  *,  ob-
serves, that  it  has  been  regarded  by  some  individuals,  as
almost  synonymous  with  pollution ;  and  the  notion  has  been
entertained,  that  it  cannot  be  even  approached  without  de-
filement This  mistake  has  arisen,  from  attention  being
directed  too  exclusively  to  the  abuses  of  the  propensity.
Like  every  thing  that  forms  part  of  the  system  of  nature,  it
bears  the  stamp  of  wisdom  and  excellence  in  itself,  although
liable  to  abuse.  It  exerts  a  quiet  but  effectual  influence  in
the  general  intercourse  between  the  sexes,  giving  rise  in
each  to  a  sort  of  kindly  interest  in  all  that  concerns  the
other.  This  disposition  to  mutual  kindness  between  the
sexes  does  not  arise  from  Benevolence  or  Adhesiveness,  or
any  other  sentiment  or  propensity  alone;  because,  if  such
were  its  sources,  it  would  have  an  equal  effect  in  the  inter-
course of  the  individuals  of  each  sex  among  themselves,
which  it  has  not.  "  In  this  quiet  and  unobtrusive  state  of
the  feeling/'  says  Mr  Scott,  "  there  is  nothing  in  the
least  gross  or  offensive  to  the  most  sensitive  delicacy.  So
far  the  contrary,  that  the  want  of  some  feeling  of  this  sort

*  Phrenological  Journal,  No.  vii.  p.  392


AMATIVENESS.  lfcl

is  regarded,  wherever  it  appears,  as  a  very  palpable  defect,
and  a  moat  unamiable  trait  in  the  character.  It  softens  all
the  proud,  irascible,  and  antisocial  principles  of  our  nature,
in  every  thing  which  regards  that  sex  which  is  the  object
of  it ;  and  it  increases  the  activity  and  force  of  all  the  kind-
ly and  benevolent  affections.  This  explains  many  facts
which  appear  in  the  mutual  regards  of  the  sexes  towards
each  other.  Men  are,  generally  speaking,  more  generous
and  kind,  more  benevolent  and  charitable,  towards  women,
than  they  are  to  men,  or  than  women  are  to  one  another."
This  faculty  also  inspires  the  poet  and  dramatist  in  compo-
sitions on  the  passion  of  Love ;  and  it  exerts  a  very  power-
ful influence  over  human  conduct  Dr  Spurzh£im  ob-
serves, that  individuals  in  whom  this  organ  is  very  large,
ought  not  to  be  dedicated  to  the  profession  of  religion,
in  countries  where  chastity  for  life  is  required  of  the
clergy.

The  abuses  of  this  propensity  are  the  sources  of  innume-
rable evils  in  life;  and,  as  the  organ  and  feeling  exist,  and
produce  an  influence  on  the  mind,  independently  of  exter-
nal communication,  Dr  Spurzheim  suggests  the  propriety
of  instructing  young  persons  in  the  consequences  of  its  im-
proper indulgence,  as  preferable  to  keeping  them  in  "  a
state  of  ignorance  that  may  provoke  a  fatal  curiosity,  com-
promising in  the  end  their  own  and  their  descendants9  bo?
dily  and  mental  constitution*"

The  organ  is  established*


2. — PHILOPROGENITIVENESS.

The  attachment  of  the  inferior  animals  to  their  young
has  often  been  the  subject  of  admiration.  In  them  it  is  at-
tributed to  instinct.  Instinct  means  an  original  propensity,
impelling  the  animal  endowed  with  it  to  act  in  a  certain
way,  without  intention  or  purpose.     Is  the  attachment  of


1  gS  FHILOPROGENITIVENESS.

human  beings  to  offspring,  the  consequence  of  a  similar  in-
nate feeling,  or  is  it  tie  result  of  reason,  or  a  modification
of  benevolence,  or  of  other  feelings?  That  it  does  not
spring  from  reflection  is  abundantly  evident  Reason  only
investigates  causes  and  effects,  and  decides  on  a  compari-
son of  facts.  The  mother,  while  she  smiles  with  ineffable
joy  on  her  tender  offspring,  does  not  argue  herself  into  the
delightful  emotion*  The  excitement  is  instantaneous ;  the
object  requires  only  to  be  presented  to  her  eye  or  imagina-
tion, and  the  whole  impetus  of  parental  love  stirs  the  mind.
Hence  a  feeling  or  propensity  is  obviously  the  basis  of  the
affection.  It  is  not  a  modification  of  any  other  sentiment,
but  an  original  propensity ;  for,  on  going  into  society,  we
find,  that  the  Love  of  Offspring  bears  no  perceptible  pro-
portion to  any  other  feeling  or  faculty  of  the  mind.  If  it
depended  on  Benevolence,  no  selfish  individual  should  be
ardently  attached  to  offspring;  and  yet  the  opposite  is  fre-
quently the  fact  If  it  were  a  modification  of  mere  Self-
Love,  as  some  have  supposed,  then  parental  affection  should
be  weak,  in  proportion  as  generosity  was  strong ;  but  this
theory  also  is  contradicted  by  experience.  Neither  do  we
find  Love  of  Offspring  bear  a  definite  relation  to  intellec-
tual endowment.  Sometimes  a  woman  of  limited  under-
standing loves  her  children  ardently ;  occasionally  another
equally  weak  is  indifferent  towards  them.  Some  highly
intellectual  women  add  maternal  affection  to  their  other
virtues ;  while  others,  not  less  acute  in  understanding,  look
on  offspring  as  a  burden.  There  are,  therefore,  the  strong-
est reasons  for  holding  it  to  be  a  primitive  tendency  of  the
mind;  and  phrenological  observations  coincide  with  this
conclusion.

The  organ  is  situated  immediately  above  the  middle  part
of  the  cerebellum,  and  corresponds  to  the  protuberance  of  the
occiput  Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  account  of  its  disco-
very. In  the  course  of  his  observations  he  bad  remarked,
that,  in  the  human  race,  the  upper  part  of  the  occiput  is  in
general  more  prominent  in  the  female  skull  than  in  the  male ;


PH I  LOPROGE  NITI VENE8S.  1 23

and  Inferred,  that  the  part  of  the  brain  beneath  was  the  or-
gan of  some  feeling  which  is  stronger  in  women  than  in  men.
Bat  the  question  presented  itself,  What  is  this  quality  ?  Da-
ring several  years  varioro  conjectures  occurred  to  him,  which
he  successively  adopted  and  rejected;  and  he  frequently
stated  to  his  pupils  the  embarrassment  he  felt  upon  the  sub-
ject He  remarked  at  last,  that,  in  this  particular  point,  the
crania  of  monkeys  bore  a  singular  resemblance  to  those  of
women, — and  concluded,  that  the  cerebral  part  placed  im-
mediately under  the  prominence,  was  probably  the  organ  of
some  quality  or  faculty,  for  which  the  monkey  tribes  and
women  were  distinguished  in  a  remarkable  degree.  He
was  led  the  more  to  entertain  this  idea,  because,  from  the
discoveries  he  had  already  made  in  this  region,  he  was
aware  that  he  was  not  to  look  for  the  seat  of  any  superior
intellectual  or  moral  faculty.  He  repeatedly  revolved  in
his  mind  all  the  feelings  manifested  by  the  monkey  tribe,  so
far  as  known  to  him.  At  last,  in  one  of  those  favourable
moments,  when  a  lucky  thought  sometimes  does  more  to
elicit  truth  than  years  of  labour  and  reflection,  it  suddenly
occurred  to  him,  in  die  midst  of  a  lecture,  that  one  of  the
most  remarkable  characteristics  of  monkeys,  is  an  extreme
ardour  o^affectkm  for  their  young.  This  quality  had  been
noticed  in  them  by  the  most  distinguished  naturalists ;  and
persons  who  have  resided  in  countries  where  monkeys  are
common,  have  also  observed  it,  and  remarked,  that  it  led
them  to  bestow  caresses  even  on  the  young  of  the  human
species,  especially  Negro  children,  when  these  were  so
unlucky  as  to  fall  in  their  way.  The  thought  flashed  upon
his  mind  that  this  might  be  the  feeling  or  quality  of  which
lie  was  in  search.  Impatient  to  put  this  conclusion  to  the
test,  by  a  comparison  of  all  the  male  with  the  female  skulls
of  animals  in  Ins  extensive  collection,  he  begged  his  hearers
to  go  away,  and  leave  him  to  his  researches; — and  on  this
examination  he  found,  that  there  existed,  in  fact,  the  same
difference  between  the  male  and  female  skull  of  the  lower
animals  in  general,  which  he  had  observed  between  the  male


124  PHILOPEOGENITIVENESS.

and  the  female  skull  in  the  human  species.  This  seemed  a
confirmation  of  the  idea,  that  the  quality  of  which  this
cerebral  part  is  the  organ,  is  that  of  affection  for  offspring—
which,  he  had  already  remarked,  was  possessed  in  a  greater
degree  by  the  females  of  the  animal  tribes,  than  by  the
males.  The  inference  appeared  to  him  more  plausible,  from
the  circumstance,  that  this  organ  was  placed  in  close  vici-
nity to  that  of  the  instinct  of  propagation.  Many  subsequent
observations  established  the  conclusion  *.

The  faculty  produces  the  instinctive  love  of  offspring  and
delight  in  children.

The  feeling  is  beautifully  represented  in  the  following
lines  of  Lord  Byron:

Adah.

Where  were  then  the  joys,
The  mother's  joys  of  watching,  nourishing,
And  loving  him  ?    Soft !  He  awakes.   Sweet  Enoch.

(ShegoestotheckikL)
Oh  Cain  I  Look  on  him ;  see  how  full  of  life,
Of  strength,  of  bloom,  of  beauty,  and  of  joy.
How  like  to  me, — how  like  to  thee,  when  gentle,
For  then  we  fare  all  alike  :  is*t  not  so,  Cain  f
Mother,  and  Sire,  and  Son,  our  features  are
Reflected  in  each  other.

Look  !  how  he  laughs,  and  stretches  out  his  arms,  '

And  opens  wide  his  blue  eyes  upon  thine,  '

To  hail  hia&ther;  while  Jus  little  form
Flutters  as  wing'd  with  joy.    Talk  not  of  pain !
The  childless  cherubs  well  might  envy  thee
The  pleasures  of  a  parent !    Bless  him,  Caix,
As  yet  he  hath  no  words  to  thank  thee,  but
His  heart  will,  and  thine  own  too.

Cain,  Act  III.  Scene  I.

The  organ  may  be  verified  in  the  easiest  manner  by  any
person  who  chooses  to  observe  nature.  It  is  one  of  the
most  conspicuous  and  easily  distinguished  in  the  head,  parti-
cularly in  the  human  species ;  and  the  manifestations  may
be  recognised  with  equal  facility.    Those  who  possess  the

•  Gall  Sur  ki  Fraction!  du  Carveau.   Edit.  1683.  roL  iiU-Fhren.  Journ.  toL  ii.  p.  S3.


PHILOPROGENITIVENESS.  125

feeling  in  a  strong  degree,  shew  it  in  every  word  and  look
when  children  are  concerned;  and  these,  again,  by  a  recip-
rocal tact,  or,  as  it  is  expressed  by  the  Author  of  Waverley,
by  a  kind  of  "  free-masonry,"  discover  at  once  persons
with  whom  they  may  be  familiar,  aud  use  all  manner  of
freedoms.  It  is  common,  when  such  an  individual  appears
among  them,  to  see  him  welcomed  with  a  shout  of
delight.  Other  individuals,  again,  feel  the  most  marked
indifference  towards  children,  and  are  unable  to  conceal  it,
when  betrayed  into  their  company.  Romping  disconcerts
them,  and  having  no  sympathy  with  children's  pranks  and
prattle,  they  look  on  them  as  the  greatest  annoyances.  The
same  novelist  justly  remarks,  that  if  such  persons  sometimes
make  advances  to  children,  for  the  purpose  of  recom-
mending themselves  to  the  parents,  their  awkward  attempts
are  instinctively  recognised,  and  fail  in  attracting  recip-
rocal attention.  On  examining  the  heads  of  two  persons
thus  differently  constituted,  a  prominence,  corresponding
to  this  organ,  will  be  discovered  in  the  hind  part  of  the
one,  which  will  not  be  found  to  the  same  extent  in  the
other.

It  is  a  remarkable  ordination  of  nature,  that  the  intensity
of  this  feeling  bears  a  proportion  to  the  weakness  and  help-
lessness of  its  objects,  rather  than  to  any  other  of  their
moral  or  physical  qualities.  The  mother  doats  with  fondest
delight  on  the  infant  in  the  first  months  of  its  existence,
when  it  presents  fewest  attractions  to  other  individuals ;  and
her  solicitude  and  affection  are  bestowed  longest  and  most
intensAr  on  the  feeblest  member  of  her  family.  On  this
principle,  the  youngest  is  the  reigning  favourite,  unless
there  be  some  sickly  being  of  maturer  age,  who  then  shares
with  it  the  maternal  sympathies.  The  primitive  function
of  the  faculty  seems  to  be  to  inspire  with  an  interest  in  the
helplessness  of  childhood ;  but  it  gives  also  a  softness  of
manner,  in  treating  the  feeble  and  the  delicate  even  in  ad-
vanced life ;  and  persons  in  whom  this  organ  is  large  in
combination  with  Benevolence,  are  better  fitted  for  the


186  PHILOPEOGENITIVENESS.

duties  of  a  sick  chamber,  than  those  in  whom  Philopro-
genitiveness  is  small.  The  natural  language  of  the  faculty
is  soft,  tender,  and  condescending.  It  is  essential  to  a
successful  teacher  of  children.  Individuals  in  whom  the  or-
gan is  deficient,  have  little  sympathy  with  the  feelingB  of
the  youthful  mind,  and  their  tones  and  manner  of  communi-
cating instruction  repel,  instead  of  engaging,  the  affections
of  the  scholar.  This  is  the  cause  why  some  persons,  whose
manner,  in  intercourse  with  their  equals,  is  unexcep-
tionable, are  nevertheless  greatly  disliked  as  teachers ;  and
children  are  generally  in  the  right  in  their  antipathies,
although  their  parents  and  guardians,  judging  by  their  own
feelings,  imagine  them  actuated  altogether  by  caprice.

It  has  been  remarked  by  Mr  Scott,  that  the  fondness  which
unmarried  females,  or  married  ladies  who  have  no  children,
sometimes  lavish  "  on  animals,  generally  of  the  smaller  and
more  delicate  kinds,  whom  they  nurse  and  pamper  with  a
degree  of  devotedness  and  affection,  which  can  be  compared
only  to  that  of  a  mother  for  her  children,9'  probably  has  its
origin  in  this  faculty.  The  feeling  seems  the  same,  its
objects  only  being  different;  and,  instead  of  overwhelming
such  individuals  with  ridicule,  they  deserve  our  forbearance
at  least,  if  not  respect,  as  "  they  are  merely  following  the
bent  of  a  strong  natural  propensity,  implanted  in  diem  for
the  wisest  purposes,  and  which,  in  more  favourable  circum-
stances, would  have  rendered  them  affectionate  mothers,
and  excellent  mistresses  of  families."

This  propensity  furnishes  the  spirit  of  lullabies,  and
inspires  the  poet  and  dramatist  in  many  of  their  representa-
tions. Woedsworth  manifests  it  strongly,  and  some  of
the  faults  of  his  manner  are  clearly  attributable  to  an  excess
of  its  influence.  It  characterises  the  Lake  school  of  poetry
in  general.

The  feeling  produced  by  this  faculty  is  so  intense  and
delightful,  that  no  other  is  more  liable  to  abuse.  When
too  energetic,  and  not  regulated  by  judgment,  it  leads  to


PHILOPROGEN1TI VENESS.  1 27

pampering  and  spoiling  children;  to  irrational  anxieties
regarding  them,  and  sometimes  to  the  most  extravagant
conceit  of  their  supposed  excellencies.  When  misapplied)
it  defeats  the  object  of  its  institution ;  for,  instead  of  condu-
cing to  the  protection  and  happiness  of  children,  it  renders
them  highly  miserable.  When  the  organ  is  deficient,  indif-
ference and  regardlessness  about  offspring  are  the  conse-
quences. Children  are  then  felt  as  a  heavy  burden;  they
are  abandoned  to  the  care  of  menials,  or  altogether  neglect-
ed, and  left  to  encounter  the  perils  and  distresses  incident
to  tender  age,  without  solace  or  protection.  Instances  have
been  known  (as  in  the  case  of  the  Countess  of  Maccles-
field, mother  of  the  poet  Savage),  of  mothers  wha
conceived  an  unaccountable  and  seemingly  causeless  hatred
against  their  own  offspring,  and  who  persecuted  them
with  relentless  severity.  Dr  Gall  knew,  at  Vienna,  a  lady,
who  loved  her  husband  tenderly,  and  who  managed  the
concerns  of  her  household  with  intelligence  and  activity,
but  who  sent  from  home,  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  light,  all
the  nine  children  to  whom  she  successively  gave  birth,  and
for  years  never  asked  to  see  them.  She  herself  was  some-
what ashamed  of  this  indifference,  and  could  not  account  for
it  to  herself.  To  quiet  her  conscience,  she  insisted  upon
her  husband  seeing  them  every  day,  and  taking  a  charge
of  their  education.  From  deficiency  of  the  organ  also,
combined  with  other  feelings  in  a  strong  degree,  probably
arises  the  cruelty  of  such  barbarous  mothers  as  Isabel  of
Bavaria,  of  whom  history  relates  that  she  stifled  all  the  sen-
timents of  affection  due  to  her  children.

Among  twenty-nine  infanticides  whom  Das  Gall  and
Spurzheim  had  occasion  to  examine,  the  organ  of  the  Love
of  Children  was  very  feebly  developed  in  twenty-five.
Dr  Gall  has  oftener  than  once  made  the  remark,  that  it  is
not  this  defect  in  development  alone  which  determines  a
mother  to  child-murder;  but  that  individuals  defective  in
this  respect,  yield  sooner  than  others  to  those  unfavourable
circumstances  which  lead  to  the  crime,  because  they  are


128  PHILOPROGENITIVENESS.

not  endowed  with  that  profound  feeling  which,  in  the  heart
of  a  good  mother,  will  rise  victorious  over  every  such  temp-
tation*

In  selecting  a  nurse  or  child's  maid,  the  phrenologist  will
be  directed  by  the  development  of  this  organ.  This  appli-
cation of  the  science,  when  mentioned  to  those  who  have
not  studied  the  subject,  generally  excites  a  smile ;  and  cer-
tainly, if  the  size  of  the  part  of  the  brain  in  question  were
no  indication  of  instinctive  affection  for  children,  no  test  for
qualification  could  be  more  justly  deserving  of  ridicule  than
the  one  now  recommehded ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the
organ  be  an  unerring  index  of  this  disposition  (which  it  is,
otherwise  all  we  are  now  considering  is  a  delusion),  no
weakness  can  be  greater  than  that  which  would  fear  to  ap-
peal to  it,  because  it  might  provoke  a  smile  in  those  who
are  ignorant  that  nature  has  established  the  function.

The  head  of  the  male  is  generally  broader  and  rounder,
and  that  of  the  female  longer  and  narrower,  when  con-
trasted with  each  other.  This  arises  partly  from  the  organ
of  Pbiloprogenitiveness  being  more  developed  in  the  female
head,  and  causing  the  occiput  to  project.  The  portion  of
brain  placed  in  the  occiput  is  greater  in  women  than  in
men,  though  the  entire  brain  of  the  woman  is  smaller  than
that  of  the  man.  This  difference  is  observable  in  the  foetal
skull  of  the  two  sexes ;  and  is  conspicuous  in  boys  and  girls.
The  manifestations  even  in  the  earliest  periods  of  life  cor-
respond ;  for  the  girl  shews  attachment  to  dolls  and  infants,
while  the  boy  is  addicted  to  romping  and  athletic  sports.
A  curious  practical  example  of  the  difference  in  this  feeling
betwixt  males  and  females  in  general  occurs  in  Morier's
Travels  in  Persia.  "  The  surgeons  of  the  Embassy"  says
he,  "  endeavoured  to  introduce  vaccination  among  the  Per-
sians, and  their  efforts  at  first  were  very  successful ;  but  on
a  sudden  its  progress  was  checked  by  the  government  itself.
Several  of  the  King's  Ferashes  were  placed  at  the  gate  of
the  Ambassador's  hotel,  nominally  as  a  mark  of  attention
to  his  Excellency,  but  really  to  stop  all  women  from  going


PHILOPROGENITIVENESS.  129

to  our  surgeons*  They  said  that  if  the  people  wanted  their
children  to  be  vaccinated,  ihe  fathers,  and  not  the  mothers,
were  to  take  them  to  the  surgeons,  by  which  means  the
eagerness  for  vaccination  was  stopped;  for  we  soon  dis-
covered that  the  males  did  not  feel  one-half  the  same  an-
xiety for  their  offspring  as  the  teamen*"— Second  Journey
,  through  Persia,  p.  191.

There  are,  nevertheless,  exceptions  to  this  general  rule*
Sometimes  the  occipital  part  of  the  brain  is  feebly  developed
in  a  woman,  and  has  acquired  a  very  large  size  in  a  man.
In  such  cases,  the  dispositions  will  be  found  to  correspond
to  the  development.  Dr  Gall  conjectures,  that  in  these  cases
the  woman  will  be  found  to  resemble  her  father,  and  the
man  his  mother,  unless  this  peculiar  conformation  should
be  hereditary  in  the  family.  There  are  men  thus  organized
who  have  a  particular  affection  for  children,  and  in  whom
the  organs  of  Amativeness  and  Adhesiveness  are  small,—*
who  bear  the  Josh  of  an  affectionate  wife,  with  a  resigna-
tion which  appears  very  philosophic,  while  the  death  of  an
infant  plunges  them  into  a  deep  and  lasting  grief.  The
want  of  children  is  with  such  men  a  constant  source  of
uneasiness,  and  often  th»  circumstance  causes  them  to  treat
with  unkmdness  a  partner  exceedingly  estimable  in  all
other  respects*

Dr  Gall  observes,  that  we  find  this  organ  more  developed
in  some  mothers  than  in  others.  It  is  generally  large  in
Negroes ;  and  infanticide  is  a  crime  almost  unknown  among
that  variety  of  the  species.  Persons  well  acquainted  with
their  character  assure  us,  that  they  never  heard  of  such  a
crime  committed  by  a  black.  The  organ  is  commonly  well
developed  even  in  male  Negroes ;  and  we  find  that  Negro
men  often  consent  to  take  charge  of  children.  Travellers
report  that  the  Tungusians  and  the  inhabitants  of  North
America  are  singularly  fond  of  their  children.  Dr  Gall
mentions,  that,  in  the  skulls  of  two  Tungusians  and  a  North
American  Indian,  which  he  had  seen  at  Gottingen  in  the
collection    of  Professor   Blumenbach,   this    organ   was


130  PHILOPROGEN1TIVENESS,

large.  Dr  Murray  Paterson  states,  that  the  Hindoos,
both  male  and  female,  are  highly  endowed  with  this  feeling ;
-—it  is  manifested  by  them,  he  says,  "  in  their  predilection
for  domestic  quiet ;  in  the  happiness  they  seem  to  feel  when
surrounded  by  their  children ;  in  the  spirit  of  their  lullabies,
and  in  their  frequent  and  ardent  embraces."  Out  of  twelve
Hindoo  skulls  originally  in  the  possession  of  the  Phrenolo-
gical Society,  eleven  have  this  organ  largely  developed,  and
only  one  moderately  so,  and  subsequent  additions  shew  the
same  result

The  feeling  in  question,  so  necessary  for  the  preservation
and  continuance  of  the  species,  is  found  strong  in  the  most
savage  tribes.  The  organ  is  decidedly  large,  even  in  the
easts  of  the  skulls  of  the  Caribs,  unquestionably  the  most
unfavourably  organized,  in  other  respects,  of  all  the  races
of  which  we  possess  any  knowledge.  Out
of  five  casts  of  Carib  skulls  in  the  Phre-
nological Society's  collection,  one  has
the  organ  very  large,  three  have  it  large,
and  the  remaining  one  rather  full.  This
tribe  appears,  from  their  cerebral  development,  and  the
accounts  of  travellers  and  historians  with  regard  to  their
manners  and  character,  to  be  endued  with  the  most  brutal
ferocity,  totally  unregulated  either  by  benevolence  or  intel-
lect; and,  unless  they  possessed  an  instinctive  propensity,
prompting  them  to  take  care  of  their  children,  they  would
soon  become  extinct,  without  the  intervention  of  famine,
pestilence,  or  an  exterminating  enemy.  A  satisfactory  an-
swer is  here  afforded  to  those  cavillers,  who  object  that
there  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  propensity  as  this,  as  the
feeling  of  Benevolence  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  prompt
parents  to  bestow  the  requisite  care  on  their  offspring.  We
have  only  to  point  to  the  Caribs,  and  say,  What  reliance
could  be  placed  on  the  benevolence  of  such  beings  ?  And
yet  they  show  attachment  to  their  young,  and  submit  to  the
inconveniences  of  rearing  them,  amidst  all  the  toils,  priva-
tions, and  hardships,  that  abound  in  savage  life.


PHILOPBOGENITIVENESS.  181

This,  like  the  other  cerebral  organs,  is  liable  to  disease,
and  derangement  in  the  manifestations  of  the  propensity
is  the  consequence.  Sometimes  the  most  painful  anxiety
is  felt  about  children,  without  any  adequate  external  cause,
and  this  arises  from  involuntary  activity  of  the  organ.

Dr  Andrew  Combe  attended  a  woman,  while  labouring
under  a  temporary  alienation  of  mind,  whose  constant  ex-
clamations during  three  days,  which  the  fit  lasted,  were  about
her  children— she  imagined  that  they  were  in  distress,  mur-
dered, earned  away,  exposed  to  every  calamity.  On  reco-
very she  complained  of  having  a  pain  in  the  hind  part  of  her
head  during  the  attack,  pointing  to  the  situation  of  Philo-
progenitiveness;  but  she  had  no  other  recollection  of  what
had  passed.  She  was  altogether  unacquainted  with  Phre-
nology*

Dr  Gall  mentions  a  case  of  a  woman  in  the  great  hos-
pital at  Vienna,  who  was  seized  with  a  very  peculiar  kind
of  madness— maintaining  that  she  was  about  to  be  delivered
of  six  children.  He  was  led,  by  his  previous  observations,
to  conjecture  that  this  hallucination  was  owing  in  part  to  a
great  development,  and  partly  to  an  over-excitement  of  the
organ  of  Philoprogenitiveness.  The  patient  died,  and  he
mentions  that  the  development  of  this  organ  in  her  head
was  quite  extraordinary.  The  posterior  lobes  of  the  brain
not  only  overhung  the  cerebellum  more  than  is  usual  in
females,  but  were  rounded  and  voluminous  in  a  very  re-
markable degree.  At  Paris,  Dr  Gall  attended  a  young
lady  of  perfect  modesty,  who  laboured  under  mental  disease.
She  lived  in  the  best  society,  and  went  to  Vienna  accompa-
nied by  some  most  respectable  friends.  She  had  hardly  arriv-
ed, when  she  ran  to  all  her  acquaintances,  and  announced  to
them,  with  the  most  lively  joy  and  in  the  openest  manner,
that  she  was  pregnant.  The  circumstances  of  this  declara-
tion, and  the  known  character  of  the  lady,  were  sufficient
to  lead  her  friends  to  conclude  her  to  be  insane.  In  a
short  time  her  joy  gave  place  to  anguish  of  mind,  and  to  a
mournful  and  invincible  taciturnity.     Soon  afterwards  she


188  PHILOPROGENITIVENE83.

died  of  consumption.  In  her,  also,  this  organ  was  ex-
tremely developed;  and  during  her  life  she  had  been  re-
markable for  her  love  of  children.  In  the  Lunatic  Hospital
at  Amsterdam,  Drs  Gall  and  Sfurzheim  saw  a  female  pa-
tient, who  spoke  -of  nothing  but  of  being  with  child,  though
no  such  thing  was  the  case.  Her  head  was  small,  and  the  or-
gan of  Pbiloprogenitiveness  alone  was  very  largely  developed.
In  another  hospital  for  lunatics,  they  saw  a  man  who  main-
tained that  he  was  with  child  of  twins.  They  announced
that  he  ought  to  have  this  organ  large,  and,  on  examining
his  head,  found  it  to  be  so.  These  cases  of  the  diseased
state  of  the  organ,  add  to  the  already  numerous  proofs  that
this  is  an  original  and  a  special  propensity.

Dr  Gall  relates,  that  he  has  examined,  with  all  the  atten-
tion in  his  power,  the  skulls  of  birds,  from  the  smallest  up
to  the  greatest,  and  of  mammiferous  animals,  from  the  shrew-
mouse  to  the  elephant,  and  has  found  throughout,  that,
in  the  females,  the  cerebral  part,  which  corresponds  to  the
organ  of  Philoprogenitiveness  in  the  human  species,  is  more
developed  than  in  the  males.  He  says,  that  if  there  had
been  presented  to  him,  in  water,  the  fresh  brains  of  two
adult  animals  of  any  species,  one  male  and  the  other  fe-
male, he  could  have  distinguished  the  two  sexes.  In  the
male,  the  cerebellum  is  larger  and  the  posterior  lobes  of
tie  brain  are  smaller.  In  the  female,  on  the  contrary,  the
cerebellum  is  smaller,  and  the  posterior  lobes,  or  the  con-
volutions connected  with  this  function,  are  larger  and  longer.
When  these  two  organs  are  distinctly  marked  in  the  crani-
um, the  two  sexes  may  be  distinguished  by  the  simple  in-
spection of  the  skull.  %  In  those  species  where  the  sexes  dif-
fer very  much  in  their  regard  for  their  young,  the  crania
differ  sometimes  so  much  in  their  form,  that  they  have  been
placed  in  collections  as  belonging  to  different  varieties  of  the
same  species,  though  in  fact  they  belonged  to  individuals  of
the  same  variety,  but  of  different  sexes.

Dr  Gall  adduces  innumerable  facts  in  support  of  this  pro-
position ;  but  as  these  can  hardly  be  made  intelligible,  with-


PHILOPROGENITIVENESS.


183


out  the  assistance  of  plates,  I  must  refer  those  who  wish  to
pursue  this  inquiry  to  his  work,  to  that  of  Mons.  Vimont,
and  to  observations  in  nature.  In  pursuing  it,  the  utmost
patience  and  attention  are  necessary,  in  order  to  avoid  mis-
takes. The  differences  will  be  found  uniformly  greatest
in  those  species  of  which  the  males  pay  no  regard  to  their
young ;  but  it  requires  a  practised  .eye  And  great,  attention,
to  discern  the  difference  in  classes,  of  which  both  the  male
and  female  bestow  care  on  their  offspring.  There  is,  hew-
ever,  a  marked  difference  in  this  respeet,  even  in  females
of  the  same  species,  who  are  fondest  of  their  young.  Every
cottager  knows,  and  .can  distinguish  in  her  poultry-yard,
particular  female  fowls,  ducks,  geese,  and  turkeys,  who
cover  their  .eggs  and,  bring  up  their  young  ones  with  the
greatest  <care,  while  these  are  others  who  spoil  thekvuests,
and  neglect  or  abandon  their  young.  On  comparing  the
heads  of  the  animals,  who  show  these  opposite  qualities,  a
decided  difference  of  conformation  will  be  found  in  the  or-
gan of  Philoprogenitiveness.— Those,  therefore,  who  wish
to  form  collections  with  this  view,  should, know  not  only
the  natural  history  of  the  species,  but  the  peculiar  disposi-
tion of  the  individuals  selected.

Almost  all  metaphysical  writers  admit  the  Love  of  Chil-
dren as  an  instinctive  propensity  of  the  human  mind.
Phrenological  observation  points  out  the  organ,  and  the  ef-
fects of  its  different  degrees  of  development,  and  also  of  its
healthy  and  sound  state,  on  the  manifestations  of  the
feeling ;  and  to  this  extent  adds  lo  the  stock  of  general
knowledge.  The  following  cuts  represent  the  organ  large
and  small :  It  is  marked  No.  2.


L&fgQ  i'lifcloprnffetittWejicM.


Smtlt  PhfloprogenitWei


It  is  proper  to  bear  in  mind,  that  these  and  all  other  con-


.*.


134  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

trasts,  are  given  in  this  work  not  to  prove  Phrenology  to
be  true,  but  merely  to  represent  the  appearances  of  the  or-
gans in  different  degrees  of  development — Established*

8.— CONCENTRATIVENESS.

The  organ  is  situated  immediately  above  PhUoprogeni-
tiveness,  and  below  Self-Esteem.  A  bony  excrescence  of
the  suture  sometimes  presents  itself  at  this  part,  which  may
be  mistaken  for  the  organ  of  Concentrativeness ;  but  the
former  is  much  narrower  and  more  pointed  than  the  eleva-
tion caused  by  the  latter,  when  it  is  large.  A  cerebral
convolution  in  each  hemisphere  runs  along  the  top  of  the
corpus  callosum,  from  the  organs  of  Concentrativeness  and
Self-Esteem,  to  the  intellectual  organs  in  the  frontal  lobe.

Observation  proves  that  this  is  a  distinct  organ,  because
it  is  sometimes  found  large,  when  the  organs  of  Philopro-
genitiveness  and  Self-Esteem  lying  below  and  above  it  are
small,  and  sometimes  small  when  these  are  large.  Dr
Gall  did  not  discover  its  function.  Dr  Spurzheim  ob-
served it  to  be  large  in  those  animals  and  persons  who
seemed  attached  to  particular  places.  "  I  consider,"  says
he,  "  in  animals,  the  cerebral  part  immediately  above  the
organ  of  Philoprogenitiveness,  as  the  organ  of  the  instinct
that  prompts  them  to  select  a  peculiar  dwelling,  and  call  it
the  organ  of  Inhabitiveness.  My  attention  has  been  and  is
still  directed  to  such  individuals  of  the  human  kind  as  shew
a  particular  disposition  in  regard  to  their  dwelling-place.
Some  nations  are  extremely  attached  to  their  country,
while  others  are  readily  induced  to  migrate.  Some  tribes
wander  about  without  fixed  habitations,  while  others  have
a  settled  home.  Mountaineers  are  commonly  much  attach-
ed to  their  native  soil,  and  those  of  them  who  visit  capitals
or  foreign  countries,  seem  chiefly  led  by  the  hope  of  gain-
ing money  enough  to  return  home,  and  buy  a  little  pro-
perty, even  though  the  land  should  be  dearer  there  than
elsewhere.    I  therefore  invite  the  phrenologists,  who  have


C0NCENTRATIVENES8.  135

an  opportunity  of  visiting  various  nations  particularly  fond
of  their  country,  to  examine  the  development  of  the  organ
marked  No.  III.,  and  situated  immediately  above  Philo-
progenitiveness.  In  all  civilised  nations  some  individuals
have  a  great  predilection  for  residing  in  the  country.  If
professional  pursuits  oblige  them  to  live  in  town,  their  en-
deavour is  to  collect  a  fortune  as  BpeecHly  as  possible,  that
they  may  indulge  their  leading  propensity.  I  have  exa-
mined the  heads  of  several  individuals  of  this  description,
and  found  the  parts  in  question  much  developed."— Phre-
nology, p.  126.  The  function,  however,  is  stated  by  him  as
only  conjectural.  From  a  number  of  observations,  the  fa-
culty appears  to  me  to  have  a  more  extensive  sphere  of  ac-
tion than  that  assigned  to  it  by  Dr  Spurzheim.

Some  persons  possess  a  natural  consciousness  of  every
thing  that  goes  on  in  their  own  minds,  in  winch  power  others
seem  to  be  remarkably  deficient.  The  former  can  detain
their  feelings  and  ideas,  and  deliberately  examine  their
character  and  consistency ;  the  latter  cannot  do  this ;  their
minds  are  like  the  surface  of  a  mirror,  on  which  each
feeling  and  thought  appears  like  die  shadow  of  a  mov-
ing object,  making  a  momentary  impression,  and  passing
away.  They  experience  great  difficulty  in  detaining  their
emotions  and  ideas,  so  as  to  examine  and  compare  them ;
and,  in  consequence,  are  little  capable  of  taking  systematic
views  of  any  subject,  and  of  concentrating  their  powers  to
bear  on  one  point.  I  have  observed  this  organ  to  be  large
in  the  former  and  small  in  the  latter.

It  is  difficult  to  describe  in  words  the  manner  of  a  man's
mind;  but  the  difference  in  manifestation  is  so  great  be-
tween those  in  whom  this  organ  is  small,  and  those  in
whom  it  is  large,  that,  if  once  comprehended,  it  will  al-
ways be  recognised.  In  conversing  with  some  individuals,
we  find  them  fall  naturally  into  a  connected  train  of
thinking;  either  dwelling  on  a  subject  which  interests
them,  till  they  have  placed  it  clearly  before  the  mind,  or
passing  naturally  and  gracefully  to  a  connected  topic.


136  C0NCENTRAT1VENESS,

Such  persons  uniformly  hate  this  organ  large.  We  meet
with  others,  who,  in  similar  circumstances,  never  pursue
one  idea  for  two  consecutive  seconds,  who  shift  from  topic
to  topic,  without  regard  to  natural  connexion,  and  leave
no  distinct  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  listener ;  and  this
happens  even  with  individuals  in  whom  reflection  is  not
deficient  $  hut  this  organ  is  in  aueh  persons  uniformly
small  I  have  met  a  military  office*,  with  Locality  and  Con-
centrativeness  both  large,  who  declared  that  he  liked  the
stirring  and  diffuse  life  of  a  soldier,  while  engaged  in  active
operations;  but  that  when  the  army  halted,  he  was  equally
pleased,  and  found  equal  facility  in  concentrating  his  mind
to  reading,  writing,  or  business,  and  was  not  annoyed  by
that  dissipation  of  intellect  of  which  many  of  his  brother-
officers  complained.  On  the  other  hand,  a  gentleman  bred
to  the  profession  of  the  law,  who  has  this  organ  rather  de-
ficient, declares  that  the  effort  of  concentrated  thinking  is
too  him  painful,  although  he  has  excellent  Comparison,
Causality,  and  Language.

The  question  occurs,  What  is  the  primitive  feeling  which
gives  rise  to  these  phenomena?  The  first  idea  that  led  me
to  the  conclusion,  that  it  is  the  tendency  to  concentrate  the
mind  within  itself,  and  to  direct  its  powers  in  a  combined
effort  to  one  object,  was  suggested  by  a  lady,  who  had  re-
marked this  quality  in  individuals  in  whom  the  organ  was
large*  The  Reverend  David  Welsh  and  Dr  Hoppe  of
Copenhagen,  having  been  informed  of  these  views,  unknown
to  each  other,  communicated  to  me  the  inference,  that  the
faculty  gives  a  tendency  to  dwell  in  a  place,  or  on  feelings
end  ideas,  for  a  length  of  time,  till  all,  or  the  majority,  of
the  other  faculties  are  satisfied  in  regard  to  them.  Both
of  these  phrenologists  acquiesce  in  the  manifestations  being
such  as  I  have  described  them,  when  the  organ  is  large  or
small.  An  excellent  letter  on  this  subject  appeared  in  the
Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  iii,  p.  193,  from  the  pen  of  an
anonymous  author,  and  conjbains  many  valuable  remarks
on  the,  ultimate  principle  of  the  faculty,  and  J  avail  myself
of  it  with  pleasure.     The  following  ai*e  extracts.


CONCENTR  ATIVENESS.  1 87

u  4  If  we  consider'  the  human  mind,'  says  Mr  Hums  in
his  Dissertation  on  the  Passions,  '  we  shall  observe  that,
with  regard  to  the  passions,  it  is  not  like  a  wind-instru-
ment of  music,  which,  in  running  over  all  the  notes,  im-
mediately loses  the  sound  when  the  breath  ceases;  but  ra-
ther resembles  a  string-instrument,  where,  after  each
stroke,  the  vibrations  still  retain  some  sound,  which  gra-
dually and  insensibly  decayB.'  From  this  he  infers,  that
when  an  object,  which  occasions  a  variety  of  emotions,  is
presented  to  the  mind,  each  impulse  will  not  produce  a
dear  and  distinct  note  of  passion,  but  the  one  passion  will
always  be  mixed  and  confounded  with  the  other.  In  his  ob-
servations on  the  laws  of  the  suggesting  principle,  Dr  Thomas
Brown  remarks  die  same  fact,  of  permanence  or  co-exist-
ence, as  taking  place  in  our  mental  conceptions  in  general,
when  associated  with  the  interest  of  any  mental  emotion.  '  I
look  at  a  volume  on  my  table/  says  he,  '  it  recalls  to  me  the
friend  ftom  whom  I  received  it, — the  remembrance  of  him
suggests  to  me  the  conception  of  his  family,— of  an  even-
mg  which  I  spent  with  them, — and  of  various  subjects  of
our  conversation*  Yet  the  conception  of  my  friend  may
continue,  mingled  indeed  with  various  conceptions,  as  they
rise  successively,  but  stHI  eo-exiating  with  them  V  Dr
Brown  proceeds,  with  the  felicity  and  ingenuity  which  so
generally  distinguish  his  writings,  to  explain  how  this  co-
existence of  ideas  gives  us  the  capacity  of  prosecuting  with
steadiness  a  menial  design  or  plan  of  thought.  His  words
cannot  be  abridged  without  doing  injustice  to  his  meaning.
'  When  we  sit  down,9  he  says,  '  to  study  a  particular
subject,  we  must  have  a  certain  conception,  though  proba-
bly a  dim  and  shadowy  one,  of  the  subject  itself.  To  study
it,  however,  is  not  to  have  that  conception  alone,  but  to
have  successively  various  conceptions,  its  relations  to  which
we  endeavour  to  trace.  The  conception  of  our  particular
subject,  therefore,  must,  in  the  very  first  stage  of  our  pro-
gress, suggest  some  other  conception.    But  this  second

*  Lectures,  vol.  ii.  p.  303.


138  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

suggestion,  if  it  alone  were  present,  having  various  rela-
tions of  its  owi^  as  well  as  its  relation  to  the  subject  which
suggested  it,  would  probably  excite  a  third  conception,
which  had  no  reference  to  the  original  subject,— and  this
third  a  fourth, — and  thus  a  whole  series,  all  equally  unre-
lated to  the  subject  which  we  wish  to  study.  It  would
hence  seem  impossible  to  think  of  the  satne  subject  even  for
a  single  minute.  Yet  we  know  that  the  fact  is  very  differ-
ent, and  that  we  often  occupy  whole  hours  in  this  manner,
without  any  remarkable  deviation  from  our  original  design.
Innumerable  conceptions,  indeed,  arise  during  this  time,
but  all  more  or  less  intimately  related  to  the  subject,  by
the  continued  conception  of  which  they  have  every  ap-
pearance of  being  suggested ;  and  if  it  be  allowed  that  the
conception  of  a  particular  subject  both  suggests  trains  of
conceptions,  and  continues  to  exist  together  with  the  con-
ceptions which  it  has  suggested,  every  thing  for  which  I
contend  in  the  present  case  is  implied  in  the  admission/

"  I  apprehend,"  says  the  writer  in  the  Journal,  "rthat
this  principle  suggests  the  true  metaphysical  theory.  If  we
conceive  that  the  simple  function  of  this  faculty  is  to  give
duration  or  fixity  to  whatever  conceptions  or  emotions  oc-
cupy the  mind,  the  various  operations  ascribed  to  Concen-
trativeness  will  flow  from  that  function  as  from  an  elemen-
tary principle.  In  Mr  Combe's  work  lately  published  #,  die
'  primitive  feeling,'  which  gives  rise  to  the  phenomena  of
Concentrativeness,  is  said  to  be,  *  the  tendency  to  concen-
trate the  mind  within  itself,  and  to  direct  its  powers  in  a
combined  effort  to  one  object.'  This,  however,  may  be
considered  rather  as  a  description  of  the  operation  of  the
power,  than  a  statement  of  the  primary  element  to  which
its  phenomena  may  be  traced.  If  we  attend  to  what  passes
in  our  minds  when  we  endeavour  to  concentrate  our
thoughts  upon  a  subject,  we  shall  find  that  we  do  not  at-
tempt any  direct  coercion  on  our  different  faculties,  but

•  System  of  Phrenology,  1885.


CONCENTRATI VENESS.  J  89

simply  endeavour  to  seize  upon  the  object  of  thought)  and
keep  it  steadily  before  the  mind.  We  are  all  occasionally
conscious  of  ineffectual  efforts  of  attention ;  if  we  examine
what  we  do  on  such  occasions,  we  shall  find  that  it  consists
in  an  attempt  to  think  of  some  subject  which  is,  for  the
moment,  less  attractive  than  some  other  objects  which  are
the  causes  of  distraction.  An  effective  concentration  of
the  faculties  takes  place  only  when  the  original  leading
conceptions  are  of  themselves  powerful  and  permanent;
and  the  concentration  mil  be  found,  consequently,  to  be
most  perfect  when  there  is  least  effort  to  produce  it  We
are  sensible  of  this  on  occasions  which  may  be  either  pain*
ful  or  pleasant ;  when  a  subject,  associated  with  strong  emo-
tion, has  taken  possession  of  die  mind ;  and  when  we  find
ourselves  incapable  of  banishing  from  our  thoughts,  even
though  very  desirous  of  doing  so,  the  train  of  conceptions
which  has  so  strongly  concentrated  our  powers  upon  itself,
and  continues  to  keep  them  in  a  state  of  sustained  and  per*
haps  distressing  activity.  We  speak  of  our  minds  having
the  command  of  our  ideas.  This  may  be  correct  enough
in  popular  language;  but,  philosophically  speaking,  our
ideas  command  our  minds.  And  even  in  those  cases  which
appear  most  like  exceptions  to  this  principle,  it  will  be
found,  on  examination,  that  it  is  merely  one  class  of  ideas
assuming  the  predominance  over  another.  When  we  vo-
luntarily change  our  train  of  thought,  or  endeavour  to  con-
centrate our  minds  upon  a  subject,  the  process  is  one  in
which,  under  an  impression  of  the  necessity  or  expediency
of  attending  to  the  particular  subject,  we  pass  from  the
train  of  irrelevant  ideas,  and  endeavour  to  reach,  by  the
aid  of  our  associations,  the  subject  which  we  wish  to  study.
Almost  every  individual  is  capable  of  this  single  effort,  and
he  may  repeat  it  again.  But  that  uninterrupted  sustaining
of  the  attention  so  given,  which  constitutes  Concentrative-
nees,  depends  on  a  quality  distinct  from  efforts  of  atten-
tion,—a  quality  most  strongly  marked  where  least  effort  is
necessary, — and  that  is  simply  the  property  which  this


140  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

mental  power  possesses  of  giving  continuance  to  thoughts
and  feelings  when  they  have  sprang  up  in  the  mind.  This
property  appears  to  exist  in  different  degrees  in  different
minds ;  to  which,  of  course,  the  diversity  in  the  manifesta-
tions of  Concentrativeness,  with  which  we  are  so  often  pre-
sented, is  to  be  mainly  attributed.

"  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  in  what  way  this  property  of
permanence  operates  in  producing  the  various  peculiarities  of
a  concentrative  turn  of  mind.  It  is  a  law  of  thought  which
all  systems  of  mental  philosophy  recognise,  although  they
may  explain  it  differently,  that  a  conception  or  feeling,
when  present  to  the  mind,  naturally  acts  in  calling  up
other  conceptions  and  feelings  of  the  same  class.  Ideas  of
Causality  call  forth  other  ideas  of  Causality ;  emotions  of
Benevolence  or  Destructiveness  are  followed  by  trains  of
conceptions  associated  by  sympathy  with  the  previous  men-
tal state.  If,  then,  one  predominating  conception  or  feeling
be  held  before  the  mind  by  the  force  of  a  strong  Concen-
trativeness, the  mental  action  just  described  will  of  neces-
sity be  greatly  enhanced.  The  secondary  conceptions  will
re-act  upon  the  original,  increasing  the  intensity  of  thought
and  feeling,  and  adding  to  the  excitement  of  the  mind.  A
more  extensive  range  of  ideas,  all  bearing  the  same  kin-
dred character,  will  thus  be  brought  into  view ;  and  while
the  intellect,  seizing  from  a  distance  the  point  to  be  pur-
sued, arranges  its  materials  on  such  a  plan  as  is  best  adapt-
ed to  attain  it,  it  is  at  the  same  time  prepared  for  execut-
ing the  design  with  greater  strength  of  conception,  or,  as
the  nature  of  the  subject  may  require,  with  a  tone  of  more
powerful  emotion.  The  effect  of  this  concentration  natu-
rally extends  to  the  active  powers  in  cases  where  their  co-
operation is  necessary;  the  associated  volitions  flow  more
readily  along  with  the  mental  train,  and  participate  in  the
harmony  of  all  the  other  faculties.

"  In  perfect  consistency  with  this  view,  we  find  that  any
circumstance  which  gives  permanence  to  an  emotion  inde-
pendently of  Concentrativeness,  produces  the  same  effect


C0NCENTBATIVENE8S.  141

The  continued  presence  of  a  cause  of  provocation  will  ex-
cite Destroctiveness  to  a  greater  excess  of  passion.  Large
Cautiousness,  along  with  deficient  Hope,  will  give  a  per-
manent tinge  to  all  the  mental  feelings ;  and,  when  excited
by  disease,  may  so  complexly  fill  the  mind  with  their
gloomy  suggestions,  as  to  render  it  inaccessible  to  every
idea  of  a  brighter  complexion.  Every  sentiment,  whatever
its  character  may  be,  casts  its  own  peculiar  light  over  the
mental  prospects;  and  the  objects  beheld  reflect  that  light
alone  to  the  mind,  whether  it  be  the  splendour  of  our  more
bright  and  joyous  feelings,  or  the  fiercer  glow  of  the  de-
structive passions,  or  the  sombre  illumination  of  a  more
melancholy  mood.

"  It  occurs  to  me  that  the  amount  of  this  power,  in  the
composition  of  intellectual  character,  has  not  been  fully
estimated  by  phrenologists.  Independently  of  Phrenology
altogether,  the  varieties  of  mental  constitution  cannot,  I
think,  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for,  but  by  supposing
that  Concentrativeness  is  an  original  element  of  mind,  vary-
ing in  force  in  different  individuals.  In  connecting  this
power  with  the  cerebral  organ,  phrenologists  have  pro-
ceeded upon  experience;  and  so  far  as  my  limited  observa-
tion has  gone,  I  have  been  gratified  by  the  remarkable  coin-
cidences which  it  has  presented  between  fact  and  this  part
of  the  system.  The  following  remarks  have  been  suggested
by  observation,  and  are  not  merely  speculative ;  but,  at  the
same  time,  they  are  submitted,  to  be  set  aside  or  confirmed
as  to  their  phrenological  accuracy  by  the  more  extensive
observations  of  our  veteran  phrenologists.

"  What  is  the  result  of  extreme  defect  in  this  organ  I  have
had  no  opportunity  of  knowing.  Deficiency,  in  the  more
ordinary  degrees,  discovers  itself  in  different  ways,  accord-
ing to  its  combination  with  other  faculties.  In  some  indi-
viduals it  produces  an  indisposition  to  settle  into  any  re-
gular plan  of  life;  or,  if  this  has  been  controlled  by  cir-
cumstances and  other  faculties,  there  may  still  be  seen  a
want  of  method,  forethought,  and  continuity,  in  the  vari-


148  CONCENTBATIVENESS.

ous  concerns  of  intercourse  or  business.  The  individual
does  not  appear  like  one  driving-  constantly  towards  a  par-
ticular object ;  his  mind  takes  its  direction  from  shifting  cir-
cumstances ;  and  if  other  faculties  conspire,  he  may  be
characterized  by  a  sort  of  careless  facility  or  vivacity  of
disposition.  Should  these  appearances  be  restrained  by
large  Cautiousness  and  Firmness,  while  the  reflecting  or-
gans at  the  same  time  are  fall,  the  manifestations  of  the  de-
ficiency will  be  considerably  different.  There  may  be  a
propensity  to  reason,  and  possibly  to  deal  in  abstract  spe-
culation ;  while  the  individual  will  exhibit,  in  his  attempts
at  argument,  a  degree  of  cloudiness  and  ambiguity  of  con-
ception, which  evidently  results  from  an  incapacity  of  hold-
ing up  distinctly  before  his  mental  vision  the  subject  of
thought.

"  We  occasionally  find  persons  with  large  reflecting  or-
gans, whom  we  are  surprised  to  observe  fittl$jjiven  to  sus-
tained reasoning  or  philosophical  speculation.  The  writer
has  noticed  some  such,  with  Causality  and  Wit  both  large,
while  he  has  had  reason  either  to  know  or  to  suspect,  that
the  organ  of  Concentrativeness  was  considerably  deficient.
The  intellectual  perceptions  of  such  appeared  to  be  strong
and  rapid,  and  possessed  the  momentary  brilliancy  imparted
by  Ideality,  or  the  energy  derived  from  a  large  Combative-
ness.  But  the  mental  action  was  never  sustained;  the
energy  ceased  when  its  impression  had  just  been  felt  by  tlie
auditor ;  and  the  decisions  of  Causality  and  Wit  were  never
prolonged  into  a  train  of  connected  argument  They  came
to  their  conclusions  by  judgments,  and  not  by  ratiocina-
tion. Whatever  could  be  seen  at  a  glance  or  two,  they
perceived,  and  often  with  much  perspicacity  and  origina-
lity ;  but  they  failed  in  every  thing  requiring  the  investi-
gation of  abstract  principles  or  logical  deduction.  They
excelled  in  whatever  admitted  of  succession  and  variety  of
remark,  but  were  unsuccessful  where  a  single  point  was  to
be  kept  in  view,  and  carried  by  argument.  They  were
better  orators  than  writers,  and  more  powerful  still  in  con-

4


CONCENTRATIVENESS*  143

venation  than  in  prolonged  oratory.  It  might  be  that  they
argued  well  in  conversational  controversy ;  bat  this  was
because  the  successive  replies  of  the  debate  broke  the  rea-
soning into  steps,  if  I  may  say  so,  and  always  presented  a
new  point  for  immediate  judgment. — All  this  appears  to
be  the  natural  consequence  of  a  deficient  Concentrative-
ness. We  must  observe,  however,  that  such  a  mind,  when
its  faculties  are  under  the  influence  of  strong  excitement,
may  exhibit  a  degree  of  unity  and  sustainedness  of  thought
beyond  what  is  usual  to  it  at  other  moments ;— but  ibis
would  prove  nothing  against  an  actual  deficiency  in  Con-
centrativeness. All  possess  the  quality  in  some  degree,
and,  of  course,  on  occasions  of  greater  excitement,  its
power  will  be  augmented.  And  still  it  may  be  said,  that
if  great  Concentrativeness  were  placed  in  the  same  cir-
cumstances, its  manifestations  would  be  still  more  re-
markable.

"  Full  or  large  Concentrativeness  gives  rise  to  other  de-
scriptions of  intellectual  character.  We  may  occasionally
observe  a  class  of  persons,  who,  with  the  intellectual  or-
gans rather  poorly  developed,  are  notwithstanding  great
dabblers  in  argument.  They  are  a  species  of  Lilliputian
gladiators,  who  are  perpetually  skirmishing  and  hair-split-
ting with  all  about  them  in  behalf  of  certain  favourite  opi-
nions, to  the  merits  of  which  few,  alas !  are  sensible  but
themselves.  This  is  the  extreme  case,  but  various  modifi-
cations of  it  mil  be  found.  The  probability  is,  that  in  all
such  the  faculty  of  Concentrativeness  is  full;  it  may  be
seen,  indeed,  in  the  natural  language  of  their  looks  and
gestures  :  along  with  this,  Causality  will  be  discovered  to
be  relatively  the  largest  of  their  intellectual  faculties,  al-
though absolutely  small.  Their  reasonings  are  distin-
guished by  two  qualities.  The  first  of  these  is  a  deficiency
of  strength  and  breadth  in  the  conceptions  which  compose
them ;  so  that  their  track  is  something  like  the  lines  of  na-
vigators' courses  in  the  charts,  remarkable  for  nothing  but
its  contmuousness.    The  second  is,  that  they  take  no  com-


144  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

prehensive  survey  of  the  general  principles  which  bear
upon  a  question ;  but  having  die  power  of  seeing  and  dis  •
secting  that  which  is  immediately  before  them,  they  work
onward  by  the  help  of  certain  little  formulae,  now  right,
and  now  wrong,  till  they  strike  upon  some  palpable  absur-
dity, some  contradiction  to  more  general  principles  or  more
extensive  analogies.  When  such  individuals  are  compared
with  persons  Of  the  former  class,  who  have  large  Causality,
and  yet  do  not  reason,  an  apparent  contradiction  is  pre-
sented to  the  phrenological  account  of  Causality,  as  a  fa-
culty which  disposes  to  metaphysics,  and  '  gives  the  per-
ception of  logical  consequences  in  argument.'  The  con-
tradiction vanishes  when  we  connect  two  powers  together
as  necessary  to  reasoning.  The  Causality  of  every  one
whose  mind  is  sound,  is  capable  of  perceiving  the  relation
between  a  cause  and  its  effect,  or  between  simple  premises
and  a  conclusion.  If  Concentrativeness  be  added,  which
gives  the  power  of  keeping  the  subject  of  thought  steadily
before  the  mind,  there  will  be  a  capacity  for  pursuing  such
a  connected  series  of  judgments  as  constitutes  reasoning.
In  mathematical  reasoning,,  where  every  term  has  a  defi-
nite extension,  the  above  power  will  be  sufficient  for  form-
ing sound  conclusions.  But,  in  the  investigation  of  moral
subjects,  there  is  required  a  comprehensive  conception  of
the  various  relations  of  each  term  or  principle  employed  in
our  deductions ;  and  this  appears  to  be  the  property  of  a
large  Causality  in  conjunction  with  the  knowing  organs  }
— the  former  giving  a  powerful  memory  for  relations  pre-
viously discovered,  and  the  latter  supplying  the  materials
on  which  the  decisions  of  Causality  are  founded.  In  both
of  these,  Buch  reasoners  as  we  speak  of  are  deficient ;  and
hence  their  speculations  want  the  elements  both  of  strength
and  comprehensiveness  of  thought*

When  full  Concentrativeness  is  joined  to  large  Causality
and  Individuality,  the  power  of  philosophy  and  reasoning
appears  in  its  greatest  perfection.  The  mind  is  at  once  pos-
sessed of  large  intellectual  resources,  and  is  capable  of

3


CONCENTRATIVENESS.  145

mating  the  most  of  them  by  its  power  of  collecting  its  con-
ceptions into  a  strong  mental  picture,  and  conveying  them
with  the  full  force  of  a  sustained  representation  to  the
minds  of  others*  The  effects  of  a  large  Causality  are  just
the  reverse  of  those  we  attributed  to  a  small.  The  intel-
lectual picture  is  enlarged  in  its  dimensions,  is  more  com-
pletely filled  up  with  related  conceptions,  and  has  its  lines
more  strongly  drawn;  and,  along  with  this,  there  is  a
more  comprehensive  view  of  the  multiplied  connexions
which  the  subject  of  thought  has  with  other  remoter
truths.''

The  styles  of  Tacitus  and  Grattan  appear  to  me  high-
ly characterized  by  Concentrativeness,  while  that  of  Du-
gald  Stewart  is  so  only  in  a  moderate  degree.  The  qua-
lity is  much  more  conspicuous  in  the  poetry  of  Thomas
Campbell  and  Crabbe  than  in  that  of  Sir  Walter  Scott*
It  seems  to  have  been  recognized  by  the  late  Dr  Thomas
Brown,  who  names  it  a  "  Comprehensive  Energy,"  and  it
abounds  in  his  own  writings*

It  has  been  objected,  that  concentration  in  style  is,  in
many  instances,  the  result  of  labour  and  condensation,  and
in  this  I  agree;  but  before  an  author  will  bestow  pains  in
communicating  this  quality  to  his  compositions,  he  must
have  a  relish  for  it  himself;  and  this,  according  to  my  no-
tion, is  inspired  by  the  organ  in  question.  The  object  of
his  exertions  is  to  bring  his  style  up  to  a  state  which  pleases
his  own  faculties ;  and  if  the  organ  be  small,  he  will  not
find  pleasure  in  concentration  either  of  feeling  or  thought.
It  has  been  said,  that  Individuality  and  Eventuality,
when  large,  produce  the  effects  here  attributed  to  Concen-
trativeness ;  but  I  am  acquainted  with  a  literary  gentleman
in  whom  these  organs  are  large,  and  Concentrativeness  de-
ficient, and  who  manifests  great  knowledge  of  facts  and
details,  combined  with  deficiency  in  the  power  of  keeping
them  continuously  before  his  own  mind,  so  as  to  discover
their  relative  bearings  and  applications.     On  the  other  hand,


1 46  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

I  am  acquainted  with  a  philosophical  author,,  who
large  Concentrativeness  with  deficient  Eventuality,  and
who  complains  of  experiencing  great  difficulty  in  acquiring
knowledge  of  details,  who  requires  to  write  down  instantly
the  results  of  his  reading  and  observations,  and  whose
knowledge  exists  in  his  portfolio  more  than  in  Ins  brain,
but  who,  in  reproducing  his  knowledge  as  an  author,  labours
incessantly  till  he  has  discovered  its  natural  relations,  and
gives  it  forth  in  the  most  concentrated  and  systematic  form*
When  Comparison  and  Causality  are  large  in  combination
with  large  Concentrativeness,  there  is  a  tendency  to  syste-
matize knowledge :  when  the  latter  is  deficient  this  is  not  felt;
and  I  regard  one  element  in  a  systematic  mind  to  be  the
power  of  giving  continuousness  to  feelings  and  ideas,  there-
by enabling  the  intellect  to  contemplate  the  relations  sub-
sisting among  them.

According  to  this  account  of  die  faculty,  an  individual
may  have  great  liking  foe  a  particular  pursuit,  Botany,  for
example,  or  Phrenology,  if  he  possess  the  combination  of
faculties  which  takes  pleasure  in  it;  and  he  may  pursue  it
with  ardour,  and  nevertheless  be  deficient  in  Coneentrativ*-
ness.  I  know  such  persons,  but  all  of  diem  make  efforts,
collect  knowledge,  or  communicate  ideas,  without  taking
a  comprehensive  and  concentrated  view  of  the  objects  and
relations  about  which  they  treat.  Dr  Spurzheim,  bow-
ever,  objects  to  my  ideas,  and  states,  that  his  experience  is
in  contradiction  to  them*  Facts  alone  must  determine  be-
tween us.  At  the  same  time,  there  appears  to  be  nothing
in  the  notions  of  Dr  Spurzheim  concerning  Inhabitive-
ness,  inconsistent  with  the  more  extensive  views  now  taken
of  the  functions  of  this  faculty.

It  has  been  objected  by  him,  that  "  Concentrativeness
cannot  possibly  be  a  primitive  faculty,  since  it  can  neither
act  alone,  nor  appear  diseased  singly;  and  since  its  very
existence  only  becomes  apparent  by  the  presence  of  other
powers  directed  to  one  object."  There  are  various  facul-
ties which  cannot  act  alone :  thus,  Firmness  presupposes


CONCENTR  ATI  VENESS.  1 47

the  activity  of  other  powers,  we  persevere  in  passion,  III
love,  in  hate*  ambition,  or  in  study;  but  cannot  well  per-
severe in  mere  abstract  perseverance :  Cautiousness  causes
us  to  fear  5  but  we  always  fear  something,  which  depends  on
other  faculties,  and  rarely  experience  abstract  fear  itself.
Concentrativeness,  therefore,  is  not  singular  in  not  acting
alone.

As  to  disease  of  Concentrativeness,  this  organ  appears
to  suffer  in  those  lunatics  whose  attention  is  immoveably
fixed  on  some  internal  impression,  and  who  remain  absorb-
ed in  silent  and  profound  meditation,  insensible  alike  to
the  threats  and  caresses  of  those  around  them,  and  to  the
effects  of  external  objects.  They  differ  from  ordinary  mo-
nomaniacs in  this,  that  the  latter,  xtfth  certain  unsound
feelings  or  intellectual  perceptions,  or  with  unsound  asso-
ciations on  the  presentment  of  certain  external  objects,  cait
still  direct  their  attention  to  other  feelings  or  ideas,  and
concerning  theih  can  hold  rational  conversation.  The  state
now  attributed  to  diseased  Concentrativeness,  must  be  dis-
tinguished also  from  one  for  which  it  has  been  sometimes
mistaken,  viz*  dementia,  Approaching  to  idiocy,  in  which  a
fixed  look  and  silent  calmness  appear,  not  from  internal
meditation,  but  from  utter  insensibility  to  stimuli  In  dis-
ease of  Concentrativeness,  the  patient  possesses  intense
consciousness,  and,  when  cured,  is  able  to  give  an  account
of  all  that  passed  in  his  mind  during  the  malady ;  in  de-
menHOj  the  period  of  the  disease  forms  a  blank  in  existence,
the  individual  recollecting  nothing.  Dr  A.  Combe,  to  whom
I  owe  these  observations,  states,  that  he  has  heard  Esqui-
kol,  in  his  lectures  at  the  Salpetridre,  speak  of  cases  such
as  those  now  described ;  and  he  has  seen  examples  which
proved  the  aeeuracy  of  his  account  of  them,  although,  ow-
ing to  the  function  not  having  been  discovered  at  the  time,
he  did  not  observe  the  condition  of  this  particular  organ.
I  ttm  acquainted  with  a  gentleman  in  whom  the  organ  is
large,  and  who,  while  labouring  under  a  nervous  affection,
in  which  Cautiousness  and  Conscientiousness  were  diseased,

k2


1 48  CONCENTRATIVENESS*

experienced  a  feeling  as  if  the  power  of  concentrating  lib
mind  were  about  to  leave  him,  and  who  used  vigorous  ef-
forts  to  preserve  it,  He  directed  his  attention  to  an  object,
frequently  a  spire  at  the  end  of  a  long  street,  and  resolute-
ly maintained  it  immoveably  fixed  there  for  a  considerable
length  of  time,  excluding  all  other  ideas  from  his  mind.
The  consequence  was,  that  in  his  then  weak  state,  a  dis-
eased fixity  of  mind  ensued,  in  which  feelings  and  ideas
stood  as  it  were  bound  up  and  immoveable,  and  thereafter
a  state  in  which  every  impression  and  emotion  was  floating
and  fickle  like  images  in  water.  He  was  then  unacquaint-
ed with  Phrenology,  but  knows  it  now,  and  expresses  his
conviction  that  the  circumstances  detailed  were  probably
referable  to  a  diseased  affection  of  the  organ  in  question.

Dr  Spurzheim  objects  farther,  that  "  no  one,  in  concen-
trating his  mind,  and  directing  his  powers  to  one  object,
exhibits  gestures  and  motions  indicating  activity  in  the  back
part  of  the  head ;  the  whole  of  the  natural  language  shews,
that  concentration  takes  place  in  the  forehead/9  With  the
greatest  deference  to  Dr  Spurzheim' s  superior  skill  and
accuracy,  I  take  the  liberty  of  stating,  that,  so  far  as  my
own  observation  goes,  those  persons  who  really  possess  the
power  of  concentration,  while  preparing  to  make  a  power-
ful and  combined  exertion  of  all  their  powers,  naturally
draw  the  head  and  body  backwards  in  the  line  of  this  organ.
The  author  of  Waverley  describes  this  as  the  attitude  of
concentrated  internal  thinking.  Preachers  and  advocates
in  whom  it  is  large,  while  speaking  with  animation,  move
the  head  in  the  line  of  Concentrativeness  and  Individuality,
or  straight  backwards  and  straight  forwards.  When  Com-
bativeness  predominates  over  Concentrativeness  in  a  plead-
er, he  draws  his  head  backwards  and  to  the  side,  in  the  line
of  Combativeness,  and  advances  it  in  a  corresponding  di-
rection.

"  This  organ,"  continues  Dr  Spurzheim,  "  is  aiso  com-
monly larger  in  women  than  in  men,  and  I  leave  every  one
to  decide  upon  the  sex  which  supports  the  more  close  and


CONCEKTRaTIVEKESS.  14$

vigorous  attention."  In  Scotland,  and  I  may  almost  say
in  England,  although  my  observations  there  have  been  less
extensive,  this  is  not  the  case ;  the  development  being  larger
in  men  in  general  than  in  women.  "  It  is  moreover,"  says
he,  "  larger  in  Negroes  and  in  the  Celtic  tribes  than  in
the  Teutonic  races ;  in  the  French,  for  instance,  it  is  larger
than  in  the  Germans.  The  national  character  of  these  na-
tions not  only  does  not  confirm  the  opinion  of  Mr  Combe,
but  is  in  direct  contradiction  to  it."  From  this  and  some
other  objections  of  Dr  Spurzheim,  which  I  pass  over  with-
out comment,  I  am  convinced  that  he  has  not  correctly  ap-
prehended the  quality  of  mind  which  I  designate  by  Con-
centrativeness. This  must,  no  doubt,  be  my  fault ;  but  it
affords  a  good  reason  for  not  prolonging  disputation.  So
far  as  my  knowledge  of  French  literature  extends,  it  is  not
marked  by  deficiency  of  Concentrativeness.  The  intellec-
tual range  of  the  French  is  limited,  but  no  nation  attain*
to  greater  perfection  within  the  sphere  which  their  faculties
are  calculated  to  reach:  they  write  the  best  elementary
works  on  science  of  any  people  of  Europe ;  and  to  this
Concentrativeness  is  essential.  They  bring  their  powers  to*
bear  in  a  regulated  manner  on  the  point  under  considera-
tion, and  present  it  clearly  and  definitely  to  the  understand-
ing. The  Germans  have  more  powerful  reflecting  faculties
than  the  French,  and  also  greater  perseverance;  but,  if  £
may  judge  from  the  limited  knowledge  of  their  literature
which  I  have  been  able  to  obtain,  they  appear  inferior  to
themin  Concentrativeness.  They  introduce  more  frequently
extraneous  ideas  and  feelings,  and  do  not  arrive  at  so  neat
and  complete  a  whole  in  their  compositions;

In  regard  to  the  tendency  to  "  Inhabitiveness,"  I  con*
ceive  that  concentration  of  mind  is  favourable  to  this  ten-
dency, and  that  men  and  animals,  whose  faculties  are  more
concentrated,  have  the  greatest  inclination  to  remain  in
one  place;  besides,  animals  which  brouse  on  rocks,  and
wlu^oh  place  their  nests  in  high  and  difficult  situations,  or
by  the  banks  of  rapid  rivers,  would  require  for  their  well-


150  CONCENTRATIVENESS.

being  and  comfort  just  such  a  faculty  as  this,  which  should
enable  them  to  maintain  their  position  with  ease,  and  at
the  same  time  to  provide  for  their  food  and  safety.  The
eagle,  which  loves  to  soar  aloft,  requires  certain  faculties
to  be  exerted  to  maintain  his  equilibrium*  while  at  the  same
time  his  eye  darts  at  once  over  a  great  expanse  "  through
the  azure  deep  of  air,"  to  discern  his  prey  on  the  surface
of  the  earth.  There  axe  farther  required  a  concentration
and  simultaneous  action  of  numerous  faculties  in  the  stoop
which  he  makes  upon  the  prey  itself,  and  in  pouncing  at
once  upon  the  bird  or  lamb  which  he  has  selected  for  his
victim.  Something  of  the  same  kind  is  required  in  the
water-fowl,  whose  cradle  is  the  deep,  in  diving  for  his  food
through  the  waters.  The  co-operation  of  all  his  powers
must  bp  required  to  keep  him  in  that  situation,  and  at  the
same  time  enable  him  to  secure  what  he  wishes  for  food,
and  avoid  his  numerous  enemies.  In  this,  way  I  conceive
that  the  new  functions  attributed  to  this  osgan  do  not  su-
persede the  old,  nor  imply  any  incorrectness  in  the  obser-
vations which  led  Dr  Spurzheim  to  conjecture  its  uses;
aj  the  same,  time  there  may  be  a  modification  in  the  faculty
itself  in  di^rent  spgcies  of  anjmalft  which  iftay  determine
some  to  high  and  some  to  hw  qftua&roa;  while  in  man  jft
may  be  a  more  general  faculty,  without  determining  to  a
residence  of  any  particular  kind.

The  strongest  expression  of  this  faculty  which  I  have
observed,  is  in  rope-dancers.  Their  coitfttenanr^a  shew  %
grqat  internal  effort  of  mental  concentration,  watching  and*
directing  the  slightest  motions  of  the  body ;  and  in  the
head  of  Ducrow,  of  which  tbn  Iftfevologioal  Society  haa
a  cast,  the  organ  is  very  large.  He  manifests  the  facujty
in  the  highest  degree.

The  leading  object  of  these  discussions  i*  to  enable  tfr*
reader  tp  form  an  iff^a  of  the  mental  quality,  if  it  be  s^ch,
inte,nde4  to  bq  designated  by  CoitgentratHtgneee,  so  that  ho
may  be  able  to  deqifta  on  the  function  of  the  organ  by  hi*
ovfs]  observations     It  a$ts,  alpng  wtfi  the  feo&igs  a*


ADHESIVENESS.  151

well  as  with  the  intellect,  and  prolong*  emotion**  Ab-
stract reasoning  is  not  admitted  in  Phrenology  a*  proof
in  favour  of  any  organ  or  faculty;  and  I  have  observed
that,  by  leading  the  mind  insensibly  to  adopt  a  conclusion
for  or  against  particular  ideas,  it  prodnoes  a  tendency  to
seek  support  for  opinions  rather  than  trath,  and  thereby
retards  the  progress  of  accurate  investigation.— The  fune-
tioa  is  stated  as  only  probable,  and  stands  open  for  farther
elucidation*

4. — ADHESIVENESS.

This  orgs*  is  situated  at  the  middle  of  the  posterior  edge
of  the  parietal  bene,  on  eaeh  side  of  Cewentrativeness*
higher  up  than  Philoprogenitiveness,  and  jwt  above  the
lambdoidaJ  suture*  When  very  large,  two  annular  protu-
berances will  be  observed  there;  or  a  general  fulness,  if  the
neighbouring  organs  be  large ;  when  small,  that  part  el  the
head  is  narrow  or  depressed*

Dr  Gall  was  requested  to  mould  for  his  collection  the
head  of  a  lady,  who  was  described  to  him  as  a  model  of
friendship*  He  did  so,  more  through  complaisance,  than
in  expectation  of  making  any  discovery.  In  examining  the
head,  he  found  two  large  prominences,  in  the  form  of  a
segment  of  a  circle,  on  the  sides  of  the  organ  of  Philopro-
genitiveness* These  prominences,  which  he  had  not  pre-
viously observed,  were  symmetrical,  and  manifestly  formed
by  part  of  the  brain ;  and  he  therefore  concluded,  that  they
indicated  organs;  but  the  question  was,  what  are  their
functions?  He  inquired  at  the  friends  of  the  lady  con-
cerning her  dispositions  and  talents,  and  also  obtained  her
own  opinion  of  the  feelings  and  capacities  which  she  most
strongly  possessed*  All  the  information  concurred  in  re*
gpsd  to  the  foes,  that  she  was  distinguished  by  inviolable
attachment  to  her  friends*  Although  at  different  periods
of  her  Kfe*  her  fortune  had  undergone  great  changes,  and
ent  several  occasions  she  had  passed  from  poverty  to  riches,


153  ADHESIVENESS.

her  affection  for  her  former  friends  was  never  forgotten*
The  idea  naturally  presented  itself,  that  the  disposition  to
attachment  might  be  connected  with  a  particular  part  of
the  brain.  This  inference  acquired  greater  probability  from
the  circumstance,  that  the  prominences  on  the  head  of  this
lady  were  .placed  immediately  above  the  organ  of  sexual
love,  and  on  the  two  sides  of  that  of  the  love  of  children,  and
that  the  three  feelings  have  obviously  some  analogy  to  each
other.  Many  subsequent  observations  confirmed  this  con-
jecture, and  the  organ  has  long  been  regarded  as  esta-
blished.

The  faculty  gives  the  instinctive  tendency  to  attachment,
and  causes  us  to  experience  the  greatest  delight  in  a  peturn
of  affection.  Those  in  whom  it  is  large,  feel  an  involuntary
impulse  to  embrace,  and  cling  to  any  object  which  is  capa-
ble of  experiencing  fondness.  It  gives  ardour  and  a  firm
grasp  to  the  shake  with  the  hand.  In  boys,  it  frequently
displays  itself  by  attachment  to  dogs,  rabbits,  birds,  horses,
or  other  animals.  In  girls,  it  adds  fondness  to  the  embraces
bestowed  upon  the  doll.  The  feelings  which  it  inspires
abound  in  the  poetry  of  Moore.  He  beautifully  describes
its  effects  in  the  following  lines :

"  The  heart,  like  a  tendril  accustomed  to  cling,
Let  it  grow  where  it  will  cannot  flourish  alone ;
But  will  lean  to  the  nearest  and  loveliest  thing,
It  can  twine  with  itself,  and  make  closely  its  own."

It  also  inspires  the  verse,

a  The  heart  that  loves  truly,  love  never  forgets,
But  as  truly  loves  on  to  the  close ;
As  the  sun-flower  turns  to  her  god  as  he  sets,
The  same  look  that  she  turned  when  he  rose."

The  old  Scotch  ballad,  "  There's  nae  luck  about  the
house,"  breathes  the  very  spirit  of  this  faculty.

The  organ  is  generally  larger,  and  the  faculty  stronger,
in  women  than  in  men ;  and  the  extreme  constancy  with
which,  in  general,  they  adhere  to  the  objects  of  their  at-
tachment may  be  attributed  to  this  faculty.    "  Man  boasts


ADHESIVENESS.  153

of  his  capacity  for  friendship,"  says  Mr  Scott,  "  and  false-
ly speaks  of  its  joys  as  the  purest  of  all  human  enjoyments.
But  it  is  only  in  the  heart  of  feeling,  confiding,  generous
woman,  that  friendship  is  to  be  found  in  all  the  fulness  of
perfection.  It  was  part  of  the  doom  pronounced  upsn  her
at  the  fall,  that '  her  desire  should  be  to  her  husband,  and
that  he  should  rule  over  her;9  and,  conformably  to  the  first
clause  in  this  sentence,  we  find  Adhesiveness  to  be,  in  gene-
ral, far  more  powerful  in  the  woman  than  in  the  man.
The  most  generous  and  friendly  man  is  selfish  in  compari-
son with  woman.  There  is  no  friend  like  a  loving  and  af-
fectionate wife.  Man  may  love,  but  it  is  always  with  a  re-
serve, and  with  a  view  to  his  own  gratification ;  but  when
a  woman  bestows  her  love,  she  does  it  with  her  heart  and
nouV'—Phren.  Joxtrru  vol.  ii.  p.  280.

Even  in  the  most  degraded  criminals,  this  faculty  some-
times manifests  itself  with  a  fervour  and  constancy  of  af-
fection worthy  of  a  better  fate.  Mart  Macinnes,  execut-
ed in  Edinburgh  for  murder,  had  gained  the  affection  of  a
person  whose  name  need  not  here  be  mentioned;  and  her
attachment  to  him  continued  strong  in  death,  and  assumed
even  a  romantic  appearance  in  the  last  moments  of  her
mortal  career.  He  had  sent  her  a  pocket-handkerchief,
having  his  name  written  in  one  corner,  and  also  half  an
orange,  with  a  desire  that  she  would  eat  the  latter  on  the
scaffold;  in  token  of  their  mutual  affection,  he  having  eaten
the  other  half  the  preceding  morning  at  the  corresponding
hour.  She  held  the  corner  of  the  napkin  in  her  mouth  al-
most all  the  night  preceding  her  execution,  and  even  on
the  scaffold.  When  seated  on  the  drop,  the  turnkey  gave
her  the  half  orange.  She  took  it  out  of  his  hand,  and,  with-
out the  least  symptom  of  fear,  said,  "  Tell  him  (the  object
of  her  attachment)  that  I  die  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  has
done  all  in  his  power  for  my  life,  and  that  I  eat  the  orange
as  he  desired  me,  May  God  bless  him.  Say  to  him  that
it  is  my  dying  request  that  he  may  take  care  of  drink  and
bad  company,  and  be  sure  never  to  be  late  out  at  night"


154  ADHESIVENESS.


She  seamed  to  forget  eternity  in  the  ardour  of  her  attach-
ment to  earth.  The  organ  is  very  large  in  the  cast  of  her
bead*— PArai*  Trans,  p.  S76.

This  great  pronenees  to,  and  ardour  is,  attachment  ok
the  part  of  the  female  tax,  render  thoee  men  doubly  guilty,
who,onthe£abehypoAe«kUmtaa»ctkmrea^yandwann-
ly  bestowed,  maybe  lightly  withdrawn  and  directed  to  an-
other, sport  with  this  beautiful  trait  of  female  nature,  and
gain  the  affections  of  women,  to  betray  their  honour,  or
gratify  a  silly  vanity  by  being  loved*

There  k  a  great  difference  among  individuals  in  regard
to  the  strength  of  this  feeling.  Some  men  hare  many  ac-
quaintances but  no  friends ;  while  others  remain  attached
to  certain  individuals  during  every  change  of  circumstances,
and  do  not  readily  enlarge  the  circle  of  their  intimates*
When  die  organ  is  large,  great  dsHght  is  felt  in  friendship
and  attachment,  the  idea  of  distant  friends  often  presents
itself,  and  the  glow  of  affection  rushes-  into  the  mind,  with
all  the  warmth  and  vivacity  of  a  passion*  Those  in  whom
it  is  small  care  little  for  friendship ;  out  of  sight,  out  of
mind,  is  their  maxim*  We  frequently  see  individuals  of
very  different  characters  and  genius,  lastingly  attached  to
each  other*  This  faculty,  strong  in  both,  seems  to  me  to
be  the  bend  of  union.  They  perhaps  feel  many  points  of
repulsion,  and  are  net  happy  if  too  long  and  too  closely
united ;  but  still,  on  being  separated,  they  experience  a  long-
ing for  each  other's  society,  which  makes  them  forget  and
forgive  every  thing  to  obtain  its  gratification.  There  are
husbands  and  wives  who  cannot  live  together,  and  yet  who
become  miserable  when  long  separated*  I  conceive  this  to
arise  from  large  Adhesiveness  in  both,  combined  with
other  faculties  in  each,  which  do  not  harmonise.

This  faculty  is  dearly  distinguishable  from  Benevolence,
for  many  persons  are  prone  to  attachment  who  are  not  gene-
rous* It,  however,  has  a  more  extensive  influence  than  the
production  of  friendship  among  individuals,  and  appears  to
give  rise  to  the  instinctive  tendency  to  congregate^  when**


ADHESIVENESS.  1#J

society  has  originated,  Ma*  is  created  obviously  witk  a
view  to  the  social  state.  His  feelings  of  benevolence,  lover
of  praise  and  justice,  require  society  for  their  objects,  as
much  as  the  stomach  requires  food  to  enable  it  to  perform,
the  process  of  digestion ;  mad  nature,  by  msan*  of  this  fa-
culty, seems  to  give  the  instinctive  tendency  to  associate*
by  means  of  which  the  whole  powers  of  the  mind  may  find
scope  for  exercise.  If  this  view  be  correct,  deficiency  in
the  organ  will  be  essential  to  an  anchorite  or  hermit

Some  of  the  lower  animals  possess  this  propensity  as  well
as  man:  It  is  remarkably  strong  in  the  dog;  and  horses
and  oxen  sometimes  become  siok  and  pine,  when  deprived
of  accustomed  companions.  "  It  is  to  be  observed,  how-
ever," says  Dr  Spubzhum,  "  that  the  instinct  of  being  at-
tached for  life,  and  that  of  living  in  society,  are  not  mere
degrees  of  energy,  so  that  a  lower  degree  produces  attach-
ment for  life,  and  a  higher  degree  for  society.  For  there  are
animals  which  live  in  society  without  bei*g  attached  for  life;
as  the  bull,  the  dog,  cock,  &c. ;  others  live  in  society,  and
inlhmjly,  as  starlings,  ravens,  crows,  &o. ;  others  again  are
attached  for  life  without  living  in  society,  as  the  fox,
magpie*"  &o.  The  instinct,  therefore,  of  living  in  society,
and  that  of  living  in  family*  are  *^jfca*^  of  the  faulty
in  qnestkm ;  ju#t  a*  smell*  although  the  same  tense  in  her-
bivorous and  carnivorous  animaK.  fe  njedifled  in  the  former
to  take  eogefeance  of  vegetable  substances,  and  in  the  1st.
ter»o£  the  animal  fibre  and  effluvia.  "  Man  belongs  to  the>
animals  which  are  social  aad\  attached*  fer  ]*£•;  society  and
marriage  are  consequently  eflfectaaot  of  human  reflection*
but  of  ait  original  decuee  of  mto^"^Spm*hGv*s  Physwg*
SysL  p.  2QG>  cmdPhrmdogy,  p.  ]£&

Dr  Gall  does  not  coincide  in  the  opinion  that  attach-
ment for  life  in  man  and  animals  results  from  this  organ.
It  appears  to  him,  so  far  as  his  knowledge  of  natural  his-
tory extends,  that,  in  all  species  where  both  the  male  and
female  concur  in  rearing  the  young,  marriage  for  life  ex-
ists ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  where  the  unaided  female


156  ADHESIVENESS.

is  sufficient  to  this  end,  the  connection  is  temporary.  At
the  same  time,  he  speaks  with  much  reserve  on  the  sub-
ject, and  is  not  prepared  to  decide,  whether  there  is  a  se-
parate organ  for  attachment  for  life, — whether  it  is  the  re-
sult of  a  combination  of  several  organs,  or  a  modification
of  Adhesiveness, — Vol.  iii.  p.  485.

Excessive  energy  of  this  faculty-  produces  extreme  re-
gret at  the  loss  of  friends,  or  at  leaving  our  country.  Nos-
talgia is  supposed  to  result  from  disease  of  the  organ.

Mr  Stewart*  and  Dr  Thomas  Brown  f,  admit  this
tendency  as  a  primitive  instinct  of  our  nature,  and  concur
in  general  with  the  views  of  the  phrenologists  in  regard
to  it.

J.  J.  Rousseau  founds  his  celebrated  Essay  on  the  Origin
of  the  Inequality  of  Ranks,  which  obtained  the  prize  from
the  Academy  of  Dijon,  on  the  non-existence  of  such  a  pro-
pensity in  the  human  mind.  He  views  man  in  his  natural
state,  as  an  isolated  and  wandering  animal,  satisfying  his
hunger  by  the  chase,  or  by  the  fruit  of  the  forest,  and
quenching  his  thirst  at  the  spring  or  the  brook,  and  having
no  more  need  or  desire  of  society  with  his  kind,  than  the
eagle  or  the  wplf.  He  conceives,  that  the  individual  who
first  enclosed  a  spot  of  ground  and  called  it  fame,  and  who
first  cajoled  his  fellow  men  to  settle  around  him  and  assist
him  in  his  projects,  was  the  author  of  all  the  evil  with
which  human  nature  is  now  "afflicted.  Many  volumes
have  been  written  in  answer  to  this  absurd  lucubration ;
but  I  submit,  that  Phrenology,  by  shewing  that  those  who
have  this  part  of  the  brain  large,  are  inspired  with  an  in-
stinctive tendency  to  attachment  and  society,  affords  a
brief  and  satisfactory  refutation  of  the  hypothesis.

The  organ  is  established.

•  Outlines,  p.  87.  +  Lecture  6*


(     157     )

5.— COMBATIVENESS.

This  organ  is  situated  at  the  posterior-inferior  angle  of
the  parietal  bone.

Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  account  of  its  discovery.
After  he  had  abandoned  all  the  metaphyseal  systems  of  the
mind,  and  become  anxious  to  discover  the  primitive  pro-
pensities of  human  nature,  by  means  of  observation,  he
collected  in.  his  house  a  number  of  individuals  of  the  lower
classes  of  society,  following  different  occupations,  coach-
drivers,  servants,  &c^  After  acquiring  their  confidence,
and  disposing  them  to  sincerity,  by  giving  them  wine  and
money,  he  drew  them  into  conversation  about  each  other's
qualities,  good  and  bad,  and  particularly  about  the  striking
characteristics  in  the  disposition  of  each*  In  the  portraits
which  they  drew  of  each  other,  they  paid  particular  atten-
tion to  those  who  everywhere  provoked  quarrels  and  dis-
putes; they  also  distinguished  individuals  of  a  pacific  dis-
position, and  spoke  of  them  with  contempt,  calling  than
poltroons*  Dr  Gall  became  curious  to  discover,  whe-
ther the  heads  of  the  bravoes  whom  they  described  dif-
fered in  any  respect  from  those  of,  the  pacific  individuals.
He  ranged  them  on  opposite  sides,  and  found,  that  those  who
delighted  in  quarrels  had  that  part  of  the  head  immediately
behind,  and  a  little  above  the  ear,  much  larger  than  the
others.

He  observes,  that  there  could  be  here  no  question  about
the  influence  of  education,  and  that  this  prominent  feature
in  the  character  of  each  could  never  be  attributed  to  the
influence  of  external  circumstances.  Men  in  the  rank  to
which  they  belonged,  abandon  themselves  without  reserve
to  the  impulse  of  their  natural  dispositions.

The  spectacle  of  fighting  animals  was,  at  that  time,  still
existing  at  Vienna.  An  individual  belonging  to  the  esta-
blishment was  so  extremely  intrepid,  that  he  frequently
presented  himself  in  the  arena  quite  alone,  to  sustain  the


158  COMBATIVENESS.

combat  against  a  wild  boar,  or  a  bull.  In  his  head,  the
organ  was  found  to  be  very  large.  Dr  Gall  next  examin-
ed the  heads  of  several  of  his  fellow  students,  who  had
been  banished  from  Universities  for  exciting  contentions,
and  continually  engaging  in  duels.  In  diem  also  the  or-
gan was  large.  In  the  course  of  his  researches,  he  met
with  a  young  lady  who  bad  repeatedly  disguised  herself  in
male  attire,  and  maintained  battles  with  the  other  sex ;
and  in  her,  also,  the  organ  was  large*  On  the  other  hand,
be  examined  the  heads  of  individuals,  who  were  equally
remarkable  for  want  of  courage,  and  in  them  the  organ
was  small.  The  heads  of  the  courageous  persons  varied
in  every  other  point,  but  resembled  each  other  in  bring
large  in  this  part.  Equal  differences  were  found  in  the
other  parts  of  the  heads  of  the  timid,  when  compared  with
each  other,  but  all  were  small  at  Combativeness.

This  faculty  has  fallen  under  the  lash  of  ridicule,  and  ft
has  been  objected,  that  the  Creator  cannot  have  implanted
in  the  mind  a  faculty  for  fighting.  The  objectors,  however,
have  been  equally  shallow  in  learning,  as  in  observation  of
human  nature.  The  profoundest  metaphysicians  admit  its
existence,  and  the  most  esteemed  authors  describe  its  in-
fluence and  operations.  The  character  of  Uncle  Tobt,
as  dfawn  by  Sterne,  is  in  general  true  to  nature,  and  it
is  a  personification  of  the  combative  propensity,  combined
with  great  Benevolence  and  Integrity.  "  If,"  says  Uncle
Toby,  "  when  I  was  a  school-boy,  I  could  not  he&r  a
dram  beat  but  my  heart  beat  with  it,  was  it  my  fault  ?  Did
I  plant  the  propensity  there  ?  Did  I  sound  the  alarm  with-
in, or  nature?"  He  proceeds  to  justify  himself  against  the
charge  of  cruelty  supposed  to  be  implied  in  a  passion  for
the  battle  field.  "  Did  any  one  of  you,"  he  continued,
"  shed  more  tears  for  Hector?  And  when  King  Priam
came  to  the  damp  to  beg  his  body,  and  returned  weeping
back  to  Troy  without  it,— you  know,  brother,  I  could  not
eM  my  dinner.  Did  that  bespeak  me  cruel  ?  or,  because,
Brother  8han0Y,  my  Meod  flew  out  into  the  camp,  and


COMBATIYENESS.  159

my  heart  putted  for  war,  Was  it  a  proof  that  it  could  not
ache  for  the  distress  of  war  too  ?'

Tacitus,  in  his  history  of  the  war  by  Vespasian  against
Vitellius,  mentions,  that,  "  Even  women  chose  to  enter
the  capital  and  abide  the  siege*  Amongst  these,  the  most
signal  of  all  was  Verulaha  Gracilia,  a  lady,  who  followed
neither  children  nor  kindred,  nor  relations,  hut  followed
only  the  war." — Lib.  iii  «  Courage,"  says  Dr  Johnson,
*  is  a  quality  so  necessary  for  maintaining  virtue,  that  it  is
always  respected,  even  when  it  is  associated  with  vice."

Mr  Stewart  and  Dr  Reid  admit  this  propensity,  under
the  name  of  "  sudden  resentment ;"  and  Dr  Thomas  Brown
gives  an  accurate  and  beautiful  description  of  it,  under  the
name  of  "  instant  anger."  "  There  is  a  principle  m  o*r
mtind,"  says  he,  "  which  is  tons  like  a  constant  protector,
which  may  slumber  indeed,  but  which  slumbers  only  at
seasons  when  its  vigilance  would  be  useless,  which  awakes
at  the  first  appearance  of  unjust  intention,  and  which  be*
comes  more  watchful  and  more  vigorous  in  proportion  to
the  violence  of  the  attack  which  it  has  to  dread.  What
should  we  think  of  the  providence  of  nature,  if,  when  ag-
gression was  threatened  against  the  weak  and  unarmed,  at
a  distance  from  the  aid  of  others,  there  were  instantly  and
uniformly,  by  the  intervention  of  some  wondeMrffking
power,  to  rush  into  the  hand  of  the  defenceless,  a  sword  or
other  weapon  of  defence?  and  yet  this  would  be  but  a
feeble  assistance,  if  compared  with  that  which  we  receive
from  those  simple  emotions  which  heaven  has  caused  to
rush,  as  it  were,  into  our  mind,  for  repelling  every  attack."
•—Vol.  iii  p.  324.  This  emotion  is  exactly  the  phrenolo-
gical propensity  of  Combativenees.  The  chief  difference
between  Dr  Brown's  views  and  ours,  is,  that  he  regards
it  as  a  mere  susceptibility  of  emotion,  liable  to  be  called
into  action  when  provocation  presents  itself,  but  slumber^
ing  in  quiescence  in  ordinary  circumstances;  while  we
look  upon  it  as  an  active  impulse,  exerting  an  influence
on  the  mental  constitution,  independent  of  unjust  attack.


160  COMBATIVENESS.

It  is  to  express  this  active  quality,  that  "  Combativeness"
is  used  to  designate  the  faculty,  in  preference  to  "  Cou-
rage-

Combativeness,  then,  inspires  with  courage,  and,  when
properly  directed,  is  useful  to  maintain  the  right     On  this
account,  a  considerable  endowment  of  it  is  indispensable  to
all  great  and  magnanimous  characters.     Even  in  schemes
of  charity,  or  in  plans  for  the  promotion  of  religion  or
learning,  opposition  will  arise,  and  Combativeness  inspires
its  possessor  with  that  instinctive  boldness  which  enables
the  mind  to  look  undaunted  on  a  contest  in  virtue's  cause,
and  to  meet  it  without  shrinking.     Were  the  organ  very
deficient  in  the  promoters  of  such  schemes,  they  would  be
liable  to  be  overwhelmed  by  contention,  and  baffled  in  all
their  exertions.      I  conceive  Mrs  Fry  would  require  no
small  Combativeness  to  give  her  courage  to  undertake  the
reformation  of  Newgate.     Without  it,  her  mind  could  not
have  felt  that  boldness  to  encounter  difficulty,  which  must
have  preceded  the  resolution  to  undertake  so  great  an  en-
terprise.    Howard,   the  philanthropist,  also  must  have
been  supported  by  it  in  the  perils  he  voluntarily  undertook
in  visiting  the  dungeons  of  Europe.    Indeed,  I  have  ob-
served that  the  most  actively  benevolent  individuals  of
both  sexes,  those  who,  in  person,  minister  to  the  relief  of
the  poor,  and  face  poverty  and  vice  in  their  deepest  haunts,
to  relieve  and  correct  them,  have  this  organ  fully  developed.
Luther  and  Knox  must  have  required  a  large  portion  of  it,
to  enable  them  to  perform  the  services  which  they  rendered
to  Christendom.

The  organ  is  large  in  valiant  warriors.  In  the  skulls  of
King  Robert  Bruce,  and  General  Wurmser,  who  de-
fended Mantaa  against  Buonaparte,  it  is  exceedingly  con-
spicuous. The  figures,  at  the  top  of  next  page,  represent
Wurmser's  skull  contrasted  at  this  organ  with  the  skull
of  a  Ceylonese  boy,  in  whom  it  is  small.


COMB  A  TIVENESS.  161

General  Wtjbmsir.  Ceylonese  Boy.


CombttthroMM  large


In  feudal  times,  great  Combativeness  was  more  essential
to  a  leader  than  it  is  in  modern  warfare.  Richard  C<eub
de  Lion,  Bruce  and  Wallace,  could  command  the  fierce
barbarians  whom  they  led  to  the  field  only  by  superior  per*
sonal  prowess ;  and,  indeed,  hope  of  victory  was  then  found*
ed  chiefly  on  the  dexterity  with  which  the  chief  could
wield  his  sword.  In  modern  warfare,  comprehensiveness
of  intellect  is  more  requisite  in  a  General ;  but  still  Com*
bativeness  is  a  valuable  element  in  his  constitution.  Na-
poleon distinguished  accurately  between  these  two  qua-
lities. He  describes  Ney  and  Murat  as  men  in  whom
instinctive  courage  predominated  over  judgment ;  and
notices  their  excellence  in  leading  an  attack,  or  a  charge
of  cavalry,  combined  with  their  incapacity  for  great  af-
fairs* The  most  perfect  military  commander,  he  says,  is
formed  when  courage  and  judgment  are  in  tequilibrio  ; — in
phrenological  language,  when  the  organs  of  Combativeness,
moral  Sentiment,  and  Reflection,  are  in  just  proportion.

This  faculty  is  of  great  service  to  an  advocate :  it  fur-
nishes him  with  the  spirit  of  contention,  and  causes  his
energies  to  rise  in  proportion  as  he  is  opposed.

It  inspires  authors  with  the  love  of  battles.  Homer  and
Sir  Walter  Scott  are  fired  with  more  than  common
energy,  when  describing  the  fight,  the  slaughter,  and  the
shouts  of  victory.  From  this  sympathy  of  historians,  ora-
tors and  poets,  with  deeds  of  arms,  warriors  are  too  incon-
siderately elevated  into  heroes,  and  thus  the  trade  Of
butchery  is  fostered  and  rendered  glorious,  with  small  refe-

L


164  COMBATIVENESS.

rence  tp  the  merits  of  the  quarrel.  Phrenology,  by  re-
vealing the  true  source  of  the  passion  for  war,  will,  it  is
to  be  hoped,  one  day  direct  the  public  sentiment,  to  mark
with  its  highest  disapprobation  every  manifestation  of  this
faculty  thai  is  not  sanctioned  by  justice,  and  then  we  shall
have  fewer  battles  and  inflictions  of  misery  on  mankind.

When  too  energetic  and  ill  directed,  it  produces  the
worst  results.  It  then  inspires  with  the  love  of  conten-
tion for  its  own  sake.  In  private  society  it  produces  the
controversial  opponent,  who  will  wrangle  and  contest
every  point,  and  "  though  vanquished,  who  will  argue
still"  When  thus  energetic  and  active,  and  not  directed
by  Conscientiousness,  it  becomes  a  great  disturber  of  the
peace  of  the  domestic  circle :  Contradiction  is  thai  a  grati-
fication, and  the  hours  that  ought  to  be  dedicated  to  pure
and  peaceful  enjoyment  are  embittered  by  strife.  On  the
great  field  of  the  world,  its  abases  lead  to  quarrels,  and,
when  combined  with  Destructiveness,  to  bloodshed  and
devastation.  In  all  ages,  countless  thousands  have  thronged
round  the  standard  raised  for  war,  with  an  ardour  and  ala-
crity which  shewed  that  they  experienced  pleasure  in  the
occupation.

Persons  in  whom  the  organ  is  large,  and  not  directed  by
superior  sentiments,  are  animated  with  an  instinctive  tend-
ency to  oppose  every  measure,  sentiment,  and  doctrine,  ad*
vocated  by  others ;  and  they  frequently  impose  upon  them-
selves, so  for  as  to  mistake  tins  disposition  for  an  acute
spirit  of  philosophising  prompting  them  to  greater  vigour  of
investigation  than  other  men.  Bayle,  the  author  of  the
Historical  Dictionary,  appears  to  have  been  a  person  of  this
constitution ;  for,  in  writing,  his  general  rule  ww  to  take  the
ride  in  opposition  to  every  one  else;  and  hence  it  has  been
remarked,  that  the  way  to  make  him  write  usefully,  was  to
attack  him  only  when  he  was  in  the  right,  for  he  would
then  combat  in  favour  of  truth  with  all  the  energy  of  a
powerful  mind.  William  Cobbkt  mentions,  that,  in  his
youth,  the  rattle  of  the  drum  inviting  him  to  war  was  en-


COMBATIVENESS.  163

chanting  music  to  his  ears,  and  that  he  ardently  became  a
soldier.  In  his  maturer  years,  the  combative  propensity
seems  4o  glow  with  equal  vivacity  in  his  mind,  although
exerted  in  a  different  direction.  By  speech  and  writing  be
now  contends  in  favour  of  every  opinion  that  is  interesting
for  the  day.  To  Combativeness  is  probably  owing  no
small  portion  of  that  boldness  which  even  his  enemies  can-
not deny  him  to  possess.

The  organ  is  large  also  in  persons  who  have  murdered
from  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  rather  than  from  cool  de-
liberate design.  The  casts  of  Haggart  and  Mart  Mao
ihnes  are  examples  in  point.  The  organ  is*  large  also  in
several  casts  of  Charibs*  skulls,  a  tribe  remarkable  for  the
fierceness  of  then*  courage.  Br  Spurzheim  mentions,  that
Ae  ancient  artists  have  represented  this  organ  large  in  their
statues  of  gladiators.  The  practice  of  that  art,  as  also1  the
prize-fights  of  England,  have  for  their  object  the  gratifica-
tion Of  this- propensity.

When  the  organ  is  very  large  and  active,  it  gives  a  hard
tfaamping  sound  to  the  Voice,  as  if  every  word  contained  a
blow.  Madame  De  Stael  informs  us,  that  Buonaparte's
voice  assumed  tins  kind  of  intonation  when  he  was  angry ;
and  I  have  observed  similar  manifestations  in  individuals,
whom  I  knew  to  possess  this  part  of  the  brain  largely  de-
veloped.

When  the  organ  is  small,  the  individual  experiences  great
difficulty  in  resisting  attacks;  nor  is  he  able  to  make  his
way  in  paths  where  he  must  invade  the  prejudices  or  en*
counter  the  hostility  of  others.  Excessively  timid  children
are  generally  deficient  in  this  organ  and  possess  a  large
Cautiousness ;  their  heads  resembling  the  figure  of  the  Cey-
lonese  boy  on  p.  161.  I  conceive  the  extreme  diffidence
arf embarrassment  of  Cowper  the  poet,  to  have  arisen  from
sttch  a  combination ;  and  in  his  verses  he  loathes  war  with  a
deep  abhorrence.  Deficiency  of  Combativeness,  however,
toes  not  produce  fear;  for  this  is  a  positive  emotion,  of-
ten of  great' vivacity,  which  cannot  originate  from  a  mere

negation  of  an  opposite  quality.

l2


H>4  CGMfiATlV£NE0&

Combativenees  is  generally  more  developed  in  men  than
in  women;  but,  in  the  latter,  it  is  sometimes  large.  If  it
predominates,  it  gives  a  bold  and  forward  air  to  the  fe-
male ;  and  when  a  child  she  would  probably  be  distinguish-
ed as  a  romp.

When  the  organ  is  large,  and  excited  by  itrong  potations,
an  excessive  tendency  to  quarrel  and  fight  is  the  conse-
quence. Hence  some  individuals,  in  whom  it  is  great,  but
whose  moral  and  intellectual  faculties  are  capable  of  re-
straining it  when  sober,  appear,  when  inebriated,  to  be  of  a
different  nature,  and  extremely  combative.  The  organ  is
liable  also  to  excessive  excitation  through  disease.  Pinel
gives  several  examples  of  monomania  clearly  referable  to
this  organ.  A  maniac,9'  says  he,  "  naturally  peaceful  and
gentle  in  disposition,  appeared  inspired  by  the  demon  of
malice  during  the  fit*  He  was  then  in  an  unceasingly
mischievous  activity.  He  locked  up  his  companions  in
their  cells,  provoked  and  struck  them,  and  at  every  word
raised  some  new  quarrel  and  fighting/9  Another  individual,
who,  during  his  lucid  intervals,  was  mild,  obliging,  re-
served, and  even  timid  in  bis  manners,  became,  during  the
fit,  highly  audacious,  "  and  experienced  the  most  violent
propensity  to  provoke  those  who  approached  him,  to  irri-
tate and  fight  them,  awe  outraneeP  On  visiting  London
Bedlam  in  1824,  I  examined  the  head  of  a  male  patient,
and  pronounced  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  to  be
uncommonly  large.  I  was  desired  to  look  at  his  hands.
They  were  fastened  to  rings  in  an  iron  girdle  round  his
waist  He  had  committed  murder  in  an  access  of  fury,
and  was  liable  to  relapses,  in  which  he  manifested  these
propensities  with  inordinate  vehemence.  \

This  organ  is  found  also  in  the  lower  animals ;  but  there
are  great  differences  among  them  in  respect  to  its  energy.
Rabbits,  for  instance,  are  more  courageous  than  hares;  and
one  dog  looks  incessantly  for  an  opportunity  of  fighting,
while  another  always  flies  from  the  combat*  The  bull -dog
forms  a  contrast  in  this  propensity  to  the  greyhound ;  and  the


COMBATIVENESS.  165

head  of  the  former  is  much  larger  betw  xt  and  behind  the
ears  than  the  latter.  "  This  also  is  an  unfailing  sign  to
recognise  if  a  horse  be  shy  and  timid,  or  bold  and  sure.
The  same  difference  is  observed  in  game-cocks  and*  game-
hens,  in  comparison  with  domestic  fowls.  Horse  jockeys,
and  those  who  are  fond  of  fighting  cocks,  have  long  made
this  observation/9 — Physiogiu  System,  p»  3Q2L
The  organ  is  established.

&<— DE8TRUCT1YENESS.

This  organ  is  situated  immediately  above,  and  extends  a
little  backwards  and  forwards  from*,  the  external  opening
of  the  ear,  and  corresponds  to  the  lower  portion  ef  the
squamous  plate  of  the  temporal  bone.  In  Dr  Gall's-  plates
it  extends  a  few  lines  further  back  than  in  those  given  by
Dr  Spurzheim  ;  and  Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  when  it  is
excessively  large,  the  whole  portion  of  the  skull  from  the
inferior  margin  of  the  parietal  bones  to  the  ears  is  elevated?
and  that,  in  cases  of  smaller  development,  the  prominence
is  confined  to  the  temporal  bones.  I  have  seen  examples
of  both  kinds.

Dr  Gall  gives,  in  substance,  the  following  account  of
the  discovery  of  this  organ.  In  comparing  attentively  the
skulls  of  several  of  the  lower  animals,  he  observed  a  cha*
.racteilstic  difference  betwixt  those  of  the  carnivorous  and
the  graminivorous  tribes.  In  graminivorous  sunnmlflj  only
a  small  portion  of  the  brain  lies  behind  the  external  open*
ing  of  the  ear ;  while  in  the  carnivorous,  a  considerably
larger  mass  is  situated  these*  For  a  long  time  he  merely
communicated  these  observations  to  his  hearers,  without
making  the  least  application  of  them  to  Phrenology .  He
only  pointed  out  that,  by  inspecting  the  cranium,  even
when  the  teeth  are  wanting,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish
whether  the  animals  belong  to  the  graminivorous  or  carni-
vorous genera.  It  happened,  at  length,  that  some  one  sent
him  the  skull  of  a  parricide ;  but  he  put  it  aside,  without


166  DESTBUCTIVJENE8S.

imagining  that  the  skulls  of  murderers  could  be  of  any
use  to  him  in  his  researches.  Shortly  afterwards  he  re-
ceived alao  the  cranium  of  a  highwayman,  who,  not  satis-
fied with  robbing,  had  murdered  several  of  his  victims.
He  placed  these  two  crania  side  by  side,  and  frequently
examined  them.  Every  time  that  he  did  so  he  was  struck
with  this  circumstance,  that  although  they  differed  in  al-
most every  other  point,  each  of  them  presented  a  distinct
and  corresponding  prominence,  immediately  above  the  ex-
ternal opening  of  the  ear.  Having  observed,  however,  the
same  prominence  in  some  other  crania  in  his  collection,  he
thought  that  it  might  be  by  mere  accident  that  these  two
parts  were  so  much  developed  in  die  skulls  of  the  mur-
derers. It  was  only,  therefore,  after  a  considerable  time,
that  he  began  to  reflect  upon  the  different  conformation  of
the  brain  in  carnivorous  and  graminivorous  animals;  and
then  observing  that  the  part  which  was  large  in  carnivo-
rous animals,  was  precisely  that  which  was  so  much  de-
veloped in  the  miirderers,  the  question  occurred  to  him,  Is
it  possible  that  there  can  be  any  connexion  betwixt  the
conformation  of  brain  thus  indicated  and  the  propensity  to
kill?  «  At  first,"  says  Dr  Gall,  « I  revolted  from  this
idea;  but  when  my  only  business  was  to  observe,  and  to
state  the  result  of  my  observations,  I  acknowledged  no
ether  law  than  that  of  truth."  "  Let  us  not,  therefore,'9
says  he,  "  fear  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of  nature,  for  it  is
only  when  we  shall  have  discovered  the  hidden  springs  of
human  artions,  that  we  shall  know  how  to  guide  the  con-
duct of  men."

The  organ  has  been  subjected  to  much  ridicule,  owing
natty  to  its  having  been  at  first  named  the  organ  of  Mur-
der, from  having  been  found  largest  in  individuals  who
bad  suffered  death  for  this  crime.  The  propensity,  how-
ever, now  designated  Destructiveness,  is  recognised  by
many  authors  as  existing  in  the  human  mind.  Lord  Kames
Observe*/  that  "  there  is  a  contrivance  of  Nature,  no  less
simplo  ihkn  effectual,  which  engages  men  to  bear  with


DESTRUCTIVENE8S.  167

cheerfulness  the  fatigues  of  hunting,  and  the  uncertainty  of
capture;  and  that  is  an  appetite  for  hunting"— u  It  \»m
illustrious  instance  of  providential  care,  the  adapting  the
internal  constitution  of  man  to  his  external  circumstances.
The  appetite  for  hunting,  though  among  us  little  necessary
for  food,  is  to  this  day  remarkable  in  young  men,  high  and
low,  rich  and  poor.  Natural  propensities  may  be  rendered
faint  or  obscure,  but  never  are  totally  eradicated." —
Sketches,  b.  i.

Vicesimus  Knox,  in  his  Essays,  gives  a  similar  theory
of  hunting.  The  delight  felt  in  this  sport  has  been  ascribed
to  the  excitement  of  the  chase,  to  emulation,  and  to  the
pleasure  of  succeeding  in  our  aim;  but  if  these  were  the
sole  sources  of  the  enjoyment,  then  it  ought  to  be  as  plea-
sant to  gallop  over  hill  and  dale,  and  leap  hedge  and  ditch,
without  as  with  an  animal  in  chase,  and  as  agreeable  to
shoot  at  any  object  thrown  into  the  air  as  at  a  bird.  This,
however,  is  not  the  case ;  unless  there  is  a  creature  to  suf-
fer the  effects  of  the  hunting  and  shooting,  these  acts  afford
but  little  pleasure.

The  feeling  is  familiar  to  poets  and  authors  who  deli-
neate human  nature.  The  description  by  Sir  Walter
Scott,  of  King  Robert  Bruce  avenging  on  Cormac  Doil
the  death  of  Allan,  is  written  in  the  very  spirit  of  Destruc-
tiveness:

Not  so  awoke  the  King !  his  hand
Snatched  from  the  flame  a  knotted  brand,
The  nearest  weapon  of  his  wrath,
With  this  he  crated  the  murderer*!  path,

And  venged  young  Allan  well  1
The  spattered  brain  and  bubbling  blood
Hissed  on  the  half-extinguished  wood ;

The  miscreant  gasp*d  and  felL

The  same  author  recognises  several  of  the  phrenological
faculties  in  the  following  lines ;  and,  in  particular,  Love  of
Approbation  and  Destructivenesa;  the  latter,  however,  only


168  DESTRtrCTIVENESS.

in  a  state  of  abuse.    The  verses  refer  to  the  battle  of  Ban-
nockbnrn:

But  O  f  amid  that  waste  of  life,

What  various  motives  fired  the  strife  i

The  aspiring  noble  bled  for  fame.

The  patriot  for  his  eountrtfe  claims

This  knight  his  youthful  strength  to  prove,

And  that  to  earn  his  lady's  love :

Some  fought  from  ruffian  thirst  of  blood,

From  habit  some,  or  hardihood.

But  ruffian  stern,  and  soldier  good,

The  noble,  and  the  slave,
From  various  cause  the  same  wild  road,
On  the  same  bloody  morning  trode,

To  that  dark  Inn  the  grave.

In  Recollections  of  the  Peninsula,  by  the  author  of
Sketches  in  India)  the  following  passage  occurs :  "  As  the
chill  dews  of  evening  were  descending  on  our  bivouack,  a
staff-officer,  with  a  courier,  came  galloping  into  it,  and
alighted  at  the  quarters  of  our  general.  It  was  soon  known
among  us  that  a  severe  and  sanguinary  action  had  been
fought  by  our  brother  soldiers  at  Talavera.  Disjointed
rumours  spoke  of  a  dear-bought  field,  a  heavy  loss,  and  a
subsequent  retreat  I  well  remember  how  we  all  gathered
round  our  fires  to  listen,  to  conjecture,  and  to  talk  about
this  glorious,  but  bloody  event  We  regretted  that  we  had
borne  no  share  in  the  honours  of  such  a  day ;  and  toe  talked
with  an  undefined  pleasure  about  the  carnage.  Yes  !  strange
as  it  may  appear,  soldiers,  and  not  they  alone,  talk  of  the
slaughter  of  battle-fields  with  a  sensation  which  partakes
of  pleasure*."  I  have  observed  some  young  men  who
possessed  good  moral  qualities,  but  whose  thoughts  ran  ha-
bitually on  killing  and  slaughtering.  The  impulse  was  re-
strained, but  they  confessed  that  it  would  have  given  them
great  momentary  gratification  to  smash  and  slay.  In  them
the  organ  was  decidedly  large.

•  Page  89.


DESTRUCTIVENES&  169

The  function  of  the  faculty  in  the  human  mind,  and  its
utility,  are  easily  discovered.  In  regarding  this  scene  of
creation,  we  perceive  man  surrounded  by  ferocious  ani-
mals, such  as  lions,  tigers,  bears,  and  wolves;  which  are
not  only  incapable  of  being  tamed  and  put  to  use,  but
which  would  be  fatal  to  him,  if  he  did  not  destroy  them.
To  maintain  himself  in  existence,  therefore,  he  must  put
many  animals  to  death.  Moreover,  he  has  received  from
nature  a  stomach  fitted  to  digest  animal  food,  and  a  bodily
system  that  is  nourished  and  excited,  and  preserved  in
health  and  activity,  by  the  aliment  which  it  affords.  To
gratify  this  appetite,  he  must  bereave  animals  of  life  by
sudden  destruction ;  for  their  flesh  is  unwholesome  and  un-
fit for  use,  if  they  die  of  old  age  or  disease.  In  the  last
place,  some  human  beings  themselves  are  so  inspired  by
evil  passions,  that  no  terror  short  of  that  of  death  will  suf-
fice to  curb  their  appetites,  and  prevent  them  from  inju-
ring their  fellow  men.  Now,  let  us  consider  in  what  con-
dition man,  placed  in  these  circumstances,  would  have
stood,  if  he  had  wanted  this  propensity.  The  hare  has  no
Deetruetiveness ;  and  its  only  safety  is  in  flight.  Man,
without  this  faculty,  would  have  been  as  little  formidable
to  his  foes  as  the  hare ;  he  would  have  been  the  timid  prey
of  every  ferocious  animal  in  want  of  a  meal.  With  De-
structiveness,  the  lion  and  tiger  read  their  fate  in  his  eye;
they  recognise  the  natural  expression  of  this  power  in  him,
as  readily  and  strongly  as  in  their  fellows  of  die  forest,
and  dread  the  encounter,  unless  irresistibly  impelled  by
hunger.

Let  us  imagine,  also,  a  community  of  men,  known  to
exist,  in  whom  no  Deetruetiveness  was  found ;  who  would
reason,  entreat,  or  flee  from  their  adversaries,  but  never
raise  a  weapon  in  their  own  defence ;  how  speedily  would
the  profligate  and  unprincipled  flock  to  the  mansions  of
such  a  people,  as  to  their  appropriate  prey ;  and  what  con-
tumelies and  sufferings  would  they  not  compel  them  to  en-
dure ?    But  let  the  community  possess  the  propensity  in


170  DESTRUCTIVENESS.

question — let  them*  in  short,  raise  their  standard,  and,  like
Scotland's  monarch,  inscribe  on  it,  "  Nemo  me  impune  far
cesset ;"  a  motto  inspired  by  Destructiveness  and  Conscien-
tiousness  combined ;  and  let  them  act  up  to  the  spirit  of  the
words,  by  hurling  vengeance  on  every  wanton  aggressor;
and  such  a  people  will  subsequently  live  in  peace  under
their  olive  and  their  vine,  protected  by  the  terror  which
this  faculty  inspires  into  those  who,  but  for  it,  would  ren-
der the  world  a  scene  of  horror  and  devastation.  When
any  power  is  so  indispensable  to  human  safety  as  this,  na-
ture implants  it  in  the  mind ;  and  such  an  instinct  is  De-
etructivene8s.

Combativeness,  then,  gives  courage  to  meet  danger  un~
appalled,  and  to  resist  it.  Destructiveness  makes  the  onset
perilous  and  terrible  to  the  aggressor.  Combativeness
enables  us  to  meet  and  overcome  obstacles,  and  having  sur-
mounted them,  desires  no  more.  Destructiveness  prompt*
us  to  exterminate  the  causes  of  them,  so  that  they  may
never  rise  up  to  create  fresh  embarrassments.  Combative*
ness  would  inspire  Luther  and  Knox  with  courage  to  op-
pose the  doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  to  maintain
the  truth  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures;  Destructiveness
would  prompt  them  utterly  to  destroy  the  Roman  Hier-
archy, and  to  trample  its  insignia  under  foot*

In  actual  life,  a  good  endowment  of  the  organ  is  an  in-
dispensable requisite  to  a  proper  discharge  of  the  duties  of
several  situations.  What  restrains  the  domination  of  the
proud,  but  a  knowledge,  that,  if  they  press  too  heavily  even
on  the  meanest,  the  feeling  of  resentment  will  start  into
activity  to  repel  the  insult ;  and  resentment  is  the  result  of
wounded  Self-esteem,  aided  by  Destructiveness.  In  the
case  of  officers  conducting  difficult  and  dangerous  enter-
prizes,  what  weight  would  the  word  of  command  carry,  If
every  stubborn  mind  that  received  it  knew,  for  certain,
that  the  leader's  dispositions  were  so  soft,  that  fee  would  in-
flict no  vengeance  for  diadfcedience  ? — and  vengeance  or  pu-
nishment flows  from  Destructiveness  directed  by  justice.


DESTEUCT1VENESS.  171

The  sword,  accordingly,  is  carried  before  the  supreme  aa-
gistrate,  and  ia  an  emblem  of  Destruetiveness  ready  to  fall
on  the  contemners  of  the  law.

These  are  not  mere  theoretical  ideas,  hot  views  founded
on  actual  observations.  The  Hindoo  head  is  smaller  than
the  European,  and  in  particular  Combativemss  and  Do*
struetiveness  are  less  in  it  in  proportion  to  the  other  or*
gens;  and  we  see  millions  of  the  former  conquered  by
hundreds  of  die  latter.  In  aotual  fife,  I  Jiave  met  with  per*
sons  who  were  so. soft  that  they  scarcely  struck  fire,  how*
ever  hardly  they  were  hit;  who  shrank  and  retreated,  yet
agonifeed  under  every  insula  that  was  offered ;  whose  an*
gear  was  so  feeble,  that  its'  manifestations  excited  only  a
deeper  scorn,  and  incited  to  farther  outrages.  Such  indivi-
dual^ possessed  small  Combathreness  and  Destruetiveness,
and  were  carried  through  life  on  the  shoulders  of  others,
being  incapable  of  fighting  their  own  way  amidst  the  tur-
msila  of  the  world.  Those  who  have  an  ample  endowment
of  these  organs,  well  regulated  by  superior  sentiments,  are
not  aware  how  much  they  owe  to  it  In  civilised  society,
we  pass  years  without  a  contest,  hut  it  is  because  all  know
that  the  sentinels  are  at  their  post,  and  that  attack  is  dan*
gerosjB.  <rA  man  la  whom  society  recognises  a  deficiency  of
these  powers,  k  not  equally  safe  from  aggression.

Dealt  utti  venose  has  been  regarded  by  some  phreno-
logists as  communicating  a  more  general  species  of  ener-
gy to  the  miasL  In  endeavouring  to  trace  analytically
the  ma-mar  in  which  it  produces  tins  hat  effect,  it  has  been
■apposed  to  grse  an  impatient  craving  appetite  for  excite-
ment ;  a  desire  to  vast  the  tirind,  as  h  were,  on  something;
a  feeding  which  would  be  delighted  with  smashing  and  tur-
jneil*  or  with  any  great  irregular  commotion,  rather  than
with  the  tisflessuess  of  repose ;  and  hence  a  large  de*
veiopqoent  of  it  is  held  to  be  incompatible  with  that  drow-
siness of  disposition  which  dreams  fife  away  in  vapid  inac-
tivity; -is  contented  to-  accept  o£  absentee  of  snffsfing  for
enjwjrment,    and  feels  excitement  as  pain,    timber  thin


172  DESTRUCTIVENESS.

a  source  of  pleasure.  In  this  view,  it  is  supposed  to  give
a  general  stir  and  impetus  to  the  mental  faculties.  The
organ  is  small  in  the  Hindoos,  and  they  are  remarkable  not
only  for  great  tenderness  of  animal  life,  but  for  deficiency
in  energy  of  character.  In  point  of  fact,  however,  the
brain  in  general,  must  be  large,  before  great  general  power
can  be  manifested ;  and  the  real  effect  of  Destrnctiveness
appears  to  be  to  communicate  ability  to  act  with  energy  in
certain  situations  in  which,  with  that  organ  small,  the  in-
dividual would  be  completely  paralyzed.  In  this  view,  it
may  add  vigour  even  to  the  manifestations  of  Benevolence,
to  which,  at  first  sight,  it  appears  directly  opposed ;  but  it
does  so,  not  by  increasing  the  positive  amount  of  that  feel-
ing, which  depends  on  its  own  organ,  but  by  fitting  the
possessor  to  perform  acts  of  real  kindness,  which  require
severity  as  their  means.

Destructiveness  gives  edge  to  sarcasm,  satire,  and  invec-
tive, and  prompts  to  the  conception  of  images  of  tenor,
which  become  sublime  or  horrible,  according  as  they  are
clothed  with  Ideality,  or  presented  in  naked  deformity.
In  Lord  Byron's  works,  it  is  strongly  manifested.  IBs
appetite  for  fierce  excitement,— the  dark  and  dismal  scenes
of  suffering  and  murder  which  generally  abound  in  his
stories,  together  with  the  deadly  venom,  and  the  fearful
vehemence  of  his  pen,  when  directed  against  his  enemies,
could  proceed  from  no  source  but  the  faculty  in  question.
It  leads  a  poet,  in  general,  to  imagine  scenes  of  devastation
and  destruction,  and  to  delight  in  the  description  of  them.
Byron's  poem  of  "  Darkness,"  exhibits  in  every  image  the
very  form  and  pressure  of  Destructiveness.

When  the  energy  of  this  faculty  is  great,  indifference  at
suffering  and  destruction  is  the  result  When  too  weak,  and
Benevolence  being  strong,  positive  pain  and  poignant  dis-
tress are  felt  at  the  sightof  death,  and  suffering  of  every  kind.
We  are  surrounded  every  day  by  death  in  all  its  forms,  and
by  destruction  in  its  every  shape:  and  nature,  by  Ineans  of
thirffcaculty,  steels  our  minds  so  far  as  to  fit  us  for  our  condi-


DESTRUCTIVENESS.  173

tion,  and  to  render  scenes  which  our  situation  constrains
us  to  witness  not  unsupportable.  A  certain  degree  of  ob-
duracy of  feeling,  regardlessness  of  suffering,  and  indiffer-
ence to  the  calamities  of  our  race,  is  absolutely  necessary  to
render  existence  tolerable  in  this  world  of  mingled  joy  and
woe*  I  have  seen  individuals  miserable  from  too  feeble  an
energy  of  this  faculty.  Every  object  in  a  state  of  pain
harrowed  up  their  feelings,  and  lacerated  their  hearts,  and
produced  a  degree  of  continued  uneasiness  scarcely  con-
ceivable by  persons  of  more  obdurate  dispositions.

The  abuses  of  this  faculty  are  easily  recognised  in  society.
There  are  persons  who  fly  into  a  passion  upon  every  trifling
occurrence,  and  vent  their  rage  on  all  who  are  subjected  to
their  authority.  This  is  a  rude  and  vulgar  manifestation
of  the  propensity.  There  are  others,  however,  who  avoid
this  form  of  misapplication,  but  who  indulge  in  making
severe  remarks  and  cutting  observations,  altogether  uncall-
ed for,  and  introduced  with  no  view  but  to  give  pain;
others  issue  their  commands  in  harsh  and  angry  terms,
backed  by  loud  threatenings  and  terrible  gesticulations ;
others  are  severe  to  excess,  on  account  of  failures  in  duty,
and  little  mindful  of  the  happiness  of  those  who  live  under
their  control:  all  these  are  abuses  of  Destructiveness.
When  very  active,  this  propensity  gives  a  dark  expression
to  the  countenance,  and  harsh  and  discordant  tones  to  the
voice.  If,  in  a  friendly  converse  with  a  person  in  whom
the  organ  is  large,  and  Secretiveness  small,  one  happens  to
touch  on  some  irritating  topic,  in  an  instant  the  softness  of
Benevolence,  and  the  courtesy  of  Love  of  Approbation,
will  be  gone,  and  the  hoarse  growl  of  Destructiveness  will
indicate  an  approaching  storm.  I  have  seen  it  stayed,  by
referring  the  rising  wrath  to  its  source  in  this  propensity,
and  calling  on  reflection  to  subdue  it.

Cursing  is  an  abuse  of  this  faculty ;  and  I  have  observed
among  the  lower  orders,  that  some  boys  who  attempted  to
practise  this  abominable  vice  through  imitation,  deeming  it
manly,  could  never  infuse  into  their  imprecations  that  force


174  DESTRUCTIVE  NESS.

and  expression  which  seemed  to  come  quite  instinctively  to
othertf;  *  and  this  natural  incapacity  for  swearing  proceed-
ed from  Destructiveness  being  moderately  developed  in
proportion  to  the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments.  I  have
said  that  this  faculty  furnishes  the  threat  which  gives  force
to  command.  In  the  Bible,  every  variety  of  motive  is  held
out  to  deter  men  from  sin ;  and  I  have  noticed,  that  those
individuals  in  whom  Destructiveness  predominates,  have  a
natural  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  threatenings  of  the  Gospel,
while  those  in  whom  Benevolence,  Hope  and  Veneration
are  large,  and  Destructiveness  deficient,  hold  out  almost
exclusively  its  promises ;  or,  if  they  do  mention  its  denun-
ciations, these  are  so  diluted  by  the  softness  of  their  own
minds,  through  which  they  pass,  that  more  than  half  their
terrors  are  abated.  Preachers  of  the  first  class,  while  they
sometimes  harrow  up  the  minds  of  more  susceptible  indi-
viduals, and  cause  them  great  uneasiness,  frequently  please
those  of  sterner  natures  by  their  vehemence.  The  latter
class,  on  the  other  hand,  are  acceptable  to  those  naturally
mUd  in  disposition,  and  appear  insipid  to  the  others*  Fear
is  a  lower  motive  than  love,  and  where  the  mind  can  b6
led  by  the  higher  feeling,  it  ought  always  to  be  preferred  .
but  many  are  open  to  the  influence  of  terror,  who  are  not
alive  to  Hope  and  Veneration,  and  hence  the  use  of  both  is
necessary.  It  is  only  inordinate  dwelling  upon  the  one  to
the  exclusion  of  the  other  that  is  reprehensible.  The  higher
the  cultivation  of  the  audience,  the  less  is  fear  likely  to  be
requisite  to  make  an  impression.  Fear  is  only  aversion  td
personal 'suffering,  and  is  totally  different  from  the  love  of
good.

The  pleasure  which  even  humane  and  cultivated  indivi-
duals experience  in  witnessing  an  execution,  is  inexplicable
on  any  principle,  except  that  of  the  existence  of  such  a
faculty  as  this,'  aided  no  doubt  by  the  love  of  excitement,

\S4effo*.  I  would  rather  than  forty  shillings  I  could  swear  as  well  as
that  gentleman.  «  Body  of  Cfesar— St  George-^and  the  foot  of  Pharaoh.**
No.    I  ha'nt  the  right  grace.  Every  Man  in  hit  Humour.


DESTRUCT1VEXE&S.  175

arising  from  Wonder,  and  some  other  faculties,  "  We
have,"  says  Mr  Scott,  in  an  admirable  Essay  on  this  pro-
pensity, "  too  much  humanity  ourselves  to  put  a  man  to
death.  But,  if  a  man  is  to  be  killed,  we  have  no  objection
to  witness  the  fact,  or,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  say  so,  to
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  seeing  it  performed." — "  Were  De-
structiveness  wanting,  and  Benevolence  favourably  de-
veloped, in  persons  present  at  an  execution,  they  would  be
terrified,  not  delighted,  by  such  a  scene." — Phren.  Tram.
p.  147.

In  children,  and  even  in  adults,  Destructiveness  fre-
quently vents  itself  in  destroying  inanimate  objects.  The
people  destroy  mile-posts,  bridges,  statues,  and  public  build-
ings, wherever  they  can  get  access  to  them ;  and  "  no  object
of  art,  or  even  of  utility,"  says  a  late  writer,  "  is  safe  from
their  depredations."  He  ascribes  this  tendency  "  to  the
spirit  of  pure  mischief," — a  correct  designation  for  ungrad-
ed Destructiveness.  The  statute  8d  Geo.  IV.  chap.  71.,
which  ordains,  "  That,  if  any  person  or  persons  BhaB
wantonly  and  cruelly  beat,  abuse  on  ill  treat,  any  horse,
mare,  gelding,"  &•»  he  shall  pay  certain  penalties  to  the
King,  is  clearly  directed  against  the  abuses  of  this  propen-
sity, and,  of  course,  supposes  its  existence.  The  adjectives
severe,  harsh,  angry,  cruel,  fierce,  ferocious,  savage,  brutal,
Barbarous,  atrocious,  indicate  states  of  mind  all  originating
from  it.

Metaphysical  authors  in  general  do  not  treat  of  any  power
resembling  this  faculty.  Accustomed  to  reflect  in  the  closet
more  than  to  observe  actions,  they  were  not  likely  to  dis-
cover it.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  surprising  that  the  con-
templation of  the  pages  of  history  did  not  suggest  a  ten-
dency of  ibis  kind  to  their  mind.  Caligula  is  represented
cutting  out  the  tongues  of  his  victims,' — delivering  them  to
be  devoured  by  wild  beasts, — forcing  individuals  to  assist
in  executing  their  relations,— torturing  and  putting  to  the
rack  unhappy  wretches  as  aft  amusement  to  his  own  fero-
cious nfind,— and  finally  expressing  a  wtah  that  tite  Roman
people  had '  but  one  head,  that  be  might  cut  it  off  by  one


170  DESTRUCTIVENESS.

blow.  Turning  our  eyes  to  Nero,  we  discover  him  indul-
ging in  equal  atrocities,  causing  Britannia  to  be  poisoned,
—murdering  hi*  own  mother, — setting  fire  to  Rome  in  four
quarters  at  once,  and  ascending  a  tower  to  enjoy  the  spec-
tacle of  the  conflagration.  In  modern  times,  we  are  pre-
sented with  the  horrors  of  the  Sicilian  Vespers,  the  carnage
of  St  Bartholomew's,  and  the  massacres  of  the  French  Re-
volution* These  actions  are  inexplicable,  on  the  supposi-
tion that  no  propensity  of  Destructiveness  exists;  and,  if
the  metaphysicians  had  applied  their  systems  to  human
conduct,  they  must  have  discovered  that  they  contained  no
principle,  capable  of  accounting  for  the  transactions  allu-
ded to.  In  the  ancient  busts  of  Nero,  the  organ  of  Destruc-
tiveness is  represented  as  enormously  large*

The  organ  is  large  in  the  heads  of  cool  and  deliberate
murderers.    It  is  very  large,  and  Benevolence  small,  in  the
skull  of  Bellingham,  who  murdered  Mr  Percival.     The
temporal  bones  protrude  at  least  half  an  inch  in  the  situa-
tion of  the  organ  of  Destructiveness,  on  each  side,  and  the
frontal  bone  presents  a  receding  surface  at  th,e  organ  of
Benevolence,  where  the  skulls  of  individuals  remarkable
for  benevolence  generally  rise  into  an  elevation  of  half  an
inch  or  more.    A  cast  of  Bellingham's  skull  may  be  in-
spected in  the  Phrenological  Society's  Collection.     The  or-
gan of  Destructiveness  is  also  largely  developed  in  the  skull
of  Gordon,  who  accompanied  a  poor  half-fatuous  pedlar
boy,  and,  in  the  middle  of  a  muir,  beat  out  his  brains  with
the  heel  of  his  clog,  and  robbed  him  of  his  pack,  not  worth
twenty  shillings*    The  skull  itself  is  in  the  Society's  Collec-
tion, and  the  bones  protrude  nearly  half  an  inch  on  each
side  at  the  region  in  question.     It  is  large  in  Charles
Rotherham,  who  pulled  a  stake  from  a  hedge  and  beat
out  the  brains  of  a  poor  woman  on  the  highway,  and  robbed
her  of  some  very  trifling  articles.     It  is  large  also  in  the
skulls  of  Hussey,  Nisbet,  and  Lockey,  who  were  executed
for  murder.    It  is  very  large,  with  deficient  moral  organs,
in  Burr  and  Hare,  who  murdered  sixteen  human  beings,
for  the  sake  of  the  price  of  their  dead  bodies  as  subjects


DESTRUCTIVENESS.


177


for  dissection.  It,  and  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness,  appear
to  have  been  very  largely  developed  in  the  head  of  Hea-
man,  executed  at  Edinburgh  for  piracy  and  murder;  also
in  the  head  of  Robert  Dean,  executed  for  murdering  a
child  without  any  rational  motive ;  and  in  the  head  of  Mit-
chell, executed  for  murdering  a  young  woman  whom  he
had  seduced,  In  the  heads  of  David  Haggart  and  Mary
Macinnes,  executed  at  Edinburgh,  and  of  Booth,  a  poacher,
executed  at  York,  all  for  murders  committed  on  the  im-
pulse of  the  moment,  it  appears  considerably  developed ;
while  in  them  Combativeness  is  also  very  large.

The  Society  possesses  casts  of  the  skulls  of  five  Charibs,
who  are  well  known  to  be  a  ferocious  tribe,  and  in  all  of
them  the  organ  of  Destructiveness  is  decidedly  large.  On
the  other  hand,  Dr  George  Murray  Patterson,  surgeon
in  the  Honourable  East  India  Company's  Service,  mentions,
as  the  result  of  three  thousand  actual  examinations,  that
the  organ  is  small  in  the  heads  of  Hindoos  in  general,  who
are  known  to  be  extremely  tender  in  regard  to  animal  life.
In  the  skills  of  fourteen  Hindoos,  twelve  of  which  were
presented  to  the  Society  by  this  gentleman,  and  two  by  Dr
J.  S.  Combe  of  Leith,  the  development  of  the  organ  will
be  fouhd  to  be  decidedly  less  than  in  the  skulls  of  Euro-
peans in  general.  The  figures  represent  the  skulls  of  Bel-
lingham  and  a  Hindoo.


BELLIXOHAM.

HINDOO.

m

Hi

Degtroctlrenew  SmalL


DertructlveDea  Large.

When  excited  by  intoxication,  the  organ  sometimes  be-
comes ungovernable ;  and  hence  arises  the  destruction  of
glasses,  mirrors,  chairs,  and  every  frangible  object  at  the
close  of  many  a  feast  Hence  also  the  temptation,  often
almost  irresistible,  experienced  by  many  a  worthy  citizen,

M


178  MSTXUCTTVEWESS.

when  inebriated^  to  smash,  a  lamp  in  big  progress  boms.
One  gentleman  assured  nw  that  the  lamps  have  appeared
to  hkn,  when  in  this  state,  as  it  were  twinkling  on  his  path
with  a  wicked  and  scornful  gleam,  and  that  he  has  fre-
quently lifted  his  stick  to  punish  their  impertinence,  when
a  remnant  ef  reason  restrained  the  meditated  blow.  In  him
Destractiyeness  k  decidedly  large,  but,  when  sober,  there
is  not  a  more  excellent  person.

The  organ  is  also  liable  to  excitement  by  disease,  and
then  the  propensity  is  manifested  with  irresistible  vehe-
mence.    The  author  of  Sketches  in  Bedlam,  describes  the
case  of  Pat.  Walsh,  a  ferocious  maniac,  who  has  been  de-
ranged altogether  about  twelve  years,  and  has,  it  is  said,
uniformly  evinced  a  character  of  desperation,  vengeance,
and  sanguinary  cruelties,  scarcely  conceivable  even  in  mad-
neafc    Notwithstanding  every  precaution  that  was  taken,
he  has  killed  three  persons  since  his  confinement     "  His
propensity  to  mischief,  malice,  and  personal  abuse,  is  as
incessant  as  his  taste  for  bloodshed  and  slaughter.    He  has
contrived,  notwithstanding  his  restriction  of  hands  and  feet,
to  break  about  seventy  panes  of  glass  within  the  last  two
years,  in  the  dining-room  windows,  although  guarded  on
the  inside  by  a  strong  iron  wire  lattiee-work.    This  amuse-
ment he  oontrived  to  effect  by  standing  on  a  form  placed
at  some  distance  from  the  windows,  and,  taking  the  bowl
of  his  wooden  spoon  in  his  mouth,  he  poked  the  handle
through  the  meshes  of  the  wire-work,  and  thus  broke  the
pane."     As  this  man  is  said  to  be  confined  in  an  iron  cinc-
ture that  surrounds  his  waist,  with  strong  hand-cuffs  at-
tached to  it,  I  infer  that  he  is  the  same  whose  head  I  exa-
mined in  Bedlam  in  1824,  and  in  whom  the  organs  of  Com-
bativeness  and  Destructiveness  were  inordinately  large.

When  this  organ  and  Combativeness  are  very  large,  com-
bined with  great  deficiency  in  die  moral  and  intellectual  or-
gans, there  is  an  innate  disposition  to  mischief  and  violence
which  renders  the  individual  dangerous  to  society.  In
visiting  the  Richmond  Lunatic  Asylum  in  Dublin,  in  1889,


was  presented  to  me  by  Dr  Crawford,  substitute
physician,  and  I  wrote  down  the  following  remarks :

Mr  Combe's  Remarks.

Patient's  name,  £.  S.
Large  Amativeness

Do.  Philoprogenitiveness

Very  large  Dcstrwdnerms

Do*  Cwtbatvoeneu

Large  Self-esteem

Do.  Cautiousness

Moral  organs,  deficient,  parti-
cularly Veneration  and  Hope
Moderate  Conscientousness
Of  the  monl  organs                       Benevolence  is  rather  well  developed.
Intellectual  organs  Rather  well  developed.
The  patient  was  withdrawn,  and  Mr  Combe  added :    This  is  the
worst  head  I  ever  saw.    The  combination  is  worse  than  Hare's*—
Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  are  fearfully  large,  and. the  mo-
ral organs  altogether  very  deficient :  Benevolence  is  the  best  de-
veloped of  them,  but  it  is  miserably  small  compared  with  the  or-
gans of  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness.    1  am  surprized  that
that  man  was  not  executed  before  he  became  insane.

Dr  Crawvosb  bad  previously  written  down,  and  then
exhibited,  the  following  observations :

Dr  CRJWFOBJfs  Remarks.

Patient  E.  &,  aged  34.    Ten  years  since  first  admission.

Total  want  of  moral  feeling  and  principle,  great  depravity  of  charac-
ter, leading  to  the  indulgence  of  every  vice,  and  to  the  commission
even  of  crime  Considerable  intelligence,  ingenuity,  and  plausi-
bility ;  a  scourge  to  his  family  from  childhood ;  turned  out  of  the
army  as  an  incorrigible  villain :  attempted  the  life  of  a  soldier ;  re-
peatedly flogged  i  has  since  attempted  to  poison  his  father.

In  preparing  a  report  of  this  and  other  cases  for  the
Phrenological  Journal,  I  sent  the  proof  sheet  to  Dr  Craw-
ford for  revisal*  which  he  returned  along  with  a  letter  to
the  following  effect :  "  I  have  a  few  remarks  to  make  on
the  lunatic,  lettered  £.  S.  You  observe  in  your  own  notes,
s  m2


1 80  DESTRUCTI VENESS.

<  I  am  surprised  he  was  not  executed  before  he  became  in-
sane.'    This  would  lead  to  the  supposition,  that  he  had
been  afflicted  with  some  form  of  insanity  in  addition  to  a
naturally  depraved  character.      Such,  however,  is  by  no
means  the  case ;  he  never  was  different  from  what  he  now
is;  he  has  never  evinced  the  slightest  mental  incoherence
on  any  one  point,  nor  any  kind  of  hallucination.     It  is  one
of  those  cases  where  there  is  great  difficulty  in  drawing  the
line  between  extreme  moral  depravity  and  insanity,  and  in
deciding  at  what  point  an  individual  should  cease  to  be
considered  as  a  responsible  moral  agent,  and  amenable  to
the  laws.    The  governors  and  medical  gentlemen  of  the
Asylum  have  often  had  doubts  whether  they  were  justi-
fied in  keeping  E.  S.  as  a  lunatic,  thinking  him  a  more  fit
subject  for  a  bridewell.     He  appears,  however,  so  totally
callous  with  regard  to  every  moral  principle  and  feeling —
so  thoroughly  unconscious  of  ever  having  done  any  thing
wrong — so  completely  destitute  of  all  sense  of  shame  or
remorse  when  reproved  for  his  vices  or  crimes — and  has
proved  himself  so  utterly  incorrigible  throughout  life,  that
it  is  almost  certain  that  any  jury  before  whom  he  might  be
brought  would  satisfy  their  doubts  by  returning  him  in-
sane, which  in  such  a  case  is  the  most  humane  line  to  pur-
sue.    He  was  dismissed  several  times  from  the  Asylum,
and  sent  there  the  last  time  for  attempting  to  poison  his
father,  and  it  seems  fit  he  should  be  kept  there  for  life  as
a  moral  lunatic  ;  but  there  has  never  been  the  least  symp-
tom of  diseased  action  of  the  brain,  which  is  the  general
concomitant  of  what  is  usually  understood  as  insanity.
This  I  consider  might  with  propriety  be  made  the  founda-
tion for  a  division  of  lunatics  into  two  great  classes ;  those
who  were  insane  from  original  constitution,  and  never  were
otherwise,  and  those  who  had  been  insane  at  some  period
of  life  from  diseased  action  of  the  brain,  either  permanent
or  intermittent. — There  would  be  room  for  a  few  addition-
al notes  to  the  case  of  E.  S.,  explanatory  of  what  I  have
said,  if  you  think  fit,"-Mr»,  20$  July  1829.


DESTRUCTIVENESS.  181

Dr  Gall  cites  a  variety  of  cases  of  diseased  manifesta-
tions of  this  propensity,  which  had  fallen  under  his  own
observation,  and  quotes  several  others  highly  illustrative
from  Pinel.     I  select  one  of  these,  in  which  the  organ  of
Destructiveness  seems  to  have  been  affected  singly,  the
other  organs  remaining  entire.    The  patient,  during  pe-
riodical fits  of  insanity,  was  seized  with  an  "  uncontrol-
lable fury,  which  inspired  him  with  an  irresistible  pro-
pensity to  seize  an  instrument  or  offensive  weapon,  to
knock  on  the  head  the  first  person  who  presented  him-
self to  his  view*    He  experienced  a  sort  of  internal  com-
bat between  this  ferocious  impulse  to  destroy,  and  the  pro-
found horror  which  rose  in  his  mind,  at  the  very  idqa  of
such  a  crime*    There  was  no  mark  of  wandering  of  me-
mory, imagination,  or  judgment.    He  avowed  to  me,  dur-
ing his  strict  seclusion,  that  his  propensity  to  commit  a
murder  was  absolutely  forced  and  involuntary, — that  his
wife  whom  he  tenderly  loved,  had  nearly  become  his  vic-
tim, he  having  scarcely  had  time  to  bid  her  flee  to  avoid
his  fury.    All  his  lucid  intervals  were  marked  by  melan-
choly reflections  and  expression  of  remorse  ;  and  so  great
did  his  disgust  of  life  become,  that  he  had  several  times
attempted,  by  an  act  of  suicide"  (this  is  common  in  the  ex-
cess of  Destructiveness)  "  to  bring  it  to  a  close.  What  rea-
son have  I,"  said  he,  "  to  cut  the  throat  of  the  superin-
tendent of  the  hospital,  who  treats  us  with  so  much  kind-
ness ?  and  yet  in  my  moments  of  fury  I  am  tempted  to  rush
upon  him,  as  well  as  others,  and  plunge  a  dagger  in  his
bosom.       It  is  this  unhappy  and  irresistible  propensity
which  reduces  me  to  despair,  and  makes  me  attempt  my
own  life."— Sur   P Alienation  Mentale,  deuxi£me  Edition,
p.  102  et  103.  sect.  117.

Individuals  who  occasionally  commit  murder,  orjset  fire
to  property,  without  any  rational  motive,  sometimes  as-
cribe their  actions  to  the  temptation  *of  the  devil,  assert-
ing that  the  devil  whispered  into  their  ears,  "  kill  him,"
"  kill  him,"  and  never  ceased  to  repeat  the  exhortation  till


188  BMTRUCTIVENESS-

they  l»d  complied  with*.  Diseased  activity  of  this  organ,
filing  the  mind  habitually  with  a  desire  to  destroy,  pro-
bably gives  rite  to  this  impression.

One  form  in  which  disease  of  this  organ  sometimes  ap-
pears, require*  particular  notice ;  it  is  when  it  proftnpte
females  of  the  most  unquestionable  reputation  to  child-
nmlder.  I  cite  the  following  from  the  public  newspapers
^f  May  1822.  «  On  Sunday  morning,  about  half-past  ten
o'clock,  m  meat  horrid  murder  of  unparalleled  inhumanity,
was  perpetrated  on  the  body  of  a  fine  female  infant,  about
bright  teonths  old,  named  Sarah  Moutf  tford,  by  her  own
mother,  wifexrf  Mr  Mountforb,  weaver,  No.  1.  Virginia
R«w,  Beth  md  Green.  The  husband,  who  is  a  Methodist,
had  gone  to  chapel,  leaving  his  wife  to  clean,  -and  send  to
the  Sunday  school,  iter  young  family*  Having  done  this,
it  appeared  Bbe  cleaned  herself  and  her  infant,  when,  over-
come by  some  extraordinary  aberration  of  intellect,  she
cut  off  the  head  of  the  child  with  a  raacr,  and,  besmeared
with  the  blood,  immediately  told  the  persons  in  the  house
of  the  bloody  deed,  desiring  to  be  given  into  custody,  as
she  wanted  to  be  hanged.  From  the  conduct  of  the
wretched  woman  after  the  transaction,  no  doubt  can  be
entertained  of  her  insanity.  Mrs  Mountford  underwent
a  short  examination  on  Monday,  and  was  committed  for
trial.  A  coroner's  inquest  has  been  held,  which  returned  a
verdict  of  wilful  murder  against  the  wretched  woman.
The  distress  of  the  family  is  extreme.  The  unhappy  hus-
band and  two  of  the  eldest  daughters  are  seen  running
about  the  streets  in  a  state  of  distraction.  One  of  the  lat-
ter has  been  deprived  of  utterance  since  the  horrid  trans-
action." This  woman  is  said  to  have  been  "overcome
by  some  extraordinary  aberration  of  intellect ;"  which  mode
of  expression  maybe  forgiven  in  the  writer  of  a  newspaper
paragraph,  although,  viewed  philosophically,  it  is  absurd.
The  intellectual  powers  enumerated  by  the  metaphysicians,
such  as  Perception,  Conception,  Memory,  Imagination,
and  Judgment,  furnish  no  propensities  to  action,  which,  be-


DE&TRUCTI  VEN£S6.  1 88

rag  deranged,  could  produce  such  a  piece  of  barbarity.
Derangement  of  intellect  causes  the  patient  to  reason  in-
correctly, and  speak  incoherently;  but  if  \m  feelings  be
sounds  lie  is  net  mischievous.  Here,  however,  die  un-
happy woman  seems  to  have  been  inspired  with  a  Mind
and  irresistible  impulse  to  kill,  arising  from  disease  of  De-
strucuvenees.

These  details  «re  exceedingly  painful,  and  the  reader
may  question  the  -taste  which  permits  their  insertion ;  but
great  ignorance  prevails  in  the  public  mind  on  this  sub-
ject, and  the  records  of  our  criminal  courts  still  shew  eases
of  wretches  condemned  to  the  gallows,  who,  if  Phrenology
were  known  to  the  judges  and  juries,  would  be  consigned
to  a  lunatic  asylum.

This  organ  is  larger  in  the  male  head  than  in  the  female;
and  hence  the  male  head  is  in  general  broader.  The  mani-
festations correspond :  for  the  propensity  is  less  vigorously
manifested  by  woman  than  by  man.

As  already  noticed,  the  organ  is  common  to  man  with
carnivorous  animals.  Dr  Gall,  however,  remarks,  "  that
the  organ  is  not,  in  all  carnivorous  animals,  situated  with
rigorous  exactness  above  the  external  opening  of  the  ear.
Among  some  species  of  birds,  for  example,  in  the  «tork,
the  cormorant,  the  heron,  the  gull,  &c.,  the  external  open-
ing of  the  ear  is  considerably  drawn  back,  and  the  organ
of  the  propensity  to  kill  is  placed  immediately  behind  the
orbits,  forming  a  large  prominence  upon  each  side,  the
siae  of  which  is  found  to  bear  an  uniform  proportion  to  the
degree  in  which  the  animal  manifests  the  propensity  to
kill.  In  comparing  the  crania  of  carnivorous  birds  with
die  akulb  of  those  that  can  Kve  indifferently  either  upon
animals '*r  vegetables,  <this  prominence  is  found  to  be  less
conspicuous  in  the  latter ;  in  the  duck,  for  example,  and  in
the  different  species  of  thrushes;  and  it  becomes  less  and
less  prominent  in  proportion  as  the  birds  exhibit  a  more
distinct  preference  for  vegetables,  such  as  the  swan,  the
goose,"  &c.  The  differences  are  illustrated  by  plates  in  Dr
Gall's  work.    If  the  brain  of  a  sheep  and  that  of  a  dog  be


184  DESTRUCTIVENE8S.

compared,  a  great  deficiency  will  be  discovered  in  the
former  at  Destructiveness.

In  1827,  Monsieur  Vimont  presented  to  the  Royal  In-
stitute of  France,  a  memoir  on  Comparative  Phrenology,  in
which  he  brings  forward  a  vast  collection  of  most  interest-
ing facts,  in  regard  to  the  dispositions  and  forms  of  the
brain  in  the  lower  animals.  In  regard  to  Destructiveness,
he  says,  "  All  animals  which  live  on  flesh,  or  which  have  a
propensity  for  destroying,  have  a  particular  part  of  the
cranium  whose  development  corresponds  with  that  of  this
faculty.  Thus  all  the  ferce  *,  without  exception,  have  the
squamous  portion  of  the  temporal  bone  f  enlargedln  a  per-
ceptible manner.  We  may  cite  as  examples,  the  tiger,  the
cat,  the  fox,  the  martin,  the  weasel,  the  ermine*

"  In  the  carnivorous  birds  properly  so  called,  the  por-
tion of  the  cranium  situated  behind  the  orbit,  corresponds
with  the  organ  of  carnivorous  instinct,  and  presents  a  re-
markable development.  In  the  omnivorous  birds,  the
enlargement  is  a  little  more  posterior.''
4    The  organ  is  established.


ALIMENT1VENESS,  OB   ORGAN   OF   THE   APPETITE
FOE  FOOD.

•  It  early  occurred  to  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  that  the
appetite  for  food  is  an  instinct  not  referable  to  any  of  the
recognised  principles  of  mind,  and  they  therefore  were  dis-
posed to  view  it  as  a  primitive  power,  having  a  separate  or-
gan ;  but  they  did  not  discover  its  situation.

In  the  sheep,  the  olfactory  nerves,  which  are  jrery  large,
are  perceived  to  originate  from  two  cerebral  convolutions,
lying  at  the  base  of  the  middle  lobe  of  the  brain,  adjoining
and  immediately  below  the  situation  occupied  by  the  or-
gans of  Destructiveness  in  carnivorous  animals.  The  sheep

•  Beasts  of  prey.

t  Situated  immediately  outward  of  Destructiveness.


ALIMENTIVENESS.  185

is  guided  in  the  selection  of  its  food  by  the  sense  of  smell ;
and  the  inference  suggests  itself,  that  these  parts  may  be
the  organs  of  the  instinct  which  prompts  it  to  take  nou-
rishment. Corresponding  convolutions  occur  in  the  hu-
man brain,  but  the  functions  of  them  are  not  ascertained,
owing  to  their  local  situation  presenting  obstacles  to  the
determination  of  their  size  during  <  life.  The  conjecture,
however,  seemed  to  me  plausible,  that  they  might  serve  a
similar  purpose  to  that  here  supposed  to  belong  to  them  in
the  sheep.

This  subject  has  attracted  the  notice  of  that  ingenious
phrenologist  Dr  Hoppe  of  Copenhagen,  and  he  has  treated
of  it  in  two  valuable  communications,  published  in  the
Phrenological  Journal,  Noe.  V.  and  VII.  He  is  of  opinion,
thai,  besides  the  nerves  of  the  stomach  and  palate,  an  af-
fection of  which  gives  rise  to  the  sensations  of  hunger  and
thirst,  there  must  also  be  an  organ  in  the  brains  of  animals
for  the  instinct  of  nutrition  (taking  nourishment  for  the
preservation  of  life),  which  incites  them  to  the  sensual  en-
joyments  of  the  palate,  and  the  activity  of  which  is  inde-
pendent of  hunger  and  thirst.  "  How,"  says  he,  "  should
the  mere  sense  of  hunger,  more  than  any  other  disagree-
able or  painful  sensation,  make  the  animal  desire  food,  the
necessity  of  such  not  being  known  to  him  by  experience  ?
This  could  only  be  effected  by  instinct,  because  either  an
instinct,  t.  e.  the  immediate  impulse  of  an  organ,  or  else
experience  and  reflection,  are  the  causes  of  all  actions.

"  We  observe,  that  the  chicken  is  no  sooner  out  of  the
egg,  than  it  picks  the  grain  that  lies  on  the  ground,  and
the  new-born  babe  sucks  the  nipple.  Is  this  to  be  ex-
plained without  the  supposition  of  an  organ  analogous  to
that  which  makes  the  duckling  immediately  plunge  into
the  water,  or  makes  the  kitten  bite  the  first  mouse  it  meets
with?

*  "  Neither  am  I  able  otherwise  to  conceive  how  the  new-
born animal  can  discriminate  what  is  useful  for  its  nutri-
tion ;  that,  for  instance,  the  chicken  never  mistakes  gravel


186  ALIMBNTIVEKESS.

for  grain,  iad  that  the  wild  beasts  always  avoid  pMSoneus
plants  without  ever  tasting  then.

"  When  the  child,  even  enjoying  perfect  health,  snobs
till  the  stomach  is  filled,  in  a  literal  sense  of  the  word,  it
surely  feels  no  -hunger  or  thirst ;  yet,  if  had  to  the  breast,
it  will  continue  racking,  even  sometimes  having  thrown  off
the  last  draught  from  overfilling.

"  If  nothing  bat  hunger  and  thirst  impelled  man  to  take
food,  he  would,  when  satiated,  have  no  appetite  for  meat
and  drink ;  yet  we  every  day  observe  people  that  cannot
resist  the  temptation  of  surfeiting  themselves  both  with
meat  and  drink,  though  they  know  k  to  be  noadons,  and
others  again  that  never  are  tempted  to  gluttony.'9

Dr  Hopps  adds  several  other  reasons  in  support  of  an
organ  of  nutrition,  and  sums  up  his  views  in  the  following
words :  "  According  to  my  opinion,  hunger  and  tkirti  must
be  discriminated  from  the  desire  of  food  whioh  we  call  fljp-
petite ;  for  those  I  consider  as  only  affections  of  the  sto-
machical  and  palatic  nerves,  caused  by  deficiency  of  neces-
sary supply;  but  appetite  as  an  activity  of  a  fundamental
animal  instinct,  which  has  in  the  brain  an  organ  analogous
to  the  rest  of  the  organs.  Yet  there  is  a  very  intimate
connexion  between  these;  thus,  nothing  can  move  effectu-
ally rouse  appetite  than  hunger."

In  lecturing  on  Phrenology,  I  had  for  some  years  pointed
out  the  part  of  the  brain  above  alluded  to  as  the  pro-
bable seat  of  this  organ ;  and  Dr  Hoppe,  without  being
aware  of  this  circumstance,  or  the  reasons  en  which  this
conjecture  was  founded,  arrived  at  a  similar  conclusion.
He  proceeded  even  so  far  as  to  point  out  an  external  in-
dication of  the  size  of  the  organ.  "  Regarding,"  says  he,
"  the  organ  for  taking  nourishment,  I  have  been  led  to
think,  since  I  wrote  last,  that  the  place  where  its  different
degrees  of  development  are  manifested  in  the  living  body,
is  in  the  fossa  zygomatica,  exactly  under  ike  ergon  of  Acqui-
sitiveness,  and  before  thai  of  Destructiveness.  Before  I  had
thought  at  all  of  Phrenology,  I  was  struck  with  the  re-


ALIMKNTIVENE8S.  187

markaUe  largeness  of  the  fooeor  head  of  a  friend  of  miae,
caused,  not  "by  prominent  «beek~bone%  as  in  some  varieties
of  mankind,  hut  more  towards  the  ears,  by  die  great  coo*
vearity  of  the  nygomatic  arch.  Knowing  that  this  indivi-
dual was  ^fcoeedingly  fond  of  good  living,  and  that,  even  in
spite  of  a  very  powerful  intellect,  and  propensities  mode-
rate in  almost  every  other  respect,  he  was  prone  to  indulge
too  freely  in  the  joys  of  the  table,  I  afterwards  thought
that  this  form  of  the  head,  and  tendency  of  the  mind,  might
bear  a  nearer  relation  to  each  other  than  had  at  first  oc-
curred to  me;  and  in  some  other  persons,  notoriously
known  to  be  fond  of  good  eating  and  drinking,  I  found  a
confirmation  of  my  suppositions.  This  prominence  of  the
bony  arch,  I  think,  must  be  an  absolute  consequence  of
the  part  of  the  cranium  lying  under  the  temporal  muscle
being  pushed  outwards,  and  diminishing,  in  that  direction,
the  space  of  the  fcmstu  Besides  this  greater  convexity  of
the  arch,  the  part  also  of  the  skull  situated  immediately
above  H,  under  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness,  wiU  in  this
case  be  observed  to  be  more  full  and  protruding.  The
largeness  of  head  produced  in  this  way  can  by  no  means
be  mistaken  for  a  mere  prominent  cheek-bone,  nor  for  the
organs  of  Acquisitiveness,  or  Deetructiveness,  or  Construe-
threness,  situated  higher,  behind,  and  in  front  of  it  Ha-
ving found  the  said  parts  in  some  persons  much  compres*
sed,  in  others  less  so,  and,  as  I  think,  the  disposition  of
mind  always  proportionate  to  it,  and  not  yet  having  met
with  any  exceptions,  I  cannot  but  hold  my  opinion  to  be
true."

I  have  been  informed  that  Mr  Crook  also,  without
knowing  Dr  Hoppe'b  remarks,  had  arrived  at  a  similar
conclusion  as  to  the  situation  of  the  organ.

The  external  part  to  which  Dr  Hoppe  alludes,  was  for-
merly included  by  Dr  Spurzheim  within  the  limits  of  De-
stmctiveness ;  but  in  Dr  Gall's  busts  and  plates,  that  or-
gan was  not  carried  so  for  forward,  and  the  function  of  the
part  in  question  was  marked  by  Dr  Gall  as  unascertained.


188  ALIMENTIVENESS.

D*  Spurzheim  now  coincides  in  the  soundness  of  the  views
of  Dr  Hoppe,  and  the  organ  is  regarded  as  probable.  The
part  of  the  brain  indicated  by  these  gentlemen  is  different
from  the  convolutions  corresponding  to  that  in  which  the
olfactory  nerves  originate  in  the  sheep*  In  the  human
brain  the  function  of  that  part  is  therefore  still  unascer-
tained.


ORGAN  OF  THE  LOVE  OF  LIFE.

In  conversing  with  a  variety  of  individuals  about  their
mental  feelings,  no  fact  has  more  forcibly  arrested  my  at-
tention than  the  difference  which  exists  in  the  love  of  life.
It  will  be  assumed  by  many,  that  this  is  an  universal  de-
sire, glowing  with  equal  intensity  in  all ;  but  this  is  not  the
fact  All  possess  the  feeling,  but  its  degrees  vary  much
more  than  is  generally  imagined.  Some  individuals  desire
life  so  intensely,  that  they  view  death  as  the  greatest  cala-
mity ;  they  declare,  that  rather  than  part  with  existence,
they  would  submit  to  live  in  endless  misery;  the  bare  idea
of  annihilation  is  unsupportable  to  their  imaginations ; —
and  they  found  an  argument  for  immortality  on  the  posi-
tion that  Ood  cannot  be  guilty  of  the  injustice  of  making
them  conscious  of  so  great  a  boon  as  life,  and  subsequently
depriving  them  of  it ;  to  have  lived,  according  to  them,
gives  an  indefeasable  title  to  continue  to  live.  Other  indi-
viduals, again,  experience  no  such  passion  for  existence ;
they  regard  pain  and  parting  with  the  objects  of  their  affec-
tions, as  the  chief  evils  of  death;  so  far  as  the  mere  plea-
sure of  living  is  concerned,  they  are  ready  to  surrender  it
with  scarcely  a  feeling  of  regret ;  they  discover  nothing  ap-
palling in  death,  as  the  mere  cessation  of  being;  and  do  not
feel  the  prospect  of  immortality  to  be  essential  to  their  en-
joyment of  the  present  life.  I  have  found  these  different
feelings  combined  with  the  most  opposite  dispositions  in
all  other  respects ;  the  great  lovers  of  life  were  not  always


LOVE  OF  LIFE.  189

the  healthy,  the  gay  and  the  fortunate;  nor  were  those
who  were  comparatively  indifferent  to  death,  always  the
feeble,  the  gloomy  and  misanthropic ;  on  the  contrary,  the
feeling  exists  strongly  and  weakly  in  these  opposite  cha-
racters indiscriminately.

Neither  does  the  difference  depend  on  the  moral  and  re-
ligions qualities  of  the  individuals;  for  equal  morality  and
religion  are  found  in  combination  with  either  sentiment.
This  is  a  point  in  human  nature  not  generally  adverted  to ;
nevertheless,  I  have  obtained  so  many  assurances  of  the
existence  of  these  different  feelings,  from  individuals  of
sound  judgment  and  unquestionable  veracity,  that  it  ap-
pears to  me  highly  probable,  that  there  are  a  special  faculty
and  organ  for  the  Love  of  Life.  We  seem  to  be  bound  to
existence  itself  by  a  primitive  instinct,  just  as  we  are  led
by  other  instincts,  to  provide  for  its  continuance  and  trans-
mission. The  organ  is  probably  situated  in  the  base  of  the
brain.

The  only  fact  tending  to  illustrate  its  position,  is  one
observed  by  Dr  A.  Combe,  and  recorded  in  the  Phrenolo-
gical Journal,  voL  iii.  p.  471.  In  describing  the  dissec-
tion of  the  brain  of  a  lady  upwards  of  sixty,  who  for  many
years  had  been  remarkable  for  continual  anxiety  about  her
own  death,  he  observes,  that  "  the  enormous  development
of  one  convolution  at  the  base  of  the  middle  lobe  of  the
brain,  the  function  of  which  is  unknown,  was  too  striking
not  to  arrest  our  attention ;  it  was  that  lying  towards  the
mesial  line,  on  the  basilar  and  inner  side  of  the  middle
lobe,  and  consequently  of  Destructiveness.  The  corres-
ponding part  of  the  skull  showed  a  very  deep  and  distinct-
ly-moulded cavity  or  bed  running  longitudinally,  with
high  and  prominent  sides,  and  presenting  altogether  an  ap-
pearance much  more  striking  than  in  any  skull  I  ever  saw.
From  the  situation  of  this  convolution,  its  development
cannot  be  ascertained  during  life,  and  hence  its  function
remains  unknown.  Whether  it  may  have  any  connexion
with  the  Love  of  Life,  is  a  circumstance  which  may  be  de-


190  SECRETIVENESS.

termined  by  future  observations ;  all  that  we  can  say  at
present  is,  that  the  Love  of  Life  seems  to  be  a  feeling  sui
generis,  and  not  proportioned  to  any  faculty,  or  combina-
tion of  faculties,  yet  known, — that  in  the  subject  of  this  no-
tice it  was  one  of  the  most  permanently  active  which  she
possessed, — and  that  in  her  the  convolution  alluded  to  was
of  very  unusual  magnitude ;  but  bow  far  the  coincidence
was  fortuitous,  we  leave  to  time  and  observation  to  deter-


7. — SECRETIVENESS.

The  organ  is  situated  at  the  inferior  edge  of  the  parietal
bones,  immediately  above  Destruotiveness,  or  in  the  middle
of  the  lateral  portion  of  the  brain.  When  the  organ  of  De-
structivene8s  is  much  developed,  it  may  be  mistaken,  by  the
inexperienced  observer,  for  the  organ  of  Secretiveness ;  so
that  it  is  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  latter  organ  is  placed
higher,  and  rather  farther  forward,  than  the  former;  and
that,  instead  of  presenting  the  form  of  a  segment  of  a  circle,
it  is  extended  longitudinally*  When  both  organs  are  high-
ly developed,  the  lower  and  middle  portion  of  the  side  of
the  head  is  characterized  by  a  general  fulness.

Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  history  of  the  discovery  of
this  organ.  In  early  youth,  he  was  struck  with  the  cha-
racter and  form  of  the  head  of  one  of  his  companions,  who,
with  amiable  dispositions  and  good  abilities,  was  distin-
guished by  cunning  and  finesse.  His  head  was  very  large
at  the  temples,  and  in  bis  natural  attitude  it  projected  for-
ward. Although  a  faithful  friend,  he  experienced  an  ex-
traordinary pleasure  in  employing  every  possible  device  to
make  game  of  his  school-fellows,  and  to  deceive  them.  Hk
natural  language  was  absolutely  the  expression  of  cunning,
such  as  Dr  Gall  had  often  observed  in  eats  and  dogs,
when,  playing  together,  they  wished  to  give  each  other  the
slip.  At  a  subsequent  period,  he  had  another  companion,
who,  at  first,  appeared  candour  personified ;  no  one  had  ever


SECftETITENESS.  191

distrusted  him;  but  his  gait  and  manner  were  those  of  acat
watching  a  moose ;  he  proved  fake  and  perfidious,  and  de-
ceived, in  an  unbecoming  manner,  his  young  schoolfellows,
his  tutors,  and  his  parents.  He  carried  his  head  in  the
same  attitude  as  before  mentioned ;  his  figure  was  handsome ;
and  his  head  exceedingly  large  at  the  temples.  One  of  Dr
Gall's  orients,  who  died  of  phthisis,  generally  passed  for
a  very  honest  man :  after  his  death,  Dr  Gall  was  struck
with  the  largeness  of  his  head  in  the  temporal  region ;  and
shortly  afterwards  learned,  that  he  had  cheated  his  ac-
quaintances, and  even  his  mother,  of  considerable  sums  of
money.  At  Vienna  he  was  often  in  the  company  of  a
physician,  possessed  of  much  information,  but  who,  on  ac-
count of  his  character  of  a  cheat,  was  generally  despised.
Under  pretence  of  dealing  in  objects  of  art,  and  lending  on
pledges,  he  robbed  all  who  put  confidence  in  him.  He  car-
ried his  tricks  and  cheats  to  such  a  length,  that  the  govern-
ment warned  the  public,  through  the  medium  of  the  public
journals,  to  beware  of  him ;  for  he  had  practised  his  arte
with  such  dexterity,  that  be  could  never  be  legally  condemn-
ed. He  often  told  Dr  Gall,  that  he  knew  no  plea-
sure equal  to  that  of  deceiving,  especially  persons  who  disr
trusted  him  most.  As  the  head  of  this  individual  also  was
very  large  at  the  temples,  Dr  Gall  was  impressed  with
the  idea  thai  there  is  a  primitive  tendency  towards  cunning
in  the  mind,  and  that  it  is  manifested  by  this  particular
cerebral  organ.  An  immense  number  of  observations  have
conjoined  his  conjecture.

The  nature  and  object  of  this  propensity  appear  to  be
the  following :  The  various  faculties  of  the  human  mind
are  liable  to  involuntary  activity  from  internal  causes,  as
well  as  from  external  excitement.  Thus,  Amativenees  be-
coming active,  gives  feelings  corresponding  to  its  nature :
Acquisitiveness  inspires  with  strong  desires  for  wealth;  and
Love  of  Approbation  fills  the  mind  with  projects  of  ambi-
tion. Every  one  will  be  conscious  that  these  or  similar
feelings,  at  times  rush  into  his  mind  involuntarily,  and  fre-


192  SECRETIVENESS.

quently  refuse  to  depart  at  the  commaSd  of  the  under*  *
standing.  If  outward  expression  were  given  to  these  im-
pulses, in  all  their  vivacity,  as  they  arise,  social  intercourse
would  be  disfigured  by  a  rude  assemblage  of  disgusting
improprieties,  and  man  would  shun  the  society  of  his  fel-
lows as  more  loathsome  than  pestilence  or  famine.  Shak-
speare,  with  that  accuracy  of  observation  which  distin-
guishes him,  has  pourtrayed  this  feature  of  the  human
mind.

"  Utter  my  thoughts  ?    Why,  say  they  are  vile  and  firise—

As  where's  that  palace,  whereinto  foul  things

Sometimes  intrude  not  ?    Who  has  a  breast  so  pure

But  some  uncleanly  apprehensions

Keep  leeU  and  law-days,  and  in  session  sit

With  meditations  lawful  ?"— Othello,  Act  iii.  Scene  3.

Some  instinctive  tendency,  therefore,  to  restrain  within
the  mind  itself,  to  conceal,  as  it  were,  from  the  public  eye
the  various  desires  and  emotions  which  involuntarily  present
themselves  in  the  mind,  was  necessary  to  enable  the  under-
standing to  regulate  their  outward  expression ;  and  nature
appears  to  have  provided  this  power  in  the  faculty  of  Se-
cretiveness.  It  is  an  instinctive  tendency  to  conceal,  and
the  legitimate  object  of  it  appears  to  be,  to  restrain  the
outward  expression  of  our  thoughts  and  emotions,  till  the
understanding  shall  have  pronounced  judgment  on  their
propriety.

Besides,  man  and  animals  are  occasionally  liable  to  the
assaults  of  enemies,  which  may  be  avoided  by  concealment,
in  cases  where  strength  is  wanting  to  repel  them  by  force.
Nature,  therefore,  by  means  of  this  propensity,  enables
them  to  add  prudence,  slyness,  or  cunning,  according  to  the
direction  given  to  it  by  other  faculties  of  the  individual,  to
their  means  of  defence.

A  sufficient  endowment  of  this  organ  is  essential  to  the
formation  of  a  prudent  character.  It  then  imposes  a  salu-
tary restraint  on  the  manifestations  of  the  other  faculties,


SECRETIVE  NESS.  193

and  serves  as  a  defence  against  prying  curiosity.  "  When
Napoleon,"  says  Sir  Walter  Scott,  "  thought  himself
closely  observed,  he  had  the  power  of  discharging  from  his
countenance  all  expression,  save  that  of  a  vague  and  inde-
finite smile,  and  presenting  to  the  curious  investigator  the
fixed  eyes  and  rigid  features  of  a  marble  bust."  Vol.  iv.
p.  37.  I  have  observed  this  power  to  be  conferred  by  large
Secretiveness.  Those  in  whom  it  is  deficient,  are  too  open
for  the  general  intercourse  of  society;  they  are  characterized
by  deficiency  of  tact,  a  headlong  bluntness  of  manner,  and
the  instantaneous  expression  of  every  thought  and  emotion,
as  it  flows  into  the  mind,  without  regard  to  the  proprieties
required  by  time,  place  or  circumstances.

Mr  Scott,  in  an  excellent  essay  on  this  propensity,  pub-
lished in  the  Phrenological  Transactions,  observes,  that  it
communicates  the  desire  to  discover  the  secrets  of  others
as  well  as  to  conceal  our  own.  The  author  of  Waverley,
in  his  novel  of  Quentin  Durward  *,  draws  the  character  of
Louis  XI.  with  exact  fidelity  to  this  principle  of  our
nature.  The  King,  says  he,  was  "  calm,  crafty,  and  pro-
foundly attentive  to  his  own  interest.  He  was  careful  in
disguising  his  real  sentiments  and  purposes  from  all  who
approached  him,  and  frequently  used  the  expressions,—
that  the  King  knew  not  how  to  reign,  who  knew  not  how
to  dissemble;  and  that,  for  himself,  if  he  thought  his  very
cap  knew  his  secrets,  he  would  throw  it  into  the  fire.  Like
all  astutious  persons,  he  was  as  desirous  of  looking  into
the  secrets  of  others,  as  of  concealing  his  own."  This  re-
presentation is  historically  correct.  According  to  this  view,
even  a  large  development  of  the  organ,  if  combined  with
good  sentiments,  and  an  enlightened  understanding,  is  a
valuable  endowment.  Persons  so  constituted,  possessing
themselves  the  natural  talent  requisite  for  intrigue,  if  they
choose  to  direct  the  faculty  in  that  way,  are  naturally  fit-
ted to  divine  and  discover  intrigues  and  secret  machinations
in  others,  and  to  defeat  them.     From  the  same  cause  they

•  Vol.  i.  p.  7.


194  SECRETIVENESS,

read9  with  great  acuteness,  the  natural  language  of  conceal*
ment  in  other  minds,  and  are  able  to  discover,  by  the  very
air  and  manner  of  a  man,  that  he  is  hiding  some  object  or
intention,  when  a  person,  in  whom  the  organ  is  small,  could
not  perceive  such  a  purpose.  In  many  of  the  affairs  of  life
also,  secrecy  is  indispensable  both  to  prudent  conduct  and
success.  *>

When  too  energetic,  or  not  properly  directed,  Secretive-
ne88  is  liable  to  great  abuses.  It  then  leads  to  a  liking  for
concealment,  intrigue,  and  crooked  policy,  for  their  own
sakes ;  and  to  a  feeling  that  it  is  wise  and  clever  to  wrap  up
the  purposes  of  the  mind  in  the  profoundest  mystery :  cun-
ning is  mistaken  for  ability,  and  deceit  for  practical  wisdom.
It  may  prompt  to  the  use  of  lies,  hypocrisy,  intrigue,  or  dissi-
mulation, as  means  to  gain  an  end.  Persons  in  whom  it
predominates,  judging  of  mankind  in  general  by  themselves,
are  never  able  to  see  the  affairs  of  the  world,  or  the  con-
duct of  others,  in  a  plain  and  simple  point  of  view,  but
imagine  life  to  be  a  continual  stratagem,  in  which  every
one  is  endeavouring  to  overreach  his  neighbour.  Such
persons  conceive,  that  the  eye  of  the  world  is  always  look-
ing into  their  breasts,  to  read  the  purposes  that  are  there
hatched,  but  which  discovery  they  are  resolved  to  prevent.
The  propensity  in  some  instances  finds  gratification  in  the
most  trifling  mysteries ;  an  individual  under  its  predomi-
nating influence  will  conceal  his  going  out,  his  coming  in,
his  engagements,  and  all  his  transactions ;  even  although
communication  of  these  would  greatly  facilitate  domestic
arrangements.  In  an  argument  a  secretive  man  will  evade
all  admissions.

Dr  Johnston  mentions  of  Pope,  that  he  took  so  "  great
delight  in  artifice,  that  he  endeavoured  to  attain  all  his  pur-
poses by  indirect  and  unsuspected  methods ;  he  hardly  drank
tea  without  a  stratagem.  He  practised  his  arts  on  such
small  occasions,  that  Lady  Bolingbroke  used  to  say  in  a
French  phrase,  that  he  played  the  politician  about  cabbages
and  turnips"


SEC11ETIVENESS.  195

Mercantile  men,  in  whom  this  organ  predominates,  oc-
casionally conceal  their  circumstances,  so  that  wife  and
children  proceed  in  the  unsuspecting  enjoyment  of  ima-
gined prosperity,  till  bankruptcy,  like  the  explosion  of  a
mine,  involves  them  in  instantaneous  ruin.  These  individu-
als generally  plead  in  excuse,  a  pretended  regard  to  the  feel-
ings of  their  relatives:  but  the  distrust  implied  in  such
conduct,  is  a  greater  injury  to  sensitive  minds,  than  the
evils  they  attempt  to  hide.  The  real  sources  of  their  con-
duct are  an  overweening  Self-esteem,  which  cannot  stoop
to  acknowledge  misconduct  or  misfortune,  and  an  inordi-
nate Secretiveness,  inspiring  them  with  an  instinctive  aver-
sion to  candid  and  unreserved  communication.  A  favour-
ite maxim  with  such  men,  is,  that  secresy  is  the  soul  of
trade.  It  is  so,  only  in  narrow  minds  misguided  by  this
propensity.

Persons  ip  whom  this  organ  is  large,  Mid  who  believe
that  they  really  conceal  their  true  character  from  the  world,
are  much  startled  at  the  exposure  which  Phrenology  is  said
to  make  of  the  dispositions  of  the  mind,  and  they  feel  great
difficulty  in  believing  it  practicable  to  compare  genuine
mental  feelings  with  development  of  brain,  because  they
imagine  that  real  motives  and  dispositions  are  never  ex-
hibited in  conduct.  Such  persons  err,  however,  in  their
estimate  even  of  their  own  powers  of  concealment;  for,
Secretiveness  does  not  alter  the  aim,  but  affects  only  the
means  of  obtaining  gratification  of  our  ordinary  desires ;
and,  besides,  if  disguise  be  really  the  forte  of  their  cha-
racter, Phrenology  has  the  advantage  of  them  still ;  for  it
exhibits  the  organ  of  Secretiveness  large,  and  in  their  very
concealment  they  will  manifest  most  powerfully  the  faculty
whose  organ  is  most  fully  developed.

Innumerable  abuses  of  this  propensity  occur  in  the  ordi-
nary intercourse  of  society.  How  polite,  acquiescent,  and
deferential,  are  some  persons  in  their  manners  to  all  who
are  present;  and  how  severe  in  their  vituperations,  when
the  same  individuals  are  gone  !  This  conduct  results  from
Secretiveness  addressing  itself  to  Love  of  Approbation  in

n2


196  SECRETIVENESS.

others,  and  endeavouring  to  please  them  by  professions
of  feigned  respect.  Many  persons  would  not,  for  any  con-
sideration, mention  a  disagreeable  truth  to  an  acquaintance.
This  ako  arises  from  an  abuse  of  the  same  faculty,  com-
bined with  great  Love  of  Approbation.

To  Mr  Scott  is  due  the  merit  of  throwing  great  light
on  the  influence  of  Secretiveness  in  producing  humour.
The  power  of  representing,  with  a  face  of  perfect  gravity,
some  ludicrous  incident,  is  one  species  of  humour.  In  this,
the  grave  exterior,  the  command  over  the  outward  expres-
sion of  the  face,  while  the  most  ludicrous  ideas  are
internally  perceived,  is  just  a  species  of  slyness,  and  is
clearly  attributable  to  Secretiveness.  This  kind  of  humour
also  is  absolutely  addressed  to  Secretiveness  in  others.  We,
as  spectators,  see  the  internal  absurdity  through  the  exter-
nal gravity,  and  this  gratifies  our  Secretiveness,  which
likes  to  penetrate  disguises  assumed  by  others,  as  well  as
to  disguise  itself.  Another  species  of  humour  consists  in
detecting  and  exposing  little  concealed  purposes  and  inten-
tions in  our  friends,  and  holding  them  up  to  view  in  all
their  nothingness,  when  they  are  mystifying  or  concealing
them  as  matters  of  real  importance.  "  The  man  of
humour,"  says  Mr  Scott,  "  delights  in  detecting  these  lit-
tle pieces  of  deception :  and  the  ludicrous  effect  of  this
seems  to  arise  from  the  incongruity  which  appears  between
the  real  and  the  assumed  character,  the  contrast  between
what  is  intended  to  be  apparent  at  the  surface,  and  that
which  is  seen  to  be  at  the  bottom."  It  is  proper  to  observe,
however,  that  Secretiveness  affords  only  the  slyness,  the
savoir  /aire,  together  with  the  tact  of  detecting  little  con-
cealed weaknesses  implied  in  humour;  and  that  the  fa-
culty of  Wit  is  necessary,  in  addition,  more  or  less,  to  pro-
duce ludicrous  effect  in  the  representation.  Thus,  a  per-
son with  much  Wit,  and  little  Secretiveness,  will  not  excel
in  humour,  although  he  may  shine  in  pure  wit.  A  person,
on  the  other  hand,  with  much  Secretiveness,  and  moderate
Wit,  may  excel  in  humour,  although,  in  intellectual  witty
combinations,  he  may  make  but  an  indifferent  figure.    It  is


SECRETIVENESS.  197

a  curious  fact,  that  the  Italians  and  English,  in  whom
Secretiveness  is  large,  delight  in  humour,  while  the  French,
in  whom  the  organ  is  moderate,  can  scarcely  imagine  what
it  is.  In  conformity  with  these  differences  in  national  de-
velopment, the  English  and  Italians  practise  a  prudent  re-
serve in  their  intercourse  with  strangers,  while  the  French
are  open  to  excess,  and  communicate  even  their  private  af-
fairs to  casual  acquaintances.  The  French  also  delight  to
live,  and  even  to  die,  in  public;  while  the  Englishman
shuts  himself  up  in  his  house,  which  he  denominates  his
castle,  and  debars  all  the  world  from  observing  his  conduct.
Other  faculties  contribute  to  these  varieties  of  taste,  but
Secretiveness  is  an  essential  element  in  the  relish  for  re-
tirement

I  have  uniformly  found  Secretiveness  large  in  the  heads
of  actors  and  artists,  and,  of  these,  I  have  been  permitted
to  examine  a  considerable  number.  In  the  cast  of  Miss
Clara  Fisher's  head,  it  will  be  seen  amply  developed.
The  theory  of  its  effects  in  aiding  the  former  seems  to  be
this :  The  actor  must  conceal  or  shade  his  real  character,
and  put  forth  the  natural  language  of  an  assumed  one.
Now,  Secretiveness  will  enable  him  to  suppress  or  withhold
all  the  faculties  which  are  not  essential  to  the  personage
whom  he,  for  the  time,  represents ;  while,  by  withdrawing
its  restraints  from  other  faculties,  it  will  allow  them  to
manifest  themselves  with  full  energy.  Thus,  suppose  an
actor,  in  whom  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness  are
large,  to  be  called  on  to'play  Iago,  a  character  in  which  sel-
fishness and  villany  predominate,  then  Secretiveness  will
enable  him  to  suppress  the  natural  language  of  his  own  su-
perior faculties,  while,  by  withdrawing  its  influence  from
Combativeness,  Destructiveness,  and  Self-Esteem,  it  will
permit  the  most  forcible  expression  of  these  in  looks,  tones
and  gestures;  and  this  will  be  Iago  to  the  life.  It  aids  the
.artist  in  a  similar  way.  It  is  known,  that  a  painter  or
sculptor,  in  working  a  figure,  studies  first  the  mental
feelings  which  it  is  intended  to  pourtray,  then  goes  to  a


198  SECRETIVENESS.

mjrror5  and  produces  the  expression  of  them  in  his  own
person,  and  copies  it  in  his  picture  or  block  of  marble.  In
this  process,  he  resembles  an  actor,  and  Secretiveness  as-
sists him  in  the  manner  before  explained.  In  this  analysis,
I  differ  in  one  point  from  Mr  Scott.  He  thinks  that
Secretiveness  confers  not  only  the  negative  power  of  sup-
pressing the  real  character,  but  also  the  positive  power  of
calling  up,  at  will,  the  natural  language  of  such  faculties
as  we  wish  to  exhibit  for  the  time.  Thus,  some  persons
are  able  to  load  others  with  expressions  of  great  esteem,
attachment,  and  good  will,  when  internally  they  hate
them.  Mr  Scott  conceives  that  Secretiveness  enables  such
individuals  not  only  to  disguise  their  real  enmity,  but  to
call  up  for  the  occasion  the  natural  language  of  Adhesive-
ness, Benevolence,  Veneration,  and  Love  of  Approbation,
and  to  use  these  as  instruments  of  deception.  This  latter
effect  appears  to  me  to  depend  on  Imitation.

When  Secret!  veness  and  Cautiousness  are  both  very  large,
there  is  a  great  tendency  to  extreme  reserve,  and  even,
when  little  knowledge  of  the  world  is  possessed,  to  suspi-
cion and  terror  of  dark  designs  and  sinister  plots,  hatching
on  every  hand  against  the  unhappy  possessor  of  this  com-
bination. In  general,  these  plots  have  no  existence  beyond
the  internal  feelings  produced  by  those  faculties.

Secretiveness,  with  small  Conscientiousness,  predisposes
to  lying,  and,  combined  with  Acquisitiveness,  to  theft.  In-
deed, Secretiveness  is  more  invariably  large  in  thieves  than
Acquisitiveness ;  and  it  prompts  to  this  crime,  probably  by
the  feeling  of  secrecy  which  it  generates  in  the  mind.  It
gives  the  idea  that  all  is  hidden,  and  that  no  eye  sees,
and  no  intellect  will  be  able  to  trace  the  fraud.  It  pro-
duces also  that  capacity  for  sly  cunning  which  is  essential
to  a  thief.  An  excellent  elucidation,  by  Dr  Andrew  Combe,
of  the  effects  of  Secretiveness,  as  a  constituent  element  in  the
character  of  a  thief,  will  be  found  in  the  Phrenological  Jour-
nal, vol.  i.  p.  611.  The  organ  is  large  in  David  Haggart,
and  in  a  variety  of  executed  thieves,  whose  casts  have  been


SECltETIVENESS.  199

obtained  It  is  large,  also,  in  John  Gibson,  a  boy  who
manifested  very  extraordinary  powers  of  deception  at  eight
years  of  age.  His  case  is  reported  at  full  length,  by  Mr
David  Bridges  junior,  in  the  Phrenological  Transactions,
vol.  L  p.  289.  On  3d  December  1828,  I  visited  in  Edin-
burgh jail,  John  Reid,  a  lad  of  sixteen,  under  sentence  of
death  (but  subsequently  respited),  for  housebreaking  and
theft.  His  head  was  uncommonly  large  for  his  years,  and
the  organ  of  Secretiveness,  in  particular,  was  enormously
developed.  Acquisitiveness  also  was  large,  and  Conscien-
tiousness deficient  The  Reverend  Mr  Porteous,  chaplain
to  the  jail,  mentioned,  that  Reid's  power  of  concealing  his
thoughts  and  feelings  was  most  extraordinary,  and  that
daring  and  secrecy  were  manifested  in  his  crime,  in  a  de-
gree that  was  almost  inconceivable.  He  had  mounted  on
the  shoulders  of  an  accomplice  to  the  second  storey  of  a
dwelling-house,  entered  by  a  window,  and,  although  per-
sons slept  in  the  bed-rooms  of  that  floor,  and  the  lamp  in
the  lobby  was  burning,  he  proceeded  down  stairs,  reached
the  dining-room,  robbed  the  side-board  of  plate,  and  got
clear  off  without  being  heard.

Another  effect  of  great  Secretiveness,  especially  when
aided  by  much  Firmness,  is  to  produce  the  power  of  re-
pressing, to  an  indefinite  extent,  all  outward  expression  of
pain,  even  when  amounting  to  positive  torture.  Ann  Ross
(whose  case  is  reported  by  Mr  Richard  Carmichael  of
Dublin  *),  with  a  view  to  excite  the  compassion  of  some
pious  and  charitable  ladies,  thrust  needles  into  her  arm  to
produce  disease,  and  carried  the  deception  so  far  as  to
allow  her  arm  to  be  amputated  without  revealing  the  cause.
The  needles  were  found  on  dissection,  and  she  was  more
mortified  by  the  discovery  of  the  trick,  than  "afflicted  by
the  loss  of  her  arm.  She  manifested  the  same  faculty  in
a  variety  of  other  deceptions.     I  examined  her  head,  and

•  Phren.  Journ.  No.  v.


200  SECKETIVENESS.

Mr  CARMicriAEL  also  furnished  the  Phrenological  Society
with  a  cast  of  it,  and  in  it  the  organs  of  Secretiveness  and
Firmness  are  decidedly  large.  The  North  American  In-
dians aHt>  are  celebrated  for  their  power  of  enduring  tor-
ture, and  the  samo  combination  occurs  in  casts  of  two  of
their  skulls  in  the  Society's  collection.

Dr  Murray  Patterson  mentions,  that  the  Hindoos
manifest  Secretiveness  in  a  high  degree,  in  the  form  of
cunning  and  duplicity,  and  the  organ  is  very  large  in  their
heads.

This  propensity,  when  predominantly  active,  produces  a
close  sly  look ;  the  eyes  roll  from  side  to  side ;  the  voice  is
low;  the  shoulders  are  drawn  up  towards  the  ears,  and  the
footstep  is  soft  and  gliding.  The  movements  of  the  body
are  towards  the  side.  Sir  Walter  Scott  accurately  de*
lineates  the  look  produced  by  this  faculty  and  Cautiousness
in  the  following  lines.

Speaking  of  Cormac  Doil,  he  says,

"  For  evil  seemed  that  old  man's  eye
Dark  and  designing,  fierce  yet  ehyy
Still  he  avoided  forward  look,
But  slow  and  circumspectly  took
A  circling  never  ceasing  glance,
By  doubt  and  cunning  mark'd  at  once  ;
Which  shot  a  mischief-boding  ray,
From  under  eye-brows  shagged  and  grey."

Lord  oftJie  Isles,  Canto  iv.  p.  24.

When  this  organ  is  very  large  in  the  head  of  an  author,
it  produces  a  curious  effect  on  his  style.  The  different
members  of  his  sentences  are  involved,  parenthetical,  and
often  obscure,  as  if  he  were  in  doubt  whether  he  selected
the  proper  place  for  his  expressions,  and  hesitated  between
what  he  ought  to  put  down  and  what  he  might  leave  to  be
understood.  He  is  also  liable  to  quaintness.  Pope's  style  oc-
casionally indicates  this  quality,  and  the  faculty  is  strongly
manifested  in  his  character.  Dr  Thomas  Brown's  style,
also,  is  characterized  by  Secretiveness,  and  the  organ  was


SECttETIVENESS.  201

large  in  his  head.  Croly's  poetry  presents  the  expression
of  it*  Goldsmith's  writings  display  a  moderate  endow-
ment This  faculty,  by  enabling  an  author  skilfully  to
work  up  his  incidents  and  events,  and  to  conceaHhe  de-
nouement of  his  plot  or  story,  till  the  most  appropriate  time
and  place  for  the  elucidation,  greatly  aids  him  in  producing
effect.

It  prompts,  says  Dr  Gall,  the  General  of  an  army  to  the
use  of  stratagems  to  deceive  the  enemy,  while  it  leads  him
to  conceal  his  own  forces  and  enterprizes,  to  make  false
attacks  and  counterfeited  marches.

This  organ  is  possessed  by  the  lower  animals,  and  Dr
Gall  remarks,  that  it  requires  a  particular  study  in  each
species.  In  the  common  species  of  ape,  for  example,  it
commences  above  the  origin  of  the  zygomatic  arch,  and
extends  forward  to  nearly  the  middle  of  this  bone.  Its  si-
tuation is  the  same  in  the  tiger,  cat  and  fox.  In  gramini-
vorous animals,  and  in  birds  distinguished  for  cunning,
this  region  will  also,  in  general,  be  found  large.

Manifestations  of  this  propensity,  clearly  attributable  to
disease  of  the  organ,  are  described  by  authors  on  insanity.
The  cunning  shewn  by  many  of  the  insane,  especially  in
concealing  their  true  state,  has  often  excited  astonishment.
Fodere'  speaks  of  two  patients  who  had  been  long  con-
fined in  the  asylum  at  Marseilles.  After  an  apparent  cure
of  considerable  duration,  their  friends  demanded  their  dis-
missal. He,  however,  suspected  deception,  and  determined
to  hold  a  long  conversation  with  them.  For  an  hour  and
a  half,  during  which  he  avoided  the  kind  of  ideas  in  regard
to  which  he  knew  them  to  be  insane,  they  spoke,  reasoned,
and  acted  like  men  of  sound  judgment.  But  when  he  in-
troduced the  subject  which  excited  their  diseased  faculties,
their  eyes  began  to  sparkle,  the  muscles  of  the  face  to  con-
tract, and  an  evident  agitation  took  place,  accompanied
with  an  effort  to  preserve  calmness.  They  were  ordered  to
be  detained.    Pinel  mentions  the  cunning  and  tricks  of


202


SECRETIVENESS.


some  lunatics  as  remarkable.  Dr  Marshall  *  notices  the
case  of  a  man  in  Bethlem  Hospital  in  1789,  who  fancied
he  was  a  great  man.  "  He  was  very  crafty,  and  used
much  flattery  to  the  keepers,  calling  them  '  fine  men,
gentlemen,9  especially  when  he  wanted  any  indulgence;
but  when  his  complacent  looks  and  genteel  expressions  did
not  avail  him,  he  became  revengeful,  made  up  some  plau-
sible story  against  them,  and  slyly  told  it  to  the  steward.
When  fresh  patients  came  into  the  house,  he  always  intro-
duced himself  to  them ;  he  was  very  civil  to  them,  and,
after  gaining  their  confidence,  he  tried  to  get  their  money
from  them,  which,  if  he  could  not  do  by  other  means,  he
had  recourse  to  stratagem  to  get  possession  of  it."

The  regular  metaphysicians  have  not  admitted  any
faculty  corresponding  to  this  propensity,  nor  am  I  aware
that  they  give  any  theory  of  cunning,  although  it  is  an  ob-
vious ingredient  in  human  nature.  The  quality,  however,
is  familiarly  recognised  by  a  variety  of  writers.  Lord
Bacon,  in  his  Essay  on  Cunning,  graphically  describes  a
number  of  the  abuses  of  Secretiveness.  "  We  take  cun-
ning," says  he,  "  for  a  sinister  or  crooked  wisdom,  and  cer-
tainly there  is  a  great  difference  between  a  cunning  man
and  a  wise  man,  not  only  in  point  of  honesty,  but  in  point
of  ability.  There  be  that  can  pack  the  cards,  and  yet  can-
not play  well ;  so  there  are  some  that  are  good  in  canvasses
and  factions,  that  are  otherwise  weak  men."


Hindoo.


Ceylokebe.


SccTCtlvcneM  large.


SccrctivcncM  email.


fago  192.


SECRETIVENESS.  203

In  Peveril  of  the  Peak,  we  have  the  following  dialogue.
"  Your  Grace  holds  his  wisdom  very  high,"  said  the  atten-
dant. "  His  cunning  at  hasty  I  do,"  replied  Bucking-
ham, "  which,  in  Court  affairs,  often  takes  the  weather-
gage  of  wisdom."

The  organ  is  established.


8. — ACQUISITIVENESS.

The  organ  of  this  faculty  is  situated  at  the  anterior  in-
ferior angle  of  the  parietal  bone.  By  Br  Spurzheim  it
was  called  Covetiveness ;  Sir  6.  S.  Mackenzie  suggested
the  more  appropriate  name  of  Acquisitiveness,  which  Dr
Spurzheim  has  since  adopted.

The  metaphysicians  have  not  admitted  a  faculty  in  the
mind,  the  function  of  which  is  to  produce  the  propensity
to  acquire,  and  which  is  gratified  by  the  mere  act  of  acqui-
sition, without  any  ulterior  object.  Dr  Hutcheson  says,
"  Thus,  as  soon  as  we  come  to  apprehend  the  use  of
wealth  or  power  to  gratify  any  of  our  original  desires,  we
must  also  desire  them ;  and  hence  arises  the  universality  of
these  desires  of  wealth  and  power,  since  they  are  the  means
of  gratifying  all  other  desires."  In  like  manner,  we  are
told  by  Mr  Stewart,  that,  "  Whatever  conduces  to  the
gratification  of  any  natural  appetite,  or  of  any  natural  de-
sire, is  itself  desired,  on  account  of  the  end  to  which  it  is  sub-
servient;  and  by  being  thus  habitually  associated  in  our
apprehension  with  agreeable  objects,  it  frequently  comes,
in  process  of  time,  to  be  regarded  as  valuable  in  itself,  in-
dependently of  its  utility.  It  is  thus  that  wealth  becomes
with  many  an  ultimate  object  of  pursuit ;  though,  at  first,
it  is  undoubtedly  valued,  merely  on  account  of  its  subser-
viency to  the  attainment  of  other  objects  *."

The  same  author  says  in  another  place,  that  "  avarice  is
a  particular  modification  of  the  desire  of  power ;  arising

•  Elements,  p.  388.


204  ACQUISITIVENESS.

from  the  various  functions  of  money  in  a  commercial  coun-
try. Its  influence  as  an  active  principle  is  much  strength-
ened by  habit  and  association  *."

Dr  Thomas  Brown  f  admits  the  desire  of  wealth  to  be
a  modification  of  the  desire  of  power,  but  he  endeavours  to
shew,  that  Mr  Stewart's  theory  is  defective  in  accounting
for  avarice,  and  enters  into  a  most  ingenious  speculation,
to  explain  how  that  feeling  arises  from  association.  He
takes  Time  into  account,  as  an  ingredient ;  and  takes  the
example  of  a  boy  purchasing  an  apple.  "  Before  the  boy
lays  out  his  penny  in  the  purchase  of  an  apple  or  an
orange,"  says  he,  "  it  appears  to  him  valuable,  chiefly  as
the  mode  of  obtaining  the  apple  or  orange.  But  the  fruit,
agreeable  as  it  may  have  been  while  it  lasted,  is  soon  de-
voured;— its  value,  with  respect  to  him,  has  wholly  ceased ;
and  the  penny,  he  knows,  is  still  in  existence,  and  would
have  been  still  his  own,  if  the  fruit  had  not  been  purchased.
He  thinks  of  the  penny,  therefore,  as  existing  now,  and  ex-
isting without  any  thing  which  he  can  oppose  to  it  as  equi-
valent ;  and  the  feeling  of  regret  arises, — the  wish,  that  he
had  not  made  the  purchase,  and  that  the  penny,  as  still  ex-
isting, and  equally  capable  as  before  of  procuring  some  new
enjoyment,  had  continued  in  his  pocket."  This  produces
"  a  slight  terror  of  expense,  which  the  habits  of  many
years  may  strengthen  into  parsimony."

Nothing  can  be  more  ingenious  than  this  speculation,
and  it  is  a  beautiful  instance  of  the  nature  of  metaphysical
science ;  but  it  is  not  sound.  The  question  occurs,  Why  is
this  "  slight  terror  of  expense"  experienced  only  by  some
boys  and  some  men,  since  association  and  the  love  of  enjoy-
ment are  universal  qualities  of  human  nature?

It  is  proper  to  mention,  however,  that  Lord  Kames
(who  has  been  censured  by  the  regular  metaphysicians  for
admitting  too  many  faculties),  recognises  the  existence  of
this  feeling  as  a  primitive  propensity  in  man,  and  calls  it

•  Outlines,  p.  92.  f  Vol  iii.  p.  47*.


ACQUISITIVENESS.  205

tbe  "  hoarding  appetite.  Man,"  says  his  Lordship,  "  is  by
nature  a  hoarding  animal,  having  an  appetite  for  storing  up
things  of  use ;  and  the  sense  of  property  is  bestowed  on
men  for  securing  what  they  thus  store  up  *."  He  adds,
that  "  the  appetite  for  property,  in  its  nature  a  great  bless-
ing, degenerates  into  a  great  curse,  when  it  transgresses  the
bounds  of  moderation."

The  observer  of  the  passion  of  avarice  in  real  life,  is  not
satisfied  with  the  theories  of  Mr  Stewart  and  Br  Brown.
Dr  King,  in  the  Political  and  Literary  Anecdotes  of  his
own  time,  remarks,  that  an  avaricious  man  "  is  born  and
framed  to  a  sordid  love  of  money,  which  first  appears  when
he  is  very  young,  grows  up  with  him,  and  increases  in
middle  age,  and,  when  he  is  old,  and  all  the  rest  of
his  passions  have  subsided,  wholly  engrosses  him."  He
mentions  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwick,  the  Duke  of  Marl-
borough, Sir  James  Lowther,  Sir  Thomas  Colby,  and
Sir  William  Smith,  as  remarkable  instances  of  it.

The  metaphysical  notions  of  Mr  Stewart  fail  entirely
to  explain  the  phenomena  of  avarice,  under  which  passion
no  enjoyment  is  sought,  except  that  of  accumulating
wealth.  The  character  of  Trapbois,  as  drawn  in  the
"  Fortunes  of  Nigel,"  and  admirably  represented  on  the
Edinburgh  stage  by  Mr  Mason,  is  a  personification  of  the
faculty  of  Acquisitiveness,  operating  as  a  blind  animal  in-
stinct, exalted  to  the  highest  degree  of  energy  and  activity,
and  extinguishing  every  feeling  of  the  mind,  except  that
of  fear;  which  it  had  cultivated  and  increased  to  minister
to  its  protection*  This  character  is  recognised  as  natural ;
highly  coloured,  indeed,  but  true  to  life  in  its  leading  fea-
tures. It  appears  absurd,  therefore,  to  ascribe,  as  the  me-
taphysicians do,  so  intense  a  passion  to  a  mere  law  of  asso-
ciation as  its  source,  to  an  error  of  the  understanding,  in
mistaking  wealth  for  the  objects  which  it  is  fitted  to  ob-
tain. The  very  essence  of  the  character  is  a  desire  for
wealth,  independent  of  every  purpose  of  application.  Phre-

•  Sketches,  B.  i.  sect.  2.


206  ACQUISITIVENESS.

nolegists  have  observed,  that  the  intensity  of  the  desire  to
acquire,  is  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  a  certain  part  of  the
brain,  and  they,  therefore,  regard  it  as  an  original  propen-
sity of  the  mind*  The  organ  was  discovered  in  the  follow-
ing manner :

When  Dr  Gall  was  employed  in  comparing  mental  ma-
nifestations with  cerebral  development,  he  was  in  the  ha-
bit of  collecting  in  his  house  numbers  of  the  lower  orders,
with  the  view  of  more  easily  discovering  the  different  pri-
mitive propensities,  which  he  supposed  would  be  found  to
operate  in  them  with  greater  simplicity  and  vigour,  than  in
persons  of  a  higher  rank.  On  many  of  these  occasions,  the
individuals  assembled,  encouraged  by  hira  to  familiarity,
accused  each  other  of  petty  larcenies,  or  of  what  they  styled
chiperies,  and  took  great  pleasure  in  pointing  out  those  who
excelled  in  such  practices ;  and  the  chipeurs  themselves  ad-
vanced in  front  of  their  companions,  proud  of  their  supe-
rior savoir-faire.  What  particularly  attracted  his  attention
was,  that  some  of  these  men  shewed  the  utmost  abhorrence
of  thieving,  and  preferred  starving  to  accepting  any  part
of  the  bread  and  fruit  which  their  companions  had  stolen,
while  the  chipeurs  ridiculed  such  conduct,  and  thought  it
silly.

To  discover  whether  this  tendency  to  pilfer  was  con-
nected with  any  particular  cerebral  organ,  Dr  Gall  di-
vided the  persons  whom  he  had  assembled  into  three
classes ;  the  first  included  the  chipeurs ;  the  second,  those
who  abhorred  the  very  idea  of  stealing ;  and  the  third,
those  who  seemed  to  regard  it  with  indifference.  On
comparing  the  heads  of  these  three  classes,  he  was  much
surprised  to  find,  that  the  most  inveterate  chipeurs  had  a
long  prominence  extending  from  the  organ  of  Secretiveness,
almost  as  far  as  the  external  angle  of  the  superciliary  ridge,
and  that  this  region  was  flat  in  all  those  who  shewed  a
horror  of  theft,  while  in  those  who  were  indifferent  about
it,  the  part  was  sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less  de-
veloped, but  never  so  much  as  in  the  professed  thieves ;


ACQUISITIVENESS.  207

and  on  repeating  the  experiment  again  and  again  with  a
new  assemblage,  he  found  the  same  results  uniformly  pre*
sent  themselves.

Having  thus  ascertained  the  constancy  of  the  facte,  the
idea  naturally  occurred  to  the  mind  of  Dr  Gall,  that  the
propensity  to  appropriate  must  be  somehow  connected  with
the  peculiarity  of  cerebral  configuration,  which  had  so
strongly  attracted  his  notice.  It  could  not  be  the  effect  of
education,  for  most  of  the  subjects  of  his  observations  had
received  none.  They  were  the  children  of  nature  left  to
their  own  resources.  Some  who  detested  stealing  happen-
ed to  be  precisely  those  whose  education  had  been  most
completely  neglected.  The  wants  and  circumstances  of  all
of  them  were  nearly  the  same, — the  examples  set  before
them  were  the  same, — and  to  what  cause,  therefore,  could
the  difference  be  ascribed,  if  not  to  an  original  difference  of
mental  constitution  ?

At  this  time  Dr  Gall  was  physician  to  the  Deaf  and
Dumb  Institution,  where  pupils  were  received  from  six  to
fourteen  years  of  age,  without  any  preliminary  education.
M.  May,  a  distinguished  psychologist,  then  director  of  the
establishment,  M.  Venus,  the  teacher,  and  he,  had  it  thus
in  their  power  to  make  the  most  accurate  observations  on
the  primitive  moral  condition  of  these  children.  Some  of
them  were  remarkable  for  a  decided  propensity  for  steal-
ing, while  others  did  not  shew  the  least  inclination  to  it,—
some  of  them  were  easily  reformed,  but  others  were  quite
incorrigible.  The  severest  punishments  were  inflicted  upon
one  of  them,  but  without  any  effect.  As  he  felt  himself
incapable  of  resisting  temptation,  he  resolved  to  be  a  tailor,
because,  as  he  said,  he  could  then  indulge  his  inclination
with  impunity.  On  examining  the  heads  of  all  these  boys,
the  same  region  was  found  to  be  uniformly  developed,  in
proportion  to  the  endowment  of  the  propensity.  He  made
casts  of  those  of  them  who  were  confirmed  thieves,  in  or-
der to  compare  them  with  such  other  heads  of  thieves  or
robbers  as  might  afterwards  fall  in  his  way.


208  ACQUISITIVENESS.

About  this  time,  also,  Dr  Gall  met  with  another  very-
decisive  proof  of  the  connexion  between  this  propensity
and  a  particular  development  of  brain.  In  the  House  of
Correction  he  saw  a  boy  of  fifteen  years  of  age}  who  had
been  a  notorious  thief  from  his  earliest  infancy.  Punish-
ment having  had  no  effect  upon  him,  he* was  at  last  con-
demned to  confinement  for  life  as  absolutely  incorrigible.
In  a  portrait  of  him  in  the  26th  plate  of  Dr  Gall's  work,
a  remarkable  prominence  in  the  lateral  region  of  the  head
is  conspicuous,  corresponding  to  what  is  now  ascertained  to
be  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness.  The  forehead  is  low,
narrow,  and  retreating,  and  his  intellect  is  stated  to  be
weak  and  defective  to  a  great  degree ;  and  hence  the  as-
cendency and  activity  of  the  propensity  in  question  are
easily  explained.

The  instinctive  appetite  for  accumulation,  produced  by
this  faculty,  viewed  only  in  itself,  presents  a  mean  and  vul-
gar aspect,  and  we  are  apt  to  regard  the  individual,  in
whom  it  predominates*  as  a  base  and  sordid  being,  cased  in
selfishness,  and  dead  to  every  generous  feeling.  But  when
we  view  it  in  its  results,  it  rises  vastly  in  dignity  and  im-
portance. The  first  demand  of  nature  is  to  live  and  to  en-
joy ;  and  without  Acquisitiveness  the  other  feelings  of  the
mind  would  prompt  man  to  kill  and  eat,  or  to  weave  and
wear,  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  present  wants.  But  if  he
bounded  his  industry  by  his  necessities,  and  lolled  in  idle-
ness while  not  employed  in  indispensable  pursuits,  although
he  might  not  starve  while  in  possession  of  health  and
strength,  he  would  never  become  rich.  Wealth  consists  of
the  savings  of  industry,  after  supplying  immediate  de-
mands :  Now,  according  to  the  metaphysicians,  there  is  ne
instinctive  propensity  in  man,  prompting  him,  by  a  natural
impulse,  to  save  and  to  accumulate ;  they  imagine  that  the
calls  of  nature  for  immediate  gratification,  or  the  love  of
power,  are  the  only  motives  to  such  exertions.  In  the  fa-
culty of  Acquisitiveness,  however,  the  Phrenologist  per-
ceives an  instinct  prompting  the  human  being,  after  his  ap-


ACQUISITIVENESS-  209

petites  of  hunger  and  thirst  are  appeased,  and  his  person
protected  against  the  elements  of  heaven,  to  labour  from
the  mere  delight  of  accumulating;  and  to  the  ceaseless
industry  which  Uiis  instinct  produces,  is  to  be  ascribed
the  wealth  with  which  civilized  man  is  everywhere  sur-
rounded. It  pqpmpts  the  husbandman,  the  artisan,  the
manufacturer,  the  merchant,  to  activity  in  their  several
vocations;  and,  instead  of  being  necessarily  the  parent
only  of  a  miserable  and  degraded  appetite,  it  is  one  of
the  sources,  when  properly  directed,  of  the  comforts  and
elegancies  of  life,  Its  regular  activity  distinguishes  civi-
lized man  from  the  savage.  The  prodigal,  who  consumes
the  last  shilling  which  he  can  command,  dies  and  leaves
not  a  trace  of  his  existence  behind  him.  The  laborious  ar-
tizan,  on  the  other  hand,  who,  under  the  impulse  of  this  fa-
culty, consumes  only  halfnhe  produce  of  his  labour,  leaves
the  other  half,  as  a  contribution  to  the  stock  of  national
capital,  to  maintain  and  set  in  motion  the  industry  of  ge-
nerations unborn.  These,  if  animated  by  the  same  spirit,
will  leave  it  with  new  accessions  to  their  posterity ;  and
thus  the  stream  of  public  prosperity  will  be  swelled,  in  an
increasing  ratio,  to  the  remotest  periods  of  time.  When,
however,  the  pursuit  of  wealth  becomes  the  business  of
life,  Acquisitiveness  usurps  the  place  of  the  moral  senti-
ments, perverts  the  intellect,  and  becomes  the  source  of  the
greatest  evils.

The  faculty  produces  a  general  tendency  to  acquire,
which  takes  its  particular  direction  from  the  other  faculties
with  which  it  is  combined.  In  a  great  collector  of  objects
of  natural  history,  this  organ  and  Individuality  are  large :
in  a  collector  of  pictures,  this  organ,  Constructiveness,  and
Ideality,  are  full ;  in  a  collector  of  old  coins,  Acquisitive-
ness and  Veneration  are  large.  In  short,  in  no  instance
where  the  desire  to  acquire  and  possess  is  strongly  mani-
fested, is  this  organ  deficient ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  in
those  in  whom  there  is  no  appetite  for  accumulation,  who
allow  their  substance  to  slip  through  their  hands,  through


210  ACQUISITIVENESS.

incapacity  to  retain  it,  I  have  seen  it  small.  It  is  a  curious
fact,  that  Mr  Owen  of  New  Lanark  maintains,  that  the  de-
sire for  wealth,  or  individual  property,  is  not  a  natural  in-
stinct of  the  human  mind;  and  in  his  own  head,  this  ori-
gan, like  that  of  Destructiveness,  the  feeling  attached  to
which  he  also  denies,  is  byuo  means  largely  developed.
So  differently  do  those  feel  in  whom  Acquisitiveness  is
large,  that  they  desire  to  acquire  for  the  mere  sake  of  ac-
quisition* If  a  person  so  endowed  be  owner  of  fifty  acres,
it  will  give  him  infinite  delight  to  acquire  fifty  more ;  if  of
one  thousand  or  one  hundred  thousand,  he  will  still  be
gratified  in  adding  to  their  number.  His  understanding
may  be  perfectly  convinced  that  he  already  possesses  ample
store  for  every  enjoyment,  and  abundant  provision  against
every  want;  but  yet,  if  this  faculty  be  active,  he  will  feel
his  joys  impaired,  if  he  ceases  to  amass.  This  explains
the  insatiable ,  nature  of  the  passion  to  acquire,  and  the
source  ako  of  the  disappointment  generally  experienced  by
persons  whose  lives  have  been  devoted  to  commerce,  when
they  retire  from  business  with  a  view  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of
their  industry.  The  gratification  of  Acquisitiveness  in  ac-
cumulating wealth,  constituted  the  chief  pleasure  of  their
previous  Kves;  and  when  this  propensity  ceases  to  be  in-
dulged, and  no  other  faculty  has  been  cultivated  with  equal
ardour,  ennui  and  disgust  are  the  natural  and  unavoidable
results  of  their  new  situation.

It  has  been  stated,  fes  an  objection  to  this  propensity,
that  property  is  an  institution  of  society,  and  that  an  organ
can&ot  exist  in  the  brain  for  a  factitious  desire.  The  an-
swer to  this  argument  is,  that  the  idea  of  property  springs
from  the  instinctive  suggestions  of  the  faculty  in  question;
and  that  the  laws  of  society  are  the  consequences,  and  not
the  causes,  of  its  existence.  They  are  intended  to  regulate
the  desires  of  mankind  for  possessions ;  but  this  purpose
clearly  supposes  such  desires  antecedently  to  exist.

Many  persons,  in  whom  Benevolence  and  Love  of  Ap-
probation are  large,  as  well  as  Acquisitiveness,  can,  with


ACQUISITIVENESS.  $U

difficulty,  believe  that  the  latter  influences  their  feelings.
They  are  so  ready  to  disburse  and  to  bestow  that  they  ne-
ver accumulate,  and  hence  persuade  themselves  that  they
have  no  tendency  to  acquire.  But  such  persons  are  keen  in
their  dealings,  they  cheapen  in  making  purchases,  know
where  bargains  are  to  be  obtained;  and,  on  consulting
their  own  minds,  will  find  that  schemes  of  acquiring  pro-
perty frequently  haunt  their  imaginations.  They  are  also
prone  to  admire  the  rich.  Persons,  on  the  contrary*  in  whom
the  organ  is  small,  -think  of  every  thing  with  more  interest,
and  pursue  every  object  with  more; avidity,  than  wealth.
They  may  be  industrious  to  live,  but  there  is  no  intense
energy  in  their  pursuit  of  gain ;  and  their  fancies,  in  build-
ing Castks  in  the  air,  rarely  erect  palaces  of  gold,  or  place
happiness  in  hordes  bf  accumulated  riches.

Tie  effects  &f  this  faculty  are  greatly  modified  by  the
strength. of' Self-Esteem.  *  The  propensity  in  question  de-
sires to  aeqtfire;  Self-Esteem  produces  the  love  of self ';  the
two  conjoined,  give  rise  to  the  Love  of  Acquisition  for  self-
gratification  ;  and  if  both  organs  be  large,  the  individual
will  have  a  strong  tendency  to  sordid  selfishness,  unless  the
moral  and  reflecting  powers  be  particularly  active  and
energetic.  The  passion  for  uniques  also  seems  to  arise
from  this  combination.

Dr  Gall  states  this  organ  to  be  little  developed  in  th*
skulls  of  the  Caribs.  In  accordance  with  this,  travellers
say  that  they  are  little  prone  to  theft;  and,  therefore,  says
Rochester,  in  his  History  of  the  Antilles,  when  they  are
robbed,  they  always  insist  that  it  must  have  been  by  a  Chris-
tian. The  Negroes  are  also  little  prone  to  steal,  and  the
organ  is  moderately  developed  in  them.  Dr  Gall  had  an
opportunity  of  observing  among  the  Spanish  troops,  that
both  the  Arragonese  and  Castilians  have  the  anterior  part
of  the  temporal  region  a  good  deal  flattened,  denoting  a
small  Acquisitiveness ;  and  he  was  assured  that  they  are
the  most  faithful  servants,  and  equally  incapable  of  steal-
iag  as  of  lying.  Jh%  Kalmucks,  again,  are  the  very  oppo-
site.     They  have  been  renowned  for  thieving  and  bad

o  ft


212  ACQUISITIVENESS.

faith ;  and  in  accordance  with  this,  Blumenbach,  an  op-
ponent of  Phrenology,  in  describing  the  Kalmuck  skull,
observes,  that  it  projects  in  the  region  of  Acquisitiveness,
"  capita  ad  latera  extantia"  Dr  Gall  possesses  two  Kal-
muck skulls,  and  both  correspond  with  Blumenbach's
description.  Dr  Spurzheim  also  tells  us,  "  that  a  young
Kalmuck,  brought  to  Vienna  by  Count  Stahrenberg,  be-
came melancholy,  because  his  confessor,  who  instructed
him  in  religion  and  morality,  had  forbidden  him  to  steal.
He  got  permission  to  steal,  on  condition  that  he  should
give  back  what  he  had  stolen.  The  young  man,  profiting
by  this  permission,  stole  bis  confessor's  watch  during  high
mass,  but  joyfully  returned  it  after  mass  was  over."

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  miser  without  a  great  endow-
ment of  this  propensity,  although  an  individual  may  be  a
thief  with  a  moderate  portion  of  it  Avarice  arises  from
Acquisitiveness,  raised  to  the  height  of  a  passion.  Theft
implies  a  want  of  regulating  and  directing  influence  from
the  motal  faculties,  as  much  as  an  excessive  and  intense
desire  to  acquire  property  for  the  sake  of  possessing  it.
Strong  sensual  propensities,  which  cannot  be  gratified
without  money,  may  lead  individuals  to  resort  to  theft  as  a
means  of  supplying  their  wants,  without  the  love  of  pro-
perty itself  being  strong ;  but  Conscientiousness  must  be
weak,  and  Secretiveness  powerful,  before  such  an  expe-
dient can  be  resorted  to.

The  existence  of  this  organ  throws  light  on  the  tendency
to  steal,  which  some  individuals,  whose  external  circum-
stances place  them  far  above  temptation,  manifest  in  a  re-
markable degree.  In  them,  it  seems  to  be  in  a  state  of  dis-
eased activity,  and  not  to  be  controlled  by  the  moral  and
reflecting  faculties.  Dr  Gall  mentions  several  cases  of
diseased  affections  of  this  propensity.  M.  Kneisler,  go-
vernor of  the  prison  of  Prague,  spoke  to  him  and  Dr  Spurz-
heim about  the  wife  of  a  rich  merchant,  who  stole  continu-
ally from  her  husband  in  the  most  adroit  manner,  and  who
was  at  last  shut  up  in  a  house  of  correction,  which  she  had
scarcely  left,  when  she  stole  again,  and  was  again  confined.


ACQUISITIVENESS.  21 8

She  was  condemned  to  a  third  and  longer  imprisonment,
and  again  commenced  her  operations  in  the  jail  itself.
With  the  utmost  address,  she  made  a  hole  in  the  stove,
which  heated  the  apartment  in  which  the  money  was  depo*
sited,  and  committed  repeated  depredations,  which  were
soon  noticed.  Every  means  were  adopted  to  detect  the
offender,  and  bells  were  suspended  at  the  doors  and  win-
dows, but  all  in  vain.  At  length  a  spring-gun  was  set,
the  wire  of  which  was  connected  with  the  strong  box.
She  was  so  dreadfully  frightened  by  its  explosion,  that  she
had  not  time  to  eseape  through  the  stove.  At  Copenhagen,
Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim  saw  an  incorrigible  thief,  who
sometimes  distributed  the  produce  of  his  larcenies  to  the
poor ;  and,  in  another  place,  a  robber,  who  was  in  confine-
ment for  the  seventh  time,  assured  thsm  with  sorrow,  that
he  felt  himself  unable  to  act  otherwise.  He  begged  to  be
detained  in  prison,  and  to  be  provided  with  the  means  of
supporting  himself.

At  Minister,  a  man  was  eondemned  to  imprisonment  for
eight  years,  on  account  of  some  robberies : — He  was  no
sooner  liberated  titan  he  committed  fresh  depredations,  and
was  thereupon  imprisoned  for  life.  Sixteen  years  thereaf-
ter he  revealed  a  conspiracy  which' had  been  formed  among
the  criminals,  and  it  was  proposed  to  reward  him  by  setting
him  free.  The  judge  objected  to  this,  that  it  would  be
dangerous  to  do  so,  as  the  man  himself  had  previously  as-
sured him  that  his  thievish  propensity  was  so  rooted  in  his
constitution  that  he  could  not  by  any  possibility  resist  it.
About*e  year  after,  he  escaped  from  prison,  betook  himself
to  his'  old  practices,  and  was  again  arrested ;  shortly  after
which  he  hanged  himself.  "  During  ten  years  that  I  have
known  this  man  in  the  prison,"  said  Wernering,  from
whom  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim  got  these  details,  "  he  was
remarkable  for  activity  and  devotion  during  divine  service;
but  I  learnt  after  his  death,  that  he  had  constantly  been
committing  theft,  even  in  the  prison  itself.91

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that,  among  the  young  men  confined


814  ACQUISITIVENESS.

in  <we  of.thepri#€^pf  B^^inf(S4a4tv|ft^),  one  in  parti-
cular attracted  th£  attention  of  Dt  &URZHttttaiiAhpntelf.
Th#y  strongly  reciommfended  neyer  to  set  Um  at  liberty,  as
Jhey  thought  it  impossible  he  could  ever  abstain  from
stealing.  They  explained  their  natives  to  the  gentlemem
who  accompanied  them,  and,  on  examining  the  registers,
ihe  latter  were  much  surprised  to  find  that  the  man  had
from  infancy  manifested  the  strongest  tendency  to  thieving.
TJ*e  organs  of  the  higher  sentiments  were  extremely  defi-
cient, whjl#  that  of  Acquisitiveness  had  acquired  the  higb-
,*pt  degree  of  development  and  energy.  Its  activity  Was
also  greatly  aided  by  his  immense  endowment  of  jSecretive-
Jiass.  The  man  himself  was  little  and  deformed;  his  fore-
head <*  villaneusly  low,"  and  depressed  backwards  imme-
diately above  the  jyebrows,  but  the  lateral  regions,  or
temple*  were  broad  and  prominent.  In  such  a  case  no
phrenologist  \*auid  hesitate  to  give  the  same  advice.

In  the  prison  at  Berne,  Dr  Gall  and  Spuezheim  saw  a
rickety  and  badly  organized  boy  of  twelve  years  of  age,
who  could  not  refrain  from  stealing ;  aM  who,  with  his
pockets  filled  with  his  own  bread,  purloined  that  of  others*
At  Haina,  the  officers  spoke  to  them  about  an  incorrigible
robber,  named  Fesselmate*,  whom  mi  punishment  could
amend.  He  stole  in  prison  to  such  an  extent,  thai  a  mark
was  put  upon  his  arm,  that  all  might  be  upon  their  guard
against  him.  Before  seeing  him,  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim
elated  what  his  development  ought  to  be,  and  thei*;  predic-
tion was  verified  at  the  first  glance.  He  had  the  appear-
ance of  being  sixteen,  although  he  was  in  reality  twenty-
six  years  of  age,  .  ftis  bead  was  round,  and  about  &e  size
of  that  of;ap  infant  vof- one  year. ,  He  was,  moreover,  deaf
and  dumb,

Numerous  examples  of  the  diseased  activity  of  this  pro-
pensity occur  in  all  lunatic  asylums,  and  afford  strong  proof
of  the  independent  existence  of  the  faculty  and  organ.  Pi-
xel tells  us,  that  It  is  a  matter  of  common  observation,
that  men  who,  in  their  lucid  intervals,  are  justly  consider-


ACQUISITIVENESS.  $1  &

ed  as  models  of  probity,  cannot  refrain  fitoia  steeling  and
cheating  daring  the  paroxysm;  and  Dr  Gall  gives  fcjur
eases  of  wonen,  who,  in  their  ordinary  state,  had  no  siieh
tendency,  bat  who,  when  pregnant,  manifested  it  in  a  high
degree.

Two  citizens  of  Vienna  attracted  his  notice,  both  of
whom  had  led  irreproachable  lives  previous  to  becoming  in-
sane* After  that  time  both  were  distinguished  for  an  ex-
traordinary inclination  to  steal.  They  wandered  ova-  the
hospital  from  morning  to  night,  picking  up  whatever  they
could  lay  their  hands  upon, — straw,  rags,  clothes,  wood*
&c.,  which  they  carefully  concealed  in  the  apartment  which
they  inhabited  in  common ;  and,  although  lodged  in  the
same  chamber,  they  stole  from  each  other.  In  both  the  or-
gan was  very  much  developed.

M.  Esquirol,  physician  to  the  Salpetriere  of  Paris,
gave  Dr  Qall  an  account  of  a  Knight  of  Malta,  who  had
quitted  the  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  Frfench  revolution,
and  who,  from  excessive  indulgence  and  disappointed  love,
had  become  weak  in  intellect,  violent  in  temper,  and  at
last  a  thief.  On  his  way  to  M.  Esquirol's  asylum,  he
contrived  to  steal  spoons,  covers,  &c.  from  the  inns  at
which  he  dined*  He  then  went  about  accompanied  by  a
servant,  and  not  unfrequently  refreshed  himself  in  coffee-
houses, and,  instead  of  paying,  put  the  cup,  saucer,  and
spoon  in  his  pocket,  and  walked  away.  In  other  respects
he  was  sufficiently  reasonable-  This  inclination  to  theft
was  cored,  although  his  intellect  remained  weak.

Aciel  Mentions  a  young  man  who  was  trepanned,  in
consequence  of  a  severe  wound  on  the  temple,  in  the  region
of  the  organ  of  Acquisitiveness.  After  his  dismissal  from
the  hospital,  he  manifested  an  irresistible  propensity  to
steal,  and  after  committing  several  larcenies,  he  was  im-
prisoned, and  would  have  been  condemned,  had  not  Acril
declared  him  insane*

"  There  are  persons,"  says  that  accurate  and  philosophic


316  ACQUISITIVENESS.

cal  observer  and  physician  Dr  Rush  of  Philadelphia*,
"  who  are  moral  to  the  highest  degree  as  to  certain  duties,
bat  who,  nevertheless,  live  under  the  influence  of  some
one  vice.  In  one  instance  a  woman  was  exemplary  in
her  obedience  to  every  command  of  the  moral  law  except
one, — she  could  not  refrain  from  stealing.  What  made  this
vice  more  remarkable  was,  that  she  was  in  easy  circumstan-
ces, and  not  addicted  to  extravagance  in  any  thing.  Such
was  the  propensity  to  this  vice,  that,  when  she  could  lay
her  hands  upon  nothing  more  valuable,  she  would  often,
at  the  table  of  a  friend,  fill  her  pockets  secretly  with  bread.
She  both  confessed  and  lamented  her  crime."

The  Journal  de  Paris  of  29th  March  1816,  states,  that
"  An  ex-commissary  of  police,  Beau-Conseil,  has  just
been  condemned  to  eight  years'  confinement  and  hard  la-
bour, and  to  the  pillory,  for  having,  when  still  in  office,
stolen  some  pieces  of  plate  from  an  inn.  The  accused  per-
sisted to  the  last  in  an  odd  enough  species  of  defence.  He
did  not  deny  the  crime,  but  he  attributed  it  to  mental
alienation,  occasioned  by  wounds  which  he  had  received  at
Marseilles  in  1815."  Dr  Gall  observes,  that  if  the  pre-
vious conduct  of  Beau-Conseil  was  irreproachable,  and  if
he  did  really  receive  a  wound  in  the  head,  either  his  de-
fender was  inexcusable  in  not  making  the  defence  avail-
able, or  the  Court  was  blameable  in  not  listening  to  it.

This  propensity  is  found  also  in  the  lower  animals.
Lord  Kames  observes,  that  "  tha  beavers  perceive  the  tim-
ber they  store  up  to  be  their  property;  and  the  bees  seem
to  have  the  same  perception  with  regard  to  their  winter
provision  of  honey."  Dr  Gall  also  mentions  a  variety  of
the  lower  animals  which  manifest  the  sense  of  property.
The  same  pair  of  storks,  swallows,  nightingales,  and  red-
breasts return,  in  spring  or  in  autumn,  to  the  same  coun-
try in  which  they  had  passed  the  season  in  the  preceding
year,  and  establish  themselves,  the  storks  on  the  same
steeples,  the  swallows  under  the  same  roofs,  and  the  night-
*  Rush's  Medical  Inquiries.


ACQUISITIVENESS.  217

ingales  in  the  same  bushes.  If  another  pair  of  birds  at-
tempt to  seize  the  place  already  appropriated,  war  is  imme-
diately waged  against  them,  and  the  intruders  are  foreed
to  depart.  Cows  returning  from  the  pasturage,  occupy
each  its  own  stall  in  the  byre,  and  defend  it  The  cat  and
dog,  in  hiding  food,  to  be  used  when  hunger  returns;  and
the  squirrel,  hamster,  and  jackdaw,  which  collect  provi-
sions for  the  winter, — undoubtedly  have  the  notion  of  pro-
perty in  the  stores  they  accumulate.  These  animals,  how-
ever, do  not  enact  laws ;  and  the  sense  of  property  is  in
them  an  instinct  of  nature.  In  the  human  race,  says  Dr
'Gall,  the  process  is  the  same;  nature  inspires  the  mind
with  the  notion  of  property,  and  laws  are  made  to  protect
it.
This  organ  is  established.


9.— CONSTRTJCTIVENES8.

This  organ  is  situated  at  that  part  of  the  frontal  bone
immediately  above  the  spheno-temporal  suture.  Its  appear-
ance and  situation  vary  slightly,  according  to  the  develop-
ment of  the  neighbouring  parts.  If  the  zygomatic  process
is  very  projecting,  or  if  the  middle  lobes  of  the  brain,  or
the  forehead  in  general,  or  the  organs  of  Language  and
Order  in  particular,  are  greatly  developed,  its  size  is  less
easily  distinguished.  The  leading  object  ought  to  be  to  de-
termine the  actual  size  of  each  organ,  and  not  its  mere
prominence ;  and,  on  this  account,  it  is  proper  farther  to
notice,  that,  if  the  base  of  the  brain  is  narrow,  this  organ
holds  a  situation  a  little  higher  than  usual,  and  there  will
then  frequently  be  found  a  slight  depression  at  the  exter-
nal angle  of  the  eye,  betwixt  the  zygomatic  process  and  the
organ  in  question,  especially  when  the  muscles  are  thin.
In  such  cases,  it  has  sometimes  appeared  as  high  up  as
Tune  generally  occurs.  This  slight  variation  from  uniform
situation  occurs  in  the  distribution  of  all  the  parts  of  the


SIS  ceNSTEuarivftNXfis.

body;  but  the  anatomist  is  not,  on  this  account,  embarrassed
in  his  operations ;  for  the  aberration  never  exceeds  certain
limits,  and  he  acquires,  by  experience,  the  tact  of  recog-
nising the  part  by  its  general  appearance*

It  has  been  objected,  that  the  elevation  or  depression  of
this  part  of  the  brain  depends  upon  the  force  with  which
the  temporal  muscles,  which  lie  over  it,  have  acted  in  the
individual ;  and  it  is  said  that  carnivorous  animals  which
masticate  bones,  and  in  consequence  possess  those  muscles
in  a  very  powerful  degree,  have  narrow  bands,  and  little
brain  in  the  region  of  tbfe  efgan*

The  answer  to  this  is  fourfold ;  lsty  Camivoif ous^aniinak
do  not  huild,  and  the  organ  in  question.  UiOTWJijftg fortlM*
The  organ  being  absent,  their  heads  are  narrow  of  coursei;
but  all  this  is  in  exact  accordance  with  Phrenology.  '  2dly>
In  the  beaver,  which  cuts  timber  with  ite^teeth,  and  in
which  the  temporal  muscles  act  with  great  energy,  the  or-
gan is  large,  andthe.headis  bro^df  which -also  harmonizes
with  our  doctrine,  and  contradicts  that  of  the  objectors*
9dty9  In  the  htimftn  race,  the  size  of  the  head,  at  the*  Re-
gion in  question,  which  indicates  the  size  of  the  organ*
does  noj;  be*r  a  proportion  to  the  force  with  .which  jwwti-
cation  is  performed;  for  some  individuals,  tyhallve  chiefly
on  slope,  ap4  *che#  Uttle,  Ji*ve  narrow  heads,  and  weak
constructive  talents,  while  others,  who  eat  hard  viands,
have  broad  heads,  and  manifest  great  mechanical  skill;
and,  4ftkly9  The  actual  size  of  the  head  in  this  quarter,
from  whatever  cause  it  arises,  bears  a  regular  proportion
to  the  actual  endowment  of  constructive  genius.

The  temporal  muscle  differs  in  thickness  in  different
persons,  and  the  phrenologist  ought  to  desire  the  individual
observed  to  move  the  lower  jaw,  and,  while  he  does  /bo*  to
feel  the  muscle,  and  allow  for  its  size.  The  uncertainty  in
regard  to  the  dimensions  of  the  temporal  muscle,  renders
it  unsafe  to  predicate  the  size  of  the  Organs  of  Construe-
tiveness  and  Acquisitiveness  from  co$U  of  the  head,  unless
information  as  to  the  thickness  of  the  fleshy  fibres  is  com-


wmaoated*  This  organ,  tberefbuB,*  fa  best  estafctished;  by
examining  living  heads,  or  skulls,  or  oasts  of  ftkulls.  '

When  Dr  Gall  first  turned  his  attention  to  the  talent
lor  construction,  manifested  by  some  individuals,  he  had
not  discovered  the  fact,  that  every  primitive  faculty  is  con-
nected with  a  particular  part  of  the  brain  as  its  organ ;  and,
on  -this  account, ihe  directed  his  observations  towards  the
whole  thead  of  great  -mechanicians.  He  was  frequently
afecuck:w?th  tbA'etrcumstanoe,  that  the  heads  of  such  ar-
tiste wtmbsjaige-uk  the  temporal  region  as  at  the  cheek
bones*  JTht8?  'however,  although  occurring  frequently,  was
net  »4DeEtirin  and  infallible  characteristic ;  and  hence  he
wa»Ied  J>y  degrees  to  believe,  that  the  talent  depended  on
a  parttcuhov-power.  To  discover  a  particular  indication  of
it  iriihe*hfiad/he  sought  acquaintance  with  men  of  distin-
guished mechanical  genius,  wherever  he  found  them,  stu-
died the  forms  of  their  heads,  and  moulded  them.  He  soon
mefcjsome  in  whom  the  diameter  from  temple  to  temple  was
gMater  than  that  from  the  one  zygomatic  bone  to  the
attar;  and  at  last  found  two  celebrated  mechanicians,  in
whom  there  appeared  two  swellings,  round  and  distinct  at
4h*  temples.  These  heads  convinced  him,  that  it  is  not  the
circumstaoutt  of  equality  in  the  zygomatic  and  temporal
diaibetqfc'  whfah  indicates  a  genius  for  mechanical  con-
struetiaq,  "hut  u  round  protuberance  in  the  temporal  re-
giop,-  situated  in  some  individuals  a  little  Ijebind,  i#  ofhefti
a  little  behind  and  above  the  eye.  This  development  is  al-
ways foupd  in  concomitance  with  great  constructive  talent,
and  when,  the  zygomatic  diameter  is  equal  U>  it,  then  there
is  a  parallelism  of  the  fact ;  but,  as  the  zygomatic  bone  is
not  connected  with  the  or^ufe  apd  pifojects  more  or  less  in
different  individuals,  this  form,  of  countenance  is  not  in-
variably the  .  concomitant  of' constructive  talent,  apd  ought
not  to  be  taken  ar  the  measure  of  the  development  of  the
organ.

Having  thus  obtained  some  idea  of  the  seat  and  exter-
nal appearance  of  the  organ,  Dr  Gall  assiduously  multi-


220  CONSTRUCTIVENESS.

plied  observations.  At  Vienna,  some  gentlemen  of  distinc-
tion brought  to  him  a  person,  concerning  whose  talents
they  solicited  his  opinion.  He  stated  that  he  ought  to  have
a  great  tendency  towards  mechanics.  The  gentlemen  ima-
gined that  he  was  mistaken,  but  the  subject  of  the  experi-
ment was  greatly  struck  with  this  observation :  He  was
the  famous  painter  Unterbergkn.  To  shew  that  Dr
Gall  had  judged  with  perfect  accuracy,  he  declared  that
he  had  always  had  a  passion  for  the  mechanical  arts,  and  that
he  painted  only  for  a  livelihood.  He  carried  the  party  to
his  house,  where  he  shewed  them  a  multitude  of  machines
and  instruments,  some  of  which  he  had  invented,  and
others  improved.  Besides,  Dr  Gall  remarks  that  the  ta-
lent for  design  so  essential  to  a  painter,  is  connected  with
the  organ  of  Constructiveness,  so  that  the  art  which  he
practised  publicly  was  a  manifestation  of  the  faculty.

Dr  Scheel  of  Copenhagen  had  attended  a  course  of  Dr
Gall's  lectures  at  Vienna,  from  which  city  he  went  to
Rome.  One  day  he  entered  abruptly,  when  Dr  Gall  was
surrounded  by  his  pupils,  and  presenting  to  him  the  cast  of
a  skull,  asked  his  opinion  of  it.  Dr  Gall  instantly  said,
that  he  "  had  never  seen  the  organ  of  Constructiveness  so
largely  developed  as  in  the  head  in  question."  Scheel
continued  his  interrogatories.  Dr  Gall  then  pointed  out
also  a  large  development  of  the  organs  of  Amativeness  and
Imitation.  "  How  do  you  find  the  organ  of  Colouring  ?"—
"  I  had  not  previously  adverted  to  it,"  said  Gall,  "  for  it
is  only  moderately  developed."  Scheel  replied,  with  much
satisfaction,  "  that  it  was  a  cast  of  the  skull  of  Raphael."
Every  reader,  acquainted  with  the  history  of  this  celebra-
ted genius,  will  perceive  that  Dr  Gall's  indications  were
exceedingly  characteristic.  Casts  of  this  skull  may  be  seen
in  the  Phrenological  Society's  collection,  and  also  in  De
Ville's  in  London,  and  O'Neill's  in  Edinburgh,  and  the
organs  mentioned  as  large  will  be  found  very  conspicuously
indicated.  That  of  Constructiveness  in  particular  presents
the  round  elevated  appearance  above  described,   as   the


CONSTRUCTIVENESS.


221


surest  indication  of  its  presence  in  a  high  degree.  An  ad-
mirable Essay  by  Mr  Scott  on  the  genius  of  Raphael,
compared  with  the  cerebral  development  ^dicated  by  this
skull,  will  be  found  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  ii.
p.  327.


w


&


Raphael.


New  Hollander.


-mm


Coostructivcnett  burgs*


CanstructiveneM  noalL


These  figures  represent  a  side  view  and  front  view  of  the  skulls  of  Ra-
phael and  a  New  Hollander.  In  the  front  view,  the  coronal  region
of  the  New  Hollander  comes  into  the  figure,  and  gives  the  forehead
an  appearance  of  size  and  perpendicularity  greater  than  nature.
But  at  the  organ  of  Constructiveness,  immediately  behind  and  above
the  external  angle  of  the  eye,  the  front  view  represents  the  real  di-
mensions in  both  skulls.  In  the  New  Hollander,  the  skull  at  Con.
structiveness  falls  greatly  within  the  line  of  the  cheek-bones ;  while
in  Raphael,  the  skull  swells  out  at  that  organ.


Sir  Walter  Scott  gives  the  following  description  of  the
New  Hollanders.  "  The  natives  of  New  Holland  are  even  at
present  in  the  very  lowest  scale  of  humanity,  and  ignorant
of  every  art  which  can  add  comfort  or  decency  to  human
life.  These  unfortunate  savages  use  no  clothes,  construct
no  cabins  or  huts,  and  are  ignorant  even  of  the  manner  of
chasing  animals,  or  catching  fish,  unless  such  of  the  latter
as  are  left  oy  the  tide,  or  which  are  found  on  the  rocks."

Several  of  Dr  Gall's  auditors  spoke  to  him  of  a  man


£22  CONSTRTJCTrraNESS.

who  was  gifted  with  an  extraordinary  talent  fat  mechff-<
nice ;  he  described  to  them  beforehand  what  form  of  a  bead
he  ought  to  hanQ  and  they  went  to  visit  him :  it  was  the>
ingenious  mathematical  instrument-maker  Lindner,  at
Vienna ;  and  his  temples  rose  out  in  two  little  rounded  ir-
regular prominences.  Dr  Gall  had  previously  found  the
same  form  of  head  in  the  celebrated  mechanician  and
astronomer  David,  Frere  Augustin,  and  in  the  famous
VoiGTLiENDER,  mathematical  instrument-maker.  At  Pa-
ris, Prince  Schwartzenberg,  then-  Minister  of  Austria,
wished  to  put  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim  to  the  test.
When  they  rose  from  table,  he  conducted  Dr  Gall  into  an
adjoining  apartment,  and  shewed  him  a  young  man :  with-
out speaking  a  word,  he  and  the  Prince  rejoined  the  com-
pany, and  he  requested  Dr  Spurzheim  to  go  and  examine
the  young  man's  head.  During  his  absence,  Dr  Gall  told
the  company  what  he  thought  of  the  youth.  Dr  Spcjrz*
heim  immediately  returned,  and  said,  that  he  believed
him  to  be  a  great  mechanician,  or  am  eminent  artist  in  some
constructive  branch.  The  Prince,  in  fact,  had  brought
him  to  Paris  on  account  of  his  great  mechanical  talents,
and  supplied  him  with  the  means  of  following  out  his  stu-
dies.

Dr  Gall  adds,  that  at  Vienna,  and  in  the  whole  Course  of
his  travels,  he  had  found  this  organ  developed  in  mechani-
cians, architects,  designers,  and  sculptors,  in  proportion  to
their  talent.

He  mentions,  that,  at  Mulhausen,  the  manufacturers  do
not  receive'  into  thdir  employment  any  children,  except
those  who,  from  an  early  age,  have  displayed  a  talent  for
the  arts  in  drawing  or  clipping  figures,  because  they  know,
from  experience,  that  such  subjects  alone  become  expert
and  intelligent  workmen.

Dr  Spurzheim  mentions  the  case  of  a  milliner  of  Vien~

na,  who  was  remarkable  for  constructive  talent  in  her  a*t>

and  in  whom  the  organ  is  large.     A  cast  of  her  skull

is  in  the  Phrenological  Society's  collection,  and  it  presents

3


CONSTHUCTrVENESS.  323

an  appearance,  in  tMs  particular  'pfrrt,*  reseirfbling  Ra-
phael's.

When  Dr  Spurzheim  was  in  EcBnbwyh,  in  1817,  he
visited  the  work-shop  of  Mr  James  Milne,  brass-founder,
a  gentleman  who  himself  displays  no  small  inventive  ge-
nius in  his  trade,  and  in  whom  Constructiveness  is  largely-
developed,  and  examined  the  heads  of  his  apprentices.  The
following  is  Mr  Milne's  account  of  what  took  place  upon
the  occasion :

"  On  the  first  boy  presented  to  Dr  Spurzheim,  on  his
entering  the  shop,  he  observed,  that  he  would  excel  in  any
thing  he  was  put  to.  In  this  he  was  perfectly  correct,  as
h6  was  one  of  the  cleverest  boys  I  ever  had.  On  proceed-
ing farther,  Dr  Spurzheim  remarked  of  another  boy,  that
he  would  make  a  good  workman.  In  this  instance^  also,
his  observation  was  well  founded.  An  elder  brother  of  his
was  working  next  him,  who,  he  said,  would  also  turn  out
a  good  workman,  but  not  equal  to  the  other.  I  mentioned,
that,  in  point  of  fact,  the  former  was  the  best,  although
both  were  good.  In  the  course  of  farther  observations,  Dr
Spurzheim  remarked  of  others,  that  they  ought  to  be  or-
dinary tradesmen,  and  they  were  so.  At  last  he  pointed
out  one,  who,  be  said,  ought  to  be  of  a  different  cafet,  and
of  whom  I  \idv3A  feittrfe*  %4  aWe  4o  make  any  thing  as  a
workman,  and  this- tamed  duT  to  be  too  correct;  for  tbfc
boy  served  an  apprenticeship  of  scfven  years,  and,  when
done,  he  was  not  able  to  do  one-third  of  the  work  per-
formed by  other  individuals,  to  whose  instruction  no
greater  attention  had  been  paid.  So  much  was  I  struck
with  Dr  Spurzheim's  observations,  and  so  correct  have  I
found  the  indications  presented  by  the  organization  to  be,
that  when  workmen,  or  boys  to  serve  as  apprentices,  apply
to  me,  I  at  once  give  the  preference  to  those  possessing  a
large  Constructiveness ;  and  if  the  deficiency  is  very  great*
I  would  be  disposed  to  decline  receiving  them,  being  con-
vinced of  their  inability  to  succeed."

The  organ  of  this  faculty  is  very  largely  developed  in  Mb


224  CONSTRUCTIVENESS.

Brunei*  the  celebrated  inventor  of  machinery  for  making
blocks  for  the  rigging  of  ships,  by  means  of  steam ;  and
who  has,  beeidjp,  shewn  a  great  talent  for  mechanics  in
numerous  departments  of  art.  It  is  large  in  Edwards,  an
eminent  engraver;  in  Wilkie,  Haydon,  and  J.  F.  Wil-
liams, celebrated  painters;  in  Sir  W.  Herschel,  whose
great  discoveries  in  astronomy  arose  from  the  excellence  of
his  telescopes,  made  by  his  own  hands;  and  in  Mr  Samuel
Joseph,  an  eminent  sculptor.  Masks  of  all  these  indivi-
duals are  to  be  seen  in  the  Phrenological  Society's  collec-
tion. In  the  late  Sir  Henry  Raeburn,  who  was  bred  a
goldsmith,  but  became  a  painter  by  the  mere  impulse  of
nature,  without  teaching,  and  without  opportunities  of
study,  I  observed  it  large.  It  is  large,  also,  in  Mr  Scou-
lar,  a  very  promising  young  sculptor,  who  displayed  this
talent  at  a  very  early  age.  I  have  noticed  it  large  in  all
the  eminent  operative  surgeons  of  Edinburgh,  in  distin-
guished engravers,  and  also  in  the  most  celebrated  cabinet-
makers, who  have  displayed  invention  in  their  art.  It  and
Form  are  large  in  children  who  are  fond  of  clipping  and
drawing  figures.  It  is  large  in  tailors  who  excel  in  their
art.

On  the  other  hand,  I  possess  a  cast  of  the  head  of  a  very
ingenious  friend,  distinguished  for  his  talents  as  an  author,
who  has  often  complained  of  so  great  a  want  of  construc-
tive ability,  that  he  found  it  difficult  even  to  learn  to  write;
and,  in  his  head,  although  large  in  other  dimensions,  there
is  a  conspicuous  deficiency  in  the  region  of  Constructive-
ness.  Among  the  negative  instances  fall  to  be  ranked  the
casts  and  skulls  of  the  New  Hollanders,  in  the  Phrenologi-
cal Society's  collection,  which  are  all  remarkably  narrow  in
the  situation  of  this  organ ;  and  their  low  condition  in  the
constructive  arts  has  been  already  mentioned.  Contrasted
with  them,  are  the  Italians  and  French.  An  accurate  and
intelligent  phrenologist  authorises  me  to  state,  that,  during
his  travels  in  Italy,  he  observed  a  full  development  of  Con-
structiveness  to  be  a  general  feature  in  the  Italian  head  ;


CONSTRUCTIVENESg.  225

and  the  same  holds,  but  in  a  less  degree,  in  the  French.
Both  of  these  nations  possess  this  organ  in  a  higher  de-
gree than  the  English.  Individuals,  among  the  latter,
are  greatly  gifted  with  it,  and  the  nation  in  general  pos-
sesses high  intellectual  organs,  so  that  great  discoveries  in
art  are  made  in  this  country  by  particular  persons,  and
speedily  adopted  and  carried  forward  by  those  whom  they
benefit ;  but  the  natural  taste  for  works  of  art  and  the  en-
joyment derived  from  them,  are  here  less  in  degree,  and
less  general,  than  in  France,  and  especially  than  in  Italy.
The  busts  also  of  eminent  artists  of  former  ages  display  a
great  development  of  this  organ;  in  particular,  in  the  bust
of  Michael  Angelo,  in  the  church  of  Santa  Croce  at  Flo-
rence, the  breadth  from  temple  to  temple  is  enormous.
The  reflecting  organs,-  situated  in  the  forehead,  and  like-
wise Ideality,  in  him  are  very  large ;  and  these  add  under-
standing and  taste  to  the  instinctive  talent  for  works  of  art,
conferred  by  Constructiveness.

These  are  positive  facts  in  regard  to  this  organ.  I  shall
aotice  a  few  circumstances,  illustrative  of  the  existence
of  a  talent  for  construction,  as  a  distinct  power  of  the  mind
apart  from  the  general  faculties  of  the  understandiqg,  from
which  the  reader  may  form  an  opinion  of  the  extent  to
which  the  phrenological  views  agree  or  disagree  with  the
common  phenomena  of  human  nature.  This  is  the  more  ne-
cessary, as  metaphysical  philosophers  in  general  do  not  ad-
mit a  primitive  faculty  of  Constructiveness,*  and  hold  me-
chanical arts  to  be  the  result  entirely  of  reflection.

Among  the  lower  animals,  it  is  clear  that  the  ability  to
construct  is  not  in  proportion-  to  the  endowment  of  under-
standing. The  dog,  horse,  and  elephant,  which  in  sagacity
approach  very  closely  to  the  more  imperfect  specimens  of
the  human  race,  never,  in  any  circumstances,  attempt  a
work  of  art*  The  bee,  the  beaver,  the  swallow,  on  the
contrary,  with  far  less  general  intellect,  rival  the  produce
tions  of  man.  Turning  our  attention  to  man,  we  observe,
that  while,  among  children  of  the  same  family,  or  the?

P


286  CONSTEUCTIVENESS.

same  school,  some  are  fond  of  a  variety  of  amusements  un-
connected with  art,  others  constantly  devote  themselves,  at
their  leisure  hours,  to  designing  with  chalk  various  objects
on  the  boards  of  books,  walls,  and  paper,  or  occupy  them-
selves with  fashioning  in  wax  or  clay,  or  clipping  in  paper,
the  figures  of  animals,  trees,  or  men*  Children  of  a  very
tender  age  have  sometimes  made  models  of  a  ship  of  war,
which  the  greatest  philosopher  would  in  vain  strive  to  imi-
tate. The  young  Vaucanson  had  only  seen  a  clock
through  the  window  of  its  case,  when  he  constructed  one
in  wood,  with  no  other  utensils  than  a  bad  knife.  A  gen-
tleman with  whom  I  was  intimately  acquainted,  invented
and  constructed,  at  six  years  of  age,  a  mill  for  making  pot-
barley,  and  actually  set  it  in  operation  by  a  small  jet  from
the  main  stream  of  the  Water  of  Leith.  Lebrun  drew
designs  with  chalk  at  three  years  of  age,  and  at  twelve  he
made  a  portrait  of  his  grandfather.  Sir  Christopher
Wren,  at  thirteen,  constructed  an  ingenious  machine  for
representing  the  course  of  the  planets.  Michael  An-
gelo,  at  sixteen,  executed  works  which  were  compared
with  those  of  antiquity*.

The  greater  number  of  eminent  artists  have  received  no
education  capable  of  accounting  for  their  talents ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  have  frequently  been  compelled  to  struggle
against  the  greatest  obstacles,  and  to  endure  the  most  dis-
tressing privations,  in  following  out  their  natural  inclina-
tions. Other  individuals,  again,  educated  for  the  arts,  on
whom  every  advantage  has  been  lavished,  when  destitute
of  genius,  have  never  surpassed  mediocrity.  Frequently,
too,  men,  whom  external  circumstances  have  prevented
from  devoting  themselves  to  occupations  to  which  they
were  naturally  inclined,  have  occupied  themselves  with
mechanics  as  a  pastime  and  amusement.  An  eminent  ad-
vocate at  the  Scottish  bar,  in  whom  Constractiveness  is
largely  developed,  informed  me,  that  occasionally,  in  the
very  act  of  composing  a  written  pleading  on  the  most
abstruse  questions  of  law,  vivid  conceptions  of  particular
*  Gall  but  les  Fonctiona  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.


CONSTRUCTIVENESS.  «27

pieces  of  mechanism,  or  of  new  applications  of  some  me-
chanical principle,  dart  into  his  mind,  and  keep  their  place
so  as  to  interrupt  the  current  of  his  voluntary  thoughts,
until  he  has  embodied  them  in  a  diagram  or  description*
after  which  he  is  able  to  dismiss  them  and  proceed  with
his  professional  duties*     Leopold  I,  Peter  the  Great,
and  Louis  XVL  constructed  locks.    The  organs  of  Con-
structiveness  were  largely  developed  in  the  late  Lord  Pro*
sklent  Blair  of  the  Court  of  Session,  as  appears  from  a
east  of  his  head,  his  statue,  and  also  from  his  portraits :
and  it  is  said,  that  he  had  a  private  workshop  at  Avondale,
in  Linlithgowshire,  in  which  he  spent  many  hours  during
the  vacations  of  the  Court,  constructing  pieces  of  mechanism
with  his  own  hands.    The  predilection  of  such  individuals
for  the  practice  of  mechanical  arts  cannot  reasonably  be
ascribed  to  want,  or  to  their  great  intellectual  faculties :  for
innumerable  objects,  more  directly  fitted  to  gratify  or  relieve
the  understanding,  must  have  presented  themselves  to  their
notice,  had  they  not  been  led  by  a  special  liking  to  the  course
they  followed,  and  felt  themselves  inspired  by  a  particular  ta-
lent for  such  avocations.     Not  only  so,  but  examples  of  an
opposite  description  are  met  with;  namely,  of  men  of  great
depth  and  comprehensiveness  of  intellect,  who  are  wholly
destitute  of  manual  dexterity.    Lucien  and  Socrates  re-
nounced sculpture,  because  they  felt  that  they  possessed  no
genius  for  it    M.  Schtjree,  formerly  Professor  of  Natural
Philosophy  at  Strasburg,  broke  every  article  he  touched.
There  are  persons  who  can  never  learn  to  make  a  pen  or
sharp  a  razor;  and  Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  two  of  his
friends,  the  one  an  excellent  teacher,  the  other  "  grand
ministre,"  were  passionately  fond  of  gardening,  but  he
could  never  teach  them  to  engraft  a  tree.    As  a  contrast  to
tfcse,  men  of  considerable  mechanical  dexterity  are  fre-
quently found  to  be  remarkably  destitute  of  talent  for
every  other  pursuit,  and  to  possess  very  limited  under*
standings.
Cases  of  disease  also  tend  to  prove  that  Constructireness

p2


228  CONSTEUCTIVENESS.

depends  on  ft  special  faculty,  and  is  not  the  result  merely  of
general  intellect.  Dr  Rush  mentions  two  cases  in  which  a
talent  for  design  had  unfolded  itself  during  a  fit  of  insanity ;
and  he  adds,  that  there  is  no  insane  hospital  in  which  exam-
ples are  not  found  of  individuals,  who,  although,  previously
to  their 'Josa  of  understanding,  they  never  shewed  the  least
trace  of  mechanical  talent,  have  subsequently  constructed  the
most  curious  machines,  and  even  ships  completely  equipped.
These  cases  are  at  utter  variance  with  the  notion  that  the  in*
tellectual  faculties  produce  this  talent ;  for  in  them  they  were
deranged,  while  they  accord  with  thd  phrenological  doc-
trine of  this  power  depending  on  a  separate  faculty  and  or-
gan, which  may  remain  sound  when  the  others  are  dis-
eased. FodEre',  in  his  Trait6  du  Goitre  et  de  la  Cretinisme,
p.  133,  remarks,  "  Thatj  by  an  inexplicable  singularity,  some
of  these  individuals  (Cretins)?  endowed  with  so  weak  minds,
are  born  with  a  particular  talent  for  copying  paintings,  for
rhyming,  or  for  music.  I  have  known  several  who  taught
themselves  to  play  passably  on  the  organ  and  harpsichord ;
others  who  understood*  without  ever  having  had  a  master,
the  repairing  of  watches,  and  the  construction  of  some
pieces  of  mechanism."  He  adds,  that  these  powers  could
Hot  be  attributed  to  the  intellect,  for  these  individuals  not
only  could  not  read  books,  which  treated  of  the  principles
of  mechanics,  "  raais  ils  etaient  derout^s  lorsqu'on  en  par-
kuty  etnese  per/ectdmnaient  jamais "

In  the  lower  animals,  nature  has  implanted  a  propensity
to  construct,  but  in  them  it  is  always  specific ;  while  in
man  a  similar  tendency  is  found,  but  general  in  its  applica-
tion. For  example,-  nature  inspires  the  beaver  not  only  with
a  desire  to  build,  but  also  with  an  instinctive  and  unerring
impulse,  independent  of  acquired  knowledge  and  experi-
ence, to  construct  a  dwelling  of  a  particular  form;  and  the
power  of  the  animal  to  build  is  confined  entirely  within  the
limited  sphere  of  its  intuitive  inspiration.  Man,  on  the
other  hand,  has  received  also  from  nature  a  propensity  to
construct,  but  not  a  limited  and  intuitive  instinct  to  build

3


CONSTRUCTIVENESS.  229

a  house  or  a  ship*  or  to  weave  a  coat  or  a  wst,  or,,  in  short,
to  fashion  any  particular  object.  The  beaver  possesses  no  ge-
neral reflecting  powers  to  direct  its  propensity,  4p  hence  it
was  necessary  to  inspire  it  not  #nly,with  a  desire  to  build,
but  with  a  ]rian  of  architecture.  To,  man,  on  the  contrary,
reflection  is  given ;  and  the  faculties  of  the  understanding
enable  him  to  invent  plans,  and  to  employ  .his  impulse  to
construct,  in  a  gipat  jvariety  of  ways*

Constructiveness,  .then,  confers  only,  the  power  of  con-
structing in  general,  and.  the  results  which  it  is  capable  of
producing  are  influenced  by  other  faculties.  For  example,
intellect  alone,  with  extreme  deficiency  of  Constpictiveness,
will  never  enable  an  individual  to  become  an  expert  me-
chanician ;  but,  if  the  development  of  Constructiveness  be
equal  in  two  individuals,  and  the  intellectual  organs  be
large  in  the  one  and  small  in  the  other,  the  former  will  ac-
complish mu~h  higher  designs  than  the  latter:  and  the
reason  is  obvious*  The  primitive  talent  for  construction  is
the  same  in  both ;  but  fte  one,  by  means  of  reflection,  is
endowed  with  the  perception,  of  the  relation  of  means  to  an
end,  and  hence  is  able  to  select,  from  the  wide  circle  of  na-
ture and  of  art,  every  object  and  appliance  that  may  extend
and  elevate  his  conceptions  and  aid  their  execution;  while
the  latter  is  limited  to  a  mere  mechanical  talent,  never
stretching  beyond  imitation  of  objects  previously  existing.

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  the  posi-
tion of  this  organ  in  some  of  the  lower  animals,, on  account
jof  the  different  disposition  of  the  convolutions,  their  small
size}-  and  the  total  absence  of  several  of  those  which  are
found  in  man*  The  organ  of  Music  in  the  lower  creatures
is  situated  towards  the  middle  of  the  arch  of  the  eyebrow,
and  that  of  Constructiveness  Jies  a  little  behind  it.  In  the
hamster,  marmot,  and  castor,  of  which  he  gives  plates,  it  is
easily  recognised ;  $nd  at  the  part  in  question,  the  skulls  of
these  animals  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  each  other.  In
the  "  rongeurs,"  the  organ  will  be  found  immediately
above  and  before  the  base  of  the  zygomatic  Arch,  and  the


230  CONSTRUCTIVEKESS.

greater  the  taltot  for  construction,  the  more  this  region  of
their  head  is  projecting*  The  rabbit  borrows  under  ground,
and  the  hare  lies  upon  die  surface,  and  yet  their  external
members  are  the  same*  On  comparing  their  skulls,  this
region  will  be  found  more  developed  in  the  mbbit  than  in
.the  hare.  The  same  difference  is  preceptible  between
the  crania  of  hirds  which  build  nests,  and  of  those  which
do  not  build.  Indeed  the  best  way  to  become  acquainted
with  die  appearance  of  the  organ  in  the  lower  animals,  is  to
compare  the  heads  of  animals  of  the  same  species  which
build,  with  those  which  do  not  manifest  this  instinct;  the
hare,  for  example,  with  the  rabbit,  or  birds  which  make
nests  with  those  which  do  not.
The  organ  is  established.


I


Genus  II.— SENTIMENTS.

This  genus  of  faculties  corresponds  to  the  "  eniotions"  of
the  metaphysicians.  The  feelings  which  they  produce,  are
not  the  immediate  consequences  of  the  presence  of  external
objects,  but  are  excited,  only  indirectly,  through  the  medium
of  intellectual  perceptions  or  sensations.  They  differ  from
intellectual  perceptions,  in  being  accompanied  with  a  pecu-
liar vividness,  which  every  one  understands,  but  which  it  is
impossible  to  express  by  any  verbal  definition*.  They  may
exist,  also,  with  great  intensity,  by  the  internal  activity  of
the  organs.  Dr  Spurzheim  has  named  these  faculties  Senti-
ments, because  they  produce  a  propensity  to  act,  joined  with
an  emotion  or  feeling  of  a  certain  kind.  Several  of  them
are  common  to  man  and  the  lower  animals;  others  are
peculiar  to  man.  The  former  shall  be  first  treated  of,  and
they  are  styled  the  Inferior  or  Lower  Sentiments.

*  Lectures  by  Dr  Thomas  Brown.    Lecture  52.


(     281     )


1.  Sentiments  common  to  Man  and  the  lower  Animals.

10.  SELF-ESTEEM.

This  organ  is  situated  at  the  vertex  or  top  of  the  head,  a
little  above  the  posterior  or  sagittal  angle  of  the  parietal
bones.  When  large,  the  head  rises  far  upward  and  back-
ward from  the  ear,  in  the  direction  of  it,  see  figures,  p.  233.
Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  account  of  the  discovery  of
the  organ.  A  beggar  attracted  his  attention  by  his  extraor-
dinary manners.  He  reflected  on  the  causes  which,  inde-
pendently of  an  absolutely  vicious  conformation  or  of  mis-
fortunes, could  reduce  a  man  to  mendicity,  and  believed
that  he  had  found  one  of  the  chief  of  them  in  levity  and
want  of  foresight.  The  form  of  the  head  of  the  beggar  in
question  confirmed  him  in  this  opinion.  He  was  young,
and  of  an  agreeable  exterior,  and  the  organ  of  Cautiousness
was  very  little  developed.  Dr  Gall  moulded  his  head,  and,
on  examining  it  with  attention,  remarked,  in  the  upper
and  back  part  of  the  middle  line,  a  prominence  extending
from  above  downwards,  which  could  arise  only  from  devel-
opment of  the  cerebral  parts  there  situated.  He  had  not
previously  observed  this  prominence  in  other  heads ;  and,
on  this  account,  he  was  very  anxious  to  discover  what  it
indicated.  His  head,  moreover,  was  small,  and  announced
neither  strong  feelings  nor  much  intellect.  After  many
questions  addressed  to  the  beggar,  with  a  view  to  discover
the  remarkable  traits  of  his  character,  he  requested  him  to
relate  his  history.  The  beggar  said,  that  he  was  the  son
of  a  rich  merchant,  from  whom  he  had  inherited  a  consi-
derable fortune ;  that  he  had  always  been  so  proud  as  not  to
be  able  to  condescend  to  labour,  either  for  the  preservation
of  his  paternal  fortune,  or  to  acquire  a  new  one ;  and  that
this  unhappy  pride  was  the  only  cause  of  his  misery.  This,
says  Dr  Gall,  "  called  to  my  recollection  those  persons  who
forbear  to  cut  their  nails,  with  the  view  of  supporting  the


•232  SELF-ESTEEM.

idea  that  they  never  require  to  work."  He  made  several
farther  observations  Jto  the  beggar,  and  shewed  him  that  he
doubted  his  veracity ;  but  he  always  reverted  to  his  pride,
0nd  seriously  stated,  that  even  now  he  could  not  resolve  to
follow  any  kind  of  labour.  Although  it  was  difficult  to
conceive  how  pride  should  cause  a  man  to  prefer  begging
Jo  working,  yet  Dr  Gall  was  led,  by  this  person's  reite-
rated assurances,  to  reflect  upon  the  sentiment,  and  to  ob-
serve the  organ,  and  he  found,  at  length,  incontrovertible
proofs  of  their  connection.

He  mentions  a  variety  of  cases  In  illustration,  of  which  I
select  only  the  following :

A  young  man,  endowed  with  faculties  above  mediocrity,
had  manifested,  from  his  infancy,  insupportable  pride.  He
constantly  maintained  that  he  was  of  too  good  a  family  to
work  or  apply  himself  to  any  thing.  Nothing  could  free  Mm
from  this  absurdity ;  he  was  even  put,  for  eighteen  months,
into  a  house  of  correction  at  Hainan  A  physician  of  Vienna,
qn  otherwise  amiable  man,  carried  the  feeling  of  pride  to
such  a  point,  that  every  time  when  called  to  a  consultation,
even  with  practitioners  older  than  himself,  or  with  public
professors,  he  regularly  took  the  precedence,  both  in  enter-
ing and  coming  out  of  the  apartment.  When  any  docu-
ment was  to  be  subscribed,  he  insisted  on  adhibiting  his
signature  first.  He  had  connected  himself  with  the  direct*
or  of  the  Great  Hospital,  but  solely,  as  he  himself  told
afterwards,  for  the  purpose  of  supplanting  him.  At  Heid-
elberg, Dr  G.  saw  a  girl  of  eighteen,  of  a  remarkable  cha-
racter. Every  word  or  gesture  in  the  least  familiar  revolted
her.  She  called  on  Gon  on  every  occasion,  as  if  he  took
a  special  interest  in  her  affairs.  When  she  spoke,  assu-
rance and  presumption  were  painted  in  her  features ;  she
carried  her  head  high  and  a  little  backwards,  and  all  the
movements  of  her  head  expressed  pride.  She  was  not
capable  of  submission ;  when  in  a  passion,  she  was  violent
and  disposed  to  proceed  to  all  extremities.  Although  only
the  daughter  of  a  quill-merchant,  she  spoke  her  native  lan-
guage with  extraordinary  purity,  and  communicated  only


SELF-ESTEEM.


233


with  persons  of  a  rank  superior  to  her  own.  In  all  these
individuals,  the  organ  of  8elf-Esteem  was  very  largely  de-
veloped. Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  he  had  examined  also
the  heads  of  a  number  of  Chiefs  of  Brigands,  remarkable
for  this  quality  of  mind,  and  that  he  had  found  the  organ
largely  developed  in  them  all.  The  6gures  represent  the
organ  large  and  small.


F&4HCOIS  Co&poxNJEa.


Mr.


Stff-Ettaem  OKxletmtB*


Self-E*teem  large.


The  faculty  inspires  with  the  sentiment  of  Self-Esteem  or
Self-love,  and  a  due  endowment  of  it,  like  that  of  all  other
faculties,  produces  only  excellent  effects.  It  imparts  that  de-
gree of  satisfaction  with  self,  which  leaves  the  mind  open
to  the  enjoyment  of  the  bounties  of  Providence  and  the
amenities  of  life ;  and  inspires  it  with  that  degree  of  confi-
dence, which  enables  it  to  apply  its  powers  to  the  best  ad-
vantage in  every  situation  in  which  it  is  placed.  It  aids
also  in  giving  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  others ;  and  we  shall
find  in  society,  that  that  individual  is  uniformly  treated
with  the  most  lasting  qjid  sincere  respect,  who  esteems
himself  so  highly  as  to  contemn  every  action  that  is  mean
or  unworthy  of  an  exalted  mind.  By  communicating  this
feeling  of  self-respect,  it  frequently  and  effectually  aids  the
moral  sentiments  in  resisting  temptations  to  vice.  Several
individuals  in  whom  the  organ  is  large,  have  stated  to  me
that  they  have  been  restrained  from  forming  improper  con-
nexions, by  the  overwhelming  sense  of  self-degradation  ex-
cited in  their  minds  by  the  mere  prospect  of  such  a  circum-
stance ;  and  that  they  believed  their  better  principles  might
have  yielded  to  temptation,  had  it  not  been  for  the  support
afforded  to  them  by  the  instinctive  impulses  of  Self-Esteem.


234  SELF-ESTEEM.

An  individual  is  predisposed  to  humility*  when  the  organ
ifl  too  small*  In  such  a  ease,  want  of  confidence,  aad  of  a
due  sense  of  his  own  importance,  is  felt.  He  has  no  re-
liance upon  himself;  if  the  public  or  his  superiors  frown,
he  k  nnahle  to  pursue  even  a  virtuous  course,  through
diffidence  of  his  own  judgment.  Inferior  talents,  combined
with  a  strong  endowment  of  Self-Esteem,  are  often  crown-,
ed  with  far  higher  success,  than  more  splendid  abilities
joined  with  this  sentiment  in  a  feebler  degree.  Dr  Adam
Smith,  in  bis  Theory  of  Moral  Sebthnents,  remarks,  that
it  is  better,  upon  the  whole,  for  an  individual  to  have  too
much,  than  too  little,  of  this  feeling ;  because,  if  we  pretend
to  more  than  we  arc  entitled  to,  the  world  will  give  us
credit  for  at  least  what  we  possess ;  whereas,  if  we  pretend
to  less,  we  shall  be  taken  at  our  word,  and  mankind  will
rarely  have  the  justice  to  raise  us  to  the  true  level.

It  is  only  when  possessed  in  an  inordinate  degree,  and  in-,
dulged  without  restraint  from  higher  faculties,  that  it  pro-
duces abuses.  In  children,  it  then  shews  itself  in  pettish-
ness,  and  a  wilful  temper.  Those  children  in  whom  the
organ  is  small,  are  generally  obedient,  and  easily  directed
according  to  the  will  of  ethers.  In  later  life,  a  great
development  of  the  organ,  with  deficiency  of  other  powers,
produces  arrogance,  superciliousness  of  deportment,  and
selfishness.  The  first  thought  of  persons  so  endowed  is,
how  the  thing  proposed  will  affect  themselves ;  they  see  the
world  and  all  its  interests  only  through  the  medium  of  self.
I  have  seen  individuals  mistake  the  impulses  of  it  for  the
inspiration  of  genius,  and  utter  common-place  observations
with  a  solemnity  and  emphasis  suitable  only  to  concentrat-
ed wisdom.  The  musician,  under  its  predominating  influ-
ence, is  sometimes  led  to  embellish  a  tune  with  decorations
of  his  own  inventing,  till  its  character  is  changed,  and  the
melody  destroyed.  In  short,  when  the  organ  is  inordinately
large,  it  communicates  to  the  individual  a  high  sentiment
of  his  own  importance,  and  leads  him  to  believe,  that  what-
ever he  does  or  says  is  admirable,  just  because  it  proceeds
from  him.    It  inspires  him  with  magnificent  notions  of  his


SEUMESTEBM.  895

own  respectability,  and  pronpts  him*  on  comparing  himself
with  others,  to  depreciate  than,  in  order  to  raise  himself
in  the  scale  of  comparative  excellence.  It  is  a  chief  element
an  the  disposition  to  oeneoriontiiess  and  envy.  Persons  who
are  fond  of  discussing  the  characters  of  others,  and  feel  the
tendency  to  vituperate  rather  than  to  praise  them,  will  he
found  to  have  this  organ  large.  It  is  the  comparison  with
self,  and  a  secret  satisfaction  at  fancied  superiority,  that
gives  pleasure  in  this  practice.  Envy  is  the  result  of
Self-Esteem  and  Love  of  Approbation,  offended  by  the
excellencies  of  others,  and  calling  np  Destructiveness  to
hate  them.  To  make  way  for  this  effect,  however,  Benevo-
lence and  Conscientiousness  must  be  deficient*

Whan  Self-Esteem  predominates,  it  gives  an  intense
feeling  of  egotism;  and  the  individual  in  his  discourse,
is  then  prone  to  use  the  emphatic  Iz  u  I  did  this,  I  said
the  other  thing/1  The  faculty  then  gives  a  solemn  gra-
vity to  the  manners,  an  authoritative  commanding  tone  to
the  voice,  and  a  kind  of  oracular  turn  to  the  mind,
which  frequently  shews  itself  in  the  most  ludicrous  man-
ner. Cobbetf's  whole  life  and  writings  indicate  an  ex-
cessively active  Self-Esteem,  aided  by  Comba ti veness ;  and
he  has  maintained,  at  different  times,  every  variety  of
opinion  that  could  enter  the  human  imagination,  and  upon
every  point  of  his  changeful  creed  he  has  dogmatized  with
more  than  oracular  infallibility.  Madame  de  Stajbl  de-
scribes most  graphically  another  illustrious  example  of
the  effects  of  an  inordinate  Self-Esteem,  even  on  a  powerful
mind.  Speaking  of  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Revolution,
she  says  that  he  possessed  considerable  talents,  "  mais  au-
lieu  de  travailler  il  ietwmoU  dehU  mSme*"  Some  indivi-
duals manifest  a  solemn  good-natured  patronizing  tendency
towards  others,  indicated  in  discourse  by  epithets  such  as
"my  good  sir,"  "  my  good  fellow,"  and  the  like.  This
arises  from  Self-Esteem  and  Benevolence  both  large.

Another  effect  of  a  predominating  Self-Esteem,  is  to  ren-
der the  individual  extremely  well  satisfied  with  whatever  be-


236  SELF-ESTEEM.

longs  to  himself.  An  eminent  phrenologist  sailed  as  a
passenger  from  the  Clyde  to  a  foreign  port,  in  a  vessel
commanded  by  a  person  in  whose  head  this  organ  was  very
largely  developed,  and  saw  many  striking  manifestations  of
it  on  the  voyage.  The  captain  said,  that  he  thought  no-
thing of  die  vessel  when  he  first  saw  her,  bnt  after  command-
ing her  for  a  while,  he  thought  her  the  first  ship  belong-
ing to  the  Clyde*  This  was  evidently  because  she  had
become  his  vessel.  On  his  voyage,  he  assumed  the  most
dictatorial  airs;  told  the  passengers  he  would  send  them
before  the  mast,  that  he  was  sole  commander  here,  and
that  all  must  obey;  spoke  habitually  of  himself,  and
seemed  to  have  an  insatiable  appetite  for  power.  He  pos-
sessed little  reflection,  and  was  deficient  in  Conscientious -


Under  the  influence  of  this  faculty,  some  authors  appear,
in  their  compositions,  to  fell  instinctively  and  unconsciously
into  excessive  use  of  pronouns  of  the  first  person.  The
following  example  is  taken  from  the  works  of  an  esteemed
philosopher:  «  When  I  first  ventured  to  appear  before  the
public  as  an  author,  /  resolved  thai  nothing  should  ever
induce  me  to  enter  into  any  controversy  in  defence  of  my
conclusions,  but  to  leave  them  to  stand  or  to  fall  by  their
own  evidence.  From  the  plan  of  inductive  investigation
which  /  was  conscious  of  having  steadily  followed,  as  far
as  /  was  able,  /  knew  that  whatever  mistakes  might  be  de-
tected in  the  execution  of  my  design,  no  such  fatal  conse-
quences were  to  be  dreaded  to  my  general  undertaking,  as
might  have  been  justly  apprehended*  had  /presented  to  the
.  world  a  connected  system,  founded  on  gratuitous  hypothesis,
or  on  arbitrary  definitions.  The  detections,  on  the  contrary,
of  my  occasional  errors,  would,  /  flattered  wyse{f,  from  the
invariable  consistency  and  harmony  of  truth,  throw  new
lights  on  those  inquiries  which  /  had  conducted  with  great-
er success ;  as  the  correction  of  a  trifling  mistatement  in  an
authentic  history  is  often  found,  by  completing  an  imper-
fect link,  or  reconciling  a  seeming  contradiction,  to  dispel


SELF-ESTEEM.  237

the  doubts  Hirich  hang  over  the  more  faithful    and  accu-
rate details  of  the  narrative.

"In*  this  hope  /was  fortified  by  the  following  sentence
of  Lord  Bacon,  which  I  thought  /might  apply  to  myself,
without  incurring  the  charge  of  presumption :  *Nos  autem,
si  qua  in  re  vel  male  credidimus,  vel  obdormivimus  et  mi-
nus attendimus  vel  defecimus  in  via  et  inquisitionem  abru-
pimus,  nihilo  minus  us  modis  res  nudas  et  apertas  ex-
hibemu8,  ut  errores  nostri  notari  et  separari  possint ;  atque
etiam,  ut  facilis  et  expedita  sit  laborum  nostrorum  conti-
nuation

"  As  this  indifference,  however,  about  the  fate  of  my  par-
ticular doctrines,  arose  from  a  deep  rooted  conviction,  both
of  the  importance  of  my  subject,  and  of  the  soundness  of  my
plan,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  be  insensible  to  such  cri-
ticisms as  were  directed  against  either  of  these  two  funda-
mental assumptions.  Some  criticisms  of  this  description  /
had,  from  the  first,  anticipated ;  and  /  would  not  have  fail-
ed to  obviate  them  in  the  introduction  to  my  former  work,
if /had  not  been  afraid  to  expose  myself  to  the  imputation
of  prolixity,  by  conjuring  up  objections  for  the  purpose  of
refuting  them,"  &c.

Another  amusing  instance  of  a  similar  style  of  writing  will
be  found. in  an  account  of  himself  by  "  Flechier  Eveque
de  Nismes,"  prefixed  to  an  edition  of  his  "  Oraisons  Fune-
bres,"  printed  at  Paris  in  1802.  I  infer  this  to  arise  from
a  great  endowment  of  Self-Esteem.  A  plate  of  the  author  *
last  namedns  prefixed  to  his  work,  in  which  a  strong  ex-
pression of  SelHEsteem  appears  depicted  on  his  countenance.
The  portraits  of  Gibbon  also  indicate  this  expression  in  a  .
remarkable  degree.  By  pointing  out  this  tendency  of  the
&culty,  those  in  whom  the  organ  is  large  will  be  put  upon
their  guard  to  avoid  this  ludicrous  form  of  its  manifestation.

The  feeling  of  individual  personality  has  been  supposed
by  some  phrenologists  to  arise  from  this  faculty ;  and  Ihey
have  been  led  to  this  conjecture,  by  the  undoubted  fact,
that  the  prominence  which  the  first  person  assumes  in  the


238  SELF-ESTEEM.

mind,  bears  a  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  o^an  ©f  Self*
Esteem.

Self-Esteem  is  an  ingredient  in  die  love  of  uniques.  The
high  value  attached  by  some  persons  to  objects  which  no
other  person  can  possess,  seems  resolvable  to  a  great  ex-
tent into  gratification  of  this  feeling.  In  possessing  the  ar-
ticle they  enjoy  a  superiority  over  the  whole  world,  and  the
consciousness  of  this  confers  a  high  value  on  it  in  their  es-
timation.

This  faculty  is  one  element  in  the  love  of  dominion  and
power.  It  is  large  in  the  busts  of  Augustus  Cjesar  and
of  Bonaparte;  and  I  have  observed  that  those  indivi-
duals who,  in  private  life,  aspire  most  eagerly  to  office,  and
who  are  most  delighted  with  the  possession  of  a  little  brief
authority,  generally,  have  a  large  Self-Esteem.  From  the
same  cause,  viz.  that  this  faculty  produces  the  love  of
power,  it  happens  that  those  who  are  most  violent  in  their
opposition  to  persons  in  authority,  generally  possess  the
same  organ  also  fully  developed.  In  short,  when  two  indi-
viduals equally  thirst  for  dominion,  and  when  the  one  can
rule  only  by  the  other  obeying,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that
the  subject  will,  in  such  a  case,  manifest  little  satisfaction
under  the  yoke,  and  that  his  very  love  of  authority  will
make  him  the  most  determined  opponent  of  it  in  others.

Nations  differ  with  regard  to  the  degree  in  which  they
possess  this  organ.  It  is  large  in  the  Hindoos,  and  the
English  have  more  of  it  than  the  French;  hence  the  man-
ner of  a  genuine  Frenchman  appears  to  an  Englishman  to
be  fawning  and  undignified;  while  the  manner  of  an
^  Englishman  appears  to  the  French  cold,  haughty,  and  su-
percilious. The  great  Self-Esteem  of  the  English,  and
their  consequent  instinctive  aversion  to  all  stretches  of
power,  are  probably  causes  of  their  political  liberty.  Dr
Adam  Ferguson  has  recognised  the  operation  of  this  senti-
ment in  maintaining  their  freedom.  Alluding  to  the
habeas  corpus  act,  he  remarks,  "  that  it  require*  a  fabric  no
less  than  the  whole  political  constitution  of  Great  Britain,

4


SELF-ESTEEM.  239

a  spirit  no  less  than  the  refractory  and  turbulent  zeal  of  this
fortunate  people,  to  secure  its  effects  *."

Self-Esteem,  when  eminently  powerful,  and  not  com-
bined with  the  higher  sentiments  equally  strong,  causes
the  individual  to  carry  his  head  high  and  reclining  back-
wards. It  gives  a  cold  and  repulsive  expression  to  the
manners,  and  it  is  in  an  especial  degree  offensive  to  other
individuals  largely  endowed  with  the  same  faculty.

Dr  Re  id  and  Mr  Stewart  treat  of  this  sentiment  under
the  designation  of  the  Desire  of  Power.  Dr  Thomas
Brown  calls  it  "  pride,"  and  defines  it  as  "  That  feeling  of
vivid  pleasure  which  attends  the  consciousness  of  our  ex-
cellence \"  Dr  Brown  views  the  desire  of  power  as  a  se-
parate principle ;  hut  the  sentiment  is  the  same  as  the  one
which  we  name  Self-Esteem ;  and  the  latter  appears  to  me
to  be  the  primitive  emotion,  which  is  felt  and  manifested
as  the  fundamental  function  of  the  organ ;  whereas,  the
desire  of  power  is  a  direction  of  the  faculty  in  a  particular
way,  resulting  from  a  combination  with  Love  of  Approba-
tion, and  depending  on  external  situation.  It  is  quite  con-
ceivable, that  a  private  individual,  removed  from  all  means
of  acquiring  authority  in  public,  may  be  very  proud,  and
manifest  little  of  the  appetite  for  dominion,  except  over
those  of  his  household ;  but  I  do  not  conceive,  that  any  one
could  be  found  fired  with  an  insatiable  ambition  for  situa-
tions of  command,  in  whom  Self-Esteem  is  defective,  or
even  moderate  in  size;  so  that  there  appears  no  adequate
ground  for  assuming  pride  as  one  primitive  sentiment,  and
the  love  of  power  as  another  and  distinct  original  desire.

In  treating  of  Acquisitiveness,  I  mentioned,  that  the
practical  effects  of  that  faculty  were  much  modified  by  thef
endowment  of  Self-Esteem,  with  which  it  happened  to  be
combined, — selfishness  being  greatly  increased  by  the  com-
bination of  both  in  a  full  degree  of  development.  Mr
Stewart  approaches  close  to  the  same  doctrine,  when  he
observes,  that  "  the  idea  of  power  is,  partly  at  least,  the

•  History  of  Civil  Society,  part  iii.  sect.  6.  t  v°l-  *«•  P-  30°-


240  SELF-ESTEEM,

foundation  of  our  attachment  to  property  *,"  A  phrenolo-
gist, on  analyzing  the  combination,  would  infer,  that  Ac-
quisitiveness desires  to  acquire  wealth,  and  Self-Esteem  to
hold  and  apply  it  to  selfish  gratification.

This  organ  appears  to  be  possessed  by  the  lower  animals*
The  turkey-cock,  peacock,  horse,  Swv  manifest  feelings  re-
sembling pride  or  Self-Esteem.

Dr  Gall,  however,  entertained  views  on  this  subject  pe-
culiar to  himself*  He  mentions,  that,  after  having  studied
the  sentiment  of  pride  as  a  primitive  mental  quality,  and
its  organ  in  the  human  race,  be  wished  to  ascertain  whether
his  observations  would  be  confirmed  by  tbe  lower  animals.
He,  therefore,  examined  the  heads  of  sueh  of  them  as  we
are  accustomed  to  call  proud, — the  race-horse,  the  cock
and  peacock.  He  did  not  find  in  any  of  these  a  remarkable
development  of  the  cerebral  parts,  corresponding  to  the  or-
gan of  Self-Esteem  in  man ;  but  he  found  a  considerable
development  of  these  parts  in  animals  in  which  he  would
never  have  thought  of  looking  for  it,  that  is  to  say,  in  those
which  voluntarily  remain  in  the  higher  regions  of  the  air,,
living  on  mountains,  and  other  elevated  situations ;  for  ex-
ample, in  the  roebuck,,  the  chamois,  the  wild  goat,  and
certain  species  of  eagles  and  falcons ;  and  what  struck  him
most  was,  that  the  parts  in  question  were  the  more  de-
veloped, in  proportion  to  the  greater  height  of  the  dwelling-
places  of  the  animals*  Dr  Gall  himself  was  astonished  at
this  observation.  That  a  predilection  for  physical  heights*
should,  in  animals,  depend  on  the  same  organ  as  that  to
which  the  sentiment  of  Self-Esteem  is  referrible  In  man*
appeared  to  him,  at  first,  altogether  improbable  and  inad-
missible t  y*V  says  he,  "  I  have  laid  down  the  rule  to  com-
municate the  progress  of  my  observations,  as  well  as  the
manner  in  which  they  have  given  rise  to  my  opinions*
Opinions  which  have  not  facts  for  their  basis,  if  not  erro-
neous, are  at  least  very  likely  to  be  so ;  and  a  natural  his-
torian ought  to  be  less  ashamed  of  committing  an  error  in

•  Outlines,  p.  92.


SELF-ESTEEM.  241

his  interpretations  of  facte,  than  of  founding  his  opinions  on
reasoning  alone."  He  accordingly  enters  into  some  inte-
resting observations  on  the  various  dwelling-places  of  ani-
mals ;  directing  the  attention  of  his  readers  both  to  those
which  inhabit  elevated  regions,  and  to  others  which  prefer
the  lowest  situations;  and  states,  that,  in  all  animals  which
have  their  abodes  in  high  places,  there  is  a  lengthened  emi-
nence in  the  middle  line  of  the  head,  immediately  above  the
organ  of  Fhiloprogenitiveness,  and  which  entirely  resem-
bles the  organ  of  Self-Esteem  in  man  *.

Dr  Spurzheim  holds,  that  this  prominence  in  the  brains
of  the  lower  animals  corresponds  to  the  organ  No.  III.  in
man,  (named  by  him  Inhabitiveness,  and,  in  this  work,
Concentrativeness) ;  and,  while  he  admits  the  accuracy  of
the  facts  stated  by  Dr  Gall,  he  differs  from  his  conclu-
sions, and  says,  that  it  is  not  the  same  organ  which  pro-
duces in  man  the  sentiment  of  Self-Esteem,  and,  in  the
lower  creatures,  the  love  of  physical  heights;  but  that
there  are  distinct  organs  both  in  man  and  the  lower  ani-
mals for  these  separate  mental  qualities.  It  appears  to  me,
that  Dr  Spurzheim  is  correct  in  maintaining,  that  the  or-
gan No.  III.  is  distinct  from  that  of  Self-Esteem,  both  in
the  lower  animals  and  in  man ;  and  the  real  extent  of  the
difference  betwixt  him  and  Dr  Gall  is  this, — Dr  Spurz-
heim admits  two  organs  lying  betwixt  Firmness  and  Phi-
loprogenitiveness, but  Dr  Gall  only  one :  Dr  Gall  consi-
ders the  whole  of  the  intermediate  cerebral  parts  as  the
organ  in  man  of  Self-Esteem,  and,  in  animals,  of  the  love
of  physical  height ;  while  Dr  Spurzheim  regards  the  up-
per portion  of  these  parts  as  the  organ  of  Self-Esteem,
and  the  lower  portion  as  the  organ  of  Inhabitiveness  in
both  cases.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  organs  are  distinct  in
the  human  species,  and  that  the  upper  serves  to  manifest
Self-Esteem.  Farther  observations  must  determine  the  func-
tions of  the  lower  organ,  or  No.  III.

•  Sur  lea  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  iv.  p-  210.


242  SELF-ESTEEM.

When  the  organ  becomes  excited  by  disease,  the  indivi-
dual imagines  himself  to  be  a  king,  an  emperor,  a  trans-
cendent genius,  or  even  the  Supreme  Being.  Dr  Gall
mentions  the  case  of  a  Monsieur  B.,  in  whom  the  organ
was  naturally  very  large,  and  who  was  accidentally  wound-
ed by  a  nail  in  this  part  of  the  brain.  While  labouring  un-
der the  influence  of  the  wound,  he  felt  himself  as  it  were
elevated  above  the  clouds,  and  carried  through  the  air,  re-
taining, at  the  same  time,  and  also  manifesting,  during  his
convalescence,  the  same  proud  and  haughty  manners  which
had  distinguished  him  during  health.

"  The  organ  was  equally  conspicuous  in  an  insane  patient
at  Baden,  near  Rastadt.  This  man's  insanity  consisted  in
believing  himself  a  Major.  He  had  a  small  head,  and  the
only  organ  which  was  developed  in  a  high  degree  was
.  that  of  Self-Esteem ;  the  whole  other  convolutions  of  the
brain  being  very  small.  In  the  charity  work-house  of  Fri-
bourg,  we  saw  an  insane  man  who  was  extremely  proud.
He  declared,  in  a  vehement  and  pathetic  tone,  *  qu'il  est
la  8ouche'  by  the  aid  of  which  God  created  and  preserves
the  world;  that  he  has  been  crowned  by  Jesus  Christ;
that  he  is  the  young  man  whom  the  Queen  of  Heaven  has
selected  for  her  spouse.  His  attitude  is  that  of  an  arrogant
despot.  Deeply  inspired  with  sentiments  of  his  high  im-
portance, he  crosses  his  arms,  and  to  give  an  idea  of  the
astonishing  power  which  he  possesses,  he  strikes  his  breast
and  sides  with  violence.  In  general,  he  stands  with '  one
foot  placed  before  the  other,  the  body  erect,  and  a  little  in-
clined backwards.  When  I  requested  him,"  says  Dr  Gall,
M  to  allow  me  to  touch  his  head,  he  replied  with  astonish-
ing arrogance,  '  Ich  habe  keinen  Kopf,  sondern  ein  Haupt?
I  have  no  head  such  as  common  men  possess,  but  a  Haupt
or  head  peculiar  to  Kings  and  Gods.  He  turned  away,
holding  us  to  be  totally  unworthy  of  approaching  him.  We
observed,  however,  very  distinctly,  that  he  had  the  organ
of  Self-Esteem  very  largely  developed."

Pinel,  Fodere',  and  other  authors  on  Insanity,  men-


SELF-ESTEEM.  243

tion  eases  equally  characteristic  of  disease  of  this  organ.
"  A  patient"  says  Pin  el,  "  confined  in  a  private  asylum  in
Paris,  during  his  fits,  believed  himself  to  be  the  Prophet
Mahomet,  assumed  an  attitude  of  command,  and  the  tone
of  the  Most  High ;  '  ses  traits  ^taient  rayonnans,  et  sa
d-marche  pleine  de  majesty  One  day  when  cannon  were
fired  in  Paris  on  account  of  some  events  of  the  Revolution,
he  persuaded  himself  that  it  was  to  render  him  homage ;
he  caused  silence  to  be  observed  around  him,  and  could  not
restrain  his  joy."  "  A  woman,"  continues  the  same  author,
"  extremely  imperious,  and  accustomed  to  make  her  hus-
band obey  with  even  more  than  docility,  remained  in  bed
part  of  the  morning,  and  then  insisted  that  he  should  come,
and  on  bis  knees  present  her  with  drink.  She  ended,  by
believing  herself,  in  the  ecstasies  of  her  pride,  to  be  the
Virgin  Mary."  In  the  Richmond  Lunatic  Asylum  in  Dub-
lin, I  saw  several  cases  similar  to  the  foregoing,  and  which
are  reported  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  vi.

This  organ  is  generally  larger  in  men  than  in  women ;
and  more  males  are  insane  through  pride  than  females.

The  organ  is  large  in  Haggart  and  Dempsey,  and  mo-
derate in  Dr  Hette.     It  is  regarded  as  established.


11. — LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.

This  organ  is  situated  on  each  side  of  that  of  Self-
Esteem,  and  commences  about  half  an  inch  from  the  lamb-
doidal  suture.  When  large,  it  produces  a  remarkable  ful-
ness and  breadth  in  the  upper  and  back  part  of  the  head.
From  ite  situation,  it  cannot  be  brought  into  line,  so  as  to
be  represented  successfully  by  figures,  similar  to  those  used
in  illustration  of  the  other  organs.

When  Dr  Gall  was  occupied  in  making  observations  on
the  organ  of  Self-Esteem,  he  met  with  a  woman  in  a  luna-
tic asylum  who  conceived  herself  to  be  the  Queen  of
France.     He  expected  to  find  the  organ  of  that  sentiment

e  2


244  LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.

largely  developed ;  but,  in  place  of  this  being  the  case,
there  was  a  very  distinct  hollow  in  the  situation  of  it,  and
a  round  and  considerable  prominence  presented  itself  on
each  side.  This  circumstance  at  first  caused  him  consider-
able embarrassment.  He  soon  perceived,  however,  that  the
character  of  this  woman's  insanity  differed  materially  from
that  of  men  alienated  through  pride.  The  latter  were  se-
rious, calm,  imperious,  elevated,  arrogant ;  and  they  affected
a  masculine  majesty.  Even  in  the  fury  of  their  fits,  all  their
motions  and  expressions  bore  the  impress  of  the  sentiment
of  domination,  which  they  imagined  themselves  to  exercise
over  others.  In  those  insane  through  vanity,  on  the  other
hand,  the  whole  manner  was  different  There  was  then  a
restless  frivolity,  an  inexhaustible  talkativeness,  the  most
affected  forwardness ;  eagerness  to  announce  high  birth  and
inexhaustible  riches,  promises  of  favour  and  honour, — in  a
word,  a  mixture  of  affectation  and  absurdity.  From  that
time  Dr  Gall  perceived  the  difference  between  the  senti-
ment of  Self-Esteem  and  that  of  Love  of  Approbation.

He  draws,  with  great  accuracy,  the  distinction  between
pride,  which  is  an  abuse  of  Self-Esteem,  and  vanity,  pro-
ceeding from  abuse  of  Love  of  Approbation.  The  proud
man,  says  he,  is  imbued  with  a  sentiment  of  his  own  su-
perior merit,  and,  from  the  summit  of  his  grandeur,  treats
with  contempt  or  indifference  all  other  mortals.  The  vain
man  attaches  the  utmost  importance  to  the  opinions  enter-
tained of  him  by  others,  and  seeks  with  eagerness  to  gain
their  approbation.  The  proud  man  expects  that  mankind
will  come  to  him  and  acknowledge  his  merit.  The  vain
man  knocks  at  every  door  to  draw  attention  towards  him,
and  supplicates  for  the  smallest  portion  of  honour.  The
proud  man  despises  those  marks  of  distinction,  which  on
the  vain  confer  the  most  perfect  delight.  The  proud  man
is  disgusted  by  indiscreet  eulogiums.  The  vain  man  in-
hales with  ecstasy  the  incense  of  flattery,  although  profuse-
ly offered,  and  by  no  very  skilful  hand  *.

*  Gall  sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  iv.  p.  296.


LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.  245

Dr  Gall  treats  of  the  abuses  of  this  sentiment,  under  the
names  of  Vanity,  Ambition,  and  the  Love  of  Glory,  rather
than  of  the  primitive  sentiment  itself.  To  Dr  Spurzheim
is  due  the  merit  of  elucidating  the  ultimate  principle  of
many  of  the  faculties,  and  in  particular  the  one  under  con-
sideration.

This  faculty  produces  the  desire  to  please,  whence  arises
the  love  of  praise  and  fame.  It  makes  us  attentive  to  the
opinions  which  others  entertain  of  us.  The  object  of  its
desire  is  approbation  in  general,  without  determining  the
means  or  the  manner  of  acquiring  it.

There  is  a  great  difference  in  regard  to  the  degree  of  en-
dowment of  this  faculty,  in  different  individuals.  Some
watch,  with  the  most  animated  anxiety,  every  motion,  and
every  look,  and  intuitively  feel  when  we  approve  or  disap-
prove. When  we  approve,  the  eye  sparkles,  the  counte-
nance opens,  and  the  individual  approaches  us  with  a  plea-
sing courtesy,  expressive  at  once  of  the  pleasure  he  has  re-
ceived from  our  approbation,  and  of  his  desire  to  retain  it.
He,  on  the  other  hand,  in  whom  the  faculty  is  naturally
feeble,  shews,  by  the  undisturbed  fixture  of  his  counte-
nance, that  our  censure  and  applause  are  alike  unimport-
ant to  him.  When  we  censure,  he  stares  us  in  the  face,
with  the  most  matchless  indifference,  or  gapes  in  stupid
wonder.

A  due  endowment  of  this  faculty  is  indispensable  to  an
amiable  character.  It  gives  the  desire  to  be  agreeable  to
others, — it  is  the  drill-serjeant  of  society,  and  admonishes
us  when  we  deviate  too  widely  from  the  line  of  march  of
our  fellows, — it  induces  us  to  suppress  numberless  little
manifestations  of  selfishness,  and  to  restrain  many  pecu-
liarities of  temper  and  disposition,  from  the  dread  of  giving
offence,  and  thereby  incurring  disapprobation; — it  is  the
butt  upon  which  wit  strikes,  when,  by  means  of  ridicule,
it  drives  us  from  our  follies.  To  be  laughed  at  is  worse
than  death  to  a  person  in  whom  this  sentiment  is  strong.

The  direction  in  which  gratification  of  it  will  be  sought,


246  LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.

will  depend  on  the  faculties  with  which  it  is  combined  in
the  individual.  If  the  moral  sentiments  and  intellect  be  vi-
gorous, it  will  prompt  to  moral  emulation  and  the  desire  of
honourable  fame.  It  animates  the  poet,  the  painter,  the
orator,  the  warrior,  and  the  statesman.  In  some  indivi-
duals it  attains  the  height  of  a  passion,  and  then  glory  is
pursued  at  the  hazard  of  life  and  of  every  enjoyment
which  it  affords,  and  fame  is  sought  for  even  in  the  can-
non's mouth.  "  Themistoclem  ilium,"  says  Cicero,  "  sum-
mum  Athenis  virum,  dixisse  aiunt,  cum  ex  eo  queereretur,
quod  acroama,  aut  cujus  vocemlibentissime  audiret?  Ejus,
ft  quo  sua  virtus  optime  prsedicaretur."  Cicero  himself
seems  to  have  possessed  this  sentiment  in  a  very  high  de-
gree :  "  Trahimur  omnes  laudis  studio,"  says  he,  "  et  opti-
on us  quisque  maxime  glori&  ducitur.  Ipsi  iUi  philosophi,
etiam  in  illis  libellis  quos  de  contemnenda  gloria  scribunt,
nomen  suum  inscribunt ;  in  eo  ipso,  in  quo  preedicationem
nobilitatemque  despiciunt,  predicari  de  se  ac  nominari  vo-
lunt  *."  If  the  lower  propensities  predominate,  the  indi-
vidual may  be  pleased,  by  the  reputation  of  being  the  best
fighter,  or  the  greatest  drinker  of  his  circle.

The  feeling  which  is  most  commonly  experienced,  when
this  organ  is  large,  even  when  favourably  combined  with
other  organs,  is  anxiety  about  what  the  world  will  think  of
us.  A  youth  in  whom  it  is  powerful  cannot  do  this  thing,
because  every  body  will  look  at  him ;  or  cannot  do  the
other,  because  the  people  would  wonder.  In  older  persons,
it  produces  a  fidgety  anxiety  about  the  opinions  of  the
public,  or  of  the  circle  of  acquaintances  who  compose  the
public  to  them.  They  imagine  themselves  continually  be-
fore the  public  eye,  and  that  the  world  is  occupied  with
little  else  than  weighing  their  motives,  speculating  on  their
conduct,  and  adjusting  the  precise  point  in  the  scale  of  im-
portance and  respectability  at  which  they  ought  to  be
placed.  A  great  portion  of  this  feeling,  however,  is  the  mere

•  Oratio  pro  Archia.


LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.  247

inspiration  of  a  very  active  and  powerful  Love  of  Appro-
bation in  their  own  heads.  The  public  are  too  much  en-
grossed with  themselves  and  their  own  affairs,  to  bestow  so
minute  and  permanent  a  degree  of  attention  upon  an  Indi-
vidual. This  anxiety  about  public  opinion,  when  exces-
sive, is  subversive  of  happiness  and  independence.  It
renders  the  mere  dicta  of  the  society  in  which  the  indivi-
dual moves  his  code  of  morality,  religion,  taste,  and  philo-
sophy ;  and  incapacitates  him  from  upholding  truth  or  vir-
tue, if  disowned  by  those  whom  he  imagines  influential  or
genteel.

The  distinguishing  characteristic  betwixt  the  disposition
to  oblige,  conferred  by  this  sentiment,  and  the  feeling  of
genuine  kindness,  which  springs  from  Benevolence,  is,  that
Love  of  Approbation  prompts  us  to  do  most  for  those  who
least  require  our  aid ;  whereas  Benevolence  takes  exactly
the  opposite  direction.  Men,  in  general,  care  little  for  the
approbation  of  their  inferiors,  their  own  household,  or
those  of  whom  they  are  altogether  independent;  and  he
whose  exertions  are  inspired  chiefly  by  this  faculty,  will  do
extremely  little  to  benefit  them.  To  serve  or  please  the
great  or  the  splendid,  on  the  other  hand,  or  strangers
whose  yoice  may  raise  or  depress  his  fame,  he  will  make
the  most  animated  exertions.  Persons,  accordingly,  in
whom  Love  of  Approbation  is  very  strong,  and  Benevo-
lence and  Conscientiousness  deficient,  are  frequently  the
most  agreeable  acquaintances  to  those  who  are  altogether
independent  of  them ;  "  they  smile  on  all  who  care  not  for
their  frowns,"  while  they  neglect  or  torment  their  inferiors
and  equals.

The  abuses  of  this  faculty  may  be  traced  in  all  ages,  and
in  every  variety  of  form.  Combined  with  Secretiveness
large,  it  prompts  its  possessor  to  pay  to  other  individuals
those  iinmpaniTig  compliments  which  pass  current  in  socie-
ty, and  which  most  persons  receive  well,  when  addressed
to  themselves,  but  treat  with  ridicule  when  bestowed
lavishly  on  others.   It  prompts  to  the  equivocation  of"  not


248  LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.

at  home,"  when  the  person  is  otherwise  engaged*  The
faculty  of  Conscientiousness  would  desire  that  the  plain
fact  should  be  stated ;  but  Love  of  Approbation  produces
an  instinctive  feeling  that  the  Self-Esteem  of  the  person
calling  will  be  offended  at  the  idea  that  any  engagement
could  render  it  inconvenient  to  see  him.  To  save  this  pang,
Love  of  Approbation  and  Secretiveness  prompt  to  the  in-
vention of  the  little  equivoque.  This  deceit  is  seen  through
by  all,  and  nevertheless  the  use  of  it  is  more  pleasing  to
persons  in  whom  Self-Esteem  and  Love  of  Approbation
are  very  large,  than  the  announcement  of  the  simple  truth.
Some  individuals  state  candidly  that  they  are  "  engaged ;"
and  I  have  asked  persons  in  whom  the  above  organs  are
large,  whether  they  felt  more  annoyed  by  this  reply,  than
by  "  not  at  home,"  even  when  they  suspected  that  the
latter  meant  really  the  former.  They  acknowledged,  that,
for  the  first  time,  they  did  feel  slightly  irritated  by  the  idea
that  their  friend  was  in  the  house  and  would  not  see  them ;
but  that  a  moment's  reflection  satisfied  them,  that  forcible
reasons  must  exist  for  the  refusal,  and  that  the  very  an-
nouncement of  the  truth  was  an  appeal  to  their  higher  feel-
ings, and  a  proof  of  unhesitating  confidence  in  their  attach-
ment and  good  sense ;  and  ever  after  they  were  not  offend-
ed by  the  reply  "  engaged."  It  is  the  same  combination
of  Love  of  Approbation  with  Secretiveness,  which  prompts
some  individuals  to  the  practice  of  calling  on  those  whom
they  are  pleased  to  style  their  friends,  when  they  are  sure
they  are  not  at  home,  for  the  purpose  of  leaving  their  card.
This  proceeding  is  an  offer  of  flattery  to  the  Self-Esteem
and  Love  of  Approbation  of  the  persons  called  upon ;  but
as  it  argues  an  absence  of  real  affection  and  esteem  for
them,  it  is,  in  truth,  an  insult ;  and,  besides,  it  necessarily
implies  so  great  a  deficiency  of  Conscientiousness  in  the  in-
dividuals who  practise  it,  that  they  are  not  to  be  relied  on
in  circumstances  in  which  real  friendship  will  be  put  to
the  test.
When  the  development  of  Love  of  Approbation  is  execs-


LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.  249

give,  while  the  regulating  organs  are  deficient,  it  is  the
cause  of  great  unhappiness.  It  renders  the  little  girl  at
school  miserable,  if  her  dress  and  the  style  of  living  of  her
parents  be  not  equal  to  those  of  the  parents  of  her  asso-
ciates. It  overwhelms  the  artist,  author,  or  public  speaker,
with  misery,  if  a  rival  is  praised  in  the  journals  in  higher
terms  than  himself.  A  lady  is  tormented  at  perceiving,
in  the  possession  of  her  acquaintance,  finer  dresses  or  equi-
pages than  her  own.  It  excites  the  individual  to  talk  of  him-
self, his  affairs,  and  connexions,  so  as  to  communicate  to  the
auditor  vast  ideas  of  his  greatness  or  goodness :  in  short,
vanity  is  one  form  of  its  abuse.  "  Sir,"  says  Dr  Johnson,
"  Goldsmith  is  so  much  afraid  of  being  unnoticed,  that  he
often  talks,  merely  lest  you  should  forget  that  he  is  in  the
company."  When  not  combined  with  Conscientiousness
and  Benevolence,  it  leads  to  feigned  professions  of  respect
and  friendship ;  and  many  manifest  it  by  promises  and  in-
vitations, never  intended  to  be  fulfilled  or  accepted.  It,
as  well  as  Self-Esteem,  prompts  to  the  use  of  the  first  per-
son ;  but  its  tone  is  that  of  courteous  solicitation,  while  the
/  of  Self-Esteem  is  presumptuous,  and  full  of  pretension.

When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  organ  is  deficient,  and  the
sentiment,  in  consequence,  is  feeble,  the  individual  cares
little  about  the  opinions  entertained  of  him  by  others ;  and,
provided  they  have  not  the  power  to  punish  his  person,  or
abridge  his  possessions,  he  is  capable  of  laughing  at  their
censures  and  contemning  their  applause.  Persons  of  this
sort,  if  endowed  with  the  selfish  propensities  in  a  strong
degree,  constitute  what  are  termed  "  impracticable"  men ;
their  whole  feelings  are  concentrated  in  Self,  and  they  are
dead  to  the  motive  which  might  induce  them  to  abate  one
iota  of  their  own  pretensions  to  oblige  others.  If  actuated
by  any  strong  passion,  and  endowed  with  intellect,  it  is  as-
tonishing what  they  are  sometimes  able  to  accomplish,  in
attaining  their  objects.  Strangers  to  ceremony,  and  indif-
ferent to  censure,  they  meet  with  a  thousand  rebuffs  which
they  never  feel,  and  are  loaded  with  an  hundred  mortifica-


250  LOVE  OF   APPROBATION.

tions  which  never  affect  them ;  free  from  the  restraints
which  delicacy  imposes  upon  others,  they  practise  upon  the
benevolence,  the  disposition  to  oblige,  or  the  interest  of
mankind,  and  succeed  in  circumstances  in  which  a  sensi-
tive mind  would  have  found  only  obstacles  unsurmountable.

Philosophers  and  acute  observers  of  human  nature,  have
long  distinguished  betwixt  Pride  and  Vanity,  but  neverthe-
less, no  error  is  more  frequently  committed  by  ordinary
minds  than  to  confound  them;  and  no  mistake  is  more
common  than  to  imagine  that  beaux  and  belles,  and  all  in-
dividuals very  tasteful  and  particular  about  their  personal
appearance  or  equipages,  are  necessarily  extremely  conceit-
ed. A  large  Love  of  Approbation  and  much  Ideality,  join-
ed with  Individuality,  which  produces  attention  to  details,
and  Order,  will,  in  general,  give  rise  to  the  passion  for
neatness,  propriety,  and  ornament ;  but  6uch  a  combination,
in  place  of  producing  a  proud  or  conceited  character,  in-
spires with  the  very  opposite  dispositions.  I  rarely  see  a
dandy  who  is  not  at  bottom  a  polite,  obliging,  good  natured,
but  probably  weak  individual ;  and  it  is  only  when  large
Self-Esteem  is  added  to  the  combination,  and  which  is  not
an  indispensable  ingredient  in  beauxism,  that  the  common
opinion  will  be  justified  by  the  result.

This  faculty  corresponds  to  the  Desire  of  Esteem  of  Dr
Reid  and  Mr  Stewart,  and  to  the  Desire  of  Glory  of  Dr
Thomas  Brown.  Their  observations  on  its  functions  are
generally  correct;  but  here,  as  in  the  case  of  Self-Esteem,
they  treat  only  of  ifs  heroic  manifestations,  and  present  us
with  no  views  of  its  operations  on  the  more  interesting
theatre  of  private  life.

The  faculty,  when  powerful,  gives  a  soft  soliciting  tone
to  the  voice,  puts  smiles  into  the  countenance,  and  produces
that  elegant  line  of  beauty  in  the  lips  which  resembles
Apollo's  bow.

As  formerly  mentioned,  the  French  are  remarkable  for
a  large  development  of  the  organ,  while  the  English  excel
in  Self-Esteem.    The  influence  of  the  Love  of  Approbation


LOVE  OF  APPROBATION.  251

shews  itself  in  the  manners,  institutions,  and  daily  litera-
ture of  France,  in  an  extraordinary  degree.  Compliments
and  praises  are  the  current  coin  of  conversation,  and  a  late
writer  most  justly  observes,  that,  "  in  France,  glory  is  the
condiment  to  the  whole  feast  of  life ;  and  the  trumpet  of
fame  is  that  which  makes  the  sweetest  music  to  their
ears  *."  In  private  life  also,  an  individual,  who  has  a  great
Love  of  Approbation  in  his  own  head,  is  extremely
prone  to  pay  compliments  to  others,  from  an  instinctive
feeling  of  the  pleasure  of  being  praised*  The  organ  is  very
large  in  the  American  Indians ;  and  the  love  of  decorations
and  ornaments,  whether  these  consist  of  stars,  garters  and
medals,  or  of  tatooed  faces,  bored  noses  and  eagles'  feathers,
spring  from  it

The  faculty  is  more  active  in  women,  in  general,  than  in
men ;  and  it  is  observed,  that  a  greater  number  of  women
than  of  men  become  insane  from  this  feeling.  Dr  Spurz-
heim  mentions,  that  he  had  met  with  only  one  man  who
had  become  deranged  from  this  cause.  Its  effects,  when
diseased,  have  already  been  described  in  the  history  of  the
discovery  of  the  organ*

The  organ  is  possessed  by  the  lower  animals.  The  dog
is  extremely  fond  of  Approbation,  and  the  horse  displays
the  sentiment,  not  only  in  his  sensibility  to  marks  of  affec-
tion, but  in  his  spirit  of  emulation  in  the  race*  Dr  Gall
mentions,  that,  in  the  south  of  France,  the  peasants  attach
a  "  bouquet"  to  the  mules  when  they  have  acquitted  them-
selves well,  and  that  the  animals  understand  it  as  a  mark
of  approbation,  and  feel  afflicted  when  it  is  taken  away*
He  mentions  also,  that  he  had  a  female  monkey,  who,  on
receiving  a  handkerchief,  put  it  on  as  a  robe,  and  took  ex-
traordinary delight  in  seeing  it  trail  behind  her  as  a  train.
In  all  these  creatures  the  organ  is  largely  developed.

The  organ  is  large  in  Dr  Hette,  the  Rev.  Mr  M.,  in
King  Robert  Bruce,  Clara  Fisher  ;  and  deficient  in  D.
Haggart  and  Dempsey.

It  is  established.

•  Edinburgh  Review,  Nov.  1820,  p.  294.


(    25a   )


12.—  CAUTIOUSNESS.

This  organ  is  situated  near  the  middle  of  each  parie-
tal bone,  where  the  ossification  of  the  bone  generally  com-
mences*

The  figures  represent  its  appearance  when  large  and
small.


Hindoo.

French  Skull.


Cautiousness  Large.


Cautiousness  SmalL


Dr  Gall  was  acquainted  at  Vienna  with  a  prelate,  a
man  of  excellent  sense  and  considerable  intellect.  Some
persons  had  an  aversion  towards  him,  because,  through  fear
of  compromising  himself,  he  infused  into  his  discourses  in-
terminable reflections,  and  delivered  them  with  unsup-
portable  slowness.  When  any  one  began  a  conversation
with  him,  it  was  very  difficult  to  bring  it  to  a  conclusion.
He  paused  continually  in  the  middle  of  his  sentences,  and
repeated  the  beginning  of  them  two  or  three  times  before
proceeding  farther.  A  thousand  times  he  pushed  the  pa-
tience of  Dr  Gall  to  extremity.  He  never  happened  by
any  accident  to  give  way  to  the  natural  flow  of  his  ideas ;
but  recurred  a  hundred  times  to  what  he  had  already  said,
consulting  with  himself  whether  he  could  not  amend  it  in
some  point.  His  manner  of  acting  was  in  conformity  with
his  manner  of  speaking.  He  prepared  with  infinite  precau-
tions for  the  most  insignificant  undertakings.  He  sub-
jected every  connexion  to  the  most  rigorous  examination
and  calculation  before  forming  it.


CAUTIOUSNESS.  258

This  case,  however,  was  not  by  itself  sufficient  to  arrest
the  attention  of  Dr  Gall  ;  but  this  prelate  happened  to  be
connected  in  public  affairs  with  a  Councillor  of  the  Regen-
cy, whose  eternal  irresolution  had  procured  for  him  the
nickname  of  Cacadubio.  At  the  examinations  of  the  public
schools,  these  two  individuals  were  placed  side  by  side,  and
Dr  Gall  sat  in  the  seat  immediately  behind  them.  This
arrangement  afforded  him  an  excellent  opportunity  of  ob-
serving their  heads*  The  circumstance  which  most  forci-
bly arrested  his  attention  was,  that  both  their  heads  were
very  large  in  the  upper,  lateral,  and  hind  parts,  the  situa-
tion of  the  organ  in  question.  The  dispositions  and  intel-
lectual qualities  of  these  two  men  were,  in  other  respects,
very  different;  indeed  they  resembled  each  other  in  cir-
cumspection, and  in  this  particular  development  of  head
alone.  The  coincidence  between  them  in  this  point  sug-
gested the  idea  to  Dr  Gall,  that  irresolution,  indecision,
and  circumspection,  might  be  connected  with  certain  parts
of  the  brain.  Subsequent  reflection  on  this  disposition,  and
observation  of  additional  facts,  converted  this  presumption
into  certainty.

It  is  a  principle  in  Phrenology,  that  absence  of  one  qua-
lity  never  confers  t  ftpotjier.  Every  feeling  is  something
positive  in  itself,  and  is  not  a  mere  negation  of  a  different
emotion.  Fear,  then,  is  a  positive  sentiment,  and  not  the
mere  want  of  courage ;  and  it  appears  to  me  that  the  facul-
ty now  under  discussion  produces  this  feeling.  The  ten-
dency of  the  sentiment  is  to  make  the  individual  apprehend
danger;  and  this  leads  him  to  hesitate  before  he  acts,  and
to  trace  consequences  that  he  may  be  assured  of  his  safe-
ty. Dr  Spurzheim  names  it  "  Cautiousness," — which  ap-
pellation I  retain  as  sufficiently  expressive,  although  the
primitive  feeling  appears,  on  a  rigid  analysis,  to  be  simply
fear.  Dr  Gall  says,  "  It  was  requisite  that  man  and  ani-
mals should  be  endowed  with  a  faculty  to  enable  them  to
foresee  certain  •vents,  to  give  them  a  presentiment  of  cer-
tain circumstances,  and  to  prompt  them  to  provide  against


254    •  CAUTIOUSNESS.

danger.  Without  such  a  disposition,  their  attention  would
have  been  occupied  only  with  the  present ;  and  they  would
have  been  incapable  of  taking  any  measure  with  reference
to  the  future."  Accordingly,  he  describee  the  faculty
which  prompts  to  these  actions,  as  if  it  comprised  some-
thing intellectual ;  and  calls  it  "  Circumspection,  Foresight"
Dr  Spurzheim  "  does  not  believe  that  it  foresees;  it  is,  in
his  opinion,  blind,  and  without  reflection,  though  it  may
excite  the  reflective  faculties."  This  observation  appears
to  me  correct.

A  full  development  of  this  organ  is  essential  to  a  prudent
character.  It  produces  a  cautious,  circumspect,  and  consi-
derate disposition  of  mind.  Persons  so  organized,  says  Dr
Gall,  "  are  habitually  on  their  guard ;  they  know  that  it
is  more  difficult  to  sustain  than  to  acquire  reputation,  and,
consequently,  every  new  undertaking  is  prosecuted  with
equal  care  as  the  first.  They  look  forward  to  all  possible
dangers,  and  are  anxious  to  anticipate  every  occurrence ;
they  ask  advice  of  every  one,  and  often,  after  having  re-
ceived much  counsel,  they  remain  undecided.  They  put
great  faith  in  the  observation,  that,  of  a  hundred  misfor-
tunes which  befel  us,  ninety-nine  arise  from  our  own  fault.
Such  persons  never  break  any  article ;  they  may  pass  their
lives  in  pruning  trees,  or  in  working  with  sharp  tools,
without  cutting  themselves.  If  they  see  a  vessel  placed
near  the  edge  of  the  table,  their  nerves  shrink.  If  they
give  credit,  or  indulge  in  gaming,  they  never  lose  large
sums  of  money.  Finally,"  says  he,  "  they  form  a  standing
subject  of  criticism  to  their  less  considerate  neighbours,
who  look  on  their  forebodings  as  extravagant,  and  their
precautions  as  trifling  and  absurd  #."

When  the  organ  is  too  large,  it  produces  doubts,  irreso-
lution, and  wavering ;  and  may  lead  to  absolute  incapacity
for  vigorous  and  decisive  conduct.  A  great  and  involun-
tary activity  of  it  produces  a  panic, — a  state  in  which  the

*  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  iv.  p.  320.


CAUTIOUSNESS.  255

mind  is  harried  away  by  an  irresistible  emotion  of  fear,  for
which  no  adequate  external  cause  exists.

The  organ  is  almost  uniformly  large  in  children,  and
appears,  from  this  circumstance,  to  be  developed  at  an  ear-
lier age  than  many  of  the  other  organs.  This  is  a  wise
provision  of  nature,  as  caution  is  never  more  indispensable
to  the  safety  of  the  individual,  than  during  the  helpless
years  of  infancy  and  childhood.  Children  possessing  a
large  endowment  may  be  safely  trusted  to  take  care  of
themselves ;  they  will  rarely  be  found  in  danger.  When,
on  the  other  hand,  the  organs  are  small  in  a  child,  he  will
be  a  hapless  infant ;  fifty  keepers  will  not  supply  the  place
of  the  instinctive  guardianship /performed  by  adequate
Cautiousness.  In  a  boy  of  six  years  of  age  it  was  very
small,  and  he  took  off  his  clothes  to  leap  into  an  old  quar-
ry full  of  water  to  recover  his  cap,  which  the  wind  bad
blown  into  it,  totally  insensible  to  the  danger,  which  was
imminent,  of  being  drowned.  In  some  very  young  chil-
dren, the  organs  are  so  prominent  as  to  alarm  mothers  with
the  fear  of  disease  or  deformity.  Water  in  the  head  indeed
frequently  shews  itself  by  an  enlargement  of  this  part
of  the  head,  and  it  is  not  uncommon  for  unskilful  persons
to  mistake  a  natural  and  healthy  development  of  the  organ
in  question,  for  an  indication  of  this  disease.

In  mature  age,  when  the  organ  is  very  deficient,  the
individual  is  rash  and  precipitate.  He  is  never  appre-
hensive about  the  results  of  his  conduct,  and  often  pro-
ceeds to  act  without  due  consideration.  Persons  of  this
description  are  frequently  of  a  gay,  careless  disposition,  and
engrossed  entirely  with  the  present ;  they  adopt  rash  reso-
lutions, and  enter  upon  hazardous  enterprises,  without  de-
liberation or  advice.  In  domestic  life,  misfortunes  over-
take them  in  consequence  of  their  want  of  precaution.
From  constitutional  recklessness,  they  precipitate  them-
selves against  objects  in  the  dark ;  they  break  frangible
articles,  owing  to  want  of  precaution  in  arranging  them ;
and  loser  the  money  which  they  lend,  by  omitting  to  take


256  CAUTIOUSNESS.

proper  security  for  repayment.  Riding  upon  a  slippery
path,  quite  insensible  to  danger,  their  horse  falls  and  de-
prives them  of  life.  A  cat,  or  other  animal,  overturns  the
candle  which  they  have  left  burning,  and  sets  their  house  on
fire.  In  short,  they  are  subject  to  interminable  misfor-
tunes, through  want  of  caution  in  their  conduct  *.

This  faculty  produces  a  repressing  influence,  and,  in
estimating  its  effects,  the  faculties  with  which  it  is  com-
bined ought  to  be  kept  in  view.  An  individual,  with  large
Acquisitiveness  and  Self-Esteem,  which  produce  instinctive
selfishness,  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  remarkably  careful  of
his  own  interest,  although  the  organ  of  Cautiousness  was
deficient  in  his  head*  It  was  admitted,  -  however,  that  his
prudence  consisted  chiefly  in  resisting  solicitations  to  per-
form generous  actions,  and  to  enter  into  6uretiship;  but
that,  when  a  tempting  prospect  of  gain  was  held  out  to
him,  although  attended  with  great  risk,  he  was  liable  to
dash  into  the  adventure,  and  in  consequence  frequently
sustained  severe  losses.  His  natural  dispositions  rendered
him  little  prone  to  excessive  generosity,  and  in  that  respect
no  danger  awaited  him ;  but  if  Cautiousness  had  been  large,
it  would  have  rendered  him  alive  to  the  perils  of  specula-
tion, and  prompted  him  to  prefer  small  and  certain  profits,
to  the  chances  of  greater  but  uncertain  gain.

Extreme  and  involuntary  activity  of  this  faculty  produ-
ces internal  sensations  of  dread  and  apprehension,  highly
distressing  to  the  individual,  although  often  very  ridiculous
in  the  eyes  of  ignorant  spectators.  Many  persons  believe
that  the  feelings  of  the  mind  depend  upon  the  dictates  of
the  understanding,  and  that  individuals,  if  they  would  al-
low themselves  to  be  convinced  of  the  groundlessness  of
their  apprehensions,  might,  by  an  act  of  volition,  remove
these  terrors.  Such  notions  argue  great  ignorance  of  hu-
man nature.  As  easily  could  we  remove  a  pain  from  the
leg,  by  resolving  to  be  quit  of  it,  as  the  unhappy  sufferer,

•  Gall  sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  p.  319.


CAUTIOUSNESS.  857

under  diseased  Cautiousness,  could  dispel  the  mental  gloom
by  which  he  is  afflicted.

A  large  development  of  this  organ,  combined  with  much
Destructiveness,  predisposes  to  self-destruction.  Cautious-
ness does  not  produce  suicide  as  a  specific  act,  but  the  sen-
timent, when  excited  to  excess  by  disease  of  the  organs,
gives  rise  to  intense  melancholy,  anguish,  and  anxiety,  and,
by  rendering  life  extremely  miserable,  indirectly  prompts
to  this  result.  Hence  the  fact,  that  the  best  of  men,  and
those  in  whose  external  circumstances  no  adequate  motive
can  be  found,  are  sometimes  led  to  that  fetal  deed.  Let
no  one  suppose  such  an  act  done  from  mere  error  in  judg-
ment. It  proceeds  always  from  internal  and  involuntary
feelings  of  a  diseased  nature,  of  the  misery  and  torment  of
which,  no  man,  who  has  never  felt  any  thing  similar,  can
form  an  adequate  conception.  The  great  ignorance  of
mankind  in  general,  regarding  the  state  of  mind  whieh
predisposes  to  suicide,  has  arisen  from  the  influence  of  the
organs  having  been  entirely  overlooked,  and  the  fact  not
being  known,  that  disease  in  any  of  them  deranges  the  cha-
racter of  the  sane  feeling  which  it  serves  to  manifest,  and
often  renders  it  independent  of  the  will.  Dr  A.  Combe
examined  a  considerable  number  of  suicides  in  the  Morgue
at  Paris,  and  found  in  them  Hope  generally  small,  with
Cautiousness  and  Destructiveness  large;  and  I  have  seen
several  similar  examples.

Many  instances  of  disease  of  this  organ  occur,  not  only
in  hospitals  for  the  insane,  but  in  private  life.  Dr  Gall
mentions,  that,  at  Vienna,  he  attended  two  fathers  of  fa-
milies in  easy  circumstances,  who,  nevertheless,  were  tor-
mented night  and  day  with  the  apprehension  that  their
wives  and  children  were  exposed  to  die  of  hunger.  The
most  earnest  assurances  of  their  friends  were  insufficient
to  make  them  comprehend  that  this  fear  was  altogether
chimerical.  After  their  recovery,  they  could  not  bear  to
hear  their  condition  mentioned,  through  terror  of  a  relapse.
Before  their  malady,  they  were  known  to  be  men  of  gloomy
dispositions.


258  CAUTIOUSNESS.

Pinel,  under  the  head  of  Melancholy,  mentions  a  varie-
ty of  cases  referrible  to  diseased  Cautiousness.  "  A  dis-
tinguished military  officer/'  says  he,  "  after  fifty  years  of
active  service  in  the  cavalry,  was  attacked  with  disease.
It  commenced  by  his  experiencing  vivid  emotions  from  the
slightest  causes;  if,  for  example,  he  heard  any  disease  spo-
ken of,  he  immediately  believed  himself  to  be  attacked  by
it;  if  any  one  was  mentioned  as  deranged  in  intellect,  he
imagined  himself  insane,  and  retired  into  his  chamber  full
of  melancholy  thoughts  and  inquietude.  Every  thing  be-
came for  him  a  subject  of  fear  and  alarm.  If  he  entered
into  a  house,  he  was  afraid  that  the  floor  would  fall,  and
precipitate  him  amidst  its  ruins.  He  could  not  pass  a
bridge  without  terror,  unless  impelled  by  the  sentiment  of
honour  for  the  purpose  of  fighting."

The  forms  in  which  this  affection  shews  itself  are  num-
berless. It  is  in  vain  to  address  the  understanding  of  the
patient  by  argument,  because  the  disease  consists  in  a  dis-
ordered state  of  a  corporeal  organ,  and  the  only  conse-
quence of  the  most  irresistible  demonstration  to  the  intel-
lect, would  be  a  change  of  the  object  of  terror,  but  no  al-
leviation of  the  feeling  of  painful  apprehension  itself.

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  this  organ  is  possessed  in  a  high
degree  by  those  of  the  lower  animals,  which  venture  out
only  during  night,  as  owls  and  bats,  and  also  by  those  ani-
mals which  place  sentinels  to  warn  them  of  approaching
danger,  as  the  wild  goose,  chamois,  cranes,  starlings  and
buzzards.

Among  the  lower  animals,  it  is  generally  larger  in  fe-
males than  in  males;  and  Dr  Gall  mentions  some  cu-
rious facts,  illustrative  of  the  greater  manifestation  of  the
faculty  by  the  former  than  by  the  latter.  He  happen-
ed to  kill,  says  he,  as  many  as  20  squirrels,  without  find-
ing a  single  female  among  them ;  although  it  was  not  the
season  in  which  they  are  confined  by  the  care  of  their
young.  He  caught,  during  three  years,  44  cats  in  his  gar-
den, among  which  he  found  only  5  females.    During  one


CAUTIOUSNESS.  259

winter  500  bears  were  killed  in  the  two  provinces  of  Vir-
ginia, among  which  only  2  females  were  discovered.  An
account  of  the  wolves  destroyed  in  France,  from  1st  Ja-
nuary 1816  to  1st  January  1817,  was  published  officially
by  Count  Gerardin,  Captain  of  the  Royal  Chace,  and  it
shewed  1894  males,  and  only  522  females.  Among  the
goats,  the  leader  is  always  a  female,  and  their  safety,  it
will  be  recollected,  arises  from  a  high  degree  of  circum-
spection. Among  wild  cattle,  horses,  and  other  animals
who  are  defended  by  courage,  the  leader  is  uniformly  a
male,  for  in  this  sex,  in  general,  Combativeness  is  larger.
This  fact,  of  females  in  general  being  more  cautious  than
males,  is  corroborated  by  Captain  Franklin,  in  his  Jour-
ney to  the  Arctic  Regions.  "  It  is  extraordinary,"  says  he,
"  that  although  I  made  inquiries  extensively  among  the  In-
dians, I  met  with  but  one  who  said  that  he  had  killed  a  she
bear  with  young  in  the  womb."

It  has  been  remarked,  in  the  way  of  criticism  on  these
statements,  that  more  males  are  produced  by  nature  than
females ;  which  is  quite  correct ;  but  this  excess  of  males
does  not  extend  to  the  twentieth  part  of  the  difference  in
the  number  of  their  deaths  by  violence.

The  metaphysicians  do  not  treat  of  "  fear,"  or  of  the
instinctive  tendency  to  avoid  danger,  as  an  original  prin-
ciple of  the  mind ;  but  Dr  Thomas  Brown  ranks  melan-
choly among  the  primitive  emotions,  which  is  one  of  the  ef-
fects of  this  faculty  in  a  state  of  constant  but  not  violent
activity.

The  organ  is  larger  in  the  Germans,  English,  and  Scots,
than  in  the  French ;  and  it  appears  to  be  larger  in  the  Eng-
lish than  in  the  Turkish  head.  Mr  Fo ester,  a  civil  servant
on  the  Madras  Establishment,  travelled  overland  from  Ben-
gal to  England,  in  the  year  1782,  disguised  as  a  Turk.  In
all  the  numberless  scenes  through  which  he  passed,  he  had
the  address  successfully  to  maintain  his  disguise,  except  in
one  single  instance,  in  which  he  was  detected  by  one  indi-
vidual, who  was  led  to  certainty  in  the  discovery  which  h«
*  r  2


260  CAUTIOUSNESS.

made  by  examining  the  shape  of  the  traveller's  head.  He
says,  "  a  Georgian  merchant,  who  occupied  the  room  next
to  mine,  (it  was  in  Cashmere),  and  was  a  very  agreeable
neighbour,  did  not,  I  observed,  give  a  ready  credit  to  my
story,  which  he  cross-examined  with  some  tokens  of  suspi-
cion ;  and  one  day  having  desired  to  look  at  my  head,  he
decidedly  pronounced  it  to  be  that  of  a  Christian.  In  a  fu-
ture conversation  he  explained  to  me,  and  proved  by  com-
parison, that  the  head  of  a  Christian  is  broad  behind,  and
flatted  out  at  the  crown  ; — that  a  Mahomedan's  head  grows
narrow  at  the  top,  and,  like*  monkey's,  has  a  conic  form."
(Forster's  Journey,  vol.  ii.  p.  33.)  This  description  indi-
cates Cautiousness  to  be  larger  in  the  Christian.  It  is  large
in  Bruce,  Raphael,  Hette,  the  Mummies  and  Hindoos ;
moderate  in  Belli ngh am,  Mary  Macinnes  and  Negroes.
The  difference  between  a  large  and  small  development
frequently  exceeds  an  inch  in  extent;  and  as  the  organ  is
particularly  easy  of  observation,  it  deserves  the  attention
of  beginners.

The  organ  is  ascertained.


Genus  III.— OF  THE  AFFECTIVE  FACULTIES.

IhSuperior  Sentiments.

Hitherto  we  have  considered  Man  so  far  as  he  is  animal.
But,  besides  the  organs  and  faculties  already  spoken  of,
common  to  him  with  the  brutes,  he  is  endowed  with  a  va-
riety of  sentiments,  which  constitute  the  human  character.
Of  many  of  these  the  lower  animals  appear  to  be  destitute.
The  convolutions  which  form  the  organs  of  Veneration,
Hope,  and  Conscientiousness  in  the  human  brain,  run
transversely ;  and  in  the  brains  of  the  lower  animals,  so  far.
as  I  have  observed,  no  corresponding  convolutions  appear.


CAUTIOUSNESS.


261


The  organs  of  Benevolence  and  Imitation,  however,  whieh
are  here  classed  among  the  superior  sentiments,  run  longi-
tudinally, and  corresponding  parts  are  found  in  the  brains
of  the  lower  animals.  The  faculties  now  to  be  treated  of
produce  emotions  or  feelings*

13.   HENEVOJLENCE.


This  organ  is  situated  at  the  upper  part  of  the  frontal
bone,  in  the  coronal  aspect,  and  immediately  before  the
fontanel.     The  figures  represent  the  organ  large  and  small
Jacob  Jervis.  Charib.


UUlLVl.hU  l,,.\    ,


Benevolence  mull..


One  of  Dr  Gall's  friends  frequently  said  to  him,  that,
as  he  sought  for  external  indications  of  mental  qualities,  he
ought  to  examine  the  head  of  his  servant  named  Joseph.
"  It  is  impossible,"  said  his  friend,  "  to  find  a  greater  de-
gree of  goodness  than  that  young  man  possesses.  For  more
than  ten  years  during  which  he  has  been  in  my  ser-
vice, I  have  seen  him  manifest,  on  all  occasions,  only  be-
nevolence, and  sweetness  of  disposition.  This  is  the  more
surprising,  as  he  does  not  possess  the  advantages  of  educa-
tion, and  has  grown  up  to  manhood  among  servants  of
very  inferior  habits."  Dr  Gall  adds,  that,  previous  to
that  time,  he  had  been  far  from  supposing  that  what  is
called  goodness  of  heart  could  have  any  organ  in  the  brain,
and,  consequently,  had  never  looked  for  indications  of  it  in
the  head.  The  repeated  solicitations  of  his  friend,  however,
at  length  awoke  his  curiosity.

He  immediately  recollected  the  habitual  conduct  of  a


262  BENEVOLENCE.

young  man,  whom  he  had  known  from  his  most  tender  in-
fancy, and  who  was  distinguished  from  his  numerous
brothers  and  sisters  by  his  goodness  of  heart  Although
he  was  passionately  fond  of  the  games  proper  to  his  age,  and
delighted  in  scouring  the  forests  in  search  of  birds'  nests ;
yet  no  sooner  did  any  of  his  brothers  or  sisters  become
sick,  than  an  inclination  yet  more  irresistible  kept  him  at
home,  and  drew  from  him  the  most  assiduous  attentions
towards  the  sufferer.  When  grapes,  or  apples,  or  cherries,
were  distributed  among  the  children,  his  share  was  always
the  least,  and  he  rejoiced  in  seeing  the  others  partake
more  largely  than  himself.  He  was  never  more  pleased
than  when  some  good  fortune  happened  to  those  whom  he
loved,  on  which  occasions  he  often  shed  tears  of  joy.  He
was  fond  of  taking  charge  of  sheep,  dogs,  rabbits,  pigeons
and  birds,  and  if  one  of  these  birds  happened  to  die,  he
wept  bitterly,  which  did  not  fail  to  draw  upon  him  the  ri-
dicule of  his  companions.  Up  to  the  present  time,  con-
tinues Dr  Gall,  benevolence  and  goodness  are  the  distin-
guishing characteristics  of  this  individual.  These  disposi-
tions certainly  did  not  arise  from  education;  on  the  contrary,
he  had  been  all  along  surrounded  by  those  whose  conduct  was
calculated  to  produce  the  very  opposite  results.  Dr  Gall
then  began  to  suspect,  that  what  is  called  goodness  of  heart
is  not  an  acquired,  but  an  innate,  quality  of  the  mind.

On  another  occasion,  amidst  a  very  large  family,  he
spoke  of  the  boasted  goodness  qf  heart  of  the  servant  Jo-
seph. "  Ah!"  said  the  eldest  daughter,  "  our  brother
Charles  is  exactly  like  him;  you  must  positively  examine
his  head,  I  cannot  tell  you  how  good  a  child  he  is."

"  I  had  thus  in  my  eye,"  says  Dr  Gall,  "  three  cases,  in
which  goodness  of  disposition  was  strongly  marked.  I
took  casts  of  their  heads,  placed  them  along  side  of  each
other,  and  continued  to  examine  them,  until  I  discovered  a
development  common  to  the  three.  This,  I  at  last  found,
although  the  heads  were  in  other  respects  very  differently
formed.    In  the  mean  time,  I  tried  to  find  similar  cases  in


BENEVOLENCE.  263

families,  schools,  &c.  that  I  might  be  in  a  condition  to  mul-
tiply and  correct  my  observations.  I  extended  my  investi-
gation to  animals  also,  and,  in  a  short  time,  collected  so
great  a  number  of  facta,  that  there  is  no  fundamental  qua-
lity, or  faculty,  whose  existence  is  better  established  than
that  of  Benevolence,  and  the  organ  with  which  it  is  con-
nected/'

The  faculty  produces  the  desire  of  the  happiness  of
others,  and  disposes  to  compassion  and  active  goodness*
It  is  easy  to  distinguish  kindness  flowing  from  this  senti-
ment,—from  acts  of  attention,  arising  from  Love  of  Ap-
probation, or  more  interested  motives.  A  warmth  of  man-
ner, and  directness  of  purpose,  are  communicated  by  this
faculty,  that  touch  the  mind  at  once.  We  feel  its  cha-
racter, and  recognise  it  as  genuine,  unalloyed  goodness,
aiming  at  no  end  but  the  welfare  of  its  object.  There  is,  on
the  other  hand,  an  air  of  coldness  and  constraint  attending
deeds  of  kindness,  proceeding  from  interested  motives,  be-
traying the  source  from  which  they  flow.  The  secret
spring,  and  ulterior  object,  are  apparent,  notwithstanding
the  efforts  made  to  conceal  them.  St  Paul  gives  a  beauti-
ful description  of  the  genuine  character  of  this  sentiment,
in  his  account  of  Christian  charity,  beginning,  "  Charity
sufiereth  long  and  is  kind ;  charity  envieth  not ;  charity
vaunteth  not  itself;  is  not  puffed  up."  The  good  Samari-
tan mentioned  in  Scripture,  is  a  delightful  instance  of  the
disposition  formed  by  Benevolence  when  eminently  power-
ful

This  faculty  is  a  great  source  of  happiness  to  the  posses-
sor. It  communicates  a  lively,  amiable,  delightful  tinge  to
the  impressions  received  by  the  mind  from  without.  It
produces  liberality  of  sentiment  towards  all  mankind,  a
disposition  to  love  them,  and  to  dwell  on  their  virtues  ra-
ther than  their  vices.  A  person  in  whom  this  feeling  is
strong,  rarely  complains  of  the  ingratitude  or  heartlessness
of  others.  His  goodness  provides  its  own  reward.  The
organ  appears  very  large  in  the  mask  of  Henri  Quatre.


264  BENEVOLENCE.

When  some  one  spoke  to  him  of  an  officer  of  the  League,  by
whom  he  was  not  loved,  he  replied,  "  Je  veux  luifaire  tant
de  triers  queje  leforcerai  dp  w!  aimer  malgrk  /«**."  A  person
thus  endowed  is  so  conscious  of  wishing  well  to  others,
that  he  does  not  doubt  of  their  good  will  towards  himself.
Adhesiveness  attaches  us  to  friends  and  to  country;  but
Benevolence  brings  the  whole  human  race  within  the  circle
of  our  affections.  Fenelon  exhibited  a  beautiful  manifes-
tation of  it,  when  he  said,  "  I  am  a  true  Frenchman^  and
love  my  country ;  but  I  love  mankind  better  than  my  coun-
try." It  inspired  Henri  Quatre  also,  when  he  replied  to
those  who  exhorted  him  to  rigour  towards  some  places
which  had  joined  the  League ;  "La  satisfaction  qu'on  tire  de
la  vengeance  ne  dure  qu'un  moment ;  mais  celle  qu'on  tire
de  la  clemence  est  eternelle."  The  organ  is  large,  and
very  distinctly  marked,  in  the  mask  of  Jacob  Jervis,  pre-
sented by  Dr  Abell  to  the  Phrenological  Society,  and  re-
presented on  p.  261.  That  individual  possessed  the  senti-
ment in  so  high  a  degree,  that  he  was  obliged  to  hide  him-
self when  he  saw  persons  coming  to  make  improper  soli-
citations, being  conscious  of  his  inability  to  resist  them.

It  is  a  vulgar  idea  that  this  faculty  cannot  be  manifested,
except  in  bestowing  alms  or  giving  away  money.  It  may
be  exerted  in  the  domestic  circle,  and  in  society,  in  a  thou-
sand ways,  productive  of  advantage,  without  any  idea  of  do-
nation. It  is  benevolence  to  those  with  whom  we  live,  to  or-
der our  arrangements  with  a  due  regard  to  their  comfort
and  happiness ;  not  to  deny  them  legitimate  and  proper
gratifications  of  their  own  dispositions ;  it  is  benevolence
to  suppress  our  own  humours  and  tendencies,  when  these
would  give  unnecessary  pain  to  others ;  to  restrain  Self-Es-
teem and  Destructiveness,  for  example,  in  our  commands ;
to  be  mild  and  merciful  in  our  censures ;  to  exert  our  in-
fluence and  authority  to  promote  the  welfare  of  others ;  and
one  of  the  most  benevolent  of  all  exercises,  is  to  visit  the
poor  and  vicious,  when  suffering  and  wretched,  even  with
%the  view  of  administering  only  the  pecuniary  bounty  of
others.


BENEVOLENCE.  265

Deficiency  of  Benevolence  does  not  produce  cruelty  or
any  positively  bad  sentiment ;  but  it  leads  to  regardlessness
of  the  welfare  of  others.  When  the  organ  is  small,  a
powerful  restraint  is  withdrawn  from  the  lower  propensi-
ties. In  Bellingham,  Hare,  Griffiths,  and  other  cold-
blooded and  deliberate  murderers,  the  organ  is  decidedly
deficient.  Those  in  whom  this  organ  is  less  than  Ac-
quisitiveness and  Self-Esteem,  rarely  feel  themselves  call-
ed on  to  join  in  works  of  charity,  to  contribute  to  sub-
scriptions, or  to  bestow  personal  exertions  for  the  be-
nefit of  others ;  they  generally  urge  the  apology,  that  they
have  enough  to  do  with  themselves,  and  that  nobody  ma-
nifests Benevolence  to  them.  This  last  excuse  may  be  just ;
for  it  is  in  the  nature  of  all  the  higher  sentiments  to  be
doubly  rewarded  ;  first,  in  the  enjoyment  which  attends  the
very  exercise  of  them ;  and,  secondly,  in  the  good  will  and
kindly  feeling  which  the  manifestation  of  them  generates
in  others.  Closely  connected  as  men  are  in  society,  and
dependent,  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  on  each  other  for
prosperity  and  happiness,  no  individual  can  enjoy,  or  leave
to  his  children,  a  richer  and  more  valuable  treasure,  than
the  esteem  and  affection  of  his  fellows,  founded  on  respect
and  gratitude  for  his  own  virtues  and  generosity.  Such
advantages,  indeed,  the  selfish  man  cannot  enjoy ;  for  his
conduct  excites  no  benevolence  in  others  towards  him,  and
his  selfishness  becomes  the  more  necessary,  as  he  has  cho-
sen it  as  his  stay.  When  large  Acquisitiveness  and  Self-
Esteem  are  combined  with  this  organ  small,  the  indi-
vidual will  be  an  utter  disbeliever  in  disinterested  good-
ness, and  will  regard  generosity,  which  has  no  selfish
end,  as  imbecility.  Such  a  combination,  also,  if  joined
with  much  Destructiveness,  probably  leads  its  possessors
to  doubt  of  the  benevolence  of  the  Supreme  Being.  De-
ficiency of  the  organ,  in  short,  exposes  the  mind  to  the
predominance  of  the  lower  feelings,  and  the  temper  is
then  apt  to  become  cold,  harsh,  sour  and  unhappy.  There
is  little  sympathy   with   enjoyment;    the  face  of  crea-


266  BENEVOLENCE.

tion  does  not  appear  to  smile;  moral  and  physical  objects
are  viewed  on  their  darkest  sides ;  and  if  Destructiveness
be  large,  the  mind  steels  itself,  with  malignity,  as  a  defence
against  their  imagined  evil  qualities ;  misanthropy,  in  short,
is  the  result.  The  character  of  Lucifer,  as  drawn  by  Mil-
ton, and  by  Byron  in  his  drama  of  Cain,  is  a  personifica-
tion of  great  Destructiveness  and  Intellect,  with  an  utter
destitution  of  Benevolence.

The  organ  is  small  in  tribes  of  men  remarkable  for
cruelty,  for  example,  in  the  Charibs.  In  the  representations
of  Tiberius,  Caligula,  Caracalla,  Nero,  Catherine  of
Medicis,  Christian  the  Cruel,  Danton  and  Robespiere,
says  Dr  Gall,  the  organ  is  deficient ;  while  it  is  large  in
Trajan,  Marcus  Aurelius,  Henri  Quatre,  and  other
individuals  distinguished  for  benevolent  feeling.

Benevolence,  admirable  as  it  is  in  its  own  nature,  re-
quires to  be  directed  by  Conscientiousness  and  Intellect,
otherwise  it  produces  abuses.  When  too  powerful,  and
not  so  guided,  it  leads  to  profusion.  This  kind  of  facility
is  not  the  effect  of  mere  weakness  of  reasoning  power ;  it
arises  from  an  over  ready  disposition  to  give,  without  an
adequate  motive  or  consideration,  except  the  pleasure  of
bestowing.

Benevolence  very  powerful,  with  deficient  Firmness^
may  lead  also  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  just  interests  of  the
individual,  to  the  necessities  or  cupidity  of  others.  In
short,  this  sentiment,  indulged  without  consideration,  pro-
duces the  worst  consequences;  indiscriminate  donations
to  beggars  in  the  street  encourage  profligacy;  and  com-
pulsory assessments  for  support  of  the. poor,  have  often
proved  the  parents  of  idleness  and  careless  conduct.  It
can  never  be  sufficiently  inculcated,  that  the  functions  of
the  different  faculties  of  the  mind  are  distinct,  that  those
which  feel  give  merely  an  impulse  in  general,  and  that
Nature  intended  the  direction  of  them  to  be  placed  un-.
der  the  faculties  which  reason.  Hence,  the  individual
who  instinctively  feels  a  vivid  compassion  for  every  ob-


BENEVOLENCE.  267

ject  in  distress,  ought  to  be  aware,  that  this  impulse  is
not  the  voice  of  inspiration  directing  him  to  the  mode
in  which  it  ought  to  be  indulged.  On  the  contrary,  the
stronger  the  emotion,  the  power  of  direction  is  not  un-
frequently  the  weaker;  because  the  feeling  is  in  itself
of  so  excellent  a  character,  and  so  delightful,  that  the
man  who  is  inspired  by  it  is  the  last  to  suspect  the  ne-
cessity of  much  consideration  in  regard  to  its  exercise*  On
the  other  hand,  however,  it  must  also  be  remembered,  that
the  faculties  which  reason  do  not  feel  Benevolence,  and
that,  hence,  that  individual  is  most  fitted  to  mature  wise
plans  of  charity,  to  whom  Nature  has  given  most  of  the  fa-
culty which  feels  this  emotion,  with  most  of  the  faculties
which  trace  consequences,  and  direct  it.

It  has  been  objected,  that  Nature  cannot  have  placed  a
faculty  of  Benevolence,  and  another  of  Destructiveness,  in
the  same  mind ;  but  Man  is  confessedly  an  assemblage  of
various  qualities.  The  great  modern  Novelist  speaks  of
"  the  well  known  cases  of  men  of  undoubted  benevolence
of  character  and  disposition,  whose  principal  delight  is
to  see  a  miserable  criminal,  degraded  alike  by  his  previous
crimes,  and  the  sentence  which  he  has  incurred,  conclude  a
vicious  and  a  wretched  life,  by  an  ignominious  and  cruel
death*.99  This  indicates  Benevolence  coexisting  in  the
same  individual  with  Destructiveness.  The  greatest  of
Poets  has  said, —

"  O  thou  goddess,

Thou  divine  Nature,  how  thyself  thou  blazon'st

In  these  two  princely  boys !  They  are  as  gentle

As  zephyrs,  blowing  below  the  violet,

Not  wagging  his  sweet  head ;  and  yet  as  rough,

Their  royal  blood  enchafPd,  as  the  rud'st  wind,

That  by  the  top  doth  take  the  mountain-pine,

And  make  him  stoop  to  the  vale."

Here  Shakspiaee  informs  us,  that  these  boys  manifested

•  St  Ronan's  WelL


268  BENEVOLENCE.

much  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness,  combined  with
great  Benevolence.  The  sword  is  one  of  the  emblems  of
State,  and  what  is  it  but  the  symbol  of  destruction  ready  to
fall  on  the  heads  of  those  who  offend  against  the  laws  ?—
ministering  thus,  in  its  very  severity,  to  purposes  of  Bene-
volence and  Justice*  What  are  the  implements  of  war  but
instruments  of  destruction ;  and  for  what  end  do  soldiers
take  the  field,  but  to  destroy  their  enemies  ?  And  yet,  sur-
geons and  numerous  assistants  attend  on  armies,  to  succour
those  on  whom  the  calamities  of  war  have  fallen  ;  the  two
faculties,  which  are  deemed  incompatible,  being  thus  mani-
fested together,  with  deliberate  design.  Without  Comba-
tiveness and  De8tructivenes8  there  would  be  no  war ;  and
without  Benevolence,  if  these  existed,  there  would  be  nei-
ther mercy  nor  compassion.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  co-
existence of  these  faculties  forming  an  objection  to  the
phrenological  system,  it  proves  its  harmony  with  nature/

Dr  Gall  refers,  not  only  the  feeling  of  benevolence,  but
the  sentiment  of  justice,  to  the  faculty  now  under  consi-
deration. "  The  reader  will  remember,"  says  he,  "  that  I
could  not  discover  the  functions  of  the  different  organs,  ex-
cept when  I  met  with  them  in  a  state  of  extreme  develop-
ment, and  when,  consequently,  the  faculties  were  mani-
fested with  excessive  energy.  A  mental  power,  in  a  state
of  high  excitement,  sometimes  exhibits  a  character  quite
different  in  appearance  from  its  ordinary  form  of  manifes-
tation. Libertinism  is  the  consequence  of  over  activity  of
Amativeness,  and  theft  of  Acquisitiveness.  It  is  the  same
with  Benevolence.  The  individuals  who  had  become  re-
markable on  account  of  uncommon  goodness  of  heart,  pre-
sented an  extreme  development  of  the  organ  in  question.
Consequently,  Goodness,  Benevolence,  Sensibility  to  Dis-
tress, are  not  the  primitive  destination,  or  ordinary  func-
tion of  this  organ ;  but  the  manifestation  of  its  exalted  con-
dition. Benevolence,  therefore,  is  something  more  than
the  primitive  function  of  the  organ  from  which  it  proceeds.
What  is  the  original  sentiment  ?     It  being  extremely  diffi-


BENEVOLENCE.  869

cult  to  make  positive  observations  on  the  fundamental  des-
tination of  an  organ,  I  am  obliged,"  continues  Dr  Gall,
"  to  resort  to  reasoning ;  and  I  think  there  are  plausible
grounds  for  holding,  that  the  primitive  tendency  connected
with  this  organ  is  that  which  disposes  man  to  conduct  suit-
able to  the  maintenance  of  social  order :  I  call  it  the  Moral
Sense,  the  sentiment  of  Justice  and  Injustice"  He  proceeds
with  a  variety  of  arguments,  and  arrives  at  the  conclusion,
that  Benevolence  "  n'est  qu'  un  degre  d'action  plus  &eve  du
sens  moral  V

Dr  Spurzheim  dissents  from  this  view,  and  holds  Con-
scientiousness to  be  a  distinct  sentiment,  of  which  he  has
discovered  and  established  the  organ ;  although  it  was  not
admitted  by  Dr  Gall.  There  are  only  two  ways  of  set-
tling this  dispute ;  the  one  by  metaphysical  analysis  of  the
feeling,  and  the  other  by  observation  of  the  organ.  The
result  of  both  appears  to  me  to  be  in  favour  of  Dr  Spurz-
heim.— I  shall  revert  to  the  subject  when  treating  of  the  or-
gan of  Conscientiousness.

In  another  point,  also,  in  regard  to  this  organ,  Dr
Spurzheim  differs  from  Dr  Gall,  and  apparently  on  good
grounds.  "  An  opinion  of  Dr  Gall's,"  says  he*  "  of  which
I  cannot  approve,  is,  that  Benevolence  may  degenerate
into  bad  temper,  and  into  the  propensity  to  rejoice  in  the
evil  that  happens  to  others,  in  the  same  way  as  the  sense
of  taste  may  degenerate  into  disgust  at  food,  physical  love
into  aversion  to  the  other  sex,  and  the  sense  of  melody  to
aversion  to  music.  The  inactivity  of  Benevolence,  or  its
exhausted  state,  may  produce  indifference  to  its  functions,
and  make  us  avoid  any  opportunity  of  doing  beneficent  ac-
tions ;  but  active  wickedness,  and  pleasure  in  the  pains  of
others,  like  cruelty,  depend  on  inferior  feelings,  unaccom-
panied by  superior  sentiments  f ."

This  organ  is  found  in  the  lower  animals,  and  when  it  is

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  ¥]%  et  sequen.
t  Phrenology,  p.  190.

1


270  BENEVOLENCE,

largely  developed,  they  are  mild  and  docile;  whereas,  when
it  is  deficient,  they  are  vicious,  ill-natured,  and  intractable.
Dr  Gall  gives  some  interesting  illustrations  of  this  fact.
The  head  of  the  tiger,  says  he,  is  more  flat  at  this  part  than
that  of  the  1km ;  and  the  heads  of  the  hyaena  and  wolf  are
more  depressed  than  that  of  the  dog.  The  organ  is  greatly
depressed  immediately  above  the  level  of  the  eyes,  in  the
baboon ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  elevated  in  the  ouran-
outang;  and  the  dispositions  of  all  these  animals  are  in  ac-
cordance with  their  development.  In  the  horse,  the  organ
is  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  a  little  above  the
eyes.  When  this  region  is  hollow  and  narrow,  a  horse  is
invariably  vicious,  and  disposed  to  bite  and  to  kick.  In
mild  and  good  natured  horses,  on  the  contrary,  this  part
stands  as  far  out  as  the  eyes,  or  even  farther.  The  driver
of  a  cabriolet  of  Neuilly,  says  Dr  Gall,  bought,  at  a  low
price,  a  horse  which  nobody  could  use  on  account  of  its  ex-
treme bad  temper ;  but  it  was  an  excellent  runner.  In  the
first  week  it  bit  off  two  of  the  driver's  fingers,  and  one  of
his  ears.  He  attempted  to  correct  it  by  redoubled  blows,
but  these  rendered  it  only  more  vicious.  He  then  resolved
to  try  the  effect  of  gentle  treatment,  and  this  succeeded  to  a-
certain  degree.  The  organ  in  question  was  very  small  in  this
animal ;  and  the  same  conformation  will  be  found  in  all
horses  which  require  to  be  muzzled,  to  prevent  them  from
biting.  On  one  occasion,  a  gentleman  in  the  country  men-
tioned at  his  dinner-table  that  he  had  two  horses,  one  ex-
tremely mild,  and  the  other  very  vicious,  in  temper.  They
were  brought  out  into  the  stable-yard,  and  by  examining
their  heads,  according  to  Dr  Gall's  directions,  I  pointed
out  each,  without  having  previously  seen  them.  The  dif-
ference was  so  great,  that  several  persons  who  were  pre-
sent recognised  it,  the  moment  they  were  told  where  to
look  for  it  I  have  seen  this  experiment  repeated  with  in-
variable success.

The  same  rule  holds  in  regard  to  dogs.    Dr  Gall  saved
two  puppies  of  a  litter  of  five,  and  watched  their  disposi-


BENEVOLENCE.  271

tioBS  with  the  closest  attention*  Even  before  their  eyes
were  opened  he  remarked  a  great  difference  between  them ;
one  of  them,  when  taken  into  the  hand,  testified,  by  its  ges-
tures, that  it  was  pleased ;  the  other  growled,  whined,  and
straggled  till  it  was  put  down.  Scarcely  were  they  fifteen
days  old,  when  one  indicated,  by  the  motions  of  its  tail,
contentment  and  gentleness,  not  only  towards  other  little
dogs,  but  to  persons  who  approached  it ;  the  other,  on  the
contrary,  never  ceased  to  grumble,  and  to  bite  every  one
within  its  reach.  Aware  how  much  was  attributed  to  edu-
cation, Dr  Gall  charged  those  who  habitually  approached
these  animals  to  bestow  equal  caresses  on  each.  He  him-
self took  the  greatest  pains  to  soften  the  disposition  of  the
ill-natured  one,  but  nothing  could  change  its  character.  It
bit  even  its  mother,  if  she  chanced  to  incommode  it.  In
the  sixth  month,  the  dogs  were  seized  with  distemper,  and
with  whatever  degree  of  gentleness  they  were  treated,  the
one  never  ceased  to  growl  and  bite,  till  death  put  an  end
to  its  efforts;  while  the  other,  on  the  contrary,  till  its  last
moment,  gave  the  most  striking  marks  of  attachment  and
gratitude  to  those  who  took  charge  of  it.  Even  the  servants
<were  forcibly  struck  with  the  difference  in  the  dispositions
of  these  animals.  Dr  Gall  states,  that  the  difference  in
their  heads  was  equally  conspicuous.

In  observing  this  organ  in  the  lower~animals,  it  is  neces-
sary to  be  acquainted  with  the  osteology  of  their  skulls,  to
be  able  correctly  to  distinguish  its  place.  In  some  of  them,
the  elephant,  the  sow,  &c.  the  two  tables  of  the  skull  are
not  parallel  at  this  part,  and  hence  the  size  of  the  organ  in
them  cannot  be  ascertained,  except  by  dissection.  In  the
bull  and  cow,  the  inner  table  is  separated  to  some  distance
from  the  external  table,  but  the  two  tables  are  parallel  in
the  region  of  this  organ,  and  on  this  account  its  size  may
be  judged  of  during  life.  The  same  is  the  case,  says  Dr
Gall,  with  the  cat*.

"  There  are  examples,"  says  Dr  Spurzheim,  "  on  record,

"  Sur  let  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  327.


272  BENEVOLENCE.

where  animals  have  shewn  high  degrees  of  benevolence  to
others,  and  even  to  man*  A  respectable  family  in  Paris
told  me,  that  they  had  a  horse  and  a  cow  living  together  in
the  same  stable ;  that  the  horse  several  times  got  untied,
went  to  the  corner  where  the  sack  of  oats  stood,  and  drew
it  in  his  teeth  near  the  cow;  probably  to  make  her  partake
of  the  good  cheer.  Many  dogs  also  exhibit  the  same  feel-
ing. Dupont  de  Nemours  saw  a  swallow  caught  by  one
foot  in  the  noose  of  a  pack-thread,  attached  to  the  roof  of
the  French  Institute  at  Paris*  The  prisoner  screamed,  and
attracted  all  the  swallows  of  the  neighbourhood.  After  a
long  and  tumultuous  consultation,  a  great  number  formed
a  line,  one  after  another,  darted  at  the  pack-thread  with
their  bills,  and  in  half  an  hour  delivered  the  captive  *."

Some  incidents  of  a  similar  nature  have  happened  in  this
country.  Dr  Millar  favoured  me  with  the  following
statement : — "  The  Reverend  Dr  Wodrow,  late  of  Steven-
ston  in  Ayrshire,  when  clergyman  of  Donlop,  a  parish  in
the  same  county,  narrates  a  curious  fact,  concerning  swal-
lows, in  a  letter  to  his  relative,  Mrs  Thomson  of  Edin-
burgh."— "  At  Dunlop  manse,  says  he,  in  a  very  dry  sum-
mer, one  of  their  nests,  attached  to  the  corner  of  the  par-
lour window,  fell  down,  aftd  lay  on  the  window-sill,  with-
out any  damage  done  either  to  the  nest  or  its  helpless  inha-
bitants, four  or  five  young  ones.  It  was  a  few  minutes  be-
fore breakfast,  when  I  observed  the  accident;  and  soon  af-
ter it  happened,  I  went  out  and  carefully  placed  it  on  the
top  of  a  cut  hedge,  and  I  waited  to  see  the  event.  It  was
pleasant  to  see  the  young  ones  fed  at  proper  intervals,  and,
at  the  same  time,  a  great  number  of  other  swallows  jointly
and  busily  employed,  in  a  warm  summer  morning,  in
building  a  new  nest  in  the  same  place  with  the  former ;
some  of  them  bringing  clay,  straws,  &c. :  others  making
use  of  these  materials;  others  dipping  themselves  into  an
open  well,  and  plashing  the  walls  of  the  nest,  and  all  of
them  cheering  one  another  to  the  useful  work.     In  two

•  Phrenology,  p.  118.


BENEVOLENCE.  273

hours  the  new  nest  was  completely  finished,  and  then  the
young  ones  were  carried  through  the  air  under  the  wings
of  one,  sometimes  two,  old  swallows,  and  safely  placed  in
their  lodging;  after  which  the  noise  and  cheering  of  the
troop  ceased."  Dr  Poole  also  stated  to  me,  that  a  cat  hav-
ing seized  a  young  sparrow,  a  flock  of  these  birds  perceiv-
ing it,  attacked  the  cat,  fastened  on  its  back,  pecked  and
flapped  till  they  made  it  let  go  its  hold,  and  rescued  the  in-
tended victim*  This  happened  in  a  garden  behind  St  John
Street,  Edinburgh,  and  was  witnessed  by  a  neighbour  of
Dr  Poole's,  who  communicated  the  circumstance  to  him.
Dogs  also  are  known  to  precipitate  themselves  into  the  wa-
ter, to  save  persons  in  danger  of  being  drowned ;  and  they
attack  with  fury  assassins  who  assail  their  masters.

I  have  mentioned  before,  that  stimulating  liquors,  by  ex-
citing the  organs,  give  energy  to  the  feelings  or  propensi-
ties which  depend  on  them  for  the  means  of  manifestation.
Some  individuals  become  excessively  profuse  when  intoxi-
cated. They  would  then  give  the  world  away ;  or,  if  they
had  the  power,  they  would  create  a  new  one,  in  which
every  individual  should  enjoy  infinite  happiness.  On  the
principle,  that  intoxication  can  never  create  any  feeling,
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  such  persons  have  naturally  a
large  endowment  of  Benevolence,  the  organ  of  which  is
stimulated  to  this  great  activity  by  strong  potations.  This,
however,  is  only  a  conjecture.

This  organ  is  liable  to  excessive  excitement  by  disease.
Dr  Gall  mentions  the  case  of  a  hussar,  who  had  always
manifested  great  benevolence  of  disposition,  and  subsequent-
ly became  insane.  He  gave  away  all  his  clothes,  and  left
himself  absolutely  naked ;  he  never  ceased  repeating  that
he  wished  to  make  every  one  happy,  and  he  introduced  into
all  his  projects  of  beneficence  the  Holy  Trinity.  In  his
head  the  organs  of  Benevolence  and  Veneration  were  ex-
tremely developed.  Idiots  in  whom  this  organ  is  largely
developed  are  good-natured  and  harmless;  while  those  in


274


BENEVOLENCE.


whom  it  is  small,  if  Destructiveness  be  large,  are  mischie-
vous and  wicked.

The  Scotch  metaphysicians  in  general  admit  the  existence
of  this  sentiment,  hut  Hobbes,  and  many  other  metaphy-
sical writers,  who  resolve  all  our  actions  into  selfishness,
deny  it.  Dr  Thomas  Brown  successfully  and  beautifully
answers  the  objection,  that  we  are  selfish  even  in  our  feel-
ings of  good-will.  "  The  analysis  of  Love,"  says  he,  "  as
a  complex  feeling,  presents  to  us  always  two  elements ;  a
vivid  delight  in  the  contemplation  of  the  object,  and  a  de-
sire of  good  to  that  object.  Though  we  cannot,  then,  when
there  is  no  interfering  passion,  think  of  the  virtues  of  others
without  pleasure,  and  must  therefore,  in  loving  virtue,  love
what  is  by  its  own  nature  pleasing,  the  love  of  the  virtue  which
cannot  exist  without  the  pleasure,  is  surely  an  affection  very
different  from  the  love  of  the  mere  pleasure  existing,  if  it
had  been  possible  for  it  to  exist,  without  the  virtue, — a  plea-
sure that  accompanies  the  virtue  only,  as  the  soft  or  brilli-
ant colouring  of  nature  flows  from  the  great  orb  above, — a
gentle  radiance  that  is  delightful  to  our  eyes,  indeed,  and  to
our  heart,  but  which  leads  our  eye  upward  to  the  splendid
source  from  which  it  flows,  and  our  heart  still  higher,  to
that  Being  by  whom  the  sun  was  made  *."


14. — VENERATION.


This  organ  is  situated  at  the  middle  of  the  coronal  as-
pect of  the  brain,  at  the  bregma  or  fontanel  of  anatomists.
The  figures  represent  it  large  and  small.

Skull  in  Dr  Gall's  Collection.  Dr  Hette.


niitl  L'irmm  3  <l<itili-!Lt-


IlcnrvoJencc  and  Kirimitv,  LtTTTf,
arnl  YL-ncr.iLloil  dfSCt&ri*


•  lecture  59.


VENERATION.  875

Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  account  of  the  discovery  of
this  organ.  His  Bather's  family  consisted  of  ten  children,
who  all  received  the  same  education,  but  their  talents  and
dispositions  were  very  dissimilar.  One  of  his  brothers  ma-
nifested from  infancy  a  strong  tendency  towards  religion.
"  Ses  jouets  6taient  des  vases  cflglise  qu'il  sculptoit  lai-
meme,  des  chasubles  et  des  surplk  qu'il  faisait  avec  du  pa-
pier." He  was  constantly  engaged  in  prayer,  and  in  saying
mass,  and  when  obliged  to  be  absent  from  church,  he  spent
his  time  in  ornamenting  and  gilding  a  crucifix  of  wood.
His  father  had  intended  him  for  a  merchant,  but  he  himself
disliked  that  occupation,  because,  said  he,  it  exposed  him  to
die  necessity  of  lying.  At  the  age  of  twenty-three  years
he  abandoned  merchandise;  and  having  lost  all  hope  of  be-
ing then  able  to  pursue  the  studies  requisite  for  the  Church,
he  fled  from  his  father's  house  and  became  a  hermit.  His
father  then  allowed  him  to  study ;  at  the  end  of  five  years
he  took  orders,  and  continued,  till  the  period  of  his  death,
to  live  in  the  exercise  of  devotion  and  the  practice  of  pe-


Dr  Gall  farther  remarked,  that,  in  schools,  some  of  the
children  took  no  interest  in  religious  instruction,  whilst
others  received  it  with  avidity ;  also,  that  those  individuals
in  the  classes,  who  voluntarily  devoted  themselves  to  the
Church,  were  either  studious,  pious,  virtuous,  and  honour-
able young  men,  or  idlers  of  the  worst  description,  indolent,
and  totally  destitute  of  talent  The  latter,  be  observes,  ob-
viously had  no  other  aim  than  that  of  living  at  the  expense
of  their  fellow  citizens ;  while  the  former  felt  a  lively  in-
terest in  the  vocation  to  which  they  aspired.  This  com-
mendable feeling  sprung  up  in  them,  says  he,  nobody  knew
how,  and  it  certainly  was  not  attributable  to  example  or
education*  or  the  circumstances  in  which  they  had  been
placed ;  for  many  of  them  had  embraced  the  profession  of
the  Church,  even  contrary  to  the  intention  of  their  parents
and  guardians.  These  facts  convinced  him  that  the  dispo-
sition to  religion  is  innate.

s  2


276  VENERATION*

At  a  later  period,  no  sooner  had  he  fixed  his  attention  t>n
some  of  the  primitive  qualities  of  mind,  than  he  recollected
these  observations  made  in  his  youth,  and  immediately  exa-
mined the  heads  of  persons  eminent  for  devotion.  He  vi-
sited the  churches  of  every  sect,  and  particularly  observed
the  heads  of  individuals  who  prayed  with  the  greatest  fer-
vour, or  who  were  the  most  completely  absorbed  in  their
religious  contemplations.  The  result  was  the  establish-
ment of  the  part  of  the  brain  in  question  as  the  organ  of
Veneration.

Catholic  countries  afford  particularly  favourable  opportu-
nities for  siyh  observations.  Dr  Bright,  a  traveller  in
Lower  Hungary,  informs  us,  that,  in  Vienna,  "  The
churches  are  almost  constantly  open,  and  enter  them  when
you  will,  servants,  who  have  been  sent  on  errands,  are  seen
kneeling  before  the  altars  or  the  images,  with  their  baskets
or  parcels  by  their  sides.  Thus  prayer,  by  its  frequency,
becomes  a  habit  and  recreation,  rather  than  the  perfor-
mance of  a  duty ;  and  I  have  often  been  truly  astonished
to  observe,  in  the  coldest  weather,  little  children,  when  far
from  the  restraints  of  their  parents,  fall  down  upon  their
knees  before  the  images  which  adorn  many  of  the  corners
of  the  streets  and  passages  in  Vienna,  and  there  remain
fixed  for  severtd  minutes,  as  in  serious  devotion  V*  I  have
observed  similar  facts  in  Catholic  cities  on  the  Continent.

The  function  of  the  faculty  is  to  produce  the  sentiment
of  Veneration  in  general ;  or  an  emotion  of  profound  and
reverential  respect,  on  perceiving  an  object  at  once  great
and  good.  It  is  the  source  of  natural  religion,  and  of  that
tendency  to  worship  a  superior  power,  which  manifests  it*
self  in  every  nation  yet  discovered.  The  faculty,  however,
produces  merely  an  emotion,  and  does  not  form  ideas  of  the
object  to  which  it  ought  to  be  directed ;  and  hence,  if  no  re-
velation have  reached  the  individual,  and  if  the  under-
standing be  extremely  limited,  the  unfortunate  being  may

•  Pages  43,  44.


VENERATION.  277

worship  the  genius  of  the  storm,  the  sun,  as  the  source  of
light,  heat,  and  vegetable  life ;  or,  if  more  debased  in  intel-
lect, he  may  worship  brutes,  and  stocks,  and  stones ;

"  Lo  !  the  poor  Indian,  whose  untutored  mind,
"  Sees  God  in  clouds,  or  hears  him  in  the  wind."

The  organ  is  large  in  Negroes,  and  also  in  Mary  Mao
innes,  who  was  extremely  prone  to  superstition.

It  has  been  objected,  that,  if  an  organ  and  faculty  of  Ve-
neration exist,  revelation  was  unnecessary.  But  Dr  Gall
has  well  answered,  that  the  proposition  ought  to  be  exactly
reversed,  for  unless  a  natural  capacity  of  feeling  religious
emotion  had  been  previously  bestowed,  revelation  would
have  been  as  unavailing  to  man  as  it  would  be  to  the  lower
animals;  while,  if: a  mere  general  feeling  of  devotion,  or
an  instinctive  but  blind  tendency  to  worship,  which  Vene-
ration truly  is,  was  given,  nothing  was  more  reasonable
than  to  add  instruction  how  it  ought  to  be  directed.  Dr
Gall  observes,  farther,  that  the  existence  of  the  organ  is  an
indirect  proof  of  the  existence  of  God.  Destructiveness  is
implanted  in  the  mind,  and  animals  exist  around  us  to  be
killed  for  our  nourishment :  Adhesiveness  and  Philopro-
genitiveness  are  given,  and  friends  and. children  are  pro-
vided as  objects  on  whom  they,  may  be  exercised :  Benevo-
lence is  conferred,  on  us,  and  the  poor  and  unhappy,  on
whom  it  may  shed  its  soft  influence,  are  everywhere  pre-
sent with  us;  in  like  manner,  the  instinctive  tendency  to
worship  is  implanted  in  the  mind,  and,  conformably  to
these  analogies  of  nature,  we  may.  reasonably  infer  that  a
God  exists  whom  we  may  adore.

The  organ  is  possessed  by  all  men,  but  in  different  de-
grees by  different  persons  :  and,  on  the  principle,  that  the
natural  power  of  experiencing  an  emotion  bears  a  propor-
tion to  the  size  of  its  organ,  every  sane  individual  will
be  naturally  capable  of  joining  in  religious  worship;  but
the  glow  of  devotional  feeling  experienced  by  each,  will
be  greater  or  less  in  intensity,  according  to  the  developr
ment  of  this  part  of  his  brain.    The  difference  in  the  feel-


278  VENERATION.

ing  k  certain,  independently  of  Phrenology,  00  that  this
science  only  reveals  the  relation  between  its  intensity  and
the  size  of  the  organ.

The  organ  is  large  in  King  Robert  Bruce,  who,  it  is
mentioned  in  History,  was  strongly  alive  to  religious  feel-
ings, and  ordered  his  heart  to  be  carried  to  the  Holy  Land,
because  he  had  not  been  able  to  fulfil  a  vow  to  visit  it  in  per-
son. It  is  large  also  in  Raphael,  and  the  subjects  which
chiefly  occupied  his  pencil  were  connected  with  devotion
and  the  Church.

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that,  in  the  portraits  of  Saints  re-
markable fcr  devotional  feeling,  this  organ  is  represented
as  large,  and  that  the  same  configuration  of  head  has  been
given  by  the  ancient  artists  to  their  High  Priests,  It  is
large  in  the  portraits  of  Constantino  Marcus  Aurelius,
St  Ambrose,  Charles  I.  of  England,  and  Malebranche.
It  is  also  greatly  developed  in  philosophers  and  poets  who
are  distinguished  for  piety,  as  in  Newton,  Milton,  and
Klopstock  ;  while  it  is  flat  in  the  head  of  Spinosa,  who
professed  atheism.  The  same  configuration  is  found  in  the
heads  of  Christ,  represented  by  Raphael.  In  these,  the
parts  behind  the  ear,  or  the  organs  common  to  man  and  the
lower  animals,  are  small ;  whereas  the  organs,  situated  in
the  forehead  and  in  the  coronal  region,  connected  with  in-
tellect and  the  moral  sentiments,  are  very  large.  This  or-
ganisation indicates  great  intellectual  penetration*  with
exalted  Benevolence  and  Veneration.  Dr  Gall  puts  the
question,  Has  this  divine  form  of  head  been  invented,  or
may  we  presume  that  it  is  a  faithful  copy  of  the  original  ?
It  is  possible,  says  be,  that  die  artists  may  have  imitated
the  heads  of  the  most  virtuous,  just,  and  benevolent  men
whom  they  eeuld  fiad,  and  thence  drawn  the  character  of
the  head  of  Christ.  In  this  case,  the  observation  of  the
artists  coincides  with  that  of  Dr  Gall, — a  circumstance
which  either  supposes  a  kind  of  presentiment  of  Organology
on  their  part,  or  an  accuracy  of  observation  scarcely  ad-


VENERATION.  279

missible.  He  considers  it  more  probable,  that  the  general
type,  at  least,  of  the  head  of  Christ  has  been  transmitted
to  us*  St  Luke  was  a  painter,  and  how  should  he  (ail  to
preserve  the  features  of  his  Master?  It  is  certain  that  this
form  of  the  head  of  Christ  is  of  a  very  high  antiquity.  It
is  found  in  the  most  ancient  pictures  and  specimens  of
mosaic  work.  The  Gnostics  of  the  second  century  pos-
sessed images  of  Christ  and  of  St  Paul;  hence  Dr  Gall
concludes,  that  neither  Raphael  nor  any  other  artist  has
invented  this  admirable  configuration  *•

The  metaphysicians  in  general  do  not  admit  Veneration
as  an  original  emotion ;  they  trace  the  belief  in  God  to  the
perceptions  of  the  understanding.  We  perceive  order,
beauty,  power,  wisdom,  harmony,  in  the  works  of  Creation,
$md  infer  from  these  qualities  that  a  supreme  creating  and
directing  Mind  exists.  In  this  view  the  phrenologists  con-
cur: the  understanding,  however,  only  perceives  facts  and
draws  inferences,  but  does  not  feel  emotions;  and,  there-
fore, after  this  deduction  was  completed,  it  would  experi-
ence no  tendency  to  adore  the  God  whom  it  had  discovered.
Now,  in  point  of  fact,  the  tendency  to  worship  is  a  stronger
principle  than  the  understanding  itself;  for  the  most  igno-
rant and  stupid  are  prone  to  venerate,  while  their  intellects
are  incapable  of  directing  them  to  an  object  worthy  of  their
homage*  Under  the  influence  of  a  blind  Veneration,  men
cut  branches  from  trees,  and  fall  down  and  worship  them ;
or  they  adore  monsters  and  reptiles  as  deities, — facts  which
were  utterly  inexplicable,  till  Phrenology  pointed  out  an
instinctive  tendency  to  venerate,  altogether  apart  from  un-
derstanding. This  tendency  is  produced  by  the  faculty  in
question,  and  it  is  a  great  omission  of  the  old  philosophers,
that  no  such  power  is  to  be  found  in  their  systems*

Hitherto  we  have  considered  Veneration  only  when  di-
rected to  religion,  which  is  undoubtedly  its  noblest  end;

•  Sur  les  Fractions  duCerveau,  tome  v.  p.  369.  See  also  a  Brief  Notice
of  some  Ancient  Coins  and  Medals,  as  illustrating  the  Progress  of  Chris-
tianity, by  the  Rev.  R,  Walsh,  LL.D.  Chaplain  to  the  Embassy  at
Constantinople.


280  VENERATION.

but  it  has  also  many  other  objects,  and  a  wide  sphere  of
activity,  in  the  present  world.  It  produces  the  feeling  of
deference  and  respect  in  general ;  and  hence  may  be  di-
rected to  every  object  that  6eems  worthy  of  such  regard.
In  children,  it  is  a  chief  ingredient  in  filial  piety,  and
produces  that  soft  and  almost  holy  reverence  with  which  a
child  looks  up  to  his  parent  as  the  author  of  his  days,  the
protector  of  his  infancy,  and  the  guide  of  his  youth.  A
child  in  whom  this  organ  is  small,  may,  if  Benevolence  and
Adhesiveness  be  large,  entertain  great  affection  for  his  pa-
rent as  a  friend ;  but,  in  his  habitual  intercourse,  there  will
be  little  of  that  deferential  respect  which  is  the  grand  fea-
ture of  the  mind,  when  the  organ  is  large.  Children  who
are  prone  to  rebellion,  little  attentive  to  command,  and  re-
gardless of  authority,  will  generally  be  found  to  have  Self-
Esteem  large,  and  this  organ  proportionally  deficient.

Veneration  leads  to  deference  for  superiors  in  rank  as
well  as  in  years ;  and  prompts  to  the  reverence  of  authority.
This  organ  is  generally  largely  developed  in  the  Asiatic
head,  and  the  tendency  to  obedience  is  strong  in  the  peo-
ple of  that  quarter  of  the  globe.  Indeed,  the  hereditary
slavery  which  has  descended  among  them  through  so  many
generations,  may  be  connected  with  the  prevalence  of  this
disposition.

A  lady  who  is  in  the  habit  of  examining  the  heads  of
servants  before  hiring  them,  told  me,  that  she  has  found,
by  experience,  that  those  in  whom  Veneration  is  large,  are
the  most  deferential  and  obedient ;  and  that  one  with  large
Combativencss  and  Destructiveness,  and  small  Veneration,
became  angry  and  abusive,  when  her  conduct  was  censured.
This  occurred,  even  although  Love  of  Approbation  and  Con-
scientiousness were  both  large ;  but  the  passion  speedily
subsided,  and  was  followed  by  self-reproach  and  repentance.
If  Veneration  also  had  been  large,  it  would  have  produced
that  instinctive  feeling  of  respect,  which  would  have  ope-
rated as  instantaneously  as  Combativcness  and  Destructive-
ncsff,  and  restrained  the  ebullitions.


VENERATION.  281

Veneration  may  also  produce  respect  for  titles,  rank  and
power ;  for  a  long  line  of  ancestry,  or  mere  wealth ;  and  it
frequently  manifests  itself  in  one  or  other  of  these  forms,
when  it  does  not  appear  in  religious  fervour.  Individuals
in  whom  Love  of  Approbation  and  Veneration  are  very
large,  and  Conscientiousness  and  intellect  not  in  proportion,
venerate  persons  of  higher  rank  than  their  own,  and  are
fond  of  their  society.  Persons  of  rank,  who  do  not  possess
high  virtues  or  talents,  are  fondest  of  the  society  of  those
in  whom  this  combination  occurs.  It  inspires  its  possessor
with  an  habitual  deference  towards  them,  which  is  felt  as  a
constant  homage.  On  occasion  of  King  George  the  Fourth's
visit 'to  Scotland  in  1822,  some  individuals  experienced  the
profoundest  emotion  of  awe  and  respect  on  beholding  him ;
while  others  were  not  conscious  of  any  similar  excitement,
but  were  surprised  at  what  appeared  to  them  to  be  the  ex-
aggerated enthusiasm  of  the  first.  I  examined  the  heads
of  several  of  both  classes,  and,  in  the  former,  found  the  or-
gan of  sVeneration  uniformly  larger,  in  proportion  to  the
other  organs,  than  in  the  latter.

This  faculty  is  likewise  the  source  of  the  profound  awe
which  some  persons  feel  in  visiting  ancient  temples,  gothic
cathedrals,  and  places  of  sepulture  for  the  illustrious  dead.
It  gives  reverence  for  church-yards,  and  other  burial-places
of  our  ancestors.  A  person  in  whom  it  is  small  experi-
ences a  feeble  influence,  even  from  Westminster  Abbey
and  the  monuments  of  departed  genius  there  preserved.
This  sentiment  is  one  ingredient  in  the  tendency  to  anti-
quarianism,  and  the  love  of  old  coins.

Veneration,  like  other  powers,  is  liable  to  abuse.  When
not  subjected  to  the  guidance  of  Reflection  and  Conscien-
tiousness, it  produces  a  bigoted  respect  for  old  customs  and
absurd  institutions,  if  only  sanctified  by  time ;  and  a  blind
tendency  to  admire  the  wisdom  of  our  ancestors,  beyond  its
real  worth.  It  gives  reverence  for  great  names  and  autho-
rities in  religion  and  philosophy,  and  thus  often  presents  a
strong  obstacle  to  the  progress  of  truth.    This  kind  of  Ve-


282  VENERATION.

Deration  maintains  every  unenlightened  devotee  in  a  state
of  bigoted  subjection  to  bis  priests :  an  emotion  of  profound
and  sanctified  respect  springs  np  in  his  mind  on  contem-
plating the  doctrines  which  they  have  instilled  into  him  in
his  youth)  and  every  suggestion  of  the  understanding,  in  op-
position to  this  feeling)  is  expelled  as  profane.  In  short,
Veneration,  when  vigorous  and  blind,  produces  complete
prostration  of  the  will  and  the  intellect  to  the  object  to
whom  it  is  directed;  and,  even  in  our  own  country,  it
frequently  holds  back  the  march  of  improvement  The
Holy  Allies  were  bent  upon  cultivating  this  sentiment  to
the  highest  possible  degree  in  their  subjects,  and  prostra-
ting reason ;  they  encouraged  monks,  processions,  and  su-
perstitious observances,  while  they  banished  philosophers
and  excluded  works  of  science.  If  it  had  been  possible  to
succeed,  these  Sovereigns  would  have  rendered  their  people
blind  worshippers  of  their  own  power,  and  trained  them
to  bow  in  humble  subserviency  to  their  will.  The  Spaniards
are  a  noble  people,  but,  while  their  intellects  have  been
shackled  for  many  centuries,  Veneration  has  been  cultivated
to  an  extravagant  height,  and  misdirected,  in  consequence
of  which  they  have  fallen  into  a  benighted  and  superstitious
condition.

Tins  faculty,  when  unenlightened,  produces  every  kind
of  superstition,  as  worshipping  beasts,  and  stocks  and
stones.  The  Negroes,  Indians,  and  even  the  Hindoos,  have
a  poor  intellectual  development,  compared  with  Europeans,
and  their  superstitions  are  more  gross*  Socrates  did  not
participate  in  the  absurd  superstitions  of  Greece,  and  in  the
ancient  busts  of  him,  he  is  represented  with  a  splendid
forehead  *•

Defect  of  Veneration  does  not  produce  profanity,  but
only  indifference  to  religious  sentiments,  and  little  reve-
rence for  power  and  ancestry.  I  have  found  Veneration
large  in  the  head  of  the  genuine  Tory, — in  him  who  really
delights  in  contemplating  kings  and  nobles,  and  regards

•  A  copy  of  his  bust  will  be  found  in  the  Phrenological  Hall.


VENERATION.  283

them  as  invested  with  a  degree  of  sanctity  by  a  long  line  of
descent,  and  the  possession  of  hereditary  authority.  In  the
genuine  Whig  or  republican)  who  sees  in  longs  and  nobles
only  men  liable  to  all  the  frailties  of  human  nature,  and  re-
quiring checks  to  prevent  them  from  abusing  power,  Vene-
ration is  generally  smaller,  in  proportion  to  their  intellec-
tual endowment.  When  Veneration,  Self-Esteem,  Consci-
entiousness, and  Intellect,  are  all  well  developed,  the  indi-
viduals are  moderate  whigs  or  moderate  tories,  and  readily
approximate  in  their  sentiments.  They  ought  to  exercise
mutual  forbearance ;  their  different  feelings  being  the  re-
sult of  different  natural  constitutions.  These  observations
are  limited  to  genuine  tories  and  genuine  whigs,  for  a  man
may  profess  toryism  through  love  of  place,  and  whiggery
through  mere  factiousness,  and  in  such  cases  other  organs
will  predominate.

As  nature  has  implanted  the  organ  of  Veneration  in  the
brain,  and  the  corresponding  sentiment  in  the  mind,  it  is  a
groundless  terror  to  apprehend  that  religion  can  ever  be
extinguished,  or  even  endangered,  by  the  arguments  or  ri-
dicule of  the  profane.  Forms  of  worship  may  change,  and
particular  religious  tenets  may  now  be  fashionable,  and
subsequently  fall  into  decay ;  but  while  the  human  heart
continues  to  beat,  awe  and  veneration  for  the  Divine  Being
will  ever  animate  the  soul ;  the  worshipper  will  cease  to
kneel,  and  the  hymn  of  adoration  to  rise,  only  when  the  race
of  man  becomes  extinct.

The  natural  language  of  this  faculty  carries  the  bead  up-
wards in  the  direction  of  the  organ*  The  voice  is  soft,
subdued,  reposing,  and  adoring.  The  greatest  difference  is
perceptible  in  the  tones  and  manner  of  prayer  of  clergymen
in  whom  the  organ  is  large,  compared  with  those  in  whom
it  is  small ;  there  is  a  soft  breathing  fervour  of  devotion  in
the  former,  and  a  cold  reasoning  formality  in  the  latter.  I
have  found  the  organ  uniformly  large  in  clergymen  who
selected  the  Church  from  natural  liking,  and  not  merely  as
a  means  of  subsistence.


284  VENERATION.

The  organ  is  generally  larger  in  the  female  head  than  in
the  male ;  and  women  are  more  prone  to  devotion*

Dr  Gall  treats  of  this  sentiment  as  producing  religious
feeling  alone ;  and  to  Dr  Spurzheim  is  due  the  merit  of
analyzing  it,  and  treating  it  as  the  sourceof  the  emotion  of
reverence  and  respect  in  general.

Nothing  is  more  common  in  the  hospitals  for  the  insane,
says  Pinel,  than  cases  of  alienation,  produced  by  devo-
tional feelings  excessively  exalted;  by  conscientious  scruples
carried  to  prejudicial  excess,  or  by  religious  terror.  As
this  kind  of  insanity,  says  Dr  Gall,  ie  often  present  with-
out derangement  of  the  other  faculties,  physicians-  ought  to
have  inferred  that  it  is  connected  with  disease  of  a  parti-
cular part  of  the  brain.  He  and  Dr  Spurzheim  saw,  in
the  hospital  of  Amsterdam,  a  patient  who  was  tormented
with  the  idea  that  he  was  compelled  to  sin*  and  that  he
could  not  possibly  be  saved.  In  him  the  organ  of  Venera-
tion was  very  largely  developed.  In  a  priest,  who  de-
spaired of  salvation,  and  in  another  patient,  who  had  the
confirmed  idea  that  he  was  condemned  to  eternal  punish-
ment, the  organ  was  also  very  large.  A  woman,  named
Elizabeth  Lindemann,  was  brought  to  Dr  Gall.  At  the
first  glance  he  perceived  that  she  possessed  this  organ  in  an
extraordinary  degree  ;  she  continued  standing  before  him,
lifting  her  eyes  from  time  to  time  to  Heaven,  and  indicat-
ing, by  all  her  gestures,  sadness  and  anguish.  From  her
youth,  she  had  been  excessively  addicted  to  prayer*  For
some  time  previous  to  the  interview  with  Dr  Gall,  she
"  had  been  subject  to  convulsions,  and  maintained  that  she
was  possessed ;  the  devil,  she  said,  entered  into  her  heart
by  her  mouth,  and  made  efforts  to  carry  her  to  hell."  Dr
Gall  mentions  also,  that  he  had  seen,  in  the  collection  of
M.  Esquirol,  casts  o£  the  heads  of  three  persons  subject  to
religious  insanity;  in  all  the  three  the  organ  of  Venera-
tion was  largely  developed.  If,  says  Gall,  M.  Esquirol
continues  for  some  time  to  mould  the  heads  of  the  insane
and  to  preserve  their  skulls,  he  will  not  fail  to  become  one
of  the  most  zealous  and  enlightened  disciples  of  Organolo-


FIRMNESS.  265

gy.  EsQifiaoL  very  justly  remarks  on  this  subject,  that
although  a  particular  sermon  has  often  been  blamed  for
producing  this  species  of  insanity,  yet  it  would  not  have
had  that  effect,  unless  there  had  been  a  predisposition  to
the  disease,  probably  a  pre-existence  of  it,  in  the  indi-
vidual. In  Dublin,  I  saw  patients  insane  from  Veneration.
The  organ  is  established.


15.  FIRMNESS.

This  organ  is  situated  at  the  posterior  part  of  the  coro-
nal region  of  the  head,  close  upon  the  middle  line.

Dr  Gall  observed,  that  persons  of  a  firm  and  constant
character  have  this  part  of  the  brain  much  developed ;  and
Lavater  had  previously  distinguished  the  same  configura-
tion, in  concomitance  with  that  kind  of  disposition*  It  is
difficult  to  determine,  by  analysis,  the  ultimate  principle  of
this  faculty.  Dr  Gall  remarks,  that,  properly  speaking,
Firmness  is  neither  an  inclination  nor  a  faculty ;  "  c'est  tene
maniire  cF&re  qui  donne  &  Phomme  me  empreinte  partictdi&re
que  Ufn  appette  le  caractere  ;  he  who  is  deficient  in  it,"  says
Jie,  "  is  the  sport  of  external  circumstances,  and  of  com-
municated impressions."  Its  effects,  says  Dr  Spurzheim,
are  mistaken  for  Will ;  because  those  in  whom  it  is  large,
are  prone  to  use  the  phrase  "  I  will,"  with  great  emphasis,
which  is  the  natural  language  of  determination ;  but  this
feeling  is  different  from  proper  volition.  It  gives  forti-
tude, constancy,  perseverance,  determination,  and,  when
too  energetic,  produces  obstinacy,  stubbornness,  and  infatua-
tion. It  will  be  found  very  large  in  stubborn  and  untrace-
able children.

The  organs  of  Self-Esteem,  Concentrativeness,  and  Firm-
ness, form  a  group  which  has  no  relation  to  external  ob-
jects ;  their  influence  terminates  on  the  mind  itself;  and
they  add  only  a  quality  to  the  manifestations  of  the  other


286  FIRMNESS.

powers :  thus  Firmness,  acting  along  with  Combativeness,
produces  determined  bravery;  with  Veneration,  sustained
devotion ;  and  with  Conscientiousness,  inflexible  integrity.
It  gives  perseverance,  however,  in  acting  only  on  the
other  faculties  which  are  possessed  in  an  available  degree.
An  individual  having  much  Firmness  and  considerable
Tune,  may  persevere  in  making  music; — if  Tune  were
greatly  deficient,  he  would  not  be  disposed  to  persevere
in  that  attempt ;  but  if  he  possessed  much  Causality,  he
might  persevere  in  abstract  study.  At  the  same  time  Dr
Gall  justly  remarks,  that  Firmness  of  character  ought  not
to  be  confounded  with  perseverance  in  gratification  of  the
predominating  dispositions  of  the  mind.  Thus  an  indivi-
dual, in  whom  Acquisitiveness  is  the  strongest  propensity,
may,  although  Firmness  bedeficient,  exhibit  unceasing  efforts
to  become  rich,  but  he  will  be  vacillating  and  unsteady  in  the
means  which  he  will  employ ; — he  will  to-day  be  captivated
with  one  project;  to-morrow  with  another;  and  the  next
day  with  a  third ;  whereas,  with  Firmness  large,  he  would
adopt  the  plan  which  appeared  to  him  most  promising,  and
steadily  pursue  it  to  the  end.

When  this  organ  predominates,  H  gives  a  peculiar  hard-
ness to  the  manner,  a  stiffness  and  uprightness  to  the  gait*
with  a  forcible  and  emphatic  tone  to  the  voice.

A  due  degree  of  it  is  essential  to  the  attainment  of  emi-
nence in  any  difficult  pursuit.  Dr  Gall  observes,  that,
when  it  is  large,  tike  motto  of  the  individual  will  be,  "  Tk
us  cede  mmlis,  sed  centra  awdacior  ito"  It  produoes  the
"  tmax  propositi  mr.H  The  organ  is  larger  in  the  British
than  in  the  French,  and  the  fatter  are  astonished  at  the  de-
termined perseverance  of  the  former,  in  the  prosecution  of
their  designs,  whether  these  relate  to  the  arts,  sciences,  or
war.  Napoleon  knew  well  the  weakness  of  the  French
character  in  this  point,  and,  hi  his  conversations,  recorded
by  Count  Las  Casss,  frequently  complains  of  it.  In  war,
the  effects  of  this  organ  are  very  conspicuous  in  the  con*

l


FIRMNESS.  287

duct  of  die  two  nations*  The  French,  under  the  influence
of  a  large  Combativeness,  and  moderate  Cautiousness,  make
the  most  lively  and  spirited  attacks,  shouting  and  cheering
as  they  advance  to  the  charge;  but  if  steadily  resisted,
their  ardour  abates ;  and,  from  deficiency  in  Firmness,  they
yield  readily  to  adversity*  The  British,  on  the  other
hand,  advance  to  the  assault  with  cool  determination,
arising  from  great  Firmness,  and  considerable  Cautiousness
and  Secretiveness ;  and  although  repulsed,  they  are  not  dis-
comfited, but  preserve  presence  of  mind  to  execute  what-
ever may  appear  most  advisable  in  the  circumstances  which
have  occurred.

This  faculty  contributes  greatly  to  success  in  any  enter-
prise, by  communicating  the  quality  of  perseverance.  Ex-
haustion will  damp  the  ardour  of  the  bravest  after  much
exertion,  and  hence  he  who  is  able  to  maintain  his  facul-
ties in  a  state  of  vivid  application  for  the  greatest  length
of  time,  will  at  last  frequently  succeed,  by  merely  weary-
ing out  his  opponent.  Fortitude  and  patience,  also,  as  dis-
tinguished from  active  courage,  result  from  this  faculty.
The  organ  is  large  in  the  American  Indians,  and  their
powers  of  endurance  appear  almost  incredible  to  Euro-
peans. Dr  Gall  found  it  very  large  in  a  highwayman,
who  was  exceedingly  hardened  in  crime.  He  was  kept  in
close  confinement  for  a  considerable  time,  with  the  view  of
forcing  him  to  disclose  his  accomplices ;  but  this  had  no
effect,  and  he  was  then  put  to  the  torture  by  beating.
Finding  this  infliction  intolerable,  he  strangled  himself
with  his  chain.  After  his  death,  the  parietal  bones  were
found  separated  precisely  at  the  point  where  the  organ  of
Firmness  is  situated.  Dr  Gall  could  not  determine  whe-
ther the  separation  arose  from  the  violent  strangulation,
the  excessive  energy  of  the  organ,  or  from  accident ;  but
records  the  fact,  to  call  attention  to  similar  cases,  should
they  occur  in  future.  This  organ,  and  that  of  Destructive-
ness,  are  very  large  also  in  John  Thurtell,  executed  for
the  murder  of  Weare,  and  he  manifested  both  powerfully


288  FIRMNESS.

in  his  conduct.  The  organ  is  also  very  large  in  King  Robert
Bruce  ;  and  he  was  distinguished  for  unshaken  firmness,
in  circumstances  in  which  an  ordinary  mind  would  have
been  overwhelmed  by  despair.  It  is  large  in  Haggart,
who  also  manifested  determination  in  crime  and  constancy
in  suffering,  in  a  remarkable  degree.

When  the  organ  is  small,  the  individual  is  prone  to  yield
to  the  impulses  of  his  predominating  feelings.  When  Be-
nevolence assumes  the  sway,  he  is  all  kindness;  when
Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  are  excited,  he  will  be
passionate,  outragttras,  and  violent :  and  thus  afford  a  spec*
tacle  of  habitual  weakness  and  inconsistency.  If  Love  of
Approbation  and  Benevolence  be  large,  and  Firmness  small,
solicitations  will,  with  great  difficulty,  be  resisted*.  The
organ  is  very  small  in  the  cast  of  Mrs  H.,  and  she  mani-
fested much  unsteadiness  of  purpose.

The  figures  introduced  on  p.  299.  represent  this  organ
large  and  small.

I  am  not  aware  that  the  metaphysicians  admit  any  fa-
culty corresponding  to  this  sentiment  It  exercises  a  great
influence  in  forming  the  character,  and  its  omission  is  very
important  in  any  system  of  mental  philosophy.

The  effects  of  disease  of  the  organ  seem  not  to  have  been
observed.  We  may  infer,  that  they  will  be  the  exaltation
of  the  function,  namely,  extreme  stubbornness  and  infatua-
tion.

This  organ  is  regarded  as  established.


16.  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

This  organ  is  situated  on  the  posterior  and  lateral  parts
of  the  coronal  region  of  the  brain,  upwards  from  Cautious-
ness, and  backwards  from  Hope.  In  Dr  Gall's  Plates,
the  function  is  marked  as  unascertained,  and  the  discovery
and  establishment  of  the  organ  are  due  to  Dr  Spurzheim.

The  dispute  among  philosophers  about  the  existence  of


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  289

a  moral  faculty  in  the  human  mind,  is  of  very  ancient  stand-
ing, and  it  has  been  conducted  with  great  eagerness  since
the  publication  of  the  writings  of  Hobbes  in  the  middle  of
the  seventeenth  century.  This  author  taught,  "  that  we
approve  of  virtuous  actions,  or  of  actions  beneficial  to  socie-
ty, from  self-love;  because  we  know,  that  whatever  pro-
motes the  interest  of  society,  has,  on  that  very  account,  an
indirect  tendency  to  promote  our  own"  He  farther  taught,
that,  "  as  it  is  to  the  institution  of  government  we  are  in-
debted for  all  the  comforts  and  confidence  of  social  life,  the
laws  which  the  civil  magistrate  enjoins  are  the  ultimate
standards  of  morality  *•"

Cudworth,  in  opposition  to  Hobbes,  endeavoured  to
shew  that  the  origin  of  our  notions  of  right  and  wrong  is
to  be  found  in  a  particular  power  of  the  mind,  which  dis-
tinguishes truth  from  falsehood.

Mandeville,  who  published  in  the  beginning  of  the  last
century,  maintained,  as  his  theory  of  morals,  That  by
nature  man  is  utterly  selfish ;  that  among  other  desires
which  he  likes  to  gratify,  he  has  received  a  strong  appetite
for  praise;  that  the  founders  of  society,  availing  themselves
of  this  propensity,  instituted  the  custom  of  dealing  out  a
certain  measure  of  applause  for  each  sacrifice  made  by  sel-
fishness to  the  public  good,  and  called  the  sacrifice  Virtue.
"  Men  are  led,  accordingly,  to  purchase  this  praise  by  a  fair
barter;"  and  "the  moral  virtues,"  to  use  Mandeville's
strong  expression,  are,  "  the  political  offspring  which  flat-
tery begot  upon  pride."  And  hence,  when  we  see  virtue,
we  see  only  the  indulgence  of  some  selfish  feeling,  or  the
compromise  *for  this  indulgence,  in  expectation  of  some
praise  f"

Dr  Clarke,  on  the  other  hand,  supposes  virtue  "  to  con-
sist in  the  regulation  of  our  conduct,  according  to  certain
fitnesses  which  we  perceive  in  things,  or  a  peculiar  congrui-
ty  of  certain  relations  to  each  other ;"  and  Wollaston,

•  Stewart's  Outlines,  p.  128.

f  Fable  of  the  Bees, vol  i.  p.  28.30.  8vo.  London,  1728;  and  Brown's
Lectures,  voL  iv.  p.  4.

T


290  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

whose  views  are  essentially  the  same,  "  supposes  virtue  to
consist  in  acting  according  to  the  truth  of  things,  in  treating
objects  according  to  their  real  character,  and  not  according
to  a  character  or  properties  which  they  truly  have  not  *•"

Mr  Hume,  it  is  well  known,  wrote  an  elaborate  treatise,
to  prove,  "  that  utility  is  the  constituent  or  measure  of
virtue:9'  In  short,  to  use  the  emphatic  language  of  Dr
Smith,  "  that  we  have  no  other  reason  for  praising  a  man,
than  that  for  which  we  commend  a  chest  of  drawers  f."

There  is  another  system  "  which  makes  the  utility  accord-
ing to  which  we  measure  virtue,  in  every  case  our  own  in-
dividual advantage.  Virtue,  according  to  this  system,  is
the  mere  search  of  pleasure,  or  of  personal  gratification.  It
gives  up  one  pleasure,  indeed,  but  it  gives  it  up  for  a  greater.
It  sacrifices  a  present  enjoyment ;  but  it  sacrifices  it  only  to
obtain  some  enjoyment,  which,  in  intensity  and  duration,  is
fairly  worth  the  sacrifice."  Hence,  in  every  instance  in
which  an  individual  seems  to  pursue  the  good  of  others,  m$
good,  he  seeks  his  own  personal  gratification,  and  nothing
else  J.

Dr  Hutchesok,  on  the  other  hand,  strenuously  maintains
the  existence  of  a  moral  sense,  on  which  our  perceptions  of
virtue  are  founded,  independently  of  all  other  considera-
tions.

Dr  Palev,  the  most  popular  of  all  authors  on  moral
philosophy,  does  not  admit  a  natural  sentiment  of  justice  as
the  foundation  of  virtue,  but  is  also  an  adherent  of  the  sel-
fish system,  under  a  modified  form.  He  makes  virtue  con-
sist in  "  the  doing  good  to  mankind,  in  obedience  to  the
will  of  God,  and  /or  the  sake  of  everlasting  happiness  || ."  Ac-
cording to  this  doctrine,  "  the  will  of  God  is  our  rule,  but
private  happiness  our  motive,"  which  is 'just  selfishness  in
another  form.

Dr  Adam  Smith,  in  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,
endeavours  to  shew,  that  the  standard  of  moral  approba-
tion is  sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  impartial  spectator,

•  Browx's  Lectures,  vol.  iv.  p.  17.        t  Lib.  clt.  p.  32.

%  Lib.  cit.  p.  64.  )|  Lib.  cit.  vol  iv.  p.  100,  101.


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  291

with  the  action  and  object  of  the  party  whose  conduct  is
judged  of.

Dr  Reid  and  Mr  Stewart  maintain  the  existence  of  a
faculty  in  man,  which  produces  the  sentiment  of  right  and
wrong,  independently  of  any  other  consideration.

These  disputes  are  as  far  from  being  terminated  among
metaphysicians  at  present,  as  they  were  a  century  ago ;
a  late  writer  on  the  subject,  the  Author  of  the  article
Moral  Philosophy  in  the  Edinburgh  Encyclopaedia,  dis-
putes the  existence  of  a  moral  sense,  and  founds  virtue  upon
religion  and  utility.

I  have  introduced  this  sketch  of  conflicting  theories,  to
convey  some  idea  of  the  boon  which  Phrenology  would  con-
fer upon  moral  science,  if  it  could  fix,  on  a  firm  basis,  this
single  point  in  the  philosophy  of  mind,  That  a  power  or  fa-
culty exists,  the  object  of  which  is  to  produce  the  sentiment
of  justice  or  the  feeling  of  moral  duty  and  obligation,  inde-
pendently of  selfishness,  hope  of  reward,  fear  of  punishment
or  any  extrinsic  motive;  a  faculty,  in  short,  the  natural
language  of  which  is  "  Fiat  justitia,  ruat  coelum."  Phreno-
logy does  this  by  a  demonstration,  founded  on  numerous
observations,  that  those  persons  who  have  the  organ  now
under  consideration  large,  experience  powerfully  the  senti-
ment of  justice,  while  those  who  have  that  part  small,  are
little  alive  to  this  emotion.  This  evidence  is  the  same  in
land  as  that  adduced  in  support  of  the  conclusions  of  phy-
sical science.

The  faculty  produces  the  feeling  of  obligation,  incumben-
cy, right  and  wrong,  for  which  we  have  no  single  definite
expression  in  the  English  language ;  just  as  Ideality  pro-
duces the  sentiment  of  Beauty.  Justice  is  the  result  of  this
sentiment,  acting  in  combination  with  the  intellectual
powers.  The  latter  investigate  the  motives  and  consequen-
ces of  actions ;  but,  after  having  done  so,  they,  of  them-
selves, experience  no  emotions.  In  surveying  human  con-
duct, however,  as  soon  as  the  intellect  has  thoroughly  pe-
netrated into  the  springs  from  which  it  proceeds,  a  feeling

r  2


292  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

of  decided  approval  or  condemnation,  distinct  from  all  other
sentiments,  and  from  pure  intellection,  arises  in  the  mind;
and  this  is  produced  by  the  faculty  of  Conscientiousness.

This  faculty  is  of  the  very  highest  importance  as  a  regu-
lator of  all  the  others.  If  Combativeness  be  too  active,  Con-
scientiousness prescribes  a  limit  to  its  indulgence ;  it  permits
defence,  but  no  malicious  aggression :  if  Acquisitiveness
urge  too  keenly,  it  reminds  us  of  the  rights  of  others :  if
Benevolence  tend  towards  profusion,  this  faculty  issues  the
admonition,  Be  just  before  you  are  generous :  if  Ideality
aspire  to  its  high  delights,  when  duty  requires  laborious
exertions  in  a  humble  sphere,  Conscientiousness  supplies  the
curb,  and  bids  the  soaring  spirit  stoop  its  wing.

Nay,  not  only  does  it  operate  as  a  curb  upon  our  too  ac-
tive desires,  but  as  a  spur  to  excite  the  faculties,  when  too
feeble  in  their  energy*  If  Benevolence  be  weak,  Conscien-
tiousness proclaims,  in  a  voice  of  authority,  that  it  is  our
duty  to  relieve  the  miserable ; — if  Acquisitiveness  be  too
feeble  to  prompt  to  industry,  this  sentiment  calls  aloud  on
us  to  labour,  that  we  may  do  justice  to  those  around  us.
From  this  regulating  quality  Conscientiousness  is  an  im-
portant element  in  constituting  a  practical  judgment  and
an  upright  and  consistent  character*

When  this  faculty  is  powerful,  the  individual  is  disposed
to  regulate  his  conduct  by  the  nicest  sentiments  of  justice  :
there  is  an  earnestness,  integrity,  and  directness  in  his  man-
ner, which  inspire  us  with  confidence,  and  give  us  con-
viction of  his  sincerity.  Such  an  individual  desires  to  act
justly  from  the  love  of  justice,  unbiassed  by  fear,  interest,
or  any  sinister  motive.

The  activity  of  this  faculty  takes  a  wider  range  than  re-
spect merely  to  the  legal  rights  and  property  of  others.  It
prompts  those  in  whom  it  is  strong,  to  do  justice  in  judging
of  the  conduct,  the  opinions,  and  the  talents  of  others.
Such  persons  are  scrupulous,  and  as  ready  to  condemn
themselves  as  to  find  fault  with  others.  When  predomi-
nant, it  leads  to  punctuality  in  keeping  appointments,  be-


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  29$

cause  it  is  injustice  to  sacrifice  the  lime  and  convenience  of
ethers,  by  causing  them  to  wait  till  our  selfishness  finds  it
agreeable  to  meet  them.  It  prompts  to  ready  payment  of
debts,  as  a  piece  of  justice  to  those  to  whom  they  are  due.
It  will  not  permit  even  a  tax-collector  to  be  sent  away  un-
satisfied, from  any  cause  except  inability  to  pay ;  because
it  is  injustice  to  him,  as  it  is  to  clerks,  servants*  and  all
others,  to  require  them  to  consume  their  time  in  unneces-
sary attendance,  for  what  is  justly  due  and  ought  at  once
to  be  paid.  It  leads  also  to  great  reserve  in  making  pro-
mises, but  to  much  punctuality  in  performing  them.  It
gives  consistency  to  the  conduct,  because,  when  every  sen-
timent is  regulated  by  justice,  the  result  is,  that  "  daily
beauty  in  the  life"  which  renders  the  individual  in  the
highest  degree  useful  and  respectable.  It  communicates  a
pleasing  simplicity  to  the  manners,  which  commands  the
esteem,  and  wins  the  affections,  of  all.  well  constituted
minds.

A  deficiency  of  this  sentiment  produces  effects  exactly-
opposite.  The  weakness  of  the  faculty  appears  in  the  go?
ttesal  sentiments  of  the  individual,  although  circumstances
may  place  him  beyond  reach  of  temptation  to  infringe  the
law.  The  predominant  propensities  and  sentiments  then
act  without  this  powerful  regulator.  If  Benevolence,  and
Adhesiveness  attach  him  to  a  friend,  he  is  blind  to  all  his
imperfections,  and  extols  him  as  the  most  matchless  of  hu-
man beings.  If  he  happen  to  offend,  he  becomes  a  monster
of  ingratitude  and  baseness;  he  passes  in  an  instant  from
an  angel  to  a  demon.  If  Conscientiousness  had  been  large,
he  would  have  been  viewed  all  along  as  a  man ;  esteem
towards  him  would  have  been  regulated  by  principle,  and
the  offence  candidly  dealt  with.  If  Love  of  Approbation  be
large,  and  Conscientiousness  deficient,  the  former  will
prompt  to  the  adoption  of  every  means  that  will  please, .
without  the  least  regard  to  justice  and  propriety.  If  an  in*
dividual  have  a  weak  point  in  hk^character,  Love  of  .Appro-
bation, will  then  lead  to  flattering  it ;  if  he  have  extras


394  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

gant  expectations,  it  will  join  in  all  his  anticipations;  if  he
be  displeased  with  particular  persons,  it  will  affect  to  hate
with  his  hate,  altogether  independent  of  justice.  In  short,
the  individual  in  whom  this  faculty  is  deficient,  is  apt  to
act  and  also  to  judge  of  the  conduct  of  others,  exactly  ac-
cording to  his  predominant  sentiments  for  the  time :  he  is
friendly  when  under  the  impulse  of  Benevolence ;  severe
when  Destructiveness  predominates ;  admires,  when  his
pride,  vanity,  or  affection,  give  him  a  favourable  feeling
towards  others ;  and  condemns  when  his  sentiments  take  an
opposite  direction,  always  unregulated  by  principle.  He  is
not  scrupulous,  and  rarely  condemns  his  own  conduct,  or
acknowledges  himself  in  the  wrong.  Minds  so  constituted
may  be  amiable,  and  may  display  many  excellent  qualities ;
but  they  are  never  to  be  relied  on  where  justice  is  concern-
ed; as  judges,  their  decisions  are  unsound ;  as  friends,  they  are
liable  to  exact  too  much  and  perform  too  little ;  as  sellers,
they  are  prone  to  misrepresent,  adulterate,  or  overcharge ;
as  buyers,  to  depreciate  quality  and  quantity,  or  evade
payment.

The  laws  of  honour,  as  apprehended  by  some  minds,  are
founded  on  an  absence  of  Conscientiousness,  with  great
predominance  of  S61f-Esteem  and  Love  of  Approbation.  If
a  gentleman  is  conscious  that  he  has  unjustly  given  another
offence,  it  is  conceived  by  many  that  he  will  degrade  himself
by  making  an  apology;  that  it  is  his  .duty  to  fight,  but  not
to  acknowledge  himself  in  fault  This  is  the  feeling  pro-
duced by  a  powerful  Self-Esteem  and  Love  of  Approbation,
with  great  deficiency  of  Conscientiousness.  Self-Esteem  is
mortified  by  an  admission  of  fallibility,  and  Love  of
Approbation  gives  the  feeling  that  the  esteem  of  the
world  will  be  lost  by  such  an  acknowledgment;  and  if
no  higher  sentiment  be  present,  in  a  sufficient  degree,  the
wretched  victim  will  go  to  the  field  and  die  in  support  of
conduct  that  is  truly  indefensible.  When  Conscientious-
ness is  strong,  the  possessor  feels  it  no  degradation  to  ac-
knowledge himself  in  fault,  when  he  is  aware  that  he  is


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  895

wrong;  in  feet  he  rises  in  his  own  esteem  by  doing  so, and
knows  that  he  acquires  the  respect  of  the  world;  while,  if
fully  conscious  of  being  in  the  right,  there  is  none  more
inflexible  than  he.

This  sentiment  is  essential  to  the  formation  of  a  truly
philosophic  mind,  especially  in  moral  investigations.  It
produces  the  desire  of  discovering  truth,  the  tact  of  recog-
nising it  when  discovered,  and  that  perfect  reliance  on  its
invincible  supremacy,  which  give  at  once  dignity  and
peace  to  the  mind.  A  person  in  whom  it  is  deficient,  views
all  propositions  as  mere  opinions  ;  esteems  them  exactly  as
they  are  fashionable  or  the  reverse,  and  cares  nothing  about
the  evidence  on  which  they  rest.  Love  of  Approbation
and  Secretiveness,  joined  with  this  sentiment  deficient,
lead  to  paradox ;  and  if  Combativeness  be  added,  there
will  be  a  tendency  to  general  scepticism,  and  the  denial
or  disputation  of  the  best-established  truths  on  every  seri-
ous subject.

No  sentiment  is  more  incomprehensible  to  those  in  whom
the  organ  is  small,  than  Conscientiousness.  They  are  able
to  understand  conduct,  proceeding  from  ambition,  self-in-
terest, revenge,  or  any  other  motive ;  but  that  determina-
tion of  soul,  which  suffers  obloquy  and  reproach,  nay  death
itself,  from  the  pure  and  disinterested  love  of  truth,  is  to
them  utterly  unintelligible.  They  regard  it  as  a  species  of
insanity,  and  look  on  the  individual  as  "  essentially  mad,
without  knowing  it."  Madame  Djb  Stael  narrates  of
Buonaparte,  that  he  never  was  so  completely  at  fault,  in
his  estimate  of  character,  as  when  he  met  with  opposition
from  a  person  actuated  by  the  pure  principle  of  integrity
alone.  He  did  not  comprehend  the  motives  of  such  a  man,
and  could  not  imagine  how  he  might  be  managed.  The
maxim,  that  "  every  man  has  his  price,"  will  pass  as  pro-
foundly discriminative  with  those  in  whom  Acquisitiveness
or  Love  of  Approbation  is  very  large,  and  Conscientious-
ness moderate;  but  there  are  minds  whose  deviation  from
the  paths  of  rectitude  no  price  could  purchase,  and  no  ho*


296  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

nours  procure  ;  and  those  in  whom  Conscientiousness,
Firmness,  and  Reflection,  are  large,  will  give  an  instinc-
tive assent  to  the  truth  of  this  proposition.

I  have  observed  that  individuals,  in  whom  Love  of  Ap-
probation was  large,  and  Conscientiousness  not  in  equal
proportion,  were  incapable  of  conceiving  the  motive  which
could  lead  any  one  to  avow  a  belief  in  Phrenology,  while
the  tide  of  ridicule  ran  unstemmed  against  it     If  die  pub-
lic opinion  should  change,  such  persons  would  move  fore-
.  most  in  the  train  of  its  admirers :     They  instinctively  fol-
low the  doctrines  that  are  most  esteemed  from  day  to  day ;
and  require  our  pity  and  forbearance,  as  their  conduct  pro-
ceeds from  a  great  moral  deficiency,  which  is  their  misfor-
tune rather  than  their  fault.    The  fact  that  this  organ  is
occasionally  deficient  in  individuals  in  whom,  the  organs  of
intellect  are  amply  developed,  and  the  animal  propensities
strong,  accounts  for  the  unprincipled  baseness  and  moral
depravity  exhibited  by  some  men  of  unquestionable  talents.
It  is  here,  as  in  other  cases,  of  the  greatest  importance
to  attend  to  the  distinct  functions  of  the  several  faculties  of
the  mind.    No  mistake  is  more  generally  committed  than
that  of  conceiving,  that,  by  exercising  the  faculty  of  Vene-
ration, we  cultivate  those  of  Benevolence  and  Justice ;  but
if  Veneration  be  large,  and  Conscientiousness  small,  a  man
may  be  naturally  disposed  to  piety  and  not  to  justice ;  or  if
the  combination  be  reversed,  he  may  be  just  and  not  pious,
in  the  same  manner  as  he  may  be  blind  and  not  deaf,  or
deaf  and  not  blind.    Deficiency  of  Veneration  does  not  ne-
cessarily imply  profanity ;  so  that,  although  an  individual
will  scarcely  be  found  who  is  profane  and  at  the  same  time
just,  yet  many  will  be  found  who  are  just  and  not  pious,
and  vice  versa.

This  faculty,  when  powerful,  is  attended  with  a  senti-
ment of  its  own  paramount  authority  over  every  other,  and
it  gives  its  impulses  with  a  tone  which  appears  like  the
voice  of  Heaven.  The  scene  in  "  The  Heart  of  Mid-Lothian,"
in  which  Jcany  Deans  is  represented  giving  evidence  on


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  297

ber  sister's  trial  at  the  bar  of  the  High  Court  of  Justiciary,
affords  a  striking  illustration  of  its  functions  and  authority
when  supported  by  piety.  A  strong  sense  of  the  imperious
dictates  of  Conscientiousness,  and  of  the  supreme  obliga-
tion of  truth,  leads  her  to  sacrifice  every  interest  and  affec*
tion  which  could  make  the  mind  swerve  from  the  paths  of
duty ;  and  we  perceive  her  holding  by  her  integrity,  at  the
expense  of  every  other  feeling  dear  to  human  nature.

Repentance,  remorse,  a  sense  of  guilt,  and  demerit,  are
the  consequences  of  this  faculty,  when  the  actions  have
been  in  opposition  to  its  dictates.  It  is  a  mistake,  however,
to  suppose,  that  great  criminals  are  punished  by  the  accu-
sations of  conscience ;  for  this  organ  is  generally  very  defi-
cient in  men  who  have  devoted  their  lives  to  crime,  and,
in  consequence,  they  are  strangers  to  the  sentiment  of  re-
morse. Haggart  felt  regret  for  having  murdered  the  jailor
of  Dumfries,  but  no  remorse  for  his  thefts.  His  large  Be-
nevolence induced  the  uneasy  feeling  on  account  of  the
first  crime,  and  his  small  Conscientiousness  was  the  cause
of  his  indifference  to  the  second.  If  Conscientiousness  had
been  strong,  he  could  not  have  endured  the  sense  of  the  ac-
cumulated iniquities  with  which  his  life  was  stained.  In
Bellingham,  both  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness  are
small,  and  he  manifested  equal  insensibility  to  justice  and
mercy,  and  testified  no  repentance  or  remorse.
-  Dr  Gall  did  not  admit  a  faculty  and  organ  of  Conscien-
tiousness. He  formerly  considered  remorse  as  the  result  of
the  opposition  of  particular  actions  to  the  predominant  dis-
positions of  the  individual ;  and,  according  to  him,  there
were  as  many  consciences  as  faculties :  for  example,  if  a
person,  in  whom  Benevolence  was  large,  injured  another,
this  faculty  would  be  grieved;  and  this  feeling  he  consi-
dered to  be  regret  or  repentance.  If  a  usurer  or  a  liber-
tine neglected  an  opportunity,  they  would  repent,  the  first
for  not  having  gratified  Acquisitiveness,  the  latter  for  not
having  seduced  some  innocent  victim.  Dr  Gall  called  this
natwral  conscience,  and  said,  that  we  could  not  trust  to  it;


298  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

and  hence,  that  laws  and  positive  institution*  became  ne-
cessary. Dr  Spurzheim  answered  this  argument  in  an
able  manner,  and  shewed  that  the  mere  feeling  of  regret  is
totally  different  from  that  of  remorse.  We  may  regret  that  we
lost  a  pair  of  gloves,  or  spent  half-a-crown;  but  this  feeling
bears  no  resemblance  to  the  upbraidings  of  conscience  for
having  robbed  a  neighbour  of  his  right,  committed  a  fraud,
or  uttered  a  malevolent  falsehood.  Dr  Gall  latterly  re-
garded Benevolence  as  the  moral  faculty :  but  the  sentiment
of  right  and  wrong  is  as  clearly  distinguishable  from  mere
goodness  or  kindness,  as  Hope  is  from  Fear ;  and,  besides,
positive  facts  prove  that  the  two  feelings  depend  on  different
organs.

This  organ  deficient,  and  Secretiveness  large,  and  espe-
cially when  the  latter  is  aided  by  Ideality  and  Wonder,  pro-
duce a  natural  tendency  to  lying,  which  some  individuals,
who  have  possessed  the  advantages  of  education  and  good
society,  have  never  been  able  to  overcome.

Some  criminals,  on  being  detected,  confess,  and  seem  to
court  punishment,  as  the  only  means  of  assuaging  the  re-
morse with  which  their  own  minds  are  devoured.  The
Phrenological  Society  has  a  cast  of  the  skull  of  one  person
who  displayed  this  desire  to  atone  for  bis  crime.  It  is  that
of  John  Rotherham,  who  met  a  servant  girl  on  the  high-
way and  murdered  her,  out  of  the  pure  wanton  impulse  of
Dsstructiveness ;  for  he  did  not  attempt  to  violate  her  per-
son ;  and  of  her  property,  he  took  only  her  umbrella  and
shoes.  When  apprehended,  he  confessed  his  crime, — in-
sisted on  pleading  guilty, — and,  with  great  difficulty,  was
induoed  by  the  judge  to  retract  his  admission.  The  organ
is  large  in  him.  He  appears  to  have  acted  under  an  exces-
sive influence  of  Destructiveness.

James  Gordon,  on  the  contrary,  who  murdered  the  ped*
lar  boy  in  Eskdale  Muir,  stoutly  denied  his  guilt,  and,  after
conviction,  abused  the  jury  and  judge  for  condemning  him.
Before  his  execution,  he  admitted  that  his  seutence  was
just.    In  him,  the  organ  of  Conscientiousness  is  defective.


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.


299


The  organ  is  very  large  in  Mrs  H.,  the  Rev.  Mr  ML,  and
in  Dr  Hette,  who  all  manifested  the  sentiment  powerfully.
Considerable  attention  is  requisite  to  discriminate  accurate-
ly the  size  of  this  organ.  When  Firmness  is  large,  and  Con-
scientiousness small,  the  head  slopes  at  an  acute  angle  down-
wards from  Firmness,  as  in  Haggaet  and  King  Robert
Bruce.  When  both  Firmness  and  Conscientiousness  are
large,  the  head  rises  considerably  from  Cautiousness  to
Firmness,  by  a  full  and  rounded  swell,  as  in  the  Rev.
Mr  M.  When  both  of  these  organs  are  small,  the  head
rises  very  little  above  Cautiousness,  but  runs  fiat  across
to  Cautiousness  on  the  other  side,  as  in  the  boy  Gibson,  and
in  Mary  Street,  a  child  distinguished  like  him  for  lying
and  deceit.    The  figures  illustrate  these  combinations.


Mrs  H.


Johit  Gibsox.


David  Haggart.


Flnmnm  ffftalt*  CotudCD


FlnaneMaadCanadca-
tinn.nfy.  deficient*


Flnnnen  large,  Cooscien-
Uousnra  deficient.


In  Mrs  H.,  Firmness  15  is  small,  and  Conscientiousness  16  large ;  in  D.
Hag  o art,  Firmness  15  is  large,  and  Conscientiousness  16  deficient ;  and
in  John  Gibson  both  of  these  organs  are  deficient,  which  is  indica-
ted by  the  head  rising  very  little  above  12  Cautiousness.  If  in  Mrs  H.
Firmness  had  been  as  large  as  Conscientiousness,  or  in  Haggaht  Con.
scientiousness  had  been  as  large  as  Firmness,  the  heads  would  have
presented  a  full  and  elevated  segment  of  a  circle  passing  from  Cau-
tiousness to  Cautiousness,  the  very  opposite  of  the  flat  and  low  line
in  the  head  of  Gibson.  It  \$  of  great  importance  in  practice  to  attend
to  these  different  forms.

The  difference  of  development  of  this  organ  in  different  na-
tions and  individuals,  and  its  combinations  with  other  or-
gans, enable  u*  to  account  for  the  differences  in  the  notions
of  justice  entertained  at  different  times,  and  by  different
people.  The  sentiment  of  Truth  is  found  by  the  English
Judges  to  be  so  low  in  the  Africans,  the  Hindoos,  and  in


300  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

the  aboriginal  Americans,  that  the  natives  of  these  coun-
tries are  not  received  as  witnesses  in  the  Colonial  Courts  ;
and  it  is  a  curious  fact,  that  a  defect  in  the  organ  of  Con-
scientiousness is  a  reigning  feature  in  the  skulls  of  these
nations  in  possession  of  the  Phrenological  Society.  The
notions  of  justice  of  that  individual  are  most  fit  to  be  assum-
ed as  a  standard,  in  whom  this  organ  is  decidedly  lange*  in*
combination  with  a  large  endowment  of  thq  other  moral
sentiments  and  reflection ;  just  as  we  hold  the  person  pos-
sessed of  the  greatest  organ  of  Tune,  in  combination  with
the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments  and  reflection,  to  be  the
best  judge  of  musical  compositions.  It  is  obvious,  also,  that
laws,  or  positive  commands,  ordering  and  forbidding  cer-
tain actions,  become  necessary  as  rules,  to  those  who  do  not-
possess  a  sufficient  endowment  of  this  sentiment  from  na-
ture to  regulate  their  conduct.  Those  who  are  favourably
gifted,  are,  in  the  language  of  St  Paul,  "  a  law  unto  them-
selves.

It  has  been  objected,  that  persons  possessing  a  large-  de-
velopment of  this  organ,  not  unfrequently  act  in  opposition
to  the  dictates  of  the  sentiment,  and  practise  selfishness,  or
sacrifice  justice  tar  ambition,  exactly  as  those  do  in  whom
the  organ  is  small*;  and  it  is  asked,  What  becomes  of  the  or-
gan in  such  instances  ?  The  plurality  of  organs  and  facul-
ties explains  this  phenomenon.  Conscientiousness  is  not
the  only  faculty  in  the  mind,  and,  although  it  is  paramount
in  authority,  it  is  not  always  so  in  strength.  A  person  in
whom  Benevolence  and  Destructiveness  are  both  large,
may,  under  special  circumstances,  which  strongly  excite
Destructiveness,  manifest  that  faculty  in  rage,  revenge*  or
undue  severity,  in  direct  opposition  to  Benevoltonce.  In
like  manner,  an  individual  in  whom  Acquisitiveness  and
Self-Esteem  are  large,  may,  if  these  are  very  forcibly  ad-
dressed, obey  their  impulse  in  opposition  to  that  of  Con-
scientiousness ;  but  the  benevolent  man,  when  the  tempta-
tion is  past,  feels  the  opposition  between  his  conduct  and*
the  dictates  of  Benevolence ;  and,  in  like  manner,  the  indi~


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  801

vidual  last  supposed,  on  cool  reflection,  becomes  conscious
of  the  opposition  betwixt  bis  unjust  preference  of  himself,
and  the  dictates  of  Conscientiousness ;  both  will  repent,
and  will  make  atonement,  and  desire  to  avoid  repetition  of
such  errors.  If  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness  had
been  small,  they  would  not  have  felt  that  their  actions  were
wrong;  'they  would  have  experienced  no  remorse ;  and  their
lower  faculties  would  have  operated  with  greatly  increased
violence.  I  have  observed  practically,  that  when  Conscien*
tiousness  is  large  in  any  individual,  he  will  yield  compliance
with  demands  made  on  him  whenever  a  strong  case  in  jus-
tice is  made  out  by  the  applicant ;  but  when  the  organ  is
not  large,  he  will  be  moved  only  by  favour  or  partiality.
It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  respectability  of
Government,  and  the  welfare  of  the  people,  that  public
functionaries  should  possess  the  former  character.  The
necessity  of  it  in  persons  in  authority  will  be  more  and
more  felt  as  society  advances  in  knowledge,  discrimination,
and  morality.

Another  difficulty  is  experienced  in  the  doctrine,  that
Conscientiousness  is  merely  a  sentiment,  and  does  not  form
specific  ideas  of  what  is  just.  This  will  be  best  removed  by
an  example :  A  judge  hears  one  side  of  a  cause,  and  Con-
scientiousness, acting  on  the  statement  presented  to  it,
through  the  medium  of  the  intellect,  produces  the  feeling
that  this  first  party  is  in  the  right.  The  other  litigant  is
next  heard,  new  facts  appear,  and  Conscientiousness  may
now  produce  the  feeling  that  justice  lies  on  his  side.  If  this
faculty  itself  had  formed  specific  ideas  of  what  is  just,  it
would  have  been  an  intellectual  power,  and  reasoning
would  have  been  in  proportion  to  it,  which  is  not  the  case ;
but,  as  it  is  only  a  sentiment,  its  real  function  is  to  pro-
duce an  emotion  of  justice  or  injustice,  on  the  particular
case  of  assemblage  of  facts  presented  to  It  by  the  intellect.
An  illustration  of  this  doctrine  is  found  in  the  "  Hermit"
by  Parmell.  The  angel  throws  the  servant  over  the
bridge ;  and  this  is  felt  to  be  unjust,  while  nothing  more


308  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS,

k  known  than  the  remit;  bat  when  the  intellect  is  after-
wards informed,  that  he  intended  next  night  to  murder  his
master,  Conscientiousness  feels  that  his  destruction  by  the  an-
gel was  just*  This  is  not  Conscientiousness  giving  opposite
decisions  on  the  same  ease;  but  the  intellect  presenting
different  cases,  or  different  views  of  the  same  case,  and
Conscientiousness  producing  its  peculiar  emotion,  in  regard
to  each  according  as  it  is  laid  before  it

This  organ  is  occasionally  found  diseased,  and  then  the
most  awful  sentiments  of  guilt,  generally  imaginary,  har-
row up  the  mind.  I  have  seen  two  individuals  labouring
under  this  disease.  One  of  them  believed  himself  to  be  in
debt  to  an  enormous  amount,  which  he  had  no  means  of
paying.  The  other  imagined  himself  to  be  guilty  of  mur-
der, and  every  variety  of  wickedness  contained  in  the  re-
cords of  iniquity;  when,  in  feet,  the  whole  conduct  of  both
while  in  health,  had  been  marked  by  the  greatest  honour
and  scrupulosity.  When  this  organ,  and  that  of  Cautious-
ness, are  diseased  at  the  same  time,  the  individual  imagines
himself  to  be  the  most  worthless  of  sinners,  and  is  visited
with  fearful  apprehensions  of  punishment.  Such  patients
sometimes  present  a  picture  of  despair  which  is  truly  appal-
ling. Slight  degrees  of  disease  of  these  organs,  not  amount-
ing to  insanity,  are  not  unfrequent  in  this  country,  and  pro-
duce an  inward  trouble  of  the  mind,  which  throws  a  gloom
over  life,  and  leads  such  persons  to  see  only  the  terrors  of
religion.

In  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  stated  that  gratitude
probably  arises  from  this  faculty;  but  Sir  G.  S.  Macken-
zie, in  his  "  Illustrations  of  Phrenology,"  has  shewed  that
"  gratitude"  is  much  heightened  by  Benevolence, — a  view
in  which  I  now  fully  acquiesce.

It  is  premature  to  speak  of  the  combinations  of  the  facul-
ties, before  we  have  finished  the  detail  of  the  simple  func-
tions ;  but  this  is  the  most  proper  occasion,  in  other  respects,
to  observe,  that  Phrenology  enables  us  to  account  for  the
origin  of  the  various  theories  of  morals  before  enumerated.


CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.  80S

Hobbes,  for  instance,  denied  every  natural  sentiment  of
justice,  and  erected  the  laws  of  the  civil  magistrate  into  the
standard  of  morality.  This  doctrine  would  appear  natural
and  sound  to  a  person  in  whom  Conscientiousness  was  very
feeble ;  who  never  experienced  in  his  own  mind  a  single
emotion  of  justice,  but  who  was  alive  to  fear,  to  the  desire  of
property,  and  other  affections  which  would  render  security
and  regular  government  desirable.  It  is  probable  that
Hobbes  was  so  constituted.

Mandeville  makes  selfishness  the  basis  of  all  our  actions,
but  admits  a  strong  appetite  for  praise;  the  desire  for
which,  he  says,  leads  men  to  abate  other  enjoyments,  for  the
sake  of  obtaining  it.  If  we  conceive  Mandeville  to  have
possessed  a  deficient  Conscientiousness,  and  a  large  Love  of
Approbation,  this  doctrine  would  be  the  natural  language
of  his  mind.

Mr  Hume  erects  utility,  to  ourselves  or  others,  into  the
standard  of  virtue ;  and  this  would  be  the  natural  feeling  of  a
mind  in  which  Benevolence  and  Reflection  were  strong,  and
Conscientiousness  weak.

Paley  makes  virtue  consist  in  obeying  the  will  of  God,
as  our  rule,  and  doing  so  for  the  sake  of  eternal  happiness
as  the  motive.  This  is  the  natural  language  of  a  mind  in
which  the  selfish  or  lower  propensities  are  considerable,  and
in  which  Veneration  is  strong,  and  Conscientiousness  not
remarkable  for  vigour.

Cudwobth,  Hutcheson,  Reid,  Stewart  and  Brown  *,
on  the  other  hand,  contend  most  eagerly  and  eloquently  for

•  I  embrace  this  opportunity  of  paying  a  humble  tribute  to  the  talents
of  the  late  Dr  Thomas  Brown.  The  acuteness,  depth,  and  comprehen-
siveness of  intellect  displayed  in  his  works  on  the  Mind,  place  him  in  the
highest  rank  of  philosophical  authors ;  and  these  great  qualities  are  equal*
led  by  the  purity  and  vividness  of  his  moral  perceptions.  His  powers  of
analysis  are  unrivalled,  and  his  eloquence  is  frequently  splendid.  His
M  Lectures"  will  remain  a  monument  of  what  the  human  mind  was  capa-
ble of  accomplishing,  in  investigating  its  own  constitution,  by  an  imper*
feet  method  In  proportion  as  Phrenology  shall  become  known,  the  ad-
miration of  his  genius  will  increase;  for  it  is  the  highest  praise  to  say,


304  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS.

the  existence  of  an  original  sentiment  or  emotion  of  justice
in  the  mind,  altogether  independent  of  other  considerations;
and  this  is  the  natural  feeling  of  persons  in  whom  this  facul-
ty is  powerful..  A  much  respected  individual,  in  whom*
this  organ  is  predominantly  large,  mentioned  to  me,  that
no  circumstance  in  philosophy  occasioned  to  him  greater
surprise,  than  the  denial  of  the  existence  of  a  moral  facul- .
ty ;  and  that  the  attempts  to  prove  it  appeared  to  him  like
endeavours  to  prop  up,  by  demonstration,  a  self-evident
axiom  in  mathematical  science.

The  organ  is  regarded  as  established.


17.— HOPE.

This  organ  is  situated  on  each  side  of  that  of  Veneration,
and  extends  under  part  of  the  frontal  and  part  of  the  parie-
tal bones.  It  cannot  be  brought  into  outline  in  a  drawing,
and  on  this  account  no  figure  is  given.

Dr  Gall  considered  Hope  as  belonging  to  every  faculty ;
but  Dr  Spurzheim  very  properly  observes,  that  although
every  faculty  being  active  produces  desire,  as  Acquisitive-
ness the  desire  for  property,  and  Love  of  Approbation  the
desire  for  praise;  yet  this  is  very  different  from  Hope,
which  is  a  simple  emotion,  sui  generis,  susceptible  of  being
directed  in  a  great  variety  of  ways,  but  not  desiring  any

that,  in  regard  to  many  points  of  great  difficulty  and  importance  in  the
Philosophy  of  Mind,  he  has  arrived,  by  his  own  reflections,  at  conclusions
harmonizing  with  those  obtained  by  phrenological  observation.  Of  this,
his  doctrine  on  the  moral  emotion  discussed  in  the  text,  is  a  striking  in*
stance.  Sometimes,  indeed,  his  arguments  are  subtle,  his  distinctions  too
refined ;  and  his  style  is  circuitous ;  but  the  phrenologist  will  pass  lightly
over  these  imperfections,  for  they  occur  only  occasionally,  and  arise  from
mere  excess  of  the  faculties  of  Secretiveness,  Comparison,  Causality,  and
Wit;  on  a  great  endowment  of  which,  along  with  Concentrativeness,  his
penetration  and  comprehensiveness  depended.  In  fact,  he  possessed  the
organs  of  these  powers  largely  developed,  and  they  afford  a  key  to  his
genius.


HOPE.  305

one  class  of  things  as  its  peculiar  objects.  Nay,  desire  is
sometimes  strong,  when  Hope  is  feeble  or  extinct  ;  a  crimi-
nal on  the  scaffold  may  ardently  desire  to  live,  when  he  has
no  hope  of  escaping  death.  Dr  Spurzheim  was  convinced,
by  analysis,  that  Hope  is  a  distinct  primitive  sentiment ;
and  was  led  to  expect  that  an  organ  for  it  would  exist.
Numerous  observations  have  since  determined  the  situation
of  the  organ,  on  the  sides  of  Veneration ;  and  it  is  now  ad-
mitted by  phrenologists  in  general  as  established.  Dr
Gall,  however,  continued  till  bis  death  to  mark  the  func-
tions of  this  part  of  the  brain  as  unascertained.

The  faculty  produces  the  sentiment  of  Hope  in  general,
or  the  tendency  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  what  the
other  faculties  desire,  but  without  giving  the  conviction  of
it,  which  depends  on  Reflection.  Thus  a  person  with
much  Hope  and  much  Acquisitiveness,  will  hope  to  become
rich ;  another,  with  much  Hope  and  great  Love  of  Appro-
bation, will  hope  to  rise  to  eminence;  and  a  third,  with
much  Hope  and  great  Veneration,  will  hope  to  be  saved,
and  to  enjoy  eternal  felicity  in  heaven.  It  inspires  with
gay,  fascinating  and  delightful  emotions;  painting  futurity
fair  and  smiling  as  the  regions  of  primitive  bliss.  It
spreads  freshness  and  joyousness  over  every  prospect,
while  Cautiousness  hangs  clouds  and  mists  over  distant
objects  seen  by  the  mind's  eye.  Hence  he  who  has  Hope
more  powerful  than  Cautiousness,  lives  in  the  enjoyment
of  brilliant  anticipations,  which  are  never  realized;  while
he  who  has  Cautiousness  more  powerful  than  Hope,  habi-
tually labours  under  the  painful  apprehension  of  evils
which  rarely  exist,  except  in  his  own  internal  feelings.
The  former  also  enjoys  the  present,  without  being  annoyed
by  fears  about  the  future,  for  Hope  supplies  his  futurity
with  every  object  which  his  fancy  desires,  quite  undisturb-
ed by  the  distance  of  attainment;  the  latter,  on  the  other
hand,  cannot  enjoy  the  pleasures  within  his  reach,  through
fear  that,  at  some  future  time,  they  may  be  lost.  The  life
of  such  an  individual  is  spent  in  painful  apprehension  of


306  HOPE,

evils,  to  which  he  is  in  fact  very  little  exposed;  for  the
dread  of  their  happening  excites  him  to  ward  them  off  hy
so  many  precautions  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  they  ean
overtake  him.

When  too  energetic  and  predominant,  this  faculty  dispo-
ses to  credulity,  and,  in  mercantile  men,  leads  to  rash  and
inconsiderate  speculations.  Persons  so  endowed  never  see
their  own  situation  in  its  true  light,  but  are  prompted  by
extravagant  Hope  to  magnify  tenfold  every  advantage,
while  they  are  blind  to  every  obstacle  and  abatement.
They  promise  largely,  but  rarely  perform.  Intentional
guile,  however,  is  frequently  not  their  object;  they  are  de-
ceived themselves  by  their  constitutional  tendency  to  be-
lieve every  thing  possible  that  is  future,  and  promise  in  the
spirit  of  this  credulity.  Those  who  perceive  the  disposi-
tion in  them,  ought  to  exercise  their  own  judgment  on  the
possibility  of  performance,  and  make  the  necessary  abate-
ment in  their  expectations.  Experience  accomplishes  little
in  correcting  those  who  possess  too  large  an  organ  of  Hope;
the  tendency  to  expect  immoderately  being  constitutional,
they  have  it  not  in  their  power  to  see  both  sides  of  the  pros-
pect, and,  beholding  only  that  which  is  fair,  they  are  ne-
cessarily led  to  conclude  that  all  is  well.  When  the  organ
is  very  deficient,  and  that  of  Cautiousness  large,  a  gloomy
despondency  is  apt  to  invade  the  mind ;  and  if  Destructive-
ness  be  large,  the  individual  may  resort  to  suicide  to  escape

from  woe.

The  faculty,  if  not  combined  with  much  Acquisitiveness
or  Love  of  Approbation,  disposes  to  indolence,  from  the
very  promise  which  it  holds  out  of  the  future  providing  for
itself.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  combined  with  these  or-
gans in  a  full  degree,  it  acts  as  a  spur  to  the  mind,  by  uni-
formly representing  the  object  desired  as  attainable.  An
individual  with  much  Acquisitiveness,  great  Cautiousness,
and  little  Hope,  will  save  to  become  rich ;  another  with  the
same  Acquisitiveness,  little  Cautiousness,  and  much  Hope,
will  speculate  to  procure  wealth.  I  have  found  Hope  and
Acquisitiveness  large  in  persons  addicted  to  gaming.


HOPE.  307

Hope  has  a  great  effect  in  assuaging  the  fear  of  death.  I
hare  seen  persons  in  whom  it  was  very  large  die  by  inches,
and  linger  for  months  on  the  brink  of  the  grave,  without
suspicion  of  the  fate  impending  over  them.  They  hoped  to
be  well,  till  death  extinguished  the  last  ember  of  the  feel-
ing. On  the  other  hand,  when  Hope,  and,  Combativeness,
which  gives  courage,  are  small,  and  Cautiousness  and  Con-
scientiousness large,  the  strongest  assurances  of  the  Gospel
are  not  always  sufficient  to  enable  the  individual  to  look
with  composure  or  confidence  on  the  prospect  of  a  judg-
ment to  come.  Several  persons  in  whom  this  combination
occurs,  have  told  me  that  they  lived  in  a  state  of  habitual
uneasiness  in  looking  forward  to  the  hour  of  death;  while
others,  with  a  large  Hope  and  small  Cautiousness,  have  said
that  such  a  ground  of  alarm  never  once  entered  their  ima-
ginations. Our  hopes  or  fears  on  a  point  of  such  import-
ance as  our  condition  in  a  future  state,  ought  to  be  found-
ed on  grounds  more  stable  than  mere  constitutional  feel-
ing; but  I  mention  these  cases  to  draw  attention  to  the
fact,  that  this  cause  sometimes  tinges  the  whole  conclusions
of  the  judgment;  and  the  existence  of  such  a  source  of
delusion  being  known,  its  effects  may  more  easily  be  re-
sisted.

In  religion,  this  faculty  favours  the  exercise  of  faith;  and
by  producing  the  natural  tendency  to  look  forward  to  fu-
turity with  expectation,  disposes  to  belief  in  a  life  to  come.
The  metaphysicians  admit  this  faculty,  so  that  Phrenolo-
gy only  reveals  its  organ,  and  the  effects  of  its  endowment,
in  different  degrees.  I  have  already  stated  an  argument
in  favour  of  the  Being  of  a  God,  founded  on  the  existence
of  a  faculty  of  Veneration  conferring  the  tendency  to  wor-
ship, of  which  God  is  the  proper  and  ultimate  object.
May  not  the  probability  of  a  future  state  be  supported  by
a  similar  deduction  from  the  possession  of  a  faculty  of
Hope  ?  It  appears  to  me  that  this  is  the  faculty  from
which  originates  the  notion  of  futurity,  and  which  carries

u  2


308  HOPE.

the  mind  forward  in  endless  progression  into  periods  of
everlasting  time.  May  it  not  be  inferred,  that  this  instinc-
tive tendency  to  leave  the  present  scene,  and  all  its  enjoy-
ments, to  spring  forward  into  the  regions  of  a  far  distant
futurity,  and  to  expatiate,  even  in  imagination,  in  the  fields
of  an  eternity  to  come,  denotes  that  man  is  formed  for  a
more  glorious  destiny  than  to  perish  for  ever  in  the  grave  ?
Addison  beautifully  enforces  this  argument  in  the  Specta-
tor, and  in  the  soliloquy  of  Cato  ;  and  Phrenology  gives
weight  to  his  reasoning,  by  shewing  that  this  ardent  Hope,
"  this  longing  after  immortality,9'  is  not  a  factitious  senti-
ment, or  a  mere  exuberance  of  an  idle  and  wandering  ima-
gination, but  that  it  is  the  result  of  a  primitive  faculty  of
the  mind,  which  owes  at  once  its  existence  and  its  functions
to  the  Creator.

Pope  beautifully  describes  the  influence  of  the  sentiment
of  Veneration,  in  prompting  us  to  worship,  blindly  indeed,
when  undirected  by  information  superior  to  its  own.  He
falls  also  into  the  idea  now  started  in  regard  to  Hope,  and
represents  it  as  the  source  of  that  expectation  of  a  future
state  of  existence,  which  seems  to  be  the  joy  and  delight  of
human  nature,  in  whatever  stage  of  improvement  it  has
been  found.

"  Lo !  the  poor  Indian  whose  untutored  mind
Sees  God  in  clouds,  or  hears  him  in  the  wind ;
His  soul  proud  science  never  taught  to  stray
Far  as  the  solar  walk,  or  milky  way ;
Yet  simple  nature  to  his  hope  has  given,
Behind  the  cloud-topt  hill,  an  humbler  heaven ;
Some  safer  world,  in  depth  of  woods  embraced ;
Some  happier  island  in  the  watery  waste ;
Where  slaves  once  more  their  native  land  behold,
No  fiends  torment,  no  Christians  thirst  for  gold.*'

The  organ  is  established.


(     309     )


18.— WONDER.

This  organ  is  situated  immediately  above  Ideality.

Dr  Gall  observed,  that  some  individuals  imagine  them*
selves  to  be  visited  by  apparitions  of  persons  dea4  or  ab-
sent ;  and  he  asks,  How  does  it  happen,  that  men  of  consi-
derable intellect  often  believe  in  the  reality  of  ghosts  and
visions  ?  Are  they  fools,  or  impostors?  or,  Is  there  a  par-
ticular organization,  which  imposes,  in  this  form,  on  the
human  understanding  ?  and,  How  are  such  illusions  to  be
explained?  He  then  enters  into  a  historical  sketch  of  the
most  remarkable  instances  of  visions.  Socrates  spoke
frequently  and  willingly  to  bis  disciples  of  a  demon  or  spi-
rit, which  served  him  as  a  guide*  Dr  Gall  remarks,  that
he  is  quite  aware  of  the  common  explanation,  that  Socra-
tes referred  only  to  the  force  and  justness  of  his  own  un-
derstanding i  but  adds,  that  if  he  had  not  himself  believed
in  a  genius  communicating  with  him,  the  opinion  that  he
had  one  would  have  been  lost  in  the  twenty-three  years,
during  which  Aristophanes  had  made  it  a  subject  of  ri-
dicule, and  his  accusers  would  not  have  revived  it  as  a
charge  against  him.  Joan  of  Arc  also  related  an  appear-
ance of  St  Michael  to  her,  who  told  her  that  God  had
pity  on  France,  and  that  she  was  commissioned  to  raise  the
siege  of  Orleans,  and  to  instal  Charles  VII.  as  King,  at
Rheims.  Tasso  asserted  himself  to  have  been  cured  by
the  aid  of  the  Virgin  Mart,  and  St  Scholastic,  who  ap-
peared to  him  during  a  violent  attack  of  fever.  In  the  his-
torical1 notes  which  accompany  the  life  of  Tasso,  the  fol-
lowing anecdote  appears,  extracted  from  the  Memoirs  of
Manso,  Marquis  of  Villa,  published  after  the  death  of
Tasso,  his  friend.

"  Tasso,  in  his  delirium,  believed  that  he  conversed

with  familiar  spirits.    One  day,  when  the  Marquis  endca.

t


310  WONDER.

voured  to  drive  these  ideas  from  his  mind,  Tasso  said  to
him,  '  Since  I  cannot  convince  you  by  reason,  I  shall  do
so  by  experience ;  I  shall  cause  the  spirit,  in  which  you
refuse  to  believe,  to  appear  to  your  own  eyes/  I  accepted
the  offer,"  says  the  Marquis,  "  and  next  day,  when  we  sat
by  the  fire  conversing,  he  turned  his  eyes  towards  the  win-
dow; and  looking  with  stedfast  attention,  appeared  so  com-
pletely absorbed,  that  when  I  called  to  him,  he  did  not  an-
swer. '  See !'  said  he,  at  length,  '  See  !  my  familiar  spirit
comes  to  converse  with  me/  I  looked  with  the  greatest
earnestness,  but  could  see  nothing  enter  the  apartment.
In  the  mean  time,  Tasso  began  to  converse  with  this  mys-
terious Being.  I  saw  and  heard  himself  alone.  Some-
times he  questioned,  and  sometimes  answered ;  and  from
his  answers,  I  gathered  the  sense  of  what  he  had  heard.
The  subject  of  his  discourse  was  so  elevated,  and  the  ex-
pressions so  sublime,  that  I  felt  myself  in  a  land  of  ecsta-
sy. I  did  not  venture  to  interrupt  him,  nor  to  trouble  him
with  questions,  and  a  considerable  time  elapsed  before  the
spirit  disappeared.  I  was  informed  of  its  departure  by
Tasso,  who,  turning  towards  me,  said,  *  In  future  you  will
cease  to  doubt.'  '  Rather,'  said  I,  '  I  shall  be  more  scepti-
cal, for  although  I  have  heard  astonishing  words,  I  have
seen  nothing.'  Smiling,  he  replied,  <  You  have  perhaps
heard  or  seen  more  than — '  He  stopt  short ;  and,  fearing  to
importune  him  by  my  questions,  I  dropt  the  conversa-
tion *."  Dr  Gall  quotes  this  dialogue  from  "  La  Vie  du
Tasso,  publiee  a  Londres  en  1810 ;"  and  I  have  translated
from  Dr  Gall's  citation  f.

Swedenboug  believed  himself  miraculously  called  to  re-
veal to  the  world  the  most  hidden  mysteries*  "  In  1743,"
says  he,  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  manifest  himself  to  me,
and  appear  personally  before  me,  to  give  me  a  knowledge

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  341.
f  For  the  original,  see  Rev.  Mr  Black's  Life  of  Tasso,  vol.  ii.
p.  240.


WONDER.  .         311

of  the  spiritual  world,  and  to  place  me  in  communication
with  angels  and  spirits,  and  this  power  has  been  conti-
nued with  me  till  the  present  day."  u  Swkdenborg,"
says  his  biographers,  "  was  a  man  of  unquestionable  sin-
cerity, but  one  of  the  most  extravagant  enthusiasts  that
ever  existed  *."

Dr  Gall  remarked,  in  the  first  fanatic  who  fell  under
his  observation,  a  large  development  of  the  part  of  the
brain  lying  between  the  organs  of  Ideality  and  Imitation,
and  subsequently  met  with  many  similar  instances.  Dr
Jung  Stilling,  says  he,  whom  he  often  saw  with  the  late
Grand  Duke  of  Baden,  was  a  tailor  in  his  youth,  then  a
tutor,  afterwards  doctor  in  medicine,  moralist,  divine,
journalist,  illuminatus,  and  visionary ;  and  in  him  this  part
of  the  brain  was  largely  developed.  He  believed  firmly  in
apparitions,  and  wrote  a  book  in  exposition  of  this  doc-
trine. In  the  Mcdscn  de  Detention  at  Berne,  Dr  Gall  saw
aYanatic,  who  believed  that  Jesus  Christ,  surrounded  by
a  brilliant  light,  as  if  a  million  of  suns  had  combined  their
splendours,  had  appeared  to  him  to  reveal  the  true  religion.
A  gentleman,  who  moves  in  the  best  society  in  Paris,  asked
Dr  Gall  to  examine  his  head.  The  Doctor's  first  remark
was,  "  You  sometimes  see  visions,  and  believe  in  appari-
tions." The  gentleman  started  from  his  chair  in  astonish-
ment, and  said,  that  he  had  frequent  visions ;  but  never,
up  to  this  moment,  had  he  spoken  on  the  subject  to  any
human  being,  through  fear  of  being  set  down  for  being  ab-
surdly credulous.  On  another  occasion,  Dr  Gall,  when
he  observed  the  development  of  the  head  of  Dr  W.,  said,
that  he  ought  to  have  a  strong  liking  for  the  marvellous
and  supernatural.  «  For  once,"  replied  he,  "  you  are
completely  mistaken,  for  I  have  laid  down  the  rule  to  be-
lieve in  nothing  which  cannot  be  mathematically  demon-
strated." After  talking  with  him  on  various  scientific  sub-
jects, Dr  Gall  turned  the  conversation  towards  animal
magnetism,  which  appeared  a  fit  topic  to  put  the  mathe-

•  Lib.  cit.  p.  342.


312  WONDER.

matical  rigour  of  his  proofs  to  the  test.  He  instantly  be-
came greatly  animated,  assured  Dr  Gall  again  very  so-
lemnly, that  he  admitted  nothing  as  true  that  was  not  ma-
thematically demonstrated ;  but  added,  he  was  convinced
that  a  spiritual  being  acted  in  magnetism;  that  it  operated
at  great  distances;  that  no  distance  indeed  presented  an
obstacle  to  its  action,  and  that,  on  this  account,  it  could
sympathize  with  persons  in  any  part  of  the  world.  "  It  is
the  same  cause,19  continued  he,  "  which  produces  appari-
tions. Apparitions  and  visions  are  rare,  no  doubt,  but
they  undoubtedly  exist,  and  I  am  acquainted  with  the  laws
which  regulate  their  production."  "  On  this  occasion,2'  says
Dr  Gall,  "  I  thought  within  myself,  that  my  inference
from  his  development  was  not  so  very  erroneous  as  the
worthy  Doctor  wished  me  to  believe."

A  man  named  Halleran,  of  Vienna,  imagined  himself
continually  accompanied  by  a  familiar  spirit ;  he  saw  the
spirit,  and  conversed  with  it.  When  he  reached  his  six-
tieth year,  his  genius  appeared  as  if  he  wished  to  leave
him,  and  only  on  certain  days  in  the  month  was  he  fa-
voured with  his  presence.  At  Gersbach,  near  Durlach,  in
the  Grand  Ducby  of  Baden,  Dr  Gall  knew  a  curate  who
was  confined  because  he  conceived  himself  to  have  a  fami-
liar spirit  At  Manheim  there  was  a  man  who  saw  himself
continually  attended  by  several  spirits:  Sometimes  they
marched  at  his  side,  in  visible  forms ;  at  other  times  they
attended  him  under  ground.  In  these  persons  Dr  Gall
found  the  part  of  the  brain  in  question  largely  developed.  He
states  as  questions  for  consideration,  "  Does  this  convolu-
tion form  part  of  the  organ  of  Imitation  ?  and,  Does  its  ex-
treme development  exalt  the  talent  for  mimicry,  to  such  a
degree  as  to  personify  simple  ideas,  and  to  give  them,  thus
metamorphosed,  a  locality,  out  of  the  individual  ?  or,  Does
it  constitute  parts  both  of  Ideality  and  Imitation  ?  or,  final-
ly, Does  it  constitute  a  separate  organ  ?  These  points  can
be  determined  only  by  farther  researches  *."
•  Sur  lcs  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  346.


WONDER.


313


Sir  Walter  Scott  observes,  that  "  no  man  ever  suc-
ceeded in  imposing  himself  on  the  public  as  a  supernatural
personage,  who  was  not  to  a  certain  degree  the  dupe  of  his
own  imposture  #."

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  the  organ  appears  large  in  the

busts  of  SOCBATES,   JOAN    OF   ARC,   C  ROM  WELL,    SwEDBN-

borg,  and  other  individuals  by  whom  the  tendency  before
described  has  been  manifested.

In  the  portrait  of  Tasso,  it  and  Ideality  both  appear
largely  developed.


Dr  Spurzheim,  in  his  recent  work  "  Phrenology  f,"
observes,  "  There  is  still  a  sentiment  which  exerts  a  very
great  influence  over  religious  conceptions,  and  which,  in
my  opinion,  contributes  more  than  Veneration  to  religious
faith.  Some  find  all  things  natural,  and  regulated  by  the
laws  of  creation ;  many  others  are  amused  with  fictions,
tales  of  wonders,  and  miraculous  occurrences*  They  find
in  every  passing  event  extraordinary  and  wonderful  cir-
cumstances, and  are  constantly  searching  after  whatever
can  excite  admiration  and  astonishment.  This  sentiment
is  to  be  observed  among  mankind  at  large,  both  among  sa-
vages and  civilized  nations.  In  every  age,  and  under
every  sky,  man  has  been  guided  and  led  by  his  credulity
and  superstition.  The  founders  of  ail  nations  have  had  a
fabulous  origin  ascribed  to  them,  and  in  all  countries  mi-
raculous traditions  and  marvellous  stories  occur  in  ample


*  Life  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  vol  iv\  p.  88.
t  P.  206.


814  WONDER.

abundance.  There  are  many  disposed  to  believe  in  dreams,
sorcery,  magic,  astrology,  in  the  mystic  influence  of  spirits
and  angels,  in  the  power  of  the  devil,  in  second  sight,  and
in  miraeles  and  incomprehensible  representations  of  all
sorts.  Some,  also,  are  disposed  to  have  visions,  and  to  see
ghosts,  demons,  and  phantoms.  This  sentiment  gains  cre-
dence to  die  true  and  also  to  the  false  prophet,  aids  super-
stition, but  is  also  essential  to  firith  tod  refined  religion.
It  is  more  or  less  active,  not  «*>iy  ki  different  individuals,
but  also  in  whole  nations.  Its  functions  are  often  disorder-
ed, constituting  one  species  of  insanity.

"  The  legislators  of  antiquity,  award  of  the  great  influ-
ence of  this  faculty,  made  frequent  use  of  it  to  enforce  and
to  confirm  their  laws*  They  spoke  in  the  name  of  God,  of
angels,  or  of  supernatural  powers.  In  our  own  days,  the
religious  sects  of  Swedenborgians,  Methodists,  Quakers,  and
many  others,  particularly  demonstrate  its  influence  and
presence.  In  dramatic  representations,  the  introduction  of
ghosts,  angels,  transformations,  and  supernatural  events,
proclaims  its  activity  both  in  the  author,  and  in  the  public,
by  whom  such  exhibitions  are  relished  and  sought  after.

"  The  existence  of  this  feeling  is  certain.  Its  organ  is
situated  anterior  to  Hope,  and  a  great  development  of  the
convolutions  on  which  it  depends,  enlarges,  and  elevates
the  superior  and  lateral  parts  of  the  frontal  bone.  It  is  re-
markably prominent  in  the  heads  of  Socrates,  of  Tor-
quato  Tasso,  Dr  Price,  Young  Stilling,  Wesley,  &c.
My  observations  on  it  are  extremely  numerous,  and  I  con-
sider it  as  established.9'

My  own  observations  on  this  organ  are  the  following.—
I  have  met  with  persons  excessively  fond  of  news,  which,
if  extravagant,  were  the  more -acceptable;  prone  to  the  ex-
pression of  surprise  and  astonishment  in  ordinary  discourse;
deeply  affected  by  tales  of  wonder;  delighting  in  the
Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments,  and  the  mysterious  inci-
dents abounding  in  the  Waverley  Novels ;  and  in  them  I
have  uniformly  found  the  part  of  the  brain  in  question


WONDEB.  315

largely  developed.  When  the  organ  predominates  in  an
individual,  there  is  a  peculiar  look  of  Wonder,  and  an  un-
conscious turning  up  of  the  exterior  angles  of  the  eye*
lashes,  expressive,  of  surprise.  In  other  persons,  I  have
found  the  part  of  the  brain  in  question  small,  and  in  them
it  was  accompanied  with  a  staid  soberness  of  feeling,  diame*
trically  the  opposite  of  the  manifestations  above  described.
Such  individuals  were  annoyed  by  every  thing  new  oar
strange;  they  scarcely  felt  or  expressed  surprise,  and  had
no  taste  for  narratives  leaving  the  beaten  track  of  probabi-
lity or  reality,  and  soaring  into  the  regions  of  supernatu-
ral  fiction*  On  analyzing  these  manifestations,  they  all
appear  to  be  referrible  to  the  sentiment  of  Wonder,  an
emotion  which  is  quite  distinguishable  from  those  hitherto
enumerated.

Philosophers  have  long  been  puzzled  to  account  for  the
circumstance,  that  a  particular  form  of  furniture  or  dress
is  pleasing,  and  is  regarded  as  even  beautiful,  when  first
introduced,  but  that  it  appears  ridiculous  and  antiquated,
after  it  has  been  superceded  by  a  newer  fashion.  Probably
one  cause  of  this  feeling  may  be  found  in  the  faculty  now
under  consideration ;  and  the  agreeable  impressions  made
on  it  by  new  objects,  may  be  one  source  of  the  gratification
which  a  change  of-  fashion  affords.  Love  of  Approbation
unquestionably  prompts  multitudes  to  follow  the  fashion*
without  much  relish  for  novelty  itself;  but  some  indivi-
duals must  take  the  lead,  and  tljere  must  be  some  prin-
ciple in  the  mind  to  be  gratified  by  mere  change,  which
excites  them  to  do  so ;  and  Wonder  may  contribute  to  this
effect.  Indeed,  as  every  faculty  has  a  useful  and  legitimate
sphere  of  action,  I  am«disposed  to  infer,  that  the  legitimate
tendency  of  this  sentiment  is  to  inspire  the  mind  with  a
longing  after  novelty  in  every  thing,  and  that  its  proper
effect  is  to  stimulate  to  invention  and  improvement.  Fa-
shion is  not  a  real  element  of  beauty  in  external  objects ;
and  to  persons  who  possess  a  good  endowment  of  Form,
more  pleasing  and  permanently  agreeable,  than  forms  of


316  WONDER.

Constructiveness  and  Ideality,  intrinsic  elegance  is  much
less  merit,  recommended  merely  by  being  new.  Hence
there  is  a  beauty  which  never  palls,  and  there  are  objects
oyer  which  fashion  exercises  no  contrail.  A  Chinese
teapot  may  be  rendered  agreeable,  by  being  fashionable,
but  will  look  ugly  when  the  mode  changes ;  while  a  vase  of
exquisite  form  will  please  in  all  countries  and  in  all  ages.
The  teapot  I  conceive  to  owe  its  attractions  to  the  impres-
sion which  its  novelty  makes  on  the  faculty  of  Wonder ;
but  when  this  has  ceased,  it  is  judged  of  by  its  proper  qua-
lities, and  condemned,  from  the  inelegant  proportions  be-
ing then  criticised  by  the  eye  of  taste ;  while  the  vase,  by
gratifying  the  faculties  which  take  cognizance  of  intrinsic
beauty,  continues  always  to  please.  This  view  is  strength-
ened by  the  fact,  that  the  greatest  votaries  of  fashion  have
frequently  execrably  bad  taste ;  a  result  perfectly  accordant
with  the  supposition,  that  the  mere  love  of  novelty  is  the
chief  element  in  this  disposition.

The  French  in  general  possess  a  considerable  develop-
ment of  the  organs  of  Ideality,  Wonder,  and  Love  of  Ap-
probation ;  and  they  have  long  been  celebrated  as  leaders
of  fashion.  Their  ordinary  discourse,  also,  is  replete  with
terms  of  admiration  and  approbation,  which  to  English-
men appear  excessive.  Every  object  is  "  superbe,"  "  mag-
nifique ;"  and  the  terms  ban,  beau,  excellent,  express  such
faint  praise  as  almost  to  imply  disapprobation.

Captain  Ross,  R.  N.  mentioned  to  me,  that  young  men,
born  and  bred  up  in  inland  situations,  who  enter  the  Navy
voluntarily,  generally  possess  a  large  development  of  this
organ,  the  gratification  of  which,  he  inferred,  incites  them
to  choose  the  sea  as  a  profession.

According  to  this  view,  Wonder  may  aid  genius,  by
prompting  to  novelty  in  all  the  conceptions  of  the  mind.  Dr
Samuel  Johnson  is  strongly  suspected  of  having  believed
in  ghosts  and  apparitions,  which  indicates  an  excessive  en-
dowment of  this  faculty ;  and  his  style  is  full  of  new  words
and  unusual  forms  of  expression,  to  which*  he  was  pro-


WONDER.  317

bably  led  by  the  same  feeling.  Dr  Chalmers  also  shews
a  strong  tendency  to  coin  new  vocables,  and  occasionally
to  give  strange  turns  to  his  discourse ;  which  perhaps  ori-
ginates from  Wonder  acting  with  Comparison,  as  his  bril-
liancy and  elevation  spring  chiefly  from  Ideality.  Mr
Ten  n ant,  the  author  of  Anster  Fair,  and  Mr  Hazlitt,
shew  some  degree  of  the  same  disposition  in  their  writings ;
and  I  have  observed  the  organ  full  in  both  of  their  heads*
The  faculty  prompts,  as  Dr  Spurzheim  remarks,  to  the
use  of  machinery  in  poetry,  and  to  the  introduction  of  su-
pernatural agency.  In  the  portraits  of  Shakspeare,  and
the  busts  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  it  is  large.

Dr  Spurzheim  concludes  his  account  of  this  faculty
with  the  following  remarks.  "  The  preceding  facts,"  says
he,  "  determined  me  formerly  to  designate  this  feeling  by
the  name  of  Supernaturality ;  and  it  is  certain  that  it  is
principally  manifested  by  a  belief  in  miraculous  and  supernctr
tural  circumstances^  in  the  foundation  of  religion  by  super-
natural means,  and  in  its  dogmatical  points.  As,  however,
the  feeling  may  be  applied  both  to  natural  and  supernatu-
ral events,  and  in  every  case  fills  the  mind  with  amaze-
ment and  surprise,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  change  the  name  of
Supernaturality  into  that  of  Marvellousness.  This  name  I
prefer  to  that  of  Wonder,  adopted  by  Mr  Combe,  because,
according  to  Dr  Johnson's  Dictionary,  wonder  is  applicable
only  to  surprise  excited  by  natural  objects,  whilst  marvel-
lousness  embraces  both  kinds  of  astonishment  caused  by  na-
tural and  supernatural  circumstances."

When  Dr  Spurzheim  observes,  in  the  foregoing  passage,
that  this  faculty  is  "  principally  manifested  by  a  belief  in
miraculous  and  supernatural  circumstances,'9  I  do  not  un-
derstand him  to  mean  that  this  belief  is  its  legitimate  func-
tion. The  period  when  Divine  Power  manifested  itself  by
extraordinary  means  was  brief,  and  is  long  since  past ;  and
philosophy  cannot  acknowledge  any  object  or  event  that
occurs  in  the  present  day  as  miraculous  or  supernatural;  a
special  faculty,  therefore,  for  belief  in  such  objects  appears


318  WONDER.

inadmissible.  The  feet,  however,  mentioned  by  Dr  Spube-
heim,  that  persons  in  whom  this  organ  is  large  have  a  na-
tural disposition  to  believe  in  the  wonderful  and  miracu-
lous is  certain.  Some  individuals,  so  endowed,  have  in-
formed me,  that  when  any  marvellous  circumstance  is
communicated  to  them*  the  tendency  of  their  minds  is  to
believe  it  uritkont  examination;  and  that  an  effort  of  philo-
sophy is  necessary  to  resist  the  belief,  instead  of  evidence
being  requisite  to  produce  it.  This  tendency  appears  to
me  to  arise  from  too  great  energy  in  this  faculty,  not  di-
rected by  reflection;  but  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
idea,  that  the  primary  sentiment  is  that  of  Wonder.  Every
propensity  and  sentiment  desires  objects  suited  to  afford  it
gratification;  Acquisitiveness  longs  for  wealth,  Love  of
Approbation  for  praise;  and,  in  like  manner,  Wonder  will
ardently  desire  the  marvellous.  Individuals,  therefore,  in
whom  the  organ  is  large,  will  delight  in  extraordinary  nar-
ratives, and  the  pleasure  felt  in  them  will  render  the  in-
tellect little  prone  to  a  severe  scrutiny  of  their  truth ;  hence
the  tendency  to  believe  in  such  communications  is  easily
accounted  for.  Still,  however,  this  longing  for  the  mar-
vellous appears  to  be  an  abuse  of  the  sentiment  Philoso-
phy does  not  recognise  the  "  supernatural,"  while  it  ad-
mits surprise  at  new  and  extraordinary  circumstances  as  a
legitimate  state  of  mind*  With  the  greatest  deference  to
Dr  SroMHmM,  therefore*  Wonder  appears  to  me  to  be
As  more  correct  name  for  this  faculty ;  and  in  this  ana-
lysis I  am  supported  by  the  authority  of  the  metaphyst-


This  organ,  in  a  state  of  exaltation,  is  the  great  foun-
tain of  fanaticism  in  religion.  When  largely  developed,  it
is  liable  to  energetic  activity,  from  its  mere  physical  size,
and  the  impression*  which  it  then  excites  are  mistaken  by
persons  ignorant  of  its  nature  for  direct  communications
from  heaven,  and  reason  is  contemned.  It  is  then  also
liable  to  be  vividly  called  into  action  by  external  commu-
nications of  a  marvellous  and  fanatical  -character,   and

4


WONDER.  SI  9

hence  the  wildest  dogmatist  pretending  to  superior  illumi-
nation, finds  no  difficulty  in  drawing  after  him  a  crowd  of
devoted  admirers.

Dr  Adam  Smith,  in  the  History  of  Astronomy  ♦,  calls
Wonder  a  sentiment,  and  attempts  to  distinguish  it  from
surprise,  "  We  wonder"  he  says,  "  at  all  extreme  and  un-
common objjects ;  at  all  the  rarer  phenomena  of  nature ;  at
meteors,  comets,  eclipses ;  at  singular  plants  and  animals ;
and  at  every  thing,  in  short,  with  which  we  have  before
been  either  little,  or  not  at  all  acquainted;  and  we  still
wonder,  though  forewarned  of  what  we  are  to  see."

"  We  ace  surprised,"  he.  continues,  "  at  those  things
which  we  have  seen  oftetu>  but  which  we  least  of  all  ex-
pected to  meet  with  in  the  place  where  we  find  them ;  we
are  surprised  at  the  sudden  appearance  of  a  friend,  wham
we  have  seen  a  thousand  times,  but  whom  we  did  not  ima-
gine we  were  to  see  there."

Dr  Thomas  Beown  f  also  admits  Wonder  as  a  primitive
emotion,  and  contends.with  success,  that  surprise  and  won-
der are  intrinsically  the  same  feeling,  only  excited  by  dif-
ferent objects  or  occurrences.  We  wonder  at  the  comet,
from  its  novelty;  we  are  surprised  to  meet  a  friend  in
Edinburgh,  whom  we  believed  to  be  in  London ;  but  it  is
the  novel  and  unexpected  situation  in  which  we  meet  him,
that  causes  the  surprise,  and  not  his  appearance  itself.

Dr  Brown  J  somewhat  strangely  observes,  that.  "  it
seems  most  probable  that  the  feeling  of  wonder,  which  now
attends  any  striking  event  that  is  unexpected  by  us,  would
not  arise  in  the  infant  mind  on  the  occurrence  of  events,  all
of  which  might  be  regarded  as  equally  new  to  it;  since
uxmder  implies,  not  the  mere  feeling  of  ncmtUy,  but  the
knowledge  of  seme  other  circumstances,  which  were  ex-
pected to  occur,  and  is,  therefore,  I  conceive,  inconsistent
with  absolute  ignorance."  The  facts  which  we  daily  observe
prove  the  very  opposite  of  this  doctrine*     The  organ  of

•  Page  2.  f  Vol.  iii.  p.  69.  t  Vol.  iii.  p.  55.


320  WONDER.

Wonder  existing,  every  new  object  excites  it,  and  calls
forth  the  emotion ;  and  hence  the  greater  the  ignorance,  the
more  frequent  and  more  intense  the  astonishment,  for  then
every  occurrence  is  novel.

Dr  Brown  *  observes  more  justly,  that  "  we  may  be
struck  at  the  same  time  with  the  beauty  or  grandeur  of  a
new  object,  and  our  mixed  emotion  of  the  novelty  and
beauty  combined,  will  obtain  the  name  of  admiration?'

Mr  Stewart  and  Dr  Reid  do  not  treat  of  this  emotion.

The  subject  of  visions  is  still  attended  with  considerable
difficulty.  I  have  met  with  cases  similar  to  those  recorded
by  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim.  In  London  Bedlam,  I  exa-
mined the  head  of  a  patient  whose  insanity  consisted  in
seeing  phantoms,  and  being  led  to  act  as  if  they  were  reali-
ties ;  although,  as  he  himself  stated,  he  was  convinced  by
his  understanding  at  the  very  time,  that  they  were  mere
illusions ;  but  could  not  regulate  his  conduct  by  this  con-
viction. In  him  the  organ  of  Form  was  well  developed,
and  that  of  Wonder  was  decidedly  large.  When  asked
whether  he  experienced  any  sensation  in  the  head  when  af-
flicted with  visions,  he  pointed  to  the  spot  on  each  side
where  the  organ  of  Wonder  is  situated,  and  said  that  he
felt  an  uneasy  sensation  there.

In  the  Richmond  Lunatic  Asylum  in  Dublin,  I  saw  se-
veral patients  in  whom  this  organ  predominates,  and  whose
insanity  consisted  in  believing  themselves  to  be  superna-
tural Beings,  or  inspired.  See  Phrenological  Journal,
vol.  vi.  p.  81.  84.

I  have  also  seen  a  person  in  the  west  of  Scotland,  who  is
liable  to  spectral  illusions.  He  is  thirty-eight  years  of  age,
in  sound  health,  remarkably  intelligent,  and  by  no  means
liable  to  extravagance  either  in  his  sentiments  or  ideas.  He
mentioned  that  there  is  almost  constantly  present  to  his
mind  the  appearance  of  a  carpet  in  motion,  and  spotted
with  figures.     On  visiting  Glasgow,  he  saw  a  large  log  of

•  Vol.  iU.  p.  57.


WONDER.  321

wood,  mounted  on  two  axles  and  four  wheels,  passing  along
the  street ;  and  on  returning  home,  the  apparition  of  the
timber  and  its  vehicle,  with  the  horses,  driver,  &c.  stood
before  him  in  the  dimensions  and  hues  of  actual  existence.
On  another  occasion,  he  saw  a  funeral  pass  by  the  bottom
of  Queen  Street,  Glasgow ;  and  for  some  time  afterwards,
whenever  he  shut  his  eyes  or  was  in  darkness,  the  proces-
sion moved  before  his  mind,  as  distinctly  as  it  had  previ-
ously done  before  his  eyes.  These  are  merely  a  few  in-
stances, out  of  many,  of  objects  and  beings  whom  he  has
seen  reappearing  to  his  fancy.  He  is  not  conscious  of  the
appearance  of  the  phantom  of  any  object  which  he  has  not
previously  seen ;  and  he  is  rarely,  or  almost  never,  troubled
with  these  visions,  when  actual  existences  are  before  his
eyes  in  broad  light;  but  at  all  times  they  appear  to  a
greater  or  less  extent  when  his  eyes  are  shut,  or  darkness
prevails*  His  head  is  in  general  well  formed ;  the  differ-
ent organs,  with  the  exception  of  the  organ  of  Wonder
(which  is  decidedly  large,  and  which  seems  to  be  the  origin
of  this  affection),  are  fairly  proportioned;  the  Knowing  Or-
gans preponderating  a  little  over  the  Reflecting.

He  mentioned,  that  this  peculiarity  has  descended  to  his
son.  Lately,  the  boy  made  up  to  what  he  conceived  to  be
a  beggar-man,  and  endeavoured  to  speak  to  him.  The
figure  retired ;  and  the  boy  followed,  till  it  disappeared  at
a  high  wall,  seeming  to  glide  into  it  The  boy  ran  up  to
the  wall,  and  groped  it  with  his  hands,  when  he  discovered
that  the  beggar  was  a  spectral  illusion.  I  had  not  an  op-
portunity of  examining  the  head  of  the  son ;  but  the  father
stated,  that,  in  other  respects,  there  was  no  peculiarity
about  his  mental  constitution.

This  tendency  of  mind,  occurring  in  remote  and  secluded
districts  of  the  Highlands,  has  probably  given  rise  to  the
second  sight.  The  individual  above  described,  if  placed  in
a  situation  where  his  chieftain,  his  clansmen,  their  dogs
and  their  flocks,  were  almost  the  only  animated  objects
presented  to  his  eyes,  would  have  been  visited  with  fre-

x


322  WONDER.

quent  spectral  appearances  of  them.  If,  after  the  occur-
rence of  such  apparitions,  the  chief  had  been  killed,  or  the
clansmen  drowned,  or  their  flocks  buried  in  the  snow,  the
coincidence  would  have  been  marked,  and  the  event  held
to  have  been  predicted  by  an  exercise  of  the  second  sight.
Where  nothing  followed  the  spectres,  nothing  would  be
said  of  their  appearance,  just  as  happens  in  the  case  of
dreams.  A  correspondent  of  the  Phrenological  Society  *,
gives  an  account  of  a  Highland  gentleman,  who  believed
that  an  apparition  of  the  second  sight  had  occurred  to  him-
self;  and  he  states,  that,  in  his  head,  the  organ  of  Wonder
is  large.

At  the  same  time,  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend,  how  an
exalted  state  of  this  organ  should  produce  these  effects,
unless  we  suppose  it  to  excite  the  organs  of  Form,  Co-
louring, &c.  to  activity,  so  as  to  conjure  up  illusions
fitted  for  the  gratification  of  Wonder;  just  as  involunta-
ry activity  of  Cautiousness  during  sleep,  excites  the  in-
tellectual organs  to  conceive  objects  of  terror,  producing
thereby  frightful  dreams.  This  theory  is  rendered  pro-
bable by  the  fact,  that  diseased  excitement  of  the  knowing
organs  produces  spectral  illusions,  independently  of  an  af-
fection of  the  organ  of  Wonder.  Mr  Simpson  has  commu-
nicated an  admirable  paper  on  this  subject  to  the  Phreno-
logical Journal  f,  to  which  I  shall  have  occasion  afterwards
to  refer.

The  general  function  of  the  organ  is  regarded  as  ascer-
tained ;  but  its  metaphysical  analysis  is  still  incomplete.


19. — IDEALITY.

This  organ  is  situated  nearly  along  the  lower  edge  of  the
temporal  ridge  of  the  frontal  bone.  Dr  Gall  gives  the  fol-
lowing account  of  its  discovery.

•  No.  vli.  p.  362.  f  No.  vi.  p.  *90.


IDEALITY.  823

The  first  poet  whose  head  arrested  his  attention,  on  ac-
count of  its  form,  was  one  of  his  friends,  who  frequently
composed  extempore  verses  when  least  expected  to  do  so ;
and  who  had  thereby  acquired  a  sort  of  reputation,  although
in  other  respects  a  very  ordinary  person.  His  forehead
immediately  above  the  nose,  rose  perpendicularly,  then  re-
treated, and  extended  itself  a  good  deal  laterally,  as  if  a
part  had  been  added  on  each  side.  He  recollected  having
seen  the  same  form  in  the  bust  of  Ovid.  In  other  poets,
he  did  not  find,  as  a  constant  occurrence,  the  forehead  first
perpendicular  and  then  retreating,  so  that  he  regarded  this
shape  as  accidental;  but  in  all  of  them  he  observed  the
prominences  in  the  anterior  lateral  parts  of  the  head,  above
the  temples.  He  began  then  to  look  upon  these  promi-
nences as  the  distinctive  marks  of  a  natural  talent  for  poe-
try; but  still  he  spoke  to  his  hearers  on  the  subject  with  a
degree  of  doubt,  especially  as,  at  this  period,  he  was  not
convinced  that  a  talent  for  poetry  depended  on  a  primitive
mental  faculty.  He  waited,  therefore,  before  deciding  de-
finitively, till  he  had  made  a  greater  number  of  observa-
tions.

A  short  time  afterwards,  he  got  the  head  of  the  poet  Alx-
inger,  in  which  this  part  of  the  brain,  and  also  the  organ
of  Adhesiveness,  were  very  much  developed,  while  the  other
portions  were  so  only  in  a  small  degree.  A  little  after  this,
the  poet  Junger  died,  and  Gall  found  the  same  promi-
nences also  in  his  head.  He  found  the  same  parts  still  lar-
ger in  the  poet  Blumauer,  with  a  large  organ  of  Wit  At
this  time,  Wilhelmine  Maisch  acquired  reputation  at
Vienna  by  his  poetry;  and  the  same  enlargement  was
found  in  his  head,  above  the  temples.  Dr  Gall  observed
the  same  organization  in  Madame  Laroche,  at  Offenbach,
near  Francfort;  in  Angelique  Kaufmann;  in  Sophia
Clementina  of  Merklen ;  in  Klopstock  ;  in  Schiller,
of  whom  he  had  a  mask ;  and  also  in  Gesner  of  Zurich.
In  Berlin  he  continued  to  speak  of  this  organ  still  with

x  2


824  IDEALITY.

considerable  reserve,  when  M.  Nicoiai  invited  him  and
Dr  Spurzheim  to  see  a  collection  of  about  thirty  busts  of
poets  in  his  possession.  They  found,  in  every  one  of  them,
the  part  in  question  projecting  more  or  less  considerably,
according  as  the  talent  was  manifested  in  a  higher  or  lower
degree  in  each  poet.  From  that  moment  he  taught  boldly,
that  the  talent  for  poetry  depends  on  a  primitive  faculty,
and  that  it  is  connected  with  this  part  of  the  brain  as  its
special  organ.

In  Paris,  Dr  Gall  moulded  the  head  of  Legouve'  after
his  death,  and  found  this  organ  large.  He  and  Dr  Spurz-
heim  opened  the  head  of  the  late  Delille,  and  pointed  out
to  several  physicians  who  were  present,  the  full  develop-
ment of  the  convolutions  placed  under  the  external  promi-
nences at  this  part;  these  convolutions  projected  beyond
all  the  others.  Dr  Gall  preserved  a  cast  of  one  of  the
hemispheres  of  the  brain;  so  that  this  statement  may  still
be  verified.  In  a  pretty  numerous  assemblage,  Dr  Gall
was  asked  what  he  thought  of  a  little  man,  who  sat  at  a
considerable  distance  from  him  ?  As  it  was  rather  dark,  he
said,  that,  in  truth,  he  could  not  see  him  very  distinctly,
but  that  he  observed,  nevertheless,  the  organ  of  poetry  ex-
tremely developed.  He  was  then  informed  that  this  was
the  famous  poet  Francois,  generally  named  Cordamuer9
from  his  having  been  bred  a  shoemaker*.  "  If  we  pass  in
review,"  says  Dr  Gall,  "  the  portraits  and  busts  of  the
poets  of  all  ages,  we  shall  find  this  configuration  of  head
common  to  them  all ;  as  in  Pindar,  Euripides,  Sophocles,
Heraclides,  Plautus,  Terence,  Virgil,  Tibullus,Ovid,
Horace,  Juvenal,  Boccacio,  Ariosto,  Aretin,  Tasso,
Milton,  Boileau,  J.  B.  Rousseau,  Pope,  Young,  Gros-
set,  Voltaire,  Gesner,  Klopstock,  Wieland,"  &c.  Dr
Bailly,  in  a  letter,  dated  Rome,  30th  May  1822,  addressed
to  Dr  Brayer,  says :  "  You  may  tell  Dr  Gall  that  I  have  a

*  A  cast  of  the  head  of  this  individual  is  in  the  Phrenological  Society's
collection,  Edinburgh,  and  in  Dx  Ville's  London.  The  organ  in  ques-
tion is  uncommonly  large.


IDEALITY,  325

mask  of  Tasso,  taken  from  nature,  and  that,  although  part
of  the  organ  of  poetry  be  cut  off,  nevertheless  the  lateral
breadth  of  the  cranium  in  this  direction  is  enormous."

The  bust  of  Homer  presents  an  extraordinary  develop*
ment  at  this  part  of  the  head.  It  is  doubted  whether  it  be
authentic ;  but,  be  it  real  or  ideal,  the  existence  of  the
prominence  is  remarkable.  If  it  be  ideal,  why  was  the
artist  ted  to  give  this  particular  form,  which  is  the  only  one
in  accordance  with  nature  ?  If  he  modelled  the  head  of  the
most  distinguished  poet  of  his  day,  as  the  best  representa-
tive of  Homer,  the  existence  of  this  development  is  still  a
fact  in  favour  of  the  organ.

We  owe  to  Dr  Spurzheim  the  correct  analysis  of  this
faculty,  and  the  very  elegant  and  appropriate  name  by
which  it  is  designated.  "  It  is  impossible,'9  says  he,  "that
poetry  in  general  should  bo  confined  to  one  single  organ ;
and  I  therefore  think  that  the  name  '  Organ  of  Poetry,
(used  by  Dr  Gall),  does  not  indicate  the  essential  facul-
ty."— "  In  every  kind  of  poetry,  the  sentiments  are  exalted,
the  expressions  warm ;  and  there  must  be  rapture,  inspi-
ration, what  is  commonly  called  Imagination  or  Fancy."

This  faculty  produces  the  desire  for  exquisiteness,  or  per-
fection, and  is  delighted  with  what  the  French  call "  Le  beau
ideal."  It  is  this  faculty  which  gives  inspiration  to  the
poet  The  knowing  and  reflecting  faculties  perceive  qua-
fities  as  they  exist  in  nature ;  but  this  faculty  desires,  for  its
gratification,  something  more  exquisitely  perfect  than  the
scenes  of  reality.  It  desires  to  elevate  and  to  endow  with
a  splendid  excellence -every  object  presented  to  the  mind*
It  stimulates  the  faculties  which  form  ideas  to  create  scenes,
.  in  which  every  object  is  invested  with  the  qualities  which
it  delights  to  contemplate,  rather  than  with  the  degree  of
excellence  which  nature  usually  bestows.  It  is  this  facul-
ty which  inspires  with  exaggeration  and  enthusiasm,  which
prompts  to  embellishment  and  splendid  conceptions.  It
gives  a  manner  of  feeling  and  of  thinking,  befitting  the  re-
gions of  fancy,  rather  than  the  abodes   of  men.    Hence


326  IDEALITY.

those  only  on  whom  it  is  powerfully  bestowed  can  possibly
be  poets,  and  hence  the  proverb,  "  Po&a  nascitur,  nan  Jit."
Those  who  experience  a  difficulty  in  conceiving  what  the
faculty  is,  may  compare  the  character  of  Blount  with
that  of  Raleigh  in  Kenilworth :  "  Bat  what  manner  of
animal   art   thou   thyself,  Raleigh,"   said  Tressilian,
"  that  thou  boldest  us  all  so  lightly?'— "  Who  I?"  replied
Raleigh,  "  An  eagle  am  I,  that  never  will  think  of  dull
earth,  while  there  is  a  heaven  to  soar  in,  and  a  sun  to  gaze
upon;" — Or  they  may  compare  the  poetry  of  Swift  with
that  of  Milton  ;  the  metaphysical  writings  of  Dr  Reid
with  those  of  Dr  Thomas  Brown  ;  the  poetry  of  Crabbe
with  that  of  Byron  ;  or  Dean  Swift's  prose  with  that  of
Dr  Chalmers.

It  was  this  faculty,  "  by  whose  aid"  Shakspeare  ima-
gined the  characters  of  Ariel  and  Prospero.  Prosperous
concluding  speech  in  the  Tempest,  is  a  beautiful  specimen
of  the  style  of  writing  which  it  produces*

"  I  have  bedimmed
The  noon-tide  sun,  calTd  forth  the  mutinous  winds,
And  *twixt  the  green  sea  and  the  azurM  vault
Set  roaring  war ;  to  the  dread  rattling  thunder
Have  I  giv'n  fire,  and  rifted  Jove's  stout  oak
With  his  own  bolt ;  the  strong  bas'd  promontory
Have  I  made  shake,  and  by  the  spurs  pluckt  up
The  pine  and  cedar ;  graves  at  my  command
Have  waked  their  sleepers ;  open'd  and  let  them  forth
By  my  so  potent  art    But  this  rough  magic
I  here  abjure ;  and  when  I  have  required
Some  heavenly  music,  which  even  now  I  do,
To  work  mine  end  upon  their  senses,  that
This  airy  charm  is  for ;  I'll  break  my  staff;
Bury  it  certain  fathoms  in  the  earth  ;
And,  deeper  than  did  ever  plummet  sound,
I'll  drown  my  book.*

Individuals  differ  exceedingly  in  regard  to  the  endow-
ment of  this  faculty  which  they  possess.  According  to  the
energy  and  activity  of  it,  poetry  is  prized  or  relished.  I
have  met  individuals  who  declared  that  they  could  perceive


IDEALITY.  327

no  excellence  in  poetical  compositions,  and  could  derive  no
gratification  from  them ;  and  yet  such  individuals  were  en-
dowed with  every  degree  of  understanding  and  penetration,
according  as  they  possessed  the  other  faculties  strongly  or
weakly,  and  were  not  uniformly  deficient,  either  in  moral
sentiments  or  judgment,  in  proportion  to  their  want  of
poetic  fire*

This  faculty  gives  a  peculiar  tinge  to  all  the  other  facul-
ties. It  makes  them,  in  every  thing,  aspire  to  Ideality.
A  cast  of  the  human  head  is  a  plain  transcript  of  nature ;
a  bust  is  nature,  elevated  and  adorned  by  the  ideality  of  a
Chantry,  a  Joseph,  or  a  Macdonald.  Add  a  large  de-
velopment of  this  organ  to  the  other  propensities,  sentiments
and  reflecting  powers,  and  it  expands  the  field  of  their  in-
terest; carries  them  outwards,  and  forwards,  and  upwards  :
and  causes  them  to  delight  in  schemes  of  improvement.  In
common  life,  we  easily  distinguish  those  who  have,  from
those  who  have  not,  a  considerable  endowment  of  it.  The
former  speak,  in  general,  in  an  elevated  strain  of  language,
and,  when  animated,  show  a  splendour  of  eloquence  and  of
poetical  feeling,  which  the  latter  are  never  able  to  com-  a
mand.  It  gives  to  conversation  a  fascinating  sprightliness
and  buoyancy,  the  very  opposite  of  the  qualities  expressed
by  the  epithets,  dryness  and  dulness.

Some  sects  in  religion,  and,  among  others,  that  most  re-
spectable body  The  Society  of  Friends,  declaim  against  or-
nament in  dress,  furniture,  and  other  modes  of  life ;  they
renounce  these  as  vanity,  while  they  hold  up  the  solid  and
the  useful  as  alone  worthy  of  rational  and  immortal  beings.
Now,  this  is  the  natural  feeling  of  persons  in  whom  Bene-
volence, Conscientiousness,  and  Veneration  are  large,  and
Ideality  very  deficient, — and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  ori-
ginal propounders  of  these  notions  possessed  this  combina-
tion ;  but  this  is  not  the  language  of  universal  human  na-
ture, nor  of  physical  nature  either.  Where  Ideality  exists
to  a  considerable  extent,  there  is  an  innate  desire  for  the
beautiful,  and  an  instinctive  love  and  admiration  of  it ;  and


£28  IDEALITY.

so  far.  from  the  arrangements  of  the  Creator  in  the  material
world  being  in  opposition  to  it,  he  has  scattered,  in  the
most  profuse  abundance,  objects  calculated,  in  the  highest
degree,  to  excite  and  gratify  the  feeling.  What  are  the
flowers  that  deck  the  fields,  combining  perfect  elegance  of
form  with  the  most  exquisite  loveliness,  delicacy,  and  har-
mony of  tint,  but  objects  addressed  purely  to  Ideality,  and
the  subordinate  faculties  of  Colouring  and  Form  ?  They
enjoy  not  their  beauty  themselves,  and  afford  neither  food,
raiment,  nor  protection  to  the  corporeal  frame  of  man :  on
this  account,  some  persons  have  been  led  to  view  them  as
merely  nature's  vanities  and  shows,  possessed  neither  of
dignity  nor  utility.  But  the  individual  in  whom  Ideality
is  large,  will  in  rapture  say,  that  they,  and  the  lofty  moun-
tain, the  deep  glen,  the  roaring  cataract,  and  all  the  varied
loveliness  of  hill  and  dale,  fountain  and  fresh  shade,  afford
to  him  the  banquet  of  the  mind ;  that  they  pour  into  his
soul  a  stream  of  pleasure  so  intense,  and  yet  so  pure  and
elevated,  that,  in  comparison  with  it,  all  the  gratifications
of  Acquisitiveness,  and  Self-Esteem,  and  Love  of  Appro-
bation, in  the  pursuits  of  wealth,  and  power,  and  conse-
quence, sink  into  insipidity  and  insignificance.  In  short,
to  the  phrenologist,  the  existence  of  this  faculty  in  the
mind,  and  of  external  objects  fitted  to  gratify  it,  is  one,
among  numberless  instances,  of  the  boundless  beneficence  of
the  Creator  towards  man ;  for  it  is  a  faculty  purely  of  en-
joyment, one  whose  sole  use  is  to  refine,  and  exalt,  and  ex-
tend, the  range  of  our  other  powers,  to  confer  on  us  higher
susceptibilities  of  improvement,  and  a  keener  relish  for  all
that  is  great  and  glorious  in  the  universe.

In  conformity  with  this  view,  the  organ  is  found  to  be
deficient  in  all  barbarous  and  rude  tribes  of  mankind,  and
large  in  the  nations  who  have  made  the  highest  advances  in
civilization.  It  is  small  in  atrocious  criminals ;  and  I  have
observed,  that  persons  who  are  born  in  the  lower  walks  of
life,  but  whose  talents  and  industry  have  raised  them  to
wealth,  are  susceptible  of  refinement  in  their  manners,  and


IDEALITY,  329

habits,  and  sentiments,  in  proportion  to  the  development  of
this  organ,  and  that  of  Love  of  Approbation.  When  it  is
small,  their  primitive  condition  is  apt  to  stick  to  them
through  life ;  when  large,  they  make  rapid  advances,  and
improve  by  every  opportunity  of  intercourse  with  their  su-
periors.

This  faculty,  then,  joined  with  Love  of  Approbation,  and
using  Constructiveness,  Form,  Colouring,  and  other  know-
ing faculties  as  their  instruments,  produce  all  the  orna-
ments of  dress  and  architecture ;  they  lead  to  the  produc-
tion of  poetry,  painting,  sculpture,  the  fine  and  ornamental
arts.  The  Society  of  Friends,  therefore,  and  the  followers
of  Mr  Owen,  who  declaim  against  ornament,  ask  us  to
shut  up  one  of  the  greatest  sources  of  enjoyment  bestowed
upon  us.  An  elegant  vase,  a  couch,  or  chair,  fashioned  in
all  the  delicacy  of  form  and  proportion  that  Ideality,  aided
by  the  other  powers,  can  attain,  or  the  human  form  attired
in  dress,  in  whieh  grace,  utility,  and  beauty,  are  combined,
are  objects  which  our  faculties  fed  to  be  agreeable ;  the
pleasure  arising  from  them  is  natural,  and  of  so  excellent
a  quality,  that  it  is  at  once  acknowledged  and  approved  of
by  intellect,  and  every  other  faculty  of  the  mind.

In  private  life,  Ideality  generally  displays  itself,  as  one
element  in  producing  correctness  of  taste.  Great  love  of
approbation  may  give  a  passion  for  finery,  but  we  some-
times see  intended  ornaments  turn  out  deformities;  through
a  want  of  taste  in  their  selection,  and  this,  I  conceive,  to
arise  partly,  from  a  defective  endowment  of  the  faculty  in
question.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  enter  a  house  in  which
exquisite  taste  reigns  in  every  object,  in  which  each  parti-
cular ornament  is  made  subservient  to  the  general  effect,
and  the  impression  from  the  whole  is  that  of  a  refined  and
pleasing  elegance;  we  may  be  almost  certain  of  finding
Love  of  Approbation  combined  with  large  Ideality  in  one  or
both  of  the  possessors.  Indeed,  where  the  degree  of  wealth
"is  equal  in  different  persons,  we  might  almost  guess  at  the
extent  of  these  two  faculties,  by  the  different  degrees  of


S30  IDEALITY.

splendour  in  their  domestic  establishment;  and  in  cases
where  homeliness  is  the  prevailing  feature,  while  affluence
is  enjoyed,  we  may  predicate  a  very  moderate  Ideality  in
the  one  or  other  of  the  heads  of  the  family.  I  have  fre-
quently observed,  in  persons  who,  from  a  humble  origin,
have  become  rich  by  commerce,  an  intense  passion  for  this
species  of  domestic  splendour,  and,  without  a  single  excep-
tion, I  have  remarked  Love  of  Approbation  and  Ideality
largely  developed  in  their  heads.

The  Plate  represents  the  organ  large  in  Chaucer,
Shakspearb,  Rousseau,  and  deficient  in  Locke  and  Wil-
liam Cobbett.

The  relish  for  poetry  or  the  fine  arts  is  generally  in  pro-
portion to  the  development  of  Ideality.  It  is  necessary
to  a  player  of  tragedy.  The  tone  or  note  of  voice  suit-
able to  Ideality  is  elevated  and  majestic,  and  hence  it
is  essential  to  enable  the  actor  to  feel  and  express  the  great-
ness of  the  personages  whom  he  represents.

In  some  individuals  the  front  part  of  this  organ  is  most
developed,  in  others  the  back  part ;  and  from  a  few  cases
which  I  have  observed,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the
latter  is  a  separate  organ.  The  back  part  is  left  without  a
number  on  the  bust,  and  a  point  of  interrogation  is  in-
scribed on  it,  to  denote  that  the  function  is  a  subject  of  in-
quiry. The  back  part  touches  Cautiousness;  and  I  suspect
an  excitement  of  this  organ,  in  a  moderate  degree,  is  an  in-
gredient in  the  emotion  of  the  sublime.  Tlffe  roar  of
thunder,  or  of  a  cataract;  the  beetling  cliff  suspended  half
way  betwixt  the  earth  and  heaven,  and  threatening  to
spread  ruin  by  its  fall, — impress  the  mind  with  feelings  of
terror ;  and  it  is  only  such  objects  that  produce  the  senti-
ment of  sublimity.  It  would  be  interesting  to  take  two  in-
dividuals with  equal  Ideality,  but  the  one  possessed  of
much,  and  the  other  of  little,  Cautiousness,  to  the  Vale  of
Glencoe,  the  Pass  of  Borrowdale,  the  Cave  of  Staffa,  or
some  other  scene  in  which  the  elements  of  the  sublime  pre-
dominate, and  to  mark  their  different  emotions.     I  suspect

4


1


IJeahty


Idwlitv


Ideality


Lhalif


'AJturss?.'


**   t'OBBl^


f/wrn  .f  A>t//'*7*  W Shr  Vtf*    SYSTEM cS*/W/{A\V0/.0/7y.  Ay   •?  7Ar>rr*.n?rt ,  A'."/, /,*,tir.t*  .  jy."  4%/»#  .*


IDEALITY.  381

the  large  Cautiousness  would  give  the  most  profound  and
intense  emotions  of  tublimity.

This  faculty,  like  all  others,  may  be  abused.  When  per-
mitted to  take  the  ascendancy  of  the  other  powers,  and  to
seek  its  own  gratification,  to  the  neglect  of  the  serious  du-
ties of  life,  and  when  cultivated  to  so  great  an  excess  as  to
produce  a  finical  and  sickly  refinement,  it  then  becomes  a
source  of  great  evils.  It  appears  in  Rousseau  to  have
reached  this  state  of  diseased  excitement  "  The  impossi-
bility of  finding  actual  beings  (worthy  of  himself),  threw
me,"  says  he,  "  into  the  regions  of  fancy ;  and  seeing  that
no  existing  object  was  worthy  of  my  delirium,  I  nourished
it  in  an  ideal  world,  which  my  creative  imagination  soon
peopled  to  my  heart's  desire.  In  my  continual  ecstasies,  I
drank  in  torrents  of  the  most  delicious  sentiments  which
ever  entered  the  heart  of  man.  Forgetting  altogether  the
human  race,  I  made  society  for  myself  of  perfect  creatures,
as  celestial  by  their  virtues  as  their  beauties,  and  of  sure,
tender,  and  faithful  friends,  such  as  I  have  never  seen  here
below.  I  took  such  delight  in  gliding  along  the  air  with
the  charming  objects  with  which  I  surrounded  myself,  that
I  passed  hours  and  days  without  noting  them ;  and  losing
the  recollection  of  every  thing,  scarcely  had  I  eaten  a  mor-
sel, but  I  burned  to  escape,"  and  return  to  this  enchanted
world.  The  theory  of  this  condition  of  mind  appears  to  be
this:  Rousseau  elevated  every  faculty  in  his  imaginary
personages,  till  it  reached  the  standard  of  excellence  fitted
to  please  his  large  Ideality,  and  then  luxuriated  in  con-
templation of  the  perfection  which  he  had  created.

In  common  life,  the  passion  for  dress,  ornament,  and
finery,  which  in  some  individuals  goes  beyond  all  reason-
able bounds,  and  usurps  the  place  of  the  serious  and  re-
spectable virtues,  results  from  an  abuse  of  Ideality,  Won-
der, and  Love  of  Approbation,  and  is  generally  combined
with  a  deficient  development  of  Conscientiousness  and  Re-
flection.

In  an  hospital,  Dr  Gall  found  this  organ  considerably


332  IDEALITY.

developed  in  a  man  who  was  insane ;  and  remarked  to  the*
physicians  who  accompanied  him,  that  he  observed  the  ex-
terior sign  which  indicated  a  talent  for  poetry.  The  patient,
in  point  of  fact,  possessed  this  talent ;  for  in  his  state  of  alie-
nation, he  continually  composed  verses,  which  sometimes
were  not  deficient  in  point  and  vigour.  He  belonged  to  the
lowest  class,  and  had  received  no  education.  In  the  col-
lection of  M.  Esquirol,  Dr  Gall  saw  a  mask  of  an  insane
person,  who  also  was  habitually  occupied  in  versifying  j
and  in  it  the  organ  in  question  is  considerably  larger  than
any  of  the  others.

This  faculty  corresponds  in  some  degree  to  that  of
"  Taste,"  admitted  by  Mr  Stewaet;  only  he  regards  taste
as  one  of  the  powers  acquired  by  habits  of  study  or  of  bu-
siness*

Dr  Thomas  Bhown  *  treats  of  beauty  as  an  original  emo-
tion of  the  mind,  and  his  doctrine  might,  with  the  change
of  names,  be  almost  adopted  by  the  phrenologist  in  speak-
ing of  Ideality.  According  to  our  doctrine,  the  knowing
and  reflecting  faculties  perceive  objects,  as  they  exist  in  na-
ture, say  a  landscape,  or  a  Grecian  temple;  and  the  faculty  of
Ideality,  excited  into  activity  by  their  features*  glows  with
a  delightful  and  elevated  emotion ;  and' to  the  qualities  in
the  external  objects  which  kindle  this  lively  sentiment  of
pleasure,  we  ascribe  the  attribute  of  beauty.  Beauty,
therefore,  as  a  strong'  emotion,  is  enjoyed  only  when  the
knowing  and-  reflecting  faculties  act  in  conjunction  with
Ideality.  If  the  intellect  acts  alone,  Ideality  remaining
quiescent,  no  vivid  feeling  of  beauty  will  be  experienced ;
—or,  if  a  person  is  extremely  deficient  in  Ideality,  then  the
most  lovely  objects  in  external  nature  will  appear  to  him
invested  in  all  their  attributes  of  form,  colour,  size,  and  re-
lative position ;  but  he  will  never  thrill  with  that  sublime
emotion,  or  that  ecstatic  delight,  which  draws  forth  the  ex-
clamation that  the  object  contemplated  is  exquisitely  beau-
tiful.     Dr  Thomas  Brown,  in  perfect  conformity  with*

•Vol.  iii.  p.  134U5.


\  _


IDEALITY.  333

this  doctrine,  says,  "  You  -are  now  in  no  danger  of  con-
founding that  view  of  Beauty,  which  regards  it  as  an  emo-
tion, dependent  on  the  existence  of  certain  previous  percep-
tions or  conceptions,  which  may  induce  it;  but  may  also,
by  the  operation  of  the  common  laws  of  suggestion,  induce,
at  other  times,  in  like  manner,  other  states  of  mind,  exclu-
sive of  that  emotion, — with  the  very  different  doctrine,
that  regards  beauty  as  the  object  of  a'  peculiar  internal
sense,  which  might,  therefore,  from  the  analogy  conveyed
in  that  name,  be  supposed  to  be  uniform  in  its  feelings,  as
our  other  senses,  on  the  presence  of  their  particular
objects,  are  uniform,  or  nearly  uniform,  in  the  intimations
afforded  by  them.  Such  a  sense  of  beauty,"  says  he,  "  as  a
fixed  regular  object,  we  assuredly  have  not ;  but  it  does  not
follow,  that  we  are  without  such  an  original  susceptibility
of  a  mere  emotion,  that  is  not,  like  sensation,  the  direct  and
uniform  effect  of  the  presence  of  its  objects,  but  may  vary
in  the  occasions  on  which  it  rises,  like  our  other  emotions ;
love,  for  example,  or  hate,  or  astonishment,  which  various
circumstances  may  produce,  or  various  circumstances  may
prevent  from  arising/9

If  Dr  Brown  had  added  to  his  theory,  that  some  indivi-
duals possess  from  nature  a  great  susceptibility  of  experien-
cing the  emotion  of  beauty,  while  others  appear  almost  in-
sensible to  it,  as  is  the  case  also  with  the  emotions  of  love,
hate,  and  astonishment,  which  he  mentions,  and  that  this
constitutional  difference  is  one  great  cause  of  the  different
perceptions  of  beauty  enjoyed  by  different  persons,  he  would
have  rendered  his  explanation  of  the  phenomena  nearly
complete.

Mr  Stewart  has  written  an  Essay  on  Beauty,  in  which
be  arrives  at  the  conclusion,  that  this  word  does  not  denote
one  single  and  simple  emotion  only,  but  that,  in  a  variety
of  instances,  in  which  external  objects  excite  agreeable
feelings,  they  are  said  to  be  beautiful,  although  the  kinds
of  emotion  which  they  call  forth  are  very  different.  Thus,
it  is  correct  speech  to  call  a  mathematical  theorem  beauti-

t


334  IDEALITY.      •

fill,  a  rose  beautiful,  and  a  lovely  woman  beautiful ;  yet  the
qualities  of  these  three  objects,  and  the  kinds  of  emotion
which  they  excite,  are  so  different,  that  they  have  no  com-
mon property,  except  that  of  the  feeling  excited  by  all  of
them  being  agreeable.

Mr  Stewart  appears  to  be  correct  in  this  observation,
and  it  is  valuable,  in  so  far  as  it  directs  our  attention  to
the  vagueness  of  the  word  beauty;  but  it  throws  no  light
on  the  theory  of  the  beautiful  itself.  Phrenology,  however,
enables  us  to  supply  Mr  Stewart's  deficiency  in  this  re-
spect. Every  faculty  is  gratified  with  contemplating  the
objects  to  which  it  is  naturally  related*  An  elevated  hymn
pleases  the  faculty  of  Veneration,  and  is,  on  account  of  rais-
ing this  delight,  pronounced  to  be  beautiful.  A  symmetrical
figure  gratifies  the  faculty  of  Form,  and,  on  account  of  the
pleasure  it  produces,  is  also  termed  beautiful.  A  closely
logical  discourse  pleases  Causality  and  Comparison,  and  on
this  account  is  also  said  to  be  beautiful.  Hence,  the  inven-
tors of  language,  little  prone  to  nice  and  metaphysical  dis-
tinctions, framed  the  word  beauty,  to  express  only  the  ge-
neral emotion  of  pleasure,  of  a  calm  and  refined  nature,
arising  in  the  mind,  on  contemplating  a  variety  of  outward
objects ;  and  in  this  sense  a  person  may  be  alive  to  beauty,
who  enjoys  a  very  imperfect  endowment  of  Ideality.  But
the  function  of  this  faculty  is  to  produce  a  peculiarly  grand
and  intense  emotion  of  a  delightful  nature,  on  surveying
certain  qualities  in  external  objects;  and  it  surpasses  so
vastly  in  strength  and  sublimity,  the  feelings  of  beauty
communicated  by  the  other  faculties,  that  it  may  itself  be
regarded  as  the  fountain  of  this  delightful  emotion,  and  be
styled  the  Faculty  of  the  emotion  of  Beauty.  When  active
from  internal  causes  it  desires  beauty,  splendour,  grandeur,
and  perfection,  for  its  gratification,  and  prompts  the  other
faculties  to  produce  and  seek  out  objects  invested  with
these  qualities.

The  question  has  been  much  agitated,  What  constitutes
poetry  ?    The  answer  afforded  by  Phrenology  is,  that  the


IDEALITY.  335

elements  of  poetry  are  all  the  feelings  and  perceptions  of
the  human  faculties,  and  all  their  productions  emhued  with
the  quality  of  Ideality.  Ideality  itself  is  a  primitive  emo-
tion, which  may  be  described  but  cannot  be  defined.  It
harmonizes,  and  may  therefore  blend  with  every  emotion,
conception,  and  production,  whose  striking  qualities  are
not  in  opposition  to  its  own  nature.  If  it  be  the  feeling  of
the  beautiful,  then  it  will  naturally  combine  with  the  high-
est and  best  manifestations  and  productions  of  the  other  fa-
culties, and  stand  opposed  to  all  imperfection.

By  communicating  the  desire  of  perfection,  Ideality  erects
a  high  standard  in  the  mind,  by  which  to  compare  actual  at-
tainments. Viewed  in  this  light,  it  appears  to  be  an  important
element  in  the  mental  constitution  of  man,  as  a  progressive  be-
ing. To  the  lower  animals,  which  cannot  pass  beyond  their
primitive  condition,  a  desire  of  arriving  at  a  more  perfect  state
would  have  been  a  source  of  pain ;  whereas  to  man,  with
an  undefined  scope  of  improvement  before  him,  no  feeling
could  be  more  useful  and  delightful.  When  regulated  by
reason,  the  perfection  which  it  aims  at  is  not  that  which
belongs  to  God  or  to  superior  Beings ;  but  that  which  re-
sults from  the  best  action  of  all  the  powers  of  man  as  a  li-
mited being.

Mr  Jeffrey's  article  on  Beauty,  in  the  Supplement  to
the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  *,  appears  to  me  to  proceed
on  a  misconception  of  the  theory  of  Dr  Brown,  and  to
be  unsound  and  inconsistent  with  human  nature.  Mr  Jef-
frey conceives  that  all  "  emotions  of  beauty  and  sublimity
must  have  for  their  objects  the  sufferings  or  enjoyments  of
sentient  beings ;"  and  he  rejects,  "  as  intrinsically  absurd
and  incredible,  the  supposition,  that  material  objects,  which
obviously  do  neither  hurt  nor  delight  the  body,  should  yet
excite,  by  their  mere  physical  qualities,  the  very  powerful
emotions  which  are  sometimes  excited  by  the  spectacle  of
Beauty."  Accordingly  he  lays  it  down,  that  the  pleasure
we  enjoy  in  contemplating  a  Highland  landscape,  arises
from  associating,  with  the  wilds  which  we  gaze  upon,  ideas

•  Page  lfil.


336  IDEALITY.

of  the  rude  sons  of  the  mist  and  the  mountain  who  inhabit
them ;  from  our  conjuring  up,  wlrile  we  look  upon  their
scenes,  recollections  of  their  loves,  their  hates,  their  strifes,
their  shouts  of  victory,  and  their  lamentations  over  the  dead;
and  from  our  ascribing  the  delight  occasioned  by  these  emo-
tions to  the  external  objects  themselves,  as  their  cause,  and
conceiving  them  to  possess  the  quality  of  beauty,  when  in
truth  they  are  only  the  occasions  which  excite  these  other
emotions  in  our  minds.  In  the  bust  of  Mr  Jeffrey,
Ideality  is  not  the  most  prominent  feature;  but  the  or-
gans of  Eventuality,  Comparison,  and  Causality  are  large ;
and  this  combination  would  produce  precisely  such  a
state  of  mind,  on  surveying  a  mountain-pass,  as  he  here
describes.  Ideality  not  being  very  energetic,  the  emotions
of  sublimity  and  grandeur  would  be  secondary  in  power ;
whereas  Eventuality,  Comparison,  and  Causality,  being
more  vigorous,  and  in  ceaseless  activity,  would  suggest  a
thousand  incidents  and  their  relations  connected  with  the
scene*  This  state  of  mind,  however,  would  be  peculiar  to
those  possessing  this  combination*

To  put  this  theory  to  the  test  of  experience,  I  accom-
panied a  French  gentleman  to  the  Trosachs,  and  marked
his  emotions  as  he  stood  right  in  the  gorge  of  the  pass  lead-
ing towards  Loch  Katrine*  He  was  comparatively  a  stran-
ger to  the  manners,  customs,  and  history  of  Scotland;  al-
though, at  the  same  time,  from  acquaintance  with  English
literature,  he  might  have  possessed  some  few  ideas  concern-
ing the  inhabitants  of  the  mountains  to  associate  with  the
rocks  which  he  beheld.  He  possessed,  however,  consider-
able Ideality,  -and  a  cultivated  understanding.  When  the
scene  burst  upon  him,  in  the  full  effulgence  of  its  glory,  he
stood  in  mute  astonishment  and  delight,  until  I  asked  him,
What  ideas  were  passing  in  his  mind  ?  His  answer  was,
"  Mon  Dieu,  je  sens,  et  je  lie  pense  pas."  I  explained  to
him  the  motive  of  the  question,  and  he  declared  that  he  ex-
perienced only  emotions  of  the  most  intense  and  elevating
kind;  that  every  nerve  thrilled  with  pleasure,  and  that  he


IDEALITY.  337

thought  of  nothing,  but  resigned  himself  entirely  to  these
delightful  sensations.  On  analyzing  his  emotions  he  said,
that  he  felt  his  mind  excited  to  rapture,  by  the  richness  and
exquisite  elegance  of  the  trees  and  shrubs  with  which  the
mountains  were  clothed;  that  his  soul  was  awed  into
sublimity,  by  the  stupendous  cliffs  which  towered  in  mag-
nificence to  the  clouds ;  and  that  even  the  chill  of  fear  crept
silently  along  his  nerves,  as  the  projecting  precipices  were
perceived  threatening  to  fall,  and  cut  off  communication  with
the  world  around  :  and  again  he  declared,  that  he  thought
not,  and  cared  not,  who  inhabited  the  wilds,  until  the
force  of  the  first  and  most  exquisite  impression  was  spent ;
and  then  his  mind  began  to  be  occupied  with  ideas  of  col-
lateral objects,  or  coolly  to  think,  and  every  moment  there-
after the  impression  diminished  in  intensity,  and  at  last
ceased  entirely  to  be  felt.

On  another  occasion  I  accompanied  a  gentleman,  also  of
education  and  a  cultivated  understanding,  but  with  little
Ideality,  to  the  same  spot.  He  looked  calmly  around  and
observed :  "  Pretty  trees  these  !  High  hills  !  Terrible  up-
roar of  elements  been  here !  Difficult  pass  for  the  High-
landers!" &c.  &c.  but  exhibited  no  emotion,  and  no  deep-
toned  sentiment  of  the  sublime,  like  the  other.

The  first  of  these  instances  shewed,  that  the  supposition
"  that  material  objects,  which  obviously  do  neither  hurt  nor
delight  the  body,  should  yet  excite,  by  their  mere  physical
qualities,  the  very  powerful  emotions  which  are  sometimes
excited  by  the  spectacle  of  beauty,"  is  not  quite  so  "  intrin-
sically absurd  and  incredible,"  as  Mr  Jeffrey  imagines;
while  the  second  instance  indicated  that  Ideality  is  truly
the  faculty  which  feels  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime,  and
that,  where  it  is  not  powerful,  the  most  magnificent  scenes
may  be  regarded  with  pleasure,  but  with  no  intense  feeling
of  beauty.

In  composition,  this  faculty  imparts  splendour  and  eleva-
tion to  the  style,  and  it  may  manifest  itself  in  prose  as  well
as  in  poetry.     The  style  of  Lord  Bacon  is  remarkably


336  IDEALITY.

imbued  with  the  splendours  of  Ideality,  sometimes  to  ex-
cess, while  that  of  Locke  is  as  decidedly  plain ;  and  the
portraits  of  both  shew  that  their  heads  corresponded  with
these  different  manifestations.  Hazlitt's  head,  which  I
have  seen,  indicates  a  large  development  of  Ideality,  and
the  faculty  glows  in  all  his  compositions.  In  Mr  Jeffrey's
head,  as  it  appears  in  the  bust,  it  does  not  predominate.
The  report  was  current  at  the  time,  that  the  review  of
Lord  Byron's  Tragedies,  which  appeared  in  No.  lxxii.  of
the  Edinburgh  Review  (February  1822),  was  the  joint  pro-
duction of  these  two  celebrated  authors;  and  keeping  in
view  the  fact,  that  Mr  Hazlitt's  Ideality  is  larger  than  Mr
Jeffrey's,  it  would  not  be  difficult,  by  a  careful  analysis
of  the  article,  to  assign  to  each  the  sentences  which  he
wrote.  Mr  Jeffrey's  predominating  intellectual  organs
are  Eventuality,  which  treasures  up  simple  incidents  and
observations;  Comparison,  which  glances  at  their  analogies
and  relations;  and  Causality,  which  gives  depth  and  logical
consistency  to  the  whole.  Hazlitt,  on  the  other  hand*
possesses  a  large  Comparison,  respectable  Causality,  with  a
decidedly  large  Ideality,  elevating  and  adorning  his  intel-
lectual conceptions.  Proceeding  on  these  views,  I  would
attribute  the  following  sentence  to  Jeffrey's  pen,  as  cha-
racteristic of  his  manner.  Speaking  of  the  qualities  of
Shakspeare's  writings,  the  reviewer  says,  "  Though
time  may  have  hallowed  many  things  that  were  at  first  but
common,  and  accidental  associations  imparted  a  charm  to
much  that  was  in  itself  indifferent,  we  cannot  but  believe
that  there  was  an  original  sanctity  which  time  only  matured
and  extended;  and  an  inherent  charm,  from  which  the
association  derived  all  its  power.  And  when  we  look  can-
didly and  calmly  to  the  works  of  our  early  dramatists,  it  is
impossible,  we  think,  to  dispute,  that,  after  criticism  has
done  its  worst  on  them ;  after  all  deductions  for  impossible
plots  and  fantastical  characters,  unaccountable  forms  of
speech,  and  occasional  extravagance,  indelicacy,  and  hor-
rors ;  there  is  a  facility  and  richness  about  them,  both  of


IDEALITY.  389

thought  and  of  diction;  a  force  of  invention,  and  a  depth
of  sagacity ;  an  originality  of  conception,  and  a  play  of
fancy ;  a  nakedness  and  energy  of  passion,  and,  above  all,
a  copiousness  of  imagery,  and  a  sweetness  and  flexibility  of
verse,  which  jb  altogether  ainrivsdled  ia,  earlier  or  in  la&er
times;  and -places  thetii,  in  oar  estimation,  in  the  very
highest  and  foremost  place  among  aacient  or  modern
poets  *•"  In  this  passage,  we  have  the  minuteness  of  enu-
meration of  Eventuality,  the  discrimination  of  Comparison
and  Causality,  and  the  good  taste  of  a  fair,  l^ufc  none  of  the
elevation,  ornament,  and  intensity  of  a  huge,  Ideality.  In
another  part  of 'the  same  review,  we  find  the  following  sen-
tences; In  Byron +,  "  there  are  some  sweet  lines,  and
many  of  great  weight  and  energy ;  but  the  general  march
of  the  verse  is  cumbrous  and  unmusical*  His  lines  do  not
vibrate  like  polished  lances,  at  once  strong  and  fight,  in
the  hands  of  his  persons,  but  are  wielded  like  clumsy  ha*
tons  in  a  bloodless  affray." — "  He  has  too  little  sympathy
with  the  ordinary  feelings  and  frailties  of  humanity,  to
succeed  well  in  their  representation.  His  soul  is  like  a
star,  and  dwells  apart.9' — "  It  does  not '  hold  the  mirror  up
to  nature,'  nor  catch  the  hues  of  surrounding  objects ;  but,
like  a  kindled  furnace,  throws  out  its  intense  glare  and
gloomy  grandeur  on  the  narrow  scene  which  it  irradiates."
Here  we  perceive  the  glow  of  Ideality ;  the  simplicity  of  the
former  style  is  gone,  and  the  diction  has  become  elevated,
figurative,  and  ornamental  I  am  not  informed  regarding
the  particular  sentences  which  each  of  the  above  gentlemen
wrote  in  this  review  ;  but  these  extracts  will  serve  as  brief
examples  of  the  differences  produced  on  the  style,  when
Ideality  sheds  few  or  many  beams  on  the  pen  of  the
author;  and  I  regard  the  probabilities  as  very  strong,  that
the  passages  are  assigned  to  their  appropriate  sources.
The  organ  is  ascertained.

•  P.  416-1 T.  f  P.  430.

Y   2


(     340     )


20.— WIT,  OR  MIRTHFULNESS.

Every  one  knows  what  is  meant  by  Wit,  and  yet  no
word  presents  more  difficulties  in  its  definition.  Dr  Gall
observes,  that,  to  convey  a  just  idea  of  the  faculty,  he  could
discover  no  better  method  than  to  describe  it  as  the  predo-
minant intellectual  feature  in  Rabelais,  Cervantes,  Boi-
leau,  Racine,  Swift,  Sterne,  Voltaire.  In  all  these
authors,  and  in  many  other  persons  who  manifest  a  similar
talent,  the  anterior-superior-lateral  parts  of  the  forehead
are  prominent  and  rounded.  When  this  development  is
excessively  large,  it  is  attended  with  a  disposition,  appa-
rently irresistible,  to  view  objects  in  a  ludicrous  light.

Wit,  however,  is  not  the  only  cause  of  laughter.  Laugh-
ter, like  crying,  may  arise  from  a  variety  of  faculties.  I
am  acquainted  with  a  boy  in  whom  Acquisitiveness  is
large,  and  he  laughs  when  one  gives  him  a  penny.  Ano-
ther youth  who  possesses  a  large  Love  of  Approbation,
laughs  when  unexpected  praise  is  bestowed  upon  him.
These  facts,  to  which  many  more  might  be  added,  shew
that  we  may  smile  from  any  pleasing  affection  of  the  senti-
ments, or  even  of  some  of  the  propensities ;  and  that  the
cause  of  a  smile  is  not  always  the  ludicrous.  This  view  is
confirmed  by  the  circumstances  which  occur  in  hysterical
affections.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  see  a  lady  or  child  laugh
and  cry  alternately  and  involuntarily,  apparently  on  ac-
count of  some  varying  affection  of  the  whole  mental  sys-
tem, rather  than  from  any  particular,  ludicrous,  or  dis-
tressing idea  presenting  itself  by  turns  to  the  fancy.  I
have  noticed  farther,  that  a  large  development  of  Hope,
Benevolence,  and  Wonder,  producing  happy  emotions,  pre-
disposes the  possessor  to  laugh ;  while  Veneration,  Consci-
entiousness, and  Reflection,  when  predominant,  give  rise
to  a  natural  seriousness  and  gravity,  adverse  to  laughter,
the  tone  of  these  faculties  being  grave  and  solemn.


wit.  841

There  may  be  much  excellent  wit,  without  exciting  us  to
faugh.  Indeed  Lord  Chesterfield  lays  it  down  as  a  cha-
racteristic feature  of  an  accomplished  gentleman,  that  he
should  never  laugh ;  and  although  this  rule  is  absurd,  yet
there  may  be  a  high  enjoyment  of  wit  without  laughter.  The
following  are  instances  in  point.  There  is  a  story  of  a  Not-
tinghamshire publican,  Littlejokn  by  name*  who  put  up  the
figure  of  Robin  Hood  for.  a  sign,  with  the  following  lines
below  it :

u  All  ye  that  relish  Ale  that's  good,
Come  in  and  drink  with  Robin  Hood;    '
If  Robin  Hood  is  not  at  home,
Come  in  and  drink  with  Littiejobu"

This  is  genuine  wit,  what  even  Chesterfield  would  al-
low to.  be  so;  and  yet  it  does  not  force  us  to  laugh*  Ano-
ther instance  is  the  following:  Louis  XV.  once  heard
that  an  English  nobleman  (Lord  Stair)  at  his  court  was
remarkably  like  himself.  Upon  his  Lordship's  going  to
court,  the  King,  who  was  very  guilty  of  saying  rude
things,  observed,  upon  seeing  him,  "  A  remarkable  like-
ness, upon  my  word ! — My  Lord,  was  your  mother  ever  in
France?"  To  which  his  Lordship  replied,  with  great  po-
liteness :  "  No,  please  your  majesty,  but  my  father  was."
This  also  is  admirably  witty ;  but  it  does  not  excite  laugh-
ter. In  Prior's  song  upon  a  young  lady  entreating  her
mother  to  allow  her  to  come  out  (as  it  is  called),  there  is
an  allusion  which,  also,  is  very  fine  wit,  although  it  is  not
laughable.  The  lady  is  alluding  to  the  liberty  enjoyed,
and  the  conquests  made, .  by  her  elder  Bister.  The  last
verse  is  as  follows :

«  Dear,  dear  mamma,  for  once  let  me
Like  her  my  fortune  try,
1*11  have  an  Earl  as  well  as  she,
Or  know  the  reason  why.1'

The  fair  prevailed,— mamma  gave  way,

And  Kitty,  at  her  desire,
Obtained  the  cba&jot  for  a  day,

AlCD  SET  THE  WORLD  ON  FIRE."


342  wit.

In  all  these  instances,  every  one  efidowed'  with  may  por-
tion of  the  organ  now  under  consideration,  must  feel  wit,
although  no  vivid  emotion  of  laughter  is  excited.  In
the  following  cases,  again,  the  risible  muscles  are  much
more  affected,  when,  in  fact,  the  real  point  of  wit  contained
in  them  is  infinitely  less*

:  The  story  of  the  Nottingham  publican,  named  Little-
•john,  who  erected  the  sign  of  Robin  Hood,  goes  on  to  say,
that  Mr  Littlejohn  having  died,  his  successor  thought  it
a  pity  to  lose  so  capital  a  sign,  and  so  much  excellent
poetry,  and  accordingly  retained  both,  only  erasing  his  pre-
decessor's name,  he  substituted  his  own  in  its  place.  The
lines  then  ran  thus :

"  All  ye  who  relish  Ale  that'f  good,

Come  in  and  drink  with  Robin  Hood;
If  Robin  Hood  is  not  at  home,

Come  in  and  drink  with  Samuel  Johjcson."

The  whole  wit  is  now  gone,  and  yet  the  lines  are  infi-
nitely more  laughable  than  before.  In  like  manner,  when
a  servant  let  k  tongue  fell  from  a  plate,  and  a  gentleman  at
the  table  said,  "  Oh,  never  mind ;  its  a  mere  lapsus  lin-
gua;" there  was  genuine  wit  in  the  remark;  but  when
another  servant,  who  had  heard  that  this  was  witty,  let  fall
a  shoulder  of  mutton,  and  thought  to  get  eflj  by  styling
this  accident,  too,  a  lapsus  lingua,  the  whole  wit  was  ex-
tinguished, but  laughter  would  be  more  irresistibly  pro-
voked. Now,  in  what  does  the  wit  of  the  first  instances
consist  ?  and  what  is  the  cause  of  the  more  laughable  effect
of  the  second  class  of  cases,  in  which  the  wit  k  actaally
extinguished  ?

This  leads  us  to  a  definition  of  Wit  Locke  describes
Wit  as  "  lying  most  in  the  assemblage  of  ideas,  and  put-
ting these  together  with  quickness  and  variety,  wherein  can
be  found  any  resemblance  or  congruity>  thereby  to  make  up
pleasant  pictures,  and  agreeable  visions  in  the  fancy  V

•  Eway,  b.  ii.  c  xi.  §  2.


wit.  84S

Now,  it  may  be  demonstrated,  that  this  definition  is  erro-
neous. For  example,  when  Goldsmith,  in  his  beautiful
verses  on  Hope,  compares  that  great  blessing  of  humanity
to  the  light  of  a  taper,  he  adds  a  circumstance  of  resem-
blance, which,  according  to  Locke's  definition,  would  be
the  perfection  of  Wit :

"  Hope,  like  the  glimmering  taper's  light,
Adorns  and  cheers  the  way.
And  itiU  at  darker  grow*  the  night
Bmto  a  brighter  rag.9*

But  this,  in  point  of  fact,  is  only  exquisitely  beautiful,  and
not  in  the  least  witty.  In  like  manner,  Moore,  in  the
following  verses,  introduces  comparisons,  which  also  are
admirably  beautiful,  but  destitute  of  every  ingredient  of
Wit  In  his  song  on  music's  powers  to  awaken  the  memo-
ry, he  says :

"  Like  the  gale  which  sighs  along
Beds  of  oriental  flowers,
Is  the  grateful  breath  of  song
That  once  was  heard  in  happier  hours.

Filled  with  balm,  the  gale  sighs  on,
When  the  flowers  have  sunk  in  death,

So  when  pleasure's  dream  is  gone,
lis  memory  Uvea  in  music's  breath**'

Again,  in  speaking  of  the  pains  of  memory,  he  says,

"  When  I  remember  all
The  friends  so  link'd  together,
I've  seen  around  me  fall
Like  leaves  in  wintry  weather ;

I  reel  like  one  who  treads  alone

Some  banquet  hall  deserted ;

Whose  lights  are  fled,  whose  garlands  dead,

And  all  but  he  departed."

In  these  instances  we  have  the  most  unexpected  resem-
blances presented  to  the  mind,  beautiful,  as  I  have  said,
but  not  witty ;  and  when  we  analyze  the  images,  we  are


344  wit.

aWc  to  refer  them  all  to  Comparison  and  Ideality  as  their
origins ;  the  suggestion  of  simple  resemblance,  adorned  with
beauty  being  their  constituent  elements.

Wherein,  then,  do  the  comparisons  which  are  witty,  such
as  those  already  cited,  or  HudibraJs  famous  simile,

"  When,  like  a  lobster  boiled,  the  morn
From  black  to  red  began  to  turn,"

differ  from  those  which  are  not  witty  ?  Tliis  brings  us  at
last  to  the  true  definition  of  Wit,  and  to  the  main  object
of  all  these  remarks,  the  functions  of  the  organ  now  under
consideration.

The  authority  of  the  metaphysicians  tends  to  support  the
idea  that  the  talent  for  perceiving  resemblances  is  distinct
from  that  which  discriminates  differences.  Malbraxche
observes,  that  "  There  are  geniuses  of  two  sorts.  The  one
remarks  easily  the  differences  existing  between  objects,  and
these  are  the  excellent  geniuses.  The  others  imagine  and
suppose  resemblances  between  things,  and  these  are  the  su-
perficial minds  *."  Locke  makes  the  same  distinction.
After  speaking  of  Wit,  as  "lying  most  in  the  assemblage
of  ideas  wherein  any  resemblance  can  be  found,"  he  pro-
ceeds thus:  "  Judgment,  on  the  contrary,  lies  quite  on  the
other  side,  in  separating  carefully,  one  from  another,  ideas
wherein  can  be  found  the  least  difference,  thereby  to  avoid
being  misled  by  similitude,  and  by  affinity,  to  take  one  thing
for  another  f."  Lord  Bacon  says,  that  w  the  chief  and  (as
it  were)  radical  distinction  betwixt  minds,  in  regard  to  phi-
losophy and  science,  is  this, — that  some  minds  have  greater
power,  and  are  more  fitted  for  the  observation  of  the  diffe-
rences, others  for  the  observation  of  the  resemblances,  of
«things."

These  ideas  will  be  better  understood  by  an  illustration.
The  objection  is  often  stated,  that  Phrenology  is  no  science,
because  a  large  organ  of  Destructiveness  and  a  large  organ
*  Rech  dc  la  Veriii,  liv.  ii.  2d  part  c.  ir.
•\  Essay,  &c  b.  ii.  c.  xi.  sect.  t.


wit.  .  %345

of  Benevolence  may  be  found  in  the  same  head,  and  then
they  will  neutralize  each  other,  like  an  acid  and  an  alkali.
This  objection  would  spring  from  a  mind  in  which  the
power  of  perceiving  resemblances  was  greater  than  that
which  perceives  differences,  and  would  appear  conclusive
at  first  sight  to  minds  similarly  constituted.  But  a  person
having  a  large  endowment  of  the  faculty  for  perceiving
distinctions,  would  discriminate  in  a  moment  the  difference
between  two  chemical  substances,  placed  in  a  state  of  me-
chanical mixture,  and  two  organs  subsisting  separately,
having  distinct  functions,  and  calculated  for  acting  on  dif-
ferent occasions ;  and  he  would  see  that  the  analogy  had
no  force  whatever.

The  question,  then,  occurs,  Which  is  the  faculty  that
perceives  differences?  Mr  Scott  has  been  led  to  believe,
that  it  depends  upon  the  faculty  of  Wit,  and  that  the  primi-
tive function  of  this  power  is  to  distinguish  differences,
while  Comparison  perceives  resemblances.  He  conceives
that  in  all  the  foregoing  instances  in  which  Wit  is  recognis-
ed, there  is  "  a  mixture  of  congruity  and  incongruity,  or
incongruity  appears  where  congruity  was  expected,"  which
in  principle  is  one  and  the  same  thing.  This  is  nearly
the  definition  of  Wit  given  by  Beattie,  and  it  also  ap-
proaches closely  to  that  given  by  Campbell  and  Dr  Thomas
Brown.  Now,  be  says  that  the  proper  function  of  the  facul-
ty under  discussion  is  to  perceive  difference,  to  observe,
in  short,  incongruity,  and  that  it  is  only  when  this  is  done
that  Wit  is  at  all  recognised.  The  wit  in  Lord  Stair's  re-
ply lies  in  the  incongruity  between  the  answer  which  Louis
received,  and  that  which  he  expected.  He  evidently  anti-
cipated that  Stair  would  say  that  his  mother  had  been  in
France;  and  the  King  meant  it  to  be  inferred,  that  she  had
been  false,  and  that  Stair  was  his  brother.  His  Lord-
ship's reply,  on  the  contrary,  completely  turned  the  tables
on  the  King.  "  No,  but  my  father  was,"  implied  that
Louis,  by  parity  of  reason,  was  descended  of  Stair's  father.


446  wit.

In  like  manner  when  Kitty

"  Obtained  fa  chariot  for  a  dap
And  set  the  world  on  fire  j*f

we  perceive  comparison  between  the  young  beauty's  exploit
and  that  of  Photon  with  the  chariot  of  the  Sun,  and  the  dif-
ference or  incongruity  is  so  striking,  that  we  feel  it  as  an
essential  ingredient  in  the  description,  and  relish  it  as  wit.
In  the  comparison  of  Hope  to  the  taper,  on  the  other  hand,

"  Which  still  as  darker  grows  the  night
Emits  a  brighter  ray,"

we  attend  only  to  the  resemblance,  which  is  very  striking
and  beautiful,  and  not  to  the  points  of  difference  ;  and  then
the  image  strikes  us  as  a  pure  comparison,  and  not  as  im-
plying any  incongruity,  and,  in  consequence,  it  is  not  felt
as  witty.

Wit,  therefore,  appears  to  consist  chiefly  in  an  intellectual
perception  of  difference,  of  congruity  amid  incongruity ;  and
hence  Wit,  like  an  argument,  may  be  retailed  a  thousand
times,  from  mind  to  mind,  without  losing  its  intrinsic  qua-
lities ;  while  humour,  which  is  ascribed  chiefly  to  Secretive-
ness,  is  entirely  personal,  and  must  be  witnessed  at  the  first
hand  to  be  at  all  enjoyed  *.    These  are  Mr  Scott's  ideas.

Dr  Spurzheim,  on  the  other  hand,  maintains  that  the
perception  of  resemblance  is  die  result  of  a  lower,  and  that
of  difference  of  a  higher,  degree  of  power  and  activity  in
each  intellectual  faculty ;  Colour,  for  example,  when  feeble,
sees  a  resemblance  between  hues,  which  by  a  more  powerful
organ  are  at  once  discerned  to  be  different ;  a  feeble  organ
of  Tune  perceives  harmonies,  where  a  higher  faculty  dis*
covers  discords ;  feeble  Causality  sees  resemblances  between
two  causes,  which  a  more  intense  Causality  distinguishes
to  be  different.  Hence  every  organ  perceives  both  resem-
blances and  differences  within  its  own  sphere.  This  ob-
jection appears  to  me  to  be  conclusive ;  and  the  instances
•  The  theory  of  Humour  is  explained  on  p.  196.


wit.  347

before  cited  from  the  metaphysicians,  receive  a  ready  ex-
planation by  supposing  that  the  geniuses  which  are  capti-
vated chiefly  by  resemblances,  possess  the  weaker,  and
those  which  discriminate  differences,  the  higher  endowment
of  the  various  intellectual  faculties  related  to  their  several

subjects.

Dr  Spurzheim  considers  the  faculty  now  under  consi-
deration to  be  a  sentiment  "  which  disposes  men  to  view
every  thing  in  a  gay  and  joyful  manner/9  He  regards  it
as  "  given  to  man  to  render  him  merry,  to  produce  gaiety,
-^feelings  not  to  be  confounded  with  satisfaction  or  con-
tentment :  these  are  affections  of  every  faculty,  whilst  gaie-
ty and  laughter  belong  to  that  which  now  occupies  our  at-
tention." According  to  this  view,  Wit  consists  in  concep-
tions, formed  by  the  intellectual  powers  imbued  with  the
sentiment  of  the  ludicrous ;  in  the  same  way  as  poetry  con-
sists in  the  manifestations  of  the  other  faculties,  acting  in
combination  with,  and  elevated  by  Ideality.

In  the  Phren.  Journal,  vol.  vL  p.  451,  Mr  Hewett
Watson  has  given  a  different  analysis  of  this  faculty,  and
illustrated  it  with  much  ability.  He  regards  it  as  an  intel-
lectual power,  whose  function  is  to  take  cognizance  of  the
nature  or  intrinsic  properties  of  things,  the  office  of  Causa-
lity being  to  perceive  the  "  relations  of  causation  and  de-
pendence in  general/'  According  to  him,  the  ludicrous  is
hmotie  of  manifestation  of  all  the  intellectual  faculties,  and
he-gives  examples  in  which  Sheridan  and  Moore  display
great  Wit,  chiefly  from  Individuality  and  Comparison.
The  faculty  now  under  discussion,  produces  wit  also  as  a
mode  of  manifestation ;  but  he  conceives  that  it  does  so  al-
ways, by  comparing  or  contrasting  the  intrinsic  qualities  of
objects.  The  study  of  character  "is  included  in  the  functions
of  Wit,  not  merely  the  actions  performed,  but  the  real  dispo-
sitions." "  Let  us  now  take  up,"  says  he, "  the  Sentimental
Tour  of  Sterne,  in  whose  mask  Causality  and  Wit  are  predo-
minating organs.  Almost  the  whole  tenor  of  this  work,  un-
like that  of  most  tourists,  consists  of  disquisitions  concerning


348  wit.

the  dispositions  and  inherent  qualities  of  persons  and  things;
for,  instead  of  narrating  whom  and  what  he  saw,  his  atten*
tion  seems  to  have  been  absorbed  in  speculations  as  to  their
conditions,  dependences,  nature,. and  qualities.  We  wish
to  condense  the  evidence  in  support  of  the  views  now  ad-
vanced concerning  the  organ  of  Wit,  and  shall  therefore  be
sparing  in  our  quotations  from  each  author,  and,  indeed,
select  them  rather  as  examples  than  evidence,,  leaving  to
those  who  may  feel  inclined  the  office  of  trying  their
soundness,  by  reference  to  the  general  writings  of  the  au«
thors  enumerated.  In  the  Preface  written  for  the  Senti-
mental Journey  we  have  the  following  disquisition :

"  *  Your  idle  people  leave  their  native  country,  and  g*
abroad  for  some  reason  or  reasons,  which  may  be  deriv-
ed from  one  of  these  general  causes, — Inferiority  of  body.;
— Imbecility  of  mind; — or  Inevitable  necessity.
.  <"  The  two  first  include  all  those  who  travel  by  land  or
by  water,  labouring  with  pride,  .curiosity,  vanity,  or  spleen,
subdivided  and  combined  ad  infinitum.

"  <  The  third  class  includes  the  whole  army  of  peregrine
martyrs ;  more  especially  those  travellers  who  set  out  upon
their  travels  with  the  benefit  of  clergy,  either  as  delinquents
travelling  under  the  direction  of  governors  recommended
by  the  magistrates,— or  young  gentlemen  transported  by
the  cruelty  of  parents  and  guardians,  and  travelling  under
the  direction  of  governors  recommended  by  Oxford,. Aber*
deen,  and  Glasgow.

'"  There  is  a  fourth  class,  but  their  number  is  so  small,
that  they  would  not  deserve  a  distinction,  were  it  not  ne-
cessary in  a  work  of  this  nature,  to  observe  the  greatest
precision  and  nicety,  to  avoid  a  confusion  of  character.  And
these  men  I  speak  of,  are  such  as  cross  the  seas,  and  bo*
journ  in  a  land  of  strangers,  with  a  view  of  saving  money
for  various  reasons,  and  upon  various  pretences;  but  as
they  might  also  save  themselves  and  others  a  great  deal  of
unnecessary  trouble,  by  saving  their  money  at  home,  and
as  their  reasons  for  travelling  are  the  least  complex  of  any


wit.  849

other  species  of  emigrants,  I  shall  distinguish  these  gentle-
men by  the  name  of  i  Simple  Travellers/

"«  Thus  the  whole  circle  of  travellers  may  be  reduced  to
4he  following  heads  :

Idle  Travellers,  Proud  Travellers,

Inquisitive  Travellers,  Vain  Travellers,

Lying  Travellers,  Splenetic  Travellers.

« <  Then  follow

The  Travellers  of  Necessity,

The  Delinquent  and  Felonious  Traveller,

The  Unfortunate  and -Innocent  Traveller,

The  Simple  Traveller ;  and,  lastly,

The  Sentimental  Traveller  (meaning  thereby  myself)."

-"There  is  in  these  distinctions  an  admixture  both  of  Philo-
sophy and  Wit,  but  certainly  more  of  the  former ;  and  if  our
readers  have  gone  along  with  our  previous  conclusions,
they  will  scarcely  hesitate  to  attribute  both  the  one  and  the
other  to  the  organ  bearing  the  cognomen  of  the  latter.
Again,  he  says :

"  The  sons  and  daughters  of  service  part  with  liberty,
but  not  with  nature,  in  their  contracts ;  they  are  flesh  and
blood,  and  have  their  little  vanities  and  wishes  in  the
midst  of  the  house  of  bondage,  as  well  as  their  task-mas-
ters."

"  Sheridan  enjoyed  no  slight  reputation  as  a  wit,  but  any
one  taking  the  trouble  to  analyze  his  manifestations  in  that
way,  will  soon  perceive  that  the  wit  of  this  remarkable  in-
dividual almost  always  consists  of  comparisons,  or  con-
trasts of  proportion,  position,  objects,  and  events,  with  lit-
tle or  no  reference  to  their  attributes  or  inherent  proper-
ties. For  instance,  he  compares  a  tall  thin  man  with  a
short  fat  wife,  to  a  church  and  steeple ;  beaux  flirting  with
a  lady  seated  in  a  very  high  carriage,  to  supporters  hang-
ing half  way  up  the  door;  a  tall  thin  man,  to  a  tree  run
up  against  a  wall ;  and  such  an  one  with  his  arms  spread,
to  a  cross  on  a  Good-Friday  bun."


850  wit.

"  As,  therefore,  in  the  works  of  individuals  noted  for  the
large  development  of  Wit,  we  find  a  peculiar  tendency  to
dS^gll  on  the  essential  properties  of  things,  and,  at  the  same
time,  in  some  of  them  an  equal  tendency  to  ridicule  aH
fancy,  philosophy,  and  reasoning,  wherein  there  appears  ne-
glect or  ignorance  of  these  attributes ;— as  we  are  not  aware
of  any  other  organ  which  can  include  perceptions  of  this
nature  in  its  function ;— and  as  the  inherent  properties  of
the  constituent  parts  of  creation  seem  to  be  intellectual
perceptions,  equally  distinct  from  those  of  condition  or  de-
pendence as  those  of  objects  are  from  those  of  their  posi-
tion and  physical  properties ; — there  seems  no  slight  pro-
bability for  supposing  the  existence  of  some  distinct  organ
for  such  perceptions  ;  and,  further,  if  we  find  them  mani-
fested strongly  when' the  organ  of  Wit  is  large ;  if  the  pecu-
liar wit  and  satire  believed  to  be  connected  with  the  func-
tion of  this  organ  is  found  to  depend  essentially  on  suck
perceptions ;  and  if  other  kinds  of  wit — that  of  Curran  and
Sheridan,  for  instance — may  exist  with  a  moderate  or  de-
ficient endowment  of  this  organ ;  we  shall  be  almost  neces-
sarily forced  to  the  conclusion  that  perception  of  inherent
properties  does  depend  on  the  organ  of  Wit,  unless  it  can
be  shewn  to  exist  powerful  when  the  organ  is  feebly  deve»
loped,  which  we  have  in  vain  looked  for.

"  It  hence  appears  that  the  range  of  this  faculty  is  far
more  extensive,  and  that  it  forms  a  much  more  ensentinl
ingredient,  in  our  philosophic  capacities  than  could  be  pre-
dicated from  only  observing  its  manifestations  when  acting
along  with  Secretiveness,  Self-esteem,  Combativeness,  and
Destructiveness,  to  produce  irony,  sarcasm,  ridicule,  and
satire ;  or,  with  other  intellectual  powers,  to  sparkle  in  the
sallies  of  wit.  Directed  towards  man,  it  probably  gives  a
tendency  to  investigate  the  real  character,  instead  of  rest-
ing content  with  observing  appearances  or  actions,  which
seems  to  have  been  greatly  the  bent  of  Sterne's  mind,  and
considerably  so  of  that  of  Franklin.  Taking  the  direc-
tion of  Religion,  it  will  inquire  into  the  nature  and  attri-


wit.  851

butea  of  God,  as  manifested  in  creation.  Cowfsb  affords
an  example  of  this,  and  Socrates  may  be  also  named.  In
physiology,  primary  or  essential  function,  as  distinct  from
modes  of  manifestation,  and  particular  actions  and  direc-
tions, will  be  its  aim.  To  the  metaphysician  it  will  impart
a  strong  desire  for  ascertaining  the  nature  and  inherent
powers  of  mind,  and  of  creation  in  general.  Phrenology,
being  an  union  of  the  two  latter — the  metaphysician  and
the  physiologist— its  founders  will  afford  us  a  suitable  illus-
tration. In  the  bust  of  Dr  Gall  the  organ  is  represented
much  less  developed  than  in  that  of  Dr  Spurzheim  ;  and
the  superiority  of  the  latter  in  discriminating  modes  of  ma-
nifestation and  particular  directions  of  the  mental  powers
from  the  powers  themselves,  is  familiar  to  all  phrenologists.
Perhaps,  too,  we  shall  not  err  in  adducing  Locke  as  a  ne-
gative instance  of  the  faculty*  In  the  portraits  of  this  phi-
losopher, Comparison  and  Causality  appear  greatly  larger
than  Wit ;  and  his  system  derives  not  only  ideas,  but  the
mental  feelings,  from  external  impressions;  but  as  he  was
obliged  to  give  the  mind  a  capability  of  being  affected  by
impressions  on  the  external  senses,  he  endowed  it  with  the
faculties  of  perception,  contemplation,  memory,  compari-
son, and  abstraction,  which  are  in  reality  but  modes  of  ac-
tivity, not  inherent  powers.  His  grounds  for  denying  the
innateness  of  ideas  were  their  non-manifestation,  or  vari-
ous modifications  in  different  individuals,  from  which  it
would  seem  that  modes  of  being  were  to  him  in  lieu  of  in-
nate powers.

"  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  organ  of  Wit  gives  a  ten-
dency to  view  every  thing  in  a  ludicrous  light ;  but  if  the
ideas  here  proposed  concerning  its  function  prove  correct,
such  a  supposition  must  be  untenable ;  and  that  it  is  so,  in
point  of  fact,  may  be  shewn  by  reference  to  nature.  The
masks  of  Drs  Cullek,  Franklin,  and  Spurzheim,  exhibit
a  greater  development  of  the  organ  than  do  those  of  Cur-
ran,  Swift,  and  Sheridan.  And  further,  let  any  one  ap-
peal to  his  own  private  friends  in  whom  the  organ  is  large-


352  wit.

ly  developed,  and  ask  whether  they  are  not  oftener  pained
than  pleased  by  things  of  opposite  and  unharmonizing  na-
ture brought  into  unnecessary  contact ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  delighted  by  harmonies  between  the  properties  or  at-
tributes, whether  real  or  imaginary,  of  different  objects."

"  It  seems  that  almost  all  amusing  wit  consists  in  a
slight  resemblance  addressed  to  the  function  of  one  organ,
and  at  the  same  time  a  difference  to  that  of  another, — thus
coming  still  nearer  to  Mr  Scott's  theory  of  laughter  than
his  own  view  of  wit  could  do.  For,  if  there  were  distinct
organs  to  perceive  resemblance  and  difference,  each  would
be  similarly  excited  by  the  specimens  of  wit ;  but  if  these
be  modes  of  activity  common  to  all  the  intellectual  powers,
then  one  of  them  is  agreeably  excited  by  the  similarity,  and
the  other  jarred  by  the  contrast,  producing  different  states
of  excitement.  We  say  "  jarred,"  because  the  more  any
organ  is  developed,  the  more  are  similarities  and  harmo-
nies between  its  perceptions  sought  after;  Tune,  Colour,
and  Number,  for  example."

I  present  these  different  views,  because  they  are  ingeni-
ous; but  the  facts  adduced  are  much  too  few  for  forming  a
judgment  on  the  question.  Mr  Watson's  observations  are
highly  interesting,  but  considerable  difficulties  attend  them.
In  Sheridan,  Individuality  and  Eventuality  are  by  much
the  predominant  intellectual  organs,  but  Wit  is  also  mo-
derately developed;  and  his  manifestations  are  in  exact
correspondence  with  Dr  Spubzheim's  views; — namely,  his
elementary  ideas  are  drawn  chiefly  from  Individuality  and
Eventuality,  and  they  receive  a  colouring  from  Wit,  which
renders  them  ludicrous;  but  they  do  not  partake  very
highly  of  this  quality,  and  in  their  nature  they  differ  from
the  witty  manifestations  of  Sterne  and  Voltaire,  in
whom  large  Causality  was  combined  with  large  Wit.  I  am
acquainted  with  two  individuals  in  both  of  whom  Indivi-
duality and  Eventuality  are  large;  but  in  the  one  Wit  is
small,  and  in  the  other  rather  large,  and  the  former  almost
never  intentionally  presents  witty  combinations  of  ideas,


wit.  353

while  the  latter  is  prone  to  do  so,  as  a  habitual  disposition
of  mind,  without  study  or  intention.  This  case  also  is  in
harmony  with  Dr  Spurzheim's  doctrine.

When  this  organ  large  is  combined  with  much  Comba-
tiveness  and  Destructiveness,  it  leads  to  satire.  It  gives
the  talent  also  for  epigrams.  Persons  in  whom  it  is  small,
if  their  predominating  faculties  be  grave,  regard  Wit  as  im-
pertinence, and  are  apt  to  be  offended  by  it.  It  is  greatly
aided  by  Individuality,  Eventuality  and  Comparison,  which
furnish  intellectual  materials  which  it  invests  with  a  lu-
dicrous appearance.

•  I  include  Wit  among  the  sentiments  in  the  present  edi-
tion, with  a  view  to  preserve  uniformity  with  Dr  Spurz-»
heim  in  the  numbering  of  the  organs  with  reference  to  the
bust  Dr  Spurzheim,  in  the  dissection  of  the  brain,  shews
that,  anatomically,  Ideality  and  Wit  belong  to  the  same  de^
partmeat  of  convolutions ;  whence  a  presumption  arises  of
their  functions  belonging  to  the  same  class  of  mental  facul-
ties; and  as  Ideality  has  been  uniformly  regarded  as  a  sen-
timent. Wit  may  with  propriety  be  placed  under  the  same
head.  Mr  Watson  has  been  led  to  regard  Ideality  also  as
an  intellectual  power ;  but  his  ideas  are  not  sufficiently  ma-
tured for  publication.  It  will  be  observed,  that  all  these
differences  relate  to  the  metaphysical  analysis  of  the  facul-
ty, and  that  phrenologists  are  agreed  on  the  fact,  that  wit-
ty and  mirthful  manifestations  are  connected  with  the  or-
gan now  under  consideration.  The  organ,  and  its  general
functions,  therefore,  are  regarded  as  ascertained.

2l.— •IMITATION'.

Dr  Gall  gives  the  following  account  of  the  discovery  of
this  faculty  and  organ.  One  day,  a  friend  with  whom  he
conversed  about  the  form  of  the  head,  assured  him  that  his
had  something  particular,  and  directed  his  hand  to  the  su-
perior-anterior region  of  the  skull.  This  part  was  elevated
in  the  form  of  a  segment  of  a  circle ;  and  behind  the  pro-*

z


354  IMITATION.

taberance  there  was  a  depression.  Before  this  time  Dr
Gall  had  not  observed  this  conformation.  This  man  had
a  particular  talent  for  imitation.  Dr  Gall  immediately
repaired  to  the  institution  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  to  exa-
mine the  head  of  the  pupil  Casteigner,  who  only  six
weeks  before  had  been  received  into  the  establishment,  and,
from  his  entrance,  had  attracted  notice  by  his  amazing  ta-
lent for  mimicry.  On  the  mardi-gras  of  the  Carnival,  what
a  little  play  was  presented  at  the  institution,  he  had  imi-
tated so  perfectly  the  gestures,  gait,  &c.  of  the  director,  in-
spector, physician,  and  surgeon  of  the  establishment,  and
above  all  of  some  women,  that  it  was  impossible  to  mistake
them.  This  exhibition  was  the  more  amusing,  as  nothing
of  the  kind  was  expected  from  this  boy,  his  education  ha-
ving been  totally  neglected.  Dr  Gall  states,  that  he  quite
unexpectedly  found  the  part  of  the  head  in  question  as  ful-
ly developed  in  this  individual  as  in  his  friend  Hannibal,
just  mentioned.

Is  the  talent  for  mimicry,  then,  said  Gall,  founded  on  a
particular  faculty  and  organ  ?  He  sought  every  opportuni-
ty of  multiplying  observations.  He  visited  private  fami-
lies, schools,  &c*  and  every  where  examined  the  heads  of
individuals  who  possessed  a  distinguished  talent  for  mi-
micry. At  this  time,  Mons.  Marx,  secretary  to  the  mini-
ster at  war,  had  acquired  a  great  reputation,  by  several
characters  which  he  played  in  a  private  theatre.  Dr  Gall
found  in  his  head  the  same  part  of  the  head  swelling
out  as  in  Casteigner  and  Hannibal.  In  all  the  other
persons  whom  he  examined,  he  found  the  part  in  question
more  or  less  elevated  in  proportion  to  the  talent  for  imita-
tion which  they  possessed*  It  is  told  of  Garrick,  says  Dr
Gall,  that  he  possessed  such  an  extraordinary  talent  for
mimicry,  thatj  at  the  court  of  Louis  XV.,  having  seen  for  a
moment  the  King,  the  Duke  D'AuMomy  the  Duke
I^Orleans,  and  Messrs  I^Aumont,  Brissac,  Richelieu,
Prince  Soubise,  &c.  he  carried  off  the  manner  of  each
of  them  in  his  recollection.    He  invited  to  supper  somo


IMITATION.  955f

friends  who  bad  accompanied  him  to  court,  and  said,  "  I
have  seen  tbe  court  only  for  an  instant,  but  I  shall  shew
you  the  correctness  of  my  powers  of  observation,  and  the
extent  of  my  memory ;"  and  placing  his  friends  in  two
files,  he  retired  from  the  room,  and  instantly  returning,  his
friends  exclaimed,  "  Ah !  behold  the  King,  Louis  XV.
to  the  life."  He  imitated  in  succession  all  the  other  per-
sonages of  the  court,  who  were  instantly  recognised.  He
imitated  not  only  their  walk,  gait  and  figure,  but  also  the
expression  of  their  countenances*  Dr  Gall,  therefore,  easi-
ly understood  how  greatly  the  faculty  of  Imitation  would
assist  in  the  formation  of  a  talent  for  acting;  and  he  exa-
mined the  heads  of  the  best  performers  at  that  time  on  the
stage  of  Vienna.  He  found  the  organ  large  in  them  all,
namely,  in  Muller,  Lange,  Brockmann,  Schroder,
Bauman,  Koch,  and  his  daughter.  He  got  the  skull  of
JBnger,  a  poet  and  comedian,  and  he  afterwards  used  it  to
demonstrate  the  organ.  Subsequently,  he  and  Dr  Spurz-
heim,  in  their  travels,  met  with  many  confirmations  of  the
organ ;  in  particular,  in  the  house  of  correction  at  Munich,
they  saw  a  thief  who  had  this  organ  large.  Dr  Gall  said
he  must  be  an  actor :  surprised  at  the  observation,  he  ac-
knowledged that  he  had  for  some  time  belonged  to  a  stroll-
ing company  of  players.  This  circumstance  was  not  known
in  the  prison  when  Gall  made  the  observation.  On  these
grounds,  Dr  Gall  conceived  himself  justified  in  admitting
the  existence  of  a  particular  talent  for  imitation ;  that  is
to  say,  a  faculty  which  enables  the  possessor  in  some  degree
to  personify  the  ideas  and  sentiments  of  others,  and  to  exhi-
bit them  exactly  by  gestures;  and  he  considered  this  talent
to  be  connected  with  the  particular  organ  now  pointed  out*

This  organ  contributes  to  render  a  poet  or  author  dra-
matic, such  a*  Shakspeare,  Corneille,  Moliere,  Vol-
taire, &c.  It  is  large  in  the  portraits  of  Shakspeare,
and  also  in  the  bust  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  whose  produc-
tions are  strongly  characterised  by  their  dramatic  scenes.

This  faculty  produces  the  talent  for  imitation  alone ;  and

z  2


356  IMITATION.

Mr  Scott  has  observed,  that,  in  perfect  acting,,  there  »
more  than  imitation.  There  is  expression  of  the  propensi-
ties and  sentiments  of  the  mind  in  all  the  truth  and  warmth
of  actual  and  natural  excitement ;  and  this  power  of  throw-
ing real  expression  into  the  outward  representation  he  con-
ceives to  depend,  upon  Secretiveness.  Thus,  says  Mr
Scorcy  a  person  with  much  Imitation  and  little- Secretive-
ness, could  represent  what  he  had  seen,  hut  he  would  give
the  externals  only  in  his  representation ;  add  Secretiveness,
and  he  could  then  enter  into  any  given  character  as  it
would  appear  if  existing  in  actual  nature :  he  could,  by
means  of  this  latter  faculty,  call  up  all  the  internal  feelings
which. would  animate  the  original,  and  give  not  a  copy
merely,  but  another  of  the  same, — a  second  edition,  as  it
were,  of  the  person  represented.  In  this  analysis  of  act-
ing, perhaps,  too  much  influence  is  ascribed  to  Secretive-
ness, and  too  little  to  Imitation :  My  own  opinion,  as  ex-
pressed on  p.  197,  is,  that  Secretiveness  produces  chiefly  a
restraining  effect,  and  that  Imitation  enables  its  possessor
to.  enter  into  the  spirit  of  those  whom  it  represents.

While,  however*  Secretiveness  and  Imitation  together
may  thus  be  regarded  as  general  powers,  without  which  no
talent  for  acting  can  be  manifested,. it  is  proper  to  observe*
that  the  effect  with  which  they  can  be  applied  in  repre-
senting particular  characters,  will  depend  on  the  degree  in
which  other  faculties  are  possessed  in  combination  with
them.  They  confer  on  the  individual  only  the  capacity  of
applying,  in  this  particular  way,  the  whole  other  powers  of
the  mind,  so  far  as  he  possesses  them ;  but  they  do  not
supply  the  want  of  these  powers*  For  example;  an  actor
destitute  of  Tune*,  however  highly  he  may  be  endowed  with
Secretiveness  and  Imitation,  could  not  imitate  Catalani,
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  perform  her  parts  on  the  stage;
and  neither  could  an  individual  possessing  little  Combative-
ness  and  Destructiveness,  represent  with  just  effect  the  fiery
Coriolanus;  because  the  natural  language  of  indignation
can  no  more  be  called  up  by  Secretiveness  and  Imitation,


IMITATION.  857

without  <k>mbativeness  and  Destructiveness,  than  melody
-without  the  aid  of  Tune.  Hence,  to  constitute  an  accom-
plished actor,  capable  of  sustaining  a  variety  of  parts,  a  ge-
neral full  endowment  of  the  mental  organs  is  required*
Nature  rarely  bestows  all  these  in  an  eminent  degree  on
one  individual ;  and,  in  consequence,  each  performer  has  a
range  of  character  in  which  he  excels,  and  out  of -which  he
is  nothing ;  and  I  have  found,  by  repeated  observations,
that  the  Ikies  of  success  and  failure  bear  a  decided  refer-
ence to  i;he  organs  fully  or  imperfectly  developed  in  the
brain.  Any  one  may  easily  put  this  observation  to  the
test  of  experiment.  Actors  incapable  of  sustaining  the  dig-
nity of  a  great  character,  but  who  excel  m  low  comedy,
will  be  found  deficient  in  Ideality ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  those  who  tread  the  stage  with  a  native  dignity  of
aspect,  and  seem  as  if  born  to  command*,  will  be  found  to
possess  it  largely  developed ;  and  also  Firmness,  Self-esteem*,
and  Love  of  Approbation.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  from
these  principles,  that  an  actor,  in  his  personal  conduct,
must  necessarily  resemble  most  closely  those  characters
which  he  represents  to  the  best  advantage.  To  enable  an
individual  to  succeed  eminently  in  acting  Shylock,  for  ex-
ample, Firmness,  Acquisitiveness  and  Destructiveness,  are
reckoned  indispensable;  but  it  is  not  necessary,  merely
because  Shylock  is  represented  as  deficient  in  Benevolence,
Justice,  Veneration,  and  Love  of  Approbation,  that  the
actor  also  should  be  so.  The  general  powers  above  re-
ferred to,  although  they  do  not  supply  the  place  of  defi-
cient faculties,  are  quite  competent  for  the  time  to  suppress
the  manifestations  of  opposite  sentiments.  Hence,  in  his
proper  character,  he  may  manifest  in  the  highest  degree  the
moral  sentiments ;  and  yet,  by  shading  these  for  the  time,
by  the  aid  of  Secretiveness,  and  bringing  into  play  only  the
natural  languages  of  the  lower  propensities,  which  also  we
suppose  him  to  possess,  he  may  represent  a  scoundrel  to
the  life.
This  faculty  is  indispensable  to  the  portrait  painter,  the


358


IMITATION.


engraver,  the  sculptor;  and,  on  examining  die  heads  of  Mr
Douglas,  Mr  Joseph,  Mr  Uwins,  Mr  W.  Allan,  Mr
James  Stewart,  Mr  Selby  the  ornithologist,  and  Mr  Law-
rence Macdonald,  I  found  it  large  in  them  all.  Indeed,
in  these  arts,  it  is  as  indispensable  as  Constructiveness.  It
also  aids  the  musician  and  linguist,  and,  in  short,  all  who
practise  arts  in  which  expression  is  an  object.

Imitation  gives  the  tendency  to  express  by  gestures  the
thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  mind,  and  hence  is  requisite
to  the  accomplished  orator.  In  private  life,  some  indivi-
duals accompany  their  speech  with  the  most  forcible  and
animated  expressions  of  countenance,  the  nascent  thought
beams  from  the  eye,  and  plays  upon  the  features,  before  it
is  uttered  in  words ;-— this  is  produced  by  much  Imitation,
Secretiveness,  and  Ideality.

This  organ  is^possessed  by  some  of  the  lower  animals,
such  as  parrots  and  monkeys,  which  imitate  the  actions  of
man.

When  this  organ  and  that  of  Benevolence  are  both  large,
the  anterior  portion  of  the  coronal  aspect  of  the  head  rises
high  above  the  eyes,  is  broad,  and  presents  a  level  surface,
as  in  Miss  Olara  Fisher,  who,  at  eight  years  of  age,  ex-
hibited great  talents  as  an  actress.  When  Benevolence  is
large,  and  Imitation  small,  there  is  an  elevation  in  the
middle,  with  a  rapid  slope  on  each  side,  as  in  Jacob  J£r-
vis.  The  organ  is  large  in  Raphael.  It  is  regarded  as
ascertained.

Jacob  Jervis.  Clara  Fisher.


In  both  of  these  figures  the  head  rises  to  a  great  height  above  the
eyes ;  but  in  Jervis  it  slopes  rapidly  on  the  two  sides  of  13,  Be-
nevolence, indicating  Imitation  deficient ;  whereas  in  Miss  Cla-
ba  Fisheb  it  is  as  high  at  21,  Imitation,  as  at  Benevolence,  in-
dicating both  organs  to  be  large.


(     359     )


Order  II— INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES-

These  faculties  communicate  to  man  and  animals  know-
ledge of  their  own  internal  sensations,  and  also  of  the  ex-
ternal world ;  their  object  is  to  know  existence,  and  to  per-
ceive qualities  and  relations.  They  consist  of  three  ge-
nera; the  first  genus  includes  the  Five  Senses ;  the  second,
those  powers  which  take  cognizance  of  external  objects
and  their  relations,  named  Knowing  or  Perceptive  Facul-
ties ;  and  the  third,  the  faculties  which  trace  abstract  re-
lations, and  reason  or  reflect.


Genus  L— EXTERNAL  SENSES.

By  means  of  the  Five  Senses,  man  and  animals  are
brought  into  communication  with  the  external  world.  Dr
Spurzheim,  in  his  "  New  Physiognomical  System,"  and,  in
Ins  recent  work  "  Phrenology,"  gives  admirable  treatises
on  the  senses ;  of  which  I  avail  myself  largely  in  the  fol-
lowing pages.

The  opinions  entertained  by  philosophers  in  regard  to  the
functions  of  the  senses,  have  been  whimsical,  extravagant,
and  contradictory.  Since  the  time  of  Bacon  and  Locks,
the  greater  number  of  philosophical  systems  rest  on  the
axiom  of  Aeistotxe,  that  all  ideas  come  into  the  mind  by
means  of  the  external  senses.  According  to  this  notion,  he
wh©  possesses  them  m  the  highest  state  of  perfection,  is
able  to  manifest  most  powerfully  the  faculties  of  the
mind;  or,  in  other  words,  the  faculties,  both  of  man  and
— kimls,  ought  to  be  proportionate  to  the  perfection  of  the
five  senses,  and  to  the  education  bestowed  tipon  them.
Daily  experience,  however,  contradicts  this  hypothesis.

Philosophers  of  another  class  maintain,  that  the  mind
«cts  independently  of  all  organization,  and  that  the  senses,


360  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

instead  of  being  instruments  of  action,  are  rather  impedi-
ments to  it  They  complain  much  4>f  the  illusions  of  the
five  senses;  and  despise  all  testimony)  and  all  conclusions
grounded  upon  sensation.  Such  notions  are  unworthy  of
being  refuted.

A  great  many  philosophers  have  also  attributed  to  the
.external  senses  many  acts  which  are  performed  by  the  in-
ternal faculties  alone.  For  instance,  Helvetius  has  said,
that  man  owes  his  arts  to  the  structure  of  his  hands ;  and
that,  if  the  hoof  of  the  horse  had  been  joined  to  the  human
.arm,  he  would  have  been  still  wandering  wild  in  the  woods.
.But  many  animals  have  instruments  equally  curious  and
perfect  in  their  structure  as  those  to  which  peculiar  capa-
cities of  mind  have  been  attributed  in  man ;  and  yet  these
instruments  do  not  produce  in  them  the  corresponding  func-
tions. Monkeys  have  hands  almost  as  nicely  formed  as  those
which  are  attached  to  the  human  arm ;  but,  do  monkeys
put  wood  upon  the  fire  to  support  combustion  ?  or,  do
they  construct  works  of  art  ?  According  to  this  opinion,
also,  insects,  crawi-fish,  lobsters,  and  still  mote  the  cuttle-
fish, ought  to  have  exact  ideas  of  extension,  of  size,  and  of
-the  theorems  of  geometry,  inconsequence  of  their  numerous
and  perfect  organs  of  touch.

In  point  of  feet,  however,  the  external  instruments  are
.often  similar,  while  the  functions  performed  by  them  are
4juite/differcnt.  The  hare  and  rabbit  have  similar  feet ;  yet
the  hare  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  fields,  while  the  rabbit
burrows  under  ground.  We  have  also  examples  of  similar
functions  observed  in  animals  which  have  instruments  quite
different.  The  proboscis  is  to  the  elephant  what  the  hand
is  to  man  and  to  the  monkey.  The  hands  of  monkeys,  and
the  feet  of  parrots  and  squirrels,  are  certainly  different;
yet,  by  means  of  these  instruments,  they  all  move  their  food
to  their  mouths  in  eating.  In  order  to  dig  up  truffles,  the
hog  ploughs  the  earth  with  his  snout,  and  the  dog  scratches
it  with  his  feet.

Other  philosophers,  again,  have  taught,  that  the  func*


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  361

tions  of  the  senses  are  not  drdained  by  nature,  but  acquired
by  experience.  For  example,  the  metaphysicians  have  writ-
ten much  about  the  rectification  of  the  sense  of  sight,  by
means  of  touch ;  and  about  what  they  call  the  acquired  per-
ceptions of  sight.

Each  sense,  however,  performs  its  functions  in  conse-
quence of  its  own  innate  constitution  alone,  and  the  rela-
tions of  every  sense  to  external  impressions  are  determi-
nate, and  subjected  to  positive  laws.  If  an  odour  make  an
impression  upon  the  olfactory  nerve,  the  impression  is  im-
mediately found  to  be  agreeable  or  disagreeable ;.  and  this
feeling  arises  from  the  constitution  of  the  sense,  and  the
relation  established  betwixt  it  and  the  odorous  particles
which  excite  it  to  activity.  The  functions  of  every  sense
depend  only  on  its  peculiar  organization ;  and  hence  no
preceding  exercise  or  habit  is  necessary,  in  order  to  acquire
the  special  power  of  any  sense.  If  the  organization  be
perfect,  the  functions  are  perfect  also ;  and  if  the  organiza-
tion be  diseased,  the  functions  are  deranged,  notwithstand-
ing all  preceding  exercise.  If  the  optic  apparatus  be  per-
fect in  newly  hatched  birds,  their  sight  is  perfect ;  as  is  the
case  with  chickens,  ducks,  partridges,  and  quails  :  If,  on
the  contrary,  at  the  first  entrance  into  life,  the  organiza-
tion of  the  eyes  or  the  ears  be  imperfect,  the  power  of
the  animal  to  see  or  hear  is  proportionally  deficient.  In
adult  persons,  vision  is  deranged  if  the  eyes  be  diseased.
In  old  persons,  the  functions  of  the  five  senses  lose  their
energy,  because  the  vital  power  of  the  organs  is  dimi-
nished.

It  is  indeed  ridiculous  to  suppose  that  Nature  should
have  produced  any  sense  which  could  not  perform  its  func-
tions, without  being  supported  by  another  and  a  different
"Sense : — that,  for  example,  we  should  not  be  able  to  see
without  feeling,  or  to  hear  without  seeing.  Hence  the  pro-
positions appear  self-evident, — that  no  sense  acquires  its
functions  by  means  of  any  other  sense,  and  that  any  one


362  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

sense  cannot  be  the  instrument  of  producing  the  sensations
experienced  by  means  of  off  the  senses  collectively.  But
we  must  observe,  that  different  senses  may  enable  us  to
perceive  the  same  object ;  and  that  one  sense  is  more  fitted
than  another  to  make  us  acquainted  with  different  objects,
and  their  qualities.  For  example,  we  may  obtain  a  con-
ception of  the  figure  of  a  book,  by  means  of  the  sense  of
touch,  and  also  by  means  of  the  sense  of  sight.

Each  aeroe,  as  already  observed,  is  subject  to  its  own  po-
sitive laws.  For  example,  we  see,  according  to  the  laws  of
the  refraction  of  light;  and  hence,  a  straight  rod  half
plunged  in  water  appears  crooked,  although  touch  proves
that,  in  this  situation,  the  rod  continues  straight

This  is  a  kind  of  rectification ;  but  it  must  not  be  con-
founded with  the  doctrine  which  maintains  that  one  sense
acquires  its  functions  by  means  of  the  rectification  of  ano-
ther sense.  Touch  may  shew,  that  a  rod  which  is  plunged
in  water,  and  looks  crooked,  is  straight ;  but  the  eyes  will
see  it  crooked  as  before.  The  rectifications,  thus  effected
by  the  senses,  are  mutual,  and  not  the  prerogative  of  one
sense.  In  this  view,  the  eyes  may  rectify  the  sense  of
touch.  If,  without  our  knowledge,  a  piece  of  thin  paper
be  placed  betwixt  one  of  our  fingers  and  the  thumb,  we
may  not  feel,  but  we  may  see  it  Even  smell  and  taste
may  rectify  the  senses  of  seeing  and  of  touch.  Thus,  many
fluids  look  like  water;  and  it  would  be  impossible  to  disco-
ver them  to  be  different  substances  by  the  sense  of  touch ;
but  it  is  easy  to  do  so  by  smell  and  taste.  Thus  each  sense
has  its  peculiar  and  independent  functions,  and  each  is  sub-
ject to  positive  laws.  But  every  sense  also  perceives  im-
pressions of  which  another  is  not  susceptible;  and  it  is  in
consequence  of  this  circumstance  that  the  external  senses
rectify  one  another ;  or  rather  produce,  by  their  co-opera-
tion, an  extent  of  accurate  conception,  which,  in  an  un-
connected state,  they  would  have  been  incapable  of  pro-
ducing.


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  363

Zt  is  a  task  of  considerable  difficulty  to  point  out  accu-
rately the  precise  limits  of  the  functions  of  the  senses,  be-
cause, in  every  act  of  perception,  their  instrumentality  is
combined  with  that  of  the  internal  faculties  of  the  mind;
and  it  is  not  easy  to  discriminate  to  what  extent  the  act
depends  upon  the  one,  and  to  what  extent  upon  the  other.
For  the  elucidation  of  this  point,  I  submit  the  following
considerations  to  the  attention  of  the  reader.

The  senses  themselves  do  not  form  ideas.  For  example,
when  an  impression  is  made  upon  the  hand,  it  is  not  the
organs  of  touch  which  form  the  conception  of  the  object
making  the  impression ;  but  the  nerves  of  feeling  in  the
hand  receive  the  impression,  communicate  it  to  the  brain,
and  a  /acuity  of  the  mind  perceives  the  object.  Without
the  nerves  of  feeling,  the  internal  faculty  could  not  ex-
perience the  perception ;  because  the  medium  of  communi-
cation betwixt  it  and  the  object  would  be  wanting.  But
neither  could  the  hand  experience  the  perception  without
the  instrumentality  of  the  internal  faculty,  because  the
nerves  of  feeling  do  not  perform  the  function  of  percep-
tion.

Hence,  previous  to  every  perception,  there  must  be  an
impression  on  the  organs  of  sense ;  and  the  function  of
these  organs  appears  to  consist  in  receiving  and  transmit-
ting this  impression  to  the  brain  and  internal  faculties.  The
nature  of  the  impression  depends  on  the  constitution  of  the
senses,  and  on  the  relations  established  betwixt  them  and
external  objects ;  and,  as  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  the
human  will  to  change  either  the  constitution  of  the  senses*
or  the  relations  betwixt  them  and  the  external  world,  it  is
clearly  absurd  to  speak  of  acquired  impressions.

But,  as  the  senses  are  constituted  with  a  determinate  re-
lation to  external  objects,  so  the  brain  and  internal  faculties
4ure  constituted  with  a  determinate  relation  to  the  organs  of
sense.  In  virtue  of  the  first  relation,  a  certain  object  makes  a
certain  impression ;  and,  in  virtue  of  the  second,  a  certain


364  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

impression  gives  rise  to  a  certain  perception;  and  both
depend  on  nature,  and  not  on  the  will,  nor  on  exercise  or
habit.

But  we  must  distinguish  betwixt  the  perceptions  we  ex-
perience of  external  objects,  and  the  inferences  concerning
their  qualities,  which  we  draw  by  reasoning  from  these
perceptions.     All  those  ideas  which  are  pure  perceptions
are  formed  intuitively,  on  the  presentation  of  objects  fitted
to  excite  them.     Inferences  from  these,  on  the  other  hand,
are  the  result  of  our  reasoning  powers.     What  are  some-
times called  "  acquired  perceptions,"  are  merely  habits  of
reasoning,  from  the  impressions  naturally  made  on  the
senses ;  and  these  habits  are  just  as  much  a  part  of  our  na-
ture as  the  original  perceptions.     It  appears  to  me,  that
the  visible  and  tangible  appearances  of  bodies  are  simple
perceptions,  because,  after  the  amplest  experience  of  some
of  these  being  deceitful,  we  cannot,  in  the  slightest  degree,
alter  our  perceptions  of  them.     For  example,  a  rod  half
immersed  in  water,  appears  crooked,  in  defiance  of  every
endeavour  to  see  it  straight.   When  we  stand  three  or  four
yards  distant  from  a  mirror,  and  perceive  our  image  in  it,
we  cannot,  by  any  efforts,  succeed  in  perceiving  the  image
as  if  formed  on  the  surface  of  the  mirror,  although  we
know  perfectly  that  it  is  so.   It  appears  always  at  the  same
distance  behind  the  surface  as  we  are  before  it     If  a  pic-
ture be  punted  according  to  the  rules  of  perspective,  and
the  laws  of  optics,  so  as  to  represent  a  vista  in  the  country,
or  a  long  street  in  a  city,  we  are  altogether  ineapable,
when  in  the  proper  position  for  viewing  it,  of  perceiving
the  surface  to  be  plain.    The  picture  appears  to  us  to  re-
present objects  at  different  distances,  and  the  most  deter-
mined resolution  to  see  them  all  equally  near,  is  of  no
avail,  although  we  know  that,  in  point  of  fact,  they  are  so.
If,  previous  to  experience,  all  objects  seen  by  the  eye  ap-
pear only  as  of  different  colours  and  shades,  and  all  equal-
ly near,  although  really  at  different  distances ;  and  if  we
learn  by  experience  only,  that  this  natural  appearance  is


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  365

deceitful,  and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  one  object  is  near  and
another  distant ;  I  cannot  perceive  a  reason  why  we  might
not  learn  by  experience  also,  to  perceive  pictures  as  plain
surfaces,  and  images  as  if  formed  on  the  surfaces  of  mirrors ;
and,  in  short,  to  get  quit  altogether  of  the  illusions  of  op-
tics. If  it  be  easy  to  acquire,  by  habit,  the  power  of  per-
ceiving objects  as  at  different  distances,  which  naturally
appear  to  the  eye,  as  all  equally  near,  it  ought  to  be  no  dif-
ficult matter  to  learn  by  experience,  to  perceive  a  surface
to  be  plain  which  really  is  so,  after  we  are  certain  of  the
fact ;  and  yet*  I  have  never  heard  of  an  instance  of  a  per-
son who  had  made  such  an  acquisition^  Colour,  Form,.
Magnitude,  and  Distance,  appear  to  be  objects  of  intuitive
perception ;  and,  accordingly,  no  experience,  and  no  repe-
tition of  acts  of  volition,  can  alter  such  appearances,  if  the
refraction  of  light,  state  of  the  eye,  and  the  internal  facul-
ties, remain  the  same.

The  following  appears  to  me  to  be  a  correct  mode  of  ascer-
taining the  limits  of  the  functions  of  the  senses :  Whatever
perceptions  or  impressions  received  from  external  objects,
can  be  renewedby  an  act  of  recollection,  cannot  depend  exclu-
sively upon  the  senses;  because  the  organs  of  sense  are  not
subject  to  the  will,  and  never  produce  the  impressions  which
depend  upon  their  constitution,  except  when  excited  by  an
external  cause.  On  the  other  hand,  whatever  impressions
we  are  unable  to  recal,  must,  for  the  same  reason,  depend
on  the  senses  alone.

These  principles  will  be  best  elucidated  by  examples.  For
instance,  when  a  bell  has  been  rung  in  our  presence,  and
the  impressions  have  ceased,  they  cannot  be  recalled  by  an
effort  of  the  will;  because  their  existence  depended  on  the
apparatus  of  the  ear  being  in  a  certain  state  of  excitation*
which  cannot  be  reproduced  by  an  act  of  volition.  Hence
these  impressions  belong  to  the  ear  alone*  But  if  an  indi-
vidual is  endowed  with  the  internal  faculty  of  Tune,  and  if
a  piece  of  music  be  played  over  in  his  presence,  then,  after
the  sound  of  the  instrument  has  ceased,  although  he  cannot


366


FUNCTIONS  OF  THE


weal  that  sound,  be  can  with  facility  reproduce  the  inter-
nal impressions  which  the  notes  made  upon  his  mind  •  in
«hoi%  he  can  enjoy  the  tone  internally  anew,  by  an  ac't  of
recoDection.    The  power  of  experiencing  the  perception  of
melody,  and  of  enjoying  the  impressions  which  it  makes,
appears,  therefore,  to  depend  on  the  internal  raculty  of  Tune!
while  the  sound  alone  .depends  upon  the  ear.     Hence  the
perfection  of  the  power  of  perceiving  melody  in  any  indi-
vidual, is  not  in  proportion  to  the  perfection  of  the  external
ear  alone,  but  in  joint  proportion  to  the  perfection  of  that
organ,  and  the  internal  faculty.     Without  the  external  ear
*e  internal  faculty  could  not  receive  the  impressions  j  but
the  external  ear  could  never  of  itself  produce  the  perceptions
of  melody.    Accordingly,  we  see  every  day  that  many  in-
dividuals enjoy  the  sense  of  hearing  unimpaired,  who  have
no  perception  of  melody.    The  same  principles  applied  to
the  other  sen**  will  point  out  distinctly  the  precise  limit
of  Uhht  foncuons.    We  may  take  an  example  from  the
sense  oftouch.    If  we  embraco  a  square  body  with  the

h«dj,cert^  impressions  are  made  on  the  nerves  of  touch,
called  Sensations,  in  consequence  of  which  the  mind  forms
an  idea  of  the  figure  of  the  body.  Now,  we  can  recal  the
conception  of  the  figure;  but  not  the  sensation  which  excit-
ed  it  The  conception,  therefore,  depends  on  an  internal
faculty ;  the  sensation  on  the  nerves  of  touch.  The  fW
tions  of  the  nerves  of  touch  appear  to  produce  the  sensj
tion  j  but  the  power  of  conceiving  is  not  in  invariable  pro-
portion to  the  power  of  feeling,  but  in  proportion  to  the  Z

ly.    The  perception,  however,  depends  as  entirely  on  Z

of  the  body  is  not  acquired  by  experience.

Dr  Sp0rzheim  observes  on  this  head,  that,  where  th.
«me  <*»  are  acquired  by  the  mstrumentality  tf Zo  o
more  senses,  the  ideas  cannot  possibly  be  formed  by  the
mu«  because  Nature,  so  far  as  man  has  discovered,  never
endows  Werent  intrusts  with  the  «mefunctij,  fa  Z


FIV  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  867

same  individual.    For  example,  we  can  require  ideas  of
Form  by  the  instrumentality  of  the  senae  of  Sight,  and  like-
wise by  means  of  Touch.    Now,  from  this  circumstance
alone,  it  is  evident  that  the  conception  of  figure  is  formed,
not  by  the  eyes,  or  by  the  nerves  of  Feeling,  because  this
would  be  an  instance  of  two  separate  senses  performing  the
same  functions ;  but  by  an  internal  faculty,  which  perceives
Figure,  in  consequence  of  impressions  made  on  either  of
these  two  different  senses.   The  impressions  made  upon  the
eye  are  totally  different  from  those  made  upon  the  nerves
of  Touch,  but  the  internal  faculty  is  adapted  by  nature  to
both ;  and  hence  the  same  perceptions  are  experienced  by
means  of  the  same  faculty,  although  through  the  instrumen-
tality of  different  media ;  but  the  same  function  is  not  per*
formed  by  distinct  senses.

These  views  of  the  functions  of  the  senses  are  illustrated
and  confirmed  by  the  phenomena  which  take  place  when
the  organs  of  Sense  are  diseased.    For  example,  when  the
Ear  becomes  inflamed,  it  often  happens  that  spontaneous
sensations  of  sound  are  experienced ;  when  too  much  blood
flows  into  the  Eye,  impressions,  like  those  of  light,  are  felt ;
when  the  nerves  of  Taste  become  diseased,  disagreeable  sa-
vours are  experienced ;  when  the  nerves  of  Toueh  are  ex-
cited by  internal  causes,  a  tickling  or  disagreeable  sensation
is  felt;  when  the  muscular  system  is  relaxed  by  nervous.
diseases,  and  flying  spasms  occur  over  the  body,  impressions
occasionally  arise  from  these  spasmodic  affections,  so  pre*
tisely  resembling  those  of  touch,  that  the  individual  is  at  a
loss  to  distinguish  them.

Every  one  is  acquainted  with  the  ridiculous  theories
which  have  been  framed  by  philosophers,  to  account  for  the
phenomena  of  perception*  Aristotle  taught,  says  Dp
Reiu,  "  That,  as  our  senses  cannot  receive  external  mate-
rial objects  themselves,  they  receive  their  species,  that  is>
their  images  or  forms  without  the  matter,  as  wax  receives
the  form  of  the  seal,  without  any  of  the  matter  of  it  *•?*

*  Essay  on  Intellectual  Powers,  p.  *5.


868  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

The  Platonists  differed  from  Aristotle  in  maintaining,
"  That  there  exist  eternal  and  immutable  ideas,  which  were
prior  to  the  objects  of  sense,  and  about  which  all  science
was  employed."  They  agreed  with  him,  however,  as  to
the  manner  in  which  these  ideas  are  perceived.  Two  thou-
sand years  after  Plato,  Mr  Locke  represents  our  manner
of  perceiving  external  objects,  by  comparing  the  under-
standing "to  a  closet,  wholly  shut  from  light,  with  only
some  little  opening  lefty  to  let  in  external  visible  resem-
blances or  ideas  of  things  without."  The  notion  of  all  these
philosophers  was,  that,  from  the  existence  of  these  images
or  ideas,  the  mind  inferred,  by  a  process  of  reasoning,  the
existence  of  the  external  objects  themselves.

Dr  Reid  refuted,  by  a  very  simple  process,  these  doc-
trines. He  pointed  out  merely  the  fact,  that  the  mind  is  so
formed,  that  certain  impressions*  produced  by  external  ob-
jects, on  our  organs  of  sense,  are  followed  by  certaiir  sen-
sations ;  and  that  these  sensations  are  followed  by  percep*
tions  of  the  existence  and  qualities  of  the  bodies  by  which
the  impressions  are  made>  and  that  all  the  steps  of  thi»
process  are  equally  involuntary  and  incomprehensible.
,  It  will  at  once  be  perceived,  that  the  doctrine  here  laid
down  regarding  the  functions  of  the  senses,  corresponds
precisely  with  the  philosophy  of  Dr  Reid.

The  organs  of  each  sense  are  double ;  and  yet  the  con-*-
sciousness  of  all  impressions  experienced  by  the  mind  is-
single.  Various  theories  have  been  propounded  to  account
for  this  fact ;  but  none  of  them  are  satisfactory.  Dr  Gali,
ventured  to  give  an  explanation  different  from  all  these*
"  He  distinguishes  two  states  of  activity  in  the  organs  of  the
senses,  calling  one  active,  the  other  passive-  The  functions-
are  passive,  if  performed  independently  of  the  will ;  the  eyer
for  instance,  necessarily  perceives  the  light  which  falls  upon
it,  and  the  ear,  the  vibrations  propagated  to  it.  Now,  wfe»
perceive  passively  with  both  organs,  says  he;  we  see  with
both  eyes,  hear  with  both  ears,  but  the  active  state  is  con-
fined to  one  organ,  and  commoply  to  the  strongest.  We  see


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  369

with  both  eyes  at  the  same  time,  but  we  look  with  one  only;
we  hear  with  both  ears,  we  listen  only  with  one ;  we  feel
with  both  hands,  we  touch  with  but  one,  &c.

"  There  is  no  doubt  that  we  look  with  one  eye  only.  In
placing  a  pencil  or  any  other  thin  body  between  us  and  a
light,  keeping  both  eyes  open,  and  throwing  the  axis  of  vi-
sion, the  sticky  and  the*  light,  into  a  right  line,  did  we  look
with  both  eyes,  the  pencil  should  occupy  the  diagonal,  and
its  shadow  fell  on  the  nose.  But  this  always  falls  on  one
eye,  on  that  which  the  person,  who  makes  the  experiment,
ordinarily  uses  in  looking  with  attention.  If  the  pencil  be
kept  in  the  same  position,  and  the  eye  not  employed  in
looking  be  shut,  the  relative  direction  of  the  objects  will
seem  to  remain  the  same ;  but  if  he  shut  the  eye  with  which
he  looked,  it  will  be  altered,  and  the  pencil  wiH  appear  re-
moved far  from  its  former  place.  Again,  let  any  one  look
at  a  point  but  a  little  way  distant,  both  eyes  will  seem  di-
rected towards  it  y  let  him  then  shut  his  eyes  alternately.
If  he  close  the  one  with  which  he  did  not  look,  the  other
remains  "motionless;  but  if  he  shut  that  with  which  he
looked,  the  other  turns  immediately  a  little  inwards,  in  order
to  fix  the  point  Moreover,  the  eyes  of  many  animals  are
placed  laterally,  and  cannot  both  be  directed  at  once  to  the
same  object.  Finally,  the  gestures  of  man  and  animals
prove  that  they  look  with  one  eye,  and  listen  with  one  ear;
for  they  direct  one  eye  or  one  ear  towards  the  object  to  be
seen  or  heard  *.

u  Notwithstanding  what  has  been  said,  Dr  Gall's  expla-
nation, seems  to  me,"  says  Dr  Spurzhbim,  "little satisfac-
tory. Indeed,  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  passively,  we
perceive,  at  the  same  time,  the  impressions  of  both  organs
of  any  sense,  not  only  if  one,  but  also  if  different,  objects
impress  the  two.  Even  different  impressions  of  different
objects  may  be  perceived  by  both  organs  of  two  senses  at
once.  We  may,  for  instance,  with  both  eyes  see  different
objects  at  the  moment  that  with  both  ears  we  hear  different
*  Dr  Spurzheim's  Phrenology,  p.  221.

A  a


370  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

sounds.  As  soon  as  we  are  attentive)  however,  as  soon  as
we  look  or  listen,  we  perceive  but  one  impression.  It  is
impossible,  therefore,  to  attend  to  two  different  discourses
at  once.  The  leader  of  an  orchestra  hears  passively  all  the
instruments,  but  he  cannot  be  attentive  except  to  one.
The  rapidity  of  mental  action  deceives  several,  and  makes
them  think  it  possible  to  attend  to  different  objects  at  the
same  moment.  It  follows  that  there  is  a  difference  between
the  active  and  passive  state  of  the  senses ;  but  whether  this
difference  suffices  to  explain  the  single  consciousness  of
every  sense  is  another  question ;  I  think  it  does  not.

"  First,  this  explanation  would  only  apply  to  functions
in  their  active,  not  at  all  in  their  passive  state;  and  the
cause  of  single  consciousness  must  be  the  same  in  both.
Further,  the  active  state  k  not  produced  by  the  external
senses  themselves,  any  more  than  voluntary  motion  by  the
mere  muscles.  Some  internal  power  renders  the  senses  ac-
tive ;  they  themselves  are  always  passive,  and  merely  pro-
pagate external  impressions ;  they  appear  active  only,  when
something  internal  employs  them  to  receive  and  to  trans-
mit impressions  to  the  brain.  It  is  therefore  probable,  that
the  internal  cause  which  excites  only  a  single  organ  of  the
external  senses  to  activity,  is  also  the  cause  of  the  single
consciousness  of  different  impressions.  Dr  Gall's  explana-
tion of  single  consciousness  is  consequently  not  only
grounded  upon  an  inaccurate  notion,  but  would  be  far
from  satisfactory,  were  the  supposition  even  true  *•"

The  mind  has  i\o  consciousness  either  of  the  existence  of
the  organs  of  sense,  or  of  the  functions  performed  by  them.
When  the  table  is  struck,  and  we  attend  to  the  subject  of
our  own  consciousness,  we  perceive  the  impression  of  a
sound;  but  by  this  attention  we  do  not  discover  that  the
impression  has  been  experienced  by  the  instrumentality  of
any  organ  whatever.  Hence  the  perceptions  of  the  mind
are  always  directed  to  the  objects  which  make  the  impres-
sions, and  not  to  the  instruments  by  means  of  which  the
•  Lib.  tit  p.  923.


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  371

impressions  are  experienced.  The  instruments  perform
their  functions  under  Nature's  care ;  and,  as  has  been  al-
ready observed,  are  not  subject  to  the  will.  We  should
have  been  distracted,  not  benefited,  by  a  consciousness  of
their  internal  action,  when  they  perform  their  functions.
It  is  when  they  become  diseased  that  we  become  conscious
of  their  action,  and  then  the  consciousness  is  painful.
Every  one  must  be  sensible  of  this  fact,  whose  eyes  or  ears
have  been  diseased.

Dr  Spurzheim  observes,  that  "  the  brain  seems  to  be
necessary  to  every  kind  of  perception,  even  to  that  of  the
immediate  functions  of  the  external  senses ;  but  it  is  not
yet  ascertained,  though  it  is  probable,  that  one  fundamen-
tal power,  inherent  in  a  particular  part  of  the  brain,  knows
and  conceives  as  sensations,  all  the  varied  impressions  made
on  the  external  senses.  Some  phrenologists  think  that  each
external  sense  has  a  peculiar  portion  of  brain  for  this  end,
and  that  the  combined  action  of  its  nerve  and  of  this  cere-
bral part,  is  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  its  func-
tions. That  the  nerve  of  taste  and  a  portion  of  brain,  for
instance,  are  necessary  to  perceive  savours ;  the  olfactory
nerve  and  a  cerebral  part,  to  distinguish  odours,  &c.  I  do
not  believe  that  consciousness  happens  without  brain,  but  I
see  no  reason  to  surmise  that  the  immediate  functions  of
each  external  sense  require  a  particular  portion  of  the  brain,
in  order  to  be  recognised  as  determinate  sensations."  (Dr
Spurzheim's  Phrenology,  p.  257.)

After  these  general  considerations,  which  apply  to  all  the
external  senses,  a  few  words  may  be  added  on  the  specific
functions  of  each  sense  in  particular.


FEELING  OR  TOUCH.

Dr  Spurzheim  inferred,  from  pathological  facts,  that  the
nerves  of  motion  must  be  distinct  from  the  nerves  of  feel-
ing ;  and  subsequent  experiments  have  proved  his  inference

Aa2


372  FUNCTIONS   OF  THE

to  be  well  founded.  This  subject  has  been  treated  of  on
page  59.  The  .sense,  of  feeling  is  continued,  not  only  over
the  whole  external  surface  of  the  body,  but  even  over
the  intestinal  canal.  It  gives  rise  to  the  sensations  of  pain
and  pleasure ;  of  the  variations  of  temperature ;  and  of
dryness  and  moisture.  These  cannot  be  recalled  by  the
will ;  and  I  therefore  consider  them  as  depending  on  the
sense  alone.  The  impressions  made  upon  this  sense  serve
as  the  means  of  exciting  in  the  mind  perceptions  of  figure,
of  roughness  and  smoothness,  and  numerous  other  classes
of  ideas  ;  but  the  power  of  experiencing  these  perceptions,
is  in  proportion  to  the  perfection  of  certain  internal  facul-
ties, and  of  the  sense  of  touch  jointly,  and  not  in  propor-
tion to  the  perfection  of  this  sense  alone.


TASTE*

The  functions  of  this  sense  are,  to  produce  sensations  of
taste  alone  ;  and  these  cannot  be  recalled  by  the  will.  We
may  judge  of  the  qualities  of  external  bodies,  by  means  of
the  impressions  made  on  this  sense ;  but  to  form  ideas  of
such  qualifies  is  the  province  of  the  internal  faculties.


smell.

By  means  of  smell,  the  external  world  acts  upon  man
and  animals  from  a  'distance.  Odorous  particles  are  con-
veyed from  bodies,  and  inform  sentient  beings  of  the  exist-
ence of  the  substances  from  which  they  emanate.  The
functions  of  smell  are  confined  to  the  producing  of  agree-
able or  disagreeable  sensations,  when  the  organ  is  so  affect-
ed. These  cannot  be  reproduced  by  an  effort  of  the  will.
Various  ideas,  are  formed  of  the  qualities  of  external  bodies,
by  the  impressions  which  they  make  upon  this  sense;
but  these  ideas  are  formed  by  the  internal  faculties  of  the
mind.


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  373


HEARING.

1  In  new-born  children,  this  sense  is  not  yet  active ;  but
it  improves  by  degrees,  and  in  proportion  as  the  vigour  of
the  organ  increases.  It  is  a  very  common  opinion,  that
music,  and  the  faculty  of  speech,  are  the  result  of  the  sense
of  hearing;  but  this  notion  is  erroneous.

As  already  mentioned,  the  auditory  apparatus  being  ex-
cited to  activity  by  an  external  eause,  produces  only  "the
impression  of  sound :  and  here  its  functions  terminate.  If,
besides,  the  faculty  of  Tune  is  possessed  by  any  individual,
melody  in  sounds  is  perceived  by  that  faculty.  If  the
faculty  is  not  possessed,  such  perceptions  cannot  exist.
Hence,  among  birds,  the  female  hears  as  well  as  the  male ;
and  yet  the  song  of  the  male  is  very  much  superior  to  that
of  the  female.  Among  mankind,  also,  many  individuals
hear,  and  yet  are  insensible  to  melody.  Thus,  both  in  man
and  other  animals,  there  is  no  proportion  betwixt  the  per-
fection of  hearing,  and  the  perfection  of  the  power  of  per-
ceiving melody.  If  it  were  part  of  the  fdnctions  of  the
auditory  apparatus  to  give  the  perception  of  melody,  how
does  it  happen  that,  in  one  individual,  the  apparatus  can
perform  only  one-half  of  its  functions,  while  in  others  it
performs  the  whole  ?  This  is  not  like  Nature's  work.  Fi-
nally, hearing  cannot  produce  music ;  because  the  auditory
apparatus  is  excited  only  by  sounds,  which  are  already  pro-
duced. The  first  musician  began  to  produce  music  before
he  had  heard  it;  and  he  did  so  from  an  internal  impulse
given  by  a  faculty  of  the  mind.  Singing-birds,  moreover,
which  have  been  hatched  by  strange  females,  sing  natu-
rally, and  without  any  instruction,  the  song  of  their  spe-
cies, as  soon  as  their  internal  organization  is  active.  Hence
the  males  of  every  species  preserve  their  natural  song,
though  they  have  been  brought  up  in  the  society  of  indivi-
duals of  a  different  kind.  Hence  also  musicians,  who  have
lost  their  hearing,  continue  to  compose.  They  possess  the
internal  faculty ;  and  it  being  independent  of  the  auditory


374  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

apparatus,  conceives  the  impressions  which  different  sounds
naturally  produce,  long  after  the  ear  has  ceased  to  be  ca-
pable of  allowing  these  sounds  to  be  experienced  anew;
hence,  likewise,  deaf  and  dumb  persons  have  an  innate  sen-
timent of  measure  and  cadence.  Though,  however,  hear-
ing does  not  produce  music,  yet,  without  an  auditory  appa-
ratus, fitted  to  receive  the  impressions  made  by  tones,
melody  could  not  be  perceived ;  and,  unless  that  apparatus
had  once  been  possessed,  neither  could  melody  be  produced,
because  the  individual  could  not  judge  of  the  impressions
which  the  sounds  he  made  were  fitted  to  make  upon  those
who  hear.

It  is  a  very  common  opinion  also,  that  hearing  alone,  or
hearing  and  voice  jointly,  produce  the  faculty  of  speech.
This  error  will  be  refuted,  by  considering  in  what  any  lan-
guage consists,  and  how  every  language  is  produced.    Lan-r
guage  has  been  divided  into  two  kinds,  natural  and  artifi-
cial.   In  both  kinds,  a  certain  sign  is  used  to  indicate  to
others  certain  feelings  or  ideas  of  the  mind.    Various  mo-
tions of  the  body,  and  expressions  of  the  countenance,  indi-
cate, the  moment  they  are  beheld,  certain  emotions  and
sentiments.    In  this  case,  the  expression  of  the  counte-
nance, or  the  motion  of  the  body,  is  a  sign  fitted  by  na-
ture to  excite  in  us  the  perception  of  the  feeling.     It  is  ob-
vious, that  the  power  of  the  sign,  in  this  case,  to  excite  the
perception,  does  not  depend  either  upon  hearing  or  voice;
for  neither  is  employed  in  producing  it :  but  that  the  effect
is  an  ultimate  fact  of  our  constitution,  which  must  be  re-
ferred to  the  will  of  our  Creator.    Besides  these  signs,  how-
ever, we  make  use  of  many  others  to  communicate  our
thoughts,  which  have  no  original  connexion  with  the  things
signified.    For  example,  the  word  table  has  no  necessary
connexion  with  the  thing  upon  which  I  now  write.     How,
then,  does  the  word  come  to  indicate  the  thing?    The  in-
ternal faculties  first  conceive  the  object :  having  done  so,
they  wish  to  fix  upon  a  sign  by  which  that  conception  shall
be  always  indicated  again.      They,  therefore,  employ  the


FIVE  EXTEftNAL  SENSES.  875

voice  to  make  the  sound  which  we  express  when  we  utter
the  word  table.  The  thing  itself  being  pointed  out,  and
the  sound  being  uttered  at  the  same  time,  the  meaning  of
it  comes  to  be  understood ;  and  hence  every  time  it  is  pro-
nounced,  the  idea  of  the  thing  is  suggested.  But  we  are
not  to  suppose  that  the  auditory  apparatus,  or  the  organs
of  voice,  conceive  the  idea  of  the  table.  This  was  done  by
the  internal  faculties  alone;  and  these  merely  made  use  of
the  organs  of  voice  as  instruments  for  producing  a  sign.
Hence  the  reason  why  monkeys  do  not  speak  is,  not  be*
cause  they  want  the  sense  of  hearing,  and  organs  of  voice*
but  because  they  have  not  certain  internal  faculties,  which
fix  upon  signs  to  indicate  the  conceptions  formed  by  the
mind.

The  proper  function,  then,  of  the  sense  of  hearing,  is
confined  to  the  production  of  the  impressions  which  we  call
sounds ;  yet  it  assists  a  great  number  of  internal  faculties.

The  auditory  nerve  has  a  more  intimate  connexion  with
the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments,  than  with  those  of  the
intellectual  faculties.

sight.

This  fifth  and  last  of  the  senses,  is  the  second  of  those
which  inform  man  and  other  animals  of  remote  objects,  by
means  of  an  intermedium ;  and  the  intermedium,  in  this
instance,  is  Light.

This  sense  has  been  said  to  acquire  its  functions  by  touch
or  by  habit  Bishop  Berkley  is  supposed  by  the  meta-
physicians to  have  discovered  the  true  theory  of  vision,  and
the  result  of  his  investigation  is,  "  that  a  man  born  blind,
being  made  to  see,  would  not  at  first  have  any  idea  of
distance  by  sight  The  sun  and  stars,  the  remotest  objects
as  well  as  the  nearest,  would  all  seem  to  be  in  his  eye,  or
rather  in  his  mind." — Stewart's  Dissert  p.  ii.  109.  Dr
Reid,  and  many  other  philosophers,  have  written  ingenious
disquisitions,  to  shew  that  our  perceptions  of  distance,
figure,  and  motion,  are  acquired.    These  speculations  have


876  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

proceeded  on  the  principle,  that  Nature  has  done  little  for
man,  and  that  he  does  a  great  deal  for  himself,  in  endowing
himself  with  perceptive  powers.    But  vision  depends  on
the  organization  of  the  eye.;  and  is  weak  or  energetic,  as
the  organization  is  imperfect  or  perfect     Some  *unmftfo
•come  into  the  world  with  perfect  eyes ;  and  these  see  per-
fectly from  the  first     The  butterfly  and  honey-bee  fly  at
the  first  attempt,  through  fields  and  flowery  meadows;  and
the  young  partridge  and  chicken  run  through  stubble  and
•corn  fields.     The  sparrow,  on  taking  its  first  flight  from
the  nest,  does  not  strike  its  head  against  a  wall,  or  mistake
the  root  of  a  tree  for  its  branches;  and  yet,  previous  to  its
first  attempt  at  flight,  it  can  have  no  experience  of  distance.
On  the  other  hand,  animals  which  come  into  the  world
with  eyes  in  an  imperfect  state,  distinguish  size,  shape,  and
distance,  only  by  degrees.     This  last  is  the  case  with  new-
born children.    During  the  first  six  weeks  after  birth,  their
«yes  are  almost  insensible  to  light ;  and  it  is  only  by  de-
grees that  they  become  fit  to  perform  their  natural  func-
tions.    When  the  organs  are  so  far  matured,  however,  the
children  see,  without  habit  or  education,  as  well  and  as
accurately  as  the  greatest  philosopher.

indeed,  as  has  been  formerly  mentioned,  the  kind  of  per-
ception which  we  enjoy  by  means  of  the  eyes,  is  dependent
solely  on  the  constitution  of  the  eyes,  and  the  relation  esta-
blished betwixt  them  and  the  refraction  of  light  So  little
power  has  experience  to  alter  the  nature  of  our  perceptions,
that  even  in  some  cases  where  we  discover,  by  other  senses,
that  the  visible  appearance  of  objects  is  illusive,  we  still
/continue  to  see  that  appearance  the  .same  as  before.  For
example,  the  greatest  philosopher,  standing  at  one  end  of  a
long  alley  of  trees,  cannot  see  the  opposite  rows  equally
distant  from  one  another  at  the  farthest  end,  as  they  appear
to  be  at  the  end  nearest  to  him,  even  after  experience  has
satisfied  him  that  the  fact  really  is  so.  He  must  see  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  perspective,  which  make  the  rece-
ding rows  appear  to  approach.;  and  there  is  no  difference  in


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  377

this  respect,  betwixt  his  perceptions,  and  those  of  the  most
untutored  infant  In  like  manner,  the  greatest  philoso-
pher, on  looking  into  a  concave  spoon,  cannot  see  his  right
hand -upon  the  right  side,  and  his  left  hand  upon  the  left
ride,  even  after  he  has  learned,  by  the  study  of  the  laws  of
optics,  that  the  image  of  himself,  which  he  sees  in  the  spoon,
is  reversed.

So  confident,  however,  is  Mr  Stewart  in  the  opinion
that  we  learn  to  see,  and  do  not  see  instinctively,  that
he  says,  "  Condillac  first  thought  that  the  «ye  judges
naturally  of  figures,  of  magnitudes,  of  situations,  and  of
distances.  He  afterwards  was  convinced  that  this  was
an  error,  and  retracted  it"  Stewart  adds,  u  nothing
short  of  his  own  explicit  avowal  could  have  convinced  me,
that  a  writer  of  such  high  pretensions,  and  of  such  unques-
tionable ingenuity  as  Condillac,  had  really  commenced
his  metaphysical  career  under  so  gross  and  unaccount-
able delusion."  Mr  Stewart  also  expresses  his  surprise,
that  Aristotle  should  maintain  that  it  is  not  from  seeing
often  or  from  hearing  often,  that  we  get  these  senses ;  but,
on  the  contrary,  instead  of  getting  them  by  using  them,  we
use  them  because  we  have  got  them."
-  It  is  worth  while  to  inquire  on  what  grounds  the  meta-
physicians maintain  such  extraordinary  opinions.  They  are
two :  first.  The  fact  that  new-born  children  miss  the  object
they  mean  to  seize,  and  shew  clearly  that  they  do  not  ap-
preciate size,  distance,  and  relative  position  accurately:
Secondly ',  The  fact  that  a  blind  man  couched  by  Chessel-
den,  on  the  first  influx  of  light  to  the  retina,  saw  all  exter-
nal objects  as  situated  in  his  eye,  and  after  a  few  weeks  per-
ceived distance  and  magnitude  like  ordinary  persons.  From
these  facte,  the  metaphysicians  infer  that  the  human  being
does  not  perceive  distance,  size  and  form  instinctively,  but
learns  to  do  so  by  experience.  The  answers  are  obvious.
The  eye  in  the  child  is  not  perfect  till  six  weeks  after  birth.
The  eye  newly  couched  is  not  a  sound  eye  instantly,  nor
do  the  muscles  and  various  parts  which  had  lain  dormant


378  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE

for  thirty  years,  act  with  perfect  effect  at  the  first  attempt,
amid  the  irritation  and  torment  of  a  painful  operation ;
and,  even  admitting  that  the  eye  was  perfectly  sound,  die
internal  organs  which  perceive  the  distance  are  not  so.  By
disuse,  every  organ  of  the  body  becomes  unfitted  for  the
doe  performance  of  its  functions.  In  civilized  nations,  the
muscles  of  the  external  ear  being  prevented  from  acting
daring  childhood,  by  the  head-dress,  not  only  lose  all  con-
tractile power,  but  actually  dwindle  into  nothing.  In  the
savage  state,  the  power  of  moving  the  ear  is  often  as  per-
fect in  man  as  in  the  lower  animals.  The  same  unfitness
for  action  is  observed  after  long  confinement  of  a  limb  for
the  cure  of  fracture,  &c.,  and  the  muscles  diminish  in  size.
In  the  same  way,  during  blindness,  the  organs  which  judge
of  colour  and  distance  never  are  called  into  action,  and
therefore  become,  to  a  certain  degree,  unable  to  execute
their  functions,  and  it  is  only  by  degrees  that  they  acquire
sufficient  energy  to  do  so.

Dr  Thomas  Brown,  whose  acuteness  I  shall  have  fre-
quent occasion  to  notice  and  to  praise,  admits  that  the
lower  animals  perceive  distance  instinctively;  and,  al-
though, on  the  whole,  he  agrees  in  the  opinions  of  Berk-
ley, Reid,  and  Stewart,  yet  he  holds  the  opposite  opi-
nion, which  the  phrenologists  maintain,  as  far  from  ridicu-
lous. "  It  is,"  says  he,  "  not  more  wonderful,  &  priori,  that
a  sensation  of  colour  should  be  immediately  followed  by  the
notion  of  a  mile  of  distance,  than  that  the  irritation  of  the
nostril,  by  any  very  stimulant  odour,  should  be  immediate-
ly and  involuntarily  followed  by  the  sudden  contraction  of
a  distant  muscular  organ,  like  the  diaphragm,  which  pro-
duces, in  sneering,  the  violent  expiration  necessary  for  ex-
pelling the  acrid  matter/1 — Vol.  ii.  p.  69.

It  is  very  true  that  Nature  does  not  give  us  intuitive  per-
ceptions of  the  number  of  feet  or  inches  at  which  any  ob-
ject is  distant  from  us;  because  these  are  artificial  mea-
sures, with  which  nature  has  nothing  to  do.  But  when
two  objects,  equal  in  size,  are  presented  to  the  eye,  the  one


FIVE  EXTERNAL  SENSES.  379

double  in  point  of  distance  to  the  other,  the  mind  has  al-
ways an  intuitive  perception  that  they  are  not  equally  near,
unless  the  external  or  internal  organs,  or  both,  are  deficient
or  deranged.

What,  then,  are  the  true  functions  of  the  eye  ?  No  organ
of  sense  forms  ideas.  The  eye,  therefore,  only  receives,
modifies  and  transmits  the  impressions  of  light ;  and  here
its  functions  cease.  Internal  faculties  form  conceptions  of
the  figure,  colour,  distance,  and  other  attributes  of  the  ob-
jects making  the  impressions :  and  the  power  of  forming
these  conceptions  is  in  proportion  to  the  perfection  of  the
eyes  and  the  internal  faculties  jointly,  and  not  in  propor-
tion to  the  perfection  of  the  eyes  alone.  Hence  the  lower
animals,  although  they  have  eyes  equal  in  perfection  to
those  of  man,  are  not  able  to  form  the  ideas  of  the  qua-
lities of  bodies,  which  he  forms  by  means  of  his  internal
faculties,  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  eye,  because
in  them  the  internal  faculties  are  wanting.

The  sense*  may  be  exercised,  and  thflir.  powers- greatly
improved,  by  exercise.  The  taate  of  the  gourmand  i%  iqore
acute  than  that  of  the  peasant ;  and  the  touch  of  tbfc  arti-
san than  that  of  the  ploughman.


Genus  II.  —  intellectual  faculties  which

PERCEIVE   THE   EXISTENCE   OF  EXTERNAL   OB-
JECTS AND  THEIR  PHYSICAL  QUALITIES*

The  faculties  now  to  be  treated  of  take  cognizance  of
the  existence  and  qualities  of  external  objects.  They  cor-
respond, in  some  degree,  to  the  Perceptive  Powers  of  the
metaphysicians;  and  form  ideas.  Their  action  is  attended
with  a  sensation  of  pleasure,  but  (except  in  the  case  of


380


INDIVIDUALITY.


Tune)  it  is  weak,  compared  to  the  emotions  produced  by
the  faculties  already  treated  of;  and  the  higher  the  func-
tions, the  less  vivid  is  the  emotion  attending  their  active
state.  In  judging  of  the  size  of  these  organs,  the  rules  laid
down  on  pages  89.  and  91.  requires  to  be  particularly  at-
tended to.


'22. — INDIVIDUALITY.


This  organ  is  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  lower  part  of
the  forehead,  immediately  above  the  top  of  the  nose.  When
large,  it  produces  breadth  and  descent  between  the  eye-
brows, at  that  part ;  when  small,  the  eye-brows  approach
closely  to  each  other,  and  lie  in  a  horizontal  line.  The
figure  of  King  George  HI.  shews  the  organ  large ;  that  of
Curran  moderate.


King  George  III.


J.  P.  Curran.


Individuality,  22,  large :
and  Form  23,  large.


Individuality,  22,  moderate:
Form  smalL


In  surveying  the  external  world,  we  may  observe,  1st,
Objects  simply  as  substances  or  existences,  such  as  a  rock,
"a  horse,  a  tree,  n  man ;  these  perceptions  are  designated  by
substances;  in  the  next  place,  the  properties  or  attributes
of  things  which  exist,  such  as  their  form,  size,  weight,  co-
lour, number;  3dly,  their  relations  to  other  objects,  such
as  their  place  and  order  of  arrangement.  After  these
perceptions,  we  may  notice  their  active  phenomena,  the
rock  falls,  the  horse  runs,  the  tree  grows,  the  man  walks ;
these  actions  are  designated  by  verbs.     As  size,   form,


INDIVIDUALITY.  881

weight,  and  colours  are  adjuncts  of  physical  existence,
Time  is  an  adjunct  of  action*  Now,  the  faculty  of  Indivi-
duality observes  objects  which  exist ;  it  gives  the  notion  of
substance,  and  forms  the  class  of  ideas  represented  by
nouns  when  used  without  any  adjected  word.  We  owe  to
Dr  Spurzheim  the  discovery  of  the  organ,  and  analysis  of
its  functions.

The  faculty  gives  the  desire,  accompanied  with  the  abi-
lity, to  know  objects  as  mere  existences*  without  regard  to
their  modes  of  action,  or  the  purposes  to  which  they  may
be  subservient.     Individuals  in  whom  it  is  large,  will  ob-
serve and  examine  an  object  with  intense  delight,  without
the  least  consideration  whence  it  has  come,  or  to  what  it
may  be  applied,  a  quality  of  mind  which  is  almost  incom-
prehensible to  persons  in  whom  the  organ  is  small  and
Causality  large.     It  prompts  to  observation,  and  is  a  great
element  in  a  genius  for  those  sciences  which  consist  in  a
knowledge  of  specific  existences,  such  as  natural  history.   It
leads  to  giving  a  specific  form  to  all  the  ideas  entertained
by  the  mind.     A  student  in  whom  this  organ  is  small,  and
the  reflecting  organs  large,  may  have  his  mind  stored  with
general  principles  of  science,  and  with  abstract  ideas,  but
will  experience  much  difficulty  in  reducing  them  into  pre-
cise and  specific  forms.    Another*  in  whom  this  organ  is
large,  will  have  all  his  knowlege  individualized;  if  he  hear
lectures  or  conversation  in  which  general  views  chiefly  are
presented,  he  will  render  them  specific  for  himself;  but
unless  his  reflecting  organs  also  be  large,  he  will  be  prone
to  miss  the  essential  principle,  to  seize  upon  the  most  pal-
pable circumstance  attending  it,  and  to  embrace  this  as
his  conception  of  it~    Such  persona  are  learned,  and  owing
to  the  store  of  facts  with  which  their  memories  are  reple-
nished, to  the  great  definiteness  and  precision  of  their
ideas,  and  the  readiness  with  which  they  command  them,
they  often  take  a  lead  -in  public  business ;  but  if  their  re-
flecting organs  are  deficient,  they  show  no  depth  m  com-
prehensiveness of  understanding;  they  do  not  advance  the


382  INDIVIDUALITY.

principles  of  science,  and  rarely  acquire  a  permanent  repu-
tation*

In  common  life,  tikis  organ  large,  confers  a  talent  for  ob-
servation, curiosity  to  know,  and  aptitude  for  acquiring
knowledge  of  details.  The  character  of  Miss  Pratt,  as
drawn  by  the  author  of  "  Inheritance,"  a  novel,  is  a  per-
sonification of  Individuality,  when  predominantly  power-
ful, and  not  directed  by  higher  faculties.  "  But  people
who  make  use  of  their  eyes,"  says  this  author,  "  have  of-
ten much  to  see,  even  between  two  doors ;  and  in  her  pro-
gress from  the  hall  door  to  the  drawing  room,  Miss  Pratt
met  with  much  to  attract  her  attention.  True,  all  the  ob-
jects were  perfectly  familiar  to  her ;  but  a  real  looker,  like
a  great  genius,  is  never  at  a  loss  for  a  subject — things  are
either  better  or  worse  since  they  saw  them  last — or  if  the
things  themselves  should  happen  to  be  the  same,  they  have
seen  other  things,  either  better  or  worse,  and  can  therefore
either  approve  or  disapprove  of  them.  MissPratfs  head  then
turned  from  side  to  side  a  thousand  times  as  she  went  along,
and  a  thousand  observations  and  criticisms  about  stair-car-
pets, patent-lamps,  hall-chairs,  slab-tables,  &c.&c.  &c.  passed
through  her  crowded  brain. — At  length  Miss  Pratt  and  Mr
Lindsay  were  announced,  and  thereupon  entered  Miss  Pratt
in  a  quick  paddling  manner,  as  if  in  all  haste  to  greet  her
friends." — "  Miss  Pratt  then  appeared  to  her  (Gertrude)  a
person  from  whom  nothing  could  be  hid.  Here  eyes  were  not
by  any  means  fine  eyes — they  were  not  reflecting  eyes —
they  were  not  soft  eyes — they  were  not  sparkling  eyes— they
were  not  penetrating  eyes;  neither  were  they  restless  eyes,
nor  rolling  eyes,  nor  squinting  eyes,  nor  prominent  eyes —
but  they  were  active,  brisk,  busy,  vigilant,  immoveable
eyes,  that  looked  as  if  they  could  not  be  surprised  by  any
thing— not  even  by  sleep.  They  never  looked  angry,  nor
joyous,  or  perturbed,  or  melancholy,  or  heavy;  but  morn-
ing, noon,  and  night  they  shone  the  same,  and  conveyed
die  same  impression  to  the  beholder*  vis.  that  they  were

l


INDIVIDUALITY.  588

eyes  that  had  a  look — not  like  the  look  of  Sterne's  monk,
beyond  this  world — but  a  look  into  all  things  on  the  face  of
this  world.  Her  other  features  had  nothing  remarkable  in
them;  but  the  ears  might  evidently  be  classed  under  the
same  head  with  the  eyes — they  were  something  resembling
rabbits' — long,  prominent,  restless,  vibrating  ears,  forever
listening,  and  never  shut  by  the  powers  of  thought."

From  communicating  this  talent  of  observation,  Indivi-
duality greatly  assists  Imitation  in  promoting  mimickry.
The  organ  is  large  in  Matthews,  and  it  is  obvious  that  ac-
curate observation  of  the  manners  and  appearances  of  men
is  a  fundamental  element  in  a  talent  such  as  his,  of  pour-
traying  on  the  stage  living  Individuals  in  their  minutest
peculiarities.

When  the  organ  is  deficient,  the  individual  fails  to  ob-
serve objects  that  exist  around  him ;  he  may  visit  a  house,
and  come  away  without  knowing  what  objects  were  in  the
rooms.  Such  a  person  walks  in  the  streets,  or  through  the
country,  and  observes  nothing*  In  short,  although  the  ex*
ternal  senses  are  in  perfect  health,  owing  to  the  feebleness
of  this  observing  power,  they  are  not  called  into  activity
for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  knowledge.

This  organ,  when  large,  prompts  to  discovery  by  obser-
vation. Persons  so  endowed  do  not  seek  to  arrive  at  new
truths  by  reasoning,  but  inquire  at  nature,  at  men,  at
books  for  information ;  and  hence,  many  brilliant  physical
discoveries  have  been  made  by  persons  largely  endowed
with  these  and  the  other  perceptive  organs,  whose  reflect-
ing faculties  have  not  surpassed  mediocrity.  Since  Ba-
con's rules  of  philosophizing  have  been  duly  appreciated
and  become  fashionable,  science  has  been  extensively  and
successfully  cultivated  by  a  class  of  minds,  which,  while  the
method  of  speculative  reasoning  prevailed,  was  excluded  from
such  pursuits.  This  class  is  composed  of  persons  in  whom
the  organ  under  consideration  greatly  predominates  over
those  of  the  reflecting  powers.  Such  individuals  are  con-
stituted by  nature  to  become  observers ;  and  natural  his-


384  INDIVIDUALITY,

lory,  particularly  botany,  anatomy,  and  even  chemistry,
arc  great  departments  of  knowledge  fitted  for  the  exercise
of  their  peculiar  talent*  The  substance  of  these  sciences
consists  in  a  knowledge  of  the  existence,  appearances,  and
properties  of  natural  objects  as  facts  ;  and  we  need  not  be
surprised  to  meet  with  eminent  professors  in  these  branches,
in  whose  heads  the  knowing  organs  predominate  over  the
reflecting-

To  the  artist  this  organ  is  of  great  importance.-  It
enables  him  to  give  body  aid  substance  to  the  conceptions
of  his  other  faculties,  and  confers  on  him  a  capacity  for  at-
tending to  detail.  In  the  pictures  of  an  artist  in  whose
head  Individuality  is  deficient,  there  is  an  abstractness  of
conception,  and  a  vagueness  of  expression,  that  greatly  de-
tract from  their  effect.  In  the  works  of  an  individual  in
whom  these  organs  are  large,  every  object  appears  full  of
substance  and  reality;  and  if  he  paints  portraits,  the  spec-
tator will  be  so  impressed  with  their  Individuality,  thai
he  will  be  apt  to  fancy  himself  acquainted  with  the  ori-
ginals.

Persons  who  excel  at  whist,  generally  possess  it  and
Eventuality  large.  If  both  of  the  organs  be  deficient,  emi-
nence will  not  easily  be  attained  in  this  game.

This  faculty  gives  the  tendency  to  personify  notions  and
phenomena,  or  to  ascribe  existence  to  mere  abstractions  of
the  mind,  such  as  Ignorance,  Folly,  or  Wisdom.

The  organ  was  large  in  Sheridan,  and  it  is  large  in  Sir
Walter  Scott.  It  is  small  in  the  Scots  in  general;  it  is
larger  in  the  English,  and  still  larger  in  the  French.

The  frontal  sinus  is  generally  present  at  the  situation  of
this  organ  in  adults,  and  this  throws  a  difficulty  in  the  way
of  judging  of  its  size.  The  function,  however,  is  ascer-
tained, by  observing  young  persons  in  whom  the  sinus  is
not  formed,  and  by  the  negative  evidence ;  that  is,  when
externally  part  of  the  skull  at  the  top  of  the  nose  is  nar-
row, contracted,  and  depressed,  the  portion  of  brain  below
is  necessarily  small,  and  then  the  mental  power  is  found


INDIVIDUALITY.  885

invariably  weak.  This  concomitance  of  large  size  and
great  power  in  young  persons,  and  of  deficiency  of  size  and
feebleness  of  power  in  all  ages,  proves  the  function ;  al-
though in  some  individuals  there  is  an  external  elevation
caused  by  sinus,  and  not  by  brain,  which  is  not  accompa-
nied with  the  corresponding  organ  in  the  mental  faculty.


23. — FORM.

Dr  Gall  was  struck  with  the  circumstance,  that  certain
persons  and  animals  recognise,  with  the  greatest  facility,
individuals  whom  they  have  not  seen  for  years,  and  even
then  only  in  passing*  In  himself,  this  faculty  was  weak;
and  frequently,  on  rising  from  table,  he  had  no  recollection
of  the  person  who  had  sat  next  to  him,  so  as  to  be  able  to
recognise  him  again  in  society,  and  he  was,  in  consequence,
exposed  to  many  painful  embarrassments  and  awkward
mistakes.  Being  desired  to  examine  the  head  of  a  young
girl  who  had  an  extreme  facility  of  distinguishing  and  re-
collecting persons,  he  found  her  eyes  pushed  laterally  out-
ward, and  a  certain  squinting  look :  after  innumerable  ad-
ditional observations,  he  spoke  of  an  organ  of  the  know-
ledge of  persons.

The  organs  lie  on  the  two  sides  of,  and  contiguous  to,
the  crista  gattu  When  small,  the  orbitar  plate  approaches
close  to  the  sides  of  the  crest,  and  then  the  external  width
across  the  nose  from  eye  to  eye  is  small ;  when  large,  there
is  a  considerable  space  betwixt  the  orbitar  plate  and  the
crest,  and  a  great  external  breadth  across  the  nose.

In  some  instances  the  frontal  sinus  is  found  at  the  situa-
tion of  this  organ ;  but  it  very  rarely  leads  to  difficulty  in
observing  its  size.  The  organ  was  large  in  King  George
III.,  and,  combined  with  his  large  organ  of  Individuality,  it
gave  him  that  extraordinary  talent  for  recollecting  persons
for  which  he  was  celebrated.     It  is  very  moderately  de-

Bb


386  FORM.

veloped  in  Curran,  and  by  referring  to  the  figures  on  page
380,  it  will  be  observed  that  the  distance  between  the  eyes
in  King  George  III.  at  23,  is  much  greater  than  in  Curran.
Dr  Gall  observes,  that  those  individuals  who  never  be-
stow more  than  a  superficial  attention  on  phenomena,  and
who  have  always  reasonings,  or  at  least  sophisms,  ready  in
explanation  of  every  fact,  pretend  that  a  deficiency,  such  as
he  experienced  in  recognising  persons,  is  owing  to  the
eyes ;  that,  in  such  cases,  the  vision  is  indistinct,  or  there
is  a  squint.  His  personal  experience,  he  adds,  affords  a  re-
futation of  this  hypothesis;  for  he  never  had  a  squint,  and
his  vision  was  particularly  acute  and  clear  *.  Often  chil-
dren from  three  to  five  years  of  age  have  a  great  memory
for  persons.  Some  dogs,  at  the  distance  of  years,  recognise
an  individual  whom  they  have  only  once  seen,  while  others,
after  a  few  days''  absence,  do  not  know  again  persons  whom
they  have  seen  frequently.  Monkeys,  dogs,  horses,  ele-
phants, and  even  birds,  distinguish,  with  greater  or  less

*  Dr  Gall  mentions,  that,  although  he  could  neither  paint  nor  design,
he  was  able  to  seize  with  great  facility  the  numerous  forms  of  the  head ;
which  statement  is  at  variance  with  great  deficiency  in  the  organ  of  form ;
but  from  the  general  tenor  of  his  observations,  it  appears  that  his  power
of  distinguishing  forms  was  not  so  great  as  he  imagined  it  to  be.  Dr
Spuhzheim  gives  the  following  note  in  his  reprint  of  the  article  Phre-
nology, in  the  3d  Number  of  the  Foreign  Quarterly  Review : — *  The
phrenological  faculties  of  Dr  Gall's  infantile  genius  were,  Individuality,
Eventuality,  and  Causality  in  an  eminent  degree.

"  It  has  been  remarked  as  singular,  that  Dr  Gall  should  have  been  the
first  founder  of  this  new  science,  whilst  he  could  not  recollect  persons  af-
ter dinner,  though  they  had  been  near  him  at  table,  and  since  he  could  not
find  his  way  again  to  places,  where  he  had  been  before ;  or,  in  phrenologi-
cal terms,  since  he  had  Form  and  Locality  very  small.  Those  who  make
that  remark,  can  neither  know  the  proceeding  of  Dr  Gall,  nor  understand
the  true  meaning  of  the  two  phrenological  denominations.  Dr  Gall
compared  the  size  of  individual  cerebral  portions  with  certain  talents  or
characters  eminent  in  any  way ;  and  he  was  not  deficient  in  the  power
of  perceiving  size  and  its  differences.  The  want  of  Locality  did  not  pre-
vent him  from  making  discoveries,  any  more  than  the  want  of  seeing  cer-
tain colours  hinders  any  one  to  cultivate  geometry  or  mathematics  in  ge-
neral. Dr  Gall's  deficiency  in  form  explains  why  be  constantly  attached


FORM.  887

facility,  their  master,  or  those  who  have  been  kind  or  cruel
to  them,  among  &  thousand.  All  the  animals  which  belong
to  a  herd,  and  also  all  the  bees  in  a  hive,  from  90,000  to
80,000  in  number,  know  each  other.  When  a  stranger
attempts  to  introduce  himself,  they  drive  him  away,  or  kill
him*,

Dr  Spurzheim  has  analyzed  the  mental  power  connected
with  the  organ  in  question,  and  considers  it  in  the  follow-
ing manner  :  "  To  me,"  says  he,  "  there  seems  to  exist  an
essential  and  fundamental  power,  which  takes  cognizance
of  configuration  generally,  and  one  of  whose  peculiar  appli-
cations or  offices  is  recollection  of  persons ;  for  persons  are
only  known  by  their  forms.  I  separate  the  faculty  which
appreciates  configuration  from*  that  of  Individuality,  since
we  may  admit  the  existence  of  a  being  without  taking  its
figure  into  consideration.  Individuality  may  be  excited  by
every  one  of  the  external  senses,  by  smell  and  hearing,  as
well  as  by  feeling  and  sight ;  while  the  two  latter  senses
alone  assist  the  faculty  of  configuration.  It  is  this  power
which  disposes  us  to  give  a  figure  to  every  being  and  con-
ception of  our  minds ;  that  of  an  old  man,  to  God  ;  to
Death,  that  of  a  skeleton,  and  so  on.  The  organ  of  confi-
guration is  situated  in  the  internal  angle  of  the  orbit ;  if
large,  it  pushes  the  eye-ball  towards  the  external  angle  a
little  outwards  and  downwards.  It  varies  in  size  in  whole
nations.  Many  of  the  Chinese  I  have  seen  in  London  had
it  much  developed.  It  is  commonly  large  in  the  French,
and  bestows  their  skill  in  producing  certain  articles  of  in-
dustry. Combined  with  Constructiveness,  it  invents  the
patterns  of  dress-makers  and  milliners.     It  leads  poets  to

himself  to  isolated  elevations  and  depressions  on  the  surface  of  the  head,
rather  than  to  their  general  configuration,  and  left  this  rectification  of
Phrenology  to  my  exertions ;  he,  nevertheless,  has  the  great  merit  of
having  discovered  first,  certain  relations  between  cerebral  development
and  mental  manifestations."

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  1,  2,  &c

Bb3


388  FORM.

describe  portraits  and  configurations,  and  induces  those
who  make  collections  of  pictures  and  engravings  to  prefer
portraits,  if  they  have  it  in  a  high  degree.  It  is  essential  to
portrait-painters.  Crystallography  also  depends  on  it ;  and
to  me  it  appears  that  conceptions  of  smoothness  and  rough-
ness are  acquired  by  its  means  *."  I  have  met  with  nume-
rous facts,  in  proof  of  this  faculty  and  organ.

A  gentleman  of  this  city,  who  had  a  passion  for  minera-
logy from  early  youth,  has  a  very  large  development  of  this
organ,  as  also  of  Comparison ;  and  I  have  seen  many  chil-
dren who  were  expert  at  cutting  figures  in  paper  pos-
sess it  with  the  organs  of  Imitation  and  Constructiveness
large.  A  gentleman  called  on  me  in  whom  Constructive-
ness, Locality,  and  other  organs  which  go  to  form  a  talent
for  drawing  landscape  and  botanical  figures  are  large,  but
in  whom  Form  is  deficient ;  and  he  said,  he  could  not,  ex-
cept with  great  difficulty  and  imperfection,  draw  or  copy
portraits.

In  the  casts  of  two  Chinese  skulls,  in  the  Phrenological
Society's  Collection,  the  organ  is  greatly  developed ;  and,  in
a  collection  of  portraits  of  eminent  painters,  presented  by
Sir  G.  S.  Mackenzie  to  the  Society,  the  organ  appears  un-
commonly large  in  those  who  excelled  in  portrait  painting.

The  metaphysicians  do  not  admit  a  faculty  of  this  kind.

Mr  Jeffrey,  in  the  article  "  Beauty,"  in  the  Supplement
to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  agrees  with  another  au-
thor, whom  he  quotes,  Mr  Knight,  in  maintaining,  that
"  There  are  no  forms  that  have  any  intrinsic  beauty,  or  any
power  of  pleasing  or  affecting  us,  except  through  their  asso-
ciations, or  affinities  to  mental  affections,  either  as  expressive
of  fitness  and  utility,  or  as  types  and  symbolr^f  certain
moral  or  intellectual  qualities,  in  which  the  sources  of  our
interest  are  obvious."  From  these  observations  one  would
suspect  Mr  Jeffrey  and  Mr  Knight  to  be  endowed  with
small  organs  of  Form  themselves,  and  that  they  have  taken

•  Phrenology,  p.  274.


FORM.  389

their  own  experience  as  that  of  mankind  in  general.  The
notion  which  Mr  Jeffrey  has  erected  into  a  fundamental
principle,  and  on  which  his  whole  essay  on  Beauty  is
built, — that  external  objects  possess  no  qualities  of  their
own  fitted  to  please  the  mind,  but  that  all  their  beauty  and
interest  arise  from  human  feelings  which  we  have  associated
with  them,  is  contradicted  by  daily  experience.  The  mine-
ralogist, when  he  talks  of  the  beauty  of  his  crystals,  has  a
distinct  and  intelligible  feeling  to  which  the  name  of  Beauty
is  legitimately  applied;  and  yet  he  connects  no  human
emotions  with  the  pyramids,  and  rhombs,  and  octagons,
which  he  contemplates  in  the  spars.  In  short,  I  have  met '
with  persons  in  whom  this  organ  is  large,  who  declare
that  they  enjoy  a  perceptible  pleasure  from  the  contem-
plation of  mere  form,  altogether  unconnected  with  ideas  of
utility  and  fitness,  or  of  moral  or  intellectual  associations ;
and  that  they  can  speak  as  intelligibly  of  elegant  and  in-
elegant, beautiful  and  ugly  shapes,  regarded  merely  as
shapes,  as  of  sweet  and  bitter,  hard  and  soft.

Dr  Gall  remarks,  that  some  authors  present  the  reader
with  descriptions  of  the  persons  whom  they  introduce,
drawn  with  great  minuteness  and  effect.  Montaigne,  for
example,  and  Sterne  are  distinguished  for  this  practice,
and  in  the  portraits  of  both  the  organ  of  Form  is  conspi-
cuously large.

It  is  regarded  as  established.


24. — SIZE.

The  faculty  of  distinguishing  Form  differs  from  the  fa-
culty of  Size ;  because  there  is  an  essential  difference  be-
tween the  idea  of  size  and  that  of  form.  The  size  may  be
the  same,  and  the  form  different.  One  of  these  kinds  of
knowledge  may  exist  without  the  other ;  and  there  is  no
proportion  between  them.   Besides,  as  formerly  mentioned,


390  size.

the  nerves  of  touch,  and  the  organ  of  sight,  do  not  form
ideas  of  any  kind;  so  that  the  power  of  conceiving  size
cannot  be  in  proportion  to  the  endowment  of  them.  Dr
Spurzheim,  therefore,  inferred  by  reasoning,  that  there
would  be  a  faculty,  the  function  of  which  is  to  perceive
Size ;  and  observation  has  proved  the  soundness  of  this  con-
clusion, for  the  situation  assigned  by  him  to  the  organ  has
been  found  correct,  and  it  is  regarded  as  probable.  In  dis-
secting the  brain,  the  convolutions  which  constitute  Size
and  Form  are  found  intimately  connected.  The  organ  is
placed  at  the  internal  corner  of  the  arch  of  the  eyebrow,
on  the  two  sides  of  Individuality.

A  member  of  the  Phrenological  Society  called  on  Dr
Spurzheim  in  Paris,  and  the  latter  remarked  that  he  had
this  organ  largely  developed.  This  proved  to  be  a  correct
indication  of  the  talent  in  his  case ;  for  he  possesses  the
power  of  discriminating  size  with  great  nicety.  He  is  able
to  draw  a  circle  without  the  aid  of  any  instrument,  and  to
point  out  the  centre  of  it  with  mathematical  accuracy.
Being  in  the  army,  he  found  himself  able  to  make  his  com-
pany fall  from  column  into  line  with  great  exactness ;  esti-
mating correctly  by  the  eye  the  space  to  be  occupied  by
the  men,  which  many  other  officers  could  never  learn  to
do.  Locality,  which  also  he  largely  possessed,  would  aid
him  in  this  practice.

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  this  faculty  is  connected
with  the  power  of  perceiving  distance,  and  that  it  is  a  chief
element  in  a  talent  for  perspective.  Mr  Ferguson,  tutor
in  the  family  of  Sir  6.  S.  Mackenzie,  stated,  that  he  had
a  difficulty  in  "  understanding  a  landscape"  in  a  picture ;
and  explained,  that  "  it  appeared  to  him  to  present  a  group
of  objects  on  a  plain  surface,  without  any  perceptible  fore
or  back  ground."  He  attributed  this  defect  in  his  percep-
tions to  his  not  having  been  taught  the  rules  of  perspective
at  school.  In  the  course  of  farther  interrogation,  he  stated,
that  he  sees  the  forms  of  objects  distinctly,  as  also  their
colour ;  that  he  likes  brilliant  tints  best,  and  that  in  nature


SIZE.  391

he  perceives  distance  also*  He  has  visited  Roslin  (in  the
neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh),  and  not  only  perceived  the
beauty  which  characterizes  that  delicious  spot,  but  enjoyed
it  with  a  keen  relish.  He  has  also  seen  many  pieces  of
Highland  scenery,  and  been  delighted  with  them.  Rivers,
meadows,  trees,  or  cultivated  ground,  are,  however,  the  ob-
jects which  interest  him  most.  On  turning  his  back  upon
any  natural  landscape,  or  shutting  his  eyes  upon  it,  his  re-
collections instantly  become  very  confused.  He  is  not  able
to  recal  in  his  mind  the  "  relative  positions "  of  the  ob-
jects ;  while  be  distinctly  recollects  the  pleasing  impressions
which  they  made  upon  him ;  this  remembrance  does  not
soon  fade.  His  recollection  of  Roslin,  for  example,  is  like
that  of  a  confused  picture  of  rocks  and  trees,  and  a  river
winding  through  them ;  but  his  remembrance  of  the  im-
pressions of  grandeur  and  beauty,  produced  by  the  objects,
is  vivid  and  distinct

For  a  long  time  it  was  difficult  to  account  for  this  curi-
ous deficiency  of  mental  power.  Mr  F.  permitted  a  cast
of  his  face  and  forehead  to  be  taken  (which  is  sold  in  the
shops),  and  in  it  the  organ  of  Size  appeared  to  be  decidedly
small,  and  Form  and  Locality  not  very  fully  developed ;
while,  by  examining  his  head,  it  appeared  that  Ideality,
Wonder,  Benevolence,  with  the  organs  of  the  other  senti-
ments, and  also  of  the  intellectual  powers,  were  nowise  de-
ficient ;  but  to  which  of  the  three  organs  of  Size,  Form,  or
Locality,  the  imperfection  fell  to  be  ascribed,  it  was  not
easy  to  determine.

Subsequently,  however,  Mr  Douglas,  miniature  painter,
a  member  of  the  Phrenological  Society,  stated  in  conversa-
tion, that  one  of  the  earliest  indications  of  a  liking  for
painting  which  he  had  experienced,  was  an  extraordinary
interest  in  matters  connected  with  perspective.  When  a
mere  child,  the  appearance  of  approach  in  the  far  end  of
ploughed  ridges  puzzled  him  exceedingly,  and  he  crawled
across  the  fields,  before  he  could  well  walk,  to  measure  the


392  size.

actual  distance  betwixt  each  ridge  with  a  stick,  and  was
lost  in  astonishment  when  he  found  that  the  space  between
each  was  actually  the  same  at  both  ends,  notwithstanding
of  the  great  difference  which  appeared  between  them  to  the
eye.  He  continued  from  this  time  to  take  a  great  interest
in  perspective,  as  a  quality  in  painting,  and  gave  up  land-
scape for  miniature  painting,  not  from  inclination,  but  from
motives  of  a  different  kind.  On  comparing  his  head  with
Mr  Ferguson's,  the  organ  of  Size  was  found  to  differ  more
than  any  of  the  others ;  it  was  very  large.

On  subsequently  examining  the  head  of  Mr  P.  Gibson,
who  was  known  greatly  to  excel  in  perspective,  I  again  found
the  organ  of  Size  very  large.  And,  finally,  in  the  head  of
a  gentleman  with  whom  I  am  intimately  acquainted,  this
organ  is  developed  rather  below  than  above  an  average ;
and  he  stated  to  me,  that,  with  the  power  of  perceiv-
ing and  recollecting  distance  with  facility,  he  has  neverthe-
less felt  great  difficulty  in  representing  it  correctly  on  pa-
per ;  and,  while  he  understands  the  general  theory  of  per-
spective, he  could  never  learn  to  practise  it  by  tact  of
hand,  and,  on  this  account,  gave  up  all  attempts  at  draw-
ing. In  the  last  edition,  I  mentioned  the  case  of  a  lady  who,
having  Form  large  and  Size  deficient,  copied  figures  accu-
rately in  regard  to  form,  but  inaccurately  in  regard  to  size*
To  which  statement  Mr  Jeffrey  objected  that  size  is  ne-
cessary to  proportion,  and  proportion  to  form ;  and  that  there
was  inconsistency  in  the  account  of  the  lady's  talents.  Mr
Jeffrey  is  right :  she  informs  me  that  it  is  only  the  simplest
forms  which  have  few  parts  that  she  is  able  to  copy  cor-
rectly, and  in  drawing  even  them  she  will  err  in  size ;  but
that  when  a  figure  has  detached  parts,  although  she  may
give  the  outline  of  each  part  by  itself  with  considerable  ac-
curacy, it  will  be  larger  or  smaller  than  the  original ;  whence
the  whole  figure  will  be  deficient  in  proportion.  In  draw-
ing from  nature,  she  failed  in  perspective;  nevertheless
she  feels  great  pleasure  in  observing  forms,  recollects  them


SIZE.  393

easily,  has  a  complete  mental  consciousness  of  the  powers
of  Form  and  Size  being  different,  and  of  the  one  being
strong  and  the  other  weak  in  her  mind*

The  frontal  sinus  throws  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  ob-
serving^this  organ ;  and  the  negative  evidence  is,  therefore,
chiefly  relied  on.

It  is  stated  as  only  probable.


25.    WEIGHT.

There  seems  to  be  no  analogy  between  the  weight  or
resistance  of  bodies,  and  their  other  qualities.  They  may
be  of  all  forms,  sizes,  and  colours,  liquid  or  solid,  and  yet
none  of  these  features  would  necessarily  imply  that  one
was  heavier  than  the  other.  This  quality,  therefore,  be-
ing distinct  from  all  others,  we  cannot  logically  refer  the
cognisance  of  it  to  any  of  the  faculties  of  the  mind  which
judge  of  the  other  attributes  of  matter ;  and,  as  the  mental
power  undoubtedly  exists,  there  appears  reason  to  conjec-
ture that  it  may  be  manifested  by  means  of  a  special  organ.
Persons  who  excel  at  archery  and  quoits,  also  those  who  find
great  facility  in  judging  of  momentum  and  resistance  in
mechanics,  are  observed  to  possess  the  parts  of  the  brain
lying  nearest  to  the  organ  of  Size  largely  developed;  and
the  organ  is  now  regarded  as  probable.  Statics,  or  that
branch  of  mathematics  which  considers  the  motion  of  bo-
dies arising  from  gravity,  probably  belongs  to  it.  Persons
in  whom  Individuality,  Size,  Weight,  and  Locality,  are
large,  have  generally  a  talent  for  engineering,  and  those
branches  of  mechanics  which  consist  in  the  application  of
forces;  they  delight  in  steam-engines,  water-wheels,  and
turning-laths.  The  same  combination  occurs  in  persons
distinguished  for  successful  execution  of  difficult  feats  in
skating ;  in  which  the  regulation  of  equilibrium  is  an  im-
portant element.    Constructiveness,  when  Weight  is  small,


39*  WEIGHT.

leads  to  rearing  still  fabrics,  rather  than  to  fabricating
working  machinery.

Mr  Simpson  published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal
(vol.  ii.  p.  410.)  an  interesting  and  ingenious  Essay  on  this
organ,  in  which  he  enumerates  a  great  number  of  examples,
in  proof  of  its  functions.  It  is  large,  says  he,  in  Dr  Chal-
mers, Dr  Brewster,  Sir  James  Hall,  Sir  George  Mac-
kenzie, Professor  Leslie,  and  in  Mr  Jardine  and  Mr
Stevenson,  two  eminent  engineers.  "  We  have  lately
seen,"  he  continues,  "  Professor  Farish  of  Cambridge,  who
manifests  a  high  endowment  of  mechanical  skill,  and  has
the  organ  large ;  as  has  Mr  Whewell  of  the  same  Univer-
sity, who  has  written  a  work  of  merit  on  the  same  subject.
In  a  visit  we  lately  made  to  Cambridge,  we  saw  much  that
was  interesting  in  regard  to  this  organ.  Professor  Farish's
son  inherits  the  mechanical  turn  and  the  organ.  We  saw
both  the  statue  and  bust  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  by  Rubil-
liac.  The  bust  was  a  likeness  taken  in  the  prime  of  his
years,  and  in  it  the  knowing  organs  are  still  more  promi-
nent than  in  the  statue.  Weight  is  very  pre-eminent  The
same  organ  is  very  large  in  the  bust  of  the  lamented  Dr
Clarke,  the  traveller ;  and,  as  might  have  been  expected,
Locality  quite  extraordinarily  developed  #.  We  met  with
several  persons  with  small  Weight,  who  at  once  acknow-
ledged deficiency  in  mechanical  talent,  and  awkwardness

*  In  the  numerous  living  heads  we  saw  at  Cambridge,  we  met  often
with  the  organ  of  Number  large,  and  found,  invariably,  that  it  was  accom-
panied in  the  individual  with  algebraic  celebrity.  The  organization  gene-
rally corresponded  to  the  cause  of  the  person's  rank  in  the  University ;
and,  although  there  were  exceptions,  most  of  the  persons  who  have  achieved
honours,  evidently  owe  them  to  the  great  power  of  their  knowing  or-
gans ;— clearly  shewing,  that  those  who  were  also  gifted  with  deeply  re-
flecting an. I  combining  powers,  are  not  called  to  use  them  either  in  classi-
cal or  mathematical  studies.  Many  men,  on  the  contrary,  have  figured
in  public  life,  in  virtue  of  their  great  endowment  of  Causality  and  Com-
parison, who,  from  a  smaller  gift  of  the  knowing  organs,  have  held  a  very
humble  grade  at  Oxford  and  Cambridge.


WEIGHT.  895

in  their  actions  and  movements.  A  child  of  two  years  old
was  mentioned  to  us,  although  we  did  not  see  it,  quite  re-
markable to  every  one  for  the  large  development  of  brain  at
this  part  of  the  frontal  bone,  and  for  the  uncommon  steadi-
ness of  its  walk,  at  an  age  when  other  children  totter,  and
it  is  the  theme  of  wonder  to  all  who  know  it."  The  organ
is  large  in  the  mask  of  Maclauchlan,  a  weaver  of  Salt-
coats, who  spent  much  time  and  money  in  devising  means
to  regulate  the  stroke  of  the  common  pump,  so  as  to  make
the  working-rod  move  with  the  same  momentum  up  and
down*  It  is  large  also  in  the  mask  of  Brunei*  the  cele-
brated engineer  and  mechanician.  In  examining  masks,  a
depression  of  muscle,  which  sometimes  takes  place  at  this
part,  must  not  be  mistaken  for  a  fulness  of  the  organ.

Mr  Simpson  proceeds :  "  The  faculty  now  under  consi-
deration, in  high  endowment,  manifests  itself  in  engineer-
ing, in  dynamical  skill,  in  the  knowledge  and  application
of  mechanical  forces.  What  may  be  its  lesser  endow-
ments? Where  do  we  find  the  organ?  Situated  in  the
midst  of  that  group,  which  gives  us  the  perception  of  the
qualities  of  material  objects ;  namely,  Form,  Size,  Locality,
Colouring,  Order,  and  Number.  It  is  evident  there  is  a
quality  of  bodies  most  essential  to  their  nature,  not  includ-
ed in  these  qualities,  singly  or  combined ;  namely,  their
density  and  corresponding  weight.  As  bodies  gravitate  in
a  well-known  ratio  to  their  density,  and  their  density  and
weight  are  the  same  thing,  Weight  is  only  one  name  for
gravitation.  Does  it  then  serve  any  important  purpose  in
our  being,  or  is  it  essential  to  our  animal  existence,  that
wc  should  have  an  instinctive  perception  of  gravitation,
operating  constantly  and  independently  of  reason?  That
state  of  rest  which  the  law  of  gravitation  constitutes  the
natural  state  of  all  bodies,  solid,  fluid,  and  aeriform,  is
called  their  Equilibrium.  The  simplest  animal  motions,
what  are  they  but  alternate  disturbance  and  restoration  of
equilibrium?'" — "  The  land-animal  walks  and  runs,  and
avails  itself  of  the  resistance  of  the  earth, — the  bird  flies  by


396  WEIGHT.

its  instinctive  perception  of  the  resistance  of  the  air, — the
fish  uses  its  fins  and  tail,  instinctively  perceiving  the  resist-
ance of  the  water."

"  Some  degree,  therefore,  of  the  power  of  adapting  mo-
tions to  the  law  of  gravitation,  some  power  over  equili-
brium, must  be  possessed  by  the  whole  animated  creation,
—for  without  it,  it  is  plain,  they  must  perish.  May  the
organ  of  Weight  be  the  organ  of  this  faculty  ?  To  man
alone  is  given  the  capacity  to  aid  this  power,  and  render  his
motion  more  effectual,  and  force  more  availing  by  the  use
of  instruments, — and  Franklin  well  named  him  a  tool-
making,  or  rather  a  tool-using  animal.  What  are  his  tools  ?
They  are  all  modifications  of  the  elementary  mechanical
powers.  His  club  and  bow  are  levers, — his  axe,  knife,
sword,  and  arrow,  are  wedges.  He  instinctively  aids  his
own  muscular  force  by  the  lever,  when  he  applies  a  bar  of
wood  to  raise  a  stone  from'  the  ground ; — if  he  wishes  to
raise  that  stone  to  a  certain  height,  perpendicularly,  he  will
instinctively  counteract  its  gravitation  by  forcing  it  up  an
inclined  plane,  instead  of  applying  his  own  bodily  force  to
lift  it  perpendicularly.  The  principle  of  the  pulley  will
suggest  itself  whenever  he  has  obtained  a  block  with  a
cord,  or  thong,  to  draw  water  out  of  a  pit.  The  screw  is
only  the  inclined  plane  wrapt  spirally  round  a  cylinder ;  to
avail  himself  of  which  he  would  be  led,  whenever  he  at-
tempted, as  he  early  did,  to  build  a  tower/'

These  views,  says  Mr  Simpson,  are  strongly  supported
by  diseased  affections  of  this  part  of  the  brain.  Miss  S.  L.
was  attacked  with  headach,  and  pain  in  the  region  of  the
organ  of  Weight,  "  her  perception  of  equilibrium  was  de-
ranged, and  she  experienced  giddiness,  inclined  position
of  horizontal  floors  and  ceilings,  and  the  sensation  of  being
lifted  up,  and  of  again  falling  down  and  forward.  Her  ac-
count of  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  for  she  said  she  felt  as  if
she  had  been  tipsy.79  Mr  Simpson  refers  to  a  diseased  con-
dition of  this,  and  some  other  of  the  knowing  organs,  a
curious  mental  affection,  which  Mr  John  Hunter,  the


WEIGHT.  397

celebrated  anatomist,  experienced  in  1776,  and  which  is

recorded  in  his  life,  written  by  Sir  Everard  Home.  "  From

great  anxiety  of  mind,"  says  he,  "  Mr  H.  had  a  severe  ill*

nese.     It  attacked  him  on  a  journey,  and  his  first  sensation,

it  is  well  worthy  of  remark,  was  that  qf  having  drunk  too

much,  although  he  had  taken  nothing  but  a  little  weak

punch.     On  going  to  bed,  he  felt  as  if  suspended  in  the  air9

and  soon  after  the  room  seemed  to  go  round  with  very  great

rapidity*     This  ceased,  but  the  strange  sensation,  like  Miss

S.  L/s,  of  being  lifted  up,  continued ;  and,  on  being  brought

home  in  his  carriage,  his  sensation  was  that  of  sinking  or

going  down.     The  symptoms  of  whirling  and  suspension

increased;  and  his  own  head,  when  he  raised  it  from  his

pillow,  seemed  to  move  from  him  to  some  distance  with

great  velocity.     When  he  became  able  to  stand  without

being  giddy,  he  was  unable  to  walk  without  support;

"  for,"  says  Sir  E.  Home,  "  his  own  feelings  did  not  give

him  information  respecting  his  centre  qf  gravity,  so  that  he

was  unable  to  Balance  his  body,  and  prevent  himself  from

falling. "     We  need  not  add,  continues  Mr  Simpson,  the

obvious  comment,  that  the  organ  of  Weight  was  diseased,

and  the  very  function  we  have  imputed  to  it,  the  instinct

of  equilibrium  (expressed  almost  in  our  own  words  by  Sir

E.  Home),  unequivocally  impeded  #.

The  phenomena  of  intoxication  are  explained  by  Mr
Simpson  in  a  similar  way.  "  Both  Miss  S.  L.  and  Mr
John  Hunter,"  says  he,  "  bore  testimony  to  the  illusive
feeling  of  being  intoxicated,  while  Miss  S.  L.  had  acute  pain
in  the  organ  of  the  instinct  or  power  of  preserving  the
balance,  and  maintaining  an  upright  posture.  But  for  an
innate,  steady,  and  never-failing  perception  of  equilibrium,
animal  movements  would  be  only  staggering  and  tumbling.
The  intoxicated  soon  lose  a  steady  gait,  fall  down,  see  per-
pendiculars at  other  angles,  believe  the  floor  itself  perpen-
dicular, and  grasp  the  ground  to  6ave  themselves  from  fall-

•  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  ii.  p.  302.


398  WEIGHT.

ing  off  its  surface ;  they  feel  lifted  up,  sinking  down,  and
whirling  round.  Sickness  would  follow  these  sensations,
independent  of  the  stimulus  of  the  liquor  to  the  stomach ;
and  it  is  extremely  probable  that  sea-sickness  results  from
the  inverted  feelings  occasioned  by  motion  which  violates
our  habitual  perception  of  equilibrium  *."

A  correspondent  of  the  Phrenological  Journal  mentions  f,
that  he  was  struck  with  this  remark  about  sea-sickness
arising  from  the  disturbance  of  equilibrium,  and  found  by
experience  when  at  sea,  that,  by  standing  at  the  vessel's
side,  directing  his  eyes  to  an  object  on  shore  perfectly  still,
the  top  of  a  mountain  for  example,  and  shutting  out  with
the  palms  of  his  hands  all  sight  of  the  ship  and  the  sea,
sickness  invariably  left  him,  but  always  returned  whenever
he  withdrew  his  hands,  and  allowed  any  part  of  the  vessel
to  catch  his  eye.

Sir  G.  S.  Mackenzie  has  suggested  the  name  "  Resist-
ance," as  more  appropriate  for  this  faculty  than  that  of
Weight.  "  We  cannot  judge,"  says  he,  "  of  Weight,  as  we
do  of  Form,  without  repeated  experience.  We  may  see
before  us  two  balls  of  the  same  size  and  colour.  We  take
up  one  of  them,  and  perceive  that  it  requires  a  certain  ex-
ertion or  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  muscles  of  the  arm
and  hand  to  support  it  From  this,  however,  we  cannot
determine  that  the  other  ball  will  produce  the  same  effect,
for  it  may  be  hollow.  Now,  although  we  have  obtained
the  experience  that  two  similar  balls  may  not  produce  the
same  effect;  this  experience  is  of  no  use  to  us,  for  we  must
always  make  the  experiment  of  lifting  both,  in  order  to
determine  which  is  the  heavier.  The  impression  of  Resist-
ance is,  however,  left  with  us ;  and  probably  it  is  the  func-
tion of  the  faculty  which  Dr  Spurzheim  calls  that  of
Weight,  to  give  us  conceptions  of  resistance  in  general  J."
Mr  Simpson,  I  believe,  is  now  disposed  to  admit  the  cor-
rectness of  this  analysis.

*  Phrenological  Journal,  vol  ii.  p.  428.  f  No.  viii.  p.  645.

£  Illustrations  of  Phrenologj,  |».  160.


(     399    )


26. — COLOURING.

Although  the  eyes  are  affected  agreeably  or  disagree-
ably by  different  modifications  of  the  beams  of  light  or  by
colours,  yet  they  do  not  conceive  the  relations  of  different
colours,  their  harmony  or  discord,  and  they  have  no  me-
mory of  them.  Certain  individuals  are  almost  destitute  of
the  power  of  perceiving  colours,  who  yet  have  the  sense  of
vision  acute,  and  readily  perceive  other  qualities  in  external
bodies,  as  their  size  and  form.  This  fact  has  been  remarked
by  Mr  Stewart.  He  says,  "  In  the  power  of  conceiving
colours,  too,  there  are  striking  differences  among  indivi-
duals: and  indeed  I  am  inclined  to  suspect,  that,  in  the
greater  number  of  instances,  the  supposed  defects  of  sight
in  this  respect,  ought  to  be  ascribed  rather  to  a  defect  in
the  power  of  conception.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  we
often  see  men  who  are  perfectly  sensible  of  the  difference
between  two  colours  when  they  are  presented  to  them,  who
cannot  give  names  to  these  colours  with  confidence,  when
they  see  them  apart ;  and  are,  perhaps,  apt  to  confound  the
one  with  the  other.  Such  men,  it  should  seem,  feel  the
sensation  of  colour  like  other  men,  when  the  object  is  pre-
sent ;  but  are  incapable  (probably  in  consequence  of  some  early
habit  qf  inattention),  to  conceive  the  sensation  distinctly,
when  the  object  is  removed  *."

In  this  quotation,  we  have  a  specimen  of  the  usual  mode
of  conducting  metaphysical  speculations.  When  the  most
curious  and  striking  phenomena  of  the  mind  are  mentioned,
and  when  we  look  anxiously  for  an  explanation  of  them,
habit  or  association  is  dragged  in  to  solve  the  difficulty;  and
this  often  merely  in  a  parenthesis,  as  if  no  difficulty  ex-
isted.

Observation  proves,  that  individuals  who  have  the  part
of  the  brain  marked  No.  26.  largely  developed,  possess  in  a

*  Elements,  ch.  Hi.


400  COLOURING.

high  degree  the  power  of  discriminating  colours,  and,  on
this  account,  the  phrenologist  admits  this  as  a  fundamental
faculty  of  the  mind*

Mr  Jeffrey  objected  to  this  doctrine,  that  light  is  always
coloured,  indeed  nothing  else  but  colour;  and  that  it  is
impossible  for  any  one  to  see  acutely  who  cannot  distinguish
colours  with  equal  success,  because  all  visible  objects  must
necessarily  be  distinguished  by  colour  alone.  The  answer
is,  that  the  eye  receives  the  external  impression  of  light,
and  transmits  it  to  the  organ  of  Colouring,  just  as  the  ears
transmit  sound  to  the  organ  of  Tune;  and  both  are  requisite
to  the  perception  of  colour.  If  the  eye  be  perfect,  and  the
organ  of  Colour  deficient,  the  individual  may  be  capable  of
distinguishing  degrees  of  intensity  of  light,  although  he
cannot  discriminate  differences  of  tint;  and  the  former  is
sufficient  to  acute  vision,  as  is  proved  by  engraving  and
black  chalk  drawing ;  in  which  form  distance  and  expres-
sion are  successfully  represented  by  mere  differences  of  light
and  shade,  or  by  different  degrees  of  light  independently  of
colour.

The  faculty,  when  powerful,  gives  a  delight  in  contem-
plating colours,  and  a  vivid  feeling  of  their  harmony  and  dis-
cord. Those  in  whom  the  organ  is  deficient  experience  little
interest  in  colouring,  and  are  almost  insensible  to  difference
of  hues.  In  the  Phrenological  Transactions,  Dr  Butter
reports  the  case  of  Mr  Robert  Tucker,  whose  eye-sight  was
not  deficient,  and  who  was  able  neither  to  distinguish  nor  to
recollect  many  of  the  primitive  colours,  even  when  shown  to
him.  "  Orange,  he  calls  green,  and  green  colours  orange ;
red,  he  considers  as  brown,  and  brown  as  red ;  blue  silk
looks  to  him  like  pink,  and  pink  of  a  light  blue  colour ;  in-
digo is  described  as  purple  *•"  The  organ  is  reported  to  be
decidedly  deficient  in  this  gentleman's  head.  The  case  of
Mr  James  Milne,  brass-founder  in  Edinburgh,  is  also  pe-
culiarly illustrative  of  this  faculty ;  and,  as  I  obtained  the
facts  from  himself,  they  may  be  implicitly  relied  on.

•  Page  210.


COLOURING.  401

Mr  Milne's  grandfather,  on  the  mother's  side,  had  a  de-
ficiency in  the  power  of  perceiving  colours,  but  could  difr-
tinguish  forms  and  distance  easily.  On  one  occasion,  this
gentleman  was  desirous  that  his  wife  should  purchase  a
beautiful  green  gown.  She  brought  several  patterns  to  him,
but  could  never  find  one  which  came  up  to  his  views  of  the
colour  in  question.  One  day  he  observed  a  lady  passing  on
the  street,  and  pointed  out  her  gown  to  his  wife,  as  the  co-
lour that  he  wished  her  to  get;  when  she  expressed  her  as-
tonishment, and  assured  him,  that  the  colour  was  a  mixed
brown,  which  he  had  all  along  mistaken  for  a  green.  It  was
not  known  till  then  that  he  was  deficient  in  the  power  of  per-
ceiving colours.

Neither  Mr  Milne's  father,  mother,  nor  uncle,  an  the
mother's  side,  were  deficient  in  this  respect ;  so  that  the  im-
perfection passed  over  one  generation.  In  himself  and  his
two  brothers,  however,  it  appeared  in  a  decided  manlier;
while  in  his  sisters,  four  in  number,  no  trace  of  it  is  to  be
found ;  as  they  distinguish  colours  easily.  Mr  Spankie,  a
cousin  once  removed,  has  a  similar  defect  *.

Mr  Milne  is  rather  near-sighted,  but  never  could  find
glasses  to  aid  his  defect  He  rather  excels  in  distinguish-
ing forms  and  proportions ;  and,  although  he  cannot  discover
game  upon  the  ground,  from  the  faintness  of  his  perception
of  colours,  yet  he  is  fond  of  shooting ;  and,  when  a  boy,  was
rather  an  expert  marksman,  when  the  birds  were  fairly  visi-
ble to  him  in  the  air.  He  sees  them,  however,  only  in  the
sky-light ;  and,  on  one  occasion,  when  a  large  covey  of  par-
tridges rose  within  ten  or  twelve  yards  of  him,  the  back
ground  being  a  field  of  Swedish  turnips,  he  could  not  per-
ceive a  single  bird.  His  eye  is  decidedly  convex  to  a  con-
siderable degree.

*  I  have  examined  the  heads  of  Mr  Milne's  brothers,  who  are  defi.
dent  in  the  power,  and  in  them  the  organ  is  evidently  little  developed.
I  have  also  examined  its  development  in  one  of  his  sisters,  and  found  no
deficiency,  but  rather  a  fulness  in  the  organ.  Mr  Ly ox,  a  member  of  the
Society,  states,  that  he  has  examined  the  head  of  Mr  Spakxix,  and  found
the  organ  rather  deficient

c  c


402  COLOURING.

Mr  Milne's  defect  was  discovered  in  rather  a  curious
manner.  He  was  bound  apprentice  to  a  draper,  and  con-
tinued in  his  service  for  three  years  and  a  half.  During
two  years,  he  fell  into  considerable  mistakes  about  colours,
but  this  was  attributed  to  inexperience  and  ignorance  of  the
names  of  the  tints  merely.  At  length,  however,  in  sell-
ing a  piece  of  olive  corduroy  fpr  breeches,  the  purchaser
requested  strings  to  tie  them  with;  and  Mr  Milne  was
proceeding  to  cut  off  what  he  considered  as  the  best  match,
when  the  person  stopped  him,  and  requested  strings  of  the
same  colour  as  the  cloth,  Mr  Milne  begged  him  to  point
out  a  colour  to  please  himself;  and  he  selected,  of  course,  a
green  string.  When  he  was  gone,  Mr  Milne  was  so  con-
fident that  he  himself  was  right,  and  the  purchaser  wrong,
in  the  colour  that  he  had  chosen,  that  he  cut  off  a  piece  of
the  string  which  he  intended  to  give,  and  a  piece  of  that
which  had  been  selected,  and  carried  both  home,  with  a
piece  of  the  cloth  also,  and  shewed  them  to  his  mother.
She  then  told  him  that  his  ribbon  was  a  bright  scarlet,  and
the  other  a  grass-green.  His  masters  would  not  believe  in
any  natural  defect  in  his  power  of  perceiving  colours ;  and
it  was  only  after  many  mistakes,  and  some  vituperation,
that  he  was  penpitted  to  resign  the  business,  and  to  betake
himself  to  another,  that  of  a  brass-founder,  to  which  he  had
a  natural  disposition ;  for  he  had  used  the  turning-loom  in
constructing  playthings,  when  a  mere  boy.

As  to  the  different  colours,  he  knows  blues  and  yellows,
certainly;  but  he  cannot  distinguish  browns,  greens  and
reds.  A  brown  and  green  he  cannot  discriminate  or  name
when  apart ;  but  when  together,  he  sees  a  difference  be-
tween them.  Blue  and  pink,  when  about  the  same  shade,
and  seen  in  day-light,  appear  to  him  the  colour  of  the  sky,
which  he  calls  blue ;  but  seen  in  candle-light,  the  pink  ap-
pears like  a  dirty  buff,  and  the  blue  retains  the  appearance
which  it  had  in  day-light.  The  grass  appears  to  him  more
like  an  orange,  than  any  other  coloured  object  with  which
he  is  acquainted.     Indigo,  violet  and  purple,  appear  only


COLOURING.  403

different  shades  of  one  colour,  darker  or  lighter,  but  not
differing  in  their  bases.  He  never  mistakes  black  and
white  objects :  he  distinguishes  easily  between  a  black  and
a  blpe,  and  is  able  even  to  tell  whether  a  black  be  a  good
or  a  bad  one.  In  the  rainbow  he  perceives  only  the  yellow
and  the  blue  distinctly.  He  sees  that  there  are  other  tints
in  it,  but  what  they  are  he  cannot  distinguish,  and  is  quite
unable  to  name  them.  In  day-light,  crimson  appears  like
blue  or  purple,  but  in  candle-light  it  seems  a  bright  red.

When  in  Glasgow,  his  greatcoat  was  carried  off  from  the
travellers'  room  by  mistake,  and  on  inquiring  at  the  waiter
what  had  become  of  it,  the  question  was  naturally  put,  what
was  the  colour  of  the  coat  ?  Mr  Milne  was  quite  puzzled
by  the  interrogatory ;  and  although  he  had  worn  it  for  a
year,  he  could  only  reply,  that  it  was  either  snuff-brown
or  olive-green,  but  which  he  could  not  tell.  The  waiter
looked  as  if  he  suspected  that  Mr  Milne  wanted  to  get
a  coat  instead  of  wishing  to  recover  one ;  but  the  coat
was  found,  although  even  yet  Mr  Milne  is  not  able  to  tell
the  colour.  He  is  apt  to  mistake  copper  for  brass,  unless
he  distinguish  them  by  the  file.

A  mask  of  Mr  Milne  is  sold  in  the  shops,  and  in  it  the
organs  of  Form,  Size,  and  Constructiveness  *  are  well  de-
veloped, while  that  of  Colouring  is  decidedly  deficient;
there  being  a  depression  in  the  part  corresponding  to  this
organ,  into  which  the  point  of  the  finger  falls  on  passing
it  along*  As  a  contrast,  the  reader  may  compare  with  it
the  masks  of  Mr  David  Wilkie,  Mr  Haydon,  Mr  Doug-
las, or  Mr  Williams,  all  eminent  painters ;  and  as  the  or-
gan is  large  in  these  masks,  a  very  marked  difference  will
be  perceptible.  •

Cases  of  this  description  are  not  rare.  In  the  mask  of
Mr  Sloane  of  Leith,  the  development  is  6mall,  and  in  a
letter,  dated  20th  February  1822,  addressed  to  me,  this
gentleman  says,  "  When  I  see  a  piece  of  tartan,  or  any

•  This  is  an  example  of  the  organ  of  Ccnstructivencss  being  situated
higher  than  usual,  as  noticed  on  p.  217*

c  c  2


404  COLOURING.

other  complication  of  Colours,  I  can  easily  distinguish  the
difference  of  shades ;  bat  were  the  different  Colours  pre-
sented to  me  singly,  I  could  not  say  which  was  which.  I
feel  particularly  at  a  loss  to  distinguish  betwixt  green  and
brown,  and  likewise  betwixt  some  shades  of  red  and  blue.
I  am  not  sensible  of  being  deficient  in  seeing  any  thing  at
a  distance,  or  of  being  unable  to  perceive  as  small  a  par-
ticle as  the  generality  of  men  can  do."  In  this  mask,  the
deficiency  is  not  so  great  as  in  that  of  Mr  Milne,  but  the
organ  of  Colouring  is  greatly  less  developed  in  it  than  in
the  masks  of  the  painters  before  alluded  to.

The  proper  way  to  observe  the  development  of  this  or-
gan, is  to  distinguish  to  what  extent  the  centre  of  each  eye-
brow projects  forward.  In  Mr  Milne  it  is  slightly  de-
pressed below  the  neighbouring  parts ;  in  Mr  Sloane,  it  is
scarcely  depressed,  but  it  does  not  project,  so  as  to  over-
hang the  eye-ball;  in  the  painters  it  is  large  and  promi-
nent, forming  a  heavy  shade  above  the  eye.  Dr  Spurz-
heim  mentions  that  a  large  development  of  it  is  indicated
by  an  arched  appearance  in  the  middle  of  the  eyebrow,
and  that  this  sign  is  found  in  the  portraits  of  Rubens,
Titian,  Rembrandt,  Salvator  Rosa,  Claude  Lorraine,
&c. ;  but  its  large  size  is  also  indicated  by  the  projection
forward  of  this  part  of  the  eyebrow  without  arching.  It
presents  this  appearance  in  the  masks  of  the  late  Sir  Henry
Raeburn,  Wilkie,  Haydon,  and  other  eminent  painters.

Dr  Gall  states  it  as  an  indubitable  fact,  that  determi-
nate laws  of  proportion  in  colours  exist.  The  three  primi-
tive colours  of  blue,  yellow,  and  red,  says  he,  do  not  har-
monize. If  we  mix  two  of  these,  an  intermediate  colour
is  produced :  Blue  and  yellow  give  green ;  blue  and  red,
violet ;  red  and  yellow,  orange.  To  obtain  a  harmonious
combination,  we  must  place  alongside  of  a  primitive  colour
a  mixed  one,  into  which  the  primitive  enters  as  an  ele-
ment ;  the  mixed  colour  will  always  be  in  harmony  with
the  two  primitive  colours  from  which  it  is  produced.  If
we  place,  says  he,  a  silk  ribbon,  of  a  blue  colour,  and  about


COLOURING.  405

«n  inch  broad,  on  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  and  look  at  it
etedfiustly ;  at  the  end  of  a  short  time,  we  shall  see,  besides
yellow  and  red,  and  (at  the  side)  orange,  resulting  from
their  mixture  *•

Mr  Jeffrey,  in  the  article  "  Beauty/'  already  alluded
to,  informs  us,  "  That  colour  is,  in  all  cases,  absolutely  in-
different to  the  eye ;"  and  adds,  "  that  it  is  no  doubt  quite
true,  that  among  painters  and  connoisseurs,  we  hear  a  great
deal  about  the  harmony  and  composition  of  tints,  and  the
charms  and  difficulties  of  a  judicious  colouring.  In  all  this,
however,  we  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is  no  little  pedan-
try and  no  little  jargon."  Speaking  of  the  natural  gamut  of
colours,  he  continues,  "  We  confess  we  have  no  faith  in
any  of  these  fancies  ;  and  believe,  that  if  all  these  colours
were  fairly  arranged,  on  a  plain  board,  according  to  the
most  rigid  rules  of  this  supposed  harmony,  nobody,  but  the
author  of  the  theory,  would  perceive  the  smallest  Beauty  in
the  exhibition,  or  be  the  least  offended  by  reversing  their
collocation."  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that  the  organ  of  Colour-
ing in  Mr  Jeffrey's  bead  is  actually  depressed ;  and  it
appears  that,  in  the  usual  manner  of  metaphysical  writers,
he  has  conceived  his  own  feelings  to  be  an  infallible  stan-
dard of  those  of  human  nature  in  general.  It  is  quite  true
that  the  eye  is  affected  only  by  the  degrees  of  light,  but  by
this  expression,  the  mind  is  here  obviously  meant.  The
author,  when  speaking  in  the  next  sentence  of  the  gamut,
draws  no  distinction  between  the  powers  of  the  mind  and
those  of  the  eye.  Those  individuals,  then,  whose  cases  I
have  cited,  and  who  cannot  distinguish  dark  brown  from
scarlet,  buff  from  orange,  or  violet  from  pink,  would  pro-
bably subscribe  to  Mr  Jeffrey's  positions.  But  other  in-
dividuals, such  as  Wilkie  and  Haydon,  hare  an  intense
sensibility  to  shades  of  every  hue,  and  of  every  degree ;
and  some  painters  have  assured  me,  that  they  experience
a  very  decided  emotion  in  contemplating  colours,  indepen-
dent of  every  association ;  and  declare,  that  they  perceive

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  82.


406  COLOURING.

harmony,  congruity  and  incongruity,  in  their  arrangements,
even  on  a  plain  board,  as  certainly  and  as  distinctly  as  they
distinguish  harmony  and  discord  in  sound.

Mr  Jeffrey,  in  his  review  of  the  System  of  Phrenology,
in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  No.  88,  controverts  these  infe-
rences. He  says,  "  "Without  meaning  to  call  in  question
the  fact  of  the  depression  of  his  skull,  we  happen  to  know
that  the  individual  here  mentioned  has  a  remarkably  fine
and  exact  perception  of  colours,  so  as  to  be  able  to  match
them  from  memory,  with  a  precision  which  has  been  the
admiration  of  many  ladies  and  dressmakers.  He  has  also
an  uncommon  sensibility  to  their  beauty ;  and  spends  more
time  than  most  people  in  gazing  on  bright  flowers  and  pea-
cocks' necks,  and  wondering,  he  hopes  innocently,  what  can
be  the  cause  of  his  enjoyment.  Even  the  phrenologists,  we
think,  must  admit,  that,  in  his  case,  it  cannot  be  the  pre-
dominance of  the  appropriate  faculty,  since  they  have  as-"
certained  that  he  is  totally  destitute  of  the  organ."

In  a  letter  which  I  addressed  to  Mr  Jeffrey,  in  answer
to  this  criticism  *,  I  asked,  "  how  could  you  assert  in  the
Encyclopaedia,  that  '  Colour  is  in  all  cases  absolutely  indif-
ferent to  the  eye,'  if  you  were  conscious  when  you  wrote
of  possessing  '  an  uncommon  sensibility  to  their  beauty?
How  could  you  stigmatise  as  i  pedantry  and  jargon,9  th6
doctrine  of  '  the  harmony  and  composition  of  tints,  and
the  charms  and  difficulties  of  a  judicious  colouring,'  and
assert,  '  that  if  all  those  colours  were  fairly  arranged,  on  a
plain  board,  according  to  the  most  rigid  rules  of  this  sup-
posed harmony,  nobody  but  the  author  of  the  theory  would
perceive  the  smallest  beauty  in  the  exhibition,  or  be  the  least
offended  by  reversing  their  collocation,*  when  all  the  time
you  enjoyed  in  yourself  c  a  remarkably  fine  and  exact  per-
ception of  colours,  so  as  to  be  able  to  match  them  from  me-
mory with  a  precision  which  has  been  the  admiration  of
many  ladies  and  dressmakers  ?"

*  Phren.  Journal,  voL  iv.  p.  1.,  and  also  p.  242. — I  beg  leave  to  refer
the  reader  to  these  Letters  for  an  answer  to  the  whole  of  Mr  Jeffrey's
criticisms  on  this  work.


COLOURING,  407

In  a  Note  to  (be  89  th  Number  of  the  Re  viewy  Mr  Jef-
frey replied  to  this  argument  as  follows :  "  There  are  two
questions  here ;  firht>  whether  there  are  any  grounds,  from
inconsistency  or  otherwise/  to  impeach  the  credit  of  the
Reviewer,  when  he  says  that  he  can  distinguish  colours,
and  shades  of  colours,  with  more  than  common  accuracy  ?
and,  secondly,  whether  there  are  any  such  grounds  for  dis-
believing hiip,  when  he  says  that  he  has  a  strong  sense  of
their  beauty?    The  first  is  the  main  allegation,  and  formed
the  whole  original  subject  t>f  controversy.    Mr  Combe  al-
leged that  the  organ  of  colour  was  actually  depressed  in
the  head  of  that  individual,  and  inferred  that  he  probably
did  not  know  scarlet  from  brown :  it  was  answered  that
this  was  a  mistake, — for  he  was  known  to  have  a  remark-
ably fine  perception  of  colours  and  their  diversities :  and
the  replication  to  this  in  the  pamphlet,  is,  that  that  cannot
well  be,  since  he  himself  had  stated,  in  the  Encyclopaedia,
that  all  colours  are  indifferent  to  the  eye,  and  one  just  as
beautiful  as  another.     Well,  suppose  he  had  said  so,  where
would  have  been  the  inconsistency  ?  for,  where  is  the  con-
nexion between  the  allegations  that  are  held  to  be  contra-
dictory ?    A  man  who  happens  to  think  brown  as  beauti-
ful as  scarlet,  may  surely  perceive  the  difference  between
them, — or,  rather  he  must  perceive  it,  when  he  compares
them,  in  this  way,  as  two  distinct  and  distinguishable  ob-
jects.   There  is  not,  therefore,  the  shadow  of  a  pretext  for
discrediting  the  Reviewer's  leading  allegation,  that  the  in-
dividual alluded  to,  though  destitute  of  th*  phrenological
organ,  can  discriminate  colours  with  unusual  readiness  and
precision."

In  answer  to  these  remarks,  I  beg  leave  to  observe,  that
Mr  Jeffrey  overstates  my  objection.  The  paragraph  on
which  he  comments  is  printed  in  this  work  verbatim  as  it
stood  in  the  previous  edition,  and  the  reader  will  perceive
that  I  did  not  allege  that  the  organ  was  absolutely  wanting
in  his  head,  and  did  not  infer  that  he  was  incapable  of  per-
ceiving colours,  or  that  "  he  probably  did  not  know  scarlet


408  COLOURING.

from  brown/'  On  the  contrary,  the  statement  was  merely
that  the  organ  is  "  depressed,"  that  is  to  say,  that  in  him
it  is  deficient  in  site  relatively  to  the  other  organs ;  where-
as in  the  painters  it  is  large.  The  work  itself  afforded  in-
formation of  the  effect  of  a  depressed  organ ;  it  is  said  "  that
perception  is  the  lowest  degree  of  activity,"  of  every  know-
ing and  reflecting  faculty;  "when  a  coloured  object  is
presented,  and  the  individual  cannot  perceive,  so  as  to  dis-
tinguish the  shades,  he  is  destitute  of  the  power  of  mani-
festing the  faculty  of  colour :"  "  Each  organ  will  enable
the  mind  to  recal  the  impressions  which  it  served  at  first
to  receive ;"  and  memory  is  merely  "  a  degree  of  activity
of  each  faculty."  A  friend  in  India,  after  reading  Mr  Jef-
frey's note,  wrote  to  me  as  follows :  "  Melody  is  the  plea-
sure arising  from  successions  of  simple  sounds  suited  to
each  other.  Harmony  is  that  arising  from  combined  sounds,
or  from  several  striking  the  -ear  simultaneously,  as  in  a
band  playing  different  parts.  The  former  requires  much
less  of  the  organ  than  the  latter,  and  hence  the  Scotch,
with  no  great  Tune,  are  melodists,  but  nothing  as  musi-
cians. In  like  manner,  the  allocation  of  simple  colours  is
their  melody,  and  the  combination  of  several  is  harmony.
Mr  Jeffrey  might  thus  place  one  ribbon  beside  another
very  well,  but  not  perceive  the  harmony  of  combined
colours  *."  There  is  no  inconsistency,  therefore,  between
the  depression  of  Mr  Jeffrey's  organ  of  Colouring  and  the
manifestations  which  he  describes.  Mr  Milne  even  is  able
to  perceive  some  colours,  to  distinguish  differences  between
them,  and  he  has  memory  of  some  of  them;  although  in
him  the  organ  is  considerably  more  depressed  than  in  Mr
Jeffrey.

The  real  objection  stated  in  the  work  was,  that  painters
not  only  distinguish  differences,  but  enjoy  direct  pleasure
from  "  contemplating  colours  independently  of  every  asso-

*  I  understand  that  this  defect  is  apparent  in  some  painters;  they  are
-capable  of  matching  a  few  simple  colours,  but  when  a  numerous  assem-
blage of  them  requires  to  be  introduced  into  a  picture,  tbey  fell  in  giving
them  harmony.


COLOURING.  409

ciation,  and  that  they  perceive  harmony,  or  congruity  and
incongruity*  in  their  arrangements,  even  on  a  plain  board,
as  certainly  and  as  distinctly  as  they  distinguish  harmony
and  discord  in  sound,"  which  assertions  Mr  Jeffrey  desig-
nated as  pedantry  and  jargon.

In  answer  to  my  statement,  therefore,  he  ought  to  have
proved,  that,  notwithstanding  of  his  depressed  organ,  he
possesses  the  faculty  in  this  higher  degree,  that  he  actually
receives  direct  pleasure  from  colours,  and  perceives  their
harmonies  and  discords.  In  No.  88.  of  the  Review,  he  en-
deavoured to  do  this,  by  referring  to  his  "  remarkably  fine
and  exact  perception  of  colours,  so  as  to  be  able  to  match
them  from  memory ;"  and,  to  his  delight,  "  in  gazing  on
bright  flowers  aud  peacocks9  necks;'9  and  in  No.  89.  of  the
Review,  be  favours  us  with  the  following  additional  argu-
ments in  support  of  this  position.

"  2.  But,  in  the  next  place,"  says  Mr  Jeffrey,  "  and  this
is  still  more  material,  it  is  certain  that  the  individual  in
question  does  not  maintain,  in  the  Encyclopaedia,  that  there
is  no  beauty  in  colours,  or  combinations  of  colours, — but
the  very  reverse.  His  whole  object  in  that  treatise,  as
every  one  must  know  who  has  looked  into  a  line  of  it,  is,
not  to  deny  the  existence  of  beauty,  but  to  explain  its  na-
ture and  causes,  in  colours  as  in  every  thing  else :  And,  ac-
cordingly, not  only  is  there  no  doubt  thrown  on  the  fact
of  their  beauty,  but  its  reality,  and  that  of  the  peculiar
pleasure  afforded  by  it,  is  both  expressly  asserted,  in  a  va-
riety of  passages,  and  constantly  assumed  and  taken  for
granted,  as  the  very  bans  of  the  theory,  and  the  test  of  its
illustrations,  which  are  urged  in  its  support  The  theory
is,  that  colours  are  beautiful,  not  in  consequence  of  the
mere  organic  operation  of  their  physical  qualities  on  the
eye,  but  in  consequence  of  their  habitual  association  with
certain  simple  emotions  or  mental  qualities,  of  which  they
remind  us  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  Thus  Blue,  for  ex-
ample, is  said  to  be  beautiful,  because  it  is  the  colour  of
the  unclouded  sky,— Green,  because  it  is  that  of  vernal


410  s  COLOURING.

woods  and  summer  meadows, — and  Red,  because  it  re-
minds us  of  the  season  of  roses,  or  of  the  blushes  of  youth
and  innocence ;— and,  accordingly,  when  these  associations
are  disturbed,  the  beauty  which  they  created  disappears.
Green  would  not  be  beautiful  in  the  sky,  nor  blue  on  the
cheek,  nor  vermilion  on  ihe  grass.  The  doctrine  is  pre-
cisely the  same  as  to  the  beauty  of  combination  of  colours,
and  it  is  attempted  to  be  proved  by  similar  illustrations.
Throughout  it  is  distinctly  stated,  and  invariably  assumed
as  indisputable,  that  they  are  beautiful,  and  afford  pleasure
to  those  who  admire  them, — though  it  is  alleged  that  there
is  a  good  deal  of  pedantry  in  those  who  dogmatise  on  the
laws  of  their  harmony,  and  affect  to  limit  their  pleasing
combinations  exclusively  to  certain  arrangements.  It  is
maintained,  as  before,  that  their  beauty  depends  entirely  on
the  associations  with  which  they  are  connected ;  and  while
it  is  admitted  that  certain  combinations  will  generally  ex-
cite the  same  associations  in  those  who  are  devoted  to  the
same  pursuits,  it  is  denied  that  these  are  either  universal
or  unvarying,  or  that  the  feeling  they  undoubtedly  excite
can  ever  be  referred  to  the  organic  action  of  the  coloured
light  on  the  sense.  These  opinions  may  be  right  or  wrong*
but  the  only  question  now  at  issue  is,  whether  they  are  in-
consistent with  the  admission  of  the  fact,  that,  colours  are
beautiful  ?  and  whether  the  man  who  holds  them  must  be
disbelieved,  when  he  says  that  he  has  a  keen  sense  of  this
kind  of  beauty?"

In  thife  note,  Mr  Jeffrey  no  longer  wonders  what  can
be  the  came  of  his  enjoyment  from  the  bright  flowers  and
peacocks'  neoks.  He  informs  us  distinctly,  that  he  has  no
direct  perception  of  beauty  in  their  colours  as  mere  colours,
but  that  the  beauty  perceived  by  him  depends  "  entirely  on
the  associations  with  which  they  are  connected."  "  Co-
lours," says  he,  "  are  beautiful,  not  in  consequence  of  the
mere  organic  operation  of  their  physical  qualities  on  the  eye,
but  in  consequence  of  their  habitual  association  with  cer-
tain simple  emotions  or  mental  qualities  of  which  they  re-


COLOURING.  411

mind  us  in  a  great  variety  of  ways."  It  now  turns  out,
accordingly,  that  his  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  bright
flowers  and  peacocks'  necks  arose,  not  from  any  quality  in
these  objects  themselves,  or  from  any  direct  effect  produced
by  them  on  his  own  mind,  but  that  he  instantly  passed  away
from  the  contemplation  of  their  hues,  and  dwelt  on  some-
thing else,  which  they  served  merely  to  introduce  to  his
fancy.  He  was  pleased,  for  example,  with  the  red  of  the
flowers,  not  because  it  was  a  colour  grateful  in  itself,  but
because  it  reminded  him  of  the  lovely  season  in  which
roses  are  produced,  or  of  the  blushes  of  youth  and  inno-
cence; and  he  delighted  in  the  blue  of  the  peacocks'
necks,  not  because  that  colour  was  intrinsically  pleasing,
but  because  it  excited  the  recollection  of  the  unclouded  sky.
The  painters,  on  the  other  hand,  in  whom  the  organ  is
large,  state  that  all  this  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  sources
of  their  pleasure  from  colours*  They  inform  me  that  the
very  circumstance  of  Mr  Jeffrey  preferring  bright  flowers
and  peacocks'  necks,  indicates  that  his  mental  power  is
weak,  that  it  requires  a  strong  stimulus  to  excite  it  to  action,
and  even  when  thus  stimulated,  it  is  not  capable  of  pro-
ducing feelings  of  direct  pleasure,  or  perceptions  of  har-
mony and  discord,  which,  from  their  large  organs,  they  de-
cidedly enjoy.  His  experience,  therefore,  corresponds  in
the  most  complete  manner  with  the  "  depressed"  state  of
the  organ  in  his  head.

This  is  so  plain  as  scarcely  to  admit  of  illustration ;  but
we  may  suppose  an  author  to  assert  that  there  is  no  har-
mony or  discord  in  sound,  and  no  direct  pleasure  from
melody;  but  that,  nevertheless,  he  enjoys  great  delight
in  hearing  a  military  band.  If  we  were  to  proceed  to  ask
such  a  person,  what  could  be  the  source  of  his  delight
in  the  band,  and  he  should  answer,  "  Oh,  the  notes  them-
selves of  the  bugle,  clarionet,  and  flute,  give  me  no  plea-
sure, but  they  remind  me  of  the  gay  uniforms,  the  wav-
ing plumes,  and  fine  martial  forms  of  the  lancers;  they
recal  the  summer  evening  parade,  with  the  loveliness  of


412  COLOURING.

earth  and  sky  in  that  delightful  season,  the  smiles  of  beauty
and  fashion  that  animate  and  adorn  the  scene ;  and  hence
the  band  gives  me  the  highest  gratification."  If  such
a  statement  were  made,  who  that  enjoys  a  sensibility  to
music,  would  not  say  that  Phrenology  would  be  in  fault  if
such  a  man  were  not  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Tune  ?  In
fact,  the  individual  supposed,  would  never  dwell  for  a  mo-
ment on  the  music  itself;  to  him  it  would  be  mere  sound,
to  excite  in  his  mind  the  ideas  of  the  lancers  and  the  pa-
rade ;  which  would  be  the  real  sources  of  his  enjoyment,
and  objects  of  his  admiration.  This  case  is  an  exact  pa-
rallel to  that  of  Mr  Jeffrey,  in  regard  to  colours.  The
colours  themselves  exhibit  no  beauty  to  his  mind;  they
make  no  impression  of  an  agreeable  nature,  so  as  to  en-
gage his  attention  with  their  own  loveliness ;  they  merely
usher  in  extraneous  ideas  and  emotions,  in  which  he  finds
real  gratification.  Would  not  Phrenology  be  in  fault,  if
in  him  the  organ  of  Colouring  were  otherwise  than  "  de-
pressed V

A  legal  practitioner,  in  a  country  town  of  Scotland,  whom
I  have  seen,  and  in  whom  this  organ  was  very  large,  was
engrossed  by  a  passion  for  showy  flowers,  even  to  the  ne-
glect of  urgent  calls  on  his  attention.  It  is  probable  that
the  intense  sensibility  to  colours,  which  accompanies  a  large
development  of  the  organ,  was  the  source  of  this  interest.

Phrenologists  are  accustomed  to  infer  the  particular  powers
which  are  most  vigorous  in  an  author's  mind,  from  the  ma-
nifestations of  them  in  his  works ;  and  none  affords  better
scope  for  observation  than  the  faculty  of  Colouring.  Un-
less the  impressions  made  on  the  mind  of  an  author  by  co-
lours were  very  strong,  he  has  no  inducement  to  introduce
them,  for  he  can  easily  treat  of  a  great  variety  of  subjects,
without  adverting  to  their  hues.  When,  therefore,  we
find  him  minutely  describing  shades  and  tints,  and  dwell-
ing on  colours  and  their  effects  with  evident  delight,  we
may  safely  infer  that  the  organ  is  large.  Mr  Ten n ant,
the  author  of  Anster  Fair,  frequently  does  so,  and  in  his
head  the  organ  is  large.


COLOURING.  413

The  organ  is  generally  larger  in  women  than  in  men ;
and,  accordingly,  some  women,  as  colourisU,  have  equalled
the  masters  among  men ;  while  as  painters,  women,  in  ge-
neral, have  always  been  inferior  to  the  other  sex.  The  fa-
culty aids  the  flower-painter,  enameller,  dyer,  and,  in  ge-
neral, all  who  occupy  themselves  with  colours.  Its  great
energy  gives  a  passion  for  colours,  but  not  necessarily  a  de-
licate taste  in  them.  Taste  depends  upon  a  perfect  rather
than  a  very  powerful  activity  of  the  faculties.  In  several
oriental  nations,  for  example,  the  faculty  appears,  from
their  love  of  colours,  to  be  strong,  and,  nevertheless,  they
display  bad  taste  in  the  application  of  them.

Dr  Spurzheim  observed,  that,  in  persons  born  blind,  the
organ  of  Colouring  is  in  general  less  developed  than  in
persons  who  see,  or  who  have  become  blind  after  mature
age.  Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  he  had  seen  a  bookseller  of
Augsburg,  blind  from  birth,  who  maintained  that  it  is  not
the  eye  but  the  intellect,  which  recognizes,  judges  and  pro-
duces proportion  among  colours.  This  individual  asserted,
that,  by  means  of  an  internal  sense,  he  had  precise  notions
of  colours ;  and  it  is  a  fact  that  he  determined  their  har-
mony exactly.  He  had  a  number  of  glass  beads,  of  various
colours,  which  he  formed  into  different  figures,  and  always
produced  harmony  in  the  arrangement  of  the  colours.  After
making  a  great  effort,  of  this  kind,  he  experienced  pain
immediately  above  the  eye,  particularly  above  the  right
eye. — (Vol.  v.  p.  85.)  I  have  seen  a  blind  man  in  Stirling,
who  distinguished  colours  with  great  accuracy  by  means
of  touch.  Derham,  in  his  Physico-Theology,  b.  iv.  ch.  6.,
mentions  a  similar  case,  and  observes,  that  "  although  the
eye  be  the  usual  judge  of  colours,  yet  some  have  been  able
to  distinguish  them  by  feeling."  These  facts  shew  that  it
is  not  the  eye  alone  which  judges  of  colours,  because  a  func-
tion can  in  no  case  be  possessed  without  the  organ  on  which
it  depends.

The  organ  is  considered  as  established.


(     4U     )


Genus  III. — intellectual  faculties  which

PERCEIVE   THE   RELATIONS   OF    EXTERNAL   OB-
JECTS,

27. — LOCALITY,

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  the  taste  which  he  had  for  na-
tural history  induced  him  frequently  to  go  into  the  woods
to  catch  birds,  or  to  discover  their  nests;  and  although  he
was  expert  in  accomplishing  these  objects,  yet,  when  he
wished  to  return  to  the  nests,  he  generally  found  it  impos-
sible to  retrace  his  way,  or  to  light  upon  the  tree  which  he
had  marked,  or  the  snares  which  he  had  placed.  This  dif-
ficulty did  not  arise  from  inattention,  for,  before  quitting
the  spqt,  he  stuck  branches  in  the  ground,  and  cut  marks
on  trees,  to  guide  him  in  his  return,  but  all  in  vain.  He
was  obliged  to  take  constantly  along  with  him  one  of  his
school- fellows,  named  Scheidler,  who,  with  the  least  pos-
sible effort  of  attention,  went  always  straight  to  the  place
where  a  snare  was  set,  even  although  they  had  sometimes
placed  ten  or  fifteen  in  a  quarter  that  was  not  familiarly
known  to  them*  As  this  youth  possessed  only  very  ordi-
nary talents  in  other  respects,  Dr  Gall  was  much  struck
with  his  facility  in  recollecting  places,  and  frequently  asked
him  how  he  contrived  to  guide  himself  so  surely ;  to  which
he  replied  by  asking  Gall,  in  his  turn,  how  he  contrived
to  lose  himself  everywhere.  In  the  hope  of  one  day  ob-
taining some  explanation  of  this  peculiarity,  Dr  Gall
moulded  his  head;  and  endeavoured  to  discover  persons
who  were  distinguished  by  the  same  faculty.  The  cele-
brated landscape-painter  Schjenberger  told  him,  that,  in
his  travels,  he  was  in  the  custom  of  making  only  a  very
general  sketch  of  countries  which  interested  him,  and  that
afterwards,  when  he  wished  to  produce  a  more  complete
picture,  every  tree,  every  group  of  bushes,  and  every  stone

2


LOCALITY.  415

of  any  considerable  magnitude,  presented  itself  sponta-
neously to  his  mind.  About  the  same  period  Dr  Gall  be-
came acquainted  with  M.  Meyer,  author  of  the  romance
of  "  Dia-na-Sore,"  a  person  who  found  no  pleasure  except
in  a  wandering  life*  Sometimes  he  went  from  house  to
house  in  the  country,  and  at  other  times  attached  himself
to  some  man  of  fortune,  to  accompany  him  in  extended  tra-
vels. He  had  an  astonishing  faculty  in  recollecting  the
different  places  which  he  had  seen.  Dr  Gall  moulded  his
head  also ;  he  then  placed  it  and  the  other  two  together,
and  compared  them  attentively ;  they  presented  great  dif-
ferences in  many  points,  but  he  was  struck  with  the  singu-
lar form  which  appeared  in  all  the  three  a  little  above  the
eyes,  and  on  the  two  sides  of  the  organ  of  Individuality,
viz*  two  large  prominences  commencing  near  each  side  of
the  nose,  and  going  obliquely  upwards  and  outwards,  al-
most as  high  as  the  middle  of  the  forehead*  From  that
time  he  was  led  to  suppose,  that  the  talent  for  recollecting
places  depended  on  a  primitive  faculty,  of  which  the  organ
was  situated  under  this  part  of  the  skull ;  innumerable  sub-
sequent observations  confirmed  this  inference*

Dr  Spurzheim  states,  that  "  the  special  faculty  of  this
organ,  and  the  sphere  of  its  activity,  remain  to  be  deter-
mined. It  makes  the  traveller,  geographer,  and  landscape-
painter,  recollect  localities,  and  gives  notions  of  perspec-
tive* It  seems  to  me,  says  he,  that  it  is  the  faculty  of  Lo-
cality in  general  As  soon  as  we  have  conceived  the  exist-
ence of  an  object  and  its  qualities,  it  must  necessarily  oc-
cupy a  place,  and  this  is  the  faculty  that  conceives  the
places  occupied  by  the  objects  that  surround  us*."  Sir
George  S.  Mackenzie  considers  the  primitive  faculty  to
be  that  of  perceiving  relative  position.  Dr  Spurzheim  states,
that  "  notions  of  perspective9'  are  given  by  Locality,  but
certain  facts,  already  noticed,  appear  to  shew  that  these
depend  rather  on  Size :  in  other  respects  his  observations
coincide  with  my  own  experience.

•  Phrenology,  p.  280.


416  LOCALITY.

Persons  in  whom  this  organ  is  large,  form  vivid  and  dis-
tinct conceptions  of  situations  and  scenery  which  they  have
seen  or  heard  described,  and  they  have  great  power  in  re-
calling such  conceptions.  When  the  faculty  is  active  from
internal  excitement  of  the  organ,  such  ideas  are  presented
to  them  involuntarily.  In  the  mask  of  Sir  Walter  Scott
the  organ  is  large.  Readers,  similarly  endowed,  are  almost
as  much  delighted  with  his  descriptions  of  scenery,  as  by  a
tour  made  by  themselves  amid  the  mountain  glens  ;  while
those  in  whom  the  organ  is  small,  are  quite  uninterested
by  his  most  splendid  poetical  landscapes.  This  author
writes  so  pictorially,  that  he  almost  saves  an  artist,  who
means  to  illustrate  his  pages,  the  trouble  of  invention.

An  author,  in  whom  this  organ  is  moderately  developed,
treats  of  places  in  a  very  different  manner.  Mr  Tenn  ant,
the  author  of  Anster  Fair  and  the  Thane  of  Fife,  merely
designates,  by  appropriate  epithets,  the  leading  features  of
a  landscape,  in  a  way  which  excites  a  pleasing  and  distinct
recollection  of  it  in  those  who  have  seen  it,  but  which  calls
up  no  picture  in  the  mind  of  a  reader  who  was  not  familiar
with  it  before ;  and  in  his  head  the  organ  of  Locality  is  be-
low gn  average  size.  The  following  lines  are  characteristic
of  his  manner:

"  Next  them  the  troopers  each  on  fervent  steed
That  dwell  urithin  the  warm  and  flowery  dale*
Where  Annan  and  where  Esk,  and  Liddle,  lead
Their  streams  down  tripping  through  the  sunny  vales,
And  where  the  stronger  and  more  swelling  Tweed
Emergent  from  his  midland  mountain,  trails
Voluminous  and  broad  his  waters  down
To  meet  the  briny  sea  by  bulwark'd  Berwick  town."

The  organ  is  large  in  the  busts  and  portraits  of  all  emi-
nent navigators  and  travellers,  such  as  Columbus,  Cook,
and  Mungo  Park;  also  in  great  astronomers  and  geo-
graphers, as  Kepler,  Galileo,  Tycho  Brache',  and
Newton.  In  Tasso  the  poet,  it  appears  also  to  have  been
very  large,  and  he  manifested  the  faculty  in  a  high  degree.


LOCALITY.  417

This  faculty  gives  what  is  called  "  Coup  (Peril?  and  judg-
ment of  the  capabilities  of  ground.  It  is  necessary  to  the
military  draughtsman,  and  is  of  great  importance  to  a  ge-
neral in  war.  Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  be  had  observed  the
organ  large  in  distinguished  players  at  chess ;  and  he  con-
ceived their  talent  to  consist  in  the  faculty  of  conceiving
clearly  a  great  number  of  the  possible  positions  of  the  men.

Some  persons  have  an  instinctive  tact  at  discriminating
and  recollecting  the  situation  of  the  organs  on  the  Phreno-
logical bust,  while  others  experience  the  greatest  difficulty
in  doing  so.  The  former  have  Locality  and  Form  large,
the  latter  small,  indicated  by  a  general  narrowness  at  the
top  of  the  nose.  The  latter  state  their  own  inability  as  an
objection  against  the  system ;  but  this  is  equally  logical  as
if  Mr  Milne  were  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  variety  of  co-
lours, because  his  own  organ  of  Colouring  is  so  defective
that  he  cannot  perceive  them.

Locality  appears  to  be  an  element  in  a  genius  for  geo-
metry. In  the  heads  or  busts  of  six  or  seven  eminent
mathematicians  which  I  have  carefully  examined,  this  or-
gan, and  also  those  of  Size,  Individuality  and  Comparison,
are  large.  Indeed,  pure  geometry  treats  only  of  the  rela-
tions of  space,  and  does  not  imply  agency,  or  any  relation,
except  that  of  proportion;  and  hence  it  might  be  legiti-
mately inferred  to  belong  to  the  sphere  of  the  organs  now
mentioned.  Negative  cases  also  coincide  with  these  posi-
tive observations.  Zhero  Colburn,  the  American  youth
who  was  celebrated  for  his  arithmetical  powers,  turned  his
attention  to  mathematics,  but  with  very  little  success.  He
stated  to  me  that  he  had  been  taught  the  first  six  books  of
Euclid,  and  understood  the  propositions,  but  felt  no  inte-
rest in  the  study.  He  liked  algebra  much  better;  and  he
has  the  organ  of  Number  large,  but  that  of  Locality  defi-
cient. The  gentleman  who  had  taken  charge  of  his
education,  it  is  said,  at  first  intended  him  for  a  mathe-
matician, but  afterwards,  finding  that  his  genius  did  not
lie  that  way,  directed  his  attention  to  law.     Mr  George

Dd


418  LOCALITY.

Bidder,  when  a  mere  child,  displayed  such  astonishing
talent  as  a  mental  calculator,  that  several  gentlemen  in
Edinburgh  were  induced  to  take  charge  of  his  education ;
and,  on  the  supposition  that  his  abilities  extended  to  mathe-
matical science  generally,  selected  for  him  the  profession
of  an  engineer.  Having  heard  of  this  intention,  and  ha-
ving observed  that  in  his  head  the  organs  of  the  mathema-
tical faculties  were  not  developed  in  any  extraordinary  de-
gree, I  inferred  that  his  eminence  as  a  mathematician  would
not  equal  that  which  he  had  attained  as  a  calculator,  and
communicated  this  conviction  in  writing  to  Principal  Baird,
one  of  his  patrons*  Mr  Bidder  subsequently  pursued  the
study  of  mathematics ;  but,  at  the  end  of  two  years,  both
he  himself  and  Professor  Wallace  informed  me,  that  he
was  not  distinguished  for  more  than  common  ability  in  the
class.  I  have  since  heard  that  Mr  Bidder  has  not  prose-
cuted the  profession  of  an  engineer ;  but  obtained  employ-
ment in  a  public  office,  in  which  his  great  talent  for  com-
putation renders  him  particularly  useful.

When  the  group  of  organs  situated  at  the  top  of  the  nose,
namely,  Individuality,  Form,  Size,  Weight,  and  Locality,
are  all  large,  there  is  generally  a  strong  talent  for  dyna-
mics. Persons  thus  endowed  excel  in  turning,  and  in
archery;  and  if  Constructiveness  be  also  full,  and  they
have  been  bred  to  professions  in  which  they  find  no  scope
for  these  faculties,  they  frequently  set  up  private  work-
shops, and  become  inventors  and  improvers  of  machinery*

The  organ  of  Locality  is  generally  much  larger  in  men
than  in  women ;  and  the  manifestations  correspond*

Dr  Gall  cites  several  cases  of  diseased  affection  of  this
organ;  and  in  the  Phrenological  Journal*,  Mr  Simpson
gives  a  highly  interesting  detail  of  symptoms  attending  dis-
order of  this  and  the  other  knowing  organs  already  treated
of.

This  organ  is  possessed  by  the  lower  animals,  and  many
interesting  facts  are  recorded  of  their  manifestations  of  the

•  No.  vii.  p.  426.


LOCALITY.  419

faculty.  Dr  Gall  mentions  several  instances  of  dogs  re-
turning to  their  homes  from  a  great  distance,  without  the
possibility  of  their  having  been  guided  by  smell  or  sight.
"  A  dog,"  says  he,  "  was  carried  in  a  coach  from  Vienna
to  St  Petersburgh,  and  at  the  end  of  six  months  reap-
peared in  Vienna :  Another  was  transported  from  Vienna
to  London ; — he  attached  himself  to  a  traveller,  and  em-
barked along  with  him ;  but  at  the  moment  of  landing,  he
made  his  escape  and  returned  to  his  native  city*  Another
dog  was  sent  from  Lyons  to  Marseilles,  where  he  was  em-
barked for  Naples,  and  he  found  his  way  back  by  land  to
Lyons."  The  common  hypothesis,  he  observes,  that  dogs
retrace  their  way  by  the  aid  of  smell,  appears  abundantly
absurd,  when  applied  to  cases  in  which  they  were  trans-
ported by  water,  or  in  a  coach ;  and  the  idea  that  these  ani-
mals can  discover  the  effluvia  of  their  master's  person  across
a  space  of  several  hundred  leagues,  appears  equally  pre-
posterous. Besides,  a  dog  does  not  return  home  by  the
straightest  road,  nor  even  by  the  precise  line  in  which  he
was  carried  away ;  and  some  naturalists  have  therefore  been
obliged  to  admit  an  occult  cause  of  this  surprising  talent,
and  named  it  a  sixth  sense*  Dr  Gall  considers  it  to  belong
to  the  organ  of  Locality.  The  falcon  of  Iceland  returns  to
its  native  place  from  a  distance  of  thousands  of  miles ;  and
carrier  pigeons  have  long  been  celebrated  for  a  similar  ten-
dency, and  have  occasionally  been  employed  in  consequence
to  convey  dispatches.  Swallows,  nightingales,  and  a  va-
riety of  sea-fowls,  migrate  from  one  climate  to  another  at
certain  seasons  of  the  year,  which  is  attributed  by  Dr  Gall
to  periodical  and  involuntary  excitement  of  this  organ.

The  frontal  sinus  has  been  stated  as  an  objection  to  Lo-
cality, but  it  rarely  ascends  higher  than  the  lower  part  of
it ;  and  while  prominences  formed  by  the  sinus  are  irre-
gular in  form,  and  generally  horizontal  in  direction,  the
elevations  occasioned  by  a  large  development  of  Locality
are  uniform  in  shape,  and  extend  obliquely  upwards  towards

the  middle  of  the  forehead.    Further,  the  negative  evidence

Dd2


420  NUMBER.

in  favour  of  the  organ  is  irresistible,  and  it  is  therefore
held  as  established.


28.   NUMBER.

A  scholar  of  St  Poelton,  near  Vienna,  was  greatly
spoken  of  in  that  city,  on  account  of  his  extraordinary  ta-
lent for  calculation.  He  was  the  son  of  a  blacksmith,  who
had  not  received  any  particular  instruction  beyond  that  be-
stowed on  other  boys  at  the  same  school ;  and  in  all  other
respects  was  nearly  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  them.
Dr  Gall  made  him  come  to  Vienna,  and  presented  him  to
his  audience  when  he  was  nine  years  of  age.  "  Lorsqu'on
lui  donnait,"  says  Dr  Gall,  "  je  suppose,  trois  nombres
exprim6s  chacun  par  dix  4  douze  chiffres,  en  lui  demandant
de  les  additionner,  puis  de  les  soustraire  deux  4  deux,  de
les  multiplier  et  de  les  diviser  chacun  par  un  nombre  de
trois  chiffres ;  il  regardait  une  seule  fois  les  nombres,  puis
il  levait  le  nez  et  les  yeux  en  l'air,  et  il  indiquait  le  resultat
de  son  calcul  mental  avant  que  mes  auditeurs  n'eussent  eu
le  temps  de  faire  le  calcul  la  plume  &  la  main.  H  avait
cre6  lui-m£me  sa  methode."  An  advocate  of  Vienna  stated
his  regret  that  his  son,  of  five  years  of  age,  occupied  him-
self exclusively  with  numbers  and  calculation,  in  such  a
manner  that  it  was  impossible  to  fix  his  attention  on  any
other  object,  not  even  on  the  games  of  youth.  Dr  Gall
compared  his  head  with  that  of  the  boy  just  mentioned,  and
found  no  particular  resemblance,  except  in  a  remarkable
prominence  at  the  external  angle  of  the  eye,  and  a  little  to
the  side.  In  both,  the  eye  was  in  some  degree  covered  by
the  external  angle  of  the  upper  eyebrow.  These  cases  sug-
gested the  idea  that  the  talent  for  calculation  might  be  con-
nected with  a  particular  organ ;  and  Dr  Gall  sought  for
men  distinguished  for  this  power,  in  order  to  verify  the  dis-
covery. He  repaired  to  the  Councillor  Mantelli,  whose
favourite  occupation  was  to  invent  and  solve  problems  in


NUMBER.  421

mathematics,  and  particularly  in  arithmetic,  and  found  the
same  configuration  in  him.  He  next  went  to  Baron  Vega,
author  of  Tables  of  Logarithms,  at  that  time  Professor  of
Mathematics,  and  who,  in  every  other  talent,  "  6tait  un
homme  fort  m&Li6cre,"  and  found  in  him  the  same  form  of
head.  He  then  visited  private  families  and  schools,  and
desired  the  children  distinguished  for  ability  in  calculation
to  be  pointed  out  to  him ;  and  still  the  same  development
recurred*  He  therefore  felt  himself  constrained  to  admit  a
special  organ  and  faculty  for  this  talent.

The  organ,  when  large,  fills  up  the  bead  outside  of  the
external  angle  of  the  eye,  a  very  little  below  the  point
called  the  external  angular  process  of  the  frontal  bone.

The  special  function  of  the  faculty  seems  to  be  calcula-
tion in  general.  Dr  Gall  calls  it  "  Le  sens  des  nombres  ;"
and,  while  he  states  distinctly  that  arithmetic  is  its  chief
sphere,  he  regards  it  as  also  the  organ  of  mathematics.  Dr
Spurzheim,  on  the  other  hand,  limits  its  functions  to  arith-
metic, algebra,  and  logarithms;  and  is  of  opinion  that  the
other  branches  of  mathematics,  as  geometry,  &c.  are  not
the  simple  results  of  this  faculty.  In  this  analysis  he  ap-
pears to  me  to  be  well  founded.  Mr  George  Bidder,
when  only  seven  years  of  age,  and  without  any  previous
instruction,  shewed  an  extraordinary  talent  for  mental  cal-
culation ;  and  I  have  seen  him,  when  only  eleven,  answer
the  most  complicated  questions  in  algebra,  in  a  minute,  or
a  minute  and  a  half,  without  the  aid  of  notation.  When
he  first  came  to  Edinburgh,  and  before  I  had  seen  him,  a
gentleman  waited  on  me,  accompanied  by  three  boys  of
nearly  equal  ages,  and  said,  "  One  of  these  is  George
Bidder,  the  celebrated  mental  calculator,  can  you  tell
which  is  he  by  his  head  ?"  On  examining  the  organ  of
Number  in  all  of  them,  I  replied  that  one  of  them  ought  to
be  decidedly  deficient  in  arithmetical  talent;  that  another
should  possess  it  in  a  considerable  degree;  but  that  the
third  must  be  Bidder,  because,  in  him,  the  organ  was  de-
veloped to  an  extraordinary  extent.    The  gentleman  then


422  NUMBER.

stated  that  the  indications  were  perfectly  correct ;  tliat  due
first  was  a  boy  who  had  been  remarked  as  dull  in  his  arith-
metical studies ;  the  second  was  the  most  expert  calculator
selected  from  a  school  in  Edinburgh ;  and  the  third  was
Bidder.  Dr  Gall  mentions  a  similar  experiment  which
was  tried  with  him,  and  with  the  same  result  He  gives  a
detailed  account  of  Zhero  Colburn,  the  American  youth
who  exhibited  great  talents  for  calculation,  and  in  whom
also  the  organ  was  found  large.  This  young  man  visited
Edinburgh,  and  afforded  the  phrenologists  of  this  city  an
opportunity  of  verifying  Dr  Gall's  observations,  which
were  found  to  be  correct.  Masks  of  him  and  Bidder  were
taken,  and  now  form  part  of  the  Phrenological  Society's
collection.  These  two  examples,  however,  prove  that  Dr
Spurzheim  is  right  in  limiting  the  function  of  this  faculty
to  calculation  of  numbers ;  as  neither  of  these  young  men
have  proved  so  eminent  in  geometry  as  in  arithmetic  and
algebra.  The  organ  is  large  also  in  the  mask  of  Humboldt,
celebrated  for  his  powers  of  calculation.  This  organ,  and
Individuality,  both  large,  give  the  talent  of  recollecting
dates.

I  am  acquainted  with  other  individuals  in  whom  this  or-
gan is  deficient,  and  who  experience  great  difficulty  in
solving  the  most  ordinary  arithmetical  questions,  who,  in-
deed, have  never  been  able  to  learn  the  multiplication  table,
or  to  perform  readily  common  addition  and  subtraction,
even  after  persevering  efforts  to  attain  expertness.  This
organ  is  small  in  the  mask  marked  "  French  M.  D. ;"  and
it  serves  as  a  contrast,  in  this  respect,  to  those  just  men-
tioned, in  which  it  is  large.

Dr  Gall  observes,  that  when  this  organ  predominates  in
an  individual,  all  his  faculties  receive  an  impression  from
it.  He  knew  a  physician  in  whom  it  was  very  large,  who
laboured  to  reduce  the  study  of  medicine,  and  even  the  vir-
tue of  particular  medicaments,  to  mathematical  principles ;
and  one  of  his  friends,  thus  endowed,  endeavoured  to  found
an  universal  language  on  similar  grounds.


NUMBER,  423

Dr  Spurzheim  mentions,  that  "  certain  races  of  Negroes
make  five  the  extent  of  their  enumeration,  that  is,  they
count  only  as  far  as  five  by  simple  terms ;  they  say,  "  five-
one,  five-two,  five-three,"  &c.  "  Negroes  in  general,"  he
continues,  "  do  not  excel  in  arithmetic  and  numbers ;  and,
accordingly,  their  heads  are  narrow  in  the  seat  of  the  or?
gan  of  Number."  Humboldt  also  mentions  that  the  Chay-
mas  (a  people  in  the  Spanish  parts  of  South  America)
"  have  great  difficulty  in  comprehending  any  thing  that
belongs  to  numerical  relations;"  and  that  "  the  more  intel-
ligent count  in  Spanish  with  an  air  that  denotes  a  great  ef-
'  fort  of  mind,  so  far  as  90,  or  perhaps  50 ;"  and  he  adds,
that  "  the  corner  of  the  eye  is  sensibly  raised  up  towards
the  temple."

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  two  of  his  acquaintances  felt
pain  in  the  region  of  this  organ,  after  being  occupied  for
several  days  in  succession  with  difficult  calculations.  In
the  Hospital  of  Vienna,  he  saw  a  patient  whose  insanity
degenerated  into  idiocy,  but  who  nevertheless  occupied  him-
self solely  with  counting.  He  stopped,  however,  regularly  at
ninety-nine ;  could  never  be  induced  to  say  one  hundred,
and  recommenced  counting  at  one.  M.  L.  A.  Gjelis,  in
his  Treatise  on  Acute  and  Chronic  Hydrocephalus,  men-
tions the  case  of  a  boy,  who,  though  stupid  in  every  other
respect,  still  manifested,  in  his  twelfth  year,  an  astonish-
ing memory  for  numbers,  and  a  strong  feeling  of  Benevo-
lence ;  which  qualities,  however,  he  adds,  disappeared  in
proportion  as  his  malady,  hydrocephalus,  increased.

It  seems  difficult  to  determine  whether  this  faculty  ex-
ists in  the  lower  animals  or  not.  George  Le  Rot  states
from  observation,  that  magpies  count  three ;  while  Dupont
de  Nemours  asserts  that  they  count  nine :  Dr  Gall  does
not  decide  the  question.

The  organ  is  established.


(     424     )


29-   ORDER.

Order  supposes  a  plurality  of  objects;  but  one  may
have  ideas  about  a  number  of  things  and  their  qualities,
without  considering  them  in  any  order  whatever.  Every
arrangement  of  external  articles  is  not  equally  agreeable  to
the  mind ;  and  the  capacity  of  being  delighted  with  order,
and  distressed  by  disorder,  is  not  in  proportion  to  the  en-
dowment of  any  other  faculty.  There  are  individuals  who
are  martyrs  to  the  love  of  order,  who  are  distressed  beyond
measure  by  the  sight  of  confusion,  and  highly  satisfied
when  every  thing  is  well  arranged.  These  persons  have
the  organ  in  question  large.  The  sort  of  arrangement,
however,  imposed  by  this  faculty,  is  different  from,  although
perhaps  one  element  in,  that  philosophical  method  which  is
the  result  of  the  perception  of  the  relations  of  things.  The
faculty  of  which  we  here  speak,  gives  method  and  or-
der in  arranging  objects,  as  they  are  physically  related ;
but  philosophical  or  logical  inferences,  the  conception  of
systematising  or  generalizing,  and  the  idea  of  classifica-
tions, are  formed  by  the  reflecting  faculties.  Dr  Spurz-
heim  mentions,  that  the  Sauvage  de  l'Aveyron  at  Paris,
though  an  idiot  in  a  very  high  degree,  cannot  bear  to  see
a  chair,  or  any  other  object  out  of  its  place ;  and  as  soon  as
any  thing  is  deranged,  he,  without  being  excited  to  it,  di-
rectly replaces  it.  He  saw  also  in  Edinburgh  a  girl,  who,
in  many  respects,  was  idiotic,  but  in  whom  the  love  of  or-
der was  very  active.  She  avoided  her  brother's  apartment,
in  consequence  of  the  confusion  which  prevailed  in  it.

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  he  has  met  with  facts  which
strongly  indicate,  that  "  order"  depends  on  a  primitive
faculty;  but  that,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  observing
the  organs  placed  in  the  superciliary  ridge,  and  the  small
size  of  this  organ  in  particular,  as  pointed  out  by  Dr
Spurzheim,  he  has  not  been  able  to  collect  a  sufficiency


EVENTUALITY.


425


of  determinate  facts  to  authorise  him  to  decide  on  its  situa-
tion*.

I  have  seen  several  instances  in  confirmation  of  this  or-
gan. A  gentleman  of  this  city,  whose  mask  is  sold  as  an
illustration  of  "  order/'  has  a  large  development  of  it ;  and
his  perception  of  symmetrical  arrangement  is  exceedingly
acute.  On  each  superciliary  ridge  of  this  cast,  there  is  an
elevation  resembling  a  small  pea,  which  is  frequently  mis-
taken for  the  organ ;  that,  however,  appears  to  be  merely
a  projecting  point  of  the  frontal  bone,  to  which  some  fibres
of  the  temporal  muscle  are  attached.  The  development  of
the  organ  is  indicated  by  a  great  fulness,  producing  a  square
appearance  at  the  external  angles  of  the  lower  part  of  the
forehead.  I  have  seen  other  cases,  in  which  that  part  of
the  brain  was  very  small,  and  the  love  of  order  was  ex-
tremely deficient.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  I  am  disposed
to  admit  the  organ  as  ascertained.  The  organ  is  large  in
the  mask  marked  "  French  M.  D.,"  and  in  Humboldt,
brother  of  the  traveller.


80.   EVENTUALITY.

This  organ,  when  large,  gives  prominence  or  rounded
fulness  to  the  middle  of  the  forehead.


Pitt.


Moore.


Sheridan.


22.  Individuality  moderate.

30.  Eventuality  large.

34.  Comparison  rather  large.


82.  Individuality  large.
30.  Eventuality  small.
34.  Comparison  very  large.


98.  Individuality  large.
30.  Eventuality  large,  and
34.  Comparison  fulL


After  Dr  Gall  had  discovered  an  external  sign  of  the
talent  for  learning  by  heart,  he  was  not  long  in  perceiving
that  it  by  no  means  indicated  every  species  of  memory.    He

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  torn.  iv.  p.  467.


426  EVENTUALITY.

observed,  that,  among  his  school-fellows,  some  excelled  in
verbal  memory,  and  remembered  even  words  which  they
did  not  understand ;  while  others  were  deficient  in  this
qualification,  but  recollected  with  uncommon  facility  facts
and  events ;  that  some  were  distinguished  by  a  great  me-
mory of  places ;  some  were  able  to  repeat,  without  mistake,
a  piece  of  music  which  they  had  heard  only  once  or  twice,
while  others  excelled  in  recollecting  numbers  and  dates ;
but  no  individual  possessed  aU  of  these  talents  combined  in
himself.  Subsequently  to  these  observations,  he  learned
that  philosophers  before  him  had  arrived  at  similar  conclu-
sions, and  had  distinguished  three  varieties  of  memory,—
memory  of  things,  u  memoria  reaUs  ;"  verbal  memory,
"  memoria  verbalis ;"  and  memory  of  places,  "  memoria  lo-
calis."  In  society,  he  observed  persons  who,  though  not
always  profound,  were  learned,  had  a  superficial  knowledge
of  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  knew  enough  to  be  capable
of  speaking  on  them  with  facility ;  and  he  found  in  them
the  middle  of  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead  very  much  de-
veloped. At  first  he  regarded  this  as  the  organ  of  the
"  memory  of  things ;"  but,  on  farther  reflection,  he  per-
ceived, that  the  name  "  memory  of  things'1  does  not  in-
clude the  whole  sphere  of  activity  of  the  organ  now  under
consideration.  He  observed,  that  persons  who  had  this
I  part  of  the  brain  large,  possessed  not  only  a  great  memory
for  facte,  tot  were  distinguished  by  prompt  conception  in
general*  and  an  extreme  facility  of  apprehension ;  a  strong
desire  for  information  and  instruction;  a  disposition  to
study  all  bnacbes  of  knowledge,  and  to  teach  these  to
other* ;  and  nk»,  that,  if  not  restrained  by  the  higher  fa-
culties, audi  persons  were  naturally  prone  to  adopt  the  opi-
nions of  others,  to  embrace  new  doctrines,  and  to  modify
their  own  minds  according  to  the  manners,  customs,  and
circumstances  with  which  they  were  surrounded.  He
therefore  rejected  the  name,  "  memory  of  things/'  and  he
adopted  the  appellations  "  Sens  des  chases,  sens  (Feducabi-
litt,  de  perfectibilite  ;"  to  distinguish  this  faculty.


EVENTUALITY.  427

These  observations  of  Dr  Gall  apply  chiefly  to  die  part
of  the  brain  now  designated  by  Eventuality ;  he  did  not
treat  of  Individuality  as  a  separate  organ ;  and  in  his  plates
it  is  left  without  mark  or  number.

The  function  of  this  faculty  is  to  take  cognisance  of  mo-
tion or  active  phenomena,  indicated  by  verbs.  In  such  ex-
pressions as  the  rock  falls,  the  horse  gallops,  the  battle  is
fought,  the  substantive  springs  from  Individuality,  and  the
verb  from  Eventuality.  It  prompts  to  investigation  by  ex-
-periment,  while  Individuality  leads  to  observation.  Indi-
viduality gives  the  tendency  to  personify  abstract  ideas,
such  as  Ignorance  or  Wisdom ;  and  Eventuality  to  repre-
sent them  as  acting.  In  a  work  written  by  an  author  with
whom  I  was  acquainted,  Mid  in  whom  both  of  these  organs
were  large,  Ignorance  and  Common-sense  were  represented
as  personages  who  addressed  the  people,  excited  them  to
action,  and  themselves  performed  a  variety  of  parts ;  Igno-
rance "  stole  a  march  on  Common-sense,"  who  by  dexterous
expedients  extricated  himself  from  the  difficulty.  An  au-
thor in  whom  Individuality  is  large  and  Eventuality  small,
will  treat  his  subjects  by  description  chiefly ;  and  one  in
whom  Eventuality  is  large  and  Individuality  small,  will
narrate  actions,  but  deal  little  in  physical  description.

Sheridan  possessed  both  organs  large,  with  those  of
Size  and  Locality  amply  developed ;  and  the  following  pas-
sage affords  an  example  of  the  prominence  which  the  phy-
sical appearances  of  objects  obtain  in  his  composition.
Speaking  of  a  woman  and  her  husband,  he  says,  "  Her  fat
arms  are  strangled  with  bracelets,  which  belt  them  like  cord-
ed brawn. — You  wish  to  draw  her  out  as  you  would  an  ope-
ra-glass.— A  long  lean  man,  with  all  his  arms  rambling,  no
way  to  reduce  him  to  compass,  unless  you  could  double
him  up  like  a  pocket  rule. — With  his  arms  spread  he'd  lie
on  the  bed  of  ware,  like  a  cross  on  a  Good  Friday  bun. —
If  be  stands  cross-legged,  he  looks  like  a  caducous,  and
put  him  in  a  fencing  attitude,  you  would  take  him  for  a
chcvau-de-frise, — to  make  any  use  of  him,  it  must  be  as  a


488  EVENTUALITY.

spontoon  or  a  fishing-rod. — When  his  wife's  by,  he  follows
like  a  note  of  admiration* — See  them  together,  one's  a  mast,
and  the  other  all  hulk, — she's  a  dome,  and  he's  built  like  a
glass-house ; — when  they  part,  you  wonder  to  see  the  steeple
-separate  from  the  chancel,  and  were  they  to  embrace,  he
must  hang  round  her  neck  like  a  skein  of  thread  on  a  lace-
maker's  bolster ;  to  6ing  her  praise,  you  should  choose  a
rondeau,  and  to  celebrate  him  you  must  write  all  alexan-
drines,"

In  the  busts  and  portraits  of  Pope,  Individuality  is  great-
ly inferior  in  dimensions  to  Eventuality ;  and  this  author
rarely  excels  in  describing  physical  appearances,  while  he
surpasses  in  representing  action.  The  following  lines  from
the  Rape  of  the  Lock  are  intended  to  describe  a  beautiful
lady;  but  it  will  be  observed  that  they  represent  action,
condition,  and  quality,  almost  to  the  exclusion  of  substan-
tive existence,  with  its  attributes  of  form,  colour,  size,  and
proportion  *.

u  Not  with  more  glories  in  the  etherial  plain,
The  sun  first  rises  o*er  the  purpled  main,
Than,  issuing  forth,  the  rival  of  his  beams
Launched  on  the  bosom  of  the  silver  Thames.
Fair  nymphs  and  well-dressed  youths  around  her  shone ;
But  every  eye  was  fixed  on  her  alone.
On  her  white  breast  a  sparkling  cross  she  wore,
Which  Jews  might  kiss,  and  infidels  adore.
Her  lively  looks  a  sprightly  mind  disclose,
Quick  as  her  eyes  and  as  unfixed  as  those :
Favours  to  none,  to  all  she  smiles  extends :
Oft  she  rejects,  but  never  once  offends.
Bright  as  the  sun  her  eyes  the  gazers  strike ;
And,  like  that  sun,  they  shine  on  all  alike.
Yet  graceful  ease,  and  sweetness  void  of  pride,
Might  hide  her  &ults,  if  belles  had  faults  to  hide :
If  to  her  share  some  female  errors  fell,
Look  on  her  nice,  and  you'll  forget  them  alL"

Rape  of  the  Lock,

•  Some  acute  and  interesting  observations  by  Mr  Hewett  Watsow,
on  the  relation  between  the  writings  of  these  and  other  authors,  and  their
cerebral  organs,  will  be  found  in  Nos.  24  and  25  of  the  Phrenological
Journal.


EVENTUALITY.  489

This  organ  is  largely  developed  in  children,  and  gives
them  an  appetite  for  knowledge,  in  the  form  of  stories  and
narratives.  In  practical  life,  it  chiefly  gives  the  talent  of
observing*  recollecting,  and  describing  action;  in  other
words,  of  observing  the  occurrences  of  which  history  is
composed,  and  of  telling  the  story  of  what  we  know.
When  deficient,  great  difficulty  is  experienced  in  observ-
ing, recollecting,  and  describing  active  phenomena.  Such
a  person  may  have  his  head  filled  with  general  impressions
of  conversations,  without  any  precise  ideas  of  the  topics
discussed;  so  that  when  he  shall  attempt  to  report  what
he  has  heard,  he  will  discover  that  he  cannot  do  so,  from
knowing  no  part  of  it  distinctly.

When  the  organ  is  large,  the  individual  will  remember
the  precise  statements  of  an  author,  whose  works  he  has
read ;  when  small,  he  will  recollect  only  the  general  im-
port.

If  Eventuality  be  large,  and  Concentrativeness  deficient,
the  qualities  of  observation  and  narration  may  be  possessed,
but  the  narrative  will  resemble  a  description  of  figures  in
a  carnival ;  it  will  be  full  of  life,  action,  and  incident,  but
deficient  in  onward  continuity;  with  Concentrativeness
large,  the  story  would  more  nearly  resemble  a  regular
drama.

If  Individuality  be  large,  physical  substances  may  be  re-
membered vividly  by  it,  their  relations  by  Locality,  and
their  causes  and  effects  by  Causality ;  but  if  Eventuality
be  deficient,  extreme  difficulty  will  be  experienced  in  bring-
ing together  these  items  of  information,  and  presenting  them
in  the  form  of  a  natural  narrative.

A  person  in  whom  this  combination  exists,  and  in  whom
Concentrativeness  is  large,  will  feel  strongly  the  desire  of
communicating  the  quality  of  .continuity  to  his  narrative,
and  on  important  occasions  he  will  produce  it  by  labori-
ously writing  down  all  the  elementary  ideas  of  his  sub-
ject, by  transposing  them,  by  filling  up,  and  striking  out


430  EVENTUALITY.

parts,  until  the  whole  shall  cohere  with  neatness  and  con-
sistency. Such  a  combination  will  fit  its  possessor  for  stu-
dying physical  more  successfully  than  moral  science ;  be-
cause action  is  the  primary  element  of  the  latter.

If  Concentrativeness  and  Eventuality  be  both  deficient,
the  literary  or  philosophical  productions  of  the  individual
will  be  marked  by  omissions  of  important  intermediate
ideas ;  in  oral  discourses  he  will  combine  description  with
inference,  without  taking  sufficient  notice  of  modes  of
action;  he  will  often  wander  from  his  subject;  and,  in
short,  he  will  display  great  knowledge  of  objects  which
exist,  together  with  profound  reflection  on  their  rela-
tions, and  yet  be  unsuccessful  in  conveying  to  the  minds
of  his  readers  or  auditors  philosophical  convictions,  similar
to  those  which  exist  in  his  own  mind;  and  this  will  be  ow-
ing chiefly  to  deficiency  in  the  power  of  representing  by
Eventuality  modes  of  action,  and  of  giving,  by  Concentra-
tiveness, continuity  to  the  thread  of  his  discourses.

Individuality,  Eventuality,  and  Concentrativeness,  are
indispensable  qualities  to  a  successful  teacher.  I  have  ne-
ver seen  a  person  capable  of  interesting  children  and
exciting  their  intellects,  who  was  deficient  in  both  the  first
and  second.  His  manner  of  communicating  knowledge  is
then  vague,  abstract  and  dry,  altogether  unsuited  to  their
mental  condition.  These  three  organs  large,  combined
with  large  Philoprogenitiveness,  Benevolence,  and  Consci-
entiousness, and  an  active  temperament,  constitute  the
leading  elements  of  a  good  teacher.

When  both  Individuality  and  Eventuality  are  large,  the
individual  possesses  two  important  qualities  for  general
business.  They  confer  that  readiness  of  observation  and
talent  for  detail,  which  are  essential  to  the  management  of
affairs.  The  lawyer  so  endowed  is  enabled  readily  to  appre-
hend the  details  of  his  cases,  easily  to  recollect  the  princi-
ples of  law,  the  dicta  of  legal  authors,  and  the  decisions  of
courts,  as  matters  of  fact ;  and  to  reproduce  the  whole  in  a
connected  narrative  before  a  judge  or  jury.     His  power


EVENTUALITY.  431

of  applying  principles  to  new  cases,  depends  on  the  re-
flecting faculties;  but  although  these  be  powerful,  yet,
if  Individuality  and  Eventuality  be  deficient,  he  may
feel  great  difficulty  in  preparation,  and  in  the  reproduc-
tion of  his  ideas.  In  point  of  fact,  the  most  eminent
practical  lawyers,  particularly  in  England,  are  distinguish*
ed  by  a  great  development  of  these  organs;  which  are
equally  necessary  to  the  public  speaker,  to  give  him  a  com-
mand over  the  materiel  or  details  of  his  subject,  and  to
enable  him  to  set  it  forth  clearly  and  naturally  to  his  audi-
ence. I  have  observed  them  large  also  in  practical  physi-
cians; for,  in  the  profession  of  medicine,  prompt  and  accu-
rate observation  is  one  important  element  in  excellence.

Both  organs  are  large  in  authors  who  acutely  observe
objects  that  exist,  and  also  life,  manners,  and  occur*
rences,  such  as  Le  Sage,  De  Foe,  and  the  Author  of  Wa-
verley.  They  are  essential  to  the  composition  of  such
works  as  Robinson  Crusoe  and  Gulliver's  Travels,  in
which  a  strong  impression  of  reality  is  produced  by  a  mi-
nute description  of  particular  objects  and  actions.  In  a
mask  preserved  in  Dublin,  and  said  to  be  that  of  Swift,
the  organs  appear  very  large.

When  both  organs  are  small,  the  individual  will  retain
only  general  ideas,  and  will  experience  great  difficulty  in
becoming  learned ;  he  may  see,  hear  or  read  many  facts,
but  they  will  make  only  a  faint  impression,  and  soon
escape  from  mind;  he  will  feel  great  difficulty  in  com-
manding, without  previous  preparation,  even  the  knowledge
which  he  possesses.

These  faculties  desire  only  to  know  existence  and  facts,
and  do  not  reason  or  trace  relations.  Hence  a  person  in
whom  they  are  strong,  and  in  whom  the  reasoning  powers  are
deficient,  gains  his  knowledge  by  questioning  and  observa-
tion. If  we  tell  him  two  facts,  which  clearly  imply  a  third,
he  will  not  naturally  endeavour  to  find  it  out  by  his  own
suggestion,  but  will  instantly  put  another  question*  Hence,


432  EVENTUALITY.

also,  the  tendency  of  these  faculties  is  to  recollect  facts,
according  as  they  occur,  and  not  according  to  any  philoso-
phical relations  between  them.  Mrs  Quickly* s  speech  to
Falstaff  is  a  beautiful  illustration  of  this  kind  of  under-
standing. She  is  reminding  him  of  his  promise  of  mar-
riage, and  says,  "  Thou  didst  swear  to  me  on  a  parcel-gilt
goblet,  sitting  in  my  dolphin-chamber,  at  the  round-table,  by
a  sea-coal  fire,  on  Wednesday  in  Whitsun-week,  when  the
Prince  broke  thy  head  for  likening  his  father  to  a  singing
man  of  Windsor ;  thou  didst  swear  to  me  then,  as  I  was
washing  thy  wound,  to  marry  me,  and  make  me  my  lady
thy  wife.  Canst  thou  deny  it  ?  Did  not  goodwife  Keech,
the  butcher's  wife,  come  in  then,  and  call  me  Gossip  Quickly  f
coming  in  to  borrow  a  mess  of  vinegar  ;  telling  us,  she  had  a
good  dish  of  prawns  ;  whereby  thou  didst  desire  to  eat  some;
whereby  I  told  thee,  they  were  HI  for  a  green  wound;  and
didst  not  thou,  when  she  was  gone  down  stairs,  desire  me  to
be  no  more  so  familiarity  with  such  poor  people,  saying,  that
ere-long,  they  should  call  me  Madam  ?  And  didst  thou  not
hiss  me,  and  bid  me  fetch  thee  thirty  shillings  ?  I  put  thee
now  to  thy  book-oath ;  deny  it  if  thou  canst  *."  Here  is  a
surprising  variety  of  trivial  circumstances,  connected  by
no  link  but  that  of  the  order  of  their  occurrence.  Yet
every  one  must  perceive,  that  they  have  an  effect  in  pro-
ducing the  impression  of  reality  on  the  mind.  We  feel  it
impossible  to  doubt  the  promise,  which  is  substantiated  by
so  particular  a  detail  of  facts,  every  one  of  which,  indeed,
becomes,  as  it  were,  a  witness  to  its  truth.

Dr  Spurzheim,  in  treating  of  Eventuality,  says,  "  This
faculty  recognises  the  activity  of  every  other,  whether  ex-
ternal or  internal,  and  acts  in  its  turn  upon  all  of  them.
It  desires  to  know  every  thing  by  experience,  and  conse-
quently excites  all  the  other  organs  to  activity ;  it  would
hear,  see,  smell,  taste,  and  touch ;  is  fond  of  general  in-
struction, and  inclines  to  the  pursuit  of  practical  know-

•  Second  Part  pf  King  Henry  IV.  Act  iL  scene  2.


EVENTUALITY.  433

ledge.  It  is  essential  to  editors,  secretaries,  historians  and
teachers.  By  knowing  the  functions  of  the  other  powers,
this  faculty  contributes  essentially  to  the  unity  of  Consci-
ousness. It  seems  to  perceive  the  impressions,  which  are
the  immediate  functions  of  the  external  senses,  and  to
change  these  into  notions  or  ideas.  Moreover,  it  appears
to  be  essential  to  attention  in  general,  and  to  the  recogni-
tion of  the  entity  myself  in  philosophy.  Its  sphere  of  acti-
vity is  very  great,  and  every  philosophic  system  has  taken
account  of  some  of  its  operations  *."

Dr  Gall  regarded  the  part  of  the  brain  here  named  Even-
tuality, as  the  organ  of  "  the  .sense"  of  things  in  man,  and  of
educability  or  perfectibility,  in  the  lower  animals.  While
he  admits  that  every  faculty  is  susceptible  of  improvement
by  education,  he  forms  a  scale  of  the  heads  of  animals,
from  the  crocodile  and  frog  up  to  man,  with  the  view  of
proving,  that  the  more  this  part  of  the  brain  is  developed
in  each  species,  the  higher  are  its  natural  susceptibilities  of
being  tamed  and  taught  Camper  and  Lavater,  he  adds,
had  made  similar  observations;  but  they  did  not  distin-
guish special  faculties  and  organs.  Dr  Spurzheim  ac-
knowledges the  correctness  of  the  facts  stated  by  Dr  Gall,
that  tame  animals  have  fuller  foreheads  than  wild  ones,
and  that  animals  are  generally  tameable,  in  proportion  to
the  development  of  their  foreheads ;  but  conceives,  that  Dr
Gall  attributes  to  a  single  faculty,  manifestations  which
depend  on  intellect  generally.  Eventuality  does  not  fill  the
whole  forehead ;  and  the  other  organs,  situated  there,  also
contribute  to  the  effects  observed  by  Dr  Gall.  The  obr
servation  of  the  latter,  therefore,  is  deficient  in  precision,
rather  than  in  truth.  Dr  Gall  regarded  the  organ  of  Be-
nevolence, in  the  lower  animals,  as  the  source  of  gentle-
ness of  disposition,  and  described  it  as  situated  in  them  in
the  middle  of  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead.     The  organ

■  Phrenology,  p.  283.

e  e


434  TIME.

of  Educability,  which  is  distinct,  he  says,  is  situated  in  the
middle  of  the  lower  part  of  the  forehead.

The  older  metaphysicians  do  not  treat  of  any  faculty
distinctly  analogous  to  Eventuality;  hut  Dr  Thomas
Brown  *,  whose  acuteness  I  have  so  often  praised,  admits
a  power  of  the  mind  under  the  name  of  "  Simple  Sugges-
tion," which  corresponds  very  closely  with  it ;  and  he  re-
duces Conception  and  Memory  of  the  metaphysicians  to
this  principle  of  Simple  Suggestion. — The  organ  is  esta-
blished.


81.  TIME.


\/VJ^\  The  power  of  conceiving  Time,  and  of  remembering  cir-
cumstances connected  by  no  link,  but  the  relation  in  which
they  stand  to  each  other  in  chronology,  and  also  the  power
of  observing  time  in  performing  music,  is  very  different  in
different  individuals.  Many  observations  have  been  made
on  this  organ ;  and  it  is  now  ascertained.  The  special  faculty
seems  to  be  the  power  of  judging  of  time,  and  of  intervals
in  general.  By  giving  the  perception  of  measured  cadence,
it  appears  to  be  one  source  of  pleasure  in  dancing.  It  is
essential  to  music  and  versification.

Mr  Simpson,  in  an  excellent  essay  on  this  faculty,  pub-
lished in  the  Phrenological  Journal  f,  states,  that  "  We  have
found  the  organ  largely  developed  in  those  who  shew  an
intuitive  knowledge  of  the  lapse  of  minutes  and  hours,  so
as  to  name  the  time  of  the  day,  without  having  recourse  to
the  clock ;  and  also  in  those  who  perceive  those  minuter
divisions,  and  their  harmonious  relations,  which  constitute
rhythm,  and  who,  when  they  apply  the  tact  to  music,  are
called  good  timists, — a  distinct  power  from  that  of  the
mere  melodist,  and  often  wanting  in  him ;  while  it  is  mat-
ter of  the  commonest  observation,  on  the  other  hand,  that

•  Lectures,  vol.  ii.  p,  192.  f  V<>1'  **•  P*  13^«


TIME.  435

this  sensibility  to  rhythm,  called  Time,  is  marked  in  those
who  have  a  very  moderate  perception  of  melody.  Such
persons  are  invariably  accurate  dancers,  observing  delicately
the  time,  though  indifferent  to  the  melody  of  the  violin.
We  have  made  many  observations,  both  in  persons  who
have  both  Time  and  Tune  large,  and  in  those  who  have
only  one  of  them  in  large  endowment,  and  we  have  never
found  the  manifestations  fail.  Very  lately  we  were  struck
with  the  uncommon  prominence  of  the  organ  of  Time  in  a
whole  family  of  young  people,  and  inquired  whether  or  not
they  danced  with  accuracy,  and  loved  dancing  ?  We  were
answered,  that  they  did  both  in  a  remarkable  degree ;  and,
as  we  lived  near  them  for  some  weeks,  we  observed  that
dancing  was  a  constant  and  favourite  pastime  of  theirs,
even  out  of  doors.  Their  dancing-master  informed  us,  that
the  accuracy  of  their  time  exceeded  that  of  any  pupils  he
had  ever  taught  There  was  thus  evident  in  these  young
persons  an  intense  pleasure  in  accurate  rhythmical  move*
roents."

The  fact  that  many  Deaf  and  Dumb  persons  dance  with
precision,  and  much  pleasure,  is  thus  accounted  for  by
Mr  Simpson.  "  That  Time,"  says  he,  "  may  be  marked
with  the  utmost  precision  to  the  eye,  is  a  fact  familiar  to
every  one  who  has  seen  a  regiment  of  soldiers  go  through
the  manual  and  platoon  exercise,  without  a  single  word  of
command,  by  obeying  the  movements  of  the  fugle-man,
who  gives  the  time  to  the  eye ;  and  who  that  has  seen  this
done  by  a  practised  corps,  is  ignorant  that  there  is  great
pleasure  in  witnessing  the  exquisitely  timed  movements  of
the  exercise?  Now,  suppose  a  dancer,  unaided  by  music,
were  to  keep  his  eye  on  any  person  or  object  which  was
marking  dancing-time  to  his  sight,  it  cannot  be  doubted
that  he  could  dance  to  it.  A  deaf  person  could  perform  the
manual  exercise  from  the  time  given  by  the  fugle-man;
and  just  as  easily  could  a  deaf  person  dance  with  his  eye
upon  the  violin-bow,  or  the  player's  arm,  or  on  the  move-
ment of  the  drumsticks.

£62


486  TUNE.

"  It  is  unnecessary  to  go  farther,  and  shew  that  the  sense
of  touch  may  be  the  channel  through  which  the  organ  of
Time  is  excited,  as  well  as  the  sense  of  hearing  and  sight.
No  one  will  dispute  that  a  soldier  could  perform  the  manual
exercise  to  a  succession  of  taps  on  the  shoulder ;  and  to
time,  in  the  same  way  given,  might  a  person  dance.

"  What  we  have  said  is  confirmed  by  fact.  It  is  well
known  that  the  deaf  and  dumb  do  dance,  taking  the  time
by  the  eye,  either  from  the  violin-player's  arm,  or  at  second
hand,  but  instantaneously  from  the  other  dancers.  We  are
acquainted  with  a  young  lady  and  gentleman  in  England,
both  of  rank,  who  are  deaf  and  dumb,  and  who,  in  addition
to  many  other  accomplishments,  dance  with  the  greatest
grace  and  precision."— See  also  Phren.  Journal,  vol.  iv#
p.  509.

The  origin  of  the  notion  of  Time  has  greatly  puzzled  the
metaphysicians.  Lord  Kames  says,  that  we  measure  it  by
the  number  of  ideas  which  pass  in  the  mind ;  but  experience
contradicts  this  supposition,  for  time  never  appears  so  short
as  when  ideas  are  most  numerous,  and  pass  most  rapidly
through  the  mind.  The  idea,  that  it  depends  on  a  separate
faculty  and  organ,  on  the  other  hand,  is  in  harmony  with
this  fact ;  for,  as  the  organ  of  Time  may  remain  inactive,
while  the  others  are  vividly  excited,  it  follows,  that  our
perceptions  of  duration  will,  on  such  occasions,  be  indis-
tinct, and  time  will,  in  consequence,  appear  brief.

•  32.  TUNE.

v\

Dr  Gall  mentions,  that  a  girl  named  Bianchi,  of  about

five  years  of  age,  was  presented  to  him,  and  he  was  asked
for  what  talent  she  was  most  distinguished.  He  discovered
in  her  no  indication  of  an  extraordinary  memory ;  and  the
idea  had  not  then  occurred  to  him,  that  the  talent  for  music
could  be  recognised  by  the  conformation  of  the  head.  In-
deed, he  had  not  at  that  time  ascertained  the  different  kinds
of  memory ;  but  his  friends  nevertheless  maintained,  that


TUNE.  437

the  young  Bianchi  had  an  extraordinary  memory  for  mu-
sic, and,  as  he  had  not  discovered  that  talent  in  her,  they
inferred  that  the  doctrine  which  he  taught  of  external  signs
for  different  kinds  of  memory  was  unfounded.  This  child
repeated  whatever  she  heard  sung  or  played  on  the  piano,  and
recollected  whole  concerts  if  she  had  heard  them  only  twice.
Dr  Gall  asked  if  she  learned  every  thing  hy  heart  with
equal  facility,  hut  he  was  told  that  she  possessed  this  as-
tonishing memory  in  music  alone.  He  concluded  that  a
well  marked  difference  exists  between  memory  for  music,
and  the  other  kinds  of  memory  with  which  he  was  then  ac-
quainted, and  that  every  kind  has  its  distinct  organ.  He
prosecuted  his  observations  with  fresh  ardour,  and  at  last
discovered  that  the  talent  for  music  is  connected  with  the
organ  now  under  discussion.  He  calls  it,  "  Le  sens  des
rapports  des  tons ;  "  "  expression,"  says  Dr  Gall,  "  qui
rattache  la  maniere  dont  l'intellect  du  musicien  met  en
osuvre  les  rapports  des  tons  k  la  mani&re  d'agir  des  sens
en  general."

The  organ  of  Tune  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  ears,
which  the  organ  of  Colour  does  to  the  eyes.  The  ear  receives
the  impressions  of  sounds,  and  is  agreeably  or  disagree-
ably affected  by  them ;  bu«  the  ear  has  no  recollection  of
tones,  nor  does  it  judge  of  their  relations ;  it  does  not  per-
ceive the  harmonies  of  sound ;  and  sounds,  as  well  as  co-
lours, may  be  separately  pleasing,  though  disagreeable  in
combination.  A  friend,  in  a  letter  written  from  India,
formerly  quoted,  says,  "  Melody  is  the  pleasure  arising  from
successions  of  simple  sounds  suited  to  each  other.  Harmony
is  that  arising  from  combined  sounds,  or  from  several  striking
the  ear  simultaneously,  as  in  a  band  playing  different  parts.
The  former  requires  much  less  of  the  organ  than  the  latter ;
and  hence  the  Scotch  with  no  great  Tune  are  melodists,
but  nothing  as  musicians.1'

A  great  development  of  the  organ  enlarges  the  lateral
parts  of  the  forehead ;  but  its  form  varies  according  to  the
direction  and  form  of  the  convolutions.    Dr  Spujrzheim


438  TUNE.

observes,  that,  in  Gluck,  and  others,  this  organ  had  a  py-
ramidal form;  in  Mozart,  Viotti,  Zumsteg,  Dussek,
Crescentini,  and  others,  the  external  corners  of  the  fore-
head are  enlarged,  but  rounded.  Great  practice  is  neces-
sary to  be  able  to  observe  this  organ  successfully ;  and  be-
ginners should  place  together  one  person  possessing  a  ge-
nius for  music,  and  another  who  can  scarcely  distinguish
between  any  two  notes,  and  mark  the  difference  of  their
heads.  The  superior  development  of  the  former  will  be
perceptible  at  a  glance.  The  faculty  gives  the  perception
of  melody;  but  this  is  only  one  ingredient  in  a  genius  for
music.  Time  is  requisite  to  a  just  perception  of  intervals,
Ideality  to  give  elevation  and  refinement,  Secretiveness  and
Imitation  to  produce  expression;  and  Constructiveness,
Form,  Weight,  and  Individuality,  are  requisite  besides,  to
supply  mechanical  expertness,  necessary  to  successful  per-
formance. The  largest  organ  of  Tune  will  not  enable  its
possessor  to  play  successfully  on  the  harp,  if  Weight  be  de-
ficient ;  the  capacity  of  communicating  to  the  string  the
precise  vibratory  impulse  requisite  to  produce  each  parti-
cular note  will  then  be  wanting.

Dr  Gall  mentions  that  he  had  examined  the  heads  of  the
most  celebrated  musical  performers  and  singers,  such  as
Rosini,  Catalani,  &c.  and  found  the  organ  uniformly
large,  and  that  the  portraits  and  busts  of  Hayden,  GluCk,
Mozart,  &c.  shew  it  also  largely  developed.  I  have  ex-
amined the  heads  of  Madame  Catalani,  and  many  emi-
nent private  musicians,  and  found  the  organ  confirmed  in
every  instance.  Dr  Gall  remarks  farther,  that  a  great
development  is  not  to  be  expected  in  every  ordinary  player
on  a  musical  instrument.  With  a  moderate  endowment,
the  fingers  may  be  trained  to  expertness ;  but  when  the
soul  feels  the  inspiration  of  harmonious  sounds,  and  the
countenance  expresses  that  voluptuous  rapture  which  thrills
through  the  frame  of  the  real  musician,  a  large  organ  will
never  be  wanting.

"  H  me  parait,"  continues  Dr  Gall,  "  que  les  honunes


TUNE,  439

qui  sont  eapables  de  dedulre  lee  lois  de  la  composition  dee
lois  des  vibrations  aonores,  et  des  rapports  des  tons,  et
d'etablir  ainsi  les  prineipes  les  plus  ge'neraux  de  la  musique,
doivent  etre  doues  en  memo  temps  (Fun  argane  des  nambres
tree  develloppe ;  car  l'exercise  de  ce  degre'  du  talent  musi-
cal exjge,  sans  contredit,  beaucoup  de  calcul ;  aussi  la  cir-
convolution  in&rieure  de  Porgane  musical,  la  plus  large  de
toutes,  se  continue  imm&liatement  dans  l'organe  des  nom-
bres.  Ce'ci  explique  pourquoi  on  peut  etre  excellent  musi-
cien,  et  n'avoir  pas  le  talent  de  la  composition ;  etre  grand
compositeur  sans  etre  en  meme  temps  grand  musicien  *."

The  heads  of  Italians  and  Germans  in  general  are  broad-
er and  fuller  at  the  situation  of  this  organ  than  those  of
Negroes,  Otaheitians,  Spaniards,  Frenchmen  and  English-
men, in  general ;  and  musical  talent  is  more  common  in  the
former  than  the  latter.

Mr  Scott  has  published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  f,
two  admirable  Essays  "  on  Music,  and  the  different  faculties
which  concur  in  producing  it,"  which  will  be  found  highly
deserving  of  attention.  He  conceives  Tune  to  be  the  pri-
mitive faculty  which  distinguishes,  "  1st,  That  agreement
of  component  vibrations  in  simple  sounds,  which  consti-
tutes them  musical;  2d,  That  relation  in  separate  sounds
emitted  together,  which  constitutes  harmony;  and,  3d,  That
relation  in  successive  notes,  which  constitutes  melody."
He  then  considers  the  auxiliary  faculties  requisite  to  the
practical  musician  (namely  those  before  enumerated),  and
points  out  the  effect  of  each  in  conducing  to  musical  ge-
nius. "  Imitation,"  says  he,  "  is  necessary,  particularly  to
the  vocal  performer,  to  enable  him  to  imitate  the  sounds  he
hears,  and  to  give,  by  his  own  vocal  organs,  a  correct  copy
of  the  music  which  he  wishes  to  execute.  Accordingly,  it
is  matter  of  observation,  that  all  angers  who  sing  naturally
and  easily,  possess  a  considerable  organ  of  Imitation."  He
then  enters,  at  considerable  length,  into  the  subject  of  mu-

•  Sur  les  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  120.
f  Vol.  ii.  pp.  170.  and  556.


442  TUNE.

a  calm  and  composed,  but  not  a  touching  expression.
When  Benevolence,  and  the  kindly  and  social  affections
are  large,  and  when  Tune,  Imitation,  and  Ideality,  are  at
the  same  time  large,  the  voice  has  a  degree  of  bewitching
softness,  as  may  be  observed  in  the  case  of  Miss  Stephens
or  Miss  Tree*  But  there  occur  in  private  life  many  in-
stances to  the  same  effect.  When  Benevolence  and  the
higher  sentiments  are  both  united  in  full  proportion,  the
voice  is  felt  to  be  peculiarly  delightful  and  harmonious.
In  men  there  is  generally  too  much  of  the  lower  propensi-
ties to  admit  of  this  in  its  highest  degree;  indeed,  these
seem  so  essential  to  a  manly  character,  that  in  them  it
would  not  be  desirable.  But  we  have  met  with  women
whose  every  tone  is  music,  and  whose  voices,  even  in  ordi-
nary discourse,  have  about  them  a  delightfulness  which  is
quite  irresistible,  and  which  makes  its  way  directly  to  the
heart.  This  softness  and  sweetness  of  voice,  is  remarked
as  a  great  point  of  female  excellence  by  King  Lear,  where
the  old  distressed  monarch  is  enumerating  the  excellencies
of  his  favourite  Cordelia, —

** Her  voice  was  ever  soft,

"  Gentle  and  low, — an  excellent  thing  in  woman  V

These  observations  of  Mr  Scott  are  very  interesting,
and  numerous  cases  have  been  observed  in  accordance  with
them ;  but  they  are  not  absolutely  correct,  because  I  have
met  with  decided  exceptions.  One  gentleman,  in  particu-
lar, has  a  moderately  sized  head,  small  cerebellum,  and
the  other  propensities  below  an  average,  whose  voice  is  ne-
vertheless a  deep  rich  bass.  It  is  certain  that  the  develop-
ment of  brain  has  some,  and  even  an  important  influence
on  the  quality  of  the  voice :  but  so  have  the  lungs  and  la-  •
rynx ;  and  it  is  still  unascertained  how  much  of  the  actual
effect  is  attributable  to  each.

When  an  average  development  of  Tune  is  combined
with  high  intellectual   organs,  the  superior  objects  with

•  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  ii.  p.  552.


TUNE..  443

which  these  are  conversant,  generally  attract  the  mind,  and
music  is  little  cultivated.  When,  on  the.  other  hand,  these
are  small,  and  Ideality,  Hope,  Benevolence,  Veneration,
and  Wonder,  which  Tune  is  particularly  calculated  to  gra-
tify, are  large,  the  tendency  to  practise  music  is  much
stronger.  Hence,  with  the  same  absolute  development  of
this  organ,  very  different  practical  results  may  ensue ;  but
this  is  in  exact  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the
science;  for  it  is  the  predominance  of  particular  organs  in
an  individual  that  decides  the  bias  of  his  mind ;  the  organs,
largest  in  size,  always  tending  most  powerfully  to  seek
gratification.

Tune  is  occasionally  found  strong  in  idiots,  and,  in  some
insane  patients,  its  activity  remains  unimpaired  amidst  an
extensive  derangement  of  the  other  faculties.  I  have  seen
two  idiots  who  manifested  it  in  a  considerable  degree.

The  following  case  is  reported  by  Dr  Andrew  Combe,
which  occurred  in  his  own  practice :

"  A  young  lady  of  high  musical  and  intellectual  powers,
and  of  a  very  active  mind,  and  who  has  for  some  months
past  been  subject  to  frequent  attacks  of  hysteria  in  all  its
ever-changing  forms,  and  who  suffers  almost  constantly  in
a  greater  or  less  degree  from  headach,  complained  on  Sa-
turday, 22d  April  1826,  of  feeling  acute  pain  at  the  exter-
nal angle  of  the  forehead,  precisely  in  the  situation  of  the
organs  of  Tune,  which  are  largely  developed,  and  upon
which,  in  describing  the  seat  of  the  pain,  she  placed  most
accurately  the  points  of  the  fingers.  Next  day  the  same  com-
plaint of  pain  in  that  region  was  made ;  and  about  two  hours
after  I  saw  her,  she  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  spasmodic
or  rather  convulsive  affection  of  the  larynx,  glottis,  and  ad-
joining parts,  in  consequence  of  which  a  quick,  short,  and
somewhat  musical  sound  was  regularly  emitted,  and  con-
tinued with  great  rapidity  as  if  the  breathing  had  been
very  hurried.  On  examination  externally,  the  os  hyoides
at  the  root  of  the  tongue  and  the  thyroid  cartilages  were
seen  in  constant  motion,  and  in  the  act  of  alternately  ap-


444  TUNE.

proximating  and  receding  from  each  other.  The  will  was
bo  far  powerful  in  controlling  this  motion,  that  the  young
lady  was  able  to  utter  a  few  short  sentences  at  a  time  with-
out much  difficulty,  interrupted,  however,  by  two  or  three
movements.  After  this  singular  state  had  continued  for
about  two  hours,  she  herself  remarked,  that  it  was  becom-
ing rather  too  musical,  and  wished  that  it  would  cease,  which
it  did  at  the  end  of  another  half-hour,  from  accidental  pres-
sure with  the  finger  in  pointing  out  the  motion  to  another
person ;  she  was  then  as  well  as  usual,  only  somewhat  fa-
tigued,

"  On  Monday,  24th  April,  she  still  complained  of  pain
in  the  situation  of  the  organ  of  Tune ;  and  stated,  that  she
had  been  dreaming  a  great  deal  of  hearing  the  finest  music  ;
that  she  felt  quite  excited  by  it,  and  could  not  even  now
get  the  impression  out  of  her  head.  The  day  passed  on,
however,  and  nothing  remarkable  occurred.

"  On  Tuesday  I  found  that  I  had  been  rather  anxiously
expected.  During  the  night  the  young  lady  had  been  tor-
mented with  the  recurrence  of  the  musical  dreams,  during
which  she  heard  and  performed  the  most  beautiful  airs,
with  a  distinctness  which  surpassed  those  of  the  preceding
night.  These  dreams  continued  for  some  hours,  and  left
such  an  impression,  that  on  awaking  she  thought  she  could
almost  note  down  one  piece  of  composition  which  had  par*
ticularly  pleased  her.  But  what  is  very  remarkable,  the
excessive  excitement  of  the  faculty  of  Tune  had  now
reached  a  height  that  could  not  be  controlled ;  the  patient
felt,  not  to  say  a  desire  only,  but  a  strong  and  irresistible
passion  or  craving  for  music,  which  it  was  painful  beyond
endurance  to  repress.  She  insisted  on  getting  up,  and  be-
ing allowed  to  play  and  sing ;  but  that  being  for  many  rea-
sons unadvisable,  she  then  begged  to  have  a  friend  sent  for
to  play  to  her,  as  the  only  means  of  relief  from  a  very
painful  state;  but  shortly  after  the  craving  of  the  faculty
became  so  intolerable,  that  she  got  hold  of  a  guitar,  lay
down  upon  a  sofa,  and  fairly  gave  way  to  the  torrent,  and,


TUNE.  445

with  a  volume,  clearness,  and  strength  of  voice,  and  a  fa-
cility of  execution,  which  would  have  astonished  any  one
who  had  seen  her  two  days  before,  she  sung  in  accompani-
ment till  her  musical  faculty  became  spent  and  exhausted.
During  this  time  the  pain  at  the  angles  of  the  forehead  was
still  felt,  and  was  attended  with  a  sense  of  fulness  and  un-
easiness all  over  the  coronal  and  anterior  parts  of  the  fore-
head. Regarding  all  these  phenomena  as  arising  from
over-excitement  chiefly  of  the  organs  of  Tune,  I  directed
the  continued  local  application  of  cold,  and  such  other
measures  as  tended  to  allay  the  increased  action,  and  soon
after  the  young  lady  regained  her  ordinary  state,  and  has
not  since  had  any  return  of  these  extraordinary  symp-
toms.

"  In  this  case,  the  order  in  which  the  phenomena  occur-
red, put  leading  queries  on  my  part,  or  exaggeration  or  de-
ception on  the  part  of  the  patient,  alike  out  of  the  question.
The  pain  in  the  organ  was  distinctly  and  repeatedly  com-
plained of  for  many  hours  (at  least  36)  before  the  first
night  of  dreaming,  and  for  no  less  than  three  days  before
the  irresistible  waking  inspiration  was  felt.  When  my  at-
tention was  first  drawn  to  the  existence  of  the  pain,  I  ima-
gined it  to  arise  from  an  affection  of  the  membranes  cover-
ing that  part  of  the  brain,  and  had  no  conception  that  it
was  to  terminate  in  any  such  musical  exhibition  as  after-
wards took  place ;  and,  in  fact,  although  the  young  lady
had  mentioned  her  previous  melodious  dreams,  my  surprise
was  quite  equal  to,  although,  thanks  to  Phrenology,  my
alarm  was  not  so  great  as,  that  of  her  relations,  when,  on
entering  the  house  on  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  the  25th,
I  heard  the  sound  of  the  guitar  mingling  with  the  full  and
harmonious  swell  of  her  own  voice,  such  as  it  might  shew
itself  when  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  health  and  vi-
gour."

Dr  Spurzheim  mentions,  that  the  heads  and  skulls  of
birds  which  sing,  and  of  those  which  do  not  sing,  and  the
heads  of  the  different  individuals  of  the  same  kind,  which


446


LANGUAGE.


hare  a  greater  or  less  disposition  to  sing,  present  a  conspi-
cuous difference  at  the  place  of  this  organ.  The  heads  of
males,  for  instance,  and  those  of  females  of  the  same  kind
of  singing  birds,  are  easily  distinguished  by  their  different
development.  The  organ  is  large  in  Haydn,  Macvicar  ;
small  in  Sloane,  and  remarkably  deficient  in  Ann  Orme-
rod.  This  girl  was  admitted,  at  twelve  years  of  age,  into
the  asylum  for  the  blind  at  Liverpool,  and  during,  two
years,  means  were  unsparingly  employed  to  cultivate  and
improve  any  musical  talent  which  she  might  possess,  but
"  with  such  decided  want  of  success,  that  her  teachers,  Mr
Handford  and  Mr  Platt,  men  of  unceasing  perseverance,
and  constantly  accustomed  to  the  most  stubborn  perverae-
ness,  were  at  last  under  the  necessity  of  abandoning  the
attempt  altogether." — Phren.  Journ.  vol.  ii.  p.  642.  The
figure  represents  her  head,  the  organ  of  Tune  being  thrown
into  the  outline  on  her  left  side,  and  the  head  of  Handel,
the  organ  being  brought  into  line  on  his  right  side. — Esta-
blished.

Handel.  Auk  Or  me  rod.


Tune  large.


Tune  very  nnalt.


33.    LANGUAGE.

.   The  history  of  the  discovery  of  this  organ  has  already
been  given  in  the  introduction,  page  48.

A  large  development  of  this  organ  is  indicated  by  the
prominence  and  depression  of  the  eyes,  this  appearance
being  produced  by  convolutions  of  the  brain,  situated  in
the  posterior  and  transverse  part  of  the  upper  orbitary
plate,  pressing  the  latter,  and  with  it  the  eyes,  more  or  less:
forward,  downward  or  outward,  according  to  the  size  of


LANGUAGE.  447

the  convolutions.  If  the  fibres  be  long,  they  push  the  eye
as  far  forward  as  the  eyebrows ;  if  they  are  only  thick,
they  push  them  toward  the  outer  angle  of  the  orbit,  and
downwards  *.  When  the  knowing  organs  are  very  large,
and  the  eyebrows  project,  the  eyes  may  appear  less  promi-
nent than  they  really  are.  The  projection  of  the  eyes  over
the  cheek-bone,  and  their  depression  downwards,  are  the
proper  signs  of  the  organs  being  large.

The  functions  of  this  organ  will  be  understood  by  a  short
elucidation.  The  different  faculties  being  active,  produce
desires,  emotions,  and  intellectual  conceptions.  The  mind
wishing  to  communicate  a  knowledge  of  these  to  other  in-
dividuals, can  accomplish  this  end  only  by  making  signs
expressive  of  their  existence.  These  signs  may  consist  of
the  peculiar  gestures,  looks,  and  cries,  that  naturally  ac-
company the  activity  of  the  several  faculties,  and  which
being  part  of  our  constitution,  are  universally  understood,
and  constitute  what  is  termed  natural  Language ;  for  ex-
ample, nature  has  formed  an  association  betwixt  the  exter-
nal appearance  of  misery,  and  the  faculty  of  Benevolence,
so  that,  on  the  presentation  of  the  appearance,  the  faculty
starts  into  activity,  and  generates  the  emotion  of  pity:
She  has  associated  the  faculty  of  Wit  with  external  objects,
so  that,  on  the  presentment  of  certain  circumstances,  laugh-
ter is  instantaneously  excited.  These  signs  require  only  to
be  presented,  and  they  are  understood  in  all  countries,  and
by  all  nations.

But  mankind  possess  the  power  of  inventing  and  esta-
blishing arbitrary  signs  to  express  their  feelings  and  con-
ceptions. For  example,  the  words  Love,  Compassion,  and
Justice,  are  mere  conventional  signs,  by  which  we  in  Bri-
tain agree  to  express  three  internal  feelings  or  sentiments  of
the  mind ;  and  there  is  no  natural  connexion  betwixt  the
signs  and  the  things  signified.  The  metaphysicians  might
attribute  this  power  to  Association ;  but  we  observe  it  to

*  The  organ  of  Form  produces  only  distance  between  the  eyes ;  without
Tendering  them  prominent,  or  pushing  them  downward*


448  LANGUAGE.

belong  to  the  faculty  of  Language.  Persons  possessing
this  faculty  strongly,  have  a  great  natural  power  of  invent-
ing arbitrary  signs,  and  of  learning  the  use  of  them,  when
invented  by  others*  But  this  faculty  gives  the  capacity  of
learning  the  signs  atone,  and  the  meaning  of  them  is  ac-
quired by  other  faculties :  If  a  horse,  for  instance,  is  pre-
sented to  the  mind,  the  faculty  of  Language  gives  the  de-
sire to  find  a  name  or  sign,  by  which  to  indicate  the  con-
ception of  it,  and  also  the  power  of  associating  the  appear-
ance of  the  object,  with  the  sound  or  name  when  invent-
ed. But  the  meaning  or  signification  which  the  word  will
embrace,  will  depend  on  the  perfection  of  other  faculties.
For  example,  the  faculty  of  Form  will  judge  of  the  form  of
the  horse ;  Size,  of  its  dimensions ;  Colouring,  of  its  colour.
Now,  a  blind  man,  by  aid  of  the  faculty  of  Language,  may
learn  to  connect  his  own  notions  of  a  horse  with  the  sound
of  the  name ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  his  conceptions  must
be  very  different  from  those  attached  to  it  by  a  person  who
sees;  for  the  blind  man  could  not  judge  of  its  colour  at
all,  and  not  very  correctly  of  its  form  and  size*  In  the
same  way,  any  one  having  the  faculty  of  Language,  may
learn  the  occasions  and  manner  in  which  the  word  justice
is  generally  used ;  but  how  imperfect  must  be  the  meaning
attached  to  it,  in  the  mind  of  a  person  like  David  Hag-
gart,  who  was  extremely  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Con-
scientiousness, compared  with  the  notion  attending  it  in
the  mind  of  a  person  in  whom  that  organ  is  extremely
large?

Every  metaphysical  author  complains  of  the  ambiguity  of
words,  and  shews  how  the  vagueness  of  their  signification
retards  the  progress  of  moral  and  intellectual  science ;  and
the  exposition  now  given  shews  whence  this  vagueness
arises.  Before  individuals  can  attach  precisely  the  same
conceptions  to  words  expressing  feelings  and  judgments  of
the  understanding,  they  require  to  possess  a  similar  combi-
nation of  faculties,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  feeling  and  judg-
ing alike ;  and  as  no  two  individuals  do  possess  exactly  si-


LANGUAGE.  449

milar  combination  of  faculties,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  feel-
ing and  judging  alike ;  and  as  no  two  individuals  do  pos-
sess exactly  similar  combinations,  there  will  be  shades  of
difference  in  the  meaning  attached  by  different  persons  to
such  terms,  in  spite  of  every  effort  to  define  them.  In  con-
sequence of  this  difference  in  faculties,  the  very  definition
itself  is  differently  apprehended.  In  mathematics  and  al-
gebra, the  things  indicated  by  the  signs  are  not  feelings,
which  vary  in  every  individual,  but  proportions  and  rela-
tions of  space  and  quantity,  which  have  a  fixed  and  ab-
stract existence,  and  which,  if  apprehended  at  all,  can  be
conceived  only  in  one  way.  Hence  the  precision  of  the
Language  of  these  sciences  compared  with  that  of  meta-
physics or  moral  philosophy.

If  these  principles  be  correct,  they  demonstrate  the  im-
possibility of  framing  a  philosophical  language,  applicable,
with  perfect  precision,  to  moral  disquisitions.  To  appre-
hend the  very  definitions  of  the  words,  we  must  be  able  to
experience  the  sentiments  which  they  are  intended  to  indi-
cate; and  many  persons  are  capable  of  doing  so  only  in  a
very  imperfect  degree.  In  attending  to  the  style  of  an  au-
thor, he  will  be  found  to  use  those  words  with  most  precision
and  felicity,  which  express  mental  feelings  or  operations
naturally  vigorous  in  himself.  Mr  Stewart,  for  example,
writes  with  great  beauty  and  correctness  in  narrative,  and
on  every  topic  connected  with  moral  sentiment;  but  his  style
becomes  loose  and  inaccurate  when  he  enters  upon  original
abstract  discussion,  requiring  the  activity  of  the  higher  in-
tellectual powers.  I  infer  from  this,  that,  in  him,  the
knowing  and  sentimental  organs  were  more  amply  developed
than  those  of  reflection.  Moore  uses  epithets  and  illustra-
tions, expressive  of  attachment,  with  great  frequency  and
inimitable  beauty;  and  we  may  conclude,  that,  in  him
Adhesiveness,  which  gives  such  feelings,  is  very  strong.
John  Belli ngh am,  on  the  other  hand,  in  his  voluminous
memorials,  petitions  and  letters,  was  continually  writing
about  justice  and  .injustice,    about  cruelty  and  oppres-

Ff


450  LANGUAGE.

sion,  exercised  towards  him ;  but  the  acts  which  he  speci-
fies are  discovered  by  every  well  constituted  mind,  not  at
all  to  possess  the  character  which  he  ascribes  to  them,  and
his  writings  on  these  points  are  replete  with  the  grossest
abuses  of  words.  This,  I  apprehend  to  arise  from  the
great  deficiency  of  Conscientiousness  which  is  discerni-
ble in  his  head.  In  professional  practice,  also,  every  law-
yer meets  with  individuals  who  pretend  to  be  ardently  de-
siring justice,  and  who  speak  incessantly  about  it,  but  who
evidently  do  not  perceive  at  all  what  it  is ;  the  selfish  faculties
in  their  case  so  far  predominating  over  Conscientiousness,
that  they  never  have  correct  notions  of  the  nature  of  jus-
tice. The  same  thing  happens  in  regard  to  religion.  Many
talk  about  it,  and  against  it,  without  in  the  least  comprehend-
ing the  object  of  their  vituperation.  In  like  manner  every
one  will  acknowledge  in  words  that  charity  is  a  duty ;  but,
on  inquiring  at  different  persons  what  constitutes  charity,
we  shall  find  their  notions  of  the  meaning  of  the  word,  and
of  the  duty  also,  to  vary  exceedingly,  according  to  their  de-
velopment of  Benevolence,  in  proportion  to  Acquisitiveness
and  Self-Esteem*.

The  power  of  associating,  by  means  of  the  faculty  of  Lan-

*  These  principles  enable  us  to  explain,  in  a  simple  manner,  the  source
and  nature  of  eloquence.  It  is  a  trite  observation,  that  every  passion  is
eloquent,  that  is  to  say,  any  propensity  or  sentiment  being  vividly  active,
excites  the  faculty  of  Language  to  give  it  utterance ;  and  as  the  mental
emotion  is  strongly  felt,  the  words  partake  of  the  force,  and  are  distin-
guished by  the  precision,  which  characterise  the  feeling.  Popular  eloquence
draws  largely  from  the  propensities  and  sentiments,  and  hence  in  many
distinguished  orators  we  do  not  discover  so  large  a  development  of  the  in-
tellectual organs,  as  those  would  expect  who  imagine  that  oratory  is  alto-
gether an  intellectual  product ;  but  in  them  an  ample  endowment  of  the
organs  of  the  propensities  and  centiments  will  be  discovered.  The  Phre-
nological Society  possesses  masks  of  Burke  and  Curb  an.  The  former
is  by  much  the  most  distinguished  for  intellect  in  his  printed  remains,  and
his  forehead  is  the  best  developed ;  but  the  impression  made  by  Curran
on  a  popular  assembly  was  perhaps  the  greater  of  the  two.  On  analyzing
Curran's  orations,  however,  no  higher  degree  of  reflecting  power  will  be
discovered  in  them  than  is  indicated  by  his  mask.


LANGUAGE.  451

guage,  conceptions  of  external  signs,  is  limited,  however,
in  one  respect    Any  indifferent  object  may  be  selected  and
used  as  the  arbitrary  sign  of  a  propensity,  feeling  or  con-
ception ;  but  if  the  object  stands  already  in  a  natural  rela-
tion to  any  faculty,  it  cannot,  except  with  great  difficulty,
be  made  the  arbitrary  sign  of  an  opposite  emotion.    For
example,  we  might,  by  a  mutual  understanding,  constitute
a  square  figure  the  artificial  sign  of  the  emotion  termed
rage*    After  the  agreement  was  understood,  that  figure
would  suggest  the  notion  of  rage,  just  as  well  as  the  let-
ters now  composing  that  word,  which  are  mere  marks,
placed  in  a  certain  order:    But,  if  we  were  whimsical
enough  to  make  the  outline  of  a  sweet  and  smiling  coun-
tenance, which  likewise  is  merely  a  species  of  form,  the
sign  of  this  emotion,  we  could  not,  except  with  great  diffi-
culty, learn  to  associate  the  idea  of  rage  with  that  figure,
for  it  is  already  the  natural  sign  of  emotions,  entirely  op-
posite ;  it  would  excite  Benevolence  directly,  more  forcibly
than  Destructiveness  indirectly,  through  the  medium  of
Language ;  it  would  call  up  ideas  of  joyfulness  and  inno-
cence, rather  than  of  anger  and  cruelty.   In  the  same  way,
we  might  associate  feelings  of  veneration,  pity,  affection  or
grief,  with  soft  and  slow  notes  of  music,  because  these
notes,  which  produce  emotions  of  a  specific  kind  them-
selves, may  become  arbitrary  signs  of  any  other  emotions
of  a  homogeneous  kind    But  it  would  be  difficult  to  form
an  association,  by  which  soft,   slow  and  delicate  tones,
would  become  the  artificial  signs  of  violent  rage,  jeal-
ousy and  fury;   because  the  natural  character  of  such
sounds  is  directly  opposite  to  the  character  of  such  feel-
ings-
Philosophers  have  written  voluminous  disquisitions  on
the  influence  of  words  on  thought ;  but  if  the  view,  now
presented,  be  correct,  feelings  and  conceptions  must,  in
every  instance,  precede  words ;  and  the  invention  of  a  term,
for  which  no  idea  exists,  instead  of  being  a  great  step  to-

Ff2


452  LANGUAGE.

wards  the  advancement  of  knowledge,  would  be  a  simple
absurdity.  It  is  true  that  the  language  of  any  nation  is  a
correct  index  of  its  attainments ;  but  this  happens,  because,
in  proportion  as  the  people  acquire  notions,  they  invent
words  to  express  them, '  and  hence  their  Language  is  com-
mensurate with  their  mental  states.

The  art  of  writing  greatly  facilitates  the  progress  of  know-
ledge ;  but  it  does  so  only  by  giving  precision  to  words  and
permanence  to  thought.  Written  words  are  to  thinking
what  cyphers  are  to  calculation ;  they  record  our  past  at-
tainments, and  enable  us  to  advance,  unincumbered,  in  the
path  of  discovery :  in  no  instance,  however,  can  they  possi-
bly precede  the  march  of  ideas.  The  new  nomenclature  of
chemistry  smooths  the  study  of  that  science ;  but  the  no-
menclature itself  was  the  result  of  correct  and  enlarged
ideas  of  the  nature  and  relations  of  chemical  substances,
and  could  not  possibly  have  been  formed  before  these  were
obtained.

Persons  who  have  a  great  endowment  of  the  organ  of
Language  abound  in  words.  In  ordinary  conversation
their  language  flows  like  a  copious  stream, — in  speech  they
pour  out  torrents.  When  this  organ  is  extremely  large,
and  those  of  reflection  small,  the  individual  is  prone  to  re-
peat, to  the  inconceivable  annoyance  of  the  hearer,  the
plainest  sentences  again  and  again,  as  if  the  matter  were  of
such  difficult  apprehension,  that  one  telling  was  not  suffi-
cient  to  convey  the  meaning.  This  practice  appears  to
originate  in  an  immoderate  power  and  activity  of  the  faculty
of  Language,  so  great,  that  delight  is  felt  in  mere  articula-
tion, independent  of  reflection.  The  same  combination
produces  a  verbose,  cumbersome,  and  inelegant  style  of
literary  composition.  Thomson's  Seasons  are  chargeable
with  a  redundancy  of  words,  and,  in  the  portraits  of  the
author,  the  organ  appears  very  large.  In  "  Dramas  of
the  Ancient  World,"  by  David  Lindsay,  we  meet  with  ex-
amples of  this  kind  of  writing.


LANGUAGE.  453

"  My  gracious  kinsman

What  good  occasion  now  hath  brought  thee  hither  ?

Noah—- Nothing  of  good,  for  good  is  flown  for  ever
Away  from  this  stained  world,  and  spotless  truth,
And  veeping  mercy,  veiling  their  bright  looks
With  their  spread  pinions,  have  forsaken  earth,
And  sought  a  refuge  at  the  sacred  foot
Of  the  Almighty's  throne.**

The  Deluge,  p.  16.

Another  example  occurs  in  the  following  passage,  ex-
tracted from  a  periodical  publication.

"  We  hope  it  will  prove  interesting  to  our  readers,  occa-
sionally to  take  a  popular  sketch  of  the  brilliant  success  at-
tending the  meritorious  activity  of  the  respectable  circle  of
scientific  chemists,  whose  pursuits,  if  judiciously  exhibited,
are  fitted  to  interest  every  mind  endowed  with  intellectual
curiosity."

When  the  organ  is  very  small,  there  is  a  want  of  com-
mand of  expression,  a  painful  repetition  of  the  same  words,
and  a  consequent  poverty  of  style,  both  in  writing  and
speaking.  The  style  of  that  author  is  generally  most  agree-
able, in  whom  the  organs  of  Language  and  of  Reflection  bear
a  just  proportion  to  each  other.  If  the  intellectual  powers
be  very  acute  and  rapid,  and  Language  not  in  equal  propor-
tion, a  stammer  in  speech  is  frequently  the  consequence.  In-
dividuality and  Comparison  greatly  assist  this  faculty,  when
applied  to  the  acquisition  of  foreign  languages  and  gram-
mar. I  have  observed  that  boys  who  are  duxes  in  classes
for  languages  generally  have  Individuality,  Eventuality,
and  Comparison  large ;  and  that  this  endowment,  with  mo-
derate Language,  accomplishes  more,  in  the  way  of  scholar-
ship, than  a  large  development  of  the  latter  organ,  with  a
small  endowment  of  the  former.  Such  individuals  have  a
great  facility  in  recollecting  rules,  as  matters  of  fact  and
detail,  in  tracing  etymologies,  and  in  discriminating  shades
of  meaning;  and  the  combination  alluded  to  gives  them
great  readiness  in  using  their  knowledge,  whatever  the  ex-
tent of  it  may  be.


454  LANGUAGE.

The  doctrine  before  laid  down,  that  the  signification  of
words  is  learned  by  other  faculties,  removes  an  apparent
difficulty  that  sometimes  presents  itself*  A  person  with  a
moderate  organ  of  Language  will  sometimes  learn  songs,
poetry,  or  particular  speeches  by  heart,  with  considerable
facility  and  pleasure ;  but  in  all  such  cases,  the  passages
so  committed  to  memory  will  be  found  highly  to  interest
his  other  powers,  such  as  Ideality,  Causality,  Tune,  Vene-
ration,  Combativeness,  Adhesiveness;  tod  the  study  and
recollection  of  vocables  only  is  to  him  difficult  and  dis-
agreeable. To  a  person,  on  the  other  hand,  in  whom  the
organ  is  decidedly  large,  mere  words  are  interesting,  and
he  can  learn  them  without  caring  much  about  their  mean-
ing. Hence,  also,  a  person  with  a  moderate  organ  of  Lan-
guage, and  good  reflecting  organs,  may,  by  perseverance,
learn  languages,  and  attain  to  proficiency  as  a  scholar ;  but
he  will  not  display  copiousness,  fluency,  and  richness  of
expression  in  his  style,  either  in  his  own  or  in  a  foreign
tongue.

It  is  difficult  to  determine  precisely,  on  what  powers  the
talent  for  learning  the  spirit  of  languages  depends.  The
fact  is  certain,  that  some  individuals  easily  learn  the  spirit
of  different  languages  without  having  a  great  memory  for
words ;  while  others  readily  acquire  words,  without  catch-
ing the  spirit  of  any  language.  Dr  Gall  admits  two  or-
gans of  language ;  one  he  names  "  Sens  des  mots,  sens  des
noms9  memoire  des  mots,  memoire  verbale;"  and  the  other
"  Sens  du  langage  de  parole  ;  talent  de  la  phUologie  ;"  and
attributes  to  the  latter  the  talent  of  philology,  and  acquiring
the  spirit  of  languages.  The  former  organ  he  describes  as
lying  on  the  posterior  half  of  the  super-orbitar  plate,  and,
when  large,  it  pushes  the  eyes  outwards ;  it  gives  a  talent
for  learning  and  recollecting  words ;  and  persons  possess-
ing it  large  recite  long  passages  by  heart,  after  reading
them  once  or  twice.  The  latter  organ,  says  he,  is  placed
on  the  middle  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  super-orbitar  plate,
and  the  eye-ball,  in  consequence,  not  only  projects,  but  is


LANGUAGE.  455

depressed ;  the  depression  producing  the  appearance  of  a
bag,  or  folding  in  the  lower  eye-lid.  Persons  possessing
this  form  of  eyes,  he  adds,  have  not  only  an  excellent  me-
mory of  words,  but  a  particular  talent  for  the  study  of  lan-
guages, for  criticism,  and,  in  general,  for  all  that  has  refe-
rence to  literature  *.  Dr  Gall  states,  at  the  same  time,
that  the  determination  of  the  size  of  the  organ  of  words  is
Attended  with  much  difficulty;  as,  from  its  situation,  it
may  extend  itself  to  the  sides,  as  well  as  forwards,  increas-
ing, in  the  former  case,  the  general  breadth  of  the  head
across  the  temples,  or  even  between  the  eyes ;  so  that  much
remains  to  be  ascertained  in  regard  to  it

Dr  Spubzheim,  on  the  other  hand,  admits  only  one  or-
gan of  Language,  lying  transversely  on  the  posterior  por-
tion of  the  super-orbitary  plates ;  and  holds,  that  it  takes
cognizance  both  of  words  and  the  spirit  of  languages.  "  It
seems  to  me,"  says  he,  "  that  the  organ  of  words  must  have
its  laws  as  well  as  those  of  Colour,  Melody,  or  any  other
faculty.  Now,  the  law  of  words  constitutes  the  spirit  of
language.  I  am  satisfied,"  he  continues,  "  that  this  opi-
nion is  correct ;  because  the  spirit  of  every  language  is  the
same,  just  as  the  essence  of  all  kinds  of  music  is  alike ;
that  is,  the  laws  or  principles  of  music  and  of  language
rule  universally,  and  are  constant;  they  are  only  modi-
fied in  different  nations,  by  modifications  in  their  organs,
and  dissimilar  combinations  of  these  in  each  f."

I  am  disposed  to  coincide  with  Dr  SpurzheimJui  this
view ;  and,  perhaps,  by  analyzing  the  source  whence  the
structure  of  Language  proceeds,  we  may  obtain  some  light
on  the  origin  of  a  taste  for  the  spirit  of  languages,  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  power  of  learning  and  recollecting
words.

Language,  then,  expresses  merely  the  feelings  and  con-
ceptions formed  by  the  various  primitive  faculties,  acting
separately,  or  in  combination.     Now,  let  us  imagine  the

•  Sur  lea  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  tome  v.  p.  18.  and  30.
t  Phrenology,  p.  288.


456  LANGUAGE.

cerebral  development  of  a  nation  to  be  distinguished  by
large  organs  of  the  Propensities,  Sentiments,  and  Knowing
Faculties,  small  Reflecting  organs,  and  little  Secretiveness.
Their  language  being  the  spontaneous  growth  of  such  a
combination,  would  naturally  abound  in  words  expressive
of  simple  feelings,  conceptions  of  individual  objects,  and
their  qualities ;  while  it  would  be  poor  in  terms  of  abstract
relation,  conceived  by  the  faculties  of  reflection.  For  the
same  reason,  the  transitions  of  such  a  language  would  be
like  those  in  Mrs  Quickly' 8  speech,  rapid,  and  in  the  order
of  the  casual  occurrence  of  the  circumstances  which  ex-
cited the  ideas;  Secretiveness  being  small,  there  would
naturally  be  little  involution  in  the  arrangement  of  the
words.  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  another  nation
Secretiveness,  and  the  Reflecting  organs,  predominated,
the  genius  of  their  Language  would  differ  widely  from  that
of  the  people  first  described.  Their  expressions  for  dis-
criminating individual  conceptions  would  be  fewer,  while
their  stock  of  words  and  phrases,  designative  of  abstract
relation,  would  be  more  extensive,  and  the  general  struc-
ture of  their  sentences  would  be  more  involved.  Now,  sup-
pose two  individuals,  with  equal  organs  of  Language,  and
consequently  equal  power  of  learning  words,  as  mere  signs,
to  possess,  the  one  a  head  like  the  former,  and  the  other  a
head  like  the  latter  people,  and  that  they  attempted  to  learn
these  different  languages,  it  appears  probable,  that  the  one
with  the  first  mentioned  development  would  find  the  ge-
nius of  the  first  language  the  most  easy  and  natural  to
him;  he  would  acquire  its  forms  of  collocation,  its  niceties
of  designation,  and  all  its  prettinesses,  with  facility  and  de-
light, because  they  would  coincide  with  the  modes  of  feel-
ing and  thinking  of  his  own  mind.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
his  attention  were  directed  to  the  language  of  the  second
people,  he  would  meet  with  greater  difficulties.  Although
he  might  master  the  words,  he  would  not  find  the  idioms
natural ;  and  the  forms  of  expression  depending  on  the  re-
flecting powers,  and  likewise  the  involution  introduced  by


LANGUAGE.  457

Secretiveness,  would  appear  to  him  extremely  intricate  and
unintelligible ;  he  would  be  obliged  to  learn  them  by  rule,
through  defect  of  instinctive  tact  in  apprehending  them ;
and  rules  alone  never  produce  a  really  excellent  linguist.
The  second  language,  on  the  other  hand,  would  come  quite
naturally  to  the  other  individual  possessing  a  head  like  that
of  the  people  who  invented  it

If  these  views  be  correct,  the  talent  for  learning  the  ge-
nius or  spirit  of  different  languages  will  depend  upon  the
development  of  the  organ  of  words,  taken  in  conjunction
with  the  power  of  the  individual  to  enter  into  the  feelings,
and  form  the  precise  kinds  of  intellectual  combinations,  of
different  nations ;  or,  in  short,  upon  the  capacity  to  go  out
of  himself,  and  to  enter  into  the  mental  states  of  others ;
and  this  is  conferred  chiefly  by  Secretiveness,  Imitation,
Individuality  and  Eventuality,  aided  of  course  by  the  other
primitive  faculties.  This  will  be  best  understood  by  an
example.  If  two  individuals  have  an  equal  development
of  all  the  organs  except  the  four  now  mentioned,  which
the  one  possesses  in  a  high  degree,  and  the  other  only  to  a
very  limited  extent,  the  former  will  have  a  power  of  enter-
ing into  the  feelings  and  reflections  of  others,  which  the
latter  would  want ;  and  this  power,  according  to  the  view
now  presented,  would  render  him  more  apt  in  acquiring  the
spirit  of  different  languages.  This,  however,  is  merely  a
theory,  thrown  out  for  the  consideration  of  the  reader,  but
it  has  been  suggested  by  facts.  I  know  an  individual,  who
has  an  excellent  development  of  many  of  the  organs,  but  is
a  very  decided  character,  and  possesses  little  of  the  talent
of  entering  into,  or  accommodating  himself  to  the  feelings
of  others,  and  he  experienced  an  inconceivable  difficulty  in
acquiring  the  simplest  French  idioms.  I  know  another
young  gentleman  who  was  in  the  same  situation  in  regard
to  Latin,  and  who  has  little  versatility.  In  them,  the  or-
gan of  Language  is  rather  deficient ;  but  then  I  have  met
with  several  persons  in  whom  the  organ  was  equally  defi-
cient, and  who  possessed  the  power  of  learning  foreign


458  LANGUAGE.

idioms;  and  in  them,  on  the  other  hand,  the  power  of
amalgamation  with  the  mental  states  of  others,  was  decided-
ly greater,  and  their  organs  of  Secretiveness,  Imitation,  In-
dividuality and  Eventuality,  were  larger.

Although  the  theory  of  the  talent  for  philology  is  in-
volved in  considerable  obscurity,  it  is  quite  certain  that  the
ready  command  of  words  in  speech  or  writing  is  in  propor-
tion to  the  development  of  the  organ  situated  above  the
super-orbitar  plate,  and  that  a  fluent  orator  or  author  is  ne-
ver found  with  a  deficiency  of  it.

Numerous  cases  are  on  record  of  the  power  of  using
words  having  been  impaired  by  disease,  when  the  ability
to  articulate,  and  the  powers  of  perception  and  judgment,
remained  entire.  In  the  Phrenological  Transactions,  Mr
Hood  of  Kilmarnock  has  communicated  a  very  interesting
instance  of  this  kind  which  fell  under  his  own  notice  as
medical  attendant.  The  patient,  a  sober  and  regular  man
of  65  years  of  age,  possessed  of  the  ordinary  knowledge  of
written  and  spoken  language,  on  the  evening  of  2d  Sep-
tember 1822,  suddenly  began  to  speak  incoherently,  and
became  quite  unintelligible  to  all  those  who  were  about
him.  "  It  was  discovered  that  he  had  forgotten  the  name  qf
every  object  in  nature.  His  recollection  of  things  seemed  to
be  unimpaired,  but  the  names  by  which  men  and  things  are
known,  were  entirely  obliterated  from  his  mind,  or  rather
he  had  lost  the  faculty  by  which  they  are  called  up  at  the
control  of  the  will.  He  was  by  no  means  inattentive,
however,  to  what  was  going  on ;  and  he  recognised  friends
and  acquaintances  perhaps  as  quickly  as  on  any  former  oc-
casion ;  but  their  names,  or  even  his  own,  or  his  wife's
name,  or  the  names  of  any  of  his  domestics,  appeared  to
have  no  place  in  his  recollection.

"  On  the  morning  of  the  4th  September,"  says  Mr
Hood,  '<  much  against  the  wishes  of  his  family,  he  put  on
his  clothes,  and  went  out  to  the  workshop;  and,  when  I
made  my  visit,  he  gave  me  to  understand,  by  a  variety  of
signs,  that  he  was  perfectly  well  in  every  respect,  with  the


LANGUAGE.  459

exception  of  some  slight  uneasiness  referrible  to  the  eyes
and  eyebrows.  I  prevailed  on  him,  with  some  difficulty,
to  submit  to  the  reapplication  of  leeches,  and  to  allow  a
blister  to  be  placed  over  the  left  temple.  He  was  now  so
well  in  bodily  health  that  he  would  not  be  confined  to  the
house ;  and  his  judgment,  in  so  far  as  I  could  form  an  esti-
mate of  it,  was  unimpaired ;  but  his  memory  for  words  was
so  much  a  blank,  that  the  monosyllables  of  affirmation  and
negation  seemed  to  be  the  only  two  words  in  the  language,
the  use  and  signification  of  which  he  never  entirely  forgot.
He  comprehended  distinctly  every  word  which  was  spoken
or  addressed  to  him ;  and,  though  he  had  ideas  adequate  to
form  a  full  reply,  the  words  by  which  these  ideas  are  ex-
pressed seemed  to  have  been  entirely  obliterated  from  his
mind*  By  way  of  experiment,  I  would  sometimes  mention
to  him  the  name  of  a  person  or  thing.  His  own  name,  for
example,  or  the  name  of  some  one  of  his  domestics, — when
he  would  have  repeated  it  after  me  distinctly,  once  or
twice ;  but,  generally,  before  he  could  do  so  a  third  time,
the  word  was  gone  from  him  as  completely  as  if  he  had  ne-
ver heard  it  pronounced.  When  any  person  read  to  him
from  a  book,  he  had  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  the  mean-
ing of  the  passage,  but  he  could  not  himself  then  read ;  and
the  reason  seemed  to  be,  that  he  had  forgotten  the  elements
of  written  language,  viz.  the  names  of  the  letters  of  the  al-
phabet. In  the  course  of  a  short  time,  he  became  very  ex-
pert in  the  use  of  signs ;  and  his  convalescence  was  marked
by  his  imperceptibly  acquiring  some  general  terms,  which
were  with  him  at  first  of  very  extensive  and  varied  ap-
plication. In  the  progress  of  his  recovery,  time  and  space
came  both  under  the  general  appellation  of  time.  All  fu-
ture events  and  objects  before  him  were,  as  he  expressed  it,
"  next  time  ;"  but  past  events  and  objects  behind  him  were
designated  "  last  time"  One  day  being  asked  his  age,  he
made  me  to  understand  that  he  could  not  tell ;  but,  point-
ing to  his  wife,  uttered  the  words  "  many  times"  repeated-
ly, as  much  as  to  say  that  he  had  often  told  her  his  age.


460  LANGUAGE.

When  she  said  he  was  sixty,  he  answered  in  the  affirma-
tive, and  inquired  what  "  time"  it  was;  but  as  I  did  not.
comprehend  his  meaning  distinctly,  I  mentioned  to  him  the
hour  of  the  day,  when  he  soon  convinced  me  that  I  had
not  given  him  the  proper  answer.  I  then  named  the  day
of  the  week,  which  was  also  unsatisfactory ;  but,  upon  men-
tioning the  month,  and  day  of  the  month,  he  immediately
signified,  that  this  was  what  he  wanted  to  know,  in  order
to  answer  my  question  respecting  his  age.  Having  suc-
ceeded in  getting  the  day  of  the  month,  he  then  pointed
out  the  "  time"  or  day  of  the  month  on  which  he  was
born,  and  thereby  gave  me  to  understand  that  he  was  six*
ty  years  of  age,  and  five  days  or  "  times"  as  he  expressed
it."

In  the  month  of  December  1822,  his  convalescepce  was
so  complete,  that  he  could  support  conversation  without
much  difficulty.  The  headachs,  with  which  he  had  been
so  long  affected,  recurred  occasionally ;  but  in  other  re-
spects he  enjoyed,  generally,  tolerably  good  health.  On
10th  January  1825,  he  suddenly  became  paralytic  pn  the
left  side.  On  17th  August  he  had  an  attack  of  apoplexy,
and  on  21st  he  expired.  In  the  Phrenological  Journal,
vol.  iii.  p.  28,  Mr  Hood  has  reported  the  dissection  of  his
brain.  In  the  left  hemisphere,  lesion  of  the  parts  was  found,
which  terminated  "  at  half  an  inch  from  the  surface  of  the
brain,  where  it  rests  over  the  middle  of  the  super-orbitar
plate."  Two  small  depressions  or  cysts  were  found  in  the
substance  of  the  brain,  "  and  the  cavity,  considered  as  a
whole,  expanded  from  the  anterior  part  of  the  brain  till  it
opened  into  the  ventricle  in  the  form  of  a  trumpet."  The
right  hemisphere  did  not  present  any  remarkable  appear-
ance."

Dr  Spurzheim  mentions  having  seen,  at  Inverness,  a
case  closely  resembling  the  foregoing ;  and  also  one  of  the
same  nature  at  Paris.  Dr  Gall  also  cites  the  case  of  a
notary  recorded  by  Pinel,  who,  after  an  attack  of  apo-
plexy,  had  forgot  his  own  name,  and  that  of  his  wife,


LANGUAGE.  461

children  and  friends,  although  his  tongue  preserved  all  its
mobility*  He  could  no  longer  read  or  write,  but  never-
theless remembered  objects  which  had  formerly  made  an
impression  on  his  senses,  and  which  related  to  his  profes-
sion. He  frequently  pointed  out  with  his  finger  the  files
which  contained  documents  that  could  not  be  found,  and
indicated,  by  other  signs,  that  he  preserved  the  former
train  of  his  ideas  entire  *.  -  Dr  Gall  mentions  also  the
case  of  a  soldier  sent  to  him  by  Baron  Larrey,  whom  he
found  to  be  very  nearly  in  the  same  condition  as  the  no-
tary mentioned  by  Pinel.  "  It  was  not  his  tongue,"  says
he,  "  which  was  the  source  of  his  embarrassment,"  for  he
was  able  to  move  it  with  great  agility,  and  to  pronounce
even  a  great  number  of  isolated  words.  It  was  not  his
memory  either  which  was  in  fault,  for  he  shewed  evident
dissatisfaction  with  himself  upon  many  subjects  which  he
wished  to  mention. .  The  only  faculty  in  him  which  was
impaired,  was  that  of  speech.  This  soldier,  like  the  pa-
tient of  M.  Pinel,  is  no  longer  capable  of  reading  or  writ-

ing+'

Some  individuals  in   whom   Language  is   large,  state

as  an  objection  that  they  have  a  bad  memory  of  names ;
but  they  will  be  found  in  general  to  have  a  deficient
memory  of  tho  objects  which  the  names  indicate ;  for
example,  if  they  cannot  recollect  names  of  persons,  they
will  have  deficient  Form  and  Individuality ;  and  if  they
cannot  recollect  names  of  tunes,  they  will  be  deficient  in
Tune.  The  defect  lies  in  the  faculty  which  apprehends
and  recollects  the  primitive  idea,  for  which  Language  re-
collects the  name;  and  it  is  quite  conceivable,  that  al-
though Language  may  be  powerful,  yet  it  may  not  furnish
names,  as  mere  words,  when  the  thing  signified  is  not  pre-
sent in  the  mind.

.  The  lower  animals  appear  to  have  this  organ  in  some  de-
gree ;  for  they  learn  the  meaning  of  arbitrary  signs  in  so

*  Pikel  sur  l'Alilnation  mentale,  2de  Edition,  p.  105.
f  Physiologie  du  Cerveau,  vol.  iv.  p.  84.


462  LANGUAGE.

far  as  they  possess  the  feelings  and  conceptions  which  they
express.

This  faculty  is  by  far  too  extensively  cultivated  in  ordi-
nary education.  The  notion  seems  generally  to  prevail,
that  knowledge  of  words  necessarily  implies  comprehension
of  the  ideas  which  they  are  intended  to  signify ;  but  this  is
a  great  mistake.  A  good  education  must  embrace  the  cul-
tivation of  all  the  faculties,  by  exercising  each  directly  on
its  own  objects,  and  regulating  its  manifestations.  The
mere  storing  the  mind  with  words  never  can  accomplish
these  ends.

The  organ  is  large  in  the  companion  of  Gall,  Sir  J.  E.
Smith,  Humboldt,  Voltaire  ;  and  small  in  the  mask  of
Fraser. — Established.


GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS  ON  INDIVIDUALITY,  AND
THE  OTHER  KNOWING  OR  PERCEPTIVE  FACUL-
TIES.

No  objection  to  Phrenology  is  more  frequently  repeated
than  that  such  and  such  persons  have  retreating  foreheads,
and  yet  are  very  clever.  A  short  explanation  will  serve  to
remove  this  difficulty.  In  the  first  place,  a  forehead  may
appear  retreating,  not  because  the  reflecting  organs  are
greatly  deficient,  but  because  the  knowing  organs  are  very
prominently  developed,  so  that  if  the  latter  were  diminish-
ed in  size,  the  former  would  appear  relatively  larger :  But
every  one  must  perceive,  that,  in  such  an  event,  the  men-
tal powers  of  the  perceptive  class  would  be  proportionally
diminished,  and  the  talents  of  the  individual  lessened,
while  the  unskilful  observer  might  imagine  him  to  possess
a  better  development  of  forehead.  In  the  mask  of  Henri
Quatre,  for  example,  the  forehead  appears  to  slope ;  where-
as, if  the  knowing  organs  were  reduced  to  the  same  state
of  projection  beyond  the  cheek  bones,  as  in  the  mask  of
Voltaire,  the  forehead  would  appear  much  more  perpen-


ON  THE  KNOWING  OBOANS.        463

dicular.  This,  however,  would  clearly  detract  from  his
mental  power.  It  would  cause  the  reflecting  faculties  to
predominate  only,  by  diminishing  his  talent  in  the  depart-
ment of  observation.

But,  in  the  next  place,  suppose  that  a  head  does  retreat
exceedingly,  still  Individuality,  and  the  other  knowing  or-
gans, may  be  large ;  and  if  we  attend  for  a  moment  to  the
range  of  these  powers,  we  shall  perceive,  that  the  indivi-
dual may  be  deficient  in  Causality  and  Comparison,  and  yet
be  very  clever.  A  wide  range  of  sciences,  falling  under  the
scope  of  Individuality  and  Eventuality  chiefly,  has  already
been  pointed  out,  and  in  which  a  person  so  endowed  may
be  very  learned.  Farther,  the  details  of  history,  statistics,
geography,  and  trade,  all  belong  to  the  department  of
simple  knowledge ;  and  in  them  also  he  may  be  eminently
skilled ;  and,  finally,  in  the  daily  occurrences  of  life,  acute-
ness  of  observation^  and  the  power  of  treasuring  up  the
lessons  of  experience  which  he  will  possess,  are  important
elements  in  a  practical  judgment.  If,  then,  to  a  large  en-
dowment of  the  knowing  organs,  a  nervous  temperament
be  added,  the  individual  will  be  active  and  enterprising ;
if  Cautiousness  be  large,  he  will  be  prudent,  and  rarely
venture  beyond  the  scope  of  his  abilities;  if  Conscien-
tiousness be  large,  he  will  enjoy  that  delicacy  of  senti-
ment which  tells  instinctively  where  the  right  lies,  and
where  the  path  of  honour  terminates ;  and  with  these  en-
dowments there  is  no  wonder  that  he  may  act  creditably
and  cleverly  in  the  ordinary  walks  of.  life.  These  are  not
imaginary  suppositions ;  but  descriptions  drawn  from  ob-
servation of  numerous  individuals  in  active  life.  Such
persons,  however,  are  never  distinguished  for  profound  and
comprehensive  views  of  abstract  principles ;  which  belong
to  the  reflecting  faculties  not  yet  treated  of.

In  the  preceding  pages,  it  is  stated,  that  the  faculty  of
Form  perceives  the  forms  of  objects ; — Colouring,  their  co-
lour;— Size,  their  dimensions; — that  Individuality  takes
cognizance  of  existences,  and  Eventuality  of  events  in  gene-


464  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS

raL  The  question  naturally  occurs,  if  the  minor  knowing
powers  apprehend  all  the  separate  qualities  of  external  ob-
jects, what  purposes  do  Individuality  and  Eventuality  serve
in  the  mental  economy?  The  function  of  Individuality  is
to  form  a  single  intellectual  conception  out  of  the  different
items  of  information  communicated  by  the  other  knowing
faculties,  which  take  cognizance  of  the  properties  of  exter-
nal objects.  In  perceiving  a  tree,  the  object  apprehended
by  the  mind  is  not  colour,  form,  and  size,  as  separate  qua-
lities ;  but  a  single  thing  or  being  named  a  tree.  The  mind
having,  by  means  of  Individuality,  obtained  the  idea  of  a
tree,  as  an  individual  existence,  may  analyze  it,  and  resolve
it  into  its  constituent  parts  of  form,  colour,  magnitude ;
but  the  contemplation  of  it  in  this  manner  is  at  once  felt
to  be  widely  different  from  the  conception  attached  to  the
word  Tree  as  a  whole.  The  function  of  Individuality,
therefore,  is  to  embody  the  separate  elements  furnished  by
these  other  knowing  faculties  into  one,  and  to  produce  out
of  them  conceptions  of  aggregate  objects  as  a  whole ;  which
objects  are  afterwards  viewed  by  the  mind  as  individual
existences,  and  are  remembered  and  spoken  of  as  such,
without  thinking  of  their,  constituent  parts.  Children  early
use  and  understand  abstract  terms,  such  as  tree,  man,  ship ;
and  the  organ  of  Individuality  is  very  prominently  de-
veloped in  them.

Farther,  Form,  Colour  and  Size,  furnish  certain  elemen-
tary conceptions,  which  Individuality  unites  and  conceives
as  one,  such  as  Man.  The  faculty  of  Number  called  into  ac-
tion gives  the  idea  of  plurality ;  and  that  of  Order  furnishes
the  idea  of  gradations  of  rank  and  arrangement.  Now,  In-
dividuality, receiving  the  intimations  of  all  these  separate
faculties,  combines  them  again,  and  contemplates  the  com*
bination  as  an  individual  object,  and  this  is  an  army.  After
the  idea  of  an  army  is  thus  formed,  the  mind  drops  the  re-
collection of  the  constituent  parts,  and  afterwards  thinks  of
the  aggregate  only,  or  of  the  combined  conception  formed
by  Individuality ;  and  regards  it  as  a  single  object.


ON  THE  KNOWING  ORGANS.  465

Eventuality  is  surrounded  by  Individuality,  Locality,
Comparison  and  Causality,  and  forms  individual  concep-
tions from  their  combined  intimations.  A  storm  is  not  an
object  of  specific  existence,  nor  is  it  a  quality  of  any  exter-
nal object ;  yet  the  mind  clearly  apprehends  it.  It  is  the
result  of  physical  elements  in  violent  commotion,  and  all
the  faculties  last  enumerated,  together  with  Eventuality  it-
self, which  observes  motion,  combine  in  furnishing  indi-
vidual conceptions,  which  Eventuality  unites  into  one  idea,
designated  by  a  "  storm."  Revolution  is  another  ex-
ample :  A  revolution  does  not  exist  in  nature  as  a  substan-
live  thing,  but  arises  from  the  combined  action  of  nume-
rous moral  and  physical  causes,  the  result  of  which  Even*
tuality  conceives  as  one  event.

It  is  interesting  to  observe  the  Phrenological  System,
which  at  first  sight  appears  rude  and  unphilosophical,  har-
monizing thus  simply  and  beautifully  with  nature.  Had
it  been  constructed  by  imagination  or  reflection  alone,  it  is
more  than  probable  that  the  objection  of  the  minor  know-
ing faculties  rendering  Individuality  and  Eventuality  su-
perfluous, would  have  appeared  so  strong  and  insurmount-
able, as  to  have  insured  the  exclusion  of  one  or  other  as
unnecessary ;  and  yet,  until  both  were  discovered  and  ad-
mitted, the  formation  of  such  terms  as  those  we  have  consi-
dered was  altogether  inexplicable.


Genus  IV. — reflecting  faculties.

The  intellectual  faculties  which  we  have  considered,
give  a  knowledge  of  objects  and  their  qualities,  and  of
events ;  those  to  which  we  now  proceed,  produce  ideas  of
relation,  or  reflect.  They  minister  to  the  direction  and
gratification  of  all  the  other  powers ;  and  constitute  what  we
call  Reason  or  Reflection.


(     456     )


34.   COMPARISON.

Dr  Gall  often  conversed  on  philosophical  subjects  with
a  sfavant,  possessing  much  vivacity  of  mind.  Whenever  the
latter  was  put  to  difficulty  in  proving  rigorously  his  posi-
tions, he  had  always  recourse  to  a  comparison.  By  this
means  he  in  a  manner  painted  his  ideas,  and  his  opponents
were  defeated  and  carried  along  with  him ;  effects  which  he
could  never  produce  by  simple  argument.  As  soon  as  Dr
Gall  perceived  that,  in  him,  this  was  a  characteristic  trait
of  mind,  he  examined  his  head,  and  found  an  eminence  of
the  form  of  a  reversed  pyramid  in  the  upper  and  middle
portion  of  the  frontal  bone.  He  confirmed  the  observation
by  many  subsequent  instances.  He  names  it  u  perspica-
city, sagacity,  esprit  de  camparaison."

The  faculty  gives  the  power  of  perceiving  resemblances
and  analogies.  Tune  may  compare  different  notes;  Colour
contrast  different  shades;  but  Comparison  may  compare  a
Tint  and  a  Note,  a  Form  and  a  Colour,  which  the  other
faculties  by  themselves  could  not  accomplish.

Comparison  thus  takes  the  widest  range  of  nature  with-
in its  sphere :  "  It  compares,9'  says  Mr  Scott,  "  things  of
the  most  opposite  kinds,  and  draws  analogies,  and  perceives
resemblances  between  them,  often  the  most  unexpected.
It  compares  a  light  seen  afar  in  a  dark  night,  to  a  good
deed  shining  in  a  naughty  world ;  or  it  compares  the  king-
dom of  Heaven  to  a  grain  of  mustard-seed.  It  discerns  re-
semblances between  things  the  most  distant  and  the  most
opposite.  It  finds  analogies  between  the  qualities  of  matter
and  mind ;"  and  from  these  comparisons  and  analogies,  a
great  part  of  our  language,  expressive  of  the  qualities  of
mind,  is  drawn ;  "  a  great  part  of  it  being  almost  metapho-
rical, and  applied  originally  in  its  literal  sense  to  designate
qualities  of  matter."  For  this  reason,  the  language  of  every
nation  proves  whether  this  organ  is  much  or  little  developed


COMPARISON.  467

in  the  greatest  number  of  its  individuals.  If  they  have  this
faculty  in  a  high  degree,  their  language  is  replete  with
figure.  Dr  Murray  Patterson  mentions  that  the  Hin-
dostanee  language  abounds  in  figures,  and  that  Comparison
is  larger  than  Causality  in  the  heads  of  the  Hindoos  in
general.  It  is  the  origin  of  proverbs,  which  in  general  con-
vey instruction  under  figurative  expressions.

This  faculty  attaches  us  to  comparison,  without  deter-
mining its  kinds ;  for  every  one  must  choose  his  analogies
from  his  knowledge,  or  from  the  sphere  of  activity  of  his
other  faculties.  He  who  has  the  faculty  of  Locality  in  a
high  degree,  derives  thence  his  examples ;  while  another
in  whom  Form  predominates,  will  illustrate  from  it.  Dr
Chalmers  draws  his  illustrations  from  mechanics  and  astro-
nomy ;  and  the  organs  which  take  cognizance  of  these  are
large  in  his  mask.

It  was  formerly  supposed  that  this  faculty  takes  cog*
nizance  only  of  resemblances,  and  that  another  discrimi-
nates differences;  but,  in  treating  of  the  faculty  of  Wit,
p.  346,  I  have  stated  that  perception  of  resemblance  is  the
result  of  a  lower,  and  discrimination  of  differences  of  a
higher,  degree  of  power  in  every  intellectual  faculty.

This  faculty  gives  a  tendency  which  is  frequently  called
Reasoning,  but  which  is  very  different  from  the  correct  and
severe  inductions  of  a  sound  logic ;  namely,  it  endeavours
to  prove  that  one  thing  is  of  such  and  such  a  nature,  be-
cause it  resembles  another  which  is  so  and  so ;  in  short,  it
reasons  by  analogy,  and  is  prone  to  convert  an  illustration
into  an  argument.  The  late  Mr  Logan,  the  minister  of
Leith,  is  an  example  of  this  kind  of  intellect.  He  is  al-
ways establishing  a  proposition,  and,  to  those  who  do  not
analyze  profoundly,  appears  to  be  an  argumentative  preach-
er ;  but  his  argument  is  not  induction,  it  is  a  mere  state-
ment of  analogies,  closed  by  an  inference  that  the  case  in
point  must  be  as  he  views  it,  otherwise  it  would  be  an  ex-
ception to  the  ordinary  arrangements  of  nature.  The  ten-
dency of  this  faculty,  when  feeble,  is  to  perceive  only  re-

Gg8


468  COMPARISON.

semblances,  and  not  the  differences  of  things ;  and,  as  a
difference  in  one  point  out  of  a  hundred  frequently  de-
stroys the  whole  force  of  the  analogy,  no  reasoning  is  so
often  false  and  superficial  as  that  of  persons  in  whom  Com-
parison is  the  leading  intellectual  organ,  but  in  whom
nevertheless  it  is  not  large.  The  late  Mr  Playfair  may
be  cited  as  an  example  in  opposition  to  these.  In  him
Causality  was  as  large  as  Comparison,  and  his  comparisons
are  merely  illustrations.  His  argument,  in  general,  stands
in  the  relation  of  necessary  consequence,  and  his  conclu-
sion is  in  the  form  of  a  direct  deduction  from  his  premises.
This  faculty  is  more  rarely  deficient  than  any  of  the  other
intellectual  powers,  and  the  Scripture  is  addressed  to  it  in
an  eminent  degree,  being  replete  with  analogies  and  com-
parisons.

This  faculty,  from  giving  readiness  in  perceiving  analo-
gies and  resemblances,  confers  great  instantaneous  acuto-
ness.  The  organ  is  largely  developed  in  a  neighbouring
nation ;  and  it  is  correctly  observed  by  a  late  writer,  that
"  ingenuity  in  discovering  unexpected  glimpses  and  superfi-
cial coincidences  in  the  ordinary  relations  of  life,  the  French
possess  in  an  eminent  degree  *."  In  schools,  the  best  scho-
lars generally  have  much  Language  and  Comparison.  The
faculty  is  of  essential  service  to  orators  and  popular  preach-
ers. It  and  Eventuality  are  the  largest  organs  in  the  fore-
head of  the  late  Right  Honourable  William  Pitt.  It  is
large  also  in  the  busts  of  Curran,  Chalmers,  Burke,  and
Jeffrey.  In  Mr  T.  Moore  it  is  very  large,  and  in  the
Westminster  Review,  No.  8,  it  was  remarked  that  there  are
two  thousand  five  hundred  similies  in  his  Life  of  Sheri-
dan, besides  metaphors  and  allegorical  expressions.  Dr
Gall  correctly  observes,  that  close  reasoning  and  rigid  in-
duction, is  always  disagreeable  to  a  popular  audience,  be-
cause their  faculties  are  not  cultivated  or  exercised  to  fol-
low abstract  conceptions.      The  great  charm  of  popular

•  Edinburgh  Review,  Nov.  1820,  p.  389.


COMPARISON.  469

speakers,  therefore,  consists  in  perspicuity  of  statement,
and  copiousness  of  illustration.

From  giving  power  of  illustration  and  command  of  figures,
this  faculty  is  of  great  importance  to  the  poet,  and  it  aids
Wit  also,  by  suggesting  analogies.  By  common  observers,
indeed,  the  metaphors,  amplifications,  allegories,  and  ana-
logies, which  Comparison  supplies,  are  frequently  mistaken
for  the  products  of  Ideality,  although  they  are  very  dif-
ferent

Ideality  being  a  sentiment,  when  greatly  excited,  infuses
passion  and  enthusiasm  into  the  mind,  and  prompts  it  to
soar  after  the  splendid,  the  beautiful,  and  the  sublime,  as
objects  congenial  to  its  constitution  *.  Comparison,  on  the
other  hand,  being  an  intellectual  power,  produces  no  pas-
sion, no  intense  feeling  or  enthusiasm ;  it  coolly  and  calmly
plays  off  its  sparkling  fire-works,  and  takes  its  direction
from  the  other  powers  with  which  it  is  combined.  If  unit-
ed with  great  Individuality  and  Causality  in  any  individual,
the  comparisons  employed  will  be  copious,  ingenious,  and
appropriate ;  but  if  Ideality  is  not  large,  they  will  not  be
impassioned,  elevated  and  glowing.  Add  to  Comparison,
again,  a  large  Ideality,  as  in  Dr  Chalmers,  and  its  similies
will  now  twinkle  in  delicate  loveliness  like  a  star,  now
blaze  in  meridian  splendour  like  the  sun,  while  intense
feeling  and  lofty  enthusiasm  will  give  strength  and  majesty
to  all  its  conceptions.

It  is  large  in  Raphael,  Roscoe,  Edwards,  Henri
Qcjatre,  Mr  Hume,  Hindoos ;  deficient  in  Charibs.

Hitherto  the  function  of  this  organ  has  been  considered
as  limited  to  a  perception  of  general  resemblance  and  dif-

•  It  is  under  the  influence  of  Ideality,  that
"  The  poet's  eye,  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling,
Doth  glance  from  Heaven  to  Earth,  from  Eaith  to  Heaven  ;
And  as  imagination  bodies  forth,
The  forms  of  things  unknown,  the  poet's  pen
Turns  them  to  shapes,  and  gives  to  airy  nothing
A  local  habitation  and  a  name  '*


470  COMPARISON.

ference  between  objects  compared;  but  a  new  view  has
been  suggested  by  my  ingenious  friend  Mr  Hewett  Wat-
son. He  conceives  that  its  simple  function  probably  is  "  a
perception  of  conditions  ;"  and  he  proposes  the  term  "  Con*
ditionality"  as  the  name.  "  It  is  admitted,"  says  he,  "  that
the  faculty  of  Form  compares  forms,  Tune  compares  notes,
and  Colouring  compares  colours*  In  these  faculties,  Com-
parison is  a  mode  of  activity  only;  and  it  is  contrary  to  all
analogy  to  assign  comparison  to  another  organ  as  its  pri-
mitive function.  The  organ  XXXIV,  therefore,  will  pro-
bably originate  some  specific  perceptions  distinct  in  kind
from  those  of  any  other  organ ;  and  its  comparisons  will  -
be  made  between  its  own  perceptions  only ;  as  is  the  case
with  every  other  intellectual  faculty."  A  few  illustrations
will  render  these  ideas  more  clear.

When  we  utter  the  word  "  Man/'  we  address  Individua-
lity alone;  we  speak  of  a  being  which  exists,  without  spe-
cifying his  form,  size,  colour,  or  weight;  without  mention-
ing his  actions;  and  without  intimating  his  condition.
When  we  say  the  man  walks,  we  add  a  new  idea,  that  of
walking :  In  this  proposition  we  call  in  the  aid  of  Eventua-
lity, which  perceives  action  or  events.  If  we  say  the  tall
man  walks,  we  address  Size,  Individuality  and  Eventua-
lity ;  or  if  we  say  the  black  man  rides,  then  Colour,  Indi-
viduality and  Eventuality  combine  in  uttering  and  in  un-
derstanding the  proposition  :  But,  suppose  that  we  are  told
that  the  miserable  man  runs  along  the  road ;  here  we  have
first,  the  man, — second,  his  condition,  miserable, — and  third,
his  action,  running :  now,  what  organ  takes  cognizance  of
his  condition."  It  is  obvious  that  it  must  be  an  organ  dis-
tinct from  the  other  two,  because  the  mind  can  conceive
the  man,  without  his  action ;  it  can  conceive  the  man  and
his  action  without  thinking  of  his  condition;  and  his  condi-
tion without  adverting  to  his  action;  his  condition  is  there-
fore a  third  and  separate  consideration,  introduced  as  an
article  of  additional  information.  Again,  suppose  that  we  are
told  that  Mr  A.  and  Miss  B.  were  married  last  week  at  the


COMPARISON.  471

altar  of  their  pariah  church;  the  information  would  be
communicated  by  and  addressed  to  the  organs  of  Indivi-
duality, which  take  cognizance  of  Mr  A.  and  Miss  B.  as
individuals,  and  the  altar  and  church  as  things  which
exist;  Locality  would  inform  us  of  the  place  of  the  mar-
riage, and  "  Time"  of  the  date  of  it ;  but  in  all  this  nothing
is  said  of  the  condition  of  the  parties.  Now,  suppose  that
we  should  meet  them  coming  from  the  church,  and  should
wish  them  much  "  happiness"  in  their  "  new  condition)"
it  is  evident  that  some  conceptions  different  from  the  for-
mer are  added.  We  now  contemplate  them  in  the  "  mar-
ried condition,"  and  we  express  our  wish  that  they  may
exist  happy  in  that  state.

Mr  Watson's  idea  is,  that  the  primitive  function  of  Com-
parison is  to  take  cognizance  of  the  condition  in  which
beings  and  inanimate  objects  exist ;  and  that  it  compares
the  conditions,  just  as  Colour  compares  colours,  and  Tune
compares  sounds.  Of  all  the  means  of  creating  interest  or
affording  illustration,  the  specification  of  the  condition  of
objects  or  beings  is  the  most  effectual.  Thus,  the  man
exists,  is  announced  by  Individuality,  and  produces  little
interest ;  the  man  dies,  is  announced  by  Individuality  and
Eventuality,  and  is  more  affecting ;  but  the  "  good  and  Just
young  man  dies,"  stirs  up  a  far  deeper  emotion ;  and  it  is
the  addition  of  his  qualities  and  condition  "good,  just,  and
young,"  that  makes  the  difference.  Poets  and  orators,
therefore,  in  whom  this  organ  is  large,  will  possess  vivid
perceptions  of  the  condition  and  qualities  of  objects  and
beings ;  and  if  every  faculty  compares  its  own  objects,  it
will  compare  conditions.  If  this  be  correct,  we  ought  to
find  authors  in  whom  Individuality  predominates,  illustrat-
ing their  subject  chiefly  by  comparing  simple  individual  ob-
jects ;  one  in  whom  Eventuality  predominates  illustrating
by  comparing  actions ;  and  one  in  whom  the  organ  now
under  discussion  predominates,  illustrating  by  comparing
conditions  or  states ;  and  such  accordingly  is  actually  the
case.  The  following  illustrations  are  furnished  chiefly  by
Eventuality.


4?2  COMPARISON.

"  When  Ajax  strives  some  rock's  huge  weight  to  throw,
The  line  too,  labours,  and  the  words  move  slow ;  ,

Not  so  when  swift  Camilla  scours  the  plain,
Flies  o'er  the  unbending  corn,  and  skims  along  the  main."

Pope.

Mr  Watson  observes,  that,  in  Sheridan,  Individuality
and  Eventuality  are  large,  and  Comparison  only  full ;  and
the  example  already  given  on  page  427,  from  his  works,
corresponds  with  this  development.

In  Moore,  Individuality  is  large,  Eventuality  deficient,
and  Comparison  very  large ;  and  that  his  descriptions  are
confined  so  much  to  conditions,  that  any  artist  who  should
attempt  to  transfer  one  of  his  beauties  to  canvas,  would  re-
quire to  invent  every  item  of  form,  proportion,  colour,  and
indeed,  every  thing  except  condition.  "  The  harp  that
once  through  Tara's  halls"  is  a  good  example  of  this ;  the
whole  piece  being  but  a  description  and  comparison  of  con-
ditions. In  another  short  poem,  "  Though  Fate,  my  girl,
may  bid  us  part,"  the  same  occurs;  and  the  following  is
another  example, —

<**  When  I  remember  all

The  friends  so  linked  together,
I've  seen  around  me  fell

Like  leaves  in  wintry  weather ;
I  feel  like  one  who  treads  alone

Some  banquet-hall  deserted ;
Whose  lights  are  fled,  whose  garlands  dead ;

And  all  but  he  departed."

It  is  quite  obvious,  that  condition  is  the  prominent  feature,
indeed,  almost  the  whole  physiognomy  of  these  lines.

In  the  busts  of  Pope,  Individuality  is  moderately  de-
veloped, Eventuality  very  large,  and  Comparison  con-
siderable. "  The  styles  of  Pope  and  Moore,"  says  Mr
Watson,  "  seem  to  be  quite  contrasted  in  this  respect,  that
Pope  narrates  all  the  circumstances  of  his  stories  in  succes-
sion, as  they  may  be  supposed  to  occur,  Moore,  on  the
other  hand,  gives  us  a  series  of  highly  finished  pictures,
describing  clearly  and  beautifully  the  state  of  the  earth,


L


COMPARISON.  473

atmosphere,  sky,  clouds,  and  dramatis  personce,  for  the
time  being,  but  by  no  means  with  that  regular  sequence  of
occurrences  which  is  to  be  found  in  Pope.     His  stories  are
the  whole  routine  of  real  life ;  those  of  Moore  stage  repre-
sentations, where  a  good  deal  is  done  behind  the  scenes,
and  only  the  most  effective  parts  brought  into  view.    Pope
writes  historical  documents  with  the  minute  accuracy  and
detail  of  a  French  pedigree ;  Moore's  pen  is  like  the  pencil
of  an  artist,  and  creates  a  gallery  of  paintings,  where  we
see  the  same  persons  in  different  situations  at  different
periods,  but  with  no  more  information  of  what  becomes
of  them  in  the  interim,  than  we  can  obtain  concerning
the  noon-day  dwelling  of  Oberon,  or  the  Ghost  of  Royal
Hamlet.    Their  styles  being  thus  different,  we  should  ex-
pect their  similies  to  exhibit  a  corresponding  diversity,  if
there  be  really  no  special  organ  of  Comparison :  those  of
Pope  should  be  less  strongly  characterized  by  resemblance
of  condition,  and  show  a  greater  or  more  proportional  va-
riety in  the  points  of  similitude ;  the  comparisons  should
be  more  diversified,  and  the  resemblances  more  comprehen-
sive."—Phren.  Journ.  vi.  389.

I  communicated  Mr  Watson's  ideas  to  Dr  Spurzheim,
before  they  were  published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal ;
and  he  favoured  me  with  the  following  remarks,  in  a  letter,
dated  Dublin,  16th  May  1830 :— "  My  description  of  Com-
parison involves  the  essence  of  Mr  Watson's  idea : —
Among  your  examples,  young  horse  belongs  to  it,  but  not
lively  horse.  The  horse  being  lively,  is  known  by  Eventua-
lity, in  the  same  way  as  motion  in  general.  The  generality
of  attributes  and  all  abstract  ideas  and  general  notions  are
conceived  by  Comparison.  Condition  indicates  not  only
itate,  but  also  cause ;  and  if  Comparison  shall  be  replaced
by  another  term,  it  cannot  be  Conditionally.  Abstraction
or  generalization  should  be  preferable.  Vergleichender
Schar/sinn  is  very  significant :  It  compares,  discriminates,
separates,  abstracts,  adapts,  and  generalizes.  The  philoso-
phers styled  Nominalists  had  it  in  an  eminent  degree,  whilst
3


474  CAUSALITY,

Individuality  was  predominant  in  the  Realists.  Compari-
son compares  conditions  or  states,  and  conditions  or  causes.
Its  essential  result  is  generalization  and  discrimination."

These  differences  of  opinion  apply  only  to  the  metaphysi-
cal analysis  of  the  faculty :  the  organ  and  the  manifesta-
tions which  accompany  it  are  held  to  be  perfectly  ascer-
tained. Examples  of  the  organ  are  given  under  Eventua-
lity, p.  425.

35.  CAUSALITY.

It  has  long  been  a  matter  of  general  observation,  that
men  possessing  a  profound  and  comprehensive  intellect,
such  as  Socrates,  Bacon,  and  Galileo,  have  the  upper
part  of  the  forehead  greatly  developed.  At  Vienna,  Dr
Gall  remarked,  that,  in  the  most  zealous  disciples  of
Kant,  men  distinguished  for  profound,  penetrating,  meta-
physical talent,  the  parts  of  the  brain  lying  immediately
outwards,  and  to  the  sides  of  the  organ  of  Comparison,  were
distinctly  enlarged.  He  and  Dr  Spurzheim  subsequently
saw  a  mask  of  Kant  himself,  moulded  after  death,  and
perceived  an  extraordinary  projection  of  these  parts.  At
a  later  period,  they  became  personally  acquainted  with
Fichte,  and  found  a  development  of  that  region  still  larger
than  in  Kant.  Innumerable  additional  observations  satis-
fied them  concerning  the  functions  of  this  organ ;  Dr  Gall
named  it  "  Esprit  mStaphysique,  Prqfondeur  d!  esprit,"  and
Dr  Spurzheim  "  Causality."

Dr  Thomas  Brown  says,  "  a  cause,  in  the  fullest  defini-
tion which  it  philosophically  admits,  may  be  said  to  be,
that  which  immediately  precedes  any  change,  and  which,  exist-
ing at  any  time  in  similar  circumstances,  has  been  always,
and  will  be  always,  immediately  followed  by  a  similar  change.
Priority  in  the  sequence  observed,  and  invariableness  of
antecedence  in  the  past  and  future  sequences  supposed,  are
the  elements,  and  the  only  elements,  combined  in  the  no-
tion of  a  cause."     This  is  a  definition  by  means  of  Indivi-


CAUSALITY.  475

duality  and  Eventuality,  of  the  functions  of  Causality,  but
it  is  not  complete.  When  we  treat  of  an  original  and  simple
power  of  mind,  all  we  can  do  is  to  state  the  circumstances
which  excite  it,  and  to  give  the  mental  affection  a  name.
We  cannot,  for  example,  by  means  of  a  definition,  enable
a  person  who  never  felt  sweetness,  to  understand  what  it
is.  We  can  only  say  that  sugar,  and  other  saccharine
substances,  when  applied  to  the  organ  of  taste,  excite  in
them  a  particular  sensation,  which  we  call  sweetness.  It  is
the  same  with  Causality.  All  we  can  accomplish  is  to  point
out  the  circumstances  in  which  the  mental  affection  con-
nected with  that  organ  arises,  and  to  give  a  name  to  the
affection  itself.  Now,  the  metaphysical  definition  describes
with  sufficient  accuracy  the  circumstances  which  excite  the
affection ;  but  it  does  not  convey  any  notion  of  the  original
mental  state  itself  which  is  thereby  produced :  In  addition
to  the  invariable  sequence  which  Eventuality  perceives,
an  impression  of  power  or  efficiency  in  the  antecedent  to
produce  the  consequent,  appears  to  me  to  be  excited  in  the
mind,  by  contemplating  instances  of  causation  in  nature  ;
and  this  impression  seems  to  be  the  primitive  mental  affec-
tion connected  with  the  organ  of  Causality.

It  is  said,  that  it  is  only  by  experience,  and  by  observing
the  invariableness  of  the  sequence  that  we  discover  the
connexion  of  cause  and  effect,  and  this  is  correct ;  but  in
this  respect  Causality  does  not  differ  from  the  other  facul-
ties. Caloric  as  a  substance  existing  in  nature  is  one  thing,
and  the  feeling  of  heat  produced  by  it  in  the  human  nerves
is  another.  Before  the  mind  can  experience  the  feeling,
heat  must  be  applied  to  the  nerves ;  but  after  it  has  been
applied  and  the  sensation  felt,  the  mind  knows  nothing
about  what  caloric  is  in  itself,  or  how  it  comes  to  have
the  quality  of  exciting  the  sensation.  All  that  the  mind
discovers  is,  that  caloric,  be  it  what  it  may,  exists;  and  that
it  is  capable  of  exciting  in  the  nerves,  the  peculiar  feeling
which  is  named  heat  or  warmth.  The  same  holds  in  re-
gard to  Causality.     Before  the  mind  can  know  the  pre-


476  CAUSALITY.

sence  of  a  cause,  it  must  have  manifested  itself  to  the
faculty  by  producing  an  effect  The  presentment  of  ca-
loric to  the  nerves  produces  the  feeling  of  heat ;  and  the
presentment  of  an  instance  of  causation  excites  in  Cau-
sality the  impression  that  a  cause  exists.  Suppose  a  bent
bow,  with  the  arrow  drawn  to  the  head,  but  retained  in
this  position,  to  be  presented,  it  is  said  that  Causality,
prior  to  experience,  could  never  discover  that,  on  the  re-
straining power  being  withdrawn,  the  bow  would  expand
and  propel  the  arrow ;  and  this  is  quite  correct ;  because
a  bow  in  this  condition  is  an  object  which  excites  only
the  .faculties  of  Form,  Size,  Colouring,  &c.  It  is  an  ob-
ject of  still  life,  of  simple  existence  ;  when  it  expands,  and
the  arrow  starts  from  the  string,  it  becomes  an  object  of
Eventuality,  which  perceives  the  motion ;  but  in  addition
to  the  perception  of  the  bow  as  a  substance,  and  to  the  per-
ception of  the  motion  of  the  arrow,  an  instinctive  impres-
sion is  generated,  that  the  expansion  was  the  cause  of  the
arrow's  motion;  and  this  impression  is  produced  by  Causality.
The  most  illiterate  savage  would  repeat  the  operation  in  the
confidence  that  the  effect  would  follow.  A  monkey,  how-
ever, although  it  might  find  the  arrow  very  useful  to  knock
down  fruit  which  it  could  not  reach  with  its  feet,  would
not  repeat  the  operation  although  presented  with  the  bow
and  arrow.  It  possesses  hands  and  arms  quite  adapted  to
draw  the  string,  but  having  no  organ  of  Causality,  it  would
not  receive  the  impression  of  causation ;  it  might  see  the
phenomena  succeed  each  other,  without  any  idea  of  effi-
ciency being  excited  *.

"  Beavers  and  others  of  the  lower  animals  appear,  at  first  sight,  to  have
some  degree  of  Causality.  Beavers  adapt  the  structure  of  their  dam  with
Surprising  sagacity  to  the  pressure  of  the  water ;  and  in  preparing  it,  they
not  only  cut  trees  in  such  a  way,  as  to  make  certain  of  their  falling  into
the  water,  and  not  on  dry  land,  but  they  select  trees  so  situated,  that
when  they  do  fell,  the  stream  shall  carry  them  to  the  spot  where  they
wish  them  to  be  placed.  There  appears  a  knowledge  of  cause  and  effect
in  these  operations ;  and  yet  the  beaver  cannot  apply  this  knowledge  out
of  its  own  department.    I  am  inclined,  therefore,  to  give  a  different  ex-


CAUJSALITY.  477

Individuality,  Eventuality,  and  Comparison  take  cogni-
zance of  things  obvious  to  the  senses.  Causality  looks  a
little  farther  than  these,  perceives  the  dependencies  of  phe-
nomena, and  furnishes  the  idea  of  causation,  as  implying
something  more  than  mere  juxta-position  or  sequence, —
as  forming  an  invisible  bond  of  connexion  between  cause
and  effect.  It  impresses  us  with  an  irresistible  conviction,
that  every  phenomenon  or  change  in  nature  is  caused  by
something,  and  hence,  by  successive  steps,  leads  us  to  the
First  Cause  of  all.  In  looking  at  the  actions  of  men,  it  leads
us  to  consider  the  motives,  or  moving  causes,  from  which  they
proceed.  Individuality  judges  of  direct  evidence,  or  facts ;
Causality  of  circumstantial  evidence,  or  that  by  inference.
In  a  trial,  a  juryman,  with  large  Individuality  and  small
Causality,  will  have  great  difficulty  in  convicting  on  circum-

planation.  It  is  probable  that  each  knowing  faculty  is  adapted  to  the
natural  laws  of  its  objects ;  the  organ  of  Tune  is  fitted  not  only  to  feel
in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  harmony,  but  instinctively  to  seek  to  obey
them  in  producing  music;  it  desires  melody,  and  melody  cannot  be
produced  except  in  conformity  with  those  laws :  it  therefore  tries,  and
tries  again,  until  at  last  it  succeeds  in  producing  sounds  agreeable  to  itself,
and  just  because  its  constitution  and  the  laws  of  harmony  are  in  accord-
ance, it  at  last  fulfils  these  laws  by  instinctive  impulse,  without  knowing
them.  It  is  probable  that  the  organs  of  Constructiveness  and  Weight  in
the  beaver,  are  in  like  manner  adapted  to  the  laws  of  gravitation,  and  that
it  instinctively  obeys  them  without  knowing  any  thing  of  the  laws  them-
selves. This  would  account  for  its  powers  being  perfect,  yet  limited  in
their  sphere.  Constructiveness  and  weight  in  man  also  may  be  adapted
to  these  laws,  but,  by  the  addition  of  Causality,  he  may  become  acquaint-
ed with  natural  powers  as  general  agents,  and  become  capable  of  tracing
their  general  application-  Thus,  a  lieaver,  an  elephant,  and  a  savage,
may,  by  the  mere  instinct  of  weight  and  momentum,  roll  or  pull  up
an  inclined  plain  a  heavy  body,  which  they  cannot  lift,  without  know-
ing any  thing  of  the  causes  why  they  succeed  in  raising  it  in  this  way  ;
but  a  philosopher,  with  great  Causality,  may  recognise  the  existence
of  the  cause,  ascertain  the  laws  of  its  operation,  and  then  adapt  it  to  a
variety  of  purposes.  This  would  account  for  philosophers  often  excelling
in  particular  branches  of  science,  who  are  very  deficient  in  Causality,
Newton,  for  example,  in  mathematics  and  weight ;  while  no  man  is  ever
observed  to  be  eminent  for  his  talent  of  applying  causation  generally,  who
has  a  deficiency  of  that  kind.


478  CAUSALITY.

stantial  evidence.  He  in  whom  Causality  is  large  will  often
feel  that  kind  of  proof  to  be  irresistible.  It  induces  us,  on
all  occasions,  to  ask,  Why  is  this  so  ?  It  gives  deep  pene-
tration, and  the  perception  of  logical  consequence  in  argu-
ment. It  is  large  in  persons  who  possess  a  natural  genius
for  metaphysics,  political  economy,  or  similar  sciences.
When  greatly  larger  than  Individuality,  Eventuality,  and
Comparison,  it  tends  to  vague  generalities  of  speculation,
altogether  inapplicable  to  the  affairs  of  life ;  and  hence  those
in  whom  it  predominates  are  not  calculated  to  shine  in  gene-
ral society.  Their  sphere  of  thought  is  too  abstracted  to
be  reached  by  ordinary  minds ;  they  feel  this,  and  remain
silent ;  and  hence  are  reputed  dull,  heavy,  and  even  stupid.
A  great  defect  of  the  organ  renders  the  intellect  superficial ;
and  unfits  the  individual  for  forming  comprehensive  and
consecutive  views,  either  in  abstract  science  or  business.
Coincidence  only,  and  not  Causation,  is  then  perceived  in
events :  Such  persons  are  often  admirably  fitted  for  common
situations,  or  for  executing  plans  devised  by  profounder  intel-
lects ;  but,  if  they  are  entrusted  with  the  duties  of  legislators,
or  become  directors  in  any  public  affair,  embracing  Causa-
tion, it  is  difficult  to  make  them  comprehend  the  natural
dependencies  of  things,  and  to  act  according  to  them.  Blind
to  remote  consequences,  they  stigmatize  as  visionary  all  in-
tellectual perceptions  which  their  own  minds  cannot  reach ;
they  reject  principle  as  vain  theory ;  are  captivated  by  ex-
pedients, and  represent  these  as  the  beau  ideal  of  practical
wisdom.

Dr  Spurzheim  observes,  "  that  the  faculty  of  Individua-
lity makes  us  acquainted  with  objects  and  facts ;  the  facul-
ty of  Comparison  points  out  their  identity,  analogy  or  dif-
ference; and  Causality  desires  to  know  the  causes  of  all
events :  consequently,  those  three  faculties  together  form-
ing systems,  drawing  conclusions,  indications,  or  corollaries,
and  pointing  out  principles  and  laws,  constitute  the  true
philosophical  understanding."

It  is  interesting  to  trace  the  effects  of  this  faculty,  strong


CAUSALITY.  479

or  weak,  in  the  mental  character,  as  it  exhibits  itself  in  the
occurrences  of  life.  I  accompanied  two  gentlemen  to  see
a  great  public  work,  in  one  of  whom  Individuality  was  large
and  Causality  small,  and  in  the  other  of  whom  the  propor-
tions of  these  organs  were  exactly  reversed.  The  former,
in  surveying  the  different  objects  and  operations,  put  ques-
tion after  question  to  the  workmen,  in  rapid  and  long  con-
tinued succession;  and  nearly  all  the  information  which  he
carried  away  with  him  was  acquired  in  answer  to  specific
interrogatories.  His  mind  scarcely  supplied  a  step  by  its
own  reflection ;  and  did  not  appear  to  survey  the  operations
as  a  systematic  whole.  The  latter  individual  looked  a  long
time  in  silence  before  he  put  a  question  at  all ;  and  when
he  did  ask  one,  it  was,  What  is  the  use  of  that  ?  The  answer
enabled  his  own  mind  to  supply  a  multitude  of  additional
ideas ;  he  proceeded  in  his  examination,  and  it  was  only  on
arriving  at  another  incomprehensible  part  of  the  apparatus,
that  he  again  inquired.  At  last  he  got  through;  then
turned  back,  and,  with  the  most  apparent  satisfaction,  con-
templated in  silence  the  operations  from  beginning  to  end
as  an  entire  system.  I  heard  him  afterwards  describe  what
he  had  seen,  and  discovered  that  he  had  carried  off  a  distinct
comprehension  of  the  principles  and  objects  of  the  work.
It  is  probable  that  a  superficial  observer  would  have  re-
garded the  first  as  the  acute,  intelligent,  and  observing  man
of  genius;  the  person  who  noticed  every  thing,  and  asked
about  every  thing ;  and  the  latter  as  a  dull  uninteresting
person,  who  put  only  two  or  three  questions  in  all,  looked
heavily,  and  said  nothing.

A  gentleman  in  a  boat  was  unexpectedly  desired  to  steer.
Be  took  hold  of  the  helm,  hesitated  a  moment  what  to  do,
and  then  steered  with  just  effect.  Being  asked  why  he  hesi-
tated, he  replied,  "  I  was  unacquainted  with  steering,  and  re-
quired to  think  how  the  helm  acts."  He  was  requested  to
explain  how  thinking  led  him  to  the  point,  and  replied,  That
he  knew,  from  study,  die  theory  of  die  helm's  action ;  that  he
just  run  over  in  his  mind  the  water's  action  upon  it,  and  its
action  on  the  boat,  and  then  he  saw  the  whole  plainly  before


480  CAUSALITY.

him.  He  had  a  full  Causality,  and  not  much  Individuality.
A  person  with  great  Individuality  and  Eventuality,  and
little  Causality,  placed  in  a  similar  situation,  would  have
tried  the  experiment  of  the  helm's  action,  to  come  to  a  know-
ledge of  the  mode  of  steering :  he  would  have  turned^it  to
the  right  hand,  and  to  the  left,  and  observed  the  effect,  then
acted  accordingly;  and  he  might  have  steered  during  his
whole  life  thereafter,  without  knowing  any  thing  more  about
the  matter.

A  question  arose  in  an  evening  party  concerning  the  cause
of  the  harvest  moon.  In  one  gentleman  present,  Indivi-
duality and  Eventuality  predominated;  in  another,  Causality
was  the  larger  intellectual  organ.  In  an  instant  the  former
said  that  the  harvest  light  was  owing  to  the  moon's  then  ad-
vancing north  to  the  Tropic  of  Cancer  at  the  time  of  her
being  full.  The  latter  paused  for  a  time,  and  added,  "  Yes,
Sir,  you  are  quite  right."  Observing  the  difference  in  their
heads,  and  perceiving  by  their  manner  that  they  had  arrived
at  the  result  by  different  mental  processes,  I  asked  them  to
explain  how  they  knew  this  to  be  the  cause.  The  first  said,
"  Oh !  I  recollect  Professor  Playfair  stated  it  in  his  lec-
tures to  be  so."  The  other  replied,  "  I  had  forgot  the  pre-
cise fact,  but  I  recollected  the  principle  on  which  the  Pro-
fessor mentioned  it  to  depend,  and  by  a  moment's  reflection
I  followed  it  out,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  which  this
gentleman  has  just  announced."  "  I  am  not  sure,"  said  the
former,  "  that  I  could  now  master  the  principle,  but  of  the
result  I  am  quite  certain ;  because  I  distinctly  recollect  of
its  being  stated  by  Mr  Playfair."  This  is  a  striking  ex-
ample of  the  mode  of  action  of  these  different  faculties.
Individuality  knows  only  facts;  Eventuality  events:  and
Causality  takes  cognizance  of  principles  alone.

Causality  is  the  fountain  of  resources.  Place  an  indivi-
dual, in  whom  it  is  small,  in  new  circumstances,  and  he  will
be  helpless  and  bewildered ;  place  another,  in  whom  it  is
large,  in  a  similar  situation,  and  he  will  shew  his  superiori-
ty by  the  extent  of  his  inventions.  A  mechanic,  with
little  Causality,  will  be  at  a  stand  if  his  ordinary  tools  are


CAUSALITY.  481

wanting,  or  if  employed  out  of  his  ordinary  line ;  another,
having  this  faculty  powerful,  will  find  a  thousand  substitutes.
If  a  person  deficient  in  Causality  be  placed  in  charge  of  any
establishment,  comprehending  a  variety  of  duties  triiich
arise  the  one  out  of  the  other,  and  all  of  which  cannot  be
anticipated  and  specified  A  priori,  he  will  be  prone  to  neglect
part  of  what  he  ought  to  attend  to.  He  will  probably  plead
forgetfulness  as  his  excuse,  but  want  of  comprehensiveness,
and  consecutiveness  of  thinking,  will  be  the  real  cause  of
his  imperfections.

If  a  person,  possessing  little  Causality,  write  a  book,  he
may  shine  in  narrative,  provided  Individuality  or  Even-
tuality and  Language  be  amply  developed ;  but  when  he
endeavours  to  reason,  he  will  become  feeble  and  confused.
Qne  endowed  with  much  Causality,  in  reading  a  work,
written  by  an  author  in  whom  this  organ  is  deficient,  will
feel  it  characterized  by  lightness  and  want  of  depth  ;  it  will
furnish  him  with  no  stimulus  to  thinking.  When,  on  the
other  hand,  a  person  possessing  only  a  small  Causality,
peruses  a  book  composed  by  an  author  in  whom  this  or-
gan predominates,  such  as  Locke's  Essays,  or  Brown's
Lectures,  he  will  regard  it  as  heavy,  abstract,  and  dry,  and
be  oppressed  by  it  as  if  a  night-mare  were  weighing  on  his
mind.

Among  metaphysicians,  Hume,  Dr  Adam  Smith,  and
Dr  Thomas  Brown  display  great  Causality,  Dr  Re  id  not.
so  much,  and  Mr  Stewart  still  less.  In  the  portraits  of
the  first  three  the  organ  is  represented  as  decidedly  large.
It  is  large,  also,  in  Bacon,  Locke,  Franklin,  and  Play-
fair  ;  and  likewise  in  the  masks  of  Haydon,  Burke,  Bru-
nel,  Wordsworth,  and  Wilkie.  It  is  moderate  in  Pitt,
Sir  J.  E.  Smith  ;  and  very  deficient  in  the  Charibs  and  New
Hollanders.  A  late  writer  observes,  that,  "  of  whatever
has  been  said  and  written  upon  the  moral  and  political
sciences  in  France,  the  general  characteristic  is  a  deficiency
in  extensive  views  of  human  nature,  in  profound  investi-
gation of  the  heart,  pourtrayed  in  all  its  strongest  feelings

•  Edinburgh  Review,  Nov.  1820,  p.  389.

H   h


482


CAUSALITY.


and  multitudinous  bearings  V  Without  subscribing  to  tbe
accuracy  of  this  observation  in  its  full  extent,  the  fact  may
be  mentioned  as  certain,  that,  in  the  French  head  in  gene-
ral the  organ  of  Causality  is  by  no  means  largly  developed*

"  The  ancient  artists,"  says  Dr  Spurzheim,  "  have  given
to  Jupiter  a  forehead  more  prominent  than  to  any  other  an-
tique head ;  and  henee  it  would  seem  they  had  observed,
that  the  development  of  the  forehead  has  a  relation  to  great
understanding."  The  bust  of  Socrates  (of  which  tbe
Phrenological  Society  possesses  a  copy),  shews  a  very  large
development  of  the  reflecting  organs.  It  is  either  a  correct
representation  of  his  real  appearance,  and  then  it  presents
an  interesting  coincidence  betwixt  his  character  and  devel-
opment ;  or  it  is  supposititious,  and,  in  thai  case,  shews
the  impression  of  the  ancient  artist,  that  such  a  mind  as
that  of  Socrates  required  such  a  tenement  for  its  abode.

As  already  mentioned,  when  the  organ  now  under  con-
sideration is  very  deficient,  the  individual  has  great  difficul-
ty in  perceiving  Causation ;  and  when  two  events  are  present-
ed to  him  following  each  other  or  concomitant,  he  sees  only
coincidence.  Illustrations  of  this  observation  frequently
occur  in  discussions  relative  to  Phrenology.  When.  Cau-
sality is  well  developed  in  an  observer,  and  several  decided
instances  of  concomitance  betwixt  particular  forms  of  head
and  particular  powers  of  mind  are  presented  to  him,  the
feeling  of  connexion  between  them  is.  irresistible;  he  is
struck  with  it,  and  declares  that  there  is  something,  here
which  ought  to  be  followed  out.  When  the  same  facts  are
exhibited  to  a  person  in  whom  Causality  is  deficient,  he  smiles
-surprizedly,  and  ejaculates  "  a  curious  coincidence ;'  but  his
mind  receives  no  strong  impression. of  connexion  between
the  phenomena ;  it  feels  no  desire  to  follow  out  the  ideas  to
their  consequences,  and  has  no  wish  to  prosecute  the  inves-
tigation. It  was  from  this  class  of  minds,,  ever  ready  to
catch  superficial  glimpses,  that  the  public  received  the  first
accounts  of  Phrenology ;  and  on  them  is  chargeable  the
misrepresentations  which  so  long  impeded  its  course.
•Edinburgh  Review,  Nov.  1820,  p.  389


CAUSALITY.  483

This  faculty  is  an  ingredient  in  the  judgment  of  the  meta-
physicians. It  is  also,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  fountain  of
abstract  ideas,  viz.  those  of  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,
and  bears,  in  this  respect,  an  analogy  to  their  abstraction.
It  and  Comparison  correspond  to  the  Relative  Suggestion  of
Dr  Thomas  Brown  :  "  A  tendency  of  the  mind,"  says  he,
"  by  which,  on  perceiving  or  conceiving  objects  together,
we  are  instantly  impressed  with  certain  feelings  of  their  mu-
tual relation  *•"  By  dispensing  with  Perception,  Concep-
tion, &c.  as  separate  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  dividing  the
intellect  into  the  two  faculties  of  Simple  Suggestion  and  Re-
lative Suggestion,  Dr  Brown  has  made  an  interesting  ap-
proach to  the  results  of  phrenological  discovery,  and  to  a
correct  analysis  of  the  actual  constitution  of  the  human  in-
tellect. It  was  impossible,  by  means  of  the  old  faculties  of
Conception,  &c  to  point  out  the  distinctive  characteristics  of
a  mind  which  collected  only  facts  in  the  order  in  which
they  were  presented  to  it ;  and  of  another,  which  struck  out
a  multitude  of  new  ideas  from  every  object  which  it  con-
templated, and  instinctively  inquired  from  what  causes  all
phenomena  proceed,  and  to  what  results  they  tend.  Dr
Brown's  Simple  Suggestion  denotes  the  one,  his  Relative
Suggestion  the  other;  and  in  Phrenology,  the  Perceptive
Faculties  correspond  to  the  former,  and  the  Reflecting
Powers  to  the  latter.

We  are  now  prepared  to  consider  some  points  which  have
occasioned  great  and  animated  discussions  among  the  philo-
sophers of  the  old  schools.  It  has  been  stated,  that  Indivi-
duality takes  cognisance  of  objects  that  exist.  A  tree,  a
ship,  a  mountain  are  presented  to  the  mind;  and  ideas
or  conceptions  of  them  are  formed;  and  the  conception
is  followed  by  an  instinctive  belief  in  their  existence.
Bishop  Berkeley  objects  to  the  belief  in  their  existence  as
unphilo8ophical,  because,  says  he,  the  conception  or  idea  is
a  mere  mental  affection,  and  no  principle  or  reason  can  be
assigned,  why  an  external  object  must  be  believed  to
*  Lectures,  vol.  iii.  p.  14.

H  h  2


484  CAUSALITY.

exist,  merely  because  we  experience  a  mental  affection.
A  smell,  for  example,  is  nothing  more  than  a  certain
impression  on  the  mind,  communicated  through  the  ol-
factory nerves.  But  no  necessary  connexion  can  be  per-
ceived between  this  affection  and  a  belief  in  the  existence
of  a  rose :  the  mind  may  undergo  the  affection  called  a
smell,  just  as  it  experiences  the  emotion  called  joy,  and  a
material  object  may  have  as  little  to  do  in  causing  the  one
as  the  other.  Hence  Dr  Berkeley  concluded,  that  we
have  philosophical  evidence  for  the  existence  only  of  mind
and  mental  affections,  and  none  for  the  existence  of  the
material  world.  Hume  carried  this  farther,  and  argued,
that  as  we  are  conscious  only  of  ideas,  and  as  the  existence
of  ideas  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  existence  of  mind,
we  have  philosophical  evidence  for  the  existence  of  ideas
only,  and  none  for  that  of  either  matter  or  mind.  Dr  Re  id
answered  Berkeley's  objection  by  observing,  that  the  be-
lief in  external  objects,  consequent  on  perceiving  them,  is
instinctive,  and  hence  requires  no  reason  for  its  support.

Phrenology  enables  us  to  refer  these  different  specula-
tions to  their  sources,  in  the  different  faculties.  Individua-
lity (aided  by  the  other  perceptive  faculties),  in  virtue  of
its  constitution,  perceives  the  external  world,  and  produces
intuitive  belief  in  its  existence.  But  Berkeley  employed
the  faculty  of  Causality  to  discover  why  it  is  that  this  per-
ception is  followed  by  belief;  and  because  Causality  could
give  no  account  of  the  matter,  and  could  see  no  necessary
connexion  between  the  mental  affection,  called  Perception,
and  the  existence  of  external  nature,  he  denied  the  latter.
Dr  Reid's  answer,  translated  into  phrenological  language,
was  simply  this, — the  cognizance  of  the  existence  of  the
outward  world  belongs  to  Individuality ;  Individuality  has
received  its  own  constitution,  and  its  own  functions,  and
cannot  legitimately  be  called  on  to  explain,  or  account
for  these,  to  Causality.  In  virtue  of  its  constitution,  it
perceives  external  objects,  and  belief  in  them  follows;  and
if  Causality  cannot  see  how  this  happens,  it  is  a  proof  that


CAUSALITY.  485

Causality's  powers  are  limited,  but  not  that  Individuality
is  deceitful  in  its  indications.

Another  class  of  philosophers,  by  an  error  of  a  similar
kind,  have  denied  Causation.     When  Eventuality  contem-
plates the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  it  discovers  only  one
event  following  another,  in  immediate  and  invariable  se-
quence: For  example,  if  a  cannon  be  fired,  and  the  shot  knock
down  a  wall,  Individuality  observes  only  the  existence  of
the  powder,  Eventuality  perceives  the  fire  applied  to  it,  the
explosion,  and  the  fall  of  the  building,  as  four  events  fol-
lowing in  succession ;  but  it  forms  no  idea  of  power  or
energy  in  the  gunpowder,  when  ignited,  to  produce  the  ef-
fect.    When  Causality,  on  the  other  hand,  is  joined  with
Eventuality  in  contemplating  these  phenomena,  the  impres-
sion of  power  or  efficiency  in  the  gunpowder  to  produce
the  explosion,  arises  spontaneously  in  the  mind,  and  Cau-
sality produces  an  intuitive  belief  in  the  existence  of  this
efficiency,  just  because  it  is  its  constitution  to  do  so;  and
it  is  as  absurd  for  Eventuality  to  deny  the  existence  of  some
quality  in  the  matter  which  gives  rise  to  this  feeling,  be-
cause only  Causality  perceives  it,  as  for  Causality  to  deny
the  existence  of  the  external  world,  because  only  Indivi-
duality perceives  it.

A  practical  application  of  much  importance  follows  from
these  doctrines.

Some  men  deny  the  existence  of  God  ;  and  others  stre-
nuously maintain,  that  that  existence  is  demonstrable  by  a
legitimate  exercise  of  reason.  The  former,  who  deny  God,
say,  that  all  we  perceive  in  external  nature  is  existence  and
the  succession  of  phenomena;  that  we  can  form  no  idea
of  efficiency  or  power ;  and  that,  therefore,  all  we  know
philosophically  is,  that  matter  exists,  and  undergoes  cer-
tain changes.  This  is  the  natural  conclusion  of  men  in
whose  heads  Individuality  and  Eventuality  are  large,  and
Causality  small ;  and,  accordingly,  Atheists  are  general-
ly very  deficient  in  the  organ  of  Causality,  and  shew  its
weakness  in  their  general  arguments  on  other  topics.     If,


486  CAUSALITY.

on  the  other  hand,  a  mind  in  which  Causality  Is  very
powerful,  surveys  the  phenomena  of  nature,  the  conviction
of  a  Cause  of  them  arises  irresistibly  and  intuitively  from
the  mere  exercise  of  the  faculty.  Benevolence  and  design,
in  the  arrangements  of  the  moral  and  physical  world,  are
clearly  perceived  by  it ;  and  it  therefore  instinctively  in-
fers, that  Benignity  and  Intelligence  are  attributes  of  the
Cause  which  produced  them.  Hence  the  fact  is  phrenolo-
gically  explained,  why  all  master  spirits  are  believers  in
God.  Socrates,  Plato,  and  the  ancient  philosophers,  are
represented  as  endowed  with  large  organs  of  Causality;  and
they  all  admitted  a  Deity.  Voltaire  had  too  large  a  Cau-
sality to  doubt  of  the  existence  of  God  ;  and  Franklin
continued  to  reverence  the  Supreme  Being,  although  he
had  renounced  Christianity.

To  some  who,  perhaps  for  the  sake  of  argument,  have
seemed  inclined  to  deny  the  existence  of  a  Deity,  I  have
made  the  following  appeal,  without  receiving  any  satisfac-
tory answer : — A  tree  with  roots  exists ;  the  earth  exists;
and  there  is  exquisite  adaptation  of  the  one  to  the  other*
The  adaptation  is  not  a  quality  of  the  tree,  nor  of  the  earth;
but  a  relation  between  them.  It  has  no  physical  existence,
but  is  clearly  apprehended  by  mind.  Mind,  therefore,  must
have  contrived  it ;  and  this  mind  we  call  the  Deity.  Cau-
sality perceives  the  adaptation.

Another  argument  resorted  to  by  atheists  finds  an  an-
swer in  the  principles  now  explained.  They  object  that
we  have  no  evidence  of  the  self-existence  of  God  ;  and  af-
firm, that,  for  any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary,  the  Ma-
ker of  the  world  may  himself  own  a  superior,  and  have  been
created.  Their  objection  is  stated  in  this  form :  "  You  who
believe  in  God  infer  his  existence  from  seeing  his  works,
on  the  principle  that  every  effect  must  have  a  cause.
But,"  say  they*  "  this  Being  himself  is  an  effect.  You  have
no  evidence  from  reason  of  his  self-existence,  or  selfcreation;
and  as  he  does  exist,  you  must  assign  a  cause  of  him,  on  the
same  principle  that  you  regard  him  as  the  cause  of  the  ma-


CAUSALITY.  487

terial  creation."  The  atheists  carry  this  argument  the
length  of  a  denial  of  God  altogether,  in  respect  that  it  is
only  the  first  cause  that,  according  to  them,  can  be  entitled
to  be  regarded  as  Deity;  and  the  first  cause,  say  they,  is  to
us  unknown.

This  speculation  may  be  answered  as  follows :  Individua-
lity perceives  existence  directly,  and  Causality  infers  qualities
from  their  manifestations.    To  be  able  to  judge  thoroughly
of  any  object,  both  of  these  faculties  require  to  be  employed
on  it    When  a  watch,  for  example,  is  presented,  Indivi-
duality, and  the  other  Knowing  Faculties,  perceive  its
wheels,  spring,  lever,  &c.  and  Causality  discerns  their  ob-
ject or  design.     If  the  question  is  put,   Whence  did  the
watch  proceed  ?    From  the  nature  of  its  materials,  as  per*
ceived  by  die  knowing  faculties,  Causality  infers  that  it
could  not  make  itself;  and  from  discovering  intelligence
and  design  in  the  adaptation  of  its  parts,  this  faculty  con-
cludes, that  its  Cause  must  have  possessed  these  qualities,
and  therefore  assigns  its  production  to  an  intelligent  artifi-
cer.     Suppose  the  statement  to  be  next  made,—"  This
artificer  himself  is  an  existence,  and  every  existence  must
have  a  cause,  Who,  then,  made  the  watchmaker  ?"    In  this
case,  if  no  farther  information  were  presented  to  Causality
than  what  it  could  obtain  by  contemplating  the  structure  of
the  watch,  the  answer  would  necessarily  be,  that  it  could
not  tell.    But  let  the  artificer,  or  man,  be  submitted  to  the
joint  observation  of  Individuality  and  Causality,  and  let  the
question  be  then  put,  Who  made  him  ? — Individuality  and
the  knowing  powers,  by  examining  the  structure  of  his
body,  would  present  Causality  with  data  from  which  it
could  unerringly  infer,  that,  although  it  perceived  in  him
intelligence  and  power  sufficient  to  make  the  watch,  yet,
from  the  nature  of  his  constitution,  he  could  not  possibly
make  himself.     Proceeding  in  the  investigation,  Causality,
still  aided  by  the  knowing  faculties,  would  perceive  farther
the  most  striking  indications  of  power,  benevolence,  and
design  in  the  human  frame;  and  from  contemplating  these,


488  CAUSALITY.

it  would  arrive  at  a  complete  conviction,  that  the  watchma-
ker is  the  workmanship  of  a  great,  powerful,  and  intelligent
Being.  If,  however,  the  question  were  repeated,  "  Whence
did  this  Being  proceed  ?"  Causality  could  not  answer.  It
would  then  he  in  a  situation  similar  to  that  in  which  it
would  he  placed,  if  required  to  tell,  from  seeing  the  watch
alone,  who  made  the  watchmaker.  Individuality  cannot
observe  the  substance  of  the  Maker  of  the  human  body ;
and  none  of  the  perceptive  faculties  can  reach  him.  His
existence  is  the  object  of  Causality  alone ;  and  all  that  it  can
accomplish  is  to  infer  his  existence,  and  his  qualities  or  at-
tributes, from  perceiving  their  manifestations.  I  have  stated
the  argument  in  the  plainest  language,  but  with  perfect  re-
verence ;  and  we  are  arrived  at  the  conclusion,  that  this
faculty  is  silent  as  to  the  cause  of  the  Creator  of  man,
and  cannot  tell  whether  he  is  self-existent,  or  called  into
being  by  some  higher  power ;  but  thus  far  it  can  go,  and  it
draws  its  conclusions  unhesitatingly,  that  he  must  exist,  and
must  possess  the  attributes  which  it  perceives  manifested  in
his  works ;  and  these  points  being  certain,  it  declares  that
he  is  God  to  us ;  that  he  is  our  Creator  and  Preserver ;  that
all  his  qualities,  so  far  as  it  can  discover,  merit  our  pro-
foundest  respect  and  admiration ;  and  that,  therefore,  he
is  to  man  the  highest  and  most  legitimate  object  of  vene-
ration and  worship.

The  organ  is  established.


(     489     )


MODES  OP  ACTIVITY  OF  THE  FACUL-
TIES.

All  the  faculties,  when  active  in  a  due  degree,  produce
actions  good,  proper,  or  necessary.  It  is  excess  of  activity
that  occasions  abuses ;  and  it  is  probable  that  Phrenology
has  been  discovered  only  in  consequence  of  some  indivi-
duals, in  whom  particular  organs  were  very  largely  de-
veloped, yielding  to  the  strongest  propensities  of  their  na-
ture. The  smallness  of  a  particular  organ  is  not  the  cause
of  a  faculty  producing  abuses.  Thus,  though  the  organ  of
Benevolence  be  small,  this  does  not  occasion  cruelty ;  but,
as  it  will  be  accompanied  with  indifference  to  the  miseries
of  others,  it  may  lead  to  the  omission  of  duties.  When,
also,  one  organ  is  small,  abuses  may  result  from  another
being  left  without  proper  restraint.  Thus,  powerful  facul-
ties of  Acquisitiveness  and  Secretiveness,  combined  with
weak  faculties  of  Reflection  and  Conscientiousness,  may,  in
certain  circumstances,  lead  to  theft.  Powerful  Combative-
ness  and  Destructiveness,  with  weak  Benevolence,  may  pro-
duce cruel  and  ferocious  actions.

Every  faculty,  when  in  action,  from  whatever  cause,
produces  the  kind  of  feeling,  or  forms  the  kind  of  ideas,
already  explained  as  resulting  from  its  natural  constitu-
tion.

The  faculties  of  the  PROPENSITIES  and  SENTI-
MENTS cannot  be  excited  to  activity  by  a  mere  act  of  the
will.  For  example,  we  cannot  conjure  up  the  emotions  of
Fear,  Compassion,  Veneration,  by  merely  willing  to  expe-
rience them.  These  faculties,  however,  may  enter  into  ac-
tion from  an  internal  excitement  of  the  organs ;  and  then
the  desire  or  emotion  which  each  produces  is  experienced,
whether  we  will  to  experience  it  or  not.  Thus,  the  cere-
bellum being  internally  active,  produces  the  corresponding


4{>0  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

feeling ;  and  this  cannot  be  avoided  if  the  organ  be  excited.
We  have  it  in  our  power  to  permit  or  restrain  the  mani-
festation of  it  in  action ;  but  we  have  no  option,  if  the  or-
gan be  excited,  to  experience,  or  not  to  experience,  the
feeling  itself.  The  case  is  the  same  with  the  organs  of
Fear,  Hope,  Veneration,  and  the  others.  There  are  times
when  we  feel  involuntary  emotions  of  fear,  or  hope,  or
awe,  arising  in  us,  for  which  we  cannot  account ;  and  such
feelings  depend  on  the  internal  activity  of  the  organs  of
these  sentiments.

44  We  cannot  Nature  by  our  wishes  rule,
Nor  at  our  will,  her  warm  emotions  cool.9'

C&ABBE.

In  the  second  place,  these  faculties  may  be  called  into  ac-
tion independently  of  the  will,  by  the  presentment  of  the
external  objects  fitted  by  nature  to  excite  them.  When  an
object  in  distress  is  presented,  the  faculty  of  Benevolence
starts  into  activity,  and  produces  the  feelings  which  de-
pend upon  it.  When  an  object  threatening  danger  is  per-
ceived, Cautiousness  gives  an  instantaneous  emotion  of
fear.  And  when  stupendous  objects  in  nature  are  con-
templated, Ideality  inspires  with,  a  feeling  of  sublimity.
In  all  these  cases,  the  power  of  acting,  or  of  not  acting,  is
dependent  on  the  will ;  but  the  power  of  feeling,  or  of  not
feeling,  is  not  so.

"  It  seems  an  unaccountable  pleasure,"  says  Hume  *,
which  the  spectators  of  a  well-written  tragedy  repeive
from  sorrow,  terror,  anxiety,  and  other  passions,  that  are
in  themselves  disagreeable  ajJ(i  uneasy.  The  more  they  are
touched  and  affected,  the  mdre  are  they  delighted  with  the
spectacle.  The  whole  art  of  the  poet  is  employed  in  rous-
ing and  supporting  the  compassion  and  indignation,  the
anxiety  and  resentment  of  his  audience.  They  are  pleased
in  proportion  as  they  are  afflicted,  and  never  are  so  happy
as  when  they  employ  tears,  sobs  and  cries,  to  give  vent  to

•  Essay  S2.


OF  PROPENSITIES  AND  SENTIMENTS.        491

their  sorrow,  and  relieve  their  hearts,  swollen  with  the  ten-
derest  sympathy  and  compassion."

Many  volumes  have  been  written  to  solve  this  problem.
Those  authors  who  deny  the  existence  of  benevolent  and
disinterested  feelings  in  man,  maintain,  that  we  sympathize
with  Cato,  Othello,  or  King  Lear,  because  we  conceive  the
possibility  of  ourselves  being  placed  in  similar  situations,
and  that  then  all  the  feelings  arise  in  us  which  we  would
experience,  if  we  were  ourselves  suffering  under  similar  ca-
lamities. Mr  Stewart,  who,  on  the  other  hand,  admits
the  existence  of  generous  emotions  in  the  human  mind,
states  it  as  Ids  theory,  that  we,  for  an  instant,  believe  the
distress  to  be  real ;  and  under  this  belief  feel  the  compas-
sion which  would  naturally  start  up  in  our  bosoms,  if  the
sufferings  represented  were  actually  endured.  A  subse-
quent act  of  judgment,  he  says,  dispels,  in  an  almost  im-
perceptible portion  of  time,  the  illusion,  and  restrains  the
mind  from  acting  under  the  emotion ;  which,  if  the  belief
of  reality  continued,  it  would  certainly  do,  by  running  to
the  relief  of  the  oppressed  hero  or  heroine;  but  still  he  con-
siders that  a  momentary  belief  is  necessary  to  call  up  the
emotions  which  we  experience.

The. phrenological  doctrine  just  delivered  appears  to  me
to  furnish  the  true  explanation.  '  Each  propensity  and  sen-
timent may  be  called  into  activity  by  presentment  of  its
object,  and,  when  active,  the  corresponding  feeling  or  emo-
tion attends  it,  in  virtue  of  its  constitution.  Happiness
consists  in  the  hajrmofcious  gratification-  of  all  the  faculties;
and  the  very  essence  of  gratification  is  activity.  "  Thus
the  muscular  system,"  says  Dr  A.  Combe,  "  is  gratified  by
motion,  and  pleasure  arises ;  the  eye  is  gratified  by  looking
at  external  objects;  Combativenes*,  by  overcoming  oppo-
sition; Destructiveness,  by  the  sight  of  destruction,  and
the  infliction  of  pain ;  Benevolence,  by  the  relief  of  suffer-
ing ;  Hope,  by  looking  forward  to  a  happy  futurity ;  Cau-
tiousness, by  a  certain  degree  of  uncertainty  and  anxiety,
&c    As  the  degree  of  enjoyment  corresponds  to  the  num-


492  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

ber  of  faculties  simultaneously  active  and  gratified,  it  fol-
lows, that  a  tragic  scene,  which  affords  a  direct  stimulus  to
several  of  the  faculties,  at  the  same  moment,  must  be  agree-
abkj  whatever  these  may  be; — 1st,  If  it  does  not  at  the
same  time,  outrage  any  of  the  other  feelings ;  2dly>  If  it
does  not  excite  any  faculty  so  intensely  as  to  give  rise  to
pain ;  just  as  too  much  light  hurts  the  eyes,  and  too  much
exertion  fatigues  the  muscles."    In  the  play  of  Pizarro,  for
example,  when  the  child  is  introduced,  its  aspect  and  situa-«
tion  instantly  excite  Philoprogenitiveness,  and  individuals
possessing  this  organ  largely,  feel  an  intense  interest  in
it; — the  representation  of  danger  to  which  it  is  exposed
rouses  Cautiousness,  producing  fear  for  its  safety ;  when
Holla  saves  it,  this  fear  is  allayed,  Philoprogenitiveness
is  highly  delighted,  Benevolence   also   is   gratified;   and
the  excitement  of  these  faculties   is  pleasure.     All  this
internal   emotion  takes  place   simply  in   consequence  of
the  constitution  of  the  faculties,  and  the  relation  establish-
ed by  nature  betwixt  them  and  their  objects,  without  the
understanding  requiring  to  be  imposed  upon,  or  to  form
any  theory  about  the  scenes,  whether  they  are  real  or  fic-
titious.    A  picture  raises  emotions  of  sublimity  or  beauty
on  the  same  principles.     "  The  cloud-capt  towers  and  gor-
geous palaces"   are  fitted  by  nature  to  excite  Ideality,
Wonder,  and  Veneration;  and  these  being  active,  certain
emotions  of  delight  are  experienced.     When  a  very  accu-
rate representation  of  these  towers  and  palaces  is  pre-
sented on  canvas,  their  appearance  in  the  picture  excites
the  same  faculties  into  action,  which  their  natural  linea-
ments would  call  up,  and  the  same  pleasures  kindle  in  the
soul.    But  what  would  we  think,  if  Mr  Stewart  assured
us  that  we  required  to  believe  the  paint  and  the  canvas  to
be  real  stone  and  lime,  and  the  figures  to  be  real  men  and
women,  before  we  could  enjoy  the  scene  ?    And  yet  this
would  be  as  reasonable  as  the  same  doctrine  applied  to  tra-
gedy.    We  may  weep  at  a  tragedy  represented  on  canvas,
and  know  all  the  while  that  there  are  only  colours  and


PROPENSITIES  AND  SENTIMENTS.  493

forms  before  us.  On  the  same  principle  we  may  shed  tears
at  seeing  a  tragedy  acted,  which  is  just  a  representation,  by
means  of  words  and  gestures,  of  objects  calculated  to  rouse
the  faculties,  and  yet  suffer  no  delusion  respecting  the  rea-
lity of  the  piece.

If  the  propensities  and  sentiments  become  excessively  ac-
tive from  these  representations,  they  may  overpower  the
intellect ;  a  temporary  belief  may  follow ;  and  the  feeling
will  be  the  stronger;  but,  in  this  case,  it  appears  to  me,
that  the  strong  emotion  does  not  arise  from  a  previous  illu-
sion of  the  understanding ;  but  that  misconception  in  the
intellect  is  the  consequence  of  the  feelings  having  become
overwhelming.

The  law  of  our  constitution  now  explained,  accounts  also
for  several  of  the  phenomena  of  insanity.  All  the  organs
are  liable  to  become  violently  and  involuntarily  active
through  disease ;  this  produces  mental  excitement,  or  vio-
lent desires,  to  act  in  the  direction  of  the  diseased  organs.
If  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  be  affected  in  this
manner,  madness  or  fury,  which  is  just  an  irresistible  pro-
pensity to  violence  and  outrage,  will  ensue.  If  the  organ
of  Cautiousness  become  involuntarily  and  permanently  ac-
tive through  disease,  fear  will  constantly  be  felt,  and  this
constitutes  melancholy.  If  Veneration  and  Hope  be  ex-
cited in  a  similar  way,  the  result  will  be  involuntary  emo-
tions of  devotion,  the  liveliest  joy  and  anticipations  of
bliss;  which  feelings,  fixed  and  immoveable,  amount  to
religious  insanity.  It  frequently  happens  that  a  patient  is
insane  on  a  single  feeling  alone,  such  as  Fear,  Hope,  or
Veneration,  and  that,  if  the  sphere  of  activity  of  this  feel-
ing be  avoided,  the  understanding  on  other  subjects  shall
be  sound,  and  the  general  conduct  of  the  patient  rational
and  consistent.  Thus,  a  person  insane  in  Self-Esteem,
sometimes  imagines  himself  a  King;  but  on  all  other  topics
he  may  evince  sound  sense,  and  consecutiveness  of  judg-
ment. This  results  from  the  organs  of  intellect  being
sound,  and  only  the  organ  of  Self-Esteem  diseased.    Some-


494  MODES  OP  ACTIVITY

times  well-meaning  individuals,  struck  with  the  clearness
of  the  understanding  in  such  patients,  set  themselves  to
point  out,  by  means  of  argument,  the  erroneous  nature  of
the  notions  under  which  they  suffer,  supposing  that,  if  they
could  convince  their  intellect  of  the  mistake,  the  disease
would  be  cured ;  but  the  malady  consists  in  an  unhealthy
action  of  the  organ  of  a  sentiment  or  propensity,  and  as
long  as  the  disease  lasts,  the  insane  feeling,  which  is  the
basis  of  the  whole  mental  alienation,  will  remain,  and  ar-
gument will  do  as  little  to  remove  it,  as  a  speech  in  re-
moving gout  from  the  toe.

The  converse  of  the  doctrine  now  explained,  also  holds
good ;  that  is  to  say,  if  the  organ  be  not  active,  the  propen-
sity or  emotion  connected  with  it  cannot  be  felt ;  just  as
we  cannot  hear  a  sound  when  the  auditory  apparatus  is  not
excited  by  the  air.

The  most  important  practical  consequences  may  be  de-
rived from  this  exposition  of  our  mental  constitution.  The
larger  any  organ  is,  the  more  is  it  prepared  to  come  into
activity,  and  the  smaller,  the  less  so.  Hence  an  indivi-
dual prone  to  violence,  to  excessive  pride,  vanity,  or  ava-
rice, is  the  victim  of  an  unfavourable  development  of
brain ;  and  in  our  treatment  of  him  we  ought  to  bear  this
fact  constantly  in  mind.  If  we  had  wished,  for  example,  to
render  Bellingham  mild,  the  proper  proceeding  would
have  been,  not  to  abuse  him  for  being  ill-tempered,  for
this  would  have  directly  excited  his  Destructiveness,  the
largeness  of  which  was  the  cause  of  his  wrath,  but  to  ad-
dress ourselves  to  his  Benevolence,  Veneration*  and  Intel-
lect, that,  by  rousing  them,  we  might  assuage  the  vehe-
mence of  Destructiveness.  In  a  case  like  that  of  David
Haggart,  in  whom  Conscientiousness  was  very  deficient,  we
ought  always  to  bear  in  mind,  that  in  regard  to  feeling  the
obligation  of  justice,  such  an  individual  is  in  the  same  state
of  unhappy  deficiency  as  Mr  Milne  is  in  perceiving  co-
lours, and  Anne  Ormerod  in  perceiving  melody ;  and  our
treatment  ought  to  correspond.    We  would  never  think  of


OF  PROPENSITIES  AND  SENTIMENTS.         495

supplying  Anne  Ormerod's  deficiency  of  Tune  by  harsh
treatment;  and  if  Haggart's  Conscientiousness  was  natu-
rally as  deficient,  we  could  as  little  have  succeeded  in  ena-
bling him  to  feel  and  act  justly  by  mere  severity  of  punish-
ment.   The  reasonable  plan  in  such  cases  is,  first,  to  place
the  individual  in  circumstances  as  little  as  possible  requir-
ing the  exercise  of  the  deficient1  faculty ;  not  to  place  Anne
Ormerod  in  a  band  of  singers ;  nor  one  Kke  DaVid  Hag-
gart  in  a  confidential  situation,  where  property  is  entrust-
ed to  him.     In  the  next  pface,  to  present  to  all  the  org&ns
of  the  higher  sentiments  which  he  possesses  largely  de-
veloped,  motives  calculated  to  control  the  propensities,
so  as  to  supply,  as  much  as  possible,  the  place  of  the  feeble
Conscientiousness,

If  the  principle  that  large  organs  give  strong  desires,
and  small  organs  weak  impulses,   be  correct,   Phreno-
logy '  must  be   calculated  in  an  eminent  degree  to  be
practically  useful  in  society.     If,  in  choosing  a  servant,
we  are  afraid  or  ashamed  to  examine  the  head,  and  light
upon  one  with  a  brain  extremely  deficient,  like  that'  of
Mary  Macinnes,  and  if  certain  strong  animal  feelings  ac-
company this  development,  we  shall  unquestionably  suffer
great  annoyance  as  die  consequence.     If  we  select  a  ser-
vant very  deficient  in  Conscientiousness  as  a  childV  maid,
she  will  labour  under  a  natural  blindness  to  truth,  and  not
only  lie  herself,  but  teach  the  children  entrusted  to  her
care  this  abominable  vice.    If  a  merchant  selects  a  clerk
with  a  head  like  David  Haggards,  and  places  money  at
his  disposal,  the  strong  animal  filings,  unrestrained  by
Conscientiousness,  will  prompt  him  to  embezzle  it.     It  is
incredible  to  what  an  extent  evils  might  be  mitigated,  or
prevented  in  society,  by  the  practical  application  of  this
principle.    I  have  applied  it  in  the  selection  of  servants
with  great'  advantage.

In  the  next  place,  if  the  presentment  of  the  object  of  a
faculty  rouses  it  into  instant  activity,  as  suffering  bene-
volence, or  danger  fear,  this  becomes  a  highly  important
principle  in  the  education  of  children.    If  we  put  on  the


496  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

natural  language  of  Destructiveness  and  Self-Esteem  in  our
intercourse  with  them,  we  shall  cultivate  those  very  facul-
ties in  their  minds,  by  exciting  the  organs ;  if  we  manifest
Benevolence  and  Veneration  in  their  presence,  we  shall
excite  the  same  faculties  in  them;  if  we  discourse  con*
stantly  about  money,  the  desire  of  increasing  it,  and  the
fear  of  losing  it,  we  shall  stimulate  the  organs  of  Acquisi-
tiveness, and  Self-Esteem  in  them,  and  increase  the  power
of  these  propensities.

In  the  third  place,  The  faculties  of  which  we  are  now
speaking  may  be  excited  to  activity,  or  repressed,  indirect-
ly, by  an  effort  of  the  will.  Thus,  the  Knowing  and  Re-
flecting Faculties  have  the  function  of  forming  ideas.  If
these  faculties  be  employed  to  conceive  internally  objects
fitted  by  nature  to  excite  the  propensities  and  sentiments,
the  latter  will  start  into  activity  in  the  same  manner,  but
not  with  so  much  intensity  as  if  their  appropriate  objects
were  externally  present  For  example,  if  we  conceive  in-
wardly an  object  in  distress,  and  Benevolence  be  powerful,
compassion  will  be  felt,  and  tears  will  sometimes  flow  from
the  emotion  produced.  In  like  manner,  if  we  wish  to  repress
the  activity  of  Ideality,  we  cannot  do  so  merely  by  willing
that  the  sentiment  be. quiet;  but  if  we  conceive  objects  fit-
ted to  excite  Veneration,  Fear,  Pride,  or  Benevolence,
these  faculties  will  then  be  excited,  and  Ideality  will  sink
into  inactivity.  The  vivacity  of  the  feeling,  in  such  cases,
will  be  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  conception,  and
the  energy  of  the  propensities  and  sentiments  together.

Hence  he  who  has  any  propensity  or  sentiment  predo-
minantly active  from  internal  excitement  of  the  organ,  will
have  his  intellect  filled  with  conceptions  fitted  to  gratify
it ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  habitual  subjects  of  thought  in
the  mind  are  determined  by  the  organs  which  are  predo-
minantly active  from  internal  excitement.  If  the  cerebel-
lum be  permanently  active,  the  individual  will  be  prone  to
collect  pictures,  books  and  anecdotes,  fitted  to  gratify  this
feeling;  his  mind  will  be  much  occupied  with  such  ideas,
and  they  will  afford  him  delight.     If,  in  another  indivi-


OF  PROPENSITIES  AND  SENTIMENTS.        497

dual,  Constructiveness,  Ideality  and  Imitation,  be  inter*
nally  active,  he  will  desire  to  see  pictures,  busts,  and
works  of  art,  in  which  skill,  beauty  and  expression,  are
combined.  He  will  know  much  about  such  objects,  be
fond  of  possessing  them,  and  of  talking  of  them.  If,  in
another  individual,  Acquisitiveness  be  internally  active,
he  will  feel  a  great  and  natural  interest  in  all  matters  con-
nected with  wealth,  and  be  inspired  with  an  eager  curio-
sity to  know  the  profits  of  different  branches  of  trade,  and
the  property  possessed  by  different  individuals.  If  Benevo-
lence be  internally  active,  the  mind  will  run  habitually  on
schemes  of  philanthropy,  such  as  those  of  Howard,  Mr
Owen,  or  Mrs  Fry.  In  these  cases,  the  liking  for  the  ob-
ject or  pursuit  depends  upon  the  particular  propensities  or
sentiments  which  are  active;  the  intellectual  faculties  serve
as  the  ministering  instruments  of  their  gratification.

These  principles  explain  readily  the  great  variety  of
tastes  and  dispositions  among  mankind;  for  in  no  two  in-
dividuals is  exactly  the  same  combination  of  organs  to  be
found,  and  hence  every  one  is  inspired  with  feelings  in
some  degree  peculiar  to  himself,  and  desires  objects  fitted
for  his  special  gratification.

As  the  faculties  of  the  Propensities  and  Sentiments  do
not  form  Ideas,  and  as  it  is  impossible  to  excite  or  recal
directly  by  an  act  of  the  will,  the  feelings  or  emotions  pro-
duced by  them,  it  follows  that  these  faculties  have  not  the
attributes  of  Perception,  Conception,  Memory,  Imagina-
tion :  They  have  the  attribute  of  Sensation  alone;  that  is
to  say,  when  they  are  active,  a  sensation  or  emotion  is
experienced.  Hence  Sensation  is  an  accompaniment  of
the  activity  of  all  the  faculties  which  feel,  and  of  the
nervous  system  in  general ;  but  sensation  is  not  a  faculty
itself.

The  laws  of  the  KNOWING  and  REFLECTING  facul-
ties are  different :  These  faculties  form  Ideas,  and  perceive
Relations ;  they  are  subject  to  the  will,  or  rather  constitute

i  i


498  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

will  themselves,  and  minister  to  the  gratification  of  the
other  faculties  which  only  feel.

1st,  These  faculties,  also,  may  be  active  from  internal  ex-
citement of  the  organs,  and  then  the  kinds  of  ideas  which
they  are  fitted  to  form  are  presented  involuntarily  to  the
mind.  The  musician  feels  the  notes  flowing  on  him  uncall-
ed for.  A  man  in  whom  Number  is  powerful  and  active
calculates  by  a  natural  impulse.  He  in  whom  Form  is
vigorous,  conceives  figures  by  internal  inspiration.  He  in
whom  Causality  is  powerful  and  active,  reasons  while  he
thinks,  without  an  effort.  He  in  whom  Wit  is  energetic,
feels  witty  conceptions  flowing  into  his  mind  spontaneous-
ly, and  even  at  times  and  places  when  he  would  wish  them
not  to  appear.

2d7y,  These  faculties  may  be  excited  by  the  presentation  of
external  objects  fitted  to  call  them  into  activity ;  and,

Sdly,  They  may  be  excited  to  activity  by  an  act  of  volition.

When  excited  by  the  presentation  of  external  objects,  the
objects  are  perceived,  and  this  act  is  called  PERCEPTION.
Perception  is  the  lowest  degree  of  activity  of  these  faculties ;
and  if  no  idea  is  formed  when  the  object  is  presented,  the
individual  is  destitute  of  the  power  of  manifesting  the  facul-
ty, whose  function  is  to  perceive  objects  of  that  kind.  Thus,
when  tones  are  produced,  he  who  cannot  perceive  the  melo-
dy of  them,  is  destitute  of  the  power  of  manifesting  the  fa-
culty of  Tune.  When  a  coloured  object  is  presented,  and
the  individual  cannot  perceive,  so  as  to  distinguish,  the  tints,
he  is  destitute  of  the  power  of  manifesting  the  faculty  of
colour.  When  the  steps  of  an  argument  are  logically  and
distinctly  stated,  be  who  cannot  perceive  the  relation  be-
twixt the  steps,  and  the  necessity  of  the  conclusion,  is  des-
titute of  the  power  of  manifesting  the  faculty  of  Causality ;
and  80  on.  Thus  Perception  is  a  mode  of  action  of  the  facul-
ties which  form  ideas,  and  implies  the  lowest  degree  of  ac-
tivity ;  but  Perception  is  not  a  separate  faculty.

This  doctrine  is  not  theoretical,  but  is  cltearly  indicated


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES,  499

by  facts.  In  the  case  mentioaed  by  Mr  Hood  *,  a  patient
haying  lost  the  memory  of  words,  yet  enjoyed  perception  of
their  meaning.  He  understood  language  spoken  by  others,
or,  in  other  words,  the  organ  of  Language  retained  so  much
of  its  power  as  to  enable  him  to  perceive  the  meaning  of
words  when  presented  to  his  mind,  but  so  little  of  its  ener-
gy as  not  to  be  adequate  to  the  act  of  recalling  words  by  an
act  of  his  will,  so  as  to  express  his  thoughts.  The  case  of
Mr  Ferguson  f  is  another  in  point  He  enjoyed  so  great  a
degree  of  the  organ  of  Size  as  to  enable  him  to  perceive
distance  when  natural  scenery  was  presented  to  his  mind,
but  so  little  as  to  be  quite  unable  to  recollect  it,  when  the
objects  were  withdrawn.  Mr  Sloane  %  is  in  a  similar  situa-
tion in  regard  to  colouring.  He  perceives  the  differences  of
hues  when  they  are  presented  to  his  eyes,  but  has  so  little
of  the  organ  that  he  does  not  recollect,  so  as  to  be  able  to
name,  them  separately.  Many  persons  are  in  a  similar  con-
dition in  regard  to  music ;  they  perceive  melody  and  enjoy
it,  when  presented  to  the  ear,  but  have  so  little  of  the  facul-
ty of  Tune  as  to  be  unable  to  recal  the  notes  after  they  have
ceased  to  be  heard.  The  same  hold  in  regard  to  the  re-
flecting powers.  Many  persons  possess  faculties  acute  and
vigorous  enough  to  perceive  an  argument,  if  placed  before
them,  who  are  quite  incapable  of  inventing  it  themselves.

Here,  again,  a  highly  valuable  practical  result  presents
itself.  If  we  place  a  person  with  a  forehead  like  Fraser's,
in  whom  the  reflecting  organs  are  deficient,  in  a  situation,
or  apply  to  him  for  advice  in  circumstances,  requiring  great
natural  sagacity  and  depth  of  intellect,  we  shall  assuredly
be  disappointed ;  whereas,  if  we  apply  to  one  having  such  a
combination  as  Dr  Franklin,  in  whom  reflection  was  very
large,  there  will  be  much  more  of  the  instinctive  capacity
of  tracing  out  beforehand  the  probable  chain  of  Causation,
and  anticipating  the  effects  of  measures  which  we  propose
to  follow.  Fraser  might  shew  good  sense  and  sound  judg-

•  Page  45S.  f  Page  390.  f  Page  403.

I  i  2


500  "     MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

ment  after  the  consequences  were  pointed  out  to  him,  be-
cause he  possesses  development  sufficient  to  give  him  percep-
tion of  causation  when  presented ;  but  he  could  not,  like
Franklin,  anticipate  effects,  as  this  is  a  higher  power.

According  to  this  view  of  Perception,  which  regards  it  as
the  lowest  state  of  activity  of  every  intellectual  faculty,  an
individual  may  possess  acute  powers  of  perception  as  to  one
class  of  objects,  and  be  quite  unable  to  perceive  others.  Thus
Mr  Milne  had  an  acute  perception  of  form,  although  he
cannot  perceive  some  colours;  other  individuals  perceive
symmetry  distinctly  who  cannot  perceive  melody.  This
exposition  has  the  merit  of  coinciding  with  nature ;  for  we
frequently  meet  with  such  examples  as  I  have  now  cited.

The  metaphysicians,  on  the  other  hand,  treat  of  perception
as  a  general  faculty,  and  when  their  doctrine  is  applied  to
nature,  the  extraordinary  spectacle  is  presented  of  their  ge-
neral power  performing  in  the  same  individual  half  its  func-
tions with  great  effect,  while  it  is  wholly  inefficient  as  to
the  other  half;  just  as  if  a  leg  could  walk  east  and  be  quite
incapable  of  walking  west.  Dr  Thomas  Brown  has  aban-
doned this  absurdity;  and  differs  from  Reid,  Stewart,  and
all  his  predecessors,  in  denying  perception  to  be  any  thing
more  than  an  act  of  the  general  power  of  the  mind.  We
call  it  an  act  of  several  special  faculties  of  the  mind ;  but
with  these  Dr  Brown  was  not  acquainted.

CONCEPTION.  When  the  Knowing  or  Reflecting  or-
gans  are  powerfully  active  from  internal  excitement,  whe-
ther by  the  will  or  from  natural  activity,  ideas  are  vi-
vidly and  rapidly  conceived ;  and  the  act  of  forming  them
is  styled  CONCEPTION ;  if  the  act  amounts  to  a  very  high
degree  of  vivacity,  it  is  called  IMAGINATION.  Thus
perception  is  die  lowest  degree  of  activity  of  any  of  these
faculties  excited  by  an  external  object ;  and  conception  or
imagination  are  higher  degrees  of  activity  depending  on  in*
ternal  causes,  and  without  the  interference  of  an  external
object     Each  faculty  performs  the  act  of  conception  in  its


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  501

own  sphere.  Thus,  if  one  person  have  a  powerful  organ
of  Tune,  he  is  able  to  conceive,  or  call  up  in  his  own  mind,
the  notes  of  a  tune,  when  no  instrument  is  sounding  in  his
ears.  If  his  organ  of  Form  be  very  small,  he  may  not  be
able  to  bring  shapes  before  his  mind  with  equal  facility.
Some  persons  read  music  like  a  book,  the  written  sign  of
a  note  being  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  call  up  the  im-
pression of  the  note  itself  in  their  minds.  This  is  a  very
high  degree  of  activity  of  the  faculty.  Temperament  has
a  great  effect  on  internal  activity ;  the  lymphatic  tempe-
rament requires  external  objects  to  rouse  it  to  vivid  action,
while  the  sanguine  and  nervous  glow  with  spontaneous
and  constitutional  vivacity.  Hence  imagination,  which
results  from  a  high  degree  of  activity,  is  rarely  found  with
a  temperament  purely  lymphatic,  but  becomes  exalted  in
proportion  to  the  approach  of  the  temperament  to  the  ner-
vous.

In  treating  of  Colouring,  I  cited  a  passage  from  Mr
Stewart,  in  which,  after  stating  the  fact  that  some  men
are  able  to  distinguish  different  tints  when  presented  toge-
ther, who  cannot  name  them  when  separate,  he  attributes
this  want  of  discrimination  to  defect  in  the  power  of  concep-
tion, probably  arising,  he  supposes,  from  early  habits  of  in-
attention. So  far  he  is  correct:  an  individual  like  Mr
Sloane  may  be  found,  whose  organ  of  Colouring  enables
him  to  distinguish  hues  when  seen  in  juxta-poaition,  and  is
yet  so  weak  as  not  to  give  him  conception  or  memory  of
them  when  seen  apart,  and  this  would  certainly  indicate  a
deficient  power  of  conception;  but  then  the  power  of  con-
ception may  be  deficient  in  this  faculty  alone,  and  very  vi-
gorous in  all  the  others.  On  Mr  Stewart's  principle,  that
conception  is  a  general  power,  we  would  have  the  anomaly
of  its  performing  one  portion  of  its  functions  well,  while
deficient  as  to  another,  which  defect  is  accounted  for  by
him,  by  supposing  early  habits  of  inattention ;  whereas  if  a
faculty  be  naturally  strong,  it  eagerly  attends  to  its  objects,
just  as  a  vigorous  and  empty  stomach  desires  food.


502  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

When  any  of  the  Knowing  or  Reflecting  organs  is  inter-
nally ctive,  the  mind  conceives,  or  is  presented  with  ideas
of  the  objects  which  it  is  fitted  to  perceive.  Thus  Locality,
Colouring,  and  Size,  being  active,  we  are  able,  with  our
eyes  closed,  to  conceive  a  landscape  in  all  its  details  of  hill
and  dale,  sunshine  and  shade.  If  this  internal  activity  be-
come morbid,  through  disease  of  the  organs,  then  ideas  be-
come fixed,  and  remain  involuntarily  in  the  mind ;  and  if
this  is  long  continued,  it  constitutes  insanity.  Many  per-
sons have  experienced,  when  in  the  dark,  vivid  impressions
of  figures  of  every  variety  of  colour  and  form  passing  be-
fore the  mind,  sometimes  invested  in  alarming  brilliancy
and  vivacity.  I  conclude  that  this  arises  from  an  internal
excitement  of  the  organs  situated  at  the  superciliary  ridge,
viz.  Form,  Locality,  Colouring,  &c.  occasioned  generally
by  an  unusual  accumulation  of  blood.  This  affection  is,  in
most  instances,  only  momentary ;  but  suppose  that  it  were
to  become  fixed  and  continuous,  then  the  mind  would  be
haunted  with  permanent  and  vivid  conceptions  of  innu-
merable and  fantastic  beings,  invested  with  more  than  die
forms  and  hues  of  reality.  This  would  be  insanity ;  not  a
diseased  feeling,  such  as  melancholy,  or  Any,  or  religious
joy,  but  an  intellectual  delusion ;  so  that  every  sentiment
might  be  sound,  and  yet  this  aberration  of  intellect  remain
fixed  and  immoveable  by  the  will.  If  we  suppose  this  dis-
ease to  take  place  in  several  Knowing  organs,  leaving  the
organs  of  Reflection  entire,  it  is  quite  possible  to  imagine
that  the  individual  may  have  false  perceptions  on  some
points,  and  not  only  be  sane  on  all  others,  but  be  able,  by
means  of  the  faculties  that  remain  unaffected,  to  distinguish
the  erroneous  impressions.

The  phenomena  of  apparitions,  or  spectral  illusions,  may
be  accounted  for  by  the  principles  now  explained.  If  se-
veral organs  become  active  through  internal  excitement,
they  produce  involuntary  conceptions  of  outward  objects,
invested  in  all  the  attributes  of  Form,  Colour,  and  Size,
which  usually  distinguish  reality.     Several  interesting  ex-


OF  INTELLECTUAL    FACULTIES.  503

amples  of  this  affection  are  given  in  the  Phrenological
Journal  *.

The  Knowing  organs,  and  the  organ  of  Wonder,  seem  to
be  the  chief  seats  of  these  diseased  perceptions,  which  ap-
pears obvious  from  the  descriptions  of  the  apparitions
themselves.  Thus  Nicolai,  the  Berlin  bookseller,  saw  the
form  as  of  a  deceased  person  within  eight  steps  of  him—
vast  numbers  of  human  and  other  forms  equally  in  the  day
and  night— crowds  of  both  sexes — people  on  horseback
birds  and  dogs— of  natural  size,  and  distinct  as  if  alive, —
of  natural  colour,  but  paler  than  reality.  *  He  then  began
to  hear  them  talk.  On  being  blooded  with  leeches,  the
room  was  crowded  with  spectres — in  a  few  hours  their
colour  began  to  fade,  but  in  a  few  more  they  were  white.
They  dissolved  in  air,  and  fragments  of  them  were  visible
for  some  time.  Dr  Alderson  of  Hull  furnishes  two  other
cases.  Mr  R.  left  his  wife  and  family  in  America,  but
saw  them  and  conversed  with  them  in  this  country — saw
trains  of  living  and  dead  persons — in  a  bright  brass  lock
again  saw  his  transatlantic  friends,  and  always  in  that
lock — had  violent  headach,  A  pothouse-keeper  in  Hull
saw  a  soldier  in  his  cellar  whom  he  endeavoured  to  seize,
but  found  an  illusion — attempted  to  take  up  oysters  from
the  ground,  which  were  equally  unreal — saw  crowds  of  the
living  and  dead — scarcely  knew  real  from  spectral  custom-
ers— suffered  repeated  flogging  from  a  waggoner  with  a
whip,  who  was  an  illusion.  In  Vol.  II.  of  the  Journal,
page  111,  is  given  the  case  of  a  man  in  the  west  of  Scot-
land, with  a  large  organ  of  Wonder,  who  sees  inanimate
things  and  persons  in  visions— had  a  spotted  carpet  for  a
long  time  before  his  eyes — a  funeral— a  log  of  wood  on
wheels.  His  son  has  the  same  tendency — he  followed  a
beggar,  who  glided  and  vanished  into  a  wall.  All  these
perceptions  are  clearly  referrible  to  the  Knowing  organs.

Mr  Simpson  has  .communicated  to  the  Phrenological
Journal  the  following  case,  which  is  particularly  interest-
•  VoL  i.  p.  541,  and  voL  ii.  pp.  Ill,  293,  362.


504  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

ing  and  instructive.  Concomitance  of  pain  in  the  precise
seats  of  the  organs,  with  disorder  of  their  functions,  forms
a  striking  feature  in  it ;  and  the  author  states,  that  he  is
ready  to  afford  the  means  of  verification  of  the  facts  to  any
philosophical  inquirer.

"  Miss  S.  L.,"  says  Mr  Simpson,  "  a  young  lady,  under
twenty  years  of  age,  of  good  family,  well  educated,  free
from  any  superstitious  fears,  and  in  perfect  general  health
of  body  and  soundness  of  mind,  has  nevertheless  been  for
some  years  occasionally  troubled,  both  in  the  night  and  in
the  day,  with  visions  of  persons  and  inanimate  objects,  in
almost  all  the  modes  and  forms  which  we  have  already
related.  She  was  early  subject  to  such  illusions  occasional-
ly, and  the  first  she  remembers  was  that  of  a  carpet  spread
out  in  the  air,  which  descended  near  her,  and  vanished
away.

"  After  an  interval  of  some  years,  she  began  to  see  hu-
man figures  in  her  room  as  she  lay  wide  awake  in  bed,  even
in  the  daylight  of  the  morning.  These  figures  were  whit-
ish,  or  rather  grey  and  transparent  like  cobweb,  and  generally
above  the  size  of  life.  At  this  time  she  had  acute  headache,
very  singularly  confined  to  one  small  spot  of  the  head;  on
being  asked  to  point  out  the  spot,  the  utmost  care  being
taken  not  to  lead  her  to  the  answer,  our  readers  may  judge
of  our  feelings  as  phrenologists,  when  she  touched  with  her
fore-finger  and  thumb,  each  side  of  the  root  of  the  nose,  the
commencement  of  the  eyebrows,  and  the  spot  immediately  over
the  top  of  the  nose,  the  ascertained  seats  of  the  organs  of  Form,
Size,  and  Lower  Individuality  !  Here,  particularly  on  each
side  of  the  root  of  the  nose,  she  said  the  sensation  could
only  be  compared  to  that  of  running  sharp  knives  into  the
part.  The  pain  increased  when  she  held  her  head  down,
and  was  much  relieved  by  holding  her  face  upwards  *.
Miss  S.  L.  on  being  asked  if  the  pain  was  confined  to  that
spot,  answered,  that  some  time  afterwards  the  pain  extended

•  Quere,—Doei>  not  this  look  like  a  pressure  of  blood  on  that  region  of
the  brain  ?


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  505

to  right  and  left  along  the  eyebrows,  and  a  little  above  (hem,
and  completely  round  the  eyes,  which  felt  often  as  if  they  would
burst  from  their  sockets.     When  this  happened,  her  visions
were  varied  precisely  as  the  phrenologist  would  have  anti-
cipated, and  she  detailed  the  progress  without  a  single  lead-
ing question.     Weight,  Colouring,  Order,  Number,  Locality,
all  became  affected;  and  let  us  observe  what  happened.
The  whitish  or  cobweb  spectres  assumed  the  natural  colour
of  the  objects,  but  they  continued  often  to  present  them*
selves,  though  not  always,  above  the  size  of  life     She  saw
a  beggar  one  day  out  of  doors,  natural  in  size  and  colour,
who  vanished  as  she  came  up  to  the  spot.     Colouring,  being
over-excited,    began  to  occasion  its  specific  and  fantastical
illusions.    Bright  spots,  like  stars  on  a  black  ground,  filled
the  room  in  the  dark,  and  even  in  daylight ;  and  sudden  and
sometimes  gradual   illumination  of  the  room  during  the
night  often  took  place,  so  that  the  furniture  in  it  became
visible.     Innumerable  balls  of  fire  seemed  one  day  to  pour
like  a  torrent  out  of  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  house  down
the  staircase.     On  one  occasion,  the  pain  between  the  eyes,
and  along  the  lower  ridge  of  the  brow,  struck  her  suddenly
with  great  violence,— when,  instantly,  the  room  filled  with
stars  and  bright  spots.    On  attempting,  on  that  occasion,  to
go  to  bed,  she  said  she  was  conscious  of  an  inability  to  bal-
ance herself  as  if  she  had  been  tipsy,  and  she  fell,  having
made  repeated  efforts  to  seize  the  bedpost ;  which,  in  the
most  unaccountable  manner,  eluded  her  grasp,  by  shifting
its  place,  and  also  by  presenting  her  with  a  number  qf  bed*
posts  instead  of  one.    If  the  organ  of  Weight,  situated  be-
tween Size  and  Colouring,  be  the  organ  of  the  instinct  to
preserve,  and  power  of  preserving  equilibrium,  it  must  be
the  necessary  consequence  of  the  derangement  of  that  organ
to  overset  the  balance  of  the  person.    Over-excited  Number,
we  should  expect  to  produce  multiplication  of  objects,  and
the  first  experience  she  had  of  this  illusion  was  the  multi-
plication of  the  bedposts,  and  subsequently  of  any  inanimate
object  she  looked  at — that  object  being  in  itself  real  and


506  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

single  ;-~4t  book,  a  footstool,  a  work-box,  would  increase  to
twenty,  or  fifty,  sometimes  without  order  or  arrangement,
and  at  other  times  piled  regularly  one  above  another.
Sueb  objects  deluded  her  in  another  way,  by  increasing  in
size,  as  she  looked  at  them,  to  the  most  amazing  excess, —
again  resuming  their  natural  size— less  than  which  they
never  seemed  to  become, — and  again  swelling  out.  Locality,
over-excited,  gave  her  the  illusion  of  objects,  which  she  had
been  accustomed  to  regard  as  fixed,  being  out  of  their
places ;  and  she  thinks,  but  is  not  sure,  that,  on  oner  occa-
sion, a  door  and  window  in  one  apartment  seemed  to  have
changed  places, — but,  as  she  added,  she  might  have  been
deceived  by  a  mirror.  This  qualification  gave  us  the  more
confidence  in  her  accuracy,  when,  as  she  did  with  regard
to  all  her  other  illusions,  she  spoke  more  positively.  She
had  not  hitherto  observed  a  great  and  painful  confusion  in
the  visions  which  visited  her,  so  as  to  entitle  us  to  infer  the
derangement  of  Order.  Individuality,  Form,  Size,  Weight,
Colouring,  Locality,  and  Number  only,  seemed  hitherto
affected.

"  For  nearly  two  years,  Miss  S.  L.  was  free  from  her
frontal  headachs,  and— mark  the  coincidence — untroubled
by  visions,  or  any  other  illusive  perceptions.  Some  months
ago,  however,  all  her  distressing  symptoms  returned  in
great  aggravation,  when  she  was  conscious  of  a  want  of
health  *•  The  pain  was  more  acute  than  before  along  the
frontal  bone,  and  round  and  in  the  eyeballs ;  and  all  the
organs  there  situated  recommenced  their  game  of  illusion.
Single  figures  of  absent  and  deceased  friends  were  terribly
real  to  her,  both  in  the  day  and  the  night,  sometimes  cob-
web, but  generally  coloured.  She  sometimes  saw  friends
on  the  street,  who  proved  phantoms  when  she  approached
to  speak  to  them ;  and  instances  occurred  where,  from  not
having  thus  satisfied  herself  of  the  illusion,  she  affirmed  to
such  friends,  that  she  had  seen  them  in  certain  places,  at

•  Constitutional  irregularity  would,  it  is  very  probable,  explain  the
whole  disorder.


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  507

certain  times,  when  they  proved  to  her  the  clearest  alibi.
The  confusion  of  her  spectral  forms  now  distressed  her.—
(Order  affected).  The  oppression  and  perplexity  was  in-
tolerable when  figures  presented  themselves  before  her  in
inextricable  disorder,  and  still  more  when  they  changed—
as  with  Nicolai — from  whole  figures  to  parts  of  figures —
faces,  and  half-faces,  and  limbs,— sometimes  of  inordinate
size  and  dreadful  deformity.  One  instance  of  illusive  Dis-
order, which  she  mentioned,  is  curious ;  and  has  the  farther
effect  of  exhibiting  (what  cannot  be  put  in  terms  except
those  of)  the  derangement  of  the  just  perception  of  gravi-
tation or  equilibrium  (Weight).  One  night  as  she  sat  in
her  bed-room,  and  was  about  to  go  to  bed,  a  stream  of
spectres,  persons'  faces,  limbs,  in  the  most  shocking  confu-
sion, seemed  to  her  to  pour  into  her  room  from  the  window,
in  the  manner  of  a  cascade  !  Although  the  cascade  continued
apparently  in  rapid  descending  motion,  there  was  no  ac-
cumulation of  figures  in  the  room,  the  supply  unaccountably
vanishing  after  having  formed  the  cascade.  Colossal  figures
are  her  frequent  visitors.     (Size. J

"  Real  but  inanimate  objects  have  assumed  to  her  the
form  of  animals ;  and  she  has  often  attempted  to  lift  ar-
ticles from  the  ground,  which,  like  the  oysters  in  the  pot-
house cellar,  eluded  her  grasp.

"  More  recently  die  has  experienced  a  great  aggravation
of  her  alarms ;  for,  like  Nicolai,  -she  began  to  hear  her
spectral  visitors  speak ! — With  Mr  R>  of  Hull,  the  spectres
always  spoke.  At  first  her  crowds  kept  up  a  buzzing  and
indescribable  gibbering,  and  occasionally  joined  in  a  loud
and  terribly  disagreeable  laugh,  which  she  could  only  im-
pute to  fiends.  These  unwelcome  sounds  were  generally
followed  by  a  rapid  and  always  alarming  advance  of  the
figures,  which  often  on  those  occasions  presented  very  large
and  fearful  faces,  with  insufferable  glaring  eyes  close  to  her
own.  All  self-possession  then  failed  her,  and  the  cold
sweat  of  terror  stood  on  her  brow.  Her  single  figures  of
the  deceased  and  absent  then  began  to  gibber,  and  soon


508  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

more  distinctly  to  address  her;  but  terror  has  hitherto
prevented  her  from  understanding  what  they  said  *.

"  Of  the  other  illusive  perceptions  of  Miss  S.  L.  we  may
mention  the  sensation  of  being  lifted  up,  and  of  sinking  downj
and  falling  forward,  with  the  puzzling  perception  of  objects
off  their  perpendicular ;  for  example,  the  room,  floor  and  all,
sloping  to  one  side.     (Weight J."

Mr  Simpson  concludes,  by  remarking  "  how  curiously
the  old-established  phenomena  of  ghosts  are  seriatim  ex-
plained by  this  case.  "White  or  grey  ghosts — the  grey
bodach  of  M'lvor  in  Waverley, — result  from  excited  Form,
with  quiescent  Colouring,  the  transparent  cobweb  effect
being  colourless.  Pale  spectres  and  shadowy  yet  coloured
forms,  are  the  effect  of  partially  excited  Colouring.  Tall
ghosts  and  dwarf  goblins  are  the  illusions  of  over-excited
Size.    Creusa  appeared  to  JEneas  colossal  in  her  size : —

"  Infelix  simulacrum  atque  ipsius  umbra  Creusae
Visa  mlhi  ante  oculos  et  nota  major  imago."

"  The  ghosts  of  Ossian  are  often  colossal.  Gibbering
and  speaking  ghosts,  with  an  unearthly  confusion  of  tongues
and  fiend-like  peals  of  laughter,  as  if  the  demons  revelled,
are  illusions  which  many  have  experienced."

The  illusions  of  the  English  opium-eater  are  no  longer
a  horrible  mystery ;  they  are  explained  in  Mr  Simpson's
paper  here  alluded  to.

There  are  persons  who  imagine  themselves  to  be  made
of  glass,  and  who  refuse  to  sit  down,  or  assume  any  posi-
tion, in  which  glass  would  not  be  safe,  lest  they  should
break  their  bodies  in  pieces ;  others  have  conceived,  that
some  object  was  attached  to  their  nose,  or  that  some  figure
was  impressed  upon  their  forehead ;  who  in  every  other  re-

*  We  may  here  mention,  that  the  phrenological  explanations  of  the
distressing  affection  which  have  been  given  Miss  S.  1»,  have  had  the
happy  effect  of  affording  her  much  more  composure  when  visited  by  her
phantoms  than  she  thought  possible.  She  is  still  terrified  with  their
speaking  \  but  her  mind,  on  the  whole,  is  greatly  eased  on  the  subject.


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  509

spect  were  sound  in  mind.  Such  aberrations  appear  to  be
fixed  and  permanent  conceptions  of  a  diseased  nature,  re-
sulting from  morbid  and  involuntary  activity  of  the  organs
of  the  Knowing  Faculties.  The  cure  will  be  accomplished
by  removing  the  organic  cause,  and  not  by  a  logical  demon-
stration that  the  object  does  not  exist,  fitted  perhaps  to  con-
vince a  sound  understanding,  but  altogether  inapplicable  to
the  removal  of  illusions  springing  from  a  diseased  brain.

Another  form  of  mental  derangement,  arising  from  in-
ternal excitement  of  the  organs,  is  the  tendency  to  involun-
tary and  sometimes  unconscious  manifestation  of  the  fa-
culties. Some  insane  patients  talk  night  and  day  to  them-
selves ;  and  in  hysterical  affections,  the  individual  often  al-
ternately laughs  and  cries  involuntarily.  The  last  pheno-
mena are  explicable  by  the  supposition  of  different  organs
becoming  active  and  quiescent  in  turns,  in  consequence  of
spasmodic  or  some  other  irregular  action  in  the  brain.  Dr
A.  Combe  saw  a  lady  in  Paris,  who,  when  just  emerging
from  insensibility,  occasioned  by  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  mani-
fested the  faculties  of  Wit  and  Imitation  quite  unconsci-
ously, but  with  so  admirable  an  effect,  that  her  relations
were  forced  into  fits  of  laughter,  mingled  with  floods  of
tears  for  her  unhappy  condition :  on  her  recovery,  she  did
not  know  of  the  exhibitions  she  had  made.  The  organs  of
Wit  and  Imitation  were  large.  Phrenology  accounts  for
such  facts,  in  a  simple  and  natural  manner,  by  the  effects
of  diseased  activity  of  the  organs*

DREAMING  may  now  be  analyzed.  If  the  greater
number  of  the  organs  remain  inactive,  buried  in  sleep,
and  two  or  three,  from  some  internal  excitement,  con-
fined to  themselves,  become  active,  these  will  present  the
mind  with  corresponding  conceptions,  and  being  separated
in  their  action  from  the  other  organs,  which,  in  the  waking
state,  generally  co-operate  with  them,  the  result  will  be  the
creation  of  disjointed  and  fantastic  impressions  of  objects,
circumstances,  and  events;  in  short,  all  the  various  phe-
2


510  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

nomena  of  dreaming.  Thus,  every  circumstance  which
disturbs  the  organization  of  the  body  may  become  the  cause
of  dreams ;  a  heavy  supper,  by  encumbering  the  digestive
powers,  affects  the  brain  painfully  by  sympathy;  and
hence  the  spectres  and  hydras  dire  which  affect  the  sleep-
ing fancy.  Fever,  by  keeping  up  a  morbid  excitement  in
the  whole  system,  sustains  the  brain  in  a  state  of  uninter-
rupted activity ;  and  hence  the  sleeplessness  which  attends
the  higher,  and  the  disturbed  dreams  which  accompany  the
lower,  degrees  of  that  disease.  Thus,  also,  is  explained
another  familiar  fact  relative  to  the  mind.  If,  during  day,
we  have  been  excessively  engaged  in  any  particular  train
of  study,  it  haunts  us  in  our  dreams.  During  day  the  or-
gans of  the  faculties  chiefly  employed  were  maintained  in
a  state  of  action,  intense  and  sustained,  in  proportion  to
the  mental  application.  By  a  general  law  of  the  consti-
tution, excessive  action  does  not  subside  suddenly,  but
abates  by  insensible  degrees ; — on  going  to  sleep,  so  much
activity  continues  to  stimulate  the  organ,  that  the  train  of
ideas  goes  on;  till,  after  long  action,  it  at  last  entirely


On  inquiry  I  find,  what  indeed  might  have  been  anti-
cipated a  priori,-  that  dreams  in  different  individuals  have
most  frequently  relation  to  the  faculties  whose  organs  are
largest  in  their  brains.  A. friend,  in  whom  Tune  is  large,
and  Language  deficient,  tells  me  that  he  has  frequently
dreamt  of  bearing  and  making  music,  but  very  rarely  of
composing  discourses,  written  or  oral.  Another  gentleman,
in  whom  Language  is  full,  and  Tune  deficient,  states  that  he
never  but  once  in  his.  life  dreamt  of  hearing  a  musical  note,
while  many  a  laborious  page  he  has  imagined  himself  writing,
reading,  and  speaking  in  his  dreams ;  nay,  he  has  repeatedly
dreamt  of  conversing  with  foreigners  in  their  own  tongue,
with  a  degree  of  fluency  which  he  could  never  command
while  awake.  In  the  same  way,  a  person  in  whom  Loca-
lity is  large  assured  me,  that  he  had  very  frequently  dreamt
of  travelling  in  foreign  countries,  and  enjoyed  most  vivid


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  511

impressions  of  the  scenery ;  while  another,  in  whom  that
organ  is  small,  never  dreamt  upon  such  a  subject.  One
friend,  in  whom  Combativeness  is  large,  told  me  that  many
a  tough  and  long  contested  battle  he  had  fought  in  his
dreams ;  while  another,  in  whom  that  organ  is  moderate,
stated  that  he  never  dreamt  of  fighting  but  once,  and  that
was  when  his  imagination  placed  him  in  the  bands  of  mur-
derers, whose  heads  he  attempted  to  break  with  a  poker,
and  wakened  in  terror  at  his  own  combative  effort.

A  curious  illustration  of  the  principle  now  under  eluci-
dation occurs  in  Scott,  who  was  executed  in  1823,  at  Jed-
burgh, for  murder.  It  is  stated  in  his  life,  that  some  years
before  the  fatal  event,  he  had  dreamt  that  he  had  com-
mitted a  murder,  and  was  greatly  impressed  with  the  idea.
He  frequently  spoke  of  it,  and  recurred  to  it  as  something
ominous,  till  at  last  it  was  realized.  The  organ  of  Destruc-
tiveness  was  large  in  his  head,  and  so  active  that  he  was
an  enthusiast  in  poaching,  and  prone  to  outrage  and  vio-
lence in  his  habitual  conduct.  This  activity  of  the  organ
might  take  place  during  sleep,  and  then  it  would  inspire
his  mind  with  destructive  feelings,  and  the  dream  of  mur-
der would  be  the  consequence.  From  the  great  natural
strength  of  the  propensity,  ha  probably  may  have  felt,  when
awake,  an  inward  tendency  to  this  crime,  and  joining  this
and  the  dream  together,  we  can  easily  account  for  the
strong  impression  left  by  the  latter  on  his  mind.

I  presume,  although  I  do  not  know  it  as  a  fact,  that  per-
sons in  whom  cautiousness  is  small,  and  Hope  and  Be-
nevolence large,  will,  when  in  health,  generally  enjoy  bril-
liant and  happy  dreams ;  while  others,  in  whom  Cautious-
ness is  very  large,  and  Hope  small,  will  be  wading  in  diffi-
culties and  woe.

Mr  Andrew  Carmichael  of  Dublin,  in  a  pamphlet  on
Dreaming",  which  he  wrote  some  years  ago,  suggests  the
idea  that  sleep  may  be  the  occasion,  when  the  waste  of  sub-
stance in  the  brain  is  repaired  by  the  depositation  of  new
particles  of  matter.    There  is  no  direct  evidence  of  the


512  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

truth  of  this  conjecture;  but  the  brain,  like  every  other
part  of  the  animal  structure,  is  furnished  with  bloodvessels
and  absorbents,  and  is  known  to  waste  like  them.  That
the  waste  should  be  repaired,  therefore,  is  a  fact  of  neces-
sary inference ;  and  that  the  period  of  sleep,  when  the  men-
tal functions  are  suspended,  would  be  particularly  suitable
to  this  operation,  is  also  matter  of  very  plausible  conjec-
ture ;  but  here  the  point  at  present  rests,  and  I  mention  it
merely  as  a  suggestion.

This  view  of  the  phenomena  of  dreaming  gives  a  death-
blow to  the  superstitious  notion  of  warnings  and  superna-
tural communications  being  now  made  to  the  mind  in  sleep;
while  it  explains  naturally  the  occasional  fulfilment  of
dreams,  as  in  the  case  of  Scott.

Thus  the  internal  excitement  of  the  organs  of  intellect
produces  conception ;  the  ideas  conceived  bearing  relation
always  to  the  particular  organ  or  organs  called  into  action.
This  excitement,  when  morbid  and  involuntary,  produces
fixed  conceptions  or  ideas,  which  is  a  species  of  insanity ;
and  the  same  excitement  taking  place  in  some  organs  during
sleep,  while  others  remain  in  a  state  of  inactivity,  produces
dreams.  Hence  these  phenomena  are  all  connected  in  their
cause,  however  dissimilar  in  their  external  appearance.

IMAGINATION.  The  metaphysicians  frequently  em-
ploy the  words  Imagination  and  Fancy,  but  neither  of  them
are  synonymous  with  the  phrenological  term  Ideality.
Imagination  is  defined  to  be,  "  The  power  of  forming  ideal
pictures ;  the  [tower  of  representing  things  absent  to  one's
self  or  others."  In  this  sense,  which  I  hold  to  be  the  pri-
mitive and  most  correct,  there  is  scarcely  a  shade  of  diffe-
rence betwixt  Conception  and  Imagination.  Locality,  Size,
Colouring,  and  Individuality,  being  active  byjttmmand  of
the  will,  we  may  call  up  in  our  mind  the  ntttures  of  a
landscape,  and  we  may  then  be  said  to  conceive  it.  If  to
this  act  the  word  imagine  were  applied,  and  we  were  said
to  imagine  a  landscape,  it  would  not  be  felt  as  improper.  Mr


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  513

Stewart,  therefore,  if  he  had  confined  Imagination  to  the
limits  here  pointed  out,  viz.  "  of  representing  things  absent
to  one's  self  or  others,"  would  not  be  blameable  for  doubt-
ing if  it  were  a  (acuity  distinct  from  Conception,  which  he
has  ranked  as  such.  At  the  same  time,  his  notion,  that
*<  Imagination  is  not  the  gift  of  nature,"  but  formed  "  by
particular  habits  of  study  or  of  business,"  is  even  on  this
supposition  erroneous ;  for  there  is  no  mode  of  activity  of
the  mind  which  is  not  the  gift  of  nature,  however  much  it
may  be  improved  by  judicious  exercise.  There  is,  how-
ever, a  difference  between  Conception  and  Imagination;
the  former  is  the  cool  and  methodical  representation  of
things  absent,  as  they  exist  in  nature,  to  one's  self,  or  to
others.  Imagination  is  the  impassioned  representation  of  the
same  things,  and  not  merely  in  the  forms  and  arrange-
ments of  nature,  but  in  new  combinations  formed  by  the
mind  itself.  In  Phrenology,  therefore,  Conception  is  view-
ed as  the  second  degree  of  activity  of  the  Knowing  and  Re-
flecting Faculties,  and  Imagination  as  the  third.  Imagi-
nation is  just  intense,  glowing,  forcible,  conceptions,  pro-
ceeding from  great  activity  of  the  intellectual  faculties,
not  confined  to  real  circumstances,  but  embracing  as
many  new  combinations  as  they  are  capable  of  calling
forth.  In  this  way,  Imagination  may  be  manifested  with-
out ornament,  or  illustration;  and  this  is  the  case  when
such  faculties  as  Form,  Locality,  Order,  Colouring,  or
Causality  act  by  themselves,  unaided  by  Ideality  and
Comparison.  Hence,  the  assertion  of  D*Alembert  #,  that
"  metaphysics  and  geometry  are  of  all  the  sciences  be-
longing to  reason  those '  in  which  Imagination  has  the
greatest  share,"  is  quite  intelligible,  and  may  have  been
seriously  said.  If  in  this  individual,  Form,  Size,  Locality,
Order,  Npqgtb^r,  and  Causality,  in  short,  the  faculties  which
go  to  constitute  a  genius  for  mathematics  and  metaphysics,
were  very  active,  he  would  be  conscious  of  imagining,  with
great  interest  and  vivacity,  many  new  relations  of  space,

*  Stewart,  Prelim.  Dissert,  to  Sup.  Encyclop.  Brit.  Part  I.  p.  6.

Kk


514  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

magnitude,  and  causation,  and  looking  to  the  usual  defini-
tions of  Imagination,  he  was  entitled  to  designate  these  acts
as  exercises  of  that  faculty.

The  metaphysicians  attach  a  different  and  more  exten-
sive meaning  to  the  word  "  Fancy;"  and,  according  to  my
understanding  of  the  functions  ascribed  by  them  to  this
supposed  power,  it  embraces  a  wider  range  than  Imagina-
tion, and  necessarily  implies  ornament  and  illustration*
Hence,  comparison  and  probably  Ideality  require  to  be
combined  with  the  Activity  of  the  Knowing  and  Reflecting
Faculties  to  constitute  Fancy.  The  latter  faculties  will
call  up  ideas  of  objects  as  they  exist  in  nature,  Ideality  will
invest  them  with  beauty,  Comparison  will  cull  similes  and
trace  analogies  throughout  the  boundless  fields  of  space,
and  the  intellectual  compound  may  be  designated  as  the
Creation  of  Fancy.  The  significations  commonly  attached
to  the  words  Imagination  and  Fancy,  are,  however,  by  no
means  precise.  The  conceptions  of  the  Knowing  and  Re-
flecting Faculties,  illustrated  and  diversified  by  Comparison
alone,  are  frequently  designated  Fancy ;  and  in  this  sense
an  author  or  orator  may  be  said  to  possess  a  brilliant  fancy,
although  Ideality  be  by  no  means  a  predominant  organ  in
his  head.  On  the  other  hand,  many  passages  of  Milton
are  the  result  merely  of  the  Knowing  Faculties,  and  Cau-
sality imbued  with  intense  Ideality,  and  in  them  Compari-
son supplies  but  few  illustrations;  nevertheless  these  are
said  to  be  highly  imaginative,  and  certainly  are  so.  Thus,
in  judging  of  genius,  Phrenology  teaches  us  to  be  minute
and  discriminating  in  our  analysis,  and  to  avoid  the  error
of  inferring  the  presence  of  all  the  powers  of  the  mind  in
an  eminent  degree,  because  one  great  talent  is  possessed.

Improvisator*  are  able,  without  study  or  premeditation,
to  pour  out  thousands  of  verses  impromptu,  often^f  no  des-
picable quality,  upon  any  subject  which  the  spectators
choose  to  suggest  I  have  not  seen  any  of  these  individuals,
but  Phrenology  enables  us  to  conjecture  the  constituent
elements  of  their  genius.    In  the  first  place,  we  may  infer


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  515

that  they  possess  a  high  nervous  or  sanguine  temperament,
communieatiog  to  the  brain  great  internal  activity.  They
would  require,  in  the  next  place,  Language,  Individuality,
Eventuality,  Comparison,  Tune,  and  Ideality,  all  large.
The  great  and  uncommon  activity  supposed,  would  pro-
duce the  readiness  of  conception  and  warmth  of  feeling
which  are  the  first  requisites ;  large  endowment  of  Indivi-
duality and  Eventuality  would  supply  foots  and  incidents
necessary  to  give  substance  and  action  to  the  composition ;
Comparison  would  afford  similes,  metaphors  and  illustra-
tions; Ideality  would  contribute  elevation;  Tune  give
rhythm,  and  Language  afford  expression  to  the  whole  ideas
so  formed  and  combined*  Observation  only  can  determine
whether  these  conjectures  be  correct,  but  the  causes  here
assigned  appear  to  be  adequate  to  the  effects,  and  this,  in  a
hypothesis,  is  all  that  can  be  expected.

MEMORY  also  is  a  mode  of  Activity  of  the  faculties.
In  most  individuals,  the  mind  has  no  power  of  calling  up,
into  fresh  existence,  the  emotions  experienced  by  means  of
the  propensities  and  sentiments,  by  merely  willing  them  to
be  felt,  and  hence  we  hold  these  faculties  not  to  possess
Memory.  The  ideas,  however,  formed  by  the  Knowing
and  Reflecting  Faculties,  can  be  reproduced  by  an  act  of
recollection,  which  powers  are,  therefore,  said  to  have  Me-
mory. Memory  is  thus  merely  a  degree  of  activity  of  the
Knowing  and  Reflecting  Organs.  I  have  said  that  Concep-
tion and  Imagination  also  result  from  the  internal  activity  of
the  organs ;  and  the  question  naturally  arises,  in  what  re-
spect does  Memory  differ  from  them  ?  The  difference  ap-
pears to  be  this,— in  Conception  and  Imagination,  new
combinations  of  ideas  are  formed,  not  only  without  re-
gard to  the  time  or  order  in  which  the  elementary  no-
tions had  previously  existed,  but  even  without  any  di-
rect reference  to  their  having  at  ail  existed  before.  Me-
mory, on  the  other  hand,  implies  a  new  conception  of
impressions  previously  received,  attended  with  the  idea  of

k  k  2


516  MODES  OP  ACTIVITY

past  time,  and  consciousness  of  their  former  existence ;  and
it  follows  the  order  of  the  events  as  they  happened  in  na-
ture. Each  organ  enables  the  mind  to  recal  the  impres-
sions which  it  served  at  first  to  receive.  Thus,  the  or-
gan of  Tune  will  recal  notes  formerly  heard,  and  give  the
memory  of  music.  Form  will  recal  figures  previously  ob-
served, will  give  the  memory  of  persons,  pictures,  and  crys-
tals, and  produce  a  talent  for  becoming  learned  in  matters
connected  with  such  objects.  Individuality  and  Even-
tuality will  confer  memory  for  facts,  and  render  a  person
skilled  in  history,  both  natural  and  civil.  A  person  in
whom  Causality  is  powerful,  will  possess  a  natural  memory
for'metaphysics.  Hence  there  may  be  as  many  kinds  of
memory  as  there  are  Knowing  and  Reflecting  Organs;
and  an  individual  may  have  great  memory  for  one
class  of  ideas,  and  very  little  for  another ;  George  Bid-
der had  an  almost  inconceivable  power  of  recollecting
arithmetical  calculations,  while  in  memory  of  history  or
languages  he  did  not  surpass  ordinary  men.  As  the
recollection  of  facts  and  occurrences  is  what  is  commonly
meant,  in  popular  language,  by  a  great  memory,  indivi-
duals so  gifted  will  generally  be  found  to  possess  a  good
development  of  Individuality,  Eventuality,  and  probably
of  Language.  >

There  appears  to  be  a  quality  of  brain,  which  gives  re-
tentiveness,  so  that  one  individual  retains  impressions
much  longer  than  another,  although  their  combination  of
organs  be  the  same.  It  is  said  that  Sir  Walter  Scott
possesses  this  characteristic  in  a  high  degree;  but  the
cause  of  it  is  unknown.  This  fact  does  not  invalidate  the
theory  of  Memory  now  given.;  because  in  every  individual,
the  power  of  retaining  one  kind  of  impressions  is  greater
than  that  of  retaining  another,  and  this  pewer  bears  a  uni-
form relation  to  the  size  of  the  organs.

Dr  Watts  seems  to  have  anticipated,  by  a  vary  acute
conjecture,  the  real  philosophy  of  Memory.  He  says,  "  It
is  most  probable  that  those  very  fibres  of  the  .brain  which


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  517

assist  at  the  first  idea  or  perception  of  an  object,  are  the
same  which  assist  also  at  the  recollection  of  it;  and  then  it
will  follow,  that  the  memory  has  no  special  part  of  the
brain  devoted  to  its  own  service,  bnt  uses  all  those  in  ge-
neral which  subserve  our  sensation,  as  well  as  our  think-
ing and  reasoning  powers  *."     This  conjecture  coincides
exactly  with  Mr  Hood's  case  of  the  person  in  Kilmarnock,
who,  although  able  to  articulate,  lost  all  power  of  recollect-
ing arbitrary  signs,  and,  with  a  sound  judgment  and  clear
understanding,  forgot,  through  disease,  his  own  name  and
the  names  of  every  person  and  thing  with  which  previously
he  was  most  familiar.     This  could  be  accounted  for  only
on  the  principle,  that  the  organ  of  Language  had  lost  the
power  of  internal  activity  at  command  of  the  will,  while
the  organs  of  the  reflecting  powers  remained  entire.     The
fact,  also,  of  the  memory  failing  in  old  age,  before  the
judgment  is  impaired,  is  accounted  for  on  the  same  prin-
ciple.   Age  diminishes  the  susceptibility  and  activity  of  the
organs ;  and  hence  they  are  unable  to  receive  and  to  re-
produce impressions  with  the  vivacity  of  youth.     Judg-
ment is  an  exercise  of  the  faculties  on  present  objects,  and
does  not  require  the  same  portion  of  internal  and  sponta-
neous excitement  for  its  execution.     It  is  known,  that,  af-
ter the  mind  has  become  dead  to  the  recollection  of  recent
occurrences,  it  recalls,  with  great  vivacity,  the  impressions
of  youth  and  boyish  years.   These  were  first  imprinted  at  a
time  when  the  whole  system  was  extremely  susceptible,
and  subsequently  have  been  often  recalled;  hence,  per-
haps, the  organs  are  capable  of  resuming  the  state  corres-
ponding to  them,  after  they  have  ceased  to  be  capable  of
retaining  impressions  from  events  happening  when  their
vigour  has  decayed.

The  doctrine  that  memory  is  only  a  degree  of  activity  of
the  faculties,  is  illustrated  by  the  phenomena  of  diseases
which  particularly  excite  the  brain.    Sometimes,  under  the

•Page  18.


518  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

influence  of  disease,  the  most  lively  recollections  of  things
will  take  place,  which  had  entirely  escaped  from  the  me-
mory in  a  state  of  health.  "  A  most  remarkable  example
of  this  kind  occurred  some  years  ago  at  St  Thomas's  Hos-
pital #.  A  man  was  brought  in,  who  had  received  a  con-
siderable injury  of  the  head,  but  from  which  he  ultimately
recovered.  When  he  became  convalescent,  he  spoke  a
language  which  no  one  about  him  could  comprehend.
However,  a  Welsh  milk-woman  came  one  day  into  the
ward,  and  immediately  understood  what  he  said.  It  ap-
peared that  this  poor  fellow  was  a  Welshman,  and  had
been  from  his  native  country  about  thirty  years.  In  the
course  of  that  period,  he  had  entirely  forgotten  his  native
tongue,  and  acquired  the  English  language.  But  when  he
recovered  from  his  accident,  he  forgot  the  language  he  had
been  so  recently  in  the  habit  of  speaking;  and  acquired  the
knowledge  of  that  which  he  had  originally  acquired  and
lost !"  Such  a  fact  as  this  is  totally  inexplicable,  on  any
principle  except  that  of  the  existence  of  organs  by  which
the  faculties  are  manifested :  for  it  could  not  be  the  mind
itself  which  was  affected,  and  its  faculties  impaired  by  the
fever,  or  which  recovered  long  lost  knowledge,  by  the  in-
fluence of  disease.  At  the  same  timt,  the  manner  in
which  suoh  an  effect  is  produced,  is  entirely  unknown.

The  case  of  which  the  following  is  an  abstract,  was
communicated  by  Dr  Djewab  to  the  Royal  Society,  and  al-
though highly  interesting,  is  at  present  inexplicable.

In  a  "  Report  on  a  communication  from  Dr  Dyce  of
Aberdeen,  on  Uterine  Irritation,  and  its  effects  on  the  fe-
male constitution  f"  Dr  Dewar  states,  that  "  It  is  a  case
of  mental  disease,  attended  with  some  advantageous  mani-
festations of  the  intellectual  powers;  and  these  manifesta-
tions disappearing  in  the  same  individual  in  the  healthy
state.  It  is  an  instance  of  a  phenomenon  which  is  some-
times called  double  consciousness,  but  is  more  properly  a  di-

•  Tufpeb'8  Inquiry  into  Gall's  System,  p.  S3.
t  Read  to  the  Royal  Society  in  February  1822.


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  519

pided  consciousness,  or  double  personality,  exhibiting  in  some
measure  two  separate  and  independent  trains  of  thought,
and  two  independent  mental  capabilities,  in  the  same
individual;  each  train  of  thought,  and  each  capability,
being  wholly  dissevered  from  the  other,  and  the  two  states
in  which  they  respectively  predominate  subject  to  frequent
interchanges  and  alternations."

The  patient  was  a  girl  of  sixteen,  the  affection  appeared
immediately  before  puberty,  and  disappeared  when  that
state  was  fully  established.  It  lasted  from  2d  March  to
Uth  June  1815,  under  the  eye  of  Dr  Dyce.  "  The  first
symptom  was  an  uncommon  propensity  to  fall  asleep  in
the  evenings.  This  was  followed  by  the  habit  of  talking
in  her  sleep  on  these  occasions.  One  evening  she  fell
asleep  in  this  manner,  imagined  herself  an  Episcopal  cler-
gyman, went  through  the  ceremony  of  baptizing  three
children,  and  gave  an  appropriate  extempore  prayer.  Her
mistress  shook  her  by  the  shoulders,  on  which  she  awoke,
and  appeared  unconscious  of  every  thing,  except  that  she
had  fallen  asleep,  of  which  she  shewed  herself  ashamed.
She  sometimes  dressed  herself  and  the  children  while  in
this  state,  or,  as  Mrs  L.  called  it,  "  dead  asleep ;"  answered
questions  put  to  her,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  shew  that  she
understood  the  question;  but  the  answers  were  often,
though  not  always,  incongruous."  One  day,  in  this  state,
she  "  set  the  breakfast  with  perfect  correctness,  with  her
eyes  shut.  She  afterwards  awoke  with  the  child  on
her  knee,  and  wondered  how  she  got  on  her  clothes."
Sometimes  the  cold  air  wakened  her,  at  other  times  she
was  seized  with  the  affection  while  walking  out  with  the
children.  "  She  sang  a  hymn  delightfully  in  this  state,
and  from  a  comparison  which  Dr  Dyce  had  an  opportu-
nity of  making,  it  appeared  incomparably  better  done  than
she  could  accomplish  when  well."

"  In  the  mean  time,  a  still  more  singular  and  interesting
symptom  began  to  make  its  appearance.  The  circumstances
which  occurred  during  the  paroxysm  were  completely  forgotten


580  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

by  Iter  when  the  paroxysm  was  over,  but  were  perfectly  re*
membered  during  subsequent  paroxysms  ;"  and  it  is  on  this
account  that  I  have  introduced  the  case  under  the  head  of
Memory.  "  Her  mistress  said,  that  when  in  this  stupor
on  subsequent  occasions,  she  told  her  what  was  said  to
her  on  the  evening  on  which  she  baptized  the  children."
Other  instances  of  this  kind  are  given.  A  depraved  fellow-
servant,  understanding  that  she  wholly  forgot  every  trans-
action that  occurred  during  the  fit,  clandestinely  introdu-
ced a  young  man  into  the  house,  who  treated  her  with  the
utmost  rudeness,  while  her  fellow-servant  stopped  her
mouth  with  the  bed-clothes,  and  otherwise  overpowered  a
vigorous  resistance  which  was  made  by  her,  even  during
the  influence  of  her  complaint.  Next  day  she  had  not  the
slightest  recollection  even  of  that  transaction,  nor  did  any
person  interested  in  her  welfare  know  of  it  for  several  days,
till  she  was  in  one  of  her  paroxysms,  when  she  related  the
whole  facts  to  her  mother.  Next  Sunday  she  was  taken  to
the  Church  by  her  mistress,  while  the  paroxysm  was  on
her.  She  shed  tears  during  the  sermon,  particularly  du-
ring the  account  given  of  the  execution  of  three  young  men
at  Edinburgh,  who  had  described  in  their  dying  declara-
tions the  dangerous  steps  with  which  their  career  of  vice
and  infamy  took  its  commencement.  When  6he  returned
home,  she  recovered  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  was  quite
amazed  at  the  questions  put  to  her  about  the  Church  ser-
mon, and  denied  that  she  had  been  in  any  such  place ;  but
next  night,  gn  being  taken  ill,  she  mentioned  that  she  had
been  at  Church,  repeated  the  words  of  the  text,  and,  in  Dr
Dyce's  hearing,  gave  an  accurate  account  of  the  tragical
narrative  of  the  three  young  men,  by  which  her  feelings
had  been  so  powerfully  affected.    On  this  occasion,  though

in  Mrs  L 's  house,  she  asserted  that  she  was  in  her

mother's."

Drs  Dyce  and  Dewar  do  not  give  any  theory  to  account
for  these  very  extraordinary  phenomena.  They  mention
that  the  girl  complained  of  confusion  and  oppression  in  her


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  521

head  at  the  coming  on  of  the  fits ;  and  that  after  the  flow-
ing of  the  menses  had  been  fairly  established,  the  whole
symptoms  disappeared.  We  are  unable  phrenologically  to
throw  more  light  on  the  case  than  these  gentlemen  have
done ;  and  the  only  conclusion  which  seems  to  arise  from
it  is,  that,  before  memory  can  exist,  the  organs  require  to
be  affected  in  the  6ame  manner,  or  to  be  in  a  state  analogous
to  that  in  which  they  were,  when  the  impression  was  first  re-
ceived. This  inference  is  supported  by  several  other  facts.
Dr  Abel  informed  me  of  an  Irish  porter  to  a  warehouse,
who  forgot,  when  sober,  what  he  had  done  when  drunk ;  but
being  drunk,  again  recollected  the  transactions  of  his  for-
mer state  of  intoxication.  On  one  occasion,  being  drunk,
he  had  lost  a  parcel  of  some  value,  and  in  his  sober  mo-
ments could  give  no  account  of  it.  Next  time  he  was  in-
toxicated, he  recollected  that  he  had  left  the  parcel  at  a
certain  house,  and  there  being  no  address  on  it,  it  had  re-
mained there  safely,  and  was  got  on  his  calling  for  it
The  same  phenomena  present  themselves ,  in  the  state  of
somnambulism,  produced  by  animal  magnetism.  In  the
works  on  this  subject,  it  is  mentioned,  and  the  fact  has
been  confirmed  to  me  by  a  very  intelligent  friend,  who  has
observed  it  in  Paris,  that  a  person  who  is  magnetized  so  as
to  produce  the  kind  of  magnetic  sleep  termed  Somnambu-
lism, acquires,  like  the  girl  in  Aberdeen,  a  new  conscious-
ness and  memory ;  he  does  not  recollect  the  transactions
of  his  ordinary  state  of  existence,  but  acquires  the  power  of
speaking  and  of  thinking  in  his  induced  state  of  abstraction
from  the  external  world.  When  this  state  has  subsided,
all  that  passed  in  it  is  obliterated  from  the  memory,  while
the  recollection  of  ordinary  events  is  restored.  If  the
magnetic  state  is  again  recalled,  memory  of  the  circum-
stances which  formerly  happened  in  that  state  is  restored ;
and  thus  the  individuals  may  be  said  to  live  in  a  state  of
divided  consciousness.  In  this  country,  the  doctrines  of  ani-
mal magnetism  are  treated  with  the  same  contempt  which
has  been  poured  upon  Phrenology.  I  am  wholly  unacquaint-


522  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

ed  with  their  merits ;  but  the  circumstance  now  stated,  of
alternating  memory  and  forgetfalness,  is  mentioned  in  the
books  on  the  subject  which  I  have  consulted,  and  has  been
certified  to  me  as  true,  by  a  gentleman  whose  understands
ing  is  too  acute  to  allow  me  to  believe  that  he  was  de-
ceived, and  whose  honour  is  too  high  to  admit  of  his
deceiving  others.  These  facts  cannot  be  accounted  for
in  a  satisfactory  way ;  but  by  communicating  a  knowledge
of  their  existence,  attention  will  be  drawn  to  them,  and  fu-
ture observations  and  reflection  may  ultimately  throw  light
upon  the  subject.

JUDGMENT,  in  the  metaphysical  ^sense,  belongs  to  the
reflecting  Faculties  alone.  The  Knowing  Faculties  may
be  said,  in  one  sense,  to  judge,  as,  for  example,  the  facul-
ty of  Tune  may  be  agreeably  or  disagreeably  affected,  and
in  this  way  may  judge  of  sounds :  but  Judgment,  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word,  is  a  perception  of  relation,  or  of
fitness,  or  of  the  connexion  betwixt  means  and  an  end,
and  belongs  entirely  to  the  reflecting  powers.  These  fa-
culties, as  well  as  the  Knowing  Faculties,  have  Perception,
Memory  and  Imagination.  Causality,  for  example,  perceives
the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  and  also  remembers  or  ima*
gines  that  relation,  just  as  Locality  perceives,  remembers,
or  imagines  the  relative  position  of  objects.  Hence  Judg-
ment is  the  decision  of  the  Reflecting  Faculties  upon  the
feelings  furnished  by  the  Propensities  and  Sentiments,  and
upon  the  ideas  furnished  by  the  Knowing  Faculties.  This
I  conceive  to  be  the  strictly  phrenological  analysis  of  Judg-
ment; but  this  term,  in  the  popular  sense,  has  a  more  ex-
tensive signification.  It  is  common  to  observe  of  an  indi-
vidual, that  he  possesses  an  acute  or  even  profound  intel-
lect, but  that  he  is  destitute  of  judgment  This  apparent
paradox  may  be  explained  in  two  ways ;  First,  By  "  an
acute  or  profound  intellect,"  is  frequently  meant  a  great
but  limited  talent,  which  we  would  refer  to  some  of  the
Knowing  Faculties.    Thus,  a  person  may  be  distinguished


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  523

for  ability  in  mathematics  or  painting,  and  not  be  eminent
for  reflection  or  judgment,  in  the  stricter  sense.  There  is,
however,  a  second  explanation,  which  is  preferable.  To
judge  of  the  line  of  conduct  proper  to  be  followed  in  the
affairs  of  life,  it  is  necessary  iofiel  correctly,  as  well  as  to
reason  deeply,  or  rather,  it  is  mare  necessary  to  feel  rightly
than  to  reflect  Hence,  if  an  individual  possess  very
powerful  reflecting  organs,  such  as  Lord  Bacon's,  and  be
deficient  in  Conscientiousness,  as  his  Lordship  seems  to
have  been,  he  is  like  a  fine  ship  wanting  a  helm,  liable  to
be  carried  from  her  course  by  every  wind  and  current.
The  reflecting  organs  give  the  power  of  thinking,  but
Conscientiousness,  and  the  other  sentiments,  are  necessary
to  furnish  correct  feeling,  by  which  practical  conduct  may
be  directed.  Indeed,  Lord  Bacon  is  a  striking  example, ,
how  poor  an  endowment  intellect,  even  the  most  transcen-
dent, is,  when  not  accompanied  by  amiable  and  upright
sentiments.  That  mind  which  embraced,  in  one  compre-
hensive grasp,  the  whole  circle  of  sciences,  and  pointed  out,
with  a  surprising  sagacity,  the  modes  in  which  they  might
best  be  cultivated, — that  mind,  in  short,  which  anticipated
the  progress  of  the  human  understanding  by  a  century  and
a  half,  possessed  so  little  judgment,  so  little  of  sound  and
practical  sense,  as  to  become  the  accuser,  and  even  d*«
famer  of  Essex,  his  early  patron  and  friend ;  to  pollute  the
seat  of  justice  by  corruption  and  bribery;  and  to  stoop  to
the  basest  flattery  of  a  weak  king,  all  for  the  gratification
of  a  contemptible  ambition.  Never  was  delusion  more
complete.  He  fell  into  an  abyss  of  degradation  from
which  he  never  ascended;  and  to  this  day,  the  darkness  of  his
moral  reputation  forms  a  lamentable  contrast  to  the  brIU
liancy  of  his  intellectual  fame.  There  was  here  the  most
evident  defect  of  judgment ;  and  with  such  reflecting  powers
as  he  possessed,  the  seat  of  his  errors  could  lie  only  in  the
sentiments,  deficiency  in  some  of  which  prevented  him  from
feeling  right,  and  of  course  withheld  from  his  finderstand*

1


534  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

iog  the  data  from  which  sound  cohclusions  respecting  con-
duct'could  be  drawn.

In  common  life,  the  effect  of  the  feelings  in  originating
opinion,  is  by  far  too  little  attended  to ;  and  we  frequently
hear  persons  carrying  on  angry  disputations,  with  a  view  to
convince  each  other's  understandings;  when,  in  fact,  the
cause  of  their  difference  lies  in  a  feeling,  so  that  if  it  could
be  made  the  same  in  both,  no  disagreement  would  exist
It  is  common  in  such  cases  to  say,  "  my  sentiments  are
entirely  different  from  yours ;"  a  form  of  expression  which
is  strictly  philosophical,  and  harmonizes  with  the  explana-
tion now  given;  but  the  parties  do  not  perceive  that  a
"  sentiment,"  in  the  strict  sense,  or  in  popular  language  a
"  feeling,"  cannot  be  communicated  by  argument ;   and
hence  maintain  the  controversy,  by  an  address  to  the  un-
derstanding alone,  and  generally  with  no  satisfactory  re-
sult    If,  on  the  other  hand,  two  persons  meet,  whose  pro-
pensities and  sentiments  harmonize,  their  "  sentiments,"
in  the  popular  sense,  generally  coincide,  although,  in  the
depth  of  their  intellectual  powers,  there  may  be  consider*
able  disparity.     In  estimating,  therefore,  the  degree  of
sound  and  practical  judgment  for  the  affairs  of  life,  the
good  sense,  or  mother- wit,  of  any  individual,  we  ought  not
to  confine  our  attention  to  the  forehead  alone,  under  the
notion  that  it  is  exclusively  the  seat  of  Judgment;  but  to
look  first  to  the  temperament,  that  we  may  judge  of  the
activity  of  the  brain,  and  next  at  the  combination  of  or-
gans; for  we  shall  invariably  find  sound  sense  to  be.  the
accompaniment  of  an  equable  development  of  $11  the  or-
gans, those  of  the  moral  sentiments  and  intellect  predo-
minating in  Size.    There  are  then  no  exaggerated  and  no
defective  powers ;  so  that  no  desires  assume  an  undue  ascen-
dency, and  no  emotions  are  so  feeble  as  not  to  be  adequately
experienced.   This  combination  is  rare,  and  hence  high  prac-
tical sense  is  more  uncommon  than  great  partial  talent.    A
person  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  possessing  the  forehead  of  an
idiot,  who  yet  had  conducted  himself  with  remarkable  pru-


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  525

dence  and  success  in  trade,  and,  by  his  estimable  qualities,
had  gained  the  esteem  of  the  little  circle  in  which,  he  moved.
On  examination,  I  found  a  fine  nervous  and  sanguine  tem-
perament ;  a  forehead  greatly  retreating  indeed ;  but  with
a  full  development  of  the  knowing  organs ;  and,  on  turning
to  the  region  of  the  propensities  and  sentiments,  the  for-
mer were  found  in  fair  proportion,  with  an  excellent  de-
velopment of  the  latter.  Conscientiousness,  Veneration,  Be-
nevolence, Love  of  Approbation,  Adhesiveness,  and  Cau-
tiousness, were  all  large  ;  and  the  sources  of  his  prudence,
good  sense,  and  amiable  qualities,  were  at  once  apparent.
To  shew  that  Phrenology  and  the  head  were  not  at  vari-
ance, I  inquired  into  his  powers  of  logical  or  profound  ar-
gumentation ;  when  his  friend  said,  that,  although  he  was
fond  of  reading,  his  acquaintances  were  surprised  that  he
never  learnt  the  meaning  of  a  great  many  plain  words ;  and
on  asking  what  these  were,  they  turned  out  to  be  abstract
terms  and  expressions,  referable  for  their  signification  to
Causality  and  Comparison.  The  individual  in  question'
not  only  could  not  reason  consecutively,  but  in  ordinary
discourse  misapplied,  and  seemed  not  to  understand,  the
terms  now  adverted  to.  This  was  exactly  what  a  phreno-
logist would  have  predicted.

In  describing,  therefore,  the  effect  of  the  Reflecting  Fa-
culties in  ordinary  life,  I  would  say  that  the  propensities
and  sentiments  furnish  the  desires  which  prompt  to  action,
and  also  the  feelings  which  regulate  conduct ;  while  reflec-
tion, without  being  able  to  alter  their  nature,  judges  of  the
motives  presented  by  them  to  its  consideration ;  taking  in  an
extent  of  view,  greater  or  less,  in  proportion  to  the  size  of
the  intellectual  organs.  For  example,  if  Cautiousness  be
excessively  large,  and  Hope  small,  this  combination  will
present  dismal  forebodings  to  the  mind ;  and  the  under-
standing cannot  alter  the  feelings  so  as  to  render  cheery
and  brilliant,  scenes  which  they  tinge  with  melancholy  and
gloom.  If  Hope  be  very  large,  and  Cautiousness  very  small,
then  the  most  delusive  anticipations  of  felicity  will  be  Bug-


586  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

gested,  and  the  understanding  will  see  objects  under  this
impression.  If,  again,  both  Cautiousness  and  Hope  be
large,  each  will  furnish  its  own  emotions  on  the  objects  of
contemplation;  and  the  understanding  now  having  two
views,  will  possess  dements  for  judging,  and  be  able,  by
oomparing,  to  come  to  a  sound  determination  between
them.

If  these  principles  be  correct,  they  enable  us  to  explain
why,  among  lawyers,  a  bad  pleader  sometimes  makes  a
good  judge,  and  vice  versa.  To  a  pleader,  intellect  and
propensity  are  more  essentially  necessary  than  Conscien-
tiousness; to  a  judge,  on  the  other  hand,  great  moral  or-
gans are  indispensable;  for  without  an  ample  development
of  them,  his  intellect  is  liable  to  be  led  astray  by  subtleties
and  false  views,  and  in  his  decisions  the  grand  element  of
justice  will  be  wanting.  I  have  noticed,  that,  where  Con-
scientiousness is  large  in  a  lawyer,  and  he  is  pleading  a  bad
cause,  he  betrays  instinctively,  by  his  natural  manner,  his
impression  that  he  is  in  die  wrong.  Another  individual,
in  whom  this  organ  is  deficient,  views  all  cases  chiefly  as
questions  of  opinion,  and  contends  for  victory  with  that  ar-
dent spirit  which  the  former  can  display  only  when  advo-
cating the  cause  of  truth.

The  same  principles  enable  us  to  judge  of  the  propriety
of  a  very  important  regulation  in  one  of  the  institutions  of
the  country, — I  mean  the  requisite  of  unanimity  in  juries  in
civil  causes.  If  two  individuals  were  constituted  umpires
on  a  olaim  of  damages  for  defamation,  and  if  one  of  them
possessed  from  nature  an  immense  Love  of  Approbation,
judging,  from  his  own  feelings,  he  would  rather  suffer
death  than  live  defamed ;  if  the  other  was  extremely  defi-
cient by  natural  constitution  in  this  sentiment,  he  could
pass  his  days  unmoved  by  the  censures  or  applauses  of  the
world,  and  the  two  could  not,  by  any  efforts  of  their  un-
derstandings, come  to  view  the  injury  sustained  by  the
plaintiff  in  the  same  light,  nor  agree  about  the  amount  of
damages  which  would  constitute  an  equitable  compensation


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  527

for  the  slander.  The  one  must  either  surrender  his  con-
science to  the  other,  or  allow  a  third  party  to  decide  be-
tween them;  for  real  unanimity  is  excluded  by  the  very
constitution  of  their  minds.  No  exercise  of  the  understand-
ing will  produce  it.  It  is  difficult  to  admire  the  wisdom  of
that  legislature  which  is  so  ignorant  of  the  human  mind  as
to  imagine  that  men  can  by  argument,  if  they  will,  arrive
at  one  conclusion  in  such  cases :  or  which,  if  it  knows  that
they  cannot  in  nature  agree,  nevertheless  conceives  it  pro-
found and  beneficial  to  require  a  verdict  in  direct  opposi-
tion to  the  constitution  of  the  mind ;  to  produce  an  appear-
ance of  unanimity,  when  the  mbstemce  is  unattainable.
Many  voluminous  arguments  have  been  brought  forward
on  the  opposite  sides  of  this  question :  but  it  appears  to  me,
that  the  mode  of  judging  of  it  afforded  by  Phrenology
carries  us  to  the  ultimate  principles  at  once*  If  it  be  natu-
rally in  the  power  of  men,  by  honest  efforts*  to  see  ques-
tions of  conduct,  such  as  occur  before  Jury  Courts,  in  die
same  light,  then  unanimity  ought  to  be  required ;  but  if
this  perfect  harmony  of  sentiment  is  excluded  by  nature,  it
is  mere  littleness  and  imbecility,  to  pretend  to  produce  it
by  an  act  of  Parliament;  accordingly,  nature  prevails  here
as  in  every  other  case,  for  all  sensible  jurors  before  com-
mencing their  deliberations,  arrange  that  the  minority  shall
yield  to  the  majority;  and  the  only  effects  of  the  law  are  to
put  it  in  the  power  of  some  very  obstinate  or  very  wicked
intfvidual  to  concuss  his  fellow  jurors  into  adoption  of  his
opinion — Which,  on  Hie  ordinary  chances,  from  his  standing
alone,  will  be  placed  at  an  extreme  point  in  the  scale  of  ab-
surdity—or  else  to  defeat  the  object  of  the  parties,  by  de-
priving them  altogether  of  a  verdict.

It  has  been  said,  that  the  requisite  of  unanimity  produces
attention  in  the  jury  to  the  case,  and  discussion  of  the  subject
among  themselves.  This  I  have  no  doubt  may  be  true,
but  even  with  every  degree  of  attention  and  discussion,  una-
nimity in  general  is  morally  impossible.  Obvious  ques-
tions of  evidence  or  right,  in  which  all  men  may  agree,  are


528  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

not  those  that  come  most  frequently  before  courts  of  justice ;
but  difficult  cases,  in  which  the  most  conscientious  and  en-
lightened men  may  differ  in  opinion.  Out  of  twelve  or  fif-
teen persons  there  is. always  a  risk  that  two  or  more  may
stand  in  the  antipodes  of  moral  and  intellectual  consti-
tution to  each  other.  Under  the  present  system  such  in-
dividuals must  yield  unconvinced.  It  appears  to  me,  that,
by  leaving  out  the  extremes,  and  requiring  a  majority  of
three-fourths,  or  some  such  proportion,  the  advantages  of
discussion  would  be  gained,  and  the  evil  of  the  great  body
of  a  jury  being  concussed  into  a  verdict  by  one  obstinate
individual,  might  be  avoided.  A  proposition  to  which  nine
men  out  of  twelve  would  voluntarily  assent,  would  be  near-
er truth  than  one  modified  by  mutual  concessions  to  conci-
liate (but  not  to  satisfy)  the  whole.

Having  now  discussed  the  metaphysical  faculties  of  Per-
ception, Conception,  Imagination,  Memory  and  Judgtnent,
and  shewn  them  to  be  merely  modes  of  activity  of  the
phrenological  faculties,  with  which  the  metaphysicians
were  unacquainted,  I  proceed  to  notice  several  other  men-
tal operations  and  affections,  which  make  a  figure  in  the
common  systems  of  mental  philosophy,  and  to  refer  them
also  to  their  principles  in  this  science.

CONSCIOUSNESS  means  the  knowledge  which  the
mind  has  of  its  own  existence  and  operations.  Dr  Thomas
Brown  denies  that  it  is  a  power,  or  any  thing  different
from  sensation,  emotion,  or  thought,  existing  at  any  mo-
ment in  the  mind.  It  gives  us  no  intimation  of  the  ex-
istence of  the  organs,  and  reveals  to  us  only  the  operations,
of  our  own  minds,  leaving  us  entirely  in  the  dark  regard-
ing the  mental  affections  of  others,  where  they  differ  from
our  own.  Hence,  by  reflecting  on  consciousness,  which
the  metaphysicians  chiefly  did,  as  their  means  of  studying
the  mind,  we  can  discover  nothing  concerning  the  organs
by  which  the  faculties  act,  and  run  great  danger  of  forming


OP  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.  529  ,

erroneous  views  of  human  nature,  by  supposing  mankind
in  general  constituted  exactly  like  ourselves.

Each  organ  communicates  consciousness  of  the  feelings
and  ideas  which  it  serves  to  manifest ;  thus,  if  the  organ  of
Tune  be  extremely  deficient,  the  individual  will  not  be
able  to  attain  consciousness  of  melody ;  a  person  in  whom
Conscientiousness  is  extremely  deficient,  will  not  be  con-
scious -of  the  sentiment  of  justice,  nor  of  its  obligations ;
one  in  whom  Veneration  is  very  feeble,  will  not  be  conscious
of  the  emotion  of  piety,  nor  of  the  duties  arising  from  it.  If
we  should  place  individuals  so  constituted,  in  situations
requiring  vivid  consciousness  of  these  emotions,  for  the  di-
rection of  their  conduct,  we  shall  be  disappointed*  This
shews  the  great  importance  of  a  well  constituted  brain.
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  organs  are  large  and  the  tem-
perament active,  intense  consciousness  of  the  corresponding
feelings  and  ideas  is  experienced;  and  some  persons^  mis-
taking the  emotions  arising  in  this  manner  from  Wonder,
Veneration,  and  other  faculties,  for  supernatural  communi-
cations, fall  into  fanaticism  and  superstition.

It  has  been  argued  by  some  sceptics,  that  the  human
mind  possesses  no  certain  knowledge,  because  not  only  the
senses  and  understanding  occasionally  deceive  us,  but  even
Consciousness  itself  gives  false  intimations;  thus,  a  man
whose  leg  has  been  amputated,  is  sometimes  conscious,  years
after  the  operation,  of  a  pain  in  the  toe  of  the  lost  foot ;  or
a  patient  suffering  under  chronic  disease  of  the  liver,  feels
no  uneasiness  in  it,  but  is  conscious  of  a  pain  at  the  top  of
the  right  shoulder.  The  answer  to  this  argument  is,  that
each  nerve  and  faculty  has  received  a  definite  constitution*
in  virtue  of  which  it  gives  certain  intimations  when  affect-
ed in  a  oertain  manner;  thus,  when  the  nerve  of  the  toe  is
affected,  the  nerve  itself  gives  consciousness  of  pain,  ac-
companied with  an  instinctive  reference  to  its  seat.  After
the  leg  has  been  amputated,  part  of  the  nerve  remains,  and
when  affected  in  the  same  manner  as  while  the  toe  existed,

l1


530  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY

it  communicatee  the  impression  which  belonged  to  it  in  its
entire  state.  In  this  there  is  no  deception,  because  the
nerve  which  originally  intimated  pain  in  the  toe,  is  affected
in  the  same  manner  as  it  was  when  the  toe  existed.  In  like
manner  the  liver  itself  possesses  little  sensibility,  but  the
phrenic  nerve  which  is  ramified  on  it  communicates  with
the  shoulder,  and  the  nerve  being  highly  sensitive,  is  affect-
ed by  the  state  of  the  liver,  and  produces  pain  in  the
shoulder.  The  nerve  in  tins  case  is  really  affected,  and
the  pain  is  the  correct  indication  of  its  state.  It  is  the  of*
fice  of  Causality  to  discover  the  causes  of  these  affections,
Consciousness  being  limited  to  the  intimation  of  the  sensa-
tions themselves.  Every  derangement  of  an  organ  of  sen-
sation or  perception  is  accompanied  with  disorder  of  Con*
sciousness  to  a  corresponding  extent :  Thus,  in  jaundice,
the  mind  has  consciousness  of  all  objects  being  yellow;  in
cases  like  that  of  Miss  8.  L.,  detailed  on  p.  504,  there  is  con-
sciousness of  disturbed  equilibrium ;  but  Causality  refers
these  perceptions  to  diseases  as  their  causes.  When  the  de-
rangement embraces  the  organs  of  Causality  themselves,
the  power  of  discriminating  the  impression  to  be  diseased
is  lost,  and  insanity  is  established.

It  would  be  of  much  practical  utility  to  teach  individuals
the  dependence  of  Consciousness  on  the  states  of  the  mental
organs ;  as  a  means  qf  inducing  them,  when  under  morbid
excitement,  to  distrust  their  own  impressions,  and  seek  re-
lief from  sensible  advisers.  In  the  present  system  of  edu-
cation, the  connexion  pf  the  feelings  and  intellect  with  ma-
terial organs,  is  so  totally  overlooked,  and  every  emotion  and
perception  is  represented  as  so  pufgly  mental,  that  when
these  become  exalted  or  disordered,  it  Is  extremely  difficult
to  enable  the  individual  to  comprehend  how  they  can  be
delusive,  or  in  any  way  affected  by  corporeal  conditions ;
and  hence  he  suffers  much  uneasiness  in  secret;  avoids  re-
course to  a  physician ;  persists  in  acting  on  his  morbid  im-
pressions, as  if  they  were  sound ;  till  at  last  disease  k  per-
manently established,  which,  under  more  enlightened  guid-


OF  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.      531

ance,  might  easily  have  been  averted,  or  cut  short  at  its
commencement

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  determine  whether  the  feeling  •
of  personal  Identity  indicated  by  the  pronoun  1  is  connect-
ed with  a  particular  organ,  or  the  result  of  the  general  ac-
tion of  the  whole  organs.     The  reader  is  referred  to  what
is  said  on  this  subject  on  p.  107,  237,  and  433.

ATTENTION  is  not  a  faculty  of  the  mind,  but  consists
merely  in  the  application  of  the  Knowing  or  Reflecting  Fa-
culties to  their  objects.  Thus  the  faculty  of  Tune,  excited
by  melody,  attends  to  notes ;  the  faculty  of  Causality,  ad-
dressed by  a  demonstration,  attends  to  the  steps  of  the  ar-
gument; and  the  other  faculties  of  the  intellect,  in  like
manner,  attend  to  their  various  objects.  Concentrativeness
gives  continuity  to  the  impressions  of  the  faculties,  Indivi-
duality and  Eventuality  direct  them  to  their  objects,  and
Firmness  ^maintains  them  in  a  state  of  application,  and
these  greatly  aid  Attention  ;  but  still  attention,  in  itself,  is
a  mere  act  of  the  different  intellectual  faculties,  and  not
the  attribute  of  any  particular  power,  established  exclusive-
ly for  its  production.

ASSOCIATION.  The  metaphysicians  have  endeavour-
ed, by  reflecting  on  their  own  consciousness,  to  discover
universal  laws,  by  which  the  succession  of  ideas  in  man-
kind in  general  is  regulated.  They  imagine  our  thoughts
to  follow  each  other  in  established  orders,  and  have  at-
tempted to  find  out  the  circumstances  which  determine
these  orders,  and  the  pauses  in  virtue  of  which  one  idea
introduces  another  into  the  mind.  Such  an  attempt  ap-
pears to  me  to  be  futile,  and  incompatible  with  success.
Suppose  that  we  wished  to  ascertain  the  laws  by  which
the  succession  of  notes  emitted  by  an  iEolian  harp  is  regu-
lated, we  should  first  endeavour  to  discover  the  causes
which  produced  them.  Similar  causes,  acting  in  similar
circumstances,  produce  similar  effects;   but  if  we  vary

l  1  2


538  MODES  OF  ACTIVITY.

one  circumstance  out  of  a  thousand,  we  cannot  calculate
on  the  result.  Now,  the  causes  which  determine  the  suc-
cession of  notes  from  an  JSolian  harp  are,  the  structure  of
the  harp ;  the  impetus  of  the  air ;  the  order  in  which  it  ex-
cites the  various  strings.  Render  all  these  circumstances
the  same  in  the  case  of  every  harp,  and  the  same  succession
of  notes  may  he  assuredly  predicted*  But  if  the  air,  that
emblem  of  inconstancy,  will  not  blow  twice  with  the  same
force  on  the  same  spot  in  a  month,  or  will  not  excite  the
same  strings  twice  in  the  same  order  of  succession  in  a
year;  and  if  no  two  iEolian  harps  can  be  made  in  every
particular  of  string,  form,  and  substance,  alike, — who,  by
observing  the  notes  arising  from  one  harp,  will  succeed  in
unfolding  the  laws  by  which  the  succession  of  notes  from
iEolian  harps  in  general  may  be  determined,  whatever
their  size,  structure,  and  number  of  strings,  and  the  cir-
cumstances in  which  they  may  be  placed?  This  illustra-
tion is  completely  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  human  facul-
ties. Ideas  are  affections  of  these,  just  as  notes  are  affec-
tions of  the  strings  of  the  harp.  Ideas  arise  from  impres-
sions on  the  various  faculties  of  the  mind ;  and  there  is  as
little  regularity  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  received,  as
in  the  breathing  of  the  air  on  the  strings.  And,  lastly,  if
harps  may* -vary  in  structure,  human  beings  do  positively
differ  in  the  relative  strength  of  their  powers.  Hence  the
same  impressions  must  produce  very  different  effects,  or
introduce  very  different  ideas  into  minds  so  dissimilarly
constituted;  and  how,  amid  such  a  countless  variety  of
causes,  can  similarity  of  effects  be  expected?

If  we  place  a  number  of  persons  on  a  hill-top,  say  Arthur
Seat,  overlooking  a  champaign  country,  and  the  sea,  and
bid  each  declare  his  thoughts-; — we  shall  find  that  one,
with  Ideality  predominant,  will  think  of  the  magnificence
of  nature,  the  boundless  extent  of  the  ocean,  the  vastness
of  the  mountains  r  and  on  recalling1  the  scene,  these  ideas
and  emotions  will  be  associated  with  it  in  his  mind :  another,
with  great  Causality  and  Constructiveness,  and  little  Ide"


ASSOCIATION.  583

ality,  will  admire  the  skill  which  he  sees  display ed  in  farm-
ing the  fields,  and  in  constructing  the  houses  and  the
ships :  one,  with  Benevolence  large,  will  think  of  the  happi-
ness enjoyed  by  the  people  who  inhabit  the  plain :  another,
with  Acquisitiveness  active,  will  think  how  the  various
branches  of  industry  will  pay ;  and  one,  with  a  strong  Ve-
neration, will  probably  take  occasion  to  admire  the  great-
ness and  goodness  of  God.  Now,  the  metaphysician  expects
to  find  out  laws,  by  which,  on  Arthur  Seat  being  after-
wards mentioned,  in  the  presence  of  these  individuals,  we
may  be  able  to  tell  the  train  of  thoughts  which  it  will  in-
troduce into  their  several  minds ;  and  he  hopes  to  arrive  at
this  result,  by  studying  the  train  which  arises  in  his  own
mind,  on  the  hill  being  referred  to  as  an  object  of  thought
Such  an  expectation  must  necessarily  be  futile.  Each  of
the  individuals  supposed  would,  on  the  mention  of  the  hill,
experience  a  train  of  ideas  corresponding  to  the  first  im-
pressions which  he  received  on  the  top,  and  nothing  can
be  more  dissimilar  than  these.  As  well,  therefore,  to  use
the  words  of  an  ingenious  phrenologist,  may  we  expect,
by  studying  the  forms  and  hues  of  the  clouds,  which  -flit
along  the  sky  to-day,  to  be  able  to  discover  laws,  by  which
their  succession  will  be  regulated  to-morrow :  as,  by  reflect-
ing on  the  ideas  which  pass  in  one  mind,  to  discover  links
of  association,  by  which  ideas  in  the  minds  of  mankind  in
general  will  be  uniformly -connected,  and  introduced  in  a
determinate  succession.

Although,  however,  it  is  in  vain  to  expect  to  find  any
law  or  principle  regulating  the  association  of  one  idea  with
another,  the  mutual  influence  of  organs  by  association  is
determinate.  There  are  also  natural  associations  betwixt
certain  external  objects  and  the  internal  faculties:  and,
lastly,  artificial  associations  may  be  formed  betwixt  objects
and  the  feelings  of  the  mind ;  and  the  laws  which  regulate
these  constitute  certain  knowledge,  and  .are  interesting  to
be  known.  Let  us,  therefore,  inquire  briefly  into  these
laws  of  association.


534  ASSOCIATION.

In  ihejirst  place,  we  are  able  to  perform  anew,  when  we
wish  to  do  so9  any  voluntary  motion  which  we  have  per-
formed before.  This  shews  that  the  nerves  of  motion  are
so  associated  or  connected  with  the  organs  of  the  mind,  as
to  be  at  the  command  of  the  will.

In  the  second  place,  by  conceiving  an  object  in  distress)  we
can  raise  the  emotion  of  pity  in  the  mind;  by  conceiving  a
splendid  scene  in  nature,  we  can  excite  the  emotion  of  su-
blimity and  beauty  produced  by  Ideality ;  by  reading  a  ter-
rific story,  we  are  able  to  experience  the  chilling  emotions
of  fear  creeping  along  the  nerves.  These  facts  point  out
a  close  connexion  betwixt  the  organs  of  Intellect  and  the
organs  of  the  different  propensities  and  sentiments.  Indeed,
in  the  dissection  of  the  brain,  the  closest  relation  betwixt
its  different  parts  is  perceived,  combined  with  arrangements
for  separate  functions;  but  this  is  connexion  rather  than
association.

Farther,  Mr  Scott,  in  his  "  Observations  on  Phrenology,"
has  pointed  out,  in  a  very  ingenious  manner,  the  beautiful
association,  in  point  of  arrangement,  of  the  organs,  for  the
purposes  of  mutual  assistance  in  their  action.  "  When  I
began,"  says  he,  "  to  consider  the  schedule  or  map  present-
ed to  us  by  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  I  could  at  first  see
none  of  this  beauty  in  it.  In  looking  over  their  list  of  powers,
I  could  observe  no  order  or  connexion  between  them.  The
whole  presented  to  me  a  rude  appearance,  quite  different,
as  I  then  thought,  from  what  is  commonly  found  in  nature.
After  a  more  attentive  consideration,  however,  light  began
to  dawn  upon  me,  and,  beginning  to  consider  the  faculties
in  a  certain  way,  and  to  group  them  after  a  certain  order,
the  whole  gradually  formed  themselves  before  me  into  a
system  of  surprising  symmetry ;  and,  like  the  disjointed
parts  of  an  anamorphosis,  when  seen  from  the  proper  point
of  view,  collecting  themselves  into  one  elegant  design,  de-
lighted me  with  the  appearance  of  that  very  order  and
beauty  which  I  would  beforehand  have  expected  to  find
in  them.     In  a  scheme  such  as  this,  where  we  find  powers


ASSOCIATION.  535

which  are  analogous,  which  resemble  one  another  in  their
nature  and  use*  or  which  act  upon  and  co-operate  with  one
another,  or  mutually  aid  and  assist,  or  control  and  balance,
each  other,  we  should  naturally  expect  the  organs  of  these
powers  to  be  situated  near  to  one  another,  and  in  such  a
way  as  either  to  adjoin,  or  at  least  to  admit  of  an  easy
communication.  Accordingly  we  find  this  to  be  the  case."
Immediately  above  Amativeness,  for  example,  we  see  in
the  bust  Philoprogenitiveness,  giving  the  love  of  offspring,
and  Adhesiveness,  producing  the  propensity  to  attachment,
the  three  together  constituting  the  group  of  the  domestic
feelings.  Next  to  them  we  find  Combativeness,  as  if  there
were  no  dearer  objects  than  these  for  which  the  various
powers  could  be  exerted.  Adjoining  to  Combativeness  is
Destructiveness ;  the  former  giving  courage  to  meet  the
enemy,  the  latter  putting  peril  in  the  onset,  and  threatening
him  with  destruction.

Amid  the  difficulties  of  life,  it  is  necessary  to  use  not
only  caution  but  also  so  much  of  secrecy  regarding  our  own
purposes,  as  not  to  carry  "  our  hearts  on  our  sleeves  for
daws  to  peck  at,"  and  we  find  Secretiveness  surmounted  by
and  in  juxtaposition  with  Cautiousness.

Turning  to  the  region  of  the  Sentiments,  we  find  Vene-
ration, which  produces  the  tendency  to  religion,  surround-
ed by  Benevolence,  Hope,  Perseverance,  and  Justice ;  or
the  fountains  of  the  whole  charities  and  duties  of  life  asso-
ciated in  a  group,  and  beautifully  arranged  for  reciprocal
aid  and  combined  action.

We  find  Ideality  approaching  these,  but  a  little  below
them,  yet  so  near  to  and  above  Construetiveness  as  to  elevate
its  designs.  Ideality  also  adjoins  to  Wit  and  Tune,  as  if  to
give  soul  and  fancy  to  poetry.

In  like  manner  we  find  the  organs  which  simply  perceive,
or  the  Knowing  Organs,  arranged  together,  along  the  su-
perciliary ridge,  and  those  of  Reflection  occupying  the
summit  of  the  forehead,  like  the  powers  which  govern  and
direct  die  whole.


536  ASSOCIATION.

Mr  Scott,  after  exhibiting  these  views,  observes,  that
such  an  arrangement  is  more  beautiful,  systematic,  and  ap-
propriate, than  human  ingenuity  could  have  devised ;  and
taken  in  connexion  with  the  fact,  that  the  organs  were
discovered  at  different  times,  and  in  separate  situations,
and  that  Order  and  Beauty  appeared  only  after  the  ultimate
filling  up  of  the  greater  part  of  the  brain  had  taken  place,
it  affords  a  strong  argument  a  priori,  that  the  organs  were
discovered,  not  invented,  and  that  the  system  is  the  work  of
nature,  and  not  of  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim.

In  treating  of  the  organ  of  Language,  I  have  explained  the
association  of  ideas  with  signs.     I  may  here  add,  that  the
doctrines  of  Mnemonics  are  founded  on  this  power  of  the
mind  to  associate  ideas  with  arbitrary  signs.     In  devising
means  for  aiding  the  memory,  it  ought  constantly  to  be
kept  in  view,  that  every  individual  will  associate,   with
greatest  ease,  Ideas  with  such  external  objects  as  he  has
the  greatest  natural  facility  in  perceiving.     For  example,
sometimes  space  is  used  as  the  medium  of  recalling  the
ideas  wished  to  be  remembered.     The  room  is  divided,  in
imagination,  into  compartments,  and  the  first  topic  of  the
discourse  is  placed  in  the  first  compartment,  the  second  into
ihe  second,  and  so  on;  so  that,  by  going  over  the  spaces,
the  different  heads  of  the  discourse  with  which  they  were
associated  will  be  recalled.     It  is  obvious,  however,  that  it
is  only  if  Locality  be  large  that  such  a  device  can  be  ser-
viceable ;  because  if  Ibis  faculty  be  weak,  it  will  be  as  diffi-
cult to  imagine  and  recollect  the  compartments,  as  the  dis-
course itself.     If,  in  like  manner,  numbers  are  resorted  to
as  the  connecting  medium,  so  that  on  hearing  one  idea,
which  we  wish  to  recollect,  we  shall  associate  it  with  the
number  one,  and  on  hearing  .another  which  we  wish  to  re-
collect, we  shall  associate  it  with  the  number  two,  it  is  ob-
vious, that,  unless  the  faculty  of  number  be  powerful,  this
will  be  a  more  difficult  process  than  that  of  simple  recollec-
tion.   Hence,  different  modes  of  recollection  should  be  used
for  different  individuals.    He  who  has  Number  most  power-


ASSOCIATION.  537

ful,  will  associate  words  most  easily  with  numbers ;  he  who
has  Form  most  energetic,  will  associate  words  most  easily
with  figures ;  he  who  has  Locality  most  vigorous,  will  asso-
ciate words  most  easily  with  space ;  and  he  who  has  Tune
most  powerful,  will  associate  words  most  easily  with  musi-
cal notes.     Hence,  also,  the  influence  of  associations  on
our  judgme&t  is  easily  accounted  for.     He  in  whom  Vene-
ration is  powerful,  and  to  whom  the  image  of  a  saint  has
been  from  infancy  presented  as  an  object  to  be  venerated,
experiences   an  instantaneous  and   involuntary  emotion
of  Veneration,  every  time  the  image  is  presented  to  him,
or  a  conception  of  it  formed ;  because  it  is  now  the  sign
which  excites  in  him  that  emotion,  altogether  independently
of  Reflecting  Faculties.    Until  we  can  break  this  associa-
tion, and  prevent  the  conception  of  the  image  from  operat-
ing as  a  sign  to  excite  the  faculty  of  Veneration,  we  shall
never  succeed  in  bringing  his  understanding  to  examine  the
real  attributes  of  the  object  itself,  and  to  perceive  its  want  of
every  quality  that  ought  j  ustly  to  be  venerated*    In  the  same
way,  when  a  person  is  in  love,  the  perception  or  conception
of  the  object  beloved  stirs  up  the  faculties  which  feel  in-
to such  vivid  emotion ;  that  emotion  is  so  delightful,  and
the  Reflecting  Faculties  have  so  little  Consciousness,  that
the  real  source  of  the  fascination  is  in  the  faculties  which
feel,  that  it  is  impossible  to  make  the  lover  see  the  object
with  the  eyes  of  a  disinterested  spectator.   If  we  could  once
break  the  association  betwixt  the  object  and  the  faculties
which  feel,  the  Reflecting  Faculties  would  then  perform
their  functions  faithfully,  and  the  object  would  be  seen  in
its  true  colours.    But,  while  we  are  unable  to  break  this
link,  and  to  prevent  this  fascination,  we  may  reason  ad  tern-
piternum,  and  our  conclusions  will  never  appear  to  be  sound,
because  the  premises,  that  is,  the  appearance  of  the  object,
will  never  be  the  same  to  the  party  most  interested  in  the
argument  and  to  us.

Thus,  the  associations  which  mislead  the  judgment,  and
perpetuate  prejudices,  are  those  of  words  or  things  with


538  ASSOCIATION.

feelings  or  sentiments,  and  not  associations  of  conceptions
with  conceptions,  or  merely  of  ideas  with  ideas.  The  whole
classes  of  ideas  formed  by  the  Knowing  and  Reflecting
Faculties  may  be  associated  ad  infinitum,  if  these  ideas  do
not  become  linked  with  the  propensities  and  sentiments,
and  no  moral  prejudices  will  arise.

In  studying  the  laws  of  association,  therefore,  we  must
go  beyond  the  ideas  themselves,  and  consider  the  faculties
which  form  them.  If  the  faculties  be  kept  in  view,  the
whole  phenomena  of  association  will  appear  lucid  and  in-
telligible ;  and  we  shall  find  nature  confirming  our  princi-
ples, because  they  will  be  founded  on  her  laws.  We  shall  see
the  individual  who  has  the  Reflecting  faculties  most  power-
ful, associating  ideas  according  to  the  relation  of  necessary
consequence ;  we  shall  perceive  him  who  has  the  Knowing
Faculties  most  powerful,  associating  ideas  according  to  the
relations  of  time,  place,  and  circumstances ;  and,  very  often,
although  not  always,  we  shall  find  each  individual  associat-
ing with  most  facility,  and  recollecting  most  perfectly  those
ideas,  which  minister  to  the  gratification  of  his  most  power*
f  ul  propensities  or  sentiments.  If  we  seek  only  for  relations
among  individual  ideas  themselves,  or  for  general  laws,  ac-
cording to  which  ideas  are  associated  in  all  individuals,  our
researches  will  never  be  crowned  with  success.  No  stronger
proof  of  this  fact  could  be  found,  than  the  circumstance,
that,  although  different  individuals  will  use  the  same  pro-
cess of  reasoning  to  produce  the  same  conviction,  yet  no
two  will  state  their  arguments  in  the  same  words,  or  make
use  of  the  same  illustrations.  The  general  identity  of  the
reasoning  process  depends  on  the  identity  of  the  constitu-
tion of  the  faculties  which  reason ;  but  difference  in  words
and  illustration  arises  from  the  particular  combination  of
organs  belonging  to  the  individual,  and  from  the  circum-
stances, in  which  he  has  been  placed,  which  afford  his
faculties  the  particular  materials  which  he  uses.

In  all  ages,  unprincipled  individuals  have  availed  them-
selves of  the  law  of  association  before  explained,  to  enslave


ASSOCIATION.  539

the  minds  of  their  fellow  men.  By  means  of  early  Im-
pressions, they  have  connected  certain  practices  and  no-
tions favourable  to  their  own  power,  with  the  Bentiments  of
Cautiousness,  Conscientiousness  and  Veneration  in  die  peo-
ple, and  thereby  caused  them  to  fear  objects  existing  only
in  imagination,  and  to  perform  actions  inconsistent  with
the  welfare  of  society.  Phrenology  will  tend  to  bring  this
species  of  tyranny  to  an  end*  Each  faculty  has  a  sphere
of  legitimate  action,  established  by  the  Creator,  which
is  in  harmony  with  every  interest  that  he  acknowledges  as
pure  and  beneficial ;  but  there  is  also  a  boundless  field  of
abuse  of  each,  favourable  to  base  and  selfish  purposes.
While  the  faculties  themselves,  and  their  relations  to  each
other,  and  external  objects,  are  unknown,  and  the  human
intellect  is  uncultivated  and  ignorant,  it  is  extremely  diffi-
cult for  ordinary  minds  to  distinguish  accurately  the  boun-
daries of  right ;  and  hence  a  wide  door  is  opened  to  abuse
of  every  power.  From  this  cause  error  is  extensively
mixed  up  with  truth,  and  deliberately  so,  by  the  unprin-
cipled, who  hope  to  profit  by  delusion ;  hence  the  opinions
and  institutions  of  society  in  most  countries  present  a
feeble  and  inconsistent  appearance ;  so  that,  in  the  moral
world,  we  per&ive  little  of  that  magnificent  power  and
comprehensive  design,  applied  for  benevolent  ends,  which
are  so  conspicuous  in  physical  creation.  In  this  state  of
things,  it  is  not  difficult  to  impress  ftdse  and  prejudicial
notions  on  the  minds  of  youth,  and  to  support  them
through  life  by  observances  fitted  to  give  them  perma-
nence; and  on  this  basis  individual  interest  erects  its  bane-
ful structures.  But  when  the  faculties,  and  their  relations,
shall  be  generally  studied,  and  knowledge  of  their  legiti-
mate spheres  of  action  shall  be  obtained,  the  discovery  will
be  made,  that  creation  is  constituted  in  harmony  only  with
their  proper  manifestations,  and  then  acute  perception  of
right,  with  high  determination  to  pursue  it,  will  take  the
place  of  groping  blindness,  and  irresolute  imbecility,  which
now  characterize  the  moral  aspects  of  society  in  many
countries  of  the  world.


540  PASSION.

PASSION  is  the  highest  degree  of  activity  of  every  fa-
culty;  and  the  passions  are  as  different  as  the  faculties:
Thus,  a  passion  for  glory,  is  the  result  of  a  high  activity  of
the  Love  of  Approbation ;  a  passion  for  money,  of  Acquis*-
tiveness ;  a  passion  for  music,  of  the  faculty  of  Tune ;  a
passion  for  metaphysics,  of  Causality.  Hence  there  can  be
no  such  thing  as  factitious  passions,  although  such  are
spoken  of  in  various  books*  Man  cannot  alter  his  nature ;
and  every  object  that  he  can  desire  must  be  desired  in  con-
sequence of  its  tending  to  gratify  some  natural  faculty.

"  Locke,  and  many  modern  writers,"  says  Dr  Spurz-
heim,  "  maintain  that  children  are  destitute  of  passions;
and  it  is  true,  that  there  is,  in  adults,  one  passion  which  is
not  observed  in  children,  the  passion  of  love.  There  have
been,  however,  some  individuals,  who,  at  three  or  four
years  of  age,  have  felt  passionately  this  propensity;  and,
in  general,  the  greater  number  of  inclinations  manifest
themselves  with  energetic  activity  in  children.  The  op-
ponents  of  Phrenology,  for  the  most  part,  confound  the
objects  upon  which  the  particular  faculties  act  at  different
ages,  with  the  inclinations  themselves.  Children,  it  is
true,  have  no  inclination  to  defraud  the  orphan  of  his  inhe-
ritance, or  to  conquer  kingdoms :  but  they  sometimes  de-
ceive one  another  for  a  bird's  nest;  they  fight  for  play-
things, and  they  are  proud  to  occupy  the  first  place  at
school ;"  and  the  same  faculties  which  give  the  desires  for
these  objects,  when  differently  directed  in  after-life,  pro-
duce the  various  passions  which  characterize  our  maturer
years.  The  boy  who  is  extremely  mortified  at  losing  a
place,  and  burns  with  a  desire  to  stand  at  the  top  of  hi*
class,  will  not  be  destitute  of  ambition  when  a  man.

PLEASURE  and  PAIN  are  affections  of  every  faculty.
Every  faculty,  when  indulged  in  its  natural  action,  feels
pleasure ;  "  when  disagreeably  affected  feels  pain :  conse-
quently the  kinds  of  pain  and  pleasure  are  as  numerous  as
the  faculties.    Hence  one  individual  delights  in  generously


PATIENCK  AND  IMPATIENCE.  541

pardoning  offences,  and  another  in  taking  revenge;  one  is
happy  in  the  possession  of  riches,  and  another  -glories  in
disdaining  the  vanities  of  mankind/'  Thus,  "  pain  and
pleasure  are  the  result,  and  not  the  cause,  of  the  particu-
lar faculties  V

PATIENCE,  and  IMPATIENCE.  Patienee  as  a  po-
sitive feeling,  arises  from  large  development  of  Benevo-
lence, Veneration,  Hope,  Conscientiousness,  and  Firmness,
combined  with  small  Self-Esteem.  This  combination  is  ac-
companied with  meekness,  humility,  constancy  and  resig-
nation ;  the  constituent  elements  of  a  patient  and  enduring
spirit  Apathy  may  arise  from  a  highly  lymphatic  tempera-
ment, or  great  deficiency  of  brain ;  by  persons  ignorant  of
human  nature,  this  state  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  pa-
tience; just  as  the  extinction  of  thought  and  feeling  in
a  nation,  is  mistaken  by  a  despot  for  the  repose  of  content-
ment.

An  individual  possessing  an  active  temperament,  and  Self-
Esteem,  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness,  larger  than
Benevolence,  Veneration,  and  Conscientiousness,  will  be  im-
patient of  opposition  and  contradiction ;  one  in  whom  Tune,
Time,  and  Ideality  are  large,  will  be  impatient  of  bad  music ;
one  in  whom  Benevolence,  Conscientiousness,  and  Causality
are  large,  Will  be  impatient  of  hypocritical  and  selfish  con-
duct. If  the  nervous  and  sanguine  temperaments  predo-
minate, the  organs  are  very  active,  and  the  individual  will
be  impatient  of  all  slow  prosing  movements,  whether  in
speech  or  actions.

JOY  and  GRIEF.  Mr  Hume  enters  into  a  very  acute
and  refined  analysis,  to  shew  that  grief  and  joy  are  merely
mixtures  of  hope  and  fear.  After  treating  of  several  pas-
sions, be  continues  thus :  "  None  of  these  passions  seem  to

*  Dr  Spurxbeim's  New  Physiognomical  System*


542  JOY  AND  GRIEF.

contain  any  thing  curious  or  remarkable,  except  hope  and
fear,  which,  being  derived  from  the  probability  of  any  good
or  evil,  are  mixed  passions,  that  merit  our  attention."

"  Probability/9  says  he,  "  arises  from  an  opposition  of
contrary  chances  or  causes,  by  which  the  mind  is  not
allowed  to  fix  on  either  side;  but  is  incessantly  tossed
from  one  to  another,  and  is  determined  one  moment  to
consider  an  object  as  existent,  and  another  moment  as  the
contrary*

"  Suppose,  then,  that  the  object  concerning  which  we
are  doubtful,  produces  either  desire  or  aversion,  it  is  evi-
dent that,  according  as  the  mind  turns  itself  to  one  side  or
the  other,  it  must  feel  a  momentary  impression  of  joy  or
sorrow."

"  The  passions  of  fear  and  hope  may  arise,  when  the
chances  are  equal  on  both  sides,  and  no  superiority  can  be
discovered  in  one  above  the  other.  Nay,  in  this  situation,
the  passions  are  rather  the  strongest,  as  the  mind  has  then
the  least  foundation  to  rest  upon,  and  is  tossed  with  the
greatest  uncertainty.  Throw  in  a  superior  degree  of  pro-
bability to  the  side  of  grief,  you  immediately  see  that  pas-
sion diffuse  itself  over  the  composition,  and  tincture  it  with
fear.  Increase  the  probability,  and  by  that  means  the
grief;  the  fear  prevails  still  more,  till  at  last  it  runs  insen-
sibly, as  the  joy  continually  diminishes,  into  pure  grief.
After  you  have  brought  it  to  this  situation,  diminish  the
grief  by  a  contrary  operation  to  that  which  increased  it,
to-wit,  by  diminishing  the  probability  on  the  melancholy
side,  and  you  will  see  the  passion  clear  every  moment,  till
it  changes  insensibly  into  hope ;  which  again  runs,  by  slow*
degrees,  into  joy,  as  you  increase  that  part  of  the  compo-
sition by  the  increase  of  the  probability."  Mr  Hume  con-
cludes by  this  question  t  "  Are  not  these  as  plain  proofs  that
the  passions  of  Fear  and  Hope  are  mixtures  of  Grief  and
Joy,  as  in  opttes  it  is  a  proof  that  a  coloured  ray  of  the  sun,
passing  through  a  prism,  is  a  composition  of  two  others,
when,  as  you  diminish  or  increase  the  quantity  of  either,

4


JOY  AND  GEIEF.  548

you  find  it  prevail  proportionally,  more  or  lees,  in  the  com-
position  ?  *"

These  views  are  exceedingly  ingenious,  and,  to  a  certain
extent,  sound ;  but  Phrenology  presents  us  with  still  more
distinct  and  accurate  elucidations  of  the  nature  of  grief  and
joy.  Each  propensity  desires  to  attain  its  object,  and  the
attainment  affords  to  the  mind  a  feeling  of  gratification.
Acquisitiveness  desires  wealth ;  Love  of  Approbation  longs
for  praise  and  distinction,  and  Self-Esteem  pants  for  autho-
rity. The  obtaining  of  wealth  gratifies  Acquisitiveness;
this  is  attended  with  pleasing  emotions,  and  these  emo-
tions constitute  Joy.  The  losing  of  wealth  robs  Acqui-
sitiveness of  its  object ;  this,  again,  is  accompanied  with
painful  sensations,  and  these  are  grief.  The  same  re-
marks may  be  applied  to  Love  of  Approbation,  Self-Es-
teem, or  Philoprogenitiveness.  When  a  lovely  child  is
born,  the  delight  experienced  by  the  parents  will  be  in
proportion  to  the  ardour  of  their  desire  for  offspring ;  or,
in  other  words,  their  joy  will  be  great  in  proportion  to  the
gratification  of  their  Philoprogenitiveness.  If  they  lose
the  child,  their  grief  vnil  be  severe  in  proportion  to  the  in-
tensity of  this  feeling,  lacerated  by  the  removal  of  its  ob-
ject In  all  these  instances  we  find /op  and  grief  existing
without  involving  either  hope  otfear.

Let  us  now  advert  to  Mr  Hume's  analysis.  Cautious-
ness and  Hope  are  both  primitive  sentiments,  the  former
producing  fear,  and  the  latter  an  emotion  sui  generis,  at-
tended with  delight  Both  have  relation  to  future  objects,
and  in  this  respect  differ  from  the  other  faculties,  the  gratifi-
cation of  which  relates  to  present  time;  but  this  circumstance
does  not  change  the  laws  of  their  operation.  If  the  pros-
pect of  future  evil  be  presented  to  the  mind,  this  excites
Cautiousness,  and  fear  is  produced ;  this  emotion  is  pain-
ful, but  fear  is  not  grief.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,
that  there  must  be  the  fear  of  something  ;  and  as  evil  is  a
disagreeable  affection  of  some  primitive  faculty*  of  Acqui-

*  Hume's  Dissertatiou  on  the  Passions,  sect  1.


544  JOY  AND  GRIEF.

sitiveness  or  Philoprogenitiveness  for  example,  Cautious-
ness is  never  affected  alone,  but  always  in  conjunction  with
some  other  power.  Thus,  if  a  son  is  sick,  Cautiousness
fears  that  he  will  die,  and  Philoprogenitiveness  is  painfully
affected  by  the  prospect  of  that  event,  which  painful  emo-
tion is  grief.  Here  fear  and  grief  are  conjoined ;  but  they
arise  from  different  sources,  and  although  the  fear  cannot
exist  without  the  grief,  in  some  degree  or  other,  yet  the
gritf  might  exist  without  the  fear;  and  would  do  so*  if  the
child  were  carried  in  a  corpse  without  a  moment's  warn-
ing. In  the  same  way,  if  a  person  hopes,  he  must  hope  for
something.  If  for  gaining  £  1000,  the  prospect  gratifies
Acquisitiveness,  and  this  is  joy.  Here  the  active  Hope  and
gratified  Acquisitiveness  mingle  in  producing  Joy,  but  still
their  sources  are  separate ;  and  if  the  £  1000  were  rea-
lized, Joy  would  exist  without  the  Hope,  although  Hope
can  scarcely  be  active  without  Joy.  The  principles  here
unfolded  will  be  found  to  elucidate  every  instance  of  the
operation  of  Hope  and  Fear,  Joy  and  Grief,  which  can
be  supposed,  and  this  is  a  strong  proof  that  we  have  found
the  truth.  They  explain  beautifully,  for  instance,  how,
with  many  individuals,  the  anticipation  of  good  is  more  de-
lightful than  the  enjoyment  of  it  If  Acquisitiveness  and
Hope  be  both  strong,  the  prospect  of  gain  excites  and  grati-
fies both  faculties  at  once;  whereas,  the  actual  attainment
pleases  only  Acquisitiveness,  and  excludes  Hope.  But  Hope
being  one  of  the  higher  sentiments,  and  Acquisitiveness
only  a  lower  propensity,  the  delights  attending  the  activity
of  the  former  are  greatly  more  elevated  and  excellent  than
those  accompanying  the  latter;  and  it  is  easy  to  conceive
that  the  exercise  of  both  must  be  more  delightful  than  that  of
either  separately,  and  that  when  Hope  is  dropped  from  the
combination,  the  better  half  of  the  pleasure  is  gone.

The  convene  of  this  holds  equally  good.  The  prospect
of  distant  evil  is  more  painful  than  the  experience  of  it
when  actually  present.  While  the  loss  of  a  child  is  con-
templated at  a  distance,  Cautiousness  adds  its  melancholy


SYMPATHY.  545

and  heart-sinking  fears  to  the  pains  of  a  wounded  Philo-
progenitivene8s;  but  when  the  event  happens,  the  influence
of  Cautiousness  is  withdrawn,  Philoprogenitiveness  alone
suffers,  and  the  actual  distress  is  less  grievous  than  the  an-
ticipation of  it

Great  wisdom  and  benevolence  on  the  part  of  the  Crea-
tor are  displayed  in  this  constitution  of  our  minds ;  for  we
are  thereby  prompted,  with  double  ardour,  to  avoid  evil,
while  yet  at  a  distance  and  subject  to  control  from  our.  ef-
forts.

SYMPATHY  *  may  be  defined  to  be  a  fellow-feeling,  in
one  person,  with  emotions  experienced  by  another*  By
attending  to  the  laws  which  regulate  the  activity  of  the
mental  faculties,  we  shall  discover  the  true  nature  of  this
affection,  and  the  circumstance*  most  favourable  to  its  oc-
currence.

Every  internal  faculty,  like  each  of  the  external  senses*
is  most  powerfully  and  most  agreeably  roused  to  activity
by  the  direct  presentment  of  its  own  objects ;  Cautiousness,
for  instance,  by  the  aspect  of  danger;  Benevolence,  by
that  of  suffering ;  and  so  on*  Hence?  if  two  individuals  of
nearly  similar  constitutions  of  mind  be  exposed  to  the  ope-
ration of  the  same  external  causes,  the  same  faculties  being
called  into  activity  in  both,  will  give  rise  to  similar  emo-
tions ;  and  they  may  then  be  said  to  sympathize  with  each
other.  This  is  one  kind  of  sympathy,  but  it  is  not  the  state-
of  mind  to  which  that  term  is  most  correctly  applied.

The  next  source  of  stimulus  to  the  faculties,  is  that  af-
forded by  Natural  Language.  When  any  faculty  is  pre-
dominantly active,  it  gives  a  peculiar  expression  to  the  fea-
tures, and  certain  determinate  attitudes  to  the  body,  the
import  of  which  is  instinctively  understood  by  all  who  pos-
sess the  same  faculty  even  in  a  moderate  degree.  Thus*
Self-Esteem  being  predominantly  active,  communicates  to

•  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Dr  A.  Combe  for  the  following  ob-
servations on  Sympathy.

m  m


546  SYMPATHY,

the  body  a  cold*  formal,  erect,  and  haughty  air.  This  air
is  recognised  instinctively  by  the  spectator  as  indicating
excessive  pride  in  the  individual  who  exhibits  it;  and  it  is
called  the  natural  language  of  Self* Esteem  *.  Now,  by  a
law  of  our  constitution,  the  natural  language  of  any  active
faculty  invariably  excites  the  same  faculty  to  activity,  and,
consequently,  gives  rise  to  the  same  emotions,  in  the  minds
of  those  who  witness  it.  The  forbidding  strut  of  great
Self-Esteem,  for  instance,  in  a  person  whom  we  never  saw
before,  addresses  itself  directly  to  our  Self-Esteem ;  we  in-
stinctively draw  tip,  and  feel  moved  to  support  our  own
consequence  by  a  coldness  proportioned  to  his.  In  like
manner,  when  we  meet  for  the  first  time  with  a  person
whose  countenance  and  gestures  express  kindness,  candour,
and  open-hearted  friendship,  which  are  the  natural  lan-
guage of  active  Benevolence,  Conscientiousness,  and  Ad-
hesiveness, the  same  emotions  are  excited  in  ourselves,  and
we  instinctively  return  his  advances  with  a  kindness  cor-
responding to  his  own.  Or,  let  us  imagine  that  we  hurry
to  meet  a  friend,  whom  we  expect  to  find  all  happiness  and
gaiety,  and  that,  instead  of  this,  seriousness,  anxiety,  and
grief,  are  depicted  on  his  countenance,  and  indicated  by
his  gestures,  these  being  the  natural  language  of  Cautious-
ness and  other  faculties  painfully  affected,  will  call  up  a  cor-
responding affection  of  the  same  faculties  in  our  minds,  and,
without  knowing  what  has  distressed  him,  our  features  and
attitudes  will  instantly  assume  an  expression  consonant  with
his  own.  It  is  to  this  involuntary  and  almost  unconscious
communication  of  feelings  and  emotions  from  the  mind  of
one  individual  to  that  of  another,  through  the  medium  of
natural  language*  that  the  term  Sympathy  is  most  properly
applied*

*  Drs  Gall  and  Sfurzbeim  have  investigated  the  laws  which  deter*
mine  the  natural  language  of  each  faculty,  and  their  exposition  of  them
is  highly  interesting  and  instructive.  The  leading  principle  is,  that  the
motions  are  always  in  the  direction  of  the  seat  of  the  organs ;  Self-Esteem,
for  instance,  produces  an  attitude  in  which  the  head  and  body  are  held
high  and  reclining  backward ;  Cautiousness  carries  the  head  backward  and
to  the  side;  Veneration,  upward  and  forward ;  and  so  on.


SYMPATHY.  547

Ab  excellent  illustration  of  this  kind  of  sympathy  is  to
be  found  in  the  effects  of  a  panic,  or  excessively  excited
Cautiousness,  in  one  individual,  exciting  the  same  feeling
in  all  who  behold  it*  The  very  sight  of  a  panic-stricken
person,  when  we  do  not  know  the  cause  which  has  given
rise  to  the  alarm,  excites  a  general  uneasiness  about  our
own  safety;  and  if  a  great  number  of  persons  together,
and  at  the  same  instant,  perceive  the  terrified  expression,
it  instantly  rouses  the  faculty  of  Cautiousness  to  its  highest
pitch  of  activity  in  all  of  them,  and  produces  the  most  in-
tense feelings  of  dread  and  alarm.  Such  are  the  causes  and
origin  of  panics  in  battles  and  in  mobs ;  and  hence  the
electric  rapidity  with  which  passions  of  every  land  pervade
and  agitate  the  minds  of  assembled  multitudes.

Another  and  very  familiar  example  of  this  kind  of  sym-
pathy may  be  seen  in  a  crowded  city.  Let  any  one  in  pass-
ing along  London  Bridge,  for  instance,  stop  short,  and
turn  up  his  face,  with  his  mouth  half  open,  as  if  stupified
with  wonder  and  amazement,  and  immediately  the  same
expression,  being  the  natural  language  of  Individuality
and  Wonder,  will  be  transferred  to  the  countenances  of
nine-tenths  of  the  passengers,  not  one  of  whom,  of  course,
will  be  able  to  assign  any  direct  cause  for  the  emotion  with
which  his  mind  will  be  filled.  As  the  propensities  and
sentiments  employ  the  intellect  to  minister  to  their  gratifi-
cation, if  the  wag  happens  to  say  that  it  is  something  vast-
ly surprising  in  the  heavens  which  attracts  his  gaze,  the
majority  of  the  curious  in  wonders  will  soon,  by  a  stretch  of
intellectual  conception,  come  to  perceive  something  where
nothing  actually  exists.

True  sympathy,  then,  arises  from  the  natural  language
of  any  active  feeling  in  one  individual  exciting  the  same
feeling  in  another,  "  antecedent  to  any  knowledge  of  what  ex-
cited it  in  the  person  principally  concerned;"  and,  therefore,
as  the  stimulus  of  natural  language  is  secondary  or  inferior
in  power  to  that  derived  from  the  direct  presentment  of  the
objects  of  any  faculty,  it  is  easy  to  explain  why  the  person

m  m  2


548  SYMPATHY.

who  feels  sympathetically,  feels  less  deeply  than  the  person
with  whom  he  sympathizes.  The  same  principle  explains,
also,  why  all  men  do  not  sympathize  in  the  same  degree,
and  why,  in  6ome  cases,  the  spectator  does  not  sympathize
at  alk  If  the  objects  presented  are  such  as  to  afford  a  di-
rect stimulus  to  a  different  faculty  in  us,  from  that  exhibit-
ed in  activity  Ivy  another,  it  follows,  that,  in  virtue  of  the
stronger  influence  of  the  direct  excitement,  the  particular
faculty  which  it  addresses  will  be  roused  into  higher  activi-
ty than  the  one  which  has  only  the  less  powerful  stimulus
of  natural  language,  and  thus  a  totally  dissimilar  emotion
will  be  experienced.  For  example,  let  us  suppose,  that  a
man  with  a  good  endowment  of  Combativeness  is  attacked
on  the  highway.  The  menacing  looks  and  gestures  (the
natural  language  of  Combativeness)  displayed  by  the  ag-
gressor, instantly  rouse  the  same  faculty  into  energetic  ac-
tion in  the  defender,  and  force  is  repelled  by  force.  But,
suppose  that  the  attack  is  made  upon  a  woman  or  an  indi-
vidual, in  whom  Combativeness  is  only  moderate,  and  in
whom  Cautiousness  predominates,  the  attack  then  becomes
a  direct  stimulus  to  Cautiousness,  which,  being  excited,
produces  fear ;  and  the  direct  stimulus  of  Cautiousness
overpowering  the  indirect  stimulus  of  Combativeness,  sub-
mission or  flight  is  resorted  to,  rather  than  defence.

Dr  Adam  Smith  *  supposes,  that  there  are  emotions  with
which  we  have  no  sympathy.  "  The  furious  behaviour  of
an  angry  man,"  says  he,  "  is  more  likely  to  exasperate  us
against  himself  than  against  his  enemies."  According  to
the  theory,  however,  of  sympathy,  that  it  excites  in  us  die
same  emotion  which  others  feel,  this  opinion  seems  to  be
untenable.  If  Combativeness  in  one  excites,  by  sympathy,
Combativeness  in  another,  which  I  hold  it  to  do,  it  follows,
that,  as  the  function  of  Combativeness  is  to  attack  or  to  re-
pel attack,  when  that  faculty  is  roused,  it  must,  from  its
xery  constitution,  exert  itself  against  something  or  some-

*  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  p.  32.


SYMPATHY.  549

body.  If  we  know  the  cause  of  the  anger  and  approve  of
it,  and  direct  our  Combativeness  against  the  angry  man's
enemies,  this  is  clearly  sympathy  in  every  sense  of  the
term.  But  if  we  disapprove  of  the  cause,  then  he  himself
becomes  the  object  of  our  combativeness ;  and  in  popular
language  it  may  be  said,  that,  in  this  case,  we  do  not  sym-
pathize with  him;  but  it  must  be  observed,  ltf,  That  the
activity  of  Combativeness  in  him  is  the.  cause  of  rousing  the
same  faculty  in  us ;  and,  fkffy9  That  the  reason  of  its  being
directed  against  himself  is  to  be.  found  in  his  having  out-
raged, by  his  conduct,  our  moral  sentiments,  and  presented
us  with  an  object  (an  unreasonably  furious  man)  which  sti-
mulates them  directly  ;  and  they  being  excited,  determine
the  direction  which  Combativeness  shall  take.  The  same
reasoning  applies  to  the  sympathy  of  Self-Esteem  and  of
other  faculties,  hitherto  supposed  not  to  sympathize.

The  proof  that  we  do  sympathize  with  anger,  when  pro-
perly directed,  as  well  as  with  grief  or  pity,  is  to  be  found
in  the  cordiality  with  which  we  approve  of  and  indeed  en-
courage a  just  degree  of  it.  Fortunately,  in  the  case  of
Combativeness,  as  well  as  of  all  the  other  propensities,  our
sympathy,  beyond  certain  limits,  is  soon  arrested  by  the  di-
rect stimulus  which  the  moral  sentiments  receive  from  the
conduct  of  the  angry  person,  and  by  the  deep  sense  of  their
inherent  supremacy  which  is  then  felt  In  consequence  we
sympathize  with  or  approve  of  the  actions  produced  by  the
lower  faculties  of  others,  only  when  these  are  guided  by  the
faculties  proper  to  man.  For  example,  we  never  sympa-
thize with  Combativeness  when  indulged  for  the  mere  plea-
sure of  fighting;  or  of  Destructiveness,  when  gratified  for
the  mere  delight  of  being  ferocious;  or  of  Acquisitiveness,
when  directed  to  the  sole  purpose  of  accumulating  wealth.
But  we  sympathize  with  the  action  of  all  of  these  faculties,
when  directed  by  justice  and  understanding.  Such,  how-
ever, is  the  beautiful  constitution  of  our  nature,  that  we
sympathize  with  the  action  of  the  sentiments  proper  to
man,  even  when  unmingled  with  any  other  motive ;  for


550  SYMPATHY.

example,  we  sympathize  with  Benevolence,  from  the  mere
glow  of  charity;  with  Veneration,  from  the  mere  inward
feeling  of  devotion;  with  Justice,  from  the  pore  dictates
of  Conscientiousness ;  and  actions  done,  apparently  from
the  impulses  of  these  (acuities,  lose  their  character  of  puri-
ty and  excellence  in  our  estimation,  in  exact  proportion  to
the  alloy  of  the  inferior  faculties  which  we  perceive  to  be
mingled  with  them.  Kindness,  in  which  we  perceive  in-
terest, is  always  less  valued  than  when  pure  and  unadul-
terated. Activity,  in  the  service  of  the  public,  loses  its
merits  in  our  eyes,  in  exact  proportion  as  we  perceive  the
motive  to  be  the  Love  of  Approbation,  unmingled  with
Conscientiousness  and  true  Benevolence.  These  facts
prove  the  accuracy  of  the  phrenological  doctrine,  that  the
higher  faculties  are  made  to  govern  the  lower;  and  it
proves  the  curious  circumstance,  that  man  is  conscious  of
possessing  feelings,  necessary,  no  doubt,  in  themselves,  but
of  the  gratification  of  which,  when  undirected  by  the  supe-
rior powers,  he  himself  disapproves.  Even  the  higher  sen-
timents, however,  must,  to  be  approved  of,  act  conformably
to  the  understanding;  and  excess  of  veneration,  of  be-
nevolence, or  of  scrupulosity,  is  always  regarded  as  weak-
ness, just  as  excess  of  any  lower  propensity  is  regarded  as
vice.

The  doctrine  of  sympathy  leads  to  valuable  practical
consequences.  The  natural  language  of  any  faculty  is  in-
telligible to  and  excites  the  same  faculty  in  another,  and
this  simple  principle  explains  why  harshness  is  much  less
powerful  than  mildness  in  commanding  the  services  of  others.
Harshness  is  the  natural  language  of  active  Self-Esteem,
Combativeness,  and  Firmness :  in  virtue  of  the  above  rule,
it  naturally  excites  the  same  faculties  in  those  against
whom  it  is  directed,  and  an  instinctive  tendency  to  resist-
ance or  disobedience  is  the  result  Among  the  uneducated
classes  this  process  is  exhibited  every  day.  A  parent,  in
a  harsh  and  angry  tone,  commands  a  child  to  do,  or  to  ab-
stain from  doing,  something ;  the  child  instinctively  resists ;


SYMPATHY.  551

and  load  threatening*  and  at  last  violence  ensue.  Than
last  are  direct  stimulants  to  Cautiousness ;  and  overpower
die  faculties  excited,  only  by  the  indirect  stimulus  of  harsh-
ness, and  obedience  at  last  takes  place.  This  is  the  nni*
form  effect  of  the  imperious  commands :  obedience  never
ensues  till  consequences  alarming  to  Cautiousness  are  per*
eeived,  and  then  it  is  attended  with  a  grudge.  Veneration*
Conscientiousness,  Love  of  Approbation,  and  Benevolence,
on  the  other  hand,  are  the  faculties  which  lead  to  willing
submission  and  obedience,  and  to  which,  therefore,  we
ought  to  address  ourselves.  If  we  stimulate  them,  compU*
ance  will  be  agreeable  to  the  individual,  and  doubly  benefi-
cial to  the  person  who  commands*

This  principle  explains  also  the  force  of  example  in
training  to  good  conduct,  and  affords  instructive  rules  for
the  proper  education  of  the  propensities  and  sentiments*
Where  parents  and  seniors  act  habitually  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  higher  sentiments,  the  same  sentiments  in  chil-
dren not  only  receive  a  direct  cultivation,  but  they  are  sus-
tained in  enduring  vivacity  by  the  natural  expression  of
their  activity  thus  exhibited.  Children  having  the  organs
of  the  sentiments  early  developed,  can  judge  of  what  is
right  and  wrong  long  before  they  can  reason,  and  hence
the  importance  of  always  manifesting  before  them  the  su-
premacy of  the  sentiments.  Much  of  the  effect  of  example
upon  future  character  has  been  ascribed  to  Imitation ;  but
although  this  has  an  influence,  I  ain  persuaded  that  it  is
small  compared  with  thai  of  Sympathy  as  now  unfolded.

There  is  a  state  of  mind  which  has  been  confounded  with
Sympathy,  but  which  arises  from  the  direct  excitement  of
the  faculties,  by  their  own  objects*  When  we  see  a  stroke
aimed  and  ready  to  fell  upon  the  leg  or  arm  of  another  per-
son, we  naturally  shrink  and  draw  back  our  own  leg  or  arm,
and  when  it  does  fell,  we  in  some  measure  feel  it,  and  are
hurt  by  it  as  well  as  the  sufferer.  Dr  Adam  Smith  pro-
coeds  to  explain  this  by  saying,  that  our  fellow  feeling
here  arises  from  our  changing  places  in  fancy  with  the  suf-


552  SYMPATHY.

ferer.  Thus,  if  our  brother  is  upon  the  rack,  says  he,
4i  By  the  imagination  we  place  ourselves  in  his  situation,
we  conceive  ourselves  enduring  all  the  same  torments;  we
enter  as  it  were  into  his  body,  and  become  in  some  measure
the  same  person  with  him,  and  thence  form  some  idea  of
his  sensations,  and  even  feel  something,  which,  though
weaker  in  degree,  is  not  altogether  unlike  them.  His  ago-
nies thus  brought  home  to  ourselves,  when  we  have  thus
adopted,  and  made  them  our  own,  begin  at  last  to  affect  us,
and  we  then  tremble  and  shudder  at  the  thought  of  what
he  feels*."

This  theory,  however,  appears  to  be  incorrect,  for  we  often
feel  intensely  for  another's  misery,  without,  even  in  idea,
changing  places  with  him.  In  beholding  suffering,  we  feel
deep  commiseration  with  its  object,  simply  because  the  fa-
culty of  Benevolence,  the  function  of  which  is  to  manifest
this  emotion,  is  a  primitive  mental  power,  having  the  same
relation  to  external  misery  or  pain,  as  light  has  to  the  eye ;
and  as  such  it  is  as  instantly  and  irresistibly  roused  by  pre-
sentment of  a  suffering  object,  as  the  eye  is  by  the  admis-
sion of  light,  or  the  ear  by  the  percussion  of  sounds.  In
witnessing  another's  misery,  we,  in  virtue  of  this  constitu-
tion of  mind,  first  feel  the  emotion  of  pity,  and,  in  propor-
tion to  its  strength,  fancy  to  ourselves  the  pain  which  he
endures :  But  the  pity  always  precedes,  and  the  effort  to
conceive  the  pain  is  the  effect,  and  not  the  cause  of  the  pity.
Hence  those  who  are.  remarkable  for  a  moderate  endow-
ment of  Benevolence,  although  possessing  superior  intellec-
tual or  conceiving  powers,  never  even  try  to  fancy  them-
selves placed  in  the  situation  of  the  sufferer,  because  they
feel  no  motive  impelling  them  to  the  attempt.  The  bene*
volent  idiot,  on  the  other  hand,  with  scarcely  any  power
of  conception,  feels  the  most  poignant  distress.

The  same  principle  explains  our  shrinking  from  a  blow
impending  over  another.     The  feeling  then  experienced  is

•  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  j>.  30.


HABIT.  558

a  compound  of  Fear  and  Pity,  Cautiousness  and  Benevo-
lence. Fear  sees  the  danger,  and  Pity  looks  to  the  conse-
quent pain.  Danger  is  the  direct  stimulant  of  Cautious-
ness, and  suffering  that  of  Benevolence ;  and,  therefore,
when  these  objects  are  presented  to  the  mind,  we  can  no
more  help  feeling  the  corresponding  emotions,  than  we  can
help  seeing  or  hearing.  The  direct  end  or  function  of
Cautiousness  is  the  care  and  preservation  of  self;  there-
fore, when  it  is  excited  by  the  aspect  of  danger,  we  look
exclusively  to  self,  and  necessarily  draw  in  our  own  leg  or
arm  as  parts  of  ourselves  ;  but  this  results  directly  from
the  constitution  of  the  faculty,  and  not  from  putting  our-
selves in  the  place  of  another.  The  direct  end  or  function
of  Benevolence,  again,  is  the  good  and  happiness  of  others,
and  therefore,  when  it  is  excited  by  the  misery  of  another,
it  necessarily,  from  its  very  constitution,  feels  for  them,
and  not  for  us.

An  active  temperament  greatly  conduces  to  sympathy,
by  producing  vivacity  in  all  the  cerebral  functions,  but  this
does  not  supersede  the  laws  of  sympathy  before  explained*

HABIT.  Next  to  Association,  Habit  makes  the  most
conspicuous  figure  in  the  philosophy  of  Mr  Stewart.  He
refers  the  incapacity  of  some  individuals  to  discriminate
colours  to  habits  of  inattention.  The  powers,  also,  of  wit,
fancy,  and  invention  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  he  informs
us,  are  not  the  original  gifts  of  nature,  "  but  the  result  of
acquired  habits  *."  "  The  power  of  taste,  and  a  genius  for
poetry,  painting,  music  and  mathematics,"  he  states,  "  are
gradually  formed  by  particular  habits  of  study  or  of  busi-
ness." And  not  only  does  habit  execute  these  magnificent
functions  in  the  system  of  Mr  Stewart,  but,  in  the  esti-
mation of  individuals  in  private  life,  it  appears  to  be  viewed
as  almost  omnipotent.  On  reading  to  a  friend  the  account
of  the  boy  Gibson's  early  atrocities,  he  attributed  them  all
to  bad  habits  formed  in  the  Charity  Work-house  of  Glas-

•  Elements,  vol.  i.  chap.  v.  p.  1.  sect.  4.


554  HABIT.

gow ;  on  exhibiting  an  individual  whose  mental  character
was  directly  opposite,  he  attributed  the  difference  to  good
habiiSf  formed  under  the  tuition  of  hi*  parents.  Thus,
there  are  no  talents  so  transcendent,  and  no  dispositions  so
excellent  or  so  depraved,  but  habit  is  supposed  by  many,
at  once,  to  account  for  them  in  suchamanner,  as  to  super*
sede  the  necessity  of  all  further  investigation.  What,  then,
is  Habit,  and  what  place  does  it  hold  in  the  Phrenological
System?

Every  voluntary  action  is  a  manifestation  of  some  one  or
more  Acuities  of  the  mind.  "  Habit"  is  defined  to  be  "  a
power  in  a  man  of  doing  any  thing  acquired  by  frequent
doing  it"  Now,  before  it  can  be  done  at  all,  the  faculty
on  which  it  depends  must  be  possessed;  and  the  stronger
the  faculty,  the  greater  will  be  the  facility  with  which  the
individual  will  do  the  thing  at  first,  and  with  which  he  will
learn  to  repeat  it.  George  Bidder,  for  example,  the  cele-
brated mental  calculator,  has  acquired  the  habit  of  solving,
in  an  incredibly  short  time,  the  most  extensive  and  intricate
arithmetical  problems,  without  the  aid  of  notation*  Before
he  could  begin  to  do  such  a  thing,  he  required  to  possess  the
organ  of  Number;  possessing  it  largely,  he  made  great  and
rapid  acquisitions  of  skill ;  and  at  seven  years  of  age  esta-
blished the  habit  which  struck  us  with  so  much  surprise.
Other  individuals  are  to  be  found  endowed  with  a  small  .
organ  of  Number,  who,  although  forced  by  circumstances
to  practise  the  use  of  figures,  never  succeed  in  acquiring  m
habit  of  performing  even  the  simplest  arithmetical  ques-
tions with  facility  and  success.  This  illustration  may  be
applied  to  painting,  poetry,  music  and  mathematics.  Be-
fore the  habit  of  practising  these  branches  of  art  and  science
can  be  acquired,  the  organs  on  which  they  depend  must  be
largely  possessed;  and  bring  so,  the  habits  result  sponter
neously  from  exercising  the  powers.  If  a  boy  at  school
acquire  a  habit  of  quarrelling  and  fighting,  it  is  obvious
that  as  these  acts  are  manifestations  of  Combativeness,  De»
structiveness,  and  Self-Esteem,  he  will  the  more  readily


HABIT.  555

acquire  the  habit  the  larger  these  organ*  are,  and  the  less
controlled  by  others.  If  these  organs  are  small,  or  if  the
higher  organs  decidedly  predominate,  the  hay  will  be  na-
turally indisposed  to  quarrelling,  and  will  acquire  the  habit
of  it  with  great  difficulty,  wherever  he  may  be  placed.  He
may  repel  unjust  aggressions  made  upon  him,  but  he  will
not  be  the  promoter  of  mischief,  nor  leader  in  die  broils  of
his  companions.

Exercise  causes  the  organs  to  act  with  greater  facility,
and  it  is  in  this  way  that  the  real  effects  of  habit  on  the
mind,  which  are  important,  may  be  accounted  for;  but  still
the  organ  must  possess  considerable  natural  power  and  ac-
tivity, to  render  it  susceptible  of  the  exercise  by  which
habit  is  formed.  The  practice  of  debate  by  advocates
at  the  bar,  gives  them  great  facility  in  delivering  «c
tempore  harangues,  compared  with  that  enjoyed  by  per-
sons whose  avocations  never  lead  them  to  make  speeches ;
and  this  facility  may  be  said  to  be  acquired  by  the  habit  of
speaking ;  but  it  will  always  bear  a  proportion  to  the  ori-
ginal endowment  of  the  faculties,  and  we  shall  find,  that,
while  habit  gives  to  one  individual  great  fluency  and  co-
piousness of  diction,  it  often  leaves  another  in  much  poverty
and  embarrassment  of  utterance.  The  powers  of  both  will
be  greatly  superior  to  what  they  would  have  been  without
the  practice  of  speaking;  but  disparity  in  eloquence  will
continue  to  characterize  them,  owing  to  differences  in  their
original  constitution.

The  metaphysicians,  as  we  have  seen,  attribute  many
important  mental  phenomena  to  the  effects  of  habit,  and
yet  they  altogether  neglect  the  influence  of  organisation  on
the  mind:  According  to  our  views,  it  is  the  organ  which
acquires  activity  and  superior  facility  in  performing  its
functions,  by  being  properly  exercised,  just  as  the  fingers
of  the  musician  acquire  rapidity  and  facility  of  motion  by
the  practice  of  playing ;  and  hence  the  effects  of  habit  in
giving  readiness  and  ease  are  accounted  for,  in  a  manner
that  is  at  least  intelligible  and  supported  by  analogy.    The


556  TASTE.

metaphysicians,  on  the  other  hand,  most  imagine  that  it  is
the  immaterial  principle  itself  which  improves  by  exercise,
and  gains  stxwgth.  by  habit, — a  notion  which  is  altogether
inconceivable,  and  in  opposition  to  the  attributes  of  a  purely
spiritual  Being.  The  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  organs  also,
explains  why,  by  practising  music,  we  do  not  acquire  die
habit  of  speaking  or  writing  with  facility,  or  why,  by  study-
ing mathematics,  we  do  not  acquire  the  habit  of  reasoning
deeply  in  moral  or  political  science*  It  teaches  that  the
organ  of  Tune  is  distinct  from  that  of  Language ;  that  the
organs  of  Size,  Order,  Locality,  Individuality,  and  Compa-
rison, on  which  mathematical  talent  depends,  are  different
from  the  organ  of  Causality,  by  which  general  reasoning  is
performed ;  and  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  exercise  one  or-
gan, and  leave  another  in  inactivity.  Those  physiologists,
however,  who  hold  the  brain  to  be  a  single  organ,  and
every  part  of  it  to  be  employed  in  every  act  of  the  mind,
require  to  explain  how  it  happens,  that  exercising  it  in  one
way  does  not  improve  it  in  all ;  or,  in  short,  (to  use  an  il-
lustration applied  by  Dr  Johnson  to  genius),  to  inform
us  why  the  man  who  can  walk  east  is  unable  to  walk  west :
If  the  organs  by  means  of  which  he  walks  east  be  diffe-
rent from  those  by  which  he  walks  west,  no  difficulty  will
occur ;  but  if  they  be  the  same,  the  question  certainly  will
require  some  portion  of  ingenuity  on  the  part  of  the  dis-
ciples of  the  old  school  for  its  satisfactory  solution.

TASTE.  Mr  Stewart  speaks  of  Taste  as  a  power  or
faculty,  and,  as  already  mentioned,  supposes  it  to  be  ac-
quired by  habit  I  am  not  aware  that  any  other  metaphy-
sician coincides  with  him  in  these  views ;  but  a  great  deal
has  been  written  upon  the  subject,  and  no  satisfactory
theory  of  it  yet  exists.  I  shall  point  out  the  manner  in
which  it  might  be  treated  phrenologically,  but  the  subject
is  too  extensive  to  allow  me  to  enter  into  it  in  detail.

In  the  Jirst  place,  every  act  of  the  mind  must  be  a  mani-
festation of  some  faculty  or  other;  and  every  act  must  be


TASTE.  557

characterized  either  by  good  or  bad  taste,  or  be  wholly  in-
different in  this  respect  Let  us  inquire  into  the  origin  of
bad  taste,  and  this  will  lead  us  to  distinguish  its  opposite,
or  correct  taste.  .  Bad  taste,  then,  appears  to  arise  from  am
excessive  or  improper  manifestation  of  any  of  the  facul-
ties. Lord  Byron  is  guilty  of  very  bad  taste  in  some  pas-
sages of  Don  Juam,  in  which  he  exhibits  the  passion  of  love
in  all  the  groesness  of  an  animal  feeling :  this  arises  from  an
excessive  manifestation  of  Amativeness,  not  purified  and
dignified  by  the  moral  sentiments  and  reflection.  In  the
same  work,  there  is  a  scene  in  a  boat,  in  which  Don  Juan
and  his  companions  are  made  to  devour  his  tutor.  To  a
being  under  the  sole  dominion  of  Destruetiveness,  such  a
representation  may  perhaps  be  gratifying ;  but  unless  this
propensity  be  very  powerful,  it  will  be  impossible  for  any
mind  deliberately  to  invent  and  enjoy  such  a  picture  of
human  misery.  No  thoughtlessness,  levity,  freak  of  fancy,
or  other  folly,  could  produce  it,  without  a  predominant  De-
structiveness. This  great  defect  of  taste*  therefore,  may
be  ascribed  to  an  excessive  manifestation  of  this  faculty,  un-
relieved by  Benevolence,  or  other  higher  feelings.  Moore,
also,  in  his  earlier  verses,  was  guilty  of  sins  against  taste,
from  excessive  manifestations  of  the  amative  propensity ;
but  this  error  he  has  greatly  corrected  in  his  later  pro-
ductions.

Faults  in  taste,  however,  arise  not  only  from  unbecoming
manifestations  of  the  lower  propensities,  but  also  from  an
inordinate  expression  of  the  sentiments  and  intellectual
faculties.  In  Peter  Bell  and  Christobell,  and  in  the  pro-
ductions of  the  Lake  School  of  Poetry  in  general,  much
bad  taste  springs  from  mawkish  and  infantine  manifesta-
tions of  Benevolence,  Philoprogenitiveness  and  Adhesive-
ness. Even  Ideality  itself  may  be  abused.  It  is  undoubt-
edly the  fountain  of  beauty,  but  in  excess  it  degenerates  in-
to bombast,  rant  and  exaggeration ;  or  that  species  of  com-
position which  a  contemporary  critic  has  appropriately  de-
signated by  the  epithet  of  "drunken  sublimity."    Worm-


558  TASTE.

worth  affords  examples  of  errors  in  taste,  arising  from  an
abuse  of  Causality;  lie  introduces  abstruse  and  unintelli-
gible metaphysical  disquisitions  into  his  poetry,  and  mis*
tifies  it,  in  place  of  rendering  it  profound.

In  like  manner,  the  expression  of  any  sentiment  or  pro-
pensity in  an  undue  degree  in  conversation  or  conduct,  is
essentially  characteristic  of  bad  taste*  An  excess  of  vani-
ty, and  the  tendency  to  engross  conversation,  is  one  form  of
it  which  occurs  in  society,  and  arises  from  over  active
Love  of  Approbation  and  Self-Esteem.  The  tendency  to
wrangle,  dispute  and  contradict,  is  another  fault  which
springs  from  an  excessive  activity  of  Combativeness.  The
disposition  to  flatter,  and  utter  a  profusion  of  agreeable
things  to  persons  whom  we  do  not  esteem,  but  wish  to
please,  is  also  characterized  by  bad  taste,  and  arises  from
an  improper  manifestation  of  Secretiveness  and  Love  of  Ap-
probation.

The  question  naturally  occurs,  What  is  the  distinction
betwixt  bad  taste  and  bad  morality  ?  I  would  answer,  that
bad  morality  always  implies  bad  taste,  for  it  springs  from
an  improper  manifestation  of  some  lower  feeling,  to  the
outrage  of  the  sentiments  of  Justice,  Benevolence  and  Ve-
neration. Bad  taste,  however,  may  occur  without  moral
turpitude,  and  this  arises  from  an  undue  activity  of  any  of
the  faculties,  without  offence  against  justice.  The  effemi-
nacies of  Peter  Bell,  for  example,  stand  low  enough  in  the
scale  of  taste;  but  as  the  greatest  tenderness  for  asses  does
not  necessarily  imply  any  breach  of  justice  to  other  beings,
the  taste  only  is  bad,  and  not  the  morality.  In  like  man-
ner, when  an  individual,  under  the  influence  of  an  exces-
sive Self-Esteem  and  Love  of  Approbation,  constitutes
himself  the  bore  of  a  party,  as  his  offence  does  not  amount
to  an  attack  upon  such  rights  as  we  guard  by  the  senti-
ment of  justice,  we  set  him  down  as  ill-bred,  but  not  as
immoral.

Chesterfield,  and  some  dictators  in  manners,  deli-
berately recommend  slight  offences  against  candour,  not


TASTE.  559

only  as  not  liable  to  the  imputation  of  bad  taste,  but  as  es-
sential to  good  taste*  Thus,  Chesterfibld  admits  a  great
deal  of  deceitful  compliance  into  his  characteristics  of  a
gentleman ;  but,  with  great  deference  to  his  Lordship's  au-
thority, I  cannot  subscribe  to  the  doctrine  that  bad  mora-
lity and  good  taste  are  in  any  degree  compatible  in  the
same  action.  An  individual  may  act  very  improperly  in
many  parts  of  his  conduct,  and  shew  considerable  refine-
ment in  other  instances ;  and  this  is  easily  understood ;  for
the  higher  sentiments  may  co-exist  with  great  animal  pro-
pensities, and  one  occasion  may  call  forth  the  former,
and  another  excite  only  the  latter,  and  the  conduct  may
thus  assume  different  aspects  at  different  times;  but  the
question  is,  Whether  the  same  action  can  be  charac-
terized both  as  immoral  and  as  possessed  of  good  taste?
In  my  opinion  it  cannot  It  is  good  taste  to  restrain
the  expression  of  our  opinions  or  views  in  society,  when
an  opposite  conduct  would  cause  only  dissensions  and
broils;  but  this  is  good  morality  also.  Chestebfield,
however,  goes  farther,  and  allows  an  expression  of  senti-
ments, which  we  do  not  entertain,  if  they  be  pleasing  to
those  to  whom  they  are  addressed,  as  perfectly  compatible
with  good  manners ;  and  this  is  a  breach  of  candour.  This
practice  is  an  insult  to  the  person  who  is  the  object  of  it ;
and  if  he  saw  the  real  motives  he  would  feel  it  to  be
such*  Nothing  which,  when  examined  in  all  its  lights,  and
its  true  colours,  is  essentially  rude,  can  possibly  be  correct
in  point  of  taste;  so  that  it  has  only  the  appearance,  and
not  the  true  qualities,  of  politeness.  In  short,  purity  in
the  motive  is  equally  requisite  to  good  taste  as  to  sound
morality ;  for  the  motive  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  ac-
tion.

The  sources  of  good  taste  may  now  be  adverted  to.  The
nervous  and  sanguine  temperaments,  by  giving  fineness  to
the  substance,  and  vivacity  to  the  action  of  the  brain,  are
highly  conducive  to  refinement*  All  authors  and  artists
whose  works  are  characterized  by  great  delicacy  and  beau-


560  TASTE.

ty,  have  fine  temperaments  combined  with  Ideality.  The
most  exquisite  mental  manifestations  are  those  which  pro-
ceed from  a  favourable  combination  of  the  whole  faculties,
in  which  each  contributes  a  share  of  its  own  good  quali-
ties, and  is  restrained  by  the  others  from  running  into  ex-
cess or  abuse.  Thus,  I  conceive  the  very  admirable  taste
of  Campbell  the  poet,  to  arise  from  a  great  endowment  of
the  higher  sentiments,  Reflection  and  Concentrativeness ;
eo  that,  on  any  feeling  or  image  occurring  to  his  mind,
these  faculties  judge  by  an  intuitive  tact  of  its  fitness,
and  modify  it  to  the  point  at  which  it  pleases  them
all  If  a  favourable  development  of  this  kind  be  possessed,
the  higher  that  Ideality  rises,  not  to  run  into  excess,  and
the  finer  the  temperament,  the  more  perfect  will  be  the
taste.  At  the  same  time,  and  for  the  same  reason,  there
may  be  much  good  taste,  of  a  simple  kind,  with  moderate
Ideality,  if  the  other  faculties  be  favourably  balanced.

As  Taste  arises  from  fine  quality  of  brain,  and  a  favour-
able combination  of  organs,  the  explanation  is  simple,  how
it  may  be  possessed  without  genius.  Genius  arises  from
great  vigour  and  activity,  depending  on  large  size,  and  a
high  temperament:  these  are  greater  endowments  than
equability,  and  an  individual  may  be  deficient  in  them,
and  yet  be  so  favourably  constituted,  with  respect  to  the  ba-
lance of  the  powers,  as  to  fee)  acutely  the  excellencies  or  the
faults  of  genius  manifested  by  others.  Hence  many  per-
sons are  really  excellent  critics,  who  could  not  themselves
produce  original  works  of  value ;  hence  also,  many  origi-
nal authors,  of  great  reputation,  display  very  questionable
Taste.

-  In  applying  these  principles  to  actual  cases,  I  find  them
borne  out  by  numerous  facts.  Dr  Chalmers  occasionally
sins  against  taste,  and  in  his  head  Ideality  and  Comparison
are  out  of  due  proportion  to  Causality,  and  some  other  or-
gans. In  Mr  Jeffrey's  bust,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  a
very  beautiful  and  regular  development  of  Eventuality,
Comparison)  and  Causality,  with  a  fair  balance  between  the

3


TASTE.  561

propensities  and  sentiment* ;  and  his  taste  is  generally  ad-
mirable.

As  good  taste  is  the  result  of  the  harmonious  action  of
the  faculties*  we  are  able  to  perceive  why  taste  is  suscep-
tible of  so  great  improvement  by  cultivation.  An  author
will  frequently  reason  as  profoundly,  or  soar  as  loftily,  in
his  first  essay,  as  after  practice  in  writing  for  twenty  years;
but  he  rarely  manifests  the  same  tact  at  the  outset  of  his
career,  as  he  attains  by  subsequent  study,  and  the  admoni-
tions of  a  discriminative  criticism.  Reasoning  depends
en  Causality  and  Comparison,  and  lofty  flights  of  imagina-
tion on  Ideality ;  and  if  the  organs  of  these  faculties  be
large,  they  will  execute  their  functions  intuitively,  and
carry  the  author  forward,  from  the  first,  on  a  bold  and
powerful  wing ;  but  as  taste  depends  on  the  balancing  and
adjusting,  the  suppressing  and  elevating,  the  ordering  and
arranging,  of  our  thoughts,  feelings,  and  .emotions,  so  as  to
produce  a  general  harmony  of  the  whole;  it  is  only  prac-
tice, reflection,  and  comparison  with  higher  standards,  that
enable  us  successfully  to  approximate  to  excellence;  and
even  these  will  do  so  only  when  the  organs  are  by  nature
equably  combined ;  for  if  the  balance  preponderate  greatly
in  any  particular  direction,  no  effort  will  produce  exqui-
site taste.

Much  has  been  written  about  a  standard  of  Taste;  and  in
considering  this  question,  a  distinction  requires  to  be  made.
If,  by  fixing  a  standard,  we  mean  'determining  particular
objects,  or  qualities  of  objects,  which  all  men  shall  regard
as  beautiful,  the  attempt  must  necessarily  be  vain.  A  per-
son possessing  Form,  Size,  Constructiveness,  and  Ideality,
may  experience  the  most  exquisite  emotions  of  beauty  from
contemplating  a  Grecian  Temple,  in  which  another  indivi-
dual, in  whom  these  organs  are  very  deficient,  may  per-
ceive nothing  but  stone  and  lime.  One  individual  may
discover,  in  an  arrangement  of  colours,  beauty  which  is
quite  imperceptible  to  a  person  deficient  in  the  organ  of
Colouring.    Or  one  may  be  delighted  with  music,  in  which

n  n


562  TASTE.

another,  through  imperfection  in  the  organ  of  Tune,  may
perceive  no  melody.  Thus  no  object,  and  no  qualities  of
objects,  can  be  fixed  upon,  which  all  mankind,  whatever  be
their  original  constitution,  will  acknowledge  to  be  beauti-
ful, and  in  this  view  no  standard  of  Taste  exists.

But  degrees  of  Beauty  may  be  estimated,  in  which
sense  a  scale  at  least,  if  not  a  standard,  of  Taste,  may  be
framed.  The  more  favourable  the  original  constitution  of
an  individual  is,  and  the  greater  the  cultivation  bestowed
on  his  powers,  he  becomes  the  higher  authority  in  questions
of  Taste.  The  existence  of  a  sentiment  of  Justice  has  been
denied,  because  individuals  are  found  in  whom  it  is  so
weak,  as  scarcely  to  influence  their  conduct ;  but  Phreno-
logy, by  pointing  out  their  defect,  shews  that  these  persons
form  exceptions  to  a  general  rule,  and  then  no  one  thinks
of  appealing  to  them,  to  determine  whether  an  action  be
just  or  unjust  in  any  particular  case.  In  like  manner,
men  deficient  in  the  faculties  which  give  the  perception  of
Beauty,  are  not  authorities  in  Taste ;  but  that  individual  is
the  highest  judge  in  whom  large  Ideality  is  combined  with
a  fine  temperament,  and  the  most  favourable  development
of  the  organs  of  propensity,  sentiment,  and  intellect ;  and
who,  besides,  has  exercised  his  faculties  with  the  greatest
assiduity.  His  determinations  in  regard  to  degrees  of
beauty  in  objects,  will  form  the  best  standards  of  Taste
which  our  imperfect  nature  is  capable  of  attaining.


EFFECTS  OF   SIZE  IN  THE   ORGANS  ON  THE  MANI-
FESTATIONS OF  THE  FACULTIES.

The  reader  is  referred  to  the  distinction  between  power
and  activity  in  the  mind,  as  stated  on  page  103  of  the
present  work.  Cceteris  paribus,  size  in  the  organs  is  the
measure  of  power  in  the  manifestations  of  the  faculties.
The  practical  application  of  this  doctrine  remains  to  be
stated ;  and  it  will  be  understood  now,  after  the  functions


EFFECTS  OF  SIZE.  563

and  modes  of  activity  of  the  primitive  faculties  have  been
elucidated.

As  size  in  the  organs  is  an  indispensable  requisite  to
power  in  the  mind,  no  instance  ought  to  occur  of  an  indi-
vidual who,  with  a  small  brain,  has  manifested  clearly  and
unequivocally,  great  force  of  character,  animal,  moral  and
intellectual,  such  as  belonged  to  Bruce,  Buonaparte,  or
Fox ;  and  such  accordingly  phrenologists  affirm  to  be  the
fact.  The  Phrenological  Society  possesses  casts  of  the  skulls
of  Bruce,  Raphael,  and  La  Fontaine,  and  they  are  all
large.  The  busts  and  portraits  of  Lord  Bacon,  Shak-
speare  and  Buonaparte,  indicate  large  heads ;  and  among
living  characters  no  individual  has  occurred  to  my  observa-
tion who  leaves  a  vivid  impression  of  his  own  greatness
upon  the  public  mind,  and  who  yet  presents  to  their  eyes
only  a  small  brain.

The  European  head  is  distinguished  from  the  Asiatic
and  native  American,  not  more  by  difference  of  form  than
of  size  ;  the  European  is  much  the  larger,  and  the  superior
energy  of  this  variety  of  mankind  is  known.  The  heads
of  men  are  larger  than  those  of  women,  and  the  latter
obey ;  or  to  bring  the  point  to  the  clearest  demonstration,
we  require  only  to  compare  the  head  of  an  idiot  with  that
of  Burke,  or  of  a  child  with  that  of  a  full  grown  man,  as
represented  on  p.  77.  If,  then,  size  is  so  clearly  a  conco-
mitant of  power  in  extreme  cases,  we  are  not  to  presume
that  it  ceases  to  exert  an  influence  where  the  differences
are  so  minute  that  the  eye  is  scarcely  able  to  detect  them.
The  rule,  Extremis  probatis  media  prcesumuntur,  is  complete-
ly applicable  here.

The  doctrine,  that  power  is  a  characteristic  of  mind,  dis-
tinguishable at  once  from  mere  intellectual  acumen,  and
also  from  activity,  is  one  of  great  practical  importance ;  and
it  explains  a  variety  of  phenomena  of  which  we  previously
possessed  no  theory.  In  society  we  meet  with  persons
whose  whole  manner  is  little,  whom  we  instinctively  feel

n  n  2


564  EFFECTS  OF  SIZE

to  be  unfit  for  any  great  enterprise  or  arduous  duty,  and
who  are,  nevertheless,  distinguished  for  amiable  feeling
and  good  sense.  This  springs  from  a  small  brain  fa-
vourably proportioned  in  its  parts.  Other  individuals,
again,  with  far  less  polish,  inferior  information,  and  fewer
amiable  qualities,  impress  us  with  a  sentiment  of  their
power,  foree,  energy,  or  greatness;  we  instinctively  feel
that  they  have  weight,  and  that,  if  acting  against  us,  they
would  prove  formidable  opponents.  This  arises  from  great
size.  Buonaparte,  who  had  an  admirable  tact  in  judging
of  human  nature,  distinguishes  between  mere  cleverness
and  force  of  character,  and  almost  always  prefers  the  latter.
In  his  Memoirs,  he  speaks  of  some  of  his  generals  as  pos-
sessing talents,  intellect,  book-learning,  but  as  still  being
nobody,  as  wanting  that  weight  and  comprehensiveness
which  fit  a  man  for  great  enterprises ;  while  he  adverts  to
others  as  possessing  limited  intellect  and  little  judgment,
but  prodigious  force  of  character ;  and  considers  them  as
admirably  adapted  by  this  qualification  to  lead  soldiers
through  peril  and  difficulty,  provided  they  be  directed  by
minds  superior  to  their  own.  Murat  was  such  a  man;
and  Buonaparte  appears  on  the  whole  to  have  liked  such
officers,  for  they  did  not  trouble  him  with  thinking  for*
themselves,  while  they  possessed  energy  adequate  to  the
execution  of  his  most  gigantic  designs.  The  leader  of  a
popular  party  who  has  risen  to  that  rank  by  election,  or
assumed  it  with  acquiescence,  will  be  found  to  have  a  large
•  brain.  The  leaders  of  an  army  or  a  fleet  also  require  a  si-
milar endowment,  for  otherwise  they  would  possess  autho-
rity without  natural  weight,  and  would  never  inspire  con-
fidence in  their  followers.  Buonaparte  had  a  large  head ;
and  officers  and  soldiers,  citizens  and  statesmen,  bowed
before  his  mental  greatness,  however  mueh  they  might  de-
test the  use  he  made  of  his  power.  In  him,  all  the  organs,
animal,  moral,  and  intellectual  (Conscientiousness  and,
perhaps,   Firmness,  expected),  seem  to  have  been  large;


IN  THE  ORGANS.


565


great  activity  was  added ;  and  hence  arose  commanding  en-
ergy, combined  with  profound  and  comprehensive  intel-
lectual capacity.

The  Society  possesses  casts  of  the  heads  of  .Captains
Franklin  and  Parry  ;  and  both  are  decidedly  large,  with
an  excellent  proportion  in  the  different  orders  of  organs.
These  commanders  displayed  great  force  of  character  in
their  respective  expeditions  in  quest  of  a  North-west  Passage.
No  tendency  to  mutiny,  or  insubordination,  occurred  even
in  the  most  trying  circumstances ;  and  this  would  be  the
case,  because  the  men  under  their  command  would  instinc-
tively feel  natural  superiority  coinciding  with  artificial  rank.

The  figure  represents  the  cast  of
Captain  Parry,  taken  by  Deville.
The  brain  is  large,  the  portion  before
the  ear  greatly  exceeds  that  behind  it.
The  asterisks  indicate  the  seat  of  Cau-
tiousness and  Causality;  the  region
above  them  belongs  to  the  moral  sen-
timents ;  it  is  large ;  Firmness  is  con-
spicuously developed ;  but  the  hair  gives  part  of  the  eleva-
tion at  Firmness,  and  allowance  falls  to  be  made  for  its
thickness.

The  men  who  are  able  to  attend  to  their  private  duties,
and  at  the  same  time  carry  a  load  of  public  business  on
their  minds,  without  feeling  encumbered,  owe  this  quality
to  great  size  in  the  brain,  combined  with  large  Knowing
Organs.  Those  who,  having  small  brains,  find  their  whole
powers  absorbed  and  exhausted  by  their  particular  occupa-
tions, wonder  at  such  men,  and  cannot  comprehend  either
their  motives,  or  the  means  by  which  they  accomplish  so
much.  It  is  power  which  distinguishes  them,  so  that
duties  which  to  others  are  oppressive,  press  lightly  on  them,
or  afford  them  only  amusement  or  relaxation.  Mr  Joseph
Hume,  M.  P.  is  a  beautiful  illustration  of  this  doctrine.
He  possesses  moderate  organs  of  Causality,  little  Wit,  less
Ideality,  with  no  great  endowment  of  Language ;  and  yet


-566  EFFECTS  OF  SIZE

even  his  opponents  allow  him  to  manifest  great  force  of  cha-
racter, with  a  power  of  application  and  perseverance  which
to  ordinary  minds  is  incomprehensible.  If  we  look  at  the
large  brain  indicated  in  his  cast,  and  attend  to  the  combi-
nation of  organs  which  it  displays,  we  shall  perceive  the
source  of  his  weight.  Thurtell  also  shewed  great  force
of  character,  and  his  brain  was  large.  This  quality  in
Thurtell  was  the  source  of  the  intense  and  long  endu-
ring interest  which  he  created  and  supported  in  the  public
mind.  He  made  deep  impressions  on  those  individuals
who  came  in  contact  with  him,  they  wrote  and  printed
their  emotions,  and  the  publie  caught  the  feeling.

In  examining  the  heads  of  criminals  in  jail,  I  have  found
the  most  daring,  desperate  and  energetic  to  possess  large
brains.  When  great  size  and  an  unfavourable  combination
occur  together,  the  officers  of  justice  are  reduced  to  despair
of  correcting  the  offender.  They  feel  a  strength  of  charac-
ter which  they  cannot  subdue,  and  an  evil  bent  which  they
cannot  direct ; — the  result  generally  is  a  report  from  the
police  that  the  individual  is  incorrigible ;  the  first  capital
offence  is  prosecuted  to  extremity,  and  he  is  hanged  for
the  sake  of  protecting  society  from  farther  mischief.  In
professional  pursuits,  also,  the  men  who  are  indisputably
paramount  to  their  fellows  not  merely  in  cleverness,  but
in  depth  and  force  of  character,  have  large  heads ;  and
this  holds  not  only  in  the  learned  professions,  but  in  mer-
cantile avocations.  I  have  observed,  that  individuals  who,
born  in  indigence,  have  risen  to  wealth,  by  conducting
great  and  extensive  establishments,  have  uniformly  brains
above  an  average  size ;  and  mercantile  travellers  who  suc-
ceed in  procuring  orders,  and  pushing  a  trade  amidst  a
keen  and  arduous  competition,  are  distinguished  by  the
same  quality.  Such  men  make  an  impression,  and  act
with  a  confidence  of  power,  which  gives  effect  to  all  they
say  or  do.  In  a  school,  if  the  children  care  nothing  for
the  master,  treat  him  with  disrespect,  and  he  fail,  after
using  every  severity,   to  maintain  discipline  and  subordi-


IN  THE  OEGANS.  567

nation,  he  will  be  found  to  have  a  small  head*  In  the  do-
mestic circle,  if  the  mistress  of  a  family  (while  in  good
health),  is  easily  overcome,  annoyed  and  oppressed  with
the  cares  and  duties  of  her  household,  the  origin  of  the
evil  will  be  found  in  too  small  a  head.

In  the  Church,  the  effects  of  size  are  equally  conspi-
cuous. A  preacher  with  a  large  brain  is  felt  by  his  flock
to  possess  weight,  and  they  submit  willingly  to  be  led  and
taught  by  him,  while  they  treat  with  indifference  the
feebleness  that  accompanies  a  little  head.  If,  as  occa-
sionally happens,  a  preacher  possess  an  excellent  combina-
tion, that  is,  the  organs  of  the  sentiments  and  intellect
large  in  proportion  to  those  of  the  animal  propensities,
he  will  be  acute,  amiable,  sensible,  and  interesting;  but  if
the  general  size  of  his  brain  be  under  an  average,  he  will
not  be  impressive  and  commanding.

The  principle  that  Size  gives  power  of  manifestation,
forms  the  key  to  the  following  criticism  on  Dr  Chalmers.
"  His  manner,  so  far  from  being  graceful,"  says  a  contem-
porary writer,  "  is  very  nearly  uncouth?  his  tones  are  nei-.
ther  musical,  nor  under  strict  subordination ;  in  the  selec-
tion of  words,  and  management  of  figures,  his  taste,  so  far
from  being  pure,  is  sometimes  very  much  the  reverse ;  his
pronunciation,  though  vigorous  and  distinct,  is  beset  with
provincialisms,  which  time  and  a  city  audience  have  done  «
very  little  to  correct ;  and  as  to  gesture,  wherever  we  have
heard  him,  he  appeared  to  be  totally  unconscious  that  he
had  got  such  a  thing  as  hands  and  arms  to  manage.  In
what,  then,  it  may  be  asked,  consists  the  secret  of  the
Doctor's  eloquence?  Simply,  as  we  take  it,  in  this, — that,
while  his  arguments  and  illustrations  are  for  the  most  part
striking  and  original,  he  possesses  prodigious  enthusiasm  and
energy  in  enforcing  them ;  that  the  defects  of  his  rhetoric
are  completely  lost  in  the  force  of  his  ratiocination ;  that
while  he  has  mathematics  or  logic  enough  to  make  his  rea-
soning acute)  grasping,  and  irresistible,  he  has  poetry  enough
to  prevent  it  from  being  dull ;  thus  evincing  the  very  high-


568  EFFECTS  OF  SIZE

eet  species  of  intellect,  the  union  of  a  sound  and  comprehen-
sive judgment^  with  a  fertile  and  brilUant  imagination.  We
have  said  he  possesses  energy,  and  this  we  take  to  be  the
great  and  redeeming  quality  of  his  manner,  compared  to
which  the  tiny  graces  sink  into  insignificance.  Whether
we  are  facile  or  fastidious,  whether  we  like  or  dislike  the
preacher's  doctrine,  one  thing  is  certain,  he  forces  us  to
attend  to  him*  A  man  inigkteasUy  get  his  pocket  picked  whik
listening  to  Dr  Chalmers,  but  we  defy  him  to  fall  asleep:'
The  bust  of  Dr  Chalmers  indicates  a  large  brain.

In  authorship,  the  same  law  holds  good.  Critics  have
been  pu&zled  to  account  for  the  high  rank  which  Dr
Samuel  Johnson  holds  in  English  literature,  and  to  dis-
cover the  qualities  of  mind  on  which  his  eminence  is
founded.  He  has  made  no  discoveries  in  morals  or  in  sci-
ence to  captivate  the  mind.  His  style  is  stately  and  sono-
rous, and  his  arrangement  in  general  good ;  but  equal  or  su-
perior graces  may  be  found  in  Goldsmith,  Thomson,  and
other  authors,  whom  nobody  would  compare  with  him  in
^genius.  His  great  characteristic  is  force  and  weight;  and
these  are  tho  concomitants  of  great  size  in  the  organs.
Milton's  writings  are  highly  characteristic  of  power,  as
are  also  those  of  Locke.  Addison,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a
specimen  of  genius  produced  by  a  felicitous  combination  of
sentiment  and  intellect,  without  preponderating  energy
from  great  size.  Power  is  the  leading  charm  of  Swift's
writings ;  he  is  not  graceful,  far  from  elegant,  his  reason-
ing is  frequently  superficial,  and  his  conclusions  question-
able ;  but  he  is  rarely  feeble.  Strength,  energy,  and  deter-
mination mark  every  page.

To  produce  its  full  effects,  large  size  must  be  accompa-
nied with  sound  health  and  an  active  temperament,  as  ex-
plained on  p.  101 ;  but  these,  while  necessary  to  give  it  ef-
fect, will  never  compensate  for  its  absence.

ACTIVITY  in  the  organs,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  live-
liness, quickness,  and  rapidity ;  Dr  Spurzheim  thinks  that


IN  THE  ORGANS.  569

long  fibres  contribute  to  activity.  The  sanguine  and  nei>
vans  temperament*  described  on  pages  39,  88,  and  101,  af-
ford external  indications  of  constitutional  activity.  Mode-
rate size  of  brain,  with  favourable  combination,  and  much
activity,  will  constitute  what  is  commonly  understood  by  a
ckver  man  in  ordinary  life ;  such  an.  individual  will  form
ideas  rapidly,  do  a  great  deal  of  work,  shew  tact  and  dis-
crimination, and  prove  himself  really  a  valuable  and  use-
ful member  of  society;  but  he  must  not  be  overloaded
with  difficulties,  or  encumbered  with  obstacles,  nor  must
the  field  in  which  he  is  called  on  to  labour  be  too  exten-
sive.

Great  errors  are  often  committed  in  society  through  ig-
norance of  this  fact.  An  individual  possessing  a  small
brain,  but  a  fine  temperament,  ancLfavourable  combination,
perhaps  distinguishes  himself  in  a  limited  and  subordinate
sphere,  or  he  makes  one  great  and  successful  effort,  in
which  his  powers  are  tasked  to  the  utmost  of  their  limits ; —
.the  notion  is  then  adopted  that  he  is  capable  of  higher  du-
ties, and  of  exhibiting  habitually  the  force  of  mind  thus
displayed  on  a  single  occasion.  He  is,  in  consequence,
promoted  to  a  more  arduous  station.  He  continues  to  exe-
cute small  matters  so  well,  that  it  is  difficult  to  point  out
individual  instances  of  failure,  and  yet  a  general  impres-
sion of  bis  incapacity  arises,  want  of  success  and  discon-
tent increase,  and  at  last,  after  great  suffering  to  him-
self, and  annoyance  to  his  employers,  he  is  dismissed.  The
small  brain  is  the  origin  of  the  incapacity ;  and  ignorance
of  its  effects  the  cause  of  his  being  misplaced.

Mankind,  in  extreme  cases,  recognise  power  or  feebleness
of  mental  character,  and  modify  their  conduct  accordingly.
Those  in  whom  moral  and  religious  principles  do  not  consti-
tute the  habitual  rule  of  conduct,  treat  individuals  in  the  most
different  manner,  according  to  the  impression  which  they
receive  from  their  manner,  and  the  estimate  they  form  from
it  of  their  strength  or  weakness  of  mind.  There  are  men
who  carry  in  their  very  look  the  intimation  of  greatness,


570  EFFECTS  OF  SIZE

whose  "manner  at  once  proclaims,  "  Nemo  me  impune  laces-
set;"  the  world  reads  this  notice,  and  holds  it  safest  to  al-
low them  to  follow  their  own  course  without  obstruction,
while  they  avoid  giving  offence.  Contrasted  with  them,
are  the  feeble  and  vacillating ;  men  as  unstable  as  water,
unsteady  as  the  wind.  The  wicked  seize  upon  them,  and
make  them  their  prey.  The  treatment  received  by  differ-
ent persons  from  society,  is  thus  widely  different ;  and  it
may  truly  be  said,  that  a  large  portion  of  mankind  can-
not easily  conceive  the  miseries  inflicted  on  the  weak  by  the
powerful  and  unprincipled  taking  advantago  of  their  defi-
ciencies.

When  a  favourable  combination,  a  fine  temperament,
and  large  size,  are  conjoined  in  an  individual,  they  consti-
tute the  perfection  of  tgenius.  This  I  conceive  to  have
been  the  case  in  Homer  and  in  Shakspeare.  Vivacious
buoyancy,  ease,  and  fertility,  arising  from  the  first  and  se-
cond causes,  joined  with  depth,  strength,  comprehensive-
ness, and  masculine  energy,  the  result  of  the  third,  place
these  authors  above  all  others  whom  the  world  has  ever
seen.  And  when  we  consider  that  these  rare  and  splen-
did gifts  must  again  be  united  in  one  individual,  be-
fore their  equal  can  reappear,  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in
perceiving  why  so  few  Homers  and  Shakspeares  are  gi-
ven by  nature  to  the  world.

In  these  observations,  I  have  treated  of  the  effects  of
Size  in  the  brain  in  general,  on  the  general  manifestations
of  the  mind,  to  bring  the  doctrine  clearly  and  forcibly  be-
fore the  reader ;  but  I  beg  of  him  not  to  fall  into  the  mis-
take of  taking  general  size  as  an  indication  of  particular
power,  for  then  difficulties  without  end  will  be  encounter-
ed. For  example,  it  has  often  been  objected,  that  a  parti-
cular individual  wears  a  large  hat,  indicating  a  large  brain,
and  yet  that  he  has  no  scope  of  intellect,  and  no  ability,  in
the  general  sense  of  the  term.  The  answer  is,  that  we
must  look  for  the  power  in  the  direction  of  the  Size,  as  ex-
plained on  p.  97.    If  the  large  hat  is  requisite,  on  account


IN  THE  ORGANS.  571

of  a  great  development  of  the  animal  organs,  we  must  ex-
pect the  individual  to  be  only  a  powerful  animal,  and  he
may  be  this,  and  at  the  same  time  a  weak  man.  If  the
size  predominate  in  the  region  of  the  sentiments,  we  may
then  look  for  greatness  in  moral  worth;  but  it  is  only
when  great  size,  combined  with  an  active  temperament,
pervades  the  whole  three  classes  of  organs,  Propensities,
Sentiments,  and  Intellect,  that  Phrenology  authorises  us  to
expect  a  general  character,  vigorous,  comprehensive  and
profound.

The  circumstances  which  modify  the  effects  of  Size  have
already  been  stated  (pp.  32,  33.  101),  when  treating  of  the
principles  of  the  science,  to  which  the  reader  is  respectful*
ly  referred*

COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE,  OR  EFFECTS  OF  THE  OR-
GANS WHEN  COMBINED  IN  DIFFERENT  RELA-
TIVE PROPORTIONS.

The  primitive  functions  of  each  organ  were  discovered,
by  observing  cases  in  which  it  decidedly  predominated
over,  or  fell  short  of,  other  organs,  in  point  of  Size ;  and  by
similar  observations  each  must  still  be  verified*  After  the
discovery  is  established,  its  practical  application  deserves
attention.  Every  individual  possesses  all  the  organs,  but
they  are  combined  in  different  degrees  of  relative  size  in
different  persons ;  and  the  manifestations  of  each  are  mo-
dified in  some  degree  by  the  influence  of  those  with  which
it  is  combined.  The  effect  of  combination,  however,  is
not  to  change  the  proper  functions  of  the  different  organs,
but  only  to  modify  the  manner  in  which  they  are  manifest-
ed ;  or  the  acts  in  which  they  seek  gratification.

Three  rules  may  be  laid  down  for  estimating  the  effects
of  differences  in  relative  size,  occurring  in  the  organs  of  the
same  brain.

Rule  first.— Every  faculty  desires  gratification  with  a


572


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.


degree  of  energy  proportionate  to  the  size  of  its  organ  * ;
and  those  faculties  will  he  habitually  indulged,  the  organs
of  which  are  largest  in  the  individual  f.

Examples: — If  the  animal  organs  in  general  are  large,  and
the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments  and  intellect  in  general
small,  the  individual  will  be  naturally  prone  to  animal
indulgence  in  the  highest  degree,  and  disposed  to-  seek
gratification  in  the  directest  way,  and  in  the  lowest  pur-
suits.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments
and  intellect  greatly  predominate,  the  individual  will  be
naturally  prone  to  moral  and  intellectual  pursuits ;  such
persons  are  "  a  law  unto  themselves."

In  illustration  of  this  rule,  the  skull  of  a  Charib,  and  the
head  of  Pope  Alexander  VI.,  who  was  a  monster  of
wickedness  in  human  form,  may  be  contrasted  with  the
skull  of  Raphael,  and  the  head  of  Melancthon  the  Re-
former.


Chaeib.


Pope  Alexander  VI.


Raphael.


r*m


Melancthon.


•  The  condition,  octieru  parib'u,  is  always  understood,  and  therefore
need  not  be  repeated,  in  treating  of  the  effects  of  Size.

f  Having  been  solicited  to  state,  in  methodical  order,  the  effects  of  the
combinations  so  far  as  observed,  I  tried  to  do  this  in  the  MS.  of  the  pre-


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  573

In  farther  illustration,  the  heads  of  Burke  and  Hare
the  murderers,  represented  on  page  87,  may  be  contrasted
with  those  of  the  Reverend  Mr  M.,  given  on  page  88,  and
Captain  Parry,   on  p.  565.      In  the  Charib,   Alexan-
der VI.,  Burke,  and  Hare,  the  basilar  and  posterior  re-
gions of  the  brain,  dedicated  to  the  animal  propensities,
greatly  preponderate  over  the  anterior  and  coronal  regions,
which  manifest  the  intellect  and  moral  sentiments*;  in
Raphael,  the  basilar  region  is  large,  but  the  intellectual
and  moral  decidedly  preponderate ;  in  Melancthon,  who
was  distinguished  for  benignity  and  wisdom  in  a  rude  and
excited  age,  the  anterior  and  coronal  regions  very  greatly
predominate ;  in  the  Reverend  Mr  M.  the  same  favour-
able combination  occurs,  and  he  was  remarkable  for  a  si-
milar character;  and  in  Captain  Parry,  the  base  is  large,
but  with  great  predominance  of  the  anterior  and  coronal
regions.    Now,  under  the  rule  before  stated,  the  first  class
will  be  naturally  prone  to  low  and  degrading  pursuits,  ha-
ving for  their  object  the  gratification  of  Amativeness,  De-
structiveness,  Acquisitiveness,  and  other  inferior  feelings ;
they  will  possess  very  few  aspirations  after  the  noble  and
beneficent  virtues  which  dignify  human  nature ;  be  blind
to  the  obligations  of  justice,  piety,  and  mercy ;  and  totally
incapable  of  appreciating  the  advantages  of  science.     The
second  class  will  form  a  direct  contrast  to  them.    They

sent  work ;  but  found  the  result  to  be  a  tedious  enumeration  of  proposi.
tkras,  adapted  to  Individuality  alone,  difficult  to  be  remembered,  and
withal  extremely  incomplete.  I  hare  therefiire  preferred  stating  princi.
pies  chiefly,  accompanied  with  illustrations,  to  render  them  intelligible,
and  shew  their  application.  This  method  was  adopted  in  the  Elements  for
the  sake  of  brevity,  and,  on  mature  examination,  it  appears  to  be  prefer,
able  in  itself:  The  reader  in  whom  the  Reflecting  Organs  and  Concentra-
tiveness  are  amply  developed,  will  not  only  easily  comprehend  the  rules
here  laid  down,  but  be  able  greatly  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  their  applies
tion.

*  The  size  of  the  coronal  region  is  best  judged  of  by  the  height  and
breadth  of  the  brain  above  Cautiousness  and  Causality,  the  situation  of
which  organs  is  indicated  in  some  of  the  figures  by  asterisks.  Wherever
that  region  is  shallow  or  narrow,  the  moral  feelings  will  be  comparatively
feeble.


574  COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.

will  naturally  feel  the  superiority  of  moral  and  intellectual
pursuits,  ardently  desire  to  advance  in  the  career  of  im-
provement, and  instinctively  love  every  virtue  and  attain-
n^piftt  that  is  calculated  to  increase  the  true  dignity  and
happiness  of  Man.  It  is  common  for  individuals  to  assume
themselves  as  standards  for  judging  of  mankind  in  gene-
ral; w  no  criterion  can  he  more  fallacious;  the  con-
sciousne^  of  men  belonging  to  the  inferior  class  would  re-
present the  race  as  base,  grovelling  and  selfish,  that  of  the
higher  as  elevated,  benignant,  and  intellectual.

Rule  second. — As  there  are  three  kinds  of  faculties,
Animal,  Moral  and  Intellectual,  which  are  not  homogene-
ous, it  may  happen  that  several  large  animal  organs  are
combined  in  the  same  individual,  with  several  moral  and
intellectual  organs  highly  developed.  The  rule,  then,  will
be,  that  the  lower  propensities  will  take  their  direction
from  the  higher  powers  ;  and  such  a  course  of  action  will
be  habitually  followed  as  will  be  calculated  to  gratify  the
whole  faculties  whose  organs  are  large.

Examples. — If  the  organs  of  Acquisitiveness  and  Con-
scientiousness were  both  large,  stealing  might  gratify  Acqui-
sitiveness, but  it  would  offend  Conscientiousness.  Accord-
ing to  the  rule,  the  individual  would  endeavour  to  gratify
both,  by  acquiring  property  by  lawful  industry.  If  Com-
bativeness  and  Destructiveness  were  large,  and  Benevo-
lence and  Conscientiousness  also  amply  developed,  wanton
outrage  and  indiscriminate  attack  might  gratify  the  first  two
faculties,  but  they  would  outrage  the  last  two ;  hence  the
individual  would  seek  for  situations  calculated  to  gratify
all  four,  and  these  may  be  found  in  the  ranks  of  an  army
embodied  for  the  defence  of  his  country ;  or  in  moral  and
intellectual  warfare  against  the  patrons  of  corruption  and
abuse  in  Church  and  State.  Luther,  Knox,  and  many
other  benefactors  of  mankind,  were  probably  actuated  by
such  a  combination  of  faculties;  Washington  nobly  dis-
played it.


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  575

If,  in  an  individual,  the  cerebellum  is  very  large,  and
Philoprogenitiveness,  Adhesiveness,  and  Conscientiousness
deficient,  he  will  be  prone  to  seek  the  directest  gratifica-
tions of  the  animal  appetite ;  if  the  latter  organs  are  large,
he  will  perceive  that  wedlock  affords  the  best  means  of  sa-
tisfying the  whole  group  of  faculties.

If  Benevolence,  Self-Esteem,  and  Acquisitiveness  are  all
large,  giving  charity  may  gratify  the  first ;  but  unless  the
individual  be  very  rich,  the  act  of  parting  with  property
may  be  disagreeable  to  the  last  two  faculties :  he  will  there-
fore prefer  to  gratify  Benevolence  by  personal  kindness ;  he
will  sacrifice  time,  trouble,  influence  and  advice,  to  the
welfare  of  others,  but  not  property.  If  Benevolence  were
small,  with  the  same  combination,  he  would  not  give  either
money  or  personal  advice.

If  Love  of  Approbation  large,  is  combined  with  large
Ideality  and  moderate  Reflecting  Faculties,  the  individual
will  be  ambitious  to  excel  in  the  splendour  of  his  equipage,
style  of  living,  dress,  and  rank.  If,  to  the  same  combina-
tion, be  added  a  powerful  intellect  and  large  Conscientious-
ness, moral  and  intellectual  excellence  will  be  preferred,  as
the  means  of  obtaining  the  respect  of  the  world.

An  individual  in  whom  Benevolence  and  Love  of  Ap-
probation are  very  large,  and  Conscientiousness  deficient,
will  be  exceedingly  kind  and  attentive  to  those  persons
who  praise  him  loudly  and  extol  his  benevolence ;  but  he
will  overlook  humble,  retiring,  and  unostentatious  merit;
he  will  speak  much  of  his  own  good  deeds.  If  Conscien-
tiousness and  Benevolence  had  predominated,  these  last
would  be  the  first  objects  of  his  regard,  and  the  good  done
would  never  be  proclaimed  by  himself.

If  Self-Esteem  large,  is  combined  with  deficient  Love  of
Approbation  and  Conscientiousness,  the  individual  will  be
prone  to  gratify  his  selfish  feelings,  with  little  regard  to  the
good  opinion,  or  the  just  claims  of  society.  If  Self-Esteem
large,  is  combined  with  large  Love  of  Approbation  and
Conscientiousness,  the  former  will  produce  only  that  de-


576  COMBINATIONS  IN  SI£E.

gree  of  self-respect  which  is  essential  to  dignity  of  charac-
ter, and  that  degree  of  independence  of  sentiment,  without
which  even  virtue  cannot  be  maintained.

If  Cautiousness  large  is  combined  with  deficient  Comba-
tiveness, the  individual  will  be  extremely  timid.  If  Com-
bativeness  be  large,  and  Cautiousness  small,  reckless  intre-
pidity will  be  the  result  If  Combativeness  be  equally
large  with  Cautiousness,  the  individual  will  display  courage
regulated  by  prudence.  If  Cautiousness,  Conscientiousness,
Self-Esteem,  Seeretiveness,  and  Love  of  Approbation,  are
all  large,  and  Combativeness  moderate,  bashfulness  or  ma**
vaise  haute  will  be  the  consequence.  This  feeling  is  the
result  of  the  fear  of  not  acquitting  one's-self  to  advantage,
and  thereby  compromising  one's  i>ersonal  dignity.

If  Veneration  and  Hope  are  large,  and  Conscientiousness
and  Benevolence  small,  the  individual  will  be  naturally
fond  of  the  act  of  religious  worship,  but  averse  to  the  prac-
tice of  charity  and  justice.  If  the  proportions  are  reversed*
the  result  will  be  a  constitutional  disposition  to  charity  and
justice,  with  no  great  tendency  to  the  exercise  of  devotion.
If  all  the  four  organs  are  large,  the  individual  will  be  natu-
rally inclined  to  engage  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  to  dis-
charge his  duties  to  men.  If  Veneration  large,  is  combined
with  large  Acquisitiveness  and  Love  of  Approbation,  the
former  sentiment  may  be  directed  to  superiors  in  rank  and
power,  as  the  means  of  gratifying  the  desires  for  wealth  and
influence  depending  on  the  latter  faculties.  If  Veneration
small  be  combined  with  Self-Esteem  and  Firmness  large,
the  individual  will  not  naturally  look  up  to  superiors  in  rank.

The  intellectual  faculties  will  naturally  tend  to  such  em-
ployments as  are  calculated  to  gratify  the  predominant
propensities  and  sentiments.  If  the  organs  which  consti-
tute a  genius  for  painting  are  combined  with  large  Acqui-
sitiveness, the  individual  would  paint  to  become  rich;  if
combined  with  Acquisitiveness  small,  and  Love  of  Appro-
bation large,  he  would  probably  labour  for  fame,  and  starve
while  attaining  it*    v


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  577

Talents  for  different  intellectual  pursuits  depend  upon
the  combinations  of  the  Knowing  and  Reflecting  Organs
in  certain  proportions.  Form,  Size,  Colouring,  Individua-
lity, Ideality,  Imitation,  and  Secretiveness  large,  with  Loca-
lity small,  will  constitute  a  portrait,  but  not  a  landscape,
painter.  Diminish  Form  and  Imitation,  and  increase  Lo-
cality, and  the  result  will  be  a  talent  for  landscape,  but  not
for  portrait,  painting.  Constructiveness  and  Weight  com-
bined  with  Tune  large,  may  produce  a  talent  for  magical
instrument  making :  Without  a  large  Tune  the  other  facul-
ties could  not  take  this  direction.  Constructiveness  com-
bined with  Size  and  Number  large,  may  lead  to  mathemati-
cal instrument  making.  Causality,  combined  with  large
Secretiveness,  Ideality  and  Imitation,  will  seek  to  discover
the  philosophy  of  the  fine  arts ;  the  same  organ  combined
with  Benevolence,  Conscientiousness,  and  Concentrative-
ness,  large,  will  delight  in  moral  and  political  investiga-
tions. If  to  Individuality,  Eventuality,  Comparison,  and
Causality,  all  large,  an  equally  well  developed  organ  of
Language  be  added,  the  result  will  be  a  talent  for  author-
ship or  public  debate ;  if  Language  be  small,  the  other  facul-
ties will  be  more  prone  to  seek  gratification  in  the  business
of  life,  or  in  abstract  philosophy.

One  great  difficulty  frequently  experienced,  is  to  com-
prehend the  effect  of  the  Reflecting  Powers,  added,  in  a  high
degree  of  endowment,  to  the  Knowing  Faculties,  when  the
latter  are  exercised  in  particular  branches  of  art,  for  which
they  appear  to  be  of  themselves  altogether  sufficient.  It  is
stated,  for  example)  that  Constructiveness,  Secretiveness,
Form,  Size,  Ideality,  Individuality,  Colouring  and  Imita-
tion, constitute  a  genius  for  painting ;  and  it  may  reason-
ably be  inquired,  What  effect  will  the  Reflecting  Organs,
large  or  small,  produce  on  this  combination  ?  This  ques-
tion is  easily  answered.  When  the  Reflecting  Organs  are
small,  Form,  Colour,  Beauty,  constitute  the  leading  objects
of  the  painter's  productions.  There  is  no  story,  no  event,
no  comprehensiveness  of  intellect  displayed  in  his  works.

o  o


578  COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.

They  require  to  be  examined  in  detail,  and  as  single  objects,
unconnected  with  others  by  any  of  the  relations  perceived
by  the  higher  powers.  Add  the  Reflecting  Organs,  however,
and  then  Outline,  Form,  Colouring,  Perspective,  will  all  sink
into  the  rank  of  means,  which  the  intellect  employs  to  ac-
complish a  higher  object ;  such  as  the  expression  of  some
great  action  or  event,  some  story,  which  speaks  to  the  judg-
ment, and  interests  the  feelings.

These  ideas  are  beautifully  illustrated  in  an  Essay  on  the
genius  of  Raphael,  compared  with  bis  cerebral  develop-
ment, by  Mr  Scott  *•  In  the  cast  of  Raphael's  skull,
the  organs  here  enumerated  as  essential  to  a  painter,  are
all  large,  and  those  of  Causality,  Comparison  and  Wit,
are  likewise  far  above  an  ordinary  size.  Now,  a  critic  on
the  productions  of  Raphael  f  says,  "  In  composition  Raf-
faello  stands  pre-eminent.  His  invention  is  the  refined
emanation  of  a  dramatic  mind,  and  whatever  can  most  in-
terest the  feelings,  or  satisfy  the  judgment,  he  selected
from  nature,  and  made  his  own.  The  point  of  time,  in  his
historical  subjects,  is  invariably  well  chosen ;  and  subordi-
nate incidents,  while  they  create  a  secondary  interest,  essen-
tially contribute  to  the  principal  event.  Contrast  or  combi-
nation of  lines  makes  no  part  of  his  works  as  an  artificial
principle  of  composition ;  the  nature  and  character  of  the
event  create  (he  forms  best  calculated  to  express  them.  The
individual  expression  of  particular  figures  corresponds  with
their  character  and  employment ;  and  whether  calm  or  agi-
tated, they  are  at  all  times  equally  remote  from  affectation
or  insipidity.  The  general  interest  of  his  subject  is  kept  up
throughout  the  whole  composition ;  the  present  action  implies
the  past,  and  anticipates  the  future.  If,  in  sublimity  of
thought,  Raffaello  has  been  surpassed  by  his  great  con-
temporary Michael  Angelo, — if,  in  purity  of  outline  and
form,  by  the  antique, — and  in  colouring  and  chiaro-oscuro
by  the  Lombard  and  Venetian  schools ;  yet  in  historical

•  Phrenological  Journal,  vol.  ii.  p.  327*

f  Life  of  Raphael,  London  1818,  anonymous.


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  579

compositions  he  has  no  rival ;  and  for  invention,  expression,
and  the  power  of  telling  a  story,  he  has  never  been  ap-
proached."

M.  Fuselj,  speaking  of  the  qualities  of  Raphael's  style
as  a  painter,  says,  that  "  perfect  human  beauty  he  has  not
represented.  No  face  of  Raphael's  is  perfectly  beautiful ;
no  figure  of  his,  in  the  abstract,  possesses  the  proportions
that  could  raise  it  to  a  standard  of  imitation.  Form  to  him
was  only  a  vehicle  of  character  or  pathos  ;  and  to  these  he
adapted  it  in  a  mode,  and  with  a  truth,  which  leaves  all  at-
tempts at  emendation  hopeless.  His  composition  always
hastens  to  the  most  necessary  point  as  its  centre  ;  andjhm
that  disseminates,  to  that  leads  back,  its  rays,  all  secondary
ones.  Group,  form,  and  contrast,  are  subordinate  to  the
event;  and  common-place  is  ever  excluded.  His  expres-
sion is  unmixed  and  pure,  in  strict  unison  with,  and  decid-
ed by,  character,  whether  calm,  animated,  agitated,  con-
vulsed, or  absorbed,  by  the  inspiring  passion :  it  never  conn
tradicts  its  cause,  and  is  equally  remote  from  tameness  and
grimace.  The  moment  of  his  choice  never  suffers  the  ac-
tion to  stagnate  or  to  expire.  It  is  the  moment  of  transition,
the  crisis  big  with  the  past,  and  pregnant  with  the  future.
His  invention  connects  the  utmost  stretch  of  possibility  with
the  most  plausible  degree  of  probability,  in  a  manner  that
equally 'surprises  our  fancy,  persuades  our  judgment,  and  af-
fects our  hearts."

In  all  this  criticism  we  have  the  most  exact  description
of  the  manifestations  of  Comparison  and  Causality,  which
give  scope,  depth,  and  force  of  intellectual  conception,  the
power  of  combining  means  to  attain  an  end,  and  the  natu-
ral tendency  to  keep  the  means  in  their  appropriate  place,
as  accessaries  merely  to  the  main  design.

Raphael's  genius,  accordingly,  can  be  fully  appreciated
only  after  having  exercised  the  higher  intellectual  faculties
on  his  works.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  acknowledges  that  it
was  only  after  repeated  visits,  and  deep  reflection,  that  he
discovered  their  merits,  his  first  impression  having  been

o  o  2


580  COMBINATIONS   IN  SIZE.

that  of  mortification  and  disappointment,  from  not  seeing
at  once  all  their  greatness.  The  excellence  of  Raphael's
style,  says  he,  is  not  on  the  surface,  "  but  lies  deep,  and  at
the  first  view  is  seen  hut  mistily.  It  is  the  florid  style  which
strikes  at  once,  and  captivates  the  eye  for  a  time,  without
ever  satisfying  the  judgment."  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
Knowing  and  Constructive  Organs  alone  had  predominated
in  Raphael,  all  these  accessaries  would  have  become  prin-
cipals ;  and  the  critic  who  possessed  intellect,  would  have
felt  a  decided  deficiency  of  design,  story,  interest,  and  ob-
ject in  his  paintings.  Hence  high  Reflecting  Organs  are
indispensable  to  historical  painting ;  and  Hatdon,  who  has
manifested  great  power  of  conception  in  this  line,  possesses
these  in  an  eminent  degree.  The  late  Sir  H.  Raeburn,
whose  style  of  portrait  painting  approaches,  in  point  of
dignity  and  force,  the  historical,  possessed  also  a  full  de-
velopment of  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead,  as  well  as  the
pictorial  organs.  In  sculpture  the  same  rule  holds.  The
artist  who  has  Form,  Size,  Constructiveness,  and  Ideality
large,  without  high  Reflecting  Organs,  may  chisel  a  vase,
or  cut  out  a  wreath  of  flowers ;  but  he  will  never  reach
grandeur  of  conception,  or  confer  thought,  dignity,  and
power,  upon  his  productions.

It  follows  from  these  principles,  that  a  sculptor  or  painter
will  represent  one  class  of  objects  with  greater  truth  and  fi-
delity than  another,  according  to  the  particular  combina-
tion of  organs  which  predominates  in  his  head.  Thus,  to
model  the  exquisite  softness,  delicacy,  and  symmetry  of  the
female  form,  the  constructive  organs,  Ideality,  and  the  mo-
ral sentiments,  may  suffice,  without  much  depth  and  power
of  reflection.  To  represent,  on  the  other  hand,  whether  on
canvas  or  in  marble,  the  man  of  genius,  profound  in
thought,  and  elevated  and  intense  in  emotion,  the  artist
himself  must  possess  great  organs  of  sentiment  and  reflec-
tion, in  addition  to  the  organs  of  art  before  described,
otherwise  he  will  never  be  able  adequately  to  conceive  or
to  express  these  modes  of  mind,  when  they  occur  in  his


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  581

subjects.  This  fortunate  combination  occurs  in  conjunc-
tion with  a  fine  temperament  in  Lawrence  Macdonald,
and  hence  the  admirable  qualities  for  which  his  sculpture
is  already  so  highly  distinguished.

The  same  rules  hold  in  architecture  and  music.  The  ar-
chitect possessing  only  the  Knowing  Organs  large,  may
produce  the  plan  of  a  house,  or  a  particular  object,  with
success ;  but  he  ought  never  to  attempt  a  work  in  which
design,  combination,  and  thought,  are  the  leading  objects.
From  not  attending  to  this  law  of  nature,  many  abortions
in  architectural  designs  occur  in  this  country.  An  artist,
with  a  constructive  and  knowing  head,  may  produce  a  plan
which  will  look  beautiful  on  paper,  and  which,  in  fact,  is
beautiful  as  an  individual  object ;  but  if  the  Reflecting  Or-
gans are  deficient,  he  will  be  incapable  of  considering  it  in
its  relations  to  surrounding  objects,  and  of  divining  how  it
will  affect  the  mind,  when  presented  in  all  its  relations ;
hence,  when  executed,  it  may  turn  out  a  deformity.  Add,
however,  the  Reflecting  Organs,  and  the  effects  of  collateral
objects  will  be  anticipated  and  provided  for.  An  architect,
in  whom  the  Reflecting  Organs  are  large,  and  the  Knowing
Organs  deficient,  will  fail  in  practical  effect,  to  which  a
command  of  details  is  indispensable.

The  musician,  in  like  manner,  who  shall  be  able  to  ex-
press thought,  feeling,  and  emotion,  with  exquisite  effect,
with  whom  sound  is  subordinate  to  sense,  design  and  ex-
pression, must  always  possess  the  higher  powers  in  addition
to  the  merely  musical  faculties.

In  oratory,  too,  a  person  with  Individuality,  Eventuality,
Comparison,  Ideality,  and  Language,  may  be  erudite,  fluent,
brilliant,  and,  if  propensity  and  sentiment  be  added,  he  may
be  vehement,  pathetic,  or  sublime ;  but,  to  give  great  com-
prehensiveness, deep  sagacity,  and  profound  elucidation  of
principle,  Causality  must  be  added  to  the  combination.

Taste  in  every  branch  of  the  fine  arts  is  distinguishable
from  power  and  comprehensiveness,  and  it  depends,  as  al-
ready explained  *,  on  a  harmonious  combination,  and  due

•  Page  456.


582  COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.

cultivation,  of  the  organs  in  general.  In  Raphael  these
requisites  occurred ;  and  it  is  because  Nature  rarely  unites
the  particular  organs  which  constitute  a  painter, — high  re-
flecting organs,  large  general  size,  harmonious  proportion,
and  natural  activity, — all  in  one  individual,  that  so  few
Raphaels  appear.

In  no  instance  is  it  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  talents
and  dispositions  of  the  individual,  whether  any  particular
organ  be  large  or  small.  If  it  be  large,  although  its  abuses
may  be  prevented  by  restraint  imposed  by  the  other  facul-
ties ;  still  its  presence  will  operate  on  the  mind.  If,  for  in-
stance, large  Combativeness  and  Destructiveness  be  com-
bined with  a  large  development  of  the  moral  and  intellec-
tual organs,  the  whole  life  may  be  passed  without  the  oc-
currence of  any  outrage ;  and  it  may  be  asked,  What  ef-
fect, in  this  case,  do  the  former  organs  produce  ?  We  shall
find  the  answer,  by  supposing  all  the  other  organs  to  re-
main large,  while  those  are  diminished  in  size,  and  tracing
the  effect  of  the  change.  The  result  would  be  an  undue
preponderance  of  moral  and  intellectual  qualities,  degene-
rating into  effeminacy.  Large  Combativeness  and  Destruc-
tiveness, add  the  elements  of  repulsion  and  aggression  to
such  an  extent  as  to  permit  the  manifestation  of  manly  en-
terprise and  courage.  Hence,  in  the  case  supposed,  these
organs  would  be  duly  performing  their  functions,  when  the
superficial  observer  would  imagine  them  to  be  entirely  su-
perfluous.

In  like  manner,  if  an  organ  be  greatly  deficient,  its  small
size  cannot  be  compensated  for  by  that  of  the  other  organs,
however  large.  Suppose,  for  example,  that,  in  an  indivi-
dual, Benevolence,  Veneration,  Love  of  Approbation,  and
Intellect,  are  all  large,  and  Conscientiousness  very  deficient,
it  may  be  thought  that  the  absence  of  Conscientiousness
will  be  of  small  importance,  as  its  influence  will  be  com-
pensated by  that  of  these  other  faculties.  This,  however,
will  not  be  the  case.  The  sentiment  of  duty  originates
from  Conscientiousness.    Hence  the  individual  supposed


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.  583

would  be  benevolent,  when  Benevolence  predominated ;  re-
ligious, when  Veneration  was  paramountly  active ;  obliging,
when  Love  of  Approbation  glowed  with  unwonted  fervour ;
but  if  all  or  any  of  these  were  on  any  occasion  counteract-
ed by  the  solicitations  of  the  inferior  propensities,  he  would
not,  if  the  organ  of  Conscientiousness  were  small,  feel  the
obligation  of  duty  enforcing  the  dictates  of  these  other  senti-
ments, and  increasing  their  restraining  power ;  in  short,  he
would  be  deficient  in  the  sentiments  of  justice,  duty,  and  in-
cumbency ;  he  would  obey  all  the  impulses  of  the  higher
faculties  when  inclined,  but  if  not  inclined,  he  would  not  ex*
perience  so  strong  a  sense  of  demerit  in  neglecting  their  so-
licitations, as  if  the  organ  of  Conscientiousness  were  large.
Farther,  the  sentiments  which  we  have  supposed  him  to
possess,  would  themselves,  if  not  directed  by  Conscientious-
ness, be  continually  prone  to  run  into  abuse.  Benevolence
to  one  would  tend  to  trench  on  the  justice  due  to  another ;
devotion  might  occasionally  be  substituted  for  charity,  or
vice  verm.

If  we  take  the  opposite  case,  and  suppose  that  an  indi-
vidual possesses  great  Intellect  and  Conscientiousness,  with
deficient  Benevolence,  Veneration,  and  Love  of  Approba-
tion ;  then,  if  the  propensities  were  strong,  his  conduct  might
be  the  reverse  of  amiable,  notwithstanding  his  large  Con-
scientiousness. With  this  combination  he  would  be  actu-
ated by  vigorous  selfish  feelings,  which  probably  might
overpower  the  single  sentiment  of  duty,  unaided  by  Bene-
volence, Veneration,  and  Love  of  Approbation ;  and  he
might  act  wrong  in  opposition  to  the  clear  dictates  of  his
own  Conscientiousness.  Video  meliora  proboque,  deteriora
sequory  would  be  his  motto.  If  his  propensities,  on  the
other  hand,  were  moderate,  he  would  be  strictly  just ;  he
would  give  every  one  his  due,  but  he  would  probably  not
be  actively  benevolent  and  pious.  The  faculty  of  Benevo-
lence inspires  with  the  feeling  of  charity,  and  Conscien-
tiousness enforces  its  dictates ;  but  if  (to  suppose  an  ex-
treme case)  the  feeling  of  charity  were  not  inspired  at  all,
Conscientiousness  could  not  produce  it,  nor  act  upon  it;  it


584


COMBINATIONS  IN  SIZE.


would  strongly  impress  the  command,  Do  not  injure  ano-
ther, because  this  duty  emanates  from  itself;  but  it  would
not  inspire  with  the  desire  to  do  him  good,  this  being  be-
yond its  limits.

Occasionally,  very  unusual  combinations  of  particular  or-
gans present  themselves,  the  effects  of  which  cannot,  by
ordinary  sagacity,  be  divined ;  and  in  such  cases  the  phre-
nologist ought  not  to  predicate  any  thing,  but  ask  for  in-
formation. As,  however,  nature  is  constant,  he  may  speak
with  confidence  the  next  time  he  meets  with  a  similar  case.
Before  it  was  ascertained  that  Secretiveness  and  Imitation
confer  the  talent  for  acting,  I  met  with  an  instance  of  this
combination,  and  predicated  something  from  it,  which  was
entirely  erroneous.  This  occurrence  was  loudly  and  ex-
tensively proclaimed  as  subversive  of  Phrenology ;  but  to
me  it  was  a  valuable  lesson,  and  a  discovery  of  some  im-
portance ;  ever  afterwards  I  found  that  talent  accompany
that  combination.


Rule  Third. — Where  all  the  organs  appear  in  nearly
equal  proportions  to  each  other,  the  individual,  if  left  to
himself,  will  exhibit  opposite  phases  of  character,  accord-
ing as  the  animal  propensities  or  moral  sentiments  predo-
minate for  the  time.  He  will  pass  his  life  in  alternate  sin-
ning and  repenting.  If  external  influence  is  brought  to
operate  upon  him,  his  conduct  will  be  greatly  modified  by
it;  if  placed,  for  instance,  under  severe  discipline,  and
moral  restraint,  these  will  cast  the  balance,  for  the  time,
in  favour  of  the  higher  sentiments ;  if  exposed  to  the  soli-
citation of  profligate  associates,  the  animal  propensities  will
obtain  triumphant  sway.  Maxwell,  who  was  executed  for
housebreaking  and  theft,  is  an  example  of  this  combination.
In  his  head  the  three  orders  of  organs
are  well  developed,  but  the  region  of
the  Sentiments,  lying  above  the  aste-
risks, is  deficient  in  size,  in  proportion
to  the  basilar  and  occipital  regions  ma-
nifesting the  Propensities.     While  sub-


COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.  585

jeeted  to  the  discipline  of  the  army,  he  preserved  a  fair
reputation;  but  when  he  fell  into  want,  his  propensities
assumed  the  ascendency,  he  joined  a  company  of  thieves,
adopted  their  practices,  and  was  executed.

The  principles  now  laid  down  remove  an  objection  that
has  frequently  been  stated,  viz.  that  as  different  combina-
tions modify  the  manner  in  which  the  faculties  are  mani-
fested, and  as  the  functions  of  some  parts  at  the  base  of  the
brain  are  still  undiscovered,  no  certainty  can  be  obtained
regarding  the  functions  even  of  the  higher  organs ;  because,
say  the  objectors,  all  the  manifestations  actually  perceived
may  be  the  result  of  the  joint  action  of  the  known  and  un-
known parts,  and  hence  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the
specific  functions  of  each.  The  answer  to  this  objection
is,  that  the  function  of  each  organ  remains  invariable,  what-
ever direction  the  manifestations  may  take  in  consequence
of  its  acting  in  combination  with  other  organs.  Hence,  if
we  suppose  the  unknown  convolutions  at  the  base  of  the
brain  to  be  the  organs  of  Hunger  and  Thirst,  as  several
facts  indicate,  then  Tune  combined  with  these  parts  large,
would  be  directed  to  Bacchanalian  songs ;  if  combined  with
these  small,  and  Veneration  large,  hymns  would  become
the  subjects  of  its  manifestation ;  But,  in  either  case,  Tune
would  perform  only  its  primitive  function  of  producing
melody.


COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.

Where  several  organs  are  large  in  the  same  individual,
they  have  a  natural  tendency  to  combine  in  activity,  and  to
prompt  him  to  a  line  of  conduct  calculated  to  gratify  them
all.  Where,  however,  all  or  the  greater  part  of  the  organs
are  possessed  in  nearly  equal  proportions,  important  practi-
cal effects  may  be  produced,  by  establishing  Combinations
in  activity  among  particular  organs,  or  groups  of  organs.
For  example,  if  Individuality,  Eventuality,  Causality,  Com-


586  COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.

parison  and  Language,  be  all  large,  they  will  naturally  tend
to  act  together,  and  the  result  of  their  combined  activity
will  be  a  natural  talent  for  public  speaking,  or  literary
composition.  If  Language  be  small,  it  will  be  extremely
difficult  to  establish  such  a  combination  in  activity,  and  the
natural  talent  will  be  deficient ;  but  if  we  take  two  indivi-
duals, in  both  of  whom  this  group  of  organs  is  of  an  ave-
rage size,  and  if  we  train  one  of  them  to  a  mechanical  em-
ployment, and  the  other  to  the  Bar;  in  the  latter,  the  Re-
flecting Organs  and  that  of  Language  will  be  trained  to
act  together,  and  the  result  will  be  an  acquired  facility  in
writing  and  debate ;  whereas,  in  the  former  individual,  in
consequence  of  the  organ  of  Language  never  being  accus-
tomed to  act  in  combination  with  those  of  Intellect,  this
facility  will  be  wanting.  On  the  same  principle,  if  a  per-
son having  an  excellent  endowment  of  the  organs  of  Pro-
pensity, Sentiment  and  Intellect,  were  introduced  for  the
first  time  into  higher  society  than  that  to  which  he  had
been  accustomed,  it  might  happen  that  he  would  lose  for  a
moment  the  command  of  his  faculties,  and  exhibit  an  un-
happy specimen  of  awkwardness  and  embarrassment.  This
would  arise  from  irregular  "and  inharmonious  action  in  the
different  organs;  Veneration  powerfully  excited  would
prompt  him  to  manifest  profound  respect ;  Love  of  Ap-
probation would  inspire  him  with  a  strong  desire  to  ex-
hibit a  pleasing  and  becoming  appearance;  Cautiousness
would  produce  alarm,  lest  he  should  fail  in  an  essential
of  breeding ;  Self-esteem  would  feel  compromised  by  em«
barrassment  stealing  on  the  mind ;  and  the  intellect,  dis-
tracted by  these  vivacious  and  conflicting  emotions,  would
be  unable  to  regulate  the  conduct  according  to  the  rules
of  propriety.  When  familiarized  with  the  situation,  the
sentiments  would  subside  into  a  state  of  less  energetic  and
more  harmonious  action;  the  intellect,  assuming  the  su-
premacy, would  regulate  and  direct  the  feelings ;  and  then
the  individual  might  become  the  idol  and  ornament  of  the
circle,  in  which  he  at  first  made  so  awkward  a  debut.


COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.  587

It  is  in  virtue  of  this  principle  that  education  produces
its  most  important  effects.  If,  for  instance,  we  take  two
individuals,  in  each  of  whom  all  the  organs  are  developed
in  an  average  degree ;  and  if  the  one  of  them  has  been. edu-
cated among  persons  of  sordid  and  mercenary  dispositions,
Acquisitiveness  and  Self-Esteem  would  then  be  cultivated
in  him  into  a  high  degree  of  activity,  and  self-interest  and
personal  aggrandisement  would  be  viewed  as  the  great  ob-
jects of  life.  If  the  Love  of  Approbation  were  trained  into
combined  activity  with  these  faculties,  it  would  desire  dis-
tinction in  wealth  or  power :  if  Veneration  were  trained  to
act  in  concert  with  them,  it  would  take  the  direction  of
admiring  the  rich  and  great;  and,  Conscientiousness  not
being  predominantly  vigorous,  would  only  intimate  that
such  pursuits  were  unworthy,  without  possessing  the  power
by  itself  of  overcoming  or  controlling  the  whole  combina-
tion against  it  If  another  individual,  possessing  the  same
development,  were  trained  amidst  moral  and  religious  so-
ciety, in  whose  habitual  conduct  the  practice  of  benevolence
and  justice  towards  men,  and  veneration  towards  God,
was  regarded  as  the  leading  objects  of  human  existence,
the  Love  of  Approbation,  acting  with  this  combination,
would  desire  esteem  for  honourable  and  virtuous  actions ;
and  Acquisitiveness  would  be  viewed  as  the  means  of  pro-
curing gratification  to  these  higher  powers,  but  not  as  it-
self an  object  of  paramount  importance.  The  practical
conduct  of  the  two  individuals  might  be  very  different,  in
consequence  of  this  difference  of  training.

The  principle  now  under  discussion  is  not  inconsistent
with  the  influence  of  size ;  because  it  is  only  in  individuals
in  whom  the  organs  are  nearly  on  an  equality  in  point  of
size,  that  great  effects  can  be  produced  by  combinations  in
activity.  In  such  cases  the  phrenologist,  in  estimating  the
effects  of  size,  always  inquires  into  the  education  bestowed.

The  doctrine  of  combinations  in  activity  explains  several
other  mental  phenomena  of  an  interesting  nature.  In
viewing  the  heads  of  the  higher  and  lower  classes  of  socie-


588  COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.

ty,  we  do  not  perceive  the  animal  organs  preponderating  in
point  of  size  in  the  latter,  and  those  of  the  moral  sentiments
in  the  former,  in  any  very  palpable  degree.  The  high  po-
lish, therefore,  which  characterizes  the  npper  ranks,  is  the
result  of  sustained  harmony  in  the  action  of  the  different
faculties,  and  especially  in  those  of  the  moral  sentiments,
induced  by  long  cultivation ;  while  the  rudeness  observable
in  some  of  the  lower  orders  results  from  a  predominating
combination  in  activity  among  the  lower  propensities;
while  the  awkwardness  that  frequently  characterizes  them,
arises  from  the  propensities,  sentiments,  and  intellect,  not
being  habituated  to  act  together.  If,  however,  an  indivi-
dual is  very  deficient  in  the  higher  organs,  he  will  remain
vulgar,  in  consequence  of  this  defect,  although  born  and
educated  in  the  best  society,  and  in  spite  of  every  effort  to
communicate  refinement  by  training ;  while,  on  the  other
hand,  if  a  very  favourable  development  of  the  organs  of  the
higher  sentiments  and  intellect,  with  a  fine  temperament,
is  possessed,  the  individual,  in  whatever  rank  he  moves,
will  have  the  stamp  of  nature's  nobility.

Several  moral  phenomena,  which  were  complete  enigmas
to  the  older  metaphysicians,  are  explained  by  this  principle.
Dr  Adam  Smith,  in  his  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,
Chapter  IL,  "  On  the  influence  of  fortune  upon  the  senti-
ments of  mankind,  with  regard  to  the  merit  and  demerit  of
actions,"  states  the  following  case :  A  person  throws  a  large
stone  over  a  wall  into  the  public  street,  without  giving
warning  to  those  who  may  be  passing,  and  without  regard-
ing where  it  may  fall ;  if  it  light  upon  a  person's  head,  and
knock  out  his  brains,  we  would  punish  the  offender  pretty
severely ;  but  if  it  fall  upon  the  ground,  and  hurt  nobody,
we  would  be  offended  with  the  same  measure  of  punish-
ment, which,  in  the  former  event,  we  would  reckon  just,
and  yet  the  demerit  in  both  cases  is  the  same.  Dr  Smith
gives  no  theory  to  account  for  these  differences  of  moral
determination.  Phrenology  explains  them.  If  the  stone
fall  upon  an  unhappy  passenger,  Benevolence  in  the  specta-


COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.  589

tor  is  outraged ; — if  the  sufferer  had  a  wife  and  family,
Philoprogenitiveness  and  Adhesiveness  are  offended.    Self-
Esteem  and  Cautiousness  also  are  excited,  by  the  idea  that
we  might  have  shared  the  same  fate  ;  all  these  rouse  Des-
tructiveness,   and   the  whole  together   loudly  demand  a
smart  infliction  on  the  transgressor.     In  the  other  event,  -
when  the  stone  falls  to  the  ground,  and  hurts  nobody,  the
only  faculties  excited  are  Intellect  and  Conscientiousness,
and  probably  Cautiousness,  and  these  calmly  look  at  the
motive  of  the  offender,  which  probably  was  mere  thought-
less levity,  and  tfward  a  slight  punishment  against  him.
The  proper  sentence,  in  such  a  case,  is  that  which  would
be  pronounced  by  Intellect,  and  the  moral  sentiments  act-
ing in  combination,  uninfluenced  by  the  lower  propensities.
Dr  Smith  states  another  case.     One  friend  solicits  a
place  for  another,  and  after  using"  the  greatest  efforts  is  un-
successful.    Gratitude  in  this  case  is  less  warm  than  if  the
place  had  been  obtained ;  and  yet  the  merit  is  the  same.
In  the  event  of  success,  Self-Esteem,  Acquisitiveness,  and
the  other  animal  organs,  are  gratified,  and  excite  Conscien-
tiousness, and  Benevolence  to  gratitude.     In  the  opposite
result,  the  repressing  influence  of  these  faculties,  disappoint-
ed and  grieved,  chills  the  glow  of  Benevolence  and  Conscien-
tiousness, and  feeble  gratitude  is  felt

When  a  person  becomes  judge  in  his  own  cause,  his  in-
tellect may  present  to  him  the  facts  exactly  as  they  hap-
pened, but  these  excite  in  his  mind,  not  simply  the  sen-
timent of  Conscientiousness,  but  also  Self-Love,  Acquisi-
tiveness, and,  if  he  has  been  grievously  injured,  Destruo-
tiveness.  Hence  the  decision  of  his  own  mind,  on  his  own
case,  proceeds  from  Intellect,  influenced  and  directed  by  all
these  lower  feelings  acting  along  with  Conscientiousness.
Present  the  same  case  to  an  impartial  spectator,  favourably
constituted,  and  his  decision  will  be  the  result  of  Conscien-
tiousness and  Intellect,  unalloyed  by  the  intermixture  of
the  selfish  emotions.
Pure  or  abstract  justice,  then,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the


590  COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.

term,  is  the  result  of  combined  activity  of  Intellect  and
Conscientiousness,  uninfluenced  by  the  animal  propensities.
For  example,  if  we  are  called  on  to  judge  of  the  conduct  of
a  person  accused,  in  order  to  arrive  at  an  absolutely  just
decision,  the  intellect  must  present  to  us  a  clear  perception
of  his  real  motives,  and  the  tendency  of  his  action;  if
either  of  these  is  wanting,  the  sentiment  of  Conscientious-
ness acts  not  on  a  real,  but  on  an  imperfect  or  imaginary
case ; — in  the  next  place,  all  the  animal  propensities  must
be  quiescent;  because,  if  offended,  Selfishness  or  anger,  or
Acquisitiveness  or  ambition,  or  Adhesiveness,  mingle  with
Conscientiousness,  the  fountain  is  polluted,  and  the  stream
cannot  be  pure.  It  is  an  interesting  fact,  that  the  dictates
of  Conscientiousness,  when  perfectly  enlightened,  and  not
misled  by  the  lower  feelings,  will  be  found  always  to  har-
monize with  the  enlightened  dictates  of  Benevolence  and
Veneration;  because  the  moral  sentiments  have  been  so
constituted  as  to  coincide  in  their  results;  and  hence,
wherever  any  action  or  opinion  is  felt  to  stand  in  opposi-
tion to  any  of  these  sentiments,  we  may,  without  hesita-
tion, suspect  either  that  it  is  wrong,  or  that  the  intellect  is
not  completely  informed  concerning  its  nature  and  legiti-
mate consequences.

In  party-politics,  Adhesiveness,  Love  of  Approbation,
and  Benevolence,  not  to  mention  Combativeness  and  De-
structiveness,  are  extremely  apt  to  enter  into  vivid  activity,
in  surveying  the  conduct  of  an  individual  who  has  distin-
guished himself  by  zealous  efforts  upon  our  own  side ;  and
our  judgment  of  his  conduct  will,  in  consequence,  be  the
determination  of  Intellect  and  Conscientiousness,  disturbed
and  led  astray  by  these  inferior  feelings.

The  doctrine  of  the  primitive  functions  of  the  faculties,
explained  in  the  first  part  of  this  work,  and  of  the  Combi-
nations now  laid  down,  shews  why  Phrenology  does  not
enable  us  to  predict  actions.  Destructiveness,  for  example,
is  not  a  tendency  to  kill  a  man  or  a  beast  as  a  specific  act,
but  a  mere  general  propensity,  capable  of  leading  to  de-


COMBINATIONS  IN  ACTIVITY.  591

struction  as  its  ultimate  result,  but  which  may  be  mani-
fested in  a  great  variety  of  ways  (many  of  them  justifiable,
others  unjustifiable),  according  as  it  is  directed  by  the  far
culties,  which,  in  eaclf  particular  instance,  act  along  with
it ;  thus,  acting  along  with  large  Acquisitiveness,  and  in
the  absence  of  Conscientiousness,  it  may  prompt  to  mur-
der ;  while  acting  along  with  large  Conscientiousness  and
Benevolence,  it  may  prove  the  orphan's  help,  and  the  wi-
dow's stay,  by  arresting  the  arm  of  the  oppressor.


PEACTICAL   APPLICATION  OF    THE    DOCTRINE    OF
THE  COMBINATIONS.

I  cannot  too  earnestly  repeat,  that  the  principles  now  il-
lustrated are  practical  and  important*  If  any  one  require
the  assistance  of  a  human  being  in  affairs  of  moment,  let
him  be  assured  that  attention  to  the  three  elements  of  tem-
perament, combination  of  mental  organs,  and  education  or
training,  will  afford  him  more  certain  information  regard-
ing the  inherent  qualities  of  the  object  and  his  practical
capabilities,  than  certificates  of  character  and  attainments,
such  as  are  commonly  relied  on.  The  extent  to  which  this
work  has  already  attained,  prevents  me,  however,  from
doing  more  than  making  a  few  observations.

In  one  instance  I  refused  to  hire  a  boy  as  a  servant,  be-
cause I  found  his  head  to  belong  to  the  inferior  class,  al-
though he  was  introduced  by  a  woman  whose  good  character
and  discrimination  I  had  long  known,  and  who  gave  him  an
excellent  character.  That  individual  was  at  first  greatly
incensed  at  my  refusing  to  engage  the  boy,  but  within  a
month  she  returned,  and  said  that  she  had  been  grossly  im-
posed upon  herself  by  a  neighbour,  whose  son  the  boy  was;
that  she  had  since  learned  that  he  was  a  thief,  and  had
been  dismissed  from  his  previous  service  for  stealing.     On


592  PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  OF  THE

another  occasion  I  hired  a  female  servant,  because  her  head
belonged  to  the  superior  class,  although  a  former  mis-
tress gave  her  a  very  indifferent  character, — the  result  was
equally  in  favour  of  Phrenology,  She  turned  out  an  ex-
cellent servant,  and  remained  with  me  for  several  years,
until  she  was  respectably  married  *.

When  a  servant  is  to  be  hired,  the  points  to  be  attended
to  are  the  following.

First,  The  temperament. — If  this  be  lymphatic,  there
will  be  little  spontaneous  activity ;  work  will  be  a  burden ;
and  exhaustion  will  soon  follow  from  forced  application.
If  it  be  purely  nervous,  there  will  be  great  vivacity,  and  a
strong  natural  tendency  to  activity ;  but  physical  strength
will  not  be  present  in  a  corresponding  degree.  Combina-
tions of  the  sanguine  and  bilious,  or  bilious  and  nervous
temperaments,  are  the  best;  the  bilious  bestowing  the  qua-
lity of  endurance,  and  the  sanguine  or  nervous  that  of
activity.

Second,  The  proportions  of  the  different  regions  of  the
brain  to  each  other. — If  the  base  of  the  brain,  the  seat  of
the  animal  organs,  be  large,  and  the  coronal  region  be  shal-
low and  narrow,  the  animal  feelings  will  be  strong,  and
the  moral  weak ;  if  both  of  these  regions  be  large,  and  the
anterior  lobe  of  the  brain  small,  the  dispositions  may  be
good,  but  the  intellect  will  be  weak.  If  all  three  be  large,
the  moral  and  intellectual  predominating,  the  best  combi-
nation of  qualities  will  be  present.

Third,  The  proportions  of  particular  organs  to  each
other. — If  the  lower  region  of  the  forehead  be  largely  de-
veloped, and  the  upper  deficient,  the  intellect  will  execute
well  whatever  work  is  placed  before  it ;  but  it  will  be  limited
in  its  capacity  of  foreseeing  what  ought  to  be  done,  if  not
pointed  out,  and  of  arranging  details  in  reference  to  the

*  A  report  of  eleven  cases  observed  in  the  Dublin  Penitentiary  is  pub-
lished in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  No.  xxi.  p.  88,  in  which  the  disposi-
tions were  inferred  from  development  of  brain.


DOCTBINE  OF  THE  COMBINATIONS.  593

whole.  If  the  upper  part  of  the  forehead  be  large,  and  the
lower  deficient,  the  power  of  abstract  thinking  (which  a
servant  rarely  requires,  and  is  almost  never  called  on  to
exercise)  will  be  connderable,  but  quite  uncultivated,  and
destitute  of  materials  to  act  on ;  while  the  talent  for  ob-
serving details,  the  love  of  order  and  arrangement,  and,  in
short,  practical  usefulness,  will  be  deficient.  The  best
combination  of  the  intellectual  organs  for  a  servant,  is  that
which  occurs  when  the  lower  region  of  the  forehead  is
large,  the  middle  region  immediately  above  the  nose,  up  to
the  line  of  the  hair,  is  also  large,  and  the  upper  lateral  re-
gion full.  The  dispositions  depend  on  the  combinations  of
the  moral  and  animal  organs.  If  Acquisitiveness,  Secre-
tiveness,  Love  of  Approbation,  and  Veneration  be  all  large,
and  Conscientiousness  deficient,  the  servant  will  be  selfish
and  cunning ;  but  extremely  plausible,  deferential,  and  po-
lite ;  eye-service  will  be  rendered  abundantly,,  but  consci-
entious discbarge  of  duty  will  be  wanting.  If  Benevolence,
Conscientiousness,  Firmness,  Self-Esteem,  and  Combative-
ness  be  large,  in  combination  with  Cautiousness,  Secretive-
ness,  Love  of  Approbation,  and  Veneration  moderate,  there
may  be  great  fidelity  and  honesty,  with  heat  of  temper,  un-
bending stiffness  of  deportment,  and,  in  short,  an  exterior
manner,  the  reverse  of  the  former ;  but  internal  disposi-
tions and  practical  conduct  in  situations  of  trust  far  supe-
rior. The  combinations  also  determine  the  fitness  of  the
individual  for  particular  employments ;  a  female  with  small
Philoprogenitiveness  ought  never  to  be  employed  as  a  nur-
sery-maid; nor  one  deficient  in  Order  and  Ideality  as  a
lady's  maid.  A  man  deficient  in  Conscientiousness  is  un-
fit to  be  a  butler  or  steward.  The  varieties  of  combina-
tion are  extremely  numerous,  and  the  effects  of  them  can
be  learned  only  by  experience.

Fourth,  The  education  or  training  of  the  individual  falls
to  be  inquired  into. — Phrenology  shews  only  the  natural
qualities,  but  the  direction  which  they  have  received  must
be  ascertained  by  inquiry.     No   combination  of  organs

p  p


594  PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  €¥  THE

will  render  an  individual  an  expert  ceofe,  without  hiding
practised  cookery,  or  an  accomplished  cofecham,  with-
out having  practically  taken  charge  of  horses,  and  karmd
to  drive.

Fifth,  The  relation  of  the  natural  qualities  of  the  master
or  mistress  to  those  of  the  servant  must  he  attended  to.*— -
If  a  mistress  with  h  small  brain,  having  Ckmsrientaoitsneee
and  Benevolence  moderate,  and  Seif-Eeteem  sod  Cotabft-
tiveness  large,  should  hire  a  Servant  possessed  of  a  large,
active,  and  well  proportioned  brain,  the  latter  will  instinc-
tively feel  that  nature  has  made  her  the  superior,  ahhomgh
fortune  has  reversed  their  relative  positions.  The  mistress
will  feel  this  too,  but  will  maintain  her  command  by  im-
periousnetes,  feaptiousness,  or  violence.  In  this  condition,
the  beJt  dispositions  of  the  servant  may  be  outraged^  and
conduct  produced  of  a  discreditable  feature,  when  oonten-
plated  by  itself,  apart  from  the  provocation.  A  servant
witfh  a  small  brain,  but  favourable  combination,  would
prove  a  treasure  to  a  mistress  possessed  of  similar  quali-
ties ;  whereas  she  would  be  felt  as  too  feeble  and  inefficient
in  her  whole  manner  and  mode  of  acting,  by  a  kdy
whose  braSn  was  very  large,  very  ftivotfrably  icombinsd,
and  very  active.  This  principle  explains  why  the
indivitliial  may  be  found  to  be  ah  excellent  servant  in  -
fhmily,  and  an  unsuitable  one  hi  fitnother.

Sixth,  The  qualities  of  servants,  in  reference  to  sach
:other,  ought  to  be  considered.^-*- Two  individuals,  ipm-
Bessing  krge  and  active  brains,  great  Setf-Ssteem,  Lovte
of  Approbation,  and  Combativeaess,  may,  if  they  have
also  Large  Ben£volenee,  Veneration,  <  and  Ckmsofeatioasness^
prove  excellent  Servants  to  their  employers,  whom*hey»-
gard  as  legitimate  objects  of  veneration  And  oottBcientioos-
ness ;  but  may  make  very  indifferent  -companions  to  'each
other.  Each  will  desire  deference  «ittd  respect  from  the
other,  which  neither  will  yield ;  and  in  all  probability,  they
will  quarrel  and  manifest  only  their  propensities  ur  their
mutual  intercourse.    Instruction  in  their  otvn  Twtture,  and


DOCTRINE  OF  THE  COMBINATIONS.  595

in  the  proper  direction  of  their  feelings,  would,  in  many
instances,  remedy  this  evil.  But  while  ignorance  conti-
nues, it  is  advisable  to  rely  chiefly  on  natural  qualities :  for
example,  if  one  servant  has  Self-Esteem  large,  a  compa-
nion should  be  selected  in  whom  this  organ  is  moderate ;
and  the  same  with  Combativeness.  When  this  is  neglect-
ed, the  natural  language  of  Self-Esteem  or  Combativeness
in  the  one  involuntarily  excites  the  same  feeling  in  the  other,
and  harmony  is  nearly  impossible :  whereas,  if  one  has  Self-
Esteem  large,  and  the  other  has  it  small,  the  natural  ex-
pression of  the  former  is  not  painful  to  the  latter ;  on  the
contrary,  the  absence  of  pretension,  which  attends  a  small
Self-Esteem,  renders  the  latter  agreeable  to  the  former,
and  a  sincere  mutual  regard  may  arise  between  them.

It  will  be  obvious  to  every  reflecting  person,  that  the
circumstance  of  a  servant  being  rejected  by  a  phrenologist,
is  no  proof  of  the  individual  being  essentially  bad ;  it  shews
only,  that,  in  one  or  other  of  the  six  points  before  men-
tioned, the  individual  did  not  suit  the  particular  phrenolo-
gist, and  no  more.  The  servant  may  be  admirably  quali-
fied for  a  different  employer.   ~

These  observations  are  offered  as  hints  of  several  parti-
culars which  appear  to  me  proper  to  be  attended  to,  and
not  as  complete  practical  directions.  The  elements  which
compose  human  character  are  so  numerous,  their  combina-
tions so  intricate,  and  so  little  has  been  done  in  the  practi-
cal application  of  the  science,  in  the  manner  now  recom-
mended, that  it  is  impossible  to  be  too  modest  either  in  giv-
ing directions  or  promising  results.  Experience  is  the
great  teacher,  and  my  sole  object  is  to  induce  phrenologists
to  seek  experience  by  practice.  I  am  aware  that  many  of
my  readers  will  feel,  that,  to  act  upon  the  principles  un-
folded even  in  this  brief  statement,  would  require  much
greater  attainments  than  they  at  present  possess;  and
hence,  many  of  them  may  consider  the  remarks  as  altoge-
ther useless ;  but  several  answers  may  be  made  to  this  ob-
jection.    First,  There  are  several  phrenologists  who  actu-

p  p  2


696  PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  OF  THE

ally  practise  what  is  here  recommended,  and  have  ex-
perienced great  advantages  from  it;  and  what  has  been
done  successfully  and  with  benefit  by  some,  may  be  accom-
plished by  others.  Secondly,  Science  is  useless  unless  it  be
practical ;  all  practical  sciences  must  advance  by  experi-
ence ;  and  it  is  only  by  beginning  and  persevering  that  ex-
perience can  be  gained.  And,  thirdly,  Even  those  persons
who  are  conscious  of  incapacity  to  practise  these  rules,
must  perceive  the  advantage  of  acting  on  them  if  they
could ;  and  must  feel  that,  until  some  mode  of  guiding  the
judgment  in  the  selection  of  servants  shall  be  resorted  to,
which  shall  bring  into  view  the  points  before  treated  of,
uncertainty,  disappointment,  and  annoyance,  must  afflict
both  masters  and  servants.  And,  finally,  Every  person  of
common  reflection  will  acknowledge,  that  while  it  would
be  a  great  advantage  to  obtain  the  foregoing  knowledge  of
human  character,  there  is  no  system  of  mental  philosophy
in  existence  which  affords  even  the  least  aid  in  attempting
it,  if  Phrenology  does  not  do  so.

This  application  of  Phrenology  has  suggested  the  ques-
tion, Are  individuals  with  "  ill  shaped  -  heads"  to  become
"outcasts  from  society  ?"  This  is  precisely  the  evil  which,
under  the  actual  system  of  criminal  legislation,  exists,  and
which  the  phrenologists  are  labouring  to  remove.  An  un-
favourably developed  brain,  and  good  natural  dispositions,
are  two  conditions  which  do  not  co-exist  in  nature.  Phre-
nologists, therefore,  by  establishing  the  fact,  that  an  im-
perfectly formed  brain  renders  an  individual  naturally
prone  to  vice,  will  afford  an  inducement  to  society  to  treat
men  so  constituted  as  moral  patients,  and  to  use  more  effec-
tual means  for  restraining  their  propensities  than  any  that
are  at  present  adopted.  This,  in  my  opinion,  would  be
preferable  to  the  existing  practice,  which  leaves  men  with
the  worst  natural  dispositions  at  liberty,  in  the  worst  of
circumstances,  to  follow  their  instinctive  tendencies,  and
only  punishes  them  severely  after  having  committed  crimes.
At  present  these  beings  are  surrounded  by  want,  misery,


DOCTRINE  OF  THE  COMBINATIONS.  597

and  the  means  of  intoxication. '  They  transgress  the  crimi-
nal law,  are  confined  in  jails  and  bridewells,  calculated  to
excite  their  propensities,  and  to  afford  little  cultivation  to
their  moral  powers;  they  are  steeped  in  vice,  branded  with
infamy,  and  then  ejected  into  the  immoral  atmosphere  from
which  they  were  taken;  a  mode  of  treatment  which  could
not  exist,  if  Phrenology  were  believed  and  understood.
-  It  has  been  further  asked  by  way  of  objection,  "  Does
Mr  Combe  deny,  that  in  the  case  he  mentions,  the  boy
whom  he  rejected  might  have  had  a  good  character,  not*
withstanding  the  indications  of  his  original  propensities  ?
If  he  denies  this,  he  denies  a  proposition  which  he  himself
has  always  stated,  and  from  which  he  derives  the  practical
value  of  Phrenology ;  namely,  that  the  original  propensi-
ties can  be  corrected,  and  even  eradicated,  by  education,
•and  other  means."

Answer:  I  have  not  stated  that  the  "  original  propensities
can  be  eradicated  by  education  and  other  means."  If  so,
Phrenology  would  necessarily  be  a  dream.  What  I  have  said
is  this, — that  all  the  faculties  may  be  directed  to  proper  ob-
jects, and,  when  so  directed,  their  action  will  become
good.  But  to  guide  strong  animal  propensities  to  virtue,
there  must  be  a  directing  power.  If  there  be  vigorous,
moral,  and  intellectual  faculties  in  the  individual  himself,
he  will,  in  that  case,  be  a  law  and  a  guide  unto  himself.
If,  however,  the  moral  and  intellectual  faculties  be  defi-
cient, which  was  the  case  with  the  individual  under  dis-
cussion, then  I  certainly  maintain,  that  strong  animal  feel-
ings will  not  guide  themselves  to  virtue.  In  this  ease,  the
directing  power  must  be  supplied //xwi  without.  The  case
of  EL  S«,  mentioned  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  No.  XXL
p.  82.  and  147,  is  exactly  in  point,  and  illustrates  the  po-
sitions here  maintained.  Now,  if  the  boy  had  been  placed
from  infancy  in  an  asylum,  from  which  temptation  to  vice
was  excluded,  and  in  which  the  highest  moral  and  intel-
lectual treatment  was  administered,  he  might  have  had  a
good  character,  notwithstanding  of  the  form  of  his  brain  ;


598  PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  OF  TELE

because,  to  situated,  he  could  not  hmve  offended*  But  I  was
informed  that  he  had  been  brought  up  in  the  ordinary  cir-
cumstances of  the  labouring  classes  in  this  country ;  and
extensive  observation  had  convinced  me,  that  that  condi-
tion does  not  withdraw  temptation  from  the  propensities,
and  does  not  supply  moral  and  intellectual  stimulus  to  the
higher  faculties,  sufficient  to  direct  a  mind  constituted  like
Ins  to  morality.  I  therefore  inferred,  that  his  good  character
was  false ;  which  it  actually  proved  to  be.  At  present  so-
ciety is  greatly  deficient  in  institutions  in  which  the  mo-
ral influence  of  higher  minds  can  be  brought  habitually
to  bear  on  inferior  minds,  in  the  absence  of  external  temp-
tation.

In  consequence  also  of  the  lamentable  ignorance  of  the
nature  of  individuals,  which  too  generally  abounds,  the
mental  deficiencies  in  which  the  tendency  to  crime  origi-
nates are  not  understood,  and  Mill  less  is  the  immense
power  of  moral  influence  which  the  best  order  of  minds
could  wield  over  the  inferior  duly  appreciated.  This  in-
fluence, however,  cannot  exert  itself  efficiently,  unless  ex*
ternal  temptation  to  evil  be  withdrawn,  which  cannot  be
the  case  without  institutions  formed  for  the  piirpose.  Phre-
nology will  hasten  the  day  when  these  shall  exist.  Society
is  in  possession,  from  history  and  observation,  of  a  pretty
accurate  knowledge  of  human  nature  in  general;  but  this
knowledge  is  too  general  to  be  practically  useful.  When
an  individual  is  presented  to  them,  they  cannot  tell  whether
he  is  naturally  a  Caligula  or  a  Washington.  Phreno-
logy not  only  gives  a  scientific  basis  and  form  to  the  gene-
ral knowledge  of  mankind  already  existing,  but  renders  it
available  in  particular  instances;  it  unfolds  the  natural
qualities  of  individual  men,  and  enables  us  to  judge  how
far  they  will  be  inclined  to  one  course  of  action  or  to  ano-
ther. I  consider  it,  therefore,  neither  unjust  nor  inhumane
to  decline  taking  into  my  service  individuals  whom  I  know
to  be  unfitted  by  their  mental  qualities  for' the  duties  which
they  would  be  required  to  perform.     In  short,  if  society  at


DOCTRINE  OF  THE  COMBINATIONS.  &&

large  would  read  the  mark*  set  by  Providence  on  n^en,  a*4
art  according  to  reason  and  sovwd  morality,  then,  instead
of  filing  ialse  characters  of  vicious  individuate  (through
Beuevolence  acting  without  Conscie^ntiouBneBs),  and,  in
consequence,  exposing  each  other  to  loss  of  property  w4
life  hy  criminal  depredations,  they  would  *$e  &e  propriety
of  treating,  as  moral  patients,  those  persons  whope  mental
deficiencies  render  them  incapable  of  guiding  themselyeato
virtue*

He  principles' now  expounded,  apply  to  the  selection  of
individuals  to  fill  every  situation  in  life.  In  my  separate
work,  on  "  the  Constitution  of  Man,"  the  application  of
Phrenology  to  morals  and  practical  conduct,  is  farther  elu-
cidated.


ON  THE  COINCIDENCE  BETWEEN  THE  NATURAL
TALENT*  AND  DISPOSITIONS  OF  NATIONS,  AND
THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THEIB  BBAINS.

The  mental  character  of  an  individual,  at  any  given
time,  is  the  result  of  his  natural  endowment  of  faculties,
modified  by  the  circumstances  in  which  he  has  been  placed.
The  first  element,  or  natural  constitution,  is  admitted,  by
most  thinking  men,  to  form  the  basis  of,  and  prescribe  the
limits,  to,  the  operation  of  the  second.  If  a  child  is  by  na-
ture extremely  combative,  and  very  little  cautious,  highly
prone  to  cpvetouaness,  and  very  insensible  to  justice,  a  re-
flecting guardian  will  adopt  a  different  method  of  education,
and  ej^jpect  different  consequences,  than  if  his  natural  dis-
positions were  exactly  the  reverse.

A  nation  is  composed  of  individuals,  and  what  is  true  of
all Jthe  parts  (which  in  a  nation  preserve  their  individuality),
must  bold  good  of  the  whole ; — nevertheless  the  fashionable
doctrine  is,  that  national  .character  depends  altogether  on
external  circumstances ;  and  that  the  native  stock  of  animal,
moral,  and  intellectual  powers  on  which  these  operate,  is
the  same  in  New  Holland  and  in  England,  in  Hindostan


600  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

and  in  France.  Mr  Stewart  informs  us,  "  That  the  ca-
pacities of  the  human  mind  have  been,  in  all  ages,  the
same ;  and  that  the  diversity  of  phenomena  exhibited  by
our  spefcies  is  the  result  merely  of  the  different  circumstan-
ces in  which  men  are  placed."  "  This,"  says  he,  "  has
long  been  received  as  an  uncontrovertible  logical  maxim ;
or  rather,  such  is  the  influence  of  early  instruction,  that  we
are  apt  to  regard  it  as  one  of  the  most  obvious  suggestions
of  common  sense.  And  yet,  till  about  the  time  of  Mon-
tesquieu, it  was  by  no  means  so  generally  recognised  by
the  learned  as  to  have  a  sensible  influence  on  the  fashion-
able tone  of  thinking  over  Europe  *."
"  There  is  some  ambiguity  in  this  passage. — The  proposi-
tion, that  "  the  capacities  of  the  human  mind  have  been,
in  all  ages,  the  same,"  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  they
have  been  alike  in  all  nations.  The  Hindoo  mind  may
have  been  the  same  in  the  year  100  as  in  the  year  1800,
and  so  may  the  English  and  all  other  national  minds ;  but
it  does  not  follow1  that  either  in  the  year  100  or  1800  the
English  and  Hindoo  minds  were  constituted  by  nature  alike ;
and  yet  this  is  what  I  understand  Mr  Stewart  to  mean ;
for  he  adds,  "  that  the  diversity  of  phenomena  exhibited  by
our  species  is  the  result  merely  of  the  different  circumstances
in  which  men  are  placed;"  embracing  in  this  proposition
men  of  every  nation  as  equally  gifted  in  natural  powers.
Now,  there  is  reason  to  question  this  doctrine,  and  to  regard
it  as  not  merely  speculatively  erroneous,  but  as  laying  the
foundation  of  a  great  deal  of  most  hurtful  practice.
*  When  we  regard  the  different  quarters  of  the  globe,  we
are  struck  with  the  extreme  dissimilarity  in  the  attainments
of  the  varieties  of  men  who  inhabit  them.  If  we  glfince
oyer  the  history  of  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  we
shall  find  distinct  and  permanent  features  of  character  which
strongly  indicate  natural  differences  in  their  mental  consti-
tutions. The  inhabitants  of  Europe  have  manifested,  in  all
ages,  a  strong  tendency  towards  moral  and  intellectual  im-

•  .Dissertation  p.  53.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  601

provement  Ae  far  bock'  as  history  reaches,  we  find  socie-
ty instituted,  arts  practised,  and  literature  taking  root,  not
only  in  intervals  of  tranquillity,  but  amidst  the  alarms  of
war.  Before  the  foundation  of  Rome,  the  Etruscans  had  es-
tablished civilization  and  the  arts  in  Italy.  Under  the  Greek
and  Roman  empires,  philosophy,  literature,  and  the  .  fine
arts,  were  sedulously  and  successfully  cultivated ;  and  that
portion  of  the  people  whose  wealth  enabled  them  to  pay  for
education,  attained  a  high  degree  of  intelligence  and  refine- .
ment.  By  the  irruption  of  the  northern  hordes,  these,
countries  were  subsequently  involved  in  a  chaos  of  igno-
rance ; — but  again  the  sun  of  science  rose,  the  clouds  of
Gothic  darkness  were  dispelled,  and  Europe  took  the  lead
of  the  world  in  science,  morals,  and  philosophy.  In  the
inhabitants  of  this  portion  of  the  globe,  there  appears  an
elasticity  of  mind  incapable  of  being  permanently  repressed.
Borne  down  for  a  time  by  external  violence,  their  mental
energies  seem  to  have  gathered  strength  under  the  re-
straint, and,  after  a  season,  to  have  burst  their  fetters,  and
overcome  every  obstacle  opposed  to  their  expansion.

When,  on  the  other  hand,  we  turn  our  attention  to  Asia,
we  perceive  manners  and  institutions,  which  belong  to  a  pe-
riod too  remote  to  be  ascertained,  and  yet  far  inferior  to  the
European  standard.  The  people  of  Asia  early  arrived  at  a
point  comparatively  low  in  the  scale  of  improvement,  which
they  have  never  passed.

The  history  of  Africa,  so  far  as  Africa  can  be  said  to
have  a  history,  presents  similar  phenomena.  The  annals
of  the  races  who  have  inhabited  that  Continent,  with  few
exceptions,  exhibit  one  unbroken  scene  of  moral  and  intel-
lectual desolation ;  and  in  a  quarter  of  the  globe  embracing
the  greatest  varieties  of  soil  and  climate,  no  nation  is  at  this
day  to  be  found  whose  institutions  indicate  even  moderate
civilization  #.

■  Since  the  observation  in  the  text  was  written,  accounts  have  appear-
ed of  a  people  discovered  by  Major  Clappebtow  in  the  interior  of  Africa,
in  a  state  of  comparative  civilization.    It  is  said,  that,  although  they  are


60S  ON  THE  CEBEBEAL

The  aepeot  of  native  America  is  still  more  deplorable.
Surrounded  for  centuries  by  European  knowledge,  enter-
prise, and  energy,  and  incited  to  improvement  by  the  ex-
ample *f  European  institutions,  they  remain,  at  the  present
time,  the  same  miserable,  wandering,  houseless,  and  lawless
savages  as  their  ancestors  were,  when  Columbus  first  set
foot  upon  their  soil.  Partial  exceptions  to  this  description
may  be  found  in  stone  of  the  southern  districts  of  North
America;  bat  the  numbers  who  have  even  attempted  to
adopt  the  modes  of  civiKzed  life  are  so  small,  and  the  pro-
gress made  by  them  so  limited,  that,  speaking  of  the  race,
we  do  not  exaggerate  in  saying,  that  they  remain  to  the
present  hour  enveloped  in  all  their  primitive  barbarity,  and
that  they  have  profited  nothing  by  the  introduction  amongst
them  of  arts,  sciences,  and  philosophy.  The  same  observa-
tions have  occurred  to  a  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Review.
Hie  following  remarks,  on  the  native*  American  character,
appeared  in  that  work  in  an  article  on  "  Hdwisok's  Upper
Canada,"  June  1822 :— a  From  all  that  we  learn,"  says  the
Reviewer,  uof  the  state  «f  the  aborigines  of  this  great  con-
tinent from  ihis  volume,  and  from  every  other  source  of
information,  it  is  evident  that  they  are  making  no  advan-
ces towards  civilisation.  It  is  certainly  a  striking  and
mysterious  fact,  that  a  race  of  men  should  thus  have  con*
tinned  for  ages -stationary:  in  a  state  of  the  rudest  barba-
rism. That  tendency  to  improvement*- a  principle  that  has
beeti  thought  mere  than  perhaps  any  other  to  distinguish
man  from  the  lower  animals,  :wonld  #eem  to  be  totally
wanting  in 'them.  Generation  after*  generation  passes  away,
ahd  no  traces  of  dd^MMemeotndiatbgnishf^he  last  foem  the
first.  The  ttfighty  wUderoeas  they  infaabk  may  he  traver-
sed' from  end  t<r  end,  and  hardly  a  vestige  be  discovered
that  Wtrkr  the  hk*d;  of  man.    It  might  .naturally  have

jet  black,  they  are  not  Negroes,  and  it  ii  conjectured  that  they  are  the
descendants  of  the  Numidians  of  ancient  history.  If  the  representations
of  their  attainment*  fee  correct,  I  anticipate  in  them  a  brain  developed
Gke  the  European.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS-  60S

been  expected,  that,  in  the  course  of  age%  eons  Superior
genius  would  have  arisen  among  them  to  inspire  hk  coun-
trymen with  a  desire  to  cultivate  the  arts  of  peace,  and  e»*
tablish  some  durable  civil  institution ;  or  that*  at  least,  du-
ring the  long  period  sinee  the  Europeans  bate  been  settled
amongst  them,  and  taught  them,  by  such  striking  examples,
the  benefits  of  industry  and  social  order,  they  would  have
been  tempted  to  endeavour  to  participate  in  blessings  thus
providentially  brought  within  their  reach.  But  all  has  been
unavailing ;  and  it  now  seems  certain  that  the  North  Ame-
rican Indians,  like  the  bears  and  wolves,  are  destined  to
flee  at  the  approach  of  civilized  man,  and  to  fall  before  his
renovating  hand,  and  disappear  from  the  face  of  the  earth
along  with  those  ancient  forests  which  alone  afford  them
sustenance  and  shelter,"

The  theory  usually  advanced  to  account  for  these  differ*
ences  of  national  character  is,  that  they  are  produced  by
diversities  of  soil  and  climate.  But,  although  these  may
reasonably  be  supposed  to  exert  a  certain  influence,  they
are  altogether  inadequate  to  explain  the  whole  phenomena.
We  ought  ever  to  bear  in  mind,  that  Nature  is  constant  in
her  operations,  and  that  the  same  causes  invariably  pro*
duce  the  same  effects.  Hence,  when  we  find  exceptions  in
result,  without  being  able  to  assign  differences  in  causes,
we  may  rest  assured  that  we  have  not  found  the  true  or
the  only  cause,  and  our  diligence  ought  to  be  quickened
to  obtain  new  light,  and  not  employed  in  maintaining  the
sufficiency  of  that  which  We  possess.

If  we  survey  a  map  of  the  world,  we  shall  find  nations
whose  soil  is  fertile  and  climate  temperate,  in  a  lower  de-
gree of  improvement  than  others  who  are  less  favoured.
In  Van  Dieman's  Land  and  New  South  Wales  a  few  na-
tives have  existed  in  the  most  wretched  poverty,  ignorance,
and  degradation,  in  a  country  Which  enriches  Europeans
as  fast  as  they  possess  it.  In  America,  too,  Europeans  and
native  Indians  have  lived  for  centuries  under  the  influence
of  the  same  physical  causes,  the  former  have  kept  pace  in


604  »        ON  THE  CEREBRAL

their  advances  with  their  brethren  in  the  Old  Continent,
while  the  latter,  as  we  have  seen,  remain  stationary  in  sa-
vage ignorance  and  indolence.

Such  differences  are  not  confined  to  the  great  continents
alone ;  hut  different  tribes  in  the  same  hemisphere  seem  to
possess  different  native  minds,  and  these  remain  unchanged
through  numerous  ages.  Tacitus  describes  the  Gauls  as
gay,  volatile,  and  precipitate,  prone  to  rush  to  action,  but
without  the  power  of  sustaining  adversity  and  the  tug  of
strife ;  and  this  is  the  character  of  the  Celtic  portion  of  the
French  nation  down  to  the  present  day.  He  represents  the
Britons  as  cool,  considerate,  and  sedate,  possessed  of  intel-
lectual talent,  and  says  that  he  prefers  their  native  ap-
titude to  the  livelier  manners  of  the  Gauls.  The  same
mental  qualities  characterize  the  English  of  the  nineteenth
oentury,  and  they  and  the  French  may  still  be  contrast-
ed in  similar  terms.  Tacitus  describes  the  Germans,  al-
lowing for  their  state  of  civilization,  as  a  bold,  prudent,
self-denying,  and  virtuous  people,  possessed  of  great  force
of  character ;  and  the  same  features  distinguish  them  still.
The  native  Irishman,  in  manners,  dispositions,  and  capa-
cities, is  a  being  widely  different  from  the  lowland  Scotch-
man ;  and  although  we  trace  the  two  nations  to  the  remotest
antiquity,  the  same  characteristic  differences  are  found.

These  differences  between  natipns  living  under  similar
climates,  are  commonly  attributed  entirely  to  the  religious
and  political  institutions  of  the  several  countries.  Presby-
tery and  parish  schools,  for  example,  are  supposed  to  have
rendered  the  Scotchman  habitually  attentive  to  his  own  in-
terest, but  cautious,  thoughtful,  and  honest ;  while  Popery
and  Catholic  priests  have  made  the  Irishman  free  and  gene-
rous withal,  but  precipitate  and  unreflecting, — ready  in  the
gust  of  passion  to  sacrifice  his  friend,  and  in  the  glow  of
friendship  to  immolate  himself.  It  is  forgotten,  that  there
were  ages  in  which  Popery  and  priests  had  equal  ascen-
dancy in  all  the  British  isles,  and  that  the  Englishman,
Irishman,  and  Scotchman,  were  beings  as  specifically  dis*


DEVELOPMENT  OP  NATIONS.  605

tinct  then  as  at  present;  besides,  the  more  correct,  as  well
as  the  more  profound  view,  is  to  regard  religions  and  poli-
tical institutions,  when  not  forced  upon  a  people  by  exter-
nal conquest,  as  the  spontaneous  growth  of  their  natural
propensities,  sentiments,  and  intellectual  faculties.  Hier-
archies and  constitutions  do  not  spring  from  the  ground,
but  from  the  minds  of  men :  If  we  suppose  one  nation  to
be  gifted  with  much  Wonder  and  Veneration,  and  little
Conscientiousness,  Reflection,  and  Self-Esteem,  and  ano-
ther to  possess  an  endowment  exactly  the  reverse,  it  is  ob-
vious that  the  first  would  be  naturally  prone  to  superstition
in  religion,  and  servility  in  the  state ;  while  the  second
would,  by  native  instinct,  resist  all  attempts  to  make  them
reverence  things  unholy,  and  tend  constantly  towards  poli-
tical institutions,  fitted  to  afford  to  each  individual  the  gra-
tification of  his  Self-Esteem  in  independence,  and  his  Con-
scientiousness in  equality  before  the  law.  Those  who  con-
tend that  institutions  come  first,  and  that  character  follows
as  their  effect,  are  bound  to  assign  a  cause  for  the  institu-
tions themselves.  If  they  do  not  spring  from  the  native
mind,  and  are  not  forced  on  the  people  by  conquest,  it  is
difficult  to  see  whence  they  can  originate.

The  phrenologist  is  not  satisfied  with  these  common
theories  of  national  character ;  he  has  observed  that  a  par-
ticular form  of  brain  is  the  invariable  concomitant  of  par-
ticular dispositions  and  talents,  and  that  this  holds  in  the
case  of  nations  as  well  as  of  individuals.

In  the  Phrenological  Transactions,  an  account  is  given
of  the  Phrenology  of  Hindostan,  by  Dr  G.  M.  Patterson.
The  HINDOOS  are  remarkable  for  want  of  force  of  cha-
racter, so  much  so,  that  a  handful  of  Europeans  overcomes
in  combat,  and  holds  in  permanent  subjection  thousands,
nay  millions,  of  that  people.  Power  of  mental  manifesta-
tion bears  a  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  cerebral  organs,
and  the  Hindoo  head  is  small,  and  the  European  large,  in
precise  conformity  with  the  different  mental  characters  *.

*  At  the  end  of  this  section  a  table  of  measurements  is  given  of  all  the
skulls  mentioned  in  it


00$  ON  THS  CEREBRAL

Further,  the  Hindoo  is  distinguished  Hindoo.

by  a  great  respect  for  animal  life,  and
absence  of  cruelty  in  his  dispositions ;
while,  at  the  same  time,  he  is  destitute
of  fire,  and  of  that  energy  of  mind
which  overcomes  obstacles  and  gives
force  to  command.  The  European  is  precisely  the  oppo-
site; he  lives  to  a  great  extent  upon  animal  food,  is  fierce
in  his  anger,  and  is  characterized  by  great  combative  and
destructive  vigour.  The  Hindoo  brain  indicates  a  manifest
deficiency  in  the  organs  of  Combat!  reness  and  Destruc-
tiveness ;  while,  in  the  European,  these  parts  are  amply
developed.  The  Hindoo  is  cunning,  timid,  and  proud ;  and
in  him  Secretiveness,  Cautiousness  and  Self-Esteem,  are
large  in  proportion  to  the  organs  last  mentioned.  In  intel-
lect, the  Hindoo  is  more  prone  to  analogical  than  direct
reasoning,  is  fond  of  metaphors  and  comparisons,  and
little  given  to  discriminating  differences ;  and  the  organ  of
Comparison  is  much  larger  in  his  head  than  those  of  Cau-
sality and  Wit.  Br  Patterson  states,  that  these  facts  are
drawn  from  upwards  of  three  thousand  observations ;  and
they  are  illustrated  by  a  collection  of  Hindoo  skulls,  pre-
sented by  him  to  the  Phrenological  Society.  These  skulls  *,
twelve  in  number,  and  a  large  addition  of  skulls  of  the
same  nation,  acquired  by  the  Society  from  other  quarters,
have  long  been  exhibited  to  public  inspection.  Mr  Mont-
gomery has  called  in  question  the  justness  of  the  charac-
ter assigned  to  the  Hindoos,  but  his  objections  have  been
ably  answered  by  Dr  Cordbn  Thomson.  —  See  Phren.
Journ.  vol.  vi.  p.  344.  I  still  regard  the  statements  made
by  Dr  Paterson  to  be  correct.

The  Society's  collection  contains  other  specimens  of  na-
tional development  of  brain  equally  interesting.  The  CHA-
RIB  skulls  present  a  striking  appearance.     They  are  much

•  I  strongly  recommend  to  the  reader  to  inspect  the  casts  of  national
skulls  here  referred  to.  The  study  of  them  will  make  an  impression  in-
finitely deeper  than  any  description.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  807

latger  than  the  Hindoo  heads,  and,  in  Chatub^

conformity  with  the   principle,    that
sloe  indicates  power,  this  tribe  is  the
Meet  remarkable,  among  aU  the  native
Americans,  for  force  of  character .   The
.Europeans  have  in  vain  attempted  to
subdue  them;   they  have  hunted  them  down  like  wild
beasts,  and  nearly  extirpated  them,  but  failed  in  every  at-
tempt to  enslave  them  in  a  mass,  as  the  Portuguese  and
Spaniards  did  die  natives  of  Mexico  and  Brazil.     Far-
ther, the  Charib  brain  is  prodigiously  developed  in  the  re-
gions of  CombatrvenesB  and  Destructiveness,  in  which  the
Hindoo  head  is  deficient}  and  the  former  race  is  as  fero-
cious as  the  latter  is  mild  and  inoffensive.     In  die  reflect-
ing organs,  the  Charib  is  the  most  deficient  of  any  human
beings  whose  skulls  have  come  under  our  notice ;  and  he
is  described  as  rushing  with  unbridled  violence  on  present
gratification,  blind  to  every  consequence,  and  incapable  of
tracing  the  shortest  links  in  the  chain  of  causation.     If  the
ear  be  taken  as  a  centre,  and  a  line  drawn  from  it  to  the
most  prominent  part  of  the  forehead  of  the  Charib  skulls,
and  another  line  be  drawn  from  the  same  point  to  the  most
prominent  part  of  the  occiput,  it  will  be  found,  that  by  far
the  largest  quantity  of  Ae  brain  is  situated  behind  the  ear;
or,  in  other  words,  that  the  organs  of  the  animal  pro-
pensities greatly  preponderate  over  those  of  the  intellec-
tual faculties ;  if  the  region  above  the  organ  of  Cautious-
ness be  measured,  the  height  will  be  found  to  be  small,
compared  with  the  European9-<-<an  indication  that  the  or-
gans of  the  moral  sentiments  also  are  deficient  in.  size.   The
Society  possesses  casts  of  five  skulls  of  .Charibs,  all  of  which,
with  individual  differences,  present. a  general  type  .charac-
teristic of  the  whole.    In  St  Thomas'  Hospital,  London,  I
have  seen  the  original  of  one  of  these  casts :— the  whole
were  procured  by  Dr  Spuezheim  from  authentic  skulls,
and  their  genuineness  may  be  relied  on.

Mr  Saoo&wiCK,  Secretary  to  the  Phrenological  Society


608  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

4>f  Lofcdon,  communicated  an  interesting  Essay  to  the  Phre-
nological Journal  (vol.  vi.  p.  377.)  on  "  the  artificial  com-
pression of  the  infant  head,  by  barbarous  nations,"  in  which
he  clearly  establishes  that  the  Gharib  and  other  Indian
tribes  flatten  the  forehead  of  their  children  by  compression,
some  of  them  by  means  of  a  small  bag  of  sand,  others  by
confinement  of  the  infant  head  between  two  small  pieces
of  wood,  one  placed  before  and  the  other  behind,  both  being
firmly  bound  together;  and  others,  on  the  north-west  coast,
by  a  board  in  the  cradle  brought  over  the  forehead,  and
tied  firmly  down  upon  the  head  of  the  infant.  The  child
is  seldom  taken  from  the  cradle,  and  the  compression  is
continued  till  it  is  able  to  walk.  With  the  cause  of  the
flatness,  however,  I  am  not  at  present  interested,  the  only
point  I  wish  to  establish  being  the  fact  of  concomitance  be-
tween the  deficiency  of  organization  and  deficiency  of  men-
tal ability,  which  is  so  certain  as  to  be  altogether  indis-
putable.

The  NEW  HOLLAND  skull  rises
a  little  above  the  Charib,  but  indi*
cates  a  lamentable  deficiency  in  the
regions  of  the  intellectual  and  moral
organs.  The  organs  of  Number,
Constructiveness,  Reflection,  and  Ideality,  are  particularly
deficient,  while  those  of  the  animal  propensities  are  fully
developed.  The  Society  possesses  casts  of  two  skulls  of
natives  of  New  Holland,  and  Sir  George  S.  Mackenzie
has  presented  to  it  the  actual  skulls  of  a  chief  and  a  female
of  that  country;  and  the  whole  correspond,  in  a  striking
manner,  in  their  general  features.

If  these  skulls  were  put  into  the  hands  of  a  phrenologist
to  state  the  dispositions  which  they  indicate,  he  would  say
that  there  ought  to  be  considerable  energy  and  determina-
tion, but  extreme  ignorance,  rudeness,  and  grovelling  low-
,  ness  of  character.  Every  talent  necessary  for  architecture,
and  the  constructive  arts  in  general,  is  defective,  while
Ideality  is  so  small,  that  sentiments  of  refinement  or  ele~


&


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  609

gance  will  scarcely  be  at  all  experienced*  The  most  un-
accustomed eve  will  perceive  how  far  this  skull  and  that  of
the  Charib  fall  short  of  the  European  in  the  organs  of  Re-
flection, Ideality,  and  Constructiveness.

The  following  account  of  the  actual  condition  of  the  na-
tives of  New  Holland,  is  given  in  Smellie's  Philosophy  of
Natural  History: — "  It  would  appear  that  they  pull  out
the  two  fore-teeth  of  the  upper  jaw ;  for  in  neither  sex,  nor
at  any  particular  period  of  life,  are  these  teeth  to  be  seen  #.
They  are  beardless ;  their  visage  is  long,  without  exhibit-
ing a  single  agreeable  feature ;  their  hair  is  black,  short,
and  crisped ;  and  their  skin  is  equally  black  as  that  of  the
Guinea  Negroes.  Their  only  clothing  consists  of  a  piece  of
the  bark  of  a  tree  tied  round  their  waist,  with  a  handful  of
long  herbs  placed  in  the  middle.  They  erect  no  houses;
and,  without  any  covering,  they  sleep  on  the  ground.  Men,
women,  and  children,  associate  promiscuously  to  the  num-
ber of  20  or  30.  A  small  fish,  which  they  catch  in  reser-
voirs made  with  stones  in  arms  of  the  sea,  constitutes  their
chief  nourishment;  and  with  bread,  and  every  species  of
grain,  they  are  totally  unacquainted  f."  I  select  this  de-
scription on  account  of  its  brevity. — Smellie  refers  to
Dampiee  as  his  authority.

Captain  Cook  was  the  first  who  explored  the  eastern
coast  of  New  Holland,  of  the  natives  of  which  he  gives  the
following  account :  "  They  appeared  to  have  no  fixed  habi-
tations ;  for  we  saw  nothing  like  a  town  or  a  village  in  the
whole  country.  Their  houses,  if  houses  they  may  be  called,
seem  to  be  formed  with  less  art  and  industry  than  any  we
had  seen,  except  the  wretched  hovels  at  Terra  del  Fuego,
and  in  some  respects  they  are  inferior  even  to  them.  At
Botany  Bay,  where  they  were  best,  they  were  just  high
enough  for  a  man  to  sit  upright  in,  but  not  large  enough
for  him  to  extend  himself  in  his  whole  length  in  any  direc-

"  These  teeth  are  wanting  in  the  chief's  skull  presented  bj  Sir  Geo*ge
S.  Mackenzie  to  the  Society,
t  Vol  iL  p.  84.


610  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

tion  :  they  are  built  with  pliable  rods,  about  as  thick  as  a
man's  finger,  in  the  form  of  an  oven,  by  sticking  the  two
ends  into  the  ground,  and  then  covering  them  with  palm-
leaves  and  broad  pieces  of  bark :  the  door  is  nothing  but  a
large  hole  at  one  end,  opposite  to  which  the  fire  is  made
Under  these  houses  or  sheds  they  sleep,  coiled  up  with
their  heels  to  their  head ;  and  in  this  position  one  of  them
will  hold  three  or  four  persons," — "  The  only  furniture  be-
longing to  these  houses  that  fell  under  our  observation,  is  a
kind  of  oblong  vessel  made  of  bark,"  which  were  supposed  to
be  used  as  backets  for  carrying  water.  Captain  Cook  men-
tions also,  that  "  both  sexes  go  stark  naked ;"  that  they  have
no  nets  or  vessel  in  which  water  can  be  boiled.  w  The
canoes  of  New  Holland,"  he  continues,  "  are  as  mean  and
rude  as  the  houses,"  being,  on  the  southern  parts  of  the
coast,  "  nothing  more  than  a  piece  of  bark,  about  twelve
feet  long,  tied  together  at  the  ends,  and  kept  open  in  the
middle  by  small  bows  of  wood ;"  and  in  the  northern  parts,
merely  the  hollow  trunk  of  a  tree.  These  were  the  inha-
bitants of  a  different  part  of  New  Holland  from  that  visited
by  Dampier.  Their  want  of  curiosity  also  was  very  re-
markable, and  forms  a  good  contrast  with  the  wonder  with
which  some  American  tribes  regarded  the  Spaniards  and
their  ships  on  their  first  appearance  in  the  new  world.
Captain  Cook  relates,  that  of  about  twenty  natives  who
were  seen  on  the  shore,  not  far  from  Botany  Bay,  "  not
one  was  observed  to  stop  and  look  towards  us,  but  they
trudged  along,  to  all  appearance  without  the  least  emotion
of  curiosity  or  surprise,  though  it  is  impossible  they  should
not  have  seen  the  ship  by  a  casual  glance,  as  they  walked
along  the  shore ;  and  though  she  must,  with  respect  to  every
other  object  they  had  yet  seen,  have  been  little  less  stu-
pendous and  unaccountable  than  a  floating  mountain,  with
all  it  woods,  would  have  been  to  us  *."

In  Malthus's  Essay  on  Population  f,  will  be  found  a
character  of  the  New  Hollanders,  founded  on  tliis  narrative

•  See  Cook's  First  Voyage,  b.  ii.  ch.  ii.  and  vi.  f  Book  i.  chap.  3.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.


611


of  Cook,  and  on  Collin's  "  Account  of  New  South  Wales,"
coinciding  in  all  important  particulars  with  the  foregoing.
The  NEW  ZEALANDER  rises  above  the  New  Hollan-
der. The  size  of  the  brain  is  pretty
nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  Euro-
pean, but  the  great  predominance  of
size  is  in  the  region  of  the  propensities*
The  anterior  lobe  is  larger  than  in  the
New  Hollander,  but  less  than  in  the
European,  while  the  coronal  region  above  Cautiousness  is
broad,  but  extremely  shallow.  The  character  which  this
head  indicates  is  one  of  considerable  energy,  cruel,  cun-
ning, cautious,  vain,  and  decidedly  deficient  in  Benevo-
lence, Veneration,  and  Conscientiousness,

The  skull  of  a  NORTH  AMERICAN  INDIAN  is  high
from  the  ear  upward,  and  short  from  the  front  to  the  back.
The  forehead  is  not  largely  developed,
while  Firmness,  Secretiveness,  and
Cautiousness,  are  very  prominently  en-
larged ;  as  is  also  Destructiveness.  Ad-
hesiveness and  Concentrativeness,  espe-
cially the  latter,  are  small.  The  So-
ciety possesses  only  two  casts  of  skulls  of  this  tribe,  and
their  general  form  and  appearance  are  alike.  It  is  impos-
sible to  draw  any  safe  inference  from  so  limited  a  collec-
tion, yet  it  may  be  worth  while  to  notice  their  character,
for  the  purpose  of  inducing  travellers  to  attend  to  their
cerebral  development  in  their  future  descriptions.

"  To  flee  from  an  adversary  that  is  on  his  guard,  and  to
avoid  a  contest  where  he  cannot  contend  without  risk  to
his  own  person,  and  consequently  to  his  community,  is  the
point  of  honour  with  the  American.  The  odds  of  ten  to
one  are  necessary  to  warrant  an  attack  od  a  person  who  is
armed  and  prepared  to  resist,  and  even  then,  each  is  afraid
of  being  the  first  to  advance.  The  great  object  of  the  most
renowned  warrior  is,  by  every  art  of  cunning  and  deceit,
by  every  mode  of  stratagem  and  surprise  that  his  invention

2  q  2


612  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

can  suggest,  to  weaken  and  destroy  tbe  tribes  of  his  ene-
mies with  the  least  possible  loss  to  his  own.  To  meet  an
enemy -on  equal- terms  is  regarded  as  extreme  folly.  To
fall  in  battle,  instead  of  being  reckoned  an  honourable
death,  is  a  misfortune  which  subjects  the  memory  of  the
warrior  to  the  imputation  of  rashness  and  imprudence*
But  to  lie  in  wait  day  after  day,  till  he  can  rush  upon  his
prey,  when  most  secure  and  least  able  to  resist  him ;  to  steal
in  the  dead  of  night  upon  his  enemies,  set  fire  to  their  huts,
and  massacre  the  inhabitants,  as  they  flee  naked  and  de-
fenceless from  the  flames,  are  deeds  of  glory,  which  will  be
of  deathless  memory  in  the  breasts  of  his  grateful  country-
men *"

To  this  description  may  be  added,  that  these  savages  pos-
sess insuperable  determination :  when  the  fate  of  war  has
placed  one  of  them  in  the  power  of  his  enemies,  he  knows
that  the  most  dreadful  tortures  await  him ;  but  the  point  of
honour  then  is  to  set  the  malignity  of  his  tormentors  at  de-
fiance, and  to  surpass  in  his  powers  of  endurance  the  ut-
most limits  of  their  barbarous  inflictions  of  pain.  The
American  savage,  besides,  as  already  noticed,  has  rarely
been  found  a  member  of  regular  society,  but  has  continued
a  wanderer  since  the  sun  first  rose  upon  his  deserts  till
the  present  day.  Even  contact  with  European  settlers,
surrounded  by  arts  and  enlightened  by  intelligence,  has
scarcely  communicated  one  spark  of  energy  to  this  mise-
rable race.  When  Europe  has  been  conquered,  the  victori-
ous and  the  vanquished  have  in  a  few  ages  amalgamated
together,  been  blended  into  one,  and  have  formed  at  last
a  single  and  united  people.  The  native  Americans  have>
on  the  contrary,  uniformly  receded  before  the  Europeans;
and  even  in  those  states  of  the  Union  in  which  their  privi-
leges are  equal  With  those  of  the  whites,  they  rarely  rise
above  the  dignity  .of  a  barber  or  a  shoe-black*

The  exact  coincidence  betwixt  the  development  of  these
skulls  and  the  character  of  this  people  would  lead  us  to  sup-
•  Malthus  on  Pop.  B.  i.  ch.  iv.


-V


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  613

pose  that  they  represent  the  national  shape.  The  general
size  is  greatly  inferior  to  that  of  the  average  European  head ;
indicating  inferiority  in  natural  mental  power.  The  com-
bination of  Destructiveness,  Secretiveness,  Cautiousness  and
Firmness  corresponds  remarkably  with  their  timid,  cunning,
persevering  ferocity ;  while  their  deficient  sentiments,  Con-
centrativeness,  and  Adhesiveness,  would  account  for  the
looseness  of  their  social  and  patriotic  relations.

The  head  of  the  BRAZIL  INDIAN
bears  some  resemblance  to  the  former.
The  deficiency  in  Size  is  the  6ame,  in-
dicating natural  inferiority  of  mind,  and
the  combination  of  organs  is  similar,
only  Firmness  is  not  so  great,  and
Concentrativeness,  and  Philoprogenitiveness  are  moderate.
The  dimensions  are  annexed  in  the  Table.

It  is  known  that  the  Jesuits  attempted  to  civilize  a  num-
ber of  these  tribes,  and  that,  by  humane  and  intelligent  treat-
ment, they  acquired  a  great  moral  ascendancy  over  them,  in-
duced them  to  settle,  and  established  something  like  order
and  the  arts  of  social  life  among  them.  If  their  brains  had
possessed  the  European  development,  we  should  have  been
led  to  expect  that  the  seeds  of  improvement  sown,  and
fostered  for  years  by  a  protecting  hand,  would  have  sprung
up,  flourished  vigorously,  and  produced  an  abundant  har-
vest of  permanent  civilization ;  but  the  picture  is  precisely
the  reverse. — "  It  must  be  admitted,"  (says  the  reviewer  of
Koster's  Travels  in  Brazil,)  "  that  Mr  Roster's  represen-
tation of  the  Indians  is  by  no  means  favourable ;  and  the
opinions  which  he  expresses  are  of  the  more  weight,  because,
as  his  feelings  and  principles  are  of  the  best  kind,  they  lead
him  always  to  judge  charitably,  and  to  look  forward  with
Hope.  Infinitely  ameliorated  as  the  condition  of  the  In-
dians has  been,  theirs  is  still  no  very  desirable  state  of  ex-
istence ; — they  are  always  regarded  as  children,  and  not  al-
ways treated  as  they  were  by  the  Jesuits,  with  paternal
kindness.    But  when  they  escape  they  shew  little  capability


614  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

of  acting  for  themselves,  and  an  evident  tendency  (as  if
instinctive)  to  return  to  a  wandering  and  savage  life;—
it  does  not  arise  from  any  feeling  connected  with  the
love  of  their  ancestors,  or  a  tradition  of  their  free  state ;
they  do  not  appear  to  know  that  their  ancestors  bad
been  slaves,  much  less  would  any  knowledge  be  preserved
of  their  anterior  state.  The  Indian  who  has  escaped  from
control  scarcely  ever  plants  for  himself, — if  he  does  be
sells  the  growing  crop  for  half  its  value,  and  removes  to
some  other  district ;  fishing  and  hunting  are  his  favourite
pursuits,  and  he  is  never  stationary  for  any  length  of  time,
unless  it  be  near  a  lake  or  a  rivulet."  The  strangest  and
worst  part  of  their  character  is  their  want  of  natural  affec-
tion,—an  old  charge  against  them,  which  Mr  Koster*&
unexceptionable  testimony  confirms.  "  They  appear/'  he
says,  "  to  be  less  anxious  for  the  life  and  welfare  of  their
children,  than  any  other  race  of  men  who  inhabit  thai
country."

These  observations  present  the  most  fertile  field  of  spe-
culation to  the  phrenologists.  The  cast  of  the  Brazil  Indian
shews  a  deficiency  in  siae  compared  with  the  European  ;
and  hence  it  corresponds  with  the  fact,  that  these  Indians
are  regarded  and  treated  as  children,  that  they  are  desti-
tute of  foresight,  and  that  degree  of  steadiness  of  purpose
which  pursues  a  remote  advantage  through  numerous  in-
tervening obstacles.  An  Individual  is  treated  as  a  child  in
the  general  case,  not  out  of  perversity  in  his  parents  or
guardians,  but  because  his  inferiority  in  intellectual  power
is  felt  both  by  him  and  them,  although  this  may  not  be
stated  in  so  many  words  as  the  reason  of  his  being  subject-
ed  to  guidance.  When  strength  of  mind  appears,  we  are
constrained,  by  the  very  laws  of  our  constitution,  to  treat
the  possessor  with  respect,  however  infantine  in  bodily  sta-
ture, or  limited  in  point  of  age.  Were  the  Indians,  there-
fore, equal  in  their  natural  energies  to  Europeans,  they
would  soon,  by  dint  of  this  mental  power,  acquire  their
knowledge  and  accomplishments,  and  instead  of  being  their
slaves,  would  become  their  rivals.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.


615


These  Indians,  however,  have  derived  some  improvement
from  education,  although  it  has  not  supplied  the  defect  of
native  energy,  "  If  education  has  hitherto  done  little  in
implanting  good  qualities,  it  has  done  much  in  eradicating
evil  ones.  They  were  among  the  fiercest  and  most  revenge-
ful of  the  human  race ;  they  are  now  quiet  and  inoffensive,
rarely  committing  murder,  (in  a  country  where  murder  is
accounted  venial,  and  generally  obtains  impunity,  if  not  ap-
plause;) and  even  those  who  are  dishonest  confine  them-
selves to  pilfering."

Mr  Koster  draws  the  following  comparison  between  the
Negro  and  the  Brazil  Indian :— "  The  Negro  character,"  says
he,  "  is  more  decided ;  it  is  worse,  but  it  is  also  better." —
"  The  Indian  seems  to  be  without  energy  or  exertiop,  equal-
ly incapable  of  great  evil  or  of  great  good.  Rich  mulattoes
and  negroes  are  not  uncommon  ;  there  is  no  instance  of  a
wealthy  Indian,  nor  did  he  ever  see  an  Indian  mechanic.
The  priesthood  is  open  to  them,  but  to  little  purpose.  Mr
Koster  heard  of  only  two  Indians  who  were  ordained  as
priests,  and  both  died  of  excessive  drinking."

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  the  native  Mexi-
can brain  is  better  developed,  for  a  rude  form  of  society  ex-
isted there  before  the  European  conquest

The  skull  of  the  NEGRO  evidently
rises  in  the  scale  of  development  of  the
moral  and  intellectual  organs :  the  fore-
head is  higher,  and  the  organs  of  the
sentiments  bear  a  larger  proportion  to
those  of  the  propensities,  than  in  the
New  Hollander.  The  organs  of  Philo-
progenitiveness  and  Concentrativeness  are  largely  de-
veloped ;  the  former  of  which  produces  the  love  of  chil-
dren, and  the  latter  that  concentration  of  mind  which  is
favourable  to  settled  and  sedentary  employments.  The  or-
gans of  Veneration  and  Hope,  also,  are  considerable  in
size.     The  greatest  deficiencies  lie  in  Conscientiousness,


J


616  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

Cautiousness*  Ideality,  and  Reflection.  The  dimensions  of
this  skull  are  given  in  the  table.

The  different  tribes  which  inhabit  Africa  present  very
different  appearances  in  point  of  civilization ;  but  none  of
them  have  made  so  great  a  progress  as  the  European  na-
tions. I  have  been  informed  by  persons  who  have  been
long  resident  in  the  West  India  Islands,  that  great  diffe-
rences are  observed  in  the  natural  talents  of  the  Negroes,
according  to  the  provinces  from  which  they  have  been
brought  Some  parts  of  Africa  yield  persons  capable  of
becoming  excellent  operative  mechanics;  others,  clerks  and
accountants ;  and  some  mere  labourers,  incapable  of  any
intellectual  attainment.  It  would  be  extremely  interesting
to  learn  in  what  respect  they  differ  in  the  forms  of  the
heads.

Some  nations  of  Africa  greatly  surpass  others  in  energy
of  character  and  mechanical  skill.  "  The  Cafires  are  en-
tirely black,  but  bear  no  trace  of  the  Negro  features.  In
the  form  of  their  6kull  and  face  they  differ  little  from  the
most  perfect  Europeans/'  This  race  is  ingenious  in  seve-
ral arts ;  but,  on  account  of  their  constant  wars,  agricul-
ture is  in  a  depressed  state.  Although  their  coast  is  covered
with  excellent  fish,  they  do  not  catch  them,  and  indeed
have  no  boats  or  canoes.  Marriage  is  invariably  conducted
by  sale.  The  Boshuans  are  represented  as  "  gay,  gentle,
and  peaceable"  in  their  manners ;  yet  they  "  carry  on  war
as  fiercely  as  all  other  barbarians. — Mr  Campbell  having,
in  the  course  of  religious  instruction,  asked  one  of  them,
'  for  what  end  was  man-made,'  the  answer  was,  '  for  plun-
dering expeditions  V"  Mr  Bowditch  gives  an  account
of  the  Ashaiitees,  by  which  it  appears  that  they  display
great  activity  and  considerable  ingenuity  of  mind ;  but  that
they  are  debased  by  the  most  ferocious  dispositions  and  the
grossest  superstition.  The  descriptions  given  by  a  variety
of  travellers  of  Timbuctoo,  and  of  the  commerce  carried  on

•  Leyden  and  Murray's  Historical  Account  of  Discoveries  and  Tra-
vels in  Africa,  vol  ii.  pp.  332,  350.


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.


617


upon  the  Niger  by  the  natives  of  Africa,  if  they  can  be  at
all  depended  upon,  also  indicate  considerable  scope  of  mind,
and  some  capacity  for  the  social  state,  and  place  the  Afri-
cans decidedly  above  the  native  Americans ;  all  these  facts
coincide  with  the  expectations  which  a  phrenologist  would
form,  on  examining  their  different  skulls.

One  feature  is  very  general  in  descriptions  of  the  Afri-
can tribes;  they  are  extremely  superstitious.  They  \>ur-
chase  fetiches,  or  charms,  at  a  high  price,  and  believe  them
to  be  sure  preservatives  against  all  the  evils  of  life.  This
character  corresponds  with  the  development  which  we  ob-
serve in  the  Negro  skulls ;  for  they  exhibit  much  Hope,
Veneration,  and  Wonder,  with  comparatively  little  reflect-
ing power.  Their  defective  Causality  incapacitates  them
for  tracing  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  and  their  great
Veneration,  Hope,  and  Wonder,  render  them  prone  to  cre-
dulity, and  to  regard  with  profound  admiration  and  re-
spect any  object  which  is  represented  as  possessing  super-
natural power.

The  heads  of  the  SANDWICH  ISLANDERS  are  under
rather  than  equal  to  the  average  size  of
the  European  head ;  and  the  race  cer-
tainly does  not  indicate  so  high  a  na-
tural character  as  the  European,  al-
though closely  approaching  to  it.  The
Phrenological  Society  possesses  five
skulls  of  the  Sandwich  Islanders.  They  are  characterized
by  the  long  form  of  the  European — the  Caucasian  variety
of  Blum enbach  ;  by  the  greater  proportion  being  before
than  behind  the  external  orifice  of  the  ear,  indicating  the
predominance  of  intellectual  over  animal  endowment.  This
is  remarkable  particularly  in  two  of  the  skulls.  The  co-
ronal region  is  broad  and  tolerably  well  developed,  but  not
equal  in  height  above  Cautiousness  and  Causality  to  the
European.  The  anterior  lobe,  manifesting  the  intellect,  is
pretty  well  developed,  being  decidedly  larger  than  that  of  the
Negro  American  Indians  and  New  Hollanders.    All  of  them


618  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

have  a  considerable  portion  of  Eventuality,  a  (acuity  which
Dr  Gall  long  ago  denominated  EducabiHty,  and  which
mucrt  greatly  expedite  civilization.  Three  of  the  skulls  are
decidedly  ancient,  and  having  been  obtained  from  the  older
Morais  or  burial-places,  probably  afford  correct  specimens
of  the  heads  of  the  aboriginal  inhabitants,  before  the  islands
were  discovered  by  Captain  Cook*  This  navigator  found
this  race  very  superior  to  most  of  the  other  savage  tribes
which  he  visited ;  and  the  advance  which  they  have  since
made  towards  civilization,  is  evinced  by  their  respectful  re-
ception of  the  bodies  of  their  king  and  queen,  who  had  died
in  London,  the  appearance  of  the  chiefs  in  English  mourn-
ing, the  procession  to  the  church,  and  the  high  improvement
conspicuous  in  the  whole  community, — circumstances  which
have  been  noticed  by  the  public  papers,  and  are  given  more
in  detail  in  a  narrative  of  the  voyage  of  the  Blonde  Frigate
to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  published  in  the  year  1826  *.

The  brains  of  the  different  EUROPEAN  NATIONS
differ  considerably  from  each  other,  but  a  common  type  cha-
racterizes them  all,  and  distinguishes  them  from  those  now
described.     They  are  decidedly  larger  Swiss  Skull.

than  the  Hindoo,  American  Indian,
and  Negro  heads;  and  this  indicates
superior  force  of  mental  character.
The  portion  before  the  ear,  connected
with  the  intellectual  faculties,  and  the
coronal  region,  or  the  organs  of  the  moral  sentiments,  are
more  amply  developed  in  proportion  to  the  base  and  poste-
rior inferior  parts  of  the  brain,  the  organs  of  the  animal
propensities.  In  short,  they  indicate  a  higher  natural
power  of  reflection,  and  a  greater  natural  tendency  to  jus-
tice, benevolence,  veneration,  and  refinement,  than  the
others.  The  organs  in  which  the  European  brain  in  an
especial  degree  excels,  are,  Ideality,  Conscientiousness,
Causality,  and  Wit.      The  organs  of  these  faculties  are

•  A  more  particular  account  of  the  Sandwich  Islanders  will  be  found
in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  vol  iii.  p.  421.


mB


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  619

almost  invariably  small  in  barbarous  and  savage  tribes.
The  European  skull  belongs  to  the  Caucasian  variety  of
Blumenbach,  which  he  considers  as  the  most  beautiful  and
perfect  of  all  the  national  crania  in  the  world ;  and  in  this
point  he  and  the  phrenologists  agree*  The  cut  represents
a  Swiss  skull,  which  is  not  large,  but  very  favourably  de-
veloped in  the  region  of  the  moral  sentiments.  If  the  space
above  the  asterisks,  Cautiousness  and  Causality,  be  com-
pared with  the  same  region  in  the  New  Zealander  or  New
Hollander,  a  very  marked  inferiority  in  the  latter  will  be
observed.

The  ANCIENT  EGYPTIANS  appear,  from  the  stupen-
dous monuments  of  art  and  science  left  behind  them,  to  have
been  a  highly  intelligent  and  civilized  people :  and  it  is  a
striking  fact,  that  the  skulls  of  ancient  mummies  are  found
almost  invariably  to  belong  to  the  same  class  as  those  of  mo-
dern Europeans.  In  the  Society's  collection,  there  are  two
skulls  of  mummies,  five  casts  of  the  skulls  of  mummies,
and  I  have  seen  or  obtained  accurate  descriptions  of  the
skulls  of  half  a  dozen  more ;  — full  size,  large  development
before  the  ear,  and  broad  coronal  region,  characterize  them
all ;   indicating  the  elements  of  a  superior  character.

The  Society  possesses  also  several  skulls  of  ANCIENT
GREEKS.  They  are  large,  and  ex-
hibit a  favourable  development  of  the
coronal  region  and  intellect,  combined
with  large  organs  of  the  propensities*
In  particular,  the  organs  of  Construc-
tiveness  and  Ideality  are  large,  and  in
this  respect,  they  form  as  striking  a
contrast  to  the  skulls  of  the  New
Hollanders,  as  the  hovels  of  the  latter  do  to  the  temples
and  works  of  art  of  the  Greeks.

These  facts  appear  to  indicate,  that  when  a  nation  is  in-
dependent, and  left  at  liberty  to  follow  the  bent  of  their
own  judgment  and  dispositions,  their  institutions  spring
from  the  peculiar  mental  constitution  which  they  have  re-


620  ON  THE  CEREBRAL

ceived  from  nature,  and  that  this  constitution  is  in  exact
accordance  with  the  development  of  their  brains.  Climate
and  other  external  causes  modify  to  some  extent  the  effects  of
natural  endowment,  but  the  distinguishing  features  of  each
people  seem  to  bear  a  more  direct  and  uniform  relation  to
the  size  and  form  of  their  brain,  than  to  those  adventitious
circumstances.  Where  a  people  is  subjugated  by  a  foreign
power,  as  the  Greeks  by  the  Turks,  and  the  Italians  by  the
Austrians,  the  national  character  has  no  adequate  opportu-
nity of  unfolding  its  peculiarities;  and  hence,  if  this  circum-
stance is  overlooked,  the  same  race  may  seem  to  present
different  characteristics  at  different  periods  of  their  history.
The  modern  Greeks,  it  was  lately  said,  no  more  resemble
their  ancestors  than  the  Hindoos  the  Europeans ;  and  this
was  urged  as  an  insuperable  objection  against  Phrenology.
Now,  however,  when  the  Turkish  yoke  is  loosened  so  as  to
allow  the  native  qualities  to  shoot,  we  see  the  same  force  of
character,  the  same  deliberate  and  determined  heroism,  the
same  capacity  for  stratagem  in  war,  with  all  the  fickleness
and  proneness  to  dissension,  the  same  ascendency  of  pas-
sion which  distinguished  the  Greeks  in  the  days  of  Pericles,
reappearing  in  their  descendants.  Many  millions  of  Hin-
doos, Africans,  and  American  Indians,  have  been  for  ages
independent  of  a  foreign  yoke,  and  never  displayed  quali-
ties such  as  those  exhibited  by  independent  Europeans.

The  effects  of  temperament  are  distinguishable  in  na-
tional skulls.  The  grain  of  the  New  Holland  skulls  is  ex-
tremely rough  and  coarse ;  that  of  the  Hindoos,  fine,  smooth,
and  compact,  more  closely  resembling  ivory ;  the  Swiss
.skulls  are  open  and  soft  in  the  grain,  while  the  Greek  are
closer  and  finer.  There  would  be  a  corresponding  quality
of  brain  in  the  individuals,  which  would  influence  the  men-
tal character.

The  Phrenological  Society  have  more  specimens  of  na-
tional skulls  than  are  here  noticed.  They  afford  interest-
ing materials  for  philosophical  reflection,  but  the  great
length  to  which  this  work  has  extended,  compels  me  to
omit  the  notice  of  them.


DEVELOPMENT  OP  NATIONS


g22  ON  THE  CEBEBBAL

„e  therefore  ^«<7^

^  lines  stated  in  ^^^.tt^
rough  estimate  **^**™^ummBmBmA  is  mul
be  {oTmea^^A^^^^^emen^s  are  taken  from  individual
^jB&fflBTand  cannot  be  given  as  an  exact  statement  of  the.
average  of  the  different  national  crania.  They  are,  how-
ever, an  approximation  to  truth,  and  are  sufficient  to  shew
the  interest  of  the  investigation.  The  collection  is  still  too
limited  to  enable  us  to  draw  average  results.  The  Negro
skull  is  a  very  favourable  specimen,  and  the  Swiss  is  per-
haps  under  the  average.

The  real  characters  of  foreign  nations  will  never  be
philosophically  delineated,  until  travellers  shall  describe
their  temperaments,  and  the  size  and  combinations  of  their
brains.  Blumenbach's  extensive  work  on  National  Crania
is  destitute  of  moral  interest,  owing  to  his  omission  of  all
notice  of  the  characters  of  the  nations  whose  heads  he  re-
presents. Donations  of  national  skulls  are  highly  esteemed
by  the  Phrenological  Society.


OBJECTIONS  TO  PHBENOLOGY  CONSIDEBED.

Having  now  considered  the  elements  of  Phrenology,  I
shall  notice  briefly  some  objections  which  have  been  urged
against  it.  These  shall  be  given,  as  nearly  as  possible,  in
die  words  of  actual  opponents,  and  an  answer  shall  be
subjoined.

Objection. — The  idea  of  ascribing  different  faculties  to
different  parts  of  the  brain  is  not  new.  Many  authors  did
so  before  Dr  Gall  ;  but  their  systems  have  fallen  into  dis-
repute, which  proves  that  the  doctrine  is  not  true.

Answer. — Dr  Gall  himself  has  called  the  attention  of
philosophers  to  the  fact,  that  the  idea  alluded  to  is  very
ancient;  he  has  given  a  history  of  previous  opinions  concern-


DEVELOPMENT  OF  NATIONS.  623

ing  the  functions  of  the  brain ;  and  shewn,  that  different
functions  have  been  attributed  to  different  parts  of  h  for
centuries  past,  while  he  has  assigned  reasons  for  these  ideas
falling  into  oblivion.  Dr  Spurzheim  in  his  works  does
the  same;  and,  in  the  Phrenological  Journal,  No.  VII.
Art.  8,  "  An  Historical  Notice  of  early  Opinions  concern-
ing the  brain"  is  given,  accompanied  with  a  plate  of  the
head,  shewing  it  marked  out  into  different  organs  in  1562,
it  is  copied  on  p.  22  of  this  work.  The  difference,  however,
between  the  mode  of  proceeding  of  prior  authors  and  that  of
Dr  Gall,  is  so  great,  that  different  results  are  accounted
for.  Former  speculators  assigned  to  certain  mental  facul-
ties local  situations  in  the  brain,  on  account  of  the  suppos-
ed aptitude  of  the  place  to  the  faculty.  Common  sense,
for  example,  was  placed  in  the  forehead,  because  it  was
near  the  eyes  and  nose ;  while  memory  was  lodged  in  the
cerebellum,  because  it  lay  like  a  store-house  behind,  to  re-
ceive and  accommodate  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  till  required
to  be  brought  forth  for  use.  This  was  not  philosophy.  It
was  the  human  imagination  constructing  man,  instead  of
the  intellect  observing  how  the  Creator  had  constituted  him*
Dr  Gall  acted  on  different  principles.  He  did  not  assume
any  mental  faculties,  and  neither  did  he  assign  them  habi-
tations m  the  brain  according  to  his  own  fancy.  On  the
contrary,  he  observed,  first,  the  manifestations  of  mental
talents  and  dispositions ;  and,  secondly,  The  form  of  brain
which  accompanied  each  of  these  when  strong  and  weak.
He  simply  reported  what  Naturfe  had  done.  There  is  the
same  difference  between  his  method  of  proceeding  and  that
of  prior  authors,  as  between  that  of  Des  Cartes  and  New*
ton  ;  and  hence  it  is  equally  intelligible,  why  he  should  be
successful  in  discovering  truth,  while  they  invented  only
ingenious  errors.

Objection. — It  is  ridiculous  to  suppose  that  the  mind  has
thirty-five  faculties ;  why  not  fifty-five  ?  or  an  hundred  and


624  OBJECTIONS  TO

five  ?    Besides,  the  phrenologists  have  been  continually  al-
tering the  number.

Answer. — As  well  may  it  be  said  to  be  absurd,  that  we
should  possess  exactly  five  senses;  why  not  ten,  or  fifteen ?
The  phrenologists  deny  all  responsibility  for  the  number  of
the  faculties.  They  admit  neither  fewer,  nor  a  greater
number,  than  they  find  manifested  in  nature.  Besides,  au-
thors on  mental  philosophy  admit  as  many,  and  some  more,
faculties  than  the  phrenologists.  Lord  Kames,  for  ex-
ample, admits  twenty  of  the  phrenological  faculties;  while
Mr  Duoald  Stewart,  in  his  System,  ascribes  more  facul-
ties to  the  mind  than  are  enumerated  in  the  phrenological
works**  The  increase  of  the  number  of  the  phrenological
faculties  is  easily  accounted  for.  It  has  invariably  been
stated,  that  the  functions  of  certain  portions  of  the  .brain
remain  to  be  discovered;  and,  in  proportion  as  this  dis-
covery proceeds,  the  list  of  mental  powers  wilt  necessarily
be  augmented.

Objection.—"  On  opening  the  skull,  and  examining  the
brain  towards  the  surface,  where  the  organs  are  said  to  be
situated,  it  seems  to  require  no  small  share  of  creative  fan-
cy, to  see  any  thing  more  than  a  number  of  almost  similar
convolutions,  all  composed  of  cineritious  and  medullary
substance,  very  nearly  in  the  same  proportions,  and  all  ex-*
hibiting  as  little  difference  in  their  form  and  structure,  as
the  convolutions  of  the  intestine."  "  No  phrenologist  has
ever  yet  observed  the  supposed  lines  of  distinction  between
them;  and  no  phrenologist,  therefore,  has  ventured,  in  the
course  of  his  dissections,  to  divide  a  hemisphere  of  the
brain  accurately  into  any  such  number  of  well  marked  and
specific  organs."

This  objection  was  urged  by  the  late  Dr  John  Barclay,
and  is  answered  at  full  length  by  Dr  A.  Combe,  in  the
Phrenological  Transactions.     A  summary  only  of  his  ob-

•  See  answer  to  Mr  Jeffrey  in  Phren.  Jour.  voL  iv.  p.  30.


PHRENOLOGY  CONSIDERED.  625

serrations  can  be  introduced  here.    Fiftt,  Although  the
objection  were  literally  true,  it  is  not  relevant ;  because  it
is  an  admitted  principle  of  physiology,  that  the  form  and
structure  of  an  organ  are  not  sufficient  to  convey  an  idea  of
its  functions ;  no  man  who  saw  an  eye,  an  ear,  or  a  nostril,
for  the  first  time  (supposing  it  were  possible  for  a  man  to
be  so  situated),  could,  merely  by  looking  at  it,  infer  its
uses.    The  most  expert  anatomist  had  looked  frequently
and  long  upon  a  bundle  of  nervous  fibres,  enclosed  in  a
common  sheath,  without  discovering  that  one  set  of  them
was  the  organ  of  voluntary  motion,  and  another  that  of
feeling;  on  the  contrary,  from  their  similarity  of  appear-
ance, these  nerves  had,  for  ages,  been  regarded  as  possess-
ing similar  functions.    Nevertheless,  Mr  C.  Bell  and  Ma
gendip  have  demonstrated,  by  experiment,  that  they  pos-
sess the  distinct  functions  of  feeling  and  motion.     Mr  Bell
has,  more  recently,  proved,  that  another  nerve,  the' use  of
which  nobody  had  conjectured  from  its  structure,  serves  to
convey  to  the  brain  intimation  of  the  state  of  the  muscles,
so  that  there  is  now  evidence  of  the  muscular  system  being
supplied  with  three  distinct  sets  of  nerves,  having  separate
functions,  which  was  never  conjectured  from  appearances.
These  discoveries  are  discussed  on  p.  5(k     It  may  there-
fore competently  be  proved,  by  observation,  that  different
parts  of  the  brain  have  distinct  functions,  although  it  were
true  that  no  difference  of  structure  could  be  perceived.

But,  2dly>  it  is  not  the  fact  that  difference  of  appearance
is  not  discoverable.  It  is  easy  to  distinguish  the  anterior,
the  middle,  and  posterior  lobes  of  the  human  brain  from
each  other;  and,  were  they  shewn  separately  to  a  skilful
phrenological  anatomist,  he  would  never  take  one  for  the
other.  The  mental  manifestations  are  so  different,  accord-
ing as  one  or  other  of  these  lobes  predominate  in  size,  that
there  is  even  in  this  case  ample  room  for  establishing  the
fundamental  proposition,  that  different  faculties  are  con-
nected with  different  parts  of  the  brain.  Farther,  many  of
the  organs  differ  so  decidedly  in  appearance,  that  they

r  r


626  OBJECTIONS  TO

could  be  pointed  out  by  it  alone.  Dr  Spurzheim  says,
that  he  "  should  never  confound  the  organ  of  Amativeness
with  that  of  PhUoprogenkiveness  ;  or  Philoprogmitiveness
with  that  of  SecreHveness  ;  or  the  organ  of  the  desire  to  ac-
quire with  that  of  Benevolence  or  Veneration ;"  and,  after
haying  seen  Dr  Spurzheim's  dissections  of  the  brain,  I
bear  my  humble  testimony  to  the  truth  of  this  assertion.
Even  an  ordinary  observer,  who  takes  a  few  good  casts  of
the  brain  in  his  hand,  may  satisfy  himself  that  the  anterior
lobe,  for  example,  uniformly  presents  convolutions  diffe-
rent in  appearance,  direction,  and  size  from  those  of  the
middle  lobe  ;  while  the  latter,  towards  the  coronal  surface,
uniformly  presents  convolutions  differing  in  appearance  and
direction  from  those  of  the  posterior  lobe  ;  and,  above  ally
the  cerebellum,  or  organ  of  Amativeness^  is  not  only  widely
different  in  structure,  but  is  separated  by  a  strong  mem-
brane from  all  other  organs,  and  can  never  be  mistaken  for
any  of  them.  Difference  of  appearance,  therefore,  being
absolutely  demonstrable,  there  is  much  better  reason  on  the
side  of  the  phrenologists  for  presuming  difference  of  func-
tion, than  on  that  of  the  opponents  for  maintaining  unity*

Sdfy,  It  is  admitted  that  the  organs  are  not  perceived  to
be  separated  in  the  brain  by  strong  lines  of  demarcation ;
but  those  persons  who  have  either  seen  Dr  Spurzheim  dis-
sect the  brain,  or  have  attended  minutely  to  its  impressions
on  the  skull,  will  support  me  in  testifying,  that  the  forms
of  the  organs  are  distinguishable,  and  that  the  mapping  out
is  founded  in  nature.  To  bring  this  to  the  test,  the  stu-
dent has  only  to  observe  the  appearance  of  any  particular
organ  in  a  state  of  large  development,  the  surrounding  or-
gans being  small ;  the  form  will  then  be  distinctly  visible*
This  subject  is  discussed  at  more  length  on  p.  93.

-Defection. — All  parts  of  the  brain  have  been  injured  or
destroyed  without  the  mental  faculties  being  affected.

Answer. — The  assertion  is  denied :  There  is  no  philoso-
phical evidence  for  it.     The  subject  is  discussed  at  length


#


PHRENOLOGY  CONSIDERED.  627

by  Dr  A.  Combe,  in  the  Phrenological  Transactions,  and  in
a  subsequent  part  of  this  work.  The  objection  is  now  ge-
nerally abandoned  by  persons  who  have  considered  the
cases,  with  the  answers  to  them.  /

1/

Objection. — The  world  has  gone  on  well  enough  with  the
philosophy  of  mind  it  already  possesses,  which,  besides,  is
consecrated  by  great  and  venerable  names,  while  Phreno-
logy has  neither  symmetry  of  structure,  beauty  of  arrange-
ment, nor  the  suffrages  of  the  learned  to  recommend  it.
Its  votaries  are  all  third-rate  men — persons  without  scien-
tific or  philosophical  reputations.  They  are  not  entitled
therefore,  to  challenge  the  regard  of  those  who  have  higher
studies  to  occupy  their  attention.  They  complain  that  on-
ly ridicule  and  abuse  are  directed  against  them,  and  that
no  one  ventures  to  challenge  their  principles  or  refute  their
facts ;  but  they  do  not  yet  stand  high  enough  in  public  es-
teem to  give  them  a  right  to  expect  any  other  treatment.

Answer.— Phrenology  being  a  new  science,  it  follows
that  men  who  possess  reputation  in  physiology  or  mental
philosophy  would  appear  to  lose  rather  than  gain  renown,
were  they  to  confess  their  present  ignorance  of  the  func-
tions of  the  brain  and  the  philosophy  of  mind,  which  is  a
necessary  prelude  to  their  adoption  of  Phrenology;  and
the  subject  does  not  lie  directly  in  the  department  of  other
scientific  men.  In  this  manner  it  happens,  oddly  enough,
that  those  who  are  most  directly  called  upon  by  their  situa-
tion to  examine  the  science,  are  precisely  those  to  whom
its  triumph  would  prove  most  humiliating.  Locke  humo-
rously observes  on  a  similar  occasion,  "  Would  it  not  be
an  insufferable  thing  for  a  learned  professor,  and  that
which  his  scarlet  would  blush  at,  to  have  his  authority  of
forty  years  standing,  wrought  out  of  hard  rock,  Greek  and
Latin,  with  no  small  expense  of  time  and  candle,  and  con-
firmed by  general  tradition,  and  a  reverend  beard,  in  an
instant  overturned  by  an  upstart  novelist  ?  Can  any  one
expect  that  he  should  be  made  to  confess,  that  what  he

b  r  2


628  OBJECTIONS  TO

taught  bis  scholars  thirty  years  ago  was  all  error  and  mis-
take, and  that  he  sold  them  hard  words  at  a  very  dear
rate  ?  What  probabilities,  I  say,  are  sufficient  to  prevail
in  such  a  case  ?  And  who  ever,  by  the  most  cogent  argu-
ments, will  be  prevailed  with  to  disrobe  himself  at  once  of
all  his  old  opinions  and  pretences  to  knowledge  and  learn-
ing, which  with  hard  study  he  hath  all  his  time  been  la-
bouring for,  and  turn  himself  out  stark-naked  in  quest  of
fresh  notions  ?  All  the  arguments  that  can  be  used  will  be
as  little  able  to  prevail  as  the  wind  did  with  the  traveller
to  part  with  his  cloak,  which  he  held  only  the  faster  *."
Human  nature  is  the  same  now  as  in  the  days  of  Locke.

There  is,  however,  another  answer  to  the  present  objec-
tion. Some  individuals  are  born  princes,  dukes,  or  even
field-marshals ;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  yet  been  an-
nounced, that  any  lady  was  delivered  of  a  child  of  genius,
or  an  infant  of  established  reputation.  These  titles  must
be  gained  by  the  display  of  qualities  which  merit  them ;
but  if  an  individual  quit  the  beaten  track  pursued  by  the
philosophers  of  the  day,  and  introduce  any  discovery,  al-
though equally  stupendous  and  new,  his  reputation  is  ne-
cessarily involved  in  its  merits.  Harvey  was  not  a  great
man  before  he  discovered  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  but
became  such  in  consequence  of  having  done  so.  What  was
Shakspeare  before  the  magnificence  of  his  genius  was
justly  appreciated  ?  The  author  of  Kenilworth  represents
him  attending  as  an  humble  and  comparatively  obscure
suitor  at  the  court  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  receiving  a
mark  of  favour  in  an  "  Ah  !  Will  Shakspeare,  are  you
there?"  And  he  most  appropriately  remarks,  that  here
the  immortal  pud  homage  to  the  mortal.  Who  would  now
exchange  the  greatness  of  Shakspeare  for  the  splendour
of  the  proudest  lord  that  bowed  before  the  Maiden  Queen  ?
Or  let  us  imagine  Galileo,  such  as  he  was  in  reality,  a
feeble  old  man,  humble  in  rank,  destitute  of  political  in-
fluence, unprotected  by  the  countenance  or  alliance  of  the
•  Book  iv.  c  20,  sect.  11.


PHRENOLOGY  CONSIDERED.  629

great,  poor,  in  short,  in  every  thing  except  the  splendid
gifts  of  a  profound,  original,  and  comprehensive  genius —
and  conceive  him  placed  at  the  bar  of  the  Roman  pontiff
and  the  seven  cardinals,  men  terrible  in  power,  invested
-with  authority  to  torture  and  kill  in  this  world,  and,  as
was  then  believed,  to  damn  through  eternity ;  men  magni-
ficent in  state,  and  arrogant  in  the  imaginary  possession  of
all  the  wisdom  of  their  age — arid  let  us  say  who  was  then
great  in  reputation — Galileo  or  his  judges?  But  who  is
now  the  idol  of  posterity — the  old  man  or  his  persecutors ?
The  case  will  be  the  same  with  Gall.  If  his  discoveries  of
the  functions  of  the  brain,  and  of  the  philosophy  of  the
mind,  stand  the  test  of  examination,  and  prove  to  be  a  cor-
rect interpretation  of  nature,  they  will  surpass,  in  substan-
tia] importance  to  mankind,  the  discoveries  even  of  Har-
vey, Newton,  and  Galileo  ;  and  this  age  will  in  conse-
quence be  rendered  more  illustrious  by  the  introduction  of
Phrenology,  than  by  the  victories  of  Buonaparte,  or
of  Wellington.  Finally,  the  assertion,  that  no  men
of  note  have  embraced  Phrenology,  is  not  supported  by
fact  In  the  New  Monthly  Magazine  for  January  1823,
it  is  said,  "  There  are  many  men  here  (Paris)  amongst  the
most  eminent  for  their  medical  and  physiological  know*
ledge,  who,  though  differing  widely  upon  other  scientific
topics,  yet  agree  in  saying,  that  there  is  much  not  only  of
probability,  but  of  truth,  in  the  system  of  Gall."  Professor
Ucelli  of  Florence  has  recently  sacrificed  his  academical
chair  for  Phrenology.  Besides,  the  writings  of  the  phre-
nologists will  bear  a  comparison  in  point  of  skill,  extent
of  information,  correctness  of  logic,  and  profundity  of
thought,  with  those  of  the  most  eminent  of  their  oppo-
nents.

Objection. — All  the  disciples  of  Phrenology  are  persons
ignorant  of  anatomy  and  physiology.  They  delude  lawyers,
divines,  and  merchants,  who  know  nothing  about  the
brain ;  but  all  medical  men,  and  especially  teachers  of  ana-


680  OBJECTIONS  TO

tomy,  are  so  well  aware  of  the  fallacy  of  their  doctrines,
that  no  impression  is  made  on  them.  They  laugh  at  the
discoveries  as  dreams.

Answer. — This  objection,  like  many  others,  is  remark-
able more  for  boldness  than  truth.  For  my  own  part,  be-
fore adopting  Phrenology,  I  saw  Dr  Barclay,  and  other
anatomical  professors,  dissect  the  brain  repeatedly,  and
heard  them  declare  its  functions  to  be  an  enigma,  and  ac-
knowledge that  their  whole  information  concerning  it  con-
sisted of  "  names  without  meaning."  It  is  acknowledged,
in  an  article  on  the  Nervous  System,  in  No*  94.  of  the
Edinburgh  Review,  quoted  on  p.  46,  of  this  work,  that  the
functions  of  the  brain  are  unknown  to  anatomists,  and  that
their  mode  of  dissecting  it  is  absurd.  This  circumstance,
therefore,  puts  the  whole  faculty,  who  have  not  studied
phrenologically,  completely  out  of  the  field  as  authorities.
The  fact,  however,  is  the  very  reverse  of  what  is  stated  in
the  foregoing  objection.  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim  are
now  pretty  generally  admitted  to  be  admirable  anatomists
of  the  brain,  even  by  those  who  disavow  their  physiology;
and  in  the  list  of  the  Phrenological  Society,  out  of  86
members,  there  are  13  doctors  in  medicine,  and  11  sur-
geons, a  proportion  considerably  larger  than  that  of  the  me-
dical profession  to  society  in  general.  The  leading  medical
journals  also  have  adopted  Phrenology  as  true.

Objection. — "  It  is  inconceivable,  that,  after  the  discovery
was  made,  there  should  be  any  body  who  could  pretend  to
doubt  of  its  reality.  The  means  of  verifying  it,  one  would
think,  must  have  been  such  as  not  to  leave  a  pretext  for  the
slightest  hesitation ;  and  the  fact  that,  after  twenty  years
preaching  in  its  favour,  it  is  far  more  generally  rejected
than  believed,  might  seem  to  afford  pretty  conclusive  evi-
dence against  the  possibility  of  its  truth."

This  objection  has  been  answered  in  the  Introduction,
p.  2,  where  it  is  shewn  that  all  important  discoveries  have

l


PHRENOLOGY  CONSIDERED.  681

been  equally  despised  and  rejected  at  their  first  announce-
ment.

The  observations  there  quoted  from  Playfair  and
Locke,  are  completely  applicable  to  the  case  of  Phrenolo-
gy. The  discovery  is  new,  important,  and  widely  at  vari-
ance with  the  prevailing  opinions  of  the  present  genera-
tion ;  and  its  reception  and  progress  have  been  precisely
such  as  any  sensible  person,  acquainted  with  the  history  of
science,  would  have  anticipated.  "  The  discoverer  of  the
circulation  of  the  blood,'9  says  the  Edinburgh  Review  *,—
"  a  discovery  which,  if  measured  by  its  consequences  on
physiology  and  medicine,  was  the  greatest  ever  made  since
physic  was  cultivated,  suffers  no  diminution  of  his  reputa-
tion in  our  day,  from  the  incredulity  with  which  his  doc-
trine was  received  by  some,  the  effrontery  with  which  it
was  claimed  by  others,  or  the  knavery  with  which  it  was
attributed  to  former  physiologists,  by  those  who  could  not
deny,  and  would  not  praise  it  The  very  names  of  these
envious  and  dishonest  enemies  of  Harvey  are  scarcely  re-
membered ;  and  the  honour  of  this  great  discovery  now
rests,  beyond  all  dispute,  with  the  great  philosopher  who
made  it."  Posterity  will  pass  a  similar  judgment  on  Dr
Gall  and  his  opponents.


II.   MATERIALISM.

The  objection,  that  Phrenology  leads  to  materialism,  has
been  frequently  urged  against  the  science;  but  it  appears
singularly  unphilosophical,  even  upon  the  most  superficial
consideration.  Phrenology,  viewed  as  the  assertion  of  cer-
tain physical  facts,  cannot,  if  unfounded,  logically  lead  to

•  No.  xciv.  p.  76.  The  article  quoted  in  the  text  is  u  On  the  Nervous
System ;"  and  the  names  of  Drs  Gall  and  Spurzheim  are  not  mention-
ed in  it  from  beginning  to  end.  The  author,  however,  in  the  above  re-
marks,  affords  them  just  grounds  of  consolation,  although  he  exemplifies
the  injustice  he  so  eloquently  condemns.


632  OBJECTIONS.

any  result,  except  the  disgrace  and  mortification  of  its  sup-
porters. On  such  a  supposition,  it  cannot  overturn  reli-
gion, or  any  other  truth;  because,  by  the .  constitution  of
the  human  intellect,  error  constantly  tends  to  resolve  it-
self into  nothing,  and  to  sink  into  oblivion ;  while  truth,
having  a  real  existence,  remains  permanent  and  impreg-
nable. In  this  view,  then,  the  objection,  that  Phrenology
leads  to  materialism,  is  absurd.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
science  is  held  to  be  a  true  interpretation  of  nature,  and  if  it
be  urged,  that,  nevertheless,  it  leads  fairly  and  logically  to
materialism,  then  the  folly  of  the  objection  is  equally  glar-
ing ;  for  it  resolves  itself  into  this, — that  materialism  is  the
constitution  of  nature,  and  that  Phrenology  is  dangerous,
because  it  makes  this  constitution  known.

The  charge  assumes  a  still  more  awkward  appearance  in
one  shape,  in  which  it  is  frequently  brought  forward.  The
objector  admits  that  the  mind  uses  the  body  as  an  instru-
ment of  communication  with  external  nature,  and  main-
tains that  this  fact  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  materialism.
In  this  I  agree  with  him ;  but  I  cannot  perceive  how  it
should  lead  nearer  to  this  result,  to  hold  that  each  faculty
manifests  itself  by  a  particular  organ,  than  to  believe  that
the  whole  mind  acts  on  external  objects  by  means  of  the
whole  body,  or  the  whole  brain.  In  short,  in  whatever
point  of  view  the  system  is  regarded,  whether  as  true  or
false,  the  objection  of  materialism  is  futile  and  unphiloso-
phical;  and  one  must  regret  that  it  should  have  been
.brought  forward  in  the  name  of  religion,  because  every  im-
becile and  unfounded  attack  against  philosophy,  made  in
,this  sacred  name,  tends  to  diminish  the  respect  with  which
it  ought  always  to  be  invested.

The  questiQn  of  materialism  itself,  however,  as  a  point  of
abstract  discussion,  has  of  late  excited  considerable  atten-
tion ;  and  I  shall  offer  a  few  remarks  upon  its  general  me-
rits. In  entering  on  the  subject,  it  is  proper  to  take  a  view
of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  point  in  dispute,  and  of
the  real  effect  of  our  decision  upon  it.     The  question  then


MATERIALISM.  633

is,  Whether  the  substance  of  which  the  thinking  principle  k
composed  be  matter  or  spirit  ?  And  the  effect  of  our  decision,
let  it  be  observed,  is  not  to  alter  the  nature  of  that  substance,
whatever  it  is,  but  merely  to  adopt  an  opinion  consonant
with,  or  adverse  to,  a  fact  in  nature  over  which  we  have
no  control.  Mind,  with  all  its  faculties  and  functions,
has  existed  since  the  creation,  and  will  exist  till  the  human
race  becomes  extinct,  and  no  opinion  of  man,  concerning
the  cause  of  its  phenomena,  can  have  the  least  influence
over  that  cause  itself.  The  mind  is  invested  by  nature
with  all  its  properties  and  essences,  and  these  it  will  pos-
sess, and  manifest,  and  maintain,  let  men  think,  and  speak,
and  write  what  they  will,  concerning  its  substance.  If  the
Author  of  Nature  has  invested  the  mind  with  the  quality
of  endless  existence,  it  will,  to  a  certainty,  flourish  in  im-
mortal youth,  in  spite  of  every  appearance  of  premature
decay.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  Nature  has  limited  its  exist-
ence to  this  passing  scene,  and  decreed  that  it  shall  perish
for  ever  when  the  animating  principle  passes  from  the  body,
then  all  our  conjectures,  arguments,  discussions,  and  asser-
tions, respecting  its  immortality,  will  not  add  one  day  to
its  existence.  The  opinions  of  man,  therefore,  concerning
the  substance  of  the  mind,  can  have  no  influence  whatever
in  changing  or  modifying  that  substance  itself;  and  if  so,
as  little  can  these  opinions  undermine  the  constitution  of
the  mind,  or  its  relations  to  time  and  eternity,  on  which,
as  their  foundations,  morality  and  religion  must,  and  do,
rest  as  on  an  immutable  basis.  According  to  Phrenology,
morality  and  natural  religion  originate  in,  and  emanate
from,  the  primitive  constitution  of  the  mental  powers  them-
selves. Innumerable  observations  have  proved,  that  facul-
ties and  organs  of  Benevolence,  Hope,  Veneration,  Justice,
and  Reflection,  exist  Now,  our  believing  that  the  mind
will  die  with  the  body,  will  not  pluck  these  sentiments  and
powers  from  the  soul ;  nor  will  our  believing  die  mind  to
be  immortal  implant  a  single  one  more  of  them  in  our
constitution.    They  would  all  remain  the  same  in  func-


634  OBJECTIONS.

tions  and  constitution,  and  render  virtue  amiable,  and
vice  odious,  although  we  should  believe  the  mind  to  be
made  of  dint,  just  as  they  would  do  were  we  to  believe  the
mind  to  be  a  more  immediate  emanation  from  the  Deity
himself.

In  short,  therefore,  this  question  of  materialism  is  one  of
the  most  vain,  trivia],  and  uninteresting  that  ever  engaged
the  human  intellect ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  unphiloso-
phical,  and  mbre  truly  detrimental  to  the  interests  of  mo-
rality and  religion,  than  the  unfounded  clamour,  or  cant
shall  I  call  it,  which  has  been  poured  forth  from  the  pe-
riodical journals  about  the  dangers  attending  it  A  manly
intellect,  instead  of  bowing  before  prejudice,  would  dissi-
pate it,  by  shewing  that  the  question  is  altogether  an  illu-
sion, and  that,  adopt  what  opinion  we  will,  concerning  the
substance  of  the  mind,  every  attribute  belonging  to  it  must
remain  unaltered  and  unimpaired.

But  not  to  stop  in  our  investigation  till  we  have  reached
the  goal,  we  may  inquire,  whether  it  be  possible  to  discover
the  substance  of  which  the  mind  is  composed,  whether  it
be  material  or  immaterial  ?  Previous  to  doing  so,  however,
we  ought  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  what  means  we  possess
of  arriving  at  a  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  the  mind.  All
our  knowledge  must  be  derived  either  from  consciousness
or  observation.  Now,  by  reflecting  on  what  we  feel,  we
discover  nothing  concerning  the  nature  or  essence  of  the
thinking  being.  We  do  not  feel  a  spiritual  substance
stirring  about  within  us,  and  elaborating  sentiment  and
thought ;  and  neither  do  we  feel  a  material  substance  pro-
ducing these  effects.  We  are  conscious  only  of  feelings
and  emotions,  of  friendships  and  attachments,  of  high  con-
ceptions and  glorious  thoughts ;  but  whether  these  origi-
nate from  matter  or  spirit ;  whether  the  first  embryo  sub-
stance of  reflection  dwelt  lowly  in  the  dust,  or  soared  a
pure  ethereal  essence  amid  the  regions  of  boundless  space,
before  it  was  constituted  a  part  of  us;  whether  God,  in
creating  man,  was  pleased  to  invest  his  material  organs


MATERIALISM.  635

with  the  property  of  thought,  or  to  infuse  into  him  a  por-
tion of  immaterial  fire ;— on  all  these  points  Consciousness
gives  us  no  information.  A  great  deal  of  popular  delusion,
indeed,  has  been  kept  alive  on  this  point,  by  the  fact  being
overlooked,  that  we  are  not  conscious  of  the  operations  of
the  brain.  Men  in  general,  because  they  are  sensible  only
of  thought  and  feeling,  and  not  of  the  movements  of  any
material  organ  performing  these  acts  of  the  mind,  imagine
that  it  is  necessarily  an  immaterial  substance,  which  is
thinking  and  feeling  within  them ;  but  they  are  equally  un-
conscious of  the  contraction  and  relaxation  of  the  muscles,
and  they  might  as  well  imagine  that  their  arms  and  legs  are
moved,  not  by  material  organs,  but  by  the  direct  impulse
of  spirit,  as  entertain  the  supposition  in  question.  In  short,
the  truly  philosophical  conclusion  is,  that,  by  means  of
consciousness,  we  are  unable  to  discover  of  what  substance
the  thinking  principle  is  composed.

Does  observation,  then,  throw  a  stronger  and  steadier
light  upon  this  long  agitated  question  ?  The  mental  or-
gans, while  in  health,  and  in  the  natural  state  in  which
their  functions  are  most  perfectly  performed,  are  complete-
ly hid  from  inspection.  No  eye  can  penetrate  the  inte-
guments of  the  head,  the  tables  of  the  skull,  the  dura
mater,  and  the  pia  mater,  to  obtain  a  view  of  the  opera-
tions performed  in  the  brain,  while  the  thoughts  run  high,
and  the  sentiments  swell  with  emotion ;  and  when  external
injury  or  disease  removes  these  coverings,  the  mind  does
not  disport  in  all  the  vigour  of  its  healthy  action.  Be-
sides, even  when  all  these  external  obstacles  to  inspec-
tion are  removed,  still  it  is  only  the  surface  of  the  convo-
lutions which  is  perceived,  and  the  soul  may  be  enthroned
in  the  long  fibres  which  extend  from  the  surface  to  the  me-
dulla oblongata,  or  thought  may  be  elaborated  there,  and
still  evade  detection.  It  will  be  said,  however,  that  death
will  solve  the  question,  and  allow  the  whole  secrets  of  the
soul  to  be  disclosed ;  but,  alas !  when  the  pulse  has  ceased
to  beat,  and  the  lungs  no  longer  play,  the  brain  presents


636  OBJECTIONS.

nothing  to  our  contemplation,  but  an  inert  mass,  of  a  soft
and  fibrous  texture,  in  whieh  no  thought  can  be  discerned,
and  no  sentiment  perceived,  and  in  which  also  no  spirit
or  immaterial  substance  can  be  traced;  so  that  from
inspecting  it  even  imagination  receives  no  food  for  conjee*
ture,  as  to  the  presence  or  absence  of  an  immaterial  guest
while  life  and  health  yet  animated  its  folds.

Observation,  therefore,  reveals  as  little  in  regard  to  the
substance  of  the  mind,  as  does  reflection  on  consciousness ;
and  as  no  other  modes  of  arriving  at  certain  knowledge  are
open  to  man,  the  solution  of  the  question  appears  to  be
placed  completely  beyond  his  reach.  In  short,  to  use  an
observation  of  Dr  Spurzheim,  Nature  has  given  man  fa-
culties fitted  to  observe  phenomena  as  they  at  present  exist,
and  the  relations  subsisting  betweeu  them ;  but  has  denied
to  him  powers  fitted  to  discover,  as  a  matter  of  direct  per-
ception, either  the  beginning,  or  the  end,  or  the  essence,  of
any  thing  under  the  sun ;  we  may  amuse  our  imagination
with  conjectures,  but  will  never  arrive  at  truth,  when  we
stray  into  these  interdicted  regions.

The  solution  of  this  question,  therefore,  is  not  only  un-
important, but  it  is  impossible ;  and  this  leads  me  to  ob-
serve, that  no  idea  can  be  more  erroneous  than  that  which
supposes  the  dignity  and  future  destiny  of  man  as  an  im-
mortal being,  to  depend,  of  necessity,  on  the  substance  of
which  he  is  made.

Let  us  allow  to  the  materialist,  for  the  sake  of  argument,
that  the  brain  is  the  mind,  and  that  medullary  matter
thinks, — What  then  ?  If,  in  fact,  it  does  so,  it  must  be  the
best  possible  substance  for  thinking,  just  because  the  Crea-
tor selected  it  for  the  purpose,  and  endowed  it  with  this  pro-
perty. In  this  argument,  the  religious  constantly  forget,  that
the  same  omnipotent  hand  made  the  brain  that  created
the  mind  and  the  universe  itself,  and  that,  in  the  dedica-
tion of  every  cerebral  convolution  to  its  objects,  be  they
thinking  or  any  other  process,  the  Divine  Wisdom  is  as
certainly  exercised,  as  in  impressing  motion  on  the  planets,


MATERIALISM.  637

or  infusing  light  and  beat  into  the  sun.  If,  therefore,  de
facto,  God  has  made  the  brain  to  think,  we  may  rest  as-
sured that  it  is  exquisitely  and  perfectly  adapted  for  this  pur-
pose, and  that  His  objects  in  creating  man  will  not  be  de-
feated, on  account  of  His  having  chosen  a  wrong  substance,
out  of  which  to  constitute  the  thinking  principle.  But
what  are  His  objects  in  creating  man  ?  This  brings  us  to
the  jet  of  the  question  at  once*  Mr  Lawrence,  it  is  said,
founds  no  moral  doctrine  on  his  opinions  regarding  the  es-
sence of  the  mind ;  but  other  materialists,  who  make  these
opinions  the  foundation  of  atheism,  wish  us  to  believe  that
the  best  evidence  of  the  Divine  intention  in  creating  the
human  soul,  is  to  be  found  by  discovering  the  substance  of
which  it  is  made ;  and  they  insinuate,  that,  if  it  be  consti-
tuted of  a  very  refined  and  dignified  material,  the  conclu-
sion necessarily  follows,  that  it  is  intended  for  magnificent
destinies,  while,  if  it  be  composed  of  a  rude  and  vulgar
stuff,  it  must  be  intended  only  to  crawl  on  this  filthy  world.
Here,  however,  sense  and  logic  equally  fail  them :  for  no
principle  in  philosophy  is  more  certain  than  that  we  cannot
infer  from  a  knowledge  of  the  mere  substance  of  any
thing  for  what  ends  it  is  fitted*  Exhibit  to  a  human  being
every  variety  of  imaginable  essence,  and  if  you  allow  him
to  know  no  more  of  its  properties  than  he  can  discover  from
examining  its  constituent  parts,  he  will  be  utterly  incapable
of  telling  whether  it  is  calculated  to  endure  for  a  day,  or
last  to  eternity*  The  materialist,  therefore,  is  not  entitled,
even  from  the  supposed  admission  that  medullary  matter
thinks,  to  conclude  that  the  human  being  is  not  immortal
and  responsible*  The  true  way  of  discovering  for  what
end  man  has  been  created,  is  to  look  to  the  qualities  with
which  he  has  been  endowed,  trusting  that  the  substance  of
which  he  is  composed  is  perfectly  suited  to  the  objects  of
his  creation.  Now,  when  we  inquire  into  bis  qualities,  we
find  the  thinking  principle  in  him  to  differ,  not  only  in  cfe-
gree,  but  in  kind)  from  that  of  the  lower  animals*  The  lat-
ter have  no  faculty  of  justice,  to  indicate  to  them  that  the


688  OBJECTIONS.

unrestrained  manifestation  of  Destructiveness  or  Acquisi-
tiveness is  wrong;  they  have  no  sentiment  of  Veneration
to  prompt  them  to  seek  a  God  whom  they  may  adore ;  they
have  no  faculty  of  Hope,  pointing  out  futurity  as  an  object
of  ceaseless  anxiety  and  contemplation,  and  leading  them
to  desire  a  life  beyond  the  grave ;  and,  indeed,  the  convo-
lutions of  the  brain,  which  in  man  form  the  organs  of  these
sentiments,  appear  not  to  exist  in  the  lower  animals.
Those  organs  also,  which  in  man  serve  to  manifest  the  fa-
culties of  Reflection,  are,  in  the  lower  animals,  eminently
deficient,  and  their  understanding,  in  exact  correspondence
with  this  fact,  is  so  limited  as  to  be  satisfied  with  little
knowledge,  and  to  be  insensible  to  the  comprehensive  de-
sign and  glories  of  creation.  Man,  then,  being  endowed
with  qualities  which  are  denied  to  the  lower  creatures,  we
are  entitled,  by  a  legitimate  exercise  of  reflection,  the  sub-
ject being  beyond  the  region  of  the  external  senses,  to  con-
elude,  on  principles  truly  philosophic,  that  he  is  designed
for  another  and  a  higher  destiny  than  is  to  be  allotted  to
them,  whatever  be  the  essence  of  his  mind.


III.   ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN
ON  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  MIND.

(By  Dr  A.  Combe.)

Of  all  the  arguments  advanced  for  the  subversion  of
Phrenology,  no  one  has  been  more  frequently  or  more  con-
fidently urged,  than  that  which  rests  on  the  alleged  fact  of
the  brain  having,  in  various  instances,  been  wounded  or
destroyed  in  whole  or  in  part,  without  in  any  degree  im-
peding the  usual  operations  of  mind.  When  narrowly  exa-
mined, however,  this  objection  proves  to  be  at  variance
with  the  views  of  those  who  maintain  it,  and  completely
demonstrative  of  their  ignorance  of  the  principles  of  the
science  against  which  it  is  directed.     "  The  system  of  Gall


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  639

and  Spurzheim,"  it  is  said,  "  however  ingenious  or  amu-
sing in  theory  it  may  be,  is  annihilated  by  the  commonest
reference  to  fact.  Experience  has  shewn  us,  that  a  man
may  live  in  the  full  enjoyment  qf  his  intellectual  faculties,  al-
though a  part  of  his  brain  is  destroyed  by  disease.  Portions
of  the  brain,  various  in  situation  and  size,  have  been  found
to  have  been  entirely  disorganized,  yet  no  single  power  of
the  mind  was  impaired,  even  to  the  very  day  of  the  patient's
death.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  one  portion  of  the
brain,  that  has  not,  in  some  case  or  another,  been  deranged
in  its  structure,  without  injury  to  the  mind.  Certainly,  of
the  parts  specified  by  Gall  and  Spurzheim,  every  one
has,  in  its  turn,  been  found  wanting,  without  any  deficiency
in  that  intellectual  faculty  which  they  would  represent  it
either  to  produce  or  sustain*."  Such  are  the  ipsissima
verba  of  a  learned  and  respectable,  though  prejudiced  op-
ponent ;  and  although  others  might  be  quoted,  who  go  still
farther  than  he  does,  I  am  ready  to  admit,  that,  if  the
statements  here  recorded  were  as  clearly  substantiated  as
they  were  swefepingly  made,  neither  the  system  of  philoso-
phy which  we  advocate,  nor  any  other  which  acknowledges
the  necessity  of  the  intervention  of  a  material  instrument
for  the  manifestation  of  the  mind,  couM  possibly  survive
for  a  day.

At  first  sight,  the  foregoing  objection  appears  to  be  highly
plausible  and  relevant;  and  coming  as  it  generally  does,
directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  members  of  the  medical
profession,  who,  naturally  enough,  are  supposed  to  be  best
qualified  to  judge,  it  is  received  by  many  with  implicit
confidence,  and  thus  operates  upon  them  with  all  the  force
of  truth ;  and,  in  fact,  to  those  who  are  alike  ignorant  of
Anatomy  and  of  Phrenology,  and  who,  therefore,  have  no
means  of  forming  an  accurate  estimate  of  its  force,  it  does
present  a  very  formidable  aspect.  As,  however,  to  those
who  are  acquainted  with  both  these  sciences,  and  who  are
consequently  better  qualified  to  judge  correctly,  the  very

"  Renxel  on  Scepticism,  p.  100.


640  OBJECTIONS.

facte  upon  which  the  objections  are  grounded,  seem,  in-
stead of  invalidating  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  new
philosophy,  to  be  clearly  and  unequivocally  demonstrative
of  their  truth ;  it  may  be  useful  to  state  such  an  abstract
of  the  evidence  itself,  as  shall  enable  even  the  unprofes-
sional reader  to  determine  how  far  it  authorizes  the  infe-
rences which  have  been  deduced  from  it  by  our  opponents-
With  this  intention,  I  shall  first  make  some  observations
on  the  testimony  offered  of  the  alleged  integrity  of  all  the
mental  faculties,  in  cases  of  extensive  injury  of  the  brain ;
and  then  examine  anatomically,  how  far  the  extent,  situa-
tion, and  nature  of  the  injuries  sustained  in  the  cases  allud-
ed to,  authorize  us  to  infer  the  partial  or  total  destruction
of  any  individual  phrenological  organ  ;  and,  lastly,  I  shall
offer  a  few  remarks  on  the  possibility  of  discovering  the
functions  of  the  brain,  from  noticing  the  effects  of  its  in-
juries,— a  mode  of  proceeding  lately  recommended  from
high  authority.

In  proceeding  to  this  inquiry,  it  must  first  be  observed,
that,  without  a  single  exception,  all  the  cases  alluded  .to  are
related  by  surgical  authors,  for  purely  professional  pur-
poses, without  the  remotest  idea  of  their  being  afterwards
founded  on,  to  prove  that  entire  preservation  of  the  mental
faculties  may  coexist  with  extensive  disorganization  of  the
organ  of  mind;  consequently,  in  all  of  them,  as  will  be
seen  by  a  reference  to  Dr  Ferriar's  paper,  in  the  4th
volume  of  the  Manchester  Memoirs,  and  to  the  48th  num-
ber of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  the  state  of  the  mind  is  men-
tioned merely  incidentally,  and  in  very  vague  and  general
terms,  as  it  was,  in  reality,  scarcely  attended  to.  For  in-
stance, it  is  stated  in  one  case,  that u  the  senses  were  retain-
ed to  the  last ;"  in  another,  that  "  there  was  no  loss  of  sen-
sibility;" in  a  third,  that  there  was  "  no  alienation  of  mind ;''
and,  in  a  fourth,  that  "  the  patient  remained  quite  well."
The  want  of  precision,  indeed,  and  the  utter  inadequacy
of  the  statements  to  establish  the  important  conclusions  de-
duced from  them,  are  so  palpably  conspicuous,  that  even


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  641

the  Reviewer  already  alluded  to,  hostile  as  he  is  to  the
doctrines  of  Phrenology,  expresses  a  "  wish  to  6ee  cases
more  minute  in  all  their  details ;  and  observed,  with  a  view
specially  to  this  physiological  inquiry,  substituted  for  those
we  at  present  possess  #,"  before  he  ventures  to  pronounce  an
irrevocable  decree ;  and  if  he  hesitates,  it  would  surely  be
too  much  to  expect  us  to  pronounce,  upon  testimony  re-
jected by  him,  a  verdict  against  ourselves.

But,  even  granting  that  these  cases  had  been  observed,
with  a  view  specially  to  this  physiological  inquiry  ;  still  this
testimony,  to  be  of  the  slightest  value  in  establishing  the
point  contended  for,  necessarily  supposes  two  conditions  or
requisites  in  those  by  whom  they  are  narrated,  which  were
manifestly  not  possessed,  viz.  1st,  A  perfect  knowledge  of  the
number  and  nature  of  the  primitive  faculties  of  the  human
mind ;  and,  2dly,  A  previous  knowledge  of  their  relative
degrees  of  endowment  and  energy  during  health,  in  the  in-
dividual cases  under  consideration.

Now,  as  to  the  first  of  these,  it  is  well  known  that  scarce-
ly any  two  metaphysicians  who  make  the  philosophy  of
mind  their  particular  study,  are  agreed  either  upon  the  num-
ber or  nature  of  the  primitive  mental  powers.  Much  less,
then,  can  we  expect  the  surgeon,  engaged  in  the  hurry  of
general  practice,  to  be  better  informed.  "  Certain  crude
ideas,"  says  the  Edinburgh  Reviewer,  in  his  notice  of  Sir
E.  Home's  paper  on  the  Functions  of  the  Brain,  "  are  at-
tached to  the  words  Intellectual  Faculties ;  a  vague  conjec-
ture arises  as  to  the  seat  and  nature  of  these  faculties  f"
How,  then,  I  would  ask,  can  any  one  certify,  even  after
the  most  scrupulous  attention,  that  all  the  powers  of  the
mind  are  retained,  when  he  is  ignorant  what  these  powers
are  ?  When  he  is  ignorant,  for  instance,  whether  the  pro-
pensities of  Destructiveness,  Acquisitiveness  or  Secretive-
ness  exist,  and  whether  the  sentiments  of  Veneration,  Hope
or  Conscientiousness,  are  primitive  emotions.  The  state  of
these,  and  other  feelings  and  propensities,  proved  by  Phre-

•  Edinburgh  Review,  No.  48,  p.  448.  f  lb.  p.  43».

S  •


642  OBJECTIONS.

nology  to  be  primitive,  is  never  once  alluded  to  in  tbe  his-
tory of  injuries  of  the  brain;  and,  consequently,  for  any
thing  we  are  told  to  the  contrary,  they,  along  with  their
respective  organs,  might  have  been  entirely  wanting,  in
every  one  of  the  cases  which  are  advanced  as  instances  of
entire  possession  of  the  faculties.  The  opponents  never
speak  of  any  except  mtellectual  faculties ;  and  in  expecting
lesion  of  these  powers,  when,  for  instance,  it  is  only  the
cerebellum,  or  posterior  lobes  of  the  brain,  that  are  dis-
eased, they  display  at  once  their  own  ignorance  of  the  na-
ture and  number  of  the  primitive  faculties,  and  their  most
profound  ignorance  of  the  doctrines  which  they  impugn.
If  any  injury  occurs  in  that  portion  of  the  brain  lying  un-
der the  most  prominent  part  of  the  parietal  bone,  which
the  phrenologist  states  to  be  the  organ  of  Cautiousness,
and  if  we  be  in  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  function
assigned  to  it,  and  wish  to  have  our  observations  confirmed
or  refuted  by  the  phenomena  attending  such  a  case,  one
would  naturally  suppose  that,  as  the  organs  are  all  double,
we  would  begin  by  observing,  whether  the  corresponding
portion  of  brain  on  the  opposite  side  partook  in  the  dis-
organization or  not ;  and  that  we  would  then  proceed  to
investigate  the  state  of  that  particular  faculty,  of  which
these  parts  constitute  the  organs,  and  thus  ascertain  whe-
ther the  feeling  of  Cautiousness  ever  remained  undiminish-
ed, where,  from  the  extent  of  the  disease,  it  ought,  ac-
cording to  the  ordinary  laws  of  the  animal  economy,  to
have  been  either  impaired,  or  entirely  awanting.

This  mode  of  proceeding,  plain  and  simple  as  it  appears,
is  not  that  pursued  by  the  opponents  of  Phrenology.  The
opponent  does  not  care,  and  does  not  inquire,  whether  it  w
one  side  only,  or  both  sides,  which  are  diseased:  he  makes
no  inquiry  about  the  presence  or  absence  of  the  manifes-
tations of  the  sentiment  of  Cautiousness :  he  proceeds  at
once  to  the  state  of  the  intellectual  powers,  with  which
Phrenology  most  distinctly  teaches  that  that  part  of  the
brain  has  no  direct  connexion ;  and  finding  none  of  the


INJUEIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  643

faculties  which  he  calls  Attention,  Perception,  Memory  or
Imagination  at  all  impaired,  he,  with  great  confidence,
concludes,  that  the  part  in  question  cannot  be  the  organ  of
Cautiousness ;  and  so  satisfied  is  he  with  his  own  reason*
ing,  that  he  thinks  himself  entitled  to  ridicule  those  who
do  not  see  its  cogency  as  clearly  as  he  does  himself.  On
any  other  subject,  this  mode  of  reasoning  would  be  looked
upon  as  proceeding  from  a  very  blameable  and  lamentable
degree  of  ignorance ;  but  such  was  once  the  state  of  the
public  mind,  that,  when  directed  against  Phrenology,  it
was  hailed  almost  universally  as  highly  philosophical  and
satisfactory.

Even  supposing,  however,  that  the  number  of  primitive
faculties  was  known,  still  no  dependence  can  be  placed
upon  cases  not  observed,  with  a  view  "  specially  to  this
physiological  inquiry;"  for  daily  experience  proves,  that
whenever  a  patient  is  able  to  return  a  rational  answer  to
any  simple  question  about  his  health,  the  surgeon  and  at-
tendants, whose  attention  is  not  directed  to  the  point,  inva-
riably speak  of  him  as  in  full  possession  of  all  his  facul-
ties, although  he  is  as  unable  to  think  or  reason  on  any  se-
rious subject,  with  his  accustomed  energy  and  facility,  as
a  gouty  or  rheumatic  patient  is  to  walk  with  his  accustom-
ed vigour.  In  one  sense,  no  doubt,  the  former  may  be  said
to  be  in  possession  of  all  his  faculties,  just  as  the  latter,
merely  because  he  can  drag  himself  across  a  room,  may  be
said  to  possess  the  power  of  muscular  motion ;  but  then  the
power  of  exercising  the  faculties  may  be,  and  is,  as  much
diminished  in  the  one  case,  as  that  of  using  the  muscles  in
the  other.  Even  take  a  convalescent  from  any  acute  dis-
ease, in  which  there  has  been  no  particular  affection  of  the
brain,  and  introduce  a  subject  which  requires  a  train  of
thinking,  and  concentration  of  mind,  to  which,  in  health,
he  is  fully  equal,  so  far  from  retaining  his  powers  undi-
minished, he  will  soon  be  reminded  of  his  enfeebled  state,  by
painful  confusion  in  the  head,  and  other  disagreeable  symp-
toms.    But,  confine  his  attention  to  any  thing  which  re-

S    8   2


644  OBJECTIONS.

quires  do  effort  on  his  part,  and  you  benefit  rather  than
barm  him  by  such  exercise,  for  it  is  then  suited  to  the  di-
minished vigour  of  his  mind.  Now,  this  is  precisely  the
kind  of  discourse  which  the  judicious  surgeon  permits  to
his  patient,  and  from  it  alone  he  forms  his  own  opinion  of
the  state  of  the  mind ;  and,  therefore,  a  person  in  such  state
is  uniformly  said  "  to  retain  .his  faculties,"  &c.  In  like
manner,  the  convalescent,  gouty  or  rheumatic  patient,  if
gently  exercised  by  strolling  about  his  room,  reaps  benefit
and  strength ;  but  suppose  you  force  him  to  an  effort  be-
yond what  his  muscular  energy  is  calculated  to  support,
the  same  bad  effect  is  produced  as  in  the  case  of  the  mind,
and  as  well  might  this  person  be  said  to  retain  his  power  of
voluntary  motion  undiminished,  as  the  other  all  his  force  of
intellect  unimpaired.

That  the  evidence  as  to  the  state  of  the  mind,  after
wounds  or  alteration  of  the  cerebral  mass,  is  really  so
vague  and  unsatisfactory,  may  easily  be  shewn  from  Dr
Ferriar's  paper,  and  from  the  Edinburgh  Review,  the
text-books  of  the  opponents.  Besides  the  objection  of  ex-
treme latitude  in  such  expressions,  as  "  no  loss  of  sensibi-
lity," "  no  loss  of  voluntary  motion,"  &c.  &c.,  when  used
to  indicate  the  condition  of  all  the  mental  faculties,  it  may
be  remarked,  that  Dr  Ferriar  speaks  of  one  man  as  re-
taining all  his  faculties  entire,  who,  it  appears,  had  labour-
ed under  hypochondriasis  for  ten  years ;  a  disease,  the  very
existence  of  which  implies  a  morbid  activity  of  some  of  the
mental  feelings,  and  which,  consequently,  ranks  in  the  list
of  insanities ;  and  of  a  girl  who,  with  evident  symptoms  of
oppressed  brain,  is  also  said  to  have  retained  her  faculties ;
and  that  the  reviewer  speaks  of  a  lady,  who,  "  the  day  be-
fore her  death,  was  capable  of  being  roused  from  her  stupor,
and  was  then  in  possession  of  all  her  senses."  But  the
idiot  from  birth,  when  roused  from  his  natural  stupor  by
the  exaltation  of  a  fever,  appears  sometimes  to  gain  a  con-
siderable share  of  intellectual  power,  only  to  be  lost  upon
recovery.     Will  he,  too,  then,  be  said  to  be  in  full  posses-


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  645

sion  of  every  faculty,  because  thus  shewn  to  be  susceptible
of  excitation  from  stimuli  ?  The  inference,  in  the  one  case,
is  certainly  as  logical  as  it  is  in  the  other.

But,  even  allowing  also  that,  from  a  previous  acquaint-
ance with  the  number  and  functions  of  all  mental  powers,
we  were  qualified  to  judge  of  their  presence  or  absence,  it
seems  still  to  be  a  self-evident  proposition,  that  before  we
can  affirm  that  a  man  possesses  them  all  unimpaired  under
disease,  we  must  have  had  some  previous  knowledge  of  the
relative  degrees  of  endowment  and  energy  in  which  he  pos-
sessed them  when  in  health.  The  differences  of  intellec-
tual vigour,  of  temper,  and  of  moral  dispositions,  between
man  and  man,  are  exceedingly  great.  The  scale  extends
from  the  lowest  pitch  of  idiocy,  up  to  the  highest  endow-
ment of  genius ;  and  the  history  of  diseases  informs  us,  that
a  man,  whose  faculties  have  suffered  a  great  diminution  of
energy,  may  still  be  able  to  return  a  rational  answer  to  a
question,  although  his  mind  is  unable  to  fathom  the  depths
it  penetrated  before.  If,  then,  our  first  acquaintance  with
a  patient  suffering  from  an  injury  of  the  brain  is  formed
by  the  side  of  his  sick-bed  after  the  accident  has  occurred,
what  means  do  we  possess  of  knowing  how  far  his  mental
powers  in  general,  or  any  one  in  particular,  have  been  in-
jured or  impaired?  Even  under  the  most  favourable  cir-
cumstances, the  difficulty  is  by  no  means  easily  surmount-
able ;  and,  when  we  consider  that  injuries  of  the  head  are
by  far  more  frequent  in  hospital  than  in  private  practice ;
and  that,  in  the  former,  the  surgeon  has  seldom  seen  the
patient  before,  it  will  be  obvious,  that,  even  supposing  the
testimony  as  to  the  actual  state  of  the  faculties  to  be  as
specific  and  precise  as  it  is  general  and  vague,  still,  in  a
great  majority  of  instances,  the  surgeon  is  unfavourably  si-
tuated for  speaking  of  the  comparative  force  of  any  of  them,
seeing  that  this  does  not  form  the  direct  or  usual  object  of
his  inquiries,  and  that,  although  it  did,  he  must  necessarily
be  ignorant  of  the  degree  in  which  they  were  manifested
before  the  injury  was  sustained.


646  OBJECTIONS.

Having  now  shewn  that  the  observers  quoted  by  the  op-
ponents were  evidently  neither  acquainted  with  the  num-
ber and  functions  of  the  mental  faculties,  nor  in  possession
of  any  means  of  judging  of  the  actual  existence,  or  compa-
rative diminution  of  any  individual  faculty,  in  cases  of  dis-
ease or  wounds  of  the  cerebral  mass,  I  proceed  to  point  out
an  anatomical  requisite,  which,  although  as  essential  as  the
other  two,  seems  not  to  have  been  possessed  in  any  percep-
tible degree  by  any  of  those  to  whom  the  cases  occurred,
or  by  whom  they  are  quoted.  I  allude  to  knowledge  of
the  situation,  form,  and  direction  of  fibre  of  the  several  or-
gans of  which  the  phrenologists  state  the  brain  to  be  a  con-
geries. Without  this  knowledge,  any  observations  must  ma-
nifestly be  imperfect : — how,  for  instance,  is  a  man  to  ascer-
tain that  the  organ  of  Cautiousness  has  been  wounded  or
destroyed,  if  he  knows  neither  its  local  situation,  nor  the
direction  in  which  its  constituent  fibres  run?  And  yet
this  is  precisely  the  state  of  mind  of  those  upon  whose  au-
thority the  objection  we  are  now  refuting  is  so  strenuously
urged : — nine-tenths  of  the  cases  occurred  long  before  the
organs  were  discovered,  and  the  remaining  tenth  were,  I
believe,  observed  in  ignorance  of  the  discovery,  so  that  all
come  under  one  class.  If  any  one,  indeed,  could  prove
that  he  has  found  both  the  organs  of  Cautiousness  destroyed,
while  the  corresponding  feeling  was  manifested  as  powerful-
ly as  before,  then  he  would  prove  the  operation  of  that  senti-
ment to  have  been  erroneously  ascribed  to  that  particular
part  of  the  brain.  But  unless  he  knows  accurately  the  si-
tuation of  that  organ  towards  the  surface,  and  the  direction
of  its  fibres  towards  the  interior,  whether  they  are  horizon-
tal, vertical,  or  oblique,  and  unless  he  ascertains  the  condi-
tion of  the  organs  of  both  sides,  How  can  he  venture  to  af-
firm that  they  were  destroyed  either  in  whole  or  in  part  ?
We  are  told,  it  is  true,  by  Mr  Rennel,  and  other  oppo-
nents, that  every  individual  part  specified  by  Gall  and
Spurzheim  has  in  its  turn  been  destroyed,  without  injury
o  the  faculty  of  which  they  call  it  the  organ.     But  if  we


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN,  647

examine  the  foundations  upon  which  such  assertions  rest,
die  same  want  of  precision,  the  same  inconclusive  vague-
ness, will  be  found  to  prevail,  as  in  the  evidence  of  the  state
of  the  mind.  Not  a  single  case  in  point  can  be  produced ;
and  it  is  evident  that  Mr  Rennel,  as  well  as  the  other  op-
ponents, supposes  the  organs  to  be  confined  to  the  surface
of  the  brain,  instead  of  extending  to  its  very  base,  to  the
medulla  oblongata.  They  also,  by  what  rules  of  logic  I
know  not,  appear  to  think  injury  of  one  organ  sufficient  to
destroy  the  function  of  both,  although  they  may  see  the  re-
verse exemplified  in  individuals  who  hear  or  see  well  with
one  ear  or  one  eye,  after  that  of  the  opposite  side  has  been


The  brain  has  been  considered  by  many  physiologists,  and
particularly  by  those  of  them  who  are  hostile  to  Phreno-
logy, to  be  a  single  organ,  every  part  of  which  concurs  in
executing  a  single  function,  viz.  that  of  manifesting  the
mind ;  but  so  far  from  supporting  their  own  conclusions,
the  eases  referred  to,  if  true,  are  directly  subversive  of
them,  and  leave  no  choice,  except  between  the  phrenologi-
cal doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  cerebral  organs,  and  the  no*
tion  that  the  brain,  the  most  delicate,  the  best  protected,
and  apparently  the  most  important  organ  of  the  body,  is,  after
all,  a  mere  useless  incumbrance,  or  at  most,  a  mere  mass
fitted  into  a  case,  and  placed  at  the  top  of  the  neck,  more
for  the  sake  of  ornament,  or  of  preserving  equilibrium,
than  for  any  more  rational  purpose ;  a  conclusion  which,
however  logically  deducible  from  their  own  premises,  they
would,  I  am  satisfied,  be  fully  more  averse  to  admit  than
the  truth  of  Phrenology  itself.  The  phrenological  doctrine
is,  indeed,  the  only  one  by  which  these  facts,  so  far  as  they
are  true,  are  at  all  explicable;  for  the  moment  we  can
prove,  not  only  that  the  brain  consists  of  two  halves  or  he-
mispheres, but  that  each  half  is  a  congeries  of  parts  per-
forming distinct  functions,  all  difficulty  disappears,  and  the
phenomena  become  consistent  with  the  ordinary  laws  of  na-
ture. We  then  see  how  one  side  or  one  part  may  be  wound-


648  OBJECTIONS.

ed  or  diseased,  without  involving  the  functions  of  the  oppo-
site side,  or  of  the  other  parts,  just  as  one  eye  may  be  put  out
without  destroying  the  function  of  the  other,  and  the  or-
gan of  one  sense,  sight  for  example,  be  injured  or  destroy-
ed, while  the  organs  of  all  the  others  remain  sound.

Upon  the  same  principle,  it  will  be  evident,  that,  before
we  can  expect  complete  loss  of  any  one  faculty,  the  entire
organ  of  both  sides  must  be  destroyed, — a  fact  which  has
been  altogether  overlooked  by  the  objectors.  For  it  will
be  seen  upon  an  attentive  examination  of  the  cases  quoted,
that  not  a  single  instance  is  recorded  in  which  this  destruc-
tion of  both  organs  has  occurred,  while  the  alleged  manifesta-
tions existed.  In  almost  all  the  cases,  the  injury  or  disease
is  expressly  said  to  be  on  one  side  only ;  and  where  it  is
on  both,  the  parts  affected  implicate  different  organs.  But
this  will  be  better  understood  by  an  abstract  of  the  cases
themselves,  as  they  are  recorded  in  the  Manchester  Me-
moirs and  in  the  Edinburgh  Review.  In  perusing  them,
I  beg  the  reader's  attention  to  the  vagueness  of  the  infor-
mation which  they  offer  in  regard  to  the  integrity  of  the
mental  faculties,  and  also  to  the  extent  and  nature  of  the
cerebral  injuries.

Mr  Earle  relates  the  case  of  a  man  whose  sensibility  re-
mained unaffected  till  within  a  few  hours  of  his  death,  al-
though an  abscess  occupied  nearly  one-third  of  the  right
hemisphere.  Mr  Abernethy  saw  a  gentleman  who  lived
for  two  years  in  the  full  possession  of  every  faculty,  not-
withstanding a  cavity  two  inches  broad  by  one  long  in  the
right  hemisphere.  Another  was  perfectly  sensible  with  an
abscess  in  the  left  hemisphere.  Sir  John  Pringle*  found
an  abscess  in  the  right  hemisphere,  as  large  as  an  egg,  in  a
patient  "  who  had  never  been  delirious,  nor  altogether  insen-
sible ;"  and  in  another,  "  who  had  never  been  so  insensible
as  not  to  answer  reasonably  when  spoken  to"  he  found  an
abscess  in  the  cerebellum  as  large  as  a  pigeon's  egg.  Dr
Ferriar  says  that  Dr  Hunter  found  the  whole  of  the  right

•  Diseases  of  the  Arm  j,  p.  259.


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  649

hemisphere  destroyed  by  suppuration,  in  a  man  who  re-
tained his  faculties  to  the  last.  One  of  Wepfer's  patients
manifested  no  loss  of  sensibility,  although  a  cyst  was  found
in  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain  as  large  as  a  hen's  egg.
Diemerbroek  saw  a  young  man  who  received  a  thrust
from  a  sword,  which  entered  at  the  eye,  and  passed  up-
wards through  the  right  ventricle,  as  far  as  the  sagittal
suture.  During  ten  days  he  "  remained  quite  well,"  with
no  loss  of  sensibility,  of  voluntary  motion,  or  of  judgment*
"  cum  sociis  convenienter,  et  bono  cum  judicio,  quacunqu*
de  re  disserens ;"  after  which  he  was  cut  off  by  a  fever.
Petit*  saw  a  soldier,  shot  through  the  left  lobe  of  the
cerebellum  and  left  posterior  lobe  of  the  brain,  live  forty-
three  hours,  whose  faculties  were  perfect  to  the  last.  An-
other man,  mentioned  by  Quesnai  as  seen  by  Bagieu,  re-
ceived a  musket-shot  from  below  upwards  through  the
right  anterior  lobe,  who  had  no  bad  symptom  till  the  twelfth
day,  and  ultimately  recovered.  Next  are  mentioned  three
cases ;  in  the  first  of  which  a  ball,  in  the  second  the  end  of
a  stiletto,  in  the  third  a  part  of  a  knife,  remained  in  the
brain  without  inconvenience  for  some  years.  Genga  tells
us  of  a  man  who,  from  a  blow  on  the  left  parietal  and  occi-
pital bones,  lost  a  portion  of  brain  as  large  as  a  pigeon's
egg,  and  yet  recovered.  Petit  saw  a  man  with  a  corpus
striatum  converted  into  a  matter  like  dregs  of  wine,  with
no  loss  of  sensibility,  although  one  side  was  paralyzed.  Val-
salva saw  an  old  man  who  was  not  insensible,  with  an  ab-
scess of  the  right  thalamus  opticus  extending  to  the  surface
of  the  brain.  Then  come  some  cases  of  diseased  pineal
gland  and  cerebellum,  without  loss  of  sensibility.  The
Reviewer  then  speaks  of  a  lady  who  complained  for  a  fort-
night  of  an  affection  of  the  head,  became  comatose,  and
died.  "  The  day  before  her  death  she  was  capable  of  being
roused  from  her  stupor,  and  was  then  in  full  possession  of
all  her  senses."  The  left  hemisphere  of  the  cerebellum  was
converted  into  pus.     Then  follows  a  case  from  La  Pey-

•  Mcraoires  de  l'Acad.  1748.


650  OBJECTIONS.

ronie,  nearly  similar,  without  loss  qf  sensibility.  Drelin-
curtiu8  *  saw  a  steatomatous  tumour  as  large  as  the  fist
between  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  produce  first  blind-
ness, then  deafness,  and  at  last  the  abolition  "  omnium  sen-
suum  et  functionum  animalium,  et  necem  ipeam."  Dr
Tyson  f  mentions  a  case  where  the  left  hemisphere  of  the
cerebellum  was  found  sphacelated,  and  the  testis  of  that
side  enlarged  and  stony.  The  patient  had  been  ill  two
months,  and  for  the  most  part  rational.  In  the  Memoires
de  l'Acad.  Royale,  1703,  Duverney  relates  a  case  of  ex-
tensive injury,  without  loss  of  sensibility.  The  Chevalier
CoLbert  received  a  blow  from  a  stone  upon  the  temple,
which  drove  in  the  bones  forming  the  back  part  of  the
orbit,  as  well  as  the  sella  turcica.  The  inferior  portion  of
the  middle  lobe  of  the  brain,  as  for  as  the  cerebellum,  was
found  broken  down,  and  partly  in  a  suppurating  state.  He
lived  seven  days,  "  retained  his  judgment  perfectly,  con-
tinued to  perform  all  his  functions,  and  exhibited  a  sur-
prising tranquillity  of  mind  till  his  death."  Ferriar  at-
taches little  importance  to  this  case,  as  confused.  One  of
the  most  remarkable  cases,  is  that  quoted  by  the  Reviewer
from  Planque,  and  by  Dr  Ferriar  from  La  Peyronie,
as  having  occurred  to  Billot  J.  A  boy  of  six  years  re-
ceived a  pistol-shot  in  the  middle  of  the  brow,  which  pas-
sed through  to  the  occiput.  He  survived  eighteen  ^days,
and  lost  a  portion  of  brain  as  large  as  a  nutmeg  daily,  and
yet  remained  quite  well  until  within  a  few  hours  of  his  death.
The  portion  of  brain,  found  remaining  in  the  skull,  did  not
exceed  the  size  of  a  small  egg.

The  Reviewer  then  quotes  three  cases  of  hydrocephalus
internus,  or  water  in  the  head,  which  convince  him  that
sensibility  may  remain  after  the  whole  brain  has  been  de-
stroyed.

Many  of  the  Reviewer's  cases  are  taken  from  Dr  Fer-
riar's  paper  in  the  Manchester  Memoirs.     I  shall,  there-

*  Addend,  ad  Wepfer,  Hist.  Apop.  Obs.  83.    f  Phil.  Trans.  No.  228.
$  M6m.  de  l'Acad.  1741.


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  651

fore,  select  the  most  interesting  of  those  which  he  has
omitted.  Diemerbroek  *  quotes  a  case  from  Lindanus,
of  a  patient  receiving  a  wound  in  one  of  the  lateral  ven-
tricles, who  went  about  as  usual  for  fourteen  days,  and  then
died.  His  surgeon  thrust  a  probe  into  the  ventricle  every
day,  without  exciting  any  sensation.  He  says  f  he  saw  a
woman  who  lost  a  portion  of  brain  as  large  as  the  fist,  from
a  fracture  of  the  right  side.  She  lived  thirty-six  days  with*
out  alienation  of  the  mind,  although  paralytic  on  the  oppo-
site side.  In  the  appendix  to  Wepfer's  Hist.  Apoplect,
Dr  Brunner  mentions  a  case  of  a  drunken  blacksmith,
aged  sixty-four,  who  died  of  apoplexy,  whose  faculties  were
rather  excited  than  impaired,  although  he  observed,  after
death,  "  piam  matrem  aqua  turgidissimam. — Ablata  dura
matre  serum  perpetim  exsudavit  et  effluxit  Iimpidum.  Uter-
que  ventriculus  aqua  scatebat  turbida,  quin  omnes  recessus
et  cerebri  cavitates  hac  inundate  et  repletee  fuerunt  Cere*
bellum  minime  flaecidum,  sed  sicut  reliquce  cerebri  partes
firmum  apparuit,  &c.  He  was  rather  acute  in  his  intellect
towards  the  end.  La  Peyronie  mentions  a  case  of  a  man
who  had  been  troubled  with  hypochondriacal  symptoms  for
ten  years,  whose  faculties  were  never  affected,  although  the
fourth  ventricle  and  cerebellum  were  found  diseased.  A
girl  died  in  the  fourth  month  of  an  arthritic  complaint,
with  evident  symptoms  of  oppressed  brain,  but  in  perfect  pos-
session of  her  intellectual  powers,  although  the  brain  was
soft  and  water  effused.  Bonnet  saw  a  case,  where,  after
eleven  days'  illness,  and,  only  towards  the  end,  occasional
alienation  of  mind,  "  tota  fere  basis  cerebri,  imprimis  cere-
bellum, et  ea  pars  medullae  spinalis  quae  primis  vertebris  ex-
cipitur,  sphacelo  invente  sunt  correpte."

Dr  Ferri  ar  concludes,  by  quoting  from  Ambrose  Pare',
what  he  considers  a  most  extraordinary  case;  but  Parens
authority  being  very  great,  he  thinks  it  merits  confidence.
It  is  that  of  the  Due  de  Guise,  "  who  was  wounded  in  the
head  by  the  thrust  of  a  lance,  which  entered  under  the  right

•  Anat  lib.  iii.  p.  637.  f  Page  560-1.


653  OBJECTIONS.

eye*  near  the  nose,  and  came  out  at  the  neck,  between  the
ear  and  the  vertebrae.  The  steel  remained  in  the  brain,  was
extracted  with  great  difficulty,  and  the  patient  recovered."
Such  are  the  principal  cases.

The  farther  removed  an  account  is  from  what  we  are  ac-
customed to  observe  in  ordinary  circumstances,  the  stronger
is  the  evidence  required,  before  we  can  believe  it,  and  in-
versely. So,  in  the  present  instance,  when  we  find  almost
all  the  cases  mentioned,  consisting  of  very  partial  injury  of
one  side  only  of  the  brain,  with  no  striking  disturbance  of
intellect,  we  are  not  disposed  to  be  scrupulous  in  admitting
them  to  be  true.  We  see  such  things  occur  in  our  own
day,  and  they  are,  in  themselves,  sufficiently  probable;
seeing  that  the  organs  are  double,  and  that  one  may  be
affected  without  the  other  participating  in  the  injury;
and  that  the  organs  of  the  intellectual  faculties  constitute
so  small  a  portion  of  the  brain,  as  to  leave  nearly  two-
thirds  of  the  whole  mass  to  be  destroyed  on  both  sides,  with-
out necessarily  interfering  with  tbe  intellect  But  when
we  come  to  6uch  cases  as  that  of  the  boy,  who  is  said  to
have  lost  all  his  brain  excepting  "  about  the  bulk  of  an  egg"
and  yet  "  remained  quite  welF'  till  within  a  few  hours  of  his
death,  we  are  compelled  to  pause,  and  ask  for  stronger  evi-
dence than  that  afforded  by  a  quotation  at  third  hand  of  a
single  case.  Neither  the  Reviewer  nor  Dr  Ferriar  ap-
pear to  have  seen  Billot's  own  account  of  it,  since  each
has  quoted  from  a  different  source ;  and  not  having  been
able  to  procure  the  original  work,  I  know  not  whether  it  is
correctly  quoted  by  either.  But  if  one  such  case  could  be
made  out  by  incontestible  evidence,  it  would  not  only  lay
prostrate  the  whole  fabric  of  .Phrenology,  but  it  would
save  us  a  great  deal  of  time  and  useless  labour  at  present
spent  in  trying  to  find  out  the  functions  of  a  part,  which,
according  to  this  account,  could  not  possibly  have  any;
and,  therefore,  when  we  see  the  whole  body  of  physiologists
persevering  in  their  endeavours  to  discover  the  uses  of  the
brain,  with  as  much  zeal  and  earnestness  as  if  no  such  case


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  653

had  ever  been  heard  of,  the  only  conclusion  which  we  can
legitimately  draw  is,  that  they,  hostile  as  most  of  them  are
to  Phrenology,  have  just  as  little  faith  in  the  accuracy  of
the  details  as  the  phrenologists  themselves;  and  if  they
disregard  the  story  as  unworthy  of  credit,  we  have  surely,
at  least,  an  equal  right  to  pursue  a  similar  course,  and  to
withhold  our  belief.  In  like  manner,  when  we  are  told,
as  in  the  three  cases  alluded  to  by  the  Reviewer,  of  the
faculties  remaining  entire  after  the  complete  destruction
of  the  brain  by  water,  we  are  entitled  to  require  evidence
of  no  ordinary  force  before  giving  credit  to  their  truth,
more  especially  since  the  late  discoveries  by  Gall  and
Spurzheim  of  the  structure  of  the  brain,  shew  the  fallacy
of  the  appearances  commented  upon  as  indicating  the  ab-
sence of  that  organ.

Out  of  the  twenty-nine  cases  here  quoted  from  different
authors,  eighteen  expressly  refer  to  injury  of  one  side  only.
These  require  no  remarks ;  for,  granting  that  none  of  the
faculties  were  lost,  there  still  remained  the  sound  organs
of  the  opposite  side  to  execute  the  functions.  Five  more
expressly  refer  to  injury  or  disease  of  the  cerebellum  and
fourth  ventricle^  parts  which  have  no  immediate  connexion
with  the  exercise  of  the  intellectual  faculties,  which  alone
are  mentioned.  In  two,  the  side  is  not  mentioned.  In
three  more,  the  whole  brain  was  extant,  but  altered  in  ap-
pearance; and,  lastly,  comes  the  case  par  excellence,  in
which  the  brain  had  almost  disappeared,  and  which,  if  ad-
mitted, would  undoubtedly  bury  Phrenology  and  its  oppo-
nents in  one  common  ruin.  Some  of  these  demand  a  few
observations.

In  Dr  Brunner's  case  of  the  drunken  blacksmith,  who
died  apoplectic,  the  whole  of  the  brain  was  still  extant  at
his  death ;  but  a  quantity  of  water  was  found  effused  upon
it ;  notwithstanding  which,  he  not  only  retained  his  fa-
culties, but  was  even  more  acute.  "  Cerebellum  minime
flaccidum,  sed  sicut  reliquee  cerebri  partes  firmum  appa-
rait"     This  is  the  consequence  of  a  certain  degree  of  in-


654  OBJECTIONS.

flammation,  which,  in  the  case  of  the  brain,  as  well  as  in
that  of  other  organs,  often  exalts  instead  of  diminishing  the
function.  Hence  it  proves  nothing  against  us.  The  effu-
sion appears  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the  apoplexy  and  of
death.

In  the  hypochondriacal  patient,  already  referred  to,  even
supposing  all  the  faculties  to  have  been  unimpaired,  the  vi-
sible seat  of  the  disease  was  confined  to  the  cerebellum  and
fourth  ventricle,  and  did  not  extend  to  the  organs  of  the  w-
tellectual  powers.  In  Bonnet's  case  of  eleven  days'  illness,
with  occasional  alienation  towards  the  end,  where  the  cere-
bellum, part  of  the  base  of  the  brain,  and  a  portion  of  the
medulla  spinalis,  were  mortified,  "  sphacelo  inventse  sunt
correptae,"  the  part  of  the  base  of  the  brain  is  not  mention-
ed; and,  therefore,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  in  favour  of
any  of  the  organs  of  the  intellectual  faculties  having  been
even  partially  destroyed  ;  and,  besides,  there  is  every  rea-
son to  believe  the  sphacelus  not  to  have  existed  for  any
length  of  time,  but  to  have  been  the  immediate  forerun-
ner of  death.

Lastly,  Although  what  Dr  Ferriar  calls  the  very  ex-
traordinary case  of  the  Due  de  Guise,  be  concluded  in  the
eighteen  cases  of  injury  of  one  side  only,  it  is  deserving  of
particular  attention.  The  lance  entered  under  the  right
eye,  near  the  nose,  and  came  out  at  the  neck  between  the
ear  and  vertebrae.  The  steel,  it  is  said,  remained  in  the
brainy  was  extracted  with  difficulty,  and  recovery  followed.
The  state  of  the  faculties  is  not  even  mentioned.  In  this
ease,  he  says,  the  base  of  the  brain  must  have  been  exten-
sively injured.  I  humbly  apprehend,  however,  that  the
brain  was  not,  and  could  not  be  touched.  Let  any  one  exa-
mine on  the  living,  or  on  the  dead  subject,  the  direction  of
such  a  wound,  and  he  will  instantly  agree  with  me  in  opi-
nion, and  will  then  be  at  no  loss  to  account  for  the  difficul-
ty of  extracting  the  steel.  Having  seen  it  stated  in  Boyer's
TraitS  des  Maladies  Chirurgicales,  that  the  spear  entered
above  the  eye,  I  procured  the  original  work  of  Ambrose

2


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  655

Pare',  and  found  that  Dr  Ferriar  was  right  in  saying  that
it  entered  under  the  eye.  But  Pare'  never  once  mentions
either  brain  or  faculty*  He  says,  "  The  head  of  the  lance
stuck  so  fast  as  to  require  a  pair  of  smith's  pincers  for  its
extraction.  Although  the  violence  of  the  blow  was  so
great,  that  it  could  not  be  without  fracture  of  the  bones,  a
tearing  and  breaking  of  the  nerves,  veins  and  arteries,  and
other  parts,  yet  the  generous  Prince,  by  the  favour  of  God,
recovered,"  p.  235,  lib.  x.  Although  the  state  of  the  facul-
ties is  not  mentioned  by  Dr  Ferriar,  I  remember  to  have
read  in  some  French  historical  author,  that  the  Duke  bore
the  extraction  with  great  fortitude,  and  retained  his  facul-
ties apparently  undiminished,  and  the  above  quotation  ac-
counts perfectly  for  the  fact ;  for  it  shews  that  the  brain
was  not  in  the  least  affected,  the  wound  being  altogether
below  it.  In  the  case  of  the  Chevalier  Colbert,  also,  Dr
Ferriar  says,  the  eye  was  crushed  to  pieces,  and  the  orbit
knocked  in ;  which  misapprehension  must  have  arisen  from
the  confused  account  given  by  the  original  author  Duver-
ney  ;  for,  in  point  of  feet,  the  stone  struck  the  temple,  and
not  the  front  of  the  eye.

Little  confidence  can,  at  any  time,  be  placed  in  the  his-
tory of  dissections,  made  only  to  discover  the  cause  of  death,
when  afterwards  applied  to  physiological  purposes.  The
surgeon,  who  has  been  in  the  habit  of  seeing  numerous  dis-
sections, and  particularly  in  hospital  practice,  made  with
this  object  alone  in  view,  knows  well  how  very  general  the
examination  of  the  diseased  parts  frequently  is,  even  when
seated  in  organs  whose  structure  and  functions  are  both
known ;  and  this  observation  naturally  applies  with  double
force  to  parts  so  little  known  as  those  contained  in  the  ca-
vity of  the  cranium.  The  Edinburgh  Reviewer  himself,  in
speaking  of  some  parts  (such  as  the  corpus  callosum,  for-
nix, &c.),  which  have  not  been  expressly  mentioned  as  de-
stroyed, says,  p.  446,  "  We  believe,  indeed,  that  several,  if
not  die  whole  of  them,  were  actually  destroyed  in  the  cases
we  have  quoted ;  but  that  they  were  omitted  in  the  detail


656  OBJECTIONS.

of  the  dissection,  either  from  a  fear  of  being  tedious,  or  be-
cause the  authors  did  not  conceive  minuteness  of  description
to  be  an  object  either  of  practical  or  physiological  importance.
As  it  is,  however,  instances  are  still  wanting,  in  which  the
parts  we  have  enumerated  are  expressly  stated  to  have  been
destroyed;  and  we  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the
physiologists  to  this  circumstance,"  &c.  The  phrenologists
in  like  manner,  beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  public
to  this  circumstance,  that  instances  are  still  wanting,  in
which  any  one  of  their  organs  is  expressly  stated  to  have
been  destroyed,  and  the  function  to  have  remained  unim-
paired.

To  such  an  extent,  indeed,  have  anatomical  structure  and
minuteness  of  detail  been  neglected  in  the  history  of  the  dis-
eases and  injuries  of  the  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  in  sojitr
as  they  are  connected  with  the  mind,  that  in  almost  every  in-
stance, the  palpable  fact  of  the  organs  being  double  has  been
overlooked :  and  not  only  has  no  attention  been  paid  to  the
situation  of  the  individual  organs,  in  examining  the  effects
of  their  injuries  in  relation  to  Phrenology,  but  it  never  has
once  been  taken  notice  of  by  the  opponents,  that,  while
they  confine  their  attention  to  the  state  of  the  intellectual
faculties  alone  in  all  cases  of  wounded  brain,  the  organs  of
these  faculties,  in  the  new  system,  constitute  not  more  than
one-third  of  the  whole  cerebral  mass,  and  that  the  other
two-thirds  constitute  the  organs  of  the  sentiments  and  pro-
pensities, which  are  never  inquired  into,  as  not  being  con-
ceived to  have  any  thing  to  do  with  the  brain.

As  it  appears,  then,  notwithstanding  the  affirmations  of
the  opponents,  to  be  quite  consistent  with  the  principles  of
Phrenology,  that  injuries  of  the  brain  may  occur,  without
necessarily  affecting  the  intellectual  faculties,  I  might,  per-
haps, here  safely  drop  the  subject.  Before  quitting  it,
however,  we  may  shortly  inquire  how  far  the  cases  refer-
red to  coincide,  or  are  compatible  with  the  doctrines  which
the  opponents  themselves  profess.  Many  of  them  teach,
for  example,  that  the  whole  brain  is  the  organ  of  mind,  and


INJtTRIES  OF  THE  BEAIN.  657

that  every  part  of  it  is  engaged  in  every  act  of  thought.
Now,  it  seems  to  me,  that  their  own  cases  are  fatal  to  any
such  theory ;  for  as  the  brain  is  subject  to  all  the  ordinary
laws  of  animal  organization,  were  any  part  of  that  general
organ  injured,  the  function,  even  according  to  their  own
account,  ought  always  to  be  impaired  in  proportion.  In-
stead of  which,  they  tell  us,  that  the  function  which  they
believe  it  to  execute,  does  not  suffer  with  almost  total  de-
struction of  the  organ !  No  other  part  of  the  human  body
is  known  to  retain  its  functions  unimpaired,  amidst  total  or
partial  change,  or  destruction  of  its  structure;  and,  there-
fore, had  they  not  been  blinded  by  preconceived  opinions,
they  must  have  perceived  that  the  very  circumstance  of  the
brain  being  partially  injured,  without  any  considerable  de-
rangement of  intellect,  was  sufficient  to  prove  that  every
part  of  that  organ  was  not  necessary  to  every  individual
act  of  mind,  and  that  the  brain  was  not  the  single  organ
they  believed  it  to  be.

Phrenology,  or  the  doctrine  of  a  plurality  of  organs  and
faculties,  alone  satisfactorily  explains  the  apparent  contra-
diction, by  shewing  that  the  state  of  one  organ,  or  part  of
the  brain,  does  not  necessarily  affect  the  condition  and
functions  of  the  others,  and  thus  the  phrenologist,  who  con-
siders particular  parts  of  the  brain  to  be  the  organs  of  dis-
tinct mental  faculties,  may  be  quite  consistent  in  believing,
that  one  of  these  organs,  and  the  faculty  with  which  it  is
connected,  may  be  wounded  and  impaired  without  neces-
sarily inducing  any  diminution  or  alteration  in  the  func-
tions of  the  others ;  and  as  he  thinks  it  proved,  that  two-
thirds  of  the  brain  constitute  the  organs  of  the  propensi-
ties and  sentiments,  he  may  still  be  quite  consistent  in  be-
lieving, that  large  portions  of  these  two-thirds,  even  on
both  sides,  may  be  injured  without  necessarily  disturbing,
in  any  high  degree,  the  intellectual  operations  carried  on  by
the  remaining  sound  third,  which  he  has  previously  ascer-
tained to  constitute  the  organs  of  the  intellectual  faculties.
But  the  opponent,  who  believes  in  the  unity  of  the  brain,

t  t


658  OBJECTIONS.

is  very  differently  circumstanced,  and  can  no  more  ac-
count for  the  intellect  continuing  unimpaired,  after  the  de-
struction of  any  part,  than  he  could  for  right  remaining
unaffected  hy  disease,  or  destruction  of  the  eye.  What,
then,  are  we  to  think  of  the  consistency  of  those  philoso-
phers, who,  like  Dr  Ferriar,  in  one  page  gravely  doubt
whether  the  brain  has  not  been  altogether  destroyed,  with-
out loss  of  mental  faculties ;  and  yet  in  another  declare
that  they  consider,  as  he  does,  "  these  medical  facts  as  al-
most demonstrating  that  the  brain  is  the  instrument, — not
the  cause,  of  the  reasoning  powers  ?"  We,  too,  consider
the  brain  as  the  instrument  of  the  mental  faculties ;  but  we
are  not  so  inconsistent  as  to  suppose,  that  it  is  a  matter  of
indifference  to  the  manifestations  of  these  faculties,  whether
that  instrument  be  a  whole  or  a  broken  one,  or  have  even
altogether  ceased  to  exist.  We  farther  consider  that  Phre-
nology, so  far  from  having  any  thing  to  fear  from  these
"  medical  facts,"  derives  additional  confirmation  from
them,  since  it  is  upon  phrenological  principles  alone  that
they  are  either  explicable  or  consistent  with  any  of  the
known  laws  of  nature.  It  is  in  such  circumstances  that
the  new  science  rises  so  far  superior  to  any  theory  of  the
mind  hitherto  invented ;  and  it  can  only  be  from  its  being
founded  on  the  solid  basis  of  truth,  that  it  is  ever  so  beat*-
tifully  and  simply  consistent  with  the  observed  phenomena
of  mind,  alike  in  a  state  of  health  and  of  disease.

I  proceed,  before  concluding  the  subject,  (being  in  some
measure  connected  with  the  present  essay),  to  make  a  few
observations  on  a  mode  of  investigating  the  functions  of
the  individual  parts  of  the  brain,  proposed  by  that  excel-
lent surgeon  Sir  E.  Home  #,  and  differing  widely  from  that
in  use  among  the  phrenologists.  "  The  varioufe  attempts,"
says  he,  "  which  have  been  made  to  procure  accurate  in*
formation  respecting  the  functions  ihfet  belong  to  indivi-
dual portions  of  the'  human  brain,  having  been  attended
with  very  little  success,  it  has  occurred  to  me,  that  were

•  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1814,  p.  469.


INJURIES  OP  THE  BEAIN.  659

anatomical  surgeons  to  collect,  in  one  view,  all  the  appear-
ances they  had  met  with,  in  cases  of  injury  of  that  organ,
and  of  the  effects  that  such  injuries  produced  upon  its
functions,  a  body  of  evidence  might  be  formed,  that  would
materially  advance  this  highly  important  investigation."

As  this  mode  of  inquiry  is  still  looked  upon  by  many  as
the  most  promising  and  philosophical  that  has  yet  been
tried,  and  as  such  is  recommended  by  the  Edinburgh  Re-
view, it  may  be  worth  while  to  see  what  it  is  really  able  to
effect.  To  me  it  appears  to  be  totally  inadequate  to  the
purposes  of  original  discovery,  although  it  may  be  usefully
employed  to  procure  additional  information,  after  the  func-
tions of  the  different  parts  of  the  brain  have  been  ascertain-
ed by  other  means.

The  defects  of  this  mode  of  investigation,  are,  1st,  That
so  long  as  we  remain  unacquainted  with  the  situation  and
limits  of  the  different  cerebral  organs,  it  is  impossible  for
us  to  pronounce,  whether,  in  any  given  case,  one  only,  or
several,  are  implicated;  and  also,  whether  the  destruction
of  any  organ  is  partial  or  complete.

2c%,  That  so  long  as  we  remain  ignorant  of  the  number
and  functions  of  the  mental  faculties,  and  of  the  effects  of
their  various  combinations  with  each  other,  we  are  neces-
sarily unable  to  decide  in  any  case,  what  particular  faculty
or  quality  of  mind  has  been  impaired  or  destroyed.  Some
faculties,  for  instance,  require  the  presence  of  such  exter-
nal objects  for  their  operation,  as  are  not  to  be  found  in  the
chambers  of  the  flick,  or  in  the  wards  of  an  hospital ;  and,
therefore,  it  is  possible  that  the  power  may  be  altogether
destroyed,  and  yet  its  absence  may  not  even  be  suspected
by  the  surgeon  or  his  attendants,  who  never  were  aware  of
its  existence  as  an  independent  faculty,  even  when  the  brain
was  entire.

Sdfy,  That  the  complex  and  delicate  structure  of  the
brain  makes  it  exceedingly  difficult,  if  not.  impossible,  to
injure  or  destroy  one  part  without  the  neighbouring  parts,
and  the  functions  which  they  perform,  participating  in  a

Tt  2


660  OBJECTIONS.

greater  or  leas  degree.  Thus,  Professor  Rolando  of  Tu-
rin, who  has  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  the  study  of  the
anatomy  and  functions  of  the  brain,  in  speaking  of  mutila-
tions, which  he  had  performed  with  a  view  to  discover  the
functions  of  a  particular  part  of  that  organ  in  the  lower
animals,  complains  of  this  as  an  almost  unsurmountable
obstacle.  "  I  have  made,"  says  he,  "  innumerable  experi-
ments to  discover  the  results  of  injuries  done  to  the  bige-
minal tubercles,  and  the  parts  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
optic  thalami,  but  I  have  tardy  obtained  consistent  results  ;
which  is  not  surprising,  if  we  consider  the  peculiar  inter-
lacing of  the  numerous  medullary  fibres  which  meet  in
these  parts ;  for,  as  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  know  what
bundles  of  fibres  have  been  affected  in  these  operations,  we
cannot  draw  clear  and  precise  conclusions  where  there  is
a  difference  in  the  result/'  If  this  holds  true  with  regard
to  mutilations  performed  with  every  precaution  to  avoid
wounding  other  parts,  and  under  every  advantage  which  an
acquaintance  with  anatomy  can  afford,  it  certainly  applies
with  tenfold  force  to  injuries,  the  results  of  accidental  and
unguided  violence.

Lastly,  That,  from  the  mere  aspect  of  the  wound,  we  are
never  certain  of  the  precise  extent  of  the  injury  done  to  the
brain;  and,  consequently,  can  never  positively  refer  the
phenomena  to  an  affection  of  any  particular  part,  and  of  it
alone.  One  injury,  for  instance,  apparently  of  the  very
slightest  nature,  often  produces  the  most  serious  constitu-
tional symptoms,  and  disturbance  of  ,the  whole  mind;
while  another,  to  appearance  much  more  severe,  is  produc-
tive of  little  inconvenience.  In  the  former,  the  effects  of
the  violence  seem  to  extend  either  immediately  or  from
sympathy  over  the  whole  brain,  or  at  least,  much  farther
than  its  external  or  visible  seat,  while,  in  the  latter,  the  af-
fection is  more  strictly  of  a  local  nature ;  and  thus  the  re-
sults obtained  in  one  case  are  often  entirely  negatived  by
those  obtained  in  another.
,    In  accordance  with,  and  in  corroboration  of  the  opinion


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  661

which  I  have  here  ventured  to  express,  as  to  the  total  ina-
dequacy of  this  mode  of  investigation  for  the  purposes  of
original  discovery,  I  would  ask  no  better  authority  than  Sir
E.  Home  himself.    For  although,  for  the  sake  of  greater
accuracy,  he  confines  himself  to  cases  which  have  come  un-
der his  own  immediate  notice,  and,  although  these  must
have  been  observed  with  a  view  specially  to  this  inquiry ;
yet,  his  own  essay  on  this  subject  affords  the  most  con-
vincing proof  and  apposite  illustration  of  all  the  defects  of
the  mode  which  it  is  written  to  recommend.     The  first
things,  for  example,  that  strike  the  reader  on  referring  to
it,  are,  1st,  That  out  of  the  ten  classes,  into  which  the  cases
are  purposely  divided  by  Sir  Everard,  no  less  than  seven,
(1.  Undue  pressure  of  water  on  the  brain,  2.  Concussion  of
the  brain,  3.  Preternaturally  dilated  or  diseased  bloodves-
sels of  the  brain,  4.  Extravasated  blood,  5.  Formation  of
pus,  6.  Depression  or  thickening  of  parts  of  the  skull,
7.  Pressure  from  tumours),  resolve  themselves  into  affec-
tions, in  which  the  totality  of  the  brain  is,  in  some  way  or
another,  concerned ;  2d,  That,  in  one,  (viz.  8.  Injury  of
the  medulla  spinalis),  the  entire  brain  is  unaffected;  and,
Sdly,  That  in  two  only,  (9.  Injury  to  the  substance  of  the
brain;  and,  10.  Alteration  of  structure),  is  the  affection
generally  confined  to  individual  portions  of  that  organ ;  al-
though in  very  many  instances,  even  in  these  two  classes,
it  extends  over  the  whole  brain.     From  his  own  statement,
then,  the  reader  would  naturally  anticipate  a  priori,  that
the  effects  resulting  from  most  of  these  injuries  would  be
such  as  are  known  to  indicate  derangement,  not  of  one,  or
of  several,  but  of  all  the  parts  of  the  brain ;  and,  conse-
quently, that  they  could  not,  by  any  possibility,  lead  to  the
discovery  wished  for,  of  the  functions  of  its  individual  por-
tions.   Accordingly,  Sir  Everard  himself  informs  us,  that
the  effects  produced  are,  delirium,  convulsions,  coma,  apo-
plexy, sickness,  watching,  and  the  like,  and  not  lesion  of  any
particular  faculty,  or  of  any  individual  function.     In  one
or  two  instances,  indeed,  the  state  of  the  memory  and  of


662  OBJECTIONS.

the  external  senses  is  mentioned,  but  without  being  con-
nected in  any  way  with  specific  injury.  The  reviewer
himself,  with  every  wish  to  be  pleased  with  Sir  Everard's
method,  is  constrained  to  say,  that  the  results  obtained  in
this  manner  are  so  vague  and  contradictory,  that  they
"  serve  only  to  confirm  what  had  already  perhaps  been  suf-
ficiently made  out  by  the  authors  we  have  named ;  to-wit,
that  there  is  no  sort  of  uniformity  either  in  the  kind  or  de-
gree of  the  symptoms  which  accompany  diseases  of  the
brain."  And  in  this  sentiment  I  cordially  concur  with
him,  in  so  far  as  regards  violent  injuries*

To  render  the  results  obtained,  either  from  observing  the
effects  of  cerebral  injuries  in  man,  or  from  the  performance
of  mutilations  upon  the  brains  of  animals,  at  all  valuable  in
illustrating  the  cerebral  physiology,  a  previous  knowledge
of  the  seats  of  the  organs,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  faculties
which  they  subserve,  has  been  already  shewn  to  be  an  in-
dispensable requisite ;  and  if  we  suppose  these  to  have  been
accurately  ascertained  by  other  means,  then  the  facility  of
making  interesting  and  precise  physiological  and  pathologi-
cal observations  is  so  greatly  increased,  that  much  valuable
information  may  be  obtained ;  especially  in  some  individual
cases,  in  the  two  last  mentioned  classes  of  Sir  K  Home*
But  without  this  preliminary  knowledge  to  guide  us  in  our
observations,  it  is  obvious  that  nothing  precise  or  practi-
cable can  be  got  at.

If  an  injury  of  the  cerebellum,  for  example,  or  of  part  of
the  posterior  lobes  of  the  brain,  occurs  to  a  philosopher,
who  is  firmly  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  "  that  the  whole
brain  is  engaged  in  every  act  of  thought,"  and  that  no  part
of  it  is  appropriated  to  the  manifestations  of  any  of  the
propensities  or  sentiments,  what  inference  can  he  draw  as
to  the  function,  upon  finding  no  intellectual  faculty  with
which  he  is  acquainted  impaired  or  wanting?  He  cannot
consistently  investigate  the  state  of  the  propensities,  and  re-
fer any  irregularities  among  them  to  the  injury  sustained,
because  these  are  not  intellectual  faculties,  and,  according


INJURIES  OF  THE  BRAIN.  663

to  him,  have  no  connexion  with  the  brain.  He  remains  of
necessity  as  much  in  the  dark  as  ever.  But  let  such  a  case
occur  to  the  phrenologist,  or  to  him  who  has  ascertained,
by  previous  observation,  the  uses  of  the  part,  it  is  evident,
that,  although  he  could  not,  any  more  than  the  philosopher,
infer  the.  function  from  a  consideration  of  the  symptoms
alone ;  yet,  having  discovered  it  by  other  means,  he  comes
to  the  inquiry  fully  competent  to  judge  whether  his  former
observations  are  confirmed  or  refuted  by  the  phenomena
now  before  him.  It  is  only  when  in  possession  of  this  pre-
vious qualification  that  we  can  derive  any  advantage  from
such,  cases  in  increasing  our  knowledge  of  mind.

That  the  philosopher,  with  such  views,  could  never  have
been  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  connexion  between  certain
parts  of  the  brain  and  the  propensities  and  sentiments,  by
the  mere  observation  of  their  injuries,  is  proved  by  wounds
of  these  parts  having  been  actually  attended  with  symp-
toms corresponding  to  their  phrenological  functions,  and
neither  he  nor  the  anatomical  surgeon  having  drawn  any
such  inference.  Wounds  and  diseases  of  the  cerebellum,
for  instance,  have  forced  themselves  upon  their  notice,
where  the  sexual  propensity  was  extinguished  by  loss  of
substance,  or  preternaturally  excited  by  the  subsequent  in-
flammatory action ;  and  yet  no  one  drew  the  inference  that
the  cerebellum  was  the  organ  of  Amativeness  *.  The  tem-
per and  moral  sentiments  have  also  been  entirely  changed,
in  consequence  of  certain  injuries  of  the  brain,  while  the
intellect  remained  unimpaired ;  and  no  one  drew  the  con-
clusion that  the  parts  affected  were  the  organs  of  these  sen-
timents. Nor  would  they  have  been  warranted  in  doing
so,  because  instances  of  injury  confined  so  entirely  to  one
part  as  to  affect  its  function,  without  having  any  influence
upon  those  of  the  neighbouring  parts,  are  so  rare,  in  com-
parison to  those  of  an  opposite  kind,  that  no  just  inferences
can  be  drawn  from  them  alone ;  although,  combined  with
other  evidence,  they  are  highly  important.

•  Wepfervs'  Historic?  Apoplecticorum,  edit  1724,  p.  487.    Magkk-


(     664     )

CONCLUSION

(  To  the  Second  Edition.)

In  the  Introduction  to  this  work,  it  is  observed,  that,
"  in  surveying  the  philosophy  of  man,  as  at  present  exhi-
bited to  us  in  the  writings  of  philosophers,  we  perceive,
firsts  That  no  account  is  given  of  the  influence  of  the  ma-
terial organs  on  the  manifestations  of  the  mental  powers;
that  the  progress  of  the  mind  from 'youth  to  age,  and  the
phenomena  of  sleep,  dreaming,  idiocy,  and  insanity,  are
left  unexplained  or  unaccounted  for;  secondly,  That  die  exist-
ence and  functions  of  some  of  the  most  important  primitive
faculties  are  still  in  dispute ;  and,  thirdly,  That  no  light  what-
ever has  been  thrown  on  the  nature  and  effects  of  combina-
tions of  the  primitive  powers  in  different  degrees  of  relative
proportion.  It  is  with  great  truth,  therefore,  that  Monsieur
De  Bonald,  quoted  by  Mr  Stewart,  observes,  thai,  "  di-
versity of  doctrine  has  increased  from  age  to  age,  with  the
number  of  masters,  and  with  the  progress  of  knowledge ;
and  Europe,  which  at  present  possesses  libraries  filled  with
philosophical  works,  and  which  reckons  up  almost  as  many
philosophers  as  writers;  poor  in  the  midst  of  so  much
riches,  and  uncertain,  with  the  aid  of  all  its  guides,  which
road  it  should  follow ;  Europe,  the  centre  and  focus  of  all
the  lights  of  the  world,  has  yet  its  philosophy  only  in  ex-
pectation."

May  I  hope  that  Phrenology  will  now  appear  to  the  at-
tentive reader  calculated  to  supply  the  deficiency  here
pointed  out,  and  to  furnish  Europe,  at  last,  with  the  Phi-
losophy so  long  in  expectation  ?

Hitherto  the  writings  of  Dr  Gall  have  been  little  known
to'the  British  public,  except  through  the  medium  of  hostile

dik's  Journal  de  Physiologie  for  April  and  August  1822;  also  Medical
Repository,  vol  xviii.  p.  268-358. — Larrey's  Memoires  de  Chirurgie  Mi.
litgire  et  Caxnpagnes,  vol.  ii.  p.  150 ;  vol.  iii.  p.  262.


CONCLUSION.  665

reviews;  and  the  most  unmeasured  ridicule  and  abuse  have
been  poured  out  against  them,  as  if  they  were  a  disgrace
to  the  century  in  which  they  were  produced;  his  fellow-
labourer  Dr  Spurzheim  has  sustained  an  equal  share  of
this  unmerited  storm.  In  preparing  the  present  Volume
for  the  press,  I  have  drawn  largely  from  the  works  of  both
of  these  founders  of  the  science ;  in  many  instances  I  have
compared  their  statements  of  fact  with  nature ;  sifted  their
arguments,  and  weighed  deliberately  their  conclusions;
and  I  now  feel  it  an  imperious  duty  to  state,  that  the  pre-
sent generation  has,  in  my  humble  judgment,  re-acted,  in
their  cases,  the  scenes  which  have  attached  so  deep  a  stig-
ma to  the  ages  of  Galileo  and  Harvey*  The  discoveries
of  the  revolution  of  the  globe,  and  the  circulation  of  the
blood,  were  splendid  displays  of  genius,  interesting  and
beneficial  to  mankind ;  but  their  results,  compared  with  the
consequences  which  must  inevitably  follow  from  Dr  Gall's
discovery  of  the  functions  of  the  brain,  (embracing,  as  it
does,  the  true  theory  of  the  animal,  moral  and  intellectual
constitution  of  man),  sink  into  relative  insignificance.  Look-
ing forward  to  the  time  when  the  real  nature  and  ultimate
effects  of  Dr  Gall's  discovery  shall  be  fully  recognised,  I
cannot  entertain  a  doubt  that  posterity  will  manifest  as  eager
a  desire  to  render  honour  to  his  memory,  as  his  contempo-
raries have  shewn  to  treat  himself  with  indignity  and  con-
tempt. If  the  present  work  shall  tend  in  any  degree  to  rouse
the  public  attention  to  his  merits,  and  to  excite  the  philoso-
phers of  England  to  do  him  justice  ere  he  die,  it  will  ac-
complish one  great  end  of  its  publication.  Let  them  at  last
lay  aside  the  prejudice  which  has  so  long  kept  them  back
from  looking  with  their  own  eyes  into  his  works,  and  from
appealing,  with  the  lights  which  he  affords,  to  Nature,  as
the  standard  by  which  to  try  the  merits  of  his  pretensions.
If  they  will  examine,  they  will  find  that  a  fortunate  thought
opened  up  to  him  avast  region  of  discovery,  and  that  he  has
displayed  gigantic  powers  in  prosecuting  it  to  its  results;  that
Dr  Gall,  instead  of  being  an  ignorant  pretender  to  know*


666  CONCLUSION.

ledge,  is  a  man  of  profound  and  solid  erudition ;  that,  so  far
from  being  a  reckless  theorist,  he  is  the  most  stubborn  adhe-
rent to  fact  that  has  perhaps  ever  appeared  in  the  annals  of
inductive  philosophy ;  and  that,  instead  of  being  character-
ised by  a  weak  understanding'  and  bewildered  imagination,
he  manifests  an  intellect  at  once  profound,  regulated,  and
comprehensive.

Dr  Spurzheim's  works  and  lectures  have  rendered  him
better  known  in  this  country,  and  the  force  of  truth  has
for  some  years  been  operating  in  his  favour.  No  reviewer
would  now  reckon  it  creditable,  to  use  the  terms  so  unce-
remoniously applied  to  him  in  1815 ;  but  a  great  debt  of
respect  and  gratitude  remains  to  be  paid  by  Britain  and
the  world  to  Dr  Spurzheim.  Ho  is  second  in  fortune  ra-
ther than  in  merit  to  Dr  Gall.  The  great  discovery  of
Phrenology  unquestionably  belongs  to  the  latter ;  but  to  Dr
Spurzheim  is  due  the  praise  of  early  appreciating  its  im-
portance, of  fearlessly  dedicating  his  life  to  the  enlarge-
ment of  its  boundaries  and  the  dissemination  of  its  prin-
ciples, at  a  time  when  neither  honour  nor  emolument,  but
obloquy  and  censure,  were  bestowed  on  its  adherents*  In
admiring  the  science  as  it  now  appears,  it  becomes  us  to  re-
collect, that  we  owe  much  of  its  excellence  and  interest  to
this  gifted  individual.  He  has  enriched  it  with  the  most
valuable  anatomical  discoveries;  ascertained  the  functions
of  several  highly  important  organs ;  shed  over  it  the  lights
of  a  refined  and  analytic  philosophy,  and  pointed  out  the
most  important  fields  of  its  application.  With  profound
gratitude  and  respect,  therefore,  I  acknowledge  myself  in-
debted to  him  for  the  greatest  gift  which  it  was  possible  for
one  individual  to  confer  on  another, — a  knowledge  of  the
true  Philosophy  of  Man.

To  my  excellent  friends,  also,  the  Reverend  David  Welsh,
Mr  Scott,  Mr  Simpson,  Mr  Lyon,  and  Dr  Andrew  Combe,
fellow-labourers  with  me  in  Phrenology,  I  owe  many  obli-
gations. In  availing  myself  freely  of  the  lights  they  have
struck  oat,  it  has  been  my  constant  wish  to  acknowledge


CONCLUSION.  667

the  source  of  my  information;  but  if,  amidst  the  habi-
tual interchange  of  ideas  with  which  they  have  honoured
me,  their  discoveries  have,  in  any  instance,  been  amal-
gamated with  my  own  thoughts,  and  their  authors  for-
gotten, I  solicit  their  forgiveness,  assuring  them  that  in-
advertency alone  has  been  the  cause  of  any  such  mistakes.
Edinburgh,  October  1825.


POSTSCRIPT  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION.

•
Since  the  foregoing  observations  were  written,  Dr  Gall

has  been  numbered  with  the  dead.  Like  many  other  be-
nefactors of  mankind,  he  has  died  without  his  merits  being
acknowledged,  or  his  discoveries  rewarded,  by  the  "  great  in
literature  and  science,"  of  his  own  age ;  but  he  possessed  the
consciousness  of  having  presented  to  the  world,  one  of  the
most  valuable  discoveries  that  ever  graced  the  annals  of
philosophy,  and  enjoyed  the  delight  of  having  opened  up
to  mankind  a  career  of  improvement,  physical,  moral,  and
intellectual,  to  which  the  boldest  imagination  can  at  pre-
sent prescribe  no  limits.  This  appears  to  be  the  reward
which  Providence  assigns  to  men  eminently  gifted  with
intellectual  superiority;  and  we  may  presume  that  it  is
wisely  suited  to  their  nature.  A  great  duty  remains  for
posterity  to  perform  to  the  memory  of  Dr  Gall,  and  I
cannot  entertain  a  doubt,  that  in  due  time  it  will  be  amply
discharged.

It  gives  me  the  greatest  satisfaction  to  renew,  after  five
years'  additional  experience,  the  acknowledgments  of  my
highest  gratitude  and  esteem  for  Dr  Spurzheim  ;  and  to
express  my  earnest  wish  that  Britain  may,  by  suitable  en-
couragement, retain  him  permanently  to  herself.
Edinbuugh,  October  1830.


(     668     )


Names  and  Orders  of  the  Organs  adopted  by  Dr  Gall.


No.


3.
4.

5.
6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.


FftBMGH.


Instinct  de  la  genera-
tion.

Amour  de  la  prog6ni-
ture.

Attachement,  amiti6.

Instinct  de  la  defense
de  soi-m6me  et  de
sa  propri6t6*

Instinct  carnassier.

Rose,  finesse,  savoir-
faire.

Sentiment  de  la  pro-
prtete.

Orgueil,  fiert6,  hau-
teur.

Vanity  ambition,  a-
mour  de  la  gloire.

Circonspection,  pr6-
voyance.


M6moire  des  cboses,
mfanoire  des  faits,
sens  des  choses,  6du-
cabilite,  perfectibi-
lity


GlRMAJC.


Zeugungstrieb.


Jungenliebe,
Kinderliebe.


Math,  Raufsinn.


Wurgsinn.

List,  Schlauheit,
Klugheit.

Eigenthumsinn.


Stolz,  Hochmuth,
Herschsucht.

Eitelkeit,  Rhum
sucht,  Ehrgeitz.

Behutsamkeit,
Vorsicht,  Vor-
sichtigkeit.

Sachgedoechtniss,

Erziehungs-

Foehigkeit,


English
Name*  given  by
Dr  Spu&xhzim.


Amativeness.

Philoprogeni-
tiveness.

Adhesiveness.

Combativeness.

Destructiveness.
Secretiveness.

Acquisitiveness,

Self-Esteem.


Love  of  Appro-
bation.

Cautiousness.


Eventuality.


CLASSIFICATION  OF  ORGANS.


669


No.

FftBHCH.

Gkrmak.

English
Names  given  by
Dr  Spurchsim.

12.

Sens     des     locality,
gens    des    rapports
de  Fespace.

Ortsinn,    Raum-
sinn.

Locality.

13.

Memoire    des     per-
sonnes,  sens  des  per-
sonnel

Personen-sinn.

Form.

14.

Sens  des  mots,  sens
des  noms,  memoire
des  mots,  memoire
verbale.

Wort-Gedoecht-
niss.

Language.

15.

Sens  de  langage    de
parole,  talent  de  la
philologie,  &c.

Spracb-For-
schungs-sinn.

Held  by  Dr
Spurzheim  to
be  included  in
tbe  last  organ.

16.

Sens  des  rapports  des
couleurs,  talent  de
la  peintnre.

Farben-sinn.

Colouring.

17.

Sens  des  rapports  des
tons,  talent  de   la
musique.

Ton-sinn.

Tune.

18.

Sens  des  rapports  des
nombres.

Number.

19.

Sens  de  mecbanique,
sens    de    construc-
tion, talent  de  l'ar-
chitectnre.

Kunst-sinn,  Ban-
sinn.

Con8tructiveness.

20.

Sagacite  comparative.

Vergleicbender-
scnarfsinn.

Comparison.

21.

Esprit  metaphyriqne
profondeur  d'esprit

,  Metapbysiscber-
Tiefsinn.

Causality.

22.

Esprit  caustique,  es-
prit de  saillie.

■Wit*

Wit.

23.

Talent  poetique.

Dicbter-Geist.

Ideality.

670


CLASSIFICATION  OF  ORGANS.


No.

24.

FftBHCH.

GlBKAK.

EWOLIBH

Names  given  by
Dt  Spuezhbim.

Bonte,    bienveillance,
douceur,    compas-
sion, &C.

Gutmcethigkeit,
Mitleiden,  &c.

Benevolence.

25.

Faculte  d'imiter,  mi-
mique.

Imitation.

26.

Sentiment  religieux.

Veneration.

27.

Fermete,  Constance,
perseverance.

Firmness.

Names  and  Orders  of  the  Organs,  according  to  the  Classifi-
cation in  the  Previous  Editions  of  this  WorJc.


Order  I-— FEELINGS,
Genus  I. — Propensities.


1.  Amativeness.

2.  Philoprogenitiveness.

3.  Concentrativeness.

4.  Adhesiveness.

5.  Combativeness.


6.  Destructiveness.
Appetite  for  Food.

7.  Constructiveness.

8.  Acquisitiveness.

9.  Secretiveness.


Genus  II. — Sentiments.
1. — Sentiments  common  to  Man  with  Lower  Animals.


10.  Self-Esteem.

11.  Love  of  Approbation.


12.  Cautiousness.

13.  Benevolence.


2. — Sentiments  proper  to  Man.

14.  Veneration.  Wonder.

15.  Hope.  17.  Conscientiousness.

16.  Ideality.  18.  Firmness.


CLASSIFICATION  OF  ORGANS.  671

Order  IL— INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES.
Genus  I. — External  Senses.


Feeling  or  Touch.

Hearing.

Taste.

Sight.

Smell.

Genus  II. — Intellectual  Faculties  which  perceive
Existence.

19.  Individuality.  21.  Size.
Upper  Individuality.  22.  Weight.
Lower  Individuality.  23.  Colouring.         *»

20.  Form.

Genus  IIL^-Intbllectual  Faculties  which  perceive  the

RELATION  OP  EXTERNAL  OBJECTS.

24.  Locality.  27.  Number.

25.  Order.  28.  Tune.

26.  Time.  29.  Language.

Genus  IV.— Reflecting  Faculties.

30.  Comparison.  32.  Wit.

31.  Causality.  33.  Imitation.


(    672    )


APPENDIX,  No.  I.


FACULTIES  OF  DR  GALL.


The  Note  referred  to  on  page  92  is  printed  on  page  386,  to
which  the  reader  is  respectfully  referred.


(    67*    )


INDEX.


U  U


J  L


(    675    )


INDEX.


Abdomiwal  temperament,  101.

Absolute  size  of  a  cerebral  organ  no
criterion  of  the  predominance  of
the  Acuity  attached  to  it,  07.

Abuses  of  the  fecukies,  what,  489.

Acquisitiveness,  organ  of,  its  situa-
tion, 30&  History  of  its  disco*
very,  206.  Large  in  thieves,  ib.
Its  size  in  different  nations,  21 1.
Cases  of  individuals  in  whom  it
was  large,  212-14.  Its  disease,
216.

■  ■  a  primitive  propensity,  not
admitted  by  the  metaphysicians,
20&  Admitted  by  Lord  Karnes,
204  Gives  rise  to  avarice,  205*
212.  Not  in  itself  base  or  sordid,
20a  Its  use,  2091  I  to  existence
disputed  by  Mr  Owen,  210.  Its
effects  modified  by  Self-Esteem,
211.  Gives  rise  to  a  tendency  to
steal,  212.  Manifested  by  the
lower  animals,  216.

Acrel,  case  of  diseased  Acquisitive-
ness from,  216.

Acting,  theory  of,  197,  366,  357.

Activity  of  the  faculties,  modes  of;
489.  Influenced  by  temperament,
601.

— .  of  mind  distinguishable
from  power,  103, 663.    Definition


ot,  104  How  indicated;  104.
Combination  of  faculties  favour-
able to,  105.

Actors  have  large  organs  of  Secre-
tiveness  and  Imitation,  197,  258^
365.      '

■  ■  tragic,  Ideality  necessary  to,
330.

Acuteness,  instantaneous*  conferred
by  Comparison,  468.

Adaptation  of  parts  of  the  universe,
proves  the  existence  of  God,  486.

Addison,  an  accurate  observer  of  hu-
man nature,  41.  Nature  of  his
genius,  668.

Adhesiveness,  one  of  the  propensi-
ties, effects  of  on  the  character,
154.  Distinguishable  from  Be-
nevolence, 166.  Gives  rise  to  so-
ciety, ib.  Very  strong  in  the  dog
and  other  animals,  166.  Its  ef-
fects in  combination,  676.

—  organ  o£  its  situation,  161.
History  of  its  discovery,  ib*  Its
functions,  162.  Generally  larger
in  women  than  in  men,  ib*  Its
disease,  156.

Affective  faculties,  260  et  $$q.

Africans,  character  of  the,  601,  616.
Their  superstition,  617-     Their
sentiment  of  truth  weak,  299.
uu2


676


INDEX.


Alderson,  Dr,  of  Hull,  his  cases  of
spectral  illusion,  603.

Alexander  VI.,  Pope,  engraving  of
his  head,  57*.

Algebra,  talent  for,  421.

Alimentiveness,  or  organ  of  the  ap-
petite for  food,  184.  Dr  Hoppe's
Tiews  of^  185.  Supposed  situation
of;  186.

Allegorical  style,  468.

Alma-giving,  not  the  only  manifes-
tation of  Benevolence,  264.

Amativeness,  situation  of  the  organ
of;  116.  History  of  its  discovery,
lia  Gives  rise  to  the  sexual
feeling,  ib.  Its  influence  on  so-
ciety, 120.  Its  abuses,  121.  Its
effects  in  combination,  575.

Ambrose,  St,  his  Veneration  repre-
sented large,  278.

American  brain  smaller  than  the
European,  31.

_  Indians,  their  Love  of  Ap-
probation and  Firmness  large,
251,  287.  Their  sense  of  truth
weak,  300.  Their  unimproveable
nature,  602.— See  North  American
Indian*

Analogies,  perception  of,  466.

Anatomists,  objection  that  they  dis-
believe Phrenology  answered,
629.

Anatomy  of  the  brain,  71.  Its  re-
cent state,  46.

; of  the  skull,  78.

Ancient  temples,  respect  for,  pro-
duced by  Veneration,  281.

Angelo,  Michael,  his  large  Construe-
tiveness,  &c  225.

Anger,  an  abuse  of  Destructiveness,
173.

Animal  magnetism,  521.

Animals,  the  lower,  brains  o£  99.
Their  Philoprogenitiveness,  132.


Concentrativeness,  149.  Adhe-
siveness, 154.  Combativeness,
164.  Destructiveness,  183.  Se-
cretiveness,  201.  Acquisitiveness,
216.  Constructiveness,  225,  228,
229.  Self-Esteem,  240.  Love  of
Approbation,  251.  Cautiousness,
258.  Benevolence,  270.  Imita-
tion, 358.  Form,  386.  Locality,
418.  Number,  423.  Language,
461.  Have  no  Causality,, 476.
Their  susceptibility  of  being
tamed  and  taught,  433.

Anterior  lobe  of  the  brain,  its  size
a  measure  of  intellect,  86.

Antiphrenologists  unreasonable  and
ignorant,  54,  55,  641,  et  seq.

Antiquarianism,  tendency  to,  by
what  caused,  281.

Apathy,  whence  arising,  541.

Apparitions,  belief  in,  arises  from
the  sentiment  of  Wonder,  309,
311.— See  Visions.

Appetite  for  Food,  supposed  organ
of;  184.  Distinguishable  from
hunger  and  thirst,  186.

Approbation,  Love  of— See  Low  of
Approbation.

Arachnoid  tnnic  of  the  brain,  76*

Archery  and  quoits,  talent  of  excel-
lence at,  393.

Architectural  talent,  581.

Architecture,  ornamental,  love  of,
whence  arising,  329.

Aristotle,  his  account  of  the  facul-
ties, 21.  His  assignment  of  them
to  different  parts  of  the  brain,  45.
Placed  the  intellect  in  the  heart,
60.  His  theory  of  the  senses,
367.

Arithmetic,  the  chief  sphere  of  the
faculty  of  Number,  421.

Arnott,  Dr  Neill,  on  the  connexion
between  mind  and  body,  10.


INDEX.


677


Arragonese    and    Castilians   hive

small  Acquisitiveness,  211.
Arrangement,  love  of,  424.
Artists  have  large  organs  of  Secre-
tiveness,  197;  Constructiveness,
824;  and  Imitation,  368.    Indi-
viduality useful  to,  384.    Effect
of  temperament  on,  559.
Ashantees,  their  character,  616.
Asiatics  have  generally  large  Vene-
ration, 280.     Inferior  to  Euro-
peans, 601.
Ass,  brain  of  the,  100.
Association,  analysis  o£  531.
Astronomers,  eminent,  their  Locali-
ty large,  416.
Atheists,  their  Causality  generally
deficient,  485.    Answers  to  some
of  their  arguments,  486.
Attention,  analysis  ofj  531.
Augustus  Caesar,  Self-Esteem  large

in  the  busts  of,  238.
Aurelius,  Marcus,  his  Benevolence
and  Veneration  represented  large,
266,278.
Authors,  manifest  their  predominant
faculties  in  their  works,  412.    Ef-
fects of  their  large  or  small  Cau-
sality on  their  works,  481.    Ef-
fect of  temperament  on,  659.  Ef-
fect of  large  heads  o£  568.
Avarice,  205, 212.
Awe,  religious,  produced  by  Vene-
ration, 281.

Bacon,  Lord,  on  cunning,  202.  His
style  imbued  with  Ideality,  337.
On  the  faculties  of  perceiving  re-
semblances and  differences,  344.
His  Causality  large,  481.  His
want  of  moral  sentiment,  623.
His  large  head,  563.

Barclay,  Br  John,  an  objection  of
his  to  Phrenology,  624.


Bashfulness,  cause  o£  676.
Basilar  region  of  the  brain,  func-
tions of,  unknown,  80.
Bayle,    Peter,    Combativeness   o£

162.
Beauty,  emotion  o£  arises  from  I-
deality,  332.    Dr  Thomas  Brown
on,  332.    Mr  Dugald  Stewart  on,
333.    Mr  Jeffrey  on,  236,  388.
Beavers,  Acquisitiveness  and  Con-
structiveness o£  216,  225,  228.
Have  no  Causality,  476,  not*.
Bees,  Acquisitiveness  and  Construc-
tiveness o^  216,  225.
Bell,  Mr  Charles,  on  plurality  of  ce-
rebral organs,  21.    A  view  of  his
discoveries  of  the  functions  of  the
spinal  marrow  and   nerves,  66.
Admits  that  the  shape  of  the  skull
is  determined  by  that  of  the  brain,
79.
Bellingham,  John,   murderer,  94,
97,  176,  260,  266,  297,  460.     En.
graving  of  his  skull,  177*     His
style,  449.
Benevolence,  organ  of,  its  situation,
261.    Engravings  of  two  heads  in
which  it  is  large  and  small,  ib.
History  of  its  discovery  by  Dr
Gall,  ib.    Deficient  in  the  heads
of  deliberate  murderers,  266.  Sup-
posed by  Dr  Gall  to  be  the  organ
of  Justice,  26a  Its  effects  on  the
lower  animals,  270, 273.    How  to
be  observed  in  them,  272.     Its
disease,  273.
—  one  of  the  superior  senti-
ments, its  aim,  26&    Difference
between  its  manifestations   and
those  of  Love  of  Approbation,  ib.
Its  effects  on  the  mind  of  its  pos-
sessor, 263,  266.    How  it  ought
to  be  exerted  in  society,   264.
Effects  of  its  deficiency,  266.   Its


678


INDEX.


abuses,  260.  Its  existence  not
inconsistent  with  that  of  Destruc-
tiveness,  867,  346.  Its  existence
generally  admitted  by  metaphysi-
cians, 274.

Berkeley,  Bishop,  his  theory  of  Vi-
sion, 875>  His  ideas  on  the  evU
dence  of  existence  of  the  material
world,  484.

Bidder,  George,  mental  calculator,
410,  421.

Bilious  temperament,  how  distin-
-     guishable,  38.    Its  effects,  ib.

Birds,  carnivorous,  have  large  or-
gans of  Destructiveness,  184.

— —  migration  of,  419.

—  tinging,  skulls  of,  446.

Blair,  Dr  Hugh,  an  accurate  ob-
server of  human  nature,  41.

.*—  Lord  President,  his  Construe*
tiveness  large,  227.

Blind  men,  case  of  one  couched  by
Cheselden,  377*  Cases  of  their
distinguishing  colours  by  touch,
413.

Blumenbach  teaches  the  connexion
of  the  mind  with  the  brain,  9.
On  smell,  27*

Bonaparte's  head  large,  31, 563, 504.
His  description  of  the  characters
of  Neyand  Murat,  161.  Intona-
tion of  his  voice  when  angry,  163.
His  Secretiveness,  193.  His
Self-Esteem,  838.  Was  unable  to
understand  integrity  of  character,
295.    His  generals,  564.

Booth,  murderer,  177*

Boshuans,  some  account  of  the,  616.

Bossuet's  foe*  small  and  brain  large,
46.

Boundaries  of  the  cerebral  organs,
89,93,626.

Brain,  demonstrated  to  be  the  or-
gan of  the  mind,  7-13.     Partial


injuries  of;  80,  648,  #*  *q.  In.
fluence  of  size  in,  29*  Small  in
children,  the  lower  classes,  and
idiots,  30.  Functions  o£  not  dis-
coverable by  dissection,  43.  Re-
cent state  of  its  anatomy,  46.
Gall's  researches  on  its  structure,
62.  Its  anatomy,  71.  Engrav-
ings o£  71 9  72.  Its  clneritioua
and  medullary  substances,  and  he-
mispheres, 72.  Its  insensibility,
74.  Its  integuments,  77*  Its  fi-
gure during  life  discoverable  by
observation,  79.  Brains  of  the
lower  animals,  99.  Texture  of
the  brain  finer  in  some  indivi-
duals than  in  others,  101.  Dif-
ference of  its  shape  in  males  and

'  females,  132.  Its  different  parts
distinguishable,  626.  Answer  to
the  objection,  that  its  parts  may
be  injured  without  affecting  the
mind,  626, 638.  Observations  on
Sir  E.  Home's  proposed  method
of  investigating  the  functions  of
its  different  parts,  668.

Brazil  Indians,  account  of  their  cha-
racter and  brains,  613.  Engrav-
ing of  the  skull  of  one,  lb.

Brewster's,  Dr,  organ  of  Weight
large,  994.

Bright's  account  of  the  devotion  of
the  inhabitants  of  Vienna,  276.

Brown,  Dr  Thomas,  on  the  connex-
ion of  mind  with  body,  13.  On
the  simplicity  or  compound  nature
of  the  mind,  1 10.  On  instant  an-
ger, 159.  His  style  characterized
by  Secretiveness,  200.  His  views
of  desire  of  wealth,  204 ;  of  power,
239 ;  and  of  glory,  260.  On  Me-
lancholy, 269.  On  Benevolence,
274.  Eulogy  of  his  character,  in-
tellect, and  philosophy,  303,  note.


INDEX.


679


His  views  of  Beauty,  839;  Vision,
378;  Wonder,  319;  and  Simple
Suggestion,  434.  His  definition
of  a  cause,  47*  Displays  great
Causality,  481.  His  views  of  Be-
lative  Suggestion,  463;  Percep-
tion, 500 ;  Consciousness,  628.

Bruce,  King  Robert,  160,  261,  260,
278,  288,  29ft.  His  large  head,
563.

Brunei,  engineer,  his  large  organs

•  of  Constructiveness,  Weight,  and
Causality,  224,395,  481.

Bulldog's  Cembativenes*  large,  and
that  of  the  greyhound  small,  164.

Burk  arid  Hare,  profiles  oft  com-
pared  with  that  of  the  Bev.  Mr
1L,  87-    Development  of,  176;

Burke's  eloquence,  450,  note.  His
Comparison  and  CftuaaMty  large,
468,481.

Burton's  division  of  the  brain  into
organs,  21.

Business,  usefulness  of  Individuali-
ty and  Eventuality  in,  430.

Bust,  phrenological  its  uses,  92.

Byron's  poems  strongly  manifest
Destfuttiveness,  179.  Bad  taste
displayed  in  some  passages  of  his
Dm  Juan,  557*


Cabinet-makers,  skilful,  have  large
Constructiveness,  224.

Caffres,  some  account  of  the,  616.

Calculation,  talent  for,  420.

Caligula,  character  of,  175.  His  Be-
nevolence small,  266.

Callipers,  use  of;  97.

Campbell,  the  poet,  his  good  taste,
whence  arising,  560.

Camper's  fecial  angle  described,  44.
Its  fellacy,  45.

Caracalla'8  Benevolence  small,  266.


Carmkhael,  Mr  A?  his  views  of
sleep,  511.

Carmichael,  Mr  Bichard,  his  report
of  case  of  Ann  Boss,  199.

Carnivorous  and  graminivorous  ani-
mals, difference  beeween  the  brains
o$  165.  Destructiveness  of  the
former,  183, 184.

CastiHans  and  Arragonese  have  small
Acquisitiveness,  211.

Catalani,  Madame,  her  organ  of
Tune,  438.

Catherine  of  Medids,  her  Benevo-
lence small,  266.

Catholics  strongly  manifest  Venera-
tion, 276.

Caucasian  variety  of  Blumenbach,
619*

Causality,  one  of  the  reflecting  fa-
culties, 474a  Analysis  of)  475  etteq.
Not  possessed  by  the  lower  ani-
mals, 4781  DrSpurzheimen,478.
Effects  of  its  strongness  or  weak-
ness in  active  life,  479, 48a  Its
effects  in  the  works  of  authors,
481.  Its  effects  in  producing  be-
lief in  Phrenology,  482.

*»■■■* '  organ  of,  history  of  its
discovery,  474.  In  whom  large,
481.  Not  large  in  the  French,  482.
Represented  large  in  the  heads  of
Jupiter  and  Socrates*  ib.  Its  ef-
fects in  combination,  577.

Cause,  Dr  T.  Brown's  definition  of;
474

Cause  and  effect,  perception  oft  474*,
477.

Cautiousness,  a  positive  sentiment,
and  not  the  mere  want  of  courage,
253.  Its  aim,  ib.  Its  effects  on  the
character,  264.  Its  effects  in  com-
bination with  other  faculties,  256,
576.  Effects  of  h*  extreme  acti-
vity, 256.


680


INDEX.


Cautiousness,  organ  of,  its*  situation,
852.  Cuts  of  two  skulls  in  which
it  is  large  and  small,  ib.  History
of  its  discovery  by  Dr  Gall,  ib.
Large  in  children,  255.  Effects  of
its  deficiency,  ib.  Combined  with
large  Destructiveness  and  defi-
cient Hope,  predisposes  to  suicide,
257, 306.  Its  disease,  257.  Larger
among  the  lower  animals  in  fe-
males than  in  males,  258.  Larger
in  the  Germans,  English  and  Scots
than  in  the  French,  259.  Differ-
ence  of  its  size  in  different  heads,
26a

Censoriousness  and  envy,  abuses  of
Self-Esteem,  235.

Cerebellum,  size  of;  at  different  pe-
riods of  life,  15,  118.  Supposed
by  Drelincourt  to  be  the  seat  of
the  soul,  50.  Its  anatomy,  75.  Is
the  organ  of  Amativeness,  116.

Cerebrum,  the  brain— See  Brain.

Ceylonese,  engravings  of  skulls  o£
161,  202.

Chalmers,  Dr,  his  Ideality  large,  94.
Fond  of  unusual  words  and  ex-
pressions, 817.  His  Weight  large,
894.  His  Comparison  large,  467,
468.  Sometimes  sins  against  taste,
560.  His  large  head  and  powerful
mind,  567*

Charibs,  99.  Their  Philoprogeni-
tiveness  large,  ib.  Engraving  of
the  skull  of  one,  ib.  672,  607.
Their  Combativeness,  163;  De-
structiveness, 177;  Acquisitive-
ness, 211;  Benevolence,  261;
Comparison,  469 ;  and  Causality,
481.  Account  of  their  brains  and
character,  130,  606.

Charity,  Christian,  St  Paul's  de-
scription of,  263.


Charles  I.  of  England,  his  Venera-
tion represented  large,  278.

Chaucer,  engraving  of  his  head,
shewing  large  Ideality,  330.

Chaymas,  their  difficulty  in  com-

-    prehending  numeration,  423*

Cheselden,  case  of  a  blind  man
couched  by,  377.

Chess-players,  eminent,  their  large
Locality,  417.

Chesterfield  on  laughter  and  wit,
341.  His  recommendation  of  po-
lite deceit,  55a

Children  have  small  cerebeUa,  15,
and  small  brains,  30.  Their  organs
of  Cautiousness  large,  255.  Effect*
of  Veneration  on,  28a  Stubborn,
have  large  Firmness,  285.  Their
Eventuality  and  Individuality
large,  429, 464,  Their  shrill  voices,
440.  Their  education,  495.  Their
passions,  54a  How  most  easily
rendered  obedient,  551.

Chinese,  their  organ  of  Form,  387,
388.

Christ's  cerebral  development,  how
represented  by  Raphael,  278.

Chronology,  memory  o£  534.

Churchyards,  respect  for,  produced
by  Veneration,  281.

Cicero's  love  of  fame,  246.

Cineritious  substance  of  the  brain,
73,75.

Circumspection,  faculty  ofj  254.—
See  CauHoutnen.

Clarke,  Dr,  his  theory  of  virtue,  289.

— —  the  traveller,  his  organs  of
Weight  and  Locality  large,  394.

Classification  of  the  faculties  and  or-
gans, 113,  668.

Clergymen,  difference  between  those
having  large  and  small  organs  of
Veneration,  283.— See  Preachers.


INDEX.


681


Clerks,  choice  of,  by  the  aid  of  phre-
nology, 495. .

Cleverness,  what,  569.

Climate  and  soil,  effect  of,  on  the
character  of  nations,  603.

Clipping  and  drawing  figures,  talent
for,  224.

Cobbett'8  Combativeness,  162.  His
Self-Esteem  large,  235.  Engrav-
ing of  his  head  shewing  Ideality
small,  330.

Colburn,  Zhero,  calculating  boy,
417,  42*.

Colby,  Sir  Thomas,  his  Acquisitive-
ness large,  205.

Colouring  a  perceptive  faculty,  399.
Possessed  by  blind  men,  413.

—  ■  organ  ofj  effects  of  its
largeness  and  deficiency,  400.
Cases  of  its  deficiency,  401-404.
Its  size,  how  to  be  distinguished,
404.  Generally  larger  in  women
than  in  men,  413.

Colours,  perception  of,  not  depen-
dent on  the  acuteness  of  vision,
390.  Dr  Gall  on  the  laws  of  their
harmony,  404.  Their  harmony
denied  by  Mr  Jeffrey,  405-412.
Distinguished  by  some  blind  men
by  touch,  413.

Columbus's  Locality  represented
large,  416.

Combativeness,  one  of  the  propensi-
ties, objections  to  its  existence
answered,  158.  More  essential  to
leaders  in  feudal  than  modern
times,  161.  Inspires  authors  with
the  love  of  battles,  ib.  Its  abuses,
162.  Its  effects  on  the  voice,  163.
Its  effects  in  combination,  574,
576.

■  situation  of  the  or-
gan o£  157.  History  of  its  disco-
very, ib.  Its  functions,  160.  En-


gravings of  skulls  in  which  it  is
large  and  small,  161.  Effects  of  its
deficiency,  ib.  Generally  larger  in
men  than  in  women,  164.  Its  dis-
ease, ib.  Its  appearance  in  the
heads  of  the  bull-dog,  grey-hound,
horse,  and  game-cock,  164.

Combe,  Dr  Andrew,  on  plurality  of
organs  in  the  brain,  15.  On  size
and  power,  23.  On  sympathy,  645.
His  answer  to  Dr  Barclay's  objec-
tions, 624.  On  the  effects  of  in-
juries of  the  brain  on  the  mental
manifestations,  636.

Combinations  in  size  of  the  cerebral
organs,  40, 571.  In  their  activity,
585.  Practical  application  of  the
doctrine  of,  591.

Commands,  most  effectual  way  of
giving,  550.

Commissures  of  the  brain,  74,  7&

Companion  of  Gall,  his  large  organ
of  Language,  48,  462.

Comparative  Phrenology,  99,  132,
149,  154,  164,  165,  183,  184,  201,
216,  225,  229,  240,  251,  258,  270,
358,  386,  418,  423,  461,  476.

Comparison,  one  of  the  reflecting
faculties,  466.  History  of  the  dis-
covery of  its  organ,  ib.  Its  func-
tion, ib.  Mr  Scott  on,  ib.  et  aeq.
Gives  a  tendency  to  analogical
reasoning,  467,  and  instantaneous
acuteness,  468.  Important  to  poets,

469.  Mr  H.  Watson's  views  of,

470.  Dr  Spurzheim  on,  473.
Compliments,  prompted  by  Love  of

Approbation,  247-

Composers,  musical,  talent  0$  439.

Comprehensive  energy  of  Dr  Tho-
mas Brown,  145.

Compression  of  the  brain,  effects  of,
11.  of  the  infant  head  by  savage
nations,  608.


682


INDEX.


Concealment  of  desires  and  emo-
tions, power  oft  produced  by  Se-
cretiveness,  109b

Copcentrativonessj  situation  of  the
organ  of;  134.  Functions  oft  135.
Views  of  Mr  Welsh  and  Dr  Hoppe
on  the  functions  of,  ISO.  Remarks
on,  by  an  author  in  the  Phrenolo*
gkal  Journal,  137.  Answers  to
Dr  Spurzheim's  objections,  146,
148.  Disease  of  the  organ,  147.
Not  admitted  by  Dr  Gall,  341.
Effects  of  its  deficiency  with
large  and  small  Eventuality,  429,
430.

Conception,  a  mode  of  activity  of
the  intellectual  frailties,  500.

Configuration,  organ  oft  387.— See
Form.

Conscientiousness,  organ  oft  its  si-
tuation,  38a  Not  admitted  by
Dr  Gall,  397.  Established  by
Spurzheim,  388, 298.  Its  disease,
303;

■  one  of  the  superior

sentiments,  function  oft  391, 893.
Its  effect  on  the  manners,  393.
Consequences  of  its  deficiency,  ib.
Is  the  origin  of  the  sense  of  truth,
394.  Its  effects  in  combination,
30(V  674-577,

Consciousness  does  not  reveal  or-
gans, 8,  43,  870,  638.  Localizes
the  mind  in  the  head,  11, 43.  Uni-
ty oft  433.  Analysis  oft  638.  Does
not  inform  us  of  the  nature  of
mind,  884.

■  double  or  divided,


I  oft  108,  518.

Constancy  conferred  by  Firmness,
886.

Constantino's  Veneration  represent-
ed large,  378.

Constitution  of  brain,  influences  the


effects  of  its  size,  33.  Indicated
to  some  extent  by  temperament,
33,569.

Constructiveness,  one  of  the  propen-
sities, 335.  Its  difference  in  man
and  the  lower  animals,  338.  Its
use,  829.

■  organ  oft  its  situa-

tion, 817.  An  objection  regarding
the  effects  of  the  temporal  mus-
cles answered,  318.  History  of
its  discovery,  819.  Large  in  Ba-
phael,  and  small  in  New  Holland-
ers, 231.  Large  in  eminent  engi-
neers, engravers,  painters;  sculp-
tors and  operative  surgeons,  334.
Large  in  the  Italians  and  French,
ib*  Examples  of  its  great  and
small  development,  836-7-8.  Its
disease,  838.  Its  situation  in  the
heads  of  the  lower  animals,  339.
Its  effects  in  combination,  677*

Convolutions  of  the  brain,  74.

Cook,  Captain,  his  large  Locality,
416.  His  account  ef  the  New
Hollanders,  609.

Cordonnier,  Francois,  engraving  of
the  head  oft  883.  His  large  Idea-
lity, 834.

Coronal  region  of  the  brain,  the  seat
of  the  moral  sentiments,  87.

Corpus  callosum  of  the  brain,  what,
74.

Coup  (T*U  conferred  by  Locality,
417.

Courage  inspired  by  the  faculty  of
Combativeness,  16a

Covetiveness,  Acquisitiveness  for-
merly so  called,  203*

Cowper,  the  poet,  diffidence  of,
whence  arising,  163.

Craniometer,  use  oft  97.

Crawford,  Dr,  of  Dublin,  remarks
on  insanity  by,  180.


INDEX.


689


Credulity,  energetic  Hope  disposes
to,  306.

Cretin*,   Constructiveness  of  the,

*  228.

Criminal  legislation,  596.

Criminals  not  always  punished  bj
remorse,  207-8.  Their  Ideality
generally  small,  328.  Effects  of
large  heads  oi,  566.

Criticism,  talent  for,  455.

Croly's  poetry  secretive,  201.

Crook,  Mr,  on  the  organ  of  Alimen-
tiveness,  187.

Crystallography,  388.

Cudworth  maintained  the  existence
of  the  moral  sense,  289, 80S.

Cullen,  Dr,  teaches  the  connexion
of  the  mind  with  the  brain,  9.

Cunning,  arises  from  Secretlveness,
&c.  192.

Curiosity  to  know  details,  arises
from  Individuality,  882.

Curran,  J.  P.,  engraving  of  his  head,
shewing  moderate  Individuality
and  small  Form,  380,  386.  His
eloquence,  450,  note.  His  Com-
parison large,  468.

Cursing,  an  abuse  of  Destructive-
ness,  173.


D'Alembert's   assertion    regarding

the  Imagination,  513.
Dancing,  love  of  and  skill  in,  whence,

434-5.
Dandyism,  250.

Danton's  Benevolence  small,  266.
Deaf  and  dumb  dancers,  435-6.
Dean,  murderer,  118, 177.
Death  viewed  in  various  lights  by

different  individuals,  188.    Fear

of;  assuaged  by  the  sentiment  of

Hope,  307.
De  Bonald,  Mons.,  on  the  diver-


sity of  philosophical  systems,  41,
664.

Deference  and  respect,  feeling  of,
produced  by  Veneration,  280.

Defoe's  Individuality  and  Eventua-
lity large,  43L

Degrees,  different,  in  which  the  fa-
culties are  possessed,  39,  51.

Dempsey,  murderer,  94,  243,  251.

Derangement,  mental— See  Insanity.

Derham  on  fli«H«pii«ii<wg  colours
by  touch,  413.

Descartes  placed  the  soul  in  the  pi-
neal  gland,  60.

Desire  produced  by  every  active  fa-
culty, 304.

Despondency,  cause  o£,  257-8,  306.

Destructiveness,  one  of  the  propen-
sities, illustrations  of,  167-8.  Dis-
tinguished from  Combativeness,
170.  Its  effects  in  society,  ib.
Supposed  by  some  phrenologists
to  give  energy  to  the  mind,  171.
Gives  edge  to  sarcasm,  satire  and
invective,  and  abounds  in  the
poems  of  Lord  Byron,  172.  EH
fects  of  its  weakness,  ib.  Its  a-
buses,  173,  175.

—_  organ  ofj  its  situa-
tion, 165.  History  of  its  discovery,
ib.  Its  functions,  169.  Large  in
murderers,  176.  Large  in  the  Cha-
ribs,  and  small  in  the  Hindoos,
177.  Excited  by  intoxication,  ib.
Its  disease,  178, 181.  Its  situation
In  the  lower  animals,  183.  Its  ex-
istence not  inconsistent  with  that
of  Benevolence,  267,  345.  Its  ef-
fects in  combination,  574.

Details,  talent  for  acquiring  know-
ledge'of,  conferred  by  Individua-
lity^, 430.

Determination,  arises  from  Finn.
ness}285.


684


INDEX.


Development  of  the  cerebral  organs
how  ascertained,  89,  Ac—See  Or*
pant.

Devil,  actions  sometimes  ascribed  to
the  temptation  of  the,  181.

Dewar,  Dr,  his  report  of  a  case  of  di-
vided consciousness,  618.

Differences,  faculty  of  perceiving,
344.

Diplotf  of  the  skull,  what,  78.

Discovery  by  observation  prompted
by  large  Individuality,  388.

Discrimination  of  dispositions  and
talents  practicable  by  observation,
70.

Disease  modifies  the  effects  of  size
of  the  brain,  34.

Dispositions,  natural,  diversity  o£
39,  51,  67,  479.

Dissection  of  an  organ  does  not  re~
veal  its  functions,  43,  66.

Distance,  power  of  perceiving,  396.

Divines  have  successfully  observed
human  nature,  41.

Division  of  the  faculties,  113.

Dogs,  their  brains,  100.  Adhesive-
ness very  strong  in,  156.  Their
Destructiveness,  183 ;  Love  of
Approbation,  361 ;  Benevolence,
370,  272-3.  Their  Locality  sup-
posed to  enable  them  to  return
home  from  a  great  distance,
419.

Dold,  Ludovico,  his  division  of  the
head  into  compartments,  22.

Dominion  and  power,  love  ot,  whence
arising,  238.

Double  Consciousness,  cases  of,  108,
61&

Doubts,  irresolution  and  wavering,

whence  arising,  264.
Douglas,  Mr  W.,  painter,  his  inte-
rest in  perspective,  391.  His  large
organs  of  Size  and  Colouring,  392,
403.


Dramatic  authors  have  large  Imita-
tion, 355.

Drawing,  talent  for,  222,  388.

Dread  and  apprehension,  whence
rising,  266.

Dreaming  explicable  only  by  plura-
lity of  cerebral  organs,  16.  Ana-
lysis of,  609.

Dreams  frequently  have  relation  to
the  largest  organs  in  the  brain,
510.

Drelincourt  placed  the  soul  in  the
cerebellum,  45.

Dress,  ornamental,  love  o£  whence
arising,  329.

Ducrow,  the  equestrian,  his  large
organ  of  Concentrativeness,  160.

Duelling,  294.

Dura  mater,  what,  76.

Duty,  sense  of,  produced  by  Con-
scientiousness, 292,  297*

Duxes  of  classes  for  languages,  what
organs  they  have  large,  463.

Dynamics,  talent  for,  418.


Ear  does  not  recollect  or  judge  of
sounds,  437*

Edinburgh  Eeview,  on  the  connec-
tion of  the  mind  with  the  brain,
11.  On  the  nervous  system,  21,
31.  On  the  recent  state  of  the
anatomy  of  the  brain,  46.  Re-
view of  Byron's  Tragedies  in,
338.  On  injuries  of  the  brain,  640,
et$eq.

Editors,  Eventuality  essential  to,
433.

Educability,  sense  of,  426,  433.

Education  not  the  cause  of  the  in*
equality  of  mental  faculties,  50.
Modifies  their  manifestations,  102.
Faculty  of  Language  too  exten-
sively cultivated  in,  462.  Effects
of,  587.


INDEX.


685


Edwards,  engraver,  his  Construe*
tiveness  and  Comparison  large,
924,358.

Egotism,  the  result  of  predominat-
ing Self-Esteem,  236.  Example
of;  236.  Produced  also  by  Love
of  Approbation,  249.

Egyptians,  ancient,  heads  of,  619.

Elephant's  brain  larger  than  that  of
man,  100.

Elevation,  physical,  love  of,  in  some
animals,  149,  240.

Eloquence,  source  and  nature  o£
460,  note,  681.

Energy  of  character  supposed  by
some  phrenologists  to  arise  from
Destructiveness,  171*

Engineering,  talent  for,  393.

English  delight  in  humour,  197.
Their  Self- Esteem,  Cautiousness,
and  Firmness,  larger  than  those
of  the  French,  238, 259, 280.  Pro.
bable  cause  of  their  political  liber-
ty, 238.

Engravers,  eminent,  have  large  or-
gans of  Constructiveness  and  Imi-
tation, 224,  368.

Envy,  by  what  caused,  236.

Epigrams,  talent  for,  arises  from  the
organ  of  Wit,  363.

Equilibrium,  instinct  of,  395b

E.  S.  of  Dublin,  character  and  de-
velopment of,  179.

Eaqulrol,  cases  of  insanity  from,  215,
284.

Europeans,  their  large  heads,  563.
Their  moral  and  intellectual  na-
ture, 000.  Account  of  their  heads,
618.

Eventuality,  one  of  the  perceptive
Acuities,  function  o£,  427.  Useful
to  men  of  business  and  lawyers,
43a  Mrs  Quickly  an  illustration
of,  432.  Dr  Spurzheim  on,  ib.
Observations  on,  466.


Eventuality,  organ  of,  Its  size  how
discriminated,  425.  Three  engrav-
ings of  heads  illustrative  of  it,  426.
History  of  its  discovery  by  Dr
Gall,  426.  Large  in  Sheridan,  427.
Effects  of  its  largeness  and  defi-
ciency, 429.  In  combination  with
large  and  small  ConcentraUve-
ness,  &c.  ib.  430,  677..  Large  in
observant  authors,  431.  "

Example,  explanation  of  its  power-
ful effects  on  children,  561.

Executions,  pleasure  in  witnessing,
whence  arising,  174. .

Exercise  of  the  cerebral  organs  in-
creases their  activity,  556.

Existence  of  material  objects,  evi-
dence of,  483.

Experiment,  tendency  to  investi-
gate by,  conferred  by  Eventuali-
ty, 427, 432.

External  senses— -See  Senses.

Eyes,  only  one  used  in  looking,  369.
Their  functions,  379.  Memory  of
forms  and  colours  not  dependent

-  on  the,  386,  399.  Do  not  perceive
the  relations  of  colours,  399,  413.
Large  organ  of  Language  indi-
cated by  their  prominence  and  de-

-  preasion,  4%  446.

Face,  size  of,  compared  with  that  of
the  brain,  46.

Facial  angle  of  Camper  described,
44.    Its  fallacy,  45.

Faculties,  plurality  of,  14,  37*
Appear  successively,  15,  38.
Connexion  ofj  with  particular  or-
gans, 36,  #*  «*?.  Combinations  of,
40,671.  Meaning  of  the  term,  106.
What  Acuities  are  admitted  to  be
primitive,  ib.  Dr  Spurzheim's
division  of  them,  113.  Modes  of
.their  activity,  489,  ei  stq.  Ex-
cited by  the  presentment  of  their


686


INDEX.


object*,  475.  Effects  of  rise  in
the  organ*  on  their  manifestation,
562,571.  De#i»ofgratttVaftk»iin
proportion  to  the  also  of  their
organs,  571.  Fxsuves,  116%
JVoewirisk*,  iK     JfoAa****  230-

868.         IXTMLUCCTUAX.     F*C¥L-

Tin,  366V  Eatmrmd  aoutf*,  369-
3791  FofntfM  pm»%  essst.
ww,  379*413.  Fmmttim  namfe-
tmffr*Utum*>  414403.  Bsflxct-
nr©  Faculties,  4*6-488.

Faith,  exercise  of,    fevottred  by
Hope,  307.

Fame,  lore  of;  24&

Familiar  spirits,  belter  in,
from  Wonder,  309, 312.

Fanaticism,  religious,  produced  by
excited  Wonder,  318.

Fancy,  514.

Farish,  Professor,  of  Cambridge,  his
organ  of  Weight  large,  304

Fashions  in  dress,  &&,  cause  of  their
mutability,  315.

Fear,  whence  arising  1*3,  263.

Feebleness  and  power  of  character,
30,563,689.

Feeling  or  Touch,  sense  of;  871*

Feelings,  118,  «#  $eq.

Females  have  a  greater  endowment
ofPbiloprogeniti  veness  than  males,
128,  133.  Differences  between
their  brains  and  those  of  males,
132.  Their  Combatftrenesa  smaX-
ler,  164.  Their  Cautiousness  and
Veneration  larger,  258, 264.— See
Wommu

■  ■    ■         among  the  lower  animals
more  cautious  than  males,  268.

Fehekn's  Benevolence,  264.

Ferae,  the  organ  of  Destructiveness
large  in  the,  184.

Ferguson,  Dr  Adam,  on  the  politi-
cal freedom  of  the  English,  238*

—  Mr,  case  of  inability  to


perceive  perspective,  30*  Hie
organ  of  Size  small,  391,  499.

Ferriar,  Dr,  Cases  of  injury  of  the
brain  mentioned  by,  646, 661, 654.

Fever,  how  productive  of  sleepless,
ness  and  dreaming,  510.

Figurative  language,  whence,  466.

Final  piety  arises  chiefly  from  Ve-
neration, 280.

Fine  arts,  by  what  faculties  pro-
duced, 829-30,  367-  Taste  in,
581.

Firmness,  one  of  the  sentiments,
use  oft  285.  Appears  not  to  be
admitted  by  metaphysicians,  28&

i  ,  organ  of;  its  situation,

285.  History  of  its  discovery,  ib.
Effects  of  its  predominance,  on
the  maimer,  286.  Larger  in  the
British  than  in  the  French,  286.
Effects  of  its  deficiency,  28a  Its
disease,  ib.

Fisher,  Miss  Clara,  her  large  Secre-
tiveness,  and  Love  of  Approba-
tion, 197, 26L  Engraving  of  her
head,  shewing  large  Imitation,
358.

Flechier,  Eveque  de  Names,  ego*.
tism  0^237

Flourens'  experiments  on  the  cere-
bellum, 119.

Foder4  on  partial  genius  in  idiots,
17.  On  plurality  of  cerebral  or-
gans, 21.  Cases  of  msanity  from,
201.  On  the  Constructiveness  of
the  Cretins,  228.

Folie  raisonante,  what,  18.

Force  of  character  always  accom-
panied by  a  large  brain,  30,  563.

Forehead,  sloping,  462.

Form,  one  of  the  perceptive  facul-
ties, its  vigour  not  proportionate
to  the  acuteness  of  vision,  386.
Manifested  by  animals,  ib.  Dr
Spurzheim's  analysis  of,  387*


INDEX.


687


Form,  organ  o£,  history  of  its  disco*
very  by  Dr  Gall,  886*  I  tt  situa-
tion, ib.  Its  size,  how  distin-
guishable, ib.  447,  note.  Engrav-
ings  of  two  heads,  in  which  it  is
large  and  small,  980.  Its  effects
in  combination,  577*

Fonter'a  journey  from  Bengal  to
England,  268.

Fortitude  conferred  by  Firmness,
286.

Fox,  Charles  James,  his  large  head,
563.

Francois  Cordonnier,  poet,  engrav-
ing of  his  heed,  233.  His  Ideality
large*  384,

Franklin,  Captain,  his  large  head,
865*

Franklin,  Benjamin,  40.  His  Cau-
sality large,  401*  Reverenced
God*  though  he  renounced  Chris-
tia«tty,46t

Frajer's  Language  small,  4*3.

French,  mot  a  humorous  nation,
197.  Their  Ctastnietiveness
large,  834.  The*  Seif-Esteem
and  Firmness  smaller  than  those
of  the.  English,  23a,  286.  Their
Love  of  Approbation  and  Cau-
tiousness very  large,  251,  259.
Are  the  leaders  of  fashion,  and
why,  316.  Their  Individuality
and  Form  large,  364, 387.  Their
Tune,  430.  Their  Comparison
fcrge,  468.  Their  Causality  not
large,  48*

French  M.  IX,  cast,  482, 425.

Front*!  sinus,  what,  61.  Objections
to  Phrenology  founded  on  its  ex-
istence, answered,  62.  Throws  a
difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  obser-
vation of  Individuality,  364;
Form,  885;  Size,  383$  and  Lo-
cality, 410.

Fry,  Mrs,  Combativeness  of;  160.


Fuseli  on  Raphael's  style*  of  paint.

ing,579.
Future  state,  disposition  to  belief

o£  arises  from  the  sentiment  of

Hope,  307.
Futurity,  brilliant  anticipations  of;

arise  from  the  Sentiment  of  Hope,

305.    Notion  of;  307.

Gaiety,  by  what  produced,  347.

Galen  placed  the  soul  in  the  brain,  50*

Galileo  and  his-  discoveries,  how
treated  by  his  contemporaries,  3.
His  Locality  large,  416.  His
greatness,  628.

Gall,  Dr  F.  J.,  the  rounder  of  Phre-
nology,47*  Birth  and  death  o^ib.
Discovered  Phrenology  by  obser-
vation, 48,  623.  Abandoned  all
theories,  51.  His  anatomical  re-
searches, 62.  First  lectured  in
1786.  His  opinion  of  the  fikrulty
of  Adhesiveness,  155.  Bid  not
admit  a  distinct  organ  of  Justice,
268.  On  Firmness,  285.  Bid
not  admit  the  organ  of  Conscien-
tiousness, 297.  His  theory  of  the
single  impressions  perceived  by
double  organs  of  the  external
senses,  368.  His  views  of  the
faculty  ef  Hope,  304,  His  organ
of  Form  deficient,  385, 386,  note.
BBs  infantile  genius,  ib.  On  the
harmony  ef  colours,  404  His
views  of  Eventuality,  433.  Ad-
mitted two  organs  of  Language*
454*  His  merits  and  discoveries,
665,  667*  Names  of  the  organs
adopted  by  him,  666.
Game-codes  and  game-hens  have
larger  Combativeness  than  do-
mestic fowls,  and  may  be  distin-
guished by  the  shape  of  their
heads,  165.
Gaming,  love  of,  whence,  306.


688


INDEX.


Ganglions,  what,  50.

Garrick's  large  organ  of  Imitation,
example  of,  364.

Gauls,  their  character  as  given  by
Tacitus,  604.

Generals,  qualifications  o£  161, 901,
417-

Genius,  cause  o£  660,  570.

—  for  music,  &c  See  Music,  <jt*.
,  partial,  explicable  only  by
plurality  of  cerebral  organs,  16.

Geographers,  eminent,  their  Loca-
lity large,  416.

Geometry,  genius  for,  417*

George  III.  his  large  organs  of  In-
dividuality and  Form,  380,  386.
Engraving  of  his  head,  38a

Georget  on  size  and  power  of
nerves,  88.

Germans  have  larger  Cautiousness
and  Tune  than  the  French,  259,
439.  Tacitus*  description  of  them,
604.

Ghosts  and  visions,  belief  in,  whence
arising,  309;— 8ee  Puisne.

Gibbon's  SeKBsteem  very  large,
237.

Gibson,  John,  199,  299.  Engrav-
ing of  his  head,  299.

i  ■  Mr  P.,  painter,  his  large
organ  of  Size,  and  excellence  in
perspective,  392.

Gladiators  represented  with  large
organs  of  Combativeness,  163.

Glory,  love  ot,  whence,  246*

Gluck's  organ  of  Tune,  438.

God,  existence  o£  indirectly  proved
by  the  organ  of  Veneration,  277,
279.  Demonstrable  by  reason,  486.

Goldsmith's  writings  display  mode-
rate Secretiveness,  391.  His  Love
of  Approbation,  249.  His  verses
on  Hope,  243.

Gordon,  James,  murderer,  97,  176,
298.


Gordon,  Dr  John,  admitted  the  cor-
respondence between  the  sice  of
the  skull  and  that  of  the  brain,

-  80.

Graminivorous  and  carnivorous  ani-
mals, difference  between  the  brains
of,  165.  Secretiveness  of  the  for-
mer generally  large,  201.

Grammar,  talent  for,  453.

Gratitude,  whence  arising,  302.

Grattan's  style  characterized  by
Concentrativeness,  146.

Great  men,  why  they  have  not  em-
braced Phrenology,  627*

Greek  philosopherscalumniated  each
other,  S.  Persecuted  by  the  peo-
ple, ib.

Greeks,  ancient,  skulls  ofj  619.  En-
graving  of  one,  ib.

Gregory,  Dr,  admits  the  connexion
of  the  mind  with  the  brain,  9.

Greyhound's  Combativeness  smaller
than  that  of  the  bull-dog,  164.

Grief  and  Joy,  analysis  o€,  641.

Griffiths,  murderer,  265.

Guilt,  sense  of,  the  effect  of  Con-
scientiousness, 297.

Guise,  Due  de,  remarkable  case  of
injury  of  the  brain,  661, 664.

H.,  Mrs,  94,  288,  299.  Engraving
of  her  head,  299.

Habit,  analysis  of,  563.

Haggart,  David,  murderer  and  rob-
ber, 88,  94,  163,  177,  198,  243,
251,288^297,299.  Engraving  of
his  head,  299.

Hall,  Sir  James,  his  organ  of  Weight
large,  394.

Haller  saw  the  necessity  of  a  plu-
rality of  cerebral  organs,  21,  22.
Had  large  face  and  brain,  45.
Placed  the  soul  in  the  brain,  60.

Handel's  Tune  large,  446.  Engrav-
ing of  his  head,  ib.


INDEX.


689


Hands  of  man  not  the  origin  of  hin

arte,  360.
Happiness  consist*  in  the  harmoni-
ous gratification  of  the  faculties,
491.
Hardwicke,   Lord   Chancellor,   his

Acquisitiveness  large,  205.
Hare,  William,  murderer,  176,  265.

Profile  of  the  head  of,  87.
Hares   and   rabbits,    difference   of

their  skulls,  230.
Harmony  and  Melody,  what,  437,

439.
Harvey  and  his  discoveries,   how
treated   by   his   contemporaries,
4,631.
Hats,  diversity  of  sizes  of;  SO,  670.
Haydn's  organ  of  Tune  large,  438,

446.
Haydon,  Mr,  painter,  his  organs  of
Constructiveness,  Colouring,  and
Causality  large,  224,  403,   481,
580.
Hazlitt's  Ideality  large,  338.    Part
of  a  review  of  Lord  Byron*s  Tra-
gedies attributed  to  him,  ib.  Ma-
•    nifests  the  sentiment  of  Wonder,

317-
Head,  engraving  of,  as  divided  into
regions  by  Dolci,  22.    Different
shape  of,  in  males  and  females,
128.    Relation  between  its  size
and  the  voice,  440.    Effects  of  its
great  and  small  size,  663-4.
Heaman,  murderer,  177.
Hearing,  sense  ofj  3731    Not  the

origin  of  Music  and  Speech,  ib.
Heart  not  the  seat  of  the  tender
affections,  44   Supposed  by  Aris-
totle to  be  the  seat  of  the  soul,  50-
Helvetius,  his  erroneous  theory,  that
man  owes  his  arts  to  the  struc-
ture of  his  hands,  360.
Henri  Quatre,  'French   poet,  his
Benevolence  large,  263.  His  fore-


head  appears  to  slope,  469.    His  %
Comparison  large,  469.
HerschePs  Constructiveness  large,

224.
Hette,  Dr,  1 18,  243,  251,  260,  299.
Hindoos   have    small    brains,  31.
Engravings   of   skulls    of,    177,
202,  606.     Their   sentiment  of
truth  weak,  299.    Their  language
figurative,  467*    Account  of  their
brains  and  character,  606.     No-
tices of  their  development,  94,  97,
171,  177,  200,  238,  260.
Historians,  Eventuality  essential  to,

433.
Hobbes  denied  the  existence  of  the
sentiment  of  Benevolence,  274,
and  of  the  moral  sense,  289, 303.
Hog's  brain,  100.

Home,  Sir  Everard,  observations  on
his  proposed  mode  of  investigat-
ing the  functions  of  the  brain,  658.
Homer's  Ideality  represented  large,
326.  Supposed  cause  of  his  ge-,
nius,  670.
Honour,  laws  of,  on  what  founded,

294.
Hood's  case  of  a  patient  who  lost  the

use  of  language,  438,  449,  517.
Hope,  one  of  the  higher  sentiments,
Dr  Gall's  views  of;  304.  Its  func-
tions, 305.     Its  effects  on  the
character,  306.    Assuages  fear  of
death,  307*   Favours  the  exercise
of  faith,  and  disposes  to  belief  in
a  life  to  come,  307.    Admitted  by
metaphysicians,  ib.
— —  organ  of,  its  situation,  304.
Not  admitted  by  Dr  Gall,  305.
Its  deficiency  predisposes  to  de-
spondency and  suicide,  306.    Its
effects  in  combination,  576.
Hoppe,  Dr,  his  views  of  Concentra-
tiveness,  136,    and   Alimentive-


neas,  185.


X  X


690


INDEX.


Hones,  shy  and  timid,  may  be  dis-
tinguished by  the  appearance  of
their  heads,  166.  Their  Love  of
Approbation,  251.  Their  Bene-
volence, 270.

Humboldt,  brother  of  the  traveller,
his  large  organs  of  Number  and
Order,  422,  425.

Hume,  David,  his  theory  of  virtue,
290,  303.  Displays  great  Cau-
sality, 461.  His  ideas  on  the  evi-
dence of  existence  of  mind  and
matter,  484.  On  the  pleasure
derived  from  a  mournful  tragedy,
490.    On  Joy  and  Grief,  541.

— —  Mr  Joseph,  his  Ideality
small,  94.  His  Comparison  large,
469*  His  large  head  and  power-
ful mind,  565.

Humility,  caused  by  deficiency  of
Self-Esteem,  234.

Humour,  influence  of  Secretiveness
in  producing,  196.  Distinguished
fromtri^ib.

Hunger  and  Thirst  distinguishable
from  Appetite,  186.

Hunter,  Mr  John,  anatomist,  dis-
ease of  his  organ  of  Weight,  396.

Hunting,  natural  appetite  for,  167*

Hussey,  murderer,  176,

Hutcheson,  Dr,  on  the  desire  of
wealth  and  power,  208.  Main-
tains the  existence  of  a  moral
sense,  290,  303.

Hydrocephalus,  255.

Hypocrisy,  lying  and  dissimulation,
prompted  by  Secretiveness,  194.

Ideality,  one  of  the  higher  senti-
ments, produces  a  desire  for  ex-
quisiteness  and  perfection,  325.
Authoro  in  whose  works  it  is  pre-
dominant or  deficient,  326.  Its
effects  in  combination  with  other
faculties,  327,  329,  577-     Little


displayed  by  quakers,  &c  329.
Its  gratification  provided  for  in
nature,  328.  Its  effects  in  private
life,  327,  329.  Its  abuses,  331.
An  important  element  in  the  con-
stitution of  man  as  a  progressive
being,  335.  Different  effects  pro-
duced by  sublime  scenery  in  two
minds  in  which  it  was  strong  and
weak,  336,  337.  Its  effects  on
style,  337.

Ideality,  organ  o£>  its  situation,  322.
History  of  its  discovery,  323.
Large  in  poets,  ib.  324.  Deficient
in  savages  and  most  criminals,  328*
Engravings  of  heads  in  which  it  is
large  or  small,  330.  Its  back  part
conjectured  to  be  a  separate  organ,
330.    Its  disease,  331.

Ideas  do  not  originate  from  the  ex-
ternal senses,  359,  363.  Are
formed  onjy  by  the  intellect,  497.
Association  of,  531.

Identity,  personal,  feeling  o£  107,
237,  433,  531.

Idiocy,  partial,  explicable  only
by  a  plurality  of  cerebral  or-
gans, 16.

Idiots  have  small  or  diseased  brains,
30.

Imagination,  what,  512.

Imitation,  a  primary  faculty,  indis-
pensable to  artists,  358.  Its  ma-
nifestation in  private  life,  ib.  Ne-
cessary tq  sogers,  439.

-■  ■■  organ  of,  history  of  its
discovery,  353.  Large  in  actors,
355.  Contributes  to  render  a  poet
or  author  dramatic,  355.  Engrav-
ing of  two  heads  in  which  it  is
large  and  small,  358.  In  combi-
nation, 577.

Immorality  and  bad  taste,  distinc-
tion between,  558.

Immortality  of  the  soul,  308,  633.


INDEX.


091


Impatience  and  patience,  541.
Improvisator!,  conjectural  explana-
tion of  their  genius,  514.  *

Individual  personality,  feeling  of,
—See  Identify.

Individuality,  one  of  the  intellectual
faculties,  its  functions,  381,  464
Prompts  to  observation,  381.  Ef-
fects of  its  deficiency  on  the  cha-
racter, 883.  When  large,  prompts
to  discovery  by  observation,  ib.
Useful  to  the  artist,  384,  Useful
to  men  of  business,  430.  General
observations  on,  462.

— — —  organ  of,  its  situation,
880.  Its  size,  how  judged  o$  ib.
Engravings  of  the  heads  of  George
III.  and  Curran,  in  whom  it  is
large  and  moderate,  ib.  Disco-
vered by  Dr  Spurzheim,  381.  Its
observation  obstructed  by  the
frontal  sinus,  384.

Infanticides  generally  possess  feeble
Philoprogenitiveness,  1*7.

Infatuation,  an  effect  of  large  Firm-
ness, 885.

Inhabitiveness,  organ  o£  according
to  Br  Spurzheim,  134— See  Con*

#frtf0fVf&9t68f»

Injuries  of  the  brain,  their  effects
prove  the  plurality  of  cerebral  or-
gans,  20.  Answer  to  objections
that  they  do  not  always  affect  the
mind,  636,  688.

Insanity,  sometimes  not  easily  dis-
tinguishable from  moral  depra-
vity, 180.  8ome  of  the  pheno-
mena of,  explained,  403.  Of  the
intellectual  faculties,  508.400.

■  partial,  explicable  only  by
a  plurality  of  cerebral  organs,
16,  la    Examples  o£  181,  403.

Integuments  of  the  brain,  76.

Intellectual  faculties,  what,  113,
350.      Mode*  of  their  activity,


487,  #/  *q.    Their  insanity,  502,

500.
Intoxication,  effects  of,  on  the  mind,

177,  873.      Explanation  of  the

phenomena  o£  397.  •  -

Intriguing  disposition,  arises  from

8ecretivene88,  103.
Irresolution,  doubts  and  wavering,

whence  arising,  854.
Italians,  delight  in  humour,  107-

Their  Constnictivenest  and  Tune

large,  824,  439.

Jardine,  Mr,  engineer,  his  organ  of
Weight  large,  394.

Jeffrey,  Mr  Francis,  denies  the  con-
nexion of  mind  with  body,  18.
Denies  that  size  is  a  measure  of
power,  27.  His  theory  of  Beauty,
335,388.  His  Ideality  not  large,
336.  Part  of  a  review  of  Lord
Byron's  Tragedies  assigned  to
him,  33a  On  Form  and  Sire,
308.  On  Colouring,  400,  405,  418.
His  Comparison  large,  468.  His
good  taste,  560.

Jervis,  Jacob,  engraving  of  his
head,  shewing  large  organ  of  Be-
nevolence, 861.  His  character,
264.  His  Imitation  deficient,
35a

Joan  of  Arc,  appearance  of  St
Michael  to,  800.

Johnson,  Dr  Samuel,  an  accurate
observer  of  human  nature,  41.  On
Courage,  150.  His  account  of  the
secretive  character  of  Pope,  104.
Suspected  to  have  believed  in
ghosts,  316.  Fond  of  unusual
words  and  expressions,  ib.  Ifis
large  head  and  energy  of  charac-
ter, 56a

Joseph,  Mr  Samuel,  sculptor,  his
Constructiveness  and  Imitation
large,  224,  S5&

x  x2


692


INDEX.


Joy  and  Grief,  anal/sis  of,  641.

Judges,  Conscientiousness  of,  301,
52&

Judgment,  483.    Analysis  o£,  522.
,  correct,  of   one's  own
cause,  difficult,  589.

Jupiter's  forehead  represented  pro-
minent by  ancient  artists,  482.

Jurymen  differently  affected  by  the
same  arguments,  477,  526.

Justice,  the  existence  of  an  inde-
pendent sentiment  ofj  demon-
strated by  Phrenology,  291.  Pure
or  abstract,  whence  resulting,  582c

Kalmucks  have  large  Acquisitive-
ness, 212.

Karnes,  Lord,  on  appetite  for  hunt-
ing, 168.  Admits  Acquisitiveness
to  be  a  primitive  propensity,  204.
On  Time,  486.    Admits  twenty

'   of  the  phrenological  faculties,  624.

Kant's  face  small  and  brain  large,
45.    His  Causality  large,  474.

Kepler's  Locality  large,  416.

King,  Dr,  on  avarice,  205.

Klopstock's  Veneration  represented
large*  278.

Knight's  Theory  of  Beauty,  888.

Knowing  or  Perceptive  Faculties.
— See  Perceptive  Faculties.

Knox,  John,  his  Combativeness
large,  160, 170,574.

,  Vicesimus,  on  hunting,  167.

Koster's  Account  of  the  Brazil  Indi-
ans, 613-15.

La  Fontaine's  head  large,  563.

Lake  school  of  poetry  characterized
by  Philoprogenitiveness,  126.
Causes  of  bad  taste  in  it,  567.

Lambdoidal  suture  of  the  skull,  81.

Language,  one  of  the  perceptive  fa-
culties, 446.  Too  extensively  cul-
tivated in  ordinary  education,  462.


Language,  organ  o£  history  of  its
discovery,  48.  Its  size  how  indi-
cated, 446.  Its  functions,  447.
Effects  of  its  great  endowment  on
style,  452.  Effects  of  its  defi-
ciency, 453.  Supposed  by  GaU  to
be  double,  454.  Dr  Spurzheim's
views  o£  455.  Its  disease,  458-
461.

— — —  natural  and  artificial,
374,447,545-6.  Figurative,  466.

Languages,  talent  for  learning  the
spirit  of;  454-5,  457.  Different
national,  455-6.

Laughter,  causes  of,  340.

Laws  of  honour,  on  what  founded,
294

Lawyers,  Individuality  and  Even-
tuality necessary  to,  490.  Effect
of  large  Conscientiousness  in,  526.

Legislation,  criminal,  596.

Leibnitz  had  large  face  and  brain,  45.

Leo  had  large  face  and  brain,  45.

Le  Sage's  Individuality  and  Even-
tuality large,  4S1.

Leslie,  Prof,  his  organ  of  Weight
large,  394.

Liberty,  political,  of  the  English,
probable  cause  of  the,  288.

Life,  love  of,  supposed  organ  of,  188.
Its  probable  situation,  189.

Limits  of  the  human  understanding,
636.

Lindner's  Constructiveness  large,
222.

Lindsay,  David,  his  style  verbose,
452.

Lobes  of  the  brain,  86,  625.

Locality,  one  of  the  perceptive  fa-
culties, Dr  Spurzheim  on  the  ana-
lysis of,  415.  An  element  in  ge-
nius for  geometry,  417*

_  organ  of,  history  of  its  dis-
covery, 414.  Its  situation,  415*
Its  effects   on   the  mind,    41 6-


INDEX.


$93


Large  in  eminent  navigators,  tra-
vellers, astronomers  and  geogra-
phers, 416.  Larger  in  men  than
in  women,  418.  Possessed  by  the
lower  animals,  ib.

Locke,  on  the  difficult  j  of  combating
old  opinions,  2, 64, 627.  Engraving
of  his  head,  shewing  Ideality  small,
330.  His  style  plain,  338.  His
theory  of  Wit,  342.  On  the  Fa-
culty of  perceiving  differences,
344.  On  Ideas,  368.  His  Cau-
sality large,  481.  His  writings
characterized  by  power  of  mind,
568.

Lockey,  murderer,  176.

Logan,  Mr,  of  Leitb,  his  analogical
method  of  reasoning,  467.

Logarithms,  talent  .for,  421.

Logical  consequence  in  argument,
perception  of,  arises  from  Causali-
ty, 478.

Louis  XI.,  SecretHreness  of,  193.

Love  of  Life,  supposed  organ  of,  188.
Its  probable  situation,  189*

Love,  physical  or  sexual,  118.

Love  of  Approbation,  one  of  the  in-
ferior sentiments,  aim  o£  245.
Its  effects  on  society,  ib.  Distin-
guished from  Benevolence,  247.
Its  abuses,  ib.  Admitted  by  Beid,
Stewart  and  Brown,  250.  Its  in-
fluence on  the  French,  251.  More
active  in  women  than  in  men,  ib.
Distinction  between  its  manifes-
tations and  those  of  Benevolence,
263.  An  element  in  correct  taste,
329.

—————  organ  of,  its
situation,  243.  History  of  its  dis-
covery by  Dr  Gall,  243.  Effects
of  its  deficiency,  249.  Possessed
by  the  lower  animals,  25L

Lower  orders  have  small  heads,  30.

Lowther,  Sir  James,  his  Acquisi-
tiveness large,  205.


Lucifer,  character  o£  266.

Ludicrous,  feeling  of  the,  whence
arising,  340,  351.

Luther's  Combat!  reness  large,  160,
170,  574.

Lying  prompted  by  Secretiveness,
194,198,29a

Lymphatic  temperament,  how  dis-
tinguishable, 32.  Its  effects,  ft.
Cause  of,  according  to  Dr  Tho-
101.


M.,  Bev.  Mr,  profile  of,  compared
with  those  of  Burk  and  Hare,  88.
His  development,  94,  251,  299.
Engraving  of  the  back  of  his  head,
first  figure,  117*

Macdonald,  Lawrence,  sculptor,  581.

Machines,  Mary,  murderer,  153,
163, 177,  260,  277.

Mackenzie,  Sir  G.  S.,  on  gratitude,
302.  His  organ  of  Weight  large,
394.  On  weight  and  resistance,
398.    On  relative  position,  415.

Maclaehlan,  his  large  organ  of
Weight,  395.

Macvicar*s  Tune  large,  446.

Madness— See  Insanity.

Magendie  asserts  that  the  brain  is
the  organ  of  thought,  10;  that
there  is  generally  a  direct  propor-
tion between  its  size  and  capacity
of  the  mind,  31 ;  that  its  size  may
be  discovered  by  measuring  the
skull,  79.  His  experiments  on  the
cerebellum,  1 19.

Magnetism,  animal,  521.

Mafebranche,  his  Veneration  repre-
sented large,  278.  On  the  facul-
ty of  perceiving  differences,  344.

Malthus*s  Account  of  the  North
American  Indians,  61 1.

Man,  social  nature  o£  155.  A  pro-
gressive being,  335.

Mandeville*s  theory  of  virtue,  38,
289,303.


694


INDEX.


Mariotte  never  could  repeat  New-
ton's  experiments,  6.

Marlborough,  Duke  oi>  his  Acquisi-
tiveness luge,  906.

Marriage!  576.

Marshall,  Dr,  cate  of  insane  8ecre*
tiveness  from,  202.

MarveUousneas,  S17.— -See  IPmdmr.

Master  and  servants,  relation  of
their  natural  qualities,  504.

Mastoid  process,  what,  81.

Materialism,  objection  that  Phreno-
logy leads  to,  considered,  031.

Mathematical  language,  precision
c4«4a

Mathematicians,  Acuities  0$  417,
421.

Matthews,  comedian,  his  large  or-
gan of  Individuality,  388.

Maxwell,  robber,  engraving  of  his
head,  664.

Measurements  of  skulls,  tables  o£
06,631.

Mechanicians,  their  organs  of  Con-
structiveness,  222;  Sue,  308.

Medical  men,  objection  that  they
disbelieve  Phrenology,  considered,
620.

Medulla  oblongata,  what,  60,  76.

Medullary  matter  of  the  brain,  73,
76.

Melancholy,  cause  of;  267-6*  306.

Melancthon,  engraving  of  his  excel-
lent head,  572.

Melody  and  harmony,  what,  437,
430.

Memory,  analysis  of}  616.  How  aC
Acted  by  age  and  disease,  617*

Memory  of  forms,  366,  616}  of  co-
lours, 300:  of  places,  414;  of
numbers,  420;  of  events,  426;
of  music,  486;  of  words,  446;  of
names,  461.

Mental  derangement.  —  See  /imo-
ftty.


Metaphorical  language,  whence,  466.

Metaphysicians,  neglected  organU
elation,  or  supposed  the  mind  to
be  material,  37, 40.  Differ  widely
from  each  other,  38,  40.  Reflect,
ed  on  their  own  Consciousness,
42,52a

Metaphysics,  talent  for,  474.

Meyer,  Monsv,  a  lover  of  wander-
ing, 416.

Migration  of  birds,  410.

Milliner  of  Vienna,  case  of  large
Constructiveness  in  a,  222.

Milne,  Mr  James,  Dr  Spurzheim's
visit  to  his  workshop,  223.  His
case  of  inability  to  distinguish  co-
lours, 401.

Milton,  276.  His  writings  charac-
terized by  great  power  of  mind,
668.

Mimicry,  talent  for,  arises  from  the
organ  of  Imitation,  assisted  by
Individuality,  364,  363.

Mind  known  only  in  connexion  with
body,  7,  23,  37, 66, 112.  Whether
simple  or  compound,  1, 167*  Its
substance  unknown,  633.

Mlrabeau  had  large  face  and  brain,
46.

Miraculous  events,  origin  of  belief
in,  317.

Mirthfulness_See  Wit.

Misers,  large  Acquisitiveness  o£  212.

Mitchell,  118.  Engraving  of  his
head,  second  figure,  117.

Mnemonics,  636.

Modes  of  activity  of  the  facilities,
488.  Of  the  propensities  and  sen-
timents, law  Of  the  knowing  and
reflecting  faculties,  407-

Monkeys,  their  brains,  100.  Have
large  PhUoprogenitiveness&  Love
of  Approbation,  123,  261.  Their
hands  nicely  formed,  360l  Have
no  Causality,  476.


INDEX.


695


Monomania,  what,  18.  Proves  the
plurality  of  cerebral  organs,  lb.

Monro  Primus,  teaches  the  relation
between  stee  and  power  of  the  ex-
ternal senses,  27.

Montaigne  had  large  face  and  brainy
46.    His  Form  large,  889.

Moore's  Comparison,  343,  425,  408.
Engraving  of  his  profile,  425.  His
style,  449,  468,  472.  Bad  taste  of
some  of  his  early  verses,  557*

Moralists  have  successfully  ob-
served human  nature,  41.

Morals,  discordant  theories  ofj  289,
302.

Moral. sense  denied  by  some  philo-
sophers, 289,  303.

——  sentiments,  260,  et  *eq.  Erro-
neously derived  from  viscera,  44.

Morier's  Travels  in  Persia,  an  illus-
tration of  the  difference  of  sise  of
Philoprogenitiveneas  in  men  and
women,  from,  128.

Motives  of  actions,  different,  applied
to  different  minds,  67.

Motor  nerves,  69,  61,  et  teq.

Mountford,  Mrs,  murderer,  case  o£
182.

Mozart's  organ  of  Tune,  43a

Mules,  their  Love  of  Approbation,
951.

Mummies,  260,  619.

Murat,  Napoleon's  description  of  the
character  of,  161.  His  energy  of
mind,  664.

Murderers,  what  organs  they  have
large,  163, 175.  What  organs  de-
ficient in,  265.

Muscular  nerves,  59,  61.

Musk,  not  the  result  of  the  sense
of  hearing,  373.  Time  in,  434,
438.  Not  perceived  or  judged  of
by  the  «w,  437-  Genius  for,  by
what  produced,  438-9,  581.  Mr
Scott's  essays  on,  499.


Musical  composition,  talent  for,  439.
Mystery,  love  of,  arises  from  Secre-
tiveness,  194.

Names,  talent  for  memory  ofj  whence
arising,  461.

Napoleon. — See  Bonaparte.

Nations  with  small  brains  conquered
by  those  with  large,  31.  Coinci-
dence between  their  characters
and  the  development  of  their
brains,  599.  Table  of  measure-
ments of  the  skulls  of  different,
621.

Natural  language,  374,  447,  545-6,
550.

Navigators,  eminent,  their  Locality
large,  416.

Negroes  have  prominent  jaw-bones,
45.  Their  development  and  cha-
racter, 129,  211,  260,  977,  615.
Their  limited  numeration,  423.
Engraving  of  the  skull  of  one,
615.

Nero,  character  ot,  176.  His  De-
structiveness  large,  ib.;  and  Be-
nevolence deficient,  266.

Nerves,  relation  of  size  to  power  o£
25.  General  view  of  the  anatomy
and  functions  of,  56.

■  of  sensation  and  motion,  59,

625.

Nervous  temperament,  how  distin-
guishable, 33.  Its  effects,  ib.  Con-
duces to  refinement,  559.

New  Hollanders,  engraving  of  skulls
of,  36, 221, 608.  Sir  W.  Scott's  de-
scription of  them,  36,  221.  Their
Causality  small,  461.  Description
of  their  heads  and  character,  608.
Captain  Cook's  account  of  them,
609.  Their  want  of  curiosity,  610.

New  opinions  generally  opposed,  3,
5,  54,  627.

NewZealanders,  character  and  brains


696


INDEX.


of;  611.  Engraving  of  the  skull  of
one,  ib.

News,  love  of,  arises  from  the  senti-
ment of  Wonder,  314.

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  opposition  to  mV
discoveries,  4.  His  large  Vene-
ration, 278;  Weight,  394;  and
Locality,  416.

Ney  and  Murat,  Napoleon's  descrip-
tion of  the  characters  of,  161.

Nicolai,  case  of  spectral  illusions,
603.

Nisbet,  murderer,  176.

Nomenclature  of  Phrenology,  113,
06a

Nominalists  and  Realists,  473.

North  American  Indians  have  large
PhiloprogenitivenesH  189.  Their
power  of  enduring  torture,  209,
612.  Their  unimprovable  nature,
602,  612.  Account  of  their  cha-
racter and  heads,  611.  Engraving
of  the  skull  of  one,  ib.

Nostalgia,  supposed  to  result  from
disease  of  the  organ  of  Adhesive-
ness, 156.

Novelty,  love  of,  arises  from  the
sentiment  of  Wonder,  316.

Number,  one  of  the  perceptive  fa-
culties, situation  and  history  of
the  discovery  of  its  organ,  420-1.
Its  functions,  421.  Effects  of  its
deficiency  and  predominance,  425,
Disease  of  its  organ,  423.  Sup-
posed by  Gall  to  be  necessary  to
musical  composers,  439.

Nymphomania,  its  influence  on  the
tone  of  the  voice,  440.

Obedience  of  children  to  their  pa-
rents, how  best  promoted,  551.
To  superiors  in  rank,  280.

Objections  to  phrenology  considered
— That  there  are  clever  men  with
retreating  foreheads,  462;    that


the  science  is  not  new,  622 ;  that
the  faculties  are  thirty-five  in
number,  623;  that  the  different
cerebral  organs  cannot  be  distin-
guished by  dissection,  624;  that
the  brain  has  been  injured  with-
out affecting  the  mind,  626,  638;
that  no  great  men  or  anatomists
have  embraced  the  science,  627,
629;  that  every  body  does  not
believe  in  it,  630;  that  it  leads
to  materialism,  631.

Observation,  .talent  for,  conferred
by  Individuality  and  Eventuality,
381-2, 430.  Discovery  by,  prompt-
ed  by  Individuality,  383.  Doe*
not  reveal  the  substance  of  mind,
635.

Obstinacy,  the  effect  of  large  Firm-
ness, 285.

Occipital  spine,  what,  81.

Old  age,  its  effects  on  the  memory,
517-

Opinions,  difference  of,  624.

Orators  aided  by  Comparison,  46a

Oratory,  talent  for,  581.

Order,  one  of  the  intellectual  facul-
ties, its  objects,  424  Size  of  its
organ  how  distinguished,  425.

Organs,  cerebral,  their  plurality  de-
monstrated, 14—23.  Particular,
connected  with  particular  facul-
ties, 36,  et  §0q.  The  functions  of;
not  discoverable  by  dissection,  43.
Definition  of  the  term,  66.  Dupli-
city and  extent  o£  85.  Length
.  and  breadth  of,  how  ascertained,
89,  91,  note.  Boundaries  of,  89,
626.  Their  relative,  not  absolute,
size,  a  criterion  of  the  predomi-
nance of  the  faculties  which  they
manifest,  98.  Talent  of  recollect-
ing their  situation,  417.  The  lar-
gest most  prone  to  activity,  484.
Their  arrangement,  534.    Effects


INDEX.


697


of  their  size  and  activity  on  the
manifestation  of  the  faculties,  562,
588.  Their  effects  in  combination,
571.  Their  difference  of  appear-
ance discoverable,  625.  Their  plu-
rality explains  many  phenomena
otherwise  unaccountable,  556,647,
656.  Classification  of,  668,  670.

Ormerod,  Ann,  her  small  organ  of
Tune,  446.  Engraving  of  her  head,
ib.

Ossification  of  the  skull,  76.

Owen,  Mr,  of  New  Lanark,  denies
the  existence  of  the  faculty  of
Acquisitiveness,  210.

Ox's  brain,  100.


Pain  and  pleasure,  what,  540.

Fain,  power  of  repressing  the  out-
ward expression  of,  whence,  190.

Painters,  eminent,  their  Construe-
tivenesa,  224;  Form,  388;  and
Size,  391-2.  Combination  of  fa-
culties in,  577.

Painting,  talent  for,  from  what  fa-
culties arising,  329,  357, 384

Paley  denied  the  existence  of  the
moral  sense,  38,  290, 303.

Pallet,  James,  murderer,  88.

Panic,  whence  arising,  and  what,
254,  547-

Parallelism  of  the  tables  of  the  skull,
79.

Pardies,  Father,  opposed  Newton*s
discoveries,  4.

Park,  Mungo,  his  Locality  repre-
sented large,  416.

ParnelTs  Hermit,  illustration  of  Con-
scientiousness from,  301.

Parry,  Captain,  engraving  of  his
large  head,  565.

Partial  genius,  15.  Insanity,  16, 18,
181,  403.  Injuries  of  the  brain,
20,  648  et  aeq.


Partiality,  the  effect  of  deficient
Conscientiousness,  301.

Passion,  what,  540.

Patience  results  from  Firmness,  287*
Analysis  of,  541.

Patterson,  Dr  G.  M.,  his  account  of
the  Phrenology  of  Hindostan,  605.

Perception  is  the  function  of  the
brain,  not  of  the  external  senses,
or  of  the  nerves,  363.  Is  the  low-
est degree  of  activity  of  the  intel-
lectual faculties,  498.  Treated  by
the  metaphysicians  as  a  general
acuity,  500.

Perceptive  acuities,  what,  113.  Fa-
cultiefrperceptive  of  the  existence,
379-41%  and  relations  of  exter-
nal objects,  414-462.  General
observations  on  them,  462.  Each
probably  adapted  to  the  natural
laws  of  its  objects,  477,  note*
Modes  of  their  activity,  407,  et*q.

Perfection,  desire  of,  produced  by
Ideality,  325.

Perseverance  conferred  by  Firm-
ness, 285-6-7.

Personal  identity,  feeling  of,  107,
237,  433,  531.

Personality,  double,  cases  of,  108,
518.

—  individual,  supposed  by
some  phrenologists  to  arise  from
Self-Esteem,  257-

Personification  of  notions  and  phe-
nomena arises  from  Individuality,
384,  387,  427.

Perspective,  idea  o£  pfbduced  by
the  acuity  of  Size,  390-393,
415.

Peruvian,  engraving  of  the  skull  of
a,  (small  No*  2.),  133.

Philology,  talent  for,  454,  45a

Philoprogenitiveness,  an  original
propensity,  12K  Illustrations  of,
from  Byron's  Cain,  124.    Its  or-


698


INDEX.


gmn  and  manifestations  easily  ob-
served, ib.  Its  influence  on  the
character,  125.  Its  abuses,  126.
Feeble  in  in&ntiddes,  127.  Stron-
ger in  women  than  in  men*  128.
Distinct  from  Benevolence,  13a

Philoprogenitiveness,  organ  o£>  121.
Its  situation,  122.  History  of  its
discovery,  ib.  Produces  love  of
children,  124.  Large  in  the  Ne-
groes, &c  120.  'Examples  of  its
disease,  131.  Engravings  of  two
skulls  in  which  it  is  large  and
small,  133.

Philosophers,  Greek,  how  treated,
3.

Phrenology  defined,  1.  Date  of  its
publication,  ib.  Great  opposition
to,  I,  6,  627.  Principles  o£  6,  et
seq.  66,  et  teq.  History  of  its  dis-
covery by  Dr  Gall,  47-65.  Pro-
gress of  the  discovery  of,  53.  De-
monstrates the  existence  of  a  mo-
ral sense,  291.  Its  simplicity  and
harmony  with  nature,  466.  E&
fects  of  Causality  in  producing
belief  in,  482.  I  ta  practical  utility,
495.  Why  it  does  not  enable  us
to  predict  actions,  590.  Objections
to,  considered,  622,  663.  A  new
science,  622.  Why  not  embraced
by  great  men,  627-  Explains  the
phenomena  of  injuries  of  the  brain,
647.

Physiologists  have  failed  to  ascer-
tain the  organs  of  the  faculties,
43.

Pia  mater,  what,  76*

Pictures  raise  emotions  of  sublimity,
how,  492.

Piety,  filial,  arises  chiefly  from  Ve-
neration, 280.

Pineal  gland  supposed  by  Descartes
to  be  the  seat  of  the  soul,  50.

Pinel  on  partial  insanity,  16, 21.  On
4


folic  fuisoiMnfe,  18.  Cases  of  insa-
nity ftom,  164, 181,  201,  243, 258,
284,460.

Pitt,  engraving  of  his  forehead,  425.
His  Eventuality  and  Comparison,
468.  His  Causality'  moderate,
481.

Plato  placed  the  soul  in  the  brain,
50.  His  Causality  represented
large,  486.

Platonists,  their  opinions  regarding
ideas,  368.

Playfiur,  Prof.,  on  the  difficulty  of
combating  old  opinions,  2.  On  the
treatment  of  Galileo,  3.  On  the
opposition  to  Newton's  discove-
ries, 4.  His  large  Comparison  and
Causality,  46&

Pleasure  and  pain,  what,  540.

Plexus  of  nerves,  what,  60.

Plurality  of  faculties  and  cerebral
organs  demonstrated,  14,  et  jsy.
Explains  many  of  the  mental  phe-
nomena, 556,  647,  656.

Poetry,  from  what  faculties  arising,
S29,  569.  Use  of  machinery  in,
prompted  by  Wonder,  317.  Fi-
gurative, 469.

Poets  have  observed  human  nature,
41.  Their  Ideality  large,  323-5.*

—  dramatic,  their  Imitation  large,
355.

Politics,  party,  bias  of  judgment  in,
590.

Pope,  secretive  character  of,  194,
200.  His  idea  of  Hope  producing
belief  in  a  future  state,  308.  His
Individuality  and  Eventuality,
428,472.  His  style,  ib.

Posterior  lobe  of  the  brain,  the  seat
of  the  animal  propensities,  87*

Power  and  dominion,  love  of,  whence
arising,  238-9.

Power,  rank  and  titles,  respect  for,
produced  by  Veneration,  281.


1TDEX.


099


Porer  of  mind,  distinct  from  activi-
ty, 103,  563,  668.  Produced  by
large  brain,  106,  568.

Practical  application  of  the  princi-
ples of  Phrenology,  65.  Of  the
doctrine  of  the  conrokiations  of
aise  and  activity  of  organs,  591.

Praise,  love  o£  Mo.

Pratt,  Miss,  in  *  The  Inheritance,'
a  personification  of  Individuality,
882.

Preachers  dwell  on  the  threats  or
promises  of  the  Gospel,  according
to  their  endowment  of  Destruc-
tiveness  and  Moral  Sentiment,
174.  Effects  of  small  heads  ot,
567_See  Clergywmu

Pride,  an  abuse  of  SelCEsteem,  231
Distinguished  from  vanity,  244,
250.

Principles  of  Phrenology,  6,  et  mq.
66,sf  aso.

Prize-fights,  168.

Processes,  mastoid  and  occipital,
what,  81.

Profusion,  an  abuse  of  Benevolence,
266.

Propensities,  116,  213.  Modes  of
their  activity,  489.

Propensity,  what,  113.

Property,  idea  of,  arises  from  Acqui.
sitiveness,  210.

Proportions  of  different  parts  of  the
brain,  an  index  of  character,  86,
592.

Prudent  character,  Secretiveness  ne-
cessary to  a,  19f.

Punctuality  in  keeping  appoint-
ments and  paying  debts,  arises
from  Conscientiousness,  292,  293.

Pythagoras  placed  the  soul  in  the
brain,  50.

Quaintness  of  style,  arises  from  Se-
cretiveness, 200.


Quakers  display  little  Ideality,  327.
Quickly,  Mrs,  an  illustration  of  In-
dividuality and  Eventuality,  432.
Quoits,  talent  of  excellence  at,  398.

Rabbits  and  hares,  difference  of
their  skulls,  230.

Raeburn,  Sir  Henry,  his  Gonstrue-
tiveness  large,  224.  His  style  of
paintings  580.

Ramus  persecuted  for  writing  a-
gainst  Aristotle,  5.

Rank,  titles  and  power,  respect  for,
produced  by  Veneration,  281.

Ranks  of  society,  subordination  of,
280.  Difference  of  manners  of
the  higher  and  lower,  how  ex-
plained, 587.

Raphael's  skull,  engraving  of,  35,
221,  572.  His  development,  94,
97,  118,  221,  260,  278,  368,  469,
578.  His  representation  of  Christ's
head,  278.  His  head  large,  563.
Character  of  his  works,  578.

Rashness  and  precipitation,  whence
arising,  255.

Realists  and  nominalists,  473.

Reason,  what,  465.

Reasoning  by  analogy,  467'

Refinement  of  manners,  susceptibi-
lity of,  by  what  produced,  358,
659.

Reflecting  faculties,  what,  113,  465.
Modes  of  their  activity,  497,  **  J*?.

Regret,  feeling  of,  what,  298.

Reid,  Dr  Thomas,  treats  of  Desire
of  Power,  239,  and  Desire  of  Es-
teem, 250.  Maintains  the  exist-
ence  of  the  moral  sense,  291, 303.
On  the  external  senses,  868.  His
answer  to  Berkeley's  argument
about  evidence  of  existence,  484.
His  Causality  not  large,  481.

John,  thief,  secretive  charac-
ter of,  199.


700


INDEX.


Relative  suggestion  of  Dr  Brown,
483.

Religion,  natural,  the  effect  of  Ye-
neration,  276,  283.

Religious  fanaticism,  the  effect  of
excited  Wonder,  318.

insanity,  284,  302.

_ institutions,  their  effects

on  the  character  of  nations,  604

Remorse  caused  by  Conscientious-
ness, 207.  Does  not  always  pun-
ish criminals,  ib.  208.

Rennell  on  the  effects  of  injuries  of
the  brain,  830.

Repentance,  the  effect  of  Conscien-
tiousness, 207*

Resemblance  and  difference,  percep-
tion of,  344,  348,  488.

Reserve  of  character,  whence,  108.

Resistance,  faculty  of,  308.— See
WeigkL    ,

Respect  and  deference,  feelingH  of,
produced  by  Veneration,  278,
280.

Respiratory  nerves,  63.

Revelation,  277>

Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  his  impres-
sions on  seeing  Raphael's  pictures,
57*.

Robespierre's  Benevolence  defi-
cient, 288.

Roget,  Dr,  supposes  the  functions
of  the  brain  to  be  still  incompre-
hensible, 48.

Rope-dancers  manifest  strongly  the
faculty  of  Concentrativeness,  160.

Roscoe,  488.

Rosini's  organ  of  Tune,  438.

Ross,  Ann,  case  of;  100.

-— -  Captain,  on  the  notation  of
development,  00.

Rotherham,  John,  murderer,  178,
208.

Roughness  and  smoothness,  percep-
tion of,  388.


Rousseau,  J.  J.,  denies  the  social

nature  of  man,  166.
__  J.  B.,  engraving  of  his

head,  shewing  Ideality  large,  330.

Diseased  excitement  of  that  organ

in  him,  331.
Rush,  Dr,  on  partial  idiocy,  16,  17-

On  tendency  to  theft,  216.  Cases

of  insanity  from,  228.

Sagittal  suture  of  the  skull,  81.

Saints,  their  organs  of  Veneration
represented  large,  278.

Sandwich  Islanders,  account  of  their
character  and  heads,  617.  En-
graving of  the  skull  of  one,  ib.

Sanguine  temperament,  how  distin-
guishable, 32.  Its  effects,  33.
Cause  of,  according  to  Dr  Thomas,
101.  Conduces  to  refinement,
660.

Sarcasm,  satire  and  invective  sharp-
ened by  Destructiveness,  172.

Satire,  produced  by  Destructiveness
and  Wit,  172,  353.

Savages  have  generally  a  large  or-
gan of  Philoprogenitiveness,  130.
Their  compression  of  the  infant
head,  608.

Scepticism,  by  what  caused,  206.

Schsenherger,  painter,  his  powerful
faculty  of  Locality,  414.

Scheidler,  a  companion  of  Dr  Gall,
414.

Scientific  men,  their  perceptive  of-
ten larger  than  their  reflecting
organs,  383,  884.

Scolding  women,  voices  o^  441.

Scots  have  generally  small  Indivi-
duality, 384.

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  his  description  of
the  New  Hollanders,  36.  His  de-
scription of  King  Robert  Brace's
vengeance  on  Cormac  Doil,  167.
Recognises  several  phrenological


INDEX.


701


faculties,  ib.  Hii  account  of  the
secretive  character  of  Napoleon
and  Louis  XI.,  193.  His  deli,
neation  of  Cormac  Doil's  Secre-
tiveness, 200.  His  Imitation
large,  355.  On  supernatural  per-
sonages, 313.  His  Wonder  large,
317.  His  Individuality  and  Even-
tuality  large,  384, 431.  His  large
Locality  and  pictorial  description
of  scenery,  41 6.  His  retentive
memory,  516.

Scott,  Mr  William,  on  Amativeness,
120.  On  Philoprogenitiveness,
196.  On  Adhesiveness,  153.  On
Secretiveness,  103.  On  humour,
196.  On  the  genius  and  cerebral
development  of  Raphael,  221.  On
the  functions  of  the  organ  of  Wit,
345.  His  theory  of  acting,  356.
On  Music,  439.  On  Comparison,
466.  On  the  arrangement  of  the
cerebral  organs,  534

— _  murderer,  ominous  dreams  of,
511.

Scripture  much  addressed  to  the  fa-
culty of  Comparison,  463.

Sculpture,  talent  for,  from, what  fa-
culties arising  222,  329,  358,  580.

Sea,  love  of  the,  in  landsmen,  gene-
rally caused  by  large  organs  of
Wonder,  316.

Sea-sickness,  Mr  Simpson's  views  of
its  probable  cause,  398.

Second  sight,  whence  arising,  321.

Secretaries,  Eventuality  essential
to,4S3.

Secretiveness,  one  of  the  propensi-
ties, nature  and  objects  of  it,  191.
Its  abuses,  194,  196.  An  ingre-
dient in  humour,  196.  Stronger
in  the  English  and  Italians  than
in  the  French,  197.  Gives  the
power  of  repressing  the  outward
expression  of  pain,  199.    Illustra-


tion of;  from  Sir  W.  Scott,  200.
Its  effects  on  the  style  of  authors,
ib*  Prompts  generals  to  employ
stratagems,  201.  Not  admitted
by  metaphysicians,  202.

Secretiveness,  organ  of,  its  situa-
tion, 190.  History  of  its  disco-
very, ib.  Large  in  actors  and  ar-
tists, 197*  Large  in  thieves,  198.
Its  situation  in  the  heads  of  the
lower  animals,  201.  Its  disease,
ib.  Engravings  of  two  skulls,  in
which  it  is  large  and  small,  202.

Sedgewkk,  Mr,  his  <  essay  on  the
compression  of  the  infant  head  by
barbarous  nations,  607.

Self-Esteem,  one  of  the  inferior  sen-
timents, uses  o£  233.  Its  abuses,
234.  Gives  rise  to  egotism,  235.
Supposed  by  some  phrenologists
to  be  the  origin  of  the  feeling  of
individual  personality,  237.  Ad-
mitted by  Beid,  Stewart,  and
Brown,  239.

■  organ  o£  its  situation,  231.

History  of  its  discovery,  231.
Cases  illustrative  of,  232.  En-
gravings of  two  heads  in  which  it
is  large  and  moderate,  233.  Its
deficiency  predisposes  to  humili-
ty, 234.  Its  physiognomy,  239.
Possessed  by  the  lower  animals,
24a  Its  disease,  242.  Gene-
rally larger  in  men  than  in  wo-
men, 243.

Selfishness,  by  what  produced,  211,
234,265.

Sensation,  what,  497.  Nerves  of,
59,  61.

Senses,  external,  their  power  in  pro-
portion to  the  size  of  their  organs,
27-29.  Their  functions,  359.  Er-
roneous opinions  that  all  ideas
come  into  the  mind  through  them,
&c  ib.    Do  not  form  ideas,  363,


702


INDEX.


86*  Mode  of  «cerUini»gUw  li-
mits of  their  functions,  366.    Ef-
fects of  their  disease,  967-    Why
they,  though  double,  perceive  #w-
gle  impressions,  866.     The  mind
not  conscious  of  the  existence  of
their  organs,  370.  Dr  Spurzheim's
opinion  that  they  have  mm  com-
mon cerebral  organ,  371.  Improv-
able by  exercise,  370.    Feeling,
871.  Taste,  873.  Smell,  to.  Hear-
ings 878.  Sight,  87*
Sentiment,  what,  118,  880.
Sentiments  common  to   man   and
the  lower  animals,  881-860.    Su-
perior, or  proper  to  man,  380-
368.     Modes  of  their  activity,
480.
Servants,  choice  o£  by  the  aid  of
Phrenology,  188,  880,  406,  591.
Points  to  be  attended  to  in  choos-
ing them,  608.
Sexual  feeling  orginates  in  Amative-

ness,  118.
Shakspeare,  an  accurate  observer  of
human  nature,  41.  His  Ideality,
386.  Engraving  of  his  head,  830.
His  large  Imitation,  866  *  and
Wonder,  817.  His  head  large,
668.  Supposed  cause  of  his  ge-
nius, 670.    His  greatness,  638.

illustrations  of  Phrenology

from,  13,  198,  367,  433,  460.
Sheep,  their  Destructiveaess  defi-
cient, 183.    Origin  of  their  olfac-
tory nerves,  184
Sheridan,  Mr  H.  Watson*s  analysis
of  his  wit,  340,  368.    His  Indi-
viduality large,  384,  437*     En-
graving of  his  profile,  486.    His
Eventuality  large,  437.     Speci-
men of  his  composition,  ib.
Sight,  sense  of,  acute  in  proportion
to  the  sine  of  its  organs,  38.    Er-
roneous theory  of  its  rectification


by  touch,  861,  863,  876.  The  me-
mory and  judgment  of  forms  and
colours  independent  of  its  exist-
ence or  acuteness,  886,  309,  413*
Simple  suggestion  of  Dr  Thomas

Brown,  484.
Simpson,  Mr  James,  ^on  Weight
and  Equilibrium,  306,   On  Time.
484    His  report  of  the  case  of
Miss  S.  L.  604.
Singers,  their  organs  of  Tune  and

Imitation,  488,  489.
Sinus,  frontnl    See  Frtntal  tmm$.
Sis*  and  form,  ideas  of,  different,

880.
fiise  of  an  organ,  eassWt  pmibtUy  a
measure  of  power  in  its  function,
33,<**#o.  Effects  of;  modified  by
temperament  and  disease,  33, 34.
How  ascertained,  69, 91,  note.  Its
effect  on  the  manifestation  of  the
foculty,  668,  «****.
— —  one  of  the  perceptive  faculties,
probably  connected  with  the  pow-
er of  perceiving  distance,  and  the
talent  for  perspective,  380.    Il-
lustrative cases  o£  ib.  391, 388.
—  organ  of,  its  existence  inferred
by  Dr  Spurzbeim,  by  reasoning,
88a    Its  situation,  ib.
Skating,  talent  for,  80S.
Skull,  never  supposed  to  be  the
cause  of  different  talents,  40.  Ac-
commodates itself  to  the  size  and
form  of  the  brain,  77»  79,  fMAt.  Its
anatomy,  78.      Its  plates  near-
ly parallel,  79.    Effects  of  disease
and  old  age  upon  its  structure,
80.      Its  plates  not  parallel  in
heads  of  some  animals,  871.    E&
foots  of  temperament  on  its  tex-
ture, 680.
8.  I*,  Miss,  curious  case  of  spectral

illusions,  306,  604.
Sleep  proves  the  connexion  of  the


INDEX,


70S


mind  with  the  brain,  la  Mr  A.
CarmichaeTs  theory  ot,  51L

Sloane,  Mr,  case  of  inability  to  dis-
tinguish colours,  403,  499.  His
Tune  small,  446.

Slyness,  arises  from  Secretiveness,
192.

Smell,  sense  of,  27, 372.

SmelhVs  account  of  the  New  Hol-
landers, 009.

Smith,  Dr  Adam,  on  Self-Esteem,
234.  On  virtue,  390.  On  Won-
der  and  Surprise,  319.  Displays
great  Causality,  481.  On  Sym-
pathy, 546,  652.  Explanation  of
two  cases  stated  by  him,  588;
589.

— —  Sir  J.  E.,  his  organ  of  Language
large,  402;  and  Causality  mode-
rate, 481.

Sir  William,  his  Acquisitive-
ness large,  205.

Smoothness  and  roughness,  percep-
tion o$  888.

Social  state  natural  to  man,  155.

Society,  uses  of  Benevolence  in,
264.

Socrates  had  no  genius  for  sculpture,
227.  His  great  forehead,  282,
482.  His  Demon,  309.  Admit-
ted a  Deity,  486.

Soil  and  climate,  effect  of;  on  the
character  of  nations,  60S.

Soldiers,  their  Combativeneas,  160.
Manual  and  platoon  exercise  ofj
435.

— —  British  and  French,  differ-
ence of  their  character,  287.

Somnambulism  produced  by  animal
magnetism,  effects  o£  521.

Soul  unknown  but  in  connexion  with
the  brain,  112 — See  Mind.

Spaniard*,  ignorance  and  supersti-
tion of  the,  282.

Sparrows,  an  example  of  their  Be-
nevolence, 273.


Spectral  illusions— See  Fittest*

Speculative  minds,  478.

Speech,  faculty  o£  not  the  result  of
the  sense  of  hearing,  374.— See
Language,

Spinal  marrow,  anatomy  and  func-
tions of,  6a  Consists  of  three
columns,  lb.

Spurzheim,  Dr  J.  G.,  birth  of,  52*
Associated  with  Dr  Gall,  ib.  His
labours,  53.  His  division  of  the
faculties,  113.  On  Inhabitive-
ness,  134,  146.  His  visit  to  Mr
Milne*8  workshop  in  Edinburgh,
223.  On  Conscientiousness,  269.
His  analysis  of  Veneration,  284.
On  Firmness,  285.  His  analysis
of  Ideality,  325.  On  the  percep-
tion of  resemblance  and  difference,
346.  OnthefccultyofWit,347.
On  the  cause  of  nngie  impressions
being  communicated  to  the  mind
by  double  organs  of  senses,  869.
On  the  faculty  of  Hope,  304.
On  Marvellousness,  3131,  317;
Form,  387;  Locality,  415';  Even-
tuality, 432 ;  Language,  455  ;
Comparison,  473 ;  Causality,  478.
On  the  passions  of  children,  540.
His  merits  and  discoveries,  667.

Stammering,  45&

Standard  of  Taste,  561.

Statics,  393.

Stealing  prompted  by  Secretiveness
and  Acquisitiveness,  198, 206, 207,
212.

Sterne,  Mr  H.  Watson's  analysis  of
the  wit  of  his  Sentimental  Jowr-
ney,  347,  352.  His  large  Form,
389.

Stevenson,  Mr,  engineer,  his  organ
of  Weight  large,  394.

Stewart,  Mr  Dugald,  on  habit,  88,
553L  On  variety  of  character,  40.
His  style  deficient  in  Concentra-
tiveness,  145.    On  the  desire  of


704


INDEX.


wealth,  203.  On  desire  of  power,
259.  On  desire  of  esteem,  250.
Admits  a  moral  sense,  291,  803.
On  Taste,  332.  On  Beauty,  333.
On  Vision,  377-  On  the  inabili-
ty of  some  men  to  distinguish  co-
lours, 399.  His  style  of  language,
449.  His  Causality  not  great,
461.  His  theory  of  the  origin  of
the  pleasure  derived  from  trage-
dy, 491.  On  Conception,  601.
On  Imagination,  613.  On  Taste,
556.  On  the  difference  of  the  ta-
lents and  dispositions  of  nations,
600.  Admits  more  faculties  than
the  phrenologists,  624.

Stomach,  supposed  by  Van  Helinont
to  be  the  seat  of  the  soul,  50.

Stratagem*,  military,  prompted  by
Secretiveness,  201.

Street,  Mary,  299.

Stubbornness,  the  effect  of  large
Firmness,  285.

Style  of  authors  how  affected  by
their  predominant  faculties,  412,
449 ;  by  their  Secretiveness,  200 ;
Ideality,  337 ;  Concentratlveness
and  Eventuality,  145,  429,  430 ;
and  Language,  452,  463.

Sublime,  feeling  of  the,  330,  336.

Successive  appearance  of  the  facul-
ties, a  proof  of  the  plurality  of  ce-
rebral organs,  15.

Sudden  resentment  of  Mr  Stewart
and  Dr  Held,  159.

Suicide,  predisposition  to,  by  what
caused,  257, 306.

Suicides,  their  cerebral  development,
257.

Supernatural  events,  belief  in,  pro-
duced by  the  sentiment  of  Won-
der, 313,  317.

Supernaturality,  317.— See  Wonder.

Superstition,  by  what  caused,  276,
279,  282.


Surgeons,  eminent  operative,  have

large  Constructiveness,  224.
Surprise  and  Wonder,   Dr  Adam

Smith  on,  319.
Sutures  of  the   skull,    what,    78.

Slightly  interrupt  its  parallelism,

80.
Swallows,  Constructiveness  of,  226.

Benevolence  at,  272.     Migration

of,  419.
Swedenborg*s  belief  in  supernatural

revelation  to  himself  310.
Swift's  Individuality  and  Eventua-
lity large,  431.      His  powerful

writings,  568.
Swiss  skull,  engraving  o£  618.
Swooning,  proves  the  connexion  of

the  mind  with  the  brain,  10.  *
Sympathy,  analysis  o£  546.

Tacitus,  his  style  characterized  by
Concentratlveness,  145.  His  de-
scription of  the  Gauls  and  Ger-
mans, 604.

Tact,  conferred  by  Secretiveness,
193.

Tailors,  skilful,  have  large  Construc-
tiveness, 224.

Talents,  natural  diversity  of,  51,  67*

Tassels  Ideality  very  large,  325.
Believed  that  he  saw  and  con-
versed with  spirits,  309.  Portrait
o£  shewing  Ideality  and  Wonder
large,  313.  His  Locality  large,
416.

Taste,  sense  of,  372.

—  correct,  produced  by  Love  of
Approbation  and  Ideality,  329.

—  in  colouring,  413.

— —  analysis  of  566.  How  suscep-
tible of  cultivation,  661.  Stand-
ard of,  ib.

Teachers,  qualifications  of  success-
ful, 430,  433.  Effects  of  amallness
of  heads  of,  566.


INDEX.


705


Temperaments  indicate  to  a  certain
extent  the  constitutional  qualities
of  the  brain,  32,  569.  Descrip-
tion and  supposed  origin  of  the
different,  ib.  Modify  the  effects
of  Size,  ib.  Are  seldom  found
pure,  101.  Br  Thomas*  theory
o£  ib.  Their  effects  on  internal
activity  of  the  faculties,  501.
Nervous  and  sanguine,  conduce  to
refinement,  559.  Their  effects  on
the  texture  of  the  skull,  620.

Temporal  muscles,  not  the  cause  of
narrow  heads,  218.  Present  a
difficulty  in  observing  the  size  of
the  organs  of  Constructiveness
fhd  Acquisitiveness,  ib.

Tennant,  Mr,  poet,  evinces  the  sen-
timent of  Wonder,  317*  His  or-
gan  of  Colouring  large,  412 ;  and
that  of  Locality  deficient,  416.

Tentorium,  what,  75, 117.

Terms  used  to  denote  the  gradations
of  size  in  different  cerebral  organs,
95.

Theft  prompted  by  Secretiveness
and  Acquisitiveness,  198, 206, 207,
212.

Thomas,  Br,  his  theory  of  the  tern-
peraments,  101.

Thomson'*  Seasons  verbose,  452.

Thoracic  temperament,  101.

Thurtell,  John,  murderer,  287.  His
large  head,  566.

Tiberius,  his  Benevolence  small,
266.

TUlotson,  an  observer  of  human  na-
ture, 41.

Time,  one  of  the  intellectual  facul-
ties, 434.  Its  function,  ib.  Es-
sential to  music  and  versification,
ib.  Mr  Simpson  on,  ib.  Neces-
sary to  accurate  dancers,  435.

—  power  of  conceiving,  434,  436.
May  be  marked  to  the  eye,  435.
Lord  Karnes  on,  436*


Titles,  rank  and  power,  respect  for,
produced  by  Veneration,  281.

Tone  of  voice,  relation  between  it
and  cerebral  development,  440.

Tories  have  generally  larger  organs
of  Veneration  than  Whigs,  232.

Touch  or  Feeling,  sense  of,  371*

Tragedy,  pleasure  arising  from  see-
ing a  mournful,  whence,  490, 491.

Tragic  actors,  Ideality  necessary  to,
330.

Trajan's  Benevolence  large,  266.

Trapbois,  in  the  novel,  a  personifi-
cation of  Acquisitiveness,  205.

Travellers,  eminent,  their  large  Lo-
cality, 416.

Truth,  sentiment  o£  arises  from
Conscientiousness,  295.

Tucker,  Mr  Robert,  case  of  inabili-
ty to  distinguish  colours,  400.

Tulpius  on  the  structure  of  the
brain,  52.

Tune,  one  of  the  intellectual  facul-
ties, 436.  An  ingredient  in  ge-
nius for  music,  438,  Mr  Scott's
views  of,  439.

—  organ  of,  history  of  its  disco-
very, 436.  Its  appearance  and
form,  437.  Large  in  musicians,
438.  Its  effects  in  combination^
442,  443,  577-  Case  of  its  dis-
ease, ib.  Different  appearance  of
the  skulls  of  singing  and  mute
birds,  445.

Tungusians  have  large  Philoproge-
nitiveness,  129.

Turks,  their  Secretiveness,  259.

Tycho  Brache's  Locality  large,  416k.


Ucelli,   Professor,   of  Florence,  a
phrenologist,  629.

Unanimity  of  Juries,  626.

Uncle  Toby,  character  of,  a  personi-
fication of  Combativeness,  Bene.
volence,  and  Integrity,  158.
yy


706


INDEX.


Uniques,  passion  for,  whence,  211,

238.
Unterbergen,  painter,  his  Construe

tiveness  large,  220.

Van  Heimont  placed  the  intellect
in  the  stomach,  50.

Vanity,  an  abuse  of  Love  of  Appro-
bation, 244.

Variety  of  character,  40,  51,  67,
470.

Vaucauson**  Constructiveness,  220.

Veneration,  one  of  the  superior  sen-
timents, functions  o£  276.  The
source  of  natural  religion,  276,
283.  Not  generally  admitted  by
metaphysicians,  279.  Its  objects
in  the  present  world,  280.  Its
abuses,  281.  Effects  of  its  defi-
ciency, 282.

■  organ  of,  its  situation,  274.
Engravings  of  two  skulls  in  which
it  is  large  and  small,  274.  His-
tory of  its  discovery,  275.  Its
natural  language,  283.  General-
ly larger  in  women  than  in  men,
264.    Its  disease,  264.

Verbosity  of  style  produced  by  pre-
dominant Language,  452.

Versification,  faculty  of  Time  essen-
tial to,  434.

Verulana  Gracilis,  a  Roman  lady  of
great  courage,  169.

Vienna,  veneration  of  the  inhabi-
tants of,  276.

Vimont,  Mons.,  on  Comparative
Phrenology,  164.

Virtue,  different  theories  of,  given
by  the  metaphysicians,  269.

Viscera,  not  the  organs  of  any  fa-
culties, 44.

Vision.— See  Sight.

Visions  and  Ghosts,  belief  in,  and
liability  to  see,  arise  from  the  sen-
timent of  Wonder,  309, 311.  Sub-


ject at,  still  attended  with  -
derable  difficulty,  320, 322.  Cases
of,  300,  310,  320,  503,*/  t$q.  How
accounted  for,  502.

Voice,  connexion  between  its  shrill-
ness and  the  cerebral  develop-
ment,  440.

Voltaire's  face  small  and  brain  large,
45.  His  organ  of  Language  large,
462.  His  forehead,  462.  Be-
lieved in  the  existence  of  God,
466V


Walsh,  Patrick,  a  maniac,  his  Com-
bativeness  and  Destructiveness
very  large,  178.

Washington,  574.

Water  in  the  head,  255.

Watson,  Mr  Hewett,  his  analysis  of
the  faculty  of  Wit,  347.  On  the
writings  of  Sheridan  and  Pope,
428,  note.    On  Comparison,  470.

Watts,  Dr,  his  explanation  of  Me-
mory,  516.

Wealth,  desire  of;  203,  20&

Weight,  a  perceptive  faculty,  393.
Kecessary  to  harp-playing,  498.

— —  organ  o£  its  existence  pro-
bable a  priori,  393.  Large  in  en-
gineers, Ac,  ib.  394b  Supposed
by  Mr  Simpson  to  be  the  organ
of  the  instinct  of  Equilibrium,
396.  Cases  of  its  disease,  ib.  Sir
George  Mackenzie's  views  of,
398.

Welsh,  Rev.  David,  on  the  Indivisi-
bility of  the  mind,  100.  His
views  of  the  faculty  of  Concen-
trativeness,  136.

Whales  have  larger  brains  than  men,
100.

Whewell,  Mr,  of  Cambridge,  his  or-
gan of  Weight  large,  304.

Whigs  have  generally  smaller  or*


INDEX.


707


gans  of  Veneration  than  Tories,
283.

Whist,  excellent  players  at,  have
large  Individuality  and  Eventua*
lity,384.   ^

Wilfulness  and  petti&ness  in  chil-
dren an  abuse  of  Self-Esteem,
234.

Willde,  Mr  David,  painter,  his  or-
gans of  Colouring  and  Causality
large,  403,  481.

Will  does  not  rule  the  propensities
and  sentiments,  489 ;  hut  mas/  in-
directly  excite  them,  496.  Con-
stituted by  the  intellectual  facul-
ties, 497.  Firmness  sometimes
mistaken  for,  286.

Williams,  J.  F.  painter,  his  Con-
st ructiveness  and  Colouring  large,
224, 403.

Wine,  effects  o(  on  the  mind,  177,
273.

Wit,  difficulty  of  Its  definition,  340.
Does  not  necessarily  excite  laugh-
ter, 341.  Instances  of  this,  ib.
Mr  Scott's  analysis  of,  345.  Mr
H.  Watson's  analysis  o£  347.

—  or  Mirthfulness,  one  of  the  fa-
culties, situation  of  the  organ  of,
340.  Functions  of,  344.  Its  ef-
fects in  combination,  353  Leads
to  satire  and  epigrams,  353.

Wollaston's  theory  of  virtue,  289.

Women  are  more  largely  endowed
with  Philoprogenitiveness  than
men,  128.    An  illustration  of  this


fact,  ib.  Have  generally  Adhe-
siveness large,  152.  Their  Com.
bativeness,  DeMructiveness,  and
Self-Esteem  not  so  large  as  those
of  men,  164,  183,  243.  Their  Ve-
neration larger*.  284.  Their  co-
louring generally  larger,  413.
Their  Locality  smaller,  418.
Their  heads  smaller  and  voices
shriller  than  those  of  males,  440,
563.

Wonder  or  Marvellousness,  one  of
the  sentiments,  Dr  Spurzheim's
views  ofj  313.  Gives  a  longing
for  novelty,  315.  Displayed  by
the  French,  Dr  Johnson,  Dr
Chalmers,  &c  316.  Admitted  by
Dr  Adam  Smith  and  Dr  Thomas
Brown,  319.  Gives  rise  to  belief
in  apparitions,  ib.  320.  Is  the
probable  origin  of  second  sight,
321.

■  organ  o£  its  situation,  309,

History  of  its  discovery,  311.

Words,  memory  ofj  446.  Preceded
by  feelings  and  conceptions,  451.

Wordsworth,  the  poet,  strongly  ma-
nifests Philoprogenitiveness,  126.
His  Causality  large,  481.  Errors
of  taste  in  bis  poetry,  558.

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  Construc-
tiveness  o£  226.

Writing,  art  of;  452.

Wurmser,  General,  Ids  Combative-
ness  very  large,  160.  Engraving
of  his  skull,  161.


FINIS.


NEILL  k  CO.,  PRINTERS.


-*-


COUNTWAY  LIBRARY


HC  sssn  Q


