TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR
PROBLEMS

By John R Commons, Professor of Political
Economy, University of Wisconsin

SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIAL PROGRESS
By Thomas N. Carver, Ph D., Professor of
Economics, Harvard University

SELECTED READINGS IN PUBLIC
FINANCE

By Charles J Bullock, Ph.D , Assistant Pro-
fessor of Economics, Harvard University

RAILWAY PROBLEMS

By William Z. Ripley, Ph.D , Professor of
Economics, Harvard University

SELECTED READINGS IN ECONOMICS
By Charles J Bullock, Ph D., Assistant Pro-
fessor of Economics, Harvard University

ECONOMIC HISTOR Y OF THE UNITED
STATES

By Guy Stevens Callender, Professor of Political
Economy, Yale University


TRADE UNIONISM AND
LABOR PROBLEMS


EDITED

WITH AN INTRODUCTION

BY

JOHN R. COMMONS

Professor of Political Economy, University of Wisconsin


GINN & COMPANY

BOSTON • NEW YORK . CHICAGO • LONDON


Copyright, 1905
By JOHN R COMMONS

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
514 6


3Ef»e gtftengttm i&regg


GINN & COMPANY • PRO-
PRIETORS • BOSTON • U,S A


PREFACE


This book is intended to do for the study of labor unions and
labor problems what Ripley's “ Trusts, Pools and Corporations ”
has done for the study of capital and its organization ; and the
preface to Dr. Ripley’s book states* the purpose of this book.
It is “intended to be more than a mere collection of economic
reprints, ” and is “planned for use specifically as a text-book;
not merely as a handy volume for reference, or as a collection
of original documents. ... It denotes a deliberate attempt at
the application to the teaching of economics of the case system )
so long successful in our law schools. With this- end in view,
each chapter is intended to illustrate a single, definite, typical
phase of the general subject. The primary motive is to further
the interests of sound economic teaching, with especial refer-
ence to the study of concrete problems of great public and
‘ private interest. A difficulty in the substitution of present-day
social and economic studies for the good old-fashioned lin-
guistic ones, or for the modern sciences, — a difficulty espe-
cially peculiar to descriptive economics as differentiated from
economic theory, — has always been to secure data sufficiently
concrete, definite, and convenient to form a basis for analysis,
discussion, and criticism. . . . The first requisite, therefore, for
the successful conduct of economic instruction in the descriptive
field is to provide raw material ; which in discussion, supple-
mentary to the general lectures, may be worked over in detail
in the class room.”

Selected, as these chapters are, mainly from the economic
journals, it has not always been possible to restrict each chap-
ter to a case illustrating a single phase or topic of the general
subject. It has therefore been necessary to furnish in the Intro-
duction and the Index a set of cross references by which the stu-
dent may bring together the several illustrations of each phase.
In this way it is hoped that two objects may be secured : first,

iii


IV


PREFACE


that of viewing each industry and its labor conditions as a unit,
wherein the several topics, such as division of labor, apprentice-
ship, minimum wage, “ closed shop,” and so forth, shall appear
in their relations to the whole ; and, second, that of furnishing the
data for such general statements or conclusions regarding these
topics as will make due allowance for the variety of attendant
circumstances under which they are exhibited. The latter is
properly the case method of study, as will be appreciated from
the two chapters devoted to the decisions of courts.

Since the volume is made up of selected cases illustrating a
branch of political economy of world-wide variety and profound
importance, it is intended to be looked upon as supplementary
to a treatise like Adams and Sumner’s “ Labor Problems/’ or
to the more general works on political economy, or to a lecture
course. For the general public it makes available the contri-
butions of many original investigators, scattered through the
economic and trade journals, which otherwise would be re-
stricted to those who have access to the great libraries of the
country.

I wish to express my great indebtedness to Professor W. Z.
Ripley, the editor of this series, for his assistance and criticisms
in the process of making selections and otherwise ; and to the
authors of the several papers for permission to reprint. It is
also a privilege to be able to acknowledge the willing cooperation
of the editors of the Political Science Quarterly , the Quarterly
Journal of Economics , the Yale Review , the Economic Journal ,
the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science , the Revieiv of Reviews , the Columbia University
Studies in History , Economics , and Public Law , the Engineer-
ing Magazine , the Sibley Journal of Mechanical Engineerings
the Atlanta University Press , the National Civic Federation
Review , and Charities.

My colleagues, Professor T. S. Adams and Professor E. A.
Gilmore, have given me aid which I heartily appreciate^ and I
have been fortunate in the assistance rendered by Miss Helen
L. Sumner of the Wisconsin University Graduate School.


JOHN R. COMMONS.


CONTENTS


Page

Introduction (Analysis of Chapters). By J. R. Commons ... vii

Chapter

I Trade Agreements. By J. R. Commons i

*

II. The Miners’ Union: Its Business Management. By

Frank Julian Warne 13

III. The Teamsters of Chicago. By J. R. Commons ... 36

IV. The New York Building Trades. By J. R. Commons 65
V. The Chicago Building Trades Dispute of 1900. By

Ernest L. Bogart 87

VI. The Incorporation of Trade Unions. Symposium . . 137

VII. Decisions of Courts in Labor Disputes 156

VIII, State Arbitration and the Minimum Wage in Aus-

tralasia. By Henry W. Macrosty 195

IX. Labor Conditions in Slaughtering and Meat Pack-
ing. By J. R. Commons 222

X. The Introduction of the Linotype. By George E.

Barnett . . 250

XI. The Premium Plan of Paying for Labor. By F S.

Halsey and James Rowan ... 274

XII. The Printing Trades and the Crisis in British In-
dustry (Restriction of Output). By G. Binney Dibblee 289

XI II. The System of Apprenticeship at the Baldwin

Locomotive Works. By S. M. Vauclain 304

XIV. The Sweating System in the Clothing Trade. By

J. R. Commons 316

XV. Slavs in Coal Mining. By Frank Julian Warne and

J. R. Commons 336

XVI. The Negro Artisan Symposium 349

XVII. Women in the Clothing Trade. By Mabel Hurd Willett 371


v


VI


CONTENTS


Chapter Page

XVIII. Women’s Wages in Manual Work. By M.B. Hammond 396
XIX. Employment of Girls in the Textile Industries

of Pennsylvania. By Peter Roberts 423

XX. The Printer’s Health. By J. W. Sullivan .... 435

# XXI. Hours of Labor. U. S. Industrial Commission . . . 454

XXII. Massachusetts Labor Legislation. By Sarah Scovill

Whittelsey 482

XXIII. State Regulation of Employment. — Decisions of

Courts 509

XXIV. The Benefit System of the Cigar Makers’ Union.

By Helen L. Sumner # . . 527

XXV. Employers’ Liability and Accident Insurance. By

Adna F. Weber 546

XXVI. Workmen’s Insurance in Germany. By Norbert

Pmkus 574

XXVII. Insurance against Unemployment. By William

Franklin Willoughby 589

XXVI II. Public Employment Offices in the United States

and Germany. By Ernest L. Bogart 603

INDEX 627


INTRODUCTION


Though organized for contest and marked by a history of
struggle, the goal of trade unionism is the trade agreement . 1
This implies the equal organization of employers and the set-
tlement of a wage scale and conditions of work through con-
ferences of representatives. The trade agreement must be
distinguished from “arbitration,” which, properly speaking, is
the reference of disputes to an umpire. Far from being a
simple solution of that kind, it is a form of constitutional gov-
ernment, with its legislative, executive, and judicial branches,
its common law and statute law, its penalties and sanctions.
As an economic organization its object is, on the one hand, to
change the status of labor from one of caprice and uncertainty
to one of definiteness, and, on the other, to equalize competitive
conditions among employers so far as their labor costs are
concerned.

That the trade agreement is subject to abuse and may
become a conspiracy of employers and unions against the pub-
lic is intimated in two or three chapters . 2 Where such is the
case the agreement has passed beyond its legitimate scope of
protecting labor and equalizing the competitive labor condi-
tions of employers. It will be noticed, however, that in such
agreements the union may become the cat's-paw of an associa-
tion, usually of small employers or contractors, and may subject
its officers to corruption and itself to internal dissensions.

Labor unions differ among themselves in their internal
organization, the principal distinction among American unions
being that of “ industrial ” and “ trade" unions. The miners'
union 3 is the most prominent example of the industrial union,
by which is meant the inclusion in one organization of all
employees in an establishment. Another example is that of

1 Pages i, 65, 154. 2 Pages 39, 57, 74, 94. 8 Page 13.

vii


Vlll


INTRODUCTION


the butcher workmen . 1 The “trade” union, or the union
including only workmen of a single craft, is seen in its typical
form in the several unions of the building trades , 2 but it will be
noticed that, through the practice of the sympathetic strike
under the control of a “ building trades council,” or a “board
of delegates,” the several trade unions working on a building
are able to combine their strength in a way similar to that of
an industrial union. The teamsters’ union 3 is peculiar in that,
while all of its members follow the same craft, yet they -work
under very different conditions in different industries. Each
industry, therefore, has its own craft union, but the several
unions in a city are united in a joint council controlled by the
same international organization. The same is true of the joint
council of the packing trades , 4 and herein they differ from the
building trades councils, the separate unions of which are
subject to separate national trade unions.

Typical cases of the conflicts between employers and unions
by way of strikes, lockouts, and boycotts are deserving of close
analysis . 5 They are often described in the decisions of courts , 6
in some cases leading to trade agreements, in others to the
destruction of the labor union. Where the trade agreement
has broken down generally, as in New Zealand and Australia,
through the defeat of the unions in strikes or lockoj§Jip, indus-
trial peace has been sought through compulsory, or rather state,
arbitration, and it is a significant fact that a similar result is
reached by state regulation of the minimum wage . 7 In the
United States the much greater strength of organized labor in
several industries is reflected in the trend of thought and prac-
tical interest away from state adjustment of the economic
demands of unions and towards the restraint and control of the
unions themselves by the state. This is seen in the discussion
of measures designed to impose greater responsibility on unions,
illustrated by the demand for incorporation . 8 The discussion

1 Page 222. 6 Pages 65, 87, 222.

2 Pages 65, 87 6 Page 156

3 Page 36. 7 ’ Page 195.

4 Page 223. 8 Page 137


INTRODUCTION


lx


of this subject brings out more clearly than has been done
before the legal nature of these organizations. Here the atti-
tude of the courts becomes of paramount importance, and cer-
tain illustrative cases have been selected, showing the grounds
on which judges assert the jurisdiction of courts of equity in
labor disputes through the writ of injunction, as well as con-
flicting decisions in different jurisdictions on the boycott and
discriminations against nonunionists . 1 On the latter subject
will be found a concise statement of the present position of
American law in the several states . 2

Underlying the organization of labor are the economic con-
ditions and issues that provoke it into existence. Two industries
which offer examples of division of labor not associated with
machinery are slaughtering and meat packing 3 and the factory
system in clothing manufacture ; 4 and the articles on these
industries reveal the two supreme advantages of a minute divi-
sion of labor, namely, increased speed of the workman and
openings for the cheap labor of immigrants, women, and chil-
dren. The chapter on the introduction of the linotype 6 is
selected, not because it is typical of the effects on labor of the
introduction of machinery, but because it presents the excep-
tionally wise policy of an intelligent labor organization in wel-
coming the machine and sharing its gains with the employer,
the inventor, and the public. In other industries machinery
has often displaced the union of skilled labor, and the resulting
effects through division of labor should be looked for rather in
the articles on slaughtering and meat packing and clothing
manufacture.

Division of labor and machinery make possible the substitu-
tion of payment by the piece in place of payment by the day or
hour, since the workman is specialized on simple and uniform
operations, whose quality can readily be inspected. But that
which is nominally day work becomes actually piecework when
a certain output or task is required. This transition from real

1 Page 156. 4 Page 316.

2 Page 183. 5 Page 250*

8 Page 222.


X


INTRODUCTION


day wages to nominal day wages but actual piece wages is seen
in the clothing trade and in slaughtering . 1 The object* and
effect of piece wages are greatly to increase the speed of the
workman, with the result that the higher earnings tempt and,
through competition, even force the employer to “cut” the,
piece rates, so that the workman is earning no more by his
intense speed than he .did when he took his time. The same
result is reached on day wages when a foreman or a contractor
is remunerated according to his success in reducing costs. 2 . One
object of labor organizations is to check this intense speed,
sometimes by placing an absolute limit on the amount of work
permitted to be done in a given time , 3 sometimes by reducing
the task , 4 and sometimes by prohibiting piecework, bonus, and
task systems . 5 This is usually denounced by employers as
restriction of output, and denied by the unions, but the dis-
tinction should clearly be made between the fact of restriction
and the justification . Advanced as a measure of protection to
health and to the older men, a restriction of this kind is, in
principle, justifiable, and the only question is that of drawing
the line between what is a fair output and what is excessive.
Restriction is 'also justified as a protective measure in cases
where the employer takes advantage of increased earnings to
cut the piece rate.

The matter of restriction of output has attracted larger atten-
tion in Great Britain than in the United States, and the value
of the “case method ” could not better be illustrated than in
the article by the manager of the Manchester Guardian . 6 The
simple question, “ Do unions restrict output ? ” cannot receive a
truthful general answer. Each allegation must be investi-
gated with reference to all the circumstances, including the
attitude of employers . 7 That this involves technical and detailed
knowledge of the business, such as that displayed by the writer

1 Pages 225, 324. 3 Pages 107, 227 5 Page 268.

2 Pages 236, 326 4 Page 328. 6 p age 2 8g.

7 See also Special Report of the U. S Bureau of Labor, Department of Com-

merce and Labor, on “ Regulation and Restriction of Output.” It may be obtained

through congressmen


INTRODUCTION


xi


of the chapter in question, should raise a warning to those who
without such knowledge accept the ex parte statements of the
parties to this acute and invidious dispute.

That restriction of output is sometimes a protective measure
is now recognized by thoughtful employers, as is seen in their
increasing approval of the “ premium system,” which is designed
to meet that objection , 1 The unions also naturally look with
suspicion on this system for reasons not fully brought out in
the chapter on this subject, because in the hands of a driving
foreman or superintendent it tends to become a task system
under the form of a so-called “ time base.” This becomes a
“dead line,” since the employee who is not able to earn a pre-
mium is discharged, and if, in addition, the employer cuts the
time base, he thereby increases the task, and the effect is the
same as when he cuts the piece rate. The virtue of the premium
system is that it automatically cuts the piece rates when the
output is increased and thereby lessens the temptation of the
employer arbitrarily to cut them. If once either the premium
rate or, more important, the time base is cut, the system breaks
down and reverts to the evils of piecework which it is designed
to obviate.

A mark of trade-union policy under the day-wage system as
distinguished from piecework is the minimum wage. That
this is not a uniform wage is seen in different chapters. The
significance of the minimum wage in protecting the ipiion
appears in the policy of the butcher workmen 2 and the coal
miners , 3 where it operates to give a preference to members of
the union, while its operation on a large scale, covering many
industries under legislative enactment, shows itself as a substi-
tute for compulsory arbitration . 4 The theory of the minimum
wage is accepted by employers when they adopt the premium
system , 5 although they add to that theory a device for speeding
up the workmen which is objectionable from the standpoint of
a union like that of the printers . 6

. 1 Page 274.

2 Page 244.

8 Page 345.


4 Page 207.

5 Page 278.

6 Page 268.


XU


INTRODUCTION


Owing to minute division of labor and specialization of work
American industry has failed to train up the ^ 11 -round mechanic,
and this failure has been seriously felt during the recent rapid
expansion of trade. Many large establishments 1 have begun
systematically to provide this training, the object being mainly
to secure men for the leading positions, such as foremen, super-
intendents, and gang leaders, to supervise and direct the
relatively unskilled and specialized machine hands and piece
workers. The apprentice system, therefore, applies to scarcely
more than 5 or 10 per cent of the positions in such an estab-
lishment, reliance still being placed on the general labor market
for supplying the mass of their workmen. On the part of smaller
establishments which cannot afford the expense of an appren-
ticeship system the subject has been taken up by associations
of manufacturers, and efforts are being made in many parts of
the country to establish technical and industrial schools sup^
ported by private endowment or by state and municipal aid.
The important distinction between practical shop work and
technical school work is touched upon in the chapter dealing
with this subject, showing the correlation between the two that
is sought to be maintained in the modern as distinguished from
the old system of apprenticeship.

The characteristic feature of American labor problems is that
of the many nationalities and races working together under
the same management. Several of the chapters in this volume,
while dealing with other topics, reveal this great underlying
social fact. The displacement of earlier nationalities by newer
types of immigrants with lower standards of living appears at
many points, and at the same time the resistance to this dis-
placement through the “ closed shop” and preference to union
men is apparent. The industrial and social characteristics of
various peoples afford a field of study in themselves, but the
issues produced by this competition of races appear in their
extreme form in the chapter on the Negro artisan. 2

1 Page 304.

2 Page 349. See also pages 23, 241, 245, 317, 336, 379, 424, 491.


INTRODUCTION


xin


The chapter on the employment of women in the clothing
trade 1 is in part a sequel to that on the sweating system. While
the latter shows the modern development of that system,
influenced by the immigration of Russian Jews, the former
shows the protective barriers which the garment workers’
union has been able to throw about one branch of the trade
through the use of the union label. On account of the limited
constituency appealed to through the label, the position of
women in that industry is not typical of their employment in
general, as can be seen in the statistical chapter on women’s
wages in manual work 2 and in the work of women in meat
packing . 3 The subject of child labor, for reasons stated in the
chapter illustrative of that subject , 4 has its greatest interest
and social importance in the employment of girls.

Of equal significance with the matter of wages and methods
of payment are those questions that deal with the social conse-
quences of American industry. Foremost is that of health in
occupations, with its related subject, temperance. That there
is both an industrial and an individual* side to this question is
brought out by the writer on the printer’s health . 6 The reduc-
tion in the hours of labor 6 is the most demonstrable fruit of
labor unions, but the fact that it must be accompanied by a
better use of the leisure gained is also made plain by the same
writer.

The activities of unions in reducing the daily period of work
is all the more important on account of the obstacles in the
way of state regulation in the United States. These obstacles
are found more in our form of government than in our economic
conditions. The leading state in this line of protecting employees’
welfare 7 is handicapped by the lack of uniformity consequent
upon our federal system, while the constitutions of the states
and the nation, under the often diverse decisions of the courts,
prevent the legislatures from doing what in other countries is

1 Page 371. 6 Page 436.

2 Page 396 6 Page 454.

8 Page 23$ 7 Page 482.

4 Page 423. See also pages 242, 345.


XIV


INTRODUCTION


solely a matter of legislative discretion . 1 Though the courts
are clear and united on the principles underlying their deci-
sions, they differ widely in their estimate of the facts set forth
in any particular case as a justification of the legislative act.
Even an amendment to a state constitution is not enough to
remove this subject from judicial discretion, since the Supreme
Court of the United States, under the fourteenth amend-
ment, has shown its determination to restrain state enact-
ments wherever its judgment does not approve the necessity of
such legislation. These principles appear in the decisions in
the cases of Holden v. Hardy and Lochner v. New York . 1

Unquestionably the most advanced act of government in
caring for the welfare of working people is found in the move-
ment away from employers' liability under the common law
to workmen’s compensation and compulsory insurance under
statute law . 2 That this movement is as yet Confined to foreign
countries renders it no less interesting by way of comparison
with American practice, as pointed out in Chapter XXV.

More perplexing thah all labor problems is that of irreg-
ular and uncertain employment. The cycles of prosperity and
depression affect both capital and labor alike and obstruct the
best intentioned efforts of employers, unions, and legislatures.
An idea of the significance of this distressing problem may be
seen in the slaughtering and meat-packing industry , 3 and its
influence is sometimes seen in the policy of restricting output
in order to “ make work ” or “ spread out work.” Attempts to
lighten the evils of unemployment are seen in the out-of-work
benefits of the cigar makers , 4 in the efforts of Swiss cantons to
provide relief by way of insurance , 6 and in the public employ-
ment offices of the United States and Germany . 6

John R. Commons.

6 Page 589.

6 Page 603.


1 Page 509.

2 Pages 546, 574.


8 Page 229.
4 Page 527.


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR
PROBLEMS


I

TRADE AGREEMENTS 1

Philanthropists have long been dreaming of the time when
capital and labor should lay aside the strike and boycott and
should resort to arbitration. By arbitration they understand
the submission of differences to a disinterested third party.
But the philanthropists have overlooked a point. Arbitration
is never accepted until each party to a dispute is equally afraid
of the other ; and when they have reached that point, they can
adopt something better than arbitration, — namely, negotiation.
This distinction was clearly brought out at the notable confer-
ence on arbitration held at Chicago in December, 1900, under
the auspices of the National Civic Federation. All the speakers
were men of practical experience, and they agreed that arbitra-
tion is impossible without organization, and that two equally
powerful organizations can negotiate as well as arbitrate. This
higher form of industrial peace — negotiation — has now reached
a formal stage in a half dozen large industries in the United
States, which, owing to its remarkable likeness to parliamen-
tary government in the country of its origin, England, may
well be called constitutional government in industry.

The longshoremen and the dock managers of the Great Lakes
now meet twice a year in a grand parliament of two houses, —
the House of Lords and the House of Commons. The House
of Lords is a primary assembly of all the dock managers along

1 From the Review of Reviews , March, 1901,


2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the lakes, each firm or corporation appearing in its primary
right of ownership. The House of Commons is a representa-
tive assembly of two delegates from each local union of long-
shoremen. The dock managers, to the number of twenty or
thirty, meet in their house on one side of the street ; the long-
shoremen, to the number of sixty or more, meet in another
house on the other side. Each house appoints a conference
committee of four or five members, including its president and
secretary. These committees receive proper instructions from
their constituent bodies. They meet in joint sessions, where
they present their demands and counter-demands. They are
referred back to the respective houses for discussion and further
instructions. In this way, for ten or fifteen days, they higgle
and bluff and parry until they can agree on a scale of wages
and conditions of labor for every port and every kind of traffic
under their joint jurisdiction. There is no arbitration ; nothing
is submitted to a disinterested third party. Each house has a
veto on the other. The legislation adopted must be such that
each independently consents to it ; not that each is fully satis-
fied with it, but that each is convinced that nothing better can
be secured without civil war, i e. a strike or lockout. In this
way, some twenty dock companies and several thousand dock
laborers have created the highest form of industrial peace, —
constitutional government.

The bituminous mine operators and the bituminous mine
workers of the four great states of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania have essentially the same constitution, except that
the two houses meet at times upon the same floor. This annual
interstate conference of the bituminous coal industry is the
most picturesque and inspiring event in the modern world of
business. Here is an industry where, for many years, indus-
trial war was chronic, bloodshed frequent, distrust, hatred, and
poverty universal. To-day the leaders of the two sides come
together for a two weeks’ parliament, face to face, with plain
speaking, without politics, religion, or demagogy; and. there
they legislate for an industry that sends upon the market annu-
ally $ 200,000, ooo of product. At the annual joint conference


TRADE AGREEMENTS


3


of 1900 — the third in the history of their constitution — there
were presented the credentials of 195 operators and 450 miners.
The operators, like the dock managers, were there, each in his
own right, as owners of coal mines in the four states. The
miners were there as the elected representatives of 110,000
mine workers in the employment of these same operators.
Here were more than 600 men, sitting on the same floor, the
employers on the right side, the employees on the left side,
each subdivided in four groups, according to their four states,
as follows :


Operators

States

Miners

72

Illinois ... ...

235

60

Indiana (Dists. 8 and 11)

60

50

Ohio

90

13

Pennsylvania (Dist 5 and Central Field) ....

65

*95

Total ... . .

450


Plainly, if the two sides of this conference are to be placed
on an equality, the 450 miners cannot be permitted to outvote
the 195 operators. At the same time, it is an advantage for
them to meet and vote together, instead of separately, as is
done by the longshoremen and dock managers. This obstacle
is overcome by giving to the operators 16 votes and the miners
1 6 votes, subdivided into 4 votes for each state. Thus the
235 miners of Illinois have the same number of votes as the
13 operators of Pennsylvania, and so on. Their votes are cast
by the chairman of each delegation. Finally, and most sig-
nificant of all, while a majority vote decides all questions of
procedure, a tmammons vote is required on all “ main and prin-
cipal questions/' i.e. questions affecting the proposed scale of
wages and trade agreement. The theory is that there are just
two parties to the bargain, — the employer and the workman,
And,* like any voluntary purchase and sale, each party must
consent to all the terms. This unanimous vote is brought
about in the following way. Of course, six hundred men


4


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


cannot u get down to business. ” Not only is the opportunity too
great for cheap and loud talk, but the main discussion is being
continually thrown off the track by subordinate topics. Con-
sequently, the joint conference appoints a “ joint scale com-
mittee ” of thirty-two, including four operators from each state
and four miners from each state, each selected by their respec-
tive caucuses. But this committee of thirty-two finds itself
also too large. It therefore appoints from its own number a
“ subscale committee ” of sixteen, which reports its conclusions
back to the separate houses.

The most comforting feature of these negotiations is the
matter-of-fact way in which each side takes the other. There
is none of that old-time hypocrisy on the part of the employers,
that their great interest in life is to shower blessings upon
their hands ; and there is none of that ranting demagogy on the
part of the workmen about the dignity of labor and the iniquity
of capital. On the contrary, each side frankly admits that its
ruling motive is self-interest ; that it is trying to get as much
as it can and to give as little as it must ; and that the only
sanction which compels them to come together, and to stay
together until they reach a unanimous vote, is the positive knowl-
edge that otherwise the mines will shut down and neither
the miner will earn wages nor the operator reap profits. It is
simply wholesome fear that backs their discussions ; the capi-
talist knows that there are no other laborers in the world whom
he can import as “ scabs ” to take the places of those whose
representatives face him in this conference and this scale com-
mittee, and he knows, too, from a severe experience, that every
one of these 110,000 miners will obey as one man the voice of
these their chosen representatives. The miners know, also,
that these capitalists with whom they are negotiating are the
very ones who control their only opportunities for earning the
wages that fked themselves and their families. Consequently,
everybody knows that an agreement must be reached before
adjournment, or else the industry will be reduced to anarchy, and
their wages and profits, to say nothing of lives, will be destroyed.


TRADE AGREEMENTS


5


Tlje above statement as to the unanimous vote needs quali-
fication. The method of voting is rather that of the unit rule ,
combined with unanimous vote of the units . It will be noticed
from what was said that there are 8 units, 4 for the operators
and 4 for the miners, each casting 4 votes. Now, each unit
makes up its vote by a majority vote of the individuals within
the unit. Indeed, it sometimes occurs that after a so-called
unanimous vote an individual operator rises to protest against
it. But, as a rule, by caucusing and conferring, the operators
vote solidly together and the miners solidly together. The two
sides are brought together only through the services of the
scale committee, as follows :

In every trade agreement there are usually two large and
distinct questions on which the parties differ, namely, wages
and methods of managing employees. The labor side wants
higher wages (including short hours) and restrictions on bosses
and foremen. The employer side wants low wages and a free
hand for the boss. Each side thereupon comes to the joint con-
ference with demands more extreme than it expects to see
granted. At the conference of 1900 the operators offered an
advance of 9 cents per ton and the miners demanded an
advance of 20 cents. The operators wished to retain the system
of paying for the screened coal only, and not for the slack and
waste ; but the miners demanded payment on the basis of the
“ run-of-the-mine,” i.e. of all coal brought to the surface, before
it is run over the screens. The miners asked also 7 cents dif-
ferential between pick and machine mining, but the operators
wanted 12 cents differential.

These opposing propositions had been formulated in separate
conventions and conferences by the opposing sides. The opera-
tors’ position was presented to the joint conference and received
the unanimous “ aye” of the operators and the unanimous “no”
of the miners. The miners’ proposition was then presented,
and received the unanimous “ aye ” of the miners and the unani-
mous, “no ” of the operators. The two sides then began their
parrying. Mr. Mitchell accused the operators of “joking.”
The operators accused the miners of absurdity. Several days


6


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


were spent in these tilts. An operator acted as chairman* with
eminent fairness ; a miner acted as secretary. Finally, when
the occasion seemed desperate and everybody had threshed out
his opinions and proclaimed his unalterable determination never
to yield, the scale committee held its private sessions for a day
and a half. Concessions were made on both sides. Certain
matters were left undecided or referred back to the state con-
ferences. The committee reported a unanimous agreement,
and the joint conference adopted it unanimously. It gave an
advance of 14 cents in some districts, and 9 cents in others.
It permitted the “ mine-run " standard in certain districts, and
the “ screened " standard in other districts, and a “double stand-
ard" in yet a third group of districts, but regulated the size of
the screen and fixed a wide differential between “mine-run "
and “regulation screen/' Similar compromises were made on
the machine scale, day labor, and all along the line. Nobody
was satisfied, yet everybody was satisfied. It was the best they
could do, and it saved the business from paralysis. “A failure
to agree," said President Mitchell in his closing speech,
“would not only have ruined the homes of the miners, but
would have ruined the business of the operators." And though
the miners did not get what they expected, yet, said Mitchell,
“there has never been a time in the history of mining, even
within the recollection of the oldest one among you, when an
advance so great as this, and applied to so great a number of
men, was secured.”

This remarkable form of constitutional government is not the
creation of any single intellect, nor of any constitutional con-
vention. It did not spring self-created from the theories of
economists or publicists. It “just growed," like Topsy and
the British constitution. Indeed, it has not yet finished grow-
ing. No man can be found who can tell who it was that first
suggested this or that feature of their constitution. For more
than twenty-five years the miners and operators have heldjoint
conferences off and on in scattered districts. A temporary
union of miners would spring up, the operators would organize
to meet it, formal or informal conferences would result, but


TRADE AGREEMENTS


7


always heretofore there have been two radical defects in enforc-
ing their agreements: first, the miners' organization did not
control the entire competitive field; second, the constitution
had developed only a legislative branch of government, but not
a judicial branch. Neither of these defects have even yet been
entirely overcome.

The first defect just mentioned was overcome in 1897, as far
as the favorable conditions of existing prosperity demanded,
when -the miners' union conquered the state of Illinois. Prior
to that time it controlled only the northern district of Illinois,
and every effort to establish uniform wages and conditions over
the interstate field was undermined by the cutthroat competi-
tion of the southern districts. But in 1897 the miners inaugu-
rated a notable strike, beginning with less than 1000 members
in that state and no money, and ending in a complete victory,
with 35,000 members and a full treasury. Immediately the
first interstate joint conference was called at Chicago, in Janu-
ary, 1898, and a scale and an agreement were adopted for the
four states. These were successfully enforced everywhere for
the succeeding year. This inspired confidence on the part of
the operators. The second conference was held at Pittsburg, in
January, 1899, and others annually.

The success of each conference depends directly upon the
enforcement of the legislation of the preceding conference.
Curiously enough, this enforcement falls solely upon the
miners' organization. The operators, indeed, have their several
state associations, but no national nor interstate association like
that of the miners. Moreover, the operators are loosely
organized. They can bring only moral suasion to bear upon
the recalcitrant operator who rebels at their national decrees.
But the miners can do more ; they not only can suspend their
own local unions which violate the agreement, but they can
shut down the mine of the rebellious operator and drive him out
of business. The operators understand this, and they know
that tjieir own protection against the cutthroat operator depends
solely on the Miners' Union. President Mitchell, of the union,
at the close of the Indianapolis conference, significantly accepted


8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

his office of joint executive in what might be called his inaugu-
ral. He said : “ I will give notice to the operators now that,
when they go home, unless they keep the agreement inviolate,
we will call the men out ; and I will serve notice on the miners
that, unless they keep the laws of the organization, we will
suspend them from the organization.”

Plainly this amazing inaugural as executive over a grand
national industry — a pledge of an imperimn in imp trio —
depends for its validity on the control of the entire competi-
tive field. Just as southern Illinois prior to 1897 could break
down the executive by sending its labor-exploited coal to the
common markets, so now there is danger in the unorganized
regions of West Virginia, with their negroes and Italians and
poor whites. The output of these unorganized miners is a
growing menace, and when business depression returns will be
an imminent peril. There is also an ever-present irritation in
the hundreds of small mines operated by farmers and others,
and their sons, at odd times and between jobs. In Illinois
there are some 900 mines of which only 200 are represented in
the state association ; the other 700 produce only 10 per cent
of the product. These small concerns are locally troublesome
and may become dangerous.

The second defect in the constitutional government of the
bituminous industry is the absence of a judiciary. The joint
conference is the legislative branch; the president of the
miners' unions is the executive branch ; but there is no judicial
branch. If the reader noticed the quotation above from Presi-
dent Mitchell's inaugural, he will have observed that Mr.
Mitchell himself expects not only to execute the law upon the
operator, but also to decide first whether the operator has
violated it. Now this is plainly a matter for judicial deter-
mination. The interstate agreement has never provided for a
jury nor a judicial hearing. Here is the next line of growth.
And indeed growth has already begun in this direction. The
latest and extremely significant development in this phase of
industrial evolution is the creation, during the year* 1900,
by the Illinois Coal Operators' Association, of the office of


TRADE AGREEMENTS


9


“ Commissioner/’ This commissioner bears the same relation
to the state operators’ association that the president of the state
miners’ association bears to that organization. He lacks, of
course, equal executive power, because his organization does
not hold the whip. But he consults with the miners’ executive
in every case of local dispute. A complaint, for example, comes
to Mr. Justi — “the commissioner” — from an operator some-
where in the state to the effect that the local union has ordered
its members out on a strike. Mr. Justi at once telephones to
Mr. Ryan, the state secretary of the miners. Mr. Ryan forth-
with orders the local union to return to work pending inves-
tigation. Then both Mr. Justi and Mr. Ryan proceed to the
point of disturbance. They hear both sides. They reach a
common interpretation of the interstate agreement as applied to
this particular dispute. The local operator and the local miners
are then informed of the decision and the necessary orders are
given. The case is settled, not by the sole dictum of the
miners’ executive, but by the joint decision of the two execu-
tives of the miners and operators. The first year’s trial of this
innovation has demonstrated its value and has given to it an
indispensable place in the frame of government. It only
remains for other states to create a similar office, 1 and then for
an interstate association of coal operators to create the same
officer to meet the national president of the mine workers’
union. It should be added that in the longshoremen’s agree-
ment these local differences and interpretations of the general
trade agreement are submitted to arbitration, provided the two
executives cannot agree.

Other industries with powerful labor unions have reached
results similar to those of the longshoremen and coal miners,
but by less bulky methods. The conference between the Stove
Founders’ National Defense Association and the Iron Molders’
Union was not only among the first to substitute negotiation
for arbitration as a basis of agreement, but also the first to
create the double executive and judiciary. The employers had

1 Other state and local associations of operators have more recently selected
commissioners, and in 1905 they formed an association for the discussion of com-
mon questions. There is as yet no permanent office of the interstate association.


IO


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


organized their association in 1886 for defense against the
powerful rudders’ union, which, they felt, was tyrannizing their
business. In a fiercely fought strike the molders were defeated,
but the employers suffered so seriously that they consented
to discuss plans for future trade agreements. In 1891 five
representatives of each organization met in a constitutional
convention. Here, unlike the miners, they created outright a
brand-new form of government. The representatives of the
molders urged the strict arbitration plan. The manufacturers,
says President Castle, of their organization, “ refused to enter
into an agreement that would obligate them in advance to sub-
mit important questions affecting their business to the decision
of an odd, disinterested man, who had no knowledge of the
business and who might be biased. Arguments upon this ques-
tion were earnest and extended. It was contended extremely
difficult to secure the services of such a man. Extravagant,
unjust, and ridiculous demands would be made by the molders
because there would be a chance to gain through the odd man,
while there could not possibly be a loss. The employer would
not stand an even chance with the employee, aside from the
merits of the situation, in an average number of arbitrations,
because public sympathy is with the workman ; they have the
votes ; they have patronage to bestow upon every business and
profession, and they know how to use this influence to the
best advantage.”

It was finally agreed to create a conference committee of six
members, three from each organization. This committee meets
every year in March or April and establishes a general piece-
rate scale of prices for the year. There is no concurrent confer-
ence of the two organizations on the large scale existing in the
wharfage and coal-mining industries. All local disputes con-
cerning the interpretation of the national agreement are settled
locally if possible; if not, then by the two presidents of the
national associations ; but if these disagree, then by the original
conference committee of six, wherein a majority vote decides.
In nine years this conference committee has been called
together only once, so successful have been the presidents in


TRADE AGREEMENTS


II


settling every dispute. During these nine years there has not
been a general strike, and no local strike or lockout has lastejJ
more than one or two days. During the depression there was
no reduction in wages, but in 1899 there was an advance of 10
per cent, and in 1900 an advance of 5 per cent. The total
advances to 1902 were 20 per cent. Other industries might
be mentioned, but these illustrate the principles.

First, the employer must recognize the union. This does
not necessarily mean unionizing his place. Here is an interest-
ing phase of these national trade agreements. The employers
who enter into them make a distinction, as already stated,
between the question of wages and the question of control over
their own business. They are willing to pay high wages if all
their competitors pay the same wages. It is not high wages
that they dread, but secret and unfair cutting of wages. This
is also exactly what the laborers resist. The joint state or
national agreements place all competitors on the same basis in
the same market. Indeed, in the coal trade the scale is nicely
adjusted so that the districts with the better quality of coal and
the lower railway charges are required to pay enough higher
wages than other districts to counterbalance their superior
natural advantages. On this basis, so far as the union enforces
the agreement every operator knows exactly what his competi-
tor's coal is costing ; there is no secret cutting ; and the trade
is not brought down to the level of the few unscrupulous and
oppressive operators who grind down their laborers. For this
reason the bulk of employers who have had experience with
these joint agreements are heartily in favor of them.

But the case is different with the restrictive rules of the
unions. Formerly an operator dreaded most of all the “pit
committee" of the local union. This committee corresponds
to the walking delegate. The “pit committee" would often
dispute with the foreman or boss as to authority over the men,
and would order miners to do this or that and forbid them to
do other things, in contradiction to the orders of the foreman.
Consequently, when the mine-workers' union demanded in their
first interstate agreement that only union men be employed, the


12


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


operators refused, and that question is still a draw. But it has
practically solved itself. Since there is no interstate legislation
on the subject, the local unions are free to take the matter into
their own hands ; and they have done this effectually by refus-
ing to work with nonunion men. And the local operators have
everywhere quietly conceded the point, because they no longer
are subject to the “ pit committee ” If they have any trouble
now with that committee, they call in the two executive and
judicial officers of the two state or national associations and
these decide the issue between the “pit committee” and the
operator.

This matter works out in the same way in the stove trade.
The employers jealously refused to unionize their shops, but
they found when their national agreements got in working
order that a “ union ” shop is just as free as an “ independent ”
shop. The case is different with the longshoremen, the boot
and shoe workers, and the typographical union, where local
disputes are submitted to an outside arbitrator. In these
agreements the factories and shops are required to be unionized.
The unions claim that otherwise they cannot enforce upon their
own locals the arbitration awards.

The most important result of these trade agreements is the
new feeling of equality and mutual respect which springs up in
both employer and employee. After all has been said in press
and pulpit about the “dignity of labor,” the only “dignity”
that really commands respect is the bald necessity of dealing
with labor on equal terms. With scarcely an exception the
capitalist officials who make these agreements with the labor
officials of these powerful unions testify to their shrewdness,
their firmness, their temperance, their integrity, and their faith-
fulness to contracts. Magnificent generalship is shown in
combining under one leadership the miscellaneous races, reli-
gions, and politics that compose the miners or the dock laborers
of America. The labor movement of no other country has
faced such a problem.

J. R. Commons.


II


THE MINERS’ UNION: ITS BUSINESS MANAGE-
MENT 1

The United Mine Workers of America has a total member-
ship in the United States exceeding 300,000. Its officials claim
for it the distinction of being the strongest and largest single
trade union in the world. It is well organized in at least ten of
the twenty-seven coal-producing states, and is gradually extend-
ing its power into all of the twenty-seven. About 75 per cent
of all the coal mine employees in the country are at present
members of the union; more than 85 per cent of the total of
486,000 are governed by the union’s scales and work under its
conditions of employment ; and, the officials of the union claim,
fully 90 per cent of all coal mine workers in the United States
would go out on a strike if a national suspension of coal mining
is ever found to be necessary by the union.

, The general scheme of organization of the United Mine
Workers bears a close resemblance in many of its features to
that of our political organization. It is composed of national,
district, subdistrict, and local unions. The jurisdiction of the
national union is intended to cover the entire coal-producing
area of the country. At present it is effective in Ohio, Indiana,
Illinois, Kansas, Iowa, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Ala-
bama, the hard-coal fields of Pennsylvania, and in portions of
the central and western bituminous coal fields of that state. It
also extends into Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, Michigan,
Arkansas, Indian Territory, Colorado, New Mexico, Montana,
and Texas.

1 From *AnnaZs, American Academy of Political Science , Vol. XXV, 1905, pp.
67-86. See also Report Anthracite Coal Strike Commission, Bulletin No 46,
XI, „S..Bureau of Labor; John Mitchell, Organized Labor, chapters 40 to 45.

13


14


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Subject to the constitution of the national union and the
legislation of the national convention the district union gener-
ally has jurisdiction over a particular state. This is due to the
convenience of state line divisions. There are exceptions, how-
ever. In Pennsylvania, for example, owing to the unusual promi-
nence of the coal-producing area of that state, there are six
districts: Districts i, 7, and 9 in the anthracite region; Dis-
trict 2 in the Clearfield or central soft coal field ; District 5 in
the Pittsburg or western bituminous coal field ; and District 16,
which also includes Maryland. In Indiana District 8 covers the
block coal field and District 1 1 the bituminous coal territory of
that state. In a few cases one district extends over more than
one state, — District 17 includes Virginia as well as West Vir-
ginia and District 21 takes in Arkansas and Indian Territory.
Under the constitution and legislation of the district union are
the subdistrict unions. These subdistrict unions have been
made a feature of the organization in order that special regula-
tion may be secured in particular cases for widely varying con-
ditions, which prevail in almost every state, without placing the
whole district in jeopardy when only small areas are affected.
Within the jurisdiction of the subdistrict are the local unions,
— the units making up the district and national unions. The
local union is the smallest of the four unions. It usually has
jurisdiction over the mine workers at a particular colliery or
mine. It must have at least ten members. The constitution
and legislation of the national union and the agreement of the
Interstate Joint Conference, which latter is entered into between
representatives of operators and mine workers, take precedence
and are supreme over all the unions. The district exercises
authority and governing surveillance over the subdistricts, and
the subdistrict over the locals. Each union, however, has its
own constitution and by-laws, its own officers and conventions,
and it legislates for its own particular area within the authority
granted to it.

The United Mine Workers of America is one of the most
democratic organizations in the world, but has the possibility
of becoming all at once one of the most autocratic. It is


THE MINERS’ UNION


*5


democratic in the sense that in the final analysis its policy and
management is in the hands of its members. All power vests
with them in their collective capacity. To them in their local
unions every great question affecting the national union is
referred sooner or later, and from the local unions come the final
decisions on all such questions. They nominate and elect by
direct vote of the members the president, vice president, and
secretary-treasurer ; indirectly through their particular districts
they elect the members of the national executive board ; they
choose the delegates that make up the national convention ; they
send instructions to this convention ; upon most of the recom-
mendations made to this convention by the president they in-
struct their delegates before the convention assembles how they
are to vote ; they not only choose the national and their own
local officers, but through regularly elected delegates they com-
pose the subdistricts and districts and through these determine
the policy that is to be adopted in any particular instance.

Once a year representatives of the local unions meet in regu-
lar convention as the national union, usually at Indianapolis,
beginning the third Monday in January, and for ten days or two
weeks outline the policy of the national union for the ensuing
year. This convention possesses absolute power ; there is noth-
ing affecting the organization it cannot do even to altering or
amending its fundamental law, the constitution. It can even
abrogate, if it so chooses, the agreement of the Interstate Joint
Conference. The representatives to this convention are elected
directly by the local unions on the basis of one vote in the con-
vention for each one hundred members (or less), and an addi-
tional vote for each additional one hundred members or majority
fraction thereof. No representative, however, can cast more
than five votes on any question. The representative must be
“a miner or mine worker or employed by the organization ”
and a member in good standing of a local union in the district
where he resides . 1 The constitution of the national union inter-
prets the term “ miner or mine worker ” as meaning “any one
working in or around the mines and a member of a local union!'

1 Section 2, Article V, of the constitution.


1 6 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

No member of the United Mine Workers occupying a position
other than that of miner or mine worker, excepting those hold-
ing positions with the organization, is eligible as representative
to any subdistrict, district, or national convention. Special
conventions, the delegates to which must possess the above
qualifications, are provided for by the constitution.

The purpose of the national convention is to legislate on any
question pertaining to the objects of the organization. These
objects are expressed in the preamble to the constitution.
“ There is no fact more generally known or more widely
believed/’ says this preamble, “than that without coal there
would not have been any such grand achievements, privileges
and blessings as those which characterize the twentieth-century
civilization, and believing as we do, that those whose lot it is
to daily toil in the recesses of the earth, mining and putting out
this coal which makes these blessings possible, are entitled to a
fair and equitable share of the same : therefore, we have formed
‘The United Mine Workers of America/ for the purpose of the
more readily securing the objects sought by educating all mine
workers in America to realize the necessity of unity of action
and purpose, in demanding and securing by lawful means the
just fruits of our toil.” The objects of the organization are
declared to be:

First. To secure an earning fully compatible with the dangers of
our calling and the labor performed.

1 Second. To establish as speedily as possible, and forever, our right
to receive pay for labor performed, in lawful money, and to rid our-
selves of the iniquitous system of spending our money wherever our
employers see fit to designate.

Third. To secure the introduction of any and all well-defined and
established appliances for the preservation of life, health and limbs
of all mine employees.

Fourth . To reduce to the lowest possible minimum the awful catas-
trophes which have been sweeping our fellow-craftsmen to untimely
graves by the thousands ; by securing legislation looking to the most
perfect system of ventilation, drainage, etc.

Fifth. To enforce existing laws ; and where none exist, enact and
enforce them; calling for a plentiful supply of suitable timber for


THE MINERS’ UNION


*7


supporting the roof, pillars, etc., and to have all working places ren-
dered as free from water and impure air and poisonous gases as
possible.

Sixth. To uncompromisingly demand that eight hours shall con-
stitute a day’s work, and that not more than eight hours shall be
worked in any one day by any mine worker. The very nature of our
employment, shut out from the sunlight and pure air, working by the
aid of artificial light (in no instance to exceed one candle power),
would, in itself, strongly indicate that, of all men, a coal miner has
the most righteous claim to an eight-hour day.

Seventh . To provide for the education of our children by lawfully
prohibiting their employment until they have attained a reasonably
satisfactory education, and in every case until they have attained
fourteen years of age.

Eighth . To abrogate all laws which enable coal operators to cheat
the miners, and to substitute laws which enable the miner, under the
protection and majesty of the state, to have his coal properly weighed
or measured, as the case may be.

Ninth . To secure, by legislation, weekly payments in lawful
money.

Tenth . To render it impossible, by legislative enactment in every
state, for coal operators or corporations to employ Pinkerton detect-
ives or guards, or other forces (except the ordinary forces of the
state) to take armed possession of the mines in cases of strikes or
lockouts.

Eleventh . To use all honorable means to maintain peace between
ourselves and employers; adjusting all differences, so far as possible,
by arbitration and conciliation, that strikes may become unnecessary.

The means for obtaining these ends are declared to be con-
ciliation, arbitration, or strikes. All three methods have been
employed in the course of the union's existence.

In order to carry out the policy of the national convention, to
enforce the constitution, and for the conduct of the business of
the national union, there are a president, a vice president, a
secretary-treasurer and an executive board, whose terms of office
are from April i of one year to March 3 1 of the next. These
officials* with the exception of the executive board, are nomi-
nated by the local unions (a candidate must be nominated by at
least three locals), and they are elected during the first week in


1 8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

December of each year by a majority of the popular vote of the
members voting who are in good standing at that time in the
national, district, or local unions. Any member in good stand-
ing in the organization is eligible to hold office in the national
union, provided he is not at the same time a salaried officer of
a district and has been a member of a local union for one year
preceding his election The nominations are made by the locals
on specially prepared blanks two months before the annual
national convention. Every candidate thus nominated must be
notified and his consent secured before his name is placed on
the ballots. These are then sent to the locals from the national
offices not later than six weeks before the convention is to
assemble. Each member present in his local union meeting at
the time of the election has one vote for each officer to be
chosen. Severe penalties are attached to the violation by any
officer or local union of the constitutional provisions governing
the election. Not later than twenty days prior to the national
convention the ballot of each local must be sent in special
envelopes, sealed, and marked “ election returns,” addressed to
the national secretary-treasurer, and by this officer deposited in
an unopened ballot box. Only the national auditors, or their
alternates, who are also selected by popular vote, are to open
this box. The result of this election as canvassed by them is
reported to the national convention, which declares elected to
the respective offices those candidates receiving the majority of
the votes cast. In case there is no election under this provi-
sion, the convention chooses the national officers, each delegate
casting by ballot the number of votes for which his local has
paid per capita tax.

This referendum plan for selecting the officers of the national
union became effective for the first time in 1902 and is still to
be regarded in its experimental stage. It has not given satis-
faction, as recent elections have demonstrated that the rank
and file, take very little interest in balloting for the candidates
except in those districts where strikes are in progress, or have
just been closed, or are about to be inaugurated. A scheme
is now under advisement to make participation in the annual


THE MINERS’ UNION


19


election for national officers compulsory by fining members who
do not vote unless a sufficient excuse can be given. Formerly
the election of national officers was by delegates to the national
convention. Under this plan it was possible to elect a national
officer by less than a majority of the votes of the members of
the local unions. It was also possible for officers or candidates
to manipulate the election or to form a combination to control
the affairs of the organization and perpetuate themselves in
power. The plan of election by popular vote was designed to
obviate these defects.

When the national convention is not in session all power
under its legislation and the constitution of the national union
is vested in the national officers. During this time, which is
for all but about two weeks of the year, supreme authority is,
in the final analysis, in the hands of one man, the national
president. In case of conflict of policy the decision of the presi-
dent is final. He has power to suspend or remove any national
officer “for insubordination or just and sufficient cause j 1 he
temporarily fills all vacancies in the national offices. The con-
stitution provides that in the exercise of the power of removal
and appointment he shall have the consent of the executive
board, but he can suspend or remove the members of this
board. He has strong influence over them in still another way:
as members of the board these officers receive no salary, but
nearly all of them are paid $4 a day and expenses as organ-
izers. Their positions as organizers depend entirely upon
appointment by the president. Moreover, the president with
the vice president and the secretary-treasurer are members of
the board. It convenes at his call and is presided over by him.
He decides all questions of dispute concerning the meaning of
the constitution ; he signs all bills and official documents ; he
determines the salaries of all employees with $3.50 or less a
day and who are not elected by the national convention ; he
presides at all national conventions, both regular and special ;
usually^ he presents an address to these gatherings, reviewing
the work of the national union and recommending whatever
1 Section 2, Article II, of the constitution.


20


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


action he deems best upon any question before the organization.
His recommendations are generally adopted. He calls special
national conventions when instructed by the executive board
or requested by five districts. He also summons conventions
of two or more districts. He may at any time, in person or
through a national officer, visit local unions, district or sub-
district conventions, and any other places connected with the
organization ; he may appoint representatives to examine the
financial accounts of any local union and instruct its officers in
their duties ; in brief, he exercises general supervision over the
workings of all the unions — local, subdistrict, district, as well
as national. In 1902 he was paid a salary of $1800. This
amount has since been increased to $3000. He is required to
devote his time and attention to the organization.

No strike can be ordered by any district nor can final action
be taken upon any questions directly or indirectly affecting the
interests of the mine workers of another district until the
approval of the national -president is secured in writing, or, if
he disapproves, until favorable action upon an appeal from his
decision has been taken by the executive board. An exception
to this, of course, occurs in case the strike or action has been
ordered by the national convention. Local strikes are under
the. jurisdiction of the district officers. Together with the other
national officers the president has the power to order a suspen-
sion of mining operations by members of the union in any dis-
trict or districts where such action is deemed advisable for the
settlement of a strike in another district or for the good of the
union. The national officers form districts and assign to them
the number of men and the extent of territory they are to have
jurisdiction over; and they may at any time change the bound-
ary and jurisdiction of any district.

The vesting of such great power by the United Mine
Workers of America in the hands of one man is due primarily
to the exigencies of strike times when for all practical pur-
poses the union becomes a military organization in the control
of which there must not be the least possibility of divided lead-
ership. Labor unions have been taught through sad experience,


THE MINERS’ UNION


21


and none more so than the United Mine Workers, that an
industrial army moving for higher wages and better conditions
of employment must have but one commander in chief if the
possibility of defeat is to be reduced to a minimum.

Next in importance to the president in the conduct of the
national union is the executive board. This board is in a
sense the organization’s board of directors. It is composed of
one member from each district. Unlike the selection of the
president, the members of this board are not chosen directly by
the local unions, but by the district conventions made up of
delegates elected by the locals — somewhat like the choosing of
United States senators by state legislatures. At the present
time there are twenty-three members, one each from the twenty
districts throughout the country, and the president, vice presi-
dent, and secretary-treasurer who are members ex officio. This
makes the board too large and unwieldy for expediting business
and recently, with the rapid spread of the union and the conse-
quent increase in the number of districts, this question has
come to be a very serious one to the officers of the organization.
It is more than probable that before long some other plan for
selecting the board members will be substituted. Formerly
the national convention elected the six or eight members of the
board. Another objection to the board as at present con-
stituted is that each member has one vote in its deliberations.
This gives to a district having only 2000 members (such as
District 16 in Maryland) as much voting influence as a district
having 75,000 mine workers (such as District 1 in the anthra-
cite region of Pennsylvania) This makes it possible for board
fnembers representing but 20 per cent of the total membership
to determine the policy of the national union when the conven-
tion is not in session. The evil of this defect is somewhat
lessened in its scope by the constitutional provision making
necessary a vote of two thirds of the members of the board before
a general strike or national suspension order can be issued, and
by the* power of suspension and removal lodged with the presi-
dent. The evil of this inequality in the voting strength of the
districts in the board has been made still less serious as a result


22


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of the anthracite strike in 1902. In the convention of 1903
following that memorable struggle, President Mitchell in his
annual address said on this point : “ Our membership in the
anthracite fields represents practically 40 per cent of the total
membership of the organization, while the voting strength of
the three members of the national executive board from the
anthracite field is only about 1 5 per cent of the voting strength
of the national organization on the executive board.” He
stated that he did not believe any advantage would be taken of
this disproportionate representation, “but in order to overcome
what appears to be a plausible objection on the part of the
anthracite railway presidents to recognition of our union, I
should recommend that upon the question of inaugurating a
strike in the anthracite field the anthracite members of the
national executive board be given equal voting power with the
members of the executive board from the bituminous fields.
Upon all other questions the voting strength of the members
of the board may remain as at present.” This recommendation
of the president was adopted by the convention in passing an
amendment to the constitution providing that each member in
the executive board, in voting on the question of a general
strike or suspension, “shall have one vote, and one additional
vote for every 5000 members in good standing they represent,
or a majority fraction thereof.”

This executive board, including the president, wields power
next in importance to that of the national convention ; in fact,
it executes the orders of the national convention and between
conventions exercises full power to direct the workings of the
national union, including the levying and collecting of assess-
ments. Not only does it have the power to order a general
strike or suspension, but it can overrule upon appeal the deci-
sions of district officers upon questions affecting strikes within
the district. It is also a court of appeal upon questions affect-
ing the interests of two or more districts, excepting in those
cases where the national convention has taken action. The
board convenes upon the order of the president, its presiding
officer or chairman, or of the secretary-treasurer at the request


THE MINERS’ UNION


23


of eleven of its members. It may at any time instruct the
president to call a special national convention. It holds in
trust for the national union all moneys in the treasury over
$15,000. Among its other duties is that of a national board
of conciliation and arbitration.

Nearly all the members of the executive board are employed
by the president as national organizers. As such they receive
$4 a day and expenses. These are the “ walking delegates/ 1
They bear the brunt of the fight, are always to be found in the
thickest of it, and generally constitute the advance guard of the
field force of the organization when an invasion of territory
heretofore unorganized is decided upon. They are the mission-
aries of the new doctrine as to the rights of man ; they usually
are compelled to blaze it forth to their kind in a wilderness of
conflicting passions and class hatreds ; they are met with sus-
picion and bitter antagonism even from those they would save
from industrial servitude. These organizers are of many tongues ;
they go among strange peoples from many climes. They teach
their doctrine of unionism alike to the Negro, the Slav, the
Lithuanian, the Greek, the German, the Englishman, and the
American. Through months and even years of bitter antago-
nism, of almost crushing opposition, they work patiently at
their tasks to bring the many nationalities into the organiza-
tion and to mold the heterogeneous mass into unity of belief
and action. Fearless and undaunted they bear persecution and
suffer imprisonment and even death for the faith that is in
them. However far apart one’s views may be from the ends
and objects professed by these organizers, if he could but see
the spirit of martyrdom often exhibited by them, he would
believe, as the writer does, that they are performing a real and
a lasting work as pioneers in the formation of our industrial
state.

These organizers, going into coal fields whose mine workers
are outside the national union, begin their task by getting into
personal touch with the men. They stop them on the street
corners, visit the places in which they are in the habit of con-
gregating, distribute among them tracts containing information


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


24

about the organization, and in various other ways plant the idea
of unionism in the minds of a few of the men. From these few
it spreads, at first almost unobservably, until gradually more
and more of the workers begin talking about “the union,” and
by degrees nearly all the employees of the mine, or where the
mines are in close proximity the employees of a number of
mines, are discussing the objects and benefits of organiza-
tion. When he thinks the time opportune the organizer calls a
meeting of those he believes interested in the movement and
organizes them into a local union. They secure a charter and
other supplies from the national headquarters for $15 and are
assigned a number by which the local is to be officially known.
In some cases the jurisdiction of a local extends to two or more
collieries or mines, but as a rule it is confined to the employees
of a single mine. Where a mining plant employs several thou-
sand men they are organized into a number of locals, usually
according to nationality or language, or, in case they are scat-
tered in nearby mining towns, to place of residence.

Once the national union gains a foothold in a coal field its
spread is rapid or slow, depending upon the particular condi-
tions encountered. Miners, mine laborers, and other workmen,
skilled and unskilled, employed in and about the mine, except-
ing the mine manager and the top boss, may join its ranks. No
one is excluded because of race, color, or nationality. Each
member is expected to pay twenty-five cents a month as dues
and whatever assessments are levied. He is provided with a
“due card” upon which the amounts paid by him are entered.
This card is his evidence of membership. (In some coal fields, —
in the anthracite region of Pennsylvania for example, — where
the union is not recognized by the operators, the members wear
buttons in the lapels of their coats as indicating membership
in the organization ) Provision is made for issuing transfer
cards when members go from one mine to another. Local
unions are compelled to accept all properly made out transfer
cards and must admit the holder to membership provided he
has been a member of the organization for at least three
months. No member in good standing who holds a due or


THE MINERS’ UNION


25


transfer card “ shall be debarred or hindered from obtaining
work on account of race, creed, or nationality /' 1 When any
member is suspended or discharged from his place at the mine
a committee of the local (the mine committee) makes an investi-
gation, and if it finds that the member is not guilty of an offense
justifying his discharge, the grievance is reported in writing to
the subdistrict and district presidents ; if these upon investiga-
tion find the report of the committee to be correct, it is made
their duty to insist upon the reinstatement of the suspended
or discharged member. Members of the locals elect their own
officers every six months and legislate for their own particular
area, subject to the constitutions of the national, district, and
subdistrict unions. Each local is compelled to become a part
of the subdistrict located within its district and to contribute
to it before the local can secure representation in either the
district or the national union, and to secure the benefits of the
national union the local must at all times be in good standing
with the national, district, and subdistrict unions. All locals
three months or more in arrears for dues or assessments are
published each month by the national secretary-treasurer. This
is called the “ unfair list ” by the locals in good standing.

It is in the local union that strikes usually have their origin.
Its members are the workers in and about the mines and are
the first to feel the effects of the adverse conditions of employ-
ment which give rise to grievances. Whenever any difference
arises between the members of a local and their employers it is
made the duty of the officers of that local to endeavor to effect
an amicable adjustment, and failing in this to notify the officers
of the district having jurisdiction over the particular local. If
the district officers after an investigation of the cause of the
complaint fail to effect a peaceable settlement “ on a basis that
would be fair and just to aggrieved members," 2 and find that a
strike would best serve the interests of the particular locality,
they may order the inauguration of a strike. The local has the
right of appeal from the decision of the district officers to the

1 Section 3, Article VII, of the constitution.

2 Section 1, Article X, of the constitution.


26 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

national executive board. Local strikes not approved by the
district officers or the national executive board are not supported
by the district, and any local union striking in violation of these
provisions may be refused recognition by the national officers.
In fact, such unauthorized action on the part of a local union
has resulted in its being deprived of its charter. Suspension
of local unions has occurred on several occasions during the
past five or six years. The charter of a local union at Saline-
ville, Ohio, was revoked in 1902 because it engaged in a strike
disapproved by the national officers.

No district can take final action upon questions that directly
or indirectly affect the interests of the mine workers of another
district or that require a strike to determine until the president
and secretary of the aggrieved district “ shall jointly prepare,
sign, and forward to the national president a written statement
setting forth the grievances complained of, the action contem-
plated by the district, together with the reasons therefor, and
the national president shall, within five days after the receipt
of such statement, either approve or disapprove of the action
contemplated by the aggrieved district, and such approval or
disapproval, together with the reasons therefor, shall be made
in writing, and a copy forwarded to the secretary of the com-
plaining district. Should the action contemplated by the
aggrieved district receive the approval of the national presi-
dent, the district shall be free to act, but should the national
president disapprove the action contemplated, the district may
appeal to the National Executive Board, which shall be con-
vened to consider such appeal within five days after its receipt
by the national secretary. Until the national president has
approved, or the National Executive Board has sustained the
appeal, no district shall be free to enter upon a strike unless it
shall have been ordered by a national convention.” 1 . . . “The
national officers shall, at any time they deem it to the best
interest of mine workers in a district that is idle, for just and
sufficient reasons, order a suspension in any other district or
districts that would in any way impede the settlement of the

1 Section 2, Article X, of the constitution


THE MINERS’ UNION


27


district affected : provided, that such action would conserve to
the best interest of the United Mine Workers of America/' 1

As the machinery for the inauguration of a strike is first put
in motion by the local union, so does the success of the strike
depend to a large degree upon the support given by the locafs,
not only by those whose members happen to be on strike but
by those in other fields whose members remain at work. The
members of the locals constitute the rank and file of the organ-
ization : they are the privates, corporals, and sergeants of the
great army of mine workers moving toward an improvement in
the conditions of their employment. In peace times they pre-
pare the organization for strikes by contributing in dues and
assessments to the district and national unions besides provid-
ing for their own local treasuries. So well did they do this in
1902 that immediately upon the special national convention
issuing its appeal for relief to carry on the anthracite mine
workers' strike, District 12 (Illinois) contributed $50,000 from
its treasury, District 8 (Indiana) $10,000, District 11 (Indi-
ana) $8000, District 13 (Iowa) $5000, District 2 (Central
Pennsylvania) $3,259.50, and Districts 25 (Missouri) and 20
(Alabama) $1000 each. Only a month before this appeal was
issued District 12 (Illinois) had contributed $50,000 for the
conduct of the strike in the two Virginias, making $100,000
from one district alone within two months for carrying on
strikes. Besides the districts the subdistricts and locals in all
the organized coal producing states contributed in the aggre-
gate a large sum from their respective treasuries to prosecute
the strike of the anthracite miners.

Under the constitution every local union is required to pay .
into the national treasury a per capita tax of ten cents a month
for each member and such additional assessments as may be
levied by the national executive board. Boys under sixteen
years of age are regarded as half members and pay one half as
much tax and assessment as full members. In the deliberations
of the local each boy member has one half a vote. These dues
and assessments from the locals form the principal sources of

1 Section 3, Article X, of the constitution.


28


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


income for the national union. When a strike of unusual pro-
portions is in progress contributions from other labor organiza-
tions and from the general public increase the funds in the
national treasury. The important part these play in the con-
duct of the organization was shown during the six months’
strike in the anthracite region of Pennsylvania in 1902. To
carry on that struggle alone, not including the expenses accom-
panying the strike of mine workers in progress at the same
time in the Virginias, the various unions of the United Mine
Workers of America voluntarily donated $258,344 and the
members of the organization paid in special assessments
$1,967,026, a total of $2,225,370. This is more impressive
when it is remembered that more than one half of the members
of the union, including the 147,000 anthracite mine workers,
were on strike, and in consequence made no contributions to
the defense fund. From the trade unions and the general
public $419,954 was contributed. The total amount t paid by
the United Mine Workers for strike purposes from January 1
to December 31, 1902, was $1,889,202. This included the cost
of smaller strikes in seven districts besides the ones in the
three anthracite districts of Pennsylvania and the district cov-
ering the two Virginias. A total of 184,000 mine workers in
the United States were on strike for two months and 160,000
for five months during 1902. In that year the total income of
the United Mine Workers of America was $3,010,877.82, and
the total expenditures $2,080,805.44. At the beginning of
1903 there was a balance in the national treasury of the union
of $1,027,120.29 1

All this indicates the importance of the financial organization
of the United Mine Workers of America. This constitutes one
of the strongest features of the national union. At its head is
the secretary-treasurer, nominated and elected directly by the
vote of the members of the local unions. He conducts all the
business of the organization concerning the management of
national headquarters, having charge of all books, documents,
and effects ; supervises the Mine Workers' Journal , the official
1 Report national secretary-treasurer, 1903.


THE MINERS’ UNION


29


weekly organ of the union ; receives all moneys and pays ail bills,
excepting when the president orders otherwise and providing
that not over $15,000 is subject to the secretary-treasurer’s
order at any one time. All sums over this amount are deposited
by him to the credit of the executive board, and to draw upon
these a written order of two thirds of the board members is
necessary. He is required to give a bond of $25,000. His
yearly salary in 1902 was $1500 and expenses, but it has since
been increased to $2500 and expenses. As a rule he reports
quarterly to the locals the condition of the national treasury.

Over all the sources of revenue and expenditure the national
secretary-treasurer enforces strict discipline with severe penal-
ties for violations of the rules. Each secretary of a local is
required by the national constitution to fill out and forward to
the national and district secretary-treasurers before the twenty-
fifth of each month a report of all members in good standing
in that local on the first day of that month, together with all
taxes and assessments due from it to the national and district
officers. For a violation of this provision a local union is sub-
ject to suspension from all privileges or benefits until the defi-
ciency is made good. To keep a check on these reports the
local secretary must inform the national office of the amount of
money paid and the number of members reported to the district
secretary, and must send the same statement to the district
office. He is required to certify that such report, is for the full
number of members in good standing in the local. Despite
these constitutional provisions not a few of the locals fail to
report the full number of members in good standing, excepting
about the time of the national convention, and they do it then
in order to secure in the convention as large a voting repre-
sentation as possible. The reason for their not making the full
report is generally traced to the desire of the locals to have
their own treasuries well filled in order to meet their own
particular wants. Some of the locals have in this way succeeded
in purchasing ground and erecting a building for their head-
quarters. All financial officers of the local unions are required
to give a bond “for the faithful performance of their duties.”


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


30

It sometimes happens, however, that officers prove faithless to
their trust and abscond with the moneys. The national union
makes efforts to have them arrested and punished, but it does
not always succeed.

If the members of a local are idle for one month or more,
they are exonerated from the payment of the per capita tax
and assessments until they resume work. This condition may
occur through a mine being abandoned or idle for repairs, by
reason of a strike, or other causes. But to secure such exoner-
ation a request, signed by the president, secretary, and mine
committee, must be approved by the district and national secre-
taries each month, in place of the regular monthly financial report,
as long as the members are idle. In case the local union is in
arrears for two months preceding the one in which the con-
vention is held, or has not in every particular complied with the
constitution of its district, or has less than ten members, it is
not entitled to representation in the national convention.

So well organized are the financial features of the United
Mine Workers of America that the national union was able to
carry on a widespread system of relief to the needy anthracite
mine workers during the closing two months of the 1902 strike.
In this relief work no distinction was made between union and
nonunion men. In fact, the testimony of many witnesses is to
the effect that aid was furnished as freely to the nonunion as
to the union mine workers. For this relief work the members
of the locals were organized into committees of various kinds.
Applications for relief were investigated by one of these com-
mittees, and if conditions were found as represented, orders for
merchandise on local grocers were furnished. On the face of
the order was stated the amount for which it was drawn ; on
the reverse side were blanks for the dates, name, quantity, and
price of the articles purchased. Both the merchant and pur-
chaser signed the order when goods to its face value had been
bought, and then returned it to the committee, which presented
it to the district secretary-treasurer for payment. This officer
then secured direct from national headquarters the necessary
amount to pay the bills. In some parts of the Schuylkill field it


THE MINERS’ UNION


3 *


was found necessary for the union to establish commissaries
and furnish the needy with food direct from its own supplies.
In some parts of the West Virginia field, while the strike there
was in progress, scores of tents were erected in the woods for
sheltering strikers who were driven from their homes. Food
and clothing bought in carload lots by the national union were
shipped from the large cities to the disturbed districts and
distributed among the strikers.

Not only does the financial feature of the organization indi-
cate that the United Mine Workers is founded upon business
principles, but there is still another phase of the work of the
national union which more strongly emphasizes this statement.
This is the holding of an annual joint conference with repre-
sentatives of the operators and coal mining companies of Ohio,
Indiana, Illinois, and the Pittsburg field of Pennsylvania. In
these conferences labor is regarded as a commodity, and the
possessor of this labor — the mine worker — is accorded the
right through representatives of the union to “ bargain ” with
representatives of the purchasers of that labor — the coal-min-
ing companies — for the price of his labor and the conditions
under which it is to be sold. This joint-conference movement in
these four states dates its beginning in 1885, although there
have been periods since then when it was inoperative. 1 The
periods when it was not in force were years of depression in
the coal trade, accompanying general industrial paralysis. The
United Mine Workers of America had come into existence at
Columbus, Ohio, January, 1890, by the amalgamation of the
Progressive Union and the National Trades Assembly, No. 135/
Knights of Labor, both of which organizations had claimed
jurisdiction over the mine workers of the country and between
whom there had been bitter and open hostility. To this divi-
sion in the ranks of the mine workers and to the fact that
the young organization was for a time too weak and adverse


1 For a complete and detailed account of the origin and operation of the Inter-
state Joirtt Conference the reader is referred to the author’s article, “The Union
Movement among Coal Mine Workers,” Bulletin of the Bureau of Labor , Depart'
ment of Commerce and Labor , March, 1904, No. 51.


3 2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


conditions were too strong is partly due the failure to hold
the joint conferences at intervals preceding 1898. They were
restored after the general suspension of soft-coal mining in
eight of the states in 1897 and have been held annually since
then. In Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, and
Alabama annual joint agreements are also signed between
representatives of the mine workers and of the operators in
each state. The conferences in the six last-named states are
held separately and are not a part of the so-called interstate
agreement of the central competitive district. The agreements
entered into, however, cover in general the same specific points,
stating the wages that are to prevail along with specified condi-
tions of employment.

Through these contracts and agreements not a few of the
objects of the national union have been attained and undoubtedly
better conditions of employment have been secured for the mine
workers in the states where they are in effect. Since the
great strike of 1897 the United Mine Workers has extended the
eight-hour workday into the mines of Iowa, Missouri, Kansas,
Michigan, Kentucky, and parts of Tennessee, and has secured
for the mine employees of those states increases in wages
ranging from 13 to over 30 per cent. Increases in the wages
of mine workers in other states have also been secured through
joint conventions with the operators, and increases in wages
with improved conditions of employment were forced from the
railroad mining companies and independent operators in the
three hard-coal fields of Pennsylvania in 1900 and 1902. Arbi-
tration of the questions in dispute between the anthracite mine
workers and the operators by a commission appointed by the
President of the United States was also forced upon the hard-
coal * mining interests. Since 1898 the membership of the
national union has increased from 43,000 to nearly 300,000.
Of this total membership about 185,000 mine employees, pro-
ducing > annually 125,000,000 tons of bituminous coal, or over
one third of the total coal production of the United .States,
now work under agreements. Many of the 147,000 anthracite
mine workers are strongly organized in the national union, but


THE MINERS’ UNION


33


as yet they have been unable to secure agreements from the coal-
hauling railroads which virtually control the mining operations.
These hard-coal miners produce annually about 60,000,000 tons.
The remaining 1 1 5,000 mine workers of the country, producing
annually about 100,000,000 tons of bituminous coal and em-
ployed principally in the states west of the Mississippi and in
West Virginia, Virginia, Michigan, Maryland, and in central and
western Pennsylvania, are as yet unorganized in the United
Mine Workers and have no agreements with their employers.

Enough has been said to show that the management of the
United Mine Workers of America is as much of a business as
is the conduct of any of the great industrial or commercial
enterprises of the present day. It directs its strength against
those forces tending to keep down the price of its commodity,
mine labor, with as much regard for its own particular interests
and in disregard of the interests of others where and when
these conflict as does any of the industrial or other trusts. In
order to control the price of mine labor it aims to prevent mine
workers from selling their labor at a lower price than that set
by the union. It does this by taking them into the organiza-
tion and persuading them to sell their labor at union prices,
or by driving them out of the industry, just as the great steel
trust endeavors to absorb or destroy the independent steel
manufacturer, or as the sugar trust attempts to control or
drive out the independent refiner. The mine worker, refusing
from one cause or another to be governed by the union in the
sale of his labor, is the independent producer of mine labor, or
the nonunion man. In driving out the commodity he has to
sell, the union is forced to attack the individual, as it is impos-
sible to dissociate the one from the other. In consequence vio?
lence and bloodshed result. Not only does the union attempt
in various ways to control this independent producer of mine
labor in the selling of his commodity, but, not unlike the so-called
trusts, in fixing the price of this labor and the conditions under
which it is to be sold, if it feels itself strong enough it brooks
no interference from other organizations which have mine labor
to sell. This is well illustrated by the United Mine Workers


34


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


practically driving out of the anthracite fields of Pennsylvania
the separate organizations of blacksmiths, engineers, carpenters,
and firemen which existed in one or more of the three fields
prior to the recent strikes. We see it again in the union’s
steady absorption of the mine employees in the coal-producing
states west of the Mississippi river, most of whom have been
under the jurisdiction of the Western Federation of Miners,
an organization composed principally of quartz miners, and the
Western Labor Union. If it ever becomes necessary in order
to attain its objects, or once attained, to prevent these objects
being lost, the same absorption by the United Mine Workers of
the coal miners of Canada and Nova Scotia may be looked for.

Trade unionism under the stimulus of the United Mine
Workers of America has come to be a business operation on a
large scale. As a business its success depends upon the close
observance of market conditions and the obeying of laws gov-
erning those conditions. Most trusts deal with material com-
modities — goods that have no feeling or mode of independent
action. They are thus able usually not only to increase the
price of their particular commodity on a rising market, but, if
they so wish, to reduce prices on a falling market. With the
trade union the difference is that it deals with a commodity
possessed by an individual with feelings and sympathies and
modes of independent action. The general experience has been
that when a period of falling prices sets in the possessor of
mine labor objects strongly to reducing the price of his labor.
The past teaches us that he persists stubbornly, even against
the advice of the leader of his union, in his refusal to reduce
his wages and will go to the extent of striking against such
reduction. The trade union also confronts great difficulties in
raising the price of its commodity on rising markets, largely
due to the fact that the consumers of labor, unlike the con-
sumers of most trust commodities, are strongly organized. *The
part of the intelligent labor leader (of the business manager of
labor) is closely to observe the conditions of the labor and gen-
eral markets and all factors likely to affect the wages of the
worker (the price of labor) and to direct his organization along


THE MINERS’ UNION


35


the lines they indicate as the proper course. A study of such
conditions is provided for in the constitution of the United
Mine Workers by giving to the president, with the consent of
the executive board, the power to appoint a man whose duty it
is to collect and compile statistics on production, distribution,
consumption, freight rates, market conditions, and any other
matter of interest connected with the coal trade likely to affect
wages.

Frank Julian Warne.


A remarkable and very unusual instance of the intelligent labor leadership
called for m the concluding paragraph of the foregoing article was the reduction
of wages m the bituminous field accepted by referendum vote of the union m
1904. On account of falling markets the operators had demanded a reduction of
10 per cent in the prices for mining, but after prolonged conference they agreed
to accept a reduction of 5J per cent. The union throughout the country was
obstinately opposed to any reduction, and the revulsion against the action of their
president m recommending and urging the acceptance of the operators’ proposi-
tion showed itself in bitter and outspoken denunciation. Throughout his home
town and elsewhere his picture was turned to the wall. But he and the executive
board carried through their campaign of education, and finally the referendum
vote sustained their position, and thus saved the industry from a general stnke.
This unusual evidence of business sagacity on the part of a union adds interest
to the detailed account of its business management as well as the trade-agreement
system which made such an outcome possible.

In 1906 the miners in the bituminous field demanded a restoration of the wages
paid them in 1903. The operators had not benefited by the reduction, as they
had been forced to make reductions in prices to railroads and other large con-
sumers On this lower basis of prices they declared their inability to restore the
former wages, and the joint conference adjourned after two weeks’ session A
second conference was held at the urgent request of President Roosevelt, but this
also adjourned after three weeks without a settlement A strike followed during
April and May, which served to exhaust the supply of coal, and then after the
union agreed to make concessions in working conditions the former wages were
restored.

In the anthracite field, on the expiration of the three years’ award of the
Anthracite Coal Strike Commission in April, 1906, work was suspended during
one month, while negotiations were in progress between the operators and the
officials of the United Mine Workers. The latter finally agreed to continue work
under the old conditions.

J. R. C.

January, 1907.


Ill

THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO 1

Only since the year 1902 have the teamsters of Chicago
discovered their power. They have always been classed as
unskilled labor, and the old-line trade unionist ridiculed and
discouraged the organizers who ventured to create a teamsters'
union. The skilled unions saw the strategic position of the
teamster, and the brewery workers made some of the brewery
drivers a part of their “ industrial ” union. But the driver felt
‘that they wanted him, not to help him, but to help them.
Only when he broke away and organized his own teamsters'
union did he get enthusiasm, for union principles.

Again, the teamster had never been clearly distinguished from
the team owner. The oldest so-called union was that of the
hack drivers, organized in 1 867. But that was a union of hack
owners as much as hack drivers, since the majority owned the
rigs they drove. Consequently their interest lay rather in hold-
ing up the fares charged to the public than the wages earned
by the driver. Their organization was never influential and
often comatose. Not until 1902 did they take in the livery
drivers employed by the great companies and thereby become
a labor union as well as a guild. Their history since then is
similar to that of other teamsters and drivers.

The laws of the former International Team Drivers' Union,
chartered by the American Federation of Labor in 1899,
admitted to membership a team owner if he operated not more
than five teams This threw the unions, the conventions, and
the laws into the hands of the owners, and prices were more
prominent than wages. Such a union was inherently weak.
While the larger team owners were formally excluded, yet their

1 From the Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol XIX, 1905, pp. 400-433.

^6


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


37


teamsters were not attracted to a union whose views respecting
wages were those of small team owners. The first object neces-
sary to form an effective union was community of interest, and
this required separation from employers. The Chicago team-
sters, in defiance of their international organization, refused to
admit owners; and finally, in 1902, they seceded, and formed
a new national union, including only teamsters and helpers.
They admitted the driver who owned the team he operated, but
excluded him if he owned a team driven by some one else.

Even this differentiation was not enough. Teamsters are
employed in every industry. No craft is so necessary and uni-
versal. But teaming in one industry is distinct from teaming in
another. The laundry driver has little in common with the coal
teamster, except horses and streets. His problems of unionism,
such as methods of payment, hours, and discipline, are differ-
ent. In 1894 coal teamsters, truck drivers, and others were in
a general union, just as they are to-day in smaller towns. But
that union quickly disappeared. In 1886 something similar had
occurred under the Knights of Labor. But in 1902 each in-
dustry was organized separately in its own “local.” Though
each is called a local union, it is more than local in the geo-
graphical sense. Each local is a distinct craft, with jurisdiction
over the entire city for all workmen of its craft, and the princi-
ple recognized for all is the same as that explicitly stated by
the Ice Wagon Drivers : “ Our Local Union has the powers of
self-government, known as Local Autonomy, and, if deemed
advisable, to make such by-laws that will be beneficent to the
local organization, such as admitting persons who own and oper-
ate one team, regulating initiation fees or dues, honorable with-
drawal cards, trials, fines, suspensions and expulsions in con-
formity with the general laws.” There are, of course, many
cases where locals overlap ; and, in order to avoid conflict of
jurisdiction, each stable is assigned to the local to which 51 per
cent or more of its work belongs.

Thus.the teamsters of Chicago were the first to establish two
principles new to the occupation, — craft autonomy and wage
unionism. Starting with these principles, within two years


38 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

there were organized 4 7 locals, from the Truck Drivers with
over 5000 members to the Dye House Drivers with 46. After-
wards this differentiation was found too fine, and some of the
smaller locals were merged into others. Nearly all were organ-
ized during the first year. They created a joint executive
council of seven delegates from each local, with power over
strikes, and in 1903 they amalgamated with the International
Team Drivers, which meanwhile had changed its constitution
to exclude employers. The organization is now known as the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters, with 821 locals in
some 300 cities.

Such sudden and precipitate organization was accomplished
and recognized with scarcely a half dozen strikes. This was
owing partly to the secrecy maintained, but mainly to an early
demonstration of power and a sympathetic interest on the part
of one class of team owners. This second factor is explained by
the peculiar nature of the business.

The two classes of team owners are those who follow teaming
for a living and those whose teaming is an adjunct to their
general business. The latter include the department stores,
the meat packers, grocers and meat markets, the brewers,
the largest manufacturers, the milk dealers, lumber dealers,
railway express companies, ice companies, some of the whole-
sale merchants, and others. The former include truck owners,
expressmen and van owners, liverymen, the commission team
owners, and, to a lesser degree, coal team owners, ice wagon own-
ers, and similar teaming contractors. The significance of this
distinction lies in the fact that many of the manufacturers and
most of the wholesale merchants and commission houses do
their teaming through contractors. With the manufacturers and
wholesale merchants the teamsters' wages are but a small part
of their total expenses. With the retail merchants the propor-
tion is larger, the largest being that of the milk dealers, — 1 5
per cent or less. But with the contracting team owners the
wages of teamsters and helpers are 50 to 75 per cent„of their
total expenses. Consequently, while competition of manufac-
turers and merchants is but slightly affected by the teamsters'


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


39


wages, competition of team owners is mainly a question of the
wages and hours of their competitors. The manufacturer and
wholesale merchant are interested in keeping wages low, but
the team owner is interested in keeping them equal. The team
owner has therefore welcomed and encouraged the organization
of the teamsters, notwithstanding an extraordinary increase in
the rates of wages, because the union equalized competition.
In taking this attitude his position has not been the same as
that of the merchant or manufacturer, whose cost of trucking
was increased whether done directly or by contract. One con-
sequence is that the team owners — by which will be meant
those with whom teaming is their business and not an adjunct
— have organized associations, not only as employers to nego-
tiate with the unions, but also as contractors to regulate rates
of cartage and livery. The principal associations of this kind
are the Chicago Team Owners, dealing with the truck drivers ;
the Furniture Movers and Expressmen’s Association, dealing
with the van teamsters and helpers and the baggage and parcel
delivery drivers and helpers; the Commission Team Owners,
dealing with the commission drivers ; and four liverymen’s
associations, dealing with the hack, coup6, and livery drivers.
These associations determine by joint agreements the rates of
wages and the hours and conditions of labor, and the scales
thus determined are the union scales paid also by merchants
and manufacturers not members of the association to their
teamsters employed directly. Many of the other teamsters’
unions have joint agreements with employers’ associations ; but
such associations being composed of merchants or manufactur-
ers are loose and informal, while the associations named above
are compact and permanent, some of them with bonds and for-
feits binding them not only to the scale of wages but also to
the scale of prices.

The Coal Team Owners and their drivers deserve special
mention by reason of their early leadership and their peculiar
methods. The drivers were organized in the fall of 1900 and
secured individual agreements during 1901. They made further
demands in the winter of 1901-1902, which, added to those


40


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


already secured, doubled the cost of teaming. For a two-horse
wagon they formerly received 50 cents a load of 4 or 5 tons,
and for a three-horse wagon 65 cents a load of 6 or 7 tons,
regardless of distance. At these rates the labor cost of cartage
was about 10 cents a ton, and the teamster earned $8 to $12 a
week of indefinite hours. The scale finally agreed upon sub-
stitutes weekly and overtime rates for the former piece rates.
The two-horse driver receives $15 and the three-horse driver
$18 for a week of 66 hours, and 35 cents and 40 cents an hour
overtime, respectively. At these rates the labor cost was raised
to about 20 cents a ton.

In order to pay these higher wages the coal dealers con-
tended that they must get higher prices for cartage. The anti-
trust law of Illinois, as amended in 1897, made an exception in
favor of any article “the cost of which is mainly made up of
wages/’ 1 To avail themselves of this exception the coal dealers
separated their cartage from their coal and organized, not a
dealers’ association, but a Coal Team Owners’ Association,
since the cost of cartage, but not the cost of coal, is “mainly
made up of wages,” and since a team owner does not have title
in the property he delivers and is therefore not responsible for
its price to the public. There is also a considerable amount of
coal hauled by contract, and contracting team owners who are
not dealers are also members of the association. The rates
charged for cartage had formerly been 22 to 27 cents a ton.
The association adopted and issued a schedule setting the rates
at 50 cents a ton for manufacturing and steam use and 60
cents a ton for domestic use within two and one half miles
from the point of loading; for each additional mile or fraction
thereof 10 cents a ton. Thus the rates for cartage were
doubled when the teamsters’ wages were doubled. But since
they started on different bases it is also true that the absolute
increase in cartage was twice as great as the increase in wages,
namely 20 to 25 cents a ton when wages were increased 10
cents a ton. There are, of course, other expenses besides wages,

1 This exception was afterwards declared unconstitutional, as being an unlaw-
ful discrimination. See People v Butler Street Foundry Co , 201 111. 236.


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


41


mainly, feed and care of horses ; and these are offered as a
justification for the disproportionate advance, though the
occasion thereof was the advance in wages. At the same time,
since the dealers mainly own their teams and their prices for
coal include delivery, their ability to maintain the rate of cartage
really depends on their ability to maintain the price of coal.
This they have not been able to do on bituminous coal on
account of the many sources of supply, while they have thor-
oughly succeeded on anthracite coal on account of the centralized
control of supply.

However this may be, the coal dealers at first relied upon the
teamsters to control the market and even to create one. They
made a provisional agreement in January, 1902, to take effect
the following May and to continue for five years, if the team-
sters meanwhile could demonstrate their power. The agree-
ment provided that none but members of the union should be
employed and that the teamsters should work for none but
members of the association. With this understanding the agent
of the teamsters stopped the delivery of coal to the great firm
of Marshall Field & Co. for a few hours in winter until that
firm signed a two-year contract with the union to use coal
instead of natural gas during the summer. This spectacular
demonstration had two results. The managers of other stores
and office buildings, who also had made the mistake of building
sky scrapers without coal bunkers, signed a similar contract
when requested ; and nearly all of the teamsters in Chicago
joined* the union. The astute agent of the coal team owners,
John C, Driscoll by name, who had engineered this coup y
proceeded on his part to organize the team owners in other
branches, and eventually became secretary of five such associa-
tions. In each case agreements similar to the original one were
made with the new teamsters’ locals. These and other locals
were organized without general strikes, except those of the
packinghouse and department store teamsters in June. Yet,
while they had but few strikes on their own account, the team-
sters in the first flush of enthusiasm stopped work in sympathy
with strikers on the inside ; and this in the case of the freight


42


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


handlers in July was the most destructive since 1894. That
disaster sobered the teamster, but it showed him his power.

Springing from these sympathetic strikes came the most
remarkable board of arbitration known to industrial disputes.
Seven of the largest employers of teamsters and seven agents
of the teamsters’ unions constituted themselves for one year
the industrial umpires of Chicago. Practically all the strikes
of new unions during that period came before this board. The
older unions, such as the building trades, disdained this upstart
jurisprudence and refused to submit their disputes. But it
happened that most of the strikes of that period were those of
new unions. The board’s powers were quasi compulsory, since
the employer who would not submit to arbitration could not get
teamsters, and the strikers who would not submit could not
get the help of the teamsters. Many of the strikes were handled
by Driscoll, the agent of the teaming employers, without bring-
ing them before the board of arbitration, and had it not been
for his unscrupulous use of money in bribing the leaders of the
unions, the board might have continued. But his corruption
was finally exposed, the teamsters withdrew their representa-
tives, and eventually deposed the officers who had been on
friendly terms with him. The board of arbitration was dis-
solved. Employers, also, who were willing that Driscoll should
use their money to “ buy off” the leaders of troublesome
strikes, became distrustful when they learned that he secretly
fomented strikes to be bought off. He lost his position in all
but the Coal Team Owners’ Association, and the other's sub-
stituted men of a different type. Since this reform movement
of 1903 the teaming industry can be studied as an economic
rather than as a criminal phenomenon.

Hours and Wages

The change most impressive brought about by the unions
is that from indefinite hours and wages to definite wages and
pay for overtime. The teamsters’ occupation is peculiar in that
it has carried over and retained in industry the practices of


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


43


agriculture. The teamster has always been expected to “ care for
his stock ” as well as to drive his wagon. Even where a team-
ing contractor’s business had grown so large as to require the
services of stablemen, the teamster was expected to be at the
stable before working time and to remain at the stable after
working time long enough to feed and curry his horses, clean
their stalls, grease and repair his wagon, hitch up and unhitch,
and keep his harness clean and the brass polished. This
required also several hours on Sunday. For such work he was
not supposed to be paid, — it was the necessary preparation for
work, not the real productive effort that brought him wages.
This continues to hold good under the union agreements, so
that, while the teamster says that he now has a ten-hour work-
ing day, the day lasts nearly always from six o’clock in the
morning to six or half past six in the evening, with one hour
for dinner. Consequently, the actual working time for which
his stipulated day’s wages is paid is n or nj hours. This
enables the truck driver to back his wagon up to the platform
for his first load at seven o’clock, the time when the inside
workers begin, and to get his last load in time to return to the
stable and leave for home at about six in the evening. For-
merly he might not get his last load till the inside workers quit,
and this might keep him at the barn till eight or nine o’clock
and even later. In some lines of teaming not depending on
factories and warehouses, such as furniture moving, groceries,
markets, and commission driving, he was called out much earlier
in the morning or kept later at night according to the amount
of work the team owner could find for him to do. The van team-
ster who took out a sleighing party was not paid for it, because
that was night work. Often he and others reported at the stable
at three, four, or five o’clock in the morning and left the stable
at eight, nine, or ten at night. On this account it is impossible
to know the number of hours most of the teamsters formerly
worked. As they were not paid for overtime, their former earn-
ings give no indication of the hours employed. In general, they
ranged from 70 to 100 hours a week, according to seasons and
kinds of teaming.


44


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


These hours have been reduced in two ways : first, by cut-
ting out Sunday work, or stipulating that it shall be paid at one
and one half or double rates ; and second, by stipulating a rate
per hour for overtime before six a.m. and after six p.m. Under
these conditions the larger team owners employ stablemen to
do much of the work formerly done by the teamsters, and in
order to avoid the higher rates for overtime, they try to arrange
t-heir work to bring it within the regular time. The wholesale
merchant who kept his truck driver hauling to the railways
during the day and then gave him a city load late in the after-
noon now concentrates his schedule of trips. Nevertheless, in
some lines the teamster continues to make a large amount of
overtime. It is not unusual for the coal teamster, at gi8 a
week and 40 cents overtime, to earn $20 or $ 24 a week. In
other branches overtime varies greatly according to the busi-
ness. Consequently, in this industry the policy of reducing the
hours of labor is necessarily often a policy of merely getting
pay for overtime and so greatly increasing the earnings. The
driver must finish his trip and return his team to the stable;
and while overtime cannot always be abolished, it can be
paid for.

Again, there are some lines in which very little change in
the hours, except Sunday relief, has occurred. The railway
express drivers never had the care of their horses, and their
reduction in hours has been but three or four a week. The
laundry and bakery drivers have about the same hours as for-
merly. The routes of the keg beer drivers had always been
equalized, so that they could finish their work in the morning;
but they were kept around the barn indefinitely for extra jobs
and errands. These extras have been cut off.

The action of the milk wagon drivers deserves special men-
tion. They directed their efforts at first not to the rates of
wages, but to the hours of work. Formerly they started out in
the summer at from one to four o’clock in the morning, made a
delivery of milk in the forenoon and a second delivery in the
afternoon, returned at four or five o’clock, spent one or two hours
in balancing their books, and got away at six or seven in the


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


45


evening, making 12 to 1 8 hours a day. Then they worked 10
hours on Sunday, delivering milk and caring for their horses
and wagons, altogether 100 hours a week for $10 or $12. In
the winter they began at six a.m., making 80 hours a week.

Their first step after organizing in January, 1903, was to cut
out the second delivery, to fix their hours in winter from 8 to
5, and to decide that in summer no delivery should be made
in the afternoon and “all wagons must be off the street by
one p.m.” This brought the hours to about 52 a week, including
4 hours on Sunday, — a reduction of nearly 50 hours in summer
and 30 hours in winter. Within the past three years their
wages have advanced to $45 and $60 a month, so that the rate
of pay per hour has more than doubled. These are minimum
rates. There are also “route men/' whose commissions on
sales bring their total earnings to $yo or $ 80 a month.

Public amazement and invective followed the “ one-daily-
delivery ” system. The rule was adopted in January and did
not attract attention until warm weather. Then the newspapers,
with several columns daily, attacked the union. Early in June
the commissioner of health stated in his weekly bulletin : “The
* one-daily-delivery ’ of milk has begun to reap its harvest. Even
in well-to-do families this thirty-six to sixty hours’ old milk can-
not be kept from souring from one delivery to the next. Herod
was more merciful in the method he used in his slaughter of
the innocents.”

Now that two summers have passed a somewhat cooler esti-
mate can be made of the drivers’ action. 1 In fact, the change
to the “one-daily-delivery” of milk could have but little direct
effect on the death rate of children. The milk formerly


1 At the close of the first season the health commissioner’s statistics showed
that the number of deaths of children under five years of age during the three
summer months (July, August, and September) was ten less than that of the pre-
ceding year, and at the close of the second season (1904) his figures for the same
months showed a still further decrease of 388 deaths. The death rate of children
under five for the twelve months remained stationary the first year and fell from
39.39 per iooo living to 32 64 the second year, and the number of deaths m the
three summer months, which had been 30 4 per cent of the year’s total in 1902,
fell to 26.6 per cent of the smaller year’s total m 1904.


46 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

delivered in the afternoon was from exactly the same milking as
that delivered in the forenoon, the only difference being that
the driver carried a part or all of it around in his wagon all
day instead of leaving it at the house in the morning. The
morning deliveries are always, with the unimportant exception
noted below, at least twenty-four and thirty-six hours old, hav-
ing been drawn the morning of the day before and the evening
of the second day before. Furthermore, in the poorer sections
of the city, where home refrigerators are scarce, a large part of
the milk has always been bought at groceries or depots con-
veniently located in nearly every block. In 1904 there were
issued 2424 milk licenses for such stores against 2516 for
wagons. Both drivers and dealers state that almost their only
afternoon customers were in the wealthier sections of the city,
and the amount taken was small, being only what the mis-
tress wished for an unexpected guest or an extra function. On
the whole, it appears that the afternoon delivery was a needless
waste, imposed by the thoughtlessness of housewives. The
fifty hours saved each week to the drivers have not laid any
hardship on the public.

While not directly affecting the death rate, the revolt of the
drivers indirectly reduced it by awakening public conscience
and bringing about reforms in the municipal health department.
The Children’s Hospital Society created a Milk Commission,
including physicians, bacteriologists, and representatives of
the Women’s Club, established a laboratory, and by special
arrangement sent out in bottles milk fourteen hours old to sick
children of the congested districts and the hospitals. The Civic
Federation employed the biological department of the Univer-
sity of Chicago to test some three hundred samples of milk
from various sources. Their report reflected unfavorably upon
the inspection of the Municipal Department of Health, and
finally led in 1904 to the appointment of an additional force of
milk inspectors, including four country inspectors to visit
farms ; and all inspectors were instructed to pay special atten-
tion to the sanitary condition of dairies and utensils. In that
year for the first time the department’s bacteriologist made a


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


47


systematic examination of the city’s market milk. Consider-
able amounts of milk were condemned, nineteen milk peddlers’
premises were abolished, several hundred dealers were notified
to place and keep their depots in sanitary condition. An ordi-
nance was adopted requiring metal seals to cans, by means of
which responsibility can be fixed on the shipper, the railway
employee, or the dealer. This has reduced milk watering 50 per
cent. The railroads were induced to furnish better facilities
for handling. 1 Coupled with a cool summer in 1904 and the
completion of sewer systems and the drainage canal, the death
rate of all ages declined somewhat, and the death rate of chil-
dren declined still more, as stated above. On the whole, the
stand taken by the milk wagon drivers diverted attention from
a false security on two deliveries of milk a day to the real
source of danger, — an inadequate milk inspection.

Earnings

The wages formerly earned were as indefinite as the hours.
While the books of the team owners, if examined, would throw
no light on the former rates of pay per hour, they would show
the earnings by the week or month. In lieu of such an exami-
nation the testimony of employers and men has been found
to agree remarkably in some lines and fairly well in others.
Apparent disagreements are explained by the existence of ex-
ceptionally high or exceptionally low wages. The policy of the
unions has been to establish a minimum rate of pay, and then
to stipulate that no employee receiving more than the scale
shall suffer a reduction. Consequently, exceptional men, espe-
cially in those lines where commissions are paid, have not
gained an increase in weekly earnings, though the reduction in
hours has increased their hourly rates ; while the lowest paid
positions have been substantially increased by the week and
amazingly increased by the hour. Looking at the position of
the average teamster without special abilities or disabilities, it
may be said that for 70 to 100 hours’ work his earnings before

1 Report of Bacteriologist and Director of the Municipal Laboratory, 1904 (MS.).


48 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

organization were ?8 to Ji2 a week. Some grocery drivers,
garbage collectors, beer wagon helpers, and many boys got as
little as $4.50 and $6, while men on commission got as much
as $25 or $30; but the prevailing testimony sets the bulk of
the earnings at $9. Since organization the minimum rates per
week have been raised, so that they range from #10 for retail
grocery drivers to $18 for a three-horse coal team driver; the
standard towards which all are aiming being $ 1 5 a week of six
days, and the rate that the largest number have reached being
somewhat less. The advances made for helpers are relatively
greater than those for drivers, bringing the two closer together,
and both to a higher level.

While these increases are large, they nearly always exagger-
ate the increased labor cost to the employers. Often the high-
est paid men were not affected, and the better paid men were
already close to the new minimum. In some lines, like depart-
ment stores and railway express, only one company was paying
the extremely low rates, and that usually to boys. In other
lines this proportion was larger. The boys have been dis-
charged and men have taken their places ; and their greater
efficiency somewhat offsets the apparent increase in pay. Fur-
thermore, from the teamster’s standpoint the reduction in
hours, which has so enormously increased his hourly rate, has
often been in the hours uselessly spent in waiting or doing
uneconomical work in order to be on hand when wanted. Such
wasted hours the employer did not count, and their reduction
does not increase proportionately his hourly cost, because now
he keeps the teamster busy every minute while on duty. Con-
sequently, the team owner’s increased labor cost is not to be
measured by the teamster’s extraordinary gain by the hour, as
would naturally be supposed, but rather by his more moderate
gain by the week.

Commissions

In several lines the teamster is more than a driver : he is
a solicitor or order clerk, and can build up or break down
his employer’s business. In some cases the companies have


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


49


regular solicitors who are not drivers, but even then the driver
must be relied upon to “ hold his trade.” This takes an extreme
form in the laundry business, where in a union of 700 members
there are 200 drivers, known as “ commission men,” who own
each a horse and wagon and “ control their trade.” Some of
these men have agencies at hotels, news stands, and so on,
where orders may be left. They can transfer their business
from one laundry to another, and their commission is 40 per
cent. At such rates the most successful driver makes as much
as $100 a week. Naturally, the laundrymen objected to this
power of transferring business, and they began to require con-
tracts preventing a man on leaving their employment from
going into the laundry business for two years thereafter. The
courts refused to sustain such contracts, but afterwards, when
they were modified so as to limit their operation to a designated
territory, they were sustained. The union met the policy of the
laundrymen by a clause in their agreements stipulating that
drivers owning their own wagon and known as “ commission
men ” should receive not less than 40 per cent of the gross
amount of work, and that “ no driver shall be requested to sign
any contract conflicting with this agreement.” Evidently, a
union of solicitors owning their places of business, protecting
their commissions, and maintaining their power to throw busi-
ness from one employer to another partakes more of the nature
of a merchants’ guild than a labor union. In the case of laun-
dry drivers not owning their wagons the union agreement pro-
vides a minimum salary of 5815 a week, which is an advance of
something like 50 per cent on their former wages. In addi-,
tion, many of them get a commission on business beyond a
certain amount. The rule of a minimum salary holds for
drivers in all other lines where commissions are paid, the laun-
drymen owning their wagons being the only class paid solely by
commissions without a minimum guaranty.

In the case of the bakery drivers the guaranty is $14 a week,
which would be useful only in the out districts where business
is light, but where the union does not yet control. The valu-
able advances are in the rates of commission, and these apply


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


5 °

to the large bakeries supplying the down-town district. Here
the minimum of $14 is significant, not as a true minimum, but
as a basis on which to compute the commissions. For example,
the best paying company in the city, which formerly paid $14
a week and 6 per cent on sales above $250 now pays $14 a
week and 1 % per cent on business up to $150, 3 per cent on
the excess to $250, and 7 per cent on the excess above $250.
Consequently, a driver who formerly received $17 on a week’s
business of $300 now gets $22.75. The larger his business,
the larger has been the rate of increase in his earnings, a few
getting as much as $40 a week and none less than $16.

The commission scheme of the beer drivers is suggestive.
The bottle beer driver, more than the keg beer driver, is
expected to “hold his trade.” In both cases the commission
is paid, not on the sales, but on the “ empties ” returned ; and
in both cases the commission has always been looked upon as
spending-money. The bottle beer driver joins many lodges to
which bartenders belong. He seldom sees the saloon proprie-
tor, for his visits are made early in the morning. His persua-
siveness is exerted on the bartender. To prevent him from
transferring his trade from one brewery to another, the brewers
have a strong association and an agreement not to take another
brewer’s driver. The agreement is enforced by a clearing
house, organized as follows. The driver does not get all of the
“empties” Many of them are thrown in the alleys and back
yards, and come into the hands of junk dealers. These sell
them to the clearing house of the brewers’ association. The
brewer who does not abide by the rules of the association can-
not get back his junk bottles through the clearing house until
his fine is paid. This is one of the means that hold the brewers
together in fixing prices and resisting organized labor. Lacking
such a clearing house, the laundrymen have not been able as
effectively to resist the “ commission men.”

The keg beer driver gets his salary of $80 a month and 4
cents additional on empty kegs returned. Before organization
his salary was $60 to $80 and his commission was 8 cents,
but out of this he paid his helper $20 to $35 a month. Now


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


51


the helper gets $55 a month paid by the brewer, and the driver
tries to keep his commission through a clause in the agreement
providing that “ peddlers, helpers, and extra drivers shall not be
required to spend any money with customers on their routes,
and their not spending any money shall not be cause for
any complaint or discharge. ,, Under this arrangement the
majority “take home” more than their salary, and the best
men with the best routes are said to earn, net, as much as $30
or $35 a week.

The milk wagon driver’s commission is computed on the
basis of “ 1 cent to the point,” a point being the unit of each
article sold, as a quart of milk, a half pint of cream, or a pound
of butter. This figures out about 14 per cent on sales ; but he
is usually paid a minimum of $60 a month, if his sales do not
yield so much, and one half cent a point on sales above the
amount necessary to compute the minimum at 1 cent. The
best man earns $100, and the majority in the service of
the “big firms” earn $65. The commission is optional, and
very few of the small dealers pay it. The union demands for
1905 would make it compulsory, would raise it to cent, and
would for the first time establish a minimum wage of $17.50
per week instead of the fluctuating minima ranging from $45
paid by the small dealer to $60 paid by the large dealer.

The commission system fades into the graded salary system
in the case of the yeast wagon drivers (belonging to the bakery
drivers’ local). The union has changed the grading and promo-
tions from the basis of individual bargaining to the basis of
seniority, the driver beginning at $15 and advancing $1 at the
end of the first year, and then $1 at two-year intervals, until at
the end of the seventh year he reaches $19. Since the starting
point was formerly $12 and seniority was counted back for
those in the service at the time when the change was made,
some of the best men received no advance, while others long
in the service but not hitherto preferred by employers were
advanced at once from $12 a week to $18 and $19.

In the case of the grocery and market drivers the range of
wages was formerly extreme, since experienced men were rare


5 2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


and unsuitable men abundant. The best commanded $25 or $30
a week, and the poorest ^ a week. The union did not attempt
to grade all the men according to seniority, but contented itself
with grading the order clerks, or “ those controlling their own
trade/’ in three classes of $ 12 , $13, and #14 for the first three
six-month periods and leaving further promotions to the
employer. For other classes of drivers they simply raised the
minimum from, say, $ 1 1 a week for those in the wholesale trade
to #15, and from $5 a week for retail drivers to $10.

The same distinction appears among the railway express
drivers. The union grades the “ conductor ” on a double wagon,
since he is a solicitor and the responsible man under bonds,
at $62 50 the first three months, $67 50 after three months,
and $70 after six months, but fixes a flat rate for the driver.
Apart from these three grades, promotions to higher pay are at
the discretion of the six companies, among whom competition
is keen and the best solicitors eagerly sought.

In these cases we can see the transition to the ordinary
teamster, who does not “ control his trade.” This is the situa-
tion with the great bulk of teaming, such as that of the truck
driver, coal teamster, building-material driver, and so on. In
general, wherever the commission or premium system on sales
is possible the union prefers it, and even requires it; but
where the commission cannot be definitely measured because
the traffic is miscellaneous, the union tries to substitute grading
according to seniority. And, finally, where the teamster is only
a driver and not a solicitor the union establishes simply a flat
minimum. There is one exception to the last statement. This
is in the loading, unloading, and hauling of common brick from
the cars, employing about 200 men in a union of 700. The
price was formerly 36 cents per 1000, raised by agreement
with the union to 40 cents, at which the driver earns $3 to $4
a day as against a day rate of $ 2.2 5 in the same local union.
With this exception the ordinary driver in the different locals
is paid by the week or month.

Besides wages and hours the unions have secured relief
from exactions which the members consider important. The


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


53


department store drivers and the livery drivers no longer pur-
chase their uniforms at company prices. The expense of
securing bonds, formerly amounting to $5 a year, required of
many classes of teamsters, is now borne by the employer. The
grocery and market wagon drivers are no longer responsible
for goods stolen off their wagons or spoiled by kerosene ; and
they, as well as the department store and other classes of retail-
delivery drivers, are protected against losses for which they are
not responsible on C.O.D packages and on goods returned. The
agreements in all cases contain an arbitration clause whereby
an umpire decides if employer and employee cannot agree.

Strikes

The experience of the unions has led to a decided change in
the matter of strikes. Sympathetic strikes seem to have been
eliminated during the past two years, except where a sister
local of teamsters was involved As far as other industries are
concerned, the teamsters have endeavored to adopt the let-alone
policy of the railway brotherhoods, although within the past
few weeks they have listened to the appeals of the garment
workers and violated this policy as well as their agreements. 1
All of their agreements require work to be continued pending
arbitration. 2 A vote to strike must be taken on paper ballots,

1 See PS., note following this chapter, p 64.

2 The truck drivers, like others, issue a card to their stewards, as follows :

Advice to Stewards

1, ^Become acquainted with the laws of the I B of T and of your Local Union.

2. Become acquainted with the agieement of your Local and the Employers’.

3 Examine the Due Books of every member working in the barn m which you are Steward
no later than the 10th of each month.

4 When a new man is employed, ask him for his Due Book. If he is not a member of
Local 705, or he is three months m arrears (and a member of Local 705 m good standing
can be had), object to him going to work

5. When a member has a complaint, he must report it to the Steward, whose duty it is to
take the member to the employer, hear both sides of the case, and, if the employer is right,
tell the member so. If he is not satisfied, send him to the officials of the Local. If the
employer refuses to comply with the Steward’s decision, notify the officials at once

6. Stewards must not call a strike unless authorized by the Local through its officers

7 Stewards should use their influence to prevent a strike until the officers have had a
chance to adjust the difference,

8 Stewards should attend as many meetings as they possibly cam.


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


54

and must have a two-thirds majority of the local. It must
then go to the joint executive council. If approved, it is
referred to the general executive board of the international
organization. That body is prohibited from approving “ unless
there is sufficient funds on hand in the International Union to
pay strike benefits ” of $5 a week. If it decides to sustain the
local, it sends a representative to take charge of the negotia-
tions and, if he deems it advisable, to order a strike. A local
striking without such approval receives no support.

The controlling influence of the International is strength-
ened by the system of finance. Out of the local dues of 50
cents a month, 1 5 cents are paid to the International treasury,
whose funds are said to be large (no figures are published).
The locals have moderate treasuries, mainly for insurance
benefits, and the International is expected after the first week
to support the strikes it approves. Nearly all of the locals pay
death benefits of $100, adding $10 for flowers The coal team-
sters tried sick benefits for a while, but stopped the experiment
because “too many got sick.”

The initiation fees of several locals are $5.25 ; but the coal,
truck, ice, van, railway express, and a few other locals have
advanced the fee to $15. For a time the truck drivers placed
theirs at $25, but they reduced it to $15, which seems to be
the figure towards which all are tending. Usually the fee is
paid in installments extending over five or six weeks after the
novitiate has gone to work. Certain ice companies “ check off ”
the fee from wages and pay it over to the union treasury, but
this practice is an exception.

The “ Closed and Open Stable ”

There is a wide diversity among the agreements respecting
the employment of union members. Some of them, like those
of the railway express drivers and department store drivers,
simply say, “There shall be no discrimination against union
drivers.” The majority are similar to the truck drivers’ agree-
ment, which reads, “Party of the first part agrees to employ


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


55


members of the Truck Drivers’ Union, Local 705, when in
their power to do so.” The furniture drivers’ agreement
formerly read as follows : “ Party of the first part agrees to
employ members of the Furniture Drivers’ and Helpers’ Local
No. 722, or those who will make application within twelve hours
after receiving employment and become a member at the next
regular meeting of the organization. In hiring men, the union
men to have the preference.” This is also the form of several
other agreements, such as that of the grocery and market
wagon drivers. It amounted to an open-shop agreement, and,
because advantage had been taken of it to weaken the union,
the Furniture Drivers’ Local went on strike at its termination
in October, 1904, to secure a closed-shop agreement. A com-
promise was finally made, and this clause was changed to
read: “ There shall be no discrimination against union drivers
or helpers. In hiring men, party of the first part agrees to
give preference to members of Local 722.” In practice this
new agreement makes the union headquarters the employment
office of the wholesale furniture dealers.

The commission team owners agree likewise “ to employ
none but members of Commission Drivers’ Union, Local No. 3,
in good standing and carrying the regular working card of the
organization, if such drivers can be supplied by the business
agent of Local No. 3, or competent men who are willing to
become members of said Local No. 3.” Besides that of the
coal teamsters, already cited, the van teamsters’ agreement is
strictly closed shop, as follows : “ Party of the first part agrees
to employ none but members of the Van Teamsters and Helpers
Union, Local 71 1, I. B. of T., in good standing and carrying the
regular working card of the organization.”

Whatever the form of these agreements they operate to give
members of the unions steady employment as against the intro-
duction of outsiders. Yet, except in the two or three strictly
closed-shop agreements, the team owners say that they can
employ any man .they see fit, whether union member or not,
provided they pay the scale and he joins the union. They dis-
charge him, however, if the union brings charges against him


56 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

and does not admit him. The high scale of wages makes it to
their interest to employ experienced men who know the depots
and routes. Hence in the case of the team owners’ associations
the open-shop question has never come up. In others it causes
friction and sometimes strikes. This is especially true of the
laundry business, where the only prolonged strike (which has
lasted since June, 1904) turns on the clause of the former
agreement conceding to the laundrymen the right to hire non-
members. In some cases the union cannot furnish members
when called upon, notably the ice wagon drivers and helpers,
more than one half of whose members leave the city during the
winter. On this account they take in some 300 new members
each season in a total membership of 1800. Their agreement
reads : “ We concede the employer the right to hire all Ice
Wagon Drivers and Helpers, providing he notifies the officials of
the Ice Wagon Drivers and Helpers Local Union No. 2 within
twelve hours after employing said Drivers and Helpers; and, if
there are any charges against said Driver or Helper, the employer
on his part agrees to discharge said Driver or Helper within
twelve hours after receiving due notice from the officials of the
Ice Wagon Drivers and Helpers Local Union No. 2. In hiring
men, the Union men to have preference ” The above twelve-
hour clause is found in most of the open-shop agreements.

In these and all other cases more reliance is placed on the
daily attitude of the employers and their representatives than
on the wording of the agreements. The unions stand ready to
strike on evidence of persistent discrimination, by which is
sometimes meant the employment of nonmembers when mem-
bers are unemployed. The employers on their side, with the
exceptions mentioned, practice conciliation, and realize that if
they kept nonunion men in their employment they could destroy
the unions. Furthermore, the teamster’s occupation is more
exposed than that of any other craftsman. Each driver is an
establishment in himself. In the crowded streets, with 30,000
teamsters organized, there is not much room for the unorgan-
ized. Actual or expected violence is looked upon by employers
and teamsters as a matter of course. Blockades and obstruction,


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


57


as well as violence, are effective, and all union drivers are
expected to do what the truck drivers explicitly command in
their by-laws : “ All members of this local shall at all times
while on duty wear his union button in plain sight, so it can be
seen by any one. Any member failing to do so shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $1 for each offense.”

It will thus be seen that the agreements, whether “ closed-
shop” or “ open-shop” in form, are “ union-shop” in practice.
On the other hand, the reciprocal feature of the coal teamsters’
provisional agreement, which forbade union drivers to work for
employers not members of the team owners’ association, has
been eliminated. In its place the following was substituted :
“The organization agrees on its part to do all in its power
to further the interests of said Association.” The commission
drivers made the same agreement with the Commission Team
Owners’ Association. The van teamsters and truck drivers
agree not to further the interests of the associations of team
owners, but simply to “ further the interests of their employer.”
These peculiar clauses do not mean that the drivers will work
only for members of those associations, since there are drivers
working for nonmembers. They simply mean that the drivers
will not work for nonmembers on terms more favorable than
those granted to members. The object is not that of an exclu-
sive agreement, but to equalize competitive conditions. One
result undoubtedly is to strengthen the team owners’ asso-
ciations, and to enable them better to maintain their official
scales of cartage. Prior to the organization of the unions the
owners’ associations were weak and ineffective. Their official
scales were cut by destructive competition. Now they include
nearly all the team owners, who seek the cover of the associ-
ation for protection against the union. The prices for cartage
have in most cases been raised, but it is impossible to know
how much. The official cartage scales have been advanced 20
to 40 per cent, but this is not decisive, for they were not
enforced, whereas the present scales are fairly well enforced.
The double wagon, which the truck owners’ scale formerly set
at $24 a week with driver and which was actually hired by the


58 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

merchant at $22 to $ 2 6, is now hired at a minimum of $31.
The single wagon has advanced from a nominal rate of $18 and
an actual one of #15 or $ 20 to an official $22 a week. The
carriage to a cemetery, for which $5 was formerly charged, now
costs $7. The official scale of the commission team owners was
always charged like a uniform freight rate by the commission
dealer to the shipper, even when less than that scale was paid
by the dealer to the team owner. In this case the new scale was
made by agreement between the team owners and the dealers,
and cartage charges were raised 10 to 100 per cent, the average
on the bulk of the business being about 30 per cent.

This scale and all others are placed at such figures that the
team owner, whether member or nonmember, who pays the
union scale of wages cannot make a profit if he cuts the scale
of cartage. The scale cannot be exorbitant compared with the
wages, since merchants and manufacturers have the option of
hiring their teamsters directly for the same wages and hours
and running their own stables ; many of them do so, while
others prefer to sell their horses and wagons and let out their
teaming to contractors at the official scale. It must be remem-
bered that a teaming contractor assumes the liabilities of a
common carrier, and a single accident to his cargo or to a pedes-
trian may wipe off the profits of a year, or even his entire capi-
tal. In the former period of reckless competition no margin was
allowed for insurance against such catastrophes, and the whole-
sale merchant, who now pays the increased cartage to a team-
ing contractor, pays for the assumption of a risk that formerly
cost him nothing, and is usually overlooked, when he does his
own trucking, until the accident occurs.

In the case of fares and charges where the general public is con-
cerned, such as those for cabs and express and furniture mov-
ing, the maximum scale is usually fixed by municipal ordinance;
the changed conditions simply mean that the legal prices are
charged, whereas formerly they were undercut. In the case
of the charge of Parmelee (the railway baggage express) of 50
cents on trunks from stations, there has been no increase, since
that was fixed by agreement with the railway companies* Other


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


59


expressmen have advanced their 25-cent charges to 35 cents
and their 35-cent charges to 50 cents. The municipal ordinance
which formerly fixed the hire of cabs at 25 cents per passenger
per mile now fixes it at 50 cents per trip per mile, whether one
passenger or two.

The economic basis which supports these official scales of
cartage in competitive lines may be illustrated by the case of the
furniture movers. The van teamsters reported at the barn not
later than half past four in the morning, and went home at night
when their work was finished. The employer, not paying them
for overtime, and being at liberty to keep them as late at night
as he pleased without extra cost, often figured on doing a cheap
job if the customer would delay the beginning until late in the
afternoon, finishing late at night. The labor cost for such a
job was practically nothing, and hence there was no bottom to
prices. One team owner could not tell how low his competitors
would be willing to go, nor could he tell how low he himself
could afford to go Even his horses, skeletonized by overtime,
did not set a certain minimum. On two or three occasions the
owners had attempted to form an association and to agree on
a minimum scale of charges, but their agreements were always
broken by the temptation so easily offered to get the teamster's
work for nothing, and to give the customer the benefit of the
exploitation. When the teamsters organized and reduced their
indefinite hours of 90 or more a week to a definite 60, with
25 cents an hour for overtime, then the employer could see
a solid foundation on which to maintain the prices agreed
upon. The result has been that the unscrupulous team owner
who beat his competitors by cheating and overworking his
teamsters has not been able to continue in the business ;
and the other class of owners, who regretted, but could not
remedy what some of them now describe as the “ actual
slavery” of the teamster, are more prosperous than ever
before. Their horses and equipment are better cared for, and
their services to the public better performed. True, the
“public” pay higher charges for cartage than before, but
the complaint from that source has partly subsided. In view


6o


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of the facts their grievance is like that of the Roman populace
when the gladiatorial combats were stopped.

The one-team owner who drives his wagon has a peculiar and
dubious place in this business. He is the connecting link, as
it were, between the ancient guild and the modern organiza-
tions of employers and workmen on class lines. He is eligible
either to the teamsters’ union or the team owners’ association.
As a member of the owners’ association he is expected to
observe the scale of cartage, and as a member of the union
the owners ask that he be made to observe it. The policy of
the unions on this point is to have less and less to do with
regulating prices, and therefore to leave the one-team owner
free to do as he pleases, unless he employs a helper. Of course,
he needs a button or a card in order to travel uninterrupted,
and this fact induces him to join one of the associations. If
he joins the truck owners, he gets an association button which
the teamsters recognize. If he is an ice wagon driver, he
requires a helper, and so is not eligible to the union ; but he is
given a card certifying that he employs a union helper and is
“ entitled to all courtesies and respect of members of the I. B.
of T.” One of the locals, the express drivers, is composed
solely of these one-team owners. Their charges are regulated
by municipal ordinance on work done by the trip. A wagon and
driver are hired by the week at $24. They can work as many
hours a day as they please, since each is his own “ employer.”

The interests of these small proprietors lead them into a field
foreign to that of the ordinary labor union, as may be seen in
the legal activities of the hack, coupe, and cab drivers. Since
1896 this local has expended $7000 in securing certain rights
of common carriers. Formerly abutting property owners, includ-
ing the railway companies, leased the right to stand on the
street in front of their property ; and the revenues of hotels
from this seizure of the public highway amounted to $50 or $60,
and in one case $200, a month. The cab drivers won a suit
in the criminal court 1 and another in the Supreme Court of


1 City of Chicago v Wilson , Chicago Legal News , August 16, 1902.


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO 6 1

Illinois 1 ; and now any driver can stand on the streets at any
place designated by police authorities. Next they contested
the right to solicit passengers inside the depots and to stand
on the line designated by the railroad authorities for Parme-
lee’s drivers. A railroad company secured an injunction in the
United States Circuit Court, and the union carried it to the
Circuit Court of Appeals and then to the United States
Supreme Court, losing each time. 2

An interesting outcome of the change from indefinite to
definite hours and wages, as well as of the separation of classes,
has been the breakdown of the “ fatherly feeling ” which some
of the team owners say they formerly had for some of their
teamsters. They learned to feel an interest in the men who
had been in their service for many years and to share their
sorrows and joys. Though such a man was unfitted for other
branches of work, he was satisfactory in his old position, if he
would accept a lower rate of pay and make himself generally
useful. Or the owner employed a boy at $i a day out of regard
for his widowed mother. Now the union comes between the
owner and his teamster. It compels the owner to advance his
pay by $3 or $6 a week to a minimum rate. It requires a higher
rate for that overtime in which the teamster had shown his
general usefulness. The teamster takes his orders from the
union and becomes a party to the coercion. Estrangement
follows. The owner cannot afford to keep the man or boy at
the higher rates of pay. He must have vigorous young men.
He has discharged the boys. A large manufacturer has cut off
the two weeks’ vacation on full pay which he formerly gave to
his teamsters. The bargain has lost its indefinite, easy, fatherly
relation of “give-and-take,” and has become a close calculation.

A similar estrangement occurs between the team owner and
his customers, “the public.” The merchant or manufacturer
was formerly willing to let the truck owner send an old man or
a boy with the team, which he got for a dollar or two less a
week on that account. The small team owner, with inferior

1 Pennsylvania R R v. City of Chicago, 18 1 111 289.

2 Do?iovan et al. v The Pennsylvania Co, 116 Fed. 907, 120 Fed. 215 ( I 9°3)>
199 U. S. 279 (i9°S)-


62


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


equipment, formerly secured trade by making concessions in
price. Now he must have just as good a team, just as large a
wagon, or just as attractive a van as his wealthy competitor in
order to get the trade. The public has lost its desire to help
out the poor team owner. Its friendly feeling, like the fatherly
feeling of the team owner, disappears when no longer paid for.
Thus has the cash nexus of unionism uncovered and dislodged
a certain amount of unconscious hypocrisy.

Naturally, at first, the team owners were at sea in dealing
with the new situation. Having lost the personal control of
their teamsters, it seemed to them that they must control the
organization that had come between them. But these organiza-
tions in turn seemed to be simply the union leaders and officers.
Consequently, an era of corruption was ushered in, the em-
ployers turning over their funds to Driscoll, a “ labor expert,”
but not a team owner, who knew how to handle the leaders.
This continued, as described above, until the unions had time
to learn self-government and depose the leaders who assumed
to sell and deliver them. They also took from the business
agents their votes, though not their seats, in the joint team-
sters’ council. The team owners then, perforce, changed their
policy. They deposed Driscoll, and elected plain business men,
team owners like themselves. The policy of these men is
what they describe as “fair dealing.” They try to remedy
every grievance, open and aboveboard, on its merits. They
realize that the team owner who, by a corrupt bargain with the
union agent, is not compelled to remedy the grievance of his
teamster has thereby an advantage over his competitors.
Equal treatment is as necessary to preserve the team owners’
association as it is to preserve the teamsters’ union. In this
way they cultivate what they call a “ friendly feeling ” with the
teamsters in place of the former paternal feeling.

This new kind of friendly feeling, while severe on individuals
here and there, accords with the teamster’s view of himself.
From what has already been said of his work and wages it fol-
lows that he is more than the mere unskilled laborer, as is gen-
erally assumed. He is sometimes a traveling salesman and at


THE TEAMSTERS OF CHICAGO


63


least a traveling representative. Even the ordinary teamster
looks upon his occupation as a craft, and the object of his union
is to have it recognized as such. He, like the salesman, is really
a man of the world, — comes in contact with many classes of
people and learns to deal with men as well as to handle material.
His work is a constant adaptation of means to ends in a strug-
gle for business, without the aid of a foreman to do his thinking.
He must know the depots, the streets, and the best routes. He
is intrusted with his employer’s property and with his employer’s
responsibilities as a common carrier for goods hauled and for
pedestrians injured. He often requires special attributes of
carefulness and promptness. The van teamster cites with pro-
fessional pride the expensive furniture moved from a fashion-
able dwelling without a scratch. The commission team driver
feels his responsibility for perishable goods and for prompt and
careful handling. The garbage collector calls himself the sani-
tary teamster. The helpers of the machinery-moving and safe-
moving teamsters are millwrights.

Now the efforts of the teamsters to have these qualities rec-
ognized as distinguishing a craft and not common to the mere
laborer are seen in some of their policies. First, there is the
enforcement of weekly salaries, as far as possible, instead of pay-
ment by the load or laying a man off when work is interrupted.
This policy leads the employer to “ bunch ” his work better, —
to keep a man steadily employed in place of letting him “hang
around,” waiting for work. Of course, trade in some lines is
seasonal, and allowance for this is made by classifying em-
ployees as “steady men” and “extra drivers and helpers.”
The latter in some cases are paid by the hour; the livery
“tripper,” by 25 per cent of the liveryman’s charge. They
are considered as serving a kind of apprenticeship, while for
the “steady men ” in slack times the old employee is to have the
preference, being the last laid off and the first taken on.
The closed-shop policy, also, is justified as the protection of
their craft against the “farmer” or the “hobo,” who can drive
a wagon but is not a teamster. As long, too, as the minimum
wage can be maintained, the team owner is not inclined to


64 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

employ these inexperienced and less reliable drivers. That the
hope of the teamster to make his calling a craft is being real-
ized is borne out by the witness of team owners, who speak
sometimes with enthusiasm of the superior character of the men
who have come to the front The “ bums” are gradually weeded
out by the employers themselves. Men of integrity and self-
respect secure the offices in some though not all of the “ locals,”
and the worldly wisdom of the teamster makes him amenable to
reason and fair dealing. He harbors no resentment on account
of his former treatment, for he acknowledges that the team
owners were themselves victims of destructive competition.

J. R. Commons.

The strike of 1905, which resulted disastrously to the teamsters, has had a
serious effect on the organization The membership of the locals which •were
involved m the strike has fallen off at least one third, due in large measure to the
condition imposed by the employers that union buttons must not be worn in con-
spicuous places by the drivers The union button worn on the cap or coat lapel
was an effective organizing factor among the teamsters.

Another result of the strike is the division in the ranks of the team drivers.
The strike was ordered in violation of written contracts, the teamsters having no
grievances of their own They were called out in support of the garment workers.
This policy did not meet with favor in a number of local unions and they held the
international president responsible When the annual convention of the Inter-
national Brotherhood of Teamsters was held m Chicago in August, 1906, it
resulted in a split, a number of delegates holding a rival convention and forming
what is known as the United Teamsters of America. This latter organization has
headquarters m Aurora, Illinois, and its president claims that it has approximately
eighty local unions affiliated and a membership of over 20,000 Ten of the Chicago
locals have gone over to the seceding faction, among them being the ice-wagon
drivers, commission-wagon drivers, and the van teamsters Nearly all the locals in
New York are now affiliated with the seceding faction, as are the St. Louis locals
and the unions in a number of smaller cities.

The trial now going on m the Criminal Court for conspiracy has also helped
to weaken the organization It has revealed a series of corrupt receipts of money
and betrayals of the unions on the part of certain leaders in ordering the strike
and following it up

While the locals which engaged m the strike have been partially disrupted
thefe has been no general reduction m wages. The unions are not in a position,
however, to ask for any new concessions. The locals which kept out of the strike
are still m good condition.


January, 1907.


J R.C.


IV


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES 1

The employers and work people in New York who have
been familiar with the building trades during the year 1903
universally agree that never in their experience have they met
so tangled a situation. A succession of strikes, lockouts, and
criminal prosecutions of walking delegates, growing out of
trade jurisdiction, rival organizations, and union misrule, and
ending in the organization of the employers and a reorganization
of the industry with a joint arbitration board, make this a
significant and interesting labor dispute of the year 1903.

The storm center of the disturbance was the United Board
of Building Trades, familiarly known as the “ Board of Dele-
gates/’ When this board was created in March, 1902, it was
confidently expected that the former anarchy of jurisdictional
strikes and dual unions would be remedied ; and the board was
organized under the advice and even the pressure of several
influential contractors who had suffered from fights between
the unions. But the organization, while it remedied in part the
evils of disunion, brought forth the new evil of “ graft.”

The first Board of Delegates in the building trades was
started in 1884 by the walking delegates of the only four
unions that had such officers at that time. These delegates
met first in a spirit of fun and sociability and without authority
from their unions. The board was extraconstitutional. It did
not realize its possibilities. The delegate was merely the busi-
ness agent of the union, selected to carry its messages, but
without authority to change or enlarge his instructions. But
there was one circumstance in the building trades that served
to give this extraconstitutional body unexpected but useful

1 From the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XVIII, 1904, pp. 409-437.

6S


66 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

power. This was the necessity of prompt action in dealing
with contractors. The building industry in New York, as well
as elsewhere in the United States, unlike that in England and
Europe, is conducted on a system of subcontracting. The
mason builder, or general contractor, secures the contract from
the owner, or “ client, 1 ” and generally puts up the brickwork;
but he submits by competitive bidding all the other work to
as many contractors as there are kinds of work. This sys-
tem enables the contractor to enter the field with little or no
capital, since it is usually arranged that partial payments shall
be made by the owner to the general contractor, and by him to
the subcontractors, as the work progresses. A subcontractor
may have but a few days’ work on a job ; and if he violates
his agreement with the union or any of the rules the union is
striving to enforce, his work may be finished and his men dis-
charged before the union can hold a meeting and call a strike.
Consequently, in the building trades the unions have given their
walking delegates authority to call a strike at the moment when
they are satisfied a rule is violated. This usually occurs when the
delegate finds a nonunion man on the job, since a nonunion man
is not supposed to observe the rules or wage scale of the union.
The delegate then reports his action to the union meeting, where
he is generally sustained as a matter of course.

But a strike of a single union on a job may not be effective.
Then the delegate must bring the matter home, if possible, to
the general contractor The other unions are working for other
contractors, and in order to hold the general contractor respon-
sible, the entire construction must be tied up. The unions
have provided for this in advance by a clause inserted when
they make an agreement, which reads, “ A sympathetic strike
shall not be a violation of this agreement.” With this in mind
the delegate invites the other delegates whose men are on the
job to meet him at the place, and he endeavors to satisfy them
that his grievance is real and cannot be remedied unless they
also “pull” their men. Here is the occasion for the Board
of Delegates. They meet two or three times a week to advise
one another of their grievances and to make appointments to


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


67


meet on the jobs. If the Board of Delegates is recognized any-
where in the union constitution, it is informally recognized in
this provision for sympathetic strikes.

It is a significant fact that the only union of the building
trades which does not permit the sympathetic strike is that of
the bricklayers, who are employed by the general contractor,
while the unions employed by subcontractors hold that the
sympathetic strike is indispensable. Naturally the bricklayers*
delegate has never been a member of the Board of Delegates.

To return to the origin of the United Board. The sociable
board of four delegates inaugurated in 1884, not realizing its
possibilities, felt its way only by gradual steps to joint action.
The unions when they acted in sympathy had done so hitherto
through the Central Labor Union, a representative assembly of
all trades in the city, meeting once a week. But little by little
the Board of Delegates took independent action, and so prompt
and satisfactory were the results that the unions quietly
accepted their usurpations and other unions elected delegates
who joined the board. In 1890 the board had become entirely
independent and dominant in the building trades.

But their supremacy did not long continue. Internal factions
and conflicts arose, mainly on personal grounds; and in 1894
the board divided. For six years two hostile boards were in the
field, the Board of Delegates and the Building Trades Council.
In some trades there were two unions claiming the same work,
one in the board and the other in the council. In other trades
the unions attempted to enlarge their jurisdiction to cover a
different trade in the opposing board. Each board acted as
a unit, employing the sympathetic strike against the other.
Employers who hired men from one board could not get men
of other trades from the other board. Building construction
was continually interrupted, not on account of lockouts, low
wages, or even employment of nonunion men, but on account
of fights between the unions. The friendly employer who hired
only union men and also the unfriendly employer were used as
clubs to hit the opposing union. And the friendly employer
suffered more than the unfriendly.


68 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


No doubt the merging of the two boards into the United
Board of Building Trades in March, 1902, was welcomed by
employers and workmen. The board included all the strong
unions except the bricklayers. Delegates were admitted on
credentials signed by the officers of the union, and thus the
board was officially recognized. Its objects were “to secure
harmony and unity of action ” and “to stop internal war-
fare.” It provided arbitration of disputes between unions,
and a penalty of suspension for the union failing to obey a
decision. Some fifteen jurisdictional disputes were thus decided
during the life of the board. In but one case was a decision
defied ; and this one defiance began the movement that wrecked
the board, as will soon appear.

The United Board adopted simple and effective rules for
sympathetic strikes. A union might act independently, but if
it did it forfeited support. When a delegate brought in his
grievance it became the “property of the board.” All of the
delegates having men on the job, said the rules, “shall be
ordered to investigate the grievance and, if deemed neces-
sary, shall have power to order a strike, provided two thirds of
the committee favor said strike.” Members of the committee
were fined $3 if thirty minutes late at the place appointed. If
they failed to agree, the delegate had an appeal to the board,
where a majority decided, and a final appeal to the president of
the board, whose decision was binding on him and the delegate
refusing to strike in sympathy.

With the employers unorganized this sympathetic strike was
irresistible. Soon rumors of “graft” and “hold-up” began to
circulate. One firm was said to have paid $ 2000 to have a
strike “called off.” Statements were made of smaller amounts
paid over. It was declared that some of these payments went,
in whole or in part, to members of the union as compensation
for “waiting time,” that is, time lost while on strike. Like the
Germans in the war with France, the unions compelled the con-
quered to pay the cost of the conquest. This indemnity policy
was praised as a peace measure, and, indeed, such it was in a
small way ; but the defective bookkeeping and accounting of


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES 69

the unions left opportunities for delegates to pocket unknown
sums for themselves.

Probably the most amazing act of the board during its brief
career was the “hold-up” of the Association of Interior Deco-
rators and Cabinet Makers and the “sell-out” of the Amal-
gamated Painters. The latter organization was a partner in the
board at its origin and objected to the admission of the local
branch of the International Brotherhood of Painters, which at
that time had but a few hundred members. The international
organization struck against the employers on their work outside
New York, and thus won from them a contract to employ only
Brotherhood men in New York. The Amalgamated Painters
had the support of the Board of Delegates, and the board called
out the other trades where Brotherhood men were employed.
But the ring in control of the board offered to seat the Brother-
hood on payment of a large sum of money. Not being able to
get this from the union, they demanded it from the employers,
who contributed $400 each to the fund. The board then seated
the Brotherhood and remained “neutral” in the fight between
the two unions.

How extensive was this blackmail on employers or on each
other is not publicly known, but it seems to have centered in a
ring headed by the leading spirit and organizer of the board,
Sam Parks, business agent of the Structural Iron Workers.
More serious than blackmail was the alleged partnership of
Parks and the board with the largest firm of builders, the
George A. Fuller Company. .This company operates on a large
scale throughout the United States, and it had introduced a sys-
tem of direct employment in place of the contract system of
other builders. By dispensing with subcontractors and doing
all its construction through its own departments, thereby more
easily keeping on friendly terms with the Board of Delegates,
it was able to complete a building in much less time than other
builders, — an item of money value to its clients. It is known
that this company paid considerable sums to delegates for
services, such as going to other localities to use their good
offices. In various ways it had the friendship and confidence


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


70

of the delegates. On the other hand, mechanics preferred to
work for it, since its construction was on such a large scale
that their employment was steadier ; and workmen in the build-
ing trades always spoke highly of its treatment of the men, its
prompt payment of wages, protection of life and limb, and
readiness to remedy grievances. It is certainly true that the
Fuller company suffered little or nothing from strikes during
the reign of the United Board, while other builders were
continually troubled.

These things might have continued longer than they actually
did, had it not been for two weaknesses of the board, — seces-
sion of the carpenters and accession of the team drivers. One
was a weakness of discipline, the other a weakness of expansion.
They opened the way for employers to organize.

Between the local branch of the old English organization,
known as the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners,
and the American Brotherhood of Carpenters there was a long-
standing feud. The Amalgamated was a small but sturdy
organization of 700 members; the Brotherhood claimed 1 0,000
members. Both went into the United Board in March, 1902.
The Brotherhood had a contract with the Fuller company to
employ only Brotherhood men. It demanded similar agree-
ments with other builders and was extending its control at
the expense of its diminutive rival. It finally demanded the
dissolution of the Amalgamated. This the board rejected. The
Brotherhood withdrew in July, 1902. From that time until
April, 1903, the board permitted Brotherhood carpenters,
although outside the board, to work with other unions, and tried
to remain neutral. But the Brotherhood was aggressive. On
certain jobs it refused to work if Amalgamated men were em-
ployed. The board stood by the Amalgamated and refused to
work on those particular jobs with the Brotherhood. The
Brotherhood decided to fight the board. The national officers
took the matter up, came on the ground with their treasury,
and on April 7, without warning, 10,000 Brotherhood carpen-
ters began an amazingly suicidal strike throughout the city.
They struck not only in the shops where Amalgamated men


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES 7 1

were employed, but they struck in shops where they had con-
tracts for the exclusive employment of their own members.
The motives and logic of this self-destruction are explained on
the ground that the Brotherhood throughout the country had
grown so rapidly that its officers had “ lost their heads/' At
any rate, all buildings were tied up. The Fuller company by a
quick stroke of generalship secured nearly all of the Amalga-
mated men in town the day after its Brotherhood men quit work
and so was not seriously affected. At this point a meeting was
called by a committee of the Building Trades Club, a semi-
business organization, and the Building Trades Employers'
Association was started.

But the carpenters’ strike, big as it was, was soon eclipsed.
A small union of building material drivers had been admitted
to the Board of Delegates , and the board saw in that union a
hope of controlling the entire building industry by the easy
means, first, of shutting off the material of any “ unfair” con-
tractor, and, next, of unionizing the lumber and material yards.
The drivers represented that they controlled the bulk of the
teamsters in the lumber and material line, and the board
indorsed their proposed demand that none but union teamsters
be employed. Here the board overreached itself, and its ven-
ture in the line of expansion brought it to an unknown conti-
nent where the employers were organized. The Association of
Lumber Dealers and the Association of Brick and Material
Handlers are close organizations of fifteen years’ successful
operation, controlling all of the yards and acting together under
a joint secretary. In the year 1 89 1 they had disastrously defeated
a union of teamsters, and they had maintained their organiza-
tion intact from that time as an exchange, a credit association,
a social club, and an employers’ association. The drivers now
began by presenting their demands to one yard at a time;
they had gone as far as five yards when, without warning,
every yard in Manhattan shut its gates. The secretary of
the two associations notified the board through the daily
press that the shut-down would continue until the board
revoked its indorsement of the teamsters’ demand. The


72


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


carpenters’ strike laid off 10,000 men, but the material men’s
shut-down laid off 70,000. It continued four weeks and split
the board. The board at this time contained thirty-seven unions,
of which twenty-two belonged to the skilled trades and fifteen
to unskilled occupations, the teamsters among the latter The
housesmiths, led by Sam Parks, went with the unskilled unions,
and took enough other trades to make a majority of one, each
union having a single vote. The skilled trades forthwith seceded,
formed a new Board of Skilled Mechanics, revoked the indorse-
ment of the teamsters, and the dealers immediately opened
their yards.

But now it was the turn of the material dealers to be sur-
prised. They had deprived the builders of material, and now
the builders were ready to deprive them of a market. Two
years before there had been a vigorous effort to organize the
builders and contractors. Each trade for many years had had
its separate organization, but it had not been possible at that
time to create a central body. The conflicting interests were
too great, the plan of organization was crude, and, more than
all, the unions themselves were not yet centralized But the
material dealers’ shut-down furnished the opportunity. While
it continued, the builders completed their organization. As
soon as the shut-down was declared off, they declared a lockout
A week later they offered to the unions a plan of arbitration.

Unlike the former plan to organize the employers, this
association was built on existing foundations. There were
in existence thirty associations of employers and contractors in
the thirty different trades of the building industry. While in
the former attempt at organization each contractor joined the
central association as an individual, regardless of the trade
association to which he owed allegiance, in the present associa-
tion the existing trade associations enter as units under a con-
stitution binding each association, while its individual members
are required to be also members of the general association.
The autonomy of the several associations is left untouched
except at points of conflict or at points where united action is
necessary in dealing with the unions. In other words, the


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


73


r

Building Trades Employers’ Association is a federal govern-
ment like the United States, in which the individual is a mem-
ber both of the general association and of his trade association,
the general association possessing such powers as are delegated
to it, and all other powers being reserved to the original trade
associations. But these delegated powers are broad, for they
include the power “ generally to determine, regulate, and con-
trol the conduct of the members of this association and the
employers’ associations represented on the board in all matters
pertaining to their relation with their employees.” Any action
dealing with prices or restricting competition is especially
excluded. Every member of a trade association becomes
thereby a member of the general association. There are also
“ individual ” and “ associate” members, but these have no
voice in the Board of Governors. A member’s dues are $40,
which are paid for him by his trade association. But he is per-
sonally required to give bond ranging from $>500 to $2500,
with a surety company, “to insure compliance with and obedi-
ence to the decisions, orders, prohibitions, and regulations of
the Board of Governors.” The amount of the bond is made
payable on the mere formal notice of the Board of Governors,
and is stipulated as liquidated damages and not as a penalty.
Latterly the association recommended to its members a form
of contract containing a lockout clause exempting the con-
tractor from damages where such lockout is ordered by the
Building Trades Employers’ Association. The bonding pro-
vision of the constitution, enforced by the additional clause
that a member cannot resign “during a temporary suspension
of business,” is counted as ’ the most essential and effective
feature of the organization. Taken with another clause of the
constitution, it amounts to compulsory membership in the
association, — the parallel to the unions’ “ closed shop.” This
other clause reads, “To promote and maintain harmony
between the different trades, it is recommended that the mem-
bers- of the association shall place all orders for work requir-
ing labor at the building in any trade represented on the Board
of Governors with members of this association.” Since the


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


74

Mason Builders’ Association has taken the lead in the move*
ment, this section of the constitution, although a recommenda-
tion, is practically a pledge on the part of the general con
tractors that they will sublet their work only to members of
the federated associations. Thus have the employers found it
necessary to bind themselves to each other after the manner
of the unions with which they are dealing.

At the same time the practice of making exclusive agree-
ments within each trade seems in a fair way to be broken up
by this larger association of all the employers in the industry.
The Stone Trade Association has not been admitted, since it
has an agreement by which members of the Stonecutters’
Union work only for members of the employers’ association,
the union treasury receiving a bonus of io per cent on all con-
tracts. This has led to a system of “cooked” bidding on
contracts. The arrangement is already crumbling, and two or
three stone trade employers have broken away and have applied
for admission to the Building Trades Employers’ Association
as associate members. Four associations of employers which
have exclusive agreements, yet without the obnoxious bonus or
bidding features of the stone trade, are represented in the
Board of Governors. These are the plumbers, the steam and
hot-water fitters, the marble dealers, and the tile dealers.

The Board of Governors is made up of three representatives
for each trade association. At the time of its inauguration
twenty associations took part through their executive commit-
tees. Soon thereafter thirty associations were represented on
the Board of Governors. The unit rule prevails, but each dele-
gate counts one vote for every five members. Thus the three
representatives of the mason builders with 108 members cast
as a unit 21 votes out of a total of 160 votes. A quorum to
order a “ cessation or resumption of work by any or all of the
members of the association” must include three fourths of the
associations, and the affirmative must cast four fifths of the votes.
The Board of Governors meets once a month or on twenty-four
hours’ notice. The association meets semiannually or on request
either of twenty-five members or of the Board of Governors.


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


75


There were three evils which the new association determined
to drive from the building industry, namely, sympathetic
strikes, jurisdictional strikes, and the power of the walking
delegate to call a strike. The Board of Governors drafted a
plan of arbitration designed to overcome these evils. Since the
walking delegates were the objects of attack, the plan was not
submitted to the Board of Delegates, but was addressed to the
secretaries of the unions and to individual members. The
unions were requested to meet and act upon it. The communi-
cation contained the following :

For the last few years the conditions in our industry have been
steadily growing worse until they culminated in the present cessation
of work. As you can see from our platform and plan of arbitration,
we have but one object in view, namely, to conduct our business
relations in a fair, honest, and American way, and we want you to
help us. . . . No doubt our actions, our motives, and our plans will
be attacked by those representatives of labor who are unwilling to be
deprived of any powers which have been given to them or have been
assumed by them. . . . We refuse to believe that the rank and file of
labor is acquainted with many of the acts of these representatives
and of the conditions which exist in some of the trades, but how
grievous they were is proven by the present standstill and the fact
that within three weeks nearly thirty employers 7 associations of our
industry have become a unit, as a living protest against oppression
and extortion. We therefore call upon every conservative and think-
ing mechanic to attend the meeting of his union and register his vote
against the un-American methods that have crept into the trade, and
to insist upon the plan of arbitration as suggested. . . .

Unfortunately, the communication to the unions did not
contain an invitation to appoint representatives to confer upon
amendments to the plan ; and since the employers declined to
meet the walking delegates who had hitherto conducted such
negotiations, nearly all of the members looked on the plan as
an ultimatum. This interpretation was afterwards disavowed
by the Board of Governors. At any rate, with unimportant
exceptions the unions ignored it, and in many cases the secre-
taries did not even read it at the meetings, explaining that it


76 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

did not bear the union printers' label. The communication was
sent only to the unions of skilled mechanics and helpers and
not to the unions of laborers.

A deadlock ensued, and continued for three weeks. Mean-
time the New York Civic Federation addressed an invitation to
the unions of mechanics and to the Board of Governors, pro-
posing a joint conference to discuss the employers' plan of
arbitration. The Board of Governors accepted the invitation,
and the labor members of the Civic Federation went to the
meetings of several unions to urge its acceptance. The officers
of three or four unions prevented them from getting a hearing,
but in every case where they were given the privilege of the
floor the union voted to send a committee. It was privately
arranged with the walking delegates that they would not seek
appointment on these committees ; and in the conference that
followed there was present but one such delegate, who took
no part in the discussion and whose presence was not objected
to. The conference met with sixty members of the Board of
Governors, and with fifteen unions represented officially and
three unions represented unofficially. It was called to order by
the chairman of the conciliation committee of the Civic Federa-
tion, representing employers, and a report on credentials was
made by the secretary of the same committee, representing
trade unions. After brief speeches counseling moderation,
these intermediaries withdrew, and the conference proceeded
to elect as its chairman the chairman of the Board of Gov-
ernors, and as secretary the president of the Tile Layers'
Union. The conference began at two o'clock on July 3 and
held continuous session until three o’clock of the morning
of July 4 Amendments were adopted, and the amended plan
was signed by all of the conferees. An adjournment was
taken until July 9, when three “ explanatory clauses " were
added. In this final form it was printed, and submitted to
all the unions. Within three weeks two thirds of the unions
signed and returned to work, and within four weeks the Gen-
eral Arbitration Board was organized and had adopted its rules of
procedure. With those unions which did not sign negotiations


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


77


were conducted ; and in a few cases where these negotiations
were unsuccessful “scab” unions were organized, with which
the members of the signatory unions worked on buildings
without protest.

In its framework the arbitration plan is identical with that
originally submitted by the employers, but certain amendments
were added at the conference. It provides that unions and
employers in each trade shall decide all questions affecting
only their particular trade. If they cannot decide and cannot
agree on an umpire, they must select an arbitration board out-
side the trade from the list of general arbitrators The General
Arbitration Board is composed of two arbitrators elected by
each employers' association and two elected by each union, the
union arbitrators not to be walking delegates. No strike can
be ordered by a union or a walking delegate, and no lockout by
an employer or an association before the matter in dispute is
brought before the General Arbitration Board and settled.
This includes specifically jurisdictional disputes and sympa-
thetic strikes, as well as appeals on matters which cannot be
settled by the employers and unions within a trade. The fol-
lowing items were added in the conferences with the unions, —
only members of the unions party to the agreement are to be
employed, and the employers’ association agrees to enforce this
clause on all contractors. If the union is unable to provide
sufficient workmen, any employer may bring the matter before
the General Arbitration Board, which has power to authorize
him to employ nonmembers. Unskilled trades, not being parties
to the agreement, are represented through mechanics of that
trade.

The notable fact which the conferences developed was the
willingness of the employers to add the items which the unions
requested and the willingness of the unions to accept the
framework which the employers proposed. In fact, the confer-
ences resolved themselves mainly into explanations of misunder-
standings. So impressive is this fact that to an outsider it
might seem that the lockout could have been avoided, had the
employers in the first place simply asked the unions to send


78 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

representatives to a conference. But it must be remembered
that the conference excluded walking delegates, who might
have been less conciliatory, since it was for the purpose of clip-
ping their powers that the conference assembled ; and, more-
over, the walking delegates could doubtless have prevented the
unions from electing as representatives any but themselves,
had not two or three weeks of idleness compelled them to
realize the strength of the new organization of employers.

However this may be, at the very beginning of the first con-
ference the union representatives proposed that all lockouts
and strikes be declared off, that work be resumed, and that
thereupon the plan of arbitration be taken up. Several unions
stated that the lockout was a violation of existing agreements
with their employers, and this was peculiarly true of the brick-
layers, whose arbitration agreement with the mason builders
had not once been violated in eighteen years. Now they were
locked out through no fault of their own, in order to compel
them to accept an additional agreement which had not been
offered to them in the regular course The bricklayers, indeed,
on this account refused to send representatives to the confer-
ence. Several other unions filed the same grievance ; and this
violation of existing agreements was the argument of greatest
force played upon by those who were able afterwards to prevent
various unions from accepting the amended plan, satisfactory
as it was in all essential points. The conference, however, pro-
ceeded, bn the request of the chairman, who said, “ Let us see
what we can do with the document first, and then we will find
out what our future action is to be.”

For the evil of jurisdictional strikes, the most disastrous and
perverse of all, the unions were as eager to find a remedy as
the employers. The only objection offered to this feature of
the employers’ plan was the probability that a local arbitrament
would decide contrary to the national policy of the two unions
concerned, and it was argued that the matter should therefore
be left to the local unions and referred by them to the national
organizations, without any trouble to the employers themselves.
But it was readily answered that the unions, neither local nor


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


79


national, had been able to settle their own disputes, and that
therefore the employers of conflicting unions were as much
interested as the unions themselves in widening their jurisdic-
tion This clause was therefore left undisturbed.

It would seem that the most radical amendment made to the
employers’ plan was that requiring the exclusive employment
of union men Yet the employers explained that all of the
existing agreements were already exclusive and were to con-
tinue in force, and that the proposed plan was not a substitute
for those agreements, but an addition to them, intended only to
remedy the two evils of sympathetic and jurisdictional strikes.
The chairman brought out strongly this position of the employ-
ers in answering a question whether a union would have a right
to strike if a member of the employers’ association should sublet
a part of his work to a nonunion contractor. He replied :

If any nonunion men are on a building in connection with union
men, and our employees come to any member of the employers’
association and notify them, at once we will notify that contractor,
owner, or whoever he is, that, unless he removes those men from
that building at once, we will order our trades withdrawn. Is that
plain enough, gentlemen ? The only point is this, gentlemen, that we
expect to work together hereafter for each other’s interests. This is
distinctly an arrangement between your association and ours. The
only thing is that we shall not be willing to interrupt work and have
every one do as he likes. We will have a regular arrangement for
handling those cases, and you will get your redress perhaps quite as
quickly and with less loss to yourself.

Since the unions, however, wished the new agreement to be
explicit on this point, the matter was taken up and discussed at
great length. It developed that, while existing agreements
were exclusive, yet a few of them contained a provision that in
busy seasons, when the union could not furnish men, the
employers might take on nonunion men on probation cards or
otherwise, who were to be discharged as soon as union men
appeared, unless the union chose to take them in. To care for
these exceptional cases a union spokesman proposed that the
employment of nonunion men in emergencies should be referred


80 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

to the General Arbitration Board. This proposal was adopted
at the second conference.

It will be seen from the above-quoted reply of the chairman
and from the arbitration plan that the employers had in mind
from the beginning not only the employment exclusively of
uniommen, but a more effective and less expensive enforcement
of that rule than any that the walking delegate with the sym-
pathetic strike could contrive. This alone has taken from the
delegate the bulk of his duties, since under the rules of pro-
cedure the secretary of the arbitration board, as soon as a
complaint is lodged, notifies the contractor to remove the non-
union man. In order to facilitate this procedure, one of the
early acts of the Board of Governors after the arbitration plan
went into effect was to notify the unions that they should not
decline to work with nonunion men on a job until twenty-
four hours after filing notice with the general secretary.
The employers reasoned that contractors who employ non-
union men are not members of the association, and that the
plan is not designed to protect nonmembers. If the union-
ist were required to work with the nonunionist, the outside
contractors with nonunion labor could underbid the members
who employ union labor at higher wages, and soon members
would drop out of the association, being protected just as much
outside and getting their labor cheaper. Consequently, to let
the unions enforce the union clause of the plan within twenty-
four hours is to protect themselves in paying union wages.
There have been three or four strikes under these conditions,
and they were promptly settled. The outside contractors, being
thus placed at a disadvantage in dealing with the unions, forth-
with apply for membership ; and in this way the unions them-
selves are strengthening the employers’ association.

The clause affecting unskilled labor is one where the employ-
ers seem to have departed more than elsewhere from their
original program. They had included the helpers’ unions, such
as those of the tile layers and steam fitters, in their arbitration
plan, since these were unions of apprentices ; but they had not
included the laborers. It will be remembered that the skilled


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


81


mechanics had seceded from the Board of Delegates. They
took the position that the majority of the troubles of the board
had sprung from the unskilled unions. But when the matter
came up in conference, the mechanics argued that the brick-
layer, the plasterer, and so on were as much dependent as the
employers upon their laborers; that they could not disregard
the claims of the laborers for protection in hours and wages ;
and that, if the mechanics bound themselves not to strike, they
should also be in a position to hold their laborers from striking.
The employers had taken the ground that wages and hours were
not involved in the present dispute, and when a union repre-
sentative proposed that the wages paid to unskilled trades
should not be reduced, nor the hours increased, and that the
laborers should have representation through the mechanics,
this was agreed to. The first case of arbitration under the per-
fected plan was that of the plasterers’ laborers, and the arbitra-
tion board awarded them $3.25 a day.

The position of the walking delegate or business agent under
the arbitration plan becomes similar to what it is in unions
in other trades, namely, an executive officer and prosecut-
ing witness of the union. His legislative powers are taken
away when his power to order a strike on his own judgment
is taken away. It becomes his business solely to look for viola-
tions of agreements. The procedure under the rules of the
arbitration board are undoubtedly slower than the summary
procedure of the walking delegate; for instead of calling out
his men as soon as he sees a violation, or as soon as he can
assemble his fellow-delegates, he must submit the complaint to
the secretary of the union, the secretary must submit it in
writing, with seal attached, to the secretary of the arbitration
board (known as the general secretary), and the latter must
address a copy to the employer complained of and a copy to
the secretary of the association to which the employer belongs
Then the union and the employers’ association become the
parties to the complaint, and they must each select two arbitra-
tors from the General Board, not members of their own organ-
izations, who must meet within twenty-four hours after notice


82


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


is sent by the general secretary. Before this board the
business agent appears as a witness. Under this procedure
decisions at first seemed painfully delayed, and there was keen
dissatisfaction among the unions. But the dissatisfaction was
such as is always found where constitutional law and courts
supersede military law and trial by battle. They are the defects
of deliberation. Their virtue is in the prevention rather than in
the cure of wrong. The rules have been liberally interpreted,
so that at present the walking delegate makes the complaint
directly to the general secretary, thereby avoiding the delay of
passing it through the hands of the union secretary. It has also
been found, as predicted by the employers, that petty grievances
are disappearing. The combined weight of the entire employ-
ers’ association and all the unions is brought to bear upon an
individual employer, so that a notice direct from the general
secretary usually brings a correction ; at the same time the
employers are careful to avoid violations Of course, the busi-
ness agents retain all their prerogatives in dealing with con-
tractors not members of the association, and for this purpose
they have organized a new Board of Delegates, known now as
the Board of Representatives of the Building Trades of New
York and Vicinity. This board is not recognized in the arbitra-
tion plan, nor by the employers of the association.

The General Arbitration Board, composed of two representa-
tives of each union and of each employers’ association, has had an
interesting and peculiar development. As originally conceived
by the employers, it was to be not really a board, but a panel
from which to select the arbitrators on any particular dispute.
It was to elect an executive committee of employers and
employees in equal number and a general secretary, and these
were to select the special arbitration board whenever the par-
ties to a complaint failed to do so. The powers of the General
Board were to end with the election of the executive committee.
But gradually the board has become a joint conciliation body
for the building industry, endeavoring to settle disputes without
resort to arbitration or else arranging the terms of arbitration.
At first, when a meeting was called, the union representatives


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


83


held a caucus on the evening preceding, and in the general
meetings the two sides were inclined to line up solid. But as
the earlier suspicions wore off, the board inclined to divide more
according to individual judgment of the merits of the question
and less on class lines.

It was stated above that several of the unions delayed sign-
ing the agreement, and that work went on in their stead with
other workmen. The fortunes and misfortunes of some of these
unions make a vivid chapter in the history of the New York
building industry. So prolonged and spectacular was the fight
of one of them under a dare-devil leader and so widespread
were the sensational accounts of its doings that to the outside
world the entire industry seemed to be tied up. These sensa-
tions undoubtedly made owners timid and retarded new enter-
prises, and this timidity of capital was the card, and the only
card, that this union had to play. But many of the other unions
and many seceders from this union returned quickly to work.

The Brotherhood of Carpenters, after blunderingly starting
the revolution and finding itself already starved when the real
tumult began, hurried to sign the employers’ agreement ; and
thus by an unconditional surrender to the employers it won a
victory over its rival, for the Amalgamated Carpenters by delay-
ing to sign were permanently disbarred.

A different outcome befell the rival unions in the painters’
trade. The Amalgamated Painters signed promptly, hoping to
bar their rival, the Brotherhood, which delayed a month. But
the Brotherhood had an exclusive contract with the Interior
Decorators, already referred to, and so was admitted. The Amal-
gamated then demanded an arbitration on the ground that^it
was discriminated against by these employers. This was the
second case before the board. The special board decided that
the exclusive agreement with the Brotherhood was in force
when the joint arbitration plan was signed, and under Article
19 was to be respected. But the board went further and
ordered the Amalgamated Painters to join the Brotherhood, this
being the national organization, adding that when this should
be done and the rivalry stopped, wages should be advanced 50


84 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

cents a day, to a minimum of $ 4 . This latter remarkable deci-
sion .was challenged by the Amalgamated, and the General Board
referred it to a judge of the Supreme Court, who promptly de-
clared that the board had exceeded its powers in ordering a union,
party to the agreement, to extinguish itself. The award of
, 50 cents of course fell with this decision, and the two unions
of nearly equal strength continue their rivalry within the board.

A jurisdictional dispute of ten years’ standing between the
carpenters and the wood workers was decided by an umpire and
is enforced, although the same dispute under charge of the two
national organizations is as far from settlement as ever. The
same is true of another dispute which for fifteen years has been
venerable with the critics of unions and has caused more incon-
venience than any jurisdictional matter in the building line.
This is the contest between the bricklayers and electrical
workers. In their case the two employers’ associations joined
with their respective unions as parties to the complaint. The
question was as to which union should cut the brickwork or
fireproofing necessary for the installation of electric conduits.
The decision is recognized by competent parties as not merely
“ splitting the difference,” but as a reasonable division according
to the nature and circumstances of the work.

The contest that centered about the Structural Iron Workers’
Union, or rather a faction of that union, was the one of most
dramatic interest. The leader of the union was its delegate,
Sam Parks, who also organized the Board of Delegates, and
headed its corrupt clique. Parks claimed the credit of having
raised the iron workers from an ill-paid, disorganized rabble at
$2.50 a day to a powerful union of 4000 men at $4 a day. But
this credit belongs also to the conditions of the trade, for wages
elsewhere had risen in similar proportion. This fact the union
was beginning to recognize ; and a faction within the union, dis-
satisfied with his bullying and dishonest methods, had been able
a year before to elect as president Robert Neidig, a man exactly
the opposite in every respect to Parks. Neidig’s faction at the
semiannual election, January, 1903, had been almost able to
defeat Parks for walking delegate; indeed, he was barely


THE NEW YORK BUILDING TRADES


85


elected at the foot of the list of four delegates, two of whom
were Neidig men. The narrow margin discredited him, and
the Neidig faction was confident just prior to the July elec-
tion that they could defeat him. But the employers unwit-
tingly came to the help of Parks. They furnished testimony to
the district attorney on which he was arrested for extortion.
He and his faction raised the cry of persecution. He appealed
to his union to vindicate him by an election, boasting that the
employers would then drop the prosecution and promising at
once to resign. His appeal was all the more taking because the
particular charge on which he was arrested was a case where he
had collected $2000 “ waiting time” for his men; the men
had actually received the money, or a part of it, and had voted
him a diamond ring in admiration of his services. As a matter
of fact, this case was dropped by the district attorney, and
Parks when he was convicted three months later was sentenced
on another charge of taking $250 at a different time and place.
He secured his vindication and was reelected, but Neidig and
his faction carried all the other offices but one. Parks did not
resign, but made the most desperate fight of which his bullying
methods were capable. He drove Neidig from the chair and
Neidig’s faction from the hall, and essayed even to capture the
national convention and displace the national president, who had
meanwhile expelled his union. He succeeded in having his
union reinstated and failed by only three votes to put his man
in the presidency. His union depleted its treasury in his
defense before the court ; but he was convicted, as were two
confederates in other unions. About this time the Fuller
company joined the employers’ association and paid a heavy
fine. The success of the plan of arbitration was evident. There-
upon a “ neutral” element in the Iron Workers' Union gained
control. It appointed a new strike committee, with power to
make a settlement with the Iron League, the trade association
of employers. But the employers meanwhile had organized the
Independent Housesmiths’ Union of New York, with a state
charter, and had entered into an exclusive agreement with it.
The foremen, with Neidig, had held aloof from Parks and his


86 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

faction, though retaining membership in the union ; and they
undertook to teach # the new men gathered in the new union.
This was possible because the structural iron worker is not
strictly a skilled mechanic. He is simply a riveter, working in
a gang on a sky-scraper or a bridge The iron framework is con-
structed in the shop, where the pieces are shaped and the holes
are drilled ready for the rivets. The requirements for the trade
are not so much mechanical skill as recklessness and daring.
The men say they do not die, but are jerked over the river.
The strength of the union is the danger of the trade and the
rivet that drops on the head of the nonunion man. This ac-
counts in part for the success of a man like Parks, and makes
all the more surprising the success of a churchgoer like Neidig.
For three months after Parks’ removal negotiations continued.
National officers of the union, the executive committee of the
American Federation of Labor, and committees of central bodies
took a hand, but without result. Work proceeded with the new
union. The employers did not wish to run the risk of another
Parks, and the new union stood on its agreement. But a
settlement to be permanent must be in harmony with the
national organization, of which the Parks union still held the
local charter. Finally, Neidig was induced to take hold. He
brought about the dissolution of both unions, a reorganiza-
tion into four locals chartered by the national organization, to
be governed by a representative district council, a committee
on membership with himself at the head to exclude the
“ vicious and criminal element,” acceptance of the employers’
plan, and an agreement with the Iron League. This closed the
last breach, and in January, 1904, was rounded out the new form
of joint government in the New York building trades.

J. R. Commons.

[The arbitration plan as described above was revised in March, 1905. The
principal change was in creating a General Arbitration Board in place of a mere
panel of jurors, so that the enforcement of agreements and awards is to be accom-
plished through the joint action of unions and employers’ associations instead of
through the separate action of the latter. The plan does not apply where nonunion
men are employed. — J. R. C.]


V


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 1

During the past year (1900) there has been fought out in
Chicago a contest between capital and labor which will receive
a prominent place in the history of .trade unionism. It was
one of the longest labor conflicts of any magnitude in the build-
ing trades that the country has ever known. But it is not so
much its duration or magnitude or costliness that has given
it such importance as it is the principles involved. The struggle
was not between individual employers and the various unions,
but between the federated bodies of the building contractors,
on the one side, and of the building trades, on the other.

The point at issue was pretty clearly defined from the begin-
ning of the controversy. The contractors were contending for
freedom from the tyranny of ignorant and irresponsible labor
leadership and for the abolition of various trade restrictions.
To secure this end they sought to destroy the federation of the
unions and to deal with each trade separately, while the unions
insisted on the maintenance and recognition of their central
body. Other issues were made at the start, but they were
gradually reduced to one, — the maintenance of the central
organization of the unions, the Building Trades Council. The
question of hours and wages entered only incidentally and
never for a moment stood in the way of a settlement. A study
of the labor organizations in Chicago is, therefore, necessary to
a thorough understanding of the building trades dispute.

I. The Building Trades Council

In Chicago the labor organizations are centralized in three
councils, — the Chicago Federation of Labor, the Building

1 From the Political Science Quarterly, Vol. XVI, 1901, pp. 114-141, 222—247.

87


88


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Material Trades Council, and the Building Trades Council.
All unions are eligible- to membership in the Federation of
Labor, while in the other two councils only such trades as are
connected with building and building material can be admitted.
In the Federation of Labor there are ninety-six different trades
affiliated. Many of the same trades which compose the Feder-
ation are also members of the other two councils. The Building
Material Trades Council, as the name indicates, is composed
of trades engaged in the manufacture of building material, such
as brickmakers and wood workers. There are in all forty-three
unions in this council, representing fifteen trades, and the
membership is about 33,000. The Building Trades Council
is a compact organization or delegate body, composed of repre-
sentatives of all the unions in the building trades. About
thirty-two trades were affiliated with it, and at the beginning
of the dispute it had a membership of from 25,000 to 30,000.

Such “ allied trades councils/’ as they are called, are found
at present only in the building and printing trades. 1 The
Chicago Building Trades Council was organized on November
22, 1890, and incorporated under the general incorporation law
of Illinois, on March 14, 1892. The purpose of the organization
may be best seen from the preamble of the constitution.

The object of this council is to construct a central organization
which shall subserve the interests of all the labor organizations
engaged in the erection or alteration of buildings; for the purpose
of assisting each other when necessary; thereby removing all unjust
or injurious competition, and to secure unity of action for their
mutual protection and support.

The objects were further set forth, in the application for a
charter, as follows :

To promote the interests and welfare of all trade and labor organ-
izations connected therewith and to extend a helping hand to such
other organizations as the said council may direct

1 Cf. Wm. M. Burke, “History and Functions of Central Labor Unions,”
Columbia University Studies m History , Economics , and Public Law , Vol. XII,
No. 1, 1899, p. 1 16.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 89

The representation of the several affiliated unions in the coun-
cil is based on their numerical strength, no trade organization
having less than five or more than twenty delegates. 1 The
thirty-two unions in the council elect about 200 delegates to
the central body, which meets once a week. The usual cor-
porate officers are elected, but their duties are largely routine,
the real power being vested in the standing committees and in
a somewhat anomalous body called the Board of Business
Agents, more commonly known as the walking delegates. The
standing committees, consisting of five members each, are a
credential committee, an organization committee, a grievance
committee, and a legislative committee. 2 The duty of the organi-
zation committee is

to seek out every branch of unorganized industry in the building
trades, use every effort to organize them into unions ; to instruct and
enlighten them on all questions relating to their advancement as
working men , and render all assistance necessary to increase the
membership of all the different organizations affiliated.

The legislative committee is

to determine what legislation will be best for the interest of the labor-
ing man, draft bills for such legislation, present them to the proper
legislators, and report from time to time the best methods of securing
the passage of the same . 8

The impenum in impeno" is the board of walking delegates,
or business agents, which is composed of all the properly
elected business agents of the various unions represented in
the council. The object of the board is “ to unite and associate
together all business agents for the purpose of mutual assist-
ance and to better accomplish the work in all parts of Chicago
and Cook County.” 4 It meets three times a week, for the pur-
pose of rendering all assistance necessary for the enforcement
of the various trade and working-card rules of the council. 5
Every sympathetic strike called must be first brought before
the board and sanctioned, although the business agent of any

1 Constitution, Article III. 2 Ibid., Article VII 8 Ibid , Article VIII.

4 By-Laws, Article II 6 Constitution, Article IX.


90


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


trade can call a strike of men in his own trade without consult-
‘ing the board. The Board of Business Agents has a set of
by-laws governing its work, independent of the council, and
could exist, through an understanding among the trades, even
if the Building Trades Council were disrupted. Although it is
not necessary to be a delegate to the council to entitle one to
a seat in the Board of Business Agents, most of the latter are
delegates to that body ; and when a measure comes up in the
central organization, if the business agent of a certain trade
speaks either for or against it, he usually carries the entire
delegation from his trade with him. Much of the present
trouble is laid by the contractors at the door of the Board of
Business Agents. While the Building Trades Council is the
superior body and is supposed to have jurisdiction over the
Board of Business Agents, the conditions are practically reversed;
for the smaller body has controlled the council . 1

The working cards mentioned above are issued quarterly to
the members of the affiliated unions at a price fixed from time
to time by the council. They must be carried by all union men,
and may be demanded at any time by the business agents or
by fellow-workmen . 2 It should be noted that this simple device
for revenue — namely, the sale of the working card — is really
a system of licensing outside of the law ; for it is implied that
no man shall work at a building trade unless he is in possession
of such a card . 3

The most important sections of the constitution are those
relating to strikes and arbitration. Article XII provides that
action on agreements or demands for an advance in wages or
an abridgment in the hours of labor, if concurred in by two
thirds of all trades present in the council, shall be binding on
all. But any trade may act on its own responsibility. Article
XIII is sufficiently important to be quoted in full.

1 0n August 17 this was partially remedied by giving the executive committee
of the Building Trades Council full power to act in all matters pertaining to the
calling of strikes and the general conduct of business.

2 Constitution, Articles XI and XVI

8 S H Wright, “ A Local Phase of Labor Combination ” (a paper read before
the Chicago Literary Club, November 27, 1899, and privately printed), p. 12,


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE


When trouble occurs on any building or job affecting any trade
represented in this council, it shall be the duty of the business agent
to immediately endeavor to settle same with contractor or owner in
accordance with the trade rules and to the satisfaction of the trade
involved. Failing in this and a strike being necessary, the business
agent shall have power to call a general strike, but before doing so
he shall lay the matter before the council or board of business
agents at their next meeting and be governed by their action or
decision, which shall be equally binding on all trades in this Council
engaged on the job or building. When a trade has no business
agent the chairman of the board shall have power to call members
of said trade off when strike is ordered. It shall require a majority
of the trades voting to order a strike. Unit rule to prevail.

It will be seen from this that it is practically in the power of
a majority of the business agents of the trades interested to
order a general strike. There is no provision made for a
referendum vote on such a question by the total membership,
nor is such a vote taken in practice.

It would be interesting to know what proportion of those
engaged in the building trades of Chicago are members of the
affiliated unions, but figures on that point are confessedly only
guesses . 1 Some of the smaller and better organized unions
practically include all the workers in the respective trades :
such are the hoisting engineers, the architectural iron workers,
the stonecutters, the mosaic tile layers, the plumbers, and the
gas fitters. On the other hand, some of the larger trades — as
the carpenters, the hod carriers, and the painters — are not so

1 The following unions, with their approximate memberships, are members of
the Building Trades Council * Architectural Iron Workers (300), Bridge and Struc-
tural Iron Workers (700), Bricklayers and Stone Masons (3500), Carpenters (5230),
Boiler Makers (500), Electrical Mechanics (500), Elevator Constructors (350), Gas-
fitters (400), Gas-Fixture Hangers (f25), Gravel Roofers (250), Hod Carriers and
Building Laborers (5200), Hoisting Engineers (160), Lathers (600), Marble Cut-
ters (100), Marble Cutters’ Helpers (100), Italian Mosaic Workers (200), Mosaic
and Encaustic Tile Layers (100), Mosaic Helpers (100), Mosaic Glass Workers
(100), Painters (3500), Plasterers (1200), Plumbers (1400), Paper Hangers (400),
Sheet-Metal Workers (400), Steam Fitters (300), Junior Steam Fitters (300), Slate
and Tile Roofers (150), Stonecutters (800), Stone Derrickmen (200), Stone
Sawyers and Rubbers (275), Stone Carvers (100), Tunnel Miners (300) ; total,
thirty-two unions, with a membership of about 30,000.


92


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


well unionized. Within the city of Chicago the greater part of
the workers belong to the unions, 1 but in the suburbs and
outside of the city they are not so well organized.

II. The Contractors Council

Corresponding to the Building Trades Council there exists
in Chicago a parallel organization of employers, known as the
Building Contractors Council. 2 This is a close federation of
some fourteen associations of employers, representing about
2500 individuals or firms. 3 A temporary organization had
been .effected as early as 1894 in the form of a building con-
ference committee, composed of eight or nine trade associa-
tions; but the present body dates from April, 1899, when it
was organized for the express purpose of opposing the Building
Trades Council. It was perfected in September of the same
year and is in all essential respects similar to its prototype,
being a delegate body with representatives from the various
affiliated masters’ associations. Organized distinctly as a “war
measure,” as one of the contractors expressed it, the Con-
tractors Council would probably not have become permanent,
as it now threatens to be, had not the struggle with the Build-
ing Trades Council provided it with a raison d’etre.

The purposes and methods of the Contractors Council are
plainly avowed in its working rules, among which are found
the following :

Rule I. This organization shall be known as “The Building
Contractors Council,” and its object shall be to foster, protect and

1 Wnght, loc. at., p. 19, estimates 80 per cent. One of the best informed of the
labor leaders estimated 85 per cent of the carpenters and practically all of the others

2 The following associations are members of the Contractors Council :
Chicago Masons and Builders, Master Carpenters and Builders, faster Carpen-
ters, Cut Stone Contractors, Master Plumbers, Master Steam Fitters, Master
Painters, Master Plasterers, House Draining, Sheet-Metal Contractors, Mantel
and Tile, Mosaic Tile, Marble Manufacturers, and the Iron League.

8 The discrepancy in numbers of trades represented in the masters’ and
journeymen’s councils is accounted for by the fact that in some cases two or
three of the trades are represented by a single masters’ association. Four groups
of the contractors are not organized at all These are the electricians, elevator
constructors, stone carvers, and tunnel miners.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 93

promote the welfare and interests of its members, engaged in the
construction of buildings m Cook County, Illinois.

Rule VII, Section 1. The Council shall have full power to take
any action which may be for the best interests of any Association
allied with the Council ; and, should the condition demand, a lockout
may be ordered by the Council to protect its interest.

Section 2. No Association allied with this Council shall hereafter
enter into an agreement with their journeymen which shall prohibit
a sympathetic lockout.

Rule X. Should any differences arise between employer and
employee, whereby the interests of any Association shall be impaired,
such Association may make a full statement of the facts, through
the secretary, to the Council ; and he shall call a meeting of the
Council to take active measures to secure and protect the interests
and rights of the Association so aggrieved.

In addition to the Contractors Council, there are a number
of other organizations of employers, corresponding to the vari-
ous organizations of the men. Among these are the Associa-
tion of Material Manufacturers, who furnish all the building
supplies to the contractors ; the Chicago Architects’ Business
Association ; and the organization of the real estate men.
While not all of these were direct employers of labor, they
sided with the Contractors Council in their contest with the
Building Trades Council.

The building trades dispute was a struggle between these
two federated bodies, and in tracing the causes that led up
to the final outbreak in February, 1900, we shall have to con-
sider in some detail the relations between the opposing organ-
izations. Friction had existed between the employers and the
Building Trades Council for some years, and the occurrences
which immediately preceded the lockout and strike were not the
ultimate causes. In outlining the latter the blame may be about
equally divided between the employers and employees On one
side, the unions claimed that the foundation of the trouble was
the refusal on their part to make exclusive agreements with the
contractors ; while the contractors asserted, on the other hand,
that the arrogance and corruption of the Building Trades
Council had become unbearable. As there was an element


94


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of truth in both charges, we cannot do better than to examine
them carefully and m that way ascertain the causes of discontent.

III. Exclusive Agreements

In the general tendency toward combination no movement
is more significant than the union effected between capital and
labor in the Chicago Building Trades by means of the so-called
« exclusive agreements. ’* The contractors in a given trade
who were members of the employers* association made an
agreement with the members of the union in that trade, accord-
ing to which the contractors were to employ only members of
the union, while the latter pledged themselves not to work
for any outside firms. In this way it was proposed to secure
a practical monopoly in the building trades, as all the con-
tractors and workmen would speedily be compelled to join the
respective organizations. Thus it was hoped to secure an
advance in wages and an increase in profits. Such agreements
were made with the carpenters, bricklayers, steam fitters,
plumbers, painters, hod carriers, and some other unions.

The experience of the carpenters will serve to illustrate the
purpose of these agreements. Their union had made exclusive
agreements with the builders* association in 1896 and 1897,
but in 1898 a difficulty arose over a clause in which the
union reserved the right to work, if necessary, for firms not
members of the association. The builders wished an absolute
agreement, according to which the union carpenters should
work only for members of their body. When the union re-
monstrated that not more than one third of the builders of
Chicago were members of the employers* association and that
these could not give employment to all the men, they were
told that, if they would refuse to work for outside firms, work
would soon be found for them. It was thus very evident that
it was the purpose of the employers to use this means to force
contractors into their association. The carpenters accordingly
struck, and by the end of a week forced the contractors to sign
individual agreements without the exclusive clause. No further
negotiations were had between the union and the association
until the close of the lockout of 1900.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 95

The bricklayers had profited probably more than any other
union by its exclusive agreements, of which the one understood
to have been made with the Sewer Builders' Association will
serve as a type. 1 The Contracting Sewer Builders’ Association,
composed of about thirty firms-, was originally organized as a
surety company for its members, but soon gained control of
sewer construction in Chicago and began to advance prices.
When a piece of work was advertised the associated con-
tractors assigned the work to one of their number and then
put in seemingly independent bids ; and as the lowest bid was
placed much higher than necessary, the surplus profits thus
realized were divided among the members of the combination. 2
It was also reported that the contractors had an agreement
with the material men, from whom they secured material at
lower prices than the independent contractor ; while additional
strength was given them by the sewer inspectors, who were
alleged to have harassed contractors not members of the associ-
ation by condemning bricks, cement, and other material. Com-
petition was most effectually stifled, however, by an agreement
made by the Sewer Builders’ Association with the Bricklayers
and Stone Masons’ Union on April 1, 1899, and renewed April
I, 1900. The agreement was absolute, the bricklayers binding
themselves to work for none but members of the Sewer Build-
ers’ Association, an infraction of this rule being punishable by
a fine of from $5 to $ 2 5 and suspension from the union. In
return, an eight-hour day and a wage scale of $1 an hour were
provided for, only union men were to be employed by the con-
tractors, and all inspectors were to be members of the Brick-
layers’ Union. While this agreement served to build up in the
sewer construction business a strong combination among the
contractors, it also secured to the workmen’s union a monopoly
of the labor market within the combination. 3

1 Chicago Tribune , November iS and 19, 1900

2 Compare the methods of the plumbers’ “ trust,” infra.

8 Another striking example of the successful exclusive agreement was that
between the Bricklayers and Stone Masons’ Union and the Chicago Masons and
Builders Association It continued some four or five years, during which time
the membership of the builders’ association increased from 90 to 500. — Tke
Bricklayer and Mason (New York), April, 1900, p. 4.


96 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Other unions had given up the exclusive agreements with
the employers, because, as one of the men said, “they got the
worst of it” The one exception to this rule was the Hod
Carriers and Building Laborers’ Union. This was composed of
the' most unskilled labor in any branch of the building trades,
and the members were exposed more than any other union to
the pressure of outside competition. Accordingly, an exclusive
agreement with their employers was a decided advantage to
them, and they were unwilling to give up the arrangement.
Finally, however, the Building Trades Council passed a reso-
lution that individual unions should not be allowed to make
exclusive agreements with employers’ associations, and the
laborers were forced to break this arrangement. Up to this
time the council had permitted each trade to make its own
agreements. Now, however, it was felt that the laborers must
conform to the position of the other unions and that no more
exclusive agreements should be entered into. It was this
action on the part of the Building Trades Council, the union
men claimed, that embittered the contractors against it and
made them determined to destroy it, for they thought that
they might then be able to force the individual unions to help
them build up a monopoly in the building trades . 1

1 The following statements of prominent labor leaders will show what their
belief in the matter was :

They are not making this figfht on account of grievances against the unions, but for
aggressively selfish purposes. They aim to crush the Building Trades Council and to estab-
lish absolute agreements with the unions under which union workmen will take employment
only from them — E. A. Davis, secretary Building Trades Council

The main object of the contractors is to secure absolute agreements by which union
workmen will work only for members of the contracting organizations They refuse to deal
with the unions except through their own council. — John A. Long, president Board of
Business Agents and of the Gas Fitters’ Union.

The contractors had absolutely no complaint against the architectural iron workers.
They shut us out simply because we belonged to the Building Trades Council. We refuse
to work solely for members of their organization and will work for any employer who
abides by our rules This is the condition which the contractors want to change for their
own advantage and for the disadvantage of laborers and citizens generally. — Thomas
Lynch, president Architectural Iron Workers’ Union. *

The contractors are responsible for this fight. They are trying to force us to join them
m crushing out contractors not members of their council and in gouging the public. — John
Clinch, president Plumbers’ Union.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE


97


IV. Causes of the Dispute

That the purpose of the Building Trades Council was to
control and so far as possible to monopolize the labor market
in the building trades industry is obvious. In this it did not
differ from the component unions. But it is evident that the
employers had encouraged them in this as long as they shared
in the results. The Building Trades Council, however, con-
sidered itself strong enough to assert its power without the
cooperation of the employers* associations There is no doubt
that for the year preceding the lockout and strike of February,
1900, the utmost friction had existed between the two parties,
largely owing to the overbearing attitude of the labor leaders
They were “ glutted with success,” as one of the laboring men
put it, and would make no concessions to the contractors. By
petty and often arbitrary demands they interfered constantly in
the construction of buildings, until the employers were goaded
to the point of rebellion. “ The time had come/* said one of
the contractors, “ when one might as well go out of the business
as submit to the demands of the Building Trades Council.”
This feeling culminated in the lockout and consequent strikes
of February 5.

There were, however, other causes which led the contractors
to seize this particular time for the struggle with the council,
among the chief of which may be mentioned the demoralized
state of the building industry in Chicago and the high prices
that obtained for all building materials. At the time of the
World’s Fair in 1893 building had been enormously stimu-
lated in Chicago, and the overproduction of that period had
continued for the succeeding six years. Both contractors and
real estate men insisted that under existing conditions there
was no money in buildings. The upward movement in prices,
too, had particularly affected iron and steel products, the
prices of which had become practically prohibitive. In addi-
tion to this there was the uncertainty and demoralization of
a presidential year, which always affects the building trades


9 8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

disastrously. As a last straw there should be taken into
account a concerted demand about the beginning of the year
for higher wages, 1 on the part of most of the unions in the
building trades.

V. Relations between the Councils

Such were the causes of the dispute. To make the narra-
tive of the controversy a connected one, however, we must go
back and review the relations between the Building Contractors
Council and the Building Trades Council from the previous
summer. On August 30, 1 899, the Building Contractors Council
appointed a committee of five and requested a conference with
a similar committee from the Building Trades Council “to
correct existing abuses and to arrange a plan whereby future
strife may be avoided.” 2 The committees held a meeting at
which the contractors stated the conditions under which they
proposed to work in the future. No action was taken by the
Building Trades Council; and, accordingly, on November 17
the Building Contractors Council passed a series of resolutions
stating that, while there was no disposition to question present
wages or hours or the principle of legitimate unionism, it
would not, after January, 1900, recognize (1) any limitation as
to the amount of work a man shall perform during his working
day ; (2) any restriction of the use of machinery ; (3) any restric-
tion of the use of any manufactured article, except prison-made
articles ; (4) the right of any person to interfere with the work-

1 At the end of December, 1899, the carpenters* unions had demanded a new
wage scale of 50 cents an hour, an increase of 7 } cents over the existing rate,
to begin on April i. Early m January the marble workers struck for uniform
payment of $3 50 a day to all cutters and setters, whether working in factories
or outside, an increase of about io cents an hour; they also demanded that
nonunion-cut blocks should not be used m the construction of buildings. The
teamsters were granted an advance of 25 cents a day; the electricians, of 3J
cents an hour, the stonecutters, of i6| cents an hour. The Hod Carriers and
Building Laborers’ Union demanded an increase of 5 cents an hour, to become
effective on March 1 ; and the list might be extended.

2 Letter of executive committee of Building Contractors Council to Mayor
Harrison, February 24, 1900.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 99

men during working hours ; (5) the right of the unions to prohibit
the employment of apprentices ; (6) the sympathetic strike.

These six points, which were later expanded into eight,
were maintained as their “ cardinal principles ” by the con-
tractors in all their subsequent manifestoes. No notice was
taken of these resolutions by the Building Trades Council.
Before the time came, however, when these rules were to be
enforced another attempt at a conference was made, under the
leadership of Martin B. Madden. A committee of seven was
appointed by each of the councils, and after a number of ami-
cable meetings an agreement was reached on December 29.
This was known as the “ Madden agreement ” and covered
the six points raised by the contractors in their resolutions of
November 17. 1

1 The following is the Madden agreement of December 30, 1899, “for the
purpose of regulating and adjusting differences that may arise in the future
between the Building Contractors Council and the Building Trades Council

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT

Section i Each council shall elect a board of arbitration of five members, who shall
jointly constitute a final board of arbiters.

Section 2 The right of a steward on the job to protect the journeymen’s interest is
recognized. All complaints, disputes, or violations of joint agreements by employer or
employee to be adjusted by the contractor or his agent and the steward or business agent of
the Building Trades Council or affiliated unions, who shall be allowed to visit all jobs during
working hours to interview the steward or workmen, but will not m any way interfere with
their work. In case of failure to adjust any complaint, dispute, or violation of agreements,
the subject-matter shall at once be referred to the standing arbitration committee of five from
the employers and five from the employees representing the trade interested, who shall
immediately decide the matter at issue [In] Any case at issue that cannot be adjusted by
the trade directly interested, appeal shall immediately be taken to the final board of arbitra-
tion, as provided m section i, to adjust all matters referred to it by any of the associations
affiliated or may become affiliated [ stc ] with party to this agreement, and their decision shall
be final

No strike or lockout shall be called or authorized by either party to this agreement or
by any member or association affiliated or by their business agents by reason of any dispute
arising between the unions represented in either association. Work shall continue uninter-
rupted while any case is pending before the final board of arbitration.

Section 3 No limitation as to the amount of work a man shall perform during his
working day.

Section 4 Question of machinery referred to the different organizations of employers
and employees In the event of failure to agree either party shall have the right of appeal
to the final board of arbitration.

Section 5. Each established employer in each respective trade shall be allowed to have at
least one apprentice, whose time of apprenticeship expires before the age of twenty-two
years.


IOO


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


It was signed by all the members of the committee from the
Contractors Council and was ratified by the council the follow-
ing day. Of the committee from the Trades Council only
four members signed it, and when it was referred by them
to the council no further action was taken on it. On Janu-
ary 17 the Building Contractors Council notified the secretary
of the Building Trades Council that they expected a definite
answer as to the intentions of the Trades Council not later
than January 27. When nothing was heard by that time, the
contractors prepared a new set of rules to govern all work
and fixed a scale of wages to go into effect February 5. The
attempt to enforce these rules was the immediate cause of
the dispute and resulted soon in tying up the whole building
industry of Chicago.

There is no doubt that the Building Trades Council made a
great mistake in ignoring the Madden agreement as they did,
especially after it had been drawn up and adopted by their
own committee E. A. Davis, secretary of the council, later 1
attempted to explain their failure to ratify the agreement by
^saying that the matter had been referred to the different unions
for a referendum vote and that before such a vote could be
taken the contractors issued their ultimatum in the form of a
new set of rules. As a matter of fact, the matter had not been

Section 6 No restriction on the use of building material other than cut and sawed stone,
granite, exterior marble work, common brick, wood mill work (except mantels and movable
furniture), and pi ison-made material

Section 7 It remains optional with contractor as to number of men he shall employ.

Section 8 No rules other than those of this agreement to be made by either side, unless
authorized by the final board of arbitration

Section 9 Rules to be drawn up by both sides at once

Section 10 Members of the Building Contractors Council to receive as favorable treat-
ment from the Building Trades Council as other contractois

Section 11 It is agreed that as long as this contract is faithfully kept by the Building
Traded Council and its affiliated unions the members of the associations affiliated with the
Building Contractors Council in the erection of buildings will employ at the buildings in
Cook County none but the workmen carrying Building Trades Council working cards in good
standing in their respective callings, except where it may be otherwise agreed by the joint
arbitration committee of the trade involved

The text of this agreement is printed in Carpentry and Budding (New York),
February, 1900, p. 56 The above was copied from the original document,
verbatim et literatim.

1 In an interview in the Chicago Times-Herald \ March 9.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE ioi


so referred ; and the writer has been assured by several promi-
nent labor men that there was no intention on the part of the
unions of ratifying the agreement. This treatment undoubt-
edly angered the contractors and rendered them both firm and
united in their subsequent action.

The notice of January 29, issued by the Contractors Council,
which was to go into effect on February 5, read as follows :

The unions affiliated with the Building Trades Council having abso-
lutely ignored the joint arbitration agreement and failed to ratify
the same, we hereby make the following rules . . . and you will
govern yourselves accordingly no limitation as to the amount of
work a man shall perform m a day ; no restriction as to the use of
machinery ; no restriction as to union or nonunion-made material ;
the foreman shall be the agent of the contractor ; the right to employ
and discharge whomever he may choose is reserved to the employer ;
eight hours shall constitute a day’s work ; the prevailing rate of wages
in all trades ; time and one half will be allowed for all overtime ;
double time for Sundays and holidays. 1

The position taken by the Contractors Council was indorsed
the day following by the general contractors of Chicago, in-
cluding many who were not members of the council. To give
effect to their action the contractors notified members of the
Plumbers’, the Hod Carriers and Building Laborers', and the
Hoisting Engineers’ unions that the rules of the Building
Contractors Council would be enforced after February 5, and
that the unions’ rules which were objected to would be
disregarded. The master plumbers led the movement and
notified their employees that they must sign individual con-
tracts. The men, with a few exceptions, refusing to do this,
they were locked* out.

The attitude of the Building Trades Council was at first
very pacific. President Edward Carroll stated on February 4
that “the council has not ordered a strike and does not

1 It will be seen that the position of the contractors, as stated here, was not as
liberal as that of the Madden agreement. After the refusal of the unions to
ratify that agreement they would at no time consent to as great concessions.


102


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


intend to do so. The affiliated unions know their duty as
union men and are expected to act accordingly.” From
the very beginning of the dispute the unions composing the
Building Trades Council insisted that the contractors were
wholly to blame for the trouble, since by instituting new
rules they had violated agreements which would not have
expired for a month or so 1 On February 6, however, the
Hod Carriers and Building Laborers’ Union, the first organi-
zation to take official action, instructed its representatives to
call strikes on every building in the city where men were
working under the new rules. The movement did not take
on large proportions until Saturday, February io, when the
carpenters were involved in the struggle. For several years
they had been working only half of Saturday, but under the
new rules of the Building Contractors Council, which were
indorsed by the carpenter contractors, they would be com-
pelled to work all of Saturday. Instructions were therefore
given by the district council of the carpenters’ union that no
member of the organization would be permitted to violate the
old rule. Accordingly, at noon on Saturday, February io,
building operations in the city were practically suspended,
when the carpenters refused to work after the noon hour.
The number of men rendered idle was variously estimated
at that time from 3000, according to the labor men, to 7000,
according to the contractors. This number continued to grow
steadily during the next few weeks, as the workmen were
called out on sympathetic strikes by the affiliated unions or
were locked out by the contractors, until about 50,000 men
were affected.

Throughout the entire time of the dispute there seemed to
be doubt as to whether it should be called a “strike” or a
“lockout” The choice of a name was usually decided by the
desire to favor one side or the other, the contractors claiming that
the men had struck, while the unions asserted that there was
no strike, but that they had been locked out. The responsibility

1 Agreements were in force between the employers and the individual unions,
some expiring March 1, others May 1, and others not till 1901.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 103

is not, however, to be fixed by the choice of a name. 1 In
some cases the contractors took the initiative, and in others
the unions. Yet it is but fair to insist that the posting of the
new rules by the contractors was in most cases tantamount
to a lockout, as they knew that the men would be compelled
to cease work by the rules of their unions ; and even in a case
where the contractors’ rules did not conflict with the rules or
agreements of the union, the men could not remain at work
if nonunion men were put on the building or if, as was gen-
erally done, a sympathetic strike was ordered in accordance
with the constitution of the Building Trades Council.

VI. Position of the Material Men

The mills and factories furnishing building materials were
soon involved in the building trades dispute, and in this case
the initiative seems to have been taken by the unions in call-
ing sympathetic strikes among the wood workers and others as
early as February 19. 2 The manufacturers and mill owners were
really in a difficult position. On the one hand, they had made
agreements with the building contractors, according to which
the contractors were to buy their materials only of firms in the
combination, and in return were to receive lower prices. Thus
the brick manufacturers in the “ brick combine ” and the
Masons and Builders Association are reported to have had an
agreement, which was to continue to April 1, by which mem-
bers of the latter were able to buy bricks at one dollar a
thousand less than was charged to outsiders, lime fifteen cents
a barrel cheaper, and vent linings, copings, and so forth, at a pro-
portionate rate. In addition to this the association was to be

1 It is almost impossible at times to distinguish in practice between a lockout
and a strike, and the distinction was given up in the English labor reports as long
ago as 1894, the generic name “ dispute ” being used for all forced cessations of
work. In the American reports the attempt is still made to distinguish the two
kinds of dispute.

2 On February 26 the Material Trades Council called a strike in two brickyards
which furnished material to buildings where nonunion labor was employed.—
Chicago Record \ February 27.


104 TRADE unionism and labor problems

paid a bonus of one dollar a thousand for all bricks sold to build-
ers who were not members of the association. 1 A part of this
sum was currently reported to have been paid into the treasury
of the contractors' council. On the other hand, the material
men had entered into agreements with the labor unions not to
furnish material for jobs where nonunion labor was employed.
This worked very well until the February lockout and strike,
when the contractors began to employ nonunion labor. The
material men were then placed in a predicament. If they
refused to furnish the contractors material, the former could
go outside the city to make their purchases ; if they furnished
the material, they would violate their agreements with the
unions and a strike would probably result. 2

On March i the mill owners and building supply men held a
meeting and took a definite position, throwing in their lot with
the Building Contractors Council. They decided not to furnish
supplies to contractors who were not members of this body.
If this plan were carried out, no contractor could break the tie-up
in the building industry by hiring members of the Building
Trades Council under the old rules, until the united con-
tractors permitted it. The contractors could then gradually
resume building with nonunion labor and have material sup-
plied only to jobs designated by them. This plan seems to
have been agreed to by the mill owners and a majority of the
material men, namely, those dealing in rubblestone, crushed
stone, lime, cement, copings, and pressed brick. The brick
manufacturers, however, refused thus to restrict their sales and
declared in favor of an open market, in which they might sell to
any one who wished to buy. A few days later the other manu-
facturers of building material took a new stand and decided
that after filling existing contracts they would not undertake

1 Mr Falkenau, chairman of the press committee of the contractors’ council,
whilp denying that there was any discrimination, admitted a difference m prices.
This he explained by saying that it was due to the discount the large firms received
for wholesale orders and for cash payment. — Chicago Times-Hcrald , May 14.

2 As early as February 9 the Bnckmakers’ Union threatened to call strikes in
all brickyards unless the agreements with them were maintained by which brick
could be sold only to employers of union labor — Chicago Record , February xo.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 105

any new contracts until the difficulties in the building trades
were settled, believing that the dispute could be settled most
quickly if material should be refused to every one.

This position was consistently maintained by most of the
material men, and their plants were either closed entirely or
kept running to supply only the immediate demands of the
trade. 1 The union men claimed, however, that there was a
secret agreement between the contractors and the material
men, according to which supplies were refused only to employ-
ers of union labor, and that the announced policy was only a
cover for discriminations against contractors outside of the
council. Charges against the Masons and Builders Association
and some ten or twelve firms, mostly plumbers, were taken
before the May grand jury, where the material men were
accused of boycotting and conspiracy. The charges could not
be substantiated, however, and were dismissed for lack of evi-
dence. That some such agreement was actually made seems
not open to doubt. One of the leading contractors, a member
of the Contractors Council, admitted to the writer that such a
combination existed among the plumbers, and the evidence
seemed to show that similar arrangements had been made by
other material men.

As the plumbers' “ trust" has come in for a large share of
public attention, it will be instructive to examine its methods.
The following is probably a fairly accurate account. 2 The
association of master plumbers, who control from 65 to 70
per cent of the plumbing work of Chicago, employed a system
that raised the price of all the work they secured. If eight or
ten of them were invited to bid on a piece of work, they would
do so ; but instead of submitting their bids at once to the con-
tractor, they would meet and in the presence of one another
would open their bids. Then the contract would be awarded to
the lowest bidder, who would add to his bid two per cent of its

1 Between 10,000 and 20,000 men were thrown out of employment in the build-
ing material trades during the dispute.

2 Testimony of J. S. Kelly, president of the United Association of Journeymen
Plumbers and Gas Fitters, before the Industrial Commission, October 11, 1900.


106 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


amount for each of the other bidders. Each of the unsuccess-
ful bidders would then increase his bid an equal amount, and
the amended bids would be submitted to the contractor. It is
said that several firms were dismissed from the Master Plumbers
Association because of their refusal to pay over the two per cent
to the unsuccessful bidders, and that in each case the Journey-
men Plumbers’ Union, which had an agreement with the master
plumbers, was called on to forbid its men from working for
the dismissed member of the masters’ association.

VII. Contentions of the Two Councils

To ascertain exactly what the truth is in a complicated
quarrel where every issue is controverted and every statement
is a matter of dispute is not easy But we can probably not
do better than to examine at this point the claims of the two
contending parties as set forth in their published statements.
Both the contractors and the labor unions evidently thought it
necessary to justify their position before the public, and circu-
lars were early drawn up by both sides explaining the situation.
The Building Trades Council was first in the field with a state-
ment 1 of its position. The most important section of the paper
was the following :

We are willing to furnish our services to whomsoever needs them
in the erection and construction of buildings, irrespective of whether
they are members of contractors’ associations or not, the only stipu-
lation we ask being that union conditions shall prevail on the building.

There followed an indictment of the Building Contractors
Council on the ground that though it claimed to be working for
the elimination of the Building Trades Council, it fined any of its
members for making individual agreements with a trades union.
Finally, as regards arbitration, the labor men insisted that they
had never refused to arbitrate, that most of the agreements
they had made with the contractors provided for arbitration,
and that they intended to live up to these agreements.

1 See Chicago papers of February 8.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 107


In conclusion [said the Trades Council] we mean to carry out the
agreements entered into by our unions m good faith ; and, if work is
stopped and the building industry paralyzed, it will be no fault of
ours. The blame rests entirely on the contractors.

An answer to this statement was soon prepared by the
Building Contractors Council and given to the public. 1 The
contractors seized upon the paragraph in which “ union condi-
tions” were demanded and proceeded to enumerate and criti-
cise seven or eight demands which were insisted on by some of
the unions and which they were unwilling to grant. It will be
profitable to consider these in detail, for the contractors based
their case largely on the charges which they made in this con-
nection, and in these conditions is to be found, if at all, the
justification for the contractors' position.

I. The first “union condition” to which the contractors
objected was “ the limitation of the work a man is permitted to
perform in a day.” Such a restriction existed in the rules of
the lathers, gas fitters, steam fitters, plasterers, and plumbers.
The lathers limited a day’s work to twenty-five bundles of lath,
for which they received $3 ; they had formerly done thirty-five
bundles for a daily wage of $1 7 5. 2 Plasterers were limited to
thirty square yards a day; the steam fitters were permitted
to lay only ninety feet of steam pipe per day ; but the plumbers
had the most objectionable rules and restricted materially the
amount of work that could be done in a day. 3 These and similar

^•See Chicago papers of February 11.

2 One of the labor men stated to the writer that they often finished by four
o’clock and then “ rushed the can ” for an hour.

3 The rules of the plumbers limiting the amount of work were as follows :

Rule I When working on lead work, eight wiped joints shall be considered a
day’s work

Rule II. When working on iron pipe, the measuring, cutting, threading and
placing in position of fifteen threads of one inch or under shall be considered a
day’s work.

Rule IV When finishing on flats or apartments, hotel or office buildings, one
fixture shall be considered an average day’s work, except laundry tubs, when each
apartment shall constitute a fixture

Rule XI. Any member violating any of these rules shall be fined one day’s
pay for the first offence, two days’ pay for the second offence, and if he persist in
the violation the association shall deal with him as it sees fit.


108 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

rules 1 of the unions were defended by them on the ground that
they were necessary to secure careful work and to prevent the
“ rusher ” from setting the pace for a fair day’s work. There
seems to be no doubt, however, that all legitimate limitations
had been exceeded, and that in all cases the so-called day’s work
could have been performed by the average workman in a few
hours. In justice to the unions, it may be said that most of
them admitted the unfairness of these restrictions. Thus, John
Clinch, president of the Plumbers’ Union, conceded in an inter-
view that “ the rules were made hastily, and they may be defect-
ive.” It is worthy of note, too, that the Journeyman Plumbers’
Union a little later 2 adopted a new form of agreement, leaving
out the clause that fixed the maximum amount of work and
providing for a permanent board of arbitration.

2. “ Another 'union condition’ is the delay caused by the
quarrels between the unions as to which shall perform a specific
piece of work.” Instances were cited where work had been
delayed for weeks, while the unions decided which should per-
form certain tasks. Such disputes occurred between the free-
stone cutters and the granite cutters, between the ornamental
iron workers and the structural iron workers, between the
steam fitters and the plumbers, and in other cases, in some of
which the work was done twice and twice paid for, and in all
of which it was delayed. On this count there is no doubt that
the contractors had a just grievance. In many instances the
Building Trades Council had not paid sufficient respect to
their interests in deciding these disputes.

3. "The union shall dictate to the contractor how many
men he shall employ on a specified building, and that he shall
not discharge a man to whom they wish to give work, even if
he is a lazy and incompetent workman.” 3 There are evidently
two counts under this charge. As to the second, the right of

1 One of the rules of the Carpenters’ Union provides that “ any member guilty
of excessive work or rushing on any job shall be reported and shall be subject to
a fine of $5 ” 2 ]yr a y 2,

8 These charges are cleverly, if ungrammatically, worded, and while generally

true are not all the truth. They must, therefore, be carefully read.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 109


the contractor to hire and discharge his own laborers was never
interfered with by the Building Trades Council, except where
the contractor failed to live up to his written agreement with
the union or where he had employed nonunion men or was not
paying union wages. Certainly the contractors could not fairly
complain on this score if after having made exclusive agreements
with the unions to employ only union men the latter should
attempt to enforce this principle without such agreements. But
as to the first count, that the union dictated how many men in
a given trade should be on a building, the contractor had just
grounds for complaint. Such a rule was made, for instance, by
the lathers, according to which six lathers must be employed on
every job On a small building there was caused by this an un-
necessary cost for scaffolding, carting, and so forth, if all the men
were to be kept busy ; and it was often the case that in interior
work, as on stairs, it was physically impossible for six men to
work at the same time Such rules had the same purpose as
those limiting the day’s work, but are even less defensible.

4. “A fourth of these ‘union conditions’ is that the union
shall dictate to the investor where he shall buy his building
materials and by whom they shall be finished.” In answer to this
charge the officers of the unions insisted that they had always
been willing to work with union-made material and had objected
only to the introduction of prison-made materials or those pro-
duced under nonunion conditions. This, however, was not the
whole truth, for they had objected to using material made by non-
union men, even if under union conditions in other respects,
and had often insisted that work should not be done outside of
Chicago. Thus, marble or granite to be used on buildings must
be cut and dressed, as far as possible, in the city by members
of the local union. Whether these demands were right or
wrong, the contractors fairly exposed themselves to the charge
of inconsistency in complaining of the action of the unions on
this score. As a student of the matter has said:

While vigorously, and in part very justly, protesting against the
interference of organized labor with the liberty of its contractors to
purchase material from whom they pleased, they countenanced and


no


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


abetted, if they did not organize, a boycott of building material pro-
ducers against the employers of union labor allied with the Building
Trades Council. 1

The unions had been educated up to this position both by the
combination between contractors and material men and by the
system of exclusive agreements into which they had entered
with the contractors and the manufacturers 2 The union men
might justly have replied to this charge, Tu quoque . There
is no doubt, however, that the attempts to enforce such rules
and thereby to give assistance to their comrades m the mate-
rial trades were the cause of a great many strikes and of a great
deal of annoyance and loss. Probably one half of all the strikes
that occurred in the building industry in Chicago during the
year 1899 were caused by the use of nonunion-made material. 3

5. “ It is a f union condition * that industry is to be blocked
by the prohibition of machinery, as in the case of the stone-
cutters, who have shut down all the planers in Chicago ; and
the carpenters, who will not allow a patent miter box to be
used.” 4 While not defending this position in general, the union
men retorted that the contractors themselves had been the first
to advocate the prohibition of machinery, and pointed also to
the case of the stone cutters. Of the eighty stone cutting
firms in Chicago only twenty had machinery; accordingly,
when the other firms made their agreements with the union
they insisted on an antimachinery clause. Now, however,
claimed the union men, they wished to mislead the public by

1 Professor Graham Taylor, “ Between the Lines in Chicago’s Industrial Civil
War,” in The Commons , April 30, 1900

2 A striking instance of the willingness of the contractors to do on occasion
what they condemned m the unions occurred m connection with the Federal Post
Office Building The specifications of this building called for granite, but the
Chicago contractors wished to have this changed to native stone They therefore
sent a delegation of labor men to Washington to lobby for this purpose. With
the labor men they used the argument that such a change m the material would
provide them with additional work. Secretary Gage did not permit the change to
be made.

8 Statement made to the writer by one of the labor leaders.

4 The trade rule of the Carpenters’ Union on this point is as follows: “Any
member who furnishes a patent miter box shall be fined $5.”


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 1 1 1


charging this against the union, whereas they were themselves
originally responsible for such rules. But even in these cases
the labor men in general opposed such restrictions and stated
their willingness to submit them to arbitration.

6. “ It is a ‘union condition’ that in many cases the growing
youth is not permitted to learn a trade.” The limitation of
apprentices is a position which the skilled trades unionists have
long held, but which is gradually being given up as indefen-
sible. 1 It is defended, however, on the ground that the unre-
stricted employment of apprentices amounts in many cases to
the employment of underpaid child labor. Most of the agree-
ments existing in the skilled trades recognize the principle by
limiting in some way the number of apprentices, and in general
it may be said that the contractors were not vitally concerned
in the abrogation of this rule where it existed. 2 On the other
hand, there is no doubt that the unions had frequently abused
this condition in their endeavors to secure as complete a monop-
oly of the labor market as possible. 3

7. “The unparalleled power of the walking delegate, armed
with the sympathetic strike, constitutes another ‘ union condi-
tion.’” In answer to this charge of the contractors, E. A. Davis,
secretary of the Building Trades Council, said : 4

They have no right to attack the walking delegate, as he is merely
the servant of his organization. Each such labor representative has
been elected by a majority vote of his union. To oppose him is to
oppose the opinions and desires of a majority of the members of the
union. He does work which the members cannot possibly do for
themselves, and in nearly every case he has the full support of his
union in his actions, though of course now and then he makes
mistakes.

1 See article by Miss Jane Addams * “Trades Unions and Public Duty,” in
American Journal of Sociology, July, 1899, pp 448 ff.

2 In their statement of principles of April 30 and June 12 they explained their
demand on this point as follows * “ This means that in each trade a fair agree-
ment as to the number of apprentices shall be entered into.” See also Section 5
of the Madden agreement.

8 See article by George C Sikes “ The Apprentice System in the Building
Trades,” in Journal of Political Economy , June, 1894.

4 In an rnterview in the Chicago Times-Herald, March 9.


I 12


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


For a considerable period previous to the lockout and strike of
February 5 the attitude of the unions toward the contractors
had been extremely dictatorial and exasperating, as has already
been pointed out. The walking delegates had used their power
mercilessly to bring the employers to terms, and had resorted
to the strike, actual or threatened, on the slightest provocation.
Yet the real fight of the contractors was not so much against
the walking delegate per se as against the sympathetic strike
with which the Building Trades Council enforced its demands.
Although there has been a steady decline in the number of
sympathetic strikes in the country at large within the last
decade, the resort to this measure had been frequent in the
building trades in Chicago. The unions having delegated the
power to call such strikes to the Building Trades Council,
there was no certainty that an agreement made with an indi-
vidual union, though for a specific period, would not be broken
at any time. 1 In order to eliminate the sympathetic strike, the
contractors therefore demanded the abolition of the Building
Trades Council.

As the smoke of charges and countercharges cleared away,
it became more and more evident that the real point at issue
was not any disagreement as to wages or hours, but the exist-
ence of the Building Trades Council itself. With the utmost
frankness the contractors, through the published statements of
their press committee 2 or the statements of the chairman of
that committee, Victor Falkenau, repeatedly admitted that this
was their object. At the very beginning of the dispute they
defined their position as follows :

Let it not be understood that the Contractors Council in the
present struggle with the men who dominate the Building Trades
Council have any war with union labor, now or at any later time.
Above all things, they wish to make very clear their position on that
point. The men in the Contractors Council believe m labor unions.

iThus the agreement of the Carpenters’ Executive Council of Chicago,
Article 10, provide “A sympathetic strike when ordered to protect the union
principles herein laid down shall not be a violation of this agreement.”

2 This press committee was finally dispensed with, July 27, on the ground that
it was too talkative.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 1 1 3

Both for the benefit of the mechanic and for the employer as well,
such organizations, unabused, are of positive and lasting benefit.
But they have come to the place in the present instance where no
man is assured of life, liberty or the pursuit of happiness unless the
domination of the Building Trades Council shall cease. . . . Between
the Chicago Building Trades Council and the Contractors Council
there can be no compromise. 1

A week later this was followed by another statement, in
which it was said, “ There is not the slightest desire on the
part of any one to discourage membership in the unions. But
there is a definite and unconquerable purpose of fighting the
Building Trades Council to the death. 2

This challenge was accepted by the unions, and the question
at issue resolved itself into the dissolution of the Building
Trades Council. The unions refused to give up their central
organization, and the contractors refused to treat with them
until they did. Other issues were raised and discussed from
time to time, but this remained the keynote of the struggle
until the end.

Both sides now settled down to what promised to be a long-
drawn-out fight. Each party adopted measures and tactics to
win over public opinion and to force a surrender from the
other. In addition to publishing statements of their position
and displaying cards in the street cars and elevated trains show-
ing the rates of wages which they had paid and were willing to
pay, the contractors attempted to continue work on the most
important buildings under construction with the help of non-
union men. On February 13 the press committee of the
Building Contractors Council reported that about 1000 men
were at work on ninety-five jobs throughout the city, 3 most
of them being “ independent union ” men or sailors and farm
hands who had come to the city in response to advertisements.
All the work done was “ emergency ” work, which had to be

1 Statement of the Building Contractors Council. See Chicago papers of

February 10. *

2 See Chicago papers of February 17.

8 On March 14 they reported 2000 nonunion men at work and on June 21,
3500. The labor men would not admit more than 1000.


1 14 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

finished as soon as possible. Their energies were concentrated
on a few buildings, on which not only nonunion men and
members of the Colored Federation of Labor went to work,
but even some of the contractors themselves. As the non-
union men were exposed to attack by union pickets and sym-
pathizers when they left the buildings, the contractors next
resorted to the plan of housing and feeding their employees in
the buildings on which they were working. Between 150 and
200 men were so cared for in the Merchants* Loan and Trust
Building and the Western Electric Building. 1

The labor men, on their part, did not long remain passive,
but early took more active and aggressive measures to insure
success in the struggle. The first attempt of the unions was
to extend the strike to other cities and to secure sympathetic
strikes on all buildings which Chicago contractors were erect-
ing outside of Chicago. A resolution 2 to this effect, in which
the Bricklayers and Stone Masons’ Union called upon the In-
ternational Union to take such action, was speedily followed by
a similar move on the part of the Building Trades Council.
They induced the National Building Trades Council to send
out from its headquarters in St. Louis a circular letter to all the
local bodies, asking all union men to refuse to work on buildings
erected by Chicago contractors or architects. This seems not
to -have been successful, owing to ignorance on the part of the
union men as to where such contracts were held ; for towards
the end of May 3 the Building Trades Council repeated the re-
quest. This time, however, they were backed up by the Material
Trades Council and the Wood Workers Council, which secured
the pledges of their national organizations to refuse to handle
material or to work for Chicago contractors in other cities. 4

1 One of the picturesque tactics of this industrial warfare was the placarding
of this building with excerpts from the state constitution, statutes, ordinances,
etc., all designed to show that the strikers were m the wrong.

2 Of February 13.

3 May 27 Still another notice was sent out on June 18 by the National
Building Trades Council, warning all union men to keep away from Chicago.

* The writer has been able to learn of only one case where a building constructed
by a Chicago contractor in another city was held up. This was in Denver.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 115

In addition to thus boycotting Chicago contractors outside the
city, the unions adopted the plan of attempting to boycott all
business men who owned or rented buildings erected with non-
union labor in Chicago. Later this system of boycotting was
extended to all merchants and others who expressed sympathy
with the contractors. Action was also taken to prevent by per-
suasion, intimidation, and force the employment of nonunion
men by the contractors.


VIII. Effects and Conduct of the Dispute

The bad effects of the long continuance of the dispute were
felt not only by the contending parties but by the general
public as well. While it is impossible to say just how many
men were thrown out of employment, since the estimates varied
widely, the number probably did not exceed 50,000. Bradstreet's
for March 10 reported the number of idle men at 50,000, and
the following week put it at 54,000. On March 27 James
O’Connell, vice president of the American Federation of Labor,
estimated the number at 40,000. The close of the twelfth
week of the dispute showed 30,800 men idle, according to esti-
mates of the unions ; 1 by the end of June this number had been
reduced to 1 5,000 or 20,ooo. 2 The number of unemployed dimin-
ished, as some of those originally on strike returned to work
or found other occupations, while many obtained employment
at their trades in other cities. The fact that so many men were
without employment for so long a time necessarily caused con-
siderable want and even suffering among the strikers, though
the unions claimed to have sufficient funds to care for all their
members. Some of the stronger unions, like the carpenters and
plumbers, paid weekly strike benefits of about $5 per member.
In the majority of cases the Building Trades Council itself
furnished orders for food and paid the rent of those in actual
need. Contributions were made by the national organizations

1 Chicago Record , May 4.

3 Estimate of the labor men to the writer.


Il6 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of several of the trades, 1 as well as by trades unions in other
lines, both in Chicago and elsewhere. Thus, the “ convention
of all trade unions of Chicago,” held on May 13, voted to
assess all its members fifty cents a week to assist the Building
Trades Council during the rest of the dispute.

That these and even larger contributions would be needed
became evident, as the dispute dragged along without indica-
tion of speedy settlement and distress showed itself more
plainly* among the idle men. Striking proof of the bad effect
of the long idleness was found in the growth of the pawn-
broking business, 2 the extension of the credit system among
the stores catering to the working classes, the falling off in the
business of the department stores, theaters, and street railways, 3
and the migration of many workers in the building trades from
Chicago. Real estate dealers stated that hundreds of laborers
had been forced to cease payments on houses which they were
buying on the installment plan and were in danger of losing
their homes. 4 5 But the building trades dispute threatened to
have more serious consequences than the temporary suffering
of those engaged. By the beginning of the fourth month
of the dispute it was estimated that between 3000 and 5000
workmen had left the city and found permanent employment
elsewhere, while almost every union in the Chicago Building
Trades Council had applications on its books for men to go
to other points. Builders stated at the beginning of June 6
that there were 500 unfinished buildings in Chicago, and
architects claimed that they had an equal number of plans of

1 For example, the bricklayers and stone masons, the carpenters, the National
Building Trades Council, the steam fitters, the plumbers, and the gas fitters

2 Within the month of May eleven new “loan banks ” were licensed in Chicago*

8 Street railway men claimed that they were losing $1000 a day during the

dispute, while one of the largest department stores, where the working people
dealt largely, reported that sales fell off $50,000 a week.

4 Other proofs of the hardship caused by the building trades dispute, though
less apparent, were the increase in the number of women and girls from the
strikers’ families who went to work dunng this time and the increased patronage
of the “ free-lunch ” counters in saloons. These facts were attested by workers
from Hull House and the Chicago Commons.

5 Chicago Record , June 9.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 117

new buildings which were being held until industrial peace
should be restored 1 Freight managers and material men
united with the retail merchants and others in lamenting the
depression in business and urging a speedy settlement. But
more important, if true, was a statement 2 to the effect that
twenty manufacturers were getting ready to move from Chi-
cago as a result of the labor troubles, while eight or nine more
had already selected sites . 3 It became evident that Chicago’s
commercial and manufacturing supremacy was threatened by
the continuance of the trouble.

The progress of the building trades dispute was marked by
the usual amount of lawlessness. Most of the outbreaks con-
sisted in assaults upon nonunion men by union pickets and
sympathizers. During the first five months of the strike the
papers reported about two hundred and fifty specific cases of
assault upon nonunion men, of which about thirty resulted in
serious injuries, from the effects of which there were three deaths.
Two union men were killed and a dozen were assaulted, as were
also contractors, special policemen, and others. Less than twenty
arrests were reported during this time. During the summer
there was a lull, but in November the union pickets instituted
a series of attacks on the nonunion laborers employed on the
Mandel Building, in which a foreman was shot to death and a
number of men injured.

One of the chief causes for the great number of assaults that
took place was undoubtedly the nonenforcement of the law
against the strikers. At the very beginning of the dispute the
contractors had demanded police protection for their property
and for nonunion men whom they employed, while the Chicago


1 See an open letter of Hibbard, Spencer, Bartlett & Co of November 28,
which stated that unless more stable conditions prevailed among the unions, a
stoie and warehouse which they were planning would either “be erected without
the employment of a union man, or it will not be erected at all ”

2 By M. B. Madden, president of the Western Cut Stone Company, April 13.

8 The International Power Company, of Providence, R. I, had selected Chi-
cago as the location of a large automobile factory and secured options on prop-
el ty there, but after investigating the condition of the labor market they decided
to go elsewhere. — Chicago Tribune , December 1, 1900


I IS TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Federation of Labor protested against the use of police for such
purposes. Failing to secure adequate protection from the city
police, the contractors swore in about five hundred detectives
and special policemen to guard their buildings j 1 the Building
Trades Council protested to the mayor against the employment
of these men . 2 At first the attitude of the police had been
merely to prevent rioting and to permit picketing so long as
the pickets did not openly molest the nonunion workers. An
opinion of the corporation counsel showed, however, that where
intimidation enters, whether by reason of threats or of large
numbers, picketing is illegal. As a result of this opinion and
of a vigorously expressed public demand, the chief of police
finally issued an order to his men “to arrest the ringleaders
in all assaults.” Mayor Harrison further directed that only two
pickets should be allowed to remain at each building. When
the second outbreak occurred in November a large force of
policemen was detailed to guard the buildings and protect non-
union workmen, and the disturbances were soon quelled Such
repeated lawlessness on the part of the walking delegates and
union pickets seemed to indicate that they had learned noth-
ing from the long-continued controversy, and served only to
alienate public sympathy.

The contractors claimed throughout the dispute, and appar-
ently not without good cause, that “ politics was mixed up in it,”
On this point an indictment of the unions by one of their best
friends may be cited.

Public opinion claims the right to criticise frankly and fearlessly the
policy of the Building Trades Council. It criticises the policy that
tolerates the acceptance of appointive political offices as the most
disastrous policy that has ever paralyzed the power or menaced the
future of organized labor in Chicago. These offices are offered as

1 They were employed for ten weeks, and the cost to the contractors was
estimated at $7 5,000 — Chicago Record, May 5

2 The attitude of the latter organization is indicated by a statement made by
John A Long, president of the Board of Business Agents, before the Industrial
Commission, to the effect that he did not approve of police protection, “ because
the men who are at fault and who are causing the trouble are not entitled to
protection ”


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 119

subsidies. Their incumbents are really held as hostages for the
delivery of the labor vote. 1

While it is impossible to ascertain exactly how many of the
labor leaders held appointive offices under the city administra-
tion there is no doubt that the number was disgracefully large. 2
The most conspicuous case was the appointment of Edward
Carroll, president of the Building Trades Council, to the presi-
dency of the Chicago Civil Service Board. 3 * * * * 8 That there was a
deliberate pact between the labor leaders and the politicians in
power seems sufficiently indicated by a change that was made
in the constitution of the Building Trades Council two or
three years ago, by which Section 3 was stricken out. This
section read as follows :

No person shall be eligible as a delegate to this council who holds
a political office, either elective or appointive ... (a political office
shall be defined as being employed in any capacity by the nation,
state, county or city).

There is no doubt that many of the leaders of the Building
Trades Council had subordinated the best interests of that body
to their own personal advantage and that the best elements
were not in control. This was felt by the unions themselves,
and a complete reorganization of the council would undoubtedly
have been effected through the efforts of the rank and file,
had not the opposition of the employers given the leaders a
rallying cry. The officers and business agents appealed to the
members to show their devotion to the cause of union labor
by upholding the organization. The men responded loyally to
this appeal ; but after the contest had dragged along for almost

1 Speech of Professor Graham Taylor before the labor mass meeting of May 13.

2 The result of an investigation m the fall of 1899 was said to show that two

thirds of the officials of the Chicago Federation of Labor and of the Building

Trades Council held such offices. A list of thirteen names was published by the

New York Sun, May 27, but there were undoubtedly others. W J Chalmers,

in his testimony before the Industrial Commission, March 20, stated that twenty-

two leading men of labor organizations held positions m the city hall.

8 Mr. Carroll resigned, under pressure, on April 29.


120


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


six months, with no prospect of a settlement, dissatisfaction
began to manifest itself. At the end of July occurred the
election of officers of the Building Trades Council, and as this
gave the members the first opportunity of passing judgment
on the administration since the beginning of the dispute, it was
regarded as very important by both contractors and labor men.
But the election by the council on July 27 of all its old officers
seemed to place the stamp of approval on the acts of its
executive and at the same time destroyed all hope of a compro-
mise settlement. A week later the Board of Business Agents
reelected all its former officers.

The conservative element was strong enough, however, to
insist on certain reforms within the Building Trades Council
itself. One of these was the amendment of the constitution
so as to forbid the holding of a political office by a delegate,
another was a modification of the basis of representation so
as to give more power to the larger unions, and a third was
the substitution of the vote by individuals for the “ trade” or
unit vote. The carpenters were particularly anxious for these
reforms, and it was understood that their adoption was the
price which had to be paid for the support given to the council
by the carpenters when the question of withdrawal from the
strike came up for vote. The growth of dissatisfaction with
the policy of the leaders in the Building Trades Council found
more decided expression a little later in the retirement of
Edward Carroll from office. First his own union, the plas-
terers, refused on September 1, by a vote of two to one, to
reelect him to the office of financial secretary, which he had
held for ten years. A month later, on October 5, Mr. Carroll
resigned, under pressure, from the presidency of the Building
Trades Council. In his letter of resignation he gave as his
reason the alleged announcement of the contractors that if
he resigned they would make agreements with all the unions.
William G. Schardt was elected president in his place, but as
the same political clique was back of the new president, no
noticeable change of policy was inaugurated. It had by this
time become pretty clear that no compromise could be hoped


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 121


for, and the struggle narrowed* down to a test of endurance
between the Building Trades Council and the Building Con-
tractors Council.

IX. Attempts at Arbitration

The history of this dispute proves that there are some
matters in labor troubles which cannot be settled by arbitra-
tion between employers and employees. Such questions as
those relating to wages or hours of labor may well be settled
in that manner, for they turn on a single economic fact and
may be determined according to that fact. Broader issues
connected with the labor problem are not always capable of
being arbitrated, and such an issue was raised here. Briefly
stated, it was a contest for control of the conditions under
which work should be carried on, and involved the right of
interference in the conduct of the business of the contractors
by the representatives of the unions. It was a struggle over
an economic principle and could not be settled by the dictum
of any court of arbitration; nor was it subject to compromise,
for it called for the surrender of one side or the other. This
was the issue involved in the demand of the contractors for
the dissolution of the Building Trades Council.

Arbitration did not fail for lack of attempts on the part of
outsiders to bring the parties to the struggle to some sort
of agreement. No less than seven attempts were thus made.
Only a little more than two weeks after the beginning of
the dispute Mayor Harrison wrote 1 both to the Building Con-
tractors Council and the Building Trades Council, asking
them to appoint committees for the purpose of conferring
together with a view to harmonizing the differences between
the two organizations. He suggested that the meetings be
held in his office and offered to act as chairman. This invi-
tation was accepted by the labor men, but declined by the
Contractors Council. The latter stated that they were unwill-
ing to enter into negotiations, because two attempts which

1 On February 21.


122


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


they had made at arbitration with the Building Trades Council
had failed . 1 But

the reason back of all others in the refusal of the contractors to
have further dealings with the Building Trades Council is the
knowledge that, as an organization, it has become so tyrannical, cor-
rupt and lawless that its existence will render the prosperity of the
building industry an impossibility. The first step toward solving
the problem is the dissolution of the Building Trades Council.

For this refusal to arbitrate the contractors were much criti-
cised by the unions and others, and the unwillingness to sub-
mit their case to a court was cited as evidence of a bad cause.
Such action, however, does not necessarily put the party so
refusing in the wrong. From the very beginning the con-
tractors took the position that they would not arbitrate with
the Building Trades Council, but expressed themselves as ready
at any time to come to terms with the separate unions, provided
they would withdraw from that body. Whether right or wrong
they were at least consistent in maintaining this attitude
throughout the struggle. Though the union men professed
themselves ready to submit their case to arbitration at any
time, they would do so only through the medium of the Build-
ing Trades Council. Such an utterly antagonistic attitude as
was assumed by the two parties to the dispute made arbitration
impossible from the very beginning — so much so that during
the investigation made in Chicago by the Federal Industrial
Commission, Mr. Harris, a member of the subcommittee, was
led to exclaim , 2 “ It looks as though you had placed the whole
matter beyond the power of arbitration.”

Another offer at mediation, by the Civic Federation of
Chicago, met with no encouragement from either side . 3 An
attempt made by P. J. McGuire, of the Brotherhood of Car-
penters and Joiners, to secure a conference failed on the
same ground . 4 The next move was the result of a conference

1 September and December, 1899.

2 To Edward Carroll, president of the Building Trades Council. See Chicago

Times-Herald, March 29 3 March 11. * April 3.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 123

between the mayor and the building material dealers. 1 The
latter threatened that if either side refused a fair offer to
restore harmony, they would aid the other side in the struggle.
In spite of this threat, however, the contractors refused to arbi-
trate with the Building Trades Council and the unions refused to
arbitrate except through that body. 2 Undaunted by the failure
of the mayor to bring the dispute to an end, the city council
now appointed a special committee of six aldermen, who to-
gether with five citizens were to investigate the labor troubles
and try to secure a settlement of them. 3 The Building Trades
Council again announced its willingness to aid the committee,
while the Building Contractors Council again refused any offer
of mediation. They restated their readiness to arbitrate with
any single union, provided it would withdraw from the council,
but refused to meet representatives from that body. More-
over, they asserted that the “ cardinal principles ” for which
they stood could not be submitted to arbitration.

The next effort at mediation was made under the leadership
of Professor Graham Taylor, as the outcome of a “convention
of all trades unions ” held on May 13, with 600 delegates
representing 190 labor organizations in attendance. It was
decided that a committee of seven persons should be created
to “investigate the building trades lockout thoroughly and
endeavor to reach a settlement,” this committee to consist
of three members of labor organizations outside of the Build-
ing Trades Council, three disinterested men from commercial
organizations, and Professor Taylor as chairman. The com-
mittee was never fully organized, as members of the Real
Estate Board and other business associations declined invita-
tions to serve, and the Building Contractors Council refused
to participate in the investigation. On July 1, however, the
labor members made a report, which expressed their confidence
in the officers of the Building Trades Council and placed the
whole responsibility for the dispute upon the contractors. Still


1 April 19.

2 In explanation of their position the contractors issued a statement, later

referred to as the “ circular of April 30.” See below, p. 125. 8 April 25.


124


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


another attempt was made by the Real Estate Board on May 22,
when its directors were authorized to act as arbitrators when-
ever requested to do so by both parties to the controversy. No
results followed this action, however, as neither the contractors
nor the union men requested the intervention.

Finally, the American Federation of Labor took up the mat-
ter some two months later, and at a meeting of its executive
council at Denver, July 19, appointed a committee of three,
with President Gompers at the head, to investigate and to
attempt to arbitrate the difficulty. Toward the end of the
month conferences were held in Chicago by the committee,
with both the Building Trades Council and the Building Con-
tractors Council; but these efforts at arbitration failed for the
same reason that had prevented settlement before, namely,
the refusal of the contractors to enter into agreements with
the Building Trades Council. The contractors, however, ex-
pressed their willingness to make agreements with represent-
atives of national or international urfions or with the American
Federation of Labor. As President Gompers refused to con-
sider this proposal, negotiations ceased. Additional suggestions
for the settlement of the dispute were freely made by promi-
nent citizens, newspapers, and others interested in its con-
clusion, but they all proved equally futile. Throughout the
controversy the state board of arbitration was completely
ignored by both parties.

At one time the action of the Building Trades Council itself
in requesting the Contractors Council to appoint a conference
committee seemed likely to lead to a conclusion of the dispute.
This invitation was accepted by the Contractors Council on
condition that the union conferees should not be their business
agents or delegates to their council. As this demand was
acceded to, a conference was held 1 between representatives of
the unions and of the employers’ associations for the purpose
of effecting a settlement. As the basis of the conference the
contractors presented their declaration of principles of April 30
together with the interpretation they put upon them. This
1 On June 12 and following days.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 125

was practically only a reiteration of their former principles.
They announced their willingness to enter into agreements
with the individual unions, provided the following conditions
were observed:

1. (a) That there shall be no limitation as to the amount of work
a man shall perform during his working day.

( b ) That there shall be no restriction of the use of machinery or
tools.

(y) That there shall be no restriction of the use of manufactured
material, except prison-made.

( \d ) That no person shall have the right to interfere with the work-
men during working hours.

( e ) That the use of apprentices shall not be prohibited.

(/) That the foreman shall be the agent of the employer.

(g) That all workmen are at liberty to work for whomever they
see fit.

( [h ) That employers shall be at liberty to employ and discharge
whomever they see fit.

2. That the following conditions are made a part of the agree-
ment :

(a) That eight hours shall constitute a day’s work.

( b ) That the rate of wages shall be [that prevailing in each trade
the previous year].

( c ) That time and one half shall be paid for overtime, and double
time for Sundays and holidays.

( d ) That the agreement shall cover a period of not less than three
years.

( e ) That an arbitration clause to provide for the adjustment of
possible difficulties in the future be made a part of the agreement.

(f) That no by-law or rule conflicting with this agreement shall
be enforced or passed by the association or union during the life of
the agreement.

( g ) That this agreement shall become operative only when the
union withdraws permanently from the Building Trades Council and
agrees not to be affiliated with any organization of a like character
during the life of the agreement.

The unions were unwilling to give up their central organiza-
tion, but in return proposed a plan for the establishment of
standing arbitration committees which should settle all matters


126 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

in dispute, work to continue pending their decision, thus doing
away with the sympathetic strike. As the objection of the
contractors to the Building Trades Council was based largely
on the latter's use of the sympathetic strike to enforce its
demands, it was thought that they would permit its continu-
ance if robbed of this weapon. Upon the flat refusal of the
contractors to accept anything less than the dissolution of the
Building Trades Council itself, the negotiations were broken
off at this point. A few days later, however, the labor men
requested another conference with the contractors and this time
submitted a statement of their position on the various points
raised by the contractors’ circular. They conceded five demands
without a change, namely, the first, third, fifth, and seventh of
the first set and the fifth demand of the second set. The ques-
tions of machinery and the rate of wages were to be left to
arbitration, and a standing arbitration committee was to be
established, to which should be referred all disputes. On the
other points there was a slight difference : the unions insisted
that their agent should visit all work when necessary ; that the
foreman, while an agent of the employer, should be a union man ;
and that they should reserve the right to refuse to work with
nonunion men. No mention was made of the dissolution of the
Building Trades Council, but the right to order strikes was taken
from it and it was thought that this concession would meet the
wishes of the contractors on this point The labor men had
gone considerably more than halfway to meet the requirements
of the employers, and when the latter rejected absolutely these
propositions of the unions, it was felt that they had determined
upon the rule-or-ruin policy. As no compromise was possible,
negotiations were broken- off for the second time.

X. Defections from the Building Trades Council

The contractors were undoubtedly influenced in assuming
this uncompromising attitude by the belief that the unions
could not hold out much longer and would soon be compelled
to surrender unconditionally. At first it seemed as though


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 127

their calculations were correct, for on June 26 the Bricklayers
and Stone Masons’ Union, one of the most powerful organiza-
tions in the Building Trades Council, decided to withdraw from
that body and sign a separate agreement with the Chicago
Masons and Builders Association. This agreement was to run
for three years and contained most of the principles for which
the contractors had stood out ; it provided also for a joint arbi-
tration board. 1 Although this defection was heralded by the
contractors as the beginning of the end, it was claimed by the
labor leaders that the withdrawal of the bricklayers removed
the one inharmonious element in the Building Trades Council
and left that organization a unit to carry on the fight. 2

For the next month there was a decided calm in building
trades circles. The contractors evidently expected other unions
to follow the lead of the bricklayers, while the efforts of the
labor leaders were directed toward keeping them in line. The
apparent success of the Building Trades Council, by the elec-
tion at the end of July of all its old officers, seemed also to
show that it was determined to pursue its former policy; and
from that time began the slow disintegration of the central
body. For the next few months the history of the dispute is


1 The bricklayers’ agreement served as a model for a uniform agreement which
was submitted early m September to all the unions This began by reciting that
it was for the purpose of preventing strikes and lockouts and of facilitating a
peaceful adjustment of all grievances and disputes which might arise from time to
time. As a basis for joint- working rules and to govern the action of the arbitra-
tion board there was laid down a code of principles which consisted of the eight
cardinal demands of the contractors The following points were also contained in
it : eight hours as a day’s work ; the Saturday half holiday dunng the months of
June, July, and August ; time and a half for overtime and double time for Sun-
days and holidays , no work on Labor Day ; all disputes to be submitted to a joint
board of arbitration with the fullest power to enforce its edicts By the last
provision the sympathetic strike was abolished. The agreement was to become
operative only w r hen the union should withdraw permanently from the Building
Trades Council and should agree not to become affiliated with any organization
of a like character during the life of the agreement.

All the agreements made subsequently with the various unions followed the
lines of this one, though modifications were often made m particular points.

2 The Bricklayers and Stone Masons’ union had not joined the Building Trades
Council until April, 1899, and had never been in complete harmony with that
organization — The Bricklayer and Mason (New York), April, 1900, p. 4.


128 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


a record of the action of the several unions. A split in the
union of the hoisting engineers was the first act to follow the
withdrawal of the bricklayers, and on July 28 the seceding
faction, composed of about fifty members, afterwards organized
under the name of the United Brotherhood of Hoisting Engi-
neers, signed a working agreement with the Building Elevator
Contractors’ Association. As E. A. Davis, the reelected sec-
retary of the Building Trades Council, was a member of this
union, this was regarded as an especially significant move.
The next break came in the suspension of the Brotherhood of
Electrical Mechanics from the council. The latter body had
ordered the Brotherhood to turn over certain work to the gas
fitters, and on their refusal had fined them $300 and suspended
them from the organization. Suspension carried with it the
loss of union working cards in Chicago, but the electricians
later obtained these from the National Building Trades Council.
While there was thus no formal withdrawal from the local
council, the action of the electricians was considered tanta-
mount to this.

An attempt on the part of some of the members of the Cut
Stone Contractors’ Association to secure the withdrawal of that
organization from the Building Contractors Council met with
signal defeat about this time, showing that the contractors were
determined to hold together.

Next to the Bricklayers’ Union that of the carpenters 1 was
the most important and powerful in the Building* Trades Coun-
cil, and its rather vacillating course during the next few months
was watched with anxiety and interest. After a failure to
reach an agreement with the contractors, owing largely to dis-
agreement over the Saturday half holiday, and the rejection by
a small majority of a proposal to withdraw from the Building
Trades Council, some of the dissatisfied members formed ah
independent organization and in September signed a three-year

1 There are two organizations of carpenters in Chicago — the United Brother-
hood of Garpenters and Joiners, which is composed of nineteen unions and about
4700 members, and the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, which
has five unions and some 300 members


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 129

agreement with the employers’ associations. Further negotia-
tions with the contractors were had during October and Novem-
ber by the regular unions, but without result. Finally, however,
on February 7, 1901, just a year from the beginning of the
dispute, an agreement was reached by which the men secured
the Saturday half holiday and agreed to leave the council. In
all essentials the agreement resembled that adopted by the
bricklayers, although one clause provided that the union might
join “a new central body, composed solely of mechanic trades
employed on buildings, . . . and that said body shall not be
called the * Building Trades Council.’” The very name was
evidently under the ban of the contractors ! Several of the
strongest unions, therefore, applied for admission to the Chicago
Federation of Labor.

The Plumbers’ Union had proposed to the contractors in July
that if they would withdraw from the Building Contractors
Council, the plumbers would withdraw from the Building
Trades Council, and they could then frame an agreement
together without difficulty. The Master Plumbers Association
refused, however, to act upon this suggestion. Two or three
further attempts to secure agreements with the contractors
failing, and efforts to secure the withdrawal of the union from
the Building Trades Council being unsuccessful, some of the
dissatisfied members of the union withdrew individually and
went to work for all contractors who paid the union scale of
wages and employed only union men, without reference to any
agreement. The seceders organized themselves later into an
independent union under the name of the Journeymen Plumb-
ers Association and on December 18 secured a charter. By
January the old union also was ready to withdraw from the
council and a unification of the two organizations was effected,
after which an agreement similar to the others was made with
the employers.

The second organization to withdraw from the Building
Trades Council in its corporate capacity was the Plasterers’
Union. On July 9 they had refused to ratify an agreement
with the contractors similar to that made by the bricklayers,


130 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

but a month later another agreement along the same lines was
brought before the union. Withdrawal from the Building
Trades Council was of course provided for, and in other
respects it differed but slightly from the bricklayers' agree-
ment. Ratification of this agreement seemed probable, but was
defeated by the arbitrary methods of Edward Carroll and other
members at the meeting of the union, — an action which
undoubtedly hurt the Building Trades Council more than any-
thing else. At the end of September Carroll was forced from
the presidency of the council, and a day later the Plasterers'
Union appointed a committee to confer with the Employing Plas-
terers' Association for the purpose of arranging an agreement
with that organization. After some rather dramatic maneuvers
by both factions, this was finally ratified by a majority of the
members on October 5, a move which carried with it the with-
drawal of the union from the Building Trades Council.

The Bridge and Structural Iron Workers formally withdrew
from the Building Trades Council on October 25 and at the
same time entered into an agreement with the Iron League,
the association of the contractors. This was the third organi-
zation to sever its connection with the council, and while not
as strong numerically as the other two, it was made up of the
tlite of the skilled workers in the building trades and had con-
siderable influence. Their agreement followed the general lines
of the uniform agreement, such as was entered into with the
bricklayers and plasterers, the main difference being a clause
giving the contractors the right to hire nonunion men in other
lines on the same job. One significant clause provided that
the union might belong to a new central organization not the
Building Trades Council.

If it was to win in the struggle with the contractors and
save itself, it was apparent that the Building Trades Council
must stop the disintegration that threatened to end its own
existence. It was, accordingly, now decided to adopt the plan
of fighting the contractors one at a time until each was forced
in turn to capitulate The first job singled out for attack was
the new Mandel Building, and on November 20 all the men


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 13 1

at work on that building were called out on strike. Although
this was the first aggressive move that the Building Trades
Council had made in several months, they seemed not to have
learned wisdom in that time, for the progress of this strike was
marked by a new outburst of lawlessness. The strike was of
short duration, for the places of the strikers were soon filled,
while the immoderate action of the labor leaders served to
alienate public sympathy. Many of the nonunion men who
had taken the place of the striking union men during this
trouble and previously were Negroes, who, with the exception
of the bricklayers and hod carriers, were practically unorgan-
ized in Chicago. An attempt was now made to align them on
the side of the Building Trades Council. The Chicago Federa-
tion of Labor issued an appeal on December 2, inviting them
to join the unions. While it does not appear that this invita-
tion was acted upon by the Negroes, it certainly evidenced a
more pacific policy on the part of organized labor.

These measures were insufficient, however, to restrain the
seceding unions, and in the middle of December the steam
fitters withdrew from the Building Trades Council. After the
failure to reach a settlement with the unions early in August
several of the master steam fitters had withdrawn from the
Contractors Council and signed three-year agreements similar
to the old ones. The principal demand of the contractors —
that the unions should withdraw from the Building Trades
Council — was not insisted on, but the agreement provided
that there should be no limitation as to the amount of work
that might be done in a day, and that no strike should be
called until the grievance had been submitted to a permanent
board of arbitration. The threatened break from the Con-
tractors Council did not become general, however, and things
remained quiet in this trade until December. Negotiations
were then begun between representatives of the Master Steam
Fitters' Association and those of the Journeymen Steam Fitters'
and the Junior Steam Fitters’ unions, which resulted in the
signing of a three-year agreement between the organizations
of employers and men. The conditions were substantially the


132


lKAUJi UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


same as those of the uniform agreement signed by the other
unions. 1 Withdrawal from the Building Trades Council and
the establishment of a joint arbitration board were the most
important features. The eight cardinal points of the contract-
ors were conceded and they were given greater liberty in the
employment of helpers. The men got the Saturday half holi-
day, double time for all overtime, and some other demands.
The wage scale remained unchanged. Permission was given to
the unions to join another central trade body, provided only it
was composed of mechanics whose trades Were closely allied.
In accordance with the terms of this agreement the Journey-
men’s and Junior Steam Fitters’ unions withdrew on December
14 from the Building Trades Council.

A few days later, on December 18, a three-year agreement
was concluded between the Master Plumbers Association and
the Gas Fitters’ Union, embodying the general features of the
agreement signed by the steam fitters. It was reached only
after considerable friction over the clause concerning the
employment of nonunion men. The question was settled
through a sort of compromise, by which it was provided that
while the bosses should have the right to hire whom they
pleased and the men to work for whom they pleased the latter
were also given the right to cease work when they chose, the
latter contingency doubtless having reference to the employ-
ment of nonunion men. Another significant clause in the
agreement was to the effect that the Master Plumbers’ Asso-
ciation should notify the union when any member of the asso-
ciation lapsed from membership. It seemed to point clearly to
a tacit understanding that the members of the union were not
to work for any master plumber who was not a member of the
association. No mention was made of a new central body such
as was referred to in the agreements of the carpenters, iron
workers, and steam fitters. In other respects it followed the
lines of the uniform agreement.

1 The details of the agreement may be found in “ The Chicago Steam Fitters’
Settlement,” in The Metal Worker (New York and Chicago), December 22, 1900,
P* 36 ,


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 133

The new year saw no interruption in the disintegration of
the Building Trades Council. Early in January the plumbers
withdrew, and shortly thereafter the Hod Carriers and Building
Laborers’ union entered into an agreement with the Chicago
Masons and Builders Association, by the terms of which they
also withdrew from the central body. As this was next to the
carpenters the largest union in the council, its action was a
severe blow. The carpenters only waited for the semiannual
election of officers in the council on January 27 ; when the
result showed that no change of policy was contemplated they
also severed their connection. This was the beginning of the
end, and the movement of secession was kept up by the with-
drawal of dissatisfied members in the unions of the stonecutters,
the slate and tile roofers, and the mosaic tile layers and helpers.
Every symptom points clearly to the final disintegration of the
Building Trades Council, though the president of that organi-
zation has denied emphatically that it will dissolve. The con-
stitution provides that it shall exist as long as five trades desire
to retain the organization. While the council may thus never
be formally dissolved, there is no doubt that its usefulness is
past and that it is practically moribund. As one of the union
men himself expressed it, “ The council is about as useful as a
dead horse.” Twelve months after the beginning of the dispute
the membership of the council had been reduced from perhaps
30,000 to about one third of that number. It was said that
about 5000 workmen had left the city in search of employ-
ment elsewhere since the beginning of the dispute. Indeed,
the end might have come sooner, had not both contractors and
unions tacitly agreed during the summer not to push the matter
to a conclusion at that time.

The statistics of building operations in Chicago show that
they had been only temporarily checked by the labor troubles
and by July, 1900, had resumed their normal activity, soon
exceeding in volume those of the previous year. The con-
tractors pointed to this fact as evidence that the strike had
failed and that the men had deserted the Building Trades
Council, but the real explanation was somewhat different.


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


134

Both contractors and union men were anxious to resume work,
but it had to be done under conditions that would not indicate
a surrender on either side. In order to quiet disaffection and
permit the men to provide for the winter, the unions allowed
their members to work for members of the Contractors Council
in violation of their rules. The contractors, on the other hand,
were willing to accept workmen without inquiring too closely
as to whether they belonged to the Building Trades Council
or not, though such an act violated their mutual agreement.
Fearing lest such a policy should disrupt their association, the
contractors next adopted the plan of requiring all workmen to
join the Industrial Union , 1 which was in favor with the Con-
tractors Council, or to sign an agreement certifying that they
had resigned from their union. To meet this move the men
received permission from their unions to sign without detri-
ment to their union standing. Accordingly, a number of the
union men, notably the carpenters, joined the Industrials, or
signed resignations from their own unions and secured work
on these terms. In some cases the contractors were reported
to have paid the initiation fee for the men who joined the
Industrial Union. There was a tacit agreement on both sides
to resume work without insisting on a formal surrender from
either. In the middle of the summer it was calculated by one
of the best-informed labor leaders that over half of all the men
employed were union men, that fully one third of the members
of the unions affiliated with the Building Trades Council were
employed, and that at least three fourths of these were getting
union wages from the contractors.

Owing to the number of nonunion men employed and the
decrease in the amount of building, there was a distinct surplus
of laborers as soon as the union men began to return to work.
In recognition of this fact, several of the unions abandoned
their demands for an increase in wages and others adopted
temporarily a lower wage scale. There seemed to be imminent
danger that the unions would lose all the gains of years in this
struggle of the Building Trades Council.

1 An organization composed of nonunion men.


THE CHICAGO BUILDING TRADES DISPUTE 135


XI. Conclusion

This recital of the progress of the building trades dispute
has made clear the fact that the sense of responsibility in their
position as trustees has not controlled the leaders of the Build-
ing Trades Council. Organized ostensibly to promote the inter-
ests of labor, it had subordinated these to the cause of a political
machine in whose service it had attempted to use the organi-
zation. In its dealings with contractors the Building Trades
Council had become arrogant and arbitrary. Assuming that it
had unlimited power, it had pushed its demands to such a point
that the employers were goaded to resistance in self-defense.
If any single lesson is to be drawn from this dispute, it is the
necessity for wise and unselfish leadership of organized labor.

But while condemning the one side we cannot hold the other
free from blame. There were hot-headed men in the lead on
both sides. After the dispute had continued for some time suc-
cess became a personal matter. Many of the contractors had
expressed themselves so decidedly that they were unwilling to
concede a single point ; they had staked their personal repu-
tation, as it were, on the outcome and would accept nothing less
than the complete submission of the Building Trades Council.
In justice to the Contractors Council, it should be said that there
were many members in their association, as there were in the
unions, who would have been glad of an honorable compro-
mise at any period of the dispute. The attitude of the Con-
tractors Council in demanding the dissolution of the Building
Trades Council while refusing to disband themselves must be
recognized as inconsistent, to say the least. They later receded
from this extreme position, when in the agreements signed with
some of the unions provision was made for the organization of
a new central body. It now seems clear that the dispute might
have been settled by mutual agreement, had the leaders on
both sides bee^ less uncompromising.

********

On April 26 the Building Trades Council voted to disband,
the motion being opposed by only the paper hangers and the


136 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


boiler makers. A few days later a new organization, under the
name of the Chicago Building Trades League, was formed by
fifteen of the eighteen strong trades in the building industry,
representing 15,000 workmen. The membership is restricted
to trades engaged in the actual construction of buildings, and
thus fifteen of the trades that were affiliated with the former
organization are made ineligible. There are to be no sym-
pathetic strikes ; differences are to be settled by arbitration ;
no person holding political office is eligible as a delegate; and
unity of the trades is to be fostered. This new central body
was perfected entirely through the efforts of local labor men
who opposed the policies of the old council and desired to live
up to the agreements recently made with the contractors. The
outcome of the year-long dispute must be regarded, therefore,
not merely as a victory for the contractors but also as a victory
for the better element in the trades unions, signifying the sub-
stitution of conciliatory methods of settling disputes for those


of bluster and threat.


Ernest L. Bogart.


The Chicago Building Trades League referred to above was short-lived. In
reality it never existed except on paper Two years later a central body of build-
ing trades unions, known as the Associated Building Trades of Chicago and Cook
County, was organized This body is still in existence and, while lacking the
powers of the old Building Trades Council, it has recently shown a tendency to
call sympathetic strikes in violation of written agreements with employers. It
embraces all of the building trades unions with the exception of the carpenters and
plasterers, who have held aloof and refused to join in any sympathetic movement.

While the sympathetic strike has to a great extent been eliminated in the
building industry of Chicago, the trades are all better organized than they were
before the lockout. Wages have been advanced in all branches Bricklayers who
received a minimum of $4 a day of eight hours at the close of the dispute now
receive I5 a day Carpenters who were paid a minimum of $3 40 a day at the end
of the lockout now receive $4 40, and at the beginning of next April their wages
are to be #4 50 for the succeeding two years Structural iron workers have
increased their wages from $4 to $4 So, and building laborers from $2 to $2 80.

The eight “ cardinal principles ” of the contractors still form a part of practi-
cally all working agreements, but, while they provide for the “ open shop,” that
part of them is a dead letter. The unions have got around^he difficulty by add-
ing a clause m the agreements providing that union men shall not be required to
work with nonunion men in the same trade or calling. This has proved to be in
actual practice a union-shop or closed-shop agreement.


January, 1907.


J. R. C.


VI


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 1


[The legal character and responsibility of a labor union are discussed from
different points of view in the following selections from a symposium of replies
to an inquiry submitted by the secretary of the National Civic Federation. The
question asked was whether unions should seek to become incorporated. — Ed]

Don C. Seitz, Member of the American Newspaper Publish-
ers' Association and Business Manager of the New York
World :

When an employer recognizes a labor union he ceases to recog-
nize the individual. The latter has no place in the economy of his
establishment. He must deal with the concrete idea represented by
unionism and forsake the theory that he can handle the individual
as such. This we have done, and the results, I think, are satisfac-
tory, so far as anything that interferes with liberty of action and
freedom of purpose can be satisfactory. When, however, we do get
ourselves into this attitude we certainly increase the responsibility
of the union and expect this responsibility to be met.

Coercive as most unions are, they naturally cannot learn to
respect the rights of employers or men who will not affiliate with
them. I think there is now less tyranny in the printing trade than
formerly, and we have the insurance of our admirable arbitration
agreement Certainly, too, there is more intelligence and a greater
appreciation of what is right among most of our employees than in
any other grade of labor, and the proposition I am about to present
is not specific to our own interests. I believe that we shall have
constant and more menacing troubles unless the newspapers, whose
duty it is to arouse public sentiment and bring issues home to the
minds of the people, shall insist that labor unions be made legally
responsible bodies by incorporation. This done, a vast deal of
trouble would disappear. It would, no doubt, be difficult to organize
unions, because of the responsibilities involved by such legislation,

1 From the National Civic Federation Monthly Review , April, 1903.

137


138 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

— as men would stop and do some thinking before assuming a legal
liability, — but in the end the unions that were brave enough and
honest enough to comply with the conditions would benefit largely
by the result. In short, legislation should be had to provide for the
incorporation of the trade unions just as we have it for forming
other corporations or trusts, and self-constituted bodies founded to
coerce employers would have no status under the law and would
become conspiracies where they failed to comply with the require-
ment to incorporate.

You cannot properly establish the Merry Toughs' Social Club
without incorporating it. You cannot join with a few friends to
promote the simplest business enterprise without incorporating it.
You cannot even establish a church without going through a legal
process. But it is perfectly possible to get together a body of work-
ingmen who without regard to your contracts or their obligations
take you by the throat with intimidation and boycott without any
serious fear of interference by law or any collection of damages
from the courts.

Large sums of money are raised by the unions from individual
assessments, but not one cent of this is reachable to recompense
the industry that bears the brunt of the conflict. When the sug-
gestion is made to the average labor leader that such incorporation
ought to be enforced, we at once meet with the answer that it would
be fatal to their methods, which is an open confession that their
methods are illegal and wrong. Business men incur millions of
responsibility in obedience to the law, while labor, much more
closely knit, is immune.

It is only recently that in overburdened England the court of
last resort ordered the Amalgamated Society of Railroad Servants
to pay the Taff Vale Railroad ^*28,000 damages for a strike and
boycott. The appellate court held that, incorporated or not, an
organized body could not keep itself outside the law, and that it
must be held pecuniarily responsible for its acts. This decision of
vast importance to all concerned swept away the pleasant fiction
that lawlessness and boycott are always to be condoned where the
“workingman” is trying to “elevate” himself. In short, in Eng-
land the worm has turned and hereafter the unions will be forced
to meet the responsibility they incur, just as the railroad does when
it wrecks a train and kills or injures its passengers. The playful
incendiaries, the murderous boycotters, and the delightful dyna-
miters may escape as individuals, but the union which precipitated


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS


139


the conflict which brought this all about must settle. This is what
we must come to here, if there is to be any human right or human
liberty left in the land.

The argument in favor of incorporating is a simple one. A cer-
tain number of carpenters desire to get together for the betterment
of their condition. They must raise a fund, elect officers. They
must have a concrete existence, if they would incorporate as a busi-
ness body. This would be the situation : When an employer called
upon the guild, as it would best be named, the condition of employ-
ment could be made plain : the responsibility of taking the work
would be incurred and the duty of performing it would be enforced.
Can there be any honest objection to this practice ? We have now
in this city the most chaotic conditions. Men drop out every day
at will in the building trades and great losses are incurred by the
contractor and owner , the situation is fast becoming intolerable.

Judge Parker, in a recent decision, holds that the laborer has the
right to do as he pleases about working or not working. This is
incontestably true, yet I should say that when the laborer had
agreed to perform a certain task for a certain price there should be
some method of making him keep his agreement. The employer is
responsible for wages, and if he has agreed to hire a man for a year
and uses him only one day, the law makes him pay for the whole
period. But the plasterer can throw down his trowel and quit in
the middle of his employment because he dislikes the expression on
his foreman’s face. If, however, we had an incorporated union of
plasterers instead of a guerrilla one, the union would have to come
forward and complete the task.

J. W. Sullivan, Typographical Union, New York :

A union has ways of its own in conducting the affairs that relate
mainly to itself and its membership. It is a big self-governing fam-
ily. In periods of strike the prescribed order of written constitu-
tion or by-law sometimes proves less desirable than the short cut
obvious as a war measure. The members then become aware that
in drawing up their laws they were unable to foresee the situation
confronting them, and they may, for example, unconstitutionally
confide absolute power temporarily in an officer or a committee.
In times of peace a union often reaches conclusions and interpreta-
tions dictated by the common sense of a meeting rather than by
the statutes as written, leaving the majority either satisfied or in a


140 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

mood to accept the judgment for better or worse. Such proceed-
ings may relate to trials of members, to executive session work, to
appropriation of funds, to informalities or irregularities in elec-
tions or referendum votes, to the opening or closing of books for
inspection, to the reading or silencing of reports, to appointing or
dismissing committees, to maintaining discipline, to accepting or
rejecting candidates for membership, to suspending or expelling
or reinstating members, to passing judgment on aggressions of
employers tending to end in strike, to investigating the conduct of
members prejudicial to the organization, and to settling questions
in which rule or precedent or necessity of the local union conflicts
with international union law. In all such proceedings two princi-
ples usually govern, — self-preservation of the union and good fel-
lowship. A popular employer, m general fair, who in a fit of temper
has willfully violated a clause m a contract or the union scale, will
be adjudged innocent. A sound and active union man who has
misappropriated a small sum will be found not guilty and given
time to refund. In these matters an unincorporated union is in the
main a law unto itself. It is free. It may make many changes in
its internal methods and in administration without lessening its
responsibility as a contracting party.

But an incorporated union would in all these steps be subject to
much revision and correction through the agencies of the law. Work
here for judges, lawyers, and enemies. The incorporated body, as
a creature of the state, must be kept in health by the state. Dis-
turbers, instigated by influences inimical to a union, might kindly
aid the state. In incorporating, a union would have admitted non-
kinsfolk as masters at the family table — the judge, of another blood,
come to set things right ; the sheriff, with keys to a jail and a money
sack for fines ; the policeman, with a club and handcuffs.

These officials now occasionally regulate family affairs in the
unions, but the courts, only acting when called upon, refuse to inter-
fere if the union's proceedings are in accordance with its own rules,
which are subject to change at the will of the majority. But if
these rules depended for regularity upon the terms of incorporation,
and if informers were sent into the unions to report infractions,
the sins of unions would be multiplied and the lawsuits ensuing
would work pleasure to scabs. The knowing are fully conscious of
what they are saying when they express a desire for an increase of
the authority of the law over trade unions. They would wreck them
from within.


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 14 1
John Frankenheimer, Counselor at Law, New York:

The question, Should trade unions be incorporated ? will be found,
in its final analysis, to be predicated upon the question, Do you
believe in trade unions? For those who believe in trade unions
will answer your question quite differently from those who oppose
this established form of labor organization. As a believer in trade
unionism, I shall answer your question from the trade-union stand-
point. There is no blinking the fact that the struggle between cap-
ital and labor has many of the features of an internecine warfare.
The forces on each side are becoming daily more disciplined and
consolidated, — the trust on one side, the federated trade unions on
the other. In a struggle of this kind discipline will count. What-
ever will weaken the disciplinary control of a trade union over its
members will necessarily weaken the trade union in its contest with
organized capital. It is because incorporation of a trade union will
deprive it of much of the power it now possesses over its members
and the management of its internal affairs that the chief legal
objection to incorporation seems to lie from the trade-union stand-
point. It is well settled that a voluntary unincorporated associa-
tion, such as a trade union, club, or stock exchange, has a much
greater power not only over the admission but also over the expul-
sion of its members than an incorporated association. Membership
in an incorporation is a statutory right in the nature of a franchise,
which can neither be withheld nor taken away by the act of the
corporation unless the power to do so be given by the charter. On
the other hand, membership in a voluntary association is derived
exclusively from the body that bestows it and may be conferred or
withheld at its pleasure. A person acquires by his admission to
membership in a voluntary association only such rights as the con-
stitution and by-laws of the association give him. He may be sus-
pended or expelled according to the rules of the association, and
if the proceedings are regular and the investigation a fair one the
decision of the association cannot be reviewed on its merits by
the courts. As was said recently in a stock exchange suit, volun-
tary associations are themselves the exclusive judges of their
mode and manner of proceeding in the suspension or expulsion of
a member.

It has repeatedly been said by the courts that their power over
voluntary associations was not as great as it is over corporations ;
that the constitution of voluntary associations is the contract


142 TRADE UNIONISM AND LxABOR PROBLEMS

between the parties, and that if its provisions are not illegal,
immoral, or contrary to public policy, it must be upheld, whether
reasonable or not ; and that this is one of the main distinctions
between a voluntary association and a corporation!

It is undoubtedly because of this greater disciplinary power of a
voluntary association over its members that the most successful
trade union in this country, the New York Stock Exchange, has
refused to be incorporated. Members of this association will admit
that the maintenance of the standard rate of commissions and of
the established rules of the trade are due to the untrammeled power
of suspension and expulsion vested in the governing committee
of the exchange. Members have been suspended or expelled for
“ splitting” commissions, “ bucketing” orders, “ fraudulent ” sales,
and other acts deemed detrimental to the best trade interests of
the association, and although frequent appeals have been made to
the courts m such cases, the invariable answer has been that the
court cannot interfere if the proceedings are regular. It stands to
reason that a powerful and wealthy trade organization, such as
the Stock Exchange, which commands the best legal talent, would
not persist in remaining an unincorporated association unless it
derived great advantage therefrom.

The fundamental advantages of an unincorporated association
over a corporation are the greater power the former possesses over
its members and over the management of its internal affairs and
its greater freedom from interference by the courts in these matters.

I take it that from the trade-union standpoint the object desired
is untrammeled disciplinary power over its members and freedom
from interference in its internal affairs by the courts. This can
undoubtedly be attained more completely in the form of a volun-
tary association than in that of a corporation, and for this reason,
if for no other, trade unions should oppose incorporation.

Were a trade union to be incorporated, every member who may
have been disciplined, suspended, or expelled would appeal to
the courts for redress, and the organization would be constantly
embroiled m litigation of this kind. Moreover, sinister influences
might be brought to bear upon a sufficiently strong minority to
justify interference by the courts in the internal affairs of the asso-
ciation, if incorporated, which would not be justified, however strong
the minority, if the association were a voluntary one.

As to the legal liability of a trade union for the authorized acts
of its members or officers, there is no difference in this respect,


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 143

under the laws of the state of New York, between a voluntary asso-
ciation and a corporation. The former can sue and be sued as well
as the latter.

In my opinion, considering the whole question from the stand-
point of the labor unions, — and this is the only practical point of
view to take of the question, — incorporation of trade unions is
inexpedient. It will weaken the power of the association over its
members and over its management of its internal affairs and will
increase greatly the power of the courts over the association in all
its affairs. Let the trade unions follow the example of the New
York Stock Exchange — which is essentially a trade union and a
very successful one — and persist in maintaining their present vol-
untary and unincorporated organization.

Levy Mayer, General Counsel Illinois Manufacturers’ Asso-
ciation :

A corporation exists as such only by virtue of a grant from the
state and the acceptance of such grant by the persons composing
the corporation. No one can be compelled to accept such a grant,
nor to become a member of the corporation against his will. To
compel labor unions to incorporate is to compel individuals com-
posing the union to become members of a corporation and to
assume the burdens and responsibilities of that relation without
their consent, or to prohibit such members from voluntarily asso-
ciating themselves together for a lawful purpose. It is not within
the province of the legislature to say to a person: “You cannot
join a union unless that union is incorporated.” That would be
equivalent to saying that a person desiring to become a member
of a labor union has to become a member of the corporation or
cease to be a “ union ” laborer. Such persons would thus be pre-
vented from pursuing a lawful purpose and would be deprived of a
right to assemble for a purpose not in violation of law. The pro-
posed law would interfere w r ith the liberty of the citizen, the right
of lawful assembly, and the freedom of contract. This view is
supported by authorities. Chancellor Kent, in his Commentaries
(Vol. II, p. 277), says:

“ It requires the acceptance of a charter to create a corporate
body, for the government cannot compel persons to become an
incorporated body without their consent or the consent of at least
a major part of them.”


144


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


In Mason v. Finch, 28 Mich. 282, the Supreme Court of Michigan
laid down the law as follows *

41 It would not be competent for the legislature ... to compel
any person or society to become incorporated without its consent.”

In Hampshire v. Franklin, 16 Mass. 76, 87, the Supreme Court of
Massachusetts said :

44 No man can be compelled by the legislature to become a mem-
ber of a corporation without his consent.”

See also Angell & Ames on Corporations (eleventh edition),
Sections 31, 81, 86.

Again, the proposed law, if applicable only to labor unions and
not to all other unincorporated associations similarly situated,
would probably violate the constitutional inhibition against 44 class
legislation.” There is nothing in the nature of a labor union which
requires special regulation which does not equally apply to other
unincorporated associations. The members of a labor union are
joined together in furtherance of a common enterprise, in which
the public at large is not directly interested or concerned. If the
public is affected, it is only indirectly. Such union, therefore, is
not a public association in the same sense that it is subject to
public regulation and control.

I have heretofore, on April 12, 1902, given an opinion to the
association that the members of a labor union are legally respon-
sible for damages caused by an illegal boycott. The compulsory
incorporation of a labor union would not make the members of
the association any more responsible than they are at present,
except in so far as the corporation might possess property. The
creation of a corporation not for pecuniary profit does not and would
not ordinarily create any more financial responsibility than now exists
on the part of individuals who would constitute the corporation.

For the reasons above stated I am of the opinion that the pro-
posed law, if enacted, would be unconstitutional. Even if the law
were constitutional, I do not believe it would accomplish the pur-
pose for which it would be designed. If a law could be devised to
compel the formation of such corporations, it would soon be dis-
covered that such corporations could readily avoid accumulating or
possessing any property.

Frederick H. Cooke, Author of 44 Trade and Labor Combina-
tions/’ Attorney at Law, New York :

The importance of the decision of the House of Lords in Taff
Vale Railway Company v. Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants,


THE INCORPORATION OF*TRADE UNIONS 145

L. R. App. Cas. 426 (1901), resulting in a recovery for a large
amount of damages against the defendant trade union, has, in my
opinion, been much exaggerated. That an association of this char-
acter should be mulcted m so large an amount is, to say the least,
unusual and may be a sociological fact of interest and importance.
But from a strictly legal standpoint the decision is comparatively
insignificant. The doctrines applied are trite, and it was simply a
narrow question of statutory construction that was really involved.

The effect of the decision was that the defendant trade union
was liable in an action for damages, that is, in tort, for unlawful
acts of its agents m the course of the management of a strike.

Before considering the precise ground of such decision, let us
consider the general principles applicable in determining the liabil-
ity of a trade union or its officers, members, or agents for such acts.

In the absence of statutory provision a trade union is nothing
but a number of persons associated for a particular purpose. As in
the case of such associations generally (frequently termed voluntary
associations), the law ignores the circumstance of association in
determining liability for unlawful acts of members of the associa-
tion. That is to say, if the members of a trade union, whether
acting singly or in combination, assault a person or trespass upon
his property, or otherwise injure him, it is merely as individuals
that they can be held liable. For instances of members being thus
held liable, injunctions being allowed, see Hopkins v. Oxley Stave
Company , 83 Fed 912, 49 U. S. App. 709 (8th Cir., 1897); Cum-
berland Glass Manufacturing Company v. Glass Bottle Blowers'
Association , 59 N. J. Eq. 49, 46 Atl. 208 (1899); Reinecke Coal Min-
ing Company v. Wood y 112 Fed. 477 (Cir. Ct. Ky., 1901); Sherry
v. Perkins , 147 Mass. 212, 17 N. E. 307 (1888); Murdock v. Walker ,
152 Pa. St. 595, 25 Atl. 492 (1893); Wick China Company v.
Brown , 164 Pa. St. 449, 30 Atl. 261 (1894). So in actions for
damages* Temperton v. Russell \ 1 L. R. Q. B. 715 (1893) ; Quinn v.
Leathern , L. R. App. Cas. 495 (1901). See also Thomas v. Cincinnati ,
N O. T. P. Ry. Company , 62 Fed. 803 (Cir. Ct. Ohio, 1894);
Brace v. Evans , 3 Ry. & Corp. L. J. 561 (1888) ; Carew v. Ruther-
ford, , 106 Mass. 1 (1870). That, however, the trade union itself is
not liable in such a case, see American Steel 6° Wire Company v.
Wire Drawers' Union , 90 Fed. 598 (Cir. Ct Ohio, 1898); Plant
v. Woods , 176 Mass. 492, 57 N. E. ion (1900), 22 Encyclopaedia
of Pleading and Practice, p. 242.

In some instances, indeed, an unincorporated trade union seems
to have been assumed to be liable in the absence of statutory


1 46 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

provision, but this assumption doubtless resulted from inad\ r ertence.
See, for instance, Consolidated Steel or Wire Company v. Murray ,
80 Fed. 811 (Cir. Ct. Ohio, 1S97). And the following are instances
of trade unions being held liable, in some of which, at least, such
unions were, so far as appears, unincorporated : Thus, in allowing
injunctions, Coeur d'Alene Consolidated cr Mining Company v.
Miners' Union , 51 Fed. 260 (Cir. Ct. Idaho, 1S92); American Steel
6° Wire Company v. Wire Drawers' Union , 90 Fed. 608 (Cir.
Ct. Ohio, 1898); Otis Steel Company v. Local Union No. 218 , no
Fed. 698 (Cir. Ct. Ohio, 1901); Southern Railway Company v.
Machinists' Local Union, m Fed. 49 (Cir. Ct. Tenn., 1901); Allis
Chalmers Company v. Reliable Lodge , in Fed. 264 (Cir. Ct. 111 .,
1901); Vegelahn v. Guntner, 167 Mass. 92, 44 N. E. 1077 (1896).
So in an action for damages, Old Dominion Steamship Company v.
McKenna , 30 Fed. 48 (Cir Ct. N. Y., 1887).

But the liability of the union in such a case is sometimes created
by statute. Thus, in the state of New York, by provisions substan-
tially m force since 1851, “an unincorporated association, consist-
ing of seven or more persons,” may be sued in the name of its
president or treasurer, and a judgment against it binds its property.
Code Civ. Pro., Sections 1919 and 1921. The action, though in
form against such officer, is in substance and reality against the
association Mason v. Holmes, 30 Misc. 719, 64 N. Y. Suppl. 596
(1900). These provisions unquestionably apply to a trade union.
Indeed, by virtue thereof, in Curran v. Galen, 152 N. Y. 33,
affirming 2 Misc. 553, 22 N. Y. Suppl. 826 (1892), an action for dam-
ages was held to lie against an unincorporated trade union for acts
resulting in taking away the plaintiff’s means of earning a liveli-
hood and preventing him from obtaining employment. Why, then,
attach so much importance to the decision in the Taff Yale Rail-
way Company case, when we have a decision at home that covers
the ground thereof? For other instances of unincorporated trade
unions held liable by virtue of such provisions, see Connell v. Stalker,
20 Misc. 423, 45 N. Y. Suppl 1048, 21 Misc. 609, 48 N. Y. Suppl.
77 (1897) ; Coons v. Chrystie, 24 Misc. 296, 53 N. Y. Suppl. 668
(1898), Matthews v. Shankland, 25 Misc. 604, 56 N. Y. Suppl. 123
(1898); Beattie v. Callanan , 67 N. Y. App. D. 14, 73 N. Y. Suppl
518 (1901). See also Van Aernam v. Bleistein, 102 N. Y. 355 (1886);
Rourke v. Elk Drug Company , 75 N. Y. App. D. 145, 77 N. Y. Suppl.
3 73 ( I 9 02 ); Hanke v.* Cigarmakers ' International Union, 27 Misc.
529, 58 N. Y. Suppl. 412 (1899).


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 147

Similar statutory provisions exist in other states ; thus, Connect-
icut (General Statutes, Sec. 588), Michigan (3 Compiled Laws,
Sec. 10,025), New Jersey (2 General Statutes, 2588). See Beck v.
Railway Teamsters' Protective Union , 118 Mich. 497, 77 N. W. 13
(1898); Mayer v. Stonecutters' Association , 47 N. J. Eq. 519, 20
Atl. 492 (1890); Barr v, Essex Trades Council 53 N. J. Eq. 101, 30
Atl. 881 (1894).

I have already said that in the Tail Vale Railway Company case
it was simply a narrow question of statutory construction that was
involved. That is to say, an unincorporated trade union was held
liable in an action for damages, notwithstanding the absence of
any statutory provision expressly making it thus liable, such liability
being, however, regarded as mferentially created by other provi-
sions, particularly those enabling it to hold property and act by
agents. The liability there regarded as inferentially created is, as
we have just seen, expressly created by statutes in New York and
other states. I repeat, then, that from a strictly legal standpoint
the decision is comparatively insignificant.

By act of Congress, 1886, chapter 567, as well as by statutes
in a number of states, provision is made for the incorporation of
trade unions. The following provisions applicable to a trade union
created by act of Congress are typical of provisions applicable to
corporations generally. It has the right “ to sue and be sued, to
implead and be impleaded, to grant and receive in its corporate or
technical name property, real, personal, and mixed, and to use said
property, and the proceeds and income thereof, for the objects of
said corporation.” It may be added that its liability to be sued
involves subjection of its property to a judgment obtained against
it. Such a union would also be subject to various statutory pro-
visions, differing in detail according to the locality. By way of
illustration merely, the following provision of the act of Congress,
1898, chapter 370, applicable to unions incorporated under the act
of 1886, is here stated: “A member shall cease to be such by
participating in or by instigating force or violence against persons
or property during strikes, lockouts, or boycotts, or by seeking
to prevent others from working, through violence, threats, or intim-
idations. Members of such incorporations shall not be personally
liable for the acts, debts, or obligations of the corporations, npr shall
such corporations be liable for the acts of members or others in
violation of law.” Under such a provision it would hardly be held,
as in the Taff Vale Railway Company case, that a trade union is


1 48 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

liable for the unlawful acts of its agents. But for instances of incor-
porated trade unions held liable for the unlawful acts of their
agents, see Moores v. Bricklayers * Union , 7 Ry. and Corp. L. J. 108
(1889) ; Casey v. Cincinnati Typographical Union , 45 Fed. 135 (Cir.
Ct. Ohio, 1891); Lacke v. Clothing Cutters\ etc., Assembly , 77 Md.
396, 26 Atl. 505 (1893).

In view of what we have seen, incorporation of a trade union,
ordinarily at least, creates a responsibility not existing independ-
ently of statute, though the extent of such responsibility may widely
vary according to local statutory provisions. But it is clear that
wherever there exist provisions of the character already considered,
making even an unincorporated trade union liable to be sued, incor-
poration is not necessary for the purpose of creating such respon-
sibility.

I do not dwell here upon the economic or sociological effects of
such creation of responsibility, though here is involved a broad and
interesting field of inquiry, including such questions as whether the
existence of such responsibility will tend to discourage the creation
of such unions or their active intervention in strikes or boycotts
instituted in the interest of their members.

I. A. Hourwicb, former Counsel to the United Brotherhood of
Cloakmakers, New York City

I shall take up the law of the state of New York, first, because
I am more familiar with it as far as it bears on this subject ; and,
second, because it is probably more liberal than the laws of other
industrial states.

First of all, let us consider the status of the labor union. It may
be either an unincorporated association of workmen or a corporation.

It must be admitted that under the existing laws a trade union
has a more unhampered course if it does not incorporate at all It
is then free to choose any legitimate line of activity open to an
individual, without coming in conflict with the provisions of a
corporation law not adapted to the special needs of labor unions.
There is a Federal law for the incorporation of labor unions, but it
requires the headquarters to be located in Washington. This pro-
vision jnakes it inapplicable to any but the great national bodies.
An organization such as the United Brotherhood of Cloakmakers,

1 Testimony before the U. S. Industrial Commission. Reports, Vol, XIV, pp.
I52-IS5-


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 149

which has branches in New York and New Jersey, with a member-
ship of about 15,000, cannot incorporate under the Federal law.

The New York state law of corporations divides them into stock
corporations and nonstock corporations, the latter being again
divided into membership corporations and religious corporations.
Prior to the latest revision of the corporation laws, there existed a
law for the organization of cooperative companies, that is, asso-
ciations where the stockholders contribute not only their money
but also and chiefly their labor. The name was retained by the
revisers, but the law itself was repealed and no other law enacted
to take its place. How is a labor organization to incorporate under
these laws ? If it incorporate as an ordinary membership corpora-
tion, it is no more than a mere social club. Its chief purpose,
“ cooperation for the purpose of obtaining an advance m the rate
of wages,” cannot be accomplished, for it would be beyond the
powers of a social club and would fall within the definition of the
objects of a business corporation. To incorporate as a business
corporation is impracticable. It would impose upon the labor union
the necessity of having a capital stock and of increasing it from time
to time ; no assessments could be levied for current expenses ; no
“stockholder” would forfeit his membership by nonpayment of
dues ; no member could be disciplined ; stock could be sold by
individual members to outsiders who do not belong to the trade,
but may be interested m having a controlling voice m the councils
of the organization. In other words, a labor union is in its very
nature different from a business corporation.

In 1897, being elected counsel to the United Brotherhood of
Cloakmakers, I was confronted with this problem of incorporation.
In the absence of law on the subject we had to make law, and we
accordingly incorporated as a “ cooperative corporation,” leaving
it to future litigation to construe the powers of such a corporation.
We had one case in the New York Supreme Court, where the defense
of ultra vires was raised against us and we were sustained by the
court. Yet the decision in this case can hardly be said to have
established a precedent, since the opinion did not go into a full
discussion of the aspects of a “cooperative corporation,” nor was
it passed upon by a higher court.

Next comes the question as to the methods of enforcing the
labor contracts. It is a sad commentary on our law that a labor
union has practically no other remedy than a strike against a
violation of the labor contract by the employer.


150 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

A contract with an employer may be made by the union as con-
tracting party, or by the individual workmen. The latter method
has been practiced in the tailoring trades in New York City. Aside,
however, from its unwieldiness, none but an utterly unintelligent
employer, such as the average sweat-shop “boss,” would enter into
such a contract, for it would bind him to keep every workman who
happened to be with him at the time the contract was made. Nor
does it serve the ends of the union, since it leaves the employer free
to hire additional help not belonging to the union. On the other
hand, it places the individual member of the union in a position
where he may override the decisions of the majority of the organ-
ized body, since under the technical form of the contract he is the
party to the same and may modify its terms by agreement with the
employer.

The only method that suggests itself is therefore a contract made
by the union, as such, with the employer. But when the contract is
taken into court the union can prove none but nominal damages.
Suppose the employer has declared a reduction of, say, 10 per cent
on the agreed rates before the expiration of the contractual term
and has locked out the members of the union, who insisted upon
union rates. The individual members who lost their positions have
suffered damage, but the union is a corporation, and as such is dis-
tinct from its members. Being a cooperative corporation, it can make
no profit on its contracts for itself, and consequently can sustain no
damages through a violation of the contracts.

Of course legal ingenuity will suggest some device to so frame
the labor contract as to bring it within the established rules of
damages. But it means that the attainment of a perfectly legitimate
end must be sought under disguise.

And, lastly, there is always open the defense of duress. Very
often the agreement is reached in the course of, or in the appre-
hension of, a strike. Whenever the agreement is sued upon by the
union it is met with the defense that the agreement had been
obtained by threats to injure the defendant’s business in case he
would not agree to the terms of the union. That such threats,
expressed or implied, are actually resorted to may be freely con-
ceded. The question is, however, Is a threat to injure the defendant’s
business unlawful ?

It goes without saying that a threat to commit violence against
the person or property of an employer or any one else is within the
purview of the penal statutes prohibiting threats, etc. But there are


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 15 1

cases where one may inflict an injury upon another without becoming
liable therefor, either civilly or criminally. If I build on my vacant
lot adjoining my neighbor’s house it will shut out the light from the
same and its rental income will go down, — a fact familiar to every
landlord m the upper part of Manhattan Island ; yet I would not
be liable in damages to my neighbor. And if I offer to sell to my
neighbor that lot at my own figure, threatening that I shall other-
wise erect a building on it and thus cause him a loss on the value
of his property, I am not liable. Similarly, if a walking delegate
threatens a manufacturer of ladies’ garments that unless he accedes
to the terms of the union a strike will be kept on in his factory
until the end of the season, and he will lose his orders, which will
go to his competitors, it is not against the law. Yet, at least in one
case, I have had the experience that a defense alleging, in the
vaguest possible terms, threats “to injure the defendant’s business,”
without specifying any unlawful act, was sustained by Judge Truax,
of the New York Supreme Court, as a sufficient defense (on a
demurrer). The case is probably not an exception.

In general, it cannot be said that the right of workmen to
refuse by concerted action to work for an employer, if the terms
do not suit them, has received unqualified recognition. The com-
mon law regards every strike as a conspiracy. The New York
statute exempts from this inhibition a strike for the purpose of
obtaining an advance in wages or for opposing a reduction of
wages. But as this statute creates an exception from the common
law, it will under the familiar rule be construed strictly ; anything
not expressly contained in it is still governed by common-law prin-
ciples. Now, a strike is not always the result of differences as to
the rate of wages, and contracts are often made by peaceable agree-
ment, without resort to a strike, for other purposes as important to
the union as an advance in the rate of wages.

One of the fundamental demands persisted in by every union and
strenuously opposed by employers is what is called the “ recognition
of the union.” The demand is usually regarded by the employers
as an encroachment upon what is technically known as “the free-
dom of labor.” As a matter of fact, however, it is identical with
similar restrictions inserted in every contract, whereby one party
agrees to deliver goods or render services to another. If a railway
company bids for transportation of troops at so much per soldier,
it is quite natural for it to stipulate that it shall have the exclusive
privilege of transportation between the particular points contemplated


152


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


in the contract. If a labor organization makes a contract of em-
ployment, it must insist upon a similar provision, lest its contract
should become inoperative. Indeed, the demand of an employer for
help is elastic, subject to expansion and contraction. He has the
privilege of laying off as many hands as may at any time be super-
fluous to him. If he should reserve the further privilege of subse-
quently replacing them by outsiders who are not bound by the
terms of the union contract, it would enable him practically to
rescind the contract with the union without openly saying so.

No less important is the injury to the discipline of the organized
body, which must inevitably result from suffering a number of out-
siders, not subject to the jurisdiction of that body, to work side by
side with the members of the union. A union of workmen will avail
itself primarily of the same remedies to enforce the terms of its hiring
as will a single hired man. In case of a breach of contract on the part
of the employer, the individual employee may quit ; if he is reason-
ably certain that he is wanted by his employer, he may thus succeed
in obtaining redress. But under similar circumstances, when one
half of the force of a factory do not belong to the union, what will
it avail the other half to quit, if the outsiders remain at work ?
Whoever has had any experience on the labor side of this matter is
forced to the conclusion that a union can sooner concede a reduc-
tion in the rate of wages than waive this fundamental demand.
Now, what is the attitude of the law on this subject ?

The appellate division of the New York Supreme Court has lately
made a new departure (in the case of Davis v. United Portable Hoist-
ing Engineers , decided in 1898) by adopting the view of the British
House of Lords, which has unqualifiedly recognized the right of a
labor union to refuse to work with nonunion men and to demand
the discharge of nonunion men where union members are employed.
This view is at variance with New York precedents — for example,
the case of Curran v. Galen — decided by the Court of Appeals as
late as 1891, where a similar demand by a labor union was held to
be an unlawful interference with the right of every citizen to work
at whatever terms he chooses. 1

From all this it may be seen that the law has not kept pace with
the industrial growth of this country. The old common-law hostility
to “ combinations in restraint of trade ” has blocked the way of
combinations of capital as well as of combinations of labor. Both
have developed, however, although denied the opportunity to invoke

1 See cases cited by Cooke above, p. 146. Also, in the following chapter, p. 183.


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS


153


the assistance of the law. It cannot be gainsaid that this is an
anomalous condition. These legal relics of a past age handicap
labor more than capital.

My brief acquaintance with both employers and employees m the
New York tailoring trade convinces me that this condition exercises
a demoralizing influence upon both employers and employees.
Manufacturers make contracts with labor unions as a mere matter
of form. I could name many a cloak manufacturer who told me,
while affixing his signature to the contract, that he did not think it
was worth the paper it was written on and that it could not be
enforced. I know of many prominent cloak manufacturers who
violated their agreements no sooner than they were made ; some of
them confessed it to me confidentially. On the other hand, the
union, knowing that its agreements must yet be tested in court „
before their validity may be established, is sometimes impelled to
make unreasonable demands upon the employers, such, for example,
as the deposit of cash or promissory notes as security for the faithful
performance of the agreement ; and what is still more important,
having little expectation of obtaining redress in court, the union
quite naturally resorts to the strike, whenever practicable, as the
only efficient method of settling its differences with the employer.

What is imperatively needed is that the law frankly recognize
combinations of labor for the object of fixing the terms of the joint
contract of employment. The law ought to recognize the peculiar
nature of the trade union as distinct from an ordinary business
corporation. There ought to be a law permitting the incorpo-
ration of associations of workmen in such a manner as to give
efficiency to their contracts with employers of labor. The law
should expressly recognize the identity of interest between the asso-
ciation and its members; it should be so framed that a breach of a
joint contract of employment would give the union a right of action
for the damages sustained by its members through resulting loss of
wages or employment. The scope of this enabling act must be suffi-
ciently broad to include all legitimate objects for which agreements
are to-day made between labor unions and employers.

This would virtually introduce arbitration by the courts in labor
disputes, thus to some extent superseding the strike by ordinary
methods of settling disputes in organized society.

It is one of the first steps to be taken if it is desired to create a
modus vjvendi between capital and labor instead of the present
state of warfare.


154 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

A. F. Weber, Chief Statistician, Department of Labor, Albany,
New York :

.The compulsory incorporation of trade unions does not seem
advisable to me at the present time. The principal argument in
favor of that policy is the impossibility of holding unincorporated
unions to their contracts. No one familiar with industrial opera-
tions is disposed to deny that local unions have been wont to keep
or break agreements at their own convenience. But the remedy for
this lack of control may be found in the organization of employers,
without resorting to experimental legislation which might introduce
greater evils than the existing ones. The contracts so frequently
broken by unions are almost always contracts with individual
employers. Just as rapidly as the employers have come together
for concerted action and replaced these individual agreements with
one general agreement between the association of employers and
the union of workingmen, they have been able to hold the unions
strictly to the terms of their agreement. It is in this way that the
mason builders in New York and Boston have for some fifteen years
preserved industrial peace with the journeyman bricklajers and
masons. In those cities the single annual agreement enteied into
by representatives of the two bodies of employers and employees
has been kept inviolate, while in cities where agreements have been
signed by individual employers there have been frequent strikes,
lockouts, and violations of contract.

The experience in the coal-mining industry has been the same.
In the anthracite district agreements, so far as they have been
entered into at all, have been signed by individual operators and
have not proved satisfactory to either side. But in Illinois and
other central states the agreement is between an employers’ asso-
ciation and the International Union of miners. All the testimony
available goes to show that during the five years’ duration of this
arrangement industrial relations have been more stable and satis-
factory m every way than they ever were before 1898, or than they
are at the present time in regions where such an arrangement is
wanting. Considering the fact that a large proportion of the work-
men in the mining industry are unskilled and uneducated, this
experience seems to afford a complete answer to the affirmation
that responsibility can be secured among such workingmen only
through the incorporation of their unions. Other tests of loyalty to
the joint agreement are familiar, — such as that of the longshoremen’s


THE INCORPORATION OF TRADE UNIONS 155

union, when the international president sent nonunion men to
work in the place of members who had gone on strike contrary
to the agreement, — while the history of railroad transportation in
this country shows that contracts would not be treated with greater
respect by incorporated unions of engineers or conductors than
they are now by the unincorporated organizations.

On the other hand, compulsory incorporation might discourage
the movement toward organization, which we all recognize as the
basis of the economic independence of wage workers. Such would
be the effect if that policy promoted litigation, which it would prob-
ably do ; for it would be difficult to frame a law that would make
the union responsible for the acts of its officers or committees and
not hold it responsible for unauthorized acts of its individual mem-
bers. In the affairs of the ordinary business corporation the
unauthorized acts of an individual stockholder cannot embarrass
the corporation because all power is lodged in the hands of the
directors. But authority in a trade union cannot be so readily
concentrated in a board of directors, since an agreement with
employers necessarily calls for the cooperation of every individual
member ; and if the courts should entertain suits against the union
for unauthorized acts of individual members, the field for intrigues
between designing employers and avaricious members would be
very large. The unions might find it impossible to maintain any
funds whatsoever, and that would of course spell the death of
unionism and collective bargaining.

Any such movement to injure or destroy trade unionism would
be disastrous to the best interests of the people, because collective
bargaining through the organization of labor is an indisputable
necessity in modern industry. If a frank, open policy of organiza-
tion is prevented or seriously embarrassed by legal restrictions,
there will probably come into existence secret and unlawful com-
binations such as agitated England before the repeal of the combi-
nation laws. And if the trade unions’ educational work among the
emigrants — an educational work that ranks second only to the
work of the public schools in American life — should be stopped or
seriously hampered, we should soon witness a revolution in our
politics only dimly foreshadowed in the socialism engendered by
the recent coal strike. The effect of the Taff Vale decision in
England has been a markedly increased participation in politics by
the organized workers as a class.


VII


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES

I. Injunctions and Trial by Jury 1

The following extracts from decisions of courts illustrate the
use of the injunction under various circumstances in. labor dis-
putes, and certain conflicting decisions in different jurisdictions.
It is not intended to give leading cases on the technical points
so much as to illustrate the industrial facts involved. While
the decisions generally sustain the increased use of writs of
injunction, it is well to call attention to their significance by
way of protests which legal writers have felt called upon to
make. F. J. Stimson, in writing of “The Modern Use of In-
junctions,” says : 2

We have seen, in private law suits between individuals or corpo-
rations, courts of equity — civil, not criminal courts — invoked to
restrain, not alone parties to the suits, but anybody, the whole
world, with or without actual notice of a court order or injunction,
not merely from interfering with property which is the subject of
the suits, but also from committing, or conspiring to commit, or aid-
ing or advising others to commit, acts which are criminal; and

1 See also C. C. Allen, “Injunction and Organized Labor/’ Reports American
Bar Association, Vol. XVII, p 299 (1894) ; same, American Law Review , Vol.
XXVIII, p 828 , Charles Noble Gregory, “ Government by Injunction,” Harvard
Law Review, Vol XI, p 487 (1898); Wm. Draper Lewis, “ A Protest against
administering Criminal Law by Inj unction, 1 }f American Law Register , Vol. XXXIII,
p. 879 (1894); Ben S Dean, “Government by Injunction,” Green Bag, Vol. IX,
p 540; P. L. Edwards, “Labor Stnkes and Injunctions,” Central Law Journal ,
Vol LIX, p 23 (1904}; Hearings, Judiciary Committee, House of Representatives,
on Anti-Injunction Bill, January 13 to March 22, 1904, Government Printing Office;
Stimson, “ Handbook to the Labor Law of the United States,” 1896 ; Report of
the Massachusetts Commission on Employer and Employed, 1904; Groat, “Trade
Unions and the Law in New York,” Columbia University, 1905.

2 Political Science Quarterly , Vol. X, p 189 (1893).

156


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 157

sometimes only on the ground that they are criminal acts, crimi-
nal at common law or made so by the recent statutes known as the
Anti-Trust Law and the Interstate Commerce Law. We have seen
more: we have seen persons committing, or about to commit, or
said to be about to commit, such acts, arrested by these civil courts,
deprived of their liberty, and punished by imprisonment; and this,
as m the Debs case and others, after the emergency which furnished
the excuse for invoking the protective jurisdiction of the equity
court had long gone by. And we have seen persons punished with-
out the usual safeguards of liberty afforded by the criminal law —
without indictment, without right to counsel, without being con-
fronted with witnesses, without trial by jury — and sentenced with-
out uniform statute, at the discretion of the judge.

Similarly Richard C. McMurtie 1 spoke of the

value of the rule that removes criminal jurisprudence from even
the apparent caprice of the judiciary and compels the intervention
of a public trial, with the witnesses and the accused brought face to
face, a jury to determine the facts, the public discussion of the
admissibility and effect of evidence, and a fixed standard of punish-
ment, with a right to a review and to an appeal to the pardoning
power. . . . The whole system of administering the criminal laws
is changed in the one particular that we and our ancestors have
thought essential to political freedom, and which the experience of
the world proves there is no other sure support for that which is
beyond all price — that is, assuring to the accused of any crime for
which there can be fine and imprisonment imposed, a trial by jury,
according to the course of the common law, that is, with the
witnesses produced and examined in the presence of the accused
and before the world. If these things are not deemed important,
there is nothing more to be said.

Judge Caldwell, of the Federal Court, in a dissenting opinion
in a case where the union was charged with boycotting, 2 said :

Courts of equity have no jurisdiction to enforce the criminal
laws. ... It is said by those who defend the assumption of this
jurisdiction by the federal courts that it is a swifter and speedier
mode of dealing with those who violate or threaten to violate the

1 “ Equity Jurisdiction applied to Crimes and Misdemeanors,” American Law
Register , Vol XXXI (n.s), pp. 2, 14 (1S92).

2 Hopkins v Oxley Stave Company , 83 Fed. at p 924 (1897).


158 trade unionism and labor problems

laws than by the prescribed and customary method of proceeding
in courts of law: that it is a “ short cut ” to the accomplishment of
the desired object; that it avoids the uncertainty and delay inci-
dent to a jury trial, occasions less expense, and insures a speedier
punishment. All this may be conceded to be true. But the logical
difficulty with this reasoning is that it confers jurisdiction on the
mob equally with the chancellor. ... It can make little difference
to the victims of short-cut and unconstitutional methods whether
it is the mob or the chancellor that deprives them of their constitu-
tional rights. It is vain to disguise the fact that this desire for a
short cut originates in the feeling of hostility to trial by jury, — a
mode of trial that has never been popular with the aristocracy of
wealth or the corporations and trusts. ... No reasoning and no
precedents can avail to deprive the citizen accused of crime of his
right to a jury trial guaranteed to him by the provisions of the
constitution “ except in cases arising in the land and naval forces,
or in the militia when in actual service in time of war or of public
danger.” . . . With the interpolations essential to support govern-
ment by injunction, the constitution would contain the following
further exceptions to the right of trial by jury: “And except when
many persons are associated together for a common purpose, and
except in the case of members of trade unions and other labor
organizations, and except in all cases of persons * of small means/ ”

Stimson also holds that the courts by the use of this writ
may encroach on the executive branch of government : 1

It makes the courts no longer judicial, but a part (and it bids fair
to be a most important part) of the executive branch of government.
More briefly and picturesquely* the federal courts may thus grow
into mere star-chambers and run the country.

Wm. H. Dunbar makes an analogous charge of encroachment
on the legislative branch of government, saying : 2

Courts of equity, like courts of law, are established for the deter-
mination of controversies between individuals. The power to issue
preliminary injunctions is incidental to the power of determining
such controversies. The right to lay down general rules for the

1 Loc. cit , p. 193.

2 “ Government by Injunction,” Law Quarterly Review, Vol. XIII, p, 362;
reprinted in Economic Studies , Vol. Ill, pp. 1-43.


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 159

government of the community, to declare ex cathedra in advance of
any contentious proceedings m which the question arises what may
and what may not lawfully be done, to impose on the whole com-
munity a duty to refrain from doing a certain act, is in its nature
a legislative right. . . .

The power of courts to punish by summary proceedings for con-
tempt all persons who obstruct the administration of justice or dis-
obey the lawful orders of the court has often been described as the
most unrestrained power exercised in our system of government.
Such matters are tried by the court itself and without any right of
appeal for error of fact or law. This power is absolutely essential
to the efficient administration of justice. It behooves the judiciary,
therefore, not only to exercise it with discretion, but to avoid exten-
sions of jurisdiction which may lead to the necessity of exercising
this power in matters properly cognizable by the courts of criminal
law and by a jury. A community in which the jury system is still
preserved and guarded as a bulwark of liberty will not tolerate
encroachments on the part of the courts of equity by which, in those
very cases in which a large part of the community is most disposed
to rely upon the jury as a check upon the supposed partiality of the
courts, the process of punishment by contempt is made to take the
place of trial by jury. The machinery essential to the ordinary
work of the courts is in danger of being ruined by its use in such
extraordinary emergencies. It is strangely inconsistent with estab-
lished principles that courts of equity should take jurisdiction in
order to prevent the ultimate issues being tried by jury; that they
should grant injunctions which appear at least to be designed pri-
marily as a means of drawing to the court power to punish by pro-
ceedings for contempt acts which should have been prevented by
the executive authorities and should be punished by the criminal
law. A preliminary injunction granted not as an incident to a
controversy between individuals, not seeking to restrain a defendant
until the rights between him and the plaintiff can be ascertained,
not acting upon known persons to prevent them from doing certain
acts, but seeking to throw the aegis of the court over certain prop-
erty so as to protect it from all persons whatsoever is of itself an
anomaly in juristic procedure. When such an injunction is granted
under circumstances which preclude its enforcement, except by
assuming the duty lodged with the executive of preserving public
order, and apparently largely for the purpose of assuming that duty,
it presents a serious menace to the very framework of government


160 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


A similar warning is uttered by Joel H. Benton, Jr., in the
annual address before the Grafton and Coos Bar Association, in
1898. He said: 1

It means that the courts have, in the judgment of many of the
most intelligent and thoughtful citizens and of Congress, exceeded
their just powers, that they have by the so-called exercise of equity
powers practically assumed to create and to punish offenses upon
trial by themselves without a jury and with penalties imposed at
their discretion. And this means that, if the courts continue in this
course, their power to enforce their orders by proceedings for con-
tempt will be limited by legislation. The people will not, and they
ought not, to submit to decisions like those in the Northern Pacific
and Ann Arbor cases. The result will be to deprive the courts of
the power to enforce orders where they ought to have power to
enforce, and the mischief that will come can hardly be estimated.
The remedy is not by legislation. The subject is not one for parti-
san debate, and should not enter into politics in any degree
whatever. Thoughtful, intelligent, conservative discussion by the
profession will remedy the evil, and to that discussion all members
of the bar who have the good of the republic at heart ought to
bring their best effort.

The question of trial by jury, raised by members of the bar,
has been decided by the Supreme Court of the United States
in the case of Debs. 2 The opinion says :

... It is objected that it is outside of the jurisdiction of a court
of equity to enjoin the commission of crimes. This, as a general
proposition, is unquestionable. A chancellor has no criminal juris-
diction. Something more than the threatened commission of an
offense against the laws of the land is necessary to call into exercise
the injunctive powers of the court. There must be some interfer-
ences, actual or threatened, with property or rights of a pecuniary
nature; but when such interferences appear, the jurisdiction of a
court of equity arises, and is not destroyed by the fact that they
are accompanied by or are themselves violations of the criminal
law. . . . The law is full of instances in which the same act may
give rise to a civil action and a criminal prosecution. An assault

1 “What is Government by Injunction? Does it exist in the United States ?”

Concord, N.H., 1898. 2 In re Debs , 158 U. S., at p. 593 (1895).


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 161


with intent to kill may be punished criminally, under an indictment
therefor, or will support a civil action for damages; and the same
is true of all other offenses which cause injury to person or property.
In such cases the jurisdiction of the civil court is invoked not to
enforce the criminal law and punish the wrongdoer, but to compen-
sate the injured party for the damages which he or his property has
suffered, and it is no defense to the civil action that the same act
by the defendant exposes him also to indictment and punishment in
a court of criminal jurisdiction. So here the acts of the defendants
may or may not have been violations of the criminal law. If they
were, that matter is for inquiry in other proceedings. The complaint
made against them in this is of disobedience to an order of a civil
court, made for the protection of property and the security of rights.
If any criminal prosecution be brought against them for the crimi-
nal offenses alleged m the bill of complaint, — of derailing and wreck-
ing engines and trains, assaulting and disabling employees of the
railroad companies, it will be no defense to such prosecution that
they disobeyed the orders of injunction served upon them and have
been punished for disobedience.

Nor is there in this any invasion of the constitutional right of
trial by jury. We fully agree with counsel that “ it matters not what
form the attempt to deny constitutional right may take, it is vain
and ineffectual, and must be so declared by the courts.” And we
reaffirm the declaration made for the court by Justice Bradley in
Boyd v. U. S.j 116 U. S. 61 6, 635, that “it is the duty of courts to
be watchful for the constitutional rights of the citizen, and against
any stealthy encroachments thereon. Their motto should be obsta
prmcipus .” But the power of a court to make an order carries with
it the equal power to punish for a disobedience of that order, and
the inquiry as to the question of disobedience has been from time
immemorial the special function of the court. And this is no tech-
nical rule. In order that a court may compel obedience to its orders,
it must have the right to inquire whether there has been any dis-
obedience thereof. To submit the question of disobedience to
another tribunal, be it a jury or another court, could operate to
deprive the proceeding of half its efficiency. In the case of Yates,
4 Johns. 314, 369, Chancellor Kent, then chief justice of the Supreme
Court of the state of New York, said * “In the case of Earl of Shafts -
bury, 2 St. Trials, 615, s. c. 1 Mod. 144, who was imprisoned by the
House of Lords for ‘high contempts committed against it, ? and
brought into the King’s Bench, the court held that they had no


1 62 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


authority to judge of the contempt, and remanded the prisoner. The
court in that case seem to have laid down a principle from which
they never have departed, and which is essential to the due admin-
istration of justice. This principle that every court, at least of the
superior kind, in which great confidence is placed must be the sole
judge in the last resort of contempts arising therein, is more ex-
plicitly defined and more emphatically enforced in the two subse-
quent cases of The Queen v. Paty and of The King v. Crosby P And
again, on page 371, “Justice Blackstone pursued the same train
of observation, and declared that all courts, by which he meant
to include the two houses of Parliament and the courts of West-
minster Hall, could have no control m matters of contempt; that
the sole adjudication of contempts and the punishments there-
of belonged exclusively, and without interfering, to each respec-
tive courts In Watson v. Williams , 36 Miss. 331, 341, it was said:
“The power to fine and imprison for contempt, from the earliest
history of jurisprudence, has been regarded as a necessary incident
and attribute of a court, without which it could no more exist than
without a judge. It is a power inherent in all courts of record, and
coexisting with them by the wise provisions of the common law.
A court without the power effectually to protect itself against the
assaults of the lawless, or to enforce its orders, judgments, or
decrees against the recusant parties before it, would be a disgrace
to the legislation, and a stigma upon the age which invented it.”

The so-called “ blanket ” or “ omnibus M injunction to which
reference has been made has also been upheld by the Supreme
Court in the following words : 1

The facts that the petitioner was not a party to such suit, nor
served with process of subpoena, nor had notice of the application
made by the complainant for the mandatory injunction, nor was
served by the officers of the court .with such injunction, are
immaterial, so long as it was made to appear that he had notice of
the issuing of an injunction by the court. To render a person amen-
able to an injunction it is neither necessary that he should have
been a party to the suit in which the injunction was issued, nor to
have been actually served with a copy of it, so long as he appears
to have had actual notice.


1 In re Lennon , 166 U. S. 554,


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 163

The following cases further illustrate the circumstances and
furnish the grounds on which the courts base their use of the
writ of injunction. 1

II. Picketing

In the case of the Union Pacific Railway Company v. Ruef \
120 Fed. 102 (1903), Judge McPherson, of the United States
Circuit Court said :

... I believe, and that without a doubt, that in so far as propo-
sitions are involved in this case, the law is as follows:

1. The defendants acted within their right when they went out
on strike. Whether with good cause or without any cause or reason,
they had the right to quit work for the Union Pacific Railroad
Company, and their reasons for quitting were reasons which they
need not give to any one. And that they all went out in a body, by
agreement or preconcerted arrangement, does not militate against
them or affect this case in any way.

2. Such rights are reciprocal, and the company had the right to
discharge any or all of the defendants, with or without cause, and
it cannot be inquired into as to what the cause was.

3. It is immaterial whether the defendants are not now in the
service of the company because of a strike or a lockout.

4. The defendants have the right to combine and work together
in whatsoever way they believe will increase their earnings, shorten
their hours, lessen their labor, or better their condition, and it is for
them, and them only, to say whether they will work by the day or
by piece work. All such is part of their liberty. And they can so
conclude as individuals, or as organizations, or as unions.

5. And the right is also reciprocal. The railroad company has
the right to have its work done by the premium or piece system,
without molestation or interference by defendants or others. This
is liberty for the company, and the company alone has the right to
determine as to that matter.

6. When the defendants went on a strike, or when put out on a
lockout, their relations with the company were at an end; they
were no longer employees of the company ; and the places they once
occupied in the shops were no longer their places, and never can be
again, excepting by mutual agreement between the defendants and
the company.

1 See also Bulletins of the U. S. Bureau of Labor, containing Decisions of Courts.


1 64 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

7. No one of the defendants can be compelled by any law, or by
any order of any court, to again work for the company on any terms
or under any conditions.

8. The company cannot be compelled to employ again any of the
defendants, or any other person, by any law, or by any order of any
court, on any terms, or under any conditions.

9. Each, all, and every of the foregoing matters between the com-
pany and the defendants are precisely the same, whether applied to
the company or to the defendants.

10. The company has the right to employ others to take the
places once filled by defendants, and m employing otheis the
defendants are not to be consulted, and it is of no lawful concern
to them, and they can make no lawful complaint by reason thereof.
And it makes no difference whether such new employees are citizens
of Omaha or of some other city or state. A citizen of Chicago, or
from any state m the Union, has the same rights as to work in
Omaha as has a citizen of Omaha.

11. Defendants have the right to argue or discuss with the new
employees the question whether the new employees should work for
the company. They have the right to persuade them if they can.
But in presenting the matter they have no right to use force or
violence. They have no right to terrorize or intimidate the new
employees. The new employees have the right to come and go as
they please, without fear or molestation, and without being com-
pelled to discuss this or any other question, and without being
guarded or picketed ; and persistent and continued and objectionable
persuasion by numbers is of itself intimidating, and not allowable.

12. Picketing in proximity to the shops or elsewhere on the
streets of the city, if in fact it annoys or intimidates the new
employees, is not allowable. The streets are for public use, and the
new employee has the same right, neither more nor less, to go back
and forth, freely and without molestation, and without being har-
assed by so-called arguments, and without being picketed, as has a
defendant or other person. In short, the rights of all parties are
one and the same.

It remains to examine the evidence, and ascertain whether any
of the foregoing matters and things and rights have been trampled
upon by the defendants, and, if so, by whom, and who are responsible.

The complainant, with its thousands of miles of railroad, has
shops at various places, and a large one at Omaha, where much
work is done on its cars, engines, and other appliances. Most of


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 165

the defendants were employees in the Omaha shops. About May 12,
1902, certain shopmen, through committees, presented to the com-
pany what they claimed were grievances. Conferences were held,
but without result. . . . Notices were given and posted by the com-
pany that the outgoing employees must return at once to their work.
They did not return, but from that time on they all continued on
the strike, and the strike is still on. The company employed many
new men for the shops, some of them citizens of Omaha and some
from other states, to take the places once occupied by the strikers.
The strikers have almost daily had meetings in a hall. A system of
pickets from their own number was organized. These pickets were
officered by captains and lieutenants to place the pickets and
command them. These pickets were sometimes placed singly, but
generally m squads. They were placed in close proximity to the
shops, and more particularly at the gates leading to the shops.
Sometimes they would be on the streets some blocks away from the
gates, but at points where it was known the present employees
must, or probably would, pass.

The officers of the pickets gave orders that the pickets must
reason and argue with the new men and those refusing to go on the
strike, and try to persuade them that they were fighting labor, and
in working for the company they were in hostility to the interests
of the laboring men, and that they ought to quit. The defendants’
position is, as they admit in evidence, that, if they could take from
the company all men from the shops, the engines would not be
repaired and that the motive power would be destroyed. Such is
their avowed purpose. Then the company would either be compelled
to cease carrying passengers, freights, and mail, or, if it continued
in business, would be compelled to reemploy the strikers on the
terms named by the strikers.

The question of fact in this case is this Have the methods to
destroy the motive power of the company been by argument and
persuasion and by peaceable methods ? If so, the writ of injunction,
under the law as evidenced by the authorities cited, should be denied.
Or have the methods to destroy the motive power of the company
been attended with assaults and violence and intimidations and
terrorizing? It is undisputed that, so far as known at least, the
orders of the lodges and by the officers were to use none but peace-
ful methods, by argument and persuasion. Directions were given
that all pickets must not drink liquor, and to wholly refrain from
all improper conduct, under penalties of discipline, including fines.


1 66 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


The evidence shows that many of the defendants are peaceable and
orderly men, and that many of them in person have committed no
assaults, nor have they been guilty of any acts of violence or intimi-
dation. And many of the defendants named in the bill, m my judg-
ment, should not be named m the permanent injunction to be issued
herein, for the reason there is no evidence to warrant such holding
against them. It is contended that the writ should issue, even
though the evidence is meager or wholly lacking. And statements
to that effect can be found in some of the cases of the Federal trial
courts- “that the writ of injunction can do no harm to a law-abid-
ing man, even though not warranted by the evidence.’ 7 I do not
so believe. I would resist such an application for two reasons:
(i) I should not be mulcted in the costs. (2) I should not be humil-
iated by having an injunction run against me, when there is no evi-
dence that I have done, or, so far as evidence shows, am not likely
to do, any of the things complained of, and am not acquiescing, by
silence or otherwise, in what my colaborers, or men in a class to
which I belong, are doing. There must either be evidence against
such parties, or the evidence must show that such parties belong to
the class or to the organization of those to be enjoined

Certain parties, to be mentioned in the decree, will be dismissed
from the case. But they will be held to ha\e knowledge of this
opinion and of the decree herein. And those in any way related in
a business way to the other defendants — those who are servants,
agents, or employees of the defendants who are enjoined, and those
who are fellows or companions of defendants who are strikers — are
and will be bound by the writ of injunction issued herein, to the
same extent and as fully as if named in the writ. {In re Eeese, 47
„C. C. A. 87, 107 Fed. 942; Ex parte Lennon , 166 U. S. 548, 17 Sup
Ct. 658, 41 L. Ed. mo.) And any action by those dismissed from
the case, as well as all others, in any way in conflict or in violation
of the writ of injunction will subject themselves to the same penal-
ties as though they were named in the writ of injunction. So that
the order of injunction herein will not include by name those against
whom there is no evidence, yet the writ will include, in effect, all
those who quit the company’s service and are engaged in the strike
with the purpose of compelling the company to reemploy them by
attempting to impair the motive power of the company or otherwise
cripple its service. In other words, the class of men will be con-
trolled by the injunction, and the class of men above alluded to will
not violate the writ, excepting at their peril.


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES i 6 j

Some of the defendants, as the evidence shows, have been guilty
of most inexcusable offenses, and some of conduct the most out-
rageous and brutal, in carrying on the general design of destroying
the motive power of the road by preventing its repair or replace-
ment. In some instances those guilty of misconduct and intimi-
dation and terrorizing and brutalities were not identified, and it
cannot be said that all were done by the strikers, because part of it
was done by sympathizers.

Details of a number of acts of violence, including the killing
of an employee, were recited, and Judge McPherson then said :

No man who has read the 1 186 pages of evidence which I have
read can have the slightest doubt but that these assaults and these
acts of violence and these threats and these blasphemous denun-
ciations would not have occurred but for this picketing. Many of
the defendants took no part m them, being honorable men. No
doubt whatever is there in my mind but that a great many of the
defendants deprecate it. But deprecation ought to be accompanied
by words of denunciation. But both deprecation and denunciation
ought to be accompanied by some affirmative acts to stop it or, at
least, to cut loose from such men.

Picketing, as evidenced by the facts in this case, is wrong and
cannot be countenanced by law-abiding men, and such picketing
cannot but be condemned by any court. As said before, the rights
and duties and obligations of employer and employee are reciprocal
and the same in requiring fair treatment. And, if one unfairly
treats the other, such other cannot retaliate by some other unlaw-
ful act. Suppose the company would arm all of its employees in
the shops, and with the guards would go to assaulting and threaten-
ing and vilifying and intimidating the pickets ; would any self-
respecting man indorse it ? Would we not then surely have a reign
of terror in Omaha ? Suppose the company would place pickets in
front of the residences of the strikers and on the streets they pass,
to and from their homes ; would any one indorse it ?

The defendants claim to have the belief that physical violence
alone is to be condemned. But all persons know that intimidation
by words, by menaces, by numbers, by position, and by many things
is just as effective as by using clubs or brass knuckles or knives.
Aggressive or daring employees would be deterred by none of the
unlawful acts. But there are two classes of employees who are
deterred. One class is the frail and the timid. And they are


1 68 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


entitled to protection. Another class, comprising the greater part
of men of this country — the law-abiding, peaceable men, those who
do not engage in brawls and who never fight excepting when driven
to the wall. They are entitled to the protection of the law, and the
complainant has the right to have them protected.

This “ picketing ” has been condemned by every court having
the matter under consideration. It is a pretense for “ persuasion,”
but is intended for intimidation. Gentlemen never seek to compel
and force another to listen to the art of persuasion. To stop
another on the street, get in his road, follow him from one side of
the street to another, pursue him wherever he goes, stand m front
of his residence, is not persuasion. Intimidation cannot be defined.
Neither can fraud be defined. But every person knows whether his
acts are fraudulent, and he knows whether his acts are intimidating.
And the courts, when the facts are presented, adjudge accordingly.

Are all the foregoing facts, supplemented with the brutal murder,
evidence of intimidation and terrorizing? If not, what can be ? In
some instances the employees were drunk and quarrelsome. But
very few of the assaults were provoked or brought on by the
employees. It is the system of picketing that did it, and it is
unlawful, and must be enjoined.

The restraining order prohibits the strikers from “following”
the employees to their homes or on the streets. It is contended
that one man has the right to walk on the streets in the same
direction another man is going. But that is not “following,”
as every one understands what “following” means. No striker
can fail to understand what it means. But, to avoid criticism, the
injunction will be so worded as to be understood by all. And the
writ of permanent injunction will issue, and the unlawful picketing
£nd the wrongful interference with the rights of others brought to
an end.

A decree for complainant was entered as follows :

It is ordered, adjudged, and decreed that each and all of the
respondents not dismissed as aforesaid, and any and all other per-
sons associated with them in committing the acts and grievances
complained of in said bill be, and they are hereby, ordered and com-
manded to desist and refrain from in any manner interfering with
the free use and occupation by complainant of any and all of its
property or premises of every kind and character ; and from enter-
ing upon the grounds or premises of complainant for the purpose of


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 169

interfering with, hindering, or obstructing its business ; and from
compelling or inducing, or attempting to compel or induce, by
threats, intimidation, force, or violence, any of the employees of
complainant to refuse or fail to perform their duties as such
employees; and from compelling or inducing, or attempting to
compel or induce, by threats, intimidation, force, or- violence, any
of the employees of complainant to leave the service of complainant ;
and from preventing, or attempting to prevent, any person or per-
sons, by threats, intimidation, force, or violence, from entering the
service of complainant ; or from preventing, by violence or m any
manner of intimidation, any person or persons from going to or
upon the premises of complainant for any lawful purpose whatever,
or from aiding, assisting, or abetting any person or persons to com-
mit any or either of the acts aforesaid; and the said respondents,
each and all of them, are forbidden and restrained from congre-
gating at or near the premises of complainant for the purpose of
intimidating its employees or coercing said employees, or prevent-
ing them from rendering their service to said complainant; and
from inducing, by intimidation, coercion, or threats, any employee
to leave the employment of said complainant, or from attacking,
assaulting, threatening, or by use of abusive language, or in any
manner of intimidation, at any place within the city of Omaha,
attempting to prevent any of the employees of complainant from
continuing in its service, or any person or persons from engaging in
the service of complainant ; and each and all of them are enjoined
and restrained from going, either singly or collectively, to the
homes of complainant’s employees, or any of them, for the purpose
of intimidating or coercing any or all of them to leave the employ-
ment of complainant, or from entering complainant’s employ, and
as well from intimidating or threatening in any manner the wives'
and families of said employees for the purpose of preventing any
employee from remaining in the service of complainant.

It is impossible, as well as impracticable, for the court in advance
to specify all the acts and things which shall or may constitute
intimidation or coercion. This must be left to the wisdom and
intelligence of respondents. Any violation of the order will, how-
ever, be done at the party’s peril.


170 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

III. Boycott — Irreparable Damage 1

This case arose on the complaint of Mr. Barr, proprietor of
the Newark Times , against eighteen labor unions affiliated in the
Essex Trades Council. The Typographical Union, which was a
member of the council, had withdrawn its members from the
office of the Newark Times on account of the use of imported
“plate matter ” by the proprietor in contravention of a rule of
the union requiring type to be set in the office. The Essex
Trades Council took up the dispute and issued a circular,
entitled “The Union Buyer; Official Bulletin of United Fair
Custom of Newark and Vicinity.” It contained the following
announcement :

Our Mission. To support the supporters and boycott the boy-
cotters of organized fair labor; to promote its public welfare by the
diffusion of common sense, urging all to carry these in trade only to
those who will return them to the people in the shape of living wages.

The grievance against the Times was stated as follows ;
“Workingmen and advertisers, remember that plate matter
means 45 cents a day, and understand why the Newark Times
is an unfair office/' The court said :

It thus clearly appears that an injury to the complainant's busi-
ness in circulation and advertising, resulting from the acts of the
defendants, comprising a large number of persons and associations
acting in concert, has not only been inflicted but threatens to be
continued. Is this illegal on the part of the defendants? Not in
the sense of being criminal and punishable as such; for, in my
judgment, the case does not, as seems to be assumed by some in
similar cases, require an expression of opinion on that point for
two reasons* First. The jurisdiction of the criminal and civil reme-
dies for acts the result of a conspiracy spring from different sources;
for while the statute in the former now requires an overt act, at
common law the act of conspiring constituted the crime. On the
other hand, the injury done intentionally, and without legal excuse,

1 New Jersey, Court of Chancery, Barr et al. v. Essex Trades Council et al n
53 N. J Eq Reports, ioi (1894).


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 171

or maliciously, is the gist of the civil remedy. Second. And, as a
consequence, while it is a short, proper, and effective way to dis-
pose of a claim of defendants that their act was in the exercise of a
legal right, to show that it was criminal, the jurisdiction of this
court to interfere by injunction cannot be based on any such con-
clusion, but must arise from conditions which involve well-estab-
lished grounds of equity jurisdiction. When, therefore, the question
is here asked if causing injury to the complainant’s business is
illegal, it is meant, Is it an actionable wrong ? That is, Has the com-
plainant a remedy by civil action against the defendants therefor,
or are the defendants privileged to do the acts charged in the man-
ner and under the circumstances complained of, even though the
natural result thereof be an injury to complainant’s business? On
the solution of this question depends the claim of the defendants
that they have acted within their legal rights. . . . Are the defend-
ants, then, privileged knowingly to inflict this injury on the com-
plainants? A man’s business is property. By the first section of
the bill of rights of the constitution of New Jersey, the right of
acquiring, possessing, and protecting property is classed as a natu-
ral and inalienable right which all men have, with those of enjoying
and defending life and liberty, and of pursuing and obtaining safety
and happiness.

. . . This freedom of business action lies at the -foundation of
all commercial and industrial enterprise. Men are willing to embark
capital, time, and experience therein, because they can confidently
assume that they will be able to control their affairs according to
their own ideas, when the same are not in conflict with law. If this
privilege is denied them, if the courts cannot protect them from
interference by those who are not interested with them, if the
management of business is to be taken from the owner and assumed
by (it may be) irresponsible strangers, then we will have to come to
the time when capital will seek other than industrial channels for
investments, when enterprise and development will be crippled,
when interstate railroads, canals, and means of transportation will
become dependent on the paternalism of the national government,
and the factory and the workshop subject to the uncertain chances
of cooperative systems.

The bare declaration by the Typographical Union that it no
longer recognized the Newark Times was, according to Mr. Beck-
meyer’s affidavit, sufficient under this perfect organization to ren-
der it incumbent upon every member of these different unions to


172


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


withhold his patronage from it. Not only this, but by the passage
of the resolutions mentioned by the different unions and the distri-
bution thereof among advertisers, a moral intimidation was brought
to bear upon the latter to further cripple the paper, either by wholly
withdrawing their advertisements or by leaving spaces, a most
effective method of calling attention to the fact that the paper was
under the ban of organized labor. Why this action? It must have
had a purpose. None of the different labor organizations, or the
members thereof, except the Typographical Union No. 103, had or
has any grievance against the complainant. Their action, in the
language of the times, was purely sympathetic. As to the Typo-
graphical Union, its members had no complaint against Mr. Barr,
except that he used certain appliances which were not acceptable
to the union. He paid the wages fixed by, and employed only
members of, the union. The withdrawal of certain of the members
from his employment was solely because he chose to use plate
matter interdicted by the union, and it is plain if the complainant
would forego his own judgment in the management of his business
in this regard and comply with the wishes and determination of the
Typographical Union with reference thereto, all matters being as
they were, the whole difficulty would be at an end. r Fo effect this
purpose, therefore, the Typographical Union, through the Trades
Council, enlisted the cooperation of the other organizations in an
attempt to so impair the success of the newspaper that the complain-
ant would be forced to accept the alternative proposed rather than
sustain the loss.

We return to the question whether defendants’ acts are action-
able. Malicious injury to the business of another has long been
held to give a right of action to the injured party.

. . . The right of action depends, then, not so much upon the
nature of the act as upon the intent with which it is done, always
assuming that injury has attended the doing of it . . .

This renders necessary an inquiry as to the intent of the defend-
ants, to ascertain if the case falls within the class in which it is held
that a malicious motive in the defendant may make an act which
would not be wrongful without the malice a wrongful act when done
with malice (Steamship Company v. McGreg&r, 23 Q, B. Div. 598-608).
From the authorities, the test is, Has the injury been inflicted inten-
tionally and without legal excuse? When we speak, in this connec-
tion, of an act done with a malicious motive, it does not necessarily
imply that the defendants were actuated in their proceedings by


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 173

spite or malice against the complainant, Mr Barr, in the sense that
their motive was to injure him personally, but that they desired to
injure him in his business, in order to force him not to do what he
had a perfect right to do. In this case the defendants have, I doubt
not, no personal spite against Mr. Barr individually and no desire to
do him a personal injury. Nor do I suppose they wish to perma-
nently injure his enterprise, for they undoubtedly want reemployment
for those who left him. They only wish, by crippling his business,
to compel him to accede to their views as to materials he shall use
in the make-up of his paper. They in fact claim that they had no
intention to injure the business of the complainant, and that their
only desire was for the protection of themselves. If the injury which
has been sustained or which is threatened is not only the natural
but the inevitable consequence of the defendants 5 acts, it is without
effect for them to disclaim the intention to injure. What other result
than injury could ensue to the business of the Newark Times, pub-
lished and circulated in Newark and its vicinity, if organizations of
individuals representing there a purchasing power of $ 400,000 a
week, each and every one not only determined not only not to pat-
ronize the paper or to buy it, but by resolutions passed in their
various organizations call upon the trading community to cease
advertising in it, with implied threats that the appearance of an
advertisement by a tradesman in the paper would be a warning to
the members of the organization to avoid trading with such persons ?
Loss of business is the only natural result to be expected from such
a condition of affairs, and, if continued, the failure of the enterprise
would seem to be inevitable. . . .

The next inquiry is, Have the defendants a legal excuse for doing
the acts which have occasioned and threaten further damage to the
complainants business? It is claimed that the term “ boycott, 55 as
used in the circular and publications, has not the offensive significa-
tion sought to be placed upon it by the complainants bill ; “ that it
does not in any way mean, indicate, or imply any threats, violence,
intimidation, or coercive action on the part of the said defendants,
or any or either of them, or the members of any such organiza-
tion, that such word has a technical meaning in the said labor
organizations, and simply expresses and implies that the members
of the said organizations should simply refrain from trading or
dealing with those persons who oppose such organizations by their
own actions and doings; that the use of the word is not intended,
and does not, in fact, encourage, advise, or urge in any manner,


*74


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


whether violent or otherwise, attacks upon or against the said news-
paper, or any person or business, but merely advises and encourages
those who have earned their money by giving their services and
labor to spend such money among those who are friendly to fair
trade and fair dealings and are in sympathy with the efforts of
organized labor to advance its own interests and welfare by peace-
able, proper, and lawful means, and not otherwise”; and further,
“that of his own knowledge, obtained from long intercourse and
association with the various labor organizations, there is nothing in
the use of the word ‘boycott' calculated or intended to intimidate
or incite violence, or induce to coercive measures, or indicate any
threat, and that its meaning is universally understood in the said
organizations to have no other or greater effect than above stated,”
— from which it is to be gathered that the use of the word “boy-
cott ” in the publications, as applied to the Times , would be regarded
by the members of the various unions to mean only that they should
refrain from trading or dealing with the complainant and with
those who oppose the organizations m their actions and doings with
reference to the complainant. I do not see that this changes the
character of the injury, but even if it does so far as the members of
the organizations are concerned, the difficulty is that these com-
munications were addressed to the public and indiscriminately
circulated. They were intended not only for membeis of the order
by whom a technical signification would be given to the word
“ boycott,” but for the general public, who would read them and
give the word its accepted meaning. . . . All the organizations
represented in the trades council, and the individual members
thereof, in strict conformity with the purpose and object for which
the said council was organized, withheld this patronage from the
said newspaper on the mere announcement by the Typographical
Union to the trades council that that union had withdrawn its
indorsement from the Times . Why? It is said that it was only
the exercise by each member of his right to spend his money as his
own will dictated. The fallacy of this is apparent. It loses sight
of the combination, the whole strength of which lies in the fact
that each individual has surrendered his own discretion and will to
the direction of the accredited representatives of all the organiza-
tions. He no longer uses his own judgment, but by entering into
the combination agrees to be bound by its decree. ... It is com-
mon knowledge, if, indeed, it does not amply so appear by the
papers in this case, that a member of a labor organization who


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 175

does not submit to the edict of his union asserts his independence
of judgment and action at the risk, if not the absolute sacrifice, of
all association with his fellow-members. They will not eat, drink,
live, or work m his company. Branded by the peculiarly offensive
epithets adopted, he must exist ostracized, socially and industrially,
so far as his former associates are concerned. Freedom of will
under such circumstances cannot be expected.

Next, as to the advertising public. Tradesmen advertise in news-
papers for the sole purpose of drawing customers to their stores. An
authoritative announcement, not from one but from many sources,
that the body of organized labor in the city or county, representing
a purchasing power of $400,000 a week, would cease to deal with
those whose advertisements appeared in the newspaper would have
a much more deterrent effect than any threat of violence. To say
that this is only advice or an intimation to the advertiser for his
guidance, if he sees fit to accept it, is trifling with the language.
Advice behind which lurks the threat of the withdrawal of such
a volume of business could have no other effect than to intimi-
date and coerce, as it did in fact make several change their judg-
ment, which had previously led them to advertise in the paper. The
claim that this boycott was attempted to be enforced without intimi-
dation or coercion will not bear the light of examination.

A legal excuse for the action of the defendants is next sought in
the claim that the Essex Trades Council is a business institution,
and that what it has done has been in prosecution of such business ;
seeking, I suppose, to bring the case within the rule of Steamship Com-
pany v. McGregor. That case proceeded on the doctrine of a lawful
competition in business, both parties being engaged in carrying on
the same character of business, and the acts complained of having
been adopted for the advancement of the defendant’s own trade, viz.,
carrying goods on a steamship line, although thereby damage to the
other party necessarily ensued. I see no similarity in the business
of these parties. That of the complainant is the publisher of a news-
paper. Members of the Typographical Union and Stereotypers’ and
Pressmen’s Union are skilled workmen, whose services might be em-
ployed in such business, but they are not carrying on any enterprise
in competition with that of the complainant. So far as the other
unions are concerned, the most, if not all of them, have no connec-
tion with such trade. Neither does the claim of the Essex Trades
Council that it is a business institution stand on any firmer ground.
The only element of business which it is engaged in would appear


176 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

from the facts to be the furnishing to tradesmen of printed cards,
certifying that they are proper persons for the members of trades
unions to deal with, suitable to be displayed in conspicuous places
in such tradesmen’s places of business. This was supplemented by
the issue under date of March 31, 1S94, of the small pocket pam-
phlet, entitled “The Fair List of Newark, containing the

names and addresses of tradesmen and persons m business in
Newark, with items of information and advice. Why this is called
a “business’’ does not appear. It is not stated that any compen*
sation is either lequired or received by the Trades Council from the
tradespeople for granting or continuing these indorsements, but
whether this is so or not, it is in no sense a competing business
with the publication of a daily newspaper, and therefore does not
come within the principle of the case referred to.

It appearing that injury to the business of the complainant has
been knowingly, without legal excuse, and therefore in law mali-
ciously, inflicted by the defendants, it was an actionable wrong, for
which the complainant is entitled to his remedy; and that brings us
to the question raised by the answer, and most strongly insisted upon
by counsel in the argument, as to whether this court has jurisdiction
to grant relief by way of injunction. Even when there is a legal
remedy, equity will interfere by injunction to prevent (1) an injury
which threatens irreparable damage, or (2) a continuing injury when
the legal remedy therefor may involve a multiplicity of suits. This
jurisdiction is established and unquestionable. In practice, the
criterion of its application is the inadequacy of the legal remedy,
depending on whether (1) “the injury done or threatened is of such
a nature that, when accomplished, the property cannot be restored
to its original condition or cannot be replaced by means of compen-
sation in money”; (2) whether full compensation for the entire
wrong can be obtained without resort to a number of suits, (3 Pom.
Eq. Jur. §§ 1338, 1346, 1357.) The difficulty of satisfactorily estimat-
ing damages to business is frequently recognized in applying those
principles to suits relating to good will, trade-marks, patent rights,
and copyrights. The complainant’s paper is published daily. While
no one has a right to be hedged in and protected from competition in
business, every one is entitled to a chance for the patronage of the
public, uninfluenced by malicious interference to excite prejudice, —
“ a right to require that the course of trade should be kept free from
unreasonable obstruction.” Representations calculated to reduce the
paper’s circulation with the public or to influence by fear of loss of


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 177

customers the number or extent of advertisements operate not once for
all but, as it were, day by day, as the paper goes to and comes from
the press, and each loss will be a distinctive cause of action. No more
vulnerable object could be presented for the operation of a boycott
than the advertising columns of a newspaper. They bear on their
face the only information necessary as to the salient points of attack.
To successfully appeal to a legal tribunal for redress for such injury
as is here shown would involve either waiting until all the damage
was done, or the bringing of innumerable suits successively, as the
damage was ascertainable. While the combination of the defendants
does not constitute complainant’s right of action to recover redress
for injury inflicted on his business, it has great bearing on the extent
of the damage thereto which may be threatened by defendants’ con-
duct. There would be no difficulty for complainant to successfully
defend his enterprise from the attacks of one or more individuals.
This is the common expectation of every one who embarks in any
business. But when opposition through the agency of already estab-
lished organizations, reaching m their locality every part of the
county and in their membership almost every industry in prominent
operation, comprising in the territory in which the paper must look
for its support operatives of a purchasing power of $400,000 a week,
is put on foot; when such an organization, not satisfied with its
potential authority over its own members, appeals to the public to
boycott the paper, to cease buying or advertising in it, with the
significant suggestion that disregard of the appeal will bring upon
such person the like opposition of the organizations, — who can esti-
mate or approximate the natural damage short of ruin ? The legal
remedy in this case thus not only involves multiplicity of suits but
the threatened damage seems irreparable. Authority is not wanting
that a court of equity will enjoin a boycott. Being itself a proceeding
of modern origin, of course no cases are to be found until recent
years. [Cases cited.] The said order to show cause must be made
absolute, with costs; and an injunction may issue against them,
restraining them from distributing or circulating any circulars, printed
resolutions, bulletins, or other publications containing appeals or
threats against the Newark Times or the complainants, its publishers,
with the design and tending to interfere with his business in pub-
lishing said paper, and from making any threats or using any intim-
idation to the dealers or advertisers in such newspaper tending to
cause them to withdraw their business from such newspaper.


1 78 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

IV. Boycott — Free Speech 3

The clothing company here named sought by injunction to
prevent Watson and his associates from declaring or enforcing
a boycott against it by inducing its customers and others who
might become such not to deal with it to the injury of its busi-
ness. A temporary injunction was granted, but on a hearing in
the St. Louis Circuit Court this injunction was dissolved and the
petition dismissed. The company then appealed to the Supreme
Court, which affirmed the action of the court below.

Marx & Haas had had trouble with their clothing cutters for
some years, resulting first in a boycott by the Knights of Labor
in 1895, and again in 1898 in a boycott undertaken by a joint
board of the Knights of Labor and the United Garment Workers
of America, affiliated with the American Federation of Labor.
In furtherance of this latter effort a circular reciting at some
length the various difficulties and grievances was issued, and
distributed freely among the patrons and possible patrons of
the firm. This circular concluded :

We are positive we have proven to you the justice of our position,
and we hope it will not be necessary to inform the labor and reform
organizations with which we are affiliated who are in your locality,
as we are satisfied we have convinced you that the stand we have
taken in this case is a just one and will command the support of
all fair-minded men. We therefore request you to write to Messrs.
Marx & Haas and inform them that you would request them to
settle the dispute with their employees, or otherwise you cannot
afford to handle their goods as long as they are antagonizing
organized labor, who are your friends and customers. By doing
this you will aid us in getting simple justice from this more than
unfair firm. Should this firm make a settlement with us, you will
be informed of the fact under the seals of the joint organizations.
Until such time we trust there will be no report made to our office
that Marx & Haas have shipped you any more goods. Kindly
inform us what action you take in this matter, and any further

1 Missouri Supreme Court, Marx Haas Jeans Clothing Company v. Watson
ctal 168 Mo. 133 (1901).


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 179

information you may desire will be cheerfully furnished by writing
to headquarters of joint executive board, No. 91 1 Pine Street,
St. Louis, Missouri.

In addition to the sending of this circular, committees visited
various merchants in St. Louis and vicinity to present the
matter more fully, and in some instances threats were made by
members of these committees that the patronage of the boy-
cotters and their friends would be withheld from certain mer-
chants unless they discontinued their business dealings with
the clothing company. In no instance, however, were there
threats of resort to violence or unlawful intimidation.

The petition of the clothing company concluded with the
request that

the defendants, their associates, confederates, agents, and repre-
sentatives be enjoined and restrained by a temporary order of
injunction, to be made final upon the hearing of this cause, from
boycotting, or making effectual, promulgating, or in any wise pro-
claiming, any boycott upon or against the plaintiff or its goods,
and from sending, conveying, or delivering in -any way j:o any
person, firm, corporation, or association any boycott notice, verbal
or otherwise, referring to the plaintiff or its goods, and from in any
way menacing, hindering, or obstructing the plaintiff from the
fullest enjoyment of all the patronage, business, and custom which
it may possess, enjoy, or acquire independent of the action of the
said defendants or any of them.

Judge Sherwood announced the opinion of the court. After
stating the above facts and reviewing the evidence given before
the court below he disposed of the question of the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court in the case. Proceeding to the points in
issue, he said :

Section 14 of our bill of rights declares that “no law shall be
passed impairing the freedom of speech ; that every person shall
be free to say, write, or publish whatever he will on any subject,
being responsible for all abuse of that liberty.” The evident idea
of that section is penalty or punishment, and not prevention. Because,
if prevention exists, then no opportunity can possibly arise for one
becoming responsible by saying, writing, or publishing “whatever


iSo TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

he will on any subject.” The two ideas — the one of absolute free*
dom “to say, write, or publish whatever he will on any subject,”
coupled with responsibility theiefor, and the other idea of preventing
any such free speech, free writing, or free publication — cannot coexist

And just here it must be observed that the right of free speech,
free writing, or free publication weie not treated by the constitution,
which iecognizes those rights as now existing and only seeks their
protection and perpetuation. . ♦ . Section 14, supra, makes no dis-
tinction and authorizes no difference to be made by courts or legis-
latures between a proceeding set on foot to enjoin the publication
of a libel and one to enjoin the publication of any other sort or nature,
however injurious it may be, or to piohibit the use of free speech
or free writing on any subject whatever; because, wherever the
authority of injunction begins , there the light of free speech, free
writing, or free publication ends. No halfway house stands on the
highway between absolute prevention and absolute f/eedom. The rights
established by Section 14 can neither be impaired by the legis-
lature, nor hampered nor denied by the courts.

Nor does it m any way change the complexion of this case by
reason of its being alleged in the petition “that the defendants,
and each of them, is without means and has no property over and
above *the exemption allowed by law wherefrom the plaintiff might
secure satisfaction for the damages resulting to it from the acts
aforesaid.” The constitution is no respecter of persons. The impe-
cunious man “who hath not where to lay his head” has as good
right to free speech, etc., as has the wealthiest man in the com-
munity. The right to enjoin in the former’s case is precisely the
same as in the latter’s ; no greater, no less. In short, the exercise
of the right of free speech, etc., is as free from outside interference or
restnciion as if no civil recovery could be had or punishment inflicted
because of its unwarranted exercise.

And in this connection it is to be constantly borne in mind that
the principle is firmly rooted in equity jurisprudence that, though
there be no remedy at law, this does not necessarily and of itself
give a court of equity jurisdiction to afford relief. The authority to
enjoin finds no better harbor in the empty pocket of the poor man
than in the full pocket of the rich man. And such authority to
enjoin can have no existence in circumstances such as the present
case presents, if the constitution is to be obeyed.

If these defendants are not permitted to tell the story of their
wrongs, or, if you please, their supposed wrongs, by word of mouth


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 181


or with pen or print, and to endeavor to persuade others to aid
them by all peaceable means in securing redress of such wrongs,
what becomes of free speech and what of personal liberty ? The fact that
in exercising that freedom they thereby do plaintiff an actionable
injury, such fact does not go a hair toward a diminution of their
right of free speech, etc., for the exercise of which, if resulting m
such injury, the constitution makes them expressly responsible.
But such responsibility is utterly incompatible with authority m a
court of equity to prevent such responsibility from occurring.

Judge Sherwood then stated that the question of the power
of the court to enjoin in cases ’of intimidation, threats of vio-
lence, or of destruction of property was not passed upon, as not
being involved in the record, and concluded :

Holding these views, we affirm the decree of dismissal entered in
favor of defendants by the court below.

Judge Robinson dissented from the above.

V. Blacklist 1

This is a bill brought by Boyer and others to procure an
injunction against the Western Union Telegraph Company, pro-
hibiting the discharge of employees on account of membership
in the Commercial Telegraphers’ Union, and also prohibiting
the maintenance by said company of a black list. The bill also
alleged that the company had conspired to destroy the Teleg-
raphers’ Union, The injunction was denied. The points in-
volved were discussed in the following manner by Judge Rogers,
who delivered the opinion of the court :

The first cause of complaint is that plaintiffs have been dis-
charged without notice from the service of the defendant from no
other cause than that they joined that union. But the answer to
that complaint is, that in a free country like ours every employee, in
the absence of contractual relations binding him to work for his
employer a given length of time, has the legal right to quit the
service of his employer without notice and either with or without
cause at any time ; and in the absence of such contractual relations

1 United States Circuit Court for the Eastern District of Missouri, Boyer et al
v. Western Union Telegraph Company , 124 Fed. Rep. 246 (1903)


lS2 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


any employer may legally discharge his employee with or without
notice at any time. The second ground foi complaint is that
defendant, its officers and agents, have unlawfully combined and
confederated together to destroy the said union, and intend dis-
charging all the members of said union from the service of the
defendant, and by threats, intimidation, and coercion, and other-
wise, are interfering with the plaintiffs and with others of their
employees for uniting with the union, and are seeking to prevent
those discharged from obtaining employment. I need not take time
to multiply authorities to show that there is no such thing in law as
a conspiracy to do a lawful thing. If the last allegation means any-
thing, it is that the defendant, its officers and agents, have con-
spired to destroy the union by discharging all its members in its
employ and refusing to employ others solely for the reason that
they were members of the union. But it is not unlawful, m the
absence of contractual relations to the contrary, to discharge them
for that or for any other reason, or for no reason at all. Hence
there is no such thing in law as a conspiracy to do that, and it
matters not whether you call such an agreement a conspiracy, a
combination, or a confederation.

True, it is alleged that defendant, its officers and agents, unlaw-
fully combined and confederated to destroy the union. But what is
unlawful is a question of law; whether a thing done is unlawful
depends on what is done or threatened to be done. But what the
defendant company, its officers and agents, combined or confederated
to do in order to destroy the union is the precise thing the complaint
fails to show. The court must always be able to look at the facts and
say that if these facts are true they are illegal ; otherwise there is no
ground for invoking its protective agency.

But it is said that defendant maintains a black list containing a list
of names of such persons as may have incurred its displeasure and
have been discharged from its service, and that by methods not
known to them it prevents such discharged persons from getting
employment as telegraph operators; that they have blacklisted
people solely because they belong to the union, and that they intend
to blacklist others for the same thing, etc. We have seen it is not
unlawful to discharge plaintiffs because they belong to the union. Is
it unlawful for defendant to keep a book showing that they were dis-
charged because they belonged to the union ? The union presumably,
and especially in view of the allegations in the bill, is an honorable,
reputable, and useful organization, intended to better the conditions


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 183

and elevate the character of its members. Is it illegal for defendant
to keep a book showing that it had discharged members of such a
union solely because they belong to it ? That seems to be the real
essence of the bill. Is it illegal to notify others that it keeps such a
book and that they can inspect it, or to inform others what such
a book shows ? That seems to be the ground of complaint. There
can be no question about it; the positive, direct, and unequivocal
allegation is that defendant keeps such a book; that plaintiffs are
placed on it solely because they belong to the union and have been
discharged solely because they did belong to the union. Can a court
of equity grant relief to a man who says for his cause of action that
he belongs to a reputable organization and that he has been dis-
charged solely because he did belong to it; that his employer who
discharged him keeps a book on which is placed his name and has
set opposite thereto the fact that he discharged him solely because he
belonged to such organization ; and that he gives that information
to other persons, who refuse to employ him on that account ? Sup-
pose a man should file a bill alleging that he belonged to the Hon-
orable and Ancient Order of Freemasons, or to the Presbyterian
Church, or to the Grand Army of the Republic; that his employer
had discharged him solely on that account ; that he had discharged
others of his employees and intended to discharge all of them for
the same reason ; that he kept a book which contained all the names
of such discharged persons and set opposite the name of each dis-
charged person the fact that he had been discharged solely on the
ground that he belonged to such organization ; and that he had given
such information to others, who refused to employ such persons on
that account. Is it possible a court of equity could grant relief ? If
so, pray, on what ground ? And yet that is a perfectly parallel case
to this as made by the bill.

VI. Employment of Nonunionists

The present position of the law in American states on the
right of a union to refuse to work with nonunion men is set
forth in an article by Bruce Wyman, on “The Maintenance of
the Open Shop/' 1 from which the following summary is taken:

Whatever weight may be given to those two decisions as authority
[. National Protective Assn. v. Cummmg (New York) and Clemmett v.

1 Green Bag , Vol. XVIL 1905, pp. 21-29.


1 84 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Watson (Indiana)], they represent the \ie\v of the minority. The
contrary holding undoubtedly has the majority. That the nonunion
man is protected against the union is the law of the following juris-
dictions at least: Maine, Perkins v. Pendleton , 90 Me. 166 (1897);
Maryland, Lucks v. Clothing Cutters Assembly ; 77 Md 396 {1S93) ;
Massachusetts, Plant v. Woods , 176 Mass. 492 (1900); Pennsyl-
vania, Erdman v. Mitchell \ 207 Pa. 79 (1903). In the following juris-
dictions the issue is in doubt: England, Allen v. Flood (1898), A. C.i,
zxith Perrault v. Gauthier , 28 Can. Sup. 241 (4S99), are ^ or the union,
but Quinn v. Leatham (1901), A. C. 495, and Gib l an v. National Amal-
gamated Union (1903), 2 K. B. 600, are distinctly for the nonunion
man; New York, Curran v. Galen, 152 N. Y. 33 (1897), and Davis
Machine Co. v. Robinson , 41 Misc. 329 (1903), are for the nonunion
man, but National Protective Association v. Camming , 170 X. Y. 315
(1902), and Davis v. United Hoisting Engineers, 28 App. Div. 396, held
for the union. In two jurisdictions at least the law permits the union
to force the nonunion man out : New Jersey, Meyer v. Journeymen
Stonecutters' Association , 47 N. J. Eq. 519 (1890 k which, however, is
based on the court’s interpretation of the local trades union statutes ;
Indiana, Clemmettv . Watson, 14 Ind. App. 38 (1893), in which again
the court relies upon the repeal of the foimer conspiracy statutes. It
is, therefore, the general American law that legal wiong is done by a
union procuring the discharge of a nonunion man. Even if their
motive is self-interest, — to get all the work for their own members,
— still most courts hold that the union cannot be allowed to use the
force of its members to crush the nonunion man. . . . Any discussion
which leaves out the fact of conspiracy and defends the union upon
the basis of the permission given individuals to compete as they
please misses the real point upon which the discussion turns. 1

Following are two decisions referred to above, taking opposite
grounds on this question :

New York Court of Appeals. National Protective Association
of Steam Fitters and Helpers v. Camming- et aL , 1 70 N. Y.
315 (1902).

This was a case in which the plaintiffs applied for an injunc-
tion to restrain the defendants, the Enterprise Association of

1 See also Wyman, “The Perpetuation of the Open Market,' ” Green Bag , Vol.
XVII, pp. 210-221 ; Lindley D Clark, “The Present Legal Status of Organized
Labor in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, Yol. XIII, pp. 172-200.


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 185

Steam Fitters, from preventing the employment of its members
and from coercing or obtaining by threats, strikes, etc., the dis-
charge of its members. The plaintiffs had applied for member-
ship in the defendant labor union, but being denied or having
been expelled, they organized a dual union, the National Protec-
tive Association of Steam Fitters and Helpers. Being refused
employment on account of the threats of a strike by the defend-
ant union, they brought the suit. An injunction was granted in
a lower court, but was withdrawn by an appellate court, and the
latter decision was sustained by the Court of Appeals, Chief
Justice Parker, speaking of the defendant association, said :

Their restriction of membership to those who have stood a pre-
scribed test must have the effect of securing careful as well as skillful
associates in their work, and that is a matter of no small importance
in view of the state of the law which absolves the master from lia-
bility for injuries sustained by a workman through the carelessness
of a co-employee. So long as the law compels the employee to bear
the burden of the injury in such cases, it cannot be open to question
but that a legitimate and necessary object of societies like the
defendant associations would be to assure the lives and limbs of
their members against the negligent acts of a reckless co-employee,
and hence it is clearly within the right of an organization to provide
such a method of examination and such tests as will secure a careful
and competent membership, and to insist that protection of life and
limb requires that they shall not be compelled to work with men
whom they have not seen fit to admit into their organization, as
happened in the case of the plaintiff, McQueed. . . .

It is well known that some men, even in the presence of danger,
are perfectly reckless of themselves and careless of the rights of
others, with the result that accidents are occurring almost constantly
which snuff out the lives of workmen as if they were candles, or leave
them to struggle through life maimed and helpless. These careless,
reckless men are known to their associates, who not only have the
right to protect themselves from such men, but, in the present state
of the law, it is their duty through their organizations to attempt to
do it, as to the trades affording special opportunities for mischief
arising from recklessness.

I know it is said in another opinion in this case that “ workmen
cannot dictate to employers how they shall carry on their business,


1 86 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

nor whom they shall or shall not employ,” but I dissent absolutely
from that proposition, and assert that, so long as workmen must
assume all the risk of injury that may come to them through the
carelessness of co-employees, they have the moral and legal right to
say that they will not work with certain men and their employer
must take their dictation or go without their services. . . .

Stated in other words, the propositions quoted [from Judge Vann’s
opinion] recognize the right of one man to refuse to work for another
on any ground that he may regard as sufficient, and the employer has
no right to demand a reason for it. But there is, I take it, no legal
objection to the employee’s giving a reason, if he has one, and the
fact that the reason given is that he refuses to work with another who
is not a member of his organization, whether stated to his employer
or not, does not affect his right to stop work, nor does it give a cause
of action to the workman to whom he objects because the employer
sees fit to discharge the man objected to rather than lose the services
of the objector.

The same rule applies to a body of men who, having organized
for purposes deemed beneficial to themselves, refuse to work. Their
reasons may seem inadequate to others, but, if it seems to be in their
interest as members of an organization to refuse longer to work, it is
their legal right to stop. The reason may no more be demanded as
a right of the organization than of an individual, but if they elect to
state the reason, their right to stop work is not cut off because the
reason seems inadequate or selfish to the employer or to organized
society. And if the conduct of the members of an organization is
legal in itself, it does not become illegal because the organization
directs one of its members to state the reason for its conduct.

The principles quoted above recognize the legal right of members
of an organization to strike, that is, to cease working in a body by
prearrangement until a grievance is redressed, and they enumerate
some things that may be treated as the subject of a grievance,
namely, the desire to obtain higher wages, shorter hours of labor, or
improved relations with their employers, but this enumeration does
not, I take it, purport to cover all the grounds which will lawfully
justify members of an organization refusing, in a body and by pre-
arrangement, to work. The enumeration is illustrative rather than
comprehensive, for the object of such an organization is to benefit
all its members, and it is their right to strike, if need be, in order to
secure any lawful benefit to the several members of the organization,
as, for instance, to secure the reemployment of a member they regard


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES i8;

as having been improperly discharged and to secure from an employe
of a number of them employment for other members of their organ
ization who may be out of employment, although the effect will be t
cause the discharge of other employees who are not members.

And whenever the courts can see that a refusal of members of ai
organization to work with nonmembers may be in the interests of th<
several members, it will not assume in the absence of a finding t<
the contrary that the object of such refusal was solely to gratif;
malice and to inflict injury upon such nonmembers. . . .

It seems to me illogical and little short of absurd to say that th
everyday acts of the business world, apparently within the domaii
of competition, may be either lawful or unlawful according to th
motive of the actor. If the motive be good, the act is lawful ; if i
be bad, the act is unlawful. Within all the authorities upholding th
principle of competition, if the motive be to destroy another’s busi
ness in order to secure business for yourself, the motive is good
but, according to a few recent authorities, if you do not need th
business or do not wish it, then the motive is bad ; and some coui
may say to a jury, who are generally the triers of fact, that a give:
act of competition which destroyed A’s business was legal if the ac
was prompted by a desire on the part of the defendant to secure t
himself the benefit of it, but illegal if its purpose was to destroy A’
business m revenge for an insult given. . . .

Nowhere throughout the finding will be found even a hint that
strike was ordered or a notification given of the intention to order
strike for the purpose of accomplishing any other result than that c
securing the discharge of the members of the plaintiff associatio
and the substitution of members of the defendant associations i:
their place. Such a purpose is not illegal within the rules laid dow:
in the opinion of Judge Yann, nor within the authorities cited therein
on the contrary, such a motive is conceded to be a legal one. It i
only where the sole purpose is to do injury to another, or the act i
prompted by malice, that it is insisted that the act becomes illega
No such motive is alleged in that finding. It is not hinted at. O
the contrary, the motive which always underlies competition i
asserted to have been the animating one. It is beyond the right an
the power of this court to import into that finding, in contradictio
of another finding or otherwise, the further finding that the motiv
which prompted the conduct of defendants was an unlawful one
prompted by malice and a desire to do injury to plaintiffs withou
benefiting the members of the defendant associations.


1 88 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

I doubt if it would ever have occurred to any one to claim that
there was anything in that finding importing a different motive from
that specially alleged in the finding, had not the draughtsman char-
acterized the notice given to the employers by the associations of
their intention to strike as “threats.”

The defendant associations, as appears from the finding quoted,
wanted to put their men in the place of certain men at work who
were nonmembers working for smaller pay, and they set about doing
it in a perfectly lawful way. They determined that if it were neces-
sary they would bear the burden and expense of a strike to accom-
plish that result, and in so determining they were clearly within their
rights, as all agree. They could have gone upon a strike without
offering any explanation until the contractors should have come in
distress to the officers of the associations asking the reason for the
strike. Then after explanations the nonmembers would have been
discharged and the men of defendant associations sent back to work.
Instead of taking that course they chose to inform the contractors
of their determination and the reason for it.

It is the giving of this information, a simple notification of their
determination, which it was right and proper and reasonable to give,
that has been characterized as “ threats ” by the Special Term and
which has led to no inconsiderable amount of misunderstanding
since. But the sense in which the word was employed by the court
is of no consequence, for the defendant associations had the absolute
right to threaten to do that which they had the right to do. Having
the right to insist that plaintiff's men be discharged and defendants'
men put in their place if the services of the other members of the
organization were to be retained, they also had the right to threaten
that none of their men would stay unless their members could have
all the work there was to do.

* * * # # * # #

A man has a right under the law to start a store and to sell at
such reduced prices that he is able in a short time to drive the other
storekeepers in his vicinity out of business, when, having possession
of the trade, he finds himself soon able to recover the loss sustained
while ruining the others. Such has been the law for centuries. The
reason, of course, is that the doctrine has generally been accepted
that free competition is worth more to society than it costs, and that
on this ground the infliction of damages is privileged. ( Common-
wealth v. Hunt , 4 Metcalf, in, 134.)


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 189

Nor could this storekeeper be prevented from carrying out his
scheme because instead of hiding his purpose he openly declared to
those storekeepers that he intended to drive them out of business in
order that he might later profit thereby. Nor would it avail such
storekeepers, in the event of their bringing an action to restrain him
from accomplishing their rum by underselling them, to persuade the
trial court to characterize the notification as a “ threat,” for on review
the answer would be : A man may threaten to do that which the law
says he may do, provided that within the rules laid down in those
cases his motive is to help himself.

A labor organization is endowed with precisely the same legal
right as is an individual to threaten to do that which it may lawfully
do. . . ,

Pennsylvania Supreme Court. Erdman et at. v. Mitchell et al '.,

207 Pa. 79 (1904).

This case came before the supreme court of Pennsylvania on
appeal from the court of common pleas of Philadelphia County,
the action being brought by William C. Erdman and others,
members of the Plumbers’ League of the city of Philadelphia,
against Robert T. Mitchell and others, officers and members of
the Allied Building Trades of Philadelphia. It appeared that
Erdman and his associates were employed as journeymen
plumbers in the erection of a large building on which were
employed also a number of nonunion workmen and a larger
number of workmen of various trades who were affiliated with
the Allied Building Trades above mentioned. After the work
had progressed for some time, a strike was ordered by the
executive board of the Allied Trades, and all workmen affiliated
therewith were ordered to desist from further labor because
of the employment on the building of nonunion men and mem-
bers of the Plumbers’ League, which was not affiliated with the
Allied Trades. After this strike had gone into effect, the de-,
fendants, Mitchell and others, as representatives of the Allied
Trades, called on the manager of the firm that had a general
contract for the building and said that if he would remove the
objectionable workmen from the building the strike should
cease.


I go TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

An agreement was finally reached, which was reduced to
writing, to the effect that plumbers should be employed who
had the card of the Allied Trades, and that all other workmen
of other trades now or hereafter employed on the building
should have in their possession current cards from unions in
affiliation with the defendants' organization. In accordance with
this agreement, Erdman and his associates were dismissed from
further employment on this building and work was resumed.
The nonunion workmen who had been employed were allowed
to continue their service and were not molested. The plaintiffs,
Erdman and others, then undertook to find employment else-
where, but were not able to secure and retain employment in
the city on account of the action of the officers of the Allied
Trades, who announced to the president of the Plumbers’
League, of which Erdman was a member, that it was the pur-
pose of the Allied Trades to prevent the employment of any
plumber in Philadelphia who was not a member of a union
affiliated with them, and that they would use the same means
that they had used in the case above described wherever they
had the opportunity of doing so.

On these facts the court of common pleas had issued an
injunction prohibiting the defendants, Mitchell and others, and
each and every one of them, their committees, agents, and
servants, from interfering with and from combining, conspiring,
or attempting to interfere with the employment of the plaintiffs,
or any one or more of them, either by threatening loss to any
employer who might take them into his service, or by any
scheme, combination, or conspiracy among themselves or with
others to annoy, hinder, interfere with, or prevent any person
or persons or corporation from employing or continuing to
employ such plaintiffs, or any one or more of them, by putting
them in fear of loss or trouble, or to do anything to hinder,
impede, or obstruct the plaintiffs, or any one or more of them,
from securing employment or continuing in employment. From
this injunction the officers of the Allied Trades took an appeal
to the supreme court, with the result that the decree of the
court below was affirmed and costs assessed upon the appellees.


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 19 1

Judge Dean, for the supreme court, spoke in part as follows :

We have before us the somewhat unusual case of two warring
trades unions invoking the law for the settlement of their respective
rights and the determination of their legal conduct in carrying out
the purpose of their respective organizations. . . .

The court below was of opinion that in so far as defendants, in
furtherance of the purposes of the council of the Allied Building
Trades, undertook by intimidation of plaintiffs and their employers
to coerce the plaintiffs into joining their organization or any particu-
lar organization and by such action caused the workmen to suffer
damage, such action was unlawful and ought to be restrained by
equity. This conclusion is correct. This is not an indictment for a
statutory offense nor for a common-law conspiracy, which last the
legislature by Acts of 1872, 1876, and 1891, has practically abolished.
It is a suit in equity to restrain an unlawful act. It is argued by
appellees 7 counsel that an act may be clearly unlawful, although not
the subject of criminal prosecution , that an agreement by a number
of persons that they will by threats of a strike deprive a mechanic
of the right to work for others merely because he does not choose
to join a particular union is a conspiracy to commit an unlawful act,
which conspiracy may be restrained.

We do not question that defendants may under their constitution
and rules resolve that they will not work with members of other
organizations or with nonunion men, and act accordingly. That is
their right, and their organization, when the conduct of its members
is limited to refraining from work themselves according to such reso-
lution, is not unlawful. But it is manifest from the findings of fact
and the testimony that defendants went far beyond this. The con-
tractors undertook the* erection of a large and expensive building.
They employed a large number of men skilled in all branches of the
building trades, a majority of whom were members of defendants’
union. No notice was given by the organization to the contractors
that their members would not be permitted to work on the same
building with members of plaintiffs’ union or with nonunion men.
After the building had progressed until it had reached what may be
called its critical stage, a strike was ordered of all the workmen
affiliated with defendants’ union, and two thirds of all at work quit.
After the strike negotiations for calling it off were opened between
defendants and the manager for the contractors, and the result was
the agreement with their union heretofore noticed. Then followed


192


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the discharge of plaintiffs from work on that building, and then an
interview between the president of plaintiffs’ union and the secretary
of defendants ’. The latter told the president that the Allied Trades
intended to pursue the same course as at the Mariner and Merchant
Building on every building in the city for the purpose of driving
every plumber into a union affiliated with the Allied Trades. This
evidence would have established a criminal conspiracy at common
law. Concede that it would not under our present legislation now
establish it ; nevertheless it is still an unlawful act. There was no
complaint as to wages by any of the workmen on the building when
the strike was declared. All wanted to work and their employers
wanted them to work. But these defendants who did not work on
the building had a grievance. Plaintiffs refused to and would not
join the defendants’ union. They must be driven to joining it by
threats of loss of work, and their employers must be compelled to aid
defendants by threats of loss of money on their contract. This is
so plain that it is waste of time to more* than state the facts to con-
vince that the conduct of defendants was calculated to intimidate
both employees and employers and consequently was unlawful. The
frightened employers, to avoid further loss, yielded. The plaintiffs
did not yield, and, to prevent further intimidation of those who would
otherwise employ them, they seek by this suit to restrain defendants
from future acts of intimidation.

The first article of the constitution says : “ That the general great
and essential principles of liberty and free government may be recog-
nized and unalterably established, we declare that all men are born
equally free and independent and have certain inherent and indefeas-
ible rights, among which are those of enjoying and defending life and
liberty, of acquiring, possessing, and protecting property and reputa-
tion, and of pursuing their own happiness.”. Then follows the con-
clusion of this section : “ Everything in this article is excepted out of
the general powers of government and shall forever remain inviolate.”
This clause, unlike many others in the constitution, needs no affirma-
tive legislation, civil or criminal, for its enforcement in the civil courts.
Wherever a court of common pleas can be reached by the citizen
these great and essential principles of free government must be recog-
nized and vindicated by that court, and the indefeasible right of
liberty and the right to acquire property must be protected under the
common-law judicial power of the court. Nor does it need statutory
authority to frame its decrees, or statutory process to enforce them
against the violators of constitutional rights.


DECISIONS OF COURTS IN LABOR DISPUTES 193

The right to the free use of his hands is the workman’s property,
as much as the rich man’s right to the undisturbed income from his
factory, houses, and lands. By his’ work he earns present subsistence
for himself and family. His savings may result in accumulations
which will make him as rich in houses and lands as his employer.
This right of acquiring property is an inherent, indefeasible right of
the workman. To exercise it he must have the unrestricted privilege
of working for such employer as he chooses, at such wages as he
chooses to accept. This is one of the rights guaranteed him by our
declaration of rights. It is a right of which the legislature cannot
deprive him, one which the law of no trades union can take from
him, and one which it is the bounden duty of the courts to protect.
The one most concerned in jealously maintaining this freedom is the
workman himself.

A conspiracy is the combination of two or more persons by some
concerted action to accomplish an unlawful purpose. It is unlawful
to deprive a mechanic or workman of work by force, threats, or intimi-
dation of any kind. A combination of two or more to do the same
thing by the same means is a conspiracy. That by the legislation
referred to such conspiracy is no longer criminal does not render it
lawful. At common law the courts held that such combination was
so prejudicial to the public interests and so opposed to public policy
as rendered it punishable criminally ; but the legislature, which gen-
erally determines what is and what is not public policy, has declared
that it is no longer a crime or misdemeanor. But this is as far as it
has gone. It is as far as it could go without abolishing the declaration
of rights. To do that the whole people of the commonwealth must
be directly consulted and they must give assent. For while the plain
implication from the declaration is that the power to limit this inde-
feasible right rests solely with the people, yet when they adopted the
constitution of 1874, with an extreme of caution they expressly said,
“ Everything in this article is excepted out of the general powers of
government and shall forever remain inviolate.” That is, shall forever
remain with the people. They will not trust their own legislature
with power to minimize or fritter it away — much less, a trades union.
If the legislature to-day abolished indictment for willful and malicious
trespass or abolished the writ of estrepement, to-morrow courts of
equity would still be bound, under the declaration of rights, to pro-
tect the citizen in the peaceable possession and enjoyment of his
land, even if to do so they were compelled to imprison the lawless
trespasser who refused to obey their writs. So the same courts are


194 TRADE unionism and labor problems

still bound to protect the humblest mechanic or laborer in his right
to acquire property. . . .

It is argued that defendants, either individually or by organization,
have the right now to peaceably persuade plaintiffs and others not to
work and their employer not to hire them. So they have; It is
further argued that they can quit work when they choose. So they
can. But neither of these suggested cases is the one before us. Here
a strike on a large building was declared because plaintiffs would not
join a particular society. The declared purpose of the strike was to
cause loss of employment to plaintiffs because they would not join the
Allied Building Trades — chose to remain faithful to their own union,
the Plumbers’ League. The Allied Trades would not declare the
strike off and permit work on the buildings to proceed until the
employers entered into contract, practically stipulating that they
would discharge plaintiffs and not reemploy them. It is not impor-
tant that apt language precisely expressing the threat should have been
used. The meaning of their declarations and acts was well under-
stood by all parties. The men lost their work. The employers, after
a damaging stoppage, were permitted to proceed because they yielded
to the threat; that is, they were intimidated because they feared
further loss. How absurd it is to call this peaceable persuasion, and
how absurd to argue that, if the law attempts to prevent it, the right
of the workmen to organize for their common benefit is frustrated !
And then, what about the right of the Plumbers’ League to organize
for the common benefit of its members, of whom the plaintiffs are a
part? The .declared purpose of the Allied Trades is by these acts to
absorb this union and thereby destroy it. Under no possible view
of the conduct of defendants was it lawful. .

And so, as already intimated, it comes simply to the question,
Shall the law of an irresponsible trades union or shall the organic law
of a free commonwealth prevail? We answer, Every court of the com-
monwealth is bound to maintain the latter in letter and spirit.


VIII


STATE ARBITRATION AND THE MINIMUM WAGE
IN AUSTRALASIA 1

********

On all sides there is a desire to discover a method whereby
peace may be secured without injury to the just claims and
expectations of the workers. The same feeling prevailed in
the Australasian colonies when industry had been laid waste
by the maritime strike of '1890, the shearers’ strikes of 1891
and 1893, and the miners’ strike of 1892. Trade unionism
had collapsed, but after the victory of the conservative forces
came a revival of progressivism, and with it an eager searching
after some sane means for dealing with the claims of labor.
The result has been a body of legislation which by its results
challenges the respect if not the assent of all engaged in
industry. New Zealand led the way under the guidance of the
Hon. W. Pember Reeves, then Minister for Labor, now Agent
General in London for the colony, who introduced his first
Industrial Arbitration and Conciliation Bill in 1891. Not till
1894, however, did he succeed in carrying his measure for the
compulsory reference of trade disputes to state boards of con-
ciliation and for the establishment of a state court of arbitra-
tion whose decisions were backed by the whole force of the law.
Victoria, in 1896, after a fierce agitation against sweating, passed
a Factory and Workshops Act, setting up wage boards for the
determination of wages in the sweated trades. These two meas-
ures have been the models for subsequent legislation in other

1 From the Political Science Quarterly , Vol XVIII, 1903, pp. 1 12—140. See
also article by Victor S. Clark, “ Labor Conditions in New Zealand,” Bulletin U. S.
Bureau of Labor, No. 49 (1903) ,* Reeves, State Experiments m Australia and
New Zealand, Vol I, pp. 59—181

J 95


196 trade Unionism and labor problems

colonies, and a description of their details and their working
will occupy the bulk of this paper. South Australia, after an
abortive and badly drawn arbitration act m 1894, adopted the
Victorian plan in 1900. In the same, year West Australia copied
the New Zealand Act, and late in 1901 the New South Wales
legislature passed an act based, but with important modifica-
tions, on Pember Reeves' model.

The New Zealand Act of 1894 was amended in 1895, 1896,
and 1898, and was replaced in 1900 by a consolidating and
amending act which was itself amended in the following year.
Although the recent amendments are important, yet the work-
ing of the system will be best understood if the original act is
first summarized, and then the amendments described which
were passed to give effect to the teachings of experience.

The “industrial matters" which were brought within the
scope of the law were defined to be “all matters or things
affecting or relating to work done or to be done, or the privi-
leges, rights, or duties of employers or workmen m any industry,
and not involving questions which are or may be the subject of
proceedings for an indictable offense." The basis of the act was
that it took no notice of irresponsible persons. An individual
employer was a person with property which could be attached
by law, but the individual worker was not in such a position.
The act therefore dealt only with organized bodies of work
people, and since the trade unions were chary of risking their
privileges by coming to close quarters with the law, it provided
for the establishment for the purposes of the act of “ industrial
unions ” of not less than seven workers or seven employers.
These unions had to be genuine organizations, with rules, commit-
tees of management, and funds, and when registered they became
corporate bodies with powers to sue and be sued, but only for
th^ purposes of the act. No member could retire without giving
three months' written notice, and all members by registration of
the union became subject to the act. Trade unions could register
as industrial unions, each branch being considered for this purpose
a separate union, and several industrial unions could unite to form
an “industrial association."


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


197


The object of the author of the act being to foster mutual
settlements of disputes, the measure proceeded next to provide
that industrial unions or associations of workers might enter
into “ industrial agreements” with any employer or employers or
union or association of employers in relation to any industrial
matter. Such agreements were to be filed in the supreme
court and enforced in the same manner as awards under the
act. In default of such agreements any party to a dispute, being
an industrial union or association of workers or employers or any
employer, could refer the matter at issue to a board of concilia-
tion, and after such reference no strike or lockout was permitted.
The physical conformation of New Zealand leads to the splitting
up of trades into local sections and to the accentuation of local
feeling. The act consequently provided that the governor might
divide the colony into districts, in each of which there should be
a board of conciliation and a clerk of awards. Each board was
to consist of four or six persons elected m equal proportions by
the industrial unions of workers and employers in the district
respectively, and of a chairman elected from outside at the first
meeting of the board or, in default thereof, appointed by the
governor, who could also nominate members in case any section
declined or neglected to elect its representatives. The voting
unit was an industrial union, each union having as many votes
as there were members to be elected by its section. The term
of office was three years, and one half of the members plus the
chairman formed a quorum, the chairman having a casting vote
only. When a dispute was referred to it the board had full
powers to call for evidence, including books and documents,
and to inspect factories, and, notwithstanding the jvay in which
the dispute was referred to it, it could make any arrangement
that was necessary to insure the dispute being brought before
it in a complete shape. Special boards could be appointed to
meet any case of emergency or any special case of industrial dis-
pute.” Parties could appear before the board either personally
or by their agents or, if all parties agreed, by counsel or solic-
itor ; but such consent has very rarely been given. The duty of
the board was first of all to strive to induce the parties to come


198 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

to a “fair and amicable settlement ” of the dispute, and if they
failed they were to “decide the question according to the merits
and substantial j ustice of the case. ” But their decision only became
operative if all parties agreed, for any party could require the clerk
of awards to refer the dispute to the court of arbitration.

The Court of arbitration consisted of three persons appointed
by the governor : the president, who must be a judge of the
supreme court, and two persons recommended by the indus-
trial associations or unions of employers and workers respec-
tively. The term of office was three years, and one member
and the president formed a quorum. The court had jurisdiction
whenever a matter was referred to it by a board, or by a party
dissenting from a board’s recommendation, or by any party in a
district where no board had been constituted. The proceedings
before the court were similar to those conducted before a board ;
frivolous cases could be dismissed and costs awarded. The court
was to decide cases by a majority of its members present “ in
such manner as they find to stand with equity and good con-
science.” It could admit evidence which was not strictly legal,
and its proceedings could neither be impeached for want of form,
nor removed to any other court or reviewed “ on any account
whatsoever.” Its award had to be made within one month after
the beginning of the case and was to specify “ each industrial
union, trade union, association, person, or persons ” bound by it
and the period not exceeding two years during which it was to
be in force. From this enumeration it will be seen that though
unorganized workmen could not appeal to the act they could
nevertheless be bound by decisions under it. On the applica-
tion of any flirty the award was to be filed in the office of the
supreme court and became then enforceable like any other judg-
ment or order up to the sum of ^500 against any “industrial
union, trade union, association, or person,” and to ^10 against
any person in virtue of his membership in a union or association.
The maximum penalty for each breach of an industrial agreement
was fixed at ^5 00.

The act came into force on January 1, 1895, but most of that
year was occupied with making the necessary arrangements,


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


199


and the first case was dealt with early in 1896. Seven districts
were constituted each with a board, and a return to the legisla-
tive council of the colony shows that during the four years,
April, 1896, to March, 1900, twenty-nine cases were settled
by the boards, fifty-seven by the court, and one was settled by
the parties. The cost of administration was ^5404. Under
the Act of 1900 the applications to the boards have greatly
increased. There have been only seven strikes and all of these
occurred among unorganized workmen or government employees
who did not come under the act. In two cases the men after-
wards organized and took advantage of the law ; in all cases the
disputes were trivial and involved only a few men and a short
stoppage of work, — at the outside three hundred altogether
were concerned. Although the description of New Zealand as
a “land without strikes” is not strictly accurate, the few cases
of cessation of work among unorganized work people only bring
out in bolder relief the general success of compulsory arbitra-
tion. The most remarkable feature about the results is the small
number of cases settled, by the boards, contrary to Mr. Reeves'
expectations. *This is largely due to the ill-will with which
employers at the beginning regarded the act. While the work-
ers were confident enough to register their trade unions as
industrial unions instead of forming separate organizations, the
employers held aloof and would not elect representatives to the
boards. In such cases Mr. Reeves contemplated that the dis-
putes would be taken straight to the court, and that the boards
would operate only where both sides by taking part in their forma-
tion were disposed towards conciliation. The government, how-
ever, completed the boards by appointing representatives of the
employers, and although no whisper has been raised against the
integrity of these gentlemen, they naturally did not command
the full confidence of their class. Besides, we must reckon with
the fighting instinct which leads the Anglo-Saxon not to surren-
der a “right ” until the last court has decided against him.

The rush of applicants and the frequency of appeals natu-
rally led to much delay in the settlement of cases, and the
chief amendments in the Act of 1900 were directed toward the


200


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


strengthening of the boards. Unless any party dissatisfied with
the decision of a board appeals to the court within a month the
decision becomes an industrial agreement. The Act of 1901
goes farther and permits any party to a dispute to take the case
straight to the court without its passing through a board. The
Act of 1900 made some other interesting amendments. Two
employers can now form an industrial union ; the court may
decline to register an industrial union if there is one in the same
locality which the applicants might conveniently join ; and the
boards are reduced to three or five members The court of arbi-
tration restricted the application of the act to persons engaged
in work “of an industrial character but the term “ worker ”
is now defined (by the Act of 1901) to include any person
“employed to do any skilled or unskilled manual or clerical
work for hire or reward.” The term of agreements and awards
is extended (by the Act of 1900) to three years, and notwithstand-
ing their expiration they are to continue in force until super-
seded by fresh agreements or new awards. The boards can no
longer demand the production of employers’ books, that power
being confined to the court. A board or the coifrt may require
at any time the appointment of two experts, one nominated by
each side, to assist as assessors but not to act as judges. When
industries are related either by being “branches of the same
trade,” or by being “ so connected that industrial matters affect-
ing the one may affect the other,” then a board or the court
may consider and deal with such related industries in making its
recommendation or award. An industrial union of workers may
refer a dispute to a board even although no one of its members
is directly concerned. An award applies to nonunionist work-
men and to new employers coming into the locality within which
the award is in force during the currency of the award. Finally,
the court may now make an award covering the whole area of the
colony, “ where the award relates to a trade or manufacture the
products of which enter into competition in any market with those
manufactured in another industrial district.” The Act of 1901
placed trade unions in the same position as industrial unions for
the purposes of the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Acts.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


201


In March, 1900, there were 26,067 members of industrial
unions out of 48,938 industrial workers. The passing of the
Act of 1901 gave a great impetus to organization ; 85 unions
were registered m eight months, and in December, 1901, there
were 241 industrial unions of workers and 12 industrial asso-
ciations. At the same date there were 71 industrial unions of
employers and 1 industrial association, but there are still a very
large number of employers unorganized.

The briefest summary of the work of the boards of concilia-
tion and the court of arbitration is to say that in the course of
the last six years they have had to deal with every kind of
industrial question, — time wages, piecework, overtime, hours
of labor, traveling allowances, position of union officials, trade
unionism, introduction of machinery, control of the factory, —
in fact, every thorny problem which has disturbed industry in
other lands. The awards are prepared with the most pamstaking
care. For example, the wages schedule in the case of the Auck-
land compositors decided in 1900 covers nine pages of the Jour-
nal of the Department of Lab 07% and in the Auckland boot trade
award of i899*there are 796 rates of pay specified. In all cases
a minimum wage is fixed, and then usually follows this remark-
able provision which removes a fertile source of dispute :

Any workman who considers himself not capable of earning the
minimum wage may be paid such less wage as may from time to time
be agreed upon in writing between any employer and the secretary
or president of the union , and in default of such agreement within
twenty-four hours after such journeyman shall have applied in writ-
ing to the secretary of the union stating his desire that such wage
shall be agreed upon as shall be fixed m writing by the chairman of
the conciliation board for the industrial district upon the application
of such journeyman after twenty-four hours’ notice in writing to the
secretary of the union, who shall, if desired by him, be heard by such
chairman on such application. Any journeyman whose wage shall
have been so fixed may work and be employed for such less wage for
the period of six calendar months thereafter, and, after the expiration
of the said period of six calendar months, until fourteen days’ notice in
writing shall have been given to him by the secretary of the union re-
quiring his wage to be again fixed in manner prescribed by this clause. 1

1 Canterbury lithographers’ award, August 19, 1901.


202


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


An example of the famous clause relating to preference to
union men must also be given in full :

So long as the rules of the union permit any person of good character
and sober habits, and a competent tradesman, to become a member
on payment of an entrance fee not exceeding 5 s., upon his written
application, without ballot or other election, and so to continue upon
contributing subscriptions not exceeding 6 d. per week, the employers
shall employ members of the union in preference to nonmembers,
provided that there are members of the union equally qualified with
nonmembers to perform the particular work ; but this shall not com-
pel an employer to refuse employment to any person now employed
by him. When union and nonunion men are employed together
they shall work in harmony and shall receive equal pay. The union
shall keep in some convenient place within one mile from the chief
post office in the city of Dunedin, and also at some convenient place
at Invercargill and at Alexandra, a book to be called “ the employ-
ment book,” wherein shall be entered the names and exact addresses
of all the members of the union for the time being out of employment,
with a description of the branch of the trade in which each such jour-
neyman claims to be proficient, and the names, addresses, and occu-
pations of every employer by whom each such journeyman shall have
been employed during the preceding two years. Immediately upon
any such journeyman obtaining employment a note thereof shall be
entered in such book. The executive of the union shall use their
best endeavors to verify all the entries in such book, and the union
shall be answerable as for a breach of this award in case any entry
therein shall in any particular be willfully false to the knowledge of
the executive of the union or in case the executive of the union shall
not have used reasonable endeavors to verify the same. Such book
shall be open to every employer without fee or charge at all hours
between eight a.m. and five p.m. on every working day except Satur-
day, and on that day between the hours of eight a.m. and noon. If the
union fails to keep the employment book in manner provided by this
clause, then, and in such case, and so long as such failure shall con-
tinue, any employer may, if he so thinks fit, employ any person or
persons, whether a member of the union or not, to perform the work
required to be performed, notwithstanding s the foregoing provisions. 1

It will be noted that by these provisions the odious nonunion
quarrel is avoided, open unions are provided and encouraged,

1 Otago boilermakers and iron-ship builders’ award, August 26, 1901.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


203


the right of the employer to select his work people is preserved,
unionists are guarded against victimization, and the union is
utilized as a highly skilled labor bureau.

Some other interesting decisions may be quoted. On the
introduction of machinery we have the following :

In the working of all machinery used in conjunction with the cur-
riers’ trade, preference shall be given to curriers, provided that such
curriers shall have had a previous experience with such machines and
are equally competent with the other workmen who are not curriers.
Apprentices to the curriers’ trade shall be taught to use the machines. 1

It is the manufacturer’s right to introduce whatever machinery his
business may require and to divide or subdivide labor in any way
he may deem necessary, subject to the payment of wages as set forth
in the rules hereinafter set forth. 2

In the event of linotype or typesetting machines being introduced
into any office, the members already employed in such office shall
have the first opportunity of being employed as probationers, and
finally as regular operators, after having attained the required standard
of efficiency, in preference to imported operators. 8

On the vital question as to the control of factories a decision
was given in these words :

The employers shall have the fullest right of control (subject to
the special provisions of this award) of, the factories and may make
such rules for the necessary and proper management thereof as they
may deem expedient. 4

A colonial award was given under the Act of 1900 which
deserves some attention. The parties were the New Zealand
Federated Boot Trade Industrial Association of Workmen, the
New Zealand Boot Manufacturers’ Industrial Union of Employers,
and ten nonassociated employers in Christchurch. Employers
were to give preference of employment to unionists, who in their
turn were to give preference of service to the associated employ-
ers ; at any time within twelve weeks the union was to have the
right to supply capable jnen to take the places of nonunionist

1 Canterbury curriers’ award, August 15, 1901.

2 Christchurch bootmakers’ award, May 4, 1901.

8 Auckland compositors’ award, June 6, 1900.

4 Canterbury slaughtermen’s award, August 14, 1901.


204 TRADE unionism and labor problems


workmen then employed who declined to join the union ; a work-
ing week of forty-eight hours and a minimum weekly wage of
jQz 2 i*. were fixed ; incompetent workmen and apprentices were
also regulated ; the award was to continue for two years and
extend over the districts^ of Christchurch, Auckland, Dunedin,
and Wellington ; any union in the federation could take proceed-
ings for the enforcement of the award within its own district ; no
industrial agreement was to be entered into between the manu-
facturers’ association and nonunionists, or between the union and
nonassociated masters without notice to the present parties. 1

The ordinary objection that compulsory arbitration is useless
since awards could not be enforced is refuted by the simple fact
that no breach of an award has been committed in New Zealand
by any body of workmen, though in some cases the decisions
have been displeasing to them. Nor has there been any con-
certed attempt by employers to frustrate the working of the
act, such breaches as have been proved being few and quickly
punished by fines, in one case amounting to £2$. The great
care taken by the court to meet cases of special difficulty has
helped the ready acceptance of its decisions. Current contracts
are very often exempted, and in the Consolidated Gold Com-
pany’s case, 1896, the court decided that the men should submit
to a reduction for a limited period on account of the company’s
heavy expenditure in development work.

As to the effects of the act on capital and industry we fortu-
nately have the independent evidence 2 of Judge Backhouse, who
was commissioned in 1901 by the government of New South
Wales to inquire into the working of compulsory conciliation
and arbitration laws in New Zealand, Victoria, and other colo-
nies. After exhaustive local inquiries he reported on this head :

Generally, I should say that my, investigations showed that with
possibly one exception industries have not been hampered by the
provisions of the act. To attempt to decide whether capital under
other conditions would have been invested* in particular industries is

1 Christchurch bootmakers’ award, May 4, 1901.

2 Report of Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Working of Compulsory
Conciliation and Arbitration Laws (New South Wales, 95 A, 1901)


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


205


to undertake a task which has merely to be mentioned to show its
impossibility. No doubt general statements were made that this
abstention had been practiced, but I found it more than difficult to
get specific instances. Any cases which were mentioned, on inves-
tigation hardly bore out the view put forward.

The one exception referred to is the boot trade, but that
industry was in a depressed state in 1893 and has continued m
the same condition, as it has also in other Australasian colonies.
The real cause of the depression is American competition, as is
shown by the rise in the importation of boots from £1 15,205 m
1895 to ^186,088 in 1900. Since the passing of the act New
Zealand has grown steadily more prosperous. In 1 894 its export
and import trade was ^16,000,000, in 1901 it was ^23,000,600 ;
in 1895, 29,879 hands were engaged in factories and workshops,
in 1901, 53,460. As the fiction that the New Zealand labor
laws have injured the prosperity of the colony is* constantly
being repeated, it may be as well to quote an Australian corre-
spondent of the Times (April 4, 1902), a hostile but plainly a
well-informed witness :

New Zealand, having recklessly borrowed English capital and
alienated its best land, was in a very bad state till the Ballance govern-
ment came into power. That government and the Seddon government
which followed it proceeded by heavy taxation and by compulsory
resumption to force the good land back into the market. They
passed factory acts and compulsory arbitration acts and compelled
government contractors to pay high wages to their employees ; they
are opening a state coal mine and have in force a system of state
life insurance. And yet, in spite of all this, — or because of all this,
— New Zealand is at present one of the most prosperous places
on earth.

While this prosperity has made the working of the act smoother
in some respects, it has led to increased demands on the part
of labor, which fortunately have taken the form of increased
recourse to the courts instead of to strikes. It has also inevi-
tably brought about a rise in prices which Judge Backhouse
mistakenly attributes to the working of the act.


206 trade unionism and labor problems


The rush of applicants caused some temporary impatience
with the workmen and no doubt contributed to increase the
appeals from the boards to the court. The apparent inefficacy
of the boards has led to suggestions for their reform or abolition.
It is somewhat doubtful whether the payment of members has
worked well, and, though the great majority of the members are
highly respected, yet in Judge Backhouse’s opinion some, by
“ taking an active part outside m the furtherance of the claims
of one of the parties,” render their boards “ boards of irritation
rather than conciliation.” Yet both Mr. Reeves and Mr. Justice
Cooper, the president of the court of arbitration, believe, and
rightly, that the boards are necessary. The double threshing
out^of a case leads to the more careful avoidance of injustice or
of injury to trade. Such delay as there is is well paid for by this
great gain.

A final quotation from Judge Backhouse will fitly close this
part of our investigation :

The act has prevented strikes of any magnitude and has, on
the whole, brought about a better relation between employers and
employees than would exist if there were no act It has enabled the
increase of wages and the other conditions favorable to the workmen,
to which, under the circumstances of the colony, they are entitled,
to be settled without that friction and bitterness of feeling which
otherwise might have existed ; it has enabled employers, for a time
at least, to know with certainty the conditions of production and
therefore to make contracts with the knowledge that they would be
able to fulfil them , and indirectly it has tended to a more harmonious
feeling among the people generally which must have worked for the
weal of the colony. A very large majority of the employers of labor
whom I interviewed are in favor of the principle of the act. .

The awards generally have been in favor of the workers, and it is
therefore easy to understand that the unionists to a man believe in
the act, and, as I have already mentioned, the nonunionists, as far
as my observation goes, find no fault with it. . . . But while the
effects of the act so far are good, the time has not yet come when it
can be said with any certainty that it is a measure which will provide
for the solution of all labor troubles. Since it came into operation
in New Zealand everything has been in favor of an increase in the
emoluments and of an amelioration of the conditions of labor, and


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


207


there cannot be the slightest doubt that wages would have risen if
there had been no act. . . . When lean years come, as come they
must, . . . when wages will be cut down instead of being raised by
the awards, — then, and not till then, can any one speak with authority
as to whether the principle involved is workable or not. 1

The legislation of Victoria in regard to Minimum Wage Boards
is contained m the Factories and Shops Act, 1896, No 1445,
amending Acts of 1896, 1897, and 1^98, and in the consolidating
and extending Factories and Shops Act, 1900, No. 1654. The
original act dealt only with the sweated trades — clothing, furni-
ture, and bread making — and was to remain in force for five
years ; the amending acts remedied various defects which came
to light ; and the Act of 1900 extended the legal regulation of
wages to all trades and was to be operative until the session of
Parliament next following May 1, 1902 A commission was
appointed under the last-named act to inquire into the working
of the acts and their effect on trade, manufacture, labor, and
commerce ; but up to the summer of 1901 it had taken evidence
principally as to early closing.

In summarizing the law it will be most convenient to take the
Act of 1900. Section 15 (1) runs:

In order to determine the lowest prices or rates which may be
paid to any person or persons or classes of persons for wholly or
partly preparing or manufacturing, either inside or outside a factory
or workroom, any particular articles of clothing or wearing apparel or
furniture, or for bread making or baking, or to any person or persons
or classes of persons employed in any process, trade, or business
usually or frequently carried on in a factory or workroom or employed
in the process, trade, or business of a butcher or seller of meat or
maker or seller of small goods, the governor in council may if he
think fit from time to time appoint a Special Board consisting of not
less than four or more than ten members elected as maybe prescribed,
and a chairman, and may at any time remove any member of the
Special Board. In fixing such lowest prices or rates the Special
Board shall take into consideration the nature, kind, and class of the
work and the mode and manner in which the work is to be done and
the age and the sex of the workers and any matter which may from

1 Loc. cit.j pp. 25-26.


208 trade unionism and labor problems


time to time be prescribed. Provided that no such Special Board
shall be so appointed except for the process, trade, or business of a
butcher or seller of meat or maker or seller of small goods, and except
in the case of any trade or business which at the commencement of
this act is included under the provisions of the Factories and Shops
Acts as regards Special Boards, unless a resolution has been passed
by either House of Parliament declaring that it is expedient to appoint
such Special Board.

The board may fix either a time rate or a piecework rate (based
on the time rate) of wages or, both, except that “ for wholly or
partly preparing or manufacturing outside a factory or work-
room articles of clothing or wearing apparel a piecework price
or rate only shall be fixed. ,, The occupier of a factory or work-
room may require the board to fix a piecework rate for persons
operating machines. Instead of specifying piecework rates the
board may determine that such rates based on the time rates
fixed by the board may be paid, and any employer who pays
piecework rates under this provision must base them “on the
earnings of an average worker working under like conditions to
those for which the piecework prices or rates are fixed and who
is paid by time at the wages rates fixed by such Special Board ” ;
the Inspector of Factories may require a list of such piecework
rates to be sent to him, and if he is dissatisfied with them he
may get the proper board to fix a suitable rate, the employer
being bound to pay to his employees twice the amount by which
his wages are deficient for the period elapsing after the inspector
has given him notice of his dissatisfaction. When a time rate
only has been fixed by a board it is illegal to pay piecework
rates. The board shall also fix the number and determine the
wages of apprentices or improvers or both ; determine the maxi-
mum number of hours to be worked per week at the minimum
wage ; and fix rates of overtime. A minimum wage of lhalf a
crown a week must be paid to any person employed in a factory
or workroom except “any member of the employer’s family
related in the first or second degree by blood or marriage to
the employer.” “ If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Chief
Inspector that any person by reason of age or infirmity is unable


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


209


to obtain employment at the minimum wage fixed by any Special
Board/’ a renewable license to work at a specified less wage for
twelve months may be issued.

A first breach of the act is punishable by fine up to ;£io ; a
second by fine from £$ to £ 2 5 ; and a third by fine from ^50
to ;£ioo and cancellation of the registration of the factory or
workroom. A determination of a special board can be challenged
for illegality before the supreme court only, and the governor
may suspend a determination for six months to give the board
an opportunity of reinvestigating the case and deciding whether
to alter or adhere to its decision. A determination once fixed
continues in force until altered The members of the boards are
elected one half by the employers, one half by the workmen, lists
of those qualified to vote being prepared from information sup-
plied by the employers. In the case of the special board for
men’s and boys’ clothing the representatives of the employers
must consist of three representatives of makers of ready-made
clothing and two of makers of order clothing, elected by separate
rolls of voters. Owing to difficulties arising from the number of
Chinese engaged in the furniture trade the special board m that
industry is appointed by the governor in council. The chairman
of a board is appointed by the governor on the nomination of the
other members. The term of office of a board is two years, and
the chairman is paid £1 and the members 10 s for a whole-day
sitting and half those fees for a half-day sitting.

Under the Act of 1896 six special boards were appointed:
Bakers, Boot Makers, Clothing Manufacturers, Furniture Man-
ufacturers, Shirt Manufacturers, and Underclothing Manufac-
turers Under the Act of 1900 twenty-one more boards were
appointed up to the end of 1900 : Butchers, Brick Makers, Car-
riage Makers, Cigar Makers, Confectioners, Coopers, Engrav-
ers, Fellmongers, Jam Manufacturers, Jewelers, Millet-Broom
Makers, Pastry Cooks, Plate-Glass Workers, Printers, Pottery
Makers, Saddlers, Stonecutters, Tanners, Tinsmiths, Wood
Workers, and Woolen Workers. In 1901 and 1902 eleven addi-
tional boards have been appointed, making a total of thirty-eight
boards settling the conditions of labor in trades employing 35,000


210


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


men out of a total of 57,000 engaged in factories and workshops.
The Act of 1900 came to an end in the summer of 1902, when
an unexpected general election prevented its renewal ; but both
sides pledged themselves to reenact it as soon as the new Parlia-
ment met. During the brief period of its abeyance there was
an ugly relapse of some of the employers into the old sweating
practices, which taught both public and politicians the sharp and
needed lesson that the baser sort of master is not easily reformed.
As soon as the new session opened the act was renewed for a
further period.

The most significant fact about the later boards is that many
of them were asked for by many of the employers in the trades
concerned. This eloquent testimony to the utility of the boards
of 1896 will lead us to look with leniency on the defects which
were discovered in their working. The general results as to
wages will be seen from the following table :


Average Weekly Wage

Minimum Wage


1896

190X

Baking, Males

£1 I 2 J. 5 </

£2 2 s 6 d

I s \d per hour

Clothing, Males .

1 15 3

2 0 5

ys 6 d per 8 -hour day

Clothing, Females . . .

*5 5

>8 3

3-r 4 d per 8-hour day

Boots, Males

1 6 10

i 14 5

ys per 8-hour day

Boots, Females ....

*3 4

15 3

3-r 4 d per 8-hour day

Shirts, Females . . .

14 5

14 8

4 d. per hour

Underclothing, Females . .

n 3

(1898)

12 7

4 d. per hour

Furniture, Males . . .

1 9 7

207

1 s. per hour

Furniture, Females . .

14 1

104

3j\ 4 d per 8-hour day


The average wages of men and women are of course much higher
when allowance is made for the children and young persons
employed, and in the case of time workers they are always well
above the legal minimum. The number of apprentices fixed in
different cases is as below :

Clothing, one male apprentice or improver to every three male adults ;
one female apprentice or improver to every two female adults.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


211


Boots, three female apprentices or improvers to every two female
adults.

Shirts, one female apprentice or improver to every three female adults.
Underclothing, two female apprentices or improvers to every female
adult.

Furniture, one male apprentice or improver to every four male adults.
Butchers, one male apprentice or improver to every three male adults.

In the shirt trade employers are allowed to fix piecework
rates inside factories, provided they enable an average worker
to earn not less than 4 d., 4 id., and 5 d. per hour according to
the class of work done. In the underclothing trade, owing to the
hundreds of lines manufactured, the employers are also allowed
to fix their own piecework rates based on the time-wage mini-
mum of 4 d. per hour. “The utmost that can be said in favor
of this system of fixing piecework rates/' according to the Chief
Inspector m his report for 1 899, “ is that it is better than nothing
and enables the department to interfere when competition cuts
the prices so low that even a skilled worker cannot earn the 4 d.
per hour fixed by the determination."

The object of the act was to prevent sweating, and on this
point Judge Backhouse says: “That the act has to a large
extent put a stop to ‘ sweating ’ there can be little doubt, but
it is very questionable whether, as far at least as some of the
workers are concerned, a state of things has not been brought
about which is quite as unsatisfactory." Before the Commission
on Unemployment in 1 899 it was maintained by the employers
that it was more profitable to employ young and quick men at
the minimum wage, and therefore the old and slow workers were
displaced in greater numbers ; that girls were dismissed as soon
as they had finished their apprenticeship ; that workers had to
work harder and more consistently ; and that for all these reasons
the Factory Acts tended to create unemployment. Particular
complaint was made about the boot trade, where the determina-
tion of the board came into force on December 29, 1897, an^l it
was shown that the number of persons employed fell from 4590
in 1897 (after having risen steadily from 3795 in 1894) to 4235 in
1898. Mr. Harkness, one of the chief manufacturers, declared :


212


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


I freely admit that the average earnings of the operatives actually
in work have been substantially increased by the minimum weekly
wage, the established piecework rates, and by the restriction of boy
labor. Those in employment, of course, form the large majority of the
workers, but it is no consolation to operatives debarred from working
by the conditions now prevailing to know that those conditions have
operated to the advantage of those more favorably circumstanced
than themselves.

Mr. Peacock, the Chief Secretary, suggested that the decrease
fell on apprentices and improvers. He said :

In one factory there were formerly 15 males, 20 apprentices, and 3
improvers, now there are 24 males, 6 apprentices, and 7 improvers;
in another there had been 10 males, 7 apprentices, and 1 improver,
now there are 12 males, 3 apprentices, and 3 improvers; in another
there had been 15 males and 17 apprentices and improvers, now there
are 56 males, 13 apprentices, and 8* improvers. It had been predicted
that the minimum would become the maximum, but this was not so.
There were 1749 males last week in m factories. Of these, 439 or
25 per cent were paid 455*. or more, 115 4.0s. to 45^., and 221 were
on piecework, leaving 974 who were getting from 36.5*. to 40.?., and a
good many of these were getting less than 36^ before the determina-
tion. In these m factories there were only 4 where the wages had
been reduced to 3 6 s. These figures were obtained by special inquiry. 1

At that time 36^. was the minimum wage. The workmen also
pointed out that the employers had worked their factories day
and night to accumulate stock in anticipation of the act, and
that stagnation had naturally followed. By 1900 the trade had
to a great extent recovered, the persons employed m that year
being 4304, and exports having risen to ^61,463 compared with
^48,213 in 1897. It must also be borne in mind that trade dur-
ing the last few years has suffered from American competition
and from a forty-five per cent rise in the price of raw materials.

The incapacity of the old and slow to earn the minimum wage
hac| not been foreseen by the framers of the Act of 1896, and
the factory department had to prevent injustice by issuing
permits to such persons to work at reduced rates, fifty-eight

1 Melbourne Age , February 24, 1898.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


213


being granted in 1899. This plan was legalized in 1900, but it
is clumsy compared with the New Zealand method of meeting
the same difficulty. Judge Backhouse estimates that “at least
250 hands ” are employed below the minimum wage, the factory
inspectors being deceived by false entries in the books. The
same charge of evasion is made with regard to the other trades,
but what the chief factory inspector said m his report for 1899
about the baking trade applies generally : “ I have never been
able to get evidence which would justify such a charge ; ... if
the men have not the courage to see that they get their legal
rights, I do not see what further can be done.” In the baking
trade evasion was practiced by working men part of their time
as pastry cooks, but that section of the trade has now a special
board.

One notable result has been the reduction of out-work in the .
clothing trade, where the piecework rates were fixed a little
higher than the time rates to compensate the workers for rent
and loss of time in conveying goods. The employers have replied
by introducing machinery and getting the work done in their fac-
tories, — exactly the result which all students of the “sweating”*
problem wish to see achieved.

The improved organization of labor which always follows the
enactment of factory acts is again exemplified in the baking
industry, where the men are paid as much now for forty-eight
hours’ work as they were formerly for sixty, but do as much in
the shorter time as they did in the longer. The protection which
the acts have been to the workers is seen in the case of dungaree
trousers, where the price paid by the wholesale houses to the
manufacturer fell from 13^. per ‘dozen before 1897 to ys. 6d.
in 1899. Under free competition this loss would have fallen
entirely on the workers ; under the acts the manufacturers
recoup themselves by better organization and improved methods,
and where they raise the price to the warehouses the latter still
retain an ample margin of profit without raising prices to* the
consumer. In the underclothing trade, that special home of
sweating, it is worth noting that the lady factory inspector
reports that the home workers as well as the factory workers


214


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


have “ greatly benefited” by the act. The results in the furni-
ture trade are the least satisfactory of all, owing to the impossi-
bility of overcoming deception by the numerous Chinese m the
industry. Here, too, the “ old and slow ” workmen are a source
of trouble, since they set up for themselves m unlicensed home
workshops.

Up to 1895 trade had been depressed ; since that time it has
gradually recovered. To that extent the rise in wages may be
attributed to general trade conditions, but no other trades show
such remarkable increases as those granted by the special boards.
The average wage in the printing trade, an industry which is
a barometer of prosperity, was in 1897 27 s. 3 d, and in 1899
27 s. 4 d The average wage in the dressmaking trade was
11 j. 1 d. in 1897 and 10 5*. 11 d. in 1899; in biscuit making
18 s. 3 d m 1897 and 1 6 s. 3 d. in 1899, — results which may
with advantage be compared with the wages in cognate trades
under special boards. Although the employment figures of the
regulated trades show a steady rise industry has not been in
the flourishing condition which has prevailed in New Zealand,
but while improving has been on the whole dull. We are,
therefore, by the experience gained in Victoria, able to dis-
count the criticism leveled at the New Zealand success that it
is due entirely to the prosperity pf the colony. In good times
and dull times we learn that regulation of wages is possible.

As much complaint, if not more, has been made about the regu-
lation of the number of apprentices as about the determination
of wages, the employers contending, as they also contended in
New Zealand, “that in time to come there will not be a sufficient
number of skilled hands to meet the requirements of some of the
industries.” Complaints were particularly abundant in the cloth-
ing trade, where the scarcity of competent female labor caused
employers to assert that the proportion of female apprentices
permitted, one to three adults, was too small. The fault, how-
ever, lay largely with employers, especially in the order trade ;
for while m the ready-made clothing trade the full legal numbers
were always employed, one of the lady inspectors reported in
1899 about the order trade:


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


215


There are a very considerable number of employers in this branch
of the trade who do not take apprentices at all and who will not take
them, preferring that other people should have the bother of teaching
them, and then expressing astonishment at the fact that so few skilled
hands are obtainable. . . . The pieceworkers, who are supposed to
gam by having an apprentice, do not care to take them, as they say
they lose more in teaching the girl than they gam by her extra work.
The employees on weekly wages could not possibly have any objec-
tion to taking apprentices, but the employer is often averse to it, as
he considers that too much of the time of the employee is wasted in
teaching girls who may leave at any moment.

The difficulty is but one particular instance of the universal
breakdown of apprenticeship which we find in all industrial
countries, and it will be interesting to observe whether the
legislatures of Victoria and New Zealand will be successful in
retaining a system for which, despite its faults, we have so far
been unable to find a completely satisfactory substitute m any
scheme of manual training. Meanwhile the trouble in the Vic-
torian clothing trade has not been appeased by raising the pro-
portion of female apprentices to one to every two adults, and
since the employers will not organize the industry, the govern-
ment must by technical schools or otherwise see that the trade
does not leave the colony

The clothing trade well exemplifies the difficulty of regulating
a thoroughly disorganized trade. While the Special Board was
toiling through nine months in preparing an exhaustive “ deter-
mination ” of thirty-five closely printed foolscap pages, the
employers were frantically laying up stock, and in the slack
time which necessarily followed they took advantage of the
necessities of their work people to try evasions of the law.
When prosecuted for illegally employing an apprentice they
succeeded m getting the conviction upset by maintaining, in
the absence of indentures, that she was an improver. The mini-
mum wage for apprentices was evaded by requiring back as a
premium on Monday morning the half crown which had been
paid as wages the previous Saturday, and by other variations of
the premium system. By the Act of 1900 all such evasions are


2 16 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


prohibited. In the boot trade more apprentices are now at work
than were employed m 1896 when there was no limitation, and
the factory inspectors answer the cry that there is a difficulty m
getting skilled tradeswomen by pointing out that the employers
do not tram their apprentices properly. A dearth of workers is
also reported in the underclothing trade, but a factory inspector
suggests that “ owing to the very low prices paid in the past
there has not been sufficient inducement for girls to stay at the
trade.”

The Butchers’ Board introduces us to a special difficulty aris-
ing out of the social habits of Australia and probably not exist-
ing elsewhere. The average wage fixed since January 1, 1901, is
45 s. per week of fifty-two hours. Judge Backhouse says :

The general complaint of the master butchers is that they have a
difficulty in arranging that the men should work the prescribed hours
only. The most of the business is done in the early part of the day,
and work must commence at the latest at six o’clock in the morning to
enable breakfast meat to be delivered, while the shop cannot shut
before five unless the public is to be inconvenienced. To get over
the difficulty some employers give two half holidays to their men,
arranging the times so that they always have some one in the shop ;
others allow long dinner hours. The price of meat has risen for the
best joints 1 \d. per pound, most of which I think is due to the higher
price of stock, but some undoubtedly to the rate of wages and hours
fixed. 1

In all the trades under the newer boards the same story is
told of increased wages, of the decrease of sweating, of the gen-
eral prevalence of average wages considerably above the fixed
minimum, and of the resulting better organization of industry.
The general opinion of employers after experience of the new
conditions is that they would not return to the old. Of course
there has been some friction. The employers’ representatives on
the Woolen Trade Board objected to one of the men’s represent-
atives since he was not practically acquainted with the trade, but
after some months’ negotiations the difficulty was settled, and a
“ determination ” embodying fifty rates of wages is now in force.

1 Report of Royal Commission, loc. cit. y p. 34.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


217


The master fellmongers retired from their board in the spring of

1901 because the majority carried a resolution fixing a 48-hour
week No other representatives of the employers would take
their places, so the governor in council appointed five persons to
fill the vacancies and a determination was framed The employers
then unsuccessfully appealed to the supreme court to quash the
determination on the ground that the governor’s nominees could
not be representatives of the employers under the act. Still
bent on resistance, most of them closed their premises for a time,
and the 309 men at work in 1900 were reduced to* 127 in 1901.
But the workmen stood firm by the board, and m the spring of

1902 only the two largest yards were still closed Trouble is
pending also in the jam and confectionery trades, where wages
have been fixed not according to the skill but according to the
age of the workers. This naturally works to the detriment of
the women over twenty-one years of age and is unequivocally
condemned by the factory inspectors.

On the whole, while we must admit that there has been a con-
siderable amount of friction in the working of the Victorian wage
boards, there has not been more than might reasonably have been
expected. Administrators tackled the hardest part of the indus-
trial problem first and gained their experience by dealing with
the chaotic sweated trades instead of with those which had
reached a fair stage of organization and where employers and
employed were trained to negotiation. Comparing the Victorian
with the New Zealand system, the former has the advantage that
no dispute is necessary to set the law in motion, and that the
legal determination of wages is posited as part of the established
order of things. On the other hand, the New Zealand require-
ment that the initiative must be taken by an organized body
throws a grave responsibility on the plaintiffs, and the careful
preparation of their case which is required necessarily exerts a
sobering influence In New Zealand the administration of the
law is kept out of reach of the politicians, while in Victoria the
consent of Parliament is needed for the formation of new boards,
and “determinations” can be suspended on appeal to the gov-
ernor, provisions which render possible at least the suspicion of


2 18 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


political influence. The difference in the powers of the two sets
of authorities is obvious, but the institution of trade boards in
Victoria will commend itself to the workers m older settled lands
rather than the local boards of New Zealand. New Zealand has
another advantage in the greater elasticity of its law. Other
defects of the Victorian law are the cumbrous system of electoral
rolls and the clumsy method of dealing with the old and slow.
The term of office of the boards, two years, is also too short.
Finally, it is a serious omission that nothing is done to foster
organization among the workers.

The legislation of the other colonies can be dismissed more
briefly. The South Australian Conciliation Act of 1894, very
similar in principle to the New Zealand Act of the same year,
was nullified in the first case raised under it by the employer
adopting the simple device of discharging his workmen on hear-
ing that there would be a reference, and maintaining that having
no employees he had no dispute. In December, 1900, that meas-
ure was supplemented by a Factories Amendment Act providing
for the establishment of minimum wage boards on exactly the
same plan as in Victoria ; the lowest minimum wage for any
employee was fixed at 4 s. per week, and the boards were enabled
to give special rates to the old and infirm. It is as yet too soon
to ascertain how the act has worked. In West Australia, also, m
December, 1900, the Industrial Arbitration and Conciliation Act
became law. Judge Backhouse, writing some six months later,
says: “It is modeled on the New Zealand acts. Although I
understand there have been industrial disputes, neither side has,
as far as I could learn, taken advantage of its provisions.” 1

After a failure in the preceding year the Industrial Arbitration
Act of New South Wales was assented to on December 10, 1901,
a measure presenting many remarkable features. Based, as every
section shows, on the New Zealand acts, it differs from them
fundamentally in omitting the boards of conciliation. The reason
for this omission was, doubtless, partly the greater concentration
of industry obliterating local patriotism, partly objection to the

1 Loc . cit., p. 34


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA


219


delays under the New Zealand law ; but it is doubtful whether
too high a price has not been paid for rapidity of decision. As
already indicated, there are many merits in the dual authorities
established in the southern colony. The industrial unions of
workers are defined to be trade unions, or branches thereof,
registered under the act and thereby incorporated solely for the
purposes of the act, a bold recognition of the utility of trade
unions not possible seven years earlier. Industrial unions of
employers are any person or company or association of persons
or companies employing at least fifty work people. Industrial
agreements may be made and enforced at law. The court of
arbitration consists of a judge of the supreme court and two
members nominated by the governor on the recommendation of
the industrial unions of employers and workers respectively, the
members of the court holding office for three years ; the salaries
are per annum each. The fullest freedom is conceded to

the court to exercise its functions in the manner which may
appear to it most suitable, and its decisions are final. Disputes
may be referred to the court by any of the parties thereto, if
industrial unions, and by the registrar or chief executive officer
of the court when any one of the parties is not an industrial
union. This latter provision is intended to make the act opera-
tive even m unorganized industries and contemplates a state of
things worse than has been found m New Zealand, where even
the sweated trades have organized to take advantage of the law.
A strike or lockout before a reasonable time has elapsed for a
reference to the court or while proceedings are pending is punish-
able by fine up to ^1000 or imprisonment up to two months.
This drastic method of abolishing the right to lock out aggrieved
employees is probably the most forcible limitation of the liberty
of employers which has yet been legalized in any free country.
Whether the punishment be ever inflicted or not, the mere fact
that it was instituted by the legislature is eloquent of the state of
public feeling in the colony. The act goes on :

If an employer dismisses from his employment any employee by rea-
son merely of the fact that the employee is a member of an industrial
union or is entitled to the benefit of an award, order, or agreement,


220


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


such employer shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £zo for each
employee so dismissed. In every case it shall lie on the employer to
satisfy the court that such employee was dismissed by reason of some
facts other than those above mentioned m this section. Provided that
no proceedings shall be begun under this section except by leave of
the court.

The most notable clause is the “ common rule ” clause, for
which Mr. Wise, the author of the act, said he was indebted to
the study of Mr. and Mrs. Sidney Webb’s Industrial Democ-
racy; and he maintained that it was “the most logical, com-
plete, and effective method of enforcing the awards.” It provides
that in any proceeding the court may

(1) declare that any practice, regulation, rule, custom, term of agree-
ment, condition of employment, or dealing whatsoever in relation to
an industrial matter, shall be a common rule of the industry affected
by the proceeding ; (2) direct within what limits of area and subject
to what conditions and exceptions such common rule shall be binding
upon persons engaged in the said industry, whether as employer or as
employee, and whether members of an industrial union or not ; (3) fix
penalties for any breach or nonobservance of such common rule as
declared as aforesaid.

In New Zealand the same purpose of bringing the rate-cutting
employer and his nonunionist accomplice under the same rules as
their honorable fellows has been achieved by the slower method
of piling award on award until the whole colony has been brought
under regulation ; but even in New Zealand the need for a swifter
jurisdiction to meet the case of Competing industrial districts has
been acknowledged by the provision for colonial awards under the
Act of 1 goo. The maximum penalties for any breach or non-
observance of any award, order, or direction are a fine not exceed-
ing ^5 00 in the case of an industrial union or any person bound
by the award who is not a member of an industrial union, and
a fine not exceeding £$ in the case of any individual member of
an industrial union. The awards are not limited in time. Lastly,
it may be noted that contrary to the excellent New Zealand prece-
dent parties may appear before the court by counsel.


STATE ARBITRATION IN AUSTRALASIA 221

This summary of Australasian legislation conclusively proves
that the legal regulation of the conditions of labor, whether by
compulsory arbitration or some other form, is possible. It would
be too much to say that it is possible under all circumstances, but
it has been shown that under certain widely varying circumstances
it has been successful. It can no longer be disposed of by a pri-
ori arguments based on book theories of economics or politics,
and that alone is a great gain. It is now incumbent on the older
countries with more complex industries to take up the experi-
ment and ascertain the value of the principles by applying them
to their own problems. For this purpose it will probably be best
to follow Victoria and establish trade boards, since artisans, m
Great Britain at least, are apt to show great distrust and jealousy
of the interference of outsiders with their trade. The new method
should be tried first in one or two selected trades and gradually
extended to others as experience advised. In Great Britain suit-
able trades would be the railway workers, who are already in favor
of the principle, and the miners, who have had a lpng experience
of the working of conciliation. A court of arbitration, appointed
as in New Zealand, should be established for each trade, and
boards of conciliation should be set up in the various centers of
the industry. Generally speaking, the procedure of New Zealand
should be followed, care being taken to keep all the provisions
of the law as elastic as possible. The courts and boards should
create their own methods of working from their own experience
and should strive to foster conciliation and the regulation of
industry by voluntary agreements. Employers would gain by the
•stability of industry, workers by their rise m status. A grave
problem is before us ; it is worth while, it is imperative, to

attempt a solution. Henry W. Macrosty.


London School of Economics.


IX


LABOR CONDITIONS IN SLAUGHTERING AND
MEAT PACKING 1

On September 9 the Executive Board of the Amalgamated
Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen of North America “ called
off ” the strike of their 50,000 members against the five packing
companies. In the Chicago stock yards, where 22,000 came
out, followed by 8000 allied trades, this was the third general
strike. For fifteen years after the Knights of Labor strike in
1886 every man or woman who ventured to start an organiza-
tion was discharged; and after 1890, when the “ combine ” of
packers became effective, many of them were blacklisted. The
strike of 1894 was sympathetic and unorganized. The strike
of 1904 was a mistake on the part of the union; for the
employers had offered arbitration sixteen hours before the men
went out, and arbitration was what the leaders had asked for.
They were out eight days and went back on an agreement to
arbitrate, but after an hour’s work were again called out on the
ground of discrimination. This was in violation of the agree-
ment just made, which bound them and their employers to
submit discriminations and all other grievances to arbitration.
The mistake was natural. It followed a history of grievances
on both sides and a conviction on the part of the workmen
that the packers were determined to destroy their union.

The national union dates from July, 1897, and is designed to
include all wage-earners in slaughtering and packing establish-
ments and all meat cutters employed in stores. The country
was fairly organized before Chicago was attacked in 1900. For
a year or more the organizations were secret, 2 but eventually

1 From the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XIX, 1904, pp. 1-32.

2 Conditions described in this article are mainly those of Chicago, the center
of the industry.


222


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


223


they felt strong enough to throw off their cloak ; and in August,
1901, they united in the Packing Trades Council. This even-
tually comprised twenty-two locals under the jurisdiction of one
national organization. Each local is organized on the line of a
department. The cattle butchers form one local. Others are
the sheep butchers, pork butchers, beef carriers, beef-casing
workers, sausage makers, wool workers, hide-cellar men, can-
ning-room employees, oleo and butterine workers, and twelve
more. At first only the skilled men in each department were
organized ; but these gradually extended their numbers to take
in the unskilled, and finally departments altogether unskilled
were organized. Each local made its own demands and agree-
ments at different times under the approval of the national
organization; but in May, 1904, a combined scale for all de-
partments and classes of labor was submitted to the employers.
It was this scale that precipitated the strike ; and the point
of division was the demand for a minimum wage of 20 cents
an hour, afterwards reduced to 18J cents, for all unskilled
labor. Demands of this kind had been made and granted in
departments where skilled workmen such as cattle butchers
and sheep butchers prevailed, but had been rejected in other
departments.

In analyzing the labor situation in the industry, we may begin
with the leading group of workmen, the cattle butchers.

The cattle butchers’ local unions number 5500 of the 50,000
members, and of these about 2000 are the most highly skilled of
all the workmen in the slaughtering and packing industry. Their
importance has brought to them the title of “ butcher aristoc-
racy.” Their strategic position is explained by the character
and expensiveness of the material they work upon. The cattle
butcher can do more damage than any other workman ; for a
cut in the hide depreciates its value 70 cents, and a spotted or
rough carcass will be the last to sell, with the risk of the rapid
depreciation of a perishable product. The sheep butcher merely
“ pulls off” three quarters of the hide, but the cattle butcher
can pull off only 2 per cent. The entire hide must be neatly
cut off, leaving the “fell,” or mucous covering, intact on the


224


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


carcass to give it a good appearance. The “ splitter/' too,
must make a neat and smooth cut straight down the middle of
the ivorylike “fins” of the backbone, or the wholesaler cannot
quickly dispose of the piece. Yet, notwithstanding the high
skill required, the proportion of skilled workmen in the butchers’
gang is very small, owing to a minute division of labor. It
would be difficult to find another industry where division of
labor has been so ingeniously and microscopically worked out.
The animal has been surveyed and laid off like a map ; and
the men have been classified in over thirty specialties and
twenty rates of pay from 16 cents to 50 cents an hour. The
50-cent man is restricted to using the knife on the most delicate
parts of the hide (doorman) or to using the ax in splitting the
backbone (splitter); and wherever a less skilled man can be
slipped in at 18 cents, 18^- cents, 20 cents, 21 cents, 22^- cents,
24 cents, 25 cents, and so on, a place is made for him and
an occupation mapped out. In working on the hide alone there
are nine positions at eight different rates of pay. A 20-cent
man pulls off the tail, a 22^-cent man pounds off another part
where the hide separates readily, and the knife of the 40-
cent man cuts a different texture and has a different “feel”
from that of the 50-cent man. Skill has become specialized to
fit the anatomy.

In this way, in a gang of 230 men killing 105 cattle an hour
there are but n men paid 50 cents an hour, 3 men paid 45
cents, while the number getting 20 cents and over is 86, and
the number getting under 20 cents is 144, as follows :


Typical Crew of Cattle Butchers and Helpers


Rate of Pay
per Hour

50 cents

45 “

40 “

3 2 i “
3 T i “

30 “

27* “

2 6| “


Number of

Rate of Pay

Number of

Men at Rate

per Hour

Men at Rate

. II

25 cents . .

.... 6

* 3

24 “

.... 1

* 5

22^ “ . .

.... 16

. 6

21 “ . .

.... 4

2

20 « . .

. . . . 20

2

18* “

.... 5

• 4

15 to 18 cents

.... 139

6 Average 21 cents

Total 230 men


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


225


The table on the following page shows the list of occupations
as provided for in the agreement of 1903-1904, with the num-
ber of men in each occupation for a gang of 230, their rates of
pay, and their schedule of output. The agreement went only
as far as knife men, who received 20 cents an hour. Those
receiving less than that rate were the shifting population of
laborers who had never been included in the scale and who
would have been raised to a minimum of 18^ cents, had the
demands of 1904 been granted.

The division of labor grew with the industry, following the
introduction of the refrigerator car and the marketing of
dressed beef in the decade of the seventies. Before the market
was widened by these revolutionizing inventions the killing
gangs were small, since only the local demands were supplied.
But when the number of cattle to be killed each day increased
to a thousand or more an increasing gang or crew of men was
put together; and the best men were kept at the most exacting
work At what point the greatest economy is reached was dis-
covered by experiment and by comparison of one house with
another. Each firm has accurate knowledge of the labor force
and the output of every other house, and in this way each
improvement becomes general and each superintendent is keyed
up. Taking a crew of 230 butchers, helpers, and laborers
handling 1050 cattle a day under the union regulations of out-
put, the time required for each bullock from the pen to the
cooler, the hide cellar, and all the other departments to which
the animal is distributed is equivalent to 13 1 minutes for one
man. But this is made up of 6.4 minutes for the 50-cent man,
minutes for the 45-cent man, and so on ; and the average wage
per hour for the gang would not exceed 21 cents, making the
entire labor cost about 46 cents per bullock.

Three objects were gained by this division of labor. First ,
cheaper men — unskilled and immigrant labor — could be uti-
lized in large numbers. Second , , skilled men became more highly
expert in the quality of their work. While, on the one hand,
this greatly increased the proportion of low-wage men, it also
pushed up the wages of the very few skilled men on the delicate


226 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Cattle Butchers, Gang of 230 Men


No of
Men

Position

Scale of Wages
per Hour

J Scale of Work (Number of Cattle
per Hour), 1903-1904

3

1

Penner . .

Knocker, when raising gates

$0 i8j

Left to House Committee


and dumping out

24

60


Knocking only ....

24

80

2

Shackler

18}

Left to House Committee

2

Hoister . . ...

.20

« « U tt

r

Sticking

•32*

w tt it u

4 1

Heading and sticking . . .

•3 2 i

25

L

Heading only ....

• 32 *

30

1

Dropper

.20

Left to House Committee

2

Pritcher up

.20

« n a u

1

Gullet raiser

.20

a a a u

3

Foot skinner

.22*

35

3

Leg breaker ...

•25

25 sets


Ripper open . . . .

•25

80

7

Floorman

.50

15


Breast sawyer . . .

25

75


Caul puller . . .

Pulling cauls and opening

.26*

50


eich

20

40

1

Eich opener

20

75

1

Tail npper . .

20

20

3

Fell cutter

27*

25

2*

Cord cutter


Left to House Committee

Rumper

40

40

3 1

Fell beater

.22*

3 1

Fell puller


60

2

Gutter

.26*

40

2*

Backer .... ...

•45

40

3

Tail sawyer

.z6*

3°

4

Splitter

•5°

25

60

2

Hanging off

.22*

2*

Clearing out

•3°

40

40

2*

Hide dropper . ...

•3 2 *


Clear out and drop together

•32*

20


Neck splitter

•31*

60

2*

Skirt trimmer

.21

60

3

Ladder men

22*

Left to House Committee

4

Bruise trimmer ...

.22*

a tt a tt

1

Scribe sawyer

• 20

tt tt a a

1

Cutting out tongues . . .


100

6

Boning heads

All other knife men . .
Laborers not covered by
agreement ....

$1.05 per 100
.20

• 16* to 19*

3 2 i


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


227


and particular parts of the work. An all-round butcher might
expect to earn 35 cents an hour, but the highly specialized
doorman or splitter earns 50 cents an hour. Some of these
expert doormen work a week at a time without cutting a single
hide, so deft and delicate becomes their handling of the knife.
If the company makes a few of these particular jobs desirable
to the men and attaches them to its service, it can become
independent of the hundreds who* work at the jobs where they
can do but little damage ; and their low wage brings down the
average to 21 cents where, if all were all-round butchers, the
average would be 35 cents. Consequently, in the course of
time the companies put a few of the strongest men and those
with a particular knack for their work on “ steady time,” paying
them a salary of $24 to $27 a week, regardless of the time
actually worked; but the other nine tenths of the gang were
hired by the hour and paid only for the time at work. These
steady-time men not only stood by the company, but acted as
pace setters; and in this way a third object of division of labor
was brought about, namely, speed. Take the occupation of
splitting, for example. In the year 1884 five splitters in a cer-
tain gang would get 800 cattle in 10 hours, or 16 per hour for
each man, the wages being 45 cents. In 1894 the speed had
been increased so that 4 splitters got out 1200 in 10 hours, or
30 per hour for each man, — an increase of nearly 100 per cent
in 10 years. The wages, except for the steady-time men, were
reduced to 40 cents per hour. Other occupations had been
speeded up and other rates of pay had been reduced in simi-
lar proportions. This was undoubtedly the grievance above all
others which led to the organization of 1901 ; for the first act of
the union was not directed toward wages or hours, but towards
a reduction of the output. This the union did by adopting
a “ scale of work ” and putting it into force without consult-
ing the foremen, superintendents, or proprietors. In the case
of the splitters the output ‘was reduced from an average as
high as 30 cattle an hour in some establishments to a uniform
25 an hour, and thereafter, in order that the gang might get
out 120 an hour, the number of splitters had to be increased


228 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


to 5. Similar changes were made in other occupations, the floor-
men being reduced from an average of 20 to a limit of 15, and
so on. An exception is the “head boners ” or trimmers, who
are the only class of workmen in the cattle gang paid by the
piece. In this occupation the rate was formerly 7 cents per
head, but it had been reduced to 9 mills per head; and the
union, without placing a limit on the amount of work, secured
two advances in the rate, bringing it to iL cents per head. At
this rate the leader of the boners can make 40 cents an hour.

The packers admit that some of them had gone too far in
rushing the men, but they hold that the union has gone too far
in restraining them. The union contends that their scale of
work is the same as that which already existed in the Hammond
plant and in one of the Swift houses. At any rate, the inelastic
restriction of output is set forth by the packers as the most
objectionable and arbitrary of all features of the union. They
cite the fact that it applies equally and without distinction to
“ canners ” that weigh 800 or 900 pounds and to corn-fed steers
that weigh 1800 pounds. The justice of this criticism is ac-
knowledged by some of the men, though they hold that the
quantity of work does not vary in proportion to the weight of
the animal and that, if the limit is low for canners, it is high
for steers, so that the average is fair. The packers cite cases
where a floorman is compelled to “kill time” sharpening his
knife or strolling along in order to hold himself down to the
union limit of work. There are undoubtedly exceptional men,
and nothing is more surprising to the -outsider than these wide
differences. One man, whose knife slips down the hide as
though he were playing, is turning out twice as much as his
comrade, who seems to be a hard worker. Individual splitters
have been known to reach as high as 60 cattle an hour, work-
ing on canners, at the time when the average was 30 ; and, of
course, when the union sets the limit for each man at 25 an hour
these swift men find spare time on their hands. Taking them
as a standard, some of the packers say that the union reduced
the output 50 per cent, whereas the reduction below the average
might have been 16 to 25 per cent, according to the plant.


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


229


After the limit was set the companies discontinued the
“ steady-time ” men and placed them all on the hour basis,
since their services as pace makers were no longer useful.
This reduction in expense must be considered as a compensa-
tion partly offsetting the reduction in work. The steady-time
men have opposed the action of the union because their earn-
ings were reduced ; but the majority of the skilled men consider
the restriction as the main blessing which the union has brought
them ; for they say that formerly they were speeded up until
they were “ in a sweat ” all day,- exhausted at night, and useless
after forty years of age, “but now it is a pleasure to work.”

In the first written agreement, dated September, 1903, it
was agreed that “ in the absence of any skilled man, those
doing the same kind of work will attempt to make up the loss
in the amount of work caused by such absentee.” This was a
valuable concession; for otherwise the absence of a floorman
would reduce the output of the gang 1 50 cattle a day, or the
absence of a splitter 250 a day, and so on. An offer on the
part of one of the companies to pay the time of the absentee
to those who made up the loss was declined by resolution of
the union, because they feared it would increase absenteeism,
and that the greed of the men would thus urge them on per-
manently to the former speed.

The artificial limit on output works against the employer in
another way, for it prevents economical adjustment of the
gang. Two doormen handle 30 cattle, but one splitter handles
25. Hence the foreman must hire two splitters and set them
at other work which could be done by cheaper men — with a
loss of time, moreover, in changing work. In the earlier days
of the industry the number of men to be assigned to one posi-
tion was determined by speeding up a man, if possible, to the
gait of the gang; but, if he could not keep up, another full man
was set to help him. Later the idea was adopted of putting
a “ half man ” or a “ quarter man ” to help him ; and the rate of
pay for the half time or quarter time was the rate for that occu-
pation. The significance of this device appears in the conten-
tion between the union and employers over “ laying off ” men


230


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


in dull seasons. The custom has always prevailed in all depart-
ments of laying off a part of the force for three or four months
when work is slack in order to give nearly full time to the
others. In a killing gang the foreman would lay off the lowest
ranks of unskilled labor and set higher paid men to doing a
part of the work in the lower paid jobs. This dropping down
would be carried through to the highest grades of labor, and in
this way half men, one third men, and one quarter men were

invented. This led to a crisis at one time, when the union

<(£■ *

insisted that a 50-cent man, who was put quarter time on a
40-cent job, should receive the higher rate of pay for all his
time. The union finally receded ; but at a later time, by threat
of a strike, they stopped the practice itself of laying off men
and succeeded in keeping the gang at full number through the
year. This episode illustrates the diametrically opposite points
of view of the employers and the men. The men preferred to
have all of their number employed short time during the dull
part of the year and thus to share equally the disadvantages
of slack work. The employer considered it better to attach
two thirds of the men to his work by giving them full time
through the year ; and he pointed out that it was exactly the
complaint of short time that gave force to their demands for
higher wages. For it was admitted on all sides that the hourly
rates of pay, if they could be earned for sixty hours a week,
would place the butcher workmen in a better position than that
of similar grades of labor in other industries. But in order to
do this they must lay off a large part of the force; and conse-
quently when the packer speaks of steady work he does not
take into account those laid off, — the work is steady only for
those retained. The union, however, includes all the workmen ;
and from their standpoint steady time cannot be secured except
by a different distribution of the work through the year, — a
thing apparently impossible in a seasonal industry like slaugh-
tering. After the strike the packers resumed the practice of
laying off men in the slack season.

Notwithstanding this policy of laying off men, the companies
have never been able to furnish full time, even for those who


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


23I


are not laid off. In the killing gangs, for instance, the man
who makes full time in December makes only two fifths to
three fifths time from February to July. Taking it altogether,
such a man, regularly employed through the year, has averaged in
years past 35 to 46 hours of work per week. The following table
shows the earnings of a splitter or doorman who “ made killing
time,” that is, worked practically all the time when a certain
gang was working. All the time lost by sickness, accident, or
other ground of absence has been added, so that the table shcjws
the full time of the gang, not the actual time of any one man in
the gang. The table represents the 25 or 30 men, in an estab-
lishment of 5000, who could have earned the highest possible
wages for men paid by the hour.

Wages of Splitter or Floorman (1888-1906)


Rate of Wages
per hour

Average Number

Average

Per cent of


Year

of Hours per

Earnings per

Possible Time


Week

Week

and Earnings

1888.


$0.40

41

$16.24

68.0

1889 .


.40

39

1586

650

1890


.40

46

18 46

766

1891 .


■45

39

17 69

650

1892 .


, 45

43

1948

71.6

1893.


J 45 (7 mo.) \

\' 4 ° (5 mo ) j

40

16 66

66.6

1894.


40

37

1472

61.6

1895.


40

37

14.99

61.6

1896.


40

35

14.20

583

1897 .


.40

35

14.11

583

1898.


.40

36

*4 33

60.0

1899.


f .40 (9 mo)\
\_.45 (3 mo) J

42

16.60

70.0

1900 .


•45

38

16 15

633

1901 .


46

21.00

76 6

1902 .


r.45 (8mo)1
\- 47 i (4 mo )/
r 47^ (9 mo.) S

46

21 70

766

1903.


j 50 (3 mo.) f

42

20 02

70.0

19041


1 .50 J

34

17.16

566

1904 2


.50

54

27 00

90 2

1905.

. . . .

• 5 °

45

2245

75 0

1906 .


.50

42

21 00

70.0


1 Six months, slack season before the strike.

2 Fourteen weeks following the strike.


232 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

The table shows that the rate of wages per hour, beginning
at 40 cents, was raised to 45 cents during the years 1891,
1892, 1893, then reduced to 40 cents until 1899, then again
raised to 45 cents, and that two further advances, to 47^ cents in
1902 and 50 cents in 1903, were secured by the union. Similar
changes were made in the rates for other skilled positions.

It will be seen that the average weekly earnings of this
highest skilled workman who had a “ steady job,” though not
“ steady time ” (since he was paid by the hour), have varied
from $14.1 1 in 1897 to $21.70 in 1902, and that the average
number of hours per week varied from 35 to 46, so that the
time actually worked and the wages actually earned varied
from 58.3 per cent to 76.6 per cent of possible time and earn-
ings on the basis of 60 hours per week for 52 weeks.

Taking this position as a standard, it will be seen that the
average weekly earnings of the men in the same gang getting
20 cents an hour have ranged from $5.64 in 1897 to $8 68 in
1902, while the men getting 16^ cents an hour have ranged
from $4.65 to $7.16. These earnings are for men who have
been kept on the force throughout the year and not laid off
by slack work, sickness, or other cause. Evidently the aver-
age earnings of the men who were laid off for three or four
months have been still lower, unless they have found work in
other industries.

After the strike of 1886 the packers introduced what was
known as “the contract system,” that is, a contract to work,
signed by each workman, authorizing the company to keep
back ten days’ pay and requiring the workman to give two
weeks’ notice of withdrawal. This practice continued until
1901, when the cattle butchers, irritated by the hardships of a
man who was refused his deposit when his child was sick, made
a demand ; thereupon the system was abolished throughout the
industry and all of the deposits were returned.

Perhaps the most remarkable gain secured by the cattle
butchers’ union, and one that was shared by all the others, was
the adoption of regular hours of work. Cattle reach the stock
yards during the night and are purchased by the packers early


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


2 33


in the morning. Seldom, however, can they be driven over^the
chutes and delivered on the killing floors before nine o'clock,
and often not until ten or eleven o'clock. Furthermore, it was
always held that they could not be kept over night, but must
all be killed on the day of arrival, since the charges of the
stock-yard company for holding over night are 50 cents a head.
Consequently, the men would report in the morning between
seven and nine o’clock, as notified the night before. If the
cattle were on hand, they began work. If the cattle were not
yet ready, after waiting awhile a notice would be posted to begin
work at ten, eleven, or twelve o’clock, as the case might be.
The men received no pay for the time spent in waiting; and
then they would be required to work often until late at night
in order to dispose of the day’s arrivals. It was nearly two
years after the union was organized before it felt strong enough
to take up this matter. A strike was threatened, but finally
a conference was secured with a leading packer. The union
spokesman told him of these hardships, comparing their posi-
tion with his own, in that they never knew beforehand when
their work would begin or be done, while he could finish up his
day’s work and go home. The packer only replied that he had
never known that such conditions existed. From the date of
that interview, although no promises were made, overtime has
been abolished for the cattle butchers in all the establishments.
The men begin regularly at seven o’clock, work until the day’s
killing is done, and go home not later than half past five p.m.
If after ten hours’ work there are cattle left over, they are held
until the next morning. That a union had to be organized and
threaten a strike in order that the owner of the business might
learn of conditions of which his own conscience promptly dis-
approved is a fact full of meaning for all who are disturbed by
the modern unrest of labor.

The union also secured four of the legal holidays which they
had never enjoyed before, and these were shared by the other
departments.

The cattle butchers devoted much time to perfecting a line
of promotion, which they say shall be “ according to superiority


234 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

aiuf oldest men to receive promotions ” By “ superiority ”
is evidently meant “seniority.” This is designed to prevent
favoritism on the part of the foremen, to prevent the intro-
duction in the lower positions of outsiders, who may then be
“ jumped over the heads” of the older men, to diminish jealousy,
and to maintain the feeling of equity and comradeship neces-
sary among the members of a union. These rules of promotion
do not find favor with the superintendents, who contend that
forced promotion often takes a man away from work that he
does well and gives him a position which he may not be able
to hold. Neatness and superior quality of workmanship are
natural to some men and never acquired by others; and, if the
foreman is required by reason of seniority to promote an awk-
ward man to a position where he may damage the hide 70
cents or retard the sale of the carcass, then the gang as a
whole suffers The antagonism at this point shows clearly the
nature of the conflict between capital and labor, — a conflict
irrepressible, as proved by the strike.

In a gang of sheep butchers the pace is set by the “ pelter,”
who loosens the hide so that it can be pulled off without tear-
ing the “fell,” or mucous covering, and by the “setter,” who
starts the carcass on the trolley. One pelter and one setter in a
gang were formerly steady-time men, and the pelter’s speed had
been pushed up to 60 and even 75 sheep an hour. The union,
which was organized a year after that of the cattle butchers,
set the limit at 40 per hour and later by an agreement with
the firms raised it to 4 6 \) and the companies placed all the
steady-time men on the hourly basis. The speed of other posi-
tions was reduced proportionately ; that is, there was a reduc-
tion of 30 or 50 per cent, according as it is measured by the
average speed or by the speed of the swiftest men.

Irregular time was a grievance even more serious with the
sheep butchers than with the cattle butchers. There are some
twelve styles of dressing mutton, according to the locality of
the market, — “ Alleghenys,” “Bostons,” “New Yorks,” and
so on. The packer must wait each morning for orders from
different parts of the country before he can decide the styles


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


2 35


and quantities of work for the day. This compelled the nfen
to wait sometimes until two o’clock in the afternoon, and to go
home late at night. They finally refused to work after half past
five p.m. under any conditions, the reason being that they could
have got out the work by that time if they had begun at seven
o’clock a.m. When the union was first organized one of the
packers discharged several of the members, but after a threat
to strike by the international union they were reinstated.

In the hog-killing and pork-cutting departments the local
union was organized at the same time as that of the sheep *
butchers; but in these departments a limit has not been placed
on the amount of work. A larger number of mechanical con-
trivances are used than is the case on the other killing floors,
such as a huge wheel for hoisting the shackled hog, a scraping
machine to take off the hair, and a trolley on which the carcass
is hooked and passed from one worker to the next. The pace
setters are the sticker, the scalder, the hooker on, the splitter,
and the chopper, the latter being in the pork-cutting room;
and, since the union has not set a limit on the amount of work,
these positions have continued on “ steady time.” The pro-
posed scale, as submitted in 1904, for the first time set a limit
in this department ; and, had this scale been adopted, the
scalder, for example, would have been restricted to 500 hogs
an hour, and his wages placed at 40 cents an hour instead of
“ steady time.”

In this department the seasonal character of the work is
more marked than in sheep and cattle killing ; but there is, of
course, a great improvement over the period preceding refriger-
ation, when hogs were killed and packed only in the winter
months. On account of the very irregular supply of animals
the union has not attempted to keep the gang at full force, but
it has tried to establish the rule that “ the last man hired is the
first laid off ; and when the gang is increased the oldest man
with the house shall be hired first.”

The sausage department has the credit of furnishing steadier
work than other departments. The union of sausage makers,
composed mainly of Germans, had a checkered and disastrous


236 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

career. They imitated the cattle and sheep butchers in demand-
ing a minimum pay for their gang; but they went further and
applied the minimum of 18L cents to all common labor. This
demand they supported in 1903 in violation of their agreement
by a strike. Their union had reached a membership of 1300, but
they found that the unskilled laborers receiving less than 18 J
cents an hour could not appreciate the advantages of the union
and would not pay their dues Since the strike was “illegal,”
the Amalgamated refused to support them, and the packers
’ filled their places. When the agreements expired in 1904 it
was this demand of the sausage makers, applied to all depart-
ments, that the Amalgamated took up and lost in the strike.

In the sausage department piecework prevails more than
elsewhere, except in the canning department. The rates are
based on the thousand pounds of sausage. The piecework sys-
tem was introduced in 1891 in stuffing sausages by machinery,
and up to the time of the union organization in 1902 the rates
and practices were such that the best man in the best year
could earn a yearly average of $12 a week, ranging from $ 8 to
$16 in different parts of the year. In other years he earned
less. In some cases piece rates had been reduced; and in
1899, without an organization, a strike forced an increase of
10 per cent in certain bologna prices that had been reduced
20 per cent. After the union was organized in 1902 other
rates were increased.

A peculiar feature of the piecework system in pork sausages,
as distinguished from bologna sausages, is the limitation of
earnings per hour through the substitution of inferior casings
when the men’s earnings exceed a certain amount. In first-
class casings without “leaks” twenty feet can be filled at one
expulsion of the steam stuffer ; but on second-class and third-
class casings the workman must tie the casings wherever a leak
appears, and this reduces the number of pounds of sausage to
his credit. Since the superintendent is charged with the cost
of material and labor and is credited with the value of the
product, sometimes getting a bonus on the margin, it is to his
interest to get not only a low labor cost but also a low cost of


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


2 37


the expensive casings, a considerable part of which is purchased
in the open market. He therefore watches his opportunity to
substitute second-class and third-class casings for first-class. At
what point it is safe to do this depends on the point of hourly
earnings below which the workmen will resist, which was found
to be about the rate of 27 cents an hour. He refrained from cut-
ting the piece rates, as he had done in the case of bolognas ;
and, since the rates are the same for all classes of cases, he
contented himself with putting slower work on the men by sub-
stituting inferior casings. This might require the men to work
overtime in busy seasons to get out the product. Consequently,
when in 1902 the union enforced its demand for a one and a
half piece rate on all work done after a ten-hour day, the super-
intendent in the next busy season furnished first-class casings,
and permitted the men to earn 35 to 36 cents an hour.

Women and girls have been taking the place of men in this
department during the past five or six years, a peculiar instance
being that of trimming meat from the bones and tying casings,
where formerly older men, who were in a way kept as pen-
sioners, have given way to girls, who work much faster. The
strike of 1903 opened an opportunity for Slav women to take
the place of German men.

The beef “ luggers ” are one of the most interesting special-
ties of this most highly specialized industry. They are the
powerful men who load the sides of beef into the cars. There
are but 60 of them in the yards ; but they have taken into
their organization the cooler hands and truckers who work with
them. Prior to 1891 the luggers were paid 28 cents an hour,
and earned $8 to $10 a week. Their hours of work are irregular,
beginning at two or four o'clock in the morning, and they work
,.only when the cars are switched in place. In 1891, on account
of irregular hours, they asked for weekly wages and in place
of 28 cents an hour secured $12.50 a week without an organ-
ization. In 1892 they again asked an advance and received
$15 for a week of 54 hours. In 1902, after they had formed
the Beef Carriers’ and Helpers’ Local, they got $17, and their
demands for 1904 were for $18.50 At $17 on “steady time”


238 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

their yearly earnings were nearly as high as those of the
splitter or floorman, who is paid 50 cents an hour “ killing
time.” The luggers also reduced the amount of their work,
so that where 5 or 6 men loaded 60 to 70 cars a day, which,
in their own words, “ certainly was slavery, as any one who
understands the work will admit,” it thereafter required 8 men
to load $0 cars. However, in the fall of 1903, after four men
in a house had been making up work for a fifth member of
the gang who was sick a month, the firm reduced the number
permanently to 4. The luggers went out on a strike; but not
being supported by the Amalgamated organization, they lost.

The number of women employed in the industry in 1890
was 990, or 2.2 per cent of the total number of employees.
This was increased by 1900 to 2954, or 4.3 per cent. In
Illinois the number is put at 1473, or 5.3 per cent. This pro-
portion has undoubtedly been increased since the last census
year; and it is generally stated that the number of women
employees in Chicago alone is 2000, or about 9 per cent of all
employees. This increase has come about partly through the
introduction of foreign-born women into the sausage depart-
ment and meat-trimming rooms at times when the men went on
strike. Prior to that time women were not employed in the
large establishments at work where the knife is used, their
work being principally painting and labeling cans, soldering
and stuffing cans, sewing up ends of bags, packing chipped
beef, packing and wrapping butterine.

The majority of the women and girls are paid by the piece ;
and the Illinois Bureau of Statistics in 1892 showed that piece
workers earned from $3.58 to $11.57 per week of 60 hours,
the average being $6.78. At that time girls paid by the week
of 60 hours earned $4 to $8 25, the bulk of employment per
year ranging from 35 to 40 weeks. Weekly rates were gradu-
ally equalized, until in 1902 the prevailing rates of pay were
$4 50 to $ 5 * 5 ° Much the larger number of women work at
piece rates, and these were gradually reduced as the girls
acquired greater speed, until in 1900, prior to the organization
of the men and without any organization on their own part, the


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


239


girls in one of the largest canning establishments went on
strike against a further cut in rates. At that time the swiftest
girl, who one year later died of consumption and overwork, was
said to be able to earn $ 20 . This girl, whose high earnings
had tempted the company to cut the rates, joined with others
of Irish-American stock and led the strike; and when they
were defeated by the introduction of foreign-born women they
found themselves blacklisted by the other large companies.
Nine of them brought suit against the four leading companies
for $50,000 damages ; but the suits were decided in May and
June, 1901, on demurrer in favor of the packers The court
declared 1 that “ the defendants agreed not to reemploy those
who went out upon a strike. This they had a right to do.
According to the allegations of the girls’ declarations the
purpose for making this agreement was bad, because by such
agreement the plaintiff cannot get employment at her trade
and is thus injured. This gives her no right of action, for a
bad motive does not make a lawful deed actionable.” The
court also intimated that a union was judged by the same
standard. “The right of union laborers to quit work or to
refuse to work where nonunion men are employed is estab-
lished beyond controversy, and that without reference to how
pitiful the consequences may be to him who is thus deprived
of an opportunity to earn bread for himself and family.”

This decision had undoubtedly an effect upon the men and
women in the stock yards in determining them during the next
two years quietly and thoroughly to organize the whole industry.
The men began to organize in June, 1900, four months after
the girls’ strike, and several departments were organized by
the men before, in March, 1902, a women’s local was chartered
with fourteen members. The initiative was taken by the head
worker of the University of Chicago Settlement, who had
noted the exclusion of the women from the men’s locals. It
was decided to organize the women of all departments in one
local, although the^ men were organized by departments. In
this way the women secure representation in the Packing
1 Chicago papers, June 11, 1901. The court was not a court of record.


240


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Trades Council and in the conventions, whereas they would be
outvoted were they to be distributed among the department
organizations. Since the scales of wages and work are agreed
upon by these superior bodies before they can be submitted
to the packers, the girls have a voice through their own dele-
gates in formulating them, which they would not have were they
organized by departments.

An interesting illustration of this influence is seen in the
compromise agreed upon at the Cincinnati Convention in 1904,
respecting the employment and wages of women in the sausage
departments. It was in this department that Slav women had
been employed in place of Germans out on strike, as described
above ; and the men afterwards insisted that in the new agree-
ment the women should be discharged. But the girl delegates
opposed this demand, even though the women were not mem-
bers of the union ; and finally it was agreed that the union
should demand that women be paid the same wages as men.
This concession to the girl delegates was not faithfully carrr£cf
out; and the scale, as actually submitted in May, provided for
“ abolition of women labor in the sausage departments.” But
the original compromise is significant as showing the standards
which the union women were willing to have applied to women’s
work. These standards were also adopted for all other girls
working in those occupations which had been recognized as
“ women’s work,” where they were not paid by the piece ; and
the demands there were the same as for the men, namely, a
minimum of 20 cents an hour. This would have amounted
to an increase of 100 per cent, since girls paid by the week
receive 9 cents and 10 cents an hour, whereas the increase for
the lowest paid men, bringing them up to the same minimum,
would have been only 10 to 15 per cent. Even the compromise
offer of 1 8 ^ cents an hour would have raised the girls 85 per
cent. These standards were agreed to by the girls in full view
of the fact that, at the same rates of pay (except in piecework),
the women would probably be displaced by men.

Immediately following the organization of the women’s local
all the charter members, to the number of 14, were discharged;


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


241


but in the course of the year, with the assistance of the men's
locals, they reached a membership of 1200. It has never been
possible for them to bring into their union the non-English-
speaking women, many of whom are married. But they se-
cured practically all the Irish-American, German- American,
and Polish-American girls ; and this gave them entire control
of some departments wfiere only such happened to be employed.
They elected their own business agent, secured reinstatement
of several members who had been discharged for union activity
(though not their president and secretary), gained advances in
some of the piece rates, and advances of 50 cents to $2 in
weekly rates. The normal rate paid now to these American
girls is $5 for beginners, rising to $ 6 with experience. In one
department, for example, employing 62 American-born girls,
there are only 8 who get as high as $6 a week. Here the girls
begin at $5 at sixteen or seventeen years of age. Very few
work more than three years, the majority leaving within that
period, usually for marriage. Numbers of Slav women return
to work after marriage, but this is not the case with the
American-born. Bohemian women and girls are increasing in
number more rapidly than other nationalities, with the Poles
and Lithuanians next ; and they are doing heavy and disagree-
able work, such as stuffing cans and trimming meat, where in
many cases they have displaced men.

A significant fact in the history of the women’s local is that,
though they are the only class of labor generally employed at
piecework, and though such a method of payment had led
them to serious overexertion, they have yet made no efforts
to limit the amount of work, some of which, especially in the
can-making departments, depends on the speed of the machine.
It seems that for the few years during which most of the
girls expect to work in the industry they choose to over-
look the strain of excessive speed, which to the men, as
they grow older, becomes the greatest of all their grievances.
The girls feel like working to their utmost for a period,
in order to save up a sum of money and quit the work for
a home of their own.


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


242

The number of children under sixteen years of age employed
in the industry was 700 in 1890. This had been increased in
1900 to 1651, or 2 \ per cent of all employees. The number in
Illinois was 596, or 2.28 per cent. The intermittent work of
the packing houses fosters in the children unsteady habits, and
even the most industrious workmen trained in this school dis-
like more than four days’ work in the week. The probation
officer of the juvenile court strongly urges the boys and girls
under suspended sentence not to work in the stock yards, and
endeavors to find other jobs for them. The parochial schools of
the neighborhood have been defective after the third or fourth
grades ; and in the Slovak school none of the teachers speak
English, while the Polish school has but recently introduced
English. The capacity of the public schools has been inade-
quate, though lately it has been increased. Since the census
year (1900) the compulsory school law has been strengthened
by amendments to the child-labor law, largely through the
efforts of the butcher workmen’s organizations, which sent a
delegation to Springfield in behalf of the proposed law. Many
of the men and women now working in the yards began at
eleven or twelve years of age ; but by the new law the work of
children under fourteen years is prohibited and the work of
those under sixteen is limited to eight hours per day. An age
and school certificate, showing ability to read and write, is
required from the health and school authorities for those under
sixteen ; and each establishment is required to keep posted in
a conspicuous place a list of all children employed and the
hours of beginning and quitting work. The enforcement of
this law is intrusted to the state factory inspector and his
deputies ; and, after sixty convictions had been secured against
some of the packers, certain firms went so far as to issue orders
to their foremen not to employ children under sixteen, though
permitted to do so by law. The short-time clause makes the
services of children undesirable, except in the offices as mes-
senger boys, where the entire force works but eight hours. The
companies usually require as a measure of protection an affi-
davit from children above sixteen, although an affidavit is not


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


243


required by law. The union does not admit persons under six-
teen years of age. Viewed as a piece of legislation to exclude
children under fourteen years of age, the law is effective.

The foregoing are departments of peculiar interest in the
industry. The others are composed mainly of unskilled labor,
as will be seen from the large percentage of those whose wages
are less than 20 cents an hour, such as the oleo workers and
glue workers, 95 per cent, the wool workers, 70 per cent, and so
on. Taking the industry as a whole, it is maintained by the
union statisticians that two thirds of the employees eligible to
membership received less than i8| cents per hour. The packers
assert that the proportion was only 6 per cent. The United
States census showed that in the year 1900 67.2 per cent of
the employees received less than 18 cents an hour, and the
United States Bureau of Labor showed that in 1903 the
laborers, who constituted 84.8 per cent of the total number of
the employees, received an average rate of 17.46 cents per
hour. These reports covered only selected establishments, but
they were typical for the industry. 1

The motives on the part of the strikers were partly sen-
timental, partly for self-preservation. The sentimental side
appealed to the public and was strongly emphasized. But there
was also a profound self-interest involved in that through the
minute division of labor promotion from the lower ranks can
be made without much training. The packers contended that
in the case of the unskilled the law of supply and demand, with
its market rate of wages, could not be overruled ; and they
pointed to the 3000 to 5000 transient laborers who gathered
every morning at seven o'clock at the several time-keeping
stations asking for work, when not one tenth of their number
could be employed. It was not a question of ability to pay the
minimum asked ; for the five packing companies controlled the
bulk of the business, and through favorable freight rates, their
own car lines, utilization of by-products, and minute division of

1 Special Report, Twelfth f Census, “Employees and Wages,” p 581; Bulletin
No. 5g, U. S. Bureau of Labor, p. 890.


244


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


labor, their position was more favorable than that of the “ inde*
pendents,” who did not have these advantages and yet were
paying the wages asked for. The packers proposed to reduce
the minimum pay of men in the killing, cutting, casing, and
beef-loading departments to 17J cents an hour, a reduction of
1 cent. All other classes of unskilled labor were to be left
“open” without a wage scale, by which transient labor might
be paid as low as 1 6\ cents. A minimum wage of 18 \ cents
was more than such inexperienced labor was worth. It was
necessary to have this floating supply only in order to fill the
places of absentees, so that the gangs might not suffer. But
the union contended that when once employed at i 6 \ cents
an hour those who were getting 18J cents would be dis-
charged; and there were known enough cases of men at i8|
cents being discharged and rehired at 16^ cents to convince
them that such would happen all along the line. After the
strike the packers reduced large classes of their regular unskilled
labor 1 and 2 cents an hour.

The demand for a minimum wage above the market rate was
also necessary to the permanency of the union, since it had
been found that those who received only market wages refused
to pay dues. It is true that nearly all of them came out on
strike with the others ; but it was the union theory that, if a
minimum of i8£ cents could be established, the companies
could not then afford to employ transient labor which was
worth only i 6 \ cents, and therefore better men would seek
these positions, and union men would be preferred by the
employers to nonunion men. This was in lieu of a demand for
the “closed shop,” for which none of the unions had asked, but
which the skilled men had secured in practice, as is shown by '
the agreement of the cattle butchers that in the absence of any
skilled man those doing the same kind of work would attempt
to make up the loss. A minimum wage would have lessened
the number of transient laborers employed and would have
made the position of union laborers steadier through the year.
The importance of this factor is seen by consulting the census 1
1 Vol. IX, p. 398.


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


245


of 1900, which shows that in the industry as a whole the
greatest number employed at any one time during the year
was 81,416 and the least number employed at any one time
57,119. In other words, 30 per cent of the employees are
unemployed in the slack season. This proportion agrees with
that of one of the largest houses in Chicago, whose employees
number about 4000 in the slack season and 6000 in the busy
season. If practically one third of the employees are laid off,
then, of course, there is a wide opening for new men, unless
blocked by the “ closed shop” or obstructed by the minimum
wage. The employers, as compensation for reduction in hourly
rates of pay, have promised to make work steadier, so that the
yearly earnings will be larger. They began during the strike by
enlisting the aid of the commission men and by sending thou-
sands of circulars to cattle raisers and shippers, urging a better
distribution of their shipments through the week. The custom
has long existed of shipping live stock on Saturday and Sunday,
so that the arrivals of cattle during a typical week would be 30,-
000 on Monday, 8000 on Tuesday, 30,000 on Wednesday, dwin-
dling to 200 on Saturday. If the shippers were organized, this
appeal might be effective ; but there is at present no certainty
of its results. And, even if shipments were equalized through
the week, this would not remedy the more serious inequality an
distribution through the year, since live stock is a seasonal
product following grass and corn.

Perhaps the fact of greatest social significance is that the
strike of 1904 was not merely a strike of skilled labor for the
unskilled, but was a strike of Americanized Irish, Germans,
and Bohemians in behalf of Slovaks, Poles, Lithuanians, and
negroes. The strike was defeated by bringing in men from the
companies' own branch houses for the skilled occupations and
negroes and Greeks for the unskilled occupations.

This substitution of races has been a continuing process for
twenty years. At the time of the strike of 1886 the men were
American, Irish, and German ; and the strike was defeated by
splitting their forces rafher than by introducing new nationalities.


246 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

After that date the Bohemians entered in large numbers,
although a few of them had begun work as early as 1882.
Bohemians have worked their way forward, until of the 24 men
getting 50 cents an hour in two of the cattle-killing gangs 12
are Bohemians, and the others are German, Irish, and American.
The Bohemian is considered to be the coming man in the busi-
ness. The Americans as wage-earners have practically been
driven out of the stock yards and are being followed by the
Irish and Germans. Those who have accumulated money leave
for something more certain. The Germans are held mainly
by the large number of homes they have purchased in the
neighborhood; and this has seemed to be the future of the
Bohemians and Poles, who have been purchasing homes for
several years, and of the Slovaks and Lithuanians, who have
begun during the past two years. The feeling of security since
the union tvas established three years ago has stimulated the
tendency to home ownership among all these nationalities,
although as yet there are many Slovaks and Lithuanians who
return with their savings to their native land. The Irish show
wide diversities of character, noticeable in contrast with the
uniformity of other races. In general there is a rising class
and a degenerating class. Neither class shows any inclination
towards home ownership. But the Irish of the rising class have
a much stronger desire than the Germans or Bohemians to
educate their children rather than to put them to work. This
class of Irish have been leaving the industry, except as held
back by a foreman ship or skilled trade, or by a salaried position
in the union, of which they have been the aggressive organizers
and leaders. With the defeat of the union doubtless many
more of them will leave. The other class, the degenerating
Irish, displaced by the Slav, have become casual laborers, with-
out definite place in any industry.

The older nationalities have already disappeared from the
unskilled occupations, most of which now are entirely manned
by Slovaks, Poles, and Lithuanians. The Poles began to ap-
pear at about the same time as the Bohemians, though not in
as large numbers ; and they have not advanced in the same


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


247


proportion. The Slovaks and Lithuanians were first seen in
1899. One Slovak who has been in the yards ten years has
worked himself up to a 50-cent job ; but he is exceptional, and
these two races have as yet only shared with the negroes the
unskilled positions. The negroes first came during the strike
of 1894, when many were imported from the South and large
cities. An intense race hatred sprang up among the Americans
and Europeans, who thought the negroes were favored by the
employers ; and this seemed to be leading to a race war. The
conflict was averted by the union, which admitted the negroes
on equal terms with the whites. This hatred has been renewed
during the recent strike, when several thousand negroes were
again imported. Notwithstanding the alleged favoritism towards
the negroes, they have not advanced to the skilled positions,
mainly because they dislike the long apprenticeship and steady
work at low pay which lead to such positions. As strike breakers
they were attracted by the easy work, free board and lodging,
and wages of $2.25 a day instead of the $1.85 asked by the
union; but in times of peace they are ngt steady workers at
the low wages of the Slav.

Italians have never found a place in the trade; and the
experience of the Greeks, who first appeared in 1904, has been
curious. Several hundred Greeks in Chicago have established
themselves as fruit dealers. When three hundred of their coun-
trymen, recently landed from Macedonia, entered the yards these
storekeepers were boycotted and several of them bankrupted.
Through the Greek consul and the Greek priest the merchants
endeavored to persuade the Greeks to withdraw from the yards;
but they did not leave until the strike was settled, and then
they went with their padrone to Detroit as strike breakers.

It will be seen that the mingling of races in the stock yards
is similar to that in other large American industries, and the
problem is a trying one both for the civic neighborhood and
for the union organizers. Unlike the union in 1886 under the
Knights of Labor, the present organization sprang from the
butcher workmen themselves ; the former had been officered
from without. In the union meetings the speeches are translated


248 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

often into three or four languages, and much trouble has been
occasioned by dishonest or prejudiced interpreters, though
with experience these are weeded out. The races are brought
together ; and, where four years ago scarcely a Polish, Slovak,
or Lithuanian family had a member who could speak or under-
stand English, now nearly all have each at least one such mem-
ber Race conflicts were infrequent because the races were
kept apart by language, distrust, and the influence of the
priests ; but there were frequent factional fights between reli-
gious societies of the same race, especially among the Poles,
each society having its own patron saint. There were also
many arrests for drunkenness, wife-beating, and neighborhood
quarrels. Curiously enough these disorderly acts dropped off
entirely from the date when the strike took effect, and the
arrests fell off 90 per cent. The strike continued eight weeks,
and the police inspector in charge of the district is reported as
saying: “The leaders are to be congratulated for conducting
the most peaceful strike Chicago has ever had. Compared with
other big strikes, su^h as the railroad strike of 1894, the team-
sters’ strike Of 1902, or the stock-yards strike of 1886, there
was no violence.”

The substitution of races has evidently run along the line of
lower standards of living. The latest arrivals, the Lithuanians
and Slovaks, are probably the most oppressed of the peasants of
Europe; and 18 cents for a day of 12 or 14 hours in the Car-
pathian foothills becomes 18 cents an hour in the stock yards.
Even with only four days’ work a week, the Slovak’s position
is greatly improved ; for in Uhrosko he had no work in winter.
Yet his improved position shows itself, not in more expensive
living, but in fabulous savings gained by packing sometimes as
many as twelve persons in three rooms, taking in boarders, and
sending! his children to work. The new arrivals of this class of
labor swell the ranks of the thousands ‘waiting at the packing-
house gates every morning, and to them there is little differ-
ence between 18 cents and 16 cents an hour. Yet it is most
remarkable that those already on the ground came out with the
union and did not go back until the strike was declared off.


SLAUGHTERING AND MEAT PACKING


249


It is not surprising that, with wage conditions, racial elements,
and former grievances such as they were, the union, when it
acquired power, should have carried a high hand. Besides the
restrictions themselves the manner in which they were enforced
was irritating. Every department or division had its “ house com-
mittee” of three stewards, who often acted as if they had more
authority than the foreman or superintendent; and frequently,
when a union rule was violated, they stopped the work “ in the
middle of the game.” When it is stated that the superintend-
ent of one of the largest firms had to deal with one hundred
and twenty of these committees, it need create no surprise to
learn that he felt relieved, when the strike came. The principal
grievance was the violation of their own constitution and agree-
ments, which forbade locals or house committees to stop work
and required all matters to be referred to higher officers for
settlement with the company. The rank and file and the lower
officers were insubordinate. Yet the superintendents observed
that the unions, as they gained experience, were electing more
conservative leaders and that petty troubles were being more
easily handled. This encouraging prospect for the union was
blighted by the blunder and disaster of the strike. When they
* returned for work the union leaders and spokesmen were
either not reemployed or were laid off afterwards when busi-


ness slackened.


J. R. Commons.


While there has been no general reduction in the wages of the skilled woik-
men since the strike of 1904, the output has been increased so that the labor cost
per unit has been reduced F01 example, on December 31, 1906, there were slaugh-
tered m the Armour plant 2365 sheep in five hours with a gang of eight “ facers ”
on lambs and nine on sheep Under the old rules it would have required six and
one-half houis to do the same amount of work. The sheep butchers are now “fac-
ing ” sixty sheep an hour, while under the union rules the limit was set by agree-
ment at forty-six and a half. The increase m output in other branches is on much
the same scale while the wages have remained the same.

The unskilled labor has suffered a reduction m certain branches The minimum
of ij\ cents an hour no longer prevails, the present minimum being 15 cents.
The union survives m only four skilled branches, but is ineffective.


January, 1907.


X

THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 1

In 1887 typesetting was essentially the same art as in the
sixteenth century. While other branches of the printing trade
had been revolutionized, the compositor had not advanced in
his process beyond the point he had reached four hundred
years before. Probably no other handicraft employing such a
large number of persons underwent as little change during this
period, so full of industrial reconstruction. Since 1890 machine
composition has been rapidly supplanting typesetting by hand.
The machine is still constantly encroaching on the field of the
hand compositor, but the period of introduction may properly be
considered as concluded by the year 1900. By that time the
craft had adjusted itself to the new conditions and the future
trend of events could be foreseen with some clearness.

It is the purpose of the present study to estimate the dis-
placement of labor due to the linotype, 2 to describe the policy
pursued by the union printers with reference to the machine and
the economic effects of the machine on the workmen engaged
in the trade, and finally to examine how far the policy of the
International Typographical Union may be successfully adopted
by other trade unions during periods of machine introduction.

1 From the Yale Review, Vol XIII, 1904, pp 251-273 See Nicholson, The
Effects of Machinery on Wages, London, 1892.

2 There are several kinds of typesetting and typecasting machines, but the
Mergenthaler linotype has exercised such a predominant influence that attention
may be confined to it without danger of serious error According to the returns
made by local unions to the secretary of the International Typographical Union,
the total number of typesetting and typecasting machines of all makes in opera-
tion on January 1, 1904, m union and nonunion offices within the jurisdiction of
six hundred and twenty-five local unions was 7129, and of these 6375 were lino-
types The proportion of linotypes was probably not quite so great outside the
territory covered by the Typographical Union, but the correction required would
not be very great.


250


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


251


The displacement of hand compositors by the introduction of
the linotype may be estimated with some accuracy and will
afford an index to the industrial disturbance involved. The
following table gives the number of linotypes manufactured in
the United States and Canada for each year from 1887 to 1903 :


18S 7 . . .

• • 55

1896 . . . .

• • 757

1SS8 . . .

... 66

1S97 . . .

. . 510

1889 . . .

* * 57

1898 . . . .

. 636

1890 . . .

• • 57

1899

. . 566

1891 . . .

... 69

1 900

. . 714

1892 . . .

. ... 288

1901 ...

. . 661

1893 . . .

. . 568

1902 ....

757

1894 . .

. 890

1903 . . . .

. . 891

1895 • • • •

. . 1076

Total . .

. . 8618


Of the 8618 machines manufactured somewhat less than
500 have been shipped out of the United States and Canada
and an approximately equal number have been destroyed by fire
or otherwise put out of use. About 7500 linotypes were in
operation in the United States and Canada on January 1, 1904. 1

The average rate of composition on the linotype at the present
time is estimated by competent authorities at between 4000
and 5000 ems per hour. The rate of hand composition does
not on the average exceed 1000 ems per hour. A linotype
operator is, therefore, able to set as much in one hour as a hand
compositor does in four. Assuming that the 7500 machines
are in operation the same number of hours each day as hand
compositors formerly worked, the possible displacement of hand
compositors to January 1, 1904, may be reckoned at 30,000.
Two modifications must, however, be made in this calculation.
In the first place, many linotypes are worked by two or three
shifts of operators. 2 The number of machine operators in the
United States, operating 7129 machines of all makes, within
the jurisdiction of the International Typographical Union on
January 1, 1904, was 10,604, or approximately 150 per cent of
the number of machines. 3 If allowance is made for this fact,

1 The officials of the Mergenthaler Linotype Company have kindly supplied
data on which the above estimate has been based.

2 See The Typographical Journal , February, 1904, p. 212 8 Ibid \


252 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the estimate of possible displacement is increased to 45,000
hand compositors. Some deduction must be made from this
total on account of the reduction m working hours. The hand
compositor worked on the average about ten hours per day,
while linotype operators do not average more than eight hours. 1
Deducting 20 per cent for this cause, we may finally estimate
the possible displacement of hand compositors at 36,000.

The actual displacement has been far less than the possible
displacement. A large part of the 7500 linotypes would $ever
have come into use if the economies incident to their operation
had not been so large as to lead to an increase in the amount
of printing done. There is no practicable method of separating
the displacement occurring at the outset from that later appar-
ent displacement due to expansion of the market. An examina-
tion of the table on page 25 1 leads, however, to the conclusion
that the years 1894, 1895*, and 1896 were marked by a large
amount of actual displacement of hand compositors 2 The rapid
introduction of machines in these years resulted chiefly from
the desire of newspaper publishers to reduce the cost of com-
position. A considerable part of the more moderate increase
of machines since 1896 has been due to an increasing demand
for the product of the machine.


Number of offices included in investigation . . 15

Number of linotypes in use . . 293

Average number of ems set on a linotype m an hour 3445

Number of printers employed before the introduction of machines . . 1512

Number of substitutes employed before the introduction of machines . . . 396

Number of printers employed after the introduction of machines . . . 968

Percentage of decrease .... 36


Even, however, during the earlier period there is evidence
that the displacement was not nearly so great as the estimate
of possible displacement would indicate. The above statis-
tics, compiled from a report made in 1895 by Mr. William
Ferguson, secretary of the New York Typographical Union,

1 See p 264 for the data on which this calculation is made

2 Additional evidence to this effect is found in the many complaints of dis-
placement contained during these years in The Typographical Journal , the official
journal of the union printers. These decrease greatly after 1896.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


253

to the New York Labqr Commissioner, throw considerable light
on this point. 1

The figures given include the whole working force of print-
ers, many of whom, on account of the character of their work,
were entirely unaffected by the machine. It appears that 293
linotypes displaced 544 printers. The actual displacement in
these offices in the initial stage was, therefore, at the rate of
less than two printers for each machine.

This difference between the possible displacement of hand
compositors and the actual displacement of printers in the
early period was due to several causes. First and most impor-
tant was the practice of putting men already at work as hand
compositors in charge of machines. The 229 machines were
manned by from 300 to 400 journeymen printers. The dis-
placement of hand compositors was therefore much greater
than the displacement of printers. ^Moreover, the speed of the
machine operators was less than it is at present. The average
number of ems set per hour, it will be noted, was found to be
3445. The present rate of 4000 to 5000 ems was attained only
after a considerable part of the operators had been some years
at the machine. New operators in most cases reach the present
average rate only after some years of practice.

Although the great increase in the demand for the machine
product naturally came after the machine had been somewhat
generally introduced, even in the introductory period the cheap-
ness of machine composition led to an increase in the amount <
of composition done. For some years prior to the introduction
of the linotype the practice of using “plate matter” had been
growing among newspaper publishers, the' high cost of hand
composition having forced the publishers to the use of an unde-
sirable substitute. The extension of this practice had been for
many years a frequent occasion of friction between the pub-
lishers and the local unions of the International Typographical
Union. The low cost of linotype composition caused in most
machine offices an entire abandonment of the use of “plate

1 Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor of the State of New York,
Vol. I, 1895, PP* 37 °- 37 2.


254 TRADE unionism and labor problems

matter,” resulting in an immediate increase of printers' work.
Furthermore, the producing power of the composing room was
increased in order to secure a greater effectiveness during the
last few hours before going to press 1 Editors canceled machine-
set matter with much less reluctance. To a casual observer the
composition of a newspaper would appear an unpromising field
for the operation of the law of elasticity of demand, but the
common experience of printers and publishers indicates that in
numerous ways the cheapening of the cost of composition acted
as an immediate stimulus to the demand.

In the second period, roughly designated as beginning with
the year 1897, consumers shared more largely in the economy
of production resulting from the use of the linotype. The
larger profits of newspaper publishers led to strong competition,
which partly took the form of an increase in the size of the
newspapers. The linotypes installed for this purpose did not
displace hand compositors, but on the contrary enlarged the
field of employment for those printers who could learn the oper-
ation of the machine. 2 In the book and job trade the cheapen-
ing of the product through competition caused an enormous
increase in the amount of composition done. As early as 1 896
the American Bookmaker , a trade journal, naively complained
that “ employing printers foolishly give to the public advan-
tages which should accrue to them. ... It is probably safe to
suggest that not one in ten of those who have adopted type-
setting machines are making any more net profit than they did
when all of their type was set by hand.” 3 The result has been
that since 1897 an expanding demand has more than offset the
displacing power of the machine.

A large percentage of the hand compositors affected by the
introduction of the linotype were members of the International

1 See below, p 264.

2 The general opinion among printers and publishers appears to be. that in
those newspaper offices which introduced linotypes about 1895, the number of
printers employed by the year 1900 was as great as it was before the introduction
of linotypes. See on this point Report of Industrial Commission, Vol VII, p. 279
(testimony of Mr. Donnelly, president of the International Typographical Union).

3 Quoted in The Typographical Journal , Vol. VIII, p. 204.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


255


Typographical Union. While this union enjoys the distinction
of being the oldest national organization of trade unionists in
the United States, the subordinate unions were until recently
almost independent of the national body. About 18 88 the
national body began to absorb power from the subordinate
unions, and this movement has gone on slowly to the present
time. To a considerable extent, therefore, the policy of the
printers with reference to the machine was determined by the
local unions. So large, however, were the interests evidently
at stake that local unions followed certain general lines of
policy laid down by the national conventions and advised by
the national executive board. 1

At the thirty-sixth annual session of the International Typo-
graphical Union, held in Kansas City in June, 1888, a resolu-
tion was adopted that “the International Typographical Union
favors the recognition of such [typesetting] machines,” and
“ recommends that subordinate unions . . . take speedy action
looking to their recognition and regulation, endeavoring every-
where to secure their operation by union men upon a scale of
wages which shall secure compensation equal to that paid hand
compositors/’ 2 At this time less than 100 machines were in
operation in the United States and Canada and the greater
part of these were being run experimentally.

By the time the session of 1889 was held the growing impor-
tance of the question led to the formulation of the union’s
policy in a general law, controlling the action of all subordinate
unions. With unimportant changes in phraseology, this law
has remained in force. In its original form it read as follows :
“The International Typographical Union directs that in all
offices within its jurisdiction where typesetting machines are
used practical printers shall be employed to run them and also
that subordinate unions shall regulate the scale of wages on

1 The evident necessity for the adoption of a common machine policy has
been a powerful influence in hastening the movement toward centralization in the
Typographical Union

2 Report of Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Session of the Interna-
tional Typographical Union, 1888, p. 18 1.


256 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

such machines.” 1 Curiously enough, the printers were at first
reluctant to operate the machines, and at the thirty-eighth ses-
sion resolutions were adopted urging “ that members of subor-
dinate unions should learn to operate . . . machines wherever
in use.” 2

By June of the next year, 1891, when the thirty-ninth annual
session of the Typographical Union was held, the delegates
were convinced of the grave importance of the machine ques-
tion In February the subordinate union at Indianapolis had
sent two of its members to New York to investigate at first
hand the working of machines. The committee found that
operators on the improved linotype were able to produce an
average of 3000 ems per hour and believed a speed of 4000
ems possible. They recommended that wages for operators
should be on a time scale and that the hours of labor should
be shorter than those prevailing for hand composition. 8 The
report of this committee, published both as a pamphlet and in
The Typographical Journal, exercised a large influence on the
convention held in the following June At that session a spe-
cial committee on typesetting devices recommended “that a
weekly or time scale be adopted for the operation of machines,”
and “that the hours of labor upon them be reduced to the
lowest possible number, eight hours being the maximum.” 4 It
was urged that a time scale was more equitable than the piece
system on account of the newness of the work and the con-
sequent difficulty of estimating the average output to be
expected. The demand for a reduction in hours was based on
the ground that “ the work upon machines was of a more exhaus-
tive character mentally and physically than hand composition.”

. 1 R e P or t of Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh Annual Session of the Interna-
tional Typographical Union, 1889, p 91.

4 Report of Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth Annual Session of the Interna-
tional Typographical Union, 1890, p. 153.

8 Typesetting Machines Report of an Inquiry into their Merits and the
txeneral Situation surrounding them, made by Typographical Union No I,
Indianapolis, Indiana ’

* Report of Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Annual Session of the International
typographical Union, 1891, p 196.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


^57


The recommendations of the committee were adopted and
became binding on the subordinate unions. The strong feeling
in the craft for local autonomy secured the repeal of these two
laws at the session of the International Union in 1893, 1 but
they became the basis for practically all wage scales formed,
and the great majority of linotype operators work at the pres-
ent time on a time scale and have an eight-hour day.

The machine policy of the union was evidently based on the
requirement that the machines should be operated only by
journeymen printers. This rule had two distinct parts. In the
first place, it asserted the claim that the operation of the machine
was printers' work. Important as this part of the rule was in
minimizing displacement, it involved no break in the former
practice of the union and in effect was simply an extension of
jurisdiction over machine operators. A different phase of the
law was the prohibition against the operation of the machine
by apprentices. The uniform custom of the International Typo-
graphical Union hitherto had been to consider any of the work
in a printing office proper for an apprentice.

There has been a slow movement towards the incorporation
of machine work in the regular training of the apprentice. In
1893 it was provided that “ apprentices may work on machines
in the last year of apprenticeship, who shall be paid two thirds
of the wages of regular operators until their time of apprentice-
ship shall have expired.” 2 This rule was anomalous in two
particulars : it restricted the time of learning the machine to
a part of the apprenticeship period, and it formulated a wage
scale for a class of apprentices. In both respects the regula-
tion was entirely opposed to the former practice of the union.
The increasing use of machines and the rapid displacement
of hand compositors led at the next session of the Interna-
tional Union to a reaction and to the withdrawal of this slight
concession. The new enactment provided that “indentured
apprentices may work on machines during the last six weeks
of apprenticeship, providing they receive the scale of the

1 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual Session of the International
Typographical Union, 1893, p. 201. 2 Jbtd ., p 200.


258 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

subordinate union.’' 1 As very few apprentices in the printing
trade have been indentured during recent years, this modifica-
tion of the prohibition was not important.

By a law passed at the national session of 1899, “ regularly
employed apprentices in machine offices ” were “ privileged to
practice on machines during all of the last three months of their
apprenticeship.” 2 Since the product of apprentices who “prac-
ticed ” on machines could not be used by the employer, while
any other part of their output had a market value, not many
employers were likely to put apprentices during working hours
at “practicing” on machines. An apprentice by virtue of the
law might, however, acquire a small amount of knowledge out
of working hours. It was not until 1903 that the union print-
ers were willing to permit the machine product of apprentices
to be used. The session of 1903 enacted that “regularly
employed apprentices shall be privileged to work on machines
during all of the last three months of their apprenticeship and
the learners’ scale shall apply to such apprentices.” 3 This
small relaxation was proposed and strongly urged by the execu-
tive committee of the International Union.

The Typographical Union has been actuated by two motives
in the enactment of legislation prohibiting the operation of
machines by apprentices. The members felt strongly that as
far as possible the opportunity to learn the new devices ought
to be restricted to the displaced hand compositors. The appren-
tices had far greater adaptability than the displaced men, who,
in a great majority of cases, must learn the machine or quit
the trade. The slight modification in the restriction of machine
work to journeymen is due to the passing of the early stage
in the introduction of the machine. The printer who was
displaced by the machine has either found his place in the
trade or has abandoned it for some other occupation. The

1 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Second Session of the International Typo-
graphical Union, 1894, p. 31

2 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Fifth Session of the International Typo-
graphical Union, 1899, P 5 ° ■

8 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Ninth Session of the International Typo-
graphical Union, 1903, p. no.


THE INTRODUCTION OR THE LINOTYPE 259

maintenance of the rule in its present form is due to the strong
fear that machine work may fall into the hands of men who are
not printers. If the Typographical Union were fully convinced
that the operation of machines was neither practicable nor
profitable except by journeymen printers trained in the trade
as a whole, there would be no reason for the continuance of the
restriction on the operation of machines by apprentices.

In order to facilitate the policy of manning the machines
with printers the subordinate unions found it necessary to pro-
vide for journeymen an opportunity of learning the new device.
Since a linotype operator produces for the first few weeks only
a small amount of matter, employers required some conces-
sions in wages during this period. The unions, usually after
conferences with employers, formulated what are known as
“learners’ scales.” The wages paid under these scales was
lower than the regular wage for operators and the period of
apprenticeship was limited. The International Union left the
decision as to the terms of “learners’ scales” entirely to the
subordinate unions, except that from 1896 to 1898 the period
of apprenticeship was fixed at two months. The local unions
showed themselves for the most part keenly alive to the impor-
tance of securing for their members a knowledge of the machine.
The formulation of a “learners’ scale” obviated the necessity
of bringing expert operators from other cities, and in so far as
this was accomplished avoided the friction which would have
resulted from the transfer of operators from one city to another.

So important did the avoidance of local displacement appear
to the union printers that they attempted in 1894 to strengthen
the hands of local unions by a general law, which required that
“ members of a subordinate union employed in an office at the
time of the introduction of machines shall have preference as
operators, one expert operator being allowed.” 1 This law only
remained in force a short time. An appeal against its enforce-
ment was taken to the international president by an expert
operator, whq maintained that his rights as a member of the

1 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Second Annual Session of the Inter-
national Typographical Union, 1894, p. 38.


26 o trade unionism and labor problems

union wore thereby infringed. President Prescott, in the cnse
of Wandress v. San Francisco Typographical Union, No. 21,
sustained this contention on the ground that the law was a
violation of the constitution of the International Union, under
which a member with a traveling card is entitled to the “ friend-
ship and good offices ” of any union to which the card may be
presented. 1 Mr. Prescott was careful to point out that the
rights of a traveling member would not be abridged where an
employer “ of his own volition or at the instigation of any per-
son or persons decided to receive no application for situations
until those who were working in his office had been given an
opportunity to show their ability or inability to manipulate
machines.” 2 The burden of avoiding local displacement was
thus placed entirely on the subordinate unions, and in the great
majority of cases agreements were concluded with employers by
which their old employees were retained as machine operators. 8

Several of the larger local unions went further in their anxiety
to meet the demand for skilled operators. Machines were
bought or rented and members were permitted to practice on
them. 4 The introduction of machines was undoubtedly much
facilitated by the constant efforts of the unions to supply the
needed operators. The unions were actuated by a keen desire to
control the machine and the fear that, if the printers did not fur-
nish the operators, they would be secured from some other source.

The subordinate unions frequently had to deal with proposi-
tions to decrease the scale for hand composition in order to
enable employers to meet the competition of the machine. This
matter was entirely within the jurisdiction of the subordinate
unions, but the officials of the International Union strongly
advised against any attempt to keep the machine out by cutting
down the price for hand work. In his address to the forty-
second annual session Mr. Prescott said : “ Those familiar with

1 The Typographical Journal \ Vol. VIII, p 301. 2 Ibid.

8 Some unions pursued a less far-sighted policy by refusing to grant reasonable
“ learners’ scales.” See The Typographical Journal, Vol. VI, p 3. The officials
of the International Union constantly impressed upon the locate the necessity of
secunng for their members an opportunity to learn the machine.

* The Typographical Journal , Vol. VI, p 7.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 261 ‘

the productiveness of machines are agreed that hand work can-
not begin to compete with them, and it is therefore futile to
attempt to stay the tide of their introduction by a reduction in
the scale unless we are prepared to suffer level decreases amount-
ing to 40 to 50 per cent, and at that figure a better living could
be secured at almost any unskilled avocation. A serious reduc-
tion in the rate of hand composition is sure to affect the machine
scale also/' 1 Notwithstanding this eminently sane advice, some
of the hand compositors, as they saw themselves displaced,
turned to their only weapon of defense, competition with the
machine. 2 One method was for a group of compositors to form
a partnership and furnish matter ready set to publishers at a
price as low as that formerly paid for composition in the pub-
lishers' offices. The compositors paid their own rent, their fuel
and light bills, as well as the cost of type. The scale of the
union was thus underbid by its own members. Another prac-
tice much in vogue in small cities was for a number of displaced
compositors to print on a cooperative plan a small newspaper.
Assisted by the sympathy of the community, they were able in
some cases to make a living wage. 3 The unions in common
decency could hardly deal harshly with such covert methods of
competition, but the union scales for hand composition were
rarely lowered for the purpose of competing with the machine.

There was practically no direct opposition to the introduc-
tion of the machine. Occasionally a small union refused for
a time to make a scale for machines, but the International
Union steadily discountenanced such a policy, and, since the
subordinate unions could not legally declare a strike without
the sanction of the executive board of the International Union,
they were soon persuaded to adopt a different line of conduct.
The Kansas printers were able to keep the machine out of the
state printing office for a time by political influence. 4 But in

1 Report of Proceedings of the Forty-Second Annual Session of the Interna-
tional Typographical Union, 1894, p. 3.

2 The Typographical Journal \ Vol. VI, p. 1 ; ibid , Vol. X, p. 251 and p. 342;

ibid , Vol XI, p 304

8 Ibid., Vol. VI, p. 7 and p. 3.


* Ibid., Vol. X, p. 453.


262 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

general the printers acquiesced in the new order of things
without a struggle.

During the years 1894 to 1896 many printers were unable to
secure work. The depression of business intensified the dis-
tress occasioned by the introduction of the machine. No safe
estimate can be made of the extent of unemployment among
printers at this time, but some indication is furnished by the
fact that the Germania Typographia, the national union of the
German printers, with a membership of about 1300, paid
$17,262.50 1 in out-of-work benefits during the fiscal year 1893-
1894. Twenty per cent of its members were unemployed in
October, 1893. 2 The proportion of unemployed among the mem-
bers of the Typographical Union was not nearly so large, but
it was undoubtedly very great.

The International Typographical Union has never paid an
out-of-work benefit, but has relied for the relief of unemployed
members on the sharing of work. In former periods of indus-
trial depression members without regular employment had been
given a part of the work controlled by their more fortunate
fellow-unionists The desire to facilitate the sharing of work
had led to the building up of an elaborate set of rules consti-
tuting what is known among union printers as the “ substitute
system.” In the first year of the introduction of the machine
this system gave temporary relief to the unemployed, and as
machines were installed the displaced compositors flocked into
the remaining hand offices as substitutes. The continual de-
crease in the number of hand offices added to the number of
substitutes and diminished their opportunities for securing
employment. The unemployed were chiefly workmen of ad-
vanced age who were unable to operate machines at sufficient
speed. They could not secure employment in other branches
of the trade because they had become highly specialized in the
setting of straight matter. Some of them went to the smaller
towns to which the machine had not come ; others abandoned
the printing industry.

1 Funf undzwanzigj ahrige Geschichte der Deutsch-Amerikanischen Typogra-

phia, von Hugo Miller, p. 58. 2 p 45 .


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 263

Even if the International Union had had an adequate system
of out-of-work benefits, it is doubtful if this class of composi-
tors would have been materially helped. Their retention in the
printing trade was an impossibility, and the inevitable readjust-
ment could be made better at an earlier time than after a period
of precarious livelihood made possible by benefits. Other print-
ers were only temporarily displaced and, with the revival of
business and the enlargement of demand, they found places in
the trade. The large local unions exerted themselves to tide
their unfortunate members over the period of depression. In
several cities the number of days which any member might
work in a week was limited to five, in order that the substitute
system might afford relief for larger numbers.

The most pronounced economic advantage accruing to the
printers from the introduction of the machine has been the
material reduction secured in the length of the working day.
Certain peculiar trade conditions favored the Typographical
Union in its demand for a short working day on machines.
The machine was first introduced in newspaper offices, and
even at the present time the number of machines in newspaper
offices far exceeds the number in book and job offices. The
following table gives the number of machines in use in each
class of offices for the years 1901, 1902, and 1904 r 1


igoi

1902

1904

Book and 30b offices .... . ...

837

981

1638

Newspaper offices . . . . .

413 8

4834

5491


The requirements of the newspaper office have consequently
been an important factor in setting the length of the working
day on machines. Prior to the introduction of the machine
wages for hand compositors in newspaper offices had been
almost uniformly on a piece basis, the union scale regulating
the price per thousand ems set. The unions required the

1 Compiled from returns made to the secretary of the International Typo-
graphical Union. See The Typographical Journal , Vol. XVIII (supplement); ibtd, f
Vol. XXIV, p 212


264 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

publishers to give employment for a fixed minimum number of
hours each working day. The maximum working day had never
been a matter of concern to the unions so far as newspaper
offices were concerned. The stress had always been the other
way, since the publishers were desirous of keeping in their
employ as large a number of printers as possible in order that
any sudden strain might be met. The printers, with many
local variations, had adopted the rule that six or seven hours'
work must be*furnished each day. Allowing for time spent in
distribution of type and in pasting up “ dupes/’ the usual work-
ing day on newspapers was rarely less than ten hours.

Newspaper publishers always need the largest composing
force during the last few hours before the paper goes to press.
In a peculiar sense it is true in newspaper work that the use-
fulness of a workman is not reduced proportionately with a
decrease in the length of the working day. The cheapness of
machine composition made it possible for publishers to increase
the capacity of their force in order to secure a much desired
increase in effectiveness during the last hours. The proposition
of the union for an eight-hour day on machine composition
seems for this reason to have met with small opposition from
the employers.

The following table shows the length of the working week
for machine operators in offices controlled by the Typographical
Union, according to scales in force January 1, 1904 r 1


Number of Hours constituting
a Week’s Work

Morning

Newspaper

Offices

Evening

Newspaper

Offices

Weekly

Newspaper

Offices

Book and
Job
Offices

Total

Unions reporting less than 48


hours

48

38

II

18

115

Unions reporting 48 hours ,

266

296

199

193

934

Unions reporting more than


48 and less than 54 hours


37

38

2 3

*13

Unions reporting 54 hours .

53

139

93

86

371

Unions reporting more than


54 hours

1

0

0

2

3


1 Compiled from returns made to the secretary of the International Typo-
graphical Union. See The Typographical Journal , Vol. XXIV, p. 21 1.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 265

Of 1536 scales for operators in the various kinds of machine
offices 68 per cent fix forty-eight hours or less as the maxi-
mum working week. The proportion of operators having a
forty-eight-hour week is still greater, since the larger unions
usually have shorter working days than the smaller ones. The
relatively large number of scales for evening newspaper offices
fixing more than forty-eight hours as the maximum working
week is due to the fact that many small towns have evening
newspapers and no morning newspapers. It is probable that
between 80 and 90 per cent of the union machine operators
in the country have at present a maximum working week of
forty-eight hours or less. In the larger cities the length of the
working day is usually the same on morning and evening news-
papers, while it is somewhat longer on weekly newspapers and
in book and job offices. The other printers employed in the
composing rooms of the newspaper have profited by the reduc-
tion in the hours of machine compositors. “Admen,” “floor-
men,” proof readers, and hand compositors employed in machine
offices usually enjoy the short working day of their colaborers,
the operators, who have set the hours of labor for the entire
composing room.

The effect of the machine on wages is difficult to estimate
on account of the change in the method of payment from the
piece to the time system. The table on the following p&ge
gives for each of the largest ten cities in the United States
the union scale for hand composition in 1891 and the union
scale for machine operators in 1904. 1

Assuming that a hand compositor was able on the average
to set 1000 ems per hour, the wages per hour of machine
operators at present is about 20 per cent higher than that of
hand compositors was in 1891. Since, however, the hand com-
positor worked ten hours as against the operators eight, the
day wages for the two kinds of work do not differ materially.
A simple comparison of the union scales for the two classes of

1 This table is compiled from reports made to the secretary of the Inter-
national Union. See Proceedings, 1892, p. 204 et seq ., and The Typographical
Journal \ Vol. XXIV, p. 213 et seq .


266 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Union Scales for
Hand Composition
per 1000 Ems, 1891

Union Scales for
Machine Operators
per Week, 1904

N umber of Hours

constituting a

Week’s Work

for Machine

Operators

Wages of
Machine Oper-
ators per Hour

Day

Work

Night

Work

Day

Work

Night

Work

Day

Work

Night

Work

New York . .

40c

50c.


$27

48

!

50c

S6|c.

Chicago .

41

46

24

26 40

48

50

55

Philadelphia

40

40

20

25

4 s

4^1

5 2 * * T2

St Louis

38

43

23 25

26 10

46

sou

56!!-

Boston . . .

38

45

22 36

24 3 6

42

53

58

Baltimore . . .

40

45

21

22 50

42

50

53i

Cleveland . .

40

43

21

24

4 S

43!

5°

Buffalo . .

33

35

19 50

22 50

42

4 6 s ,

53$

San Francisco

45

50

27

30

45

60

66J

Cincmnati . .

41

45

22

25

48

45b


Average .

39 6

442


51

57


workmen neglects, however, an important consideration. Under
the piece system few employers paid any of their workmen
more than the minimum rate, while a considerable part of
the machine operators in all the cities included in the table
get more than the scale. 1 The speedy and accurate operator
receives a differential wage over the slower workman. 2 Machine
operators in these cities, therefore, receive somewhat more on the
average for eight hours’ work than hand compositors did at the
introduction of the linotype for ten hours’ work. The difference
in favor of the operator is even greater in the smaller cities.

Regularity of employment has been up to the present far
greater among the machine operators than it was formerly
among the hand compositors as a class. The constant expan-
sion in the demand for operators has kept the competent work-
men fully employed. The “learners’ scales” have been so

1 In the arbitration proceedings held m June, 1903, to determine the wage
scale for machine operators m New York City, the New York union laid stress
on the fact that one half of the newspaper operators in that city received more
than the existing scale. — Arbitration Proceedings, Typographical Union , No. 6
v New York Newspaper Publishers (MS.).

2 In Chicago a bonus is paid all operators on matter set beyond a fixed

amount In the other cities the differential is not fixed so exactly, but works

itself out by individual bargaining


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 267

arranged that employers train new operators only when they
are needed. The machine, moreover, has increased indirectly
but materially the regularity of employment for all printers
through its effect on the number of apprentices. As long as
straight matter was set by hand there was a profit to the
employer in having apprentices, since within a comparatively
short time they became proficient enough in this branch of the
trade to more than repay the employer for the low wages paid
them. The result was that the fcumber of apprentices was out
of proportion to the growth of the industry. Largely as a result
of the overcrowding in the trade a class of printers came into
existence who were known as “ tramp ” printers. Drifting here
and there in search of work, many of them acquired dissolute
habits. Printers holding regular situations were expected to share
work with these fellow-unionists, and in many cities it became
the custom for unmarried newspaper compositors to work only
two or three days each week during periods of depression.

The first convention of the Journeymen Printers of the
United States, held in 1850, was strongly of the opinion that
“too many printers had been manufactured of late years.” 1
The local printers’ unions always put forward as one of their
chief aims the restriction of the number of apprentices, but
achieved only a very partial success. The introduction of the
machine has appreciably diminished the importance of the
apprenticeship question to the printers. Since straight com-
position is the branch of the work to which the machine is best
suited, the profit from apprentices has sensibly decreased, and
as the machine extends its field the future needs of the busi-
ness become the controlling factor in the regulation of the
number of apprentices. The “tramp” printer, a sign of an
unhealthy trade condition, has almost disappeared and confines
his operations to the smaller towns in which hand composition
still maintains its hold.

Besides the length of the working day, the rate of pay, and
regularity of employment, one other factor in the conditions

1 Proceedings of the National Convention of Journeymen Printers of the
United States, New York, December 2, 1850 (Philadelphia, 1851).


268 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of work is worthy of attention in every trade, — the intensity of
labor required. Linotype operators are universally agreed that
the high speed attained on the machines makes the work far
more exhausting than hand composition The International
Typographical Union has at times gone close to limitation of
output in its desire to keep the speed required within what the
union considers reasonable limits At the forty-first annual
session it was enacted that “ no member . . . shall be allowed
to accept work . . where a tfisk, stint, or dead line is imposed
by the employer on operators of typesetting devices.” 1 The
same session prohibited operators from accepting a “ bonus
per thousand above the regular scale.” 2 The fear that the
employers would raise the required amount so high as to make
the work a very heavy strain or that through the incentive of
a bonus the standard would be put up by especially skillful
operators to a point difficult of attainment led to the enact-
ment of these laws.

The prohibition on the payment of bonus was . repealed in
1 894, 3 but the sentiment against this form of wages remained
very strong, and in 1902 it was enacted that no bonus should
be accepted by machine operators where “such bonus is vol-
untary on the part of the employer and is not provided for in
the scale of prices” 4 The session of 1902 went much farther
than any of its predecessors and recommended “that subordi-
nate unions establish a stated amount of machine composition
which is considered a fair day’s work.” 6 The laws of the
Typographical Union, if they had been literally enforced as
they stood in 1902, denied the employer the right to place any
definite stint, but gave the union the right to do the very
thing prohibited to employers. Despite the prohibition against
employers fixing the accomplishment of a certain amount of
work as a condition of employment, this was done in nearly all
newspaper offices, and in 1903 the Typographical Union repealed

1 Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual Session of the International Typo-

graphical Union, p 200 2 Ibid, p 201. * Ibid , p. 38.

* Proceedings of the horty-Eighth Session of the International Typographical

Union, p.141. 5 Ibid., p. 142,


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE 269

its prohibition . 1 The same session struck out the section
recommending the “establishment by the local unions of a
fair day’s work .” 2 The rule against the acceptance of bonus
except when paid according to the union scale is the only
remaining law of this kind, except a provision that " members
shall not engage in speed contests .” 3 The purpose of this
unique prohibition is to prevent exaggerated ideas arising of
the amount proper for an operator to perform.

Such rules as those described^ have seemingly been entirely
ineffective in checking the increase in the speed of operators.
Occasionally a local union has sheltered an unreasonable de-
mand behind such rules, but in the main the speed of the
operator has been determined only by his ability. The large
number of operators receiving more than the minimum wage
scale indicates that as a class their output is not arbitrarily
limited. A large part of the supporters of the legislation
described desire to secure by this means employment for opera-
tors who are not able to reach the standard set. The constant
increase in the speed of the operator has made the old provi-
sions for learning the machine inadequate. The proper remedy
is for the unions and employers to revise the “ learners’ scales ”
to conform to existing conditions.

The success of the International Typographical Union in
enforcing the rule that printers shall be employed as linotype
operators has been frequently attributed solely to the strength
of that organization. In his testimony before the Industrial
Commission Mr. Gompers, president of the American Fed-
eration of Labor, said : “ The printers have had a remarkable
history, particularly within the last five years. The machine
. . . was introduced and it is one of the cases where a new
machine revolutionizing a whole trade was introduced without
involving a wholesale disaster even for a time, and it is due
to the fact that the International Typographical Union has
grown to be an organized factor, recognized by those employing

1 Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Session of the International Typographical

Union, p. 123. 2 Ibtd ., p. 136.

8 International Typographical Book of Laws, 1903, General Laws, section 69.


270 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

printers as a factor to be considered /' 1 A more explicit state-
ment of the same view was made before the commission by
Mr. D. F. Kennedy, an organizer of the Federation of Labor for
Indiana. He said, “These [typecasting] machines would now
be run by typewriters, not typesetters, had it not been for
the union taking possession of the situation to that extent that
they compelled them to use typesetters to run the machine .” 2

If a union can force in every period of machine introduction
the preferential employment of its members on the new devices,
one solution of the much discussed problem of the displaced
workman is offered. The introduction of machinery frequently
leads to the employment of less highly trained and less skillful
workmen; in many cases to the replacing of skilled artisans
with poorly paid women and children operatives. The printers
require an apprenticeship of four years before the workman is
permitted to operate the linotype. How far is it true that the
Typographical Union by sheer force of combination has been
able to force the employment of highly paid workmen to per-
form work which might be done by a much cheaper class of
laborers ? On the answer to this question depends the decision
as to the possibility of similar combinations of workmen in
other trades utilizing the experience of the printers on these
occasions when fundamental reconstructions of their trade
are in progress. A policy which requires the employment of
skilled workmen for work easily within the power of less skill-
ful employees would be clearly uneconomic, and its continued
enforcement would be against great economic pressure.

The International Typographical Union undoubtedly occu-
pied an advantageous strategic position in the introduction of
the machine. Its chief strength for many years had consisted
in the control of the greater part of the larger newspaper
offices. It is entirely probable that the union did secure the
control of the machine in some of these offices because the
publishers feared the boycott, which is peculiarly effective
against newspapers. A second advantage possessed by the

1 Report of the U. S Industrial Commission, Vol. VII, p. 615.

2 Ibid., Vol. VII, p. 748.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


271


union lay in the fact that, as the machine was introduced in the
smaller newspaper and job offices, the supply of expert workmen
trained in the offices of the large union newspapers furnished
a ready labor market for the employers installing linotypes*

Several facts point, however, to the conclusion that the
policy of the printers has succeeded not simply through the
power of combination. In the early years of the introduction of
the linotype much was said about the possibility of operating
machines with unskilled labor. 1 The experiment was tried in
several cities, but with such small success that employers have
abandoned the attempt to recruit their linotype operators from
this class of labor. Nonunion offices with substantial uniformity
employ printers as machine operators. The union rules do not
bind these employers and their policy is dictated by economic
interest. The same practice prevails in all other countries
where the linotype is in use. 2 No tendency to replace male
with female labor has ever appeared. The proportion of female
to male operators is smaller than the proportion of female
to male hand compositors. In January, 1904, the number of
women operating typesetting and typecasting machines in the
United States and Canada was 520, about 5 per cent of the
total number of linotype operators. 3 The number of women
engaged in the United States in 1900 as printers and compos-
itors was 15, 875, 4 about 15 per cent of the total number of
printers and compositors.

A trade-union rule without economic justification would
probably have won its chief success at the outset. The returns
made to the officers of the Typographical Union show that so
far from the union losing control of the machine the propor-
tion of union to nonunion operators is increasing. The following

1 The printers were profoundly affected by the fear that they would be sup-
planted by a cheaper class of labor. The continuance of the restriction on
apprentices working the machine is due to the persistence of this fear See
above, p 258 and p. 267

2 See Webb, Industrial Democracy, p/407 ; Radiguer, Maitres Imprimeurs et
Ouvriers Typographes, p 482.

8 The Typographical Journal , Vol XXIV, p. 212.

4 Twelfth Census of the United States, Population, Part II, p. 507.


2J2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


table shows by years the percentage of union operators and
machine tenders. 1 At the present time 92 1 per cent of all
machine employees according to these returns are members of
the union. 2 In no other branch of the trade does the union
control so large a proportion of the workmen.


Percentage of Total Number


1901

1902

1904

Male machine operators

92

92

94i

Female machine operators

63

56

62^

Machine tenders . ... ....

86

39

95

Operator machinists . .

100

90

93


A consideration of the technical character of the linotype
confirms the conclusion that it differs from many machines in
requiring for its most profitable operation the skill of the super-
seded handicraftsman. The amount produced on a linotype is
directly proportional to the skill of the operator, while the great
mass of labor-saving inventions reduce the work of the laborer
to that of tending the machine. Every part of the hand com-
positor's knowledge is useful to the machine operator, except
an acquaintance with the location of the case boxes, and instead
the operator must learn the keyboard of the machine. In addi-
tion the operator must think far more quickly. He must not
only know the same things, but he must be able to use knowledge
more rapidly. 8

The real merit of the policy of the Typographical Union was
that it secured for its members an opportunity to show to the

1 Compiled from The Typographical Journal , Vol. XVIII, No. II (supple-
ment) ; ibid., Vol. XXIV, No. 2, p. 212.

2 The census made by the union officials omits more nonunionists than union-
ists, but the conclusion as to the tendency is not weakened by such omissions.

8 The present linotype operators were trained at hand composition. As this
method of production falls more and more into disuse, it is a grave question
whether apprenticeship in a printing office will form a sufficient training for the
operators. The knowledge of spelling, punctuation, and capitalization which the
apprentice gets from hand composition will probably have to be obtained in trade
schools, or the apprentices intended for linotype operators will be recruited from
a better educated class of boys. For some time, howevei, this will not be an
urgent question.


THE INTRODUCTION OF THE LINOTYPE


2 73


employer that the union printer was more profitable than the
unskilled workman as a machine operator. This policy required
the frank recognition of the machine, its honest working, and
fair concessions to employers during the period of machine
apprenticeship.

George E. Barnett.

Johns Hopkins University.


[Following is the statistical table compiled by the secretary of the union for the
year beginning January, 1904, and referred to on pages 271 and 272 preceding.
It will be noted that the number of female machine operators (omitting machine
tenders and operator machinists) m nonunion offices (195) is about 28 per cent of
the total number of nonunion operators (714), but the number of female opera-
tors in union offices (325) is less than 4 per cent of the total number of union
operators (8851). — Ed ]


Class of Employees

Union

Nonunion

Total

Per Cent
Union

Male machine operators

8526

5 i 9

9°45

94 *

Female machine operators . . .

325

r 9 S

520

62*

Machine tenders . .

596

3 *

627

95

Operator machinists

970

69

1039

93

1

Total ...

10,417

814

11,231

923


XI

THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 1

Broadly speaking there are two methods of paying for labor
in common use. Under the first method payment is made in
proportion to the amount of time consumed in doing the work,
while under the second payment is made in proportion to the
amount of work done. In the vernacular of the shop these are
called respectively the days-work and the piecework plans.

A third plan deserves attention, not because of its connec-
tion with the subject but because of its intrinsic importance.
It is in a sense a combination of those named and, measured
by the extent of its use, it is next to them in importance.
I refer to the New England Contract Plan under which certain
leading men, who are called sometimes foremen and some-
times contractors, are given contracts for doing certain work.
The shop and its facilities are the property of the employer,
but the contractors proceed much as though the shop was their
own. They engage the help and arrange their rates of pay,
this pay being by the day, the men as a whole having no interest
in the contracts. The contractors are not capitalists and do not
furnish the capital or pay their men, who are paid by the
employer precisely as though there were no contract plan in
the shop, but the wages as paid are charged against tfte various
contracts, and as the work is turned in the contractors are paid
the difference between the contract price and the wages paid out.

There is no question that this plan has had a large influence
on the development of the metal-working industries of New
England. It has, moreover, extended far beyond the confines

1 From the Sibley Journal of Mechanical Engineering, Vol. XVI, March, 1902.
On this and related subjects see also Schloss, Industrial Remuneration, 3d
edition, 1898.


274


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 275

of New England. Some very large works — among them the
Baldwin Locomotive Works — operate on this plan.

Inquiry regarding this plan will frequently be baffled by its
contradictory aspects to the different parties. To the employer
it is piecework, as he ultimately pays for the work by the
piece, and he will frequently call it by that name. To the
workman, on the other hand, it is simple day's work, with
the addition of an unusually energetic and lynx-eyed foreman.
Except as he learns it accidentally, he need not even know
that the shop is at bottom a piecework shop, as his own rate
of pay, as well as that of his associates, is exclusively by the day.

The day’s-work and piecework plans are in their leading
faults antithetical. From the nature of the day’s-work plan
the workman has no direct share in any increased production
which he may bring about by more intelligent or increased
exertion, the benefits of such increase going wholly to the
employer. The only inducement the workman has toward
increased effort is the hope that through it he may eventually
obtain a slight increase in his daily wages.

From the nature of the piecewyk plan, on the contrary, the
employer has no direct share in any increased production which
the workman may bring about by more intelligent or increased
exertion. He has the indirect benefit due to the increased pro-
duction from a given plant, but the wages cost remains the same
regardless of the production.

I have spoken of these features of the two plans as their
chief faults, and they are such because through them and in
consequence of them community of interest between employer
and employee in the reduction of costs is impossible. Neither
offers any basis for such a community of interest, and it is this
which it is the prime object of the premium plan to supply.
The piecework plan has upon its face the appearance of equity
and fair dealing. “ It pays for the work done and in proportion
to what is done. The industrious are rewarded in accordance
with their industry,” etc., etc. The universal opposition of
labor unions to it is looked upon as another evidence of their
total depravity. Of course, .in so far as the objections of the


276 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

unions are a reflection of the opposition which some of them
have to their members doing a large amount of work it cannot
be defended and is not worth discussion, but for other reasons
and on other grounds their position of opposition is impreg-
nable. Near acquaintance with the system shows that it is not
what it appears to be. It is in fact a remarkable illustration
of how completely a thing may differ in appearance from what
it is in reality. It is in appearance a system of rewards, but
it is in fact a system of punishments, and worse still a system
of punishments for doing well ’

As this is a severe arraignment it requires an examination of
the actual workings of the system. A piece of work has been
done by day’s work and it is proposed to change it to piece-
work. The piece cost 1 under day’s work is first determined
and a somewhat smaller piece price is then set and given to the
workman. If he has had no experience with piecework, he feels
that he cannot “make wages” and objects. He is then told
that if he will not take it some one else will ; in other words,
he is compelled to take it, and this is the first objection to the
plan, — it involves compulsion. If this were all that could be
said against the system, it would not have much weight, but it
is nevertheless worth noting. Leading is always better than
driving, and compulsion is a good thing to avoid if possible.

No man knows what he can do under an incentive until he
has tried it. The workman in saying that he cannot “ make
wages ” at the piece prices offered when piecework is first
introduced is entirely sincere, but he is nevertheless mistaken.
All experience shows that when the test comes the increase of
output under the incentive of piece rates is far beyond what
any one — manager or workman — would have believed possible.
The output mounts up and the wages with it, and the employer
soon finds that he is paying an extravagant rate of daily wages,
an extravagant rate being understood as a rate materially in
excess of what it would be necessary to pay another workman
for doing the same work, he having the first man’s experience

1 The actual wages paid for doing the work, or the “ wages cost ” only, is
considered here.


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 277

before him. The employer submits to this for a time, but the
wages continue to increase and ultimately he is driven to his
only recourse, — he cuts the piece price. This is an immediate
announcement to the workman that the promises of piecework
are false. He was told that he would be paid a certain rate per
piece, but he finds that to be true up to a certain limit only.
The workman, again under compulsion, accepts the new price,
but unless he is very dull he has learned a lesson. If he is
very dull, it may require a second cut to enforce this lesson,
and this second cut, either on the price of his own work or on
that of some fellow-workman, is soon forthcoming. The lesson
is that if he pushes his production to a point which raises his
earnings beyond a certain more or less clearly defined limit the
direct result will be a cut in the piece price. Perhaps new men
come in or the old ones are given new work to do, — the result
is the same. If any one is so unwise or so unfortunate as to do
a large amount, he is at once punished for it by having his rate
cut. Such cuts from the workman’s standpoint have but one
result, — he is compelled to work harder than before, but he
earns no more. This is the result of his own efforts to increase
his output, and hence it is that f call the piecework system a
system of punishment for doing well.

The net result of the system is a somewhat greater output
and somewhat higher wages than would be obtained with the
day’s-work system, but there is no spirit of progress. The work-
men push their earnings as near to the limit as they dare and
then stop making further effort to increase their output. If one
man has several pieces of work, on some of which the prices are
high while on others they are low, he makes out false time
tickets, charging time to one job which belongs to another, so
a» to equalize matters and give a fair average and thus take
advantage of the high rates on some pieces to equalize the low
rates on others. The whole tendency is to cultivate deceit and
antagonism. The piecework plan is, in short, simply a mischief-
maker and a discord breeder.

The workman of course looks upon these cuts as an exhibi-
tion of pure hoggishness on the part of the employer. While


278 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the employer may take undue advantage in this way, the fact
remains that if he does not make the cuts from choice he will
eventually do it from necessity, for it can be shown that these
cuts are an integral part of the piecework plan, which can no
more be operated without them than a windmill can be oper-
ated without wind, for the reason that as the years go by the
whole tendency of prices is downward . . .

The day’s-work and piecework plans are, as has been shown,
antithetical in their faults, and the premium plan is an effort to
obviate these faults by splitting the difference between them,
so to speak. By this is meant that whereas with the day’s-
work plan the immediate gains due to increased effort by a
workman go to the employer, while with the piecework plan
they go to the workman, with the premium plan they are
divided between the workman and his employer, and this is the
essence and substance of it.

To understand this suppose that a piece of work has been
done upon the day’s-work plan and that it is proposed to change
it to the premium plan. The time which it has required is deter-
mined, and the workman, who is still paid the old day rate, is
told that if he will reduce that time he will, in addition to his
daily wages, be paid a premium for each hour or part of an hour
by which he reduces the time, this premium per hour bei?ig
less than his hourly rate of wages. Please note this, as it is by
this device that the division of the gains is made. If he objects,
he is simply told, “Very well, try or not as you think best;
there is the work and the offer, and the premium is ready when-
ever you have earned it.” In other words, the proposition is
simply an offer of a reward for an increase in output without a
trace of anything in the nature of compulsion. It is of course
expected and usually found that with this reward before him
the workman will sooner or later endeavor to increase and
succeed in increasing his output. . . .

To gather the exact workings of the plan assume a concrete
case. A workman is paid say $3 per day and produces one
piece of a kind per day, that is, in ten hours. He is told that
he will continue to be paid his $3 a day as before, but that if


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 279

he will reduce the time on the piece he will be paid in addition
to his wages a premium of 10 cents for each hour saved. If he
reduces the time by an hour, that hour representsin money value
a gross saving of 30 cents. Ten cents of this amount is paid
to him as a premium, leaving the remaining 20 cents in the
employer’s possession, this sum making itself manifest in the
reduced cost of the work. If the workman goes on redu-
cing the time in which the piece is made, the same process is
repeated, each hour saved resulting in an increase in the work-
man’s wages of 10 cents and in a reduced cost of the piece of
20 cents. In other words, the wages go up and the costs go
down simultaneously, this apparently paradoxical result coming
about from the fact that the gross time saved is divided between
employer and employee, part of it going to increase the wages
of the latter and the remainder going to reduce the cost to the
former. This is shown in the accompanying table, which, for
purposes of illustration, is extended until the workman has
doubled his output, in which case the wages cost of the work
has gone down from $3 to $2, while the workman’s earnings per
day have advanced from $3 to $4.


The Workings of the Premium: Plan


1

2

3

4

5

Time

consumed

Wages per
Piece

Premium

Total Cost of
Work= Column 2
+ Column 3

Workman’s Earnings
per Hour= Column 4
— Column 1

10 hours

$3-oo

$0 00

$3 °°

$0 30

9 “

2 70

.10

2 So

• 3 11

8 “

2.40

20

2 60

•325

7 “

2.10

•30

2 40

•343

6 “

1 80

.40

2 20

.366

5 “

1.50

• 5 °

2.00

.40


There is of course a considerable gain to the employer due
to the increased production from a given plant, since the
secondary costs of production — the expense items which make
up the burden and which must be added to the cost of labor
and material in order to obtain the ultimate or true cost — are


28 o trade unionism and labor problems


increased but little in consequence of the intensified production.
It is, however, easy and customary to exaggerate the employer’s
gains from the system, a subject that will be discussed more
fully further on.

It will be seen that superficially the plan has some resem-
blance to the profit-sharing plan. The chief difference is that
whereas the profit-sharing plan treats the business as a whole
and the workmen in a body, the premium plan treats each indi-
vidual and his work separately. Under the profit-sharing plan
the gross profits at the end of the year are determined and
a certain percentage of these is divided among the workmen
regardless of individual merit, whereas under the premium plan
each workman’s earnings depend solely upon his own efforts. . . .

As outlined above the premium plan is a very simple thing,
an almost absurdly simple thing, and it would seem to be so obvi-
ously correct in principle as to be accepted without question.
It has, however, required much time and effort to get it tried.
It is now being tried, however, on a scale which will determine
its merits and insure its permanency, if it is really what it
appears to be. No very exact idea of the extent of this trial
can be given, as interested parties who at first came to me for
information and suggestions now go to their friends It is
known to be in use in the United States, Canada, England,
Scotland, Germany, Italy, and Belgium. Interest has been shown
in Sweden and Austria, but it is not known to me whether the
plan is in use there. It has apparently attracted more intelligent
and serious attention in Great Britain than here or elsewhere,
— a fact which may perhaps be due to the considerable feeling
there that British industrial methods need improvement. . . .

The first question to be decided after the adoption of the
plan has been determined upon is the rate of the premium,
that is, what proportion of the value of the time saved is to be
given to the workman who saved it.

For this there is a perfectly clear principle to guide us and
that principle is precisely the one which we use in buying any-
thing whatever with money, namely, to pay what is necessary to


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR # LABOR 281

get what is wanted but to pay no more. If we have a fence to
paint or a roof to shingle, the only principle we ever think of
following in order to get the work done is to pay enough to
induce some one to do it. If we offer less than that, the work
will go undone, while if we pay more the surplus is a simple
gratuity. So here. A workman has been working at the usual
pace and has been paid the usual daily wages. If we wish to
induce him to do more, we should offer enough, but no more,
as a premium to induce him "to make the extra exertion. If we
offer too little, he will reject the offer, the offered returns being
t<?o small to recompense him for the effort, and the desired
increase will not be obtained. On the other hand, if we offer
too much, the surplus, as in the case of painting the fence or
shingling the roof, is a simple gratuity.

Looked at from this standpoint it is clear that there can be
no single rate of payment which will apply to all classes of
work. In the machine shop, for example, increased output is
largely a matter of intelligence. The workman uses coarser
feeds, higher speeds, and deeper cuts. He has several tools at
hand and grinds one while another is at work so that as soon
as one is dull another may be slipped into its place without
loss of time. In other words, he crowds the machine rather
than himself. In the blacksmith shop or foundry, however,
increased output can be secured only by actual increased mus-
cular effort by the workman. It is clear that in the first instance
a smaller premium will suffice than in the others.

I have always considered this feature of the plan, whereby
the incentive can be graded according as the work is laborious
or not, to be one of its best features, though it has attracted
less attention than it deserves.

Looking at the premiums when settled in accordance with
this simple principle of paying what is necessary but no more,
we learn several things, of which the first is that they are in no
sense bonuses or gratuities, but that, on the contrary, they are,
in ^the fullest sense of the word, earnings. . . . We learn,
secondly, that they do not need to be cut from time to time,
but that so long as the methods of production do not change


282 TRADJC UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the rates may be permanent. The plan contemplates increasing
the workman’s earnings as a reward for increased effort by him-
self. Should the proprietor introduce a new labor-saving machine,
it would be economically wrong to continue the old rates, since
the increased output of the new machine is not the result of the
workman’s efforts. Under such circumstances a new base time
must be determined and the premiums be based on that.

If the rates have been settled in accordance with this prin-
ciple, there need, however, be no change in them so long as the
methods of production remain the same, and indeed there must
not be. Such cuts would introduce the objections of piecework
and destroy the workman’s confidence in the system and with
it his incentive to further effort. To cut the rates is to kill the
goose that lays the golden egg. It is essential that the limit
to the workman’s earnings shall be set by his own capacity to
produce and not, as with piecework, by an arbitrary ruling of
the office.

It has often been objected that the proprietor may cut the
rates if he chooses, and that after all the plan still has the same
fundamental objection as piecework. True, the plan does not
make rate cutting impossible, but it does make it unnecessary
and unprofitable Smaller initial rates than those determined
by this principle would have been less profitable to the employer,
and to cut them when once set would not only lead to less prof-
itable rates, but it would stop further progress by destroying
the workman’s confidence. Under this plan it is to the em-
ployer’s interest not to cut, while, as has been shown, under
piecework such cuts are sooner or later forced upon him.

With the rates set in this manner we see, thirdly, that with
a single limitation we have secured an ideal economic condition,
a condition under which and under given methods of produc-
tion we will obtain the highest possible production and the
lowest possible cost, while the workman will receive the highest
wages to which he is economically entitled. In other words, we
will secure the maximum possible efficiency of plant.

Considering the premiums as set in this way and considering
also the rates which experience shows to be sufficient, we learn,


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 283

fourthly, the fundamental defect of piecework, — its initial in-
centive is too high; that is, it offers a reward for increasing the
output which is larger than is necessary to produce that increase
and larger than it is economically possible for the employer to
continue to pay. It is from this defect that all the difficulties
with piecework spring. Cutting the rates is a clumsy and dis-
astrous method of correcting this defect.

When it comes to the actual setting of the premium rates it
must be owned that our guiding principle gives us but little
help, but that is equally true of it as applied elsewhere. The
real difficulty we have to face is that whereas if we have a
fence to paint or a roof to shingle we have a large body of
experience to draw upon, in the matter of premiums the body
of available experience is small. In the one case the custom of
the locality settles for us what rate we must pay, whereas in
the other custom has not yet been established. In this matter
I am satisfied that the tendency is to set the rates too high,
that is, to set them so high that in the future the employer
will be apt to find as with piecework that another workman
would be glad to take the work at a lower rate, if that rate were
guaranteed. The premium rates actually paid range between
one third and one half the wages rates. The former figure for
machine-shop work I regard as about right, but the latter, except
in shops which were under a high state of efficiency before the
adoption of the plan, I regard as dangerous. In my own use of
the system in Canada the highest rate paid to men was one
third the wages rate, and it ranged from this down to one
quarter, and this rate seemed there to be ample, although the
lowest of which I have any knowledge. At the same time
everything in the way of wages, salaries, and incomes is on a
smaller scale in Canada than here, and the rate would probably
be too low here. . . .

The question of the extent of the gains made is of course a
legitimate one. Several tables giving comparisons of the three
iteips affected before and after the adoption of the system have
been published and the gains are uniformly greater than would
be believed possible. In one case a certain corporation had


284 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

made thirty-five large, heavy machines, and at a later date they
entered upon a second contract for twenty duplicates which
were made under the premium system, the base time being
taken from the cost records of the first machines. At a certain
stage of progress with the second lot I was given a table of
the records of the two contracts, the figures given including
all records, good and bad alike, that had been made on the
second lot. The extent of the exhibit is shown by the fact that
the time reported in it for the first contract aggregated about
20,000 hours. Taking the time, wages cost of the work, and
wages earned per day on the first contract as unity, the second
contract showed a reduction in time of 43 per cent, a reduction
in the wages cost of 25 per cent, and an average increase in
wages per day of 29 per cent.

It is scarcely possible to collect from the results of every-
day work data of any kind which are in all respects satisfactory.
It is especially difficult to preserve that fundamental condition
of all intelligent experimenting that but one condition shall be
varied at a time, and candor requires it to be said that this
criticism applies to this exhibit. In the nature of things one of
these lots of machines came first chronologically. A piece of
work done the second time is usually done with a reduction in
the time expended, and, other things being equal, the second lot
of machines, without any premium at all, should have shown
some saving in time and cost. Other things were not equal,
however, the second lot being for twenty machines while the
first was for thirty-five, and in these matters the advantage goes
with the larger lot, which should, other things being equal,
be made proportionately more quickly than a smaller lot. To
correct the figures for these influences is impossible, but it is
perfectly certain that without the premium system no record
approaching that given above could have been made.

The same corporation gave me a second exhibit, which was
not open to these objections, though unfortunately it was much
smaller. This exhibit showed the results on certain parts wfych
had been reduced t'o a strictly manufacturing basis. They had
been made over and over again and the advantage of sequence


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 285

was thus eliminated, while the lots were of the same size in
both columns of the exhibit. The numbers in the lots of dif-
ferent pieces varied between one hundred and three hundred.
Both workmen and foreman were positive that the time on these
parts was down to the minimum and that it was useless to
apply the premium plan to them. Nevertheless the pieces for
which the figures were given showed an average reduction in
time of 41 per cent.

Another exhibit of considerable magnitude was supplied by
an electrical manufacturing company, the average results shown
being a reduction in time of 39 per cent, a reduction in wages
cost of 28 per cent, and an increase in wages per day of 23
per cent.

These gains are so large as to excite incredulity. Most men
of experience will not seriously consider a system which deliber-
ately proposes to increase output by 70 per cent while reducing
wages costs and increasing daily wages by 25 per cent, and I
am satisfied that if the plan did about half as well as it really
does its growth would be much more rapid than it is. Apart
from exact figures, which are difficult to get, is testimony from
many men in many lines of work, which is substantially
unanimous in saying that the system works in the manner
described, and this testimony is not a matter of geography or
nationality.- ... F . S . Haesee.


The Premium Plan at the Works of David Rowan & Co.,
Glasgow, Scotland 1

Work as recorded on a job ticket is given to a workman on
a time allowance, and if he reduces this time allowance his
rate of wages per hour while he is working at the job is
increased by the same percentage as that by which the time
allowance has been reduced. It is of course apparent that data
must be collected for the purpose of arriving at the time to be

1 From the American Machinist , January 9, 1902. Correspondence of Mr.
James Rowan with Mr. Halsey


286 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


allowed to do work. For this purpose a special department
(rate-fixing department) is required, and when instituted, data
accumulate very quickly. The period occupied in doing work
under the usual time-payment conditions may be accepted as
the time allowance of the premium system.

When a job is given to a workman a job ticket is issued to
him with a description of the work to be done and the time
allowed to do it. On completion of the work the job ticket is
initialed and the time of day recorded on it by the foreman,
and this is the time of commencing the next job. When the
work has been examined and passed by the works inspector
the job ticket is handed to the rate-fixing department, which
passes the same for payment. In the case of a job being
rejected by the inspector, any premium which would otherwise
have been earned by the workman by reason of his having
reduced the time allowance is forfeited. No clerical labor
devolves upon the workmen and very little upon the foremen.

The time allowance for a job given to a workman rated at
say Sd. per hour is ioo hours, and the actual time occupied on
the job amounts to 75 hours. We have then 100 hours at Sd.
= 800 pence against 75 hours at Sd. + 25 per cent (2d.) = 750
pence, giving the workman a premium = 150 pence, or 2d. per
hour, and the employer a reduced cost = 50 pence. Provided
the time allowances are equitable to employer and employed,
and based on the average attainments of hourly labor, it will be
evident from the foregoing that the higher the premium earned
by the workman the greater will be the saving in cost. The
output of the machines is also increased, but it is a hard matter
to put a value to this.

The table shows your method of premium system, that
adopted by Messrs. G. & J. Weir of this city, and our system.
Messrs. Weir’s is exactly the same as yours in principle, with
the exception that the workman 'receives half the time saved
and in your case he receives one third. 1 My system is totally

1 Mr. Rowan is of course in error in assuming my idea to be thus limited.
The amount of the premium rate has received in these columns as much or more
discussion than any other feature of the system. — F. S. H.


THE PREMIUM PLAN OF PAYING FOR LABOR 287


Comparison of Different Methods of calculating Premiums


Halsey's Method


"Wages Rate 30 Cents per Hour

Premium earned
on Job

Total Labor
Cost

Workman’s Rate
per Hour

Hours

allowed

Hours

taken

Time Wages
on Job

IOO

IOO

$ 3 ° 00

$0.00

$30 00

$ 0.30

100

90

27.00

I 00

28.00

31

IOO

So

24 00

2.00

26 00

•325

IOO

70

21.00

3 00

24 00

*343

IOO

60

18.00

4 00

22,00

.366

IOO

5 °

15.00

500

20.00

40

IOO

40

12 00

600

l8.00

*45

IOO

30

9 00

7 00

l6.00

*533

IOO

20

6 00

8.00

I4.OO

.70

IOO

10

300

9 00

12 00

1.20

IOO

I

30

990

10.20

10 20

Weir's Method

IOO

IOO

$ 30.00

$0.00

$ 3 ° 00

#0.30

IOO

90

27.00

150

28.50

.316

IOO

80

24 00

300

27.00

•337

IOO

70

21.00

450

2 5 - 5 ° *

• 3 fi 4

IOO

60

18 00

600

24 00

.40

IOO

50

15.00

7 5 °

22.50

•45

IOO

40

12 00

9.00

21 00

•525

IOO

30

9.00

10 50

1950

•65

IOO

20

6 00

12.00

18.00

.90

IOO

10

G->

0

0

l 3 5 °

16 50

165

IOO

I

•30 )

1485


15 15


Rowan's Method


IOO

IOO

$30 00

$0 00

$3° 00

$030

IOO

90

27 00

2 70

29 70

•33

IOO

80

24 00

4 80

2880

•36

IOO

70

21.00

630

27.30

39

IOO

60

18 00

7 20

25 20

.42

IOO

50

15.00

7 5o

22.50

•45

IOO

40

12 00

7.20

19.20

.48

IOO

30

9 00

630

1530

• 5 i

IOO

20

6.00

480

10.80

•54

IOO

10

3 00

2 70

5 70

•57

IOO

I

• 3 °

.297

•597

*597


288 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


different. You will notice in the last line of the table showing
the results of your system that a workman, if he is allowed ioo
hours to do a piece of work and does it in one hour, receives
about 34 times his hourly rate of wages , with Weir’s system
he receives 50 times , with our system not quite double. Also
compare the next to the last line, showing with your system his
wages are increased 4 times, with Weir’s times, with mine
90 per cent, or 10 per cent less than double.

In quoting the last two lilies of the table showing the results
of your system, Weir’s system, and my system, you will no
doubt remark that these are extreme cases and seldom to be
met with, but these are the cases we are aiming at and hope to
arrive at some day, although it may be a long way off. When
we do arrive at them we will not require to cut the man’s rate,
but you will, and so will the Messrs. Weir ; so that while yours
is a decided improvement upon the ordinary piecework system
at the earlier stages, there is no great improvement upon the
ordinary piecework system when you come to great reductions
in the hours taken, and these are the stages at which you wish
to encourage the men as well as at the earlier stages ; here I
think my system has a great advantage over any other system
of which I have yet heard.


XII

THE PRINTING TRADES AND THE CRISIS IN
BRITISH INDUSTRY 1 2

Jeremiads, apart from any literary value they may have, are
not of any conspicuous service to mankind. For one thing,
they are apt to come when the need for them is over, as the
particular variety of prophet who is responsible for them loves
not to talk at sluggish or incredulous ears. Further, they are
generally discouraging at a time when perhaps the condition of
affairs is beginning to improve. Lastly, they take the common
form of recrimination between those who should be fellow-
citizens, or fellow-workers, or partners in some joint enterprise.
The present discussion on the decadence of British industry,
which has been continued for some time, partakes at best of
the unphilosophical character hinted at above, while at times
it degenerates into an avowed polemic against trade unions.
It has been begun by a would-be encyclopedic correspondent
of the Times? from whose columns the controversy — and why
should it be a controversy? — has overflowed into half the
magazines and journals of the country. The difficulty now is
to lend so vast a subject-matter some unity for the purposes of
fair discussion, if we would not allow ourselves to be drawn
into a partisanship in what is unnecessarily supposed to be a
conflict between the interests of employers and employed. As
far as the articles in the Times as a whole are concerned, they
are chaotic enough to be considered impartial on this disputed
question, even if that be not their intention. While the main

1 From the Economic Journal , Vol. XII, 1902, pp 1-12. The writer is manager
of the Manchester Guardian .

2 The Times articles are reprinted under the title “ Trade Unions and British
Industry,” London, 1904. — Ed.


289


290 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


argument, printed in aristocratic “ bourgeois/’ seems to be
that British workingmen are incompetent enough to be dis-
honest and dishonest enough to remain incompetent, there are
not wanting little jewels of knowledge, printed in unassuming
“minion,” where an intelligent employer, not afraid to be
straightforward, gives some sound raps to his own class and a
generous acknowledgment of the merit of the best men under
him. . . . What is more obviously wanting in the Times articles
as a whole is some proper methodical treatment of the confused
mass of material collected. A single industry treated with
adequate knowledge would give more solid ground for sound
generalizations than all the display of undigested technical
information ranging over twenty different trades, which makes
such an impression on the nonindustrial public. Supposing
there to be a need of some vital amendment of our industrial
organization, which is within the range of imagination even of
an optimist, there is room in such a study of the question for
many aspects omitted or scantily treated in the articles which
have appeared in the Times. I will not quarrel with their cor-
respondent for setting aside, on the whole, the vexed question
of tariffs, which would lead us into unnecessary ramifications ;
but it seems to me that in each industry there should be con-
sidered in any comparison of ourselves with competing coun-
tries or with a particular competing country the following
points : material resources, efficiency of traffic conditions, aver-
age scale of transactions, facilities for securing capital, and,
especially while we are discussing the efficiency of labor, the
efficiency also of the employing class. My inclination is to be-
lieve that where we are now falling behind our competitors

and I mean generally in this article to keep America in mind as
the chief one of them — is much more in respect to the other
items that I have mentioned than in the supposed average
inefficiency of British labor or on account of the trade restric-
tions imposed by labor organizations.

Let me attack without delay my own particular subject, the
printing trades. It is clear from Article VIII in this series of
the Times that their correspondent has taken great pains to


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


291


inform himself from instructed persons of the conditions of a
business not known to him at first hand. His information, so
far as it goes, is correct and many of the reflections are just,
but in his sketch there is so much missing that any deductions
from his inadequate material are too narrow to be of general
value. Of the three common processes of printing, by which I
mean the composition of types, the stereotyping of printing
surfaces, and printing proper in the press, he has inverted
the natural order, and speaks first of machine minding or the
tending of printing presses. In this class of work he treats of
only one variety of press, the two-revolution flat-bed press,
now in a state of transition. This is a kind of press still cover-
ing a very wide range of work, but less than it used to do a
few years ago. For the steady improvement of rotary presses
proper — that is, where the paper passes continuously between
two revolving cylinders instead of in sheets between a revolv-
ing cylinder and a flat reciprocating bed — is gradually robbing
a larger and larger portion of magazine and good-class illus-
trated work from the older and slower machine. I know that
at present two of the leading printing-press manufacturers in
America, where we still look for our new ideas and processes,
have got their minds fixed on improvements adapted for this
special purpose as being the next probable step in the gradual
advance of efficiency. Now in Article VIII there is no word
of mention of these fast rotary presses, whether single, triple,
quadruple, or sextuple, whether made by Hoe, Goss, Foster,
or the Victory Company, and the slow-working presses at the
other end of the scale, such as the platen press or the power
die press, are passed over in similar silence. However, taking
the narrow class of work to which the contributor of the Times
does refer, he has raised one interesting point, which shows
how dangerous it is to argue from the particular to the general
without a full command of the facts. He writes:

A curious illustration of these restrictive methods of working is
afforded by the fact that some of the fast American presses intro-
duced into this country have actually been thrown out of order
because of the unwillingness of the men to work them at the rate for


292


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


which they are designed. There can, however, hardly be any patri-
otic prejudice against these u American ” machines as such, because,
though designed in the United States, they are now built in England
from English materials by English workmen, and these English-made
machines are declared to be better made and capable of quicker run-
ning than those constructed in America. Obviously the real motive of
the printers is to “ leave work for some one else”

Although it is not quite clear, I take it that by the words
“ thrown out of order ” no accusation of rattening is brought
against British workmen. Still, as it stands, we have here an
instance of what is labeled in the Times articles as “ ca’
canny,” in other words, the deliberate manufacture of work in
order to increase employment. But the instance brought forward,
which happens to be within my knowledge, is a rather absurd
exaggeration of an experience common to every employer.
Here we have a Miehle machine, a comparatively new kind of
machine, introduced by the Machinery Trust, evidently for the
first time, in an office where acquaintance with this grade of
press was inadequate. The Miehle was designed for a run of
2000 an hour; but it is*not easy for a machine minder accus-
tomed to feed a Wharfedale at 1200 or 1500 an hour to jump
at once into the habit of the increased speed, and in this case
the workman, perhaps from stupidity, more probably from
timidity, geared the machine, or had it geared, to work at a
lower speed. In nine cases out of ten this would have had no
result except that sooner or later the employer or his foreman —
supposing the office to be in capable hands — would have found
that the machine was not running up to contract speed and would
have wished to know the reason why. Then either the employer
would have insisted on the proper output from the machine
minder, or else complaint would have been made to the manu-
facturers. In this particular case — and I have never heard of a
similar one — the machine was so delicately constructed that it
was injured and thrown out of order by running under its
proper speed. But apart from the fact that the accident may
have arisen quite as much from overcaution as from careless-
ness, if an employer is to interpret every case of laziness or


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


293


incompetence as conspiracy, the columns of the Times for a year
would not hold the evidence that could be brought forth. . . .

With regard to the primary process of printing, the composi-
tion of types, whether by machine or by hand, only the former
is dealt with in the article which we are considering. Great
stress is laid on the performances attained in certain competi-
tions on the linotype machine held in London, Glasgow, and
Manchester, performances to which employers of experience
will attach no very great value. There can be no harm in these
competitions, and I greatly regret that the Typographical
Association in a narrow-minded spirit should have discouraged,
and the London Society have forbidden, any participation by
their members in these tests of skill under artificial conditions.
But it must not be assumed that competitions of this kind set
up any standard of output available for practical purposes. We
have not, as I myself believe, at all reached a possible or even
creditable output in England in machine composition, but the
adoption of deceptive records such as those obtained in com-
petitions seems to do more harm than good Of more interest
in the said article are passages quoted from the remarks of
an employer evidently well versed in the condition of the
London trade and also in the details of the re cent dispute
between the masters and the London Society of Compositors.^
There ~Is^much truth in his statement that masters in the
printing trade — and it is as true of the^pro vinces as in London
— arp not sufficiently acquainted with the extremely difficult
technicalities of composition, and in all dealings with their
men they put themselves^ at a further disadvantage by the
universal employment jn union houses of union men as their
overseers. This is not to say that among this able and faithful
class of men there is a general disloyalty to the firms which
employ them, but simply as a matter of human nature it is
impossible for a man to serve two masters ; it is enough to
expect of a newly appointed overseer, who has been a good
union man for say fifteen or twenty years and who is still
on the sick and superannuation funds of the society and
dependent for all prospective benefits from these funds on the


294 trade unionism and labor problems

votes of the men under him, that he should be at most impar-
tial when difficulties arise between his employers and the
union. But impartiality is hardly the virtue required by a
business man from his own agent; one would not expect it
from a solicitor nor even from an expert witness.

To sum up the consideration of this question of machine
composition, just objection can be taken to the policy of the
Typographical Association and also of the London Society of
Compositors in the two following important respects, — their
refusal to allow any form of bonus or premium system in
union offices and their prohibition of any marking or checking
of copy whereby the output of individual operators can be
ascertained. It is further true, although less so of the Typo-
graphical Association, which is the provincial organization, and
more so of the London Society, that the effect of their action
— and it is difficult to believe, considering how able a body of
men have been their leaders, that their intentions have always
been directed the other way — has been to delay and obstruct
the introduction of linotype and other typesetting machines
and to hamper their use. Circumstances, in the shape of an
obsolete table of extra payments for “fat” matter and anti-
quated traditions and regulations as to what may be assigned
to “ house” hands and what are the functions of “ stone” men
and correctors, have also militated against the full development
of the new efficiency of machinery. But we can find a useful
instance of how much employers themselves are to blame for
many of their present troubles in a comparison between the
position now occupied by union houses in London and in the
provinces. The provincial employers have been organized for
some years in the Linotype Users’ Association, to which also
many London houses nominally belong. Some four or five
years ago a useful working agreement was made between them
and the Typographical Association, covering the greater part of
their area but not London, whereby all questions relating to
working on what is called the “ stab ” or weekly wage system
were regulated on a satisfactory basis The agreement has
been loyally observed, and although it does not cover the


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


295


whole ground and is not to be regarded as final, still under
it linotype users, at present mostly newspapers, enjoy the
real control of their offices, as well as an option between two
working systems. Of the two systems the weekly wage system
has been found to be more advantageous and has been gener-
ally adopted by union houses in the provinces. The London
houses, on the other hand, were slower to adopt the new
machinery and slower to resort to combination. At the time
of the provincial agreement they neglected to take steps to
join the larger and on the whole stronger body of their breth-
ren and to effect either together with them or simultaneously
an" equally advantageous working arrangement. That is the
position they are now in. Neither the morning nor the even-
ing newspapers in London are at liberty to adopt the “stab”
or weekly wage system so long as they remain union houses.
In all the expensive details of charges for extras they are in
the hands of -the London Society. Headings, small caps, rules,
italics, and “fat ” matter of every kind have all to be paid for
two or three times over. And it is not so much the additional
cost of these impositions which constitutes a burden on the
employer as the continual impediment they offer to efficiency.
Some idea of how much this amounts to in the long run can
be seen in the parallel cases of three London houses now turn-
ing out the same class of work. Two of these houses employ
only Society hands, and the output per hour is 4000 ens 1 and
5000 ens respectively. The third office is non-Society, and
their men are paid an inclusive rate on the piece system, while
no extras are recognized. The result in efficiency is astonish-
ing, as the output is 7500 ens an hour. Another instance can
be shown in the case of the St. James Gazette , which, to escape
from the toils of “ extras ” under the piece system, offered their
men a fixed weekly wage as an alternative, but were refused by
the union a right possessed by every employer in the prov-
inces. The only resource of the newspaper was to become
a non-Society house. In all this the moral to me is that

1 Equivalent to 2000 cms according to the American standard of measurement
— Ed.

*


296 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

employers should have the foresight to provide for their own
interests; and for this barrier to efficiency the London Society
is in only a minor degree to blame. The remedy is within the
reach of London employers whenever they will take the trouble
to combine to protect themselves against a rather elementary
form of oppression. . . .

The common-sense view of the condition of the printing
trade in Great Britain is that it is now in a very fair condition
of prosperity and efficiency. The nature of the work takes it
out of the rank of those industries in which foreign competi-
tion is possible to any great extent. By far the greater part of
printing, for instance all newspapers, magazines, weekly papers,
and the smaller kind of jobbing work, must be done by each
country on the spot where it is wanted, and even supposing
this natural condition of the business were removed there is
little doubt that so far from the bulk of our printing going to
the continent, we should soon be doing, provided we had the
stocks of type and the command of the languages, a good deal
more of their work than they would be doing of ours. There
is very little demand for cheap printing. If there were, country
offices can be found in England where straightforward work
would be quite as cheaply done as in Middelburg, Holland.
There was a town in the north of England where I heard of
rates for machine composition which were about a fourth of
the London rates, but the proprietor was not making a fortune.
No, if comparisons are to be made between printing in our
country and printing elsewhere, some other standard must be
taken than mere cost per square foot of paper. There can be
no doubt that our efficiency in nearly every matter relating to
printing is very much higher than it was ten years ago, and
with hardly an exception, unless perhaps in some improved
ments in the most delicate color printing, our lessons have!
come from America, whence also we have received nearly all
our new processes and our improved machinery. For all this
.we cannot pLyjne ourselves on having surpassed those who
have lately been our instructors. There is still a great deal
for us to learn from the American printers, who, although not


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


297


so far ahead of irs as they used to be, are more efficient, both
masters and men, than we. Take for instance the composi-
tion of types by machine, about which a great deal has been
already said. Statistics valuable for comparative purposes here
are hard to get, as there is no absolute standard and working
conditions vary immensely in different offices. But from in-
quiries and comparisons made on visits to America in 1899
and 1901 and from much correspondence which I have read
both in American and in English papers on the subject, my
opinion is that the output on the linotype machines there is
on the average not less than 60 per cent greater than here in
a given time.

This difference is certainly a great deal more than it should
be, and as the linotype machine has become of general use in
the country now for five or six years we ought to be past the
transition stage. As matters now stand in the provinces, where,
as pointed put above, we have come nearer to a permanent
settlement than in London, most offices are working on the
“stab” system, where the rates are fixed by agreement with
the Typographical Association at an increase of 12J per cent
on the local rates for hand setting in vogue before the introduc-
tion of typesetting machinery. Under the present terms, how-
ever, the rate of production is much lower than it should be,
and employers must look around for some needed stimulus.
This stimulus is not supplied by the “ piece ” scale, which, being
based on a slight advance on the old “piece” hand rates, does
not take into account the enormously increased productivity of
the machine. The present piece rates now enforced by the
Typographical Association and the London Society of Com-
positors, although never yet officially sanctioned by the Lino-
type Users’ Association, which is the organization of the em-
ployers, besides the fact that they sanction the continuance of
obsolete and obstructive regulations as to extras, which are
even more oppressive than they are costly, practically bring
an easy and luxurious living within the reach of the careless
and incompetent. It is possible now for a compositor who
has received a year’s training on the linotype machine to


2g8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

attain without special skill or unusual exertion an output of
five thousand ens 1 per hour, or about half the average rate of an
American compositor. As his weekly bill will be augmented at
least io per cent by extras and fat matter and he will probably
have copy for forty-five hours during the week, some of which
will be overtime at higher rates, this prince of workingmen will
receive in London or Manchester on a morning newspaper some
seventy or seventy-five shillings a week. This is a higher
income than a graduate of Oxford or Cambridge with first-class
honors can often obtain in the scholastic market.

In all this I want to make it clear that I have no quarrel
with the high wages but with the fatal obstacle to all improve-
ment. There is many a student who has been of less use to
the world than a first-rate linotype operator; but it is not just
that a student who works hard should find it more difficult to
earn a living than the compositor who plays with his work.
Undoubtedly the lack of efficiency in this branch of the print-
ing industry is the serious thing. The facts are clear, and em-
ployers should rouse themselves to put an end to it. Naturally
it is not the function of the Typographical Association or of
the London Society of Compositors to lower the wages of their
own members, nor does the primary responsibility for securing
increased efficiency and a better output rest with them while
their employers remain supine.

In two respects only is the policy of the two great trade
unions of the compositors open to objection, both of which
have been mentioned above and were referred to in 'the Times
article. The first and most important is their refusal to
countenance any form of premium or bonus system. Their
resistance to this is theoretically indefensible, as a premium
system consults equally both the interests of the workman who
requires a living or minimum wage and the interests of the
employer who wants to be secured a minimum output. There
is further a supreme interest which combines both these and is
often forgotten by each side, — the common welfare of the trade.

1 That is, 2500 ems American measure. See Chapter X, “ Introduction of the
Linotype,” p. 253. — Ed


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


299


The premium system, after providing for the workman a regular
weekly wage, insures also to the employer a definite weekly
output. When the rights of both have been fully secured they
are partners in further progress, and the employed receives a
share of the profit which he is making for his employer. Not
only is it the system which prevails in and is responsible for the
progress of the most ably conducted engineering industries in
America, not only is it adopted in perhaps the best-regulated
manufacturing enterprise in the world, the Steel Works of
Pittsburg, but its principle has been accepted and it is now in
force in many prosperous workshops in our own country. Its
adoption by the printing industry would soon enable both
master and men to reach a standard equal to that now attained
in America.

The second restriction on progress with which we can
reproach both the Typographical Association and the London
Society of Compositors is not extremely serious and is not so
discreditable to the intentions of their officials as to their
intellects. They forbid any attempt to get the operator work-
ing on a weekly wage to furnish any account of his output. As
the employer now has the means of detecting by an automatic
arrangement on the machine what work each individual has
done, the continuance of this obsolete and useless regulation
among the union rules can have no effect but to prejudice them
in the eyes of the public. . . .

Before leaving the subject of composition and compositors I
should -like to add a tribute to men whom I have personally
known among the leaders of the Typographical Association of
Great Britain and Ireland. I can remember during a period of
ten years negotiations with more than three presidents and two
secretaries and many, many committeemen. My impression
from prolonged conferences and frequent dealings with them
as opponents was not only that they had a better command of
detail than we employers who had to meet them, but that they
were a farsighted, able set of men, whose influence over their
followers was in the direction of progress. They honorably
observed any engagements made with us, even at times when


3 00 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

they had great difficulty in bringing the men whom they repre-
sented into line. . . .

The course of the last ten or fifteen years in the printing
trade has been one long process of education from America.
An employer must reckon it part of his duties nowadays to
take a trip across the Atlantic as often as possible to inquire into
new processes and look up new machinery. There is nothing to
be ashamed of in this course, for during the greater part of the
last century the pilgrimage was the other way. And our imi-
tation is not slavish, nor does our capital go altogether to
American manufacturers. We have to buy our experimental
machinery mostly from the land where it was invented, but our
manufacturers are quick to take up the American patents and
to borrow their models, so that the industry is not lost to this
country. To mention a few specific instances of especial im-
portance, this has been the case with the linotype typesetting
machine and the whole class of fast rotary newspaper presses
with the triangular former, commonly called the Hoe folder, a
type now adopted by all English manufacturers but first intro-
duced from the other side. The same is true of two special
classes of flat-bed presses, some systems of applying electrical
power to printing machinery, and also the latest product of
American invention, the autoplate stereotyping machine. In
all the above cases, while the patterns and patents come from
the other side of the water, this machinery is now being manu-
factured in England.

There seems to b # e a generally prevalent opinion* among
employers who have made inquiries for themselves — and I am
not speaking now especially of my own business but referring
to all kinds of manufactures — that although wages are univer-
sally higher in America both in money and in real value, still
labor is cheaper because it is so much more efficient. This
feeling is at the bottom of the curious outcry against trade
unions lately prevalent at a time when trade unionism is
much less aggressive than it was fifty years ago. It is assumed,
and it is quite true, that our material in labor equals that of
the best country in the world. The deduction is that the labor


THE -CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


301


organizations are to blame for keeping back the proper output of
their members, and a great deal of evidence has been collected,
especially in the series of articles published in the Times , to prove
the existence of a subtle conspiracy labeled “ ca' canny ” per-
vading unionism and encouraged by its leaders, whereby a
given quantity of work can be distributed to as large a number
of hands as possible. Now we all know what “ making work”
means. Every employer knows what it means ; every one who
has ever employed a plumber can imagine what it is like. But
the accusation that “ making work” has been adopted as a
system by unionism in general and that trade-union leaders
encourage it I maintain is not proven, and moreover it is not
true Knowing personally some of the trade-union leaders I
most certainly accept their explicit denials on the subject; they
are too intelligent to adopt deliberately a policy which must
tend to general degeneration. No, ( ‘ca' canny,” as it is called,
is something much more simple than the Times would have it to
be; it is just poor human nature, or the vices of laziness and
ignorance, from which employers themselves are not exempt.
Let us imagine the position of the trade-union leader and its
difficulties. He is elected to specific duties which mostly con-
cern the relations between his constituents and their em-
ployers. He has often to bargain on their behalf about terms
and conditions of labor, and my experience is that he is gen-
erally better up in the points of his brief than are his opponents.
When the fixing of wages is in question his plain duty is to
secure the highest price for their labor.* Caveat emptor \ It is
the employer on whom the responsibility rests of- testing the
quality of the article he buys.

If we have been passed in the race of industrial efficiency by
America, — which I take to be a proved fact in more industries
than one, — the trade unions are not to blame. For one thing
their power is absurdly exaggerated, and more so by the weak
employer than by one who is capable. The strongest trade
union in Great Britain, the Amalgamated Society of Engineers,
went down before the combination of masters who were con-
tending for a point of efficiency. Whenever the newspapers of


3°2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


this country care to combine in earnest to secure the more
efficient working of linotype machines, a point on which I have
dwelt above at some length, not all the efforts of the Typo-
graphical Association nor the London Society of Compositors
can stand in the way. Nor would they struggle against it.
The difficulty in this matter is to induce employers to see their
common interest. In America, where unionism is more power-
ful and more aggressive than here, the employers as a class
have been taught to combine more readily on emergency, they
aim more at securing efficiency of labor and less at low money
wages, and above all they will make any sacrifice to secure the
real control of*their own enterprises.

On the contrary, in England the employers are in compari-
son apt to attach too much importance to low money wages,
they are lazy in resisting small encroachments on their liberty
which may later on become a dangerous interference, and they
are much slower to swallow individual jealousies for a common
purpose. But then we have not the same level of ability to
draw upon for our employing class here as in the newer coun-
try. The capable man rising from below has much greater
difficulties in his way, difficulties which are the result of cen-
turies of prejudice and class interests. On the other hand, the
best of the brains of our upper classes will go anywhere but
into industry, — into a bank or a merchant’s office perhaps, but
not into horny-handed manufacture. *The attractions of digni-
fied and cultured ease, of politics or the learned professions, are
too dazzling for that igcreasing class of people, those with small
independent means. Besides, our university and other higher
education is not yet adjusted to the new importance with which
industrial needs are confronting us. The older universities,
given up to the cultivation of the most refined forms of
pleasure, are well adapted to the requirements of persons born
to high position. But such are few, and without capital or
position waiting for him the young Oxford or Cambridge
graduate starts in business, if he is not above it, in ignorance
of two or three elementary lessons which the office-trained
boy has learned at nineteen, such as, for instance, the amount


THE CRISIS IN BRITISH INDUSTRY


303


of concern which the world takes in the fate of interesting
young men between twenty-three and thirty. We want a
university training for the modern employer, but a wasted ten
years is too high a price to pay for it. Every year the older
universities carry out faithfully their grand system of attract-
ing, selecting, and sorting out the best of the young talent of
England, a system not excelled in any other institution or set
of institutions in the world. The best are sent forward to
ambitious careers. A large number who are not needy receive
a compensation for their diminished energy in a greater appre-
ciation of cultivated pleasure. But every year a goodly propor-
tion of young intellectual England sinks back into*a disappointed
obscurity. And all the while what the industries of this country
need are brains — brains and trained brains. But we need to
train the brains at the top more than the brains at the bottom.

G. Binney Dibblee.

Manchester, England.


XIII


THE SYSTEM OF APPRENTICESHIP AT THE
BALDWIN LOCOMOTIVE WORKS 1

The Baldwin Locomotive Works have always maintained
a system of apprenticeship. ... In January, 1901, however,
a new system was inaugurated in which the apprentices were
divided into three classes. The different classes and require-
ments are shown in Diagram 1 ; the horizontal lines represent
the number of apprentices employed and the vertical lines their
age and occupation, from which it will be seen that there are :

1. First-class apprentices, of whom there were 232 in service on
January 1, 1904; they are required to have a good common-school
education and are not to be over 17 years and 3 months of age.
They are indentured for four years, and are required to attend a
free night school for at least two evenings in each week during the
first three years of the apprenticeship. The first year the apprentice
is expected to take up elementary algebra and geometry, and the rudi-
ments of mechanical drawing during the remainder of the two years.

2. Second-class apprentices, of whom there were 99 in service on
January 1, 1904. Applications for indenture in this class are con-
sidered from boys who have an advanced grammar- or high-school
training and who are not over 18 years of age. The term for this
class is three years, and the apprentices are required to attend
night school which shall teach them the rudiments of mechanical
drawing for the first two years of the indenture.

3. Third-class indenture ; this is in the form of an agreement with
young men of 21 years of age who are graduates of colleges, tech-
nical schools, or scientific institutions having courses in the higher
mathematics, natural science, and drawing. They are not required

1 From the Engineering Magazine , Vol. XXVII, 1904, pp. 321-333. See also
•“Trade and Technical Education,” Sixteenth Annual Report of the U S. Com-
missioner of Labor, 1902.

3°4


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 305


Diagram i. Classes and Requirements of Apprentices,
Baldwin Locomotive Works


Age


First Class, 237 Boys


24

23


Mechanics

and

Gang Foremen


22


21


20


Me-


Night

chan-


W orkshop

School

ical

19


Two

Dra#


Evenings

mg


per


18


Week

1 ®


S3


17


16

15


Grammar

Schools


14


13

12


Primary

Schools


9

8


Second Class, 99

*

Third Class, 48

Contractors

and

Subforemen

1

Ass’t Foremen,
Foremen, and
Executive Staff

Workshop

U niversity
or

Technical

School

Workshop

Night

School

for

Drawing

High

School

High

School

Grammar

Schools

Grammar

School

1

Primary

Schools

Primary

School


306 trade unionism and labor problems

to attend any night classes, but in lieu of this must read some tech-
nical journal and turn in a synopsis of all the articles of some jour-
nal. This matter is used for indexing the articles in the publication.
The indenture in each case places upon the firm the obligation to
teach the apprentice his art thoroughly and to furnish him abundant
opportunity to acquire a practical knowledge of the business. The
employer is also bound to retain the apprentice in service until he
has completed the term provided for in the indenture, with the
reservation of the right to dismiss the apprentice for cause.

Diagram 2. Rates of Pay of Apprentices, Baldwin
Locomotive Works


First Class

Second Class

Third Class

VO

C

oj

0)

c/3

Planer

Planer

Shaper

Shaper

ts

j-T

rt

<D

>\

C/3

Shaper

Planer

Lathe

Bench Work

c/3

X

§ ^
G ro

C/3

cA

Lathe

Bench Work

tv.

Slotter

NSk.

ON

Planer

t/3

X

G

Planer

C

a

Bench Work

j-T

a

Boring Mill


Shaper

0

Bench Work

<v

Bench Work

5 -

Highway Office

TJ

N

Lathe

"0

Bench Work

C/3

0


ON

Test Room


Bonng Cylinders

C/3

X

Test Department

U

g

Planer

u

Planing Cylinders


Valve Gang

30

♦Shaper

41

Po

Erecting Gang 1


r d

ro

Erecting Gang

-a

ro

Erecting Gang

nd

ro


Erecting


C/3

X

Erecting Gang

C

Brass Work m


1-^

Track Foreman

ri

<D

Erecting Shop


So

>4 M


to

X

Throttle Gang


C/3


Valve Gang


X


Bonus $125

$100


The rates of pay are shown in Diagram 2 ; this diagram also
shows how well the works discharge the obligation to the
.apprentice, for these statements have been compiled from
actual cases and show the work upon which the apprentices
are engaged for each three months of service. ... It will


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 307

be seen that the apprentices are changed every three months,
and the first-year apprentice is given experience of such an
extended character as to make him a first-class and thorough
mechanic. At the end of his service he is given a bonus of
$125; he is then at liberty to sever his connection with the
works and has the means of traveling halfway across the con-
tinent in search of a job satisfactory to him.

It will be seen, as shown in Diagram r, that the course for
the first-class apprentices is designed to develop first-class
mechanics and men for positions of minor responsibility; the
object of the course for the second class is to develop men for
the positions of contractors and subforemen; and the assistant
foremen, foremen, and executive staff are developed from the
third class of apprentices, although no limitation is placed upon
the height to which any class of apprentice may aspire or rise,
and the first class of apprentices may and do rise to places of
higher responsibility than those held by the third class.

It is very essential that men holding positions of responsi-
bility should acquire a habit of making observations and keep-
ing record of them, and in this manner develop habits which
will prove very valuable to them when asked to look after the
work of several men or the material required for a gang or shop.
In order to systematize this work a form is provided for the
second and third class of apprentices which each is required to
fill in. This form contains all the data necessary to establish
piecework prices. The better class of apprentices is thus or-
ganized into an elemental rate-fixing department, and informa-
tion is secured from which can be obtained a very accurate
estimate of the cost of labor or of any piece of work The
superintendent of apprentices also secures a very accurate
knowledge of the work being done by each apprentice and a
means for comparing the work of the different apprentices.

The management carefully guard against any tendency
toward paternalism, in an effort to bring out the individual
qualities of the apprentices, and with the belief that the appren-
tices will develop into better and stronger men if they are com-
pelled to rely upon their own resources. There are no special


308 trade unionism and labor problems


No

MACHINE INSPECTION

Shop .. Foreman Machine . No Date

Contractor .. . Class of Work . Card

Material . - Engine

Operation

Size
of Tool

R P M

Feed

Depth
of Cut

Speed

Total

Time

Average

Time

Minimum

Time


Remarks :


Tool steel used Apprentice


lectures and no clubs or social features ; the blue overalls level
all social distinction ; princes and sons of men of wealth work
shoulder to shoulder with those less favored, and it is such an
everyday experience as to call for no comment.

Since January i, 1901, at which time the present system
of apprenticeship was inaugurated under the supervision of
Mr. N. W. Sample, there have been indentured 545 appren-
tices, — 352 first-class, 124 second-class, and 69 third-class. Of
this number 153, or about 28 per cent, have been discharged
for reasons other than expiration of their terms of apprentice-
ship. The total number of apprentices carried on the shop rolls
at the close of the year 1903 was 379, of which number 345
are machinists, 5 blacksmiths, 5 brass finishers, 10 molders, 12


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 309

pattern makers, 1 boiler maker, and 1 sheet-iron worker. There
are 232 first-class, 99 second-class, and 48 third-class.

In addition to indentured apprentices there are 23 special
apprentices, largely from foreign countries, one being a native
of Finland, one of Costa Rica, two of San Domingo, five of
Cuba, one of Spain, four of Japan, three of Porto Rico, and one
of Mexico.

The number of apprentices indentured during the year 1903
was 165 ; of this number 156 were indentured to the machinists’
trade, 5 to the trade of pattern making, 1 to brass finishing,
1 to molding, and 1 to boiler making. There are 97 first-class,
40 second-class, and 28 third-class. There have been 61 appren-
tices discharged during the year and 13 dropped from the rolls
by reason of expiration of apprenticeship.

Two apprentices in the first class completed their terms
during the year. Both are exceptionally good hands and at
the expiration of their time were employed as machinists.
Eleven apprentices in the third class -completed their terms
during the year; six of this number have been promoted to
places of responsibility in the erecting and machine shops and
in the maintenance department ; five others are employed as
machinists in the erecting shop.

During the year 1904 15 first-class, 31 second-class, and 19
third-class apprentices will complete their terms of apprentice-
ship. The attendance of the apprentices at the second term of
the school year, commencing January 5 and ending February 25,
1903, was 63 per cent of all the first-class and second-class boys
on the rolls at the opening of the term, and it is expected that
the percentage of attendance for the present year will be even
greater.

These figures show that the Baldwin Locomotive Works are
doing their share to prevent “race suicide” of the trades
worked upon in their establishment. It will also be seen that
the plan is not altogether a philanthropic one, for the incor-
poration of the several features mentioned before makes the
system self-supporting. The chief advantage, however, is the
development of a loyal, brainy set of men with a thorough


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


310

training in the mechanic arts and especially developed in cer-
tain lines. Those of them that remain will lend their energy to
assisting and building up the business of their employers, and
they are just as proud of the works and their accomplishments
and just as jealous of their reputation as the proprietors them-
selves, for they consider themselves the children of the works
The manufacturing plant that has a loyal, intelligent body of
workmen who make their employers’ interest their own, has
the very best equipment for meeting the strenuous competi-
tion of the present day. s> M _ Vauclain _

From Proceedings of the Engineers ’ Club of Philadelphia ,

Vol. XIX, January, 1902, pp. 60-64. Remarks by Mr.

Vauclain, answering inquiries.

... In handling several thousand apprentice boys it became
apparent to me that no matter how well the apprentice was taught
in the workshops, or how much he was encouraged to go to the vari-
ous night schools in our city, such as the Franklin or Spring Garden
Institute, the Young Men’s Christian Association, Drexel, or others
for the technical part of his education, we found that he desired
something to show that he had learned the art or that he had served
a specific time at this art. In other words, he was just as anxious to
get his diploma as the young man who graduates from the university,
or from Sibley Or Stevens, or some such institution, and in my opin-
ion was just as much entitled to it. It also became apparent to me
that if we were to remain successful in competition with the world
we should have to get to work at once and systematically educate our
apprentices not only in so far as the handicraft is concerned, but so
that they should have a certain amount of technical knowledge to go
with it, and that this technical knowledge should go hand m hand
with the manual training that they were receiving in the shops.
Very naturally the thought occurred to me, “ What are we going to
do with the great unwashed, — the boys who cannot go to school,
the boys who are turned out of the grammar schools perhaps before
they have barely entered them ? ” The parents must put these boys
to work, and, fortunately for us, the laws of Pennsylvania relieve us
of this mass of humanity — poorly trained and poorly educated, and
whose parents have no thought in placing them at work but the


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 31 1

'greed of gain. The law allows the employment of any boy under
sixteen years of age and over thirteen only when his parents go
before a magistrate and get a permit ; consequently we are able to
keep out of our workshops all boys under sixteen, except those who
are the sons of widows and who must have employment somewhere.
These boys we employ as messengers, and keep them and train them
and bring them along until such time as we can put them to a trade.
Our idea m establishing three grades of apprentices was to take care
of the three grades of boys that come to us. First, the boys of the
masses, — the boys of ordinary education, very ordinary education
indeed ; these boys we compel to remain with us four years. We
require that they shall go outside at night to some of the many night
schools and take a one year’s course in elementary geometry and alge-
bra in order to get a slight knowledge of these subjects. The second
and third years they must attend drawing school. They must take a two
years’ course m drawing outside of the workshops. At the expiration
of the four years we give these boys a bonus and we discharge them
from our employ. They get a diploma — their indenture is their
diploma; their bonus is their reward and the wherewith to go else-
where and seek employment. Now, the high-school boys are well-
educated boys. I defy any young men of eighteen to go before an
employer with a better education than these boys who come to us
from our Philadelphia High School. They have a good knowledge of
geometry and many of the higher branches of mathematics ; they know
something of mechanical drawing, enough to go on with the work.
Therefore we omit with such boys the preliminary course in elementary
algebra and geometry and we prescribe that for two years they must
attend night school in mechanical drawing in order to perfect them-
selves, — in order to learn to express their thoughts upon paper as
they absorb ideas in the workshop. We also give such young men a
bonus, and we require only three years of service from them on account
of the superior education they have when they come to us. The
superior education enables us more quickly to grasp the needs, — the
place to put them, — and they absorb more or less readily the instruc-
tions given them from their immediate superiors through the superin-
tendent of the shop. The bonus these young men get is $100 in place
of the $125 of their more unskilled companions. This $100 we think is
sufficient to enable them to go elsewhere and secure employment, and
we are never ashamed to let one of these apprentices go for that. He
always shows up well. The third man to take care of is the graduate
of our universities, the ordinary mechanical engineer who comes to us


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


312

not quite so green as grass so far as mechanical handicraft is con-
cerned. He is willing to get down to the hardest work we have in our
shop, and he works at it like a steam engine. He has all the technical
knowledge that is necessary. He has it, but he does not know how
to use it. We encourage him in this manner: We cannot indenture
him, being a man, but we make a specific contract with him for two
years and pay him enough to keep body and soul together. We give
him thirteen cents an hour for the first year, sixteen cents an hour for
the second year, and a clean certificate at the end of that time. We
have not had a man of that description for that length of time who
has not been lifted out of the position he had contracted for and who
is not enjoying a very much more remunerative position and one in the
line of promotion. It is from these men that we must fill the superior
offices in our workshop, and these boys we promote. The man or
boy who has determined to get to the top and will burn his candle
at night to gain the knowledge that his more favored companion has
received in a better institution of learning than he has attended
also gains his reward. The third boy we must have to fill the ordi-
nary ranks in the workshops, and the better educated we can have
the ordinary rank and file in our workshops the better chance we
will have of competing with foreign manufacturers and the better
chance we will have of extending the markets of American manufac-
tures throughout the world ; it is only in this way that we can do so.
You have asked me why we can afford to do this, — why we can
afford to turn away from the doors every year several hundred young
men. We do not expect to keep them all. We will keep the better
ones that we come across from time to time. We promote them so
that their ambition will permit them to stay with us. Have you not
already seen the point ? Every one of these men that go forth from
an establishment of this kind will sing its praises forever. They
will shout just as lustily for the Baldwin Locomotive Works as they
have done for Yale, Harvard, or the university, or any other institu-
tion they have left. You will have an advertising medium that can-
not be surpassed by anything ; and further than that, you will have
established in your own workshop a set of men that will be invalu-
able, that you can never hire in the open market. When I hear a
manager say he has had so many men call in his efforts to secure a
foreman, he has tried and tried to get certain men to do certain work
and failed, I pity that man. That man has not the courage to go
down in his pocket and labor for a few years to train men to fill
these positions, and if you can put out your coin, if you have the


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 313

small courage to hand it over to these young men, you will get it
back tenfold before you know where you are.

Q. — I should like to ask Mr. Vauclain to what extent the instruc-
tion of the apprentice is conducted under the direct supervision of
the Baldwin Locomotive Works.

Mr. Vauclain. — The Baldwin Locomotive Works do not intend
to give night instruction. They do not intend to impart the tech-
nical knowledge. We depend upon the various night schools estab-
lished throughout the city, and we pray for the establishment of more
and better night schools to give instruction for that portion of the
training of the apprentices. The manufacturer has the commercial
side of the question to deal with. He can impart the commercial
side of the business in connection with the technical training. He
must be a manual student commercially. He must be able to make
that work pay. He must be able to get it out for a certain sum of
money, and he must be able to get it out well for that money, because
the better his product is the more work will come into that workshop,
therefore, if the foremen, or the superintendents, or the owners, or
the managers of these manufacturing institutions will give their
time and attention to the handicraft, the manual training, they cer-
tainly should expect to get the technical portion of the training of
their students outside. Now, in order to make a scheme of this sort
successful, one must make a business of it. You cannot hand these
boys over to the tender mercies of a foreman, because it is not one
out of fifty who can take a boy and who can say to himself, “ That
boy is perfect on that work , here, give him another planer ; there is
no use keeping that boy on that work any longer.” No, he will keep
him there until the superintendent says, “You must not keep that
boy there any longer; you are doing him an injustice.” In order to
avoid such a condition of affairs I felt that we should have a super-
intendent of apprentices, a man whose business should be to look
after the apprentices not only in the shop but out of the shop, a man
who would see that they are taken care of and that the foreman does
not take advantage of them, but that as fast as a boy learns he is
pushed along. We hire him for what he learns from us for the future,
and we must have that boy pushed along so that he can learn, so that
he can absorb everything that is capable of being absorbed in that shop.
If he is not capable of being pushed along so fast, he is pushed along
slowly and more care is taken of him. We do not want to allow that
boy to sink down into disappointed youth. We just want him, when
he is twenty-one, to be able to work and to go on and keep on working


314 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

with irresistible energy. Now, this superintendent of apprentices
must do that work, and he must further see that the boy carries
out his side of the contract, — that he attends these night schools.
He must see where he goes; he must examine into the matter; he
must see the boy’s teacher or professor and he must report upon his
progress, so that we can form a determination of the value of this
apprentice from a technical standpoint. We find it very difficult to
provide for a certain branch of this work, but great effort is being
made to carry it on for any number of boys. The public schools are
taking an interest ; everybody will take an interest in it after a while,
when it becomes known. It is the right policy, if we can only interest
manufacturers to establish a system of this kind. All those interested
will find all they can do to keep up with the other end of the busi-
ness if the manufacturer will take care of the handicraft ; and until
that time does come, if we cannot obtain the technical education for
these young men outside at night, as we should, the only thing to do
is to establish an educational institution of our own and take these
boys so many hours from work and say, You must go there and
receive it. Insist upon it. It does n’t cost much. You can get a good
educator for $3000 a year, and what is $3000 when you divide it up
among a thousand boys ? Three dollars for each boy ; and if those
boys are worth anything they will not only earn their wages but they
will earn a great deal more. They will earn the money you might
spend upon their education, and in the years to come they will be
grateful for the trouble you have taken to make better men of them.

Q. — I would like to ask Mr. Vauclain if he can say whether or
not, taking the last six months of the work of the three grades, the
high school or the university men show a decided advantage and
adaptability with tools and otherwise over the other class that lack
education.

Mr. Vauclain. — That goes without question. The better edu-
cated a young man is the better his work is all the way through ;
that is, I am speaking of them as a whole, as an entirety. You
occasionally find a young man who has had no chances when he was
young, — a boy that we have taken in, perhaps, as an errand boy,
whom we have brought along and raised by common education.
The foremen give him a book on arithmetic and they let him work
problems in his spare time. The clerks in the office teach him how
to handle figures, and in that way he gets some education before he
is apprenticed; when he gets apprenticed he wants to know more.
He goes to the Spring Garden Institute and he learns howto put his


APPRENTICESHIP AT THE BALDWIN WORKS 315

thoughts on paper. He will ask you enough questions to set you
crazy. That is one of the boys that you cannot keep down, and his
work of the fourth year will shine alongside the work of the more
educated person. He is not the man the more educated person is,
and he realizes it and absorbs all he can from him. He listens and
profits by what this man is willing to give him. One of the greatest
things in the success of a young man is his ability to handle men,
and unless he has that ability he is next to worthless as a manager.
In this connection we try to give as many of our young men as
show any capacity whatever for handling men an opportunity to
improve. As soon as we perceive they can handle two or three men
we give them the opportunity, and we increase the number and are
glad to increase it, because we have vacant places waiting at the
top for men who can fill these positions; until then we have to fill
them from the few we hire from the outside.


XIV


THE SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING
TRADE 1

The term “sweating,” or “ sweating system,” originally de-
noted a system of subcontract, wherein the work is let out to
contractors # to be done in small shops or homes. “ In practice/’
says the report of the Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics , 2
“ sweating consists of the farming out by competing manufac-
turers to competing contractors of the material for garments,
which in turn is distributed among competing men and women
to be made up.”

The system to be contrasted with the sweating system is the
“factory system,” wherein the manufacturer 3 employs his own
workmen, under the management of his own foreman or super-
intendent, in his own building, with steam, electric, or water
power. In the sweating system the foreman becomes a

1 From Report of the U. S. Industrial Commission, Vol. XV, 1901, pp. 319-352.

2 Report of the Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1892, p. 358.

3 The term “manufacturer” in the clothing trade has a peculiar significance.
It means the wholesale merchant, or warehouseman. The exact designation would
be “ merchant manufacturer.” Such a manufacturer usually has an “inside shop ”
and several “outside shops.” The inside shop is usually on the manufacturer’s
own premises, and includes the cutters who cut the cloth for the contractors, the
examiners who inspect the garments on theh* return, and the “ bushelmen ” who
repair and reshape the garments if necessary.

The “ outside shops ” are the shops of contractors who take the goods out from
the manufacturer for stitching and finishing If the manufacturer does his own
work directly under a superintendent or foreman, instead of indirectly through a
contractor, this shop also is known as an “inside shop.” Workmen employed by
a contractor often speak of themselves as employed by the manufacturer who
furnishes the work to the contractor. Since the manufacturer sets the contract
price, it might almost be said that the contractor is really the manufacturer’s fore-
man, who taji^s the responsibility of finding help, doing the work, and making
such wages of management as he can at the price set by the manufacturer.

316


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 317

contractor, with his own small shop and foot-power machine.
In the factory system the workmen are congregated where they
can be seen by the factory inspectors and where they can
organize or develop a common understanding. In the sweating
system they are isolated and unknown.

The sweating system has undergone significant changes dur-
ing the past fifty years. The early part of the last century, when
the term seems to have originated in England, it applied to
ready-made new clothing in the form of army clothing given
out to contractors. At that time each tailor usually made the
entire coat at home. The manufacturer of ready-made clothing
and army clothing would give his work to a contractor who was
a responsible party, usually not a tailor himself. This con-
tractor would then give the work to some man who kept a
tailors’ boarding house or a saloon where the tailors were
accustomed to come together. This boarding-house keeper or
saloon keeper was a subcontractor, though not a tailor. He in
turn would give this work out to the individual tailors whom
he personally knew, who were responsible for the work. The
money received by these subcontractors for their part was called
(< sweat money,” implying that their profit was the difference
between the price they received from the manufacturer or con-
tractor and the price paid to the tailor for making the garment,
and that they invested no labor in the transaction.

There was an agitation in the United States in the early
fifties against this system because of the low condition of the
tailors. They worked for very low wages and many of them
were unemployed much of the time. The work used to be
made between seasons for /me third and one fourth of the
regular price.

In the sixties the influx of the Russian Jews into the ready-
made clothing trade, replacing the native and Irish tailors,
began to be felt. Here the incursion of the foreigner seems to
have been irresistible. His success was not always due to the
lower wages he was willing to take, for he was competing with
the outcasts of the English tailoring trade, the unskilled English-
woman and the wretched and often imported Irishman, whose


318 trade unionism and labor problems

wages were as low as the contractor was willing to pay. But
the success of the immigrant was due to his willingness to change
the mode of production by using the sewing machine and divi-
sion of labor, against which the native tailor showed a decided
aversion. Here the influx of the foreign Jew has wrought a
complete change in the contract system. The old contractor
was a mere middleman and had no need for any knowledge of
the tailoring trade ; he was generally a lodging-house keeper, who
secured the work by giving a cash deposit for the goods he took
from the manufacturer and distributed among the wretched
tailors in the lodging house and the helpless women in his
vicinity, who completed the whole garment. He was replaced
by the Jewish contractor, who made his work in a shop. This
Jewish contractor was not a mere middleman ; he was neces-
sarily a tailor and an organizer of labor, for his work was done
by a system of division of labor calling for various grades and
forms of skill, namely, the baster, machinist, and presser, with
various subdivisions, such as fitter, busheler, finisher, button-
hole maker, feller, basting puller, etc.

The position of the contractor or sweater now in the business
in American cities is peculiarly that of an organizer and
employer of immigrants. The man best fitted to be a contractor
is the man who is well acquainted with his neighbors, who is
able to speak the languages of several classes of immigrants, who
can easily persuade his neighbors or their wives and children
to work for him, and who in this way can obtain the cheapest
help. The contractor can increase the number of people
employed in the trade at very short notice. During the busy
season, when the work doubles, the number of people employed
increases in the same proportion. All the contractors are
agents and go around among the people. Housewives, who
formerly worked at the trade and abandoned it after marriage,
are called into service for an increased price of a dollar or two
a week. Men who have engaged in other occupations, such as
small business and peddling, and are out of the business most
of the year, are marshaled into service by the contractor, who
knows all of them and can easily look them up and put them in


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 319

as competitors by offering them a dollar or two a week more
than they are getting elsewhere. It is the contractor who has
introduced the Italian home finishers into the trade ; he has
looked them up and taught them the work and is getting it
made for less than half the wages that he formerly paid for the
same work.

The contractor never has at one time a large amount of work.
Through him the industry is scattered over a wide area, among
all kinds of people, and he thrives as long as they do not know
one another. The contractor is an important factor in the
clannishness of the immigrant nationalities. It is in part due
to him that we have in large cities the Jewish districts, Polish
districts, Swedish districts, etc., with very little assimilation.
The contractors establish their shops in the heart of the district
where the people live, and since they can practically earn their
living at home, they have no opportunity of mingling with
others or of learning from the civilization of other peoples.

The following is a typical case : A Polish Jew in Chicago, at
a time when very few of the Poles were tailors, opened a shop
in a Polish neighborhood. He lost money during the time he
was teaching the people the trade, but finally was a gainer.
Before he opened the shop he studied the neighborhood ; he
found the very poorest quarters where most of the immigrant
Poles lived. He took no one to work except the newly arrived
Polish women and girls. The more helpless and dependent they
were the more sure they were of getting work from him. In
speaking about his plans he said, “ It will take these girls years
to learn English and to learn how to go about and find work.
In that way I will be able to get their labor very cheap.” His
theory turned out to be practical. He has since built several
tenement houses.

The contractor in the clothing trade is largely responsible for
the primitive mode of production, — for the foot-power sewing
machine, for the shops in the alleys, in the attics, on top floors,
above stables, and in some cases in the homes of the people.
These small shops are able on account of low rent and meager
wages to compete successfully, although with foot power,


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


320

against the large shops and factories with steam or electric power.
Usually it is not necessary to have more than fifty dollars to
start a shop with foot-power machines. As there is no invest-
ment in goods, the contractor runs no risk. Little managing
ability is required, because the number of employees is small.

The unlimited hours of work, often seven days in the week,
is a feature of the contracting system. The contractor himself
works unlimited hours. His shop is open^ most of the time.
He deals with people who have no knowledge of regular hours.
He keeps them in the dark with regard to the prevailing number
of hours that other people work.

The contractor is an irresponsible go-between for the manu-
facturer, who is the original employer. He has no connection
with the business interests of the manufacturer nor is his inter-
est that of his help. His sphere is merely that of a middleman ;
he is practically useless in a large factory. He holds his own
mainly because of his ability to get cheap labor, and is in reality
merely the agent of the manufacturer for that purpose. In this
he generally succeeds, because he lives among the poorest class
of people, knows them personally, and knowing their circum-
stances can drive the hardest kind of a bargain. A very large
number of the people who work in the sewing trade for con-
tractors usually hope to become contractors themselves. When
they succeed in this they reduce the prices, since the con-
tractor when he first takes out work takes it for less money
than other contractors.

Usually when work comes to the contractor from the manu-
facturer and is offered to his employees for a smaller price
than has previously been paid, the help will remonstrate and
ask to be paid the full price. Then the contractor tells them,
“ I have nothing to do with the price. The price is made for me
by the manufacturer. I have very little to say about the price.”
That is, he cuts himself completely loose from any responsi-
bility to his employees as to how much they are to get for their
labor, throwing the responsibility on the manufacturer who
originally gave him the work. The help do not know the manu-
facturer. They cannot register their complaint with the man


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 32 1

who made the price for their labor. The contractor, who did not
make the price for their labor, claims that it is of no use to
complain to him. So that however much the price for labor
goes down there is no one responsible for it.

In case the help form an organization and send a committee
to the manufacturer, the manufacturer will invaribly say, “I do
not employ you and I have nothing to do with you ” ; and when
they go back to the contractor and file their complaint, he will
invariably say, “ I am not making the price for your labor. I am
simply paying you as much as I can out of what I get from the
manufacturer.” This is also true with regard to any agree-
ments of a labor organization that may be made. If an agree-
ment is made with a contractor, it is usually worthless, because
he has no property invested that can be levied upon. If the
agreement is made with the manufacturer, it does not hold,
because he is not violating it. In this irresponsible state of the
business it is extremely difficult to devise any way in which
organizations can make agreements and enforce them.

There is always a cut-throat competition among contractors.
A contractor feels more dependent than any of his employees.
He is always speculating on the idea of making a fortune by
getting more work from the manufacturer than his neighbor-
and by having it made cheaper. Usually when he applies for
work in the inside shop he comes in, hat in hand, very much
like a beggar. He seems to feel the utter uselessness of his
calling in the business. Oftentimes the contractor is forced to
send work back because he cannot make it under the condi-
tions on which he took it, yet he does not dare to refuse the
offer for fear the manufacturer will not give him more of his
work. So he tries to figure it down by every device, and yet,
perhaps, in the end is forced to s&id it back.

The contractor is always speculating on what is coming next
in the busy season, and sometimes in the busy season he can, as
a matter of fact, save some money ; but this is only for a short
time. The most of the year, probably for about nine months,
he is in this cut-throat competition. This is indeed the worst
factor in the trade.


3 22


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


It must not be inferred from what precedes that the con-
tractor is the cause of the sweating system, or that the sweat-
ing system is identical with the contract system. Both the
contractor and the sweating system are the product of a dis-
organized and crowded labor market. This distinction is not
apprehended even by the tailors’ unions, who direct their ener-
gies mainly to the abolition of the contractor instead of to the
abolition of the conditions which produce the contractor. The
factory system itself is not always clearly marked off from the
contracting system. A factory foreman may send work out at
night to be done by his own employees at their homes. A fac-
tory may use partly mechanical power and partly foot power.
A manufacturer may employ subcontracting within the factory.
On the other hand, the small manufacturer may practice the
same oppression and impose the same insanitary conditions upon
his employees as would be done by a contractor. In the manu-
facture of cigars the “ sweater” is not a contractor, but is a
manufacturer who buys his material on the market and sells his
product to jobbers or regular purchasers. In the manufacture
of clothing the “ sweater” is a contractor who agrees to take
out material owned by the merchant and to return it to him as a
finished garment. The only difference is that in the cigar busi-
ness the raw material is owned by the one who directly employs
the labor, while in the clothing business the raw material is the
property of the merchant. In both cases the labor is equally
“ sweated.”

The futility of directing the energies of reform solely against
the contractor may be seen in New York in one branch of the
clothing trade, that of ladies’ ready-made garments, including
cloaks and so-called “ tailor-made suits.” Already in this line
of manufacture fully 75 per dfcnt of the product has passed out
of the hands of contractors into those of “ manufacturers.”
Ten years ago probably 90 per cent of women’s clothing was
made by people who worked for contractors, while now only
about 25 per cent of the trade are working for contractors.
But so far as the people employed in the business are con-
cerned there has not been any material change for the better,


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 323

since these small manufacturers retain all the abuses of long
hours, small pay, and insanitary shops. The way in which this
new class of manufacturers has arisen in the clothing trade and
has driven out of business the large manufacturer on Broadway
who sent his work out to contractors is one of the remarkable
developments of this remarkable trade. These former large
manufacturers who have abandoned the ready-made business
have gone into the retail or custom trade and have set up model
“inside” factories on Broadway, where they cater to the more
well-to-do purchasers. Small manufacturers on Division and
other streets, who have absorbed the former wholesale trade,
have followed a method somewhat as follows.

A contractor who had been able to save five hundred or six
hundred dollars makes up in a small shop a number of samples
and designs. He then communicates with the buyers of whole-
sale dry goods or with clothing houses, cloak jobbers, country
merchants, “ mail-order ” houses, or department stores, stating
that he has opened a shop and is able to sell new and first-class
designs in the several patterns of cloaks and suits at a much
lower price than the cloak manufacturers are doing. He does
not send out traveling salesmen, but waits for buyers to call and
see his samples and leave their orders. Having received an
order, he takes it to some convenient bank, which usually extends
him credit with a woolen house somewhat approximating the
amount of the order, furnishing also a certain amount of cash
with which to pay his help. The bank takes the order from him
as guaranty, and also collects the bill -after the goods are made
and delivered. In this way a man with very little money is able
to blossom out from a contractor into a manufacturer and to do
business to the amount of the orders he is able to get.

The saving by this small man as against the large cloak
manufacturer is in the following ways : he does not have to pay
a high-priced designer, since he designs his own patterns ; he
does not have to pay a superintendent, since he manages his
own business ; nor does he pay high rents, since he is usually
located in the poor quarter of the city. He can get labor as
cheap as any contractor because he runs his shop in the same


324 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

method when he becomes a manufacturer as he ran it when he
was a contractor ; that is, his shop is open day and night, and
people can work as many hours as they wish. He is always
on the lookout for cheap help and he is careful in regard to
saving the goods and pieces, which cannot be saved in the
same manner in the large factory. So by selling goods in some
instances for thirty and forty per cent less than the wholesale
cloak manufacturer can possibly do he can give the buyers of
these wholesale and jobbing houses and also the retail and
department" stores the benefit that was formerly derived by the
large wholesale manufacturer. In reality he is little more than
he used to be, a contractor, with the difference that he now does
his own cutting and his own marketing ; and the profits on
his labor and on the capital invested in the business are shared
with the banker.


The Task System

Accompanying the immigration of Jews from 1876 to 1882
the remarkable “ task system” was introduced in the coat
shops in New York. This system produces at the present time
perhaps one half the coats made in that city. The task system
is peculiar to the city of New York, where it originated and
continues. It exists neither in other cities of the United States
nor in other countries. It is peculiar, also, to the Jewish shops.

The task system was the first real division of labor in coat
shops. It has a double characteristic. There is a “team,” or
“set,” of workmen, and t^e wages are paid by the piece. The
number of workmen in the set is three, — the machine operator,
the baster, and the underbaster or finisher. The pressing .is
usually done by a fourth man, who is not a member of the team.
With such nicety has this system been adjusted, through the
pressure of competition, that at the present time it is found that
:one presser can press more coats than one team can complete in
a day ; and, on the other hand, two teams can furnish more work
than one presser can complete ; consequently the standard shop,
in which four fifths of the task work is done, is that of the
“three-machine” shop, that is, the shop of three teams of


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 325

operator, baster, and finisher to two pressers. Sewing on buttons
and tacking pockets is done by a girl working by the week.
Originally in many cases where the shop was small the con-
tractor himself was one of the team, but at the present time,
with three teams, he is the fitter or bushelman. Each team,
therefore, is composed of the following : one operator, one baster,
one edge baster or finisher. To every three teams, two pressers ;
two girls for sewing on buttons, tacking pockets, and so forth ;
one or two girls for buttons, felling armholes, and so forth.

When the task system originated with the Jewish immi-
grants, about the year 1877, it took the place of the journey-
man tailor in the ready-made work. The coat for which the
tailor received $5 or $6 as custom work, and for which he
received $2.50 to $3 in the dull season as ready-made work,
was made in these Jewish task shops for $1.50 to $2. At this
price the Jews earned as much money as the merchant tailor
and even more. The latter made very little use of the sewing
machine. Most of the work on the coat was done by hand.
When the division of labor was introduced in the Jewish shops
each particular division became a trade in itself. The machine
operator did not know how to do pressing or basting, the presser
could not do the work of the others, and so on. The sewing-
machine operator now became an important factor in the trade.
He was able to do many parts of the work by machine that were
formerly done by hand, and as a result the coat was made much
quicker. Then again, the men who were engaged only in bast-
ing were able to do tjieir work much quicker and probably
better. The same was true of the presser and finishers.

•In addition to the division of labor, the characteristic of the
task system as distinguished from a piece system consists in
the fiction that the workmen are earning a standard amount of
wages per week. The scale originally fixed upon, and adhered
to at the present time, was $18 for the operator, $16 for the
baster, and $7 to $9 for the girl edge baster or finisher, or $11
to $12 for the man edge baster who has latterly taken the
girl's place. Starting out upon this basis, it was found twenty
years ago that a team could complete per day eight or nine


326 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

cheviot coats with plain seams and with welts on the outside
At this rate the price per coat for the team was about So cents.
The present price is only 28 to 35 cents.

The process by which the price of labor was reduced, follow-
ing the great influx of Hebrews in 1882, was somewhat as
follows. The contractor, who was, perhaps, himself a member
of the team on a kind of cooperative basis with the others,
would go to the manufacturer and ask for work. Finding that
there was but little work to be had, he would offer to take the
coats cheaper than the price theretofore paid. When he came
home he would tell his men that there was not much work and
he was obliged to take it cheaper, and, since he did not want to
reduce their wages and pay them less per day, all they would
have to do would be to make another coat in the task. That is,
if they were accustomed to make 9 coats in the task, they would
be required to make 10, then 11, and so on. The wages were
always reduced on the theory that they were not reduced at all
but the amount of labor increased. In this way intense speed
was developed. The men who had been accustomed to making
9 coats in a task would make 10, and so on up to 15, 18, and
even 20, as is the customary task at the present time. The
hours began to be increased, in order to make the task in a day.
Within the last three years it is said by the men that it is only
in very rare cases that a set can make a task in a day ; that it is
usual for these sets of three, even when working twelve or thir-
teen hours per day, to make only 4^ or 5 tasks in a week. In
previous years, they claim, men were able to make 7 and 8 tasks
or days’ work per week.

This increased number of coats per task probably explains
why, in the evolution of the trade, women could not hold their
own as edge basters and finishers. About 1500 to 2500 girls
have been driven out and men have taken their places at wages
fifty per cent higher. This is because both the hours and the
speed were increased continually so that women were phys-
ically unable to perform the task.

The task system, it is said, has two advantages, — the men
work substantially by piecework and have a personal inducement


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 327

to perform their work as quickly as they can ; and since they
are in a team, each has to keep up with the others, so that
a higher speed by any one induces higher speed by the other
two. So nicely are the members of these teams adjusted to
each other that frequently a baster or an operator is out of
work because for the time being he cannot find the other two
members whose speed is exactly fitted to his. By this queer
cooperative production in the form of team work, combined
with the personal interest of piecework, the Hebrew tailors in
New York have devised what is perhaps the most ingenious
and effective engine of overexertion known to modern industry.

One reason why piecework and high speed have become the
framework of the contractors’ shops is probably because the
Jewish people are peculiarly eager to earn a big day’s wages
regardless of sacrifice. The Jewish workman is willing to work
very hard for this, and does not wish to have it said that there
is a limit to his earning capacity. It is the desire of the Jew
to have his employment so arranged that he can speculate and
bargain upon his earning capacity and can make use of the
seasons: Piecework gives him that opportunity. In a rush
season he will demand a decrease in the number of coats to
the task, making more tasks per week and consequently earn-
ing higher wages. If the work is slack and the number of
coats in the task is increased, he will speculate upon his abil-
ity to work harder and still earn high wages. Usually he is
anxious to accumulate money and open up a contractor’s shop
for himself, or to go into some kind of business. It is not for
love of hard work nor because of lack of other enjoyment that
the Jew is willing to work so hard, but for the sake of getting
rid of work. At the same time it is true regarding green immi-
grants of all races that the conditions of a strange land stimu-
late them to the hottest exertion of which they are capable.
The Jewish immigrant is peculiar only in that he is not by
nature a wage-earner, and he keeps before himself continually
the goal of emancipation from hard work.

This characteristic of the Jew shows itself in his irritation
under the discipline of the factory. He is willing to work long


328 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

hours, but does not like to have any one dictate the time when
he shall begin work or stop work. He does not like to be
driven nor have bis attention called to the fact that he has not
made much work. He wants to have freedom. This he usually
has in the contractor’s shop. He is very nearly “ his own boss ” ;
he can smoke, talk, run around, stay at work an hour longer, come
in an hour earlier, or come later. The conditions of sweat-shop
employment which favor this are piecework and an almost com-
plete absence of factory regulations and factory management.

While the task system displaced the journeyman tailor in the
manufacture of ready-made coats, it has itself in the past five years
met a competitor in the factory, or large shop. In this contest the
task system appears to be antiquated and uneconomical. Dur-
ing the twenty-five years of its existence in New York it shows no
material change. The division of labor is but slightly different
from what it was originally. We now have the operator, baster,
and edge baster or finisher, with a helper or two in each branch
of work, just as formerly, except that the edge baster or finisher
is now a man, while originally this work was done by women.
But the task itself, instead of being 8 or io coats, was raised to
20 to 24- coats, though reduced to io or 12 at times by the
union. The workmen make up in overexertion what they lack
in shop organization and division of labor. The team system
lacks elasticity and the power of expansion. The division of
labor can go no further than to pass the coat through the hands
of not more than nine or ten persons. If the shop grows in size
the growth is not organic, it is segmentary. It cannot add a
man here and a girl there, but must add an entire team; in
fact it must add three teams in order economically to adjust
the work of the two pressers.

There has, indeed, been a cumbersome attempt during the
past ten years to introduce a further division of labor in the
task system. It consists in a curious reduplication of the team.
The operator in the original team becomes the first operator
and does the parts requiring more careful work. He takes
with him another man, called “ two thirds of an operator,” who
does operator’s work requiring less skill and is paid two-third


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 329

wages, and still a third man, called “ one third of an operator/'
who does the least skillful work and gets one-third pay. The
same threefold division is made for the baster and for the
edge baster, so that there is also a “ whole baster,” a “ two-
thirds baster," and a “ one-third baster." A shop of this kind
is called not a three-team shop but a “ two-team " shop, since
it requires a whole man plus a two-thirds man plus a one-third
man to make two “ whole men." This awkward subdivision is
not making headway, but the entire task system is yielding to
the more elastic and organic factory system. This is known in
the trade as the “ Boston system," or “ section work," in order
to distinguish it from the task system, which is peculiar to New
York. It is not really a “ Boston system," since it is found also
in Philadelphia, Chicago, and elsewhere, but it has been slow to
gain a foothold in New York because the task system has met
it by its unique capacity for overexertion. Now that it has been
introduced on the basis of New York's wages and standards of
exertion those contractors who have adopted it are confident
of its future. The “ factory " employs 50 to 200 persons, where
the task system employs 10 to 20. It has a minute division
of labor and an elasticity of expansion far beyond that of the
task system.


Nationalities and Organizations

The Jew occupies a unique position in the clothing trade.
His physical strength does not fit him for manual labor. His
instincts lead him to speculation and trade. His individualism
unsuits him for the life of a wage-earner, and especially for the
discipline of a labor organization. For these reasons when the
Jew first lands in this country he enters such light occupations
as sewing, cigar making, and shoemaking. Only about eleven
per cent of the Jewish immigrants were tailors in Europe.
The reason why so many of them take up that occupation in
America is because the work is light. They begin as helpers
and advance to full-fledged mechanics. After they have worked
for some time and have learned the trade they open contractors'


330


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


shops for themselves. They can begin with a capital of fifty
dollars From that they go into the wholesale manufacture of
clothing A similar development occurs in cigar manufacture,
Jews do not enter in large numbers those industries where
machinery plays an important part, but if they do enter they
strive to set up as small manufacturers or contractors. Probably
the only place in the United States where shoes are made out-
side of factories by the old sweating system is among Jewish
contractors in New York.

Jewish women are employed to a much less extent than the
women of other nationalities, and their children are kept in
school until fifteen or sixteen years of age. It is quite unusual
for Jewish tailors to teach their children their own trade. The
young generation seek other callings.

The Italian tailor in his own country receives only about
one half the wages received by the Russian, Polish, Hungarian,
and Roumanian Jews in their own countries, and about one
quarter of the wages paid for similar grades of work in western
Europe. Consequently in the United States, with his standard
of living, he can successfully compete with the newly arrived
Russian Jew and much more successfully with the German or
Englishman. The Russian Jew who is not a tailor but learned
his work in this country and works in the shop as operator or
presser is usually from the stock of small business men in the
old country who have a fairly good standard of living, and he is
regarded among the clothing workers as of the better class.
He will insist on better living and higher wages for his par-
ticular kind of work than the tailor. This accounts for a curious
paradox in the task system in New York, where the operator,
who usually comes from the commercial classes in Russia, will
command $3 instead of $ 2 .66, which is paid to the skilled tailor
for the basting. This also holds true in other branches, such
as cloak making and pants and vest making. The operator
usually gets more money than the tailor, due to the fact that
this line of employment has been taken up by a class of people
who did not work in the clothing trade in the old country and
whose standard of living was not as low as that of the tailor.


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 331

But when we come to the Italian we find that he will work
at operating, or pressing, or any branch of the trade which he
learns in this country at exceedingly low wages. He has
usually been a farmer or farm hand, and the standard of living
of the Italian farmer is even below that of the tailor. While as
yet the Italians have not come into the trade in very large
numbers, since they have sought mainly the common outdoor
employments, yet those who have taken up this branch of work
usually accept much less wages than skilled tailors. Consider-
ing the large immigration of Italians it seems that the future
clothing workers in this country are not likely to be the Jews
but the Italians.

One point at which the Italians have an advantage is the
employment of their wives and sisters. The Italian and his
wife will come to the shop together. If he is a pants operator
she is usually his helper, or if he is a cloak maker she is his
hand sewer and finisher, and so both labor together to cover
the expenses of the family. In the case of the Jews, the Jew-
ish woman will not go to work in the shop after she is married.
There are numbers of cases where the Italian and his wife
together work for the same price which the Jew receives for
his labor alone, and in this way the Italian is able to crowd the
Jew out of the trade.

The Italian, like the Jew, has a very elastic character. He
can easily change habits and modes of work and adapt himself
to different conditions. He is energetic and thrifty and will
work hard, with little regard to the number of hours. It is
quite usual for an Italian cloak maker, like the Jew, after he has
worked ten hours in the shop with his wife to take a bundle of
work home at night. But, unlike the Jew, he not only does the
work at home himself, but he is assisted by the women in his
family and often leaves a part of the work for them to do dur-
ing the day.

By comparing the Italian and the Pole it will be found that
it is the Polish women who enter the sewing trade, whereas the
former Polish farmer clings to common work requiring hard labor.
The Italian is able to control such work as the manufacture


33 2


►TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR 'PROBLEMS


of clothing, silk weaving, hat making, and other trades where
taste and a fine sense of touch are essential for a successful
performance of the work. The Polish farmer can successfully
compete in factory work, where hard, automatic labor is neces-
sary; but the Italian dislikes mechanical work and is better
adapted to diversified pursuits where manipulation is required

The mode of production among the Germans and Bohemians
is similar ; the women and girls are operators, edge basters, and
finishers, with men as first basters and trimmers. The Bohemi-
ans probably employ their children in the shops more than the
Germans. The Bohemians are a fairly well-educated people,
and have a number of unions among their working population.
When the price for labor is reduced they usually start a move-
ment in resistance.

The Poles work in the same way as the Germans and Bohemi-
ans. Owing to the opposition of their priests they have never
made any attempt to join a labor organization. During the
strike in Chicago in 1896 it was the Polish shops that continued
at work and defeated the strike. The Poles are a submissive
people while working, and it is in their shops that the hardest
driving is done. They have greater endurance and will work
for a lower rate of wages than any other nationality. The con-
tractors are mainly Jews. The Polish children begin to work
early. In a shop of sixteen persons there will usually be four
to six children under sixteen years of age.

Notwithstanding the competing power of Polish women they
can probably be outclassed by Italian women. While a great
many Polish women have entered the trade they have not yet
developed great speed nor been able to work in factories pro-
ducing the best grades of work, while Italian women are almost
perfect imitators. The Italian woman can develop speed and
can work with skill. Like the Poles, they also are obedient to
orders.

The best people in the clothing trade in Chicago are the
Scandinavians, including Swedes, Norwegians, and Danes.
They are engaged in the manufacture of pants and vests, under
contractors of their own nationality. They do not work more


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 333

than ten hours a day as a rule, usually in large shops with steam
power. They uphold the price for their labor more than the
Bohemians or Poles and have developed the best labor organ-
izations in the trade . 1 Their standard of living is high, and
many of them are fairly well educated. The Swedes do not
put their children to work but send them to school.

The women of the above-mentioned nationalities — Germans,
Bohemians, Poles, and Swedes — are generally employed in the
shops. In many cases they work even after marriage. The
mother or grandmother stays at home keeping house and taking
care of the children while the younger women of the family
are in the shop. There are in the Swedish shops about five
women to one man on pants and vests, and about two women
to one man in the Polish and Bohemian coat shops. In the
Jewish shops there are about equal numbers of men and women,
although the women are mainly of other nationalities.

The standard of living of all nationalities has been gradually
raised after their immigration to this country. Probably the
Jewish immigrant changes his standard of living soonest.
When the Jew wishes to make more money he will leave his
former occupation as operator or baster and will become a
contractor or storekeeper. So that instead of trying to raise
the standard of living in the trade, he will try to leave the trade
and throw in his lot with people whose standard of living is
somewhat higher. In this way his commercial instinct militates
continually against making active efforts to better the condition
of his trade.

The Poles and Italians adhere to a lower standard of living
for a longer time. During the last few years immigration from
their countries has been continual, yet there is not much
evidence of a material rise in the standard of living among the
clothing workers. While it may be that the clothing workers
are earning more money and are living under somewhat better
conditions than they did in the old country, yet here in this
country their .lot in life has not improved. The low standard

1 These organizations were locked out and defeated m 1904-1905 on the “closed-
shop ” issue. The teamsters struck m sympathy with them. See footnote, p. 64.


334


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of living on the part of those immigrants who are continually
coming into the trade is always a successful check on the
efforts of immigrants of longer residence to better their condi-
tion. So they have no choice except either to stay in the trade
and submit to the conditions of the newly arrived immigrant
or to leave the trade and go into business. The Jews have
been successful in doing the latter. As regards the condition
of the clothing workers, it is about the same as it would be if
all these Poles, Jews, and Italians had begun to engage in the
trade yesterday. Those who have had a better standard of living,
such as the Germans and Irish, have been crowded out of the
trade and have been replaced by the Italians, Jews, and Poles.

The movement of wages in the clothing trade is directly
affected by the fate of labor organizations. Considering the
continual influx of immigrants unaccustomed to unionism, the
employment of women and children, and the prevalence of home
work, the problem of organization is indeed serious. In New
York the Jews have controlled the trade for the past twenty
years, so that conflicts of nationalities within the union have not
occasioned difficulty. The problem has been the nature of the
Jew himself. The Jew’s conception of a labor organization is
that of a tradesman rather than that of a workman. In the
manufacture of clothing, whenever any real abuse arises among
the Jewish workmen, they all come together and form a giant
union and at once engage in a strike. They bring in ninety-five
per cent of the trade. They are energetic and determined. They
demand the entire and complete elimination of the abuse. The
demand is almost unanimous and is made with enthusiasm
and bitterness. They stay out a long time, even under the
greatest of suffering. During a strike large numbers of them
are to be found with almost nothing to live upon and their fam-
ilies suffering, still insisting, on the streets and in their halls,
that their great cause must be won.

But when once the strike is settled, either in favor of or
against the cause, they are contented, and that usually ends the
union, since they do not see any practical use for a union when
there is no cause to fight for. Consequently the membership


SWEATING SYSTEM IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


335

of a Jewish union is wholly uncertain. The secretary's books
will show 60,000 members in one month and not 5000 within
three months later. If perchance a local branch has a steady
thousand members from year to year, and if they are indeed
paying members, it is likely that they are not the same members
as during the year before. A German union, on the contrary,
will have the same members year after year, well or ill, with
little change. The Jew joins the union when it offers a bargain
and drops it when he gets, or fails to get, the bargain.

The Jew is also exceedingly abstract and metaphysical and
greatly interested in general principles. His union is always,
therefore, except in time of a strike, a forum for the discussion
of socialism and the philosophy of the labor movement. The
socialist element acquires control when the workingmen stay
away from the union, and they urge an organization devoted
mainly to propaganda on the principles of the solidarity of all
labor, without much attention to trade differences. The Jewish
labor press, pamphlets, and speakers, nearly all recruited from
the socialists, have continually engaged in these discussions,
neglecting the formation and strengthening of their unions.
These statements are substantiated again and again in the his-
tory of the trade in New York. It is a saying on the East Side
that there is always a strike going on somewhere.

J. R. Commons.


A strike in New York in 1910 revolutionized the branch of Ladies’ Garments.
The “ Protocol ” entered between the Cloak, Suit, and Skirt Manufacturers’ Pro-
tective Association and the Union provided for the abolition of home work and
all subcontracting ; for the “ preferential union shop,” that is, a shop where union
standards as to conditions, hours, and wages prevail, and where union men are
preferred, although employers have freedom of selection and are not confined to
any list. There are joint boards, one on sanitary control, one on arbitration, and
one on grievances The agreement proved successful. In 1913 other strikes led
to similar agreements m the shirtwaist, kimono, and white goods’ divisions, not
included in 1910. The protocol practically unionized the shops. See author’s
paper on “Causes of the Union Shop Policy” in Proceedings of American
Economic Association , 1904.

J. R. C.


March, 1913.


XV

SLAVS IN COAL MINING


Anthracite Mines 1

Prior to the inauguration of the strike of the anthracite mine
workers in 1902 the writer was a witness of an eviction scene
in one of the mining “ patches.’' A “ patch” in the hard-coal
fields of Pennsylvania is a small group of houses situated near a
colliery and used as residences by the mine employees. The
houses in this instance had been occupied up to the time of the
eviction by members of English-speaking races. They were in
arrears for rent, and their belongings were being put out upon
the public highway by the constable and his deputies.

One particular house had been the home of the families of a
Scotchman and his son. These two men, with their wives and
the three small children of the younger, occupied the four rooms,
two of which were on the first floor and two on the second. Of
the seven members of the household the two men were the only
wage-earners All their effects on this eviction day were piled
along the highway, — a bureau, “straw ticks,” a stove, several
chairs, a rag carpet or two, with here and there a lithograph scat-
tered incongruously among boxes, kitchen utensils, and the sepa-
rated parts of beds. These and other belongings were of such
quantity and cumbersomeness as to make necessary the employ-
ment of a wagon with horse and driver to remove them. This
description would apply as well to the scenes presented at the other
miners’ houses in this particular f %patch ” on this eviction day.

A week or so later I was again at this mining “ patch.” Into
the houses unwillingly vacated by the English-speaking mine
workers representatives of the Slav races were moving. They

1 From Charities, Vol XIX, December 3, 1904 See also Wame, The Slav
Invasion and the Mine Workers, Philadelphia, 1904.

336


SLAVS IN COAL MINING


337

came not along the highway, with their belongings in wagons,
but by trail across the mountain from the railway station at
Hazleton, with their household effects m blanketed bundles and
trunklike boxes slung across their backs. The women, of whom
there were but few, carried with seeming ease huge bundles, one
on top of the head and one under each arm, and, like the men,
represented a beast-of-burden adaptability to the most exacting
physical labor under pressure from hard cii cum stances. Eight
men and one woman took up their quarters in the particular
house in which the families of the two English-speaking mine
employees had lived.

The cooking utensils of the newcomers were of the barest in
quantity and quality. They had neither chairs nor bureaus.
Their meager supply of clothing was all but limited to the gar-
ments they wore. “ Straw ticks ” and beds were conspicuous by
their absence, the new occupants being content with rolling them-
selves in blankets and sleeping upon the uncarpeted floor.

Thus in the concrete is illustrated the meaning of the Slav
invasion of the anthracite coal fields of Pennsylvania, a phenome-
non which has been going on, unobserved by most of us, for the
past quarter of a century and more.

Previous to the coming of these alien races the English, Welsh,
Irish, Scotch, Germans, Canadians, with the native Americans,
formed the mining population of the hard-coal fields and domi-
nated the labor supply of the anthracite industry. Beginning
about 1875, the Slav and Italian invasions swept into the coal
fields, bringing a group of races wholly foreign to those already
dominant there, not only ethnically but in habits and customs,
language and institutions The Pole, the Slovak, the Ruthenian,
the Bohemian, the Magyar, the Lithuanian, the Italian, and like
nationalities crowded into the mining settlements, precipitating
new factors into the already complicated industrial situation and
making intensely acute the problem of race assimilation. Briefly,
down to 1900 the most striking effect of this invasion was the
migration in large numbers of members of the English-speaking
nationalities not only from the anthracite industry itself but from
that section of Pennsylvania.


338 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Immigrants from Poland, Austria, Russia, Hungary, and Italy
in the eight hard-coal-producmg counties increased from 1925 in
1880 to 45,007 in 1890 and to 89,328 m 1900. The English-
speaking foreign-born inhabitants — those from Ireland, Ger-
many, Scotland, England, and Wales — in the anthracite region
increased from 102,421 in 1880 to 123,636 in 1890; by 1900 they
had decreased to 100,269. At the same time the total foreign-
born population increased from 108,827 in 1880 to 170,582 in
1890 and to 193,692 in 1900. In brief, the English-speaking
races, who composed nearly 94 per cent of the total foreign-born
element in the eight hard-coal-producmg counties m 1 880, formed
less than 73 per cent m 1890 and no more than 52 per cent
in 1900. From less than 2 per cent of the total foreign-born
population in 1880 the central European races increased to over
25 per cent in 1890 and to over 46 per cent in 1900.

This tendency in the anthracite industry of the Slav races to
increase and of the English-speaking nationalities to decrease is
even more clearly shown in statistics of employees of the coal-
mining companies. The foreign-born Slav and Italian workers
in and about the mines of the Philadelphia and Reading Coal
and Iron Company, the largest single employer of mine labor
in the lower or Schuylkill field, increased from 5839 in 1890 to
9521 in 1901. The foreign-born English-speaking employees
decreased from 14,176 to 1152 during the eleven years. For
the same period the employees grouped as “born in America ”
— for the most part descendants of English-speaking immigrants,
doing the easiest work in and around the mines — increased from
4719 in 1890 to 15,627 in 1901.

The movement of the Slavs into and* of the English-speaking
race out of the hard-coal industry is distinctly traceable also
according to the coal fields, being first marked in the Schuylkill
field, then in the middle or Lehigh field, and lastly in the
northern or Wyoming field.

This remarkable and sudden change in the racial composition
of the anthracite-mine laborers has been the result of marked
differences in the standards of living of the Slav and Italian
and English-speaking mine workers, — differences which are


SLAYS IN COAL MINING


339


very clear to those who have observed closely at first hand this
industrial phenomenon. Specific illustrations are on record m
nearly every “company” store in the family grocery bills of
these newcomers and of the English-speaking mine employees.
The differences are also indicated in the fact that the English-
speaking mine worker has usually been married and has had
children ; the incoming Slav, generally speaking, has neither wife
nor children. He has thus been free from the family outlay and
from the necessity of having a wage income sufficient to meet
the expense these goodly possessions entail. Unlike the English-
speaking miner, the Slav has not had the parent’s cost of sending
his children to the public school ; he has not had the property
owner’s tax contribution to meet; he has not had the male citi-
zen’s expense of voting, for the individual’s cost for such political
privileges, where they have been exercised by the Slav, has usu-
ally been met by the political faction which hoped to profit by
the Slav’s use of suffrage. In church contributions, in insurance
against injuries and death while at work in the mines, m the
dues of beneficial societies, and in the cost of like social and
industrial activities, the Slav has not had as great an expense as
the English-speaking nationalities in the mines.

All these represent the money cost to the individual of civic
responsibilities, the proper exercise of which is of incalculable
benefit to a community. For our particular purpose they indicate
also some of the sources of cost to the English-speaking mine
employee which enter into determining his standard of living and
which he can meet only by the sale of his labor. The incoming
Slav has been practically free from the necessity of meeting
these and other expenses, since his standard of living has been
much lower in cost than what the English-speaking mine worker
has been compelled to meet. In consequence two distinctly
marked groups of labor bearing different prices have competed
in practically the same market for the sale of their labor.

It is an economic commonplace that where two commodities
are offered for sale, other things being equal, the consumer
chooses the one bearing the lower price. In the anthracite
industry the consumers of mine labor were the railroad mining


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


340

companies. With an oversupply of labor almost daily offered
for sale, they purchased that of the Slav and Italian because it
was the cheaper. It was not only because of their lower standard
of living but also because they plied their picks in more danger-
ous places, worked thinner seams, and put up with conditions
of employment which the English-speaking mine workers would
not brook. In consequence the older nationalities began to be
forced out of the industry and the migration already mentioned
resulted. It was inevitable that the English-speaking mine
workers who desired to remain in the industry should do one of
two things, — either sell their labor for the price this new com-
petition set or compel the Slav and Italian to work for a wage,
that is, to sell his labor for a price sufficient to support the
higher standard of living. The former, as we have seen, was the
tendency down to 1900 ; but by the strike of that year, and much
more so by that of 1902, this competition has been brought under
the control of the English-speaking miner. How long this con-
dition is to remain is likely to be definitely settled m 1906, when
the award of the Anthracite Coal Strike Commission terminate?.

In the struggle of 1900 the United Mine Workers of America
had the greatest difficulty in prevailing upon the Slav and Italian
to “ join the union.” Up to this time racial antipathies, social dis-
tinctions, language, and so forth, were among the strong barriers
which prevented unity of action by the English-speaking and the
non- English-speaking groups. These obstacles were finally over-
come by the union by securing as industrial leaders of these
races men of their own nationality who could speak English.

Through the support of the Slav and Italian the strike of 1900
brought to all mine workers an increase in wages and a mitiga-
tion of some of the hard conditions of employment. The Slav's
industrial self-interest being thus brought home to him, he made
the “best ” striker in the strike of 1902. In this way and so far
the United Mine Workers have controlled competition to the
advantage of all mine labor in the hard-coal fields.

For the twenty-five years down to 1900 the racial forces in
opposition to assimilation between the Slav and English-speaking
nationalities in the anthracite industry were dominant. But the


SLAVS IN COAL MINING


341


industrial disturbances of 1900 and 1902 have put into operation
new and different forces, or rather they have directed the social
forces into a different channel. On the broad ground of indus-
trial self-interest racial ties are being broken down, largely
through the instrumentality of the United Mine Workers of
America. The English-speaking races have established what is
practically a minimum wage in most of the occupations about
the collieries, and by so doing are the sooner bringing the Slav
up to a higher standard of living. In consequence assimilation
between the English-speaking and the Slav races will not be such
a remote possibility as formerly. With a higher wage and better
conditions of employment, there are indications that the Slav
races and their descendants are responding with alacrity to the
influences tending toward conformity to American industrial con-
ditions. They are, in general, frugal, industrious, peaceable, and
for the most part possess qualities of character which will in time
and under proper conditions make them a valuable addition to
American citizenship. The present problem in the coal fields
is how to bring favorable influences to bear upon them. This
small geographical area in northeastern Pennsylvania, containing
twenty-six different nationalities, with their different languages,
customs, traditions, and habits of thought and action, — a hetero-
geneous mass of races m the course of assimilation, — presents
one of the most remarkable social phenomena of our time. From
its progress much of value should be learned to aid in the greater
problem yet to be faced

Not only, as has been shown, was this immigration of cheaper
labor from European countries one of the principal causes which
operated to give rise to the coal miners’ strikes in 1900 and
1902, but it had much to do with bringing about the strike of the
steel workers in 1901, that of the textile workers in 1903, and
that of the meat handlers at Chicago in 1904. All these strikes
centered about the unskilled occupations in the different indus-
tries, the very occupations toward which the competition of
Slav and Italian was directed by virtue of their being unskilled
workmen. They were indications of a widq^pread conflict waged
by immigrants to secure a foothold in American industries. The


342 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

movement is one which continues to furnish a serious menace to
our industrial stability.

Slav immigration would not be the serious problem that it is
to-day if its distribution had been intelligently effected. It has
become an acute problem m many sections primarily because the
distribution of its elements has been neglected. Salvation now
must be in a reliance upon American institutions to assimilate
this great influx of aliens That this task is to test those insti-
tutions very near to their breaking point is clear to all observers
of industrial and social conditions

Experience thus far should teach the necessity for immediate
and well-organized action looking toward the directing of at least
a portion of this immigration stream into those sections of the
country — into the South, for example — where it is most needed,
instead of permitting it to follow the haphazard channel of its
own making into the large industrial centers where its elements
congregate in “ foreign quarters ” and give rise to municipal and
other problems whose tendencies are working serious injury to
our communities. Already some of the southern railroads have
undertaken this task, but it must be planned on a much larger,
scale and be supported much more comprehensively than there
is now any evidence of, if we are to hope for a solution of some
of the more important problems arising out of immigration.

Frank Julian Warne.

Bituminous Mines 1

The special significance of a paper on the Slavs in the bitumi-
nous mines of Illinois is found in the effect on them of the mine
workers’ union. Practically all the Slavs in Illinois, outside of
Cook County, are at work in or about the mines, as very few of
them are employed on railway and other kinds of construction
which attract the Italians. Of the 37,000 mine workers in Illi-
nois about 60 per cent are foreign-born, and of this 60 per cent
about one fourth are Slavs and Lithuanians. The four or five

1 From Chanties , Yol XII, December 3, 1904.


SLAVS IN COAL MINING


343


divisions of the Slavs exceed in number any other nationality
of the foreign-born, the Italians coming next, to the number of
3000. Among these the Slavs predominate in the order Poles,
Slovaks, and Bohemians, while the Lithuanians number less
than 1000. The great majority of them have entered this field
since 1 894, their introduction at that time being brought about
through the general strike of the American and west European
miners. The strike ended in a complete defeat of the improvised
union of the time, and as a result the Slavs and the Italians have
become m certain districts the predominating elements.

The circumstances of their immigration cannot be understood
without a word on the characteristics of the mining industry in
the state of Illinois. The northern field was the first m develop-
ment, but it had the disadvantage of exceedingly thin veins of
coal, a seam of forty inches being a prevailing depth. The south-
ern field, on the other hand, is characterized by veins of six to
ten feet in thickness. Owing to the greater facility of mining in
the southern field, the introduction of machinery, and the thick-
ness of the seam, the competition of coal in the markets had
become so serious that many mines in the northern field were
reduced to two or three months’ work m the year, and even at
prices per ton for mining double the prices in the southern field
the miners were unable to earn similar wages. On this account
the northern field has been the source of labor agitation, and the
prominent leaders of the mine workers’ union both in state and
national fields have had their training in that section. It was,
consequently, into this field that the majority of the Slav and
Italian immigrants were brought by the operators, as is plainly
shown by the statistics compiled by the Illinois Bureau of Labor
Statistics, showing that in the first, second, and fourth mining
districts of the state the percentages of foreign-born miners are
respectively 89 per cent, 72 per cent, and 62 per cent ; whereas
in the other parts of the state the highest proportion is 5 1 per
cent, and in the seventh, the most southerly district, only 20 per
cent are foreign-born.

This distribution of the Slavs, who with the Italians constitute
the bulk of these large percentages of foreign-born inhabitants.


344 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

applies not only to districts throughout the state but also to
working places within the mines. For it is the Slav and the
Italian who are willing to take the places where the difficulties
of mining are greatest and where consequently the output and
earnings of the miner are least The American and west
European stock tend to distribute themselves m the better dis-
tricts of the state and to keep the better-paying positions within
each mine.

After the strike of 1894, notwithstanding a remarkable
decrease in wages, there was practically no improvement in the
mining business for three years. The conditions not only of
the English-speaking miners but even of the Slavs and Italians
became so oppressive that in 1897, when the strike was called
by the remnant of the former union, practically every miner and
mine worker m the state, including Slav and Italian, laid down
his tools. The union entered the strike with no treasury and
only a few hundred members, but at the end of four months won
a complete victory and a general increase in wages, together with
the eight-hour working day. The organization in Illinois is much
stronger than in other parts of the bituminous field, mainly because
the mine workers m this state held out at least a month longer
than those in the other states of the competitive field and thereby
secured terms in the final settlement with the operators more
to their advantage than the terms secured in the other states.
Since the success of the strike in 1897 the mine workers’ union
has made annual agreements with the operators, the terms
regarding both wages and conditions of work being most
minutely described.

The English-speaking miners universally show an inclination
to keep Slavs and Italians from coming into the mines, and their
immigration has been very slight since 1897. Practically the
only way in which the Slav coming from the old country can
now get employment as a miner is through the intervention of
a relative or friend who agrees to be responsible for him The
state law requires two men to work together in a “room,” and
the miners’ union requires them to share their earnings equally.
Consequently a new miner who wants work must find an old


SLAVS IN COAL MINING


345


miner who will teach him and share with him. This naturally is
not easy to do. Furthermore, he must serve a year’s apprentice-
ship above ground as a laborer before going below. This applies
to miners proper who are paid by the ton. A different restriction,
to be mentioned below, exists for “mine workers,” who are paid
by the day.

The union at first established an initiation fee of fifty dollars,
which practically excluded all newcomers. Owing to the strenu-
ous opposition of the operators in their annual conferences, this
initiation fee was reduced to ten dollars, at which figure it now
stands. At the same time the agreements distinctly provide for
the open shop, the employer being given the right to hire new
men not members of the organization provided he does not dis-
criminate against union men However, on account of the high
minimum wage for day labor which the union secured and has
been able most effectually to enforce, it is not to the interest of
the operator to employ fresh and inexperienced men, provided
older employees are on the ground. The significance of the mini-
mum wage will be seen in the fact that whereas for common labor
the rate of pay for ten hours’ work prior to the strike of 1897 had
been reduced as low as $ 1 40, the union gradually increased the
minimum rate for all day labor employed above ground to $2.02!
in 1903, although a reduction was accepted m 1904, bringing it
to $1.91 for eight hours’ work. For undergroundwork the mini-
mum was increased until it stood at $2.56 in 1903, but was
reduced in 1904 to $2.23 for eight hours’ work. With such
a high minimum, notwithstanding the open-shop privilege, the
employer has little inducement to take on new men.

The high minimum has also an important effect on the employ-
ment of boys and on the attitude of the Italian and Slav toward
the public-school system. At such rates of pay the employer is
not inclined to take boys into the mines ; in fact they secure their
employment after they reach the age of sixteen mainly through
the responsibility which their fathers and brothers assume on
their part. Owing to the complete exclusion of boys from the
mines in any capacity whatever, there has been a remarkable in-
crease in school attendance of foreigners’ children, who otherwise


346 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

would be found at work in order to help out the family income.
The Slavs are beginning to take an interest in the public-
school system, several instances being known where repre-
sentatives of this race, as well as of the Italian, have been
elected to the school boards. This fact, however, should not be
made too much of, since their participation is mainly owing to
the effort of Americans — business men and mine superintend-
ents — to invite and urge Slavs and Italians to accept such repre-
sentation on these boards. The object of course is to interest
foreigners in the school system, but the interest must be culti-
vated from without and does not spring voluntarily from the Slavs
themselves. In many cases it is a difficult matter to secure a
Slav or an Italian who will accept such a position.

The Italian shows more intelligence and appreciation of his
position in the union than does the Slav. The policy of the mine
workers’ union is to distribute the offices among the different
nationalities in order to have interpreters at their meetings and
agents to keep the several nationalities in line. Undoubtedly
the greatest difficulty encountered in the mining region at the
present time under the system of agreements with the operators
is the presence in such large numbers of non-English-speaking
miners and mine workers The enforcement of the interstate and
state agreements is a matter of difficulty, sometimes on account
of the dishonesty of the interpreter, and often on account of his
inefficiency, and this is especially serious in the northern fields
where the unions are controlled by the Slavs and the Italians
There have been several local strikes and violations of the agree-
ment on account of this barrier of language, and there is no one
object which appeals more to the operators of the state than that
of instruction in English. This object of course did not appeal
to them prior to the organization of the mine workers and the
establishment of the agreement system, but now that they have
for eight years been running their mines in cooperation with the
union, they find it necessary to assist the latter in bringing for-
ward its more conservative and intelligent members and in raising
the general level of intelligence of the mass This accounts for
the interest which they show in the public-school system, and


SLAVS IN COAL MINING


347


there is no subject of which the operators speak with greater
pride than of the high grade of schools in the mining districts.
Frequently a superintendent or other officer of a company will
be found on the school board in company with a Slav, an Italian,
and representatives of other nationalities. The parochial schools,
which are attended by a majority of the Slav children, are of an
unusually high order, and not only is the English language taught
in all of them, but English may be said to be the language of the
parochial schools.

The fact which interests the observer most of all is the mar-
velous thrift of the Slavs. Notwithstanding the prevalence of
the use of intoxicants among them and other nationalities, large
numbers have good bank accounts, and the movement toward
purchasing homes has become perhaps the most noticeable fea-
ture of mining communities In many cases company houses
have been sold to employees, and often it happens that a Slav
miner is able to pay in cash six hundred to a thousand dollars
for his house These houses are of course not elaborate, but
there are none so inferior as those which one sees in the southern
anthracite fields. It is agreed on all sides that the stability of
employment which has prevailed since 1897 has been the main
incentive of this movement toward home proprietorship.

Compared with the situation of the Slavs in the cities, that of
those living in the mining districts of Illinois is idyllic. Their
houses though small are not overcrowded, as they are in Chi-
cago, each has its garden plot, and the hills and woods are near
Notwithstanding their work is underground, ventilation is always
good, temperature is even the year round, hours are short, and
in addition the union has a way of taking holidays for all nation-
alities whenever a particular nationality has a saint’s day.

Of course the isolation of the mining camp brings its special
problems, a peculiar one being the absence of the wider and
higher educational opportunities The situation is ripe for a
large movement of an educational kind, based on instruction in
English, with the addition thereto of manual training and house-
hold economics for the young people and centers of amusement
and civic education for all. The friendliness of the mining


348 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

companies and their superintendents toward a movement of
this kind would be insured from the start, while the strong
organization of the mine workers, reaching every individual,
would cooperate if the enterprise were properly launched.

As might be expected, the English-speaking miners do not
look upon their own position with that degree of satisfaction
shown by the Slavs and Italians. Although they are not leaving
the mines, yet they are the ones who make complaints and who
lead in agitations for improved wages and conditions Judging
themselves by the American standards with which they are
familiar, their inability to maintain these standards on the earn-
ings of the Slav is a constant source of irritation. While they
come to the front m the Mine Workers’ Union, yet the union has
been too much occupied with economic questions to permit time
and thought for educational and social improvements This line
of progress must be inaugurated by the operators, and there
could hardly be found in any industry a field more receptive for
that kind of interest in their work people which has come to be
known as “ welfare work.”


J. R. Commons.


XVI

THE NEGRO ARTISAN 1

. . . Here we have perhaps the best key to the situation in
the South before the war ; there was little demand for skilled
labor in the rather rude economy of the average slave plantation,
and the Negro did the most of this. The slave artisan, how-
ever, was rather a jack-of-all-trades than a mechanic in the
modern sense of the term, — he could build a barn, make a
barrel, mend an umbrella, or shoe a horse. Exceptional slaves
did the work exceptionally well, but the average workman was
poor, careless, and ill trained, and could not have earned living
wages under modern competitive conditions. While then it is
perfectly true to say that the slave was the artisan of the South
before the war, it is probably also true^that the average of work-
manship was low and suited only to rough plantation life. This
does not of course gainsay for a moment the fact that on
some of the better plantations and in cities like Richmond,
Savannah, Charleston, and New Orleans there were really
first-class Negro workmen who did good work.

Even before the war a movement of slaves to the cities took
place, first of house servants with the masters’ families and
then of slave artisans ; if the slave was a good artisan he was
worth more hired out in the city than on the country planta-
tion. Moreover, the Negro greatly preferred to be in town, since
he had there more liberty, more associates, and more excitement.
Probably in time there would have been evolved in the South
a class of city serf artisans and servants considerably removed

1 Extracts from The Negro Artisan * Report of a Social Study made under the
Direction of Atlanta University. Edited by W E Burghardt Du Bois. Atlanta
University Press, 1902 See also Hoffman, “ Race Traits and Tendencies of the
American Negro,” Publications of the American Economic Association , Vol. XI,
pp. 250-309.


349


350 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

from the mass of field hands. It is significant that the Georgia
law prohibiting slaves from hiring their time specifically excepted
certain of the larger towns.

After emancipation came suddenly, in the midst of war and
social upheaval, the first real economic question was the self-
protection of freed workingmen. There were three chief classes
of them, — the agricultural laborers, chiefly in the country dis-
tricts ; the house servants in town and country; and the artisans,
who were rapidly migrating to town. The Freedmen’s Bureau
undertook the temporary guardianship of the first class, the
second class easily passed from half-free service to half-servile
freedom. The third class, the artisans, however, met peculiar
conditions They had always been used to working under the
guardianship of a master, and even though that guardianship in
some cases was but nominal, yet it was of the greatest value for
protection. This soon became clear as the Negro freed artisan
set up in business for himself. If there was a creditor to be
sued, he could no longer bring suit in the name of an influential
white master; if there was a contract to be had, there was no
responsible white patron to answer for the good performance
of the work. Nevertheless these differences were not strongly
felt at first, since the friendly patronage of the former master
was often voluntarily given the freedman, and for some years
following the war the Negro mechanic still held undisputed
sway. Three occurrences, however, soon disturbed the situa-
tion. These were the competition of white mechanics, the
efforts of the Negro for self-protection, and the new industrial
development of the South.

These changes were spread over a series of years and are
not yet complete, but they are the real explanation of certain
facts which have hitherto been explained in false and inade-
quate ways. It has for instance been said repeatedly that the
Negro mechanic carelessly threw away his monopoly of the
southern labor market and allowed the white mechanic to sup-
plant him. This is only partially true. To be sure, the ex-slave
was not alert, quick, and ready to meet competition. His busi-
ness hitherto had been to do work but not to get work, save in


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


351


exceptional cases. The whole slave system of labor saved him
from certain sorts of competition, and when he was suddenly
called to face the competition of white mechanics he was at a
loss. His especial weakness was the lack of a hiring contractor.
His master or a white contractor had usually taken jobs and
hired him. The white contractor still hired him, but there was
no one now to see that the contractor gave him fair wages.
Indeed, as the white mechanics pressed forward, the only refuge
of the Negro mechanic was lower wages. There were a few
Negro contractors here and there, but they again could only
hope to maintain themselves by markedly underbidding all
competitors and attaining a certain standing in the community.

What the Negro mechanic needed then was social protection,
— the protection of law and order, perfectly fair judicial pro-
cesses, and that personal power which is in the hands of all
modern laboring classes in civilized lands, namely, the right of
suffrage. It has often been said that the freedman, throwing
away his industrial opportunities after the war, gave his ener-
gies to politics and succeeded in alienating his friends and exas-
perating his enemies by proving his inability to rule. It is
doubtless true that the freedman laid too much stress on the
efficacy of political power in making a straight road to real
freedom. And undoubtedly, too, a bad class of politicians,
white and black, took advantage of this and made the recon-
struction Negro voter a hissing in the ears of the South. Not-
withstanding this the Negro was fundamentally right. If the
whole class of mechanics here, as in the Middle Ages, had been
without the suffrage and half free, the Negro would have had
an equal chance with the white mechanic and could have
afforded to wait. But he saw himself coming more and more
into competition with men who had the right to vote, the pres-
tige of race and blood, the advantage of intimate relations with
those acquainted with the market and the demand. The Negro*
saw clearly that his industrial rise depended to an important
degree upon his political power, and he therefore sought that
power. In this seeking he failed, primarily because of his own
poor training, the uncompromising enmity and apprehensions


352 . TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of his white neighbors, and the selfishness and half-hearted
measures of his emancipators. The result was that the black
artisan entered the race heavily handicapped, the member of
a proscribed class, with restricted rights and privileges, with-
out political and social power. The result was, of course, that
he was enabled to maintain himself only by accepting low wages
and keeping at all hazards the good will of the community.

Even here, however, he could not wholly succeed. The indus-
trial conditions in the country were rapidly changing. Slowly
but surely the new industrial South began to arise and with it
came new demands on the mechanic. Now in the very nature
of the case the Negro mechanic could not meet these demands.
He knew how to do a few things by rule of thumb, such as
building one of the rambling old-fashioned southern mansions
or a slave shanty; he could construct a rough sugar hogs-
head and resole a shoe , in exceptional cases he could do even
careful and ingenious work in certain lines ; but, as a rule, he
knew little of the niceties of modern carpentry or iron work-
ing, he knew practically nothing of mills and machinery and
very little about railroads, — in fact he was especially ignorant
in those very lines of mechanical and industrial development in
which the South has taken the longest strides in the last thirty
years. And if he was ignorant, who was to teach him? Cer-
tainly not his white fellow-workmen, for they were his bitterest
opponents because of strong race prejudice and because of the
fact that the Negro works for low wages. Apprenticeship to
the older Negro mechanics was but partially successful, for they
could not teach what they had never learned. In fact it was
only through the lever of low wages that the Negro secured
any share in the new industries. By that means he was enabled
to replace white laborers in many branches, but he thereby
increased the enmity of trade unions and labor leaders. Such
in brief was the complicated effect of emancipation on the
Negro artisan, and one could not well imagine a situation more
difficult to remedy.


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


353


Local Conditions: Texas 1

We have always had among us some men who have been
more or less skillful in the use of tools. During the days of
slavery these men built the houses, made the plows, carriages,
and wagons, and performed nearly all that class of labor. The
constant doing brought to them experience, and experience
ripened into a degree of skill. Slavery was their trade school
and experience their instructor. After the Civil War these
workmen followed the trades, and at first they had the field to
themselves.

In the course of time labor-saving machines were introduced
and new methods of doing things were adopted ; the old work-
man entered a ne^r era , he found himself face to face with new
conditions; his school did not give instruction in the use of
machines and he was unable to keep step with the onward march
Some of them who did keep up have finished their work and
gone to their reward. No one has taken the vacant places,
and to-day the ranks of Negro artisans need — sadly need —
recruiting.

Texas offers great opportunities to skilled workmen in various
trades. Her natural resources surpass those of any state in the
Union. It is her proud boast that within her broad domain is
to be found everything from a salt mine to an oil geyser. These
resources are but partially developed, some not at all. The
Negro artisan has had a share in this development, and will
have a larger share in the future provided he will fit himself
for this larger share. I have had opportunity to observe condi-
tions among artisans only in the cities, towns, and country
districts of southern Texas.

Ours being an agricultural state, blacksmiths are in greater
demand than perhaps any other tradesman. You will find a
Negro blacksmith in nearly every town and at every country
crossroad. They are found managing shops on many of the
large cotton and sugar plantations. One of the largest sugar

1 By E H. Holmes, of the Prairie View Normal School. [The Report contains
similar contributions from other states. — Ed.]


354


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


farms in the Southwest, located at Sugarland, Texas, employs
a Negro foreman of its blacksmith shop at a salary of $1080
per year. In the towns the majority of them are doing business
for themselves ; a few own their shops and are making a living*
and accumulating property. There are still others who work
by the day in shops owned by whites. These receive wages
according to their skill. White men having the same degree of
skill would receive no more. There is such a shop at Brenham,
Texas. Some weeks ago the owner of this shop stated that he
worked a few colored men, that he would employ more if they
could do superior work, and that -there was no discrimination
practiced in his shop ; he also expressed the hope that our school
would send out more students who could make drawings and
work from drawings. It is difficult to tell the percentage of
Negro artisans in the towns, since they do not register their
occupations. Whatever is known must be learned by inquiry or
from personal contact. Let us consider conditions at Houston,
Texas. This is a city having a population of 60,000, one third
of whom are Negroes. It is in every respect a liberal and rep-
resentative city. There are seven blacksmiths who own and
run their shops, and two of these shops employ from three
to five workmen. The proprietors make a good living, and
nearly all of them own their homes. The largest carriage and
iron repair shop, owned by a white man, employs five Negro
blacksmiths on its working force. Two of these manage their
own fires. They are paid according to skill, although sometimes
discrimination is made on account of color. Two boiler and
foundry shops employ Negro workmen. They receive the regu-
lar molders’ wages, $4 per day, and a few of them have been
in the service of the firms for years. The Southern Pacific
Railway System employs them in two of its shops. In these
shops are some who manage their fires, one who operates a
steam hammer, some who build and repair cars, and a large
number of helpers who rank several grades above common
laborers. A few of these men have been steadily employed for
twenty-five years, some longer. The wages range from 1 5 to
25 cents per hour, according to skill. It might be of interest


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


355

to remark just here that one of the helpers long years ago was
foreman of the shop. Time and improved machinery forced
him down. So far as employment goes there is practically no
discrimination against blacksmiths, and I do not know of any
blacksmiths’ union in the whole state.

Carpenters are fewer in number than blacksmiths. In the
small towns they are journeyman workers. As a class they do
inferior work. Their wages range from $1.25 to $2 per day.
White journeymen do the same poor quality of work but receive
higher wages. Their pay ranges from $1.50 to $2 50 per day.
The best carpenters drift to the cities, because the people there
appreciate and demand good work and live in better houses.
Competition is sharp and the labor unions are strong. In the
city of Houston we have four men who contract for themselves.
They do good work and find ready employment. They get
contracts not exceeding $2500. In the same city are several
old contractors who have been forced to retire on account of
close competition. Two white contractors work* a force of
Negro and a force of white carpenters, separately of course.
They pay according to skill, white and black alike. More dis-
crimination is shown against carpenters than against any other
class of tradesmen. Negro carpenters have been urged to form
unions which would affiliate with white unions, but have not
thought best to do so. They know that they would be called
upon to strike in concert with the other unions, and they feel that
in the end they would get the worst of it. As long as they find
employment they prefer to work independently of the unions.

Brickmasons are fewer than carpenters. This class of workers
are in demand, wages are high, and discrimination is reduced to
a minimum. There are no brick contractors in Houston, and
only one or two in the state. Bricklayers in the towns are
journeymen and most of them do a good grade of work; wages
are from $3 to $4 per day. In the cities wages are a little
better. I know of no plasterers. Sometimes men are called from
New Orleans to do that sort of work. The finest plastering in
our state capitol was done by Negroes brought from Chicago.
Nearly all the employees in the cotton-seed-oil mills and cotton


356 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

compresses are Negroes. They are not all common laborers.
It requires skill to operate some of the machines and to get
the products ready for market. Wages are from $i 50 to $3
per day. In some of the trades we do not find the Negro at
all, or if found they are so few that they do not count in trade
competition. Houston has no shoemakers, no plumbers and
harness makers, and I know of but one tinner in the state.
These are the conditions as they now exist among Texas arti-
sans. I have observed that any man who knows how to do
something and knows how to do that something well. and is
willing to do something will find ready employment. Opportu-
nities are not wanting, but many times when these opportunities
present themselves we are not able to grasp them because of
lack of training. The world wants trained workmen, men whose
trained minds will direct skilled hands, men who are masters
of their craft. Not more than three per cent of our young men
in Texas are entering the trades, and at the present death rate
among the old workmen it will not be long before we shall
be conspicuous for our absence from all the trades. On the
other hand, a very large percentage of young white men enter
the trades. We have a great influx of emigrants from Europe.
They come and work the farms. They are better farmers than
any one else, — they make a crop, rain or no rain. The Ameri-
can needs rain to make his crop, and in a few years he finds
that he cannot compete with the foreigner because his land is
too poor. He abandons the farm and seeks refuge in the
trades, or he moves to another county to begin farming anew.

There are some reasons why our young men avoid the trades.
There is a class of young men who after finishing some school
course do not believe in manual labor, skilled or unskilled.'
When the slaves were emancipated their first thought was to
send their children to school like the white folk, to dress them
like white children, and to keep them from work like the white
children. To do any sort of manual labor was to their minds
a badge of humility and a relic of slavery. The old master was
a gentleman and he did not work ; their sons must be like him
and like his sons. This idea was taught the children and it


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


357


has grown up in them and still remains in them. If a record
could be made of all that these dear old parents suffered and
endured, of how they toiled and what sacrifices they made, that
their children should be ladies and gentlemen who did not have
to work, it would make a tale far more pitiable than Uncle
Tom’s Cabin. They passed from the slavery of the white man
to the slavery of their own children.

Another hindrance is that society looks down upon a man
who works with his hands, however much skill he may possess
or however much remuneration that skill commands. This class
distinction does not exist among us alone. It is hard to see how
a man can be intelligent and at the same time be a mechanic.
We cannot associate the two ideas. Fear of nonemployment
keeps another class from entering the trades. Those who
oppose industrial education never fail to present this argument,
and they have made an impression on some which nothing but
time and changed conditions will ever efface. Another class
would enter the world of workingmen but for the fact that
they are ambitious to excel in whatever line of work they may
choose, but to become an intelligent artisan requires years,
long years of hard work and patient study on short pay. They
cannot wait ; results are too long coming Many of our young
men who do follow the trades are not living up to the full
measure of their opportunities. In the first place, the employer
cannot always depend upon them. They are just as likely not
to come to work at the appointed time as they are to come.
It matters not how busy the employer may be or how anxious
he is to finish the job, our young workman feels that he is
under no obligation to see him through. He feels free to
take a day off and go fishing, or to enjoy himself in some
other way. That ’s his idea of liberty. When the next Negro
workman comes along and asks for a job the contractor says,
“No, we don’t want any more Negroes.” Then we say that
that man is prejudiced. I used to think so, too, but I do not
think so now. I have hired some of them myself, and I know
that unreliability has kept Negroes out of more good jobs than
incompetency ever did. Unsteadiness is another barrier to


358 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

success. In the lumber district of eastern Texas there are
numerous sawmills which run the year round. The owners
employ Negro workmen for places requiring skill whenever
they can be found. I have in mind one man who has been with
a certain firm for eighteen years. In fact he has been with the
company so long and .has given such faithful service, the mana-
gers have forgotten that he is a Negro. He is now a compe-
tent sawyer and receives $ 6 per day. The sawyer’s place at
these mills is perhaps the best-paying place of all, outside the
management. The wages run from $4 50 to $6 according
to skill. The places are open to Negroes and occasionally they
take them, but after working for ten or twelve months they
conclude that they have made enough and retire. The job is
too steady. I do not mean these general statements to apply
to all our workmen, but I do say that they apply to the major-
ity. Our artisan must be more competent, more faithful, and
more reliable. It ’s the only way to hold what we have. We
must be progressive. We have clung to the old ways — the
methods of half a century ago — too long. If we do not make
the best use of these trade advantages which are now ours, we
not only shut ourselves out but we close the door of oppor-
tunity in the faces of our boys who expect to enter.

The Employment of Skilled Negroes in the South

In 1889 and 1891 the Chattanooga Tradesman made in-
quiries into the status of Negro labor in the South. The
employers questioned in 1889 employed 7000 Negroes, of whom
possibly 2000 were skilled or semiskilled. “ The general tenor
of the replies indicated perfect satisfaction with Negro labor.”
In 1891 replies were received from the employers of 7395
Negroes, of whom 978 were skilled and many semiskilled, and
the editor concluded that “the Negro as a free laborer, as a
medium-skilled and common worker, is by no means a ‘failure,’
— that he is really a remarkable success.”

In 1901 a third joint investigation into Negro skilled labor
was made by the Tradesman and the Sociological Department


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


359


of Atlanta University. It was not an exhaustive inquiry and
there is no way of knowing what proportion of the employers
of skilled Negro laborers were reached. In 1891 12 per
cent of the Negroes employed by those written to were skilled
or semiskilled; in 1901, 20 per cent, 344 firms answered
in 1901, employing 35,481 men, of whom 16,145 were Negroes,
and 2652 of these were skilled or semiskilled workmen. The
following tabulation is made in answer to the question “ How
do Negroes compare in efficiency with white workmen ? ”


Answers

Establishments

Negroes employed

answering

Skilled

Semiskilled

“ Far infenor ” . .

17

96

38

“ Not as good ” . . . ...

28

135

55

“ Poor average, some as good ”

23

260

57

“ Better ” for “ this work ” or “ at same wages ”
or “ than available whites ” ...

42

382

89

“ As good ” . .

43

456

145

“ Better ”

*9

665

80

No answer . . . . .

4

79

—

“ Cannot say ” . . . . ....

3

34

—

“ Cannot compare, employ no whites ”

9

49

7


Some comments were :“No good, but the white help is mighty
poor, too.” “Not reliable — lack judgment.” “Haven’t as good
hands for skilled work.” “Would give perfect satisfaction if
they were steady.” “ Prompt, willing, and steady, but lack judg-
ment.” “ Not as quick to learn, but stick closer to work.” “More
easily controlled.” “As good or better.” “ Perfect satisfaction.”

The employers were also asked the question “What effect
has this education had ? ”


Answers

Establishments

Negroes employed

answering

Skilled

Semiskilled

“ Bad effect ” . ....

16

73

66

“ No effect ”

9

J 34

22

“ A little learning is a dangerous thing ” .

4

30

57

“ Little effect ”

4

7

13

“ Cannot say ” . ....

5

41

—

“ Helps some, hindeis others ” . .

5

3i

—

“ Would help, if industrial ” ... . .

1

40

—

“ Good effect ”

28

257

89


360 trade unionism and labor problems

Some comments follow :

Think they feel more responsibility than the ignorant ones, —
want more and are more willing to work to get what they want.

Somewhat improved by it.

The education has had a good effect on them and I had rather
employ these Negroes with education than if they had no education.

Educating a Negro makes him worthless as a laborer. He gets
saucy and thinks he is as good as a white man. Uneducated Negroes
give no trouble. Educating a Negro makes him mean and indolent.
You find more criminals in educated Negroes than in uneducated.

Makes them better citizens by giving them means to employ their
minds. The bad Negro, as a rule, is the most ignorant.

There is some more indolence and disposition to loaf among
Negroes who have a smattering of education, although there are
exceptions. We would much prefer to have a man who can at least
read, write, and figure a little than one entirely ignorant, provided he
is a steady worker.

Enables them to undertake more. It is questionable whether
education tends to modify or decrease their humility toward white
men ; probably it does. They are still, on the whole, inferior to the
white man.

Can’t say, except in our opinion it follows as a matter of course
that the more a man learns the more he is worth.

Has done but little good, owing to lack of sense to start with.

We believe educating the Negro is having the effect of taking
them from the farms, going to the towns and cities hunting public
works at better pay. This is but natural, and we believe in the end
will prove beneficial.

We can’t but feel that education improves them. Our experience,
though, has been that those who have some knowledge of books are
profligate. This may be due to bad selection on our part.

What kind? We guess you mean training. A Negro cannot be
educated. We only want a Negro with educated hands and bodies.
Some darkies can learn to read and write a little — and just then
they are ready and ripe for the penitentiary or for Hades.

From our observation the result is not good from an industrial
standpoint, our opinion being that the trouble is that the little
education they have received has been literary instead of industrial.


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


361

It has detracted from his usefulness in positions where he is the
most useful, such as hard manual labor, without fitting him to take a
better position in the ranks of skilled labor.

We have but few positions where education of itself would be of
much value. Coupled with other good qualities it would have value.
Our colored people are generally self-respecting and we believe better
because of their steady employment, but they seem to lack in thrift,
frugality, and in saving their wages.

We believe that education would have a good effect if with it
there was some systemized effort to make them property owners and
to build up a healthy interest in their particular community. This
does not seem to be the trend of affairs, and until present conditions
change, as they will perhaps sooner than any of us think now, we do
not look for much radical improvement.

We have heard a good deal about education spoiling the colored
man as a laborer. Our experience here, however, convinces us that
the better he is educated the better he is able to compete with the
white man in giving close attention to the business that employers
require of him, thereby giving better satisfaction and better work.
It is true in many cases that an education seems to spoil the colored
man, but we think he would be spoiled anyway, just the same as
among white men many times the highly educated seem to feel
themselves above doing manual labor.

Some general comments on Negro workmen follow :

Yes, they understand my way of having work done and are willing
workers when treated right. I never allow them imposed upon by
any one and have no strikes. They are the best judges of human
nature on earth.

The most satisfactory sawyer, shopman (blacksmithing and wood-
working), green-yard fireman, train-track fireman, logging-engine fire-
man, log trippers, cant-hook man, night watchman, -edger man, trimmer
man, or teamsters, and men grading lumber in sawmill, are all Negroes.

Best laborers we can get. We believe the Negro the best laborer
in the South.

Are more tractable, steadier, and can be depended upon in their
particular places. In an emergency whites have better judgment. On
the whole we prefer Negroes where it is possible to use them.

The work they do is well done and for furnace work equally as
efficient as that of white men and indeed I prefer them.


362 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Some are just as good as any or most white men, while a greater
number are just as poor as the white trash.

After living in the South for twenty years and employing from one
to twenty Negroes all the time will say from any standard there are
no skilled workmen with black skins, and I have employed the best
to be found in Montgomery as carpenters, bricklayers, engineers,
firemen, and machine operators.

We find that many of our most thrifty and intelligent Negroes are
drifting north and securing employment in the large industries about
Pittsburg, and many of them making good records for efficiency.

We have just this day begun the employment of Negro molders
for our stove foundry. We have been employing white molders for
the past fifteen years, but as nearly all the foundries in this city are
employing Negro molders and seem well satisfied with the result, we
decided to do so also. We believe we will make a success of the
venture, but will not be able to answer your questions until we have
had them at work for a while.

We consider them a necessity in our business, because white labor
is not obtainable. Considering the condition of their ancestry and
the conditions in which they themselves live, I think they are doing
very well indeed. Future generations will doubtless see the race in
a better condition and more intelligent, making better citizens.

In this line they are much superior to white labor. White men
would not stand the heat and grease. We fion’t want white labor.
They are too prone to strike. Give them the earth and they would
strike for the moon. White men could be more efficient than Negroes,
but they won't.

Do the same work and obey better , more profit, less trouble.

Some of them display excellent judgment, while others are stupid.
They don’t expect as much as white men and do, if anything, more
faithful work than the white labor.

The younger class are more given to loafing and light work. When
given places as foremen, or semiresponsible, they are usually very
exacting.

A Negro is a Negro with us, and is made to keep his place.

The white workmen do not like to work side by side with the
Negro workmen. However, they treat them politely, and there is the
kindliest feeling between whites and blacks here.


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


363


The Attitude of Organized Labor

The attitude of the American Federation of Labor may be
summed up as having passed through the following stages :

1 . The working people must unite and organize irrespective of
creeds color , sex, nationality , or politics.

This was an early declaration but was not embodied in
the constitution. It was reaffirmed in 1897 after opposition.
Bodies confining membership to whites were barred from
affiliation.

2. Separate charters may be issued to central labor unions,
local unions , or federal labor unions composed exclusively of
colored nCembery.

This was adopted by the convention of 1902 and recognizes
the legality of excluding Negroes from local unions, city central
labor bodies, and so forth.

3. A national union which excludes Negroes expressly by con-
stitutional provision may affiliate with the American Federation
of Labor.

No official announcement of this change of policy has been
made, but the fact is well known in the case of the railway
trackmen, telegraphers, and others.

4. A national union already affiliated with the American
Federation of Labor may amend its laws so as to exclude
Negroes .

This was done by the stationary engineers at their Boston
convention in 1902, and an attempt in the same line was made
by the molders at their convention the same year. The Federa-
tion has taken no public action in these cases.

This is a record of struggle to maintain high and just ideals
and of retrogression ; the broader-minded labor leaders, like
Samuel Gompers, have had to contend with narrow prejudice
and selfish greed; it is a struggle parallel with that of the
Negro for political and civil rights, and just as black Ameri-
cans in the struggle upward have met temporary defeat in their
aspirations for civil and political rights, so too they have met
a rebuff in their search for economic freedom. At the same


364 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

time there are to-day probably a larger number of effective
Negro members in the trade unions than ever before; there
is evidence of renewed inspiration toward mechanical trades
and a better comprehension of the labor movement. On the
other hand, the industrial upbuilding of the South has brought
to the front a number of white mechanics who from birth
have regarded Negroes as inferiors and can with the greatest
difficulty be brought to regard them as brothers in this battle
for better conditions of labor. Such are the forces now arrayed
in silent conflict.

With reference to the attitude of national and international
organizations of the several trades we may make the following
list in the order of increasing hostility toward the Negro:


Miners — Welcome Negroes in nearly all cases
Longshoremen — Welcome Negroes m nearly all cases
Cigar Makers — Admit practically all applicants
Baibers — Admit many, but restrain Negroes when possible.

Seamen — Admit many, but prefer whites
Firemen — Admit many, but prefer whites
Tobacco Workers — Admit many, but prefer whites.

Carriage and Wagon Workers — Admit some, but do not seek Negroes.
Bnckmakers — Admit some, but do not seek Negroes
Coopers — Admit some, but do not seek Negroes
Broom Makers — Admit some, but do not seek Negroes.

Plasterers — Admit freely m the South and a few in the North.

Carpenters — Admit many m the South, almost none in the North.

Masons — Admit many in the South, almost none in the North.

Painters — Admit a few m the South, almost none m the North.

The evidence on which the above is based cannot all be given
here ; it is, however, pretty conclusive. There are, for instance,
numbers of competent Negro painters, carpenters, and masons ;
yet who has seen one at work in a northern city ? There
are numbers of brickmakers, wheelwrights, and coopers, but few
have been brought into the unions and in the North few can
get in. The seamen, firemen, and tobacco workers have many
Negroes, but Negroes fear to join them lest by demanding
union wages their white fellow-workmen will hasten to sup-
plant them. This has virtually been admitted by labor leaders
and others. A South Carolina employer says that among


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


365

bricklayers of equal skill Negroes receive $1.75 and whites
$2 50 a day, and “the object of the white men in organizing
the Negroes is to get them to demand the same wages that the
whites demand/’ Messrs. Garrett and Houston, president and
secretary of the Georgia Federation, confirm this, as do many
others, and the secretary of the Southern Industrial Con-
vention adds : “ There is discrimination even in the union.
The* white members try to get employment for each other and
to crowd out the colored members.” The same thing occurs
in the North ; now and then a Negro is admitted to a union,
but even then he stands less chance of getting work than a
white man.

Local Option m the Choice of Members. The general attitude
of the Federation of Labor, and even of the national unions,
has little more than a moral effect in the admission of Negroes
to # trade unions. The present constitution of the Knights of
Labor admits members “at the option of each local assembly.”
The real power of admission in nearly all cases rests with the
local assemblies, by whose vote any person may be refused, and
in a large number of cases a small minority of any local may
absolutely bar a person to whom they object. The object of
this is to keep out persons of bad character, or sometimes
incompetent workmen. In practice, however, it gives the local
or a few of its members a monopoly of the labor market and a
chance to exercise, consciously or unconsciously, their prejudices
against foreigners or Negroes.

The following unions require a majority vote for admission
to the locals :


Boot and Shoe Workers
Amalgamated Carpenters
Bottle Blowers
Glass Workers
Wood Workers
Coopers
Stogy Makers


Amalgamated Engineers
Metal Polishers
Stove Mounters
Bakers
Barbers

Steam Engineers
Coal-Hoisting Engineers


The wood workers, coal-hoisting engineers, and coopers re-
quire an examining committee in addition.


366 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

The following require a two-thirds vote for admission to the
locals :

Brotherhood of Carpenters Sheet-Metal Workers

Pamters Pattern Makers

Tile Layers Tin-Plate Workers

Flint-Glass Workers Broom Makers

Iron and Steel Workers

Nearly all these require also the favorable report of an
examining committee. Among the iron and steel workers two
black balls can make a second election necessary.

The following unions require more than a two-thirds vote
for admission :

Electrical Workers, two-thnds vote, plus one, and examination.

Molders, two-thirds vote, plus one

Core Makers, two-thirds vote, plus one.

Boiler Makers, three black balls reject.

Blacksmiths, three black balls reject, two require second election.

Street Railway Employees, three-fourths vote

Leather Workers (horse goods), three black balls reject.

The Typographical Union and printing pressmen and many
others leave all questions of admission to the local unions abso-
lutely, except that an appeal lies to the national union. In
nearly all cases save that of the cigar makers the adverse vote
of a local practically bars the applicant. It is here and not
usually in the constitutions of the national bodies that the
color line is drawn ruthlessly in the North.

In like manner the methods regulating apprenticeship mili-
tate against Negroes in nearly all the trades. Many unions,
like the hatters, trunk makers, printers, stonecutters, glass
workers, and others, limit the number of apprentices according
to the journeymen at work. Very often, as in the case of the
hatters, the union prescribes the terms of apprenticeship and
oversees the details. In the case of the coal-hoisting engineers,
elastic-goring weavers, and some others, the consent of the
local must be obtained before any particular apprentice is
admitted. In other cases there are age limits, and there is very
general demand among the unions for still more rigid regula-
tion and the use of articles of indenture. Strong unions go so


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


367

far as to refuse to recognize a workman who has not served his
apprenticeship in a union shop, or begun it between the ages of
seventeen and eighteen. The tin-plate union especially enjoins
its members from teaching their trade to any unskilled work-
ingmen about the mills. The black boy who gets a chance to
learn a trade under such circumstances would indeed be a
curiosity.

Summary of the Attitude of Organized Labor . Putting the
strength of organized labor in the United States at the con-
servative estimate of 1,200,000, we may summarize the situation
as follows :

Unions with 500,000 members include 40,000 Negroes.

Unions with 200,000 members include 1000 Negroes.

Unions with 500,000 members include no Negroes.


The rule of admission of Negroes to unions throughout the
country is the sheer necessity of guarding work and wages. In
those trades where large numbers of Negroes are skilled they
find easy admittance in the parts of the country where their
competition is felt. In all other trades they are barred from
the unions, save in exceptional cases, either by open or silent
color discrimination. There are exceptions to this rule. There
are cases where the whites have shown a real feeling of brother-
hood ; there are cases where the blacks through incompetence
and carelessness have forfeited their right to the advantages of
organization. But on the whole a careful, unprejudiced survey
of the facts leads one to believe that the above statement is
approximately true all over the land.

The president of the American Federation of Labor writes :

It has been and is now our endeavor to organize the colored
workers whenever and wherever possible. We recognize the neces-
sity of this if it is hoped to secure the best possible conditions for
the workers of every class in our country. I should say that your
statement is neither fair nor accurate. After careful perusal of the sum-
ming up of the attitude of the A. F. of L. toward colored workmen
I should say that you are inclined not only to be pessimistic upon the
subject but you are even unwilling to give credit where credit is due.


368 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

The Employer, the Artisan, and the Right of Suffrage

A few quotations throw an interesting side light on the
suffrage question in the South and its relation to the Negro.
The last Southern Industrial Convention at Chattanooga said :

We recommend that every possible means shall be used to educate
the public sentiment of the South to regard the Negro as a factor in
the upbuilding of the South, and that as such we should use all
possible means to make him as efficient as possible, and pledge him
the fullest guaranty of earning a living in every honest field of honest
endeavor, and protection in his God-given right of self-support.

A prominent southerner said before the Industrial Com-
mission :

I believe that in the Negro labor of the South lies the panacea for
the wrongs frequently committed by organized labor and a reserve
force from which can be supplied any needed number of workers
when the time shall come when they shall be needed.

Most workingmen in the South laugh at such threats because
they are certain the Negro cannot become a formidable competi-
tor in skilled labor. A writer in the Molders ’ Journal makes
considerable fun of the exaggerated predictions as to the Negro
molder and writes him down as a “dismal failure/’ Another
writer, however, takes the previous one to task and asserts that he

will woo us into a sense of fancied security and induce us to look
upon the Negro problem in our trade as one that will solve itself by
the Negro’s demonstrating his incapacity and being ignominiously
dismissed from the foundry.

That is very flattering to our vanity, but it is contrary to facts. I
believe I am well within the mark when I say that in the last twenty
years Negro molders have increased five hundred per cent, and that
excluding the Negro pipe molders, whom I do not class as skillful
mechanics, I know of two foundries at least where the molding is done
entirely by Negroes, — three if we include the Ross-Mehan annex in
Chattanooga. There is the one at the foot of Lookout Mountain and
another in Rome, Georgia. A few years ago a mere handful of Negroes
worked at molding in Chattanooga ; to-day there are over two hun-
dred ; and I am convinced that the question of what shall be done with


THE NEGRO ARTISAN


369

the Negro molder is one which in the very near future will demand
more of our attention, if we would maintain for ourselves fair wages
and conditions in the South . 1

On the other hand, a white speaker in the Tenth Barbers'
Convention said :

Is the disfranchisement of the Negro the first step toward making
history repeat itself? I for one will not believe it, as I have too much
confidence in American manhood to think that they will allow it.
Those of you who live in the South may feel, you may even say, it
is right, and then I will say to you, If it is right to deny the right of
franchise to any American citizen, though his color or nationality be
what it may, then it may be your turn to-morrow, because those who
seek to disfranchise the Negro to-day will seek to extend their power
by disfranchising you to-morrow. Our protection for to-morrow calls
on us to protest in favor of the disfranchised Negro of to-day.

Here, then, are the four great forces : the northern laborer,
the southern laborer, the Negro, and the employer. The south-
ern laborer and the employer have united to disfranchise the
Negro and make color a caste ; the northern laborer is striving
to make the whites unite with the Negroes and maintain wages ;
the employer threatens that if they do raise labor troubles
he will employ Negroes. The Northern laborer sees here the
danger of a disfranchised, degraded, and yet skilled competitor,
and raises the note of warning. Is not this a drama worth the
watching ?

Summary

We have studied in considerable detail the history of the
Negro artisan, the condition of Negro mechanics throughout
the country, the attitude of organized labor toward the Negro,
and the opinions of employers. On the whole the survey has
been encouraging, although there is much to deplore and criti-
cise. Our conclusions may be summed up as follows :

1. Slavery trained artisans, but they were for the most part
careless and inefficient. Only in exceptional cases were they
first-class mechanics.


1 See Chattanooga Tradesman , November 1, 1901.


370 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

2. Industrial schools are needed. They are costly and as
yet not well organized or very efficient, but they have given
the Negro an ideal of manual toil and helped to a better under-
standing between whites and Negroes in the South. Eventu-
ally they may be expected to send out effective artisans, as they
have already begun to do.

3. There are a large number of Negro mechanics all over
the land but especially in the South. Some of these are pro-
gressive, efficient workmen. More are careless, slovenly, and
ill trained. There are signs of lethargy among these artisans
and work is slipping from them in some places ; in others they
are awakening and seizing the opportunities of the new indus-
trial South.

4. The labor unions, with 1,200,000 members, have less than
40,000 Negroes, mostly confined to a few unions and largely
semiskilled laborers such as miners. Some labor leaders have
striven against color prejudice, but it exists and keeps the
mass of Negroes out of many trades. This leads to complicated
problems, both industrial, political, and social.

5. Employers on the whole are satisfied with Negro skilled
labor and many of them favor education as tending to increase
the efficiency of Negroes Others think it will spoil the docility
and tractableness of Negro labor. The employment of Negro
skilled labor is slowly increasing.

6. The Negro evinces considerable mechanical ingenuity.

On the whole this study of a phase of the vast economic

development of the Negro race in America but emphasizes the
primal and emphatic need of intelligence. The situation is
critical and developing swiftly. If the Negro is deftly guided
with the larger wisdom of men and deeper benevolence of great
hearts, an outcome of good to all cannot be doubted. If he is
muddled by half -trained men and guided by selfish and sordid
interests, all the evils of industrial history may easily be repeated
in the South. “ Wisdom [then] is the principal thing; therefore
get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding r


XVII

WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 1

I. The Factory System in the Overalls Trade

. . . The manufacture of overalls and workingmen’s garments
is the branch of the clothing industry into which the factory
system was first introduced and in which it is now most largely
employed. As early as 1871 there was in Wappinger’s Falls,
New York, the nucleus of the establishment that claims to
have been the first overalls factory in the United States. . . .
There are at least three reasons for the early use of machines
run by mechanical power in this line of work. First, it is harder
to drive a needle through the closely woven cotton fabrics of
which these suits are made than through woolen goods. Second,
the work is less complicated than that on regularly tailored suits,
and it is consequently of advantage to be able to keep up a
constant high rate of speed. Third, it is work that can well be
done by women, but the use of foot-power machines would have
made it, in some cases at least, more difficult to increase rapidly
the number of operatives of the class desired.

During the year 1900 there were 2901 people in New York
state engaged in making overalls and workingmen’s suits. 2
These were found in thirty-four establishments. The average
number of employees in a factory was therefore eighty. This is
in marked contrast to the situation that we have found in other
branches of the ready-made clothing trade. If our official sta-
tistics on this subject are of any value they establish two facts :

1 From Chapters VII and IX of “ The Employment of Women in the Cloth-
ing Trade,” Columbia University Studies m History , Economics , and Public Law ,
Vol. XVI, pp 298-312, 329-360

2 Compiled from the Fifteenth Annual Report of the Factory Inspector of the
State of New York, 1900


37i


372 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

first, that the overalls industry is carried on chiefly under the
factory system; second, that it flourishes in small cities.
Among overalls manufacturers, however, there is an impression
that large quantities of the cheaper grades of overalls are made
in New Vork City in shops in which the operatives are chiefly
Jewish or Polish men. Neither the reports of the factory
inspectors nor the opinions of labor leaders familiar with the
situation in the clothing trade in the city justify this opinion.
It is difficult to find half a dozen such shops, and while a small
number certainly exist, I find no reason to think that they
manufacture any appreciable percentage of the total output.

Because of the relatively unimportant position held by New
York City in this branch of the clothing trade I have extended my
investigations to include Newburg, New York, a city frequently
referred to as the center of the overalls trade. . . . There three
establishments, and in fact overalls factories in general, are
under the direct control of the manufacturer. The contractor
does not appear, and no work is given out to be done in the
homes. The factory serves all purposes Here the garments
are cut, and are made up on machines driven by steam, gas,
or electricity; buttonholes are made and buttons sewed on by
machinery; and the completed goods are packed and shipped
directly to the retail dealer. The output of these factories is
large, and the variety of goods manufactured in them is note-
worthy. There are overalls of all kinds, unlined duck coats,
pants made of various kinds of cotton goods, and sometimes
even woolen suits, which are of a substantial character but
lack the cut and finish that a tailor would give. Many factories,
however, probably a majority of them, confine themselves to
the manufacture of the various styles of cotton suits needed by
men working at trades.

In such factories the division of labor between the sexes is
almost everywhere the same. The cutting, whether done by
machinery or by hand, is under the charge of men, and they
alone are found also in the shipping department. With rare
exceptions alLthe work of making garments is done by women.
They form 83 per cent of the total number of employees in the


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


373


factories in New York state engaged in making overalls ^ancl
workingmen’s clothing. The 17 per cent comprising the men
are found in the two departments before mentioned.

Except in the establishments where woolen suits as well as
cotton are made up, nearly all the women, certainly more than
90 per cent of them, are employed in stitching up the garments.
The remainder put on buttons, bars, or tags, or make button-
holes by machine, or ‘serve as examiners of the work. The woolen
suits require some hand finishing. This work does not differ much
from the finishing work previously considered. The method in
which a pair of overalls, a duck coat, or a pair of cotton pants is
stitched up by machinery differs somewhat in different factories.
It is common to find that the entire garment is sewed up by a
single girl. In the case of overalls she may do all the stitching
except on one seam, which is sewed on a double-needle ma-
chine Sometimes, however, we find section work, but even this
involves a very slight division of labor. For example, the work
may be divided among three girls, each of whom has only a
particular part to do. Usually a girl has to understand not only
how to put together an entire garment of a certain kind but
even how to make up several kinds of garments. It is cus-
tomary to divide the operators in a factory into coat operators,
pants operators, and overalls operators. This means, however,
that each of the girls has her special kind of garment to make
only when there is plenty of work of all kinds. . . .

It is contrary to the practice of these three factories to' admit
girls under 16 years of age. Of the 900 women employed only
3 were below that limit. On the other hand, the work demands
quickness of movement, and the superintendents state frankly
that they have no use for a woman over 45. Probably none
even of that age would be taken on, but individual instances
may be found where women as old as 62 are still retained in
the factory. A large majority of the employees are strong*
healthy-looking women of between 20 and 30 years of age.
The girls entering the factory have in almost all cases gradu-
ated from the grammar schools, and some of them both speak
and write with considerable force and ability. , , *


374 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

The somewhat varied nature of the work required, especially
the necessity of passing from one kind of work to another,
demands some intelligence on the part of the worker. Quick-
ness of movement is perhaps the primary requisite of a good
machine operator in this line of work. But it is noticeable that
the brightest girls, provided they take an interest in their work,
not only learn it in the least time but also become usually the
most rapid workers. Ability to concentrate attention is abso-
lutely essential. For this reason there is a class of girls that
have been especially successful, the deaf-mutes. In spite of
the constant whir and buzz of machinery in the large rooms
and the movement of passing people, nothing distracts their
attention. ...

Few of the women are married, and none of those who marry
do so with the expectation of remaining at their work. Misfor-
tune, however, may send them back to it There are several
cases on record where former operators have returned to the
factory after the death of their husbands, and have been able
to bring up their children on their earnings. Qpposite one of
the large Newburg factories is a day nursery, where children
are cared for while their mothers are at work. The attendant
in charge says that she has never had more than three children
whose mothers were working in the overalls factory, in spite of
the fact that it employs between five hundred and six hundred
women. Of this number about five per cent, according to the
superintendent, leave every year to marry.

The popular idea of a clothing factory has been formed
largely from the distressing, and unfortunately true, descrip-
tions that have from time to time appeared of the small, ill-
ventilated, and dirty clothing shops in the Jewish quarter of
New York City. Yet the workingman who buys a pair of over-
alls for seventy-five cents, especially if it bears a union label,
may be reasonably sure that it was made up under sanitary
conditions that could not easily be improved. The New York
factory under consideration is not a large one, but it is well
lighted, and the employees are provided with all conveniences.
No employee has a word of private criticism to make in this


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


375


respect. The Newburg establishments are large and are
especially adapted to the work to be performed. In one the
light comes entirely from overhead, m order that it may be less
trying to the eyes. In both factories there i§ an evident and
an intelligent effort made to provide everything that may be
conducive to better work or to greater comfort on the part of
the employees. The supply of operators is here scarcely equal
to the demand for them, and this fact forms an additional incen-
tive to consideration for their welfare.

In the Newburg factories the regular ten-hour working day
is observed. It extends from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m , with one hour
intermission for dinner. The doors are closed at 7 05 a.m. and
1 05 p.m., and any employee not within the building at that
time loses his hdf-day’s work. These hours of work are the
ones generally observed in the overalls factories. The shortest
regular working day of which I know is that of a large and
prominent western factory. Here a nine-hour day is observed,
with a Saturday half holiday throughout the year, and no work
overtime is permitted. . . .

Employment is regular throughout the year in all these
three factories, except during the ten days or two weeks when
account of stock is taken. The legal holidays are of course
observed. Occasionally there is not sufficient work to keep all
classes of employees busy, but this is unusual. The operators
have work practically all the time. It seems a surprising thing
to find clothing establishments in which the women, instead of
complaining of lack of work during part of the year, actually
absent themselves from work at times because they wish to do
other things. There are two reasons why employment is more
regular in the manufacture of overalls and workingmen’s
garments than in other branches of the clothing trade. The
primary reason is found in the facts that styles are less fre-
quently changed and that the demand, especially for certain
classes of garments, is less rigidly determined by the season.
Of course there are certain months when orders come m more
frequently, as the spring months in the overalls trade, but it is
possible to forecast the future demand to quite an extent, and


376 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

working for stock commonly supplements the order work
during the dull season. The second reason for steady employ-
ment, but one that would remain inoperative without the first,
is found in the amount of capital invested in the plants. The
capital must not be permitted to lie idle. The absence of girls
from work, especially in the busy season, is regarded as a posi-
tive injury to the employer, since their machines stand idle.
No definite regulations have been adopted, however, by the
manager of any of these three factories to restrict this evil.
The relations existing between the management and the em-
ployees are in general friendly, and when there is a special
pressure of work a request is made that there be as few
absences as possible. Such a request is usually heeded.
Special admonitions may be resorted to irk individual cases,
but after all the chief security for regular attendance at work
is found in the fact that absence entails loss of wages. With
the great mass of the workers these motives are quite sufficient
to insure regularity. That no more stringent measures are
adopted in the few cases, in which these prove unavailing is to
be explained, as one of the superintendents asserts, by the fact
that the places of the girls could not well be filled. “ Other-
wise,” he added, “ we might attempt to regulate the matter,
since at times we are certainly inconvenienced.”

. . . None of the experienced operators earn less than $i
a day, and there are at least twenty who appear ik the records
as averaging over $1.50 per day throughout the year. These
twenty earn regularly, therefore, from $9 to $10 a week. Prob-
ably no woman averages more than that in this line of work,
though for a short time some of them may earn more.

How long does a girl need to learn machine operating on
overalls ? There have been several cases where girls were earn-
ing a dollar a day by the end of the second month. Some super-
intendents claim that any bright girl should be able to do that,
but among the women themselves the impression prevails that
it is no disgrace to spend three or even four months before
attaining that degree of speed. From the beginning the women
are paid at piece rates and therefore begin to earn something at


377


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE

#

once. The work can be learned only in the factories, where a
teacher is provided. One firm estimates that the actual cost of
teaching each new worker is twenty-five dollars. This amount
is apparently obtained by making allowance for the profit that
would accrue to the establishment if the machine were run by
an experienced hand.

... In Newburg the greater part of the women belong to
families that have resided in Newburg for a number of years.
Many of them were born there. There are, however, two other
classes. The first and smaller one consists of girls who have
come to Newburg with their parents, or more frequently with
the mother alone, in order to enter the factories. The second
class is composed of girls who have come to the city alone and
who board usually in some private family. Except in connection
with the latter class, which comprises not more than one fourth
of the girls, one is almost as strongly impressed with the essen-
tial economic unity of the family as was the case among the very
different classes of women in New York. What is earned by
these women is in general simply a part of the family income,
and not in any sense a fund for separate maintenance. The
character of the home, the amount spent on clothing, and the
social activities of the women are determined by the general
economic status of the families rather than by the ability of the
women themselves. But when we come to consider the extent
to which the family status is here affected by the employment
of the daughter we meet with quite a different situation. The
women are in many cases the chief support of the family. We
find here to a certain extent a repetition of the experiences of
some of the New England towns. The opportunities for men
to work have not increased as rapidly as have those for women.
The latter were never better than they are to-day. In the case
of the former, however, it is not only true that the industries
in Newburg in which men are employed have not expanded,
but in some instances works have actually been abandoned, as
has happened to certain foundries and shops for the manufacture
of steam engines. In some instances men who were old and
could not readily find similar work elsewhere have undoubtedly


378 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS
%

been led to remain in Newburg on account of the excellent
factory positions held by their daughters. More frequently,
perhaps, it is a widowed mother who remains with her daughters,
while her sons find work elsewhere. There are still, of course,
many men industrially employed in the city, and in these cases
the wages of the daughters or sisters form a less important
part of the family income. While in few instances, perhaps,
may the employment of the women of the household be regarded
as directly a reason for less exertion on the part of the men,
indirectly, by interposing an obstacle in the way of free move-
ment elsewhere on the part of the family, it undoubtedly has
had that effect.

There are no “ factory boarding houses” maintained in the
city. The girls who are without families board in private
homes. Seldom more than two or three board in one place.
One result of this practice is that they blend quite readily with
the people of the city and do not form a distinct class by them-
selves. From three to four dollars a week is the usual charge
for board and lodging.

The energy of the young women is by no means exhausted
by their industrial activity. Opportunities for social intercourse
come in connection with their church work and with their trade
unions, as well as in the varied life of a small city. A number
of the girls take music lessons and find time and interest to
practice with more or less regularity. During the winter of
1900 and 1901 forty of the girls were members of the Young
Women’s Christian Association, an organization that here does
not draw strict denominational lines but admits Catholics as
well as Protestants. The general fee for membership is one
dollar. There are for the members both free classes and pay
classes. The factory girls are quite as ready to join the latter
as the former. The gymnasium and the cooking classes have
proved especially popular with them, though sometimes dress-
making is taken up.

Practically all of the women carry life insurance. In the case
of those with no near relatives this usually amounts to about


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


379


$200, which is regarded as enough for burial expenses and
miscellaneous items. A larger proportion of them are insured
for $500, and while I can present no definite records in support
of the statement, on the strength of information from various
reliable sources I feel justified in saying that there are probably
as many as a hundred women in one factory employing five or
six hundred women who are carrying insurance to the amount
of $1000, usually for the benefit of the mother.

Few of the women save money. Those who are independent
of relatives pay three or four dollars a week for board, main-
tain their insurance, meet a few incidental expenses, and spend
the rest on clothes. A few belong to benefit societies, such as
the Ladies’ Branch of the Foresters, which insures its mem-
bers a weekly payment of five dollars in case of sickness. A
small number, however, have bank accounts. . . .

Certain broad general contrasts appear between the women
working on coats, pants, and vests in New York City 1 and the
women employed in the manufacture of overalls and working-
men’s suits. The former class is composed chiefly of Italian
immigrants, with an admixture of Jewish and German women;
the latter is made up almost exclusively of American-born
women of Irish, American, or sometimes German parentage.
The majority of the former class do not speak English ; nearly
all of the latter have received a grammar-school education. The
former are generally married women, engaged in finishing gar-
ments by hand at home; the latter are single women, operating
machines in factories. The wages of the former class are small
and irregular ; those of the latter are relatively high and stable.
Although in both cases the wages ordinarily form a part of the
family income, the share contributed by the Italians is supple-
mentary, while the overalls workers are in many instances the
main support of the family. A considerable number of this
class of employees are independent, self-supporting women.
These protect themselves by life insurance and occasionally by
membership in benefit societies or by deposits in the bank.

1 See Chapter XIV on the sweating system. — Ed,


380 trade unionism and labor problems


II. Trade Unions

The United Garment Workers of America is an international
union which now includes in its membership almost all the
organized men and women in the United States engaged in the
manufacture of men’s ready-made clothing, together with a
number in Canada. ... In its establishment the women workers
bore no part either directly or indirectly, and the first officers
chosen were all men. Before the second convention, which was
called late in 1891, twenty-four charters had been granted. Of
these three were taken out by women’s unions. One of these
unions never paid any dues and was shortly dropped from the
records; another led a precarious and nervous existence for
some years and at last went to pieces ; the third, formed
through the influence of the employer, who desired the label,
has continued to the present time.

In April, 1902, the United Garment Workers was composed
of 179 local bodies, of which 83 admitted men only, while 96
were made up either exclusively of women or of both men and
women. In the unions of the last kind the women were usually
in a large majority. The total membership was about 25,000,
of which number approximately 8000 were women. It has
been the general policy of the United Garment Workers to
organize men and women in separate unions. The existence of
“ mixed” bodies has come about in many cases through the
creation of unions among the employees of single factories. In
the overalls trade, for example, the mass of the employees are
women operators, but a half dozen or more men are usually
employed in each factory as cutters. The unions in these
factories would naturally include the men, and it is frequently
in this way that the mixed unions have arisen. In this respect
the garment workers differ from the cigar and cigarette makers,
among whom the women are usually admitted to the men’s
unions. These two industries, cigar making and the manufac-
ture of clothing, are practically the only ones in this country
in which women have been organized in large numbers. The
United Garment Workers claims both a larger number and a


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 381

greater proportion of women than is to be found in any other
national union.

. . . While the leaders of the union were beginning to ques-
tion the efficacy of the strike as a universal panacea for the
ills of the clothing trade, the increase in the demand for the
union label, which prior to 1896 had been in an experimental
stage, turned their hopes in another direction. The union has
found in the label a powerful lever. It is to-day the most
important factor in determining the policy of the United Gar-
ment Workers, and as it is largely owing to the label that so
many women's unions have been established in this country,
we may consider somewhat fully the conditions which limit
its use.

The labels of the United Garment Workers are sold to any
manufacturer of ready-made clothing who is willing to enter
into an agreement to employ in the manufacture of garments
only members of the union, to maintain proper sanitary condi-
tions in his shop, to comply with the requirements of the state
laws relating to workshops, to regulate hours and wages in
accordance with the union standards that are maintained in the
locality or that may be agreed upon with the employees, and to
refer to the general offices of the United Garment Workers for
mediation all difficulties arising between employer and employees
which they themselves are unable to settle. In the overalls
trade no labels are granted except to manufacturers who have
all the work done upon their own premises without the inter-
vention of a contractor. All garments must bear the label.
For this branch of the clothing trade a general minimum price
list for the whole country has been drawn up, but there are
numerous complaints that the rate is not uniformly enforced.
There is one other point of importance to be noticed. Within
the last year the Garment Workers have issued a declaration
of war upon the contract system. .It is recognized that it will
be extremely difficult to restrict the label to employers who
give out no work to be done off the premises, but it is the aim
of the union to crush out the contract system so far as possible.
As a first step the requirement that all goods shall be made up


382 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

in the factory or shop of the manufacturer has been made a
further condition of granting the label to applicants in New
York City. Manufacturers already possessing the right to use
the label are given six months’ time in which to comply with
the new provisions. The gradual extension of this new condi-
tion to all other cities is contemplated, and those cities will be
considered first in which the worst abuses are found.

It is evident that if the requirements were strictly and
fairly enforced by the union the label would guarantee to the
purchaser of clothing to which it was attached that the goods
were manufactured by fairly paid laborers under sanitary con-
ditions It is the aim and desire of the union that the label
shall stand also for good quality and good workmanship, good
relatively to the class of clothing to which the article m ques-
tion belongs. Although it is doubtless true that in earlier days
the presence of the union label bore almost no significance, the
numerous precautions and safeguards that the union is now
throwing about it should tend to arouse both respect for it and
confidence in it, not only among those in sympathy with the
union movement but on the part of the general purchasing
public as well.

The agreement entered into between the unions and the
employers is in some respects a flexible one and varies some-
what in different sections of the country. This policy has had
three results. It has given color to the claim that the union
label does not stand for a definite reliable minimum of pro-
tection to the laborer ; it has caused dissatisfaction among
employers in some localities, who claim that they would be will-
ing to enter into a uniform agreement to be enforced equally
against their rivals, but maintain that under the present system
they are discriminated against ; and, finally, it has resulted in
the maintenance of some union shops in localities in which the
rigid enforcement of all the requirements would have made
them impossible. Because the label does not always stand for
definite conditions, because many of the well-to-do classes object
to the requirement that only union labor shall be employed,
and because many others have given no thought to the


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


383


matter, the demand for clothing bearing the label is restricted
almost exclusively to the laboring classes. For this reason the
label is found chiefly on garments intended for their use. In
August, 1901, there were 125 manufacturers of labeled clothing
in the United States and Canada, and 12,000 garment workers,
of whom more than one half were women, were working under
the label agreement. During the preceding year, from August,
1900, to August, 1901, fourteen and a half million labels had
been sent out. 1 A paid label secretary is now employed. It
is the purpose of the General Executive Board to devote as
much time and money as possible to extending the use of the
label and the demand for it.

The formal organization of the United Garment Workers is
democratic. The initiative and referendum have been preserved,
and appeals are frequently made to the whole body of members,
but, as is usually the case under such provisions, only a small
vote is cast, rarely representing more than twenty-five per cent
of the members. The guiding power is exerted by a small group
of men who from the beginning have held responsible offices
in the union and who represent perhaps the most conservative
influence in the body.

Such are the characteristic principles of the United Garment
Workers, and I think it but fair to say that in the determina-
tion of the general policy of the union the women have had
little iUany influence. In the conventions they rarely speak
on questions of broad interest, or upon the action to be taken
in particular cases except those in which they are immediately
concerned. They then occupy somewhat the position of expert
witnesses. Their testimony is given only upon those points on
which they are peculiarly fitted to speak, and when it is given

it is directly to the point Miss describes the conditions

in the- Tactory, and the convention at once dispatches a

telegram to the firm threatening to withdraw the label unless
the demands of the employees are immediately conceded. The
Syracuse women make a united appeal for the aid of the

1 Report of the General Secretary, Tenth Annual Convention, The Garment
Worker , Vol. V, No. 12, p 10.


384 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

international body in the establishment of a nine-hour day in
the tailoring trade, and the women from the overalls factories
all press for the establishment of a minimum price list for the
making of overalls. In most cases the women delegates have
been sent for the express purpose of presenting some such
request. These appeals are usually fully discussed in the com-
mittee meetings, where some of the women manifest consider-
able ability. In general, then, it may be said that while the
routine business remains exclusively in the hands of the men,
and while the men are responsible also for the determination of
the general policy of the union and its action in the greater
number of specific cases, the women perform valuable supple-
mentary work. I might add that I am given to understand
that the presence of the women has contributed not a little to
the orderly character of the conventions and to the rapid dis-
patch of business.

So far as financial contributions to the International Union
and the benefits received from it are concerned men and
women stand nominally on precisely the same footing. In
practice, however, there is a slight advantage in favor of the
latter, since financial assistance in strikes is granted to them
somewhat mjfe readily The chief income of the union is
obtained from a per capita tax, which has increased by varying
increments from three cents a month in 1891 to the present
monthly tax of twelve cents. In addition to this the General
Executive Board is permitted to levy a special strike assessment
of five cents a week when it is considered necessary, and it has
assumed the right to levy special assessments for other pur-
poses. From August, 1900, to August, 1901, but six such
special assessments were levied, amounting in all to thirty
cents per person. 1 Even this was an unusually heavy burden.
Finally, twenty-five cents of each initiation fee also passes to
the general body. The total receipts during the year were
$35^53.79. The chief expenses aside from the cost of labels,
which is usually fully covered by the proceeds of their sale, are

1 For these figures and those which follow see Report of the General Secretary-
Tenth Annual Convention, The Garment Worker , Yol. V, No. 12, pp. 7 and 8.


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 385

those involved in organizing unions, in paying the salaries of
the president, secretary, and clerks, and in advertising the label.
Strike benefits paid during the year amounted to only $3251.
It is an interesting point that of this sum $2725 went to women
overalls workers engaged in a strike in Kansas City. Only when
a strike has been indorsed by the General Executive Board do
members have the right to call upon the United Garment
Workers for aid. Then, if the funds permit, they have the
right to a weekly payment of five dollars apiece. In addition
to this, or when it is impossible to pay this, the General Execu-
tive Board may authorize the striking local union to send appeals
for assistance to other local bodies. While the rights of all are
equal, it is claimed that there is rather more readiness on the
part both of the General Executive Board and of the local
unions to extend aid to women than to men. This benefit is
paid until the General Executive Board declares the strike at
an end or until the funds are exhausted.

Ever since the establishment of the union there has been a
constant agitation in favor of the introduction of higher dues
and of sickness and death benefit provisions. To the higher
dues the women have always been opposed, and such increase
as has been made has been in the face of their opposition. The
plan for the establishment by the International Union of a sick-
ness and death benefit fund has met with opposition, especially
from the cutters. It has at length been entirely abandoned in
favor of the maintenance of such provisions by the local unions.

Let us pass now to a study of the local unions composed
either wholly or in part of women. [The statistical table shows
that from 1891 to 1900 82 women's locals had been organized,
of which in 1900 33 had disbanded and 49 were in existence.
— Ed.]

First. It is shown that the unions in which both men and
women are found in this industry are composed so largely of
women that it is not necessary to distinguish between them
and the unions composed exclusively of women.

Second. Up to April, 1900, women had conducted or partici-
pated in the affairs of 82 unions.


386 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Third . This figure is somewhat deceptive, since 12 of the
unions practically never existed at all ; that is, a charter was
taken out by some enthusiastic unionist, in which proceeding
the women may possibly have had no share whatever, and the
prospective organization failed to come to life, no dues were
paid, and no record of members was obtained.

Fourth Weak unions formed among women usually fall apart
in less than two years, some not even living through the year.
Of those that had maintained themselves more than two years
all but two still survived in 1900.

When we consider the circumstances under which the unions
that have fallen apart were formed we are usually able to dis-
cover at once the reasons why they were unable to maintain
themselves. Such an investigation throws considerable light
upon the feasibility of attempting to establish women’s unions
where the conditions are unfavorable. Each of thirty-three such
unions was formed originally in one of three ways. Sometimes
an employer engaged in the manufacture of clothing wanted
the union label, and since in order to obtain it it was neces-
sary to employ only union hands, he ordered the women to form
a union. Such was the case in at least ten of these unions.
These included six unions formed in small towns in Maine where
the women worked for Boston firms desiring the label. These
women were far removed from the mass of organized labor, had
little if any communication with the general body except by
letter, and were not only indifferent to the formation of the
union but were in some cases actually opposed to it, as it was
regarded as nothing but an additional drain upon their low
wages. Two of these label unions were formed in Columbus,
Georgia, each of which consisted of the employees of a single
shop. Of the other two cases one was that of a union in Scran-
ton, Pennsylvania, in which the girls took no interest until they
got into a disagreement with the General Executive Board ;
and the other was formed in Chicago in a shop from which the
label was withdrawn owing to bad sanitary conditions. In all of
these cases the label was withdrawn after a short time, usually
either because the employer failed to find it profitable or


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 387

because he failed to comply with the requisite conditions.
Upon the withdrawal of the label the unions immediately went
to pieces In no instance were there surrounding circumstances
of such a character as to arouse the interest or enthusiasm of
the members. The membership was small, rarely exceeding
twenty in a union.

In other cases unions were established through the influence
of some man or of a small number of men. This group of unions
is much larger than the preceding one and includes eighteen
of the thirty-three unions. The men were in some instances
tailors who desired the women in the trade to be organized
that they might give aid in enforcing concessions from an
unwilling employer; sometimes they were zealous unionists
from other trades. In this group were several of the unions
previously noted as having had practically no existence. Typ-
ical of this class was Local Union 137. This was composed of
Polish tailoresses who, having been called together and addressed
by some man, immediately voted to form a union but never
held another meeting. In other cases the unions were not only
formed but officered by men, and with two possible exceptions
all these unions dragged along without voluntary cooperation
on the part of the women. There was no growth from within.
Their suspension was speedily brought about through the non-
payment of dues. There were two cases, however, to which
this general description does not apply. Local Union 33, of
Baltimore, Maryland, called the Ladies’ Protective Association,
and composed largely of Germans, showed marked independ-
ence. In the strike of 1896 these women encouraged the men
to remain out and did everything in their power to prevent
them from yielding. Even when the latter gave up the contest
the women refused for some time to go back to work. They
were finally forced to make concessions, however, amd in the
general disaster of that year the union went to pieces. The
other independent union was also in Baltimore. Local Union
98 was formed of Lithuanian women, and was dissolved under
the same circumstances as No. 33. This union had combined
with its industrial functions a certain semireligious, semisocial


388 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

character, which fact had undoubtedly contributed to its strength.
The meetings were held in a church in the presence of the
priest, but partook largely of the nature of social gatherings.

Of the unions that have disappeared only one group remains
to be noticed, and that the smallest and most interesting class.
It consists of the unions formed not through the efforts of the
employer or of the men but at least in part by the spontaneous
movement of the women themselves. There were but five of
these unions. First of them comes the charter union, Local
Union 1 6. It is with the history of this union, and often with
this alone, that the student of women’s unions is most familiar,
if his attention has been confined to New York City; yet it
has perhaps the least typical history of any of the eighty-two
unions. Local Union 90, of Brooklyn, is the only other union
whose experiences have been at all similar. Local Union 16
was composed largely of Jewish girls, a few of whom were
bright, attractive speakers, interested in the establishment of
their union and eager to extend their influence even beyond
their own group. But it has been the experience of trade
organizers^ not only here but elsewhere, that it is extremely
difficult to arouse in young Jewish girls any permanent interest
in their work. It is not merely that they leave it upon marry-
ing, — in general the American girls do the same, — but the
possibility of marriage seems to interfere with any serious or
earnest interest in work, while the American girls so long as
they remain at work are interested and ambitious. Possibly
owing to a clear understanding of the situation the East Side
Jewish tailor refuses to regard the industrial activity of the
Jewish girls as worthy of serious attention, and thinks it hope-
less to expect the women employees to be unionists.. As a
result we have from Local Union 16 what is, so far as I am
aware, the only complaint issued by women in the garment
trade of failure on the part of the men to give all due assistance.

. . . With reference to the influences instrumental in the
formation of the 49 unions in existence in 1900 we notice a
marked contrast between this class and the preceding one.
While in the latter class 18 unions owed their establishment


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE 389

•

to the personal exertions of the union men, m the present class
only 4 trace their origin exclusively to that influence, although
in many instances the men undoubtedly gave some assistance.
As against io of the extinct unions organized through the
label, 3 7 of the existing unions were so organized, — a very
large percentage of the total number. Under the general
heading of unions formed through the label I would suggest
three subclasses, the first to include all unions where the em-
ployees are entirely indifferent or are opposed to organization ;
the second to consist of those bodies the members of which are
now active unionists ; and the third to include the remaining
cases, in which the relations between employer and employee
are influenced by special and differing conditions. In the class
characterized by perfect passivity on the part of the employees,
we must place at least 1 1 unions. Any one of these would go
to pieces at once if the label were withdrawn ; the existence
of the organization at present confers no benefits upon its
members. Typical cases *under this head are unions formed
in two of the southern factories among the girls working in
cotton mills. In as many as 23 cases, however, we find that
unions formed under the influence of the label are active and
progressive. In this number are included most of the large
women’s unions regarded by the entire body of garment
workers as successful. Of the 23, 1 1 are composed of employees
in large overalls factories, while 4 of the others are located in
Syracuse, 'a city which has the distinction, from the trade-
union point of view, of being better organized than any other
city in the country. Of the third class there are 3 unions, one
in a cooperative factory in Alabama the stock for which was
subscribed by union men, a second in Ontario under a philan-
thropic employer who is trying to create a model factory, and
a third in Dover, New Jersey, where the employer is himself a
union man.

In addition to the large group of unions formed under the
label and the small group previously referred to as organized
by union men, there is among existing unions a group of
seven in the establishment of which the women have taken


390 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the initiative. Among these the organization at Streator,
Illinois, is perhaps the most prominent. It existed for some
time as a social club before assuming the form of a trade
union.

From the study of these individual cases we are justified in
drawing certain general conclusions :

1. That while nine or ten years ago, in the early days of the
United Garment Workers, the great part in the organization
of women’s unions was performed by men and the union, if
maintained, was kept up chiefly through the efforts of the men,
this is no longer the case.

2. That at the present time the most powerful influence for
the formation of unions among women is the union label.

3. That although the union label is unable of itself to guar-
antee the continued existence of an efficient union, yet the
existence of such a union is essential to the protection of the
label.

4. That the support and sympathy which come from the
presence of a large body of unionists in the community are of
great importance.

5. That although women have as yet rarely established per-
manent local unions, they can and do successfully maintain
them under favorable circumstances.

. . . What are the functions actually performed by these
women’s unions? Have they after all anything more than the
mere form of an organization, with a membership created by an
artificial stimulus and incapable of performing any real service?
Of some of them, as we have already noticed, this is a fair
description, but it is not true of all. It proved to be practically
impossible to make a detailed study of the economic, educational,
and social functions of the ninety-six unions existing in 1902.
Therefore, in order to get a more accurate idea of the actual
results of the organization of women workers, I concentrated
my attention upon eight of the oldest unions, with a total
membership of about two thousand women and two hundred
men. None of these unions is less than five years old, and one
has been in existence twice that length of time. The conditions


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


391

found to prevail in these organizations should then be fairly
typical for the stronger unions.

The members of these organizations are practically all girls
born in America, frequently of Irish or German parentage but
in perhaps the majority of cases with American parents. There
is a slight sprinkling of Jewish and Polish women, constituting
probably not more than one per cent of the total number.
Nearly all the girls have had a common-school education. In
all of the eight unions the women are employed on light
cotton coats, pants, or vests, or on overalls. In rare cases
some work is performed on workingmen's woolen suits not
regularly tailored. In each case all the members of the union
work in a single shop or factory for one employer who uses the
label on his goods. What are the relations between this em-
ployer and his employees ? Does the union exist chiefly in his
interest, in order to secure to him the right to use the label ?
Is it entirely subservient to his purposes ?

In the first place, these unions are not directly subsidized by
the employer. In five of the unions he has never given financial
aid to the organization. To one union the firm employing the
members offered to give one hundred dollars to help establish a
sick-benefit fund. In the case of another union the traveling
expenses of a delegate to the national convention were paid by
the firm in one instance. In a third case donations have been
made once or twice when especially requested. All of these
were isolated and special acts of kindness on the part of friendly
employers. The financial burdens of the unions were borne by
the members.

What are the relations between the employer and the union
when questions of wages are in dispute? Practically all the
women are paid at piece rates. In each of these factories the
rates are fixed by an annual agreement between the employer
and a committee appointed by the union representing the dif-
ferent departments of the shop. There is a union standard of
piece rates which is supposed to serve as a minimum in all union
factories Two of the factories have schedules corresponding
very nearly to the union standard, one pays higher rates on


392


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


some articles and lower on others, and the remaining five
pay apparently somewhat higher prices. Does the existence of
the union have any measurable effect upon the scale of prices ?
In one factory the connection has been clear. The right to use
the label was refused until the wages were raised to the stand-
ard rates, and they have not since been reduced. In a second
factory difficulty in adjusting the rate of wages has occurred
on four or five occasions ; the general officers of the union
have been called in and a compromise has been reached. In
the remaining six cases no appeal for the assistance of the
general officers has been made, but the comparison of prices
and privileges, which connection with the union has made pos-
sible, has placed the employees in a position where they were
better able to decide what demands they might properly make
and insist upon. Local abuses in the matter of fines, local
exactions, and local low prices are less easily maintained when
employees are thoroughly familiar with the conditions prevail-
ing elsewhere.

In some cases, however, disagreements cannot be amicably
settled. Frequent strikes are much to be deplored, but a union
which is never ready to strike to enforce its demands has little
strength. If these label unions are, as is sometimes claimed,
only tools in the hands of their employers, we shall certainly
never find them resorting to such measures Of these eight
unions four have at one time or another declared strikes. They
have engaged in five strikes, in four of which they were suc-
cessful. One was against a reduction of wages, and three for
an increase. The fifth case was one in which there was a mis-
understanding as to the price agreement. The General Execu-
tive Board investigated the case, decided that the employer was
right in his contention, and ordered the members of the local
union to return to work. None of these strikes were prolonged
over three weeks, and in only one was any assistance required
from either the international body or other local unions.* In the
history of other unions of women clothing workers, however,
there are records of longer and more persistent strikes. One
in Peoria, Illinois, which had lasted three months and in which


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


393


one hundred and twenty-five women, operators on overalls and
shirts, had participated, was terminated on May i, 1902, by the
success of the strikers.

These strikes haye usually been conducted in a firm and dig-
nified manner. The advantages possessed Wy the union women
on strike consist not so much in the financial support on
which they can count, though this is in some cases extremely
important, as in their habit of acting together with a common
purpose and in their possession of trained leaders in whom
they have confidence. The women holding official positions in
the unions or sent as delegates to the central federations or
the national conventions find in their union work a school in
which knowledge of the prevailing conditions of the trade is
gained, clearness of judgment is developed, and a sense of
responsibility and fair-mindedness is attained. In every large
union of women is found a small group of able members whose
influence is generally felt throughout the body. Their position
is frequently conservative, and their influence is often exerted
to prevent hasty and ill-considered action. It would be unfair
to leave the impression that the existence of the unions tends to
frequent disagreements between employer and employed. It is
perhaps as often true that they are responsible for the recog-
nition of the fact that some claims cannot be pushed as that
others can. And in many cases difficulties are settled through
the mediation of the national officers which in unorganized
factories would undoubtedly result in strikes and temporary
abandonment of work. While in several instances the forma-
tion of a union has been opposed by employers, as in the Peoria
case previously mentioned, other employers prefer to deal with
an organization, feeling that it works in favor of the fair
employer against the unfair.

It is upon the ability of labor unions to improve the economic
condition of their members that their chief claim to considera-
tion is usually based. Various methods which have as yet
found no place in the women’s organizations have been adopted
to accomplish this object. Competition among the women work-
ing on the class of goods that we have been considering is not


394


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


keen, and the demand for their work is increasing. Conse-
quently there has been no attempt to limit the supply of labor
by apprenticeship regulations and no attempt to increase the
demand by limiting the output. The desire has been to make
the hours, wages, •and general conditions found in the best
factories prevail throughout the trade and steadily to raise
rather than to lower the standard. While in some cases the
formation of the union has made little difference in the eco-
nomic standing of its members, in others, in the various ways
and for the various reasons already noted, it has been efficacious.

To the educational benefits which some of the women derive
from the union reference has already been made. Naturally
there are comparatively few who participate in these. The
majority of the women are not deeply interested in union
matters or much affected by them. But the sanity of judgment
and the business ability developed in some of the women are
noteworthy, and are to a great extent responsible for the eco-
nomic benefits obtained by the body as a whole.

Aside from external influences, such as the employer’s desire
to retain the union label and consequent encouragement to the
union, the most important factor in keeping these women’s
unions together is probably to be found in their social functions.
These are especially prominent in the small towns and cities,
and do much to retain the interest of the members when no
immediate economic incentive to membership exists. The great
problem is not to induce a group of women to form a union
when they wish to rebel against some injustice, realizing that
they can do so effectively only in combination. The real dif-
ficulty is to persuade them to remain together, to hold regular
meetings, to pay regular dues, when all is peaceful and they
see no immediate return for such expenditure of time and
money. For various reasons sickness, death, and out-of-work
benefits appeal less strongly to the women than to the men.
Among the latter these constitute probably the most powerful
inducement to retain membership during seasons of peace and
plenty. In the women’s unions the development of social
attractions performs much the same service. Unless through


WOMEN IN THE CLOTHING TRADE


395


practical compulsion from without, I doubt whether any
women’s union has maintained itself with a large membership
for a considerable number of years without the aid of dances,
card parties, and social gatherings of other kinds. The greater
ease with which social bonds are developed in the small towns
and cities accounts largely for the greater activity of the unions
located in small places.

To the general statements already made on the subject of the
establishment of women’s unions we may add, from our study of
eight well-established organizations, the following conclusions:

1. Successful unions have usually been found among fairly
well-educated American girls of American, Irish, or German
parentage.

2. Such women are chiefly engaged in the more highly
skilled and highly paid work on clothing, that is, in operating
on light-weight goods rather than in finishing clothing.

3. They are found chiefly in factories working for employers
using the union label.

4. While the desire of the employer to retain the label is a
powerful support to the union, such a union acts frequently for
the independent good of its members and not as the mere tool
of the employer.

5. There are numerous instances in which the economic
benefits derived by members from the existence of the union
are clearly shown.

6. One of the most important results flowing from the
existence of women’s unions is to be found in the development
of trained, intelligent, and conservative workingwomen.

7. The unions frequently serve to check hasty and incon-
siderate action and to substitute arbitration and mutual con-
cessions for more violent measures.

8. Social gatherings of various kinds are extremely helpful,
if not absolutely essential, to the retention of the interest of
the majority of women members during the prolonged periods
when they are working for no direct and immediate economic
advantage.

Mabel Hurd Willett.


XVIII

WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK 1


In an article which first appeared in the Economic Journal
for December, 1891, and which has recently been reprinted
in Problems of Modern Industry, Sidney Webb presents the
results of an investigation made by him concerning the causes
of the “alleged differences in the wages paid to man and
women for similar work.” The facts which the writer had to
present were so few in number that no sweeping generalization
could be made from them. But though no definite conulusion
could be arrived at, the facts seemed to suggest that, so far as
manual work is concerned,

the frequent inferiority of woman’s earnings is due, in the main, to a
general but not invariable inferiority of productive power, usually in
quantity, sometimes in quality, and nearly always in net advan-
tageousness to the employer . 2

This explanation^ of the lower wages paid to women would
the writer thinks, be even more true in the United States than
in England.

Custom is presumably less powerful in regulating wages in the
United States than in England, and in the United States the propor-
tion which the average earnings of women in manufacturing industries
bear to those of the men is, as we have seen, considerably higher
than in this country. Where competition rates of wages prevail, and
especially where the women are protected by strong trade unions,
they often earn wages equal to those of men for equal work . 8

The suggestion that the lower wages paid to women have at
least a partial justification in the inferiority of women's work

1 From the Political Science Quarterly , Vol XV, 1900, pp. 508-535.

2 Problems of Modem Industry, p 63. 8 Ibid , p. 64.

396


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


397

has received the approval of several eminent economists in
both England and America. Professor William Smart, 1 John
A. Hobson, 2 and Hon. Carroll D. Wright 3 have all agreed
that the inferiority of women’s work is a leading cause of the
lower wages paid to them. This inferiority, it is said, may
show itself in several ways and may itself be due to other causes
than natural inability ; but whatever be the explanation, where
men and women do the same work the women “ seldom reach
man’s level in quantity and quality.” 4 Until recently this
theory of women’s wages has lacked adequate confirmation.
Mr. Webb acknowledged that the facts cited by him were too
few in^number to enable definite conclusions to be drawn from
them, and none of the later exponents of the theory have fur-
nished us with many additional illustrations.

The importance of the theory is almost self-evident. No one
of its supporters has pretended that it is the only explanation
of the difference which usually exists between men’s and
women’s wages ; and Mr. Webb implies at least that in other
than manual work this is probably not the chief cause of dis-
similarity. Popular opinion has, however, been directly opposed
to the views expressed by the above writers ; and the general
feeling that employers discriminate against women in the pay-
ment of wages has found expression in writings on the labor
problem, in the reports of labor bureaus arfd commissions, and
even in legislation, to such an extent that it seems worth while
to investigate the matter still further, in order to see how far
the theory in question can be sustained by statistical evidence.


I

The Eleventh Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor
(1897), entitled “Work and Wages of Men, Women, and Chil-
dren,” gives us an opportunity of testing by a large number of

1 “Women’s Wages,” in Studies in Economics, pp. 116 ff.

2 Evolution of Modern Capitalism, pp 299-304.

8 “ Why Women are paid less than Men,” Forum , Vol. XIII, p. 633.

4 Evolution of Modem Capitalism, p. 302.


398 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

facts the theory advanced by Mr. Webb, and of observing how
far his prediction that the theory would be found more true for
the United States than for England is realized. The report
itself was prepared with a view of making possible a comparison
of the wages paid to men, women, and children. It furnishes us
with a statement of the wages paid to employees in the various
establishments ; 1 gives the estimates of employers or foremen
as to the relative efficiency of the men, women, and children
employed ; 2 furnishes a comparison of the earnings of women
and children with those of men in cases where the efficiency is
the same ; 3 gives the reasons of employers for hiring women
and girls rather than men, and states whether their employ-
ment is increasing ; 4 and also gives the number of hours of the
working week in each establishment. 5

Like all statistical material, these tables need to be used
with great caution, and all conclusions drawn therefrom must
be accepted with reservation. The statements of employers
and foremen as to the relative efficiency of their employees
and the reasons given for employing females must be received
with some allowance for imperfect knowledge or unintentional
errors The report itself gives the warning 6 that there is reason
to believe that differences in the character of the work per-
formed by the men and the women existed in some instances
where no distinction ‘‘was specified by the employer ; and we shall
later have occasion to note that this difference may pertain to
the amount as well as to the character of the work performed. It
is quite improbable that the real grounds of the preference for
female labor are always correctly stated. Many of the reasons
given explain nothing. Thus it is obviously a contradiction to
state that men and women are equally efficient in the perform-
ance of a certain kind of work and then to say that the women
are “ better adapted ” for its performance. To state that women
are “ cheaper ” than men is doubtless a sufficient reason for
preferring them, if their efficiency is the same; but it does

1 Table I, pp 35~5 13. 4 Table IV, pp. 583-610.

2 Table II, pp 514-547. 6 Table VI, pp 639-645.

8 Table III, pp. 548-582. 6 P. 26.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


399


not go far toward explaining why their wages are less. Yet
although the reasons given cannot be regarded as entirely
reliable, they may at times save us from attributing an inferi-
ority to women's work when it does not exist.

Information as to the relative efficiency of the men and the
women could be obtained from only 436 establishments out of
a total of 93 1 from which other facts given in the report were
obtained. But these 436 establishments are pretty well distrib-
uted throughout the chief manufacturing states and represent
all the leading industries in which women are employed. The
investigation may therefore be considered as on the whole
tolerably complete and satisfactory.

The grades of efficiency of the operatives in these 436 estab-
lishments are indicated by an alphabetical classification — A,
B, C, D, etc. — in which A indicates the highest degree of
efficiency, B the next highest, and so on. Accordingly, if we find
men and women performing the same work in the same estab-
lishment and both designated by A, we know that they are sup-
posed to be equally efficient and to possess this efficiency in
the highest degree. If, however, we find men and women per-
forming the same kind of work but with the men designated
by A while the women are in grade B, we know that the women
are less efficient workers than the men. This seems to dis-
pose of the question of efficiency, but unfortunately it does not
do so in all cases. When we come to discuss the question of
piecework we shall see that the above classification is open to
criticism. With these remarks explanatory of the report, we
may now turn to a consideration of the facts furnished by the
investigation/


II

The class of occupations known as “ domestic and personal
service ” is represented in the report by forty-four establish-
ments. Eighteen of these report as to the efficiency of the
employees, and of these eighteen only six (four laundries and
two bakeries) furnish instances of men and women of the same


400


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


degree of proficiency performing the same kind of work. In
the laundries the operatives in question are either ironers,
washers, or clerks. The average earnings of the fourteen men
are 23 per cent higher than those of the twelve female
employees; 1 in the restaurants male cooks receive average
earnings^4 6 per cent in excess of those paid to females. There
is apparently no reason for doubting that the efficiency of the
women employees was equal to that of the men in these occupa-
tions, except that among the ironers piece wages seem to pre-
vail, although in some instances the men work by piece and the
women by time. This makes it probable that in this suboccu-
pation the women are not equal to the performance of the same
amount of work that the men accomplish. It is also to be
noted that in one instance where men and women are engaged
as pastry cooks the hours of work are longer for the men than
for the women. The managers of the laundries claim that the
women are “ better adapted ” to perform the work than are the
men, although one manager also explains that they are “ cheaper.”
In the restaurants the women are said to be ‘‘cheaper,” although
in one case they are also said to be “ better adapted.”

In the manufacture of bakery and confectionery goods only
nine establishments out of forty-eight report as to the efficiency
of their employees, and only four of these establishments
record instances of men and women of equal efficiency perform-
ing precisely the same work. There are five instances in these
establishments where the average wages of forty women are
lower by 10 per cent than are the wages of thirty-one men per-
forming the same work, and one instance where the same aver
age wages are paid to four women shippers as are paid to one
man for the same work. It is to be noted, however, that in
this case the man’s efficiency is of the third grade, represented
by C, while the other male shippers are in grade A or B. All
the women shippers are in class C; and time wages prevail for all
employees. One of these factories reports as its reason for
preferring women that they are “ cheaper ” ; another, that

1 Throughout this paper all of the figures given pertain to adults, — male and
female workers eighteen or more years of age.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


401


they are “ better adapted a third, that they are “ better
adapted, cheaper, and work more steadily”; while the fourth
does not state the grounds of its preference.

In the manufacture of paper boxes it would seem that the
efficiency and skill of the female operatives should be fully
equal to that of the men, and that here if anywhere the theory
of equality of wages for equality of work should show itself.
But the facts serve* neither to prove nor to disprove the theory.
Out of a total of thirty factories represented in the report
only three report as to the efficiency of their employees, and
only two of these furnish examples of men and women of equal
efficiency performing the same work. In a Minnesota factory
we find four male workers receiving average wages of $7.75
per week, while fifteen females possessing “ equal efficiency ”
receive on an average only $5.30^, or 46.1 per cent less than the
men. The men work on time wages, the women on piece wages.
In the other factory, a New York establishment, we find thir-
teen male workers receiving average wages of $6.68|, while the
twenty-three females receive $8.49^, or 27.1 per cent higher
than the average paid to men. Both piece and time wages pre-
vail for both sexes, and in both cases the women receive the
higher pay. The highest wages paid fo the men are $10.87;
the lowest, $3.50. The highest wages paid to the women are
$13*03; the lowest, $5. The Minnesota firm claims that the
women are “better adapted and more industrious,” while
the New York firm merely says that they are “better
adapted.”

In the manufacture of brooms and brushes there are four
instances in two establishments where sixty-nine men receive
wages higher by 55.6 per cent than do the seventy women
workers of like efficiency. The difference in wages is incon-
siderable in the case of the New York factory, where time
wages prevail, but is very great in the Maryland establishment,
where both sexes are employed at piece rates.

The boot and shoe industry is one of the largest occupations
in which women find employment, and in New England women
have been employed in large numbers in this industry since


402


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


early in the century. 1 The present report gives evidence con-
cerning twenty-eight establishments, in which 2442 adult males
and 1183 females are employed. Only seven of these establish-
ments, however, report as to the efficiency of their employees,
and of these only six furnish us data for a comparison of men’s
and women’s wages for the same work performed with sup-
posedly equal efficiency. In the six establishments given there
are fifteen instances of this kind. In four instances sixteen
women receive average wages higher by 6.4 per cent than do
the nine men performing the same kind of work. In the other
eleven instances the men receive higher wages, the difference
in their favor being 28 1 per cent. There are forty-nine men
and fifty-nine women covered by these eleven instances. The
branches of the occupation in which the men receive the higher
wages are stitching, finishing, heel making, skiving, sole cutting,
and vamping. The women receive more than the men as stitch-
ers, buttonhole makers, and vampers. Both time and piece wages
are paid, but the piece rates are more noticeable in those branches
in which women are most largely employed, especially stitching
and vamping. The reasons usually given for the employment
of women are that they are “ better adapted” or “ cheaper,”
though one establishment, which pays less to the women than
to the men, says the women are “ neater and more rapid.”

In the manufacture of “ canned and preserved fruits, vege-
tables, and meats ” there are two instances in which seventeen
women obtain wages higher by 1 5 7 per cent than do four men
who do the same work with equal efficiency. But there are
only three establishments out of nineteen reporting which
furnish instances of men and women engaged in the same occu-
pations. The instances just given are cases where men are
competing with women in what are essentially the women’s
branches of the industry.

Fifty-six establishments engaged in the manufacture of
cigars, tobacco, and snuff are considered in the report. Only

1 As early as 1829, $60,000 were paid out annually to women engaged m the
boot and shoe manufacture at Lynn, Massachusetts. — Wright, Wages and Prices,
1752-1880, p. 19.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


403


twenty-eight of these report as to the relative efficiency of
their employees, and of these only thirteen give instances of
men and women of the same degree of efficiency performing
the same work. In the thirteen establishments there are
twenty-six such instances. In six cases thirty-five female
workers receive average wages higher by 14.3 per cent than
do twenty-three male workers engaged at the same tasks. In
the other twenty instances the average wages of the 321 men
employed are 20.4 per cent higher than the average wages of
the 469 women who are their competitors. The same general
superiority of men’s wages has been observed by Mr. Webb in
the English cigar establishments. He explains it as due to the
better quality of cigars made by the men, although he con-
fesses that the superiority of men’s work is not so clear here. 1
In the absence of direct proof to the contrary it would seem
that the greater neatness and deftness of the women should
give them an advantage in this industry. But it is worthy of
note that the majority of cases where the women receive the
higher wages are among the lower grades of efficiency, B
or C. The statement that men generally receive the higher
wages is supported by illustrations from every branch of the
tobacco manufacture, while the instances where women
receive the higher wages are confined to cigar makers, carton
makers, and strippers. Seven of the thirteen establishments
say as a reason for employing women in preference to men
that the women are more easily controlled ; three say that they
are less liable to strike ; two, that they are more reliable ; two,
that they are neater ; three, that they are better adapted ; two,
that they are cheaper ; two, that they are more rapid ; and
single instances are given where the women are more industri-
ous, more easily procured, more careful, or learn more rapidly
than do the male operatives. 2 Of the twenty instances where the
men earn more than the women seventeen are cases where both
men and women are employed at piecework ; two, where both
are paid by time ; and one, where the mode of payment is not

1 Economic Journal , Vol I, p. 639; Problems of Modem Industry, pp. 51, 52.

2 In some instances more than one reason is given.


404 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

given. Of the six instances where the women receive the higher
wages two are cases of piecework; one, of time wages; two, of
the combination of the two modes of remuneration for both sexes;
and one, of failure to name the method of remuneration.

The fact that the higher wages are usually paid to men is
well illustrated in the manufacture of clothing. In one Mis-
souri establishment engaged in making cloaks thirteen tailors
in grades A, B, and C receive average wages much in excess
of the sixteen tailoresses who are reported as performing the
same work with equal efficiency, while seven tailoresses in
grade D receive slightly higher wages than do three men in
the same class. The owner of this establishment reports
that the women are “ better adapted ” for the work and are
“more easily controlled ” than the men. There is another
instance in the clothing industry where women receive the
higher pay. Three forewomen and designers for dresses and
cloaks receive average weekly wages of $41 66 J, while the one
man similarly employed receives but $30. The women are said
to be “better adapted”; and one might readily doubt whether
in this instance at least the work is the same for both sexes.
A North Carolina establishment has four men and four women
engaged in selling clothing and dry goods. The women are
said to be as efficient as the men and to be better adapted to
the business ; but they receive on the average only $4 per
week, while the men receive $11. Taking the clothing indus-
try as a whole, so far as represented in this report, we find
five instances where the men are paid wages 45 6 per cent
higher than those received by women and two instances where
the women receive wages 20.3 per cent in excess of those paid
to male workers of the same degree of efficiency.

In the printing and publishing business there are five
instances in which women earn more than men, the difference
in their favor being on an average 16.4 per cent. There are,
furthermore, four instances where their wages are equal to
those paid to men ; but, on the other hand, there are twenty
instances where the wages of the men exceed those of the
women by 26.6 per cent.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


405


In the manufacture of rubber and elastic goods the wages
of men and women approach somewhat nearer to equality. In
five instances the women receive higher wages, the difference
in their favor being, however, only 3 8 per cent ; and in one
instance the same wages are paid to men and women. In only
four instances do the men receive higher wages for the same
work, the excess amounting to 11.3 per cent. But since only
two industries in this branch of manufactures report as to the
efficiency of their employees, no conclusion of wide applica-
tion is possible.

It is rather startling to find that in the manufacture of tin-
ware and sheet-metal goods the women receive the higher
wages in the only cases where men and women of equal effi-
ciency are found as competitors. But the instances of such
competition are only two in number, and these are found ill
only two establishments out of five investigated. The differ-
ence in favor of the women is reported as 7.7 per cent ; but
an inspection of the figures from which the percentage is drawn
shows the difference to be accidental and to be due to that
source of so many statistical fallacies, the simple average.
Thus in one of the instances given seventy-eight men engaged
as solderers earn wages ranging from $3 to $7 per week, the
average being $5 09; while thirty women similarly employed
have the same upper and lower limits to their wages, but the
average in this case is found to be In the other

instance one male painter receives $5 per week, while four
women who receive from $4.50 to $6 f° r the same work
earn on an average $5.62^- per week. It is also to be noted
that in both these instances the men and women are placed as
regards efficiency in the second class, that indicated by B.
Only men are found in the A class.

In mercantile pursuits the fact that men generally receive
higher wages than women even when they perform the same
work with apparently the same efficiency is quite easily dem-
onstrated. In the book and stationery trade there is one
instance where one man and three women receive equal wages
for equal work, and one instance where the men receive the


4 o6 trade unionism and labor problems

higher wages. In selling general merchandise, insurance, and
sewing machines, and in miscellaneous trades, the men receive
in all cases of equal efficiency the higher wages ; but only eight
instances of such efficiency, scattered throughout the same
number of establishments, are given.

In the dry-goods trade there are two instances in two estab-
lishments where four men and three women receive the same
pay for equal work ; seven instances m six establishments where
eighty-six women receive wages 12 5 per cent higher than those
paid to eighty-five men ; and one hundred and eleven instances
in seventy-four establishments where the men’s wages are 61 per
cent higher than the wages of the women, who are said to be
equally efficient. Here again we find that it is invariably in the
lower grades of efficiency, B, C, or D, that the women receive
wages equal to or higher than those paid to men. Practically
all the instances where men and women are engaged in per-
forming the same work are among salesmen and saleswomen,
where the only method of payment is that of time wages.

Ill

It is the textile industries, however, which afford the best
opportunity for testing the theory under discussion by means
of the application of statistics. It is in these industries that
women have been longest employed and are still found in the
greatest numbers.

In the New England states, the chief center of the textile
manufacture, we are confronted with the phenomena of long-
established industries; traditional methods of work and to
some extent traditional modes of living ; a highly developed
system of factory legislation, devised in the interests of the
working classes ; strong trade unions among the male workers
and in some places organized female labor as well. On the
other hand, we have in the cotton manufacture of the southern
states an opportunity to study comparative wages where there
is an absence of all those restrictions on competition which
characterize the industries of New England. Fortunately the


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


407


report with which we are dealing gives us much fuller informa-
tion concerning the textile industries, especially the cotton
manufacture, than for any other industry or group of industries.
The number of factories which have reported as to the relative
efficiency of their male and female employees, the number of
instances of “ equal efficiency” given, and the large number of
employees of both sexes show that the results of the investi-
gation are not merely accidental. In the cotton industry, for
example, the investigation covers eighty-six factories. Sixty-
three of these establishments report as to the efficiency of
their employees, and fifty-five of them furnish instances of men
and women performing the same work with what is said to be
equal efficiency. The eight factories which do not furnish such
instances are for the most part, small establishments. The
total number of adult males in these eight factories is only
sixty and of adult females fifty-two. In the fifty-five mills
which furnish examples of men and women of like degrees of
efficiency performing the same work there are fifty-six instances
where the women receive higher wages than do the men. The
average wages of these women are 8 6 per cent higher than the
corresponding average for men. In one hundred and nmety-five
instances the men receive average wages 176 per cent higher
than the wages paid to the women who perform similar work,
while in thirty-six instances men and women receive equal
wages for equal work. Owing to the importance of this indus-
try and the number of instances of equal efficiency cited, we
shall examine these figures somewhat in detail.

In speaking of women’s wages in the cotton industry of
England Mr. Webb says:

Perhaps the clearest case of similar work is that of the Lancashire
cotton weavers, where men and women often perform exactly the
same work side by side in the same shed under practically the same
Factory Act restrictions. Here the piecework rates are the same for
women as for men, and clever women often get through more work
and thus earn higher weekly wages than some of the men. A similar
equality of task wages appears to prevail in cotton weaving in France. 1

1 Problems of Modern Industry, pp. 54, 55.


408 trade unionism and labor problems

Whatever may be the truth concerning the wages of cotton
weavers in England and France, the investigation of the Depart-
ment of Labor does not show that any such equality in the
remuneration of men and women exists among American cotton
weavers. There are nineteen instances in ten mills where 201
female operatives receive the same average wages as do 169
men performing the same work with the same degrees of
efficiency. There are, furthermore, twenty-nine instances in
twenty-one mills where 753 women employed at weaving
receive higher wages than do the 585 men who perform the
same work with equal efficiency. On the other hand, there are
ninety-nine instances in forty-three factories where 3015 men
receive higher average wages than those paid to 5560 women
who do the same work and are said to be equally efficient.

No other branch of the cotton manufacture furnishes so
many instances of men and women performing the same work
as does the business of weaving. Nearly all the principal sub-
occupations — spinning, carding, speeding, warping — furnish
examples of equality of wages in a few instances, but in the
great majority of cases the inferiority of women's wages is
clearly demonstrated. The table on the opposite page shows
the terms of competition between men and women for the
cotton manufacture as a whole and for all the leading branches
of the industry as well.

It is interesting to notice the geographical distribution of
the various cases within the industry where the women receive
wages equal to or higher than those paid to men for the same
work performed with equal efficiency. As already noted, the
cotton factories are generally situated either in the New Eng-
land or the South Atlantic states, especially in the Carolinas
and Georgia. Now, of the thirty-six instances in this indus-
try where men and women receive equal wages for equal work
thirty-one are in the South and only five are in New Eng-
land. Of the fifty-six instances in which the women receive
higher wages than are paid to men^twenty-four are in New
England, twenty-four in the South, and eight in the middle and
western states. Of the one hundred and ninety-five instances in


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


409


Comparison of Wages of Men and Women in the Cotton
Manufacture


Occupation

Men and Women
receive Equal Wages

Men receive Higher
Wages

Women receive
Higher Wages

Factories

Instances

Men

Women

Factories

Instances

S

S

Women

Factories

Instances

Men

Women

All branches *. .

20

36

2 35

238

47

*95

395i

7036

29

56

888

III3

Weaving . . .

IO

*9

169

201

43

99

3015

5560

21

29

58s

753

Spinning . . .

I

1

5

8

7

20

82

563

3

3

12

17

Carding. . . .

I

2

19

3

7

12

47

52

—

—

—

—

Speeding . . .

2

2

5

4

7

10

67

Il6

4

4

15

3 2

W arping . . .

2

2

4

2

3

3

8

26

1

1

*3

38

Dressing . . .

—

—

—

—

3

7

78

74

—

—

—

—

Doffing . .

I

1

1

2

2

4

43

52

—

—

—

—

Finishing . . .

—

—

—

—

3

3

40

19

—

—

—

—

Twisting . . .

—

—

—

—

1

1

1

1

2

3

37


Beaming . . .

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

1

2

54

101

Slubbing . . .

I

1

4

1

4

4

34

55

1

1

3

1

All other . . .

7

8

28

17

6

3 2

536

5 i 8

4

13

169

156


which the men receive the higher wages forty-nine are in the
South, one hundred and thirty-five in New England, and eleven
in the middle and western states. These facts seem to give
some support to Mr. Webb's statement that “where competition
rates of wages prevail and wher£ the women are protected by
strong trade unions, they often earn wages equal to those of
men for equal work.” 1 The cotton industry in the South is of
recent development, and the high demand for labor has enabled
women, as well as men, to secure high wages . 2 Custom is doubt-
less largely responsible for the lower rate of wages paid to
women in New England, where the industry has been long estab-
lished. In the South both male and female labor is unorganized,
while in New England the men have the assistance of strong
trade unions. In many places the women do not belong to the

1 Economic Journal , Vol. I, p # 649 ; Problems of Modern Industry, p. 64.

2 Nominal wages are of course lower for both sexes than in the New England
states But the labor cost per spindle is somewhat higher in the South than in
Massachusetts. — See Labor Bulletin of Massachusetts, No. 5 (January, 1898), p. 5.


4 io TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

same unions as the men, and in many others they are entirely
unorganized, so that they are less able to enforce a demand for
higher wages. It is also to be noticed that in those instances
where men's wages are higher than women’s the difference is
much greater in New England than in the South, where it is
often insignificant.

The results of the investigation which have thus far been
presented do not seem to bear out the conclusion of Messrs.
Webb, Smart, Hobson, and Wright that where men and women
perform the same work and do it equally well their wages are
usually the same. Among the cotton weavers, where Mr. Webb
thinks the conditions of employment are practically the same
for both sexes, we find that out of a total of one hundred and
forty-seven instances, representing 6514 women and 3769 men,
in only nineteen instances, or 12 92 per cent of the total number,
do men and women receive equal wages. The 201 women repre-
sented by these nineteen instances form only 3.08 per cent of
the entire number of women weavers. In twenty-nine instances,
or 19.73 per cent of the total number, the women earn more than
the men; but there are only 753 women included in this class,
and these constitute only 1 1.56 per cent of the total number of
women engaged in weaving. In the other ninety-nine instances,
comprising 67.34 per cent of the total number, the men earn
the higher wages. The women here comprise 85.36 per cent of
the total number of women weavers. The other branches of the
cotton industry make an even less favorable showing for the
women employees, as can readily be seen in the above table.

There is still another way of testing Mr. Webb’s theory
that women usually do inferior work and that where their
wages are inferior to men’s it is because their work is inferior.
If this were* true in the cotton industry, we might expect that
the instances where the women earn wages as high as or
higher than those paid to men would generally occur in the
lower grades of efficiency On the contrary, of the thirty-six
instances of equal remuneration for men and women twenty-
three are in grade A ; while of the fifty-six instances where
the women receive the higher pay twenty-six are in class A


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


411

and seventeen in class B. No final conclusions can be drawn
from these facts, but they do not seem to bear out the idea
that women’s wages in the cotton industry are lower because
their work is inferior.

Of the eighty-six industries engaged in the manufacture of
cotton goods included in the investigation, all but eight report
the employment of women in the mills to be increasing. The
reasons given by superintendents and managers for employing
women are in sixty-six instances that they are more easily
controlled ; in seventeen, that they are more reliable ; in thir-
teen, that they are cheaper ; in eleven, that they are more indus-
trious ; in nine, that they are more rapid ; in five, that they
are neater; in two, that they are more careful; and in one
each, that they are less liable to strike and are cleaner. 1

The other textile industries present fewer instances of men
and women engaged in doing similar work and possessing
equal efficiency as workers, but so far as the facts are given
they reveal the same results as the cotton industry. In the
manufacture of cotton and woolen goods there are in eight
factories fifteen instances where men earn wages 20.9 per cent
higher than do women for the same work, four instances (one
among finishers and three among weavers) where the women
earn 9.8 per cent higher wages than do the men, and one
instance, among the weavers, of equality in wages. In the
manufacture of hosiery, knit goods, and underwear there are
represented eighteen factories in which equal efficiency is
recorded. In seven instances the women receive the higher
wages, -the difference in their favor being 7.7 per cent ; but in
eighteen instances the wages of the men exceed those of the
women by 23.1 per cent. In the manufacture of jute goods
there are two instances where men earn more than the women
and two instances where their wages are equal. In the silk
industry, represented by seven establishments, there are seven-
teen instances of equal efficiency. One of these is among
spinners, one among winders, and the other fifteen among
weavers. In eleven instances the men receive the higher
1 In some instances more than one of the above reasons are given.


412 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

wages, in five instances the higher wages go to the women, and
in one instance the wages are equal. Where men’s wages are
higher the difference is 20.8 per cent; where women’s wages
are higher the difference is only 9.4 per cent. In the manu-
facture of woolen and worsted goods there are ninety-nine
instances where the men earn wages higher by 34.3 per cent
than do the women, who are said to be equally efficient. In
only ten instances do the women receive the higher wages,
and the difference in their favor is slight, being only 5.5 per
cent. Eight of these instances are among weavers, one among
spoolers, and one among finishers Of the thirty instances in
the textile industries other than cotton where women’s wages
equal or exceed the wages paid to men sixteen are in the
highest grade of efficiency and seven in the next highest. The
others are scattered through the grades C, D, and E.

IV

The statistics thus far presented show for all the leading
industries in which manual labor is employed (i). that men’s
wages are generally superior to those paid to women, even
where the work is the same ; (2) that in those instances where
the women receive higher wages than -the men the difference
in their favor is much less than the difference in favor of the
men in the instances in the same industries where the men’s
wages are higher; (3) that while women’s wages are more
nearly equal to men’s in the textile industries, especially in
weaving, even here men’s wages are unquestionably superior;
(4) that in the great majority of instances within the textile
industries where the women receive wages as high as or higher
than the men the competition between the sexes takes place
within the higher grades of efficiency, A and B, and therefore
does not indicate an inferiority in women’s work. We must now
turn to a consideration of certain facts which may serve to
modify the conclusions to which our work has thus far led us.

Mr. Webb has pointed out that among the Lancashire cotton
weavers, where the women earn wages apparently equal to


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


413


those paid to men, the payment is by piece ; 1 and he further
states that weaving “ appears to be nearly always paid at equal
rates, whatever the material or locality ” 2 In this country it
is not easy to determine conclusively whether in occupations
where piece wages prevail the wages of men and women are
more nearly equal than they are in occupations where time
wages are the rule. Time wages predominate in the majority
of American industries and are unquestionably much more com-
monly employed than in English industries. In certain branches
of some industries, however, payment by piece is the rule in the
United States as well as in England, and this is especially true
of weaving. Some of the New England cotton mills pay for
weaving partly by piece and partly by time, and there are a
few instances where the men are paid by time and the women
by piece. But among all the eighty-six industries engaged in
cotton manufacture that are included in the investigation of
the Department of Labor, there is but one, I believe, where
weaving is paid for entirely by time.

The question now arises whether, in cases where men and
women are engaged in the performance of similar work and are
said to be equally efficient, and where the mode of payment
is by piece, differences in wages are to be explained by a
difference in the rate of payment per piece or by a difference
in the quantity produced within a given time. To this ques-
tion the report itself affords no direct answer. It would seem
that any comparison of efficiency should certainly be based
on quantitative as well as on qualitative measurements. The
introduction to the statistical tables says that the data as* to
relative efficiency of employees “ represent the best judgment
of the best-informed officials or foremen of each establish-
ment .” 3 Doubt is expressed as to whether the report always
distinguishes between the grades of work in an occupation where
women and children may be doing lighter work than the male
employees; but it implies at least that in other respects the
statements as to relative efficiency may be relied upon.

1 Problems of Modern Industry, p. 52.

2 Ibid , p. 54. 8 Ibid , p. 26.


4X4


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


It now appears that this is not the case, at least so far as
piecework is concerned. In answer to an inquiry concerning
this point the Commissioner of Labor remarks that

it was impossible to take account of piece rates. ... In the report
« equal efficiency” is a term which applies more to quality of work
done than to quantity. The determination of the efficiency of the
parties involved in the investigation was, of course, by foremen.
I am satisfied that in most cases their idea of efficiency involved
quality more than quantity, — that a woman might weave goods just
as well and produce just as good a quality in her results as a man,
although she might not weave so many yards in a day ; hence there
would be a variation in the pay, although the piece rates were the
same. It has been our experience that wherever men and women
work at piece rates they are paid the same for the same quantity of
product, but time worked, quantity, and other reasons might work a
variation in the amount paid to each in the aggregate . 1

From this explanation it would appear that in cases where
men and women receive different compensation for performing
the same work the difference in wages may after all be due
to a real difference in the amount of work performed, — that
in all probability this is the real explanation for differences in
wages in those occupations where piece rates prevail. If this
be true, the report gives much greater support to the theories
of Messrs. Webb, Hobson, Smart, and Wright than seems to
be the case from a mere examination of the tables. Of the
781 instances recorded where men and women perform the
same work “with the same degrees of efficiency,” 217 are
instances of payment by piece rates. There are, furthermore,
167 instances where both time and piece wages are paid, — in
some cases the men being paid by time and the women by
piece, in other cases both modes of payment being applied to
both sexes. In all these instances where differences in earn-
ings exist they might be explained, in part at least, by differ-
ence in productivity. The following table shows for the entire
group of industries the modes of payment and the relative stand-
ing of the men and women as respects their earning capacity.

1 Personal letter from Hon. Carroll D. Wright, August 23, 1898.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


415


Wages and Mode of Payment — All Industries


Relative Wages paid to
Men and Women

Total Number
of Instances
of Equal
Efficiency

Time

Wages

Piece

Wages

Time and
(or) Piece
Wages

Mode of
Payment
not given

Men earn more than

women . . .

595

279

147

133

36

Women earn more than

men . .

129

35

52

3 1

II

Men and women receive
equal wages . . .

57

30

18

3

6

Total ....

781

344

217

167

53


Dropping out of consideration the fifty-three instances where
the mode of payment is not specified, we find that in over half
the remaining instances the amount of work performed enters
as a cause — perhaps the chief cause — of differences in wages.
The number of instances of equal wages is small, almost insig-
nificant, when compared with the number of instances where
such equality does not exist. The number of instances where the
women earn higher wages than the men is also small when com-
pared with the instances where the men’s earnings are higher ;
but it is interesting to note that the proportion is higher where
women are given an opportunity to earn high wages on the
piece-rate plan than it is in the case of time wages. This fact
is emphasized by the table on the following page, which shows
the modes of payment and the relative earnings of men and
women in the seven leading industries in which women are
employed.

Returning now to the textile industries and examining the
instances of equal efficiency in the business of weaving in the
light of our recent discovery as to piece rates, we find that
nearly all of the two hundred and forty-two instances of so-called
equal efficiency must be considered equal only as respects the
quality and not as respects the quantity of the work. The table
on page 417 indicates a general inferiority of women’s work in
this branch of the textile manufacture.


416 trade unionism and labor problems


Wages and Mode of Payment — Seven Leading Industries


Industry

Relative Wages paid to
Men and Women

Instances
of Equal
Efficiency

Time

Wages

Piece

Wages

Time and
(or) Piece
Wages

Mode of
Paym’t
not
given

Boots and shoes

Men earn more . .
Women earn more

1 1

4

I

I

3

6

1

3

Cigars, tobacco,

Men earn more . .

20

2

17

—

1

and snuff

Women earn more

6

I

2

2

1


Men earn more

15

I

5

6

3

Cotton and woolen

Women earn more

4

I

1

1

1

goods

Wages equal for
men and women

1

—

—

—

1


Men earn more . .

195

49

59

75

12

Cotton goods

Women earn more

56

9

2 5

15

7

Wages equal for
men and women

36

14

17

1

4


Men earn more . .

11

—

10

1

—

Silk and silk

Women earn more

5

—

4

1

—

goods

Wages equal for
men and women

1

1

—

. —

1 —

Hosiery, knit goods,

Men earn more . .

18

5

1

8

4

and underwear

Women earn more

7


2

3

2

Woolen and

Men earn more . .

99

42

26

23

8

worsted goods

Women earn more

10

3

7


—


Although over one third of the total number of instances of
equal wages paid to men and women which are given in the
report are found in this one branch of the textile manufacture,
these instances constitute only about 8J- per cent of the total
number of instances of “ equal efficiency ” found in weaving ;
and if to these we add the further instances where the women
earn the higher wages, we still have on]y 27.27 per cent of the
total number. In other words, in an occupation in which the
women employed outnumber the men and one which is univer-
sally regarded as suited to the employment of women, in those
cases where the same rates per piece are paid to women as
to men the superiority of men’s work is shown by the fact


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


417


Wages and Mode of Payment for Weaving


Industry

Relative Wages paid to
Men and Women

Instances
of Equal
Efficiency

Time

Wages

Piece

Wages

, Mode of
Time and n

(or) Piece *

Wages

45 given


Men earn more . .

177

I

98

66

12

All textile

Women earn more

46

2

30

9

5

industries

Wages equal for
men and women

20

—

19

— i

Bags and bagging

Men earn more .
Women earn more

3

—

3

■

Carpets

Men earn more . .

2


2


Women earn more

2

—

2

— ' —


Men earn more . .

13

—

6

5 ' 2

Cotton and woolen

Women earn more

3

—

1

1

1

goods

Wages equal for
men and women

1

— •

—

— 1


Men earn more . .

99

—

52

39

8

Cotton goods

Women earn more

29

—

19

7

3

Wages equal for
men and women

T 9

—

19

— —

Silk and silk

Men earn more . .

11

I

7

3 —

goods

Women earn more

4

—

3

1 —

Woolen and

Men earn more . .

49

—

28

19 2

worsted goods

Women earn more

8

2

5

— 1


that in nearly three fourths of the instances cited their wages
are higher than those paid to their female competitors. This,
like the other facts as to piece wages cited above, certainly
gives strong support to the opinion that the lower wages of
women in manual occupations are the direct result of their
lower productivity.

The same conclusions cannot be applied with the same
degree of certainty to occupations where time wages prevail,
but there are reasons for doubting even here whether the
term “ equal efficiency ” can be made to exclude all differences
in the producing power of men and women. When we turn to
Table VI of the report, where the number of working hours


418 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

per week is given, we find that twenty-two instances out of the
two hundred and seventy-nine where men earn higher wages
than do women and where both sexes are employed at time
wages can be explained by a difference in the number of hours
worked, the women putting in from one and a half to twelve
hours less time per week than the men. It is highly probable,
if not certain, that this means lower productivity on the part of
the women. We have, as a further indication, if not proof, of
the inferiority of women’s work, the fact that outside of the
industries where women are most largely employed and where
piece rates prevail the tendency toward equality of wages or
even higher wages for women is quite generally found to exist
in the lower grades of efficiency. Reference has already been
made to this fact in the case of the manufacture of bakery and
confectionery goods, in cigar and cigarette manufacturing, in
the clothing industry, in the manufacture of tinware and sheet-
metal goods, and in the dry-goods trade. But the same thing is
true in the manufacture of bags and bagging, of dress trim-
mings, of gloves and mittens, of rubber and elastic goods, of
watch and clock machinery, and of kindling wood. It is also
true of library work and of the book and stationery trade.

In all these industries, although in a few instances women
earn wages as high as or even higher than the men in the
same occupations, the competition takes place in the lower
grades of efficiency, while in the upper grades men alone are
employed ; or if men are employed along with women, their
earnings are higher.


V

The American investigation furnishes considerable support
to the opinions of the English investigators, that men and
women seldom come into direct competition even when em-
ployed in the same establishments. This is naturally the first
point to be determined in framing an answer to the question,
Why do women receive lower wages than men ? If the work
performed by men and women is not the same, the inequality
of wages may be due ‘wholly or in part to the inequalities of


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


419


employment. The question then becomes, as Professor Smart
puts it, “ Why are men and women employed in different
groups of employment ? ” 1

The supporters of the marginal-productivity theory of wages
naturally look to women’s wages for confirmation of their views.
Professor Smart in his treatment of women’s wages clearly has
this theory in mind. Since the time of Jevons, says he,

we have looked for the measure of value in marginal utility; for the
value of “ production goods” in their marginal utility as instruments
of production ; and with these for the value of labor in the value of
its marginal product and not m any predetermined fund divided out
among a variable number of workers . 2

Accordingly he looks to the price of an article as the first
thing to be considered in determining the value of the labor
which helped to produce it. Although he rejects the notion
that wages are low because goods are cheap, and points out
that the initiative in reducing prices comes from producers,
he is inclined to think that the explanation for the low wages
of women rests in the fact that

women are in almost exclusive possession of certain branches of
trade, and that in these branches the commodities made are recog-
nized by public opinion as being “ cheap.” Common observation
must confirm Mr. Webb’s conclusion that there are certain trades
where men do not compete with women , indeed, that there is a
well-marked relegation of women workers toward certain ill-paid
trades ; while at the same time there is as well-marked a movement
of men toward the better-paid trades . 3

As the investigation made by the Department of Labor took
place in industries where both men and women were engaged
in turning out a given product or series of products, we can-
not very well find in it either confirmation or disproof of the
statement that women are paid less than men because they
produce “ cheap ” commodities. If women stitchers and men
tasters are employed in the making of the same shoes, we can-
not well claim that the women are paid less than the men

2 Ibid , p. ill. 3 Ibid., p. 122.


1 Studies in Economics, p. 122 .


420 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

because their products are less valuable. However, if we can
show that women are generally employed as stitchers and men
as lasters, we may find a reason, if not a justification, for the
lower wages paid to them. It is this view of the situation
which the results of the American investigation apparently
confirm. A search through Table I of the report, which gives
the number of men, women, and children employed in each
subdivision of the industries investigated, reveals the fact that
outside of the textile manufactures in the majority of the
important industries men and women are seldom employed in
the same suboccupations. The women's work, therefore, does
not come into direct competition with that of men.

The manufacture of cigars, cigarettes, smoking tobacco, and
snuff presents an exception to the general rule. There are
fifty establishments employing 3327 men and 2989 women rep-
resented in the report, and in all of the important branches
of the manufacture both sexes seem to be employed. Here
we* find no direct proof to confirm the opinion cautiously
expressed by Mr. Webb 1 that the women do inferior work in
this industry, although the facts as to piece rates and the
prevalence of women in the lower grades of efficiency give
indirect support to the notion that their work is less valuable
to their employers.

In the textile industries there are more examples than else-
where of men and women at work in the same branches of
the industry; but even here by far the largest number of
the women are employed as drawers-in, spinners, speeders,
warpers, and weavers, while the men absorb the majority of
the other branches. In the cotton industry, for example, in
the eighty-six establishments included in the report there are
fifty-five occupations in which women are reported as employees,
but in the majority of these occupations there are only a few
women. Women are employed in sixty-five mills as weavers,
in sixty as spinners, in fifty-nine as spoolers, in twenty-two as
drawers-in, in twenty as speeders, in eleven as slubbing- frame
tenders, in ten as doffers, in nine as drawing-frame tenders, in
1 Problems of Modern Industry, pp 51, 52.


WOMEN’S WAGES IN MANUAL WORK


421


nine as twisters, in nine as winders, in eight as reelers, and in
five as carders. All other occupations are represented by less
than five instances. In the largest establishment represented
in this industry, a New Hampshire mill, there are one hundred
and twenty-nine suboccupations given, in but thirty-one of which
women are employed. From this array of evidence one feels
almost justified in acknowledging the truth of the strong state-
ment with which Mrs. Webb enforces the more cautious con-
clusion of her husband.

We are so accustomed in the middle class to see men and women
engaged in identical work, as teachers, journalists, authors, painters,
sculptors, comedians, singers, musicians, medical practitioners, clerks,
or what not, that we almost inevitably assume the same state of
things to exist in manual labor and manufacturing industry. But
this is very far from being the case. To begin with, in over nine
tenths of the industrial field there is no such thing as competition
between men and women : the men do one thing and the women do
another. . . . And even in those industries which employ both men
and women we find them sharply divided m different departments,
working at different processes, and performing different operations . 1

VI

It is somewhat difficult to summarize the conclusions to be
derived from such a variety of considerations and such a multi-
plicity of facts, but perhaps it may be done in some such
manner as the following.

1. In the majority of trades and industrial callings men and
women do not compete for the same work to any considerable
extent. Exceptions to this rule are found in the textile indus-
tries, in the manufacture of tobacco and of boots and shoes,
and in the dry-goods trade. In all of these industries men and
women are usually found performing the same work, though
their competition is often limited to a few branches of the
industry. Where they do not perform the same work it is
impossible to say how far differences in remuneration are due
to sex and how far to inequality of work.

1 Problems of Modem Industry, p 94


422


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


2. In the leading occupations in which women do compete
with men for the same work payment by piece rates seems to
be the rule. In such cases the earnings of women are more
often equal to those of men than where time wages are paid.
Usually, however, women are inferior to men in the quantity
produced.

3. In occupations where time wages prevail and men and
women perform the same work the lower wages of women can
in many instances be explained by a shorter working day for
the women than for the men and by the fact that the com-
petition takes place in the lower grades of efficiency. The
women workers naturally tend toward these grades, while
the higher grades are filled mainly by men. In such cases the
women often earn wages as high as or even higher than the
men do in these lower grades, but they seldom earn as much as
men where the competition takes place in the higher grades.

4. Women’s natural disadvantage, due to their lower produc-
tivity, is increased by the force of custom Where competitive
rates of wages prevail, as in the textile industries of the South,
women’s wages are often equal to those of men.

5. In spite of the lower productivity of women there seems
to be a tendency to increase their employment in occupations
in which they have been at work, as well as to employ them in
new fields of industry. This is partly due to woman’s greater
tractability. It may also happen that the wages of women are
lower, when compared with those of men, than is their produc-
tivity. Women’s lower standard of living, their partial depend-
ence on other means of support, and their lack of combination
prevent them from obtaining their true economic wages.

Finally, it must be repeated that these conclusions apply
only to manual work. Doubtless they are in a degree appli-
cable also to the higher callings ; but here woman’s inferiority
is usually less, and the influence of custom, of the standard
of living, and of the irregular and temporary character of her

employment is much greater. ^ TT

r & M. B. Hammond.


XIX


EMPLOYMENT OF GIRLS IN THE TEXTILE
INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 1

Pennsylvania, if classified according to the amount of power
used in manufacturing, ranks first among the states of the Union.
In the decade 1890 to 1900 the increase in the value of its prod-
ucts was greater than that of any other state. There is an aggre-
gate wealth in its banks of over $150,000,000, which is over
$500 per capita of the depositors, while in its building and loan
associations there is an aggregate assessment of over $ 1 1 2,ooo,OQp.
The capital invested in instruments of production and real estate
devoted to productive industry amounts to over a billion and a
half dollars, and the net value of products of its mills and factories
in 1900 was over a billion dollars, or nearly $175 per capita
of population. In the half century from 1850 to 1900 the gross
per capita value of the products increased from $67.07 to $291.19.
All this proves, if proof is needed, that the state of Pennsylvania
is rich, and is under no necessity of enlisting in its industrial army
thousands of young girls whose physical vigor and intellectual
power are impaired by continuous and arduous labor.

The labor needed in our factories and workshops to produce
articles of social utility, whose net value is over one billion dollars,
amounts to over 800,000 hands, of whom 188,578 are females;
and of the female employees, 17,286 are girls under sixteen
years of age. Many of these children are employed in stores as
“ cash girls,” but the vast majority of them are employees in mills
and factories, where tiny fingers labor for ten hours each day for
three hundred days in the year. The industries in which most

1 From the Annals , American Academy of Political Science, Vol XXIII, 1904,
pp. 434-444. Consult the same for*other articles on child labor; also bulletins of
the National Child Labor Committee, New York, and Florence Kelley, “A Boy
Destroying Trade,” Chanties , Vol. XIII, 1903, pp 15-19.

423


424 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of them are employed are silk throwing, hosiery and underwear,
cigars and sweet stuffs, umbrellas and parasols, paper bags and
boxes, and so forth. These industries, in which female child labor
forms so important a part of the employees, are not equally dis-
tributed over the state. They are found for the greater part
in the eastern portion. Pennsylvania has sixty-seven counties,
but in eighteen of them, all of which are east of Harrisburg,
which contain 52.87 per cent of the female population of the
state, we find 87.07 per cent of all girls employed under sixteen
years of age. The six counties in which female child labor most
prevails are Berks, Lackawanna, Lancaster, Lehigh, Luzerne,
and Philadelphia. Most of the children employed in these coun-
ties are found in factories and mills located in large cities such
as Reading, Scranton, Lancaster, Allentown, Wilkesbarre, and
Philadelphia. Of all the girls under sixteen years of age em-
ployed in the state 69.81 per cent are in the above six counties,
which contain only 34.98 per cent of the female population of
the state.

There are in Pennsylvania eighteen cities with over 25,000
population. By a comparison of the returns from the factory
inspectors and the returns from the superintendent of public
instruction of the state we are able to determine approximately
the percentages of female children of the age group 13-16 years
employed in these cities. The table on the opposite page gives
the percentages.

York and Easton, together with the cities mentioned in the
preceding paragraph, stand forth conspicuously in this list as
centers where young girls are largely employed. * The second
column in the table gives the percentages of the native-born
children of foreign-born parents, and the third column gives the
percentages of the foreign-born element of the population of these
cities. The table shows that cities such as MacKeesport, Johns-
town, Erie, Pittsburg, and Allegheny, which have the highest
percentages in the second and third columns, have the lowest per-
centages of girls under sixteen years*employed ; while the cities in
which the highest percentages of this class of employees are found
— with the exception of Scranton and Wilkesbarre — have the


GIRLS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 425


Percentage of Girls
of Age Group 13-16
Years Employed

Percentage of
Population having
Foreign Parents

Percentage of
Population
Foreign bom

In the state

9 16

22 7

15 6

Allegheny . . ...

7 82

37 4

232

Allentown ... . .

41.63

14 I

84

Altoona . . .

10.17

179

84

Chester . . ....

19 28

25 4

149

Easton

24 46

*7 9

8.4

Erie .

380

40 cf

22 6

Harrisburg . . ....

16 09

10 1

49

Johnstown ... ...

1 00

26.7

203

Lancaster . . ...

49 40

18 9

84

MacKeesport

059

329

2 7 3

Newcastle . ...

2.86

22 7

18.8

Philadelphia . .

1951

320

22 8

Pittsburg

4.12

37 3

263

Reading

3602

12 6

75

Scranton

3 2 95

44 3

28 4

Wilkesbarre ...

2603

40 0

23 3

Williamsport

616

194

77

York . .

3 1 44

9.2

38


lowest percentages of foreign-born inhabitants or descendants of
foreign-bom parents. This suggests that entrepreneurs in mills
and factories do not wholly draw their supply of child labor
from among the children of the foreign-born element. What-
ever degeneracy is associated with the labor of girls of tender
years in factories, it prevails among the children of the native-
born as well as among those of the foreign-born parents in
the state.

Let us now consider three industries of the state, namely, silk
throwing, hosiery, and worsted mills. The following table gives
us the percentages of female hands employed in them.


Percentage
of Female
Employees

Percentage of
All Employees
under 16 Years

Percentage of
All Employees
under 21 Years

Percentage of
Female Em-
ployees under
16 Years

Percentage of
Females among
All Employees
under 21 Years

Silk ....

70 65

20 'fb

5 ° 97

2215

77 49

Hosiery . . .

79.50

18 92

52.19

1977

83 10

Worsted Mills

57 40

U 83

31 90

2304

73*75


426 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

This table shows that the vast majority of employees in these
industries is female, and that of this majority an average of over
22 per cent is under sixteen years of age. Of both male and
female employees nearly 20 per cent are under sixteen years, while
an average of nearly 50 per cent of the hands is composed of
minors. These percentages, which show how prevalent female
labor is in these industries, are still further corroborated by
studying them in distinct localities. Take the three industries of
silk throwing, hosiery, and underwear mills in special localities,
and the following table gives the percentages of female labor m
them.


Percentage
of Female
Employees

Percentage
of All Em-
ployees
under

16 Years

Percentage
of All Em-
ployees
under

2i Years

Percentage
of All
Females
under

16 Years

Percentage of
Girls among
All Employees
under

16 Years

Silk


In Philadelphia . . .

7707

6.IO

25 08

5 28

66.66

Outside Philadelphia

77 68

23 90

52.84

25 00

77.69

Hosiery


In Philadelphia

77 °9

26 00

56.41

26 82

7953

Outside Philadelphia. .

76.98

24 42

48.73

2 7-37

8625

Underwear


In Philadelphia . . .

87 19

768

27.73

7-65

62 50

Outside Philadelphia

84 60

9 15

36 60

7 S 3

69 65


This table shows that among the silk workers in Philadelphia
we do not find nearly so many minors and young girls under six-
teen years employed as in this industry outside that city. In the
hosiery mills the employment of these classes is as great as m
territories outside Philadelphia, while in the underwear factories
the employment of minors and young girls is not so prevalent
as in the other two industries.

A study of the factories and mills in five of the cities where
female labor most prevails gives us- the table on the following
page as to the percentages of minors employed and the per-
centages of girls under sixteen years employed.


GIRLS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 427


Percentage of
Employees under

21 Years

Percentage of Girls
under 16 Years
Employed

Lancaster ....

48 24

1878

Reading . . ...

. . . . . 42.26

20.39

Allentown ....

5 i 39

23 16

Wilkesbarre . .

64 59

2248

Scranton . . . . .

55 °5

30.87


Let us now consider the wages of these classes of our em-
ployees In the census returns of 1900 we have data given of
three industries — silk, hosiery, and worsted goods — whereby
we may compute the average annual wage of females. It is as
follows :


Average per
Annum

Average per
Working Day

Women 16 years and over (silk) ....

$204 33

68 cents

Girls under 16 years (silk)

128.95

43 “

Women 16 years and over (hosiery)

265.58

85 “

Girls under 16 years (hosiery)

141.61

47 “

Women 16 years and over (worsted goods) . . .

290 6l

97 “

Girls under 16 years (worsted goods) . . .

174-54

58 “


In “ Industrial Statistics ” of our state the daily wage for all
employees in silk throwing, hosiery, and worsted yarns is 84 cents,
95 cents, and $1, respectively, which differ from the figures
given by the census of 1900, which are 74 cents, 90 cents, and
$1.09, respectively. The average daily wages of children under
sixteen years employed m silk, hosiery, and underwear in the state
is 43 cents, 46 cents, and 47 cents, respectively. Averages, how-
ever, do not give us the true wages paid in factories which are
located in cities and towns where an abundant supply of cheap
labor is near at hand. In factories located in towns and cities in
the anthracite regions young girls work for ten hours each day,
or sixty hours a week, for from $1.50 to $2 a week. A girl
who earns $3 a week is considered fortunate, while forewomen
who have charge of from fifty to one hundred girls get only $$
a week. In factories located in small towns the average daily


428 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

wage of females over sixteen years, as well as that of girls
under sixteen years, is fully 25 per cent lower than that of the
general averages based on the census returns. Of all industries
employing young girls that of silk throwing pays the lowest
wages, notwithstanding the fact that “ of the several branches
of the industry the manufacture of silk stood first in the value
of products in 1900.” Pennsylvania, according to the last census,
ranks second in the industry among the states of the Union.

In the annual report of the factory inspectors for 1902 the
chief of inspectors says concerning child labor : “The first year’s
report of the Department in 1890 showed that over 10 per cent
of the employees were children between the ages of twelve and
sixteen years This year’s report shows that less than 5 per cent
were employed between the ages of thirteen and sixteen years.”
In the census of 1890 only 3.87 per cent of all employees in the
state were children under sixteen years, while in 1900 the per-
centage was 451. During the decade, 1 890 to 1900, the increase
in the employment of children under sixteen years was 47.80 per
cent, while the percentage increase of school children in the
decade was 15.3. During the same decade the number of female
employees increased 44.87 per cent, while the female population
of the state increased 19.5 per cent. The returns of the census
for 1870, 1880, 1890, and 1900 showed that the percentages of
children employed under sixteen years, as compared with all
employees engaged in mechanical and manufacturing pursuits in
Pennsylvania, were 6.02, 7 66, 3 87, and 4.51, respectively. The
percentage in 1902 as given in the factory inspector’s report was
4.51. With these figures before us it is hard to see how the
chief of the factory inspectors could make the above statement.
In the last generation the percentage increase of female employees
in the state was about three times the percentage increase of our
population. Since 1870 many legislatures have attempted to
regulate child labor in the state, but the number employed has
kept pace with the percentage increase of our population. In
1890 the average wage of children under sixteen years was 50.6
cents a day; in 1900 it was 53 cents, an increase of 5.5 per cent.
The average wage of females over sixteen years in 1 890 was 89


GIRLS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 429

cents a day ; in 1900 it was 87 cents, a reduction of 2.28 per cent.
The small percentage of children under sixteen years employed
in Pennsylvania is no guarantee that child labor is less prevalent
here than in southern ^states, to which public attention has been
recently called. Our state has many industries in which few
children are employed, such as iron and steel, locomotive and
car building, foundries and electric apparatus. Hence, to give
the percentage of children under sixteen years employed in all
industries of the commonwealth may appear favorable to Penn-
sylvania (4.51 percent) as compared with North Carolina (1470
per cent), but the method of comparison is misleading as to the
prevalence of child labor in both states. North Carolina has no
large industries in which few children are employed. If a just
comparison between north and south is made, the nature of the
industries in the respective states should be taken into consid-
eration. Rev. E. G. Gardner wrote in the fall of 1902 that of
45,044 operatives in textile industries m North Carolina, 7996
(17.7 per cent) were under fourteen years of age and their daily
average wage was 29 cents. In the textile industries specified
in the table on page 426 there is an average of nearly 22 per
cent of the employees under sixteen years of age whose average
net wage, outside Philadelphia, is not 40 cents a day. In North
Carolina 37.8 per cent of the population are employed in gainful
occupations and in Pennsylvania 38.8 per cent ; but in the former
state 64.1 per cent of these are engaged in agricultural pursuits
and 1 2 7 per cent only in manufacturing and mechanical work,
while in Pennsylvania only 14 per cent of all employees are in
the former class of work, but there are 40.1 per cent in the
latter. A just comparison of female and child labor in both
states can be made only when we find what percentages of
females of the age group 13-23 years and of children of the age
group 13-16 years are employed in each By this method of
comparison we find that 16 3 per cent of females of the age group
1 3—23 years are employed in Pennsylvania and 6.6 per cent in
North Carolina, but the percentage of children under sixteen
years of age employed in both states is about the same, — in
Pennsylvania 20.2 and in North Carolina 20.4. While we censure


43 °


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the states of the South for their exploitation of child labor, we
should not lose sight of this evil in Pennsylvania because of the
specious argument that only 4.5 1 per cent of the total employees
are children under sixteen years of age.

A study of the laws of Pennsylvania relative to child labor
reveals a mass of complicated, contradictory, and confusing stat-
utes. Legislators, in their anxiety to do something, have dis-
regarded the labors of their predecessors. They pass laws wholly
oblivious of the importance of historical continuity, and the result
is a series of incongruous and disconnected statutes regulating
the labor of the wards of the state. But however bungling the
work of the legislators is, the student is hardly prepared to find
Pennsylvania more indifferent than Russia to the interests of its
children employed in factories. England, since the passage of
the Ashley Act in 1833, has prohibited the employment at night
of persons under eighteen years. Every other European country
of any industrial importance has followed England’s example.
Even Austria and Russia, whence come the Slavs, whose manner
of life and customs we so frequently condemn, forbid the labor of
young persons at night. But these people coming to Pennsyl-
vania find young girls under sixteen years of age employed at night
in our mills. Many deem it cruel to employ these young persons
by day for ten* hours in stifling mills, but every humane per-
son considers it barbarous to employ them at night. This is a
reproach to a state as rich as ours, and, although the wrong was
amply exposed before the Coal Strike Commission, there were
no legislators found in the last legislature chivalrous enough to
champion enthusiastically the cause of the coming mothers of
our state.

The Journal of the American Medical Association , in com-
menting on child labor in the South, said : “ When these
immature individuals are kept at constant work for long hours
the outlook for their future can be imagined. It is bad policy
for a state to encourage the increase of degeneracy in this way,
to say nothing of the questions of humanity involved. Whatever
may be thought of some of the other demands of the labor
agitation of the day, that of the abolition of child labor, as it


GIRLS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 431


exists in some of the southern factories, can be indorsed by our
profession, and should be by the public generally.” Suppose the
medical profession of Pennsylvania, numbering over iq,ooo per-
sons, were to direct its attention to the 17,286 girls under sixteen
years of age employed in our state, would not their professional
knowledge of the development of the female organism from the
ages of thirteen to sixteen years urge them- to cooperate in the
attempt to abolish this evil? From the days of Quetelet down
to the present accurate measurements have been taken of the
bodily growth of young girls from thirteen to sixteen years, and
the consensus of opinion is that at no period of their life do they
grow so rapidly as then. The female, during these years, develops
more rapidly than the male, so that the average girl of sixteen
years has reached a stage in physical development which boys
do not attain until two or three years later. All parents who duly
watch over their children know that the factory and the mill are
not proper places for girls from thirteen to sixteen years of age.

From the standpoint of economics this employment of young
girls cannot be justified. The more wealth produced, the more
we have for distribution. The larger the number of persons
engaged in gainful occupations the better. But alongside these
self-evident truths we must place another, namely, that if the
health of our industrial life is to be preserved, the various indus-
tries of the state must be self-supporting. Those which flourish
by the labor of women and children are not self-supporting, for
they consume an amount of energy which they do not replace.
They draw upon the capital stock of the nation’s vital force and
care little or nothing about the degeneracy they effect. When
the silk throwers of England were fighting for a living wage, it
was asked, “ What is a fair day’s wage ? ” and the reply was,
“The due reward for our labor may be summed up in these
words : shelter, food, and raiment both for ourselves, our wives,
and our children,” Suppose we apply that rule to the textile
industries of Pennsylvania Is 40 cents a day sufficient to give
proper food, raiment, and shelter to a child of from thirteen to six-
teen years of age ? Can a young lady keep herself in food, clothes,
and room on 85 cents a day ? The state spent on its youths in


432


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the Huntingdon Reformatory in the year 1901 an average of
$248.90 per capita, or $4.79 per week, a sum twice as large
as that which our young girls earn in our mills and factories.
The state has erected a comfortable home for its convicts and
spends annually $199.95 P er capita on food, clothing, etc.; this
is $3.84 a week, or $1.1 6 less than the average weekly wage of
young women over sixteen years employed in the mills, a differ-
ence that is barely sufficient to cover the item of rent. The tex-
tile industries are not self-supporting. We are safe in saying that
50 per cent of the employees in these industries expend an amount
of energy which their wages do not replace. The majority of
the women and girls who labor in them cannot provide for their
wants with the wages they earn ; they must either go short or
else the deficiency must be supplied from wages earned in other
industries.

But that is not all. The textile industries drain the energy of
successive generations of youths and care nothing whence they
come or whither they go. Over 50 per cent of the employees
are minors. When these come to their majority they pass out of
the industry and their place is supplied by successive relays of
youths under sixteen years. Every boy or girl at the age of thir-
teen has cost somebody from $500 to $600 ; however, the textile in-
dustries have not paid the bill. Young men are constantly forced
out of these industries when they demand wages that will enable
them to establish a home and raise a family, and young women
soon reach the maximum wage, and however long they remain
in the factory, they have no hope of better wages. Young men
who leave the industry face the world at a great disadvantage,
and when their industrial capacity diminishes and ailments come
upon them which finally end in death, the industries in which they
spent theiir youth bear no part of the burdens which fall upon
the community. If these industries existed in a state where the
institution of slavery prevailed, they would be obliged to raise
boys and girls for the mills, and they would also be compelled
to provide for them when ailments, old age, and death came upon
them. But here in Pennsylvania the textile industries flourish
by absorbing a supply of energy that has cost them nothing.


GIRLS IN TEXTILE INDUSTRIES OF PENNSYLVANIA 433

The children and youths are drained of their strength for a decade
and then pushed out into the world. These industries hold the
same advantageous position as compared with the self-supporting
industries that they would if they received a bounty or subsidy
from the government. They flourish by freely drawing upon the
capital stock of the nation, and, .being under no social pressure
to maintain a rate of wages that will keep their employees day
by day in unimpaired health and vigor, they wholly lose sight of
the larger obligation to maintain each generation unimpaired in
quantity and quality.

Society may ask for cheap products from the textile industries,
but goods that have in them the flesh and blood of the future
mothers of the toiling masses are not cheap. The price paid is
degeneracy. Insufficient wages mean insufficient food" liability
to diseases, industrial inefficiency, scanty clothing, cramped dwell-
ings, and a vitiated atmosphere. These women and young girls,
who under financial pressure yield the strength so much needed
in the building up of their frames, pay the penalty in headaches,
toothaches, dyspepsia, and sores, dragging pains and chronic
anaemia. Do the medical profession find among these young
mill hands that state of health which is normal among the young
daughters of the professional classes? Communities where textile
industries flourish ar& the scenes of degeneracy, and upon each
generation rests a jcurse. The individuals who are exploited
depart farther and farther from the higher type of womanhood
which American civilization has held before the world.

The social interest of our state demands that the textile indus-
tries be made self-supporting. It cannot be done by collective
bargain, for the youths, under existing conditions, cannot be
organized so efficiently as to effect this. The better way is to
check the excessive use of child labor by raising the age at which
boys and girls can be employed. The International Socialist and
Trade Union Congress in 1896 demanded that the age of boys
and girls beginning to work should be raised to sixteen years.
This certainly ihould be done in the case of our girls, and the
medical profession, because of its greater knowledge of the phys-
ical organism, ^should advocate such legislation. Pennsylvania,


434


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


whose productive wealth annually amounts to over two billions
of dollars, should rise to the degree of intelligence which regards
the boys and girls not as independent wealth producers who
earn their wages from day to day, but as the future citizens and
parents of our commonwealth, for whom, up to their majority,
proper conditions of growth and education should be secured.
The well-being of society demands that all conditions of employ-
ment inconsistent with the maintenance of the employees in a
state of efficiency as producers should be eliminated. Nothing
imperils this imperative of modern civilization so much as per-
mitting young girls to be employed for bare subsistence at an
age when nature taxes their system to the limit of profitable
endurance. Such a custom works deterioration both in the
physical and intellectual spheres, and hinders the continuous
existence, generation after generation, of healthy and efficient

descendants. ^ ^

Peter Roberts.

Mahanoy City, Pennsylvania.


XX

THE PRINTER’S HEALTH 1

The number of deaths m its membership during the five years
and eleven months from June 30, 1897, to May 31, 1903, inclu-
sive, on which benefits were paid by the International Typograph-
ical Union of North America, was 2994. Of this total 132 3, or
about 45 per cent, were from respiratory diseases, that is, pul-
monary phthisis, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia, diphtheria, pleu-
risy, and pulmonary congestion. Though the official mortuary
Reports for the period named show that some of the evils of our
iccupation hasten death through heart and nerve ailments espe-
c 'ally, it is the startling figures under this heading of respiratory
diseases that must first challenge investigation when we set out
to reduce our death rate.

The most striking facts seen are the number of deaths of
young men and the number of deaths from consumption. Of
the 1323 deaths from respiratory ailments 490, or nearly 38 per
cent, were of men between the ages of twenty-one and thirty-
two, inclusive. How many of the 1323 were of consumption?
Deaths from this disease were not separately recorded until the
year ending May 31, 1903. For that year for the first time
the causes of death were fully itemized by the union secretary,
the method of classification theretofore being under a few general
headings. Of the 476 deaths for the year 191 were from respira-
tory diseases. Of these 191, 128 were from “ consumption” (in
the words of the report, consumption 72, pulmonary phthisis 11,
tuberculosis 44, pulmonary hemorrhage 1). The deaths from
pneumonia were 51. Thus the lung ailments grouped in com-
mon speech as “consumption” certainly carried away more than

1 From the Typographical Journal , Vol XXIII, 1903, No 5, p 425; No 6,
p 527, condensed See also Doehnng, “Factory Sanitation and Labor Protec-
tion,” Bulletin No. 44, U. S Bureau of Labor; Oliver, Dangerous Trades, the
standard authority.


435


43 6 • TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

27 per cent of our members dying in that year, and how many
of the men dying of pneumonia were at the same time consump-
tive statistics cannot reveal.

For the year ending May 31, 1904, the deaths in the Inter-
national Union from respiratory diseases numbered 2 16 in a total
of 578, the number from “consumption” being 95 (consumption
58, pulmonary phthisis 22, tuberculosis 13, hemorrhage of the
lungs 2). Pneumonia carried away 72, bronchitis 6, congestion
of the lungs 5. The death rate for the year was 12.5 per 1000.

Some further light comes from a random selection of three
monthly death reports in the Journal and a noting of the cause^
of death therein given. Of the 93 deaths from various diseased
as reported at the International Typographical Union offices fom
^ovember, 1901, November, 1902, and May, 1903, 28 wer*
given by the local union physicians as from tuberculosis, phthisis
consumption, and hemorrhage of the lungs, and 10 of these 28
were erf men under thirty-two years of age. Seven of the^V
deaths were of pneumonia. These figures serve to confirm tha
fact that the causes of death in our trade are quite uniform year!
by year in present circumstances, and that the proportion of deaths)
from consumption may therefore be foretold to a certainty so
long as circumstances remain as they are.

The ascertainable statistics hence indicate these conclusions :

First. In America, of the total annual deaths among union
printers the proportion dying of consumption is fully 30 per cent.

Second. Of this 30 per cent at least one third die within the’
early period of life, when the direct effects of occupational evils
may be looked for.

Statistics regarding English printers tell a story even more
alarming. Of 799 deaths reported by the London Society of Com-
positors for the ten years 1880-1889, inclusive, 296, or 37percent,
were due to phthisis alone. Besides, bronchitis and astKma were
the causes of 85 deaths, and pneumonia and pleurisy of 65 ; that is,
446 of 799 deaths occurring from causes falling under one general
classification were largely traceable to occupational conditions.

Of 852 deaths occurring in the Typographieal Association of
England (the union printers outside London) in the six years


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


437


1894-1899, inclusive, tuberculosis carried off 287. While from
1881 to 1890 the mean annual death rate from tuberculosis for
all males between twenty and sixty-five years of age in England
an^L Wales was but 1.8 per 1000, the rate for members of the
Typographical Association in the six years noted was 3.4, and for
the London Society 3.9, m either case about double the normal.
Says Dr. Thomas Oliver in Dangerous Trades, “ It may be
taken as a fact that printers are more liable to tubercular con-
sumption than men engaged in most other trades.”

. In England the phthisis mortality figure for printers is 326,
while for agriculturists it is only 102. For occupied males in
general the mortality figure for all diseases is 953 ; for agri-
culturists it is 602; for printers 1096. Printers die off much
faster than miners, for whom the mortality figure, including
accidents, is only 935 In plain words, the printer follows an
occupation far more dangerous to life than does the miner.

Middle-aged American printers are heard commonly to assert
from their own observation that if an apprentice has a sensitive
throat or a delicate chest, “ something about the office or the
business ” seems to search out the weak spot in the young man's
constitution, to plant disease thereat, and enfeeble him or bring
him to an early death. If he can weather through to well past
thirty, he may live to the general average term of life. But for
any indifference to the ordinary laws of health he speedily meets
with cruel punishment. That 40 per cent of the whole number
of printers dying of respiratory diseases should officially be
reported to be those of men under thirty-three is confirmatory
of this common nonstatistical observation. Printers die fast and
die young.

What, it may be asked, is this “ something about the office or
the business ” that contributes so greatly to make the printer
physically what he is ? The conditions need not be guessed at ;
they are determinable.

Dr. Stiihler of Berlin, taking his statistics from the reports
of sick-benefit societies, states that of 3000 printers in Berlin
313, or about 10.4 per cent, were annually sick from lead colic
But it is possible that lead colic was a convenient ailment to


438 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

assign to Berlin printers, perhaps with their own collusion, espe-
cially as Berlin seems to be the only city entering such disturbing
statistics in the reference books. Chemical analyses are more
reliable. Stumpf found that the„dust ofjpruging offices often
contained as much as 14.43 per cent of lead. Faber collected
lead from printing-office dust as follows : from the floor 11.51
per cent ; from a shelf 6 59 per cent ; from behind the frames
of an alley 4.7 per cent. Keygi found 10 to 15 per cent of lead
in the floor dust.

Printers breathe air not only heavily laden with lead dust at
all times, but strong with noxious fumes from drying type during
and following distribution, and while at this work, as well as on
rising in the morning, some compositors detect a metallic taste
in their saliva. Compositors also absorb lead through the pores
of their skin, the hand typesetter from the separate types which
are constantly in his fingers while at work, the linotype operator
from the slugs, which, hot from the mold and lead-greasy to
the touch, turn the hands to a lamp black hue. The careless
apprentice who eats his office lunch with type marked fingers
takes lead into his stomach. . . . Compositors rarely have acute
attacks such as painter’s colic, m which convulsions may occur.
The form from which they suffer, often unconsciously, is chronic
plumbism. . . . But while a risk of plumbism is unavoidable,
medical men say it seems never to affect many individuals in the
trade, their constitutional powers of resistance enabling them to
escape the poison or to throw off its effects easily.

A fact next to be noted is both a consequence and a cause.
Printers have a somewhat uniform physical development. The
youthful typesetter may take on length, but he commonly lacks
breadth; he fails to develop the blacksmith’s arms or the sailor’s
shoulders. Rarely is his appearance that of the athlete. To
acquire rounded biceps, hard leg muscles, or even a sun-bror J
face he must take much open-air exercise. But this he seldom does
systematically. Not one youth in many attains his full natu '4
growth in a printing office, and not one journeyman in many ret' 04
his full physical powers to a ripe old age without a break. 3 /hf
this, of course, there are causes in addition to lead poisoni^irs


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


439


Typesetting is exhausting work. Standing hour by hour brings
on backache, and in some men varicose veins and swollen feet.
Sitting on the high printing-office stool doubles up the hand
typesetter, constraining his arm motions and interfering with his
digestion. The linotype operator has trials more severe. His
stool being low, his legs are thrown into cramped positions. From
the pot of molten type metal under his machine come a trying
heat and offensive gases. He must watch the delicate mechanism
of his iron rival lest it go wrong. The electric light thrown on
his copy often sharply conflicts with the daylight. His keyboard
work with wrist and fingers and his handling of hot slugs result
at times in a numbness that threatens scrivener's palsy. Either
as typesetter or linotype operator the compositor's brain is active
every moment during the workday. Composition can never be
mechanical. Attention must be given to deciphering the copy,
to spelling, capitalizing, punctuating, office style, and correcting
the lines as composed. Each of these distinct mental acts helps
to drain the bodily forces. The work as a whole is tedious and
monotonous. As the brain becomes fatigued its cells shrink.
With every type a man sets there is a touch of wear on the
cerebral tissue itself, only to be repaired by the restorative oper-
ations of nature, — food, rest, and sleep.

The average printer, consequently, is not robustly developed ;
he is wan from plumbism and mentally and physically worn
through the nature of his occupation as it is to-day pursued. It
is this overtaxed state of mind and body, the effect of circum-
stances in the business which call for a reduced draft upon his
powers, that may in turn cause the printer’s general health
quickly to succumb under other office conditions quite common
bu* wholly avoidable.

• The printer frequently works in a place by no means designed
t$ meet the requirements of his health and comfort. Narrow,
low-ceiled warehouse lofts, basements, attics, inner rooms of
office buildings, inadequately lighted and badly ventilated, —
such makeshifts for composing rooms frequently see a large force
of compositors and readers patiently pursuing their labors. The
annoying racket of presses and line-casting machines, added to


440


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the rank odors of inks and benzine, may further set the work-
man’s nerves on edge, while by turns he is made to shiver in
cold draughts from open doors and to swelter through hot waves
from steam pipes. Before his day’s work is done he is m a state
of lassitude and extreme fatigue.

In New York by far the larger number of printers die in
the winter months. For this fact two reasons are commonly
assigned. First, in winter the air of the composing rooms,
with doors and windows closed, is more foul than at other
seasons, and when the risk of an open window is run pneumonia
may follow. Second, the unemployed, underfed, and perhaps
consumptive use up their stock of health and strength by mid-
winter because of the confinement indoors. In effect the two
reasons become one; it is a case of pure air against bad air.
When doors and windows are open in summer the hands find
some relief from print-shop insanitation.

The following table shows the deaths of printers in New York
by years and by quarter years and half years, for the period from
1900 to 1903, inclusive.


Year ending
June 1

Whole
Number
of Deaths

Three Months,
January to
March

Other Nine
Months

Six Months,
November
to April

Other Six
Months

I90O .

69

23

46

35

34

1901 . .

77

23

54

44

33

1902 . .

90

27

63

50

40

1903 .

100

39

61

61

39

Totals

336

* 112

224

190

146


The three bad-air months, January, February, and March, in
these four years took 33.3 per cent of the deaths instead of the
25 per cent due in each quarter of the year. The 100 deaths
of 1903 brought the death rate of Typographical Union No. 6
(New York) up to the extraordinary figure of 17 per 1000, the
membership being slightly more than 6000. For the international
union, with a membership of 42,436, the death rate in 1903 was
11 per 1000, the average for the last twelve years being 13 per
1000. Comparison with the general average death rate of society


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


441


brings poor encouragement for printers. The death rate for
men, women, and children in some American cities is less than
19 per xooo; in certain large districts in England, even includ-
ing infant mortality, it is less than 15 per 1000 per annum.
For Greater New York, with a population of 3,570,000, the death
rate for the week ending October 29, 1904, was 14.46.

For the year ending May 31, 1904, No 6 lost 1 12 members by
death. The year Fad brought into its ranks about five hundred
new members ; hence the usual local death rate was outstripped.
The death rate for printers in New York is almost double what
it ought to be, as indicated by the general rate in healthy com-
munities. For the International Typographical Union member-
ship the death rate is 30 to 40 per cent higher than the normal.

That there may be no doubt as to the membership of No. 6
and its death rate the number paying per capita tax to the Inter-
national in the years mentioned is herewith given: July 1, 1898,
to June 30, 1899, 5140; July 1, 1899, to June 30, 1900, 4898;
July 1, 1900, to May 31, 1901, 4620 ; 1902, 5258; 1903, 5850.
The actual membership each year was several hundred in excess
of these figures, as about 5 per cent are usually in arrears.

Some members of No. 6 have the impression that “all the
broken down printers of the country flock to New York.” This
is not confirmed by wide observation. The brother who is bank-
rupt in health and purse is a figure familiar in every large typo-
graphical center. Even in country towns the seldom employed
extra hand, in habits identical with his city compeer, is ever to
be found. The opinion of our international^secretary on this point,
founded on his many visits to all the larger cities during his long
term, and on his constant tabulation of statistical returns is:
“It is impossible for me to say whether or not your relief fpnd
attracts invalids and superannuated members to New York. All
of our unions have old members whom they assist in different
ways. From what I know of the membership of your union, I
do not believe you have more than your share in proportion to
the membership.”

A comparison between No. 6’s own total of deaths from year
to year and the total for all the other unions in the I. T. U., with


442


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


the two consequent but divergent averages, leads one to ask
whether the apparent excess of the death rate given for No. 6 is
accurate. For example, in the last three years No. 6 itself paid
death benefits m thirteen cases not granted by the International.
A similar ratio of difference between the actual totals of the
other local unions and the International's total would raise the
latter’s true death rate considerably. And this difference may
for other reasons be even greater than it seems. While No. 6’s
members and their families strain a point to obtain its $150
insurance, in cities which have no extra local death fund mem-
bers may fall away from the union during the period of old age
or a time of prolonged straitened circumstances before death.
If this be true, the headquarters rate of 13 deaths per 1000 per
year for twelve years is less than the actual figure.

. . . Released from the depressing atmosphere of the com-
posing room after long hours of nerve tension, many an exhausted
printer’s one absorbing inclination is “to take a bracer.” Unless
he is a man of self-control, systematically conducting his struggle
for life and health, he takes his bracer in some form of alcohol.
From every point of view this habit is fraught with danger. If
he takes his beer or spirits at home, the sought-for stimulus may
be attained after a time only by increasing the quantity of the
drmk. If he imbibes in a barroom, conviviality may lead him to
deprive himself of his needed rest abed and also to consume
beyond his appetite. However or wherever a man drinks, the
drop he desires as a tonic may become the quantity acting as a
poison. The printer’ s | danger is doubled with his allowance of
drink. While the depression consequent on plumbism and viti-
ated air gives him a craving for alcohol, by a counteraction alco-
hol taken in excess predisposes him to plumbism. Here, indeed,
is a vicious circle.

A broken-down alcoholic printer is commonly the compound
resultant of :

First. Incomplete physical development as a youth.

Second Daily exhaustion as either a hand or machine type-
setter.

Third. Unsanitary conditions in the printing office.


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH 443

Fourth. Ignorance and consequently carelessness regarding
personal hygiene.

Fifth . Plumbism.

Sixth . Alcohol, with later the interaction of plumbism and
alcohol.

Seventh. Vagrant living.

Printers who are victims of alcohol have the same unmis-
takable stamp. On seeing a knot of them congregated at a
corner a literary man exclaimed, “What saturnine faces they
have 1 ” Curiously, Dr. Oliver, speaking of the pale and expres-
sionless faces of persons suffering from lead poison, says that
acute cases are termed saturnine cachexy. But alcohol drives
blood to the eyes and nose. A case of alcoholic plumbism, there-
fore, presents a bloated face, with heavy and dull outlines, grayish
white as to the broader surfaces, mottled red as to middle fea-
tures, the expression of the whole sullen and sodden.

The high death rate of men in this class is an accepted fact in
the trade. Just what proportion of printers falls*to the level of
the chronic alcohol patient it is difficult to estimate. The impres-
sions of the- casual observer may be grossly inaccurate. The
veteran proprietor of a daily newspaper once expressed his belief
that few of the one hundred compositors he employed were steady
men. Never going up to the composing room himself, he took his
impressions largely from a group of disreputables always standing
about the side-door entrance. Though really less than one tenth
of the force, these loungers, with floating “ subs,” bore false
testimony against the other nine tenths who passed in or out of
the building without halt. . . .

A rule-of-thumb method of estimating the proportion of alco-
holic printers would be to ascertain the probable number among
those drawing out-of-work relief at the union rooms Since 1893
No. 6 has appropriated $25,000 to $47,000 a year for its
unemployed, paying the money for stated periods m weekly
allowances Several successive relief clerks and several com-
mitteemen have concluded that not more than one man in three
drawing relief is incapacitated through drink. Since the largest
number of members ever receiving a week’s allowance is about


444


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


300, this would indicate that of the 6000 members less than 2
per cent are alcoholics at any one time. But it is among this
2 per cent that death is ever busiest. One of the union officials
says, “As one set dies off others come to take their places.”
Not the perfect sobriety of all the remaining 9 S per cent keeps
the proportion of alcoholics down to 2 per cent, but the havoc
of death among the stricken.

Besides chronic alcoholics there are occasionals. A printer,
exhausted, depressed and not aware, perhaps, how much he is
physically the victim of circumstances, finding relief in a glass
and lively company, quits work for a day or a week, with drink
his recreation. His vitality having been lowered at his trade and
his nerves now deadened by alcohol, he catches cold readily and
in a short time develops pneumonia. If he recovers, his chances
for sound health are diminished. He may be a sober man the
rest of his days, but alcohol has done for him what plumbism
and foul printing-office air might never have done. It has proba-
bly killed his $ hances for longevity His death sooner or later
,adds one more in the respiratory column of the I. T. U. statistics.

Up to this point we have seen m the mam the facts elicited by
the query, “ Why is the death rate among printers so high ? ” Let
us now ask, “ Cannot that death rate be lowered ?” It is with this
object in view that this study of the printer has been written.

The typographer, as we have seen, is largely “ made up ” by his
trade, — by physical conditions as they exist in that trade. Indi-
viduals, many of them, may vary widely from the typical printer.
But when we perceive that there is a trade type of man, and
that not a high physical type, we naturally desire to have the
average printer brought up to normal standards or higher.

The first truth to be recognized is that the remedy lies largely -
in our own hands, individually and collectively. Individually,
because every man has a will and intellect of his own, whereby
his acts are effective. Collectively, because every printer suffers
more or less from the lack of prevision and care on the part of
all the craft.

We must grant a certain influence on all persons who toil
within its doors due to conditions m the printing office. The


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


445


very trend of the printer's mind and spirits uniformly depends
in large degree on the state of his body. Printers present to
the observer curiously coincident mental attitudes on surface
matters. Deeper down, of course, they differ. If compositors
are an irritable lot, as evidenced in their explosive denunciations
of the proof reader, it signifies in part the evil effects of lead on
nerve tissue, which men can no more fully control than they
can change a printing-office complexion. If printers are sadly
skeptical and prone to censure, it must be due to foul air in the
lungs rather than to perverted impulses of the heart. If they
know the names rather than the contents of books, it is because
their constant perusal of copy during long hours of work satiates
their appetite for general reading. The indifference or apathy
prevalent in the craft to office hygiene, or even to the first step
necessary to hygienic reform, — a study of health conditions, —
may be traced to occupational overexhaustion and physical
underdevelopment.

And next one must grant the difficulty in changing printing
offices for the better. The lunch rooms show little improvement
from one year to another. Chapel chairmen m vain declare that
foremen or managers ought to prohibit the sale of alcoholic bever-
ages anywhere in the building, creating as it does the very evils
that result in many a man's discharge. To enforce fresh -air laws
compositors are sometimes obliged to call in the Board of Health.
But the crowning difficulty lies in the problem of a workday that
unfits the compositor for any duty except his daily shop task.

Yet, if once he is determined to grapple with the remediable
evils of the occupation, every individual can fall back on certain
resources of his own, while he may also look for the action of
the union in a very considerable sphere.

The important point is to know that health is mainly the
result of management When we read that as a class literary
men are the longest-lived, we must see plainly on reflection that
it is because they are observers and thinkers. Ascertaining as
closely as possible the trfith as to certain influences relating to
health, they proceed to act on this knowledge. As men in gen-
eral might do if better educated, they observe at least the more


446 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

obvious laws of health. They know how far the physical state
of an individual is the result of accident and how far of taking
proper care of himself

I am inclined to think that with advancing years many printers
study their health. Our International Union statistics show that
the printer who safely passes forty-five may live long afterward.
Of 329 members who died in 1901 and 1902 between the ages
of forty-five and seventy-four, inclusive, 197 were between forty-
five and fifty-nine, while 132 were between sixty and seventy-
four. Thus only sixty-five more died during the first age period
of fifteen years after forty-four than during the second; and
hence a printer at forty-five would have but three chances of
dying before fifty-nine to two thereafter before seventy-four
But these data ’are slight, of course, and all printers do not die
members of the union, a somewhat numerous class being the men
who leave the trade while yet young. Printers often meet a man
who will tell them : “ I once worked at typesetting, but had to
quit the business on account of poor health.” On the other hand,
very few men, it may be safely said, take up our occupation to
improve their health.

On passing into the forties, however, many printers take on
flesh. The vigorous survivors who have arrived at middle life,
if not wholly immune to the effects of lead, resist it successfully,
and those who drink regulate their habits with a deepening wis-
dom. The vitality of the strong then asserts itself in a spread
of girth. Proof readers almost invariably grow stouter at their
sedentary labors. In 1898 the seventeen readers in the World
proof room, nearly all men past forty, and all but one or two
graduates of the composing room, weighed on the average 174
pounds, about 40 pounds more than the average male American.

How much can be done through obeying the laws of health m
rebuilding even the physically ruined man is marvelous. In
1899 No. 6’s printers’ farm, maintaining on an average forty-six
superannuated and invalided men for twenty-seven weeks, reha-
bilitated their health in nearly all cases and literally fattened
many of them like beeves In six months several gained twenty-
five pounds, others fifteen, twelve, or ten. In nine months one


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


447


gained forty pounds. Some so weak on going to the farm that
they could barely walk were soon at work gardening with the
sensation of play.

Encouraged by such considerations, the printer, or more accu-
rately the compositor, will ask, “ What regimen can I adopt to
counteract the conditions in which I work ? How can I other-
wise strive for health ? ”

He who has reached the anxious stage must inevitably begin
with settling in his mind the question whether or not he really
will take proper care of his health. He must decide whether he
is to act and live as a man who is impressed with a sense of his
duties to himself, his home, and society, or whether he is merely
to float along as a worthless piece of human driftwood. If he is
to be a man, he will do a man’s part. He will make and not
mar himself.

Next, on mentally revolving the question in its various phases,
he will perceive that even the printer shut up in an office may
within certain limits be what manner of man he will Just as
apprentices may or may not employ or neglect their passing
opportunities to learn the trade, so may all the members of the
craft employ or neglect what means are^open to them to pre-
serve their health. One thing is certain, — a man’s health rarely
takes care of itself.

What should be the principal health rules of a printer ?

Few will dispute that the day a young compositor decides to
let drink alone he takes the first step in turning his face toward
health. With the basis of fair health, his prospects for thrift,
uprightness, and mental improvement — and, moreover, respect-
ability and independence — are increased tenfold. He not only
fortifies himself against lead poison, but he turns his back on
the source of ruin to thousands now among the dead.

To buoyant youth the ills of life are far away. The deadly
consequences of drink, seeming so remote, the lively young
printer regards lightly. The possibility of his falling to the
drunkard’s level he can hardly entertain seriously. Yet decade
by decade the statistics of drink continue to repeat themselves
or to reveal results worse than ever before. Dr, Oliver says the


448 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

mortality of English printers from alcoholism in 1891 had fully
trebled as compared with what it was in 1881. “I can drink or
let it alone,” vanity whispers to the young compositor as he
works on the mortuary tables of his community and observes
their frightful testimony against alcohol. In his absorbing sel'f-
confidence he detects in himself no weakness for stimulants, yet
in a few years more his own name may be set up in the same
tabular forms by another compositor, this one, too, perhaps,
equally unwise and self-deluded. The whisper of hope that self
may go scot-free forever while others die is akin to lunacy.
And that men should resort to barrooms, of all places, for health
suggestions, or should consult saloon keepers as to remedies for
their ills, tells an amazing story of ignorance and credulity. For
these professors of hygiene, the publicans, themselves steadily
die off like victims of a perennial plague.

If the drinfi habit is on the increase among printers in Eng-
land, it may with some certainty be affirmed that it is on the
decrease in America. The typecasting machine, no less than all
other costly and intricate machinery, requires its operators to be
sober and otherwise at their best in body and mind. The machine
has also greatly diminished the ranks of the “ tourists,” that ele-
ment m the craft most conspicuous in maintaining traditions of
a reckless and convivial manner of life. Transit by electricity
has enabled many a night hand to get what in horse-car days was
impossible, — a dwelling place in the suburbs, where both jour-
neyman and apprentice find social pleasures dissociated from
drinking resorts. To-day among American peters more men
than ever before are avoiding the drink habit and are quietly
influencing others to do likewise. In voicing a sentiment against
strong drink one can feel that he is moving with the tide and
attacking a diminishing evil. Yet it is still an evij^ and invites
every blow that can be dealt to it.

On the road to sobriety taken by the young printer personal
cleanliness becomes the care first in importance. Next comes eat-
ing. The young printer in fair health, working during the day,
can practice the plain dietetic rules generally laid down by med-
ical men. . . . The morning newspaper printer whose stomach is


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


449


about normal may take food four times a day to advantage, as it
will lessen his inclination for stimulating drink. Unavoidably, he
must go to work after his dinner, the evening meal and the
heaviest of the four. The other three meals may be light : break-
fast on rising, a full meal ; a fruit luncheon at eleven o’clock or
midnight ; and on reaching home, about four in the morning,
something easily digestible, such as hot apple sauce with a piece
of bread. Under this regimen the stomach will never become
so empty as to bring on weak spells. It is when he is hot, tired,
and languid that even the sober compositor feels that a drink
might do him good.

The linotype operator, the proof reader, or the compositor not
on his feet constantly during the working hours ought to walk
home in all kinds of weather if he lives within two or even three
miles of the office. A good walk after work will make him
breathe deeply, put his blood in active circulation, and benefit
the whole inner man. It will “help digestion,” “purify the
blood,” “strengthen the muscles,” and “throw off waste prod-
ucts,” as the writers of medical advertisements say of their
nostrums. Moreover, walking just before going to bed is a prime
promoter of sleep.

Sound sleep is necessary to health. He who shuns overwork,
eats regularly, takes no strong drink, and avoids harmful food is
well on the way to find sleep, if this is possible amid his home
surroundings. The morning newspaper printer is at the mercy
of day noises, for which there is no prevention. Still, he should
sleep with his beclroom windows open. Some night hands have
their shades up daytime and yet sleep in comfort blindfold.
Regular rest brings regular sleep, if this can be brought at all.
But “snub sleep, and she turns away.”

Beware of*the man who offers you drugs. “ Take a little rye
whisky,” advises the bartender, or it may be beer or brandy.
“Take a bottle of this,” advises the druggist, handing out the
product of a liberal advertiser and profit payer. “ Take this pre-
scription for your catarrh,” advises the physician, substituting
medicine for hygiene. Ninety per cent of the printers swal-
lowing the doses proffered them would be the better for throwing


450 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR LKUBLEMS

the stuff away, for they would avoid the “ after effects ” of
alcohol, opium, and mistaken local treatment.

But after all the real trouble is that one cannot ordinarily
interest most men even in their own health until it is gone.
That health should be a subject of daily consideration, especially
m connection with food, clothing, workshop, dwelling place, and
length of workday, most men have no more conception than
children. Many are middle-aged before they know how to take
a drink of water; they are not aware that what they call “ thirst ”
in summer or m an overheated room is often no more than a hot
throat and mouth, and may be relieved by rinsing and gargling
with cold water, perhaps without swallowing a drop.

Usually he who passes unscathed amid conditions killing to
others moves blithely along, his mind occupied with affairs of
his own Not until he himself is stricken does the individual
who is careless bestir himself. Circumstances detrimental only
to the weaker call forth no protest from the stronger. “We’re
not bothered by any draughts,” say the majority to the feeble
men who are chilled and want the windows closed. And the
shielded care little for the exposed. “There’s no lead poisoning
in printing offices nowadays,” oracularly said a daily newspaper
managing editor in my presence ; “ linotype matter is nearly all
antimony and has only a trace of lead,” — impressions he might
have corrected by consulting the office reference books or inquiry
at the type foundry Moreover, he but substituted one poison
for another, for working up antimony is classed by the faculty
as a dangerous occupation.

To pass now from the sphere of individual effort to that of
collective activity, What can the union do for the health of its
members ? Briefly, it may :

First. Bring printing offices up to the standards^ the Board
of Health.

Second. Take sides against alcohol.

Third. Enlist employers in improving printing office con-
ditions.

Fourth. Assume a guardian’s protection over helpless mem-
bers.


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


4Si


Fifth . Stop speeding and overtime at health limits.

Sixth. Continue to shorten the workday.

Justification of the last two measures is plain. There is a
limit to the compositor's power of turning out a “string ” Every
hour added to his day’s work after he is thoroughly fatigued is
an injury to his health. Where conditions are so unwholesome
as in the printing trade it is the right and duty of men to avoid
excesses of toil as they would serious excesses of any other sort.
The day when printers have natural and reasonable hours will
be shown when apprentices enjoy a vigorous growth, when con-
sumption is not a frequent occupational effect, when the propor-
tion of the men predisposed to drink is reduced to the general
mean, and when, no less than in healthful pursuits, the average
term of life will rise from forty-two years, as it is at present,
to half again that age.

In considering the various steps the union may adopt to
promote the health of its members, it becomes plain that the
first and most promising is to establish the eight-hour workday.
Whatever else may be desirable, that object is feasible.

In the large cities the printer must generally rise early and
travel far to reach the printing office district from the modest
neighborhood to which high rents have driven his family ; in
New York perhaps thousands in our trade spend two hours a day
moving to and fro between office and home. It is the time so
consumed that stands in the way of the printer’s self-care in
many respects. He neglects a cold because he has no time to
visit a doctor unless he takes a day off; he lays aside books
or papers that he knows are of importance to him and which he
never finds time to read ; he puts off family matters that need
his attention and suffers afterward from their neglect ; he fails to
take hold of "the question of office sanitation because of his hurry
to ggt away and be home at the expected hour. At work he is
nowadays expected to be capable of rushing. In some offices
rush is the rule. There the man’s nerves are racked in nine
hours. Machine operating will run him down in less time. With
his mind bent on his task while in the office and both body and
mind in a state of fatigue in his off hours, he feels that he has


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


452

hardly opportunity to think. It is certain he cannot make the
best of his mental or physical powers. The recreation of his
Sundays and holidays can come only after he has performed
necessary tasks at home. He may entertain many plans for self-
advancement, all to be postponed until he can find time to begin.
He may feel he is standing still, only to rejoice, however, that
he is not going backward.

. . The introduction of the machines in the trade was mas-
tered by the union, else we might in many towns see them now
operated by girls working ten hoprs a day. Science and labor
organized have herein released the daily newspaper compositors
from trade customs little better than slavish. When I was nine-
teen years of age, in 1867, at a union meeting in Leavenworth,
Kansas, the president called upon me, as “ the youngest states-
man ever seen on the floor,” to make a speech. I had within
that year been introduced tq, the morning newspaper system of
work then prevailing west of the Mississippi. Composition began
at two o’clock in the afternoon and continued three hours ; with
a second start at seven it kept up, with waiting breaks, until three
or later next morning Distribution began at noon or before and
was resorted to during the waits. The working day thus dragged
along through fourteen hours or more. In response to the pres-
ident’s invitation I managed to say above a whisper that I
should like to see our workday on the newspapers brought down
to ten hours, like the rest of the world about us. My words were
followed with the outbreak of laughter that is evoked on hearing
mention of the impossible. But to-day morning newspaper com-
positors usually work only eight hours. Some work seven.

The coming four decades may see changes in the trade almost
equally striking. Up to the present time unionism in its forma-
tive period has perforce paid most attention to preventing a fall
in wages and to shortening the workday, the latter large|§- on
economic grounds. In the future, while pursuing these essential
purposes, I believe the collective printers will also systematically
set about defending their health.

In time the reformed printery will surely come. The building
will be designed for a printing office, and not be a structure


THE PRINTER’S HEALTH


453


condemned for all other purposes. Neither will it be a boastful
new edifice with every modern improvement except where the
printers work. The composing room ceilings will be fourteen to
twenty feet high. The walls will be of a cheerful neutral tint.
The floors will be swept daily during the absence of the force.
The semicivilized hands who still spit will use spittoons ; there will
be no sputum on the floor. Mechanical fans will blow out the
floating dust ; ventilating tubes will run from both floor and
ceiling. Type cases will pass under the bellows often. Every
man, possessed of his own lacker, will wear while at work a suit
of clothes designed for the office. The wash rooms, tile laid,
will have the appointments of a good hotel. Cases and linotype
machines will be ranged out of draughts and so as to give left-
hand window lights, and where artificial illumination is used it
will be electricity, with the lamp shades tinted, the outer side
green and the inner white Press -and stereotype rooms will be
separate from the composing room. To the proof readers will be
assigned, not stuffy dens or cubby-holes, but spacious private
offices. Work in such printing offices will proceed with the joy-
ful drive natural to well-fed, happy, healthy, full-grown men.
On the street the apprentices will look like college athletes, the
journeymen like prosperous business men. Why not ? Many
printers so appear now. The office cat will wax fat. The entire
force will work but six hours. Wages, let us hope, will be one


dollar an hour.


J. W. Sullivan.


Typographical Union No. 6, New York.


XXI

HOURS OF LABOR 1

Effects of Reductions in Hours

A large amount of testimony has been taken by the Indus-
trial Commission regarding the movement for fewer hours of
labor, and the effects of reductions in hours upon production
and upon the wages and conditions of workmen and their fami-
lies. It is brought out that in nearly all occupations an increas-
ing strain and intensity of labor is required by modern methods
of production. Trade unions have generally been compelled to
abandon their restrictions upon the quantity of work that a man
shall turn out. The introduction of machinery and the division
of labor have made it possible to increase greatly the speed of
the individual workman. This intensity varies in different occu-
pations. In glass blowing payment by the piece and unlimited
output have resulted in peculiarly exhausting efforts. The glass-
bottle blower, working eight and a half hours, says the secretary
of the union, makes double the number of bottles, but his period
of usefulness is ten years shorter than it was twenty years ago.
In Europe, as formerly in this country, a man can blow glass
up to sixty years of age; now in America he cannot work after
he is fifty or fifty-five. Machinery operates in some cases to
increase the intensity of labor, as in the boot and shoe factories,
where the operator is required to handle thousands of pieces in
a day and to guide them through the machines. The testimony
of a representative of the Cotton Weavers' Association shows
this increasing strain of work. He says:

Anybody who works in the mills now knows it is not like what it
was twenty-five or thirty years ago, because the speed of the machinery

1 From Final Report of the U. S Industrial Commission, Vol. XIX, 1901,

pp. 763-79 3-


454


HOURS OF LABOR


455


has been increased to such an extent, and they have to keep up
with it. In some mills in this city, and probably m other cities m
this state, the operative is compelled to turn off so much production
per week, and if the production does not come up to the point, he or
she is discharged. There was a time when that was not the case.
They took their sewing and their knitting along, and there was no
anxiety about how much work they ^could get off, but it is not so
now. Now they work from the time they go in until they come out.
You can see them going to-morrow morning at ten minutes past six,
and they will not come out until six to-morrow night.

The intensity of exertion operates to a less degree in work
on other classes of machinery, where the feeding is nearly auto-
matic. Even where machinery has not been introduced, as in
the case of bricklayers and carpenters, there has come about in
the larger cities a more minute division of labor, so that one
workman is occupied continuously on one kind of work, in
which he acquires great speed.

It is certain that any programme for reducing this intensity of
exertion must fail. The entire tendency of industry is in the
direction of an increased exertion. Any restrictions on output
must work to the disadvantage of American industry, and the
employers are often right in their demand, usually successful,
that such restrictions be abandoned This being true, there is
but one alternative if the working population is to be protected
in its health and trade longevity, namely, a reduction of the
hours of labor.

This increased intensity of exertion is not found to so great an
extent in farm labor. Nevertheless, testimony before the com-
mission shows that there has been a reduction in the Northern
states in the hours of labor on farms, except in the seasons of
harvesting. In the case of farm labor there is usually a longer
period of rest in the middle of the day, which in the South
often runs as high as two hours This, of course, is a relief to
the severity of the work, although it subtracts from the hours
of leisure at the beginning and the end of the day.

A reduction in hours in both manufactures and agriculture
has accompanied a remarkable increase in the use of machinery


456 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

and the division of labor, and on this account it is often impos-
sible to measure the effect of a reduction of hours on the quan-
tity of output. It might be presumed that when paid by the
day the workman would not increase his output per hour with
the shorter day as much as when paid by the piece. But this
is not borne out by the testimony. The representative of a silk
factory, indeed, holds that when employees are paid by the day
the output in nine hours might equal that in ten in some depart-
ments, as the weaving department, though not in the spinning
department ; this might also be true where piece wages are
paid instead of time wages. He says:

Where machinery comes in as a heavy element a spindle is a
spindle, and the more minutes it runs in a day the more work it will
turn off. It cannot go any more in one minute than another, but it
runs straight ahead, whereas in weaving the element of personality
comes in. One has the knack of keeping his threads in straight, and
another is careless and has to stop and mend them and lose ten or fif-
teen minutes’ time. A really good weaver will get off a great many
more yards than a poor one on the same machine, whereas a spindle
is a fixed quantity and the more hours it runs the more work it does.

[Weavers] are paid by the yard, whereas the spinners are paid by
the day. They get day wages and they have no particular incentive
to hustle ; so long as they keep their ends up and keep the spinning
machine going they are doing their duty. . . . There is little if any
objection on the part of the hands to working overtime ; you cannot
keep it up long ; they get tired of it after a while, but for two or
three months they rather welcome the change.

This witness had not actually tested the nine-hour day, but
spoke from his judgment of the probabilities. Another witness,
a representative of a large drop-forge establishment, after three
months' experience with the nine-hour day, testified that there
is a slightly larger average daily output than there was for the
ten-hour day in both day work and piecework, though in every
other respect work was done under similar conditions. This
has not been due to the fact that methods were lax previously,
for there was rigid supervision under the ten-hour system. A
part of the gain has been made by reason of the fact that under


HOURS OF LABOR


457


the nine-hour system the men go promptly to work on the minute
and work up to the very close of the day ; also because a man
can work normally without pushing himself at a higher rate of
speed for nine hours than he can for ten. The fundamental
reason, according to this witness, for the keeping up of the
amount of production is to be found in the spirit of the men
themselves. If the machines were operated at the highest rate
of speed, were in perfect condition, and were continuously fed,
a workman could not maintain his output at the same amount,
if the hours of labor were shortened ; but these perfect con-
ditions are rarely if ever found. It cannot be demonstrated
mathematically just how it happens that a man can produce as
much in nine hours as he formerly could in ten, but as a matter
of fact it has been the experience of almost every manufacturer,
says this witness, that “ a man can and will and does do more
the moment he is justly and fairly and liberally treated.”

It is true also that the higher the wages and the fewer the
hours the greater is the pressure upon the employer to substi-
tute labor-saving devices and to be more careful in his selection
of high-grade workmen. No doubt it is true that a given auto-
matic machine will not often run faster per hour in eight hours
than in ten, but industry has by no means reached the limit of
invention. Invention will cease only when the employer ceases
to adopt new labor-saving machinery, and every reduction in
hours and rise in wages keeps the employer further and further
away from that sluggish policy. While a particular machine
will not go faster in eight hours than in ten, the substitute
for that machine which the eight-hour day presses upon the
employer to adopt will go faster. Fewer hours have in this way
an indirect as well as a direct compensating effect. Not only
do they make it possible for the workman to keep up his inten-
sity of personal exertion during each hour of the day and to
work more days at a high rate of speed, but they cause the
employer to economize his labor at every point and to improve
its quality by better selection. One advantage to the employer
in fewer hours is the smaller number of breakages and injuries
to machinery, owing to more alert attention on the part of the


45 8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

workmen. For the same reason it is often true that the quality
of the work is better.

This pressure upon the employees accounts in part for the
greatly increased use of machinery and the division of labor in
the more highly skilled occupations. A representative of the
building trades who testified before the Commission maintained
that the lessening of the number of hours made the erection of
buildings somewhat more expensive , a contractor stated that
it had enabled employers to get better men and better work than
under the Jong workday, and that they do more proportionately
in eight hours than they did formerly in nine ; also that through
invention and the introduction of machinery buildings are now
put up as cheaply as they were in 1872 and 1873, when the hours
were ten a day. A representative of the Chicago Bridge and
Structural Iron Workers' Union holds that the eight-hour day
has so increased the efficiency of the laborer that there is actually
more work done in eight hours than was formerly done m ten.

A boiler manufacturer who has adopted the eight-hour day tes-
tifies that he does not think his men do as much in eight hours
as they did in nine, taking one day as the basis of comparison;
but that at the end of the year he believes he would find that
they had done just as much as they did when they were work-
ing an hour longer. One condition necessary to bring about
this result is that he is careful to select in his employment the
best grade of men and to treat them fairly. A manufacturer of
mining machinery fiolds that it is to the interest of the man-
ufacturer to employ his men only eight hours, since he gets better
services out of the men. Formerly, when the hours of machin-
ists were reduced from twelve to ten, and again when they were
reduced from ten to nine, the same alarming predictions were
made as now when it is proposed to reduce them from nine to
eight ; yet the inventions in machinery have made it possible
for manufacturers to reduce their hours and still make as much
money as they did formerly in the longer workday. This witness
holds that the eight hours in this industry are needed not so
much to relieve the men of severe exertion as because a better-
educated man is required to do the work.


HOURS OF LABOR


459


Representatives of the machinists’ organization do not main-
tain that a reduction in hours will not immediately reduce the
output ; in fact, their leading argument for fewer hours is not
the severe physical exertion of machinists, but the larger oppor-
tunities for work for the unemployed, whose number is now
increased by the overproduction consequent on increased effi-
ciency of labor and labor-saving machinery. They declare, how-
ever, that the improvements in machinery in this country and
the energy of the workmen enable them to produce twice as much
as the corresponding English workmen, and a still larger amount
as compared with the German. In this way, gradually, the manu-
facturer overcomes the increased cost of reduced hours.

The eight-hour day in the sheet-steel mills was brought about
without difficulty, owing to the economy of adopting three
shifts of eight hours each. Prior to 1884 there were two shifts
working ten hours, and between turns the furnaces lay idle with
coal in them and had to be kept hot until the next set came
on. The experiment was tried of increasing the speed and
reducing the hours, introducing three shifts ; and to-day three
shifts are working in all these mills, each making nine instead
of seven heats, as was formerly done in the ten-hour day.

Reduction of Hours in Mining 1

The most important instance in recent years of the adoption
of the eight-hour working day has occurred in the bituminous coal
mining industry. The strike of 1897 secured in the bituminous
mines of the four leading eastern coal states — Illinois, Indiana,
Ohio, and Pennsylvania — the eight-hour day, and a similar
reduction has been obtained in western states. In Utah the
eight-hour day was secured in 1896 by action of the legislature
by a law applying to all mines and smelters. The difference
in the methods by which this reduction was secured in the
two cases adds interest to a comparison of the results which
followed.

1 See testimony on this subject in Reports of the Industrial Commission,
Vol. XII.


460 trade unionism and labor problems

In Utah the operators and employers did not oppose the
legislation at the time of its enactment, largely because they
thought it might be the means of keeping down unions and
strikes and disturbances among the employees. This object
has apparently been obtained, since there are no active unions
in the state. A similar law was enacted in Colorado in 1899,
but was declared unconstitutional by the state court. At the
same time a number of operators continued upon the eight-hour
basis even after the law was declared unconstitutional.

It should be noted that the reduction of hours in the
bituminous coal mines has not been strictly a reduction from
ten hours to eight, since under the eight-hour rule a miner is
required to be at his working place when the eight hours begin
and when the eight hours end, and lunch time is taken from the
miner's time rather than from the employer’s time ; whereas
formerly the ten hours included the time spent in going from
the mouth of the pit to and from the face of the coal. In the
Pennsylvania district the period is nine hours instead of eight,
but includes the time spent in going to and from the mouth of
the pit. Strictly speaking, the reduction is more nearly from
ten hours a day to nine than from ten hours to eight. In
Utah, however, in the case of the smelting works the reduction
is much more extreme, the hours, formerly twelve per day,
being reduced to eight. This is a reduction of 33^ per cent in
the time, and would make necessary an increase in the working
force of 50 per cent, provided there were no increase in
efficiency.

There is a general agreement that the fewer hours in the
coal mines have increased the energy of the workmen, and that
there has been little or no decrease in the amount of work
turned out during the day. The men are stimulated “ to do a
good honest eight hours’ work”; the foremen do not find them
asleep, as they used to, or lounging around or smoking.

The effect upon the efficiency of the workmen varies, how-
ever, with different occupations. While it is generally agreed
that the miner does as much work in eight hours as he formerly
did in ten, it is held by a few witnesses that this is not true of


HOURS OF LABOR


461

the furnace men in the smelters, to which the laws of Utah and
Colorado applied. The furnace can take only so much material
an hour, and the furnace men can do no more work on that
account. Another witness, however, asserted that the reduc-
tion of 33 J- per cent in the hours of labor of smelter employees,
which would be expected to require an employment of 50 per
cent more men, absorbed only 30 per cent more men and, com-
bined with the reduction in wages of about 23 per cent on the
basis of a day’s work, resulted in a net increase in the cost of
labor of about 10 per cent. The table of wages and hours sub-
mitted by this witness is here given in full, to which are added
computations showing the wages per hour, the per cent of
increase per hour, and the per cent of decrease per day in those
wages following the enforcement of the eight-hour law of June 1,
1896. It shows reductions in the pay per day of 11 to 33L per
cent, with increases in the pay per hour of 11 to 33^ per cent.


Rates of Wages, Ha'nauer Smelting Works, Utah


Occupation

After 10 per cent
Reduction, Jan 1,1894

Under 8-hour Law,
June 1, 1896

After 10
per cent
Reduc-
tion, 1894

Under

8-hour

Law

Per
cent
Increase
per Hour

Per

cent

Decrease
per Day

Crushermen

$2 70 per 12 hours

$2 40 per 8 hours

Cents
per hour
22 5

Cents
per hour
30 0

33 h


Roast firemen

$2 25 per 12 hours

$1.66 per 8 hours

18 7

21 7

io§

26I

Roast helpers

$2.25 per 12 hours

$1 50 per 8 hours

18 7

18 7

None

33 J

Blast furnace feed-
ers

$2 70 per 12 hours

$2 00 per 8 hours

22 5

r 7 5 .

20f

25

Furnacemen

$2 70 per 12 hours

$2 00 per 8 hours

22 5

U 5

2of

25

Furnace helpers

$ 2 25 per 12 hours

$1 50 per 8 hours

iS 7

18 7

None

33 $

Laborers

$1,575 per 10 hours

$1 40 per 8 hours

*5 7

17 S

11+

11+

Suppliers

$2 025 per 12 hours .

$1 50 per 8 hours.

168

18 7

1 1 — (—

26

Teamsters .

$2 25 per 10 hours

$2 25 per 10 hours

22 5

22 5

None

None

Night foreman

$4 05 per 12 hours

$3 25 per 8 hours

362

40 6

12

20

Day foreman
Blacksmith

$144 per month
$4 00 per 10 hours . .

$144 per month
$4.00 per 10 hours

40 0

40 0

None

None

Blacksmith helpers

$2 25 per 10 hours

$1 75 per 10 hours

22 5

i 7 5

20f

25

Dump foreman

$2 25 per 10 hours

$2 25 per 10 hours

22 5

22 5

None

None


One witness states that with common labor under the Utah
law there is very little difference in the amount of work accom-
plished; but others maintain that the greater energy applies
throughout all employments of a manual character.


462 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

In some of the metal mines of Utah and Colorado three
shifts have been introduced instead of two shifts of ten hours
each. The mine that works eight hours can produce more than
one which works ten hours, not only because the men do as
much in eight as in ten hours, but also because under the ten-
hour system the mine is idle four hours out of the twenty-four ;
whereas under the eight-hour system one shift takes up the
tools at the moment when the preceding shift lays them down,
and no time is lost. It is contended by one witness that the
system of shifts is impracticable in the bituminous coal mines.
The loss occurs in operating the tipple at which the coal is
loaded on the outside. It is held that where two hundred or
three hundred men are employed the day shift and night shift
cannot be successfully introduced, because the tipple cannot
be operated at night. On this account this witness claims that
the operator endures a loss through the eight-hour day, since
he loses two hours in the use of his machinery.

On the other hand, an operator in the Massillon district of
Ohio states that where a mine is prepared to take care of the
coal a miner can produce as much m the eight hours as he
could before in the eight and a half or nine hours, because
formerly during a large part of this time he was waiting for
cars, and because where the equipment of the mines has been
improved and the coal is handled promptly outside there is not
much difference in the output.

While the introduction of machinery in bituminous coal min-
ing has for some time been advancing, the greatest advances
have occurred in the past four years, following the time when
the eight-hour day was introduced. The number of tons mined
by machines in the entire United States in 1891 was 6,211,732 ;
this had increased under the ten-hour system to 22,649,220
in 1897, an increase of 16,000,000 tons in six years. On the
other hand, from 1897 to 1900, a period of three years under the
eight-hour system, the number of tons mined by machines rose
to 52,790,523, an increase of 30,000,000 tons. The proportion
of the output mined by machines increased from 6.66 per cent
in 1891 to 16.19 per cent in 1897, and then to 25.15 per cent


HOURS OF LABOR


463

in 1900. It is doubtless true that the use of machines would
have increased whether or not the eight-hour day had been
introduced, and it cannot be shown statistically that the fewer
hours have stimulated the introduction of machinery ; but indi-
vidual witnesses who have appeared before the Commission
have asserted this to be the fact, and the large increase in
machine mining seems to substantiate the claim. The two
factors — increased energy on the part of the employees and
increased economy on the part of the employer — have cer-
tainly in the coal mining industry maintained a daily output
equal to that which existed before the eight-hour day was intro-
duced. This is shown in the reports of the United States Geo-
logical Survey and of the Illinois Commissioner of Labor on the
production of coal for the six years from 1895 to 1900. Dur-
ing the two years 1895 and 1896, under the ten-hour system,
the average output per workingman per day was 2.9 and 2.72
tons , while in 1897, during the latter three months of which the
eight-hour day prevailed, the average output per man was 3.03
tons per day ; and for 1898, 1899, and 1900, three years of the
eight-hour day in the majority of the coal mines, the average out-
put ranged from 2 98 to 3 09 tons. Each year of the eight-hour
day shows for the country as a whole a larger output per day for
each workman than the highest output of the ten-hour day.

Individual states such as Ohio and Pennsylvania, where there
has been a great increase in machinery and where since 1897
the eight-hour day is universal, show an increased output per
day per man. But there is one state, Illinois, where the pro-
portion of coal mined by machines has remained fairly con-
stant, standing at 19.57 per cent in 1896, increasing to 249
per cent in 1899, and falling to 19 73 per cent in 1900 In
this state the highest output per day for each workman was in
1897, when it reached 3.36 tons. This was a year when the
mines were operated part of the time ten hours a day and part
of the time eight. The ten-hour years (1894-1896) show an
average output per day for each employee of 2 53 to 3 tons,
while the eight-hour years (1898-1900) show an average of
3. 1 1 to 3.21 tons. This increase must be ascribed solely to


464 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the increased energy and promptness of. the workmen, since,
as already stated, the proportion of coal mined by machinery in
that state has remained constant.

In the case of Utah, where the law went into effect in June,
1896, there is for the four complete years of the eight-hour
day (1897-1900), an output per day of 3.54 to 3.99 tons and
for the three ten-hour years (1894, 1895, and 1896), an output
of 3.05 to 3 47 tons.

These reports bring statistical evidence to support the testi-
- mony of witnesses before the Industrial Commission that in *
the industry of coal mining the shorter working day has
increased the efficiency of both the workman and the manage-
ment. This being so, it follows that the shorter working day
has not increased the amount of employment of miners, and
that the increase which has actually occurred in the number of
days worked is to be ascribed solely to the improved industrial
conditions of the country and not to the reduction of hours.

It is true, as stated by one witness, that the shorter working
day makes it possible for the individual workman, under such
arduous conditions as those of smelting works, to work a larger
number of days each month. In the smelting works of Utah,
already referred to, the men were able to work under the twelve-
hour system an average of only twenty-four days a month, but
with the shorter hours they were able to increase their average .
number of days to nearly thirty. Plainly a change of this kind,
to the extent that the workman is able to put in more time,
does not widen the opportunities for the absorption of the
unemployed. On the other hand, the fact that the operation of
the smelting furnaces cannot be greatly speeded does increase
the number of employees required for a given output, though
not proportionately to the decrease in hours. . . .

Foreign Competition and Reduction in Hours

Lack of uniformity in the hours of labor is burdensome only
to those employers who are in the same competitive field. This
may be a very limited field, as in the building trades, or it may


HOURS OF LABOR


465


cover the entire area of the United States, as in most manu-
facturing industries, or it may reach to foreign lands. Compe-
tition with foreign manufacturers, where the hours are longer,
is often advanced as an argument against reduction of hours in
American industries. A manufacturer of machinery 1 contends
that foreign competition, especially competition with Germany
and Belgium, where men work low wages and turn out good
material during a long workday, makes it impossible to reduce
the hours from ten to nine in this country. His objection is
based upon the large amount of capital invested in machinery
which he cannot afford to keep idle a tenth of the normal time.
At the present time the industries of the United States stand
well toward the front in the movement for fewer hours, being
only less advanced than Great Britain and the colonies of Aus-
tralasia. While it is impossible to state concisely for different
countries the average hours of labor, it is possible to compare
countries as regards what might be designated as the prevail-
ing hours in the industries engaged in international competi-
tion. From the standpoint of competition, the eight-hour day
in Australia has little significance, since the industries of those
colonies which affect the world’s market are mainly agriculture
and stock raising. Great Britain, however, is our severest
industrial competitor, with the exception in some industries
of France and Germany. At the present time in Great Britain
the hours of work per week in factories are quite generally 53;
that is, 9^- hours a day, with a Saturday half holiday. The
miners have for some years enjoyed a workday not exceeding
8 hours. Compared with Great Britain, therefore, the United
States, with the prevailing average of about 9^ hours a day, or
57 a week, 2 has not yet reached the point where foreign com-
petition can be said to be an important consideration as regards
further reduction of hours. The recent reduction in the
machinery industries to 9 hours per day brings this country
more nearly to the level which Great Britain has held in that
industry for thirty years ; but in other large industries, like

1 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol. VIII, p. 7

2 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol VII, p. 622.


466 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

that of textiles, there still remains a difference of 5 hours in
Massachusetts to 1 5 hours in the South in excess of the work-
ing week of the British workman. On the continent of Europe
the workday is longer than m either Great Britain or the United
States, ranging from 10 to 12 hours a day in Germany, from
8 to 13^ in Hungary, from 10 to 12 in Spain, from 14 to 16 in
Russia (except in iron and steel works, where in some occupa-
tions the 8-hour day prevails); in Austria the workday is 11
hours. Yet these countries, with their long workdays, are less
able to compete with the United States than is Great Britain.
A reduction to 9 hours per day in this country would be neces-
sary in order to reach the British level. A further reduction
below 9 hours would be necessary in order to subject American
industries to a disadvantage in competition with British manu-
facturers, who at present are our strongest foreign competitors.

While foreign competition is a matter of moment in consid-
ering the reduction of hours in American industries, it is ques-
tionable whether it has really as great weight as the competition
of different states in the American Union among themselves.
There is one advantage which the American workmen have in
the matter of foreign competition which does not hold in respect
to the more backward states of the American Union, namely, the
protective tariff. Whereas a single state with advanced labor
legislation cannot protect itself against the cheap labor and
long workday of another state, the entire Union is able through
the protective tariff to restrict the competition of the longer
workdays and lower wages of European and Asiatic labor, and
thus to make it possible to raise the level of wages and to
reduce the limit of hours to the furthest extent that domestic
competition will permit. It is possible, indeed, that an extreme
reduction of hours, while not a menace to American industry
from the side of the importation of cheap products, might never-
theless restrict the sales of American products abroad in compe-
tition with foreign products. While the extension of our foreign
trade is a matter to be cultivated and promoted, it does not
follow that this should be encouraged if it requires low wages
and a long workday for American workmen. . . .


HOURS OF LABOR


467


Shorter Workdays through Labor Organization

In the absence of legislation the only effective means of
securing a reduction of hours is through labor organization.
This is, of course, the method by which in recent years the
most significant and important reductions in the United States
have been secured. The concentration of effort on this point
for the past fifteen years by the American Federation of Labor
has already accomplished notable results. The general effort,
beginning in 1886, is believed to have reduced the day's labor
of the working people of the United States by fully one hour.
Where the hours had been twelve, they were reduced to eleven;
where they had been eleven, they were reduced to ten. 1

. . . The reports of the New York Bureau of Labor Statistics
since 1891 have contained complete investigations of the hours
of labor of organized workmen in that state. The following
summary, prepared by the commissioner, 2 shows the changes
in the hours which have taken place.

The number of employees fluctuated between 186,003 in 1891
and 407,235 in 1899, a growth partly natural and partly due to an
increasing number of establishments reporting. The results may be
summarized as follows :


Proportion of Employees Working the Specified Hours
per Day (1891-1899)


1S91

1892

^93

1894

*895

...

1896

1897

1898

1899

8 hours or less

9 - 3 %


107%;

144%

11 - 9 %

94%

97%

82%

81%

9 hours . . .

16 6

16.5

18 1

17.8

179

203

20 9

22.2

22.1

10 hours

72 2

72.5

69 2

651

67 9

66 6

65-5

65.8

66.1

Over 10 hours

i 9

2.0

2 0

2 7

2 3

37

3-9

38

3*7

Total

100.0%

0

0

0

100 0%

0
. 0
b

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100 0%

100.0%


While the proportion of employees working 8 hours or less has
slightly decreased and that of employees working more than 10 hours

1 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol VII, p 623.

2 The data on which this summary is based are found in the report of the New
York Bureau of Labor Statistics for 1900.


468 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

has slightly increased, the important change has been the growth of
the 9-hour group at the expense of the io-hour group ; while in 1891
72.2 per cent of the employees were working 10 hours a day, in 1899
the proportion was only 66.1, and in the same period the percentage
of 9-hour workers increased from 16.6 to 22.1 per cent It is worthy
of note that the proportion working short hours (not more than 8)
increased temporarily in the years of depression (1893-1897).

Very considerable differences appear between New York City and '
the remaining portion of the state, as shown by the following table :


New York City Remainder of the State


1896

1897

1898

1899

1896

1897

1898

1899

8 hours or less . .

12.6%

! 3 7 %

12 3%

13 1%

6 8%

65%

49%

41%

9 hours ....

3 i 8

3 1 9

34 0

363

11 *3

12 0

12 6

10.3

10 hours . . . * .

53 1

5 1 3

50 6

48 0

77 2

77.0

78 0

81.0

Over 10 hours . . .

2 5

3 1

3 1

2 6

47

4*5

45

4.6

Total . ...

roo 0%

0

6

0

0

0

0

100 0%

100 0%

100 0%

100.0%

100 0%


Not only do the proportions in the two parts of the state differ in
each year, but the tendencies throughout the period are different.
While in the metropolis the relative strength of the io-hour group
has diminished in favor of 9-hour work, in the interior towns the
io-hour day has been gaining upon the 9-hour and 8-hour days. In
1899 almost exactly one half of the employees of metropolitan estab-
lishments worked 9 hours a day or less, while the corresponding per-
centage for the remainder of the state was 14.4. The differences,
fnoreover, exist in nearly every industry.

The contrasts in each group are decidedly noticeable and furnish
a conspicuous illustration of the power of organized labor. Although
some industries are not strongly organized in New York City, — as
textiles, for example, — the very fact that 8 or 9 hours is accepted as
the limit of their day’s toil by the leading workingmen of that city
has a natural effect in establishing that as a part of the body of cus-
toms, traditions, and habits that go to make up the local standard of
life. The figures for Group XII, the building industry, are especially
significant; they show that 90 per cent of the New York City work
people in those trades work less than 58 hours a week, or 9^ hours
a day, as compared with 50 per cent in the other towns of the state.

Returning now to the figures for the entire state for the earliest
and latest years of the period 1891 and 1899, we may note that some


HOURS OF LABOR 469

industries have not shared in the progressive shortening of hours
confirmed in the first table.

Percentage of Employees of Manufacturing Establishments in
New York State working the Specified Number of Hours
daily in June, 1891 and 1899


Group I
Stone, Pottery,
Glass

Group II
Metals,
Machinery, etc

Group III
Wood

Group IV
Leather,
Rubber, etc.


1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

8 hours or less . .

9 hours . ...

10 hours

Over 10 hours .

10 6%
17.I
65 3

7 *o

164%

18.7

587

6 2

42%

IO 0

84.8

1.0

48%

769

2.6

0.8%

187

79-5

1 0

4 4 %
16.5
769
2.2

6 6%
238
69-5
0.1

iS%

16.1

82.0

0.1

Total . ...

100.0%

100 0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100 0%

100 0%

100 0%


Group V
Chemicals,
Oils, etc

Group VI
Pulp and Paper

Group VII
Printing and
Publishing

Group VIII
Textiles


1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

8 hours or less . . .

9 hours

10 hours

Over 10 hours . . .

89%

2 K 0

59*2

6.9

6 5 %
15*3

725

57

i 7 %
4 1

65 5

28 7

01%

0 1
663

335

7 7 %
22.2

700

0 1

12 8%
53 9

329

0.4

47%

89

863

0 1

3 -i%
10 s
85-5
09

Total

100.0%

roo 0%

100 0%

100.0%

100 0%

100 0%

100 0%

100.0%


Group IX
Clothing,
Millinery, etc

Group X
Food, Tobacco,
Liquors

Group XI
Public Utilities

Group XII
Building


1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

1891

1899

8 hours or less . ,

9 hours . . . .

10 hours ....

Over 10 hours . .

108%
35 3
53 8
0.1

84%

4 i *3

502

0.1

36 3%

I 7-3

42 O

44

13 - 5 %

168

61.7

80

31%

2.6

75-5

188

124%

1.4

44 2
42 0

33 9 %
326

33 4
0.1

54*4

23.1

21.6

09

Total . .

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100.0%

100 0%

100.0%

100.0%


There has been an increase in the average working time in the
boot and shoe industry (Group IV), in the manufacture of chemicals
and the refining of petroleum (Group V), in the paper-making indus-
try. A similar increase in Group X is partly due to the fact that


47 o TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

bakeries and breweries, with comparatively long hours, were more
strongly represented in 1899 than in 1891, while the reports of cigar
factories, with their shorter hours, showed a relatively small increase
in the number of employees. One of the noteworthy changes in the
way of reduction of hours appears in the printing and publishing
industry; whereas 70.1 per cent of the printers worked 10 hours or
more in 1891, only 33.3 per cent had those hours in 1899 — and
that was before the general nine-hour day was established by agree-
ment between national associations of employers and employees.

It will be noticed that 9667 employees (2.4 per cent of the aggre-
gate number) were reported in 1899 as working regularly more than
70 hours a week. Of these 2153 were workmen in paper mills, a
large proportion of which have for several years past been operated
24 hours a day or 72 a week for each if two shifts. A large propor-
tion of the employees of gas companies also work in two shifts of
12 hours each, and the same maybe said of stationary engineers and
firemen, who are found in nearly all industries, but are especially
numerous in breweries. Finally, a considerable number of employ-
ees of railway car shops work seven days in the week, thus aggre-
gating 70, 77, or even 84 hours a week.

Legislation governing Hours of Labor

While the efforts of labor organizations in behalf of reason-
able reduction of hours are in general to be commended, it is
plain that they cannot be expected to reach all classes of labor,
nor indeed those most in need of protection in this regard It
has been estimated that labor unions include only 10 or 15 per
cent of the wage-earning population. They do not include to
any great extent women and children, who in 1890 constituted
20 per cent of the employees in manufactures, and who, on
account of physical weakness or immature years, stand in great-
est need of reasonable hours. . . .

Legislative regulation of the hours of labor must be considered
as supplementary to regulation by private contract and labor
organization, to be resorted to where these methods fail and
where there is evident reason for the reduction. In England
and in America it has generally been held that legislation
reducing the number of working hours should apply only to


HOURS OF LABOR


471


women and minors, and not to men. The latter have been held
to be better able to care for themselves and to secure, through
organization or otherwise, the improved conditions which they
demand. But women and children have been considered weaker
in bargaining and more in need of legislative protection. There
is a tendency in both countries, however, to depart from this
view and to legislate for men as well as for women in the reg-
ulation of hours. While such legislation has not as yet been
actually enacted in England, it has been adopted in Utah and
Wyoming in the case of miners and smelters. With these two
exceptions, the legislation of American states, reducing the
hours of labor, applies only to women and minors. Where men
work in the same factories they generally get the advantage of
the shorter workday of the women and children, although this
is not always so.

The problem of legislative regulation turns upon three ques-
tions * practicability, constitutionality, uniformity.

Practicability . Legislation respecting hours of labor stands
upon an entirely different footing from legislation respecting
wages. It is practically impossible to devise any legislation
which will effectively maintain a minimum rate of wages for
any occupation, or for the country at large, even should leg-
islative interference of this kind seem advisable. Secret eva-
sion would quickly nullify such a law. But legislation setting
a maximum to the number of hours of employment can be so
framed and administered as to prevent evasion. It must be
observed, however, that reliance cannot be placed upon pros-
ecution of the employer by the employee. The latter is in a
dependent position, and the implied threat of discharge is too
heavy a penalty to pay for a doubtful victory in a legal prose-
cution. Such a prosecution is possible only where the em-
ployee is backed by a strong labor organization; and a labor
organization strong enough to prosecute an employer under
state laws is strong enough to secure its demands without the
state law. Legislation is needed only where organization fails.
This being so, legislation concerning hours requires the creation
of a strong force of factory inspectors. The factory inspector


472


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


is the public prosecutor of violations of factory laws. The
simple provision existing in the laws of Massachusetts, New
York, and other states, requiring that the employer shall post
in his factory the hours for beginning and quitting work and
the interval for the noonday meal, and providing penalties
where this notice is not posted, makes it possible for the
inspector to discover by his own inspection whether the shop
is working overtime or not. With this simple provision, a
factory working outside the posted hours is prima facie violat-
ing the law, and it is not necessary that the factory inspector
should call in the employees as witnesses and subject them to
the danger of discharge. The inspector, like a police officer,
becomes his own witness, with the most conclusive of testi-
mony. Where the legislation respecting hours is evaded, as it
undoubtedly is in some cases in New York and other states, it
will be found that the defect lies chiefly in the failure to
enforce the provision requiring the posting of hours and in
the necessity of summoning the employees as witnesses. Some-
times this failure is excused on the ground that the require-
ment is a mere technicality, and that it would be a petty
persecution on the part of the inspector to prosecute for every
trifling detail; but in the enforcement of a law of this kind
this particular technicality is all important ; and if it is intended
to enforce the law at all, the posting of the hours is an essen-
tial condition of success.

In some occupations, like the manufacture of clothing and
notions, it is often possible to evade the short-hour legislation
by requiring employees to take work home at night, and where
they are not organized they are afraid to refuse. To meet this
evasion the provisions in the law of Massachusetts and other
states requiring all home workers to have a license, and requir-
ing also that the employer furnish to the factory inspector a
list of all his home workers, is the most effective device yet
enacted into law. The inspector refuses to grant licenses for
home work to those who work in the daytime in the factory,
on the ground that they are already working the legal limit
and that to take work home at night would be an evasion of


HOURS OF LABOR


473


the law. Consequently, the inspector, in case of violation, prose-
cutes the employer, not directly for sending work home at
night, but for furnishing work to unlicensed home workers. A
prosecution on the former account would require testimony of
the home worker, and would result inevitably in connivance
and evasion. A prosecution on the latter account requires only
careful inspection on the part of the officer.

The foregoing technical details are noticed to show the
practicability of legislation regarding hours of labor for facto-
ries and mines. It does not follow that such legislation will be
practicable for farm labor or for home workers. Its success
depends upon the existence of establishments separate from the
home. Indeed, legislation of this character is justified mainly
by the existence of the factory system, the increased intensity of
exertion, the injury to the health of the worker, and the greater
profitableness of labor which that system has introduced.

Constitutionality} . . ,

Uniformity . The serious defect in legislation regulating the
hours of labor in factories is found in the lack of uniformity
in the different states. Massachusetts has established the 58-
hour week for women and children in factories. The adjoining
state of New York places the limit at 60 hours; New Jersey
at 55 hours; Pennsylvania at 60 hours ; Wisconsin at 48 hours,
though permitting contracts for overtime; South Carolina and
Georgia at 66 hours; others at 60 hours a week. There are
twenty-two states that have no restrictions for adult women,
eighteen that have no restrictions for women under twenty-one,
and seventeen that have no restrictions on male minors. Utah
and Wyoming are the only states that limit the hours of
men, and this applies only to workers in smelters and under-
ground mines.

While it is doubtless true that within limits the fewer
hours of one state do not place that state at a disadvantage,
owing to the greater energy which fewer hours make possible,
yet a further reduction by law from the 58 hours of Massachu-
setts or the 55 hours of New Jersey to, say, 48 hours, as is the
1 See Chapter XXIII for decisions of courts on this question. — Ed.


474


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


case in Australia, seems exceedingly difficult to bring about as
long as other states retain a maximum as high as 60 or 66
hours and still other states have no restrictions whatever. A
greater degree of uniformity of legislation on this point is an
urgent requirement. After an experience of seventy years in
England and nearly thirty years in Massachusetts, together
with the more recent experience of twenty other American
states, legislation reducing the hours of women and minors in
factories has justified itself as a proper action for any civilized
state. It is true that local differences exist in the climate and
other conditions, but these should not be considered decisive.
Those states which are just now advancing to the position of
manufacturing communities might well learn from these ex-
amples the lesson that permanent industrial progress cannot
be built upon the physical exhaustion of women and children.
Factory life brings incidentally new and depressing effects
which those whose experience has been wholly agricultural do
not appreciate. But the experience of states which have pushed
their way from agricultural to manufacturing industries, and
have found that their delay in protecting their factory employees
has weakened the physical and moral strength of the new gener-
ation of working people, would seem to be an experience which
the citizens of new manufacturing states should hope to avoid.
A reduction in hours has never lessened the working people's
ability to compete in the markets of the world. States with
shorter workdays actually manufacture their products at a lower
cost than states with longer workdays. Several witnesses
before the Industrial Commission, both manufacturers and
employees', have urged a national law reducing the hours of
women and children in factories to a uniform standard. There
is evidence that the demand for such a law is growing in
strength. But Federal legislation, with the attendant force of
Federal factory inspectors, is objectionable. Other countries,
even Germany, with its federal form of government, have uni-
form factory laws covering all parts of the land ; but it has
been the pride of the American Commonwealth that except
in great emergency no state should be coerced to do that


HOURS OF LABOR


475


which is either for its own interest or for the interest of other
states. This principle is sound, but it cannot be overlooked
that those states which profit by their strategic position to
hold their sister states below the level of humane self-protec-
tion demanded by modern factory conditions are storing up
against themselves feelings of resentment and retaliation. It
is certainly practicable for any state to bring its hours of labor
for women and children in factories down to the standard of
55, set by New Jersey. This standard is near that of our
principal competitor, Great Britain. This, at least for the
present, should be the standard adopted on its own initiative
by every state that enters the ranks of factory production.

Federal Legislation

While in manufactures and mining the regulation of hours
belongs to the several states, yet in transportation the inter-
state character of the industry brings the subject under the
powers of Congress. The policy of Congressional action depends
upon the need of protecting the traveling public and freight
traffic, and the inability of certain classes of employees to organ-
ize for their own protection. On account of the nature of train
service the hours of railroad employees are necessarily irregular.
A certain distance must be covered before the train crew can
be released, and the time required may be short, or, under
exceptional circumstances, may be exceedingly long. There is,
however, a very general tendency of railroad managements to
bring the hours of trainmen within reasonable limits, and the
ten-hour day is the ideal standard established by agreement for
such service. The principal motive actuating the management
is the necessity that the trainmen should be wide-awake, and
this acts as a protection against unreasonable demands; at the
same time, prior to the organization of the railroad unions the
workday was much longer than at present. Even now, in
the case of the unorganized switchmen, telegraphers, trackmen,
and station men, the hours are frequently twelve a day, and in
some cases from sunrise to sunset. During the summer, when


476 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

days are long, trackmen work 14 hours on many roads. In
emergencies all these employees are also required to remain on
duty much longer than 12 hours.

While it is true that the trainmen are especially responsible
for the safety of the traveling public, it is ^lso true, as stated
by the president of a leading railroad, 1 that “of the 20,000
names on our pay roll you could pick out very few who do not
carry the lives of the passengers in their hands/’ Telegraph
operators occupy a peculiarly responsible position in traffic
operations, and it is no uncommon thing for a coroner’s jury
to ascribe the cause of a railroad wreck to the negligence of a
telegraph operator who had been on duty for an excessive
number of hours. Railway trackmen are the poorest paid and
hardest worked of all employees. They handle heavy material,
such as cross-ties and steel rails, and even heavy cars. Both
on their own account and on account of the safety of the
traveling public, the hours of labor of these unorganized classes
of railway employees should be reduced to eight.

The legislation of the several states affecting the hours of
employees limits such hours to 10 or 12, and in five states
contracts for a longer time are invalid, and a company so con-
tracting is liable to a penalty. 2 The constitutionality of such
statutes can now probably be sustained under the decision of
the United States Supreme Court on*the Utah mining law.
Railroad labor, however, is undoubtedly covered by the inter-
state powers of Congress, and a Federal law regulating the
hours of labor would be constitutional. The limitation of con-
tinuous runs by engineers or continuous service by telegraph
operators or switchmen without a period of sufficient rest, as
well as other regulations affecting the surroundings and dangers
of the employment, are within the province of Congress. The
Industrial Commission has recommended that Congress enact
a code covering all the conditions of employment of railroad
labor throughout the United States. Such a code would have
the advantage of simplifying the conditions throughout the

1 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol. IV, p 288.

2 Ibtd., Vol V, pp. 27, 28,


HOURS OF LABOR


477


country, and by the force of example would lead the states,
it is hoped, to adopt voluntarily the code in cases where Con-
gress cannot properly interfere. This the Commission believes
to be one of the most important efforts in the labor interest to
which the attention of Congress can possibly be invited.

Sailors and Seamen

On the Great Lakes the hours of seamen are excessive, the
men working 12 hours on the schooners, and occasionally as
high as 30 hours at a stretch on the steamboats. This in-
cludes 24 hours of all kinds of labor, followed by 6 hours steer-
ing; they then get 6 hours’ rest, and again 6 hours at the
wheel. These excessive hours are ascribed to the underman-
ning of the vessels, which condition, besides requiring many
hours, is also unsafe for passengers and property. It is stated
that in other countries men are required to stand at the wheel
only 2 hours, with 4 hours off, while on the Great Lakes they
are required to stand 6 hours, with 6 hours off, and this occurs
very often, as stated above, after continuous work for 24 hours. 1
Water transportation comes under the interstate commerce pow-
ers of Congress, and the regulation of hours and the requirement
of adequate numbers in the crew are matters which Congress
is fully competent to dpal with.

Hours of Labor on Public Works and Public
Contracts 2

There is one phase of legislation affecting the hours of labor
wherein the interests of private employment are not directly
affected, namely, the hours of workmen employed directly by
the Federal, state, and local governments. These different
governments combined are undoubtedly the largest employers


1 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol. IX, pp 403-408

2 See also Hearings of the Committee on Labor, House of Representatives,
on Eight-Hour Bill, February 15 to March 29, 1900, February 25 to March
29, 1902.


478 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of labor in the United States, and whatever labor legislation
is enacted affecting them has relatively important weight upon
the condition of the working people in general. The Fed-
eral Government has been the pioneer in reducing the hours
of labor of its employees. In 1840, at a time when in
private employment u or 12 hours was the rule, an order of
the President provided for 10 hours in all public employment;
and again in 1868, after private employment had reached the
standard of 10 hours, Congress reduced the hours for public
employees to 8. Even this reduction does not place the man-
ual laborer and artisan in the employment of the Government
on the same basis as the clerical and official force, for whom
the hours are but to 7J- a day.

State governments and city authorities have followed the
Federal Government in the adoption of the eight-hour day. The
first city to introduce this reduction was New York, in 1870.
At the present time there are eight or nine states which pre-
scribe the eight-hour day for all labor on public works, whether
in the employment of the state or of the local divisions.

There are special reasons in government employment whereby
it is possible to advance more rapidly in the reduction of hours
than is the case in private employment. The government in
the work which it conducts is not subject to foreign or domestic
competition ; its services are paid from taxes, and it is not com-
pelled to dispose of its products at a market price. For this
reason it is free to take broader views of its obligations to its
employees than those taken by the private employer Its action
is determined more by the ethical and political standards of the
public than by the competitive conditions of industry. In this
way the government is able to stand before the industries of
the country as a model employer. Undoubtedly the example of
the ten-hour day in public employment had some influence in
bringing private employment up to that standard, and, again,
the lead taken by Congress and by the state and local govern-
ments in establishing the eight-hour day has assisted the labor
element in securing whatever of that reduction in private
employment they have been able to bring about.


HOURS OF LABOR


479


Besides the direct employment which the government in its
several branches provides, there is a still larger amount of
indirect employment on public works, and in the manufacture
of goods and material, which is conducted through contractors.
It was not until 1892 that Congress enacted a law which
extended the eight-hour day to contractors and subcontractors
upon the public works of the United States or the District of
Columbia. Later state legislatures have taken this position,
the laws on that subject having been enacted mainly in 1899,
although the law of Kansas dates from 1891 and that of
Colorado from 1894. 1 The efficiency of those laws is not
always secured, because there is no provision for their enforce-
ment through a state official. The law in Kansas was a dead
letter until in 1898 the legislature placed its enforcement in
the hands of the Commissioner of Labor.

It is evident that without the extension of the eight-hour law
to public contractors the government is at a disadvantage in a
comparison of the costs of production in those enterprises
which are operated by its own employees. The extension of
the eight-hour law to contractors on public works equalizes the
conditions of public and private employment in those branches
where work is done partly by the government or municipality
and partly by contractors. This discrepancy has, indeed, led to
a larger proportionate use of the contract system than was the
case before the enactment of the eight-hour law. Even the Fed-
eral law of 1892 does not bring contractors up to the level of
government employment, since it is defective in the particular
that an exception is made in cases of “ extraordinary emer-
gency ” The character of the emergency is not described, as
is usually done in such legislation ; and consequently con-
tractors are accustomed to employ laborers and mechanics for
a longer period than eight hours and to certify the extra hours
as due to “ extraordinary emergency.” Undoubtedly, the emer-
gencies contemplated in the act are those only of fire, flood, or
military operations, when life and property are endangered.
An amendment specifying these classes of emergencies is
1 Reports of the Industrial Commission, Vol. V, p. 25.


480 trade unionism and labor problems

necessary in order that the law of 1892 may bring about the
objects intended, and may place contractors on public works on
a level with the departments which conduct their work through
their own staff of employees. The law, also, is not interpreted
in such a way as to regulate the hours of employees at a dis-
tance from the actual construction, and on this account, while
the eight-hour day may prevail in the erection of a customhouse
or post office, the stone may be cut in another state on the
nine-hour or ten-hour system.

It is to be noted that the law of 1892 applies only to public
works, and not to goods or material furnished to the govern-
ment. It applies only to such constructions as fortifications,
breakwaters, public buildings, and so on. The government is
also a purchaser through contract of a large quantity of army and
navy equipment, vessels of war, clothing, boots and shoes, and
so forth. It is perhaps true that the reasons for applying the
eight-hour day to contractors on public works are stronger than
those which would apply the same to contractors on goods or
material manufactured for the government It is objected that
a law of this kind would require public authorities to trace the
material purchased by contractors back to the original manu-
facturers, and from the original manufacturers back to the raw
material extracted from the soil or brought up from the mines.
This objection is certainly fatal to a measure which does not
make exception of all material purchased upon the open market.
It has been decided by the Attorney-General that the act of
1892, providing for eight hours on public works, does not apply
to material purchased by contractors, but applies solely to the
employees under the immediate direction of such contractors
or subcontractors. The same distinction should unquestionably
be made in any legislation providing for the eight-hour day upon
goods or material manufactured under contract for government
use.

More weighty, however, than this objection is that .which
holds that if manufacturers are compelled to work only eight
hours on government work they will be compelled to reduce the
hours on private contracts to the same number. Contracts for


HOURS OF LABOR


481

goods and material are made by establishments manufacturing
for the general market, and it would be impossible to sepa-
rate their government contracts from their private contracts.
Doubtless the effect of such legislation would be extensive. It
would apply to all vessels of war, all clothing and boots and
shoes manufactured for the army, and all army and navy
equipment. The probable number of employees affected in
these industries cannot be predicted ; but it is probable that
such legislation would bring about at first a specialization of
factories for public work. This might involve somewhat higher
prices paid by the government than those paid by private pur-
chasers ; but as a practical means for promoting the adoption
of eight hours throughout the industries of the country such a
measure would unquestionably have wider and more beneficial
effect than any other that could be adopted by Congress. Such
a bill, reducing the hours of labor on all government contracts
to eight hours per day, was introduced in the Fifty-Sixth Con-
gress and passed the House, but failed in the Senate.


XXII

MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION 1
Economic Effects

Tax on Production . Given this series of laws 2 acting upon
manufacturing interests, the first question before the economist
is : Have they been a tax upon the productive power of Massa-
chusetts? The laws deal with (i) Child Labor, (2) Hours of
Labor for Women and Minors, (3) Sanitation and Safety, (4)
The Employment Contract and the Employer's Liability for
Injury to Employees, and (5) Wage Payments. Of these we
may disregard the expenses imposed by safety and sanitary
requirements ; for employers themselves recognize such as
incumbent upon them, law or no law; while for many years
now no complaints of injustice or caprice in the orders of
inspectors have been made. It would also be idle calculation
from the practical point of view to attempt to place a money
value upon the results of restrictions upon child labor, which
nevertheless tend to narrow the supply of cheap workers. But
the statutes concerning the employer’s liability for injury
sustained by an employee, the requirement of weekly wage
payment, and above all the shortened hours of labor have
been loudly denounced as burdensome taxation and deserve
careful consideration.

The first two regulations are of minor importance. Under
the statute which extends and defines somewhat more broadly

1 From Supplement to the Annals , American Academy of Political Science , Jan-
uary, 1901, pp 35-78. See also S N. D North, “ Factory Legislation in the United
States,” etc , Bulletin of the National Association of Wool Manufacturer s, Vol.
XXV, 1895, pp. 208-271, Webb, The Case for the Factory Acts, 1901 (Great
Britain) ; Hutchins and Harrison, A History of Factory Legislation, 1903

2 A review of the laws referred to is found on pages 1 to 35 of the Supplement,
as cited in preceding footnote.


482


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION 483

the common-law principle of employer’s liability, it has become
very generally the custom to take out a new form of special
accident insurance to cover the risk which these more definite
obligations impose. This has, therefore, raised the manufac-
turers’ fixed charges by an inconsiderable percentage. The law
leaves decisions of fact largely to the jury, and while em-
ployers acknowledge the enactment to be commendable, they
have had some reason for complaint on account of verdicts
rendered more upon grounds of mercy toward the unfortunate
than of justice toward the responsible.

As regards the regulation of the method of paying wages,
weekly payments have so increased the office work in many
establishments that additional clerks have been required to
perform it, and the old method of receipt taking has been
abandoned as too time consuming. There is advanced also the
claim that business concerns are themselves obliged to give
long credits on orders received, which make such weekly cash
payments on their part decidedly inconvenient, if not actually
burdensome.

These expenses appear, however, of but slight consideration
when compared with the ever-resisted mandate of shortened
hours of labors. The whole battle of the labor movement
centers in this issue. On one side stands the claim that the
increased efficiency both in labor and management, the higher
speed of machinery, and so forth, which are forced upon pro-
ducers fully compensate — and more than compensate — for the
loss of time. To this is opposed the charge that such legisla-
tion has already, without corresponding compensation, so taxed
Massachusetts’ manufacturers that they cannot compete with
like industries in other places. Curtailment of hours tends to
make fixed charges assume undue proportion ; it effectually
reduces the volume of machine output.

The facts adducible in support of these conflicting views may
be briefly reviewed. The short-hour movement had been long
gathering strength before it received legislative recognition in
the ten-hour law of 1874. So determined had been the efforts
of Fall River unions to secure the concession that many of


484 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the mills there, rather than risk warfare at a profitable season,
did institute a ten-hour system in 1867, which lived for some
twenty-one months. These experiments furnished a few statis-
tics bearing on the issue, which may be summarized as follows :


American Lmen Company

1868, 6 wks. 10 hrs. average product, 32 23 yds. a loom per diem .

1869, “ “ 11 “ “ “ 37 14 “

Loss due to shorter day 10+ per cent.


Granite Mills

1867, 10 hrs. product, 3861 pieces a, week

1869, 11 “ “ 4350 “ “

1870, 11“ “ 4356 “ “

Loss due to shorter day 10+ per cent.

Union Mills

1867 (304I days) 10 hrs. product, average 36,210 yds per diem ,
1869 (208 J “ ) 11 “ “ “ 39,984 “

Loss due to shoiter day 10+ per cent.


Merchants' Manufacturing Company

5 wks. 10 hrs , 593 hands produced 1,125,000 yds , earned $20,294.

5 “ n “ 486 “ “ I 495 . 35 I “ “ 21,441.90.

1 1 hrs running at reduced prices

Loss due to shorter day 10+ per cent.


Atlantic Mills, Lawrence


First Account.

io-hour system since 1867 Increased speed 5 per cent.
Strict time regulations enforced.

New machinery from time to time.

First two years, product diminished 5 per cent.

1871, stock at a low figure.

Dividend small. 1


Second Account.

io-hour system since 1867. Increased speed “ a little.”

“ At first ” lost 5 per cent.

After ij years product “equal to what it had been under 11-hour
system ”

1871, product as great as under 12-hour system.

Same help, machinery, and class of goods

1 M F J. Dickinson, “Argument against Ten-Hour Bill,” 1871. Hearing
^efore Legislative Labor Committee, p. 17 (pamphlet).


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION 485

Mr. Dickinson shows no mill conducted on the eleven-hour
system in the same class of goods doing any better than th 6
Atlantic Mills. 1

In the matter of figures employers have the bookkeeper’s
advantage. The cases here cited do not at all exhaust the list
which employers bring forward, whereas I have been able to
find only one or two such examples given upon the other side.
Nor have I seen these figures anywhere seriously questioned.
It is noticeable, however, that the eleven-hour years chosen for
comparison were not those which preceded the ten-hour experi-
ment, but in each case those which followed upon it. Such
selection might suggest advantages in the later years of such
improved machinery or methods as experience had shown to be
useful. The margin of difference between the amounts allows
some scope for reductions on this score without very materi-
ally altering their bearing upon the point at issue. The action
of the mill owners was consistent with the figures when, after
this * experiment had been continued for twenty-two months,
they returned to the old hours. The evidence given prevailed
to stave off legislative action for several years.

After the passage of the ten-hour law in 1874 we have again
a period which ought to furnish some interesting comparative
statistics. Although inoperative over the state as a whole,
inspectors had some opportunities to note the effects in cases
of compliance. In his report for 1878 the Chief of Police
inserts an extract from the letter of a Massachusetts mill
owner as an example of the results which his department had
observed.

From the means of comparison we have (mills in Massachusetts
arid Connecticut with equal quality of machinery and the same grade
of goods) we find the production of mills per set to be as the hours
of labor ; that is, a set of machinery running ten hours per day will
not turn out more than ten elevenths as many yards of the same
"grade of goods as one running eleven hours, but rather a small frac-
tion less. . . . There is in Connecticut a saving over Massachusetts

1 Charles Cowley, “Argument for Petitioners in Ten-Hour Bill,” 1871. Hearing
before Legislative Labor Committee, p. 5 (pamphlet).


486 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of $2157 per annum, or more than 9 per cent on expenses common
to both mills. ... In mills where longer hours reign there will be
a small margin of profit when those of Massachusetts have none or
are losing money.

The report goes on to say that a tour in Rhode Island and
Connecticut showed manufacturers in these states to be using
the most improved machinery and methods eleven hours daily
with no apparent injury to the health of the operatives, being
happy in their advantage over some Massachusetts competitors.
The Chief in his report declares himself fearful of the conse-
quences of the law if thoroughly enforced.

Examining a report a few years, later, when efforts to enforce
this measure were meeting with decidedly better success, we
read : “ Results have shown the wisdom of such legislation/’ 1
And again : “ A mass of facts had been collected in this and
other countries tending to show that no ultimate decrease of
production or of profits thereon would follow if the number of
hours were lessened ; lapse of time has only strengthened these
convictions.” 2 A case is here also given of an unnamed manu-
facturer who reduced his time from sixty-six to sixty hours per
week and “ at the end of six months found his product increased
nearly 10 per cent, and the quality of the work done more
perfect.”

In 1883 the Bureau of Statistics of Labor made a careful
study of profits and earnings in Massachusetts, and drew a
comparison between the years 1875 and 1880 on these lines. 3
The study concludes :

Examination of the tables shows falling off in the percentage of
gross profits in 1880 as compared with 1875. In the state this fall
is 7.17 per cent; in Boston, 14.89 per cent; in the state, excluding
Boston, 4.91 percent. In the state in 1880 percentage of stock used
fiad advanced n 52 per cent; wages had been cut down 4.35 per
cent, expenses had increased .02 per cent; and net profits had

1 Massachusetts Police Report, Inspection, 1882, p 15.

2 Ibid , 1887, p 18

3 Although passed m 1874, the ten-hour law was not well m operation until
after 1879.


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION 487

fallen off 7.19 per cent. In other words stock used cost 11.52 per
cent more in 1880 than in 1875. To counterbalance this wages
were cut down 4.35 per cent and manufacturers lost 7.19 per cent,
or n.54 per cent. If we deduct increase in expenses, .02 per cent,
we secure 11.52 per cent as net loss to employers and employees.

Boston stock cost 18.29 P er cent more in 1880 than in 1875 ; of
this the employees bore 3.40 per cent, the employers 14.53 P er cent,
while 36 per cent was gained on expenses. 1

We must not, of course, make the error of attributing this
to short-hour legislation as a chief cause ; nor in any event
must too great weight be placed upon the testimony of such
averages ; nevertheless the figures are of interest, as they cor-
roborate other authority.

Continuing the search after evidence, we may add here a few
later statements of comparative costs. These are taken after
the reduction of hours in 1892 (c. 357) to fifty-eight weekly.

A Rhode Island mill of two thousand looms can produce twenty
thousand yards per week more of printed cloth than one in Massa-
chusetts, as the difference between fifty-eight and sixty hours per
week. 2

The Everett Mills have plants both in Massachusetts and
Maine. Alike in equipment and grade of product and under
identical management, the returns made were as follows :

In Maine, working eleven and a half hours per day, the mills
earned a dividend at a time when the Massachusetts branch,
working ten hours, was compelled to reorganize. Repeated
comparisons all show that longer hours result in proportionally
larger earnings. 3

TheTremont and Suffolk Mills are in very close competition
with the Nashua Mills of New Hampshire, and it was affirmed
that the increased product of sixty hours per week (over fifty-
eight) would mean to the former $50,000 per annum. 4

1 Report of Massachusetts Bureau of Labor Statistics. Profits and Earnings,
1883, p. 372

2 Quoted from the Boston Commercial Bulletin , in Bulletin of Wool Manufac-
turers, September, 1895, P* note>

8 Ibid., p 266.

4 A. S. Covel before Legislative Labor Committee, 1898.


488 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Dividends of the Lowell Manufacturing Company for fifteen years,
from 1881 to 1895, have averaged a trifle under 4 per cent. Money
could not have been hired at that rate during the period. 1

Southern mills opened by Northern capital, in several cases
as “ dependencies ” of Massachusetts corporations, earned divi-
dends upon their capital stock during 1897, while the Northern
ones failed to do so. 2

The cotton mills are the chief but not the only complainers.
The fifty-eight-hour requirement bears heavily upon smaller,
spasmodic trades, such as confectionery, straw plaiting, and
millinery. Dealers claim that at holiday seasons and at other
times of temporarily increased demand they lose good business
orders through inability to fill them in the short hours allowed
by law or to get new help for night work. The clause which
restricts the making up of time lost to loss within “ the same
week” (not within seven days) brings pressure and annoyance
upon such businesses as laundries, where orders tend to crowd
during the first of the week.

I have been unable to find any figures in Massachusetts
which oppose these contrary results. The two cases generally
cited are the Atlantic Mills already referred to and the Harris
Mills, a voluntary experiment in the ten-hour system, at Woon-
socket, Rhode Island. The Harris Mills manufactured a high
grade of cloth goods which met almost no competition.

The argument in rebuttal, without means of statistical proof,
throws doubt on the statements given above. Reference is made
to the cases of voluntary reduction to eleven hours in 1853 at Low-
ell, Lawrence, and Fall River. There, during the eight years
which elapsed before the regime became general, no attendant ab-
straction of capital appeared, but there was a constant growth. 3

Statement is also made that during the twenty-one months of
experiment at Fall River “ that city outstripped all competitors.”

1 A. T. Lyman before Legislative Labor Committee, 1898.

2 See testimony of Mr. Lovering and of A. T. Lyman before Legislative Labor
Committee, 1898.

8 G. E McNeill,' before Labor Committee on repeal of Ten-Hour Bill, 1879,
p. 4 (pamphlet).


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


489

Again, when an attempt was made in 1879 t0 repeal the ten-
hour law enacted the previous year, action did not proceed
from Fall River, “nor Lowell, nor Lawrence, nor Holyoke,
nor Chicopee, nor New Bedford, but from West Boylston, Sut-
ton, Suncook, and Edward Atkinson,” — not from the great
centers of industry, but from comparatively unimportant quar-
ters and was instigated by “ an agitator.” 1

The chief criticism upon these claims is that they apply to
the cotton industry at a time when it easily held a monopoly,
and when a tax no more considerable than that imposed by this
shortening of hours would hardly be sufficient to injure its
growth. Yet even the reduction to eleven hours had been con-
sidered by employers more as a concession to labor agitation
than as an economic measure. Concerning the Fall River ex-
periment, statements to be balanced against this claim have
been given above. . . .

How far do other effects of these laws tend to offset this
burden ? Two results are generally admitted.

1. Restrictive labor laws stimulate to greater speed and to
other improvements in machinery and management.

2. They increase the efficiency of labor.

Every reduction of hours thus far has been followed immedi-
ately by the speeding of machinery; by imposing stricter time
regulations; by introducing special discipline in “gang work,”
so that time may not be lost to a whole shift through the fault
of a single member, and so forth ; eventually by the replace-
ment of old machines by new ones of greater capacity requir-
ing usually fewer operatives to tend them ; and also by such
further changes in management or methods as can be devised
to accomplish saving. This is the unanimous testimony of
employers, laborers, and inspectors.

By these means the old volume of production has been
regained. Statistics of manufacture show production to be
advancing in Massachusetts, as elsewhere, in spite of the odds
against it. The disturbing thought to Massachusetts is that

1 G. E. McNeill, before Labor Committee on repeal of Ten-Hour Bill, 1879,
p. 16 (pamphlet).


490 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

although her manufacturers are forced into the lead in making
improvements, and leadership often involves costly as well as
successful experimentation, her rivals very quickly fall into line.
Equipment in neighboring states is equally up to date, and this
holds good very generally even of the Southern cotton mills.
Where Northern enterprise and capital have lately established
themselves in the South it is claimed that the mills are even
better equipped, having had no old machinery too costly to be
lightly put aside m favor of the new.

Concerning the increase in efficiency through increased
leisure, there has been much loose and unprofitable debate.

Where hours were originally excessive reductions were to
employees a physical benefit which told in greater vigor of
work. Note the traditional effect of reductions from the
twelve-hour and fourteen-hour day to the eleven-hour system.
It was a policy followed by employers as a concession to labor
not in the end disadvantageous to their own interests.

Again, cases are cited in connection with the ten-hour reduc-
tion, where the full quota of work was accomplished in the
restricted day. These instances are almost invariably found in
departments most purely dependent upon manual labor, as in
the Holyoke thread mills, in “ drawing in ” for the cotton web,
in cigar shops, and so forth. In machine work speeding the
machinery does, of course, set a somewhat higher work require-
ment upon the tender, in this sense increasing efficiency, but
the product depends most intimately upon the speed of the
machine as the determining factor.

Of the several labor leaders consulted not one has held
that the ordinary factory operative succeeds in accomplish-
ing the same amount of work in a ten-hour day or fifty-eight-
hour week as he did before in eleven hours or in the sixty-hour
week.

The fact appears to be that the stimulus of “piece wage”
has effectually eradicated the lazy employee, while working
hours were already short enough to prevent exhaustion in ordi-
nary cases. The exchange of fifty-eight for sixty hours has
certainly effected but infinitesimal changes in efficiency.


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


491


Compared with the labor of adjoining states, it cannot be
said that Massachusetts labor stands appreciably higher in
skill. Compared with Southern labor the cotton mills’ reports
bring astonishing evidence of operatives, new to the occupa-
tion, working very long hours and manipulating machinery
running at a speed closely approximating that of the mills of
Fall River and Lowell.

The Southern labor is of sound mountain American stock,
while a large proportion of Northern operatives are short-
resident foreigners. This fact is often forgotten in making
comparisons between the two sections. The heterogeneous
character of Northern mill hands appears from the following
extract from the report of the labor committee in 1898 on
reduction of wages.

* In 1895 the number of persons employed in the cotton mills in
Fall River was about 22,398. Of this number 15,823 were foreign
born. Places of birth were as follows.


Canada (English) .

. . 217

Portugal .

• • 5 8 7

Canada (French)

6056

Prince Edward Island .

. . 25

England

• 6073

Scotland . . . .

• • • 344

Germany

64

Sweden

. . 19

Ireland

2130

Other foreign countries

. . 274

New Brunswick

13


Nova Scotia

. . 2i


15.823


We think this is fairly representative of the foreign born at work
in the other cotton centers. 1

Massachusetts labor laws have certainly acted to induce care
in methods and to encourage the introduction of improved
machinery. Beyond exacting a more constant attention to

1 The Twelfth Census, Occupations, pp. 303-307, gives the following figures
for cotton-mill operatives in Massachusetts — Ed


Males

Females

Native white, native parents

Native white, foreign parents

Foreign white . ... ....

i j 9 2 S

8,849

28,092

2,045

10,024

25,843

Aggregate, white .

38,866

37 , 9 12


49 2


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


work, however, they apparently have not increased the produc-
tive efficiency of the normal machine-tending operative. More-
over the figures 0/ manufacturers above presented include all
of these factors which are, indeed, quite inextricable from the
general problem. Conclusions, therefore, remain the same.

Investment

Has this tax imposed by labor legislation, then, operated to
discourage investment in Massachusetts ? It is unequivocally
stated that “vast sums of Massachusetts capital have gone to
other New England states, driven away chiefly by adverse con-
ditions created by legislation .” 1 There has been growth, but
in “unmistakably reduced ratio,” and this is due to “public
knowledge of-restrictions and limits greater here than in any
other state,” constituting “a direct discrimination against capi-
tal, against labor, and against the material development of the
state .” 2 “The result of isolation 3 . . . was visible in the more
rapid development of competing industries in neighboring states,
notably in Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Maine .” 4

“Upon the passage of the McKinley law both foreign and
domestic capital opened new textile industries in the United
States ; none of any importance chose to locate in Massachu-
setts. They went to Connecticut, Rhode Island, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, and New York .” 5

These statements are put in a tone of conviction and authority.
But there is neither proof nor legitimate protest in the misty
realm of “it might have been.”

Problem : Given a sum of floating capital in a world full of
inviting industrial ventures, determine the point at which it
will fall. Did ever an economist solve equations that involved
a like proportion of unknown quantities, or seek to trace a curve

1 Bulletin of Wool Manufacturers , September, 1895, pp. 261-262.

2 Ibid , p 264

8 In 1880 Massachusetts was the only state in which the ten-hour day prevailed.
She is still the only state where short-hour laws are well enforced.

i Ibid , September, 1895, p. 234.

6 Ibid , June, 1891, p. 107


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


493


of so many dimensions? The “vast sums” that might have
settled in Massachusetts it would be vain for us to seek ; nor
should we speculate too freely on what might have become of
“ other New England states ” if Massachusetts labor legisla-
tion had not “driven” that capital to them. Their common-
place growth, as shown in tables of statistics, should allow
Massachusetts to be magnanimous upon this point.

The “ unmistakably reduced ratio ” of growth in Massachu-
setts and the “ more rapid growth of competing industries in
other states” may be verified or disproved by statistics. It is
a textile bulletin that makes the statement ; it is the textile
industry which is most evidently a “ competing industry in
other states.” We may, therefore, very properly take our fig-
ures from its history . 1 . . .

These figures certainly do not indicate that the Massachu-
setts cotton industry was lagging as compared with that of her
neighbors ; 'if not the cotton industry, we may be assured that
no other was. Massachusetts general industrial returns have not
brought consternation to the public. The government annually
contemplates them with self-satisfied pride. As a whole, they
give no indication of a stunted growth. Outside of textile
occupations there is no complaint of injury.

In earlier days Massachusetts, in her great cotton manu-
facturing centers, long held a practical monopoly of the cotton-
goods production of the country To-day, however, her position
is altered ,* another section competes with increasing strength
to force her goods from the market.

The history of the American cotton industry in itself would
give plentiful material for economic and sociological study. It
begins with the introduction of the factory system in Massa-
chusetts ; it has always been a chief subject of tariff regulation

1 Census statistics show that the number of spindles in cotton manufacture
from 1880 to 1890 increased in Massachusetts 3,548,603, or 84 per cent, in New
Hampshire 299,502, or 32 per cent ; in New Jersey i 99 , 5 ° 9 > or 86 per cent; m
New York 158,610, or 28 per cent ; in Maine 145,597, or 21 per cent, in Rhode
Island 125,053, or 7 per cent; in Connecticut 64,198, or 7 per cent; in Vermont
44,147, or 82 per cent ; and decreased in Pennsylvania 118,754, or 28 per cent.
See Twelfth Census, Manufactures, Part III, p. 49 — Ed.


494 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

and labor-law enactments ; it built a large monopoly centered
in a single state, later carrying a heavy burden of state taxation
and furnishing livelihood to thousands ; dependent by its very
character upon special natural and social conditions, it has seen
a stripling wrestler with nature’s bears and lions grow up, now
to offer resistance to its Goliath strength.

We will not here attempt needless review of history. The
growth of Southern competition is most apparent in very recent
years. 1 . . . The following would seem to give an approxima-
tion to the actual facts. In advantages the South leads in cost
of labor, estimated at from 30 to 40 per cent less than that of
Northern labor, or about two cents less per pound of goods.
It holds also an indefinite advantage in total freedom in hours.
Against the Massachusetts mills, limited to a fifty-eight-hour
week, the Southerner may run seventy-two hours at will. The
lighter taxation in the South, in many cases amounting even
to no taxation at all, is another evident advantage. These claims
are very generally conceded. As against the minor advantages
of cheap fuel, abundant water power, nearness of raw material,
and lower cost of building, counterbalancing considerations
favor the North. The North has lower cost for shipping and
marketing of goods, at least 10 per cent lower for machinery;
a saving in rates of interest on better security, and a larger

1 Twelfth Census, Manufactures, Part III, p 28. “ In 1880 there were in that
part of the country i6r establishments only which made reports to the census ,
in 1890 there were only 239, an increase of 78, or 48.4 per cent j and m 1900 there
were 400 separate establishments, an increase from 1890 of 161, or 67 4 per cent.
A scrutiny of the returns by states shows that substantially the whole increase in
the South has been in the four states of North Carolina, South Carolina,
Georgia, and Alabama. The number of establishments m these four states was
1 19 in 1880, 191 in 1890, and 355 in 1900 In the other states of the Southern
group the number was 42 in 1880, 48 in 1890, and 45 in 1900.

“ It would be revealing but a' part of the truth to rest the statement of Southern
industrial expansion upon the number of establishments ; for in the decade from
1880 to 1890 the number of spindles in the four leading Southern states increased
almost twofold, from 422,807 to 1,195,256 ; and the average number of spindles to
a mill increased from 3553 to 6258 In the decade from 1890 to 1900 the progress
has been at an even greater ration, although the basis of calculation is larger, for
the total number of spindles is 3,791,654, the numerical increase 2,596,398, the
percentage of increase 217, and the average number of spindles to a mill has
become 10,651.”


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


495


surplus capital which permits the purchase of cotton when the
market price is lowest. Other advantages of more intangible
nature are also urged, — “economics,” “public protection,”
“experience,” “advanced laws,” “invigorating atmosphere,”
“stimulating environment,” “intelligent workmen, who have
learned to know and protect their rights.” 1

These varied advantages compared in an actual market
price have generally favored the South by showing a balance
of at least one fourth of a cent in the yard. The difference in
actual cost of production is claimed to be two cents per pound,
or 33J- per cent less in the South than at Fall River.

It is to be noted that the character of the advantages claimed
will show Massachusetts a loser as a result of the leveling
influence of time. The claim of higher skill in Northern labor
is already losing its force in the face of speed, and product
shown by Southern machinery. Now ample credit and lower
capital must also soon 'be looked for there. It seems, indeed,
to an unbiased onlooker that “ Southern competition has come
to stay,” and that “it is foolish to ignore or belittle it.” 2
The Massachusetts Labor Bureau laid the blame for the dis ;
tressing conditions of 1897 to 1898 upon the abnormal business
depression, “ consequent ” overproduction, and resulting pres-
sure of competition, and the measure of accuracy of the state-
ment is demonstrated by the return of normal prosperity with
the general revival of business activity throughout the country.
This must not, however, be permitted to cloak the important
bearing upon the present and future situation of the following
facts. In spite of an already thoroughly established industry,
in a center calculated to attract further investments of capital
seeking the occupation, a large competing business has grown
-up. In order thus to compete against the odds in favor of this
well-organized and concentrated industry, it was obliged to
produce the same goods at lower prices. This it has done and
-more. While the Northern mills complained of overproduc-
tion, Southern mills were working day and night to fill their
orders. The market continued perfectly good at the lower
1 Labor Bulletin, January, 1S98, p. 38 (G. A. Chase). 2 Ibid \


496 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

selling prices. In the South the mills manufactured at such
price and with a profit. Cases are adduced in which the North-
ern mills relied upon their Southern branches to make good
their loss. As an example, the Massachusetts Mills of Lowell
have such a branch in Georgia. They went there in order to
save their trade with China when they found it impossible to
continue the competition from Massachusetts because the
Southern mills were underselling them in the New York mar-
ket. Built in 1895, this mill has been “ unable to keep up with
orders” and has “made a profit from the start.” Mr. South-
worth continues : “ We are able to sell at a profit goods made
in that mill which we could not sell at all if they were produced
in Lowell, owing to the difference in cost. Operations in the
South have been so successful that we are now considering
the increase of our plant there.” The Spartanburg Mills tell
the same tale. They had languished long at Newburyport, but
they have built two new mills out of their Southern profits.
The Arkwright Club, reporting upon its investigations concern-
ing this Southern competition, stated its belief in the “ hope-
lessness” of continuing so one-sided a struggle as that in
coarse-grade cottons.

As yet Southern mills have not attempted to make the finer
grades. There seems no adequate reason why they should not
in time, but advantages would at first weigh less strongly on
their side. There is, therefore, prospect that the cotton indus-
try of Massachusetts will tend to develop upon these lines. “ It
will abandon certain kinds of goods which cannot be profitably
made ; it will extend the output of others and cheapen pro-
duction by improvements in machinery and processes ; the
industry in each section will take the form to which it is best
adapted.” 1 In this conclusion the Bulletin appears to recog-
nize the fact of unproductive conditions in branches of the
Massachusetts cotton industry.

Natural conditions weigh against this occupation in Massa-
chusetts *, a stronger force than state legislation is determining
its future. Years since, Massachusetts lost her iron works ;

1 Labor Bulletin, January, 1898, p. 42.


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


497

this was not on account of labor legislation. Nor can we now
believe that the repeal even of every labor law would perma-
nently alter the present situation.

Given, however, stich weight of adverse conditions ; given
laws which, as we have seen, impose an appreciable tax, when
every least saving counts ; we are driven to conclude that this
legislation has tended to hasten the departure of the industry
of producing the heavier grades of cottons from the state.


Effect on Wages

. . . Approached without prejudice, the problem of ascer-
taining the rise or fall of wages due to restrictive labor legisla-
tion appears at first simple, but so intimately do such variations
depend upon other economic forces that almost endless diffi-
culties arise in the process of elimination. Industrial statistics
show a constant advance in labor earnings, with little reference
to the dates of labor laws ; the continual introduction of refine-
ments in machinery has had an overpowering influence upon
this progress; concessions to the demands of trade unions have
contributed a large but indefinite share, while fluctuations in
business prosperity which cause temporary changes in rates
further complicate the problem . 1 In cases where special ad-
vances have appeared more local reasons are always forthcom-
ing as sufficient causes.

1 Changes m Wages, 1880, February to July , 1904. — Textiles,

February, 1880, advance of 10 per cent.

February, 18*84, reduc^>n of 5 to 8 per cent

February, 1885, furth^ reduction of about 6 per cent.

March, 1886, advance to former list

April, 1891, advance of 4 per cent to mule spinners only.

July, 1892, advance of 3 per cent to make weekly earnings under fifty-
eight-hour law same as before.

September, 1893, reduction of 7 to 10 per cent.

August, 1895, advance of 5 to 7 per cent.

January, 1898, reduction averaging 8 per cent

April, 1899, restoration to January, 1898, wages.

December, 1899, wages advanced 10 per cent

March, 1902, advance of 10 per cent in Fall River and New Bedford.

July, 1904, reduction of 12% per cent in Fall River.


493 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

An illustration will perhaps make the situation more intel-
ligible. Here, for example, is a case where the rise in wages
was exclusively due to new machinery. A number of old Bige-
low carpet looms were replaced by new looms of similar gen-
eral construction, but running at twice the speed and therefore
weaving twice as many yards of goods per day. The output in
yards being 'doubled, the rate of piece wages was cut about 2 5
per cent, leaving an increase in day wages of about 2 5 per cent.
In this instance the rise in wages was perhaps unusual, owing
to the length of time that the old machines had been in use ;
it serves, however, to indicate the importance of the influence
which in hundreds of less evident instances should nevertheless
be credited to machinery. Speed is, of course, only one of the
many mechanical improvements which have increased the work-
ing capacity of labor and accomplished a saving in the cost of
production, which redounds to the benefit of both employer and
operative as illustrated above. Indeed, practical examples under
this head might be multiplied ad infinitum .

Again, it hardly needs argument to convince an American
public of the strength with which organized labor pushes its
interests in the industrial world. So costly are the large strikes
to all concerned that no manufacturer will ignore, until the point
of outbreak, symptoms of discontent among his operatives, if
business conditions warrant a more conciliatory course. Nor are
the labor unions slow to recognize and take advantage of sea-
sons of prosperity when their demands are likely to be heeded.
All employers appreciate the steady pressure of this force, and
it is certainly unfortunate that we ha^e as yet no means which
can even approximately measure it. This sensitive wage barom-
eter responds to the slightest changes in business atmosphere ;
a disturbance of war or rumor of war at hand or in the remote
corners of the earth, the surge of a national election, the year's
agricultural crop, or increasing markets, — all are registered in
some degree in corresponding fluctuations of the wage column.

In such an entanglement of immediate causes, a study of
statistics which concern the resultant alone could avail little
to enlighten us, and would certainly lead through a wearisome


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


499


way. Failing figures, the question was religiously put to em-
ployers, labor leaders, and government officials, that at least
some statement of a general opinion might be entered here.
But this also was a vain hope.

Employers said in substance: We have never attempted to
figure it out. We have an ample labor market and pay a stated
day or, more generally, a piece wage. While there is a steady
market this remains the same; but when the demand increases,
or gives prospect of increase, or can be tempted even by slightly
decreased prices, we put in new machines of greater capacity
in proportion to the labor attending ; we cut piece wages in
less proportion than the machine increases labor capacity, and
consequently wages rise. If our operatives grow restless, or
threaten to strike for higher wages, if business conditions allow,
we advance the day rate or piece rate slightly. We have never
knowingly given more wages because of reduced hours or other
labor restriction ; we have no reason to believe that legislation
has had an appreciable effect.

Labor leaders said: We are not scholars or economists to
offer a theory, nor can we give you any explanation of the fact ;
but there the fact stands. Every shortening of the hours of
labor has been attended with an advance in wages. That is
enough for us to know to keep us working toward more of the
same thing.

Inspectors said: We cannot judge at all.

Officers of the Labor Bureau said : Statistics are not yet com-
plete enough to justify deductions. We can only say that in
general real wages are rising.

Discussion of this wage question centers in the main about
restriction of hours as the effective cause.

In contrast with the attitude of the labor leaders, we have
seen the constant voluntary evasion of the ten-hour law by
employees. 1 In 1887 the inspectors made note: “ Discontent
with the ten-hour law is not found among mill owners only, but
also among workers who earn less wages.” 2

1 Massachusetts Police Report, Inspection, 1887, p. 20.

2 Ibid., pp. 14, 15.


5 °°


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


We must conclude, as did the Hon. Amasa Walker, more than
thirty years ago, that “ there is no sufficient evidence that wages
have risen in consequence of, or contemporaneously with, the
reduction of hours of labor ” 1 or the enactment of other meas-
ures of labor legislation.


Employment

For the sake of argument we may allow, then, that shortened
hours of labor do not appear to have acted to increase the wage
of the individual worker; nevertheless has not this been the result
to workers as a class through increase of numbers ? Has not
this restrictive legislation increased employment ? The argu-
ment on one side is that under shorter hours, in order to keep
up the product, more labor must be employed. (Here it may
be noted parenthetically that this statement ignores the pre-
vious claim that short hours are already compensated by greater
efficiency of the original company of workers; nor does it
count the extra wage payments as an increasing cost of produc-
tion.) The answer rests upon other grounds. The number of
employees in a given factory is strictly limited by the amount
of machinery there provided for them to tend ; such limit upon
numbers can therefore be raised only by new investment in
like machinery The contrary tendency is claimed, that restric-
tions placed upon labor make the manufacturer seek to dispense
with it as far as possible, new investment in machinery seeking
that of labor-saving value. “ The diversion of labor-taxed capi-
tal into new investments in other states may there increase
employment, but not in Massachusetts.”

Cases present themselves in support of both claims. In the
building trades, clothing industry, and so forth, such increase
of employment has been evident ; in cotton mills and gener-
ally where machinery is expensive there tends to be a decrease
in the proportion of labor. The problem of the unemployed in
Massachusetts seems to be as far from solution as elsewhere ;

1 Report of majority of commissioners on Hours of Labor to the Massachusetts
Legislature, 1867.


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


SOI

certainly shorter hours have not acted to any appreciable extent
to absorb enforced idlers into productive industries. 1

The claim that legislation has driven employees away from
Massachusetts to other states where longer hours prevail is too
groundless to deserve discussion. Labor is to a certain extent
migratory everywhere, but there has been no perceptible
increase of migration from Massachusetts. At a border line a
few discontented operatives may have moved to neighboring
mills, but their number has been insignificant.


Effect upon Woman and Child Labor

We have seen that nearly the whole of this restrictive legis-
lation bears directly upon the labor of women and children.
Has it y then, resulted in decreasing their number in factories ?

Inspectors' reports, from 1878 on, note a continued decrease
in the number of children employed. In 1882 the reduction in
numbers during the previous two years was estimated at 50 per
cent. 2 Prosecution for violation became less frequent, and com-
pliant employers found the exactions of school certificates, em-
ployment tickets, and so forth, such ’continual annoyance that
they preferred to dispense with child labor so far as possible. 3

Although allowance must be made here for improvements in
machinery which have made automatic many processes before
given into the hands of children, and for the public sentiment
which frmvns upon their employment, we are still warranted in
attributing a substantial influence to legislation in the attain-
ment of the above results.

The same does not, however, hold true with respect to
women. The proportion of women employed in Massachusetts
is not appreciably decreasing. Restrictions upon the labor of
women involve far less inconvenience than is imposed by the

1 Brentano, Hours, Wages, and Production, p. 69.

2 Massachusetts Police Report, Inspection, 1882, p 25.

8 The United States Census chronicles a decrease in Massachusetts from 17,445
in 1880 to 12,556 in 1900, or of 20 per cent m the two decades, of children under
sixteen years of age employed in manufacturing industries. — Ed,


502 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

details of child-labor laws. The limitation to short hours is the
only really serious drawback to their employment. The cheap-
ness of their labor, added in some of the more delicate opera-
tions of manufacture to their superior dexterity, is sufficient
largely to counterbalance this disadvantage.

Conclusions Summarized

We may summarize our conclusions as to the economic effects
of Massachusetts labor legislation as follows :

1 . A real and appreciable tax has been put upon the industry
of Massachusetts.

2. This has been a goad, increasing the ordinary incentive
of competition to urge the use of better machinery and more
careful management, and has forced her manufacturers to take
the lead in the introduction of improvements. Neighboring
states have, however, quickly imitated her successful methods.

3. Improvement in machinery, speed, and so forth, involves
somewhat higher work requirements, and to that extent increased
efficiency. The reduction of hours below eleven has been accom-
panied by an offsetting increase of efficiency only in a few cases
of arduous and predominatingly manual labor. Piecework had
already fulfilled its function here.

4 Whereas statistics of manufacture show Massachusetts to
be growing at a normal rate, and with no evidence of injury
from her labor laws, one industry of importance is in an unmis-
takably critical situation. There is reason to believe that the
heavy-grade cotton mill is leaving the state. In this case natural
conditions weighed already against Massachusetts, and legisla-
tive restrictions have been a tax tending to hasten the departure
of the industry to the more favored South.

5. The effect upon wages has been slight and is very difficult
to estimate The influences of improved machinery, of the
demands of labor unions, and of market conditions have been
so great as to overshadow that of legislation. Comparison with
other states compels the conclusion that there is no sufficient
evidence of a tendency in restrictive legislation to raise wages.


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


503

6. We found increased employment in building trades, and so
forth, fully offset by tendencies to save labor by machine work.
Unemployment remains an unsolved problem in Massachusetts.

7. Protective legislation has unquestionably reduced child
labor, both directly by the restriction of such labor, and again
indirectly by the stimulus given to mechanical improvements
which have raised the requirements of attention, and so ’forth,
and made work before given to children automatic.

8. The number of women employed has maintained a con-
stant ratio. The restrictions, chiefly in hours, have been offset
by the cheapness and dexterity of female labor.

9. Among manufacturers the disquieting influence of the con-
stant threat of further protective measures on behalf of labor is
noticeable as an obstacle to business confidence. Bills are each
year brought before the legislature, backed by a political party
of constantly growing strength.

10. Another economic effect of this legislation is the unesti-
mated expense which years of struggle for and against the pas-
sage of these laws has imposed upon both laborer and capitalist.
This must aggregate no inconsiderable sum of money.

Health

Of prime importance is the standard of health in the com-
munity What has Massachusetts labor legislation done for the
health of her workers ?

At the time when the ten-hour bill was eliciting warmest
discussion (1865-1874), a chief argument presented in its favor
was that “the health of female operatives demands it !” So
important was this point made that the government called upon
the Board of Health for a special investigation in 1871. The
report then given upon the “ Health of Minors in Manufac-
tories” contained the following statement : “A comparison of the
death rate of operatives with that of the whole population at the
same ages, for the years i860 to 1865, allowance being made for
war deaths, showed the figures to be * remarkably close.' ” Esti-
mates of absence from work on account of sickness asked for


504 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

from employers varied approximately from zero to 5 per cent,
while many replied that absence from the mills had been too
trifling to record. 1 The result of the investigation convinced
the board that there was very little evidence of special disease
or unhealthiness due to laboring in factories, even in those days
of long hours.

The validity of these deductions has been adversely criticised. 2
But Dr. Derby’s conclusions do not stand entirely alone m their
testimony to the general good health of operatives. The com-
missions of 1865 and 1866 held the same view ; while the opinion
of practitioners among factory hands bore out the testimony.
More general studies made both in the United States and
England further corroborate this opinion on the basis of a wider
experience.

That long hours and lack of open-air exercise often led to
great fatigue it is not attempted to deny, and the community
must recognize that industrial prosperity depends largely upon
keeping its labor energy strong and fresh. If, day after day,
the worker quits the factory in an exhausted condition this
cumulative pressure tends to sap away her vitality, and instead
of developing into a more skilled operative she is likely to
become less efficient at her task. The passage of the ten-hour
law in 1874, however, appears to have put an effectual check to
this danger in Massachusetts. Since then the argument of
extreme fatigue has been abandoned by labor leaders, who seek
to base their claims upon some other ground.

It is noticeable that from the first the health remedy proposed
was shortened hours instead of better ventilation and sanitation
for the workroom, which would have seemed the prior need.
Possibly this was due to the fact, already noticed, that the
working class itself instituted the movement and was hardly in
a position to appreciate the importance of the latter reform, or it
may have been only the easy confusion of argument with object.


1 G. Derby (M. D.), “ Health of Minors m Manufactories,’’ Senate Document,
No. 50, 1871.

2 Charles Cowley, “Argument for Petitioners in Ten-Hour Bill,” before Joint
Special^ ommittee, p. 102 (pamphlet)


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


505


Certainly the construction of old factory- buildings displayed
little forethought or provision for the health or comfort of
employees. Visit to-day the workrooms of an average modern
factory, and then that of an old one, be it ever so carefully
remodeled to the legal requirements. The light, airy room and
cheerfulness of surroundings in the new stand out against the
cramped and gloomy quarters of the old in a contrast that must
convince even the most skeptical of the blessing of this advance.
The worker is confined to the room practically throughout the
day. Under conditions of insufficient ventilation the air of a
factory could not long be expected to retain its freshness, and
to breathe for hours every day such a vitiated atmosphere must
have added greatly to the wearisomeness of the day’s work.
Many processes of production tend in themselves to produce
injurious conditions, but until regulated by law this fact was
generally unheeded both by employer and workman, either
because of indifference to the principles of hygiene or ignorance
of them. To-day, however, stringent and, we may fairly say,
well-enforced laws control such cases.

The system of ventilation to be used must now be submitted, *
with the plans of every new factory, for approval by the chief
of police or the inspector, and those buildings in which it was
originally lacking must be remodeled to the satisfaction of the
inspectors. To-day, also, there is a special legal remedy in cases
where a process which engenders unhealthy conditions is not
properly protected, and the inspector is empowered to order the
use of such form of ventilating mechanism, or contrivance “ not
excessively expensive,” as shall answer the necessity of the
case. In conditions of ventilation, as the Hon. Carroll D.
Wright suggests, the modern factory compares quite favorably
with the modern schoolroom or lecture hall.

Ventilation, cleanliness, and sanitary conditions have certainly
•done as much to check the slow wearing out of life as have safety
provisions to guard against the more sudden disasters of acci-
dent. We cannot but believe that these more healthful and
sunny surroundings have done more than the shortened day to
increase the bodily vigor of the factory girl.


506 trade unionism and labor problems

Among regulations which have contributed to protection of
health the laws concerning child labor must take a prominent
place. . . . But let us not enter into discussion where the facts
are so palpable and so universally admitted. . . .

Standards of Living

What testimony is there that the legislation reviewed has
contributed to raise the standard of living of workers ? The
same answer is given to this question by employer, inspector,
labor leader, and charitable worker. At his work the operative
has become accustomed to cleanliness, air, light, and good order,
and has begun to miss them in the home, if they are lacking
there. Thus the general verdict is that the legal requirements
in regard to sanitation and so forth in factories, which have so
altered the surroundings of workroom life, have at the same
time served perceptibly to encourage like cleanliness and care
taking in the home.

The menace of coming illiterate generations which was not
at all to be scoffed at m 1870 is no longer feared. Thirty
years ago children as young as eight years of age were often
to be found at work in mills and workshops, but to-day a legal
age limit which banishes children under fourteen years from
employment meets with general compliance. The “ factory chil-
dren ” of former times have become the “ school children ” of
to-day. If there are still illiterate minors, they must lay chief
blame to themselves. There is not to-day any lack of opportunity;
lack of appreciation of opportunity is the cause of such illiteracy
as prevails, and is confined almost entirely to the newer foreign
element. The best-devised law and strongest police force would
be obliged to content itself with incomplete achievement here.

Opposition was at first made to the weekly payment of
wages. It could be no advantage to the thrifty, who easily
secure credit and with monthly pay have the advantage of buy-
ing in bulk ; it would be an injury to the weak and dissolute,
substituting four monthly temptations for one. This statement
of opinion, on the part of some employers has not yet received


MASSACHUSETTS LABOR LEGISLATION


507


the support of figures . 1 Intoxication has not increased ; for
superintendents make short work of dismissing such unreliable
service, with most healthfully sobering effect.

Workers themselves claim an advantage in cash payments,
which allow them to trade where they find the best bargains
and not only where they can obtain credit. In Lawrence it
was remarked that rent, food, and so forth, fell in some cases
nearly 20 per cent, and that shops where operatives used to
trade exclusively were forced to cut prices and encounter close
competition . 2 Under the system of monthly payments opera-
tives had also frequently found themselves obliged to ask for
wage advances, a favor generally heavily discounted at the
office, often at the rate of 10 per cent 3 Weekly payments
appear, indeed, to have conduced to home economy on the part
of the workers.

Citizenship

Lastly, has this legislation had any effect upon the develop-
ment of citizenship ? The shorter hours conceded by law to
labor have been little “ misused ” and have caused no “ increase
of laziness.” The solicitude indicated by this objection appears
almost hypocritical in face of the silence which never questions
the propriety of erratic shut-downs at the convenience of
manufacturers.

The argument for shorter hours appears to be strongly
supported here. From the beginning advance towards civiliza-
tion, and in civilization towards higher attainment, has been
conditioned upon leisure time beyond that necessary to the gain-
ing of a livelihood. It is a wide law and it applies throughout.
Leisure is equally a requirement for the advance of our labor-
ing classes to better conditions of living.

Short hours in Massachusetts have contributed their increase
of opportunity which has not been neglected. Not only do we

1 See Inspectors’ Reports This testimony was corroborated in interviews by
several employers who had made previous voluntary experiment.

2 Massachusetts Police Report, Inspection, 1887, p. 59

8 E. Porntt, Factory Legislation m the United States, p 192.


5 o8 trade unionism and labor problems

find libraries and lecture courses offered, but to-day, as never
before, labor flocks to use these and asks always for more of
them. On a half holiday we find many in the public museum
or gallery. Compare these Massachusetts operatives with those
of other states. They stand the acknowledged leaders of their
class in this country, organized, intelligent, progressive.

Perhaps their voice has grown stentorian, but they are ready
and able to argue their point. It is the testimony of the Board of
Arbitration that operatives have shown a knowledge and appre-
ciation of the methods and aims of arbitration, and an intelli-
gent recourse to them, quite equal to that of their employers.
The trade union with its problem of organization and its school
of free discussion has been the chief instrument in this educa-
tion, but its efficiency has depended upon hours of leisure
away from the factory. Experience of social intercourse, of the
necessity of discipline in trade-union organizations, and of the
weight of logic in argument have given workingmen a new
appreciation of their own relation to order, government, and the
community.

Summary

The legal sanitary requirements of cleanliness, light, ven-
tilation, and so forth, in the factory act improve the health and
spirits of workers, and tend to induce the same conditions in
their homes.

Restrictions upon child labor have expelled at least 75
per cent of the original number of working children from em-
ployment, substituted the schoolroom for the factory, and
regulated work for minors in general.

Weekly wage payments appear to have encouraged house-
, hold economy rather than to have fostered dissolute living.

Restrictions upon labor have brought increased social and
educational opportunities within reach of operatives ; have
advanced the interests of good citizenship among them ; have
tended to* raise their standards of living, with important eco-
nomic consequences in broadening the home market.

Sarah Scovill Whittelsey.


XXIII

STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT —
DECISIONS OF COURTS

I. Employment of Men — Fourteenth Amendment 1

The supreme court of Utah had sustained a statute limiting
the employment of workingmen in underground mines and in
smelters to eight hours per day. Holden, having been found
guilty and fined in employing a miner more than eight hours,
alleged before the Supreme Court of the United States that
the Utah statute was repugnant to the Constitution of the
United States in these respects :

It deprives the defendant and all employers and employees of the
right to make contracts in a lawful way and for lawful purposes.

It is class legislation, and not equal or uniform in its provisions.

It deprives the defendant and employers and employees of the
equal protection of the laws, abridges the privileges and immunities
of the defendant as a citizen of the United States, and deprives him
of his property and liberty without due process of law.

m

Justice Brown, after stating the facts, said :

The validity of the statute in question is, however, challenged
upon the ground of an alleged violation of the fourteenth amendment
to the Constitution of the United States, in that it abridges the
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States, deprives
both the employer and the laborer of his property without due t
process of law, and denies to them the equal protection of the laws.
As the three questions of abridging their immunities, depriving them
of their property, and denying them the protection of the laws are so
connected that the authorities upon each are to a greater or less extent
pertinent to the others, they may properly be considered together.

1 United States Supreme Court. Holden v. Hardy , 169 U. S. 366 (1898).

509


510 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Prior to the adoption of the fourteenth amendment there was a
similar provision against deprivation of life, liberty, or property with-
out due process of law incorporated in the fifth amendment ; but as
the first eight amendments to the Constitution were obligatory only
upon Congress, the decisions of this court under this amendment
have but a partial application to the fourteenth amendment, which
operates only upon the action of the several states. The fourteenth
amendment, which was finally adopted July 28, 1868, largely expanded
the power of the Federal courts and Congress, and for the first time
authorized the former to declare invalid all laws and judicial deci-
sions of the states abridging the rights of citizens or denying them
the benefit of due process of law.

This amendment was first called to the attention of this court in
1872, in an attack upon the constitutionality of a law of the state
of Louisiana, passed in 1869, vesting in a slaughterhouse company
therein named the sole and exclusive privilege of conducting and
carrying on a live-stock landing and slaughterhouse business within
certain limits specified in the act, and requiring all animals intended
for sale and slaughter to be landed at their wharves or landing places.
(Slaughterhouse cases, 16 Wall. 36.) While the court in that case
recognized the fact that the primary object of this amendment was
to secure to the colored race, then recently emancipated, the full
enjoyment of their freedom, the further fact that it was not restricted
to that purpose was admitted both in the prevailing and dissenting
opinions, and the validity of the act was sustained as a proper police
regulation for the health and comfort of the people. A majority of
the cases which have since arisen have turned, not upon a denial to
the colored race of rights therein secured to them, but upon alleged
discriminations in matters entirely outside of the political relations
of the parties aggrieved.

These cases may be divided, generally, into two classes * first,
where a state legislature or a state court is alleged to have unjustly
discriminated in favor of or against a particular individual or class
of individuals as distinguished from the rest of the community, or
denied them the benefit of due process of law; second, where the
legislature has changed its general system of jurisprudence by
abolishing what had been previously considered necessary to the
proper administration of justice, or the protection of the individual. . . .

An examination of both these classes of cases under the fourteenth
amendment will demonstrate that, in passing upon the validity of
state legislation under that amendment, this court has not failed to


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 51 1

recognize the fact that the law is to a great extent a progressive
science , that in some of the states methods of procedure which at
the time the Constitution was adopted were deemed essential to
the protection and safety of the people, or to the liberty of the citi-
zen, have been found to be no longer necessary ; that restrictions
which had formerly been laid upon the conduct of individuals, or of
classes of individuals, had proved detrimental to their interests,
while, upon the other hand, certain other classes of persons (particu-
larly those engaged in dangerous or unhealthful employments) have
been found to be in need of additional protection. . . . They are
mentioned only for the purpose of calling attention to the proba-
bility that other changes of no less importance may be made in the
future, and that, while the cardinal principles of justice are immu-
table, the methods by which justice is administered are subject to
constant fluctuation, and that the Constitution of the United States,
which is necessarily and to a large extent indexible and exceed-
ingly difficult of amendment, should not be so construed as to
deprive the states of the power so to amend their laws as to make
them conform to the wishes of the citizens, as they may deem best
for the public welfare, without bringing them into conflict with the
supreme law of the land. Of course, it is impossible to forecast the
character or extent of these changes , but in view of the fact that,
from the day Magna Charta was signed to the present moment,
amendments to the structure of the law have been made with increas-
ing frequency, it is impossible to suppose that they will not con-
tinue, and the law be forced to adapt itself to new conditions of
society, and particularly to the new relations between employers
and employees, as they arise. . . . We do not wish, however, to be
understood as holding that this power is unlimited. While the peo-
ple of each state may doubtless adopt such systems of laws as best
conform to their own traditions and customs, the people of the
entire country have laid down in the Constitution of the United
States certain fundamental principles to which each member of the
Union is bound to accede as a condition of its admission as a state.
Thus the United States are bound to guarantee to each state a
republican form of government, and the tenth section of the first
article contains certain other specified limitations upon the power
of the several states, the object of which was to secure to Congress
paramount authority with respect to matters of universal concern.
In addition, the fourteenth amendment contains a sweeping provision
forbidding the states from abridging the privileges and immunities


512 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of citizens of the United States and denying them the. benefit of
due process or equal protection of the laws. . . . This right of
contract, however, is itself subject to certain limitations which
the state may lawfully impose in the exercise of its police powers.
While this power is inherent in all governments, it has doubtless
been greatly expanded in its application during the past century,
owing to the enormous increase in the number of occupations which
are dangerous or so far detrimental to the health of employees as
to demand special precautions for their well-being and protection,
or the safety of adjacent property. . . .

While this power is necessarily inherent in every form of gov-
ernment, it was, prior to the adoption of the Constitution, but
sparingly used m this country. As we were then almost purely an
agricultural people, the occasion for any special protection of a
particular class did not exist. Certain profitable employments, such
as lotteries and the sale of intoxicating liquors, which were then
considered to be legitimate, have since fallen under the ban of pub-
lic opinion, and are now either altogether prohibited or made sub-
ject to stringent police regulations. The power to do this has been
repeatedly affirmed by this court.

After mentioning several forms of legislation for the protec-
tion of workmen m factories and mines, which have uniformly-
been held to be constitutional, the court continued :

But if it be within the power of a legislature to adopt such means
for the protection of the lives of its citizens, it is difficult to see why
precautions may not also be adopted for the protection of their
health and morals. It is as much for the interest of the state that
the public health should be preserved as that life should be made
secure. . , . Upon the principles above stated we think the act in
question may be sustained as a valid exercise of the police power
of the state. The enactment does not profess to limit the hours of
all workmen, but merely those who are employed in underground
mines, or in the smelting, reduction, or refining of ores or metals.
These employments, when too long pursued, the legislature has
judged to be detrimental to the health of the employees ; and, so
long as there are reasonable grounds for believing that this is so, its
decision on this subject cannot be reviewed by the Federal courts.

While the general experience of mankind may justify us in believ-
ing that men may engage in ordinary employments more than eight


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT


513


hours per day without injury to their health, it does not follow that
labor for the same length of time is innocuous when carried on
beneath the surface of the earth, where the operative is deprived of
fresh air and sunlight, and is frequently subjected to foul atmos-
phere and a very high temperature, or to the influence of noxious
gases generated by the processes of refining or smelting.

We concur m the following observations of the supreme court of
Utah in this connection. “The conditions with respect to health
of laborers m underground mines doubtless differ from those under
which they labor in smelters and other reduction works on the sur-
face. Unquestionably, the atmosphere and other conditions in
mines and reduction works differ. Poisonous gases, dust, arid
impalpable substances arise and float in the air in stamp mills,
smelters, and other works in which ores containing metals, com-
bined with arsenic or other poisonous elements or agencies, are
treated, reduced, and refined, and there can be no doubt that pro-
longed effort, day after day, subject to such conditions and agen-
cies, will produce morbid, noxious, and often deadly effects in the
human system. Some organisms and systems will resist and endure
such conditions and effects longer than others. It may be said that
labor in such conditions must be performed. Granting that, the
period of labor each day should be of a reasonable length. Twelve
hours per day would be less injurious than fourteen, ten than twelve,
and eight than ten. The legislature has named eight. Such a
period was deemed reasonable. . . . The law in question is con-
fined to the protection of that class of people engaged in labor in
underground mines, and in smelters and other works wherein ores
are reduced and refined. This law applies only to the classes sub-
jected by their employment to the peculiar conditions and effects
attending underground mining and work in smelters, and other
works for the reduction and refining of ores. Therefore it is not
necessary to discuss or decide whether the legislature can fix the
hours of labor in other employments. Though reasonable doubts
may exist as to the power of the legislature to pass a law, or as to
whether the law is calculated or adapted to promote the health,
safety, or comfort of the people, or to secure good order or promote
the general welfare, we must resolve them m favor of the right of
that department of government.” (4b Pac. 1105.)

The legislature has also recognized the fact, which the experience
of legislators in many states has corroborated, that the proprietors
, of these establishments and their operatives do not stand upon an


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


5H

equality, and that their interests are to a certain extent conflict-
ing. The former naturally desire to obtain as much labor as pos-
sible from their employees, while the latter are often induced by the
fear of discharge to conform to regulations which their judgment,
fairly exercised, would pronounce to be detrimental to their health
or strength. In other words, the proprietors lay down the rules,
and the laborers are practically constrained to obey them. In such
cases self-interest is often an unsafe guide, and the legislature may
properly interpose its authority.

It may not be improper to suggest in this connection that
although the prosecution in this case was against the employer of
labor, who apparently, under the statute, is the only one liable, his
defense is not so much that his right to contract has been infringed
upon, as that the act works a peculiar hardship to his employees,
whose right to labor as long as they please is alleged to be thereby
violated. The argument would certainly come with better grace
and greater cogency from the latter class. But the fact that both
parties are of full age and competent to contract does not neces-
sarily deprive the state of the power to interfere, where the parties
do not stand upon an equality, or where the public health demands
that one party to the contract shall be protected against himself.
The state still retains an interest m his welfare, however reckless
he may be. The whole is no greater than the sum of all the parts,
and when the individual health, safety, and welfare are sacrificed
or neglected the state must suffer.

We have no disposition to criticise the many authorities which
hold that state statutes restricting the hours of labor are unconsti-
tutional. Indeed, we are not called upon to express an opinion
upon this subject. It is sufficient to say of them that they have no
application to cases where the legislature had adjudged that a lim-
itation is necessary for the preservation of the health of employees,
and there are reasonable grounds for believing that such determina-
tion is supported by the facts. The question m each case is whether
the legislature has adopted the statute in exercise of a reasonable
discretion, or whether its action be a mere excuse for an unjust dis-
crimination, or the oppression or spoliation of a particular class.

Seven years after the case pf Holden v Hardy the Supreme
Court of the United States handed down a decision on the
constitutionality of a New York statute regulating bakeries 1

1 United States Supreme Court Lochner v. New York , 25 Sup. Court Rep. *

539 (1905)*


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 515

Mr Justice Peckham, after making the statement of facts,
delivered the opinion of the court :

The indictment, it will be seen, charges that the plaintiff in error
violated the noth section of article 8, chapter 415, of the Laws of
1897, known as the Labor Law of the State of New York, in that he
wrongfully and unlawfully required and permitted an employee
working for him to work more than sixty hours in one week. . . .
It is not an act merely fixing the number of hours which shall con-
stitute a legal day’s work, but an absolute prohibition upon the
employer’s permitting, under any circumstances, more than ten
hours’ work to be done in his establishment. The employee may
desire to earn the extra money which would arise from his work-
ing more than the prescribed time, but this statute forbids the
employer from permitting the employee to earn it.

The statute necessarily interferes with the right of contract
between the employer and employees concerning the number of
hours in which the latter may labor in the bakery of the employer.
The general right to make a contract m relation to his business is
part of the liberty of the individual protected by the fourteenth
amendment of the Federal Constitution. . . .

This court has recognized the existence and upheld the exercise
of the police powers of the states in many cases which might fairly
be considered as border ones, and it has, in the course of its deter-
mination of questions regarding the asserted invalidity of such stat-
utes on the ground of their violation of the rights secured by the
Federal Constitution, been guided by rules of a very liberal nature,
the application of which has resulted, in numerous instances, in
upholding the validity of state statutes thus assailed. Among the
later cases where the state law has been upheld by this court is that
of Holden v. Hardy , 169 U. S. 366. . . .

It will be observed that even with regard to that class of labor
[underground mines and smelters] the Utah statute provided for
cases of emergency wherein the provisions of the statute would not
apply. The statute now before this court has no emergency clause
in it, and, if the statute is valid, there are no circumstances and no
emergencies under which the slightest violation of the provisions of
the act would be innocent. There is nothing in Holde?i v. Hardy
which covers the case now before us. In every case that comes
before this court, therefore, where legislation of this character is
, concerned and where the protection of the Federal Constitution is
sought, the question necessarily arises, Is this a fair, reasonable,


5 16 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

and appropriate exercise of the police power of the state, or is it an
unreasonable, unnecessary, and arbitrary interference with the right
of the individual to his personal liberty or to enter into those con-
tracts in relation to labor which may seem to him appropriate or
necessary for the support of himself and his family ? Of course, the
liberty of contract relating to labor includes both parties to it. The
one has as much right to purchase as the other to sell labor.

This is not a question of substituting the judgment of the court
for that of the legislature. If the act be within the power of the
state it is valid, although the judgment of the court might be totally
opposed to the enactment of such a law. But the question would
still remain, Is it within the police power of the state ? and that
question must be answered by the court

The question whether this act is valid as a labor law, pure and
simple, may be dismissed in a few words. There is no reasonable
ground for interfering with the liberty of person or the right of free
contract by determining the hours of labor m the occupation of a
baker. There is no contention that bakers as a class are not equal
in intelligence and capacity to men in other trades or manual occu-
pations, or that they are not able to assert their rights and care for
themselves without the protecting arm of the state interfering with
their independence of judgment and of action. They are in no
sense wards of the state. Viewed m the light of a purely labor law,
with no reference whatever to the question of health, we think that
a law like the one before us involves neither the safety, the morals,
nor the welfare of the public, and that the interest of the public is
not in the slightest degree affected by such an act. The law must
be upheld, if at all, as a law pertaining to the health of the individ-
ual engaged in the occupation of a baker. It does not affect any
other portion of the public than those who are engaged in that occu-
pation. Clean and wholesome bread does not depend upon whether
the baker works but ten hours jter day or only sixty hours a week.
The limitation of the hours of labor does not come within the police
power on that ground.

It is a question of which of two powers or rights shall prevail, —
the power of the state to legislate or the right of the individual to
liberty of person and freedom of contract. The mere assertion that
the subject relates, though but in a remote degree, to the public
health does not necessarily render the enactment valid. The act'
must have a more direct relation, as a means to an end, and the end
itself must be appropriate and legitimate, before an act can be held


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT


517


to be valid which interferes with the general right of an individual
to be free in his person and m his power to contract m relation to
his own labor.

This case has caused much diversity of opinion in the state courts.
In the Supreme Court two of the five judges composing the court
dissented from the judgment affirming the validity of the act. In
the Court of Appeals three of the seven judges also dissented from
the judgment upholding the statute. Although found in what is
called a labor law of the state, the Court of Appeals has upheld the
act as one relating to the public health, — in other words, as a health
law. One of the judges of the Court of Appeals, in upholding the
law, stated that in his opinion the regulation in question could not
be sustained unless they were able to say from common knowledge
that working in a bakery and candy factory was an unhealthful
employment. The judge held that while the evidence was not uni-
form, it still led him to the conclusion that the occupation of a
baker or confectioner was unhealthful and tended to result in dis-
eases of the respiratory organs. Three of the judges dissented from
that view, and they thought the occupation of a baker was not to
such an extent unhealthful as to warrant the interference of the
legislature with the liberty of the individual.

We think the limit of the police power has been reached and
passed in this case. There is, ip our judgment, no reasonable founda-
tion for holding this to be necessary or appropriate as a health law
to safeguard the public health or the health of the individuals who
are following the trade of a baker. If this statute be valid, and if,
therefore, a proper case is made out in which to deny the right of
an individual, sui juris , as employer or employee to make contracts
for the labor of the latter under the protection of the provisions of
the Federal Constitution, there would seem to be no limit to which
legislation of this nature might n>ot go. . . . In looking through
statistics regarding all trades and occupations, it may be true that
the trade of a baker does not appear to be as healthful as some
other trades, and is also vastly more healthful than still others. To
the common understanding, the trade of a baker has never been
regarded as an unhealthful one. Very likely physicians would not
recommend the exercise of that or of any other trade as a remedy
for ill health. Some occupations are more healthful than others, but
we think there are none which might not come under the power of
the legislature to supervise and control the hours of working therein,
if the mere fact that the occupation is not absolutely and perfectly


5 1 8 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

healthful is to confer that right upon the legislative department of
the government. It might be safely affirmed that almost all occu-
pations more or less affect the health. There must be more than
the mere fact of the possible existence of some small amount of
unhealthfulness to warrant legislative interference with liberty. It is
unfortunately true that labor, even in any department, may possibly
carry with it the seeds of unhealthfulness. But are we all, on that
account, at the mercy of legislative majorities ? A printer, a tin-
smith, a locksmith, a carpenter, a cabinetmaker, a dry-goods clerk,
a bank’s, a lawyer’s, or a physician’s clerk, or a clerk in almost any
kind of business, would come under the power of the legislature on
this assumption. No trade, no occupation, no mode of earning
one’s living, could escape this all-pervading power, and the acts of
the legislature in limiting the hours of labor in all employments
would be valid, although such limitation might seriously cripple the
ability of the laborer to support himself and his family.

... All that it could properly do has been done by it with regard
to the conduct of bakeries, as provided for in the other sections of the
act above set forth. These several sections provide for the inspec-
tion of the premises where the bakery is carried on, with regard to
furnishing proper wash rooms and water closets apart from the
bake room, also with regard to providing proper drainage, plumb-
ing, and painting ; the sections, in addition, provide for the height
of the ceiling, the cementing or tiling of floors, where necessary in
the opinion of the factory inspector, and for other things of that
nature ; alterations are also provided for, and are to^be made where
necessary in th£ opinion of the inspector m order to comply with
the provisions of the statute. These various sections may be wise
and valid regulations, and they certainly go to the full extent of
providing for the cleanliness and the healthfulness, so far as possible,
of the quarters in which bakeries are to be conducted. Adding to
all these requirements a prohibition to enter into any contract of
labor in a bakery for more than a certain number of hours a week
is, in our judgment, so wholly beside the matter of a proper, rea-
sonable, and fair provision as to run counter to that liberty of per-
son and of free contract provided for in the Federal Constitution.

It is manifest to us that the limitation of the hours of labor as
provided for in this section of the statute under which the indict-
ment was found and the plaintiff in error convicted has no such
direct relation to, and no such substantial effect upon, the health
of the employee as to justify us in regarding the section as really


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 519

a health law. It seems to us that the real object and purpose were
simply to regulate the hours of labor between the master and his
employees (all being men, sui juris ) m a private business not dan-
gerous in any degree to morals or m any real and substantial degree
to the health of the employees. Under such circumstances the free-
dom of master and employee to contract with each other in relation
to their employment, and m defining the same, cannot be prohib-
ited or interfered with without violating the Federal Constitution.

II. Employment of Men — State Constitution 1

This case arose under a statute similar to the one in Utah
limiting the hours of labor in mines and smelters. The chief
justice said :

In the light of these authorities it is clear . first, that the deci-
sion of the Supreme Court of Utah in construing the Utah statute
is not an authority here, for the reason that the decision there was
based entirely upon the mandatory nature of a provision of the
Utah constitution which is not present in our organic act, second,
in affirming the judgment of the Utah court the decision of the
Supreme Court of the United States m the Holden cases is not a
precedent for this court in construing our act, for the reason that
the sole question before the Federal court was whether or not the
Utah act violated the Federal Constitution. If, however, it could
be maintained that this affirmance was in effect a determination
that the Utah law was in harmony with the Utah constitution, the
decision of the Federal court would not be an authority here,
because we have no such constitutional provision.

The extent and meaning of the act in question are not difficult
of ascertainment, though it is not a model of statutory composi-
tion. That it operates as a limitation both upon the employer and
the employee seems clear. It forbids a certain kind of employment.
There can be no employment without the concurring acts of him
who contracts for employment and of him who contracts to be
employed. Both are within the inhibitions of the enactment, and
if it is valid each is liable to the penalty for making the forbidden
contract. The petitioner, therefore, as a laboring man, is prohib-
ited from entering into a contract to work in a smelter more than
eight hours in any one day. If in our constitution there was, as
1 Supreme Court of Colorado. In re Morgan, 26 Colo 415 (1899).


520


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


there seems to be in that of Utah, a specific affirmative provision
enjoining upon the general assembly the enactment of laws to pro-
tect the health of the classes of workmen therein enumerated, it
might be that acts reasonably appropriate to that end would not be
obnoxious to that provision of our constitution forbidding class
legislation. The two provisions should be construed together so as
to harmonize, if that be possible under sound canons of construc-
tion, and the general clause forbidding class legislation might be
regarded as qualified by the special one which authorizes such legis-
lation in respect to the enumerated classes. Article 16 of our con-
stitution is devoted to mining and irrigation, and section 2 directs
that “the general assembly shall provide by law for the proper ven-
tilation of mines, the construction of escapement shafts, and such
other appliances as may be necessary to protect the health and
secure the safety of the workmen therein.” These regulations man-
ifestly embrace only such reasonably necessary mechanical appli-
ances as will secure the end in view, and do not include other kinds
of health regulations. We have no constitutional provision which
authorizes the legislature to single out workingmen in underground
mines and smelters and impose upon them restrictions as to the
number of hours they shall work at these industries, from which
workingmen m all other departments of industry are exempt.

The act is equally obnoxious to the provisions of our bill of rights,
set out in the statement, which guarantee to all persons their natu-
ral and inalienable right to personal liberty, and the right of acquir-
ing, possessing, and protecting property. Liberty means something
more than mere freedom from physical restraint. It includes the
privilege of choosing any lawful occupation for the exercise of one’s
physical and mental faculties which is not injurious to others. The
right to acquire and possess property includes the right to contract
for one’s labor. The latter is essentially a property right. That
this act infringes both the right to enjoy liberty and to acquire and
possess property seems too clear for argument. While not conced-
ing that this limitation is not permissible, counsel for respondent,
as we understand them, recognize the fact (but, if they do not* the
same is only too apparent) that these natural rights are violated by
the provisions of the act. The limitation is claimed to be warranted
on the ground that these and all other constitutional guaranties
must yield to the paramount and sovereign right of the state to
exercise its police power to protect the public health, and to this,
the principal question in this proceeding, we now address ourselves.


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT


521


Starting then with the premise, which is practically admitted to be
true, that this act contravenes the constitutional provisions quoted
in the statement, let us see if, notwithstanding this conflict, it can
be justified as a valid exercise of the police power. . . . While
invoking as a warrant for this act that phase of the police power
extending to the public health, its supporters do not claim that its
real and primary object is to protect the public health, or the health
of that portion of the community in the immediate vicinity or
affected by the operation of smelters. Were the object of the act
to protect the public health, and its provisions reasonably appro-
priate to that end, it might be sustained ; for in such a case even
the constitutional right of contract may be reasonably limited. But
the act before us is not of that character. In selecting a subject
for the exercise of the police power the legislature must keep within
its true scope. The reason for the existence of the power rests upon
the theory that one must so use his own as not to injure others, and
so as not to interfere with or injure the public health, safety, morals,
or general welfare. How can an alleged law that purports to be the
result of an exercise of the police power be such in reality when it
has for its only object, not the protection of others, or the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare, but the welfare of him
whose act is prohibited, when, if committed, it will injure him who
commits it, and him only ? What we mean to decide is that in
a purely private lawful business, in which no special privilege or
license has been granted by the state, and the carrying on of which
is attended by no injury to the general public, it is beyond the
power of the legislature under the guise of the police power to pro-
hibit an adult man who desires to work thereat from working more
than eight hours a day on the ground that working longer may, or
probably will, injure his own health.

The result of our deliberation is that this act is an unwarrantable
interference with, and infringes the right of, both the employer and
employee in making contracts relating to a purely private business
in which no possible injury to the public can result ; that it unjustly
and arbitrarily singles out a class of persons, and imposes upon them
restrictions from which others similarly situated and substantially in
the same condition are exempt ; and that it is not, under our consti-
tution, a valid exercise of the police power of this state, either in the
subject selected or in the reasonableness of the regulation . 1

1 Following this decision the constitution of the state of Colorado was amended
so as to authorize a law similar to that of Utah


522


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


III. Employment of Women 1

By act approved June 17, 1893, the legislature of Illinois
undertook “to regulate the manufacture of clothing, wearing
apparel, and other articles in this state, and to provide for the
appointment of state inspectors to enforce the same, and to
make an appropriation therefor. ,,

Upon the complaint of the factory inspector appointed under
this law a warrant was issued by a justice of the peace of Cook
County against William E. Ritchie for violating section 5 of
the statute in question by employing a certain adult female,
more than eighteen years of age, at work in a factory longer
than eight hours on a certain day in February, 1894. The case
was tried in the criminal court of Cook County, on appeal from
the Judgment of the justice of the peace, and the defendant
was convicted and fined, whereupon the case was brought, on
writ of error, before the Supreme Court of Illinois, which tribu-
nal, on March 14, 1895, reversed the judgment of the criminal
court and decided that section 5 of the act which declares that
“ no female shall be employed m any factory or workshop more
than eight hours in any one day or forty-eight hours in any one
week” is unconstitutional. Judge Magruder said in part:

It is contended by counsel for plaintiff in error that that section
is unconstitutional as imposing unwarranted restrictions upon the
right to contract. On the other hand, it is claimed by counsel for
the people that the section is a sanitary provision and justifiable
as an exercise of the police power of the state. Does the provision
in question restrict the right to contract ? The words “ no female
shall be employed ” import action on the part of two persons. There
must be a person who does the act of employing and a person who
consents to the act of being employed. Webster defines “employ-
ment” as not only “the act of employing” but also “the state *of
being employed.” The prohibition of the statute is therefore two-
fold : first, that no manufacturer or proprietor of a factory or work-
shop shall employ any female therein more than eight hours in one
day; and, second, that no female shall consent to be so employed.
It thus prohibits employer and employee from uniting their minds or
1 Supreme Court of Illinois Ritchie v. People , 155 111 98 (1895)


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT


523


agreeing upon any longer service during one day than eight hours.
In other words, they are prohibited, the one from contracting to
employ, and the other from contracting to be employed, otherwise
than as directed. . . . Section 2 of article 2 of the constitution of
Illinois provides that “ no person shall be deprived of life, liberty,
or property without due process of law.” . . . The privilege of con-
tracting is both a liberty and property right. Liberty includes the
right to acquire property, and that means the right to make and
enforce contracts. . . . The legislature has no right to deprive one
class of persons of privileges allowed to other persons under like
conditions. The man who is forbidden to acquire and enjoy prop-
erty in the same manner in which the rest of the community is per-
mitted to acquire and enjoy it is deprived of liberty in particulars
of primary importance to his pursuit of happiness. If one man is
denied the right to contract as he has hitherto done under the law,
and as others are still allowed "to do by the law, he is deprived of
both liberty and property to the extent to which he is thus deprived
of the right. . . . Women employed by manufacturers are forbidden
by section 5 to make contracts to labor longer than eight hours in
a day, while women employed as saleswomen in stores, or as domes-
tic servants, or as bookkeepers, or stenographers, or typewriters, or
in laundries, or other occupations not embraced under the head of
manufacturing are at liberty to contract for as many hours of labor
in a day as they choose. The manner in which the section thus
discriminates against one class of employers and employees and in
favor of all others places it in opposition to the constitutional guar-
anties hereinbefore discussed, and so renders it invalid.

But aside from its partial and discriminating character, this enact-
ment is a purely arbitrary restriction upon the fundamental rights
of the citizen to control his or her own time and faculties. It
substitutes the judgment of the legislature for the judgment of
the employer and employee in a matter about which they are com-
petent to agree with each other. It assumes to dictate to what
extent the capacity to labor may be exercised by the employee, and
takes away the right of private judgment as to the amount and
duration of the labor to be put forth in a specified period. Where
the legislature thus undertakes to impose an unreasonable and
unnecessary burden upon any one citizen or class of citizens it
transcends the authority intrusted to it by the constitution, even
though it imposes the same burden upon all other citizens or classes
of citizens. General laws may be as tyrannical as partial laws. . . .


524


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


But it is claimed on behalf of defendant in error that this section
can be sustained as an exercise of the police power of the state.
The police power of the state is that power which enables it to pro-
mote the health, comfort, safety, and welfare of society. It is very
broad and far reaching, but is not without its limitations. Legisla-
tive acts passed in pursuance of it must not be m conflict with the
constitution, and must have some relation to the ends sought to be
accomplished ; that is to say, to the comfort, welfare, or safety of
society. . . . There is nothing in the title of the act of 1893 to
indicate that it is a sanitary measure. The first three sections con-
tain provisions for keeping workshops in a cleanly state, and for
inspection to ascertain whether they are so kept. But there is
nothing m the nature of the employment contemplated by the act
which is m itself unhealthful or unlawful or injurious to the public
morals or welfare. ... It is not the nature of the things done, but
the sex of the persons doing them, which is made the basis of the
claim that the act is a measure for the promotion of the public
health. It is sought to sustain the act as an exercise of the police
power upon the alleged ground that it is designed to protect woman
on account of her sex and physique. It will not be denied that
woman is entitled to the same rights, under the constitution, to
make contracts with reference to her labor as are secured thereby
to men. . . . Inasmuch as sex is no bar, under the constitution
and law, to the endowment of woman with the fundamental and
inalienable rights of liberty and property, which include the right
to make her own contracts, the mere fact of sex will not justify the
legislature in putting forth the police power of the state for the
purpose of limiting her exercise of those rights, unless the courts
are able to see that there is some fair, just, and reasonable connec-
tion between such limitation and the public health, safety, or wel-
fare proposed to be secured by it.

In another case illustrating this topic arising in the stat^of
Nebraska, 1 William Wenham was convicted of a violation of
an act of the legislature which restricts the hours of employ-
ment of females in certain industries, and provides for the
enforcement of its requirements. It was charged that Wen-
ham in operating a laundry had employed one Lizzie Falconer
for fourteen hours per day and eighty-four hours per week.


1 Supreme Court of Nebraska. IVenkam v. State > 65 Neb. 394 (1902).


STATE REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT


525


Section 1 of the law referred to provides “that no female
shall be employed in any manufacturing, mechanical, or mer-
cantile establishment, hotel, or restaurant in this state more
than sixty hours during any one week, and that ten hours shall
constitute a day’s labor. . . ” Before the Supreme Court of
the state the law was upheld and the conviction affirmed.
Judge Barnes said :

In the case of Com v. Hamilton Mfg. Co., 120 Mass. 383, it was
held that a statute prohibiting the employment of all persons under
the age of eighteen and all women from laboring in any manufactur-
ing establishment more than sixty hours per week violates no con-
tract of the commonwealth implied in the granting of a charter to
a manufacturing company nor any right reserved under the con-
stitution to any individual citizen, and may be maintained as a
health or police regulation. The act in question was taken from,
and is practically an enactment of, the statutes of Massachusetts ;
and we may fairly presume that our legislature in adopting this act
also adopted the law relating to it, as announced by the supreme
judicial tribunal of that state. In many of the states laws have
been enacted limiting the hours during which women and chil-
dren shall be employed in factories. While in some of these states
the constitutionality of these laws, as applied to women, has been
doubted, yet in most of them they have been upheld. . . .

The members of the legislature come from no particular class.
They are elected from every portion of the state, and come from
every avocation and from all the walks of life. They have observed
the conditions with which they are surrounded, and know from
experience what laws are necessary to be enacted for the welfare of
the communities in which they reside. They determined that the
law in question was necessary for the public good, and the protec-
tion of the health and well-being of women engaged in labor in the
establishments mentioned in the act. That question was one exclu-
sively within their power and jurisdiction, and their action should
not be -interfered with by the courts unless their power has been
improperly or oppressively exercised. Women and children have
always, to a certain extent, been wards of the state. Women in
recent years have been partly emancipated from their common-law
disabilities. They now have a limited right to contract. They may
own property, real and personal, in their own right, and may engage
in business on their own account. But they have no voice in the


526 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

enactment of the laws by which they are governed, and can take
no part in municipal affairs. They are unable, by reason of their
physical limitations, to endure the same hours of exhaustive labor
as may be endured by adult males. Certain kinds of work which
may be performed by men without injury to their health would
wreck the constitutions and destroy the health of women, and ren-
der them incapable of bearing their share of the burdens of the
family and the home. The state must be accorded the right to
guard and protect women as a class against such a condition , and
the law in question to that extent conserves the public health and
welfare. On the question of the right to contract, we may well
declare a law unconstitutional which interferes with or abridges the
right of adult males to contract with each other in any of the busi-
ness affairs or vocations of life. The employer and the laborer are
practically on an equal footing, but these observations do not apply
to women and children. Of the many vocations in this country
comparatively few are open to women. Their field of remunerative
labor is restricted. Competition for places therein is necessarily
great. The desire for place, and in many instances the necessity of
obtaining employment, would subject them to hardships and exac-
tions which they would not otherwise endure. The employer who
seeks to obtain the most hours of labor for the least wages has such
an advantage over them that the wisdom of the law for their pro-
tection cannot well be questioned. No doubt, these considerations
were the moving cause for the passage of the law in question. If
the act is the result of a fair, reasonable exercise of police power,
it should be upheld. By the general police power of the state per-
sons and property are subjected to many restraints and burdens in
order to secure the general comfort, health, and prosperity of the
state. The perfect right of the legislature to so exercise such power
has never been questioned where it was reasonably exercised. Wc
are unable to find a case where the courts have laid down any rigid
rule for the exercise of police power. There is little reason, uncjp*
our system of government, for placing a narrow interpretation on
this power, or restricting its scope so as to hamper the legislature
in dealing with the varying necessities of society and new circum-
stances as they arise, calling for legislative intervention in the pub-
lic interest. The moment the police power is destroyed or curbed
by fixed or rigid rules a danger will be introduced into our system
which would be far greater than the results arising from an occa-
sional mistake by legislative bodies in exercising such power.


XXIV


THE BENEFIT SYSTEM OF THE CIGAR
MAKERS’ UNION

The Cigar Makers’ International Union is, with respect to
the variety and the value of its benefits, the model beneficiary
organization of the United States. Though the system of the
Cigar Makers is not yet as complete as is maintained by many
English unions, it already includes strike, sick, death, disability,
traveling, and out-of-work benefits, while a vigorous agitation is
in progress for the introduction of the superannuation benefit.
This union is deliberately based upon the principle of high dues
and an elaborate beneficial system. Each of its 41,536 mem-
bers contributes $3 initiation fee and 30 cents per week in
dues, while from 1879 to 1904, inclusive, the organization has
paid out about $6,400,000 in benefits of all kinds. Its growth
in membership has been steady and permanent, and has not
been characterized either by sudden increases or by sudden
decreases. As compared with other American labor organiza-
tions the Cigar Makers’ International Union is remarkable for
its comparatively slow but certain growth and for the few
fluctuations in its prosperity.

The first national union of cigar makers was effected in
1864, and in 1867 this organization adopted the name Cigar
Makers’ International Union of America. It was not, however,
until the convention at Buffalo in 1879 that the beneficial sys-
tem as now existing was begun by the introduction of loans
for the support of traveling members. At the same time the
strike benefit was reorganized and new and better regulations
adopted. The effect upon the membership of the union was
immediate. In 1865 there were 984 members, and in 1869,

527


528 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

5800, falling to 3771 in 1873 and to 1016 in 1877. In 1879
the membership was 2729, 1 but by 1880 it had risen to 4440.

At the Chicago convention in 1880 sick and death benefits
were added, and in 1881 the membership jumped to 14,604,
falling, however, in 1882 to 11,430 A previous attempt had
been made, as early as 1873, to introduce a death benefit which
was to be supported by an assessment of 10 cents per mem-
ber to be levied after each death, but the members refused
to pay the assessment and the plan was a failure. The death
benefit as adopted in 1880 amounted simply to the payment of
$40 toward defraying funeral expenses, but in 1887 there was
added to this funeral benefit a plan of insurance for all mem-
bers of five years’ standing, the amount paid being from $200
to $550 according to length of membership. In 1887, more-
over, a wife’s funeral benefit was established, and in 1893 this
was extended to the dependent mothers of single members.
Another change made in 1887 was a provision to the effect
that a member of three years’ standing, on drawing a retiring
card, could retain his title to sick and death benefits by the
payment of 10 cents per week and the special semiannual tax
of 50 cents. Meanwhile the membership, which had risen to
13,214 in 1883, falling again to 11,871 in 1884 and attaining
12,000 in 1885, rose to 24,672 in 1886, and never again sank
below 17,000.

Very soon after the introduction of the traveling, sick, and
death benefits an agitation began in favor of some system of
out-of-work or unemployed benefit. This was, of course, the
greatest departure yet attempted from the established practice
of labor organizations in this country. Sick and death bene-
fits are comparatively common, but the Cigar Makers’ Inter-
national Union was a pioneer among*American labor organiza-
tions in the field of out-of-work benefits. The arguments
advanced in favor of the system were, not only that it would


1 The figures before 1879 are from the Report of the Industrial Commission,
Vol. XVII, p. 280, while those for 1879 and succeeding years are taken from the
Cigar Makers' Official Journal , May, 1904. From 1879 t0 1881, inclusive, these two
sets of figures do not correspond.


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS' UNION 529


relieve the distress of unemployed members, but that it would
further the main object of the union, the maintenance and
improvement of trade conditions. As early as the 1885 con-
vention President Strasser urged that the success of strikes
depended upon the attitude of the unemployed, and at the 1887
convention he said, referring to the out-of-work benefit:

By supporting our members in such emergency, they will have no
excuse for working below the regular scale; nor will they have an
excuse for accepting conditions of employment which are injurious
to the interests of their fellow-woikmen. It will instill into them more
manhood and independence 1 6 resist encroachments of employers in
times of depression. It will be the strongest feature to maintain the
rate of wages which has been secured during the favorable seasons
of trade.

The English unions, too, were cited to show the steady
growth of organizations having strong beneficial systems, and
the fluctuations of the American labor movement as compared
with the English were attributed to the lack of benefits.

On the other hand, the opponents of the out-of-work benefit
urged that, while *the sick and death payments bore certain
approximate proportions to the membership of the union, the
number of unemployed members was dependent solely upon
trade conditions, and in case of industrial depression might
increase so rapidly as to swamp the union. It was also asserted
that the 20 cents per week paid in dues at that time was
already high enough to keep out of the union seven eighths of
the cigar makers of the country, and that the dues ought to be
lowered rather than raised the additional 10 cents requisite to
maintain this benefit. Apprehension was expressed, moreover,
that an out-of-work benefit would be the source of a great deal
of abuse and annoyance. #

In 1885 the committee on officers* reports failed to agree
to the president’s recommendation for an out-of-work benefit,
and in 1887, in spite of the support of both the president and
the committee, the plan was defeated in the convention after a
long discussion. In 1889, however, the out-of-work benefit was
adopted, and very soon the misgivings in regard to its practical


530 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

application were dispelled. Several changes have been made
m the details of administration, but the principle remains as
originally adopted.

The benefits paid in 1905 by the Cigar Makers’ International
Union of America were as follows: (1) strike benefit, paid also
in case of lockout or victimization ; (2) sick benefit, payable in
case of sickness or disablement; (3) death benefit, including
the insurance payment as well as funeral benefit, and also
the wife’s and mother’s funeral benefit; (4) disability benefit;
(5) traveling benefit, or loans to traveling members ; and (6)
out-of-work or unemployed benefit. No member is entitled to
receive more than one of the weekly benefits, such as strike,
sick, and out-of-work benefits, at the same time. The Cigar
Makers Official Journal for April, 1905, publishes a table
showing the amounts paid for each of the benefits, and also
the cash balance, by years. In 1904 there were paid out : as
strike benefit, $32,88888; as sick benefit, $163,226.18; as
death benefit, $151,752.93; as traveling benefit, $58,728.71;
and as out-of-work benefit, $29,872.50.

Members who have been in good standing for at least three
months are entitled to a strike benefit, provided the strike is
approved by the proper authorities of the International Union,
of $5 per week for the first sixteen weeks, and $3 per week
until the strike or lockout shall have terminated. The assist-
ance in case of a lockout is the same as in case of a strike,
and any member who is discharged by his employer on account
of having carried out the orders of his union is entitled to the
same payments as if he were out on strike. If a striker secures
work and is then discharged within fourteen days, he remains
entitled to benefit as a striker; but if he retains this employ-
ment for over fourteen days and fl then discharged, he is
entitled to no further strike payments.

Members who have been such continuously for one year or
more are entitled to a benefit of $5 per week in case they
become sick or disabled in such manner as to render them
unable to work. This sickness or inability, however, must have
lasted for at least one week, or seven days, “and shall not


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 531


have been caused by intemperance, debauchery, or other
immoral conduct.” This latter provision is found in the same
or similar language in practically every union which pays a
sick benefit. The Cigar Makers also provide that no member
leaving the United States or the Dominion of Canada shall
be entitled to any benefit during his absence. Moreover, the
constitution states that “ female members . . . shall not be
entitled to any sick benefit three weeks before and five weeks
after confinement.” Each member is entitled to receive sick
benefit for a period of thirteen weeks in each year, commencing
from the date of the first report made to an officer of the union.
Members of less than one year's standing are not, of course,
entitled to sick benefit, but there is a constitutional provision
that they shall not be suspended for nonpayment of dues,
during sickness or disability, accompanied by the condition
that they shall upon resuming work pay 10 per cent of their
wages towards making up the arrears until the constitutional
limit is reached. This does not, however, excuse such members
from paying their percentages on loans, fines, or other indebted-
ness during the time of sickness. A member taken sick while
traveling has only to deposit his card with the union under
whose jurisdiction he is at the time in order to receive his
benefit from the International Union, provided he has not left
the United States or Canada.

There are a number of provisions designed to guard the sick
benefit from fraud. In the first place, it is provided that there
shall be visiting committees of not less than three officers or
members, who shall visit sick persons at least once a week, no two
of the committee visiting a member at the same time. Mem-
bers are obliged to furnish the financial secretary of their local
with their correct address and to notify him immediately of all
changes. For failure to do this or to perform their duties as
visiting committee they are fined 50 cents. Members holding
retiring cards but entitled to sick benefits, as well as active
members, may be required to serve on these visiting com-
mittees. If the visiting committee is refused admittance to the
house or is not allowed to see the sick member, the union is


532 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

not obliged to pay the weekly allowance, but the committee is
excused from visiting members having contagious diseases.
When the committee has made its report, if there is no doubt
of the sickness or inability of the member claiming benefits,
the executive board of the union is empowered to draw on the
treasurer for the sick benefit, and to report the fact in writing at
the next regular meeting of the union. But if there is any doubt,
the executive board may take the opinion of a physician ap-
pointed by the union Physicians’ certificates, however, are not
accepted unless ordered by the union or the visiting committee.
Uniform cards for receipts for sick benefits and also for physi-
cians’ certificates are issued by the international president.
There is a fine of $25 for officers granting sick benefit other-
wise than as specified in the rules.

The Cigar Makers’ International Union pays, on the decease
of a member who has been such for two years, a death benefit
of $50. This is designed to assist in the payment of funeral
or cremation expenses, and is paid to the nearest of kin or
whoever has the burial in charge. It is, of course, simply a
funeral benefit. For members of five years’ standing, however,
the death benefit is $200, for those of ten years’ standing $350,
and for those of fifteen years’ standing $550. Here the idea of
provision for the family through insurance is uppermost, and
this benefit has been since 1893 payable to the person desig-
nated by the member on joining the union. This beneficiary
may be changed at any time, and if a member fails to designate
any one to receive the money it is to be paid tadifSTKem^ law.
If, however, he designates no one, and no claim is tH8e by
the heirs within one year after the death of the member, the
beneficiary money reverts to the union. Before the benefit is
paid, moreover, all international and local indebtedness of the
deceased member is deducted. No sick or death benefits are
granted if the performance of military duties is the cause of
sickness or death. In case there is* no one to take charge of
the funeral of a deceased member, that duty devolves upon the
president of the local union, who is authorized to expend upon
the burial the $50 funeral benefit of a member of two years’


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 533

standing, or, in case the member is entitled to $200 or more
death benefit, a sum not to exceed $100. Any member of
fifteen years’ standing who has become incapable of working at
the trade is allowed to retain his claim on the death benefit by
the payment of 10 cents per month, payable quarterly.

A married member of two years’ standing is entitled, on the
death of his wife, to a funeral benefit of $40, provided that
the wife was not engaged in the cigar-making industry or not
entitled, as a member of the International Union, to the death
benefits as previously described. An unmarried member, more-
over, is entitled to the same benefit in case of the death of
a widowed mother who was dependent solely upon him for
support. No member, however, may receive this benefit more
than once, and it is not payable to members who have drawn
retiring cards by reason of quitting the trade, even though by
the payment of 20 cents per week and all assessments they may
still be entitled to receive ordinary sick and death benefits.

Obviously, the death benefit, as compared with the other
benefits, offers little opportunity for fraud. Nevertheless, there
are cert^n rules designed to prevent irregularities. The secre-
tary of the local union, for instance, must notify the International
president of the death of any member entitled to more than $50
benefit, giving the full record of membership of the deceased as
shown in the books of the local, and the International president
must compare this with the record of the International office
before the local is permitted to pay the benefit. “Any local
union violating this section shall be held liable for any amount
they may have paid over and above the amount the International
records show said deceased member to be entitled to.” The
International president publishes in the Cigar Makers ’ Official
Journal the names, ages, and causes of death of the members
on whose account the death benefit has been paid.

The disability benefit is a substitute for the death benefit.
That is, if a member has “ through total blindness or the loss
of both hands become permanently incapacitated for perform-
ing any kind of labor,” the International executive board, at
the request of the local union, and after a conclusive and


534


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


satisfactory investigation, may cause the payment direct to the
disabled person of whatever death benefit he is entitled to at
the date of application. Within ten days after receiving this
disability benefit the member is issued a final withdrawal cer-
tificate, and he is thereafter subject to no further benefits by
reason of sickness or death.

The system of loans to traveling members is the oldest of
the Cigar Makers’ benefits, but the payments are on a different
basis from the others, owing to the fact that repayment is
expected. The union constitutes itself a loan agency for the
benefit of its members, carefully guarding itself, however, from
the possibility of loss. Any member in good standing for one
year, who is unable to obtain employment and wishes to try
another location, is entitled to a loan sufficient for transporta-
tion, by the cheapest route, to the nearest union in any direc-
tion desired, and also to a loan of SO cents, excluding the fare.
The loans, however, shall not exceed in the aggregate $20 ,
and no more than $ 8 shall be loaned to a member at any
one time. No member may receive a second loan until the
first one is paid, and the amount paid is credited in jthe order
that the loans were drawn. When a member has traveled the
required number of miles, as registered in his loan book, he is
entitled to a loan from any other union. But if a member
loses or destroys his loan book, he is not entitled to receive
any benefits or a duplicate loan book until after two months,
during which time the loss is published in the Official Journal \
The International Union is able to trace members, whether
traveling on loans or not, from union to union, and thus to
avoid duplication of benefit payments, by means of the provi-
sion of the constitution that every traveling member shall carry
a traveling card showing his standing, the number of weeks
during which he has received sick and out-of-work benefits, and
so forth. Any member leaving the jurisdiction of a local union
and failing to provide himself with such a card is fined 50 cents,
and any member failing to deposit his card with the nearest
union after moving is fined 10 cents per day for the first thirty
days, and is then expelled from the union.


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 535


The officer intrusted with the duty of granting loans is the
financial secretary of the local union, and he is governed by
strict rules in the performance of this duty. Blanks to be
filled out are furnished by the International Union, and finan-
cial secretaries are required to report monthly to the Inter-
national president all loans granted and collected on cards,
with the names of the members concerned and their numbers.
Careful records are kept at the office of the International
Union, and every six months the names of persons delinquent
ninety days in the ‘payment of loans are published in a supple-
ment to the Official Journal . The following provisions in regard
to the issuing of loans appear in the constitution of the Inter-
national Union :

The financial secretary in issuing duplicate loan cards shall enter
in red ink the balance due on the member’s old card, and punch out
the amount due. No indorsement of loans paid in a member’s loan
book shall be considered valid by financial secretaries unless stamped
with financial secretary’s seal. Members who have grievances caused
by the foregoing may by application to the International president
have their accounts corrected according to International accounts.
Secretaries must use financial secretary’s seal as a receipt for loans
paid, stamped over their signatures in member’s loan cards. Failing
herein they shall be fined $5, such fines to be remitted to the Inter-
national Union.

Moreover, any financial secretary granting a loan larger than
the amount specified is subject to a fine of not less than the
amount which he granted over $20, which is obtained by col-
lecting 25 per cent of his wages Members, too, who attempt to
alter or erase any figure or change any sum in their loan books
are fined $25 for the first offense, and are expelled from the
union and their names published in the Official Journal for the
second offense. If such a person should again desire to become
a member, he is obliged to pay an initiation fee of at least
$25, together with all loans, fines, and assessments previously
incurred, and to pay 25 per cent of his weekly earnings until
his indebtedness is canceled. A member accepting an illegal
loan is fined $5 for each offense.


536 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

The repayment of the loans is provided for carefully and in
detail. Every shop must have a collector, who is charged with
the duty of collecting all fines, assessments, dues, and loans,
and paying over the sums received to the secretary of the
union. The shop collector may be elected by the members
in the shop, but if these fail to do so he is appointed by the
president of the local union. If but one union man is employed,
he is the collector. In a town where there is more than one
shop the members elect also a town collector, who receives the
money from the various shop collectors and turns it over within
forty-eight hours to the secretary of the union. The loans are
repaid at the rate of io per cent of the weekly earnings, but
if a member goes to work the latter part of the week he is
allowed until Saturday of the following week, when he is
obliged to pay io per cent of his aggregate earnings during
the entire time. If a member refuses or neglects to pay to the
shop collector his percentage on loans received from the union,
he is suspended, forfeits all previous rights and benefits, and
can be reinstated only upon the payment of $3, being con-
sidered a new member except for the fact that he is still liable
for the indebtedness previously incurred. The shop collector
reports such refusal or neglect to the financial secretary, and is
liable to a fine of $1 if he fails to do so. The financial secre-
tary and the shop collector are both responsible under penalty
for the enforcement of every detail of this system of repayment.

The traveling and sick benefits are paid to members of 0 $e
year’s standing, but the out-of-work benefit, like the death bene-
fit, is paid only to members who have paid weekly dues for
a period of two years. Members who are not entitled to the
benefit, however, are not suspended for nonpayment of dues
and assessments, provided they report themselves out of work
at least twice a week. They are obliged upon obtaining em-
ployment to pay at least 10 per cent of their weekly wages
until they have established themselves within the constitutional
limit, and, if they remain out of work until entitled to benefit,
all dues and assessments are deducted before the benefit is
paid. Such members must obtain signed and sealed certificates


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 537

from the financial secretary to whom they have reported during
their nonemployment.

The amount of the out-of-work benefit is $3 per week, and
50 cents for each additional day, but no benefit is paid during
the first week of employment. Members drawing benefit for
less than six days, moreover, are stricken from the list. After
having received benefit for six weeks a member is not entitled
to any further benefit for seven weeks thereafter, and no mem-
ber may receive more than $54 during any one year, com-
mencing July 1. When a member under fifty years of age has
received the full benefit of $54 in the year he must have worked
for four weeks before he is again entitled to benefit, but this
does not apply to members over fifty years of age, who may
apparently draw the full $54 every year without working at
the trade at all, thus practically receiving a superannuation
benefit to that amount.

Any member who obtains employment before receiving six
weeks' benefit, and is then discharged before eight weeks have
elapsed, is entitled to the balance of his benefit, but a member
obtaining employment for two days or longer before his regis-
tration has entitled him to benefit, that is, before the first week
of unemployment has elapsed, forfeits his previous registration.
Members who have received four weeks' strike or sick benefit
are not entitled to out-of-work benefit for four weeks thereafter,
and sick members incapable of doing a day’s work are not con-
sidered as out of work. No out-of-work benefit is paid from
June 1 till September 23, nor from December 16 to January
15, — dull seasons in the trade, — and members who are unem-
ployed during these times have no privileges except that from
June 1 to September 23 they may, by obtaining a certificate
and reporting themselves out of work to the financial secretary
at least once a week, obtain remission from suspension for non-
payment of dues and assessments. As in the case of members
who have not been such long enough to be entitled to out-
of-work benefits, however, this privilege must later be paid
for by giving the collector of the union 10 per cent of the
weekly earnings until within the constitutional limit, or, if the


538 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

unemployment continues, by the forfeit of a similar portion of the
out-of-work benefit when it comes due. Any member engaging
in any other occupation during the period of unemployment is
not entitled to benefit. Moreover, the large number of women
members has led to the provision that “ members doing their
own domestic work shall not be entitled to any benefit.” A
member who voluntarily quits a job is not entitled to out-of-
work benefit until he shall have again obtained employment for
at least one week. Finally, the constitution of the International
Union provides that “ any member losing his employment
through intoxication, or courting his discharge through bad
workmanship or otherwise shall not be entitled to any benefit
for eight weeks thereafter, and shall be so recorded in his
loan book; inability to hold a job shall not deprive a member
of his benefit.”

The procedure through which members receive the out-of-
work benefit is carefully guarded. In the first place, any mem-
ber who wishes to apply for this benefit must, after being
discharged or laid off, obtain from the collector of the shop a
certificate stating the cause thereof, and must present this to
the financial secretary of the local union These certificates are
kept on file for inspection by the finance committee and Inter-
national financier. The applicant is then allowed to register.
Each local is provided by the International Union with a regis-
try book, and in this the names of the unemployed entitled
to out-of-work benefit are written. This must be signed every
day, and if the member does not sign he forfeits his benefit
for that day, while if he fails for three consecutive days to
sign the registry book he forfeits the benefit of previous regis-
tration and is not entitled to any benefit until after the pre-
liminary week has again elapsed. Particular hours are specified
during which unemployed members must register. Traveling
members before receiving benefits must deposit their cards
with a union in which they have been registered for six days,
and jurisdiction members who are unable to report at least every
second day to the financial secretary must report twice every
week in writing and must have their reports countersigned by


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 539


the town and shop collector, producing additional evidence if
demanded by the union. “But in no case shall a member be
entitled to out-of-work benefit if he remains in a place where
no union shop exists.” The financial secretary of the local
must report at every regular meeting the names of members
who have received out-of-work benefit, together with the cause
of loss of employment.

It will be observed that the checks upon fraud are numerous,
-and that the registry system itself is exceedingly strict. It has
been found necessary that this should be so. When the out-
of-work benefit was originally adopted it was under a careful
registry system, but shortly afterwards this was changed to a
card system. At the convention in 1896 the International
president reported:

I am fully persuaded that a serious mistake was made when the
old registry system for the out-of-work member was abolished. The
present or card system opened the door to fraud and petty abuses,
which, I regret to say, has in some instances been taken advantage of.
I recommend a return to the book-registry system as being abso-
lutely necessary to the successful regulation and maintenance of one
of the grandest and most humane features of our benefit system, and
the establishment of such other safeguards as may commend them-
selves to your judgment and wisdom.

This recommendation was adopted by the convention, and the
book-registry system was reestablished. Still another check is
provided by the section of the constitution that imposes sus-
pension and a fine of from $5 to $25, as the union may deem
proper, upon any member obtaining benefits or endeavoring to
obtain benefits under 'false pretenses.

For the purpose of obtaining work for the unemployed every
union must establish a labor bureau, while it is made the duty
of the shop collectors to report to the financial secretary of the
local union upon the day of receiving notice of the vacancy
any jobs that may be open in their factories. Any shop col-
lector failing so to report, or any financial secretary failing
immediately to refer to the factory in question an unemployed
member, is liable to a fine of not less than $1. Any member,


540


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


moreover, who knows where a job is open and fails to report
it to the financial secretary is fined $i.

Any member refusing to work m a shop where work is offered
him, or who neglects to apply for work in a shop if directed by the
financial secretary or any officer of the union, or shop collector, shall
not be entitled to any benefit until he has secured employment for at
least one week. This shall apply to jurisdiction towns within a radius
of ten miles. Shop collectors shall immediately report to the finan-
cial secretary the name (if known) of any member refusing to work
where work is offered him , failing to so report he shall be fined $ 2 *
for each offense.

Two other constitutional provisions relating to the benefit
system should be mentioned. In the first place, applicants for
membership in the union who are affected with chronic diseases
or who are over fifty years of age are not entitled to any out-
of-work or sick benefit and to no more than $50 death benefit.
They pay the regular initiation fee, but only 1 5 cents weekly
dues, while full beneficial members pay 30 cents weekly dues.
The executive committee of the local union is the judge of the
class to which a new member is assigned. On the other hand,
as has been already mentioned, any retiring member who has
contributed dues for three years may continue to be entitled to
sick and death benefits by the payment of a certain sum in
dues. When the provision was adopted this sum was 10 cents,
but it has been raised to 20 cents per week All assessments
of the International Union must also be paid. A retiring mem-
ber failing to avail himself of this privilege forfeits all previous
rights and benefits.

This elaborate system of benefits is supported by the pay-
ment for each member of $3 initiation fee, 30 cents per week
dues, and special assessments and fines. Any member who
is in arrears for eight weeks’ dues or assessments, except in
such cases of unemployment or sickness as have been already
mentioned, stands suspended from benefits. “ If the member
within two weeks from such suspension places himself within
the eight-week limit and remains within such limit for ninety
days from date of suspension, he shall be restored to his previous


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 541

rights. Failing to comply with the above" he shall stand sus-
pended from the union.”

The benefits come out of what is practically the common
fund of the Cigar Makers’ International Union. They are paid
directly by the locals, but the locals themselves in all financial
affairs are carefully regulated by the constitution of the Inter-
national Union. Each local, for instance, must deposit all its
money above a certain minimum amount, depending upon the
•membership, in an appointed bank, or purchase registered bonds
of the United States or Canada. Its expenditures, moreover,
are carefully regulated, being limited not only to certain speci-
fied objects but to a certain percentage of gross receipts. A
union which has thirty members or less may expend on its gen-,
eral budget, each item of which is carefully enumerated, 30 per
cent of its gross income, one having from thirty to fifty mem-
bers 25 per cent, and one having fifty members or over 20 per
cent. This does not include benefits, which are paid according
to the fixed rules already described, any local permitting illegal
expenditure on benefits being fined $25. If the funds of a local
union become exhausted by legitimate expenditure, the execu-
tive board of the International Union, upon receipt of notice
to that effect, orders other unions to forward to the first one
whatever sums may be considered necessary. Furthermore,
there is a regular system of equalizing the funds of local unions
according to the annual and monthly reports of the International
president, upon the basis of the benefits paid by each. Thus,
if one local pays for legal benefits more than its pro rata amount,
the deficit is made up to it ^>y those other unions which may
have expended less than their pro rata amounts. The receipts
of the International office for its legitimate expenditures are
obtained by simply drawing upon any local union from month
to month. The orders for money are made by the International
president with the consent of the executive board and are
published in the Official Journal thirty days prior to being sent
to the local.

As for the actual cost of the benefit system, the table on the
following page shows the per capita expenditure on the various


542


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Benefit Expenditures, 1891-1900 1

Light-face type shows total expenditure , black face, per capita expenditure


Year

Strike

Sick

Death

Out-of-work

Total

Member-

ship

1891

#33,53! -78

$1.38

#87.472 97

$3.61

$38,068 35
$i-S 7

$21,223.50

$0.88

$180,296 60

$7.44

24,221

1892

37,477.60

I.40

89,906 30
3*37

44,701 97

1.68

17.46075

.65

189,546 62
7.10

26,678

1893

18,228 15
.68

104,391.83

3.90

49.458 33

1.85

89,402.75

3-33

261,481 06
9.76

26,788

1894

44,966.76

1 62

106,758 37
3.84

62,15 8 77

2 23

I 74 » 5 I 7* 2 5

6.27

388,401 15
13.96

27,828

1895

44,039 46

1*59

112,567.06

4.06

66,725 98

2.40

166,377 25

5-99

389 > 377*75

14.04

27,760

1896

27,446 46

1. 00

109,208 62
4.00

78,768 09

2.88

175,76709

6-43

391,190.42

14.31

27,318

1897

12,17509

.46

112,77463

4.28

69,18667

2.62

117,47440

4.46

311,61079

11.82

26,341

1898

25,11859

*95

111,283 60
4.21

94.93983

3-58

70,197 70

2.65

301,539 72
II.39

26,460

1899

12,331.63

•43

107,785.07

3.71

98.993 8 3

3.41

* 38,037 OO
I. 3 I

257,147 53

8.86

28,994

1900

137,82323

4.06

117,45584

3.46

98,291 00
2.89

23,897 00
.70

377 , 4 I 7*07

II. 11

33>955


benefits in each of a series of ten years. As the period under
consideration includes both good and bad times in about equal
proportion, these figures show the approximate cost of the
entire system under average conditions. It will be observed
that the expenditures per capita on strike and out-of-work ben-
efits have fluctuated very greatly, but that the expenditures on
sick and death benefits show only slight variations. It is also
noticeable that, except in the bad years 1894, 1895, and 1896,
the strike benefit is small when the out-of-work benefit is large,
and vice versa. In 1904 the strike benefit cost 79 cents per


1 Cigar Makers' Official Journal , May, 1904, p. 7.


BENEFIT SYSTEM OF CIGAR MAKERS’ UNION 543

capita, the sick benefit $3.93, the death benefit $3 65, and the
out-of-work benefit 72 cents. During the same year $1.41 per
capita was spent upon the traveling benefit, but as this is
generally paid back it should not be counted as a part of the
cost of the benefit system. With regard to the traveling benefit
International President Perkins states : “ The loans are repaid,
although the books show that we grant from $2000 to $3000
more loans each year than we collect, and according to records
there are now outstanding [April, 1905] $88,000 in loans. Prob-
ably $30,000 or $40,000 of this amount is lost ”

The membership of this organization, thanks to its benefit
system, has been comparatively stable. Though the number of
members declined somewhat during the years 1895, 1896, and
1897, and even in 1898 was not as great as it had been m 1894,
the decline was not nearly as great as in many other unions
during the same period The Operative Plasterers’ International
Association, for instance, which pays only death benefits, had
90 locals in 1891, 70 in 1892, 80 in 1893, 72 in 1894, 75 in
1 895, 63 in 1896, 62 in 1897, and only 38 in 1898, rising, how-
ever, to 13 1 in 1901 1 Again, the Bricklayers’ and Masons’
International Union declined in membership from 27,448 in
1892 to 19,674 in 1894. This union has no national benefit
system. 2 The International Wood Carvers, with only death
benefits, decreased in membership from 1433 in 1893 to 749
in 1 897, 3 and the Seamen’s Union decreased from 1750 mem-
bers in "1 89 1 to 350 members in 1895 4

Obviously a strong benefit system has a decided influence
in keeping the membership of a labor organization intact during
dull times. International President Perkins states with reference
to the system :

The effect upon the loyalty of the members is remarkable, inas-
much as it lessens the suspensions and has a tendency to make the
organization more permanent. They usually make better fighters dur-
ing times of strikes, and, as they become imbued with the spirit that
loss of membership means a serious financial loss both to themselves

1 Industrial Commission, Vol XVII, p. 154.

2 Ibid.,, p. 1 1 8. 8 Ibid.) p. 202. 4 Ibid.) p. 256.


544


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


and their families, they are more loyal. The so-called insurance
feature in our organization, paying from $50 to $550 upon the death
of a member, has a strong influence in the maintenance of loyalty
throughout the organization.

The union is especially proud, too, of its out-of-work benefit,
and the published statements in regard to the amounts expended
on this benefit are often used by labor statisticians as a barom-
eter of labor conditions throughout the country. It should be
remembered that all this has been accomplished in the face of
unfavorable trade conditions which have rendered it impossible
to organize more than a small proportion of the cigar makers
of the country.

At present a vigorous agitation is in progress, carried on
principally through the Cigar Makers' Official Journal , in favor
of the establishment of a superannuation benefit. Many old
and feeble members, it is said, are now paid out-of-work and
sick benefits who ought to be receiving superannuation benefits.
Moreover, it is urged that this benefit would strengthen the
prestige of the organization. As early as 1893 Samuel Gompers,
president of the American Federation of Labor, as delegate to
the convention of the Cigar Makers’ International Union, intro-
duced an amendment to the constitution establishing a super-
annuation benefit. His plan was to pay to members of ten
years’ standing a pension of $5 per month, to be increased to
$6 after fifteen years’ membership, provided that members
receiving for five consecutive years full out-of-work or full sick
benefits should be placed on the list of members entitled to
superannuation benefit, who should receive, however, only $4
per month until after the ten and fifteen years respectively
required for the $5 and $6 pensions. This proposition was
apparently introduced simply to bring the matter before the
membership. In June, 1904, another incomplete working plan
was suggested in an editorial in the Cigar Makers' Official
Journal, This provided for the payment of a pension of $6
monthly to any member contributing dues for twenty-five years,
who was sixty years of age or over, and unable to earn $6
weekly; and monthly pensions of $7 and $10 respectively to


Benefit system of cigar makers’ union 545

members seventy years of age and of thirty years’ standing and
to members eighty years of age and of thirty yeafs’ standing.

In this connection it may be observed that the Amalgamated
Society of Carpenters and Joiners, an English organization with
over 70,000 members, dating from i860, pays, op. an average,
something like a third less for its superannuation benefit than
for its sick and funeral benefits combined, so that, if the sick
and death benefits of the Cigar Makers are worth, as is assumed
in the provision for retiring members, about 20 cents per week,
the Cigar Makers’ International Union, in which insurance
is an important factor in the death benefit, could doubtless
easily support a superannuation benefit similar to that of the
Amalgamated Carpenters, with an increase of 10 cents per
week in the dues. The Amalgamated Society of Carpenters
and Joiners pays, in this country, from $2.45 to $2.80 per week
superannuation benefit. The only other labor organization in
the United States which is paying superannuation benefit at the
present time is the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, another
English organization, though the Pattern Makers’ League of
North America has a provision in its constitution for the pay-
ment of this benefit after 1920. Thus the Cigar Makers have,
so far as the United States is concerned, practically a pioneer
field to explore in the establishment of a superannuation benefit.


University of Wisconsin.


Helen L. Sumner.


XXV


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY AND ACCIDENT
INSURANCE 1

I

An illustration of the defective foreign-news service of the
American press is afforded by the almost complete ignorance
that exists here to-day concerning one of the most far-reaching
social movements of the nineteenth century. Although the
foremost topic of public discussion in the countries of Europe
has lately been the problem of accidents to workingmen, the
cable dispatches published in our newspapers have scarcely
given an inkling of the fact; and while England, France, Den-
mark, and Italy within the space of eight months (from August 6,
1897, to April 9, 1898) all enacted comprehensive laws, based
on entirely new principles, for the protection and indemnifica-
tion of wage-earners exposed to industrial risks, the only echo
of this almost revolutionary movement that reached the read-
ers of American journals was the report that the Swiss people
had made use of the referendum to defeat a proposed law for
compulsory sickness-and-accident insurance ! The explanation of
such apparent prejudice or indifference on the part of foreign

1 Ffora the Political Science Quarterly , Vol XVII, 1902, pp. 256-283. The
principal authority followed in this paper is the Seventeenth Annual Report of
the New York State Bureau of Labor Statistics (1S99), ^ art H °f which is devoted
to the subject of “The Compensation of Accidental Injuries to Workmen.” As
this document is fully indexed, the present writer deems it unnecessary to make
specific references. The report also contains bibliographies of the best sources,
to which may be added the following recent articles •

“Accidents to Labor,” by W. F. Willoughby, in the Bulletin of the United
States Department of Labor, January, 1901

“The British Workmen’s Compensation Act,” by A. M. Low, ibid
“ Present Status of Employers’ Liability in the United States,” by S. D. Fes-
senden, ibid ., November, 1900.

546


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


547


correspondents may be left to others with a better knowledge
of the cause ; the present writer is concerned rather with the
contrast between European and American principles of legisla-
tion in this important field.

To begin with, it may be stated as emphatically as possible
that European interest m the problem has not been due to any
greater frequency of industrial accidents abroad than in the
United States. On the contrary, as might be inferred by any
one who stops to think of the incomparable energy, restlessness,
and fearlessness of American workingmen, of the relatively high
intensity of work in American shops and factories, and of the
vastly greater use that our people make of machinery, more
workmen, relatively, are injured here than abroad. Statistical
demonstration of this might be extended to an indefinite length ;
but it will be entirely sufficient to cite the fact that the Amer-
ican railways, as compared with the British, have twice the
number of employees and every year kill four times as many of
them, the annual ratio of accidental deaths to total employees
of all classes being i to 420 in the United States as compared
with 1 to 950 in Great Britain. And if m Germany, with its
50,000,000 people, 8000 wage-earners are killed and more
than 400,000 injured every year, we are fairly safe in assuming
that in the United States, with its 75,000,000 people, the army
of employees annually killed or injured is 50 per cent greater.
The problem of industrial accidents, then, exists as surely in the
western hemisphere as in the older continent.

Two possible reasons may be advanced for the fact that the
problem has attracted little attention here outside of purely
academic circles, while in Europe it has agitated popular forums
and extorted consideration from statesmen. The contrast prob-
ably rests, first, upon differences in the economic situation of
workingmen on the two continents, and, secondly, upon differ-
ences of legal philosophy. European workmen, with their
cramped position, their slender resources, and the burden of
militarism, have not been able to obtain an adequate reward for
their toil, and hence are likely to be financially crushed by com-
paratively slight misfortunes and thereby thrown upon the public


548 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

charities for maintenance. American workingmen, on the other
hand, have earned and received high wages and have thus
enjoyed what their European confreres would call financial inde-
pendence , their savings or their insurance in fraternal orders
have enabled them to withstand the effects of all but the most
serious physical injuries without becoming a burden upon the
public. Such relative financial independence, however, is becom-
ing far less general in the United States, and it is in recognition
of this fact that many of the larger railroad systems have estab-
lished relief funds or pension departments through which the
employer makes some contribution to the alleviation of distress
among his injured employees. In the great stock yards, sugar
refineries, iron and steel works, and other industrial plants of
American cities the foreign-born laborers earn so little money
above their minimum requirements that a severe injury is almost
sure to make them dependent upon public or private charity.
The natural and logical remedy would be a law requiring all
employers to act toward their injured workmen as liberal em-
ployers already act, — to pay the necessary medical expenses
and a moiety of the wage of the victim during the period of
disablement from work.

That such a law has nowhere been enacted in America
may be in part ascribed to the prevalent individualistic philos-
ophy, which, refusing to look at the social effects, decrees that
the wage-earner, in accordance with tradition, must carry the
ordinary risks of his occupation. It is assumed that before
accepting employment the workman will calculate the relative
advantages and disadvantages of his prospective occupation,
including the probable danger to life and limb; and that
his remuneration is thereupon so adjusted that his wages
will include compensation for possible injury . 1 This legal

1 See the opinion of Chief J ustice Shaw of Massachusetts in the leading case of
Fa-rwell v. Boston and Worcester, 4 Met. 49 : “ The general rule resulting from
considerations as well of justice as of policy is that he who engages in the employ-
ment of another for the performance of specified duties and services for compen-
sation takes upon himself the natural and ordinary risks and perils incident to
the performance of such services, and, in a legal presumption, the compensation is
adjusted accordingly.”


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


549


fiction , 1 however, has no basis in fact ; railroad trainmen, for
instance, obtain no more than the wages of ordinary laborers,
although one out of every eleven of them is seriously injured
every year. Sailors, miners, quarrymen, and other workmen in
extrahazardous trades are paid no more than laborers in other
occupations, excepting where the matter of skill enters into the
question. To suppose that these wage-earners ever seriously
consider the matter at all is to impute to them a measure of
foresight and of economic strength in the wage bargain that is
found only in the skilled artisan class, the “aristocracy of labor.”

Nevertheless, the two reasons above recited (the relative eco-
nomic independence of American wage-earners and the prevalent
individualistic philosophy) explain why in this country all prac-
tical efforts thus far made to deal with the problem of industrial
accidents have been limited to proposals for altering the law of
negligence so far as it concerns the relation of employer and
employee. Premising that the employees assume the ordinary
risks of their occupations, the law holds the employer responsible
for accidents due to his own negligence precisely as it holds any
person liable to pay damages for such neglect of his duties as
results in injury to other persons. But in one essential respect
the common law of England and America has discriminated
against the servant or employee : it has refused to maintain the
doctrine of principal and agent in the case of accidents caused
by negligence when the person injured is an employee of the
person by whom or upon whose behalf the act of negligence
was committed.

To illustrate : if a grocer’s delivery wagon runs down a pedes-
trian, who himself is not at fault, the pedestrian has the right
of action for damages not merely against the driver but also
against the principal, the grocer, who may in fact have given
the most precise instructions to his driver about exercising vigi-
lance arid respect for the rights of pedestrians. This ancient

1 It has been so characterized by Judge Earl of the New York Court of
Appeals : “ To enforce the supposed public policy a fiction has been invented by
which the servant is said to assume all the risks of the service in which he
engages.” — Crispin v. Babbitt , 81 N. Y. 529.


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


55 °

and firmly established principle of respondeat superior, whereby
the principal must answer for negligent acts of his agent, rests
purely upon the expediency of giving the victim a legal claim
upon some party who is pecuniarily responsible, — in other words,
some one who can pay damages. It is, apparently, a universal
principle of law, and its justification, aside from the motive of
expediency just indicated, rests upon the idea that, if a man finds
it convenient or profitable to delegate any part of his work to
others, he must still be ready to furnish satisfaction for injuries
growing out of such work ; if he fears to risk his property by
thus giving bonds for the conduct of his agents, he has the
alternative of doing his own work alone. Now the injustice of
the American law of negligence, as applied to employees, lies in
the fact that our courts have created an exception to the uni-
versal principle expressed m the maxim respondeat superior by
refusing to hold the principal responsible for the negligence of
an agent when the perspn injured is a fellow-employee. To recur
to the illustration : if the supposed pedestrian run down by a
careless driver of a grocer’s wagon happened to be a clerk in
the employ of the same grocer, he could not obtain damages
from the principal.

Crudely illustrated, this is the famous “fellow-servant doc-
trine” which has naturally evoked antagonism on the part of
American workingmen. It is a doctrine that is not tolerated in
continental courts, and it was largely abolished by statute in Eng-
land more than twenty years ago. It has also been considerably
modified either by legislation or by judicial decisions in most
American commonwealths . 1 But workingmen look upon it as a
burden even in its modified form, and to it is apparently due
most of their present discontent. Will they be satisfied with its
entire abolition ? Is an employer’s liability law, perfected on these
lines, really a solution of the problem of accidents to labor ? That

1 In recent years the courts have stretched the doctrine of “ vice principal ” so
as to cover many coemployees of an injured workman That is to say, if the
agent whose negligence brought about the injury to a coemployee was performing
any of the duties properly belonging to the employer, he is regarded not as a
“fellow-servant” but as a “ vice principal,” or alter ego , of the employer, who thus
becomes liable for damages.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY 55 1

question may most properly be answered by reviewing the expe-
rience of other countries.


II

In Germany, as in England and the United States, the prob-
lem of industrial accidents did not assume prominence until the
advent of railways ; but in the German states the legislature did
not step aside and leave the courts to develop a law of employers’
liability. On the contrary, railway construction had scarcely begun
in Germany when in 1838 the Prussian legislature enacted a law
which provided that every railway company should be liable for
personal injuries to employees (as well as to passengers), unless
it could prove in court that the accident was occasioned by the
negligence of the victim or by an act of Providence ; and still
further to strengthen the employee’s case, the law specifically
provided that the risks inherent in the railroad business should
not be considered as rendering accidents inevitable, and hence
should not exempt the corporation from responsibility. This
Prussian law of 1838 thus goes far beyond the demands of
American workingmen at the present time, at least so far as
respects railways, which are in truth the subject of most of the
agitation ; for it transfers the burden of proof from the shoulders
of the injured employee to those of the corporation. It distinctly
directs that the employer, and not the employee, is to assume
the ordinary risks of the industry.

Upon the formation of the German Empire in 1871 this
Prussian act of 1838 was embodied in a general-liability law for
the Empire, whioh also defined, though in less stringent terms, the
liability of proprietors of factories, mines, quarries, and so forth.
The enormous industrial expansion of Germany, following its
consolidation under a strong government, rapidly transformed
the small shops of handicraftsmen into great factories, in which
the employer’s responsibility for his workingmen was dissipated
among numerous superintendents, foremen, and others who
assumed certain of his functions of control. The conditions of
labor in factories and mines began to approximate those on the
railways, and the earlier reform movements sought to extend the


552 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

provisions of the railway-liability law to the manufacturing indus-
try and other employments. But far-sighted economists — Schaffle,
Wagner, Schmoller, and others — deemed such a reform entirely
inadequate, holding that, because of thfe difficulty of locating
the negligence, the law of negligence could by no possibility be
sufficiently perfected to secure for injured workmen proper com-
pensation. This difficulty was set forth in the preamble of the
accident-insurance bill of 1881.

To burden the person injured with the requirement of furnishing
proof of negligence on the part of the employer or his agents trans-
forms the beneficence of the law for the workingman into an illusion
in the majority of cases. The procurement of such evidence, suffi-
ciently difficult in any event, is not seldom rendered impossible as
respects some of the most severe injuries brought about by natural
forces, as happens in mines, establishments with steam boilers, and
factories for the manufacture of explosives. Herein the condition of
the workplace — the implements and appliances, upon which the whole
case of the workman really turns — is so altered by the accident itself
as to be unrecognizable ; while those persons through whose testimony
alone negligence in many cases can be proven have been killed or
injured by the accident. The injured, even if not, as is generally the
case, parties to the suit, are left in such condition by the catastrophe
as to be unable to give formal testimony.

Without entering further into the legislative history of the
question, it will be sufficient to state that the economists, aided
by Emperor William I and Bismarck, finally triumphed in the
passage of the act of 1884, which made employers responsible
for all accidents to employees in the course of their occupation
except such as should be occasioned by the willful misconduct of
the victims themselves. This minor exception is virtually all that
is left in Germany of the law of negligence so far as it concerns
employees. 1

To comprehend fully the methods of the German law for
indemnifying workmen injured at their work, one must consider
an analogous law enacted two years earlier (1882), namely, the

1 Of course, employers may still be sued for negligence; but such actions are
brought only when the negligence is so gross as to promise a considerably larger
compensation than that afforded by the accident-insurance law.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


553


sickness-insurance law. This act requires the establishment of
sick funds in all industries, one third of the contributions to come
from employers and two thirds from the working people. Any
employee injured while at work is cared for by the sick funds
for the first three months after the accident ; but if at the end of
these thirteen weeks he is still incapacitated, he is entitled to an
allowance equal to two thirds of his wages, besides the medical
expenses, out of a fund maintained by the employers. If he dies
at any time as a result of his injuries, his family is entitled to a
yearly pension not exceeding 60 per cent of his wages.

In order to guard the employee against the possible loss of
his compensation or allowance through the bankruptcy or failure
of his employer, the law provides for the collective responsibility
of employers ; that is, all employers are grouped together int5
associations by industries (. Bcrufsgenossenschaften ), and each asso-
ciation pays the claims of workingmen employed by its own mem-
bers. The members of each association are annually assessed,
according to the size of their pay rolls and the hazard of their
business, at a rate sufficient to pay the death claims, the benefits
to temporarily disabled workmen, and the pensions to entirely
incapacitated workmen and the families of employees killed by
accident. The assessments must also cover the administrative
expenses of the association, which include the salaries of a large
number of engineering and mechanical experts employed by the
associations to inspect the factories of members and see that the
best appliances are bought and used for safeguarding dangerous
machinery. Briefly put, the German law requires every employer
to join a mutual insurance company, which indemnifies his employ-
ees for all personal injuries sustained in the course of their employ-
ment, the question of negligence on one side or the other having
nothing to do with the amount of such indemnification, 1 which is
fixed by the amount of the employee's wages and, in case of his
death, the number of surviving dependents. The administrative

1 With the qualification that no compensation is paid when the injury is due
to the victim's willful misconduct — which in practice has proved unimportant —
and that the victim may sue for damages when the employer has been grossly
negligent.


554 trade unionism and labor problems

machinery for determining the compensation is prescribed by the
law, but, on account of limitations of space, cannot be described
here. 1

For eighteen years now this compulsory accident-insurance
system has been on trial in Germany, and its success can no
longer be seriously questioned It has been successively ex-
tended by the lawmaking authorities, and when in 1900 it was
thoroughly overhauled and revised the changes were wholly
in the direction of enlarging its scope. The broad result is to
be seen m the following facts : About 20,000,000 persons, or
nearly two fifths of the entire population and ten elevenths of
that part engaged m gainful occupations, are protected by the
insurance system, and any one of these persons, in case of a dis-
abling accident, may claim a living allowance as a right and not
as a charity; each year about 100,000 accidental injuries are
indemnified, of which one half are cases of temporary disable-
ment (exceeding, however, a duration of three months) and one
half cases of permanent disablement or death ; about $20,000,000
are annually expended through this system, of which 80 or 85 per
cent is actually paid to the sufferers, about 2 per cent being
expended for the prevention of accidents, and the remainder
representing the expenses of management The actual burden
of this insurance upon German industry cannot be determined,
for the reason that permanently injured employees are not in-
demnified with a lump sum of money, but are pensioned with
an annual or quarterly allowance for life. Nevertheless, the
annual expenditures, which are almost identical with the assessed
contributions of employers, have lately averaged only $ 1.22 per
$100 of the annual wage roll, and this is a lower rate than any
prevailing from 1892 to 1897. Of course, the rate varies enor-
mously from industry to industry according to the relative risks
of accident ; it is about twenty-four times as great in mining
as in the tobacco industry, which is the least hazardous of the
manufactures. 2

1 See Chapter XXVI, p. 574.

2 In 1897 the amount actually paid in the indemnification of injuries was $1.78
per $100 of wages in mining, and only 8 cents in the tobacco industry


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


555


III

The other countries of Europe had been as much concerned
as Germany with the question of reforming the law of liability,
but they postponed action m order to await the result of the
German experiment. Only Austria, which is for the most part
a German country, accepted at once the new principle of incor-
porating in the cost of production of manufactured goods, by the
side of the allowance for wear and tear of machinery, an item for
the wear and tear of human operatives. But the Austrian law of
1887, though it insures compensation for all injuries, regardless
of the question of negligence, differs m many respects from
the German law. It permits employers, for example, to deduct
10 per cent of their assessments from the wages of employees,
and it requires the capitalized value of each pension to be paid at
the time of the accident. 1 Again, the collective responsibility of
employers is secured, not as in Germany through associations
for different industries, only the railroads having a trade associa-
tion, but through seven provincial or district associations. Fur-
thermore, the government itself does not undertake the business
of insurance, although it establishes the rates. Additional varia-
tions from the German law can also be found in the scale of
compensation, but these need not be entered into at this point.

The other Teutonic nations of northern Europe could not but
be influenced by the long discussion of employers’ liability and
accident insurance m Germany and the final adoption of the latter
principle. Within a few months after the enactment of the Ger-
man law of 1884 parliamentary commissions were at work in
Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland, gathering statistics of
accidents, of the methods for alleviating distress in the families
of the stricken workmen, and so forth. The Norwegian commis-
sion completed its labors and presented draft bills in 1890, and

1 It appears that the actuaries put the rate of the contributions somewhat too
low when they calculated that the average assessment would have to be #1.40 per
$100 of the annual pay roll; whereas, for the seven years 1890-1896 the net
charges amounted to $1 55 per $100 of wages. The premium required in certain
dangerous industries also proved too low, and the next revision of the schedule of
rates will result in many increases and but few reductions


556 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

in 1894 the legislature fully accepted the principle of compulsory
compensation for all accidents and enacted an accident-insurance
law This law more closely resembles the Austrian -than the
German act. Compensation begins four weeks after the acci-
dent and is fixed at 60 per cent of the victim’s wages ; in the
event of his death the pension to his family is not to exceed 50
per cent of his average annual income. In Norway as in Ger-
many the expenses of indemnification of injuries are to be paid
by the employers without deduction from wages ; but in Norway
the state guarantees the indemnities and collects the assessments
from employers through a state insurance office, the expenses of
which are a state charge

In 1895 Finland enacted a workmen’s compensation law of
less comprehensive scope. While it provides a scale of compen-
sation and requires employers to insure their employees against
accident through authorized companies or by depositing securities
with the government, it does not grant compensation to employees
injured through the fault of fellow-workmen or vis major. In
other words, it does not cover the unavoidable mishaps which
constitute the bulk of all industrial accidents.

The Danish parliamentary commission made its report in 1888,
but, owing to differences of opinion as to the wisdom of a system
of obligatory insurance, the legislature did not agree upon a law
until 1897. 1 The action of Great Britain seemed to have a decisive
influence in crystallizing sentiment m Denmark, as in the other
continental states. On account of the far-reaching influence of
English policy, it is advisable to consider somewhat carefully the
steps by which the British Parliament at last definitely abandoned
employers’ liability based upon the law of negligence and accepted
the principle of compensation for all accidents.

IV

As we have already seen, the judge-made law of employers’
liability, embracing the indefensible doctrine of common
employment, had operated in England and the United States to

1 Sweden, the remaining Scandinavian country, did not enact an accident-
insurance law until 1901.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


557


the great injury of the English and American workmen. And
the fact that the “ fellow-servant doctrine ” was upheld so much
more rigorously by the English courts, dominated by the capi-
talistic House of Lords (the final court of appeal), as well as the
fact of the greater relative importance of machine production,
inspired in England a movement for legislative definition of the
law of liability and led to the adoption of the Employers' Lia-
bility Act of 1880, which has served as a model for several
American statutes. While this act removed some of the more
unjust defenses utilized by employers to avoid the penalties of
their negligence, it failed to give general satisfaction. Amend-
ments were offered at nearly every session of Parliament and
several commissions were appointed to examine into the ques-
tion. Finally, in 1893, the Gladstone government accepted the
views of the workingmen and introduced an employer’s liability
bill that was calculated to destroy the doctrine of common
employment root and branch This bill passed the House of
Commons, but came back from the House of Lords with un-
acceptable amendments concerning the power of employers to
contract themselves out of their liability by special agreements
with their employees. TJie consequent defeat of the bill ended
the prospect of legislation under the Liberals.

But the situation so urgently demanded reform that the
Conservatives, upon their accession to power in 1895, could
not decline to act, especially in view of their obligations to the
Liberal-Unionist wing, which through its leader, Joseph Cham-
berlain, had promulgated a really liberal labor programme, includ-
ing reform of the liability law. 1 The government bill, intro-
duced at the session of 1896-1897, went far beyond any of the
proposals of the Liberal government by offering compensation
for all accidental injuries, quite irrespective of the negligence
of this person or that.

The debates upon this bill fill several hundred very interesting
pages in Hansard. The average member of Parliament, who
was likely to be an employer, could not at first understand why


1 See Mr. Chamberlain’s article in the Nmetee?itk Century , November, 1892.


558 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

he should pay indemnification for injuries for which he was not
to blame. But the history of employers’ liability throughout
the era of machine production had demonstrated the impos-
sibility of locating the blame, since, as a matter of fact, the
great bulk of industrial accidents are virtually unavoidable.
Any person can see that the operator of a buzz saw is exposed
to greater risks than a cigar maker, and no amount of care on
the part of the employer or the operator will serve to equalize
the risks. For the vast majority of accidents, therefore, the
liability of an employer under the law of negligence affords
no remedy to the victim. Striking evidence of this fact was
adduced in the testimony taken by the Royal Commission on
Labor in 1894, when one of the great accident-insurance com-
panies testified that in 26,087 cases of accidental injury which
it had indemnified under collective accident-insurance policies
carried by employers, not more than 3026, or 12 per cent,
would have been entitled to compensation under the law of
negligence.

Now assuming that a liability law based on negligence would
compel employers to pay compensation for that 12 per cent
of their injuries to their employees, it could be easily demon-
strated that the uncertainties, the expense, and above all
the bitterness of class feeling incident to such legal conflicts,
would frequently outweigh the advantages of the law. Such
a law must of necessity be full of uncertainties, because it
attempts to define the duties of employer and those of em-
ployee, — duties which are constantly shifted with the progress
of invention and the adoption of improvements. One week a
court may have held that it was not the employer’s duty to
provide certain safeguards for a machine because such pro-
visions had not become a part of the usual customs and prac-
tices of the business ; another week the same court might
decide that such guards were necessary and reasonable. In
one case, where scaffolding has given way and a workman has
been seriously injured, it is decided that the foreman, acting
for the employer, should have inspected the defective scaffold-
ing; in the next case it may be held that the obligation of


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


559


inspecting the scaffolding rested upon the employee himself.
Numerous cases of fatal accidents also occur in which the
evidence of negligence is destroyed and the workingman's
family are thus deprived of their rightful indemnification, even
•though the law itself may be clear; such cases are of frequent
occurrence among colliery explosions, where the witnesses
perish along with all evidences of possible negligence.

If the uncertainty and expensiveness of legal actions for
damages were not sufficient to deter an injured employee from
proceeding against his employer, he would be deterred by the
apprehension of losing employment. The official memorandum
of the British Home Office summed up the defects of the em-
ployers’ liability law from the viewpoint of the workingman in
the following single paragraph.

The truth is that to the workman litigation under the act has more
than its usual terrors. It is*not merely that litigation is expensive
and that he is a poor man and his employer comparatively a rich
one, — it is that when a workman goes to law with his employer he, as
it were, declares war against the person on whom his future probably
depends ; he seeks to compel him by legal force to pay money, and
his only mode of doing so is the odious one of proving that his
employer or his agents — his own fellow-workmen — have been guilty
of negligence. Add to this that the legal proof of such negligence is
often extremely difficult. The broad result is that a legal claim for
damages only answers where the injury is very great and the work-
man is prepared to leave his master’s service . 1

If uncertainty and expensiveness made the law unsatisfactory
to the workman, they did not make it satisfactory to the em-
ployer. Liability to pay damages for negligence did not lead
to any correspondence between the penalty and the degree of
culpability. The most criminal negligence might result in a
trifling injury, compensated at the expense of a week’s wages,
while some trifling oversight in the selection of materials might
lead to loss of life and heavy damage suits. Employers kept

1 Appendix to the minutes of evidence taken before the Royal Commission of
Labor, 1S94, c 7063-111 A, p 351


5 6o trade unionism and labor problems

in their service an army of lawyers whose remuneration would
have afforded compensation to hundreds of injured employees.
On the other hand, many a fairly disposed employer found him-
self prosecuted by professional “ damage' ’ lawyers, or “ shy-
sters, ^ ” who stepped in to prevent any peaceable arrangement
between him and an injured workman. Mr. Chamberlain, for
example, related the experience of a friend who told him that
“ in two cases which he was absolutely bound to fight and
both of which he won, the costs amounted to more than any
compensation ever given under the Employers’ Liability Act.” 1
That act — which, be it remembered, is substantially the law in
America to-day — was characterized by Mr. Asquith, the Liberal
leader, as “an elaborate series of traps and pitfalls for the
unwary litigant, and productive of litigation which, in propor-
tion to its difficulty and cost, is absolutely barren of result.” 2

It was probably the cold, hard fact of the expensiveness of
futile litigation under the liability law that appealed more
than any other argument to the conservative British capitalists
and merchants who compose the House of Commons and in-
duced them to adopt the new principle of compensation for all
accidents.

Aside from the experience of foreign countries, never deci-
sive to an Englishman, the country already had some evidence
of its own as to the probable workings of the new system.
After the passage of the liability act of 1880 there had grown
up in England great insurance companies which made a
business of relieving employers of suits for damages brought
on* behalf of injured employees, the premiums for such insur-
ance being a certain percentage of the annual pay roll.
These companies, moreover, did a real accident-insurance busi-
ness on a similar basis, issuing to employers for a somewhat
higher premium a workman’s collective-insurance policy. The
statistics furnished by one of the largest of these insurance
companies afforded the instructive comparison shown in the
following table.

1 Parliamentary Debates, XLVIII (1897), 1465.

2 Ibid., XLIX, 753.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


561


Liability

Insurance

Workmen’s

Collective

Insurance

Claims admitted ... ...

Claims abandoned

Claims litigated

No claims made

Total accidents reported

1,188

952

327 1
7 . 75 °

26,087

97

4

10,217

26,188


It thus appeared that of 10,217 injured employees only 1327,
or 13 per cent, could obtain compensation under the employers'
liability law, while under the accident-insurance policy all
but an infinitesimal number were compensated. The contrast
pointed the way to a new system of legislation whereby the
compensation of accidents should be a mere business arrange-
ment rather than a matter of law. The British Workmen's
Compensation Act of 1897, like the German act of 1884, the
Austrian act of 1887, and the Norwegian act*of 1894, virtually
makes the employer the insurer of his workmen against all
accidents. In the words of Mr. Chamberlain, it says to every
employer in the industries covered by the act :

When you enter upon a business you must consider this compen-
sation is as much a trade charge as is now the provision which you
are called upon to make for the repair of machinery. You at present
have to put aside every year a certain sum for the repair of the inert
machinery, which is a factor in your business. Now the human
element in the business has to be considered, and in the case of
accident what reparation you can make must be made as a charge
upon the business.

The scale of compensation fixed by the law assures to a
totally disabled workman a weekly benefit equal to one half his
average wages ; to the family of a workman mortally injured, a
lump sum equal to three years’ wages (but not less than $730
or more than $1460). The disability allowance begins with the
third week of disablement.

In passing it should be noted that the act of 1897, while
affording these new compensations to an injured workman,

1 Of these 136 were won and 191 lost by workmen.


562 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

does not abolish his old rights of action against a negligent
employer. On the contrary, he may sue his employer for neg-
ligence under the common law or under the liability act of
1880, and if defeated may still claim as a matter of right, not
to be disputed, the compensation allowed him under the new
act. Provided the workman is disabled from earning full wages
for a period of at least two weeks, the only defense the em-
ployer can offer is that the accident did not “ arise out of and
in course of the employment,” or that it was attributable to
the serious and willful misconduct of the workman himself.

This is not the place to enter upon a discussion of the vir-
tues and defects of the English Workmen’s Compensation Act of
1 897. Certain things about it, however, are clearly established :

1. The principle of compensation for all accidents has been
permanently accepted in England ; the only amendment made
to the act has been one to widen its scope by extending it to
agriculture. The 6ccupations not as yet embraced in the law are
domestic service, service in small workshops where no mechani-
cal power is used, the building of structures less than thirty
feet high, mercantile pursuits, trucking, and navigation. It will
be seen that the only industrial classes still outside the law that
are exposed to heavy risks are seamen and fishermen.

2. Litigation, even in the beginning when the law required
interpretation, has been insignificant. In the first six months
of its operation not a single litigated case was recorded in
some of the principal mining districts, which, with a population
of 1,500,000, had innumerable accidents. Probably the experi-
ence of the Bolton and District Operative Cotton Spinners’ Pro-
vincial Association is indicative of the operation of the law.
Its report for 1901 shows that since the act came into opera-
tion the claims of 640 injured members had been paid, of which
only 12, or less than 2 per cent, were the subject of litigation.
Unofficial returns in other industries show similar results and
indicate that the proportion of claims settled without litigation
is over 98 per cent.

3. The cost of indemnification has been comparatively low
in spite of the high premiums demanded by insurance


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


563

companies. In South Roxburghshire, where the insurance com-
panies asked from 22 \ to 37^ cents per $100 of the annual
pay roll, mutual insurance associations were formed by the
employers and indemnities paid on the basis of a premium of
only 12 \ cents per $100 of wages. 1 As yet the burden of the
act, if indeed it has been a burden, has not made itself felt in
the competition with foreign countries, most of which, indeed,
have similar acts.


V

The action of England in accepting the principle of compen-
sation for all accidents seemed to bring to a head the discussion
that had been going on in other countries for a decade or more
In the four years that have since elapsed no fewer than nine
states have enacted similar laws, including France, Italy, Spam,
Holland, and Sweden, as well as two of the Australasian colo-
nies. The Danish act of January 7, 1898, has already been
mentioned ; like the English act, it makes insurance voluntary
on the part of employers, but gives the injured employee a prior
claim on insurance due to the employer in case of accident. The
accident benefit, which does not begin until the fourteenth week,
is fixed at 60 per cent of the victim’s wages, and the indemnity
in case of his death is equivalent to four years’ wages.

Italy followed with the act of March 17, 1898, which made
insurance obligatory, indeed, but left employers the option of
insuring in authorized companies or in mutual associations or
by the deposit of securities with the government. The dis-
ability allowance begins on the sixth day after the accident,
and is equal to 50 per cent of the victim’s usual wages. In
case of permanent disablement or death the indemnity is a
lump sum equal to five years’ wages.

About the same time France was enacting a workman’s
compensation law. The question had been before the legisla-
ture at every session for years, but the Senate and Chamber
of Deputies had not previously succeeded in agreeing upon a

1 See M. Barlow, “ The Insurance of Industrial Risks,” Economic Journal ,
Vol. XI (September, 1901), p. 348.


564 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

bill. Now the influence of the English act, combined with
the exigencies of local politics and the approach of elections,
resulted in the act of April 9, 1898. Under this law the acci-
dent allowance begins on the fifth day after the accident, and
for temporary disablement is fixed at one half the victim's
average wages, while for permanent incapacity it is two thirds
of his wages. In event of his death pensions to surviving
members of his family are not to exceed, in the aggregate,
60 per cent of his annual wage.

The treatment of the insurance problem in this act is pecul-
iar to France, and is the result of a compromise between the
Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. Instead of compelling
employers to carry insurance for the protection of their em-
ployees or against the possibility of their own bankruptcy or
failure, the French government guarantees the payment of
accident benefits and indemnities. For this purpose a special
guarantee fund is to be accumulated by means of a small addi-
tion to the regular business tax in the case of concerns sub-
ject to the law. This novel experiment will be watched with
interest in other countries. While it might easily lead to a
state insurance office, France has been noted for the strong
development of employers’ mutual associations, and it is gener-
ally hoped that these may continue to gather strength under
the new regime.

No new compensation acts were recorded in 1899, but on
January 30, 1900, Spain joined the other industrial countries
with such legislation. The Spanish act is rather limited in
scope, as it does not require the compensation of inevitable
accidents (those caused by vis major), and in that particular
more closely resembles employers' liability laws. But it pro-
vides a definite scale of compensation, the temporary allow-
ance to an injured employee being one half his usual wages
and the indemnity for permanent disability being a lump sum
equal to two years’ earnings. In the case of fatal accidents the
indemnity to the victim’s family is likewise two years’jearnings,
or, at the option of the employer, a pension equal to not more
than 40 per cent of the workman’s income.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY 565

The New Zealand act of October 18, 1900, and the South
Australian act of December 5, 1900, are modeled so closely
after the English act as to call for no special consideration.

The accident-insurance law enacted by Holland, January 2,
1901, grants to the workmen perhaps the most liberal terms
of any of these acts. The allowance, which begins on the day
following the injury, is to be- 70 per cent of the victim’s regu-
lar wage, and that is also the ratio in case of permanent (and
total) disability. In case of death the pension to his family is
to be 60 per cent of his earnings. Insurance in authorized
private companies or the government insurance office is obliga-
tory unless the employer prefers to deposit securities with the
government for the payment of compensation to his injured
employees. One peculiar feature of the Dutch act is the dis-
crimination against drunkenness ; the law provides that, if the
accident is due to intoxication, the victim shall receive only
one half the usual allowance, and his heirs or dependents none. 1

On February 21, 1901, the Kingdom of Greece adopted a
workmen’s compensation act for mines, smelting works, and cer-
tain quarries, which is peculiar in that one half of the indemni-
ties due to permanent disabilities and fatalities are to be paid
by the Miners’ Provident Fund, which is administered by the
government. But as the fund is maintained by the taxation
of mines, and so forth, the burden really falls upon the industry
after all. The allowance for disablement is 50 per cent of the
usual wage.

The Swedish act of April 24, 1901, is not so liberal as the
earlier Norwegian act, and the scale of compensation differs
from all others in that it fixes an invariable sum as the disability
allowance or benefit instead of a percentage of the wage earned
by each victim; nor does it require indemnification of injuries
occasioned by the willful misconduct of third persons, providing
they do not exercise authority. By opening the door to dis-
putes respecting the negligence of certain persons and the
responsibilities of others the act thus embodies the usual defect

1 The Dutch law is summarized in the Bulletin of the U. S . Bureau of Labor,
May, 1901, pp. 1 90-1 93


5 66 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

of employers’ liability laws, namely, it does not avoid enormous
expenses for litigation.

Switzerland is still debating schemes of accident insurance,
having accepted the principle more than ten years ago in the
form of a constitutional amendment. After long preparation
the federal legislature in 1899 passed a compulsory sickness-
and-accident insurance law which was to go into force Janu-
ary x, 1903 ; but on the referendum vote in 1900 the law was
rejected by a majority of two to one. It seems probable that
new projects will be less comprehensive in scope. In the mean-
time the Swiss have a very liberal employers’ liability law,
enacted some twenty-five years ago, which, like the Prussian
law of 1838, places the burden of proof upon the employer and
makes him liable for all injuries, unless he can prove in court
that the accident was caused by the act of God or the negli-
gence of the victim.

Russia has a similar law applying to railways and steamships,
and is therefore in a more advanced position than the United
States.

Belgium is the only other industrial nation of Europe that
has not accepted the principle of risque professionnel. While a
very successful organization of mine owners m Belgium has fur-
nished at its own- expense accident aid to injured miners since
1840, interest is by no means wanting in a national accident-
insurance system The ministry itself prepared and introduced
a bill in 1898, after the adoption of workingmen’s compensation
acts in England, France, and Italy ; but the bill was referred
to a commission, and before it was reported the legislature was
dissolved and a general election held (1900). Belgium having
already enacted an old-age pension law, it can safely be premised
that the problem of industrial accidents will not long await a
solution.


VI

The preceding review of European experience with the prob-
lem of industrial accidents ought to throw some light* upon the
probable course of legislation in the United States. Even should


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


567

the agitation by our workingmen for the statutory abrogation
of the obnoxious fellow-servant doctrine prove entirely success-
ful, it will bring us only to the first stage in the evolution of
negligence law into accident insurance, — the stage reached by
England twenty years ago, after the enactment of the Em-
ployers' Liability Act of 1880. This act, indeed, constituted an
improvement upon preexisting conditions ; but as a final solu-
tion of a large problem it was a flat failure, or, as Mr. Asquith
termed it, “ a scandal and a reproach to the legislature.” We
have already sketched its breakdown and noted that its fatal
defect consisted in requiring an enormous outlay on the impos-
sible task of locating the blame for the accidents of modern
industry. The futile litigation which, on account of its expen-
siveness, finally convinced Parliament of the failure of negligence
law as a remedy for the injuries of employees is characteristic of
the United States at the present time. And what is the logical
result ? The courts, in order to discourage suits and thus restrict
the volume of litigation, have betrayed a tendency to throw out
cases on technical grounds or to treat lightly the responsibility
of the employer. The authors of one of the leading American
text-books on the law of negligence plainly declare that

it has become quite common for judges to state as the ground of
decisions the necessity of restricting litigation. Reduced to plain
English, this means the necessity of compelling the great majority of
men and women to submit to injustice, in order to relieve judges from
the labor of awarding justice, . . . The law of master and servant
in its relation to the law of negligence affords perhaps the most
striking example in the last half century of gross injustice done by
this disposition to restrict responsibility and suppress litigation. 1

It is difficult to believe that any person at all familiar with
the operations of the British act of 1880 can look for any decided
improvement in American conditions through amendments to
the law of negligence. 2 When in 1893 the Liberal party in

1 Shearman and Redfield on Negligence (1898), pp. lii, vi.

2 It is doubtful if the American statutes modeled upon the British act of 1880
have brought about any perceptible improvement over the common law. This
much, at least, is true, — the liability-insurance companies charge employers no


568 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

England sought to improve the act of 1880 without abandoning
the foundation principle of negligence, the attempt was defeated
partly because the bill came to b„e known, not as an Employers’
Liability Bill, but as a “ Lawyer’s Employment Bill.” This
satirical appellation is really descriptive of all legislation on
the present subject that aims to rest the responsibility of em-
ployers on the ground of negligence.

The term may be said to apply also to a more advanced type
of liability law, which, though it has not as yef been proposed
in the United States, was adopted in some European countries
in the first half of the nineteenth century, namely, the legis-
lation under which the burden of proof of negligence was
shifted from the workman to the employer. As long ago as
1838 the Prussian law required a railroad company to pay dam-
ages to injured employees unless it could go into court and
there produce legal evidence that the accident was caused by
vis major or by the negligence of the injured workmen This
is still the law in Switzerland for all mecfSanical industries, and
in Russia and Hungary for transportation companies. But none
of these countries has been satisfied with such a law, and all of
them have either abandoned it already or are preparing so to do.

The third stage in the evolution of accident legislation is
reached when a community has once grasped the principle of
risque professionnel y — the principle, namely, that every trade
and occupation has its own risks or dangers, and that, as the
bulk of the accidents therein are unavoidable,* they should be
paid for out of the profits of that trade and not saddled upon
the families of individual workmen. The demonstration of the
truth of this principle waited upon the collection of compre-
hensive statistics; but since the establishment of accident-
insurance systems in several countries such statistics abound.
It will be worth our while just to glance at some of the best
of them, shown in the following table.

heavier premiums in Massachusetts, which since 1887 has had a “ model ” liability
law, than in the other New England states, which have enacted no such laws.
The inference is that disabled Massachusetts workmen get no more compensation
than their comrades protected only by the common-law rules


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


569


Accidents in Austria, 1890-1894


Number

Percentage

Fault of victim

Fault of employer-

Fault of third perse
Unforeseen con ting
Unknown . . .

' Imprudence and gross negligence . .

Disobedience of rules or neglect to use

safeguards

Willful misconduct

Defective plant

Omission of safeguards ...

Gross carelessness

m

^encies


10,937

1,563

7

4 i 3

218

53

762

33.976

471

22.60

3 2 3
.01

•8S

•45

.11

!*57

70.20

*97

Total 1

48,400

99 99


These statistics extend through five years and embrace nearly
50,000 accidents to employees. It appears that fully 70 per cent
of the accidents were declared to be unavoidable by the gov-
ernment officials who investigated them, and whose judgment,
since the indemnitiesihad to be paid without reference to the
cause of the casualty, may be regarded as wholly unbiased.

It must be clear, upon reflection, that the conditions under
which modem industry is carried on preclude the possibility
of explaining every accident by somebody’s negligence. This
much was dimly understood when various countries took the
first step of shifting the onus probandi from employee to
employer. If, now, the employees are not to blame for the
innumerable injuries to which they are subject, why should
they be made to bear the financial burden of those injuries?
Why should not that burden be distributed over the com-
munity instead of being concentrated upon a certain number
of families who, in any event, will have to bear the physical
and mental suffering involved in the death, crippling, or maim-
ing of men ? The risk of fire is undeniably greater in a gun-
powder mill than in a brewery, but the owner of the mill
does not bear the burden by contenting himself with lower
profits than the brewer’s ; he simply pays for the greater risk
by higher rates of fire insurance and passes the cost on to the
consuming public in a higher price for his product. If the


570


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


additional expense imposed upon a gunpowder manufacturer
through the more frequent losses by fire can be thus recouped
from consumers, why should not the expense of indemnifying
his workmen for accidents be likewise made a part of the cost
of production, and thereby be transferred to the community
at large ? Only one thing will prevent such shifting of the
burden, and that is the ability of competitors to put their
goods on the market without incurring like charges. Hence
the law must require all competitors in a given trade to make
the same compensation for the same injuries. This is what
Europe has done ; by compelling employers to compensate
injured employees according to a fixed scale, it has taxed the
community, through higher prices of goods, for the support of
its injured members.

Many minds bred in the philosophy of individualism will un-
doubtedly see in such legislation nothing but injustice to the
employer. In reality such legislation is in strict conform-
ance with the innermost spirit of English and American com-
mon law. It recognizes the existence of undeserved distress
among workingmen and undertakes to alleviate their suffering
by giving them a claim upon some person who is pecuniarily
responsible. And that is precisely the principle embodied in
the time-honored common-law rule that the principal is liable
for the acts of his agent.

The course of reasoning thus followed to justify the principal-
and-agent theory of liability also justifies the workmen’s com-
pensation acts adopted by all the leading countries of Europe,
which require the employer to assume all the risks of the
employment which he calls into being. But while the employer
makes the primary payment, just as he pays for the wear and
tear of his machinery or the loss of his plant by fire, the con-
sumers ultimately pay the cost. The alternative to such a
general distribution of the financial burdens of industrial acci-
dents is the present method, by which the entire burden is put
primarily upon the poorest classes, and when it crushes them,
to the damage of the community, is at last tardily assumed by
the latter through the public charities.


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


571


While the principal European nations have reached the third
stage of accident legislation, many of them have advanced to a
fourth stage. In England, Denmark, and Spain the legislature
was content to prescribe the compensation which an employer
should pay for the injury of an employee. It did not furnish
to the injured employee any security for such payment further
than the usual liens upon the employer’s property or upon any
insurance money due him. The omission might prove a serious
one upon occasion ; for example, when a great colliery explosion
kills scores of workmen the resulting indemnities would almost
inevitably bankrupt the employer unless he had taken out an
accident-insurance policy upon his mine. In order to guarantee
the payment of these indemnities the countries outside of the
three mentioned above have resorted to compulsory insurance.
Germany, the pioneer in the whole movement, adopted, as we
have seen, the simple expedient of the collective responsibility
of employers organized by industries. Austria employs the
same system, except that the employers’ mutual associations
are organized by districts or provinces rather than by indus-
tries. In Italy and Finland employers may transfer their liabili-
ties to such mutual associations ; otherwise they must carry
accident insurance in the state insurance office or authorized
companies, or deposit securities with the proper state officers.
Holland allows only the three latter alternatives, while Norway
has gone still farther and made its state insurance institution
the sole means of collecting premiums from employers and
paying indemnities to workmen. France, finally, is trying the
original method of giving injured working people a government
guarantee of their pensions through the proceeds of a special
tax upon the establishments subject to the law.

Should the United States, or any of our states, enact a
workmen’s compensation law, one would expect the example
of England rather than the Continent to be followed, at least
until the impracticability of leaving the matter of insurance to
the initiative of the employer has been fully demonstrated.
And while the genius of America favors voluntary rather than
compulsory insurance, the private institutions to furnish such


572


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


insurance are already developing. Should Congress enact a
law requiring interstate carriers to compensate employees for
all injuries m their employment, it would find many of the
largest systems already provided with insurance institutions
in the form of relief funds, which, under government supervi-
sion, would serve their purpose admirably. On the other hand,
should the individual commonwealths enact such compensation
laws for all mechanical industries, they would find already in
existence a large business in liability and accident insurance,
which is being transacted by private companies. These com-
panies are now issuing to employers workmen’s collective
policies that promise the payment of stated sums for certain
definite injuries ; for example, in the event of death or the
loss of two eyes or limbs, a sum equal to one year’s wages,
not exceeding $1500; for the loss of one limb, a sum equal to'
one third the above. Such blanket policies would be issued,
by many companies, if public statutes required the compensa-
tion of accidents upon an established scale; and as insurance
companies are already subject to public supervision, it would
involve the introduction of no new principle to require their
accident-insurance policies to conform to certain standards that
might be embodied in a workmen’s compensation act.


Albany, New York.


Adna F. Weber.


The fate of the first American attempt to establish cooper-
ative accident insurance in place of employers’ liability illustrates
the difficulties that will attend the realization in this country of
the principle of trade risk as it has been accepted throughout
Europe. In 1902 the Maryland legislature enacted two laws
(chapters 139 and 412) which abolished the doctrines of com-
mon employment and contributory negligence with respect to
workmen engaged in mining and transportation. But the acts
permitted the employers to secure exemption from this addi-
tional liability by paying over to the state insurance commis-
sioner an annual sum proportioned to the number of employees
and the hazards of their trade, thus creating a fund for the


EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY


573


indemnification of the families of workmen so unfortunate as
to be killed while at their work. Employees might be called
upon for one half the contributions made by each employer.
The measure was certainly well-intentioned in spite of its
crudeness, and under its provisions seven quarrying companies
and two street-railway companies deposited with the insurance
commissioner sums amounting to $5314, which was substan-
tially all expended in the payment of five death claims at the
statutory rate of $1000 for each employee. On July 3, 1903,
however, an employee of the United Railways and Electric
Company of Baltimore sued the company for damages on
account of personal injury sustained through the alleged negli-
gence of the company. The company pleaded that it had
obtained exemption from liability for negligence by contrib-
uting to the insurance fund under the operation of the new
laws, but the court of common pleas of Baltimore city held
(April 27, 1904) that the legislature had no authority to
exempt an employer from legal liabilities and thus “take away
from citizens a legal right which they had theretofore enjoyed
and which could be enforced by them in the courts ; nor to
deny to them the right to have their cases heard before a jury.”
The act was also unconstitutional in that it vested “in the
insurance commissioner powers and functions essentially judicial
in their character.”

It is not to be doubted, however, that a workmen's compen-
sation act could be framed that would be entirely in harmony
with the requirements of American constitutional law, knd it is
particularly worthy of note that the Massachusetts Committee
on Relations between Employer and Employee, on which there
were representatives of both employers and employees, unani-
mously recommended a workmen's compensation law quite
similar to the English act, which has operated with so much
general satisfaction that in 1901 it was extended to agriculture.

A. F. W.


August 25, 1905.


XXVI


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY 1

Twenty years have now passed since the first law on com-
pulsory workmen’s insurance in Germany went into operation.
It represented the first step towards the realization of that
broad scheme whose outlines were put forth by the emperor
William I in his well-known “ Message” (. Botschaft ) of Novem-
ber 17, 1881, the “ Magna Charta of German Social Policy,”
as it is called by some, not altogether unreservedly, for of sub-
sequent legislative measures following in its steps none has
overstepped the limits which it describes. Such deliberate and
direct evolution adds much to the interest connected with the
problem itself; it considerably simplifies the investigation of
the question as to what has been the success of the scheme in
its contact with life’s reality, and how far the wish of the law-
giver was realized “ that the cure of social evils be sought for
not exclusively in the repression of social-democratic excesses,
but also in the active furthering of the workmen’s well-being.” 2

. . . Those who visited the Palais de l’Economie Sociale at the
Universal Paris Exhibition of 1900 were certainly very much
impressed by the obelisk representing the mass of gold equiva-
lent to the insurance benefits that were paid out in Germany to
workmen between the years 1885 and 1899. Such an obelisk
would have weighed 961,000 kilograms, and would have had
a nominal value of 2,400,000,000 marks (about $600,000,000),
a truly imposing figure, which exceeded all expectations ; the
labels with the inscriptions “ Grand Prix,” that were displayed

1 From the Yale Review, Vol -XII, 1904, pp 716-730. See also Famam, “ Psy-
chology of German Workmen’s Insurance,” Yale Review , Vol XIII, pp 98-113

2 Dass die Heilung sozialer Schaden nicht ausschhesslich auf dem Wege der
Repression sozialdemokratischer Ausschreitungen, sondern gleichmassig auf dem
der positiven Forderung des Wohles dei Arbeiter zu suchen sein werde.

574


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY


575

everywhere on the walls of this particular pavilion, bore witness
to the full expert appreciation.

A few figures will give a more comprehensive idea of this
gigantic organization. In 1900 there were 23,021 sick-benefit
clubs (. Krankenkassen 1 2 ) ; the number of insured was 9,520,763,
— that is, 423 insured in each club (409.4 in 1899). Accident
business was done by 1 1 3 professional associations (Berufsge?ios-
senschafteri) (48 of these rural), 478 governmental, provincial,
and communal executive authorities ( Ausfuhrungsbehorden ), and
13 insurance offices of builders’ associations ( Versicherungsan -
stalten der Baugcwerksberufsgen ossenschaften) . No exact data
can be obtained as to the activity of these latter. 2 Accord-
ingly, any correct estimate as to the number of persons insured
would be possible only with reference to associations and to
executive authorities. By the former 18,073,174 persons were
insured in 1901; by the latter, 793,565. However, the first
figure is excessive, as persons occupied simultaneously in indus-
try and in agriculture are insured and quoted twice; in 1895
they numbered about i,6oo,ooo. 3 Bringing in these correc-
tions, we should not be wrong in assuming the number of those
insured against accident to be 18,000,000.

Invalid and old-age insurance is done by thirty-one insurance
institutions ( Versichcrungsanstalteri) and by nine special estab-
lishments (besondere Kasseneinnchttmgen). The number of
those compulsorily insured was 11,813,259 in 1895, but now,
especially after the reforms of 1899, it should be considerably
larger; this fact among others is shown by the returns from
the sale of invalid insurance stamps, which show an increase
from 93,000,000 marks in 1891 to 134,000,000 in 1901. As
regards those insured for invalidity and old age not on the
compulsory basis, an attempt towards an exact estimation of
their number would meet almost insuperable difficulties.


1 The difficulty of rendering similar expressiofts into English rests in the
different formation of these organizations m Germany, on the one hand, and in
America and England, on the other

2 See Amthche Nachnchten d. R V. A , 1902, p 114.

8 See Amthche Nachnchten , 1902, p. 5, and ibid., 1903, p. 5.


576 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


From 1885 to 1897, 2,908,200,000 marks have been collected
for workmen’s insurance. The individual items composing this
sum are as follows :


Million Marks !

Interest
and Other
Profits

Employees

Employers

Government

Sickness . . • • 95 2 5

Accident

Invalidity and old age . . . 355-6

401. 1
547-2
355-6

98.4

61.9

66 6
693

Total, 1885-1897 1308.1

Percentage of total expenditure 44-98

I 3°3 9
4483

3 - 3 8

197.8

68


The years 1898 to 1900 show returns from sick -insurance
of 584,800,000 marks; from accidents, 277,800,000 marks;
from invalidity and old age, about 441,000,000 marks, — which
brings the total up to 4,311,900,000 marks; by this time this
sum will beyond doubt exceed 5,000,000,000 marks.

These sums cover the claims and go towards forming the
funds of the organizations of workmen’s insurance. These
funds increase with an extraordinary speed. Thus in 1897 sick-
benefit clubs were in the possession of 146,500,000 marks;
associations, of 157,800,000; and insurance institutions, of
585,200,000 marks, — forming a total of 889,502,609 marks,
while towards the end of 1900 the invalidity-insurance institu-
tions and nine special establishments showed an accumulation
of 847,195,466.73 marks. 1

The costs of administration were during the period from 1885
to 1897 altogether 205,200,000 marks, that is, 10. r per cent of
the total expenditure. They show, however, a tendency to
decrease ; they were individually as follows :


1885-1897

1898

1900

Sick insurance .....

Accident insurance . .

m

Invalid and old-age insurance

, 6.0%

19.6

13*4

5 - 7 %

14-3

10.3

90%

64


1 Towards the end of 1901, 929,162,180.19 marks. AmtUche Nachrichteriy 1903,
No, 1, pp 146 and 1 67,


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY


The claims paid show a very steady increase ; the amounts
are stated in the accompanying table.

Of this expenditure of 2,413,- — - — —

800.000 marks between 1885 and Rate of

_ -IV Million Increment

1889, 48.3 per cent was covered Year Marks against the

by the rates of workmen, 45 5 Preceding^ ear

per cent by employers, and 6.2 1SS5 541

per cent by the government. For 1886 61 9 *4 4%

1900 the expenditure of the in- l8S8 ?S2 8

dividual classes was, respectively, 1889 92.6 184

176.500.000 (sickness), 101,100,- i8 9 ° ”2.7 21.7

000 (accidents), and 85,900,000 ^

(old age and invalidity), — alto- 1893 1789 12.1

gether 363,500,000 marks, almost i8 94 lS 9 0 56

a million marks daily. In 1901 jg^ 229.1 *9.8

the expenditure increased in the 1897 256.4 119

accident class to 1 15,000,000 and i8 9 8 2 7 9*7 9 * 1

in the invalidity and old-age class 1899 304,7 8 9 _

to 98,000,000. 1885-1899 24138

The sick benefits paid from

1885 to 1900 numbered 42,800,000 cases, with 720,400,000
days of sickness; down to 1901, 1,033,301 accident claims were
paid; from January 1, 1891, to the end of 1901, 734,251 pen-
sions were paid for invalidity, 14,309 for sickness, and 389,971
for old age ; in all 1,138,531 pensions were paid by the forty
invalidity-insurance institutions and establishments mentioned
above. Towards January 1, 1902, these were paying 675,095
individual pensions.

The figures quoted show what enormous sums were collected
by the organizations of workmen’s insurance and what con-
siderable masses of population were and are benefiting by
these* To fully appreciate these results we should compare the
present situation of the German workman with that previous
to the reforms in question. Thus, for instance, in 1876 there
were in Germany 5239 sick-benefit clubs* having 869,204
members; as late as 1880 some progress is noticeable in
Prussia, but even then we find only one and one-third million


578 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

insured against sickness and a still smaller number against
accident, invalidity, and old age.

The satisfactory part of German compulsory workmen’s insur-
ance rests not only upon its financial success ; the very fact
that 44.98 per cent of the total was contributed by the work-
men themselves shows what an excellent school of thrift and
providence it has proved itself to the persons concerned. Not
much less (namely, 44 83 per cent of the total) represents the
contribution of the employers, — a sacrifice which to our mind
possesses even greater social importance than the contribution
of the workmen. It must not be forgotten, first, that this sum
contains an increase of workmen’s pay; second, that this in-
crease is employed towards saving and supporting the working
power of the employed classes ; and that it supplants success-
fully the contributions which the whole community formerly had
to pay towards the maintenance of the pauper workman, and
which, after all, went to benefit the employer.


Expenditures

Million Marks

1885-1897

1899

I9OO

Medical aid . . . .

2 43 4

31.92

34-33

Medicaments, etc ... .

1995

24 56

25 99

Pecuniary benefits to members

5382

63 55

69-95

Pecuniary benefits to their families

90


Pecuniary benefits in maternity cases

16 6


Infirmaries and reconvalescence .

138-7

25 28

27 58

Funeral benefits

44 9


Other expenses, as transportation, etc ...

76.7


Apart from this purely economic point there is the question
of popular hygiene yet to consider. Formerly the workman in
case of sickness or accident would generally seek medical advice
and attendance either too late or not at all. Cures undertaken
in the far from hygienic surroundings of the workman’s dwell-
ings were not always satisfactory, $vere hardly ever carried
through, and, at the best, expensive drugs had to be dispensed
with, because the workman’s savings and his credit would soon


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY


579


be exhausted. These evils were palliated considerably by the
sick-benefit clubs, which provided the sick with medical aid,
medicine, and financial support, thus partly at least making
good the loss of wages. An enumeration of the individual
items (see table on opposite page) of expenditure in the sick-
benefit clubs under the new law will still better show the full
scope of their activity. This expenditure shows an increase in
fairly constant proportions as follows :


Years . ...

1896

1S97

1898

1899

1900

Million marks . . .

11S.72

13 ° 44

138.6S j

' 5 S 78 |

172.70


The immediate result of this activity shows itself in a decrease
of mortality among the members of sick-benefit clubs. Between
1888 and 1897 the percentages of deaths by years were: 0.96,
0.95, 0.99, 0.98, 0.98, 0.90, 0 89, 0.86, o 85.

The influence of associations and invalidity-insurance insti-
tutions lies also in a similar direction.

The associations and executive authorities spent from 1885 to
1898 on general medical and medicinal assistance, 39,114,523
marks; in 1899, 6,439,420.19; and in 1900, 6,919,962.45 marks.
If to this we add 2,562,790 marks that have been spent by the
same institutions on assisting early cases of sickness to the
thirteenth week, we find a total expenditure on sickness of over
55,000,000 marks between 1885 and 1900. The importance of
such early help follows from the fact that during the year 1896
out of 9619 cases 80 per cent (7677) were treated on this basis
with complete success.

In the class of accidents we are also able to trace the favor-
able results obtained through the activity of associations and
executive authorities ; we find the proportion of serious cases
decreasing, though the general number of accidents insured is
constantly increasing (see table on following page).

Finally, we wish to mention here the accident wards ( Unfall -
stationen) instituted, for “example, in Berlin by eight local
associations; in other places it is the duty of these associa-
tions to see that boxes with bandages and so forth be kept


5 8 o trade unionism and labor problems

Number of Persons to whom Benefits were first Awarded

! Absolute I Per 1000 Insured


Accident Caused Accident Caused


Year

Total

Death 1

Permanent

Incapacity

al.

Total

Death 1

Permanent

Incapacity

g* &

£ 3

0 rt

g* S'


|


Entire

Partial

i s


Entire

Partial

S 8
a> a

1886

10,540

2,716

1,778

3,961

2,085

283

i 0 73

O.48

I.06

O.56

1887

17,102

3,270

3,166

8,462

2,204

4.15

0.79

O.77

2.05

0-54

1888

21,057

3.64s

2,203

11,023

4,186

2 O4

0 35

0 21

I.07

0.41

1889


5. l8 5

2,882

i6 >337

6,615

2 32

0 39

O 22

1.22

O.49

1890

41,420

5 . 9 S 8

2 ,68l

22,615

10,166

3 °4

044

0 20

1.66

0,74

1891

5 °» 5°7

6,346

2,561

27,778

13,812

2 80

0 35

O 14

i -54

0.77

1892

54,827

5.811

2,640

3 °> 5 6 9

15,807

3 °4

0.32

015

1.69

088

1893

61,874

6,245

2,487

36,236

16,906

34 i

0.34

0 14

2 00

0 93

1S94

68,677

6,250

i, 75 2

3 8 > 95 2

21,723

3 78

0 34

0 10

2 14

1.20

1895

74,467

6,335

1,668

4 o, 5 2 7

25,937

405

0-35

0 09

2.20

I 41

1896

85,272

6,989

i> 5 2 4

44,373

32,386

484

0.39

0.09

2 52

I 84

1897

91,171

7,287

M 5 2

46,489

35-943

5 08

0.41

0 08

2 59

2.00

1898

96.774

7,848

1,109

47,764

40,053

5 - 3 o

0 43

006

2 62

2.19

1899

104,811

7,999

I > 2 97

51,240

44,275

563

0 43

0 07

2 75

2.38

1900

106,447

8,449

1,366

5 1 » 1 1 1

45,521

563

0.45

0.07

2.70

2 41

1886-1900

915,965

90,333

30,566

477,447

317,619

4 03

0 40

0,13

2 10

1.40

1902

116,089

8,359

1,416

54,340

5 I >974

615

044

008

288

2.75


in all factories ; also that at least one of the working staff be
instructed in first aid to the injured.


Year

Marks

1891

372.84

1892

31,884.20

,893

108,338 52

1894

364,576.61

1895

631,788.98

1896

I » I 75 » 5 ° 4 * 3 8

1897

I > 993 > 59 2 * 22

1898

2 > 769, 33 °* 2 3

1899

4 , 056 , 975*19

1900

6,210,726.33

1901

7,912,219.85


We find also similar provisions in
the Invalid Insurance Act of 1899.
The insurance institutions have the
right to provide medical and medicinal
assistance to sick workmen before the
term prescribed (twenty-six weeks),
if the disease threatens to end in in-
capacity to work; in this case these
institutions receive a compensation
from sick-benefit clubs. Moreover, if
there is ground to believe that the
person receiving an invalid pension


1 The number of fatal accidents is given in this table for the sake of convenience.


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY 581

will regain his ability to work, the insurance institutions may
procure for him the means of taking the treatment required.
Thus from 1891 to 1901 they expended 16,500,000 marks for
the purposes mentioned (see table on opposite page).

Special efforts are made to combat consumption, either by
cooperating directly with the Central Committee for Building
Sanatoria for Consumptives or by providing the necessary capi-
tal at low rates. 1 The returns of these institutions make a very
favorable showing. Of consumptive cases which were cured,
or at least considerably improved, the percentages were : in
1897, 68 ; in 1898, 74; in 1899, 74; in 1900, 72; and in 1901,
77. Of other patients in these years, respectively, 69, 73, 71, 72,
and 74 per cent. General mortality from consumption is steadily
on the decrease; in places with a population above 15,000 it
was, per 100,000 : in 1895, 249.2 ; in 1896, 234; in 1897, 230;
in 1898, 213.6; in 1899, 221.8, and in 1900, 222.6.

Besides their medical activity the organs of workmen’s insur-
ance, and especially the professional associations, are super-
vising the sanitation of factories and similar establishments.
They work in conjunction with the special official inspectors,
of whom in 1896 there were 280, while the supervisors of the
association numbered 201.

After the exposition of its economical and sanitary influ-
ence the question of the moral and educational value of com-
pulsory insurance arises. Many points are, of course, patent
at the first glance ; almost all writers on the subject accentu-
ate the legal and the social rise of the working class through
education to a greater independence in mind and action, the
pacifying influence upon social relations, and the encourage-
ment towards a more sober and ordered mode of life. The
change wrought by it upon the workman’s mental attitude
has not, however, received that attention which it indubitably
deserves.

Of all evils inherent in the “ lower classes ” that are at
present accessible to the*active care of the legislator, there is

1 In 1900, 3,766,761.78 marks and in 1901, 5,038,751.39 marks were expended
by these institutions for this purpose alone.


582 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

none worse than the entire absence of motives for thrift and
providence. No doubt, the contemporary workman may have
the same predisposition, even the same leanings towards social
“ decency ” and prudence; but the conditions of his existence
are such that frugality based on individual effort often requires
considerable sacrifices and yet often has the result that the
first adverse fortune will blow the petty savings to the winds.

As a means to overcome the sullen fatalistic indifference
born of such knowledge, compulsory insurance has certainly
the least heinous aspect. Its further educational value will, of
course, depend upon the form which the subsidies derived from
it will take. If the consciousness of the workingman will see
in them not benevolence but his due, that has been earned by
personal effort and work, his self-esteem is sure to be raised.

There is current in German literature an interpretation of
these legal relations which is based upon the principle of the
financial law ; we find it insisted upon that the contributions
paid should be looked upon as a certain kind of tax that has
no relation whatever, either economic or legal, to the benefits
paid. According to this view workmen’s insurance should not
be looked upon as an insurance proper, but as a kind of “state
provision” ( staatliche Fursorge ), which is something not far
removed from ordinary poor relief.

Not wishing to enter upon a thorough discussion of these
views, we merely wish to mention that such theories are sup-
ported by nothing extant in legislation, and that their realiza-
tion would bring forth effects directly opposite to those aimed
at. Suffice it to point out the dislike with which any taxation
is received by the populace. By calling the law one of “ work-
men’s insurance,” and the payments collected from the insured
“shares,” the legislator has admitted no inconsistency, for it
was distinctly emphasized that the insurance benefits have
nothing whatever to do with poor relief, and that the “ insured ”
has a legal claim on them in case of illness, accident, incapacity,
and old age.

Turning from the workman to the employer, we find that the
interests of the latter have visibly profited by the improvement


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY 583


of the conditions of labor of the former, which has been
followed by an increased productiveness of his work. There
has been, and still is, much opposition of employers to com-
pulsory insurance, yet on the whole there is no lack of con-
ciliatory opinions coming from the same camp. One of the
chief objections, namely, that the increased expense of labor
would impair the competitive power of German industry abroad,
has been met by the argument that even before the time of
compulsory insurance many employers did insure their em-
ployees with private companies without any prejudice to their
own interests ; also that the expenditure imposed upon the em-
ployer is comparatively insignificant . 1

Without going to the length of some writers, who would fain
ascribe the enormous development which German industry has
shown of late to compulsory insurance, it cannot be denied
that it contributed to it in no small degree, if it were only by
strengthening the purchasing power of the home market.

Compulsory insurance has also vastly improved the relations
between workman and employer. Accustomed as the German
people are to be led by the government, both parties are
enabled to meet on its neutral platform, are brought nearer
through discussion of common affairs or arbitration in disputes,
are familiarized with quiet and businesslike argumentation, and
are better acquainted with each other’s needs, wants, and modes
of thinking. Thus an esprit dc corps is developing, drawing the
attention from narrowly selfish to broader common interests.
Evidence of this is seen in a whole series of social measures
which are directed towards these ends and which were initiated
by the employers.

It seems almost premature as yet to venture a discussion as
to how far the whole nation as such has profited by the measures
in question. Some parts of the whole problem may, however,
be attacked even now.

In the first place, the poor-law unions have found powerful
assistance in compulsory insurance, together with all other
branches of official and private benevolence. Although there
1 According to Greisel, it does not exceed 5^- per cent of the wages.


584 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

are no official statements extant on this matter, as it is not
considered in German statistics at all, it may suffice to point
out that those circumstances that make for indigence are the
very ones which ’are most insured against. Thus, of the total of
all cases insured, at least 50 per cent were against contingencies
that ordinarily lead towards impoverishment.

It would, of course, be a great mistake to assume that the
weight thus taken off the shoulders of poor-law unions should
be equivalent to the figure stated ; for, apart from the difficulty
of bringing into the medley of all causes, objective and sub-
jective, any system that would fit them for the application of
statistical calculations, any correspondence of effects would be
disturbed by the fact that the poor-law unions cooperate with
the insurance organizations, doling out subventions sometimes
rather late, and fairly often in insufficient proportions.

Neither can there be any correspondence for the further rea-
son that the new acts (of July 11, 1891, for Prussia, and March
12/1894, for the Empire) on poor relief have caused a consid-
erable increase in the budgets, these budgets in their turn being
largely dependent upon purely adventitious chances and local
conditions (for example, a large influx of unemployed).

Finally, ^the means that are at the disposal of the poor-relief
authorities are almost always inadequate, and with the easing of
the burden in one direction the expenses of other departments
will therefore often increase.

These are the reasons why no exact numerical statements
were obtained by the inquiries conducted in 1894 by the
German Association for Poor Relief and Charity and in 1897
by the Statistical Bureau of the German Empire on the initi-
ative of the Chancellor. Nevertheless, opinions were every-
where expressed that all benevolent institutions did profit by the
activity of compulsory insurance, in spite of the fact that in
some cases the budget of these institutions grew considerably
larger. The Act on Sick Insurance was everywhere the most
helpful, the Old-Age and Invalidity Insurance Act less so, and
the Act on Accidents least of all. In a few instances, however,
we are even able to give numerical statements. In Saxony the


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY 585


items of expenditure for poor relief were the following (per
10,000 of population):


1885

#

1890

Sickness ...

67.9

54 1

Accidents ....

i 76

1 3*9

Old age .

31*7

32.3

Funeral benefits . . . . .... . .

03

1 03


In Berlin the expenses for poor relief from 1 880-1 881 to
1895-1896 were by years per capita the following: 4.16
(marks), 4.15, 3.98, 3.90, 3.77, 3.70, 3.71, 3.59, 3.51, 3.51,
3 24, 3.41, 3.64, 3.38, 3.35, 3.35, 3.29. In' Cologne these
expenses fell between 1879-1880 and 1896-1897 from 7.81
marks to 4.66 marks per capita.

The workmen’s insurance organizations need not necessarily
invest their funds in government stock ; they also have the right
to supply capital to institutions of public utility. The follow-
ing table shows what considerable sums were loaned for such
purposes.

The thirty-one invalidity-insurance institutions and nine
special establishments had invested towards the end of 1901:


Marks


1. Towards building workmen’s dwellings 87 * 529 , 567.00

2. Towards agricultural credits (on mortgages, narrow-gauge

railways, keeping of roads, improvement of soil, cattle

farming, etc.) . . . . 64,588,410.00

3. Towards building infirmaries and convalescent homes of

all kinds, refuges and shelters, public baths, homes
for the blind, infants’ schools, slaughterhouses, water-
works, canals, drainage, cooperative stores, etc. , . 108,237,387.80

Total 260,355,364.80


Compulsory insurance may yet be destined to play a very im?
portant r61e in the future of Germany in the capacity of a
savings institution, hoarding, as it were, a large and cheap
capital to be used for sudden and urgent public needs.


5 86 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

A less prominent and tangible yet very valuable service has
been rendered by compulsory insurance to Germany in the
creation of a wholly new class of small annuitants, which fact,
besides being itself very gratifying, has yet the further result,
that it has made the annuitants leave the more expensive in-
dustrial centers for the country, thus forming something of an
antidote to the “ rural exodus.” Some capital is thus conveyed
to the villages, compensating them at least to a slight degree
for the loss they suffer from this emigration of the younger
element.

As to the influence which compulsory insurance has had upon
the physical and moral hygiene of those parts of the nation
that it did not immediately concern, we might almost repeat
what has already been stated as to its value for the working
class. There is the improvement of sanitary conditions, which
though starting at one point would necessarily spread through
all adjoining social layers; there is also the raising of the
nation’s vital forces by the increase of the number of healthy
and able-bodied individuals.

In this connection it seems justifiable to point out the steady
decrease of general mortality, in which compulsory insurance
was, of course, not the only factor, yet certainly one of the most
important. The yearly mortality per thousand was: in 1851—
i860, 27.8; in 1861-1870, 28.4; in 1871-1880, 28.8; in
1881-1890, 26.5 ; in 1891-1900, 23.5. This sudden decrease
is even more forcibly shown by a comparison of the figures
giving the average mortality in town and village during the
interval from 1867 to 1894. Down to the eighties the mortality
in villages was quite 2 per cent lower than in towns ; from about
the middle of that decade this difference begins to diminish
rather quickly, and in 1890 it turns in the opposite direction,
till the average mortality of towns falls below that of villages
Without overlooking many other influences combining to pro-
duce this effect, we are yet fully inclined to see even in this, to
a great extent, the action of compulsory insurance. 1

1 It may also be noted that the percentage of suicide in Germany is almost
constant, while it continues increasing m other countries.


WORKMEN’S INSURANCE IN GERMANY 587

Improving general social and economic conditions has natu-
rally had an influence also upon the decrease of crime. The
following table, giving the number of sentences passed in the
respective years for theft per 10,000 of population above twelve
years of age, will give a fit illustration of what has been said.

In view of the many tangible results that

have been obtained in Germany by means of Yeats Per 10,000
compulsory insurance of workmen, there is
nothing surprising in the circumstance that
writers on the subject, especially if they be
Germans, do not stint their praises for the
whole legislation in toto, lapsing at every
attempt at a critical valuation of its measures
into rather full-voiced panegyrics. This very
pardonable tendency is strongly inherent even
in comparative sketches, which take from it
a rather strong color. 1 Official publications 2
are great sinners in this respect, though the
tendency shows itself generally merely in a
partial depression of the critical faculties,
which by no means interferes with the exact-
ness of the material supplied. We find but few voices raised
in protest against this exuberance of general satisfaction.

They who point out the insufficiencies and inefficiencies we are
guilty of, who are not averse to noticing superiority though it be of a
foreign pattern, show certainly more public spirit than those who fold
their hands with a self-satisfied conviction that now at last Germany
is heading the progress of social reform. ... It has always been the
wiser course to take the good where you find it than to rest on laurels. 3

There could be nothing worse for us than if now we found full
satisfaction in self-pleased pride, ruminating in contemplative idle-
ness over our work so excellently well done. 4

1 See Zacher, Die Arbeiter-Versicherung im Auslande, 1898-1900. Boediker,
Die Arbeiterversicherung in den Europaischen Staaten, 1895

2 See the pamphlet written for the Pans Exhibition, 1900

8 E. Fr. in Soztale Praxts, 1900, p. 34

4 Frankenberg in Braun’s Archtv fur soztale Gesetzgebung und Stattshk , Vol.
XII, p. 72.


1882

32.6

1883

3i-3

1884

30 1

1885

279

1886

27.2

1887

26.0

1 888

25 4

1889

27 8

1890

27 2

1891

28 1

1892

31.0

1893

26 9

1894

26.6

1895

25 6

1899

194

1900

20 2


588 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

Van der Borght, in spite of the exaggerations he has com-
mitted himself to in his book, is also led to the remark :


Of course, we have no right to rest, jubilating at what we have
attained. In the very structure of workingmen's, insurance there is
much yet to be repaired and completed.


There are certainly many gaps and omissions left in legisla-
tion. Yet to us this does not seem to be all that can be said
in criticising it ; there are some points of no mean importance
which should be questioned more seriously than has been done,
— a task we intend to take up at some other time.


Gottingen.


Norbert Pinkus.


XXVII

INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT 1


The purpose of workingmen's insurance is to make pro-
vision for the assistance of workingmen when through any
incapacity they are unable to earn their usual wages. A work-
ingman may be unable to work as the result of any of four
contingencies, — accident, sickness, old age or invalidity, or
inability to obtain employment ; and a complete system of
assistance must necessarily cover all four of these cases. It is
now very generally admitted that insurance of some kind,
mutual or state-aided, voluntary or compulsory, offers the best
means of providing for the first three contingencies, that is,
for those involving physical disability. Within recent years,
however, the desirability of extending the field* of insurance to
the fourth contingency, where inability to earn wages is the
result of involuntary idleness, has been strongly urged. It is
the purpose of this paper to cfonsider to what extent a system
of insurance can be profitably employed in this last case.

Fortunately, we need not study this problem from the purely
theoretical standpoint. The fact that during the widespread
industrial depression of recent years, many workingmen have
been forced to remain in involuntary idleness has led to

1 From the Political Science Quarterly, Vol XII, 1897, pp. 476-489. See also
Report of the Massachusetts Board upon Unemployment, 1895.

The literature of insurance against unemployment is already extensive. For
the best account of the Swiss experiments with which this paper chiefly deals, the
reader is referred to two Circulaires of the Musee Social, Nos 2 and 5 of Series
B ; the report of the French Office du Travail, Documents sur la question du
ckdmage , 1896; and the paper by Eugene Rostand, “ De ^assurance contre le
chbmage involontaire,” contained in the report of the third session of the Inter-
national Congress in Relation to Accidents to Labor and Social Insurance, Milan,
1894. The Circulaires of the Musee Social give the most complete bibliography
of the question that has been prepared,

589


590


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


attempts in various countries to make provision against unem-
ployment through some system of insurance. Conspicuous
among them are the out-of-work insurance institutions that
have been created in several of the cantons of Switzerland, at
Cologne, and at Bologna. Of these the Swiss organizations are
of much the greatest importance, and for that reason most
attention will be devoted to their operation. A consideration
of the efforts there made will serve not only to illustrate the
principles involved in the organization of this kind of an insur-
ance system but also to show the practical difficulties with
which its administration is attended.

The first attempt under government auspices to provide for
insurance against unemployment was made by the town of
Berne. On January 13, 1893, the town council provided for
the creation of a municipal institution for the insurance of
workingmen against unemployment. Though under municipal
authority, membership in the institution was left entirely vol-
untary. Practically the only condition of membership was the
payment of monthly dues of forty centimes ($ 0 , 077 ). To the
fund thus accumulated the town agreed to add a subsidy,
the maximum amount of which was limited to five thousand
francs ($965) a year. The constitution also provided for the
receipt of gifts from employers and other individuals.

The value of the out-of-work benefits was fixed at one franc
per day for an unmarried man, and a franc and a half for a
married man. This relief was to be granted only during the
months of December, January, and February. To be entitled
to receive it a member must have paid his dues regularly during
at least the six months next preceding, and must have been
unable to obtain work during at least fifteen days. Relief,
when granted, however, began to run after the first week of
unemployment. Various conditions were placed upon those
receiving benefits, in order to protect the institution against
imposition. Thus members out of work had to present them-
selves twice a day in a room set aside for that purpose, where
they might spend the day if they desired. A workingman who
refused work of any kind lost all right to aid of any kind : a


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT


591


member thus had no right to refuse work because it was not
in his trade. There were various other cases in which the
workingman lost his right to a benefit: for instance, when
lack of employment was the result of his own fault, and espe-
cially when he had engaged in a strike. The administration of
the fund was intrusted to a commission of seven members, of
whom three were to be named by the municipal authorities, two
by the employers contributing to the fund, and two by the
workingmen.

This institution has now been in existence a sufficient length
of time to furnish some indication of the character of the
results. The number of members during the first year, r 893—
1894, was 404. Of these 166 were aided during the year, receiv-
ing $1319.16, or an average of $7. 95 each. The highest sum
paid to any one person was $20 27. The total expenditure of
the year was $1 508.30 The receipts for the year were : dues of
members, $212.30; gifts from employers and others, $382.14;
municipal subsidy, $913.86. It will be seen that the mem-
bers contributed but 14 per cent of the total receipts, and that
they received in actual benefits six times the amount paid in
by them as dues. One would think that under such excep-
tionally favorable circumstances membership would increase
rapidly. Such, however, has* not been the case. During the
second year, 1 894-1895, there were but 390 members, or 14 less
than during the preceding year. Aid was given to 219 persons,
or more than half the members, to the extent of $1869.06, or
an average of $8 53 each. Only $263.79 out of the total receipts
of $2249.86 came from dues of members. The ratio of this
sum to the amount paid out in benefits is 14 per cent, the
members thus receiving on an average seven times the amount
contributed by them.

The institution was first established for but two years as an
experiment. In 1895, the two years having elapsed, the town
council determined by an almost unanimous vote to continue
it in operation. Some modifications were, however, introduced
in its organization. Dues were raised from forty to fifty cen-
times per month, and the maximum amount of- the municipal


592


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


subsidy was raised from $965 to 581351. Daily benefits were
increased to one and a half francs for unmarried and two francs
for married members. In addition, the administration of the
municipal employment bureau, which had until then been an
independent institution, was attached to that of the insurance
fund. The result of these changes was to increase the opera-
tions of the system. On December 31, 1895, there were 605
members enrolled, of whom 169, or 49 more than during the
preceding year to the same date, had been aided. The total
receipts during the year 1895-1896 were $2213.99, of which
$312.70 were derived from dues. The total expenditures were
$2121.30, of which $1932.22 were for benefits. In this third
year, therefore, slightly over six times the amount received as
dues from the members was paid in benefits.

Saint Gall, a town of about 30,000 inhabitants, was the*first
to follow the example of Berne in providing for the insurance
of workingmen against unemployment. Its policy, however,
differed radically from that of Berne in that it adopted the
principle of compulsory insurance. By the law of May 14, 1894,
the canton of Saint Gall authorized any of its communes to
create a compulsory-unemployment insurance institution, and
provided further that several communes might combine to
organize a general insurance system. It was on the basis of
this law that the town of Saint Gall, after an abortive attempt
to unite with the neighboring communes of Tablatt and Strau-
benzell, founded its unemployment insurance fund by act of
June 23, 1895.

The principal features of this institution may be summarized
as follows: Membership was made obligatory upon all working-
men whose daily wages did not exceed five francs, excluding
youths and apprentices earning less than two francs a day.
Weekly dues were fixed at x 5 centimes for members earning
three francs or under, 20 centimes for those earning from
three to four francs, and 30 centimes for those earning more
than four. The amount of the benefit was likewise propor-
tioned to the wages of the recipient, being 1.80, 2.10, and
2.40 francs per day respectively for the three classes. Benefits


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT


593


could not be paid to any person for more than sixty days in any
one year. In order to be entitled to benefits a member must
have paid dues uninterruptedly for at least six months, and had
to show that for at least five days he had not been able to secure
work suited to his occupation at the usual wages of the season.
Any man who was without work as the result of his own fault,
who had participated in a strike, or who refused without a good
reason work assigned to him by the employment bureau which
was operated in connection with the insurance fund, was de-
barred from any right to benefits. Workingmen incapacitated
for labor through sickness or accident were not entitled to
benefits, since they were otherwise insured against these two
contingencies. In addition to dues, the revenue of the fund
included a subsidy from the town, which, according to the law,
could not exceed a maximum of two francs for each person
insured and a subsidy from the canton. No account was taken,
apparently, of gifts and donations from employers or other
persons. The fund was administered by a commission of nine
members, two of whom were appointed by the municipal author-
ities and seven by the workingmen.

This institution commenced operations July i, 1895. The
law being obligatory, the first duty of the commissioners was
to see that all persons to whom the law applied became mem-
bers. As the result of the first notice 1535 persons joined; a
new call a month later added 579 names ; and, as the result of
further efforts, the total number of persons enrolled during the
first year was increased to 4220. This total was secured only
after securing over 150 convictions of persons who had neg-
lected to answer the summons to enroll. Of the total number
secured 2895 were members of the first class, or those earn-
ing not more than three francs ; 1 179 of the second class; and
but 146 of the third.

During the year 430, or about 10 per cent of the members,
registered themselves as without work. Of these only 363
received benefits, since many had not made the required con-
tributions for six months. To the beneficiaries was paid a total
of $4536.30, or an average of $10.55. The highest amount


594


TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


received by one person was $24.32, and the lowest $1.74. The
receipts and expenditures during the year were as follows :


Receipts

Contributions of members . . $4183.14

Municipal subsidy, cash .... . . . . 772 00

Municipal subsidy, payment of operating expenses . 1084 44

Interest . ... 2181

$6061.39

Expenditures

Benefits $ 453 ^ 30

Operating expenses ... . . .... 1084.44

$5620.74

Balance on hand ... . . . . $440.65


It will thus be seen that the year closed with a surplus in the
bank, in spite of the fact that the city paid only a portion of
the maximum sum that it could be required to pay. It should
be remembered, however, that as this was the first year no
benefits were paid during the first six months, since no member
could before that time have made the required number of pay-
ments. Accordingly, the officials estimated that future charges
would be much heavier and that it would be necessary either
to increase contributions or to reduce the benefits.

This institution, like that at Berne, was created for a pro-
visional period of two years. Before the end of the second year,
however, the city council on November 8, 1896, by a decisive
vote ordered the suspension of the fund after June 30, 1897.
The first experiment in compulsory insurance against unem-
ployment was thus declared a failure. It is worthy of note
also that this suppression was accomplished on the motion and
through the votes of representatives of the working classes in
the council.

A detailed account of the organization and operations of the
institution at Saint Gall has been given, even though its sup-
pression has been definitely decided upon, since in matters such
as this information can be gained from failures as well as from
successes. It is worth while, therefore, to examine some of the


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT


595


objections that were raised against this scheme. The first was
that which inevitably arose from the members who were forced
to make contributions without receiving any benefits in return.
This is a fundamental objection. The liability to lack of
employment varies greatly in the different trades ; so that to
require all workingmen earning less than a certain sum to
become contributors to an insurance fund, as was done at Saint
Gall, results in positive injustice. Employees having steady
employment, such as factory operatives, are made to contribute
to the insurance of workingmen such as those in the building
trades, who are certain to be unemployed more or less during
the year. The experiments at Berne and at Saint Gall have
shown that it is the workingmen in the building trades who
suffer most from lack of employment. Thus, in the former city,
though membership is open to men of all occupations and the
benefits are six or seven times the dues, only day laborers, for
the most part in the building trades, and other employees in
the same trades have availed themselves of the fund. Out
of the 226 persons registered the second year as out of work,
there were 163 day laborers, 18 plasterers or painters, 13 roof-
ers, 10 masons, 9 carpenters, 4 stonecutters, 3 cabinet-makers,
2 locksmiths, 1 wood sawyer, 1 cement worker, and 1 fireman.
It will be observed that factory employees proper were abso-
lutely unrepresented. Turning now to the experience of Saint
Gall under compulsory insurance, it is found that, though both
factory and building-trades employees were required to be in-
sured, practically all the persons aided belonged to the latter
class. Of the 430 persons registered as out of work during
the first year there were 205 day laborers, 47 masons, 18
porters, 17 house painters, 14 public messengers, 13 dressmakers,
12 plasterers, 11 carpenters, and 10 roofers, while no other
occupation was represented by as many as ten persons.

A second objection was the great difficulty experienced in
enforcing membership. The administrators of the fund found
it almost impossible to compel persons to become members
or afterwards to pay their dues, even though they resorted to
prosecution in a great many cases. In the December following


596 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

the commencement of operations they found it necessary to
send notices to mo persons who were behind i*n the payment
of their dues. On April i over 4000 francs were owing by about
1300 persons.

Finally, it was complained that the indemnities were much
too high. It was found that the efforts of those out of work
to gain employment were sensibly relaxed. Many seemed to
use every effort to obtain as much relief as possible, seeking
work earnestly only after they had been aided the maximum
number of sixty days. In a word, self-help seemed to have been
lessened in just the proportion that assistance was granted.

In spite of the check that the movement for the insurance
of workingmen has received in Switzerland through the sup-
pression of the institution at Saint Gall, efforts in this direction
have not been abandoned. Though it is generally admitted that
both the Saint Gall and the Berne systems had defects, it is
claimed that they were such as lack of experience rendered
inevitable, and that they can be eliminated by a more scientific
organization. At Basel a plan is now under consideration that
is of especial interest, since it involves an attempt to meet the
objections which have been urged against the two older schemes.
The proposed system is beyond doubt in every way a more
detailed and more carefully worked out plan of insurance than
any that has yet been put into operation.

In 1894 the council of state of Basel submitted to the gen-
eral council a proposition for the municipal insurance of work-
ingmen against unemployment. This measure, after discussion,
was first referred to a committee of experts, the leading spirit
of which was M. Adler, professor of political economy at the
University of Basel, The commission reported in April, 1896,
a modified plan. After a full discussion this report was referred
to a committee of the general council, which, after further con-
sideration, reported a specific bill, differing in but slight details
from the proposition of the committee of experts. In its final
form the plan provides for the compulsory insurance through
a municipal fund of all masons and excavators and all working-
men subject to the federal factory law who do not earn more


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT


597


than 2000 francs a year, excluding, however, young people and
apprentices earning less than 300 francs a year. In adopting
the principle of compulsion, however, the important option is
given to the workingmen of insuring themselves through volun-
tary organizations instead of through the municipal system.
This permission was granted in order to meet the objection
that was urged against the bill as first framed by the committee
of experts, that certain classes of workingmen had already vol-
untarily insured themselves through their labor organizations
and that it would be unjust to compel them to become members
of the city organization. This was notably true of the members
of the Typographia, an organization of the printers of the city.

The receipts of the fund consist of (1) dues from members,
(2) contributions from employers, (3) a subsidy from the city,
and (4) gifts and legacies. For the payment of dues and the
determination of the amount of benefits to be given, members
are first divided into three categories, — factory employees,
workingmen in the building trades who are the least subject to
unemployment, and other workingmen in the building trades.
The object of this division is to take account of the differences
in the degree of probability of unemployment. Within each of
these categories there is a further division of members into
three classes, according as their weekly earnings are 1 5 francs
or under, from 1 5 to 24 francs, or 24 francs or over. The weekly
contributions demanded of these classes are io, 15, and 20 cen-
times respectively for members of the first category; 20, 30,
and 50 centimes for members of the second ; and 30, 45, and
60 centimes for members of the third. The contribution of
employers is fixed at 10 centimes per week per workingman
insured in the first category, and 20 centimes for working-
men of the second and third categories. The city assumes all
the expenses of management and agrees to grant an annual
subsidy of 25,000 francs.

The benefits granted to members out of work vary from
80 centimes to 2 francs a day. They are graduated in an
ingenious manner according to the class to which the recip-
ients belong and according to their needs. Thus the unmarried


598 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

man, the married woman, and the widower or widow without
children under fourteen years of age receive from 0.80 to i
franc a day ; the widow or widower with children under four-
teen years of age, and the married man if he has not more than
one child under fourteen years of age receive from 1.20 to
1.50 francs per day; and, finally, the married man with several
children under fourteen years of age receives from 1.50 to 2
francs. The benefits of the married man are reduced 20 or
33 per cent if his wife is also employed, or if she receives
a benefit from the insurance fund. The maximum length of
time during which benefits can be paid is ninety days. An
important provision is that there may be paid, in place of the
above indemnities, traveling expenses for so great a distance
as two hundred kilometers, and an indemnity of 1 franc to an
unmarried or 2 francs to a married man who desires to leave
the city to obtain work elsewhere. This is to prevent a work-
ingman who has an opportunity of finding work from remain-
ing a charge upon the fund. No benefits are payable when
the lack of employment is the result of a dispute of employees
with their employer concerning the amount of their wages ;
when the member voluntarily quits his employment; when he
has been dismissed for breaking the factory or other regula-
tions , when the lack of employment is the result of sickness or
accident against which the workingman is elsewhere insured;
or when, without a valid excuse, the person insured refuses
work offered to him.

<*

The question of insurance against unemployment has also
received attention in other Swiss cities, notably Zurich and
Lausanne. As yet, however, the discussions have not resulted
in any distinct propositions ; and it will, therefore, be unneces-
sary to consider them. The institutions that have been actually
created at Cologne and Bologna offer few points of interest.-
The one at Cologne was created in 1896 and is under mu-
nicipal management. Insurance under it is purely voluntary.
Any workingman over eighteen years of age and a resident of
the city during two years can become a member by paying a
weekly contribution of 25 pfennigs. He thus acquires a “ right


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT


599


to work ” in case he is unemployed during the period from
December 15 to March 15. If work cannot be found for him,
he is entitled during the first twenty days of unemployment
to a benefit of 2 marks if he is married, or i| marks if un-
married. A large guarantee fund has been created through
gifts and the contributions of honorary members. In addition,
the city itself has granted a subsidy of several thousand dollars
as an encouragement to workingmen to become members. At
Bologna a voluntary unemployment-insurance institution has
been created which affects only employees in building trades.
Members must pay an annual contribution of 3.30 francs if
they are under twenty years of age, or 5 francs if over that
age. The out-of-work benefits are 60 centimes a day for mem-
bers of the first class and 1 franc for members of the second
class during a maximum of forty days commencing with the
sixth day of unemployment.

The experiments that have been made in Switzerland and
elsewhere, while they are not sufficiently extensive to furnish
conclusive evidence regarding the practicability of insurance
against unemployment, are fully adequate to bring out the chief
considerations that must be taken into account in any attempt
to organize such a system

An examination of the nature of the problem of unemploy-
ment shows that insurance principles are ill suited for its solu-
tion. Insurance presupposes that the risk involved shall possess
two characteristics, — it must be well defined, and it must be
the consequence of a chance that can be estimated with some
degree of certainty. The risk of unemployment conforms to
neither of these conditions. It is not well defined, since there
is no fixed criterion as to what work the unemployed should be
required to accept. It does not depend upon calculable chance,
because the personal element involved in seeking and retaining
work, to say nothing of the uncertainty of the employers’ action,
enters so largely. Though lack of employment is often unavoid-
able on the part of the workingman, the latter’s will and energy
play such an important part in the matter that any attempt to


6oo TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


distinguish unavoidable idleness is futile. Insurance concerns
itself with a risk that can be calculated and provided for in
advance; but this cannot be done in regard to lack of employ-
ment. The study of the various systems that has just been
made shows that, in spite of the fact that the term insurance
has been employed, the attempt has not really been made to
create insurance systems. In no case has the attempt been
made to calculate risks and to adjust contributions accordingly,
or indeed to make the system self-supporting. Only nominal con-
tributions have been required from members, while the great
burden of expense has been borne by the government and by
voluntary contributors. In reality, therefore, it is scarcely proper
to speak of these institutions as insurance organizations. What
has been created is really a more methodical system of granting
relief to the unemployed.

Turning now to the actual organization of the Swiss systems,
it will be seen that the radical mistake was the failure to recog-
nize the essentially different conditions obtaining in different
industries. The problem of lack of employment in the factory
trades, for example, is quite different from that in the building
trades or among ordinary day laborers. It may be confidently
stated that any attempt to introduce even a modified form of
insurance against unemployment should follow strictly trade
lines. In this respect the Basel proposition shows a marked
advance over the other systems.

This, however, brings us to the consideration of the out-of-
work benefit features of labor organizations. If unemployment
insurance should follow trade lines, every argument would seem
to indicate that such efforts should be made through existing
organizations of workingmen. The great work done by these
organizations in the way of aiding their members is well known.
For example, the chief labor correspondent of the British Board
of Trade stated, in his report on trade unions for 1895, that
one hundred of the principal unions expended during the year
$2,121,775 in relief of the unemployed. In the United States
a large part of the expenditures of the trade unions likewise go
for this purpose, though it is not possible to make any exact


INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT 6oi

statement of the amount . 1 This method of granting relief pos-
sesses manifest advantages over the use of a municipal organ-
ization. The work of unions is not charity but the highest order
of mutual aid. Labor unions, moreover, are in a peculiarly
favorable position to assist their members in obtaining work,
and are able to guard themselves against imposition. Finally,
as we have seen, unemployment is not a condition beyond the
control of individuals, and does not happen with a regularity
that can be calculated. Insurance proper affords little room for
discretion in granting relief, while each case of unemployment
should be considered upon its particular merits. Labor organ-
izations can exercise this necessary discretion in a way that is
utterly beyond the power of a municipal institution.

The logical conclusion's that in America, at least, provision
against lack of employment can best be made for the estab-
lished trades by the men themselves through tjieir organizations;
and that this provision cannot be made according to hard and
fast insurance principles, but must allow for a certain elasticity
or discretion in the granting of relief, according to fhe cir-
cumstances of each case and the amount of funds available
for this purpose.

Though the Swiss systems must be regarded as faulty in
lacking the character of true insurance, it is not desired to give
the impression that such municipal institutions cannot be made
to serve a useful purpose. On the contrary, there are involved
in their organization principles which when properly applied
can Be of great assistance in solving the problem of unemploy-
ment. They may not provide scientific insurance, but they
constitute a vast improvement over the old methods of indis-
criminate and uncertain relief. They require employees to
register and to make some personal sacrifice in order to be
entitled to relief; they insure that relief shall be granted only
to bona fide residents of the city ; and they bring the unem-
ployed under the supervision of the public authorities. This
last feature greatly facilitates finding work for idle men either

1 See Chapter XXIV, p 527, The Benefit System of the Cigar Makers’
Union.


602 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


through a public employment bureau or in the immediate serv-
ice of the government. To accomplish their work in the best
way, however, the municipal institutions should cease to lay
emphasis upon the idea of insurance. The principle of registra-
tion, accompanied by the requirement of small monthly contri-
butions, is the really valuable feature of their work. They
should seek chiefly to reach those classes which do not possess
labor organizations. Finally, they should make assistance to
the unemployed in finding work the most important part of
their duties. Only after they have failed in this effort should
they grant pecuniary relief.

William Franklin Willoughby.


XXVIII


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES IN THE UNITED
STATES AND GERMANY 1

I. United States

. . . From the recentness of the movement for the establish-
ment of these offices it is evident that other attempts must have
been made to secure the registration of the unemployed and
the equilibration of the labor market. The most important of
these agencies in the United States are the private intelligence
offices; and it is to a consideration of these that we must,
therefore, first address ourselves before we can fully understand
either the need of or the demand for offices conducted under
the control of the state.

Private employment agencies exist in almost every city of
the Union, but no systematic canvass has ever been attempted
to ascertain their number or the extent of their business. How-
ever, from some scattered data in the reports of several of the
state bureaus of labor statistics, it has been possible to compile
a few figures which are of interest, and may be considered typ-
ical of all. These show the number of private agencies in a few
cities, the number of applicants, and the estimated receipts;
but none of these statistics can be considered accurate, many
of the returns being confessedly only estimates. In Boston
there were 1 19 private employment agencies in 1893, and
reports from 87 of them showed 600,934 applicants for employ-
ment, of whom 128,912, or 21.45 P er cent, secured positions.
At the minimum charge of 50 cents apiece, this would yield

1 From the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. XIX, 1900, pp. 341-377. See
also Kellor, Out of Work, 1904

603


604 trade unionism and labor problems

the offices over $300,000 a year. 1 Commissioner Hall gives
figures for St. Louis and Kansas City which, he thinks, repre-
sent about 40 per cent of the business done in these two cities.
In St. Louis there were 6032 applications for employment in
seven women’s agencies, and 5626 positions secured. The
admitted receipts, which Mr. Hall thinks about half of what
was in fact received, were $3198. Six other agencies found
work for 20,800 out of 106,600 applicants. Their receipts are
estimated at $100,000. The Kansas City agencies were only a
little behind this, as the following figures show :


Number of Agencies

N umber of Applications

Positions Filled

Receipts from Fees

8 (for men)

64,740

43> 6 72

$ 64,464

4 (for women) .

. 22,711

3- 8 3 5

6,103


Commissioner Hall estimates that the $70,567 admitted
receipts were less than one half the amount actually taken in. 2

There were 119 licensed agencies in Chicago in 1896, at
which it is estimated that not less than 1,000,000 persons
applied for employment during the year. At the minimum
charge of $1 apiece, this would give an annual income of
$i,ooo,ooo. 3 In California 69 well-equipped private employ-
ment agencies are reported to exist, whose cost of maintenance
alone is estimated at $206,700 a year. 4 * Twenty-one private
agencies are reported from Colorado, most of them being
situated in Denver.

Inadequate as these figures are, they yet serve in some degree
to show the extent of the business done by the employment
agencies of the country, and to give an idea of the vast sums that
are paid annually by the unemployed for the purpose of securing

1 Twenty-Fourth Annual Report of Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor,
1893, p, hi.

2 Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics and Inspection
of Missouri, 1892.

8 Tenth Biennial Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of Illinois, 1898,
P* 133.

4 Seventh Biennial Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of California,

1895-1896, p. 52.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


605

employment. That these agencies meet a real want seems not
open to doubt. But the further question as to how well they
fill it and with what advantage to the unemployed is not so cer-
tainly to be answered in their favor. In fact, one of the strongest
arguments in favor of the establishment of free public employ-
ment offices rests on the abuses which exist in the private
agencies. This point is made much of by the commissioners
of labor in the various states, and their reports contain many
instances of the deception and fraud practiced by these agen-
cies on the unemployed. While they are naturally interested
in making out as strong a case as possible against the “pay”
agencies, and though a large number of these are of the highest
possible character, there is still without doubt a large class
which merely preys on the unemployed and takes advantage of
their need.

The least of the abuses which are perpetrated is the uni-
versal practice of accepting a fee, whether there is prospect of
finding a position or not, and of refusing to refund it when a
position is not secured . 1 No pay agency will ever admit that
the labor market is overstocked . 2 Worse than this is the prac-
tice of advertising for laborers to undertake work in distant
cities and of sending them to fill purely fictitious openings after
accepting their fees . 3 In the case of some of the more dishon-
est agencies there is an agreement between the foreman and
an agency, according to which men sent by the agency are
employed, but only for a few days, and then discharged to
make way for others. The fees are divided between the agent
and the foreman . 4 An additional refinement, which is reported
from New York, consists in an illicit connection of employment
agencies with alleged employers, who refer an applicant to a
guarantee agency, which is also in the league, and which exacts
another fee for looking up the references . 5 It is a not uncommon

1 The laws of a number of states require that the fee be refunded if employ-
ment is not secured.

2 “ Fraudulent Advertisement of Lucrative Employment,” by P. G Hubert, Jr.,
Lippmcotfs Magazine , Vol LIV, p. 657.

8 Illinois Report, 1898, p. 133. 4 California Report, 1896, p. 56.

6 Bulletin of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, December, 1899, p. 155.


606 trade unionism and labor problems


plan to have the employment agency located in the rear of a
dram shop, which the men, who are purposely kept waiting in
the hope of securing a position, will unfailingly patronize.

Many of the abuses here complained of are largely the result
of inadequate supervision and control of the agencies in their
dealings with an ignorant and needy class of persons, easily
victimized and slow to seek redress. To regulate these evils of
the private employment offices, a few of the states have, there-
fore, required them to pay licenses or give bonds, or do both.
Colorado, Illinois, Maine, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and Wash-
ington compel all employment offices to pay an annual license
fee, ranging from $i m Maine to $200 in Illinois. In Louisiana
and the cities of New York and Brooklyn a license must be
obtained in order to do business ; but no payment is required. 1
Five of the states — Colorado, Illinois, Louisiana, Minnesota,
and Wisconsin — place the managers of all private agencies
under heavy bonds ; and all of the states named also provide
penalties for infringement of the law. Most of them, too, regu-
late the charges which the agencies can make, providing that
no fee shall be charged unless a bona fide position is secured for
the applicant.

Free employment agencies, as private or quasi public institu-
tions, already exist in large numbers throughout the United
States, especially in the large cities. Many of the charity-
organization societies maintain employment bureaus inciden-
tal to their work of relief, and sometimes, as in Minneapolis,
Brooklyn, and Baltimore, independently thereof. In the two
last-named cities this work grew to such proportions as to
threaten to overshadow the more legitimate work of the society,
and was therefore suspended, except for destitute cases. 2 Many
churches have employment features, as do also the Young Men’s
Christian Associations, Y oung Women’s Christian Associations, 3

1 A bill of this sort is now before the New York legislature (Assembly Bill,
No. 361, January 22, 1900)

2 Proceedings of the National Conference of Chanties and Correction, Toronto,
1897, p. 211.

8 E g. the Y.W.C.A, and Women’s Exchange of St. Louis. Missouri Report,
1892


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


607


and social settlements. 1 The Salvation Army has paid much
attention to this phase of its many-sided work, more so in
England than in this country. Most of the trade unions have
this feature more or less developed, restricted usually, how-
ever, to the trades interested. In Chicago at least two depart-
ment stores have conducted employment bureaus, free to their
customers, for female domestic servants. In Boston there are
fourteen free employment bureaus connected with religious,
philanthropic, medical, and other institutions. 2 In New York 3
among many are the Bible House, the Working Girls’ Alli-
ance, St. Bartholomew’s Guild, 4 and the Cooper Union Labor
Bureau, conducted since 1895 by the New York Association
for Improving the Condition of the Poor. Perhaps the assist-
ance given the unemployed by many newspapers through the
free insertion of want advertisements should be mentioned,
since this method of seeking work often takes the place of a
resort to the employment office.

Numerous as the free private or philanthropic agencies were
in the United States, the stigma of charity attached to their
work; and the best class of employees were not to be found on
their lists. To meet this objection and at the same time secure
their advantages, the next step was accordingly the establish-
ment of iree public employment offices; and to a consideration
of these we may now turn..

Ohio 5 was the first and for a long time the only state to
maintain free public employment agencies. The act establish-
ing them was passed April 28, 1890, and was amended the

1 E.g Hull House at one time did so Illinois Report, 1898, p. 135.

2 Massachusetts Report, 1893, pp. 81-114

8 Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of New York,
1896, p. 923.

4 Year Book , 1899, p. 295.

5 Reports of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of Ohio, 1890-1899.

The movement in Ohio was due directly to the example of France. Mr.
A W. J. Lewis, later commissioner in charge of the Ohio Bureau of Labor
Statistics, was one of a group of labor representatives who attended the Paris
Exposition of 1SS9 ; and what he there saw of the great public offices led him
to advocate their establishment m his state. See the Report of the Minnesota
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1891-1892,


608 trade unionism and labor problems


following year/March 24, 1891. It created five free employ-
ment offices as adjuncts to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and
placed the appointment of the superintendents and clerks of
the offices in the hands of the labor commissioner. The sala-
ries of the officers were to be borne by the cities within which
the offices were organized, but the general expenses were to be
defrayed by the state. Each superintendent should make a
weekly report to the commissioner, and lists of applications in
each office should be sent weekly to every other office and there
posted. The amendment of 1891 limited the tenure of office
for all superintendents and clerks to two years. Since that
time no further change in the law has been made.

Offices were opened during the summer of 1890 in the five
leading cities of the state, — Toledo, Cleveland, Dayton, Cin-
cinnati, and Columbus. The success of these offices was marked
from the start. For the first six months the applications for
employment amounted to over 20,000, for nearly half of whom
positions were secured. Perhaps the most striking testimonial
to their success is to be found in the fact that, while there were
at least twelve well-known private employment agencies in these
cities at the time of the establishment of the public offices, the
commissioner of labor reported in 1892 that they no longer
existed in Columbus, Toledo, and Dayton, while only a few
“ still managed to exist” in Cleveland and Cincinnati. The
facilities of the offices seem to have been made very general use
of by employers, the applications for help sometimes outnum-
bering the applications for employment, especially in domestic
service. The superintendents of the offices, reporting on this
point in 1891, stated that employers generally favored the
establishment of the offices, and that the working people were
unanimous in their approval. Two of the superintendents,
however, reported that manufacturers denied any need of such
a bureau, since so many applications for employment were made
directly at the factories. While this is true in general of skilled
labor, it is, of course, less true of unskilled labor, and not at all
the case with domestic and personal help. The activities of the
offices are, therefore, particularly marked in the latter field.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


609


The reports of the offices show a fairly steady growth from
year to year in spite of the depression of 1S93, and give evi-
dence that the bureaus are filling a real want. While the num-
ber of applications for employment on the part of men has not"
changed materially, the applications for male employees and the
number of positions filled has steadily decreased. On the other
hand, the number of women dealt with, especially domestic
servants, has grown continuously, seeming to indicate that the
bureaus are becoming more or less “ intelligence ” offices of the
familiar type for the registration of servants. There seems to
be no desire in the state to abolish the offices; but the annual
reports of the labor commissioner reiterate the demand for cer-
tain changes in the law which shall place them on a firmer
basis. Objection is made to the provision which places the
payment -of the salaries of the superintendents and clerks upon
the cities within which the bureaus are situated, partly on the
ground that they are at the mercy of municipal politicians . 1 . . .

The third state in the Union to create free public employ-
ment offices by law was New York 2 by the act of May 25,
1896, which provided for the establishment of such offices in
New York City and Buffalo. Owing to the crude provisions
of this measure, which required among other things the send-
ing of a weekly list of all applicants for employment or help to
each of the 1168 supervisors of townships in the state, it was
repealed in the following year, and replaced by the substitute
act* of May 13, 1897,


1 Returns of five Ohio offices for selected years :


1890

1893

1896

1899


Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male 1

Female

Applications for employ-
ment

14,529

5,607

14,169

12,685

12,668

15,030

15,259

10,886

Applications for help .

n,453

, 6,701

5,826

11,403

3,078

12,632

6,216

17,681

Positions secured . .

5,575

3,413

4,566

8,635

2,781

10, 164

5,058

9,93i


2 Reports of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of New York, 1896-1898 ; and
Bulletin of the Bureau, September and December, 1899.


6io TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


This act of 1897 provided for the establishment of free
public employment bureaus in cities of the first class, namely,
New York and Buffalo. ... An annual appropriation of $5000
was made for the New York office ; and the appointment of
superintendent and clerks was placed in the hands of the
commissioner of labor, under civil-service regulations. All
applicants are required to fill out statistical blanks, giving
information as to -age, nationality, occupation, wages, cause of
idleness, references, and so forth. In addition a confidential
letter of inquiry is sent to the last employer of every applicant
for employment, requesting testimony as to character and
ability, the response being filed with the application. These
letters are answered very generally and apparently truthfully.
Not only are the interests of the employers thus safeguarded,
but those of the employees also by requiring, in cases where
help is wanted out of town, that the railroad fare shall be paid
to the destination, and that the employer shall meet the
employee at the end of the journey.

The statistical information gathered on the blanks which
are filled out in the office is tabulated and published in the
annual reports of the Bureau of Labor. 1 The statistics of the
number of applicants show a decrease after the first few
months. This was largely due to the exaggerated expectations
that were entertained at the time the office was opened as to


iThe work of the New York office from its establishment on July 20, 1896, to
January 1, 1900, is shown in the following table :


1896

1897

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Applications for employment

6458

1582

8040

3966

3319

73 IS

Applications for help . . ....

332

616

948

418

1624

2052

Situations secured


444

378

1127

1505


a ?

00

i


*899


Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Applications for employment

Applications for help .... .

Situations secured . . ......

2487

302

2613

2344

•

5100

2646

2000


■

5280
3043
. 24QI


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


61 1

its ability to obtain work for all applicants. Since then the
number of applications has decreased, while the number of
positions secured has increased. In one occupation the demand
has continually outrun the supply, — domestic service, and more
particularly general housework. The activities of the bureau
are now confined almost exclusively to this department. . . .

The fifth state to establish free public employment agen-
cies by law was Illinois, which provided for their creation
in all cities of fifty thousand population or over by an act
approved April n, 1899. Three offices were accordingly opened
in Chicago on July 31, — one on the North side, one on the
South side, and the third on the West side of the city. The
law provides for the appointment for two years of a man super-
intendent at a salary of $1200 and of a woman assistant at not
more than $900 per annum. All expenses of the office are to
be defrayed by the state Weekly lists showing the number
and character of all applicants for positions and for help are
to be sent by each office to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and
a complete list to be mailed weekly from that bureau to each
free employment office, to each state inspector of factories, and
to each state inspector of mines. And it is made the duty of
these officials to assist in securing employment for such appli-
cants, and to notify the superintendents of the employment
offices of all vacancies that come to their notice. Superintend-
ents of the free offices are, furthermore, empowered to spend not
more than $400 a year in advertising for positions. The Illinois
law further contains a strike clause, which, as it does not appear
in the laws of any other state, deserves to be quoted in full. 1

The provisions for the collection of statistical data and for
registration of applicants are more elaborate than in any other
office. Every applicant for employment must answer a list

1 ** In no case shall the superintendent of any free employment office created
by this act furnish or cause to be furnished workmen or other employees to any
applicant for help whose employees are at that time on strike or locked out; nor
shall any list of names and addresses of applicants for employment be shown to
any employer whose employees are on strike or locked out ; nor shall such list
be exposed where it can be copied or used by an employer whose employees are
on strike or locked out.” — Labor Laws of the State of Illinois, 1899, P* 2 3 > § 8*


6i 2 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


of some thirty questions as to age, sex, nationality, conjugal
condition, religion, length of residence, number of children,
literacy, occupation, affiliations, cause of idleness, wages, health,
references. Applicants for help are permitted to fill out a less
formidable list. As in New York, and in identically the terms
used there, a confidential letter is sent in each case to the last
employer of every applicant for employment, requesting infor-
mation as to character, sobriety, and obedience. When a call for
help is made at the office a suitable applicant is at once notified
of the position by a reply postal and is requested to use the
return card to inform the office whether employment is secured.
At the same time a note is sent to the prospective employer,
notifying him who has been sent and inclosing a postal card
to be used in notifying the office on his part whether he has
engaged the applicant sent him. In this way the closest possible
control is maintained.

In the city of Seattle, Washington, 1 there was established
in April, 1894, a municipal free employment bureau, the only
one of its kind in the United States. Originally created as
an adjunct to the municipal office of labor statistics, it was
later made a part of the civil service department of the city
on the adoption of a new city charter in the spring of 1895.
The secretary of the civil service commission assumed the
office of labor commissioner and has devoted a part of his
time to the conduct of the employment bureau. The suc-
cess of the bureau has been marked ; the increasing demands
made upon it necessitated the appointment in 1897 of an
assistant, a woman, who has charge of the women’s depart-
ment, and in the following year the appointment of an
additional clerk. The expansion of the work has also neces-
sitated two removals of the office, each time to more commo-
dious quarters.

The conditions of the labor market in Washington seemed
to require the establishment of an employment bureau which
should cover the whole field more completely than was possible

1 Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Labor of Seattle, Washington,
1894-1899.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


613

for the private employment agencies. Situated as it is, Seattle
is the outlet of streams of transient laborers on the way to
Alaska and other points in the Northwest. Many of the indus-
tries, too, which are carried on in the state are of a seasonal
and variable character, such as hop picking, fishing, logging, and
railroad work, calling for constant readjustment and redistribu-
tion of the labor force. This fact is very clearly seen in~the
statistics of the work done by the bureau, in which I have
separated the hop pickers and railroad laborers from the other
applicants. Of course, this extension of the business of the
bureau would not have been possible without the cooperation
of the employers of labor ; and in this regard Commissioner
Grout seems to have been particularly successful, as practically
all labor for the. railroads and the hop fields in the state is
obtained through the agency of the municipal office.

In the administration of the bureau the commissioner has
sacrificed the statistical part of the work, with the accompani-
ments of detailed registration, to the more practical end of
securing speedy employment of all applicants. Accordingly,
no figures are given of the number of applications for positions
or for help, but only of positions filled. The number of per-
sons for whom work has been secured, even after eliminating
the most fluctuating elements, shows a very steady growth.
Although a municipal office, its usefulness is not limited to the
city, applications for labor having been received from almost
every town in the state, and from Alaska, British Columbia,
Oregon, Montana, and Idaho. An analysis of the positions filled
during 1898 showed that about 63 per cent were of “common,
unskilled labor/ 1 30 per cent “vocations requiring some knowl-
edge or skill/' while only about 7 per cent represented skilled
trades. 1 This last figure was doubled the following year, but
the work of the bureau has been largely confined to the class
of unskilled labor. About nine tenths of these positions are
out of the city Private employment agencies seem to have
been largely displaced by the municipal bureau ; and the num-
ber of these, though fluctuating, was reduced to seven at the

1 Fifth Annual Report, 1898.


6 14 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

end of 1899. All private agencies are required to secure a
license from the city and pay an annual fee of $ioo. 1 . . .

The account thus far given of free public employment offices
in the United States, taken largely from the reports of the
offices themselves, has not been a very encouraging one. Not
even the most ardent advocate of their extension would con-
tend that they have been attended with striking success. Of
the nine states in which their establishment has been attempted,
they have been given up in three, — Montana, Iowa, and Cali-
fornia, — while in Nebraska the office is struggling along with
very unsatisfactory results. In these cases the establishment
of the bureaus seems to have been premature and not called
for by the needs of the community (except perhaps in Cali-
fornia), but to have been advocated or created by the politicians
as a sop to the laboring classes 2 * In only five states — namely,
Ohio, New York, Missouri, Illinois, and Washington — is there
such an increase in the number of applications and positions
secured as to indicate a steady growth in usefulness. The
municipal office at Seattle appears to have met with success a
real want in the community where it is located, and to have
enlisted most fully the cooperation of both employers and
employees. But one of the main elements in its success is the


1 The following figures show the work done by the bureau from April 1, 1894,
to January 1, 1900*


Positions furnished in Seattle


1894*

1895

1896

O'

CO

1898

1899

Total , . .

2,623

3,729

3,268

5,952

13,871

18,153

Hop pickers .

1,144

2,050

i 35 4

2,890

2,235

2,682

Railroad laborers

2

i, 3 «*

57 i 3

2,784

7,077

2,102

Grand total . . . .

3»967

5,779

3,403

11,626

24,183

22,837

Total expenses . . .

$909 65

$ 1120 00

$727 5 °

#724.80

$1377 13

#1136 66

Cost of each position furnished .

$0 2293

$0 1938

$0 2138

$0 0624

$0 0569

$0 05


1 Nine months. 2 Not specified

3 General laborers included in totals above. Office did not act as agent for the railroads before
1897 ~ 4 Almost total failure of harvest.

2 The commissioner of the Montana bureau, in a letter to the writer, ascribes

the failure of the office in that state to the dislike of it as a Populist measure.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


615

fact that it has had to deal largely with unskilled labor. So
far, at least, the offices have been used very little by members
of skilled or well-organized trades ; and their representatives
seem to think it doubtful if they ever will be. An analysis of
the occupations of those applying for employment, particularly
in the large cities, shows that the majority of the men are
unskilled laborers ; and another large portion may properly be
classed under the head of domestic or personal service, —
coachmen, gardeners, hostlers, waiters, hotel employees, and the
like. The women are recruited almost entirely from this latter
class. The writer has visited several of the offices, and in every
case has been forcibly impressed by this fact. In so far the
expectations of the friends of the offices have been disappointed,
for they had hoped to see them used less by domestic servants
and more largely by skilled artisans and mechanics.

The public employment offices in this country do not seem
to have encountered any opposition 1 due to industrial disputes,
such as has made their success problematical in Germany,
With the exception of the Illinois law, which forbids the offices
furnishing employees during a strike, there is nothing in the
various acts to regulate their administration under such circum-
stances. As a matter of fact, the management of the various
offices has differed in this respect, even within a single state . 2
While the representatives of organized labor are, on the whole,
in favor of the free public employment offices, they are unani-
mous in insisting that they shall be held entirely neutral during
labor disputes. In the event of strikes they should not be per-
mitted to furnish men to fill the place of strikers, and in case
of disputes as to wages they should not attempt to provide
employees at a lower rate of wage than that for which conten-
tion is being made. It was feared that the insistence upon
references would militate against the offices among the work-
ing people by introducing the hated “ character note ; but so
far little objection has been met on that score. Yet one of the

1 Except in Grand Rapids.

2 Thus in Ohio the Dayton office sends men to fill the places of strikers. The
others do not


616 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


first essentials for the success of such offices lies in the selec-
tion of the applicants. Without such selection employers will
not as a rule use them. And thus, as to the general outlook for
the free offices, the following paragraph from the exhaustive
report of the English Department of Labor on “Agencies and
Methods for dealing with the Unemployed ” will apply equally
well to the United States :

With the best of conditions, labor bureaus can hardly be expected
to become the sole or principal means of bringing together employers
and unemployed. The bulk of the work of hiring labor and seek-
ing employment will in most trades continue to be done directly
between workmen and employers, as is the case where, as m France,
the system of bureaus has been carried much further than in the
United Kingdom. Nor as regards the organized trades can labor
bureaus, as a rule, compare m utility, so far as workmen are con-
cerned, with the work of a well-managed trade society. The chief
field of usefulness of labor bureaus is likely, therefore, to be found
for some time to come in the less highly organized trades.


II. Germany

Before proceeding to consider the comparatively recent
movement for establishing free public employment offices in
Germany, it will be instructive to glance at various other
agencies which have been resorted to there. These may be
divided into at least four groups, — private pay agencies, phil-
anthropic employment offices, and agencies conducted by asso-
ciations of employers or unions of workmen.

In spite of the rapid growth in number of the free offices,
within the last decade especially, the private employment
agencies are probably still in the majority; and in certain occu-
pations they exercise almost a monopoly. They are made us b
of particularly for domestic servants, employees in mercantile
establishments, hotels, and restaurants, farm laborers, sailors,
and actors. 1 Though evils are complained of in connection with
these offices, they are apparently not so great as in the United

1 V. Weigert, Arbeitsnachweis nnd Schutz der Arbeitswilligen, Berlin, 1899, p. 2..


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


617


States, since all employment agencies are placed under police
control by imperial law, and are made to pay a license fee.
According to a statistical investigation carried out in Prussia
in 1895, the number of such agencies in that kingdom alone
was 5216. During the year 1894 these 5000 agencies had
received 535,020 applications for employment, 481,358 appli-
cations for help, and had secured 381,206 positions. 1

Under philanthropic employment offices we may include
those conducted by religious societies, charitable organizations,
communal or police officials, the lodging houses (. Herbergen ) of
various societies, the relief stations ( Naturalverpjlegungssta -
tioneri ), and the like. Together these form a perfect network
of agencies throughout the empire for the purpose of securing
work for the unemployed; but, inasmuch as they deal largely
with the shiftless and incapable classes and those who do not
wish to secure situations, the statistical results of their work
are not very favorable. Since, however, they are free employ-
ment offices, no charge being made, and are also in large part
public (in that they are either connected with public institu-
tions or aided by public funds), it will be advisable to consider
them briefly.

Most of these agencies are connected with the various insti-
tutions established for dealing with and suppressing vagrancy. 2
The anti-begging societies ( Vereine gegen Armennot tmd Bet-
telei ), which are organized in all towns and cities throughout
Germany, discourage the giving of alms and require their mem-
bers to refer all applicants to the office of the society. With
this an employment bureau is connected, and an attempt is
immediately made to secure work for the applicant. The society
further provides a relief station ( Verpflegungsstatiori ), where by
a few hours' work the destitute wayfarer can earn a ticket
which will entitle him to food and lodging at the lodging house
( Herberge ). If no work can be found for him in this locality,

1 Zeitschrift des Koniglichen Preussischen Statistischen Bureaus, Jahrgang 36,
1899, pp. 7-1 1.

2 Vagrancy and Public Charities in Foreign Countries, Special Consular Report,
Washington, 1893, pp. 293, 305, 320, 329, 340


618 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


he is next day given a card to the next Herberge , where he
must report that afternoon and there in turn make application
for work. If he wanders from the route which he has chosen,
he is liable to arrest as a vagrant. The anti-begging societies
are supported entirely by private subscriptions ; but practically
the same work is done by the public authorities in most of the
German states by the establishment of public stations giving
relief in kind (. Naturalverpflegungsstationen ). Of 1957 such
stations maintained in Germany in 1890, 1707 were maintained
by public authority, and 250 by societies. Similar work is also
done by the German Lodging-House Society ( Deutscher Her -
bergsverein ), which has established in all the states a number
of lodging houses for wayfarers in search of employment, the
institutions being maintained largely by provincial or local
societies. These various relief stations and lodging houses,
together with the labor colonies, have succeeded in legitimatiz-
ing the movements of a class which without them would become
mere vagrants. They have, therefore, reduced the number of
arrests for vagabondage, 1 but do not seem to have contributed
in any permanent way towards solving the problem of the
unemployed by securing employment for them.

The establishment of employment offices has also been
fostered by the various trade organizations, both those con-
ducted by the employers and those managed by the laborers.
While at first their creation seems to have been inspired only
by the motive of adjusting the labor supply and demand, of
later years they have been used extensively by both sides as a
Kampfmittel in the struggle between labor and capital. As
this movement has led to the establishment of offices by a
variety of organizations, it will be necessary to consider these
separately.

1. Following the example of the early guilds, the modern
Innungen have also endeavored to secure employment and help
within their respective trades by undertaking the duties of
employment offices. Though in the main they comprise only a

1 In Prussia the number decreased from 23,808 in 1882 (no stations) to 8605
in 1890 (951 stations).


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES 619

small portion of the members of the various trades, still a few
of them, as the barber guild, are of national importance. The
possibility of an extension of this side of their activity was
afforded them by a provision in the industrial code of July 26,
1897, 1 according to which the establishment of employment
offices is expressly enumerated among the privileges of the
guilds. It is unlikely, however, that they will assume any
greater importance in the future, as they are managed largely
in the interest of the employers and seem to be losing ground.
They have gained a stronger foothold in northern Germany
than in the South. In Prussia 734 such employment offices
were reported for the year 1894, of which 642 made no charge.
Most of the others charged only a nominal fee. These offices
further reported for the same year 121,342 applications for
employment, 54,614 applications for help, and 47,093 positions
secured.

2. Employers' organizations ( Gewerbe - or Fabrikantenver -
eine). Towards the end of the eighties the employers of labor
began to unite with the avowed purpose of opposing the social-
istically inclined laborers’ organizations. One of the principal
means used by the newly formed unions as well as the older
ones was the establishment of employment offices, “ which should
be managed exclusively by employers, and whose members
should pledge themselves to obtain labor only through these
offices.” 2 The alliance of master masons and carpenters and
the association of metal workers were the first larger organ-
izations of employers to adopt this rule, as well as the further
one “ to employ no laborer who belonged to any social-demo-
cratic association.” This attitude, it is needless to say, does
not commend their employment offices to the mass of laborers,
nor indicate that they are managed in an impartial manner.
Such agencies have been created, in addition to those of the
metal workers and masons and carpenters, by the smiths, book-
binders, paper hangers, painters, cabinetmakers, and potters.
They exist also in the textile industries and in the building

1 Gewerbeordmmg, §§ 81 a, 88, etc Quoted by H Eckert, Die beste Organisa-
tion des Arbeitsnach weises, p. 6. 2 Weigert, he. at., p. 6.


620 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS 4


trades. 1 Of such organizations some thirty conducted employ-
ment offices in Prussia in 1894, of which about half the number
charged a fee. These offices reported 34,873 applications for
employment, 17,400 applications for help, and 16,910 positions
secured. In addition to the organizations of manufacturers, the
agrarian unions have in many instances established employ-
ment bureaus, of which sixteen were reported in Prussia. Dur-
ing 1894 these received 3759 applications for employment,
26x2 applications for help, and filled 1629 positions.

3. Workingmen’s organizations ( Fach - or Gewerkvereine ).
Since the founding of the Hirsch-Duncker trade unions, which
made the employment feature an important part of their work,
many of the workingmen’s organizations have established em-
ployment offices. As a rule, however, they have not attained a
position of importance, being necessarily conducted at a dis-
advantage, usually open in the evenings only, and administered
by the secretary or other official of the union in connection
with other duties. Unfortunately, their management has often
exposed them to the same charges of partiality of which the
workingmen are ready enough to accuse the employers’ offices.
Not infrequently, too, the offices have been used as a weapon
in the struggle against the employing class, as in the case of
the Berlin beer boycott of 1896. This boycott, which had
assumed immense and ominous proportions, was finally settled
by the establishment of a joint employment office, conducted
by a joint committee of employers and employees. Of offices
managed by the workingmen alone there existed in Prussia
during 1894 about 300, of which only 230 made reports. These
230 offices received >6,046 applications for employment, 32,968
applications for help, and secured positions for 26,760 persons.

4. A small number of employment offices have been estab-
lished which are managed jointly by representatives of em-
ployers’ and laborers’ organizations. They have been called
into being largely by the efforts of some more liberal-minded
employers, who have desired to avoid the unfairness of those
offices managed exclusively by employers or by employees;

1 Richard Calwer, Arbeitsmarkt und Arbeitsnachweis, Stuttgart, 1899, p. 44.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


621


and they have been fairly well received by the laboring men.
They were opposed, however, by the Employers' Conference at
Leipsic in 1898 and have not obtained any great prominence,
especially as the growth of public bureaus has rendered them
to a large extent unnecessary They are especially prevalent
in mercantile circles. In Prussia sixty such offices were reported,
of which number only forty-six made returns. During 1894
these received 58,584 applications for employment, 33,153 ap-
plications for help, and furnished 23,129 positions. About
half of these offices required the payment of a fee, ranging
from $1,25 to $5.

Although many — in fact, most — of the employment agen-
cies which have already been mentioned are free and are in
the main open to all applicants, they are not public in the sense
of being supported by public funds. The movement for. the
establishment of free public employment offices, either com-
munal or municipal, has grown rapidly in the last few years ;
and at present such offices are maintained in most of the prin-
cipal cities and towns in Germany. The first such agency seems
to have been established at Freiburg in May, 1892, by the
joint action of the organizations of employers and the labor
unions ; but it did not come under municipal management and
control until 1897. The real impetus to the movement, how-
ever, was given in the autumn of 1893 by a report of the Stutt-
gart Trade Council ( Gewerbegericht ), which strongly advocated
the establishment of a municipal employment bureau in that
city. Although the plan was not carried out at the time, it met
with the warmest approval the following year at the meeting
of the Social Congress at Frankfort, where it was advocated
both by workingmen and capitalists. The plan suggested
there formed the basis of the various municipal offices which
sprang up in rapid succession in all parts of the empire. In
South Germany, especially, the movement met with success.
In Wurtemberg, Bavaria, Hesse, Baden, and Prussia one city
after another proceeded with the establishment of public bu-
reaus. It is impossible to say how many such offices exist at
present in Germany, as no authoritative list has been published


622 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


and the number is large and steadily growing. Dr. Freund,
superintendent of the Invalid and Old Age Pension Office at
Berlin, estimated the number in 1899 at about 1 14. 1

The fundamental principle of the public offices is equal repre-
sentation : employers and employees are both represented in
the management in equal proportion and with equal powers.
In general, the administration is connected with the Trade
Council {Gewerbegencht ) , and a city official is the chairman of
the governing board. These offices are, of course, free to all
applicants of any trade or occupation. The organization and
administration of the Munich office — which is admittedly the
best managed and which has served as a model for many of the
others — will serve to illustrate the general features common
to them all. 2 The ultimate oversight of this office resides in
the city magistrate ; but its immediate control rests in the
hands of an elective board of seven, of whom three are employ-
ers and three employees, the chairman of the Trade Council
being ex officio chairman of the board. The office has a men’s
division, where three assistants are employed, and a women’s
division, where there are also three assistants. It receives appli-
cations for every sort of employment, and during the year 1898
secured positions for over 32,000 persons. The total expenses
of the office, which are borne by the city of Munich, amounted
to only about $3650, of which $500 went for rent. The work
of the office is administered with typical German thoroughness.
Applicants for employment are divided into classes according to
occupation, — thirty-two classes for men and ten for women, —
each class having a separate and detailed list. Every applicant is
required to fill out a statistical blank, giving occupation, name,
and so on, and is given a card with his number. If a suitable
position is open, he is sent immediately, or notified by post, to
go to the prospective employer, to whom he hands a postal card
addressed to the employment bureau; this card legitimatizes him

1 Freund, Arbeitsnachweise, Berlin, 1899, P- x 3 *

2 Die Einrichtung von Arbeitsnachweisen und Arbeitsnachweis-Verbanden.
Verhandlungen der ersten deutschen Arbeitsnachweis-Konferenz, Karlsruhe, 1897,
Berlin, 1898, p. 42.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES


623


and the employer is supposed to fill it out and send it back. The
applicant is also required to report the result of his application
to the bureau. By this system and by frequent use of the
post the bureau seems to have been successful in keeping track
of all positions filled. Owin^to the German system of police
oversight, and particularly to the compulsory use by domes-
tic servants of registration books in which their places and
terms of service are all noted, less time is devoted to looking
up references than in similar bureaus in the United States. The
name of an applicant is kept on the books as long as two
months. After the expiration of that period the application
must be renewed.

Although the Munich office was not established until 1895,
it has served as a model for most of the later offices, much as
the Ohio agencies have in this country. In the smaller towns
the administration is, of course, much more simple and direct.
The development of the separate offices had not proceeded very
far, however, before the need was felt of a more centralized
system by means of which the various offices could be brought
into closer touch with one another. The matter was first agi-
tated by the Wurtemberg government, and soon after by Bava-
ria, Baden, Hesse, and Prussia ; and although the movement
is as yet only in the experimental stage, it has been fairly well
developed in these states. In Baden, for instance, reports are
sent in by the other offices to the Karlsruhe office, which acts
as a central clearing house, sending out again immediately the
reports of each office to every other office. Each office is
then in a position to send applicants to fill openings in other
places or to request help from the district where there is a sur-
plus. In Wurtemberg the Stuttgart office acts as the central
agent, sending out reports of all vacancies twice a week, not
only to all the other employment offices but to every town of
more than 3000 inhabitants and to all institutions which main-
tain employment features. In Dusseldorf a slightly different
method is used. Instead of letting one of the employment
offices act as clearing house for the others, an independent
central bureau has been established, whose sole duty it is to


624 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS

act as agent between the various offices. Some sort of central-
ized system has been found so necessary for the best results
that a closer union between the different states by means of
the establishment of an imperial central bureau has been advo-
cated. While such a move is ve&y unlikely in the near future,
the necessary bond of union has been created by the formation
(February 4, 1898) of the Association of German Employment
Offices, whose first meeting was held in Munich in September,
1898. Its objects are the creation of a deeper interest in the
work and establishment of employment offices, and the collec-
tion of uniform statistics. 1 At the time of its formation sixty-
eight bureaus were enrolled as members, of which thirty were
municipal, eight provincial, and the rest philanthropic free
institutions. A monthly journal, Der Arbeitsmarkt , has also
been published in Berlin by Dr. Jastrow, who seeks, to tabulate
and utilize these statistics to determine accurately the fluctua-
tions of the labor market.

The majority of the public employment offices in Germany
are municipal ; but many of them are aided by the state, espe-
cially in south Germany. Frequently, too, grants have been
made by state, province, or municipality to employment offices
maintained by joint boards of employers and employees, while
no attempts have been made to share in the administration. In
fact, like so many of the German social-reform movements, the
initiative and support for this one seem to have come largely
from the government.

It is difficult to say what the attitude of the labor unions or
their members is towards the public employment offices, as opin-
ions in these circles are widely divided. 2 Those workingmen who
see in the agencies only a weapon in the struggle with capital
oppose their establishment, as they fear that they will be used
to their disadvantage. And, in fact, the tone of the discussion
in the Munich Conference on the subject of “ What can the

1 The stenographic report of the proceedings of this meeting has been pub-
lished as a supplement to No. 11 of Socials Praxis , and also separately as
Schriften des Verbandes deutscher Arbeitsnachweise, No. 1, Berlin, 1899.

2 Calwer, loc. cit , p. 7.


PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT OFFICES 625

Employment Bureaus do to secure Laborers for the Agricul-
tural Districts ? ” seemed to lend color to that idea. 1 On the
other hand, the attitude of the organized employers is also
largely hostile to the extension of the public offices. 2 It is
only fair to say, however, that extreme opposition is not often
shown except by the agrarian members.

One of the most disputed points and one which was most
strongly insisted on by the labor unions at the beginning of the
movement for public employment offices was the attitude of
the office during a strike. The unions demanded that no help
should be furnished to an establishment or industry while a
strike was in progress. This more extreme position has not
been strictly adhered to, and at a preliminary conference held
at Karlsruhe in 1897 the representatives of the labor unions
declared that they would be satisfied to have the offices con-
tinue their activity during a strike, if the officials would only
acquaint all applicants with the fact that a strike was in prog-
ress. 3 Among the different offices the practice varies in this
regard. In Stuttgart the office continues its work without
interruption ; in Strasburg the governing commission decides
whether to stop or not; the same is true of Mainz, Treves, and
a number of other cities ; Cologne discontinues the work of
the office during a strike; in Breslau and Frankfort no rules
for the conduct of the offices at such a time have been for-
mulated. It may safely be said that the fear on this point was
largely groundless, and that it makes no practical difference
as to the outcome of a strike whether the employment office
ceases its activities or not. So many other factors enter that
the existence of such an agency and its attitude can have very
little effect one way or the other.

In spite of some antagonisms and difficulties at first, the
German free public employment offices have met with decided
success. Their number has grown from a dozen in 1894 to
over one hundred in 1899, while the extent of their activity

1 Verhandlungen der Munchener Konferenz, pp 6 ff.

2 Weigert, loc at , p. 33

s Verhandlungen der Karlsruhe Konferenz, p 69.


626 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


has more than kept pace with their growth in numbers. The
positions secured for applicants numbered about 190,000 in
1896 in all the “free” bureaus, while by 1898 they amounted
to over 250, 000. 1 One noticeable fact is shown by the statistics
of the German agencies, which points to a high degree of suc-
cess, — the relatively small number of women applicants. Of the
men for whom positions were secured by far the larger part
belonged, of course, to the class of unskilled labor ; but the
more skilled trades and occupations were also well represented.

It will at once be seen that, though the movement is a more
recent one, it has proceeded farther in Germany than in the
United States, and has met with a much greater degree of suc-
cess. Aside from the undoubted advantages which the German
offices possess in the concentration of the population and the
smallness of the area that they have to deal with, there seems
to be no doubt that such institutions find a more favorable


reception on the continent of Europe than in this country
The differences in industrial conditions, indeed, are so great
that probably little is to be learned from German experience
which will materially aid us in the United States in solving
the problem of finding work for the unemployed by means of


free employment offices.


E L Bogart.


1 Weigert, loc at, pp 70-75; Jastrow, m Arbeitsmarkt, 1898.


INDEX


Accident Insurance, 546, 574
American Federation of Labored, 124,
362.

Apprentices, 80, m, 214, 257, 2 66, 304,

345 -

Arbitration, 1, 17, 90, 121.

Arbitration, Compulsory, 195
Assimilation. See Races
Australasian Colonies, 195.

Baldwin Locomotive Works, 304.

Benefit Systems, 394, 442, 527. See
Insurance

Benefits, Union, 600.

Blacklist, 18 1.

Bonus System, 45, 2 68, 294 See Com-
missions, Premium Plan
Boot and Shoe Workers, 12.

Boycott, 170, 178.

Brewery Workers, 36.

Building Trades, 65, 87.

Butcher Workmen, 222
Child Labor, 242, 345, 423, 501, 506
Cigar Makers’ Benefit System, 527
Civic Federation, 7, 76.

Closed Shop, 12, 54, 73, 10S, 244, 334,

34 5, 365 See Nonunionists, Trade
Agreements

Clothing Manufacture, 316, 371
Commissions, 45, 48. See Bonus Sys-
tem, Premium Plan.

Competition, Equalization of, 7, 343
Contract System, 274, 318. See Sweat-
ing System.

Courts, Decisions of, 1 56, 239, 268, 509
Dead Line, 268. See Task System
Debs Case, 160

Decisions of Courts See Courts

627


Division of Labor, 223, 324
Dues, 27, 30, 384.

Earnings See Wages
Education. See Child Labor
Employers’ Associations, 72, 92, 294,
619. See Trade Agreements.
Employers’ Liability, 546.

Employment Agencies, 603.

Exclusive Agreements, 38, 40, 57, 74,
94 See Trade Agreements
Factory Legislation, 242, 428, 470, 509.
See Legislation, State Regulation of
Labor, Courts.

Factory System, 322, 328, 371
Foreign Competition, 464.

Garment Workers’ Union, 380
Graft, 41, 62, 68, 85 See Exclusive
Agreements.

Great Britain, 289

Health m Occupations, 435, 503. See
Factory Legislation, State Regula-
tion of Labor, Courts.

Hours of Labor, 42, 59, 232, 263, 320,
451, 454, 482, 509 See State Regu-
lation of Labor, Courts, Factory
Legislation.

Immigration See Races.

Incorporation of Trade Unions, 137.
Industrial Unions, 33, 36, 222 See
Trade Autonomy
Injunctions, 61, 156 See Courts
Insurance, 378 See Unemployment,
Accident Insurance, Employers’ Lia-
bility, Benefit Systems.

Insurance, Unemployment, 589
Joint Councils, 65, 87, 223, 239.
Jurisdiction, 78, 84, 108


628 TRADE UNIONISM AND LABOR PROBLEMS


Legislation See State Regulation of
Labor

Linotype, 250, 449, 452.

Local Autonomy, 37, 365.

Lockout, 102. See Strikes

Longshoremen, 1

Machinery, no, 203, 250, 291, 454,
489.

Massachusetts, Labor Legislation, 482.

Membership, 32.

Mine Workers, 1, 13, 336, 459, 509.

Mmimum Wage, 201, 207, 223, 236,
240, 243, 278, 345.

Negroes, 114, 349 See Races.

New Zealand, 195

Nonumomsts, 30, 33, 53, 79, 109, 183,
202, 239. See Closed Shop

Out-of-Work Benefit, 262. See Unem-
ployment.

Picketing, 163.

Piecework, 5, 40, 21 1, 236, 241, 251,
274, 294, 325, 381, 391, 413- See
Premium Plan.

Plumbers, 105.

Politics, 1 1 9.

Premium Plan, 274, 294. See Piece-
work, Bonus System.

Printing Trades, 289. See Typograph-
ical Union, Linotype.

Promotions, 233.

Public Works, Hours of Labor, 477.

Races, 23, 241, 245, 317, 329, 336, 379,
424, 491

Recognition of Union, n. See Trade
Agreements

Referendum, 18

Restriction of Output, 107, 227, 235,
236, 238, 241, 268, 276, 289, 328, 451,
455. See Premium Plan, Piecework,
Health m Occupations.

Sailors, 477,

Shop Rules, 203 See Machinery, Re-
striction of Output.


Skilled Labor, 349

Slaughtering and Meat Packing, 222.

Socialism, 335

Standard of Living, 333, 336, 506 See
Races

State Regulation of Laboi, 460, 470
482, 509

Stock Exchange, 143.

Stove Founders, 9
Strike Benefits, 530.

Strikes, 17, 20, 22, 25, 41, 53, 78, 90,

97, IIS, 248, 334. 346, 392
Suffrage, 367

Sunday Work, 44.

Sweating System, 210, 316. See Con-
tract System

Sympathetic Strike, 41, 66, in, 189
See Strikes

Taff Vale Decision, 138, 144.

Task System, 268, 324 See Dead Line,
Premium Plan
Teamsters, 36
Temperance, 442

Trade Agreements, 1, 14, 31, 39, 55, 77,

98, 154, 382 See Exclusive Agree-
ments.

Trade Autonomy, 37, 67. See Indus-
trial Unions
Trade Schools, 310.

Typographical Union, 12, 170, 250, 289,
435-

Unemployment, 229, 243, 244, 252, 262,
375, 529, 589, 603.

Union Label, 374, 381.

Union Shop, 12. See Closed Shop.

U nskilled Labor, 80, 243 See Races.
Violence, 117, 163, 167. See Strikes.
Wages, 40, 42, 47, 57, 63, 231, 265, 327,
354» 376, 396, 427. 461, 497-
Walking Delegate, 11, 25, 65, 81, 89
Women Workers, 210, 237, 238, 271,
318, 326, 371, 396> 4237 5°L 5 22 *
Workmen’s Insurance, 546, 574.
