Principles  of  labor  legislation


3  1924  020  748  095


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


GIFT  OF
Honor  Sections  A&B


Date  Due


MA-^I  /


NXJVM»Liii  afeg  s


1955  J  S


^


^.aa.


"n^


iSL


MAR  1  0  '»


ft-T^


j3  A  i


F£B,-2A.


?rjfTVS'


JMni^ggSJBJL


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in
tlie  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924020748095


PRINCIPLES  OF
LABOR  LEGISLATION

BY
JOHN R.  COMMONS,  LL.D.

PBOFEBBOR OP POLITICAL ECONOMY, UNIYERSITT OF WISCONSIN

FORMER  MEMBER  INDUSTRIAL  COMMISSION  OF  WISCONSIN  AND

UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

AND

JOHN  B.  ANDREWS,  PH.D.

SECBETABT OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOB

LABOB  LEQISLATION,  EDITOB  OF  THE  "aMEBI-

CAN LABOB LEQIBI^TIOH BEVIEw"

PREPARED  IN  CO-OPERATION  WITH

THE  AMERICAN BUREAU  OF

INDUSTRIAL  RESEARCH


HARPER 6f BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Ai5'^5^7


Principles  of  Labor  Legislation


Copyright,  1916,  by  Harper  &  Brothers

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America

Published  February,  igi6

A-Q


CONTENTS

PAGE,

Chapter  I: THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW i

1.  The  Labor  Contract i

(i)  Industry 2

(2)  Labor  Law 3

(3)  Politics 4

2.  Individual  Rights 5

3.  Due  Process  of  Law 9

(i)  Public  Powers 10

a.  Power  to  Preserve  Peace  and  Execute  the

Laws 10

b.  The  Taxing  Power 11

c.  Guardianship 11

d.  Eminent  Domain 12

e.  Proprietorship 13

f.  The  Police  Power 13

g.  Commerce  Power  and  Federal Powers . .  15
h.  Police  Power  and  the  Constitution ...  15

(2)  Public  Authorities 18

a.  The  Executive 20

b.  The  Legislature 21

c.  The  Judiciary 22

d.  The  Administration 23

(3)  Principles 24

a.  Public  Benefit 24

b.  Equal  Protection  of  the  Laws 28  •

Chapter  II: INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING 35

I.  The  Laborer  as  Debtor 35

(i)  Servile  Labor 36

a.  Slavery 36

b.  Serfdom 37

c.  Peonage 37

(2)  From  Master  and  Servant  to  Employer  and  Employee  40

a.  Indentured  Service 41

b.  Apprenticeship 41

0.  Contract  Labor 42

d.  Padrone  System 46


CONTENTS

PACE

e.  Imprisonment  for  Debt 47

f.  Wage  Exemption 47

g.  Homestead  Exemption 48

h.^Assignment  of  Wages 49

2.  The  Laborer  as  Creditor 50

(i)  Time  of  Payment 50

(2)  Place  of  Payment 52

(3)  Basis  of  Payment S3

(4)  Medium  of  Payment 53

a.  "Living  In" 53

b.  Company  Houses  and  Labor  Camps  ...  54

c.  Company  Stores 55

(5)  Deductions 56

(6)  Mechanics'  Liens  and  Wage  Preference ....  60

3.  The  Laborer  as  Tenant 61

(i)  Classes  of  Agricultural  Workers 61

a.  Hired  Laborers 62

b.  Tenants 63

c.  "Croppers" 63

(2)  Agriciiltural  Labor  Legislation 65

4.  The  Laborer  as  Competitor 68

(i)  Protection  against  Immigrants 69

a.  Induced  Immigration 70

b.  Exclusion  of  Orientals 74

c.  The  Literacy  Test 76

(2)  Protection  against  Convict  Labor 77

5.  Legal  Aid  and  Industrial  Courts 80

(i)  Private  and  Public  Legal  Aid 81

(2)  Industrial  Courts 86

Chapter  III: COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING 91  .

1.  The  Law  of  Conspiracy "91

(i)  Origins  of  Collective  Bargaining 92

(2)  Doctrine  of  Conspiracy 95

(3)  Court  Decisions loi

a.  Strikes loi

b.  Boycotts 106

c.  Picketing 108

(4)  Restrictions  on  Employers  and  Employees . . .  112

(5)  Justification  of  True  Collective  Bargaining . . .  115

(6)  Damage  Suits 120

(7)  English  Law  of  Labor  Disputes I22_

2.  Mediation  by  Government 124

(i)  Definition  of  Terms ■•'125

(2)  Foreign  Countries 127

(3)  United  States 131

a.  State  Legislation 131

b.  Federal  Legislation 133


CONTENTS

3.  Coercion  by  Government 139

(i)  Restrictions  on  Strikes  and  Lockouts 139

(2)  Development  of  Coercive  Intervention 141

a.  England 141

b.  Australasia 142

c.  Canada  and  the  United  States 156

4.  Unions  of  Government  Employees 160

(i)  Recognition  of  Unions 161

(2)  Cooperative  Employment 166

Chapter  IV: THE  MINIMUM  WAGE ,  ..  - 167

1.  Economic  Basis 168

(i)  Low  Wage  Scale 168

(2)  Economic  Weakness  of  Low-Paid  Workers , . .  169

2.  Historical  Development 171

(i)  Australasia . . . .' 171

(2)  Great  Britain 174

(3)  The  United  States 176

3.  Standards 179

(i)  Australia 179

(2)  Great  Britain 180

(3)  The  United  States 180

a.  Definition  of  the  Living  Wage 180

b.  Wage  Losses  from  Unemployment  ....  182

c.  Profits  of  the  Business 182

d.  Substandard  Workers 184

4.  Methods  of  Operation 185

(i)  Flat  Rate  Laws 185

(2)  Wage  Board  Laws 186

5.  Results 190

(i)  Changes  in  Wage  Rates 190

(2)  Changes  in  Wages  above  the  Minimum . . . .  192

(3)  Effect  on  Unemployment 192

(4)  Effect  on  Industry 193

(5)  Effect  on  Trade  Unionism 194

(6)  Effect  on  Efficiency 195

6.  Constitutionality 196

Chapter  V: HOURS  OP  LABOR 200

I.  Maximum  Daily  Hours 204

(1)  Children 204

(2)  Women 208

(3)  Men 22s

a.  Public  Work 225

b.  Private  Employments: (a)  Transportation;

(b)  Mines  and  Timnels;  (c)  Factories  and

Workshops 229

c.  Constitutionality 237


CONTENTS

PACE

2.  Rest  Periods 246

(i)  Daily  Rest  and  Meal  Times 246

(2)  Night  Work 248

(3)  Saturday  and  Legal  Holidays 251

(4)  One  Day  of  Rest  in  Seven 253

(5)  Annual  Vacations 258

Chapter  VI: UNEMPLOYMENT 261

1.  Regulation  of  Private  Employment  Offices ....  264

(i)  Abuses  of  Private  Agencies 266

(2)  Restrictive  Legislation 267

2.  Public  Employment  Exchanges 270

(i)  State  and  Municipal  Offices 270

(2)  Federal  Activity 276

(3)  European  National  Systems 278

3.  Systematic  Distribution  of  Public  Work 283

(i)  Emergency  Work 284

(2)  Adjustment  of  Regular  Work 287

4.  Regularization  of  Industry 290

(i)  The  Liverpool  Dock  Scheme 292

(2)  Recent  Progress 293

Chapter  VII: SAFETY  AND  HEALTH 295

1.  Reporting 297

(1)  Accidents 298

(2)  Occupational  Diseases 302

2.  Prohibition 304

(1)  Exclusion  of  Persons 305

a.  Children: (a)  Age  Requirements; (b)  Physi-

cal Requirements;  (c)  Educational  Re-
quirements; (d)  Special  Problems  in  En-
forcing Restrictions  on  Child  Labor . .  305

b.  Women: (a) Prohibited Employments;

(b)  Childbirth  Protection 317

c.  Men: (a)  Physical  Qualifications; (b)  Tech-

nical Qualifications 320

(2)  Prohibition  of  Substances  or  Instruments ....  325

3.  Regulation 327

(l)  Factories  and  Workshops 327

a.  Machine  Guards 328

b.  Protection  against  Fire 330

c.  Lighting,  Heating,  and  Ventilation  ....  331

d.  Seats,  Toilets,  and  Dressing-Rooms . . .  334

e.  Protection  from  Infectious  Disease . . .  335

f.  Tenement  House  Manufacture 336

, (2)  Mines  and  Tunnels 338

a.  Mining 239

b.  Work  in  Compressed  Air 341


CONTENTS

PAGE

(3)  Transportation 342

a.  Navigation 342

b.  Railroads  and  Streetcars 344

(4)  Development  of  Standards 349

(i)  Defects  of  Early  Legislation 349

(2)  The  Method  of  Administrative  Orders . . 352

Chapter  VIII: SOCIAL  INSURANCE 354

1.  Industrial  Accident  Insurance 356

(i)  Rules  of  Employers'  Liability 358

a.  Duties  of  the  Employer 358

b.  Burden  of  Occupational  Risks 358

c.  Fellow  Servant  Rule 359

d.  Contributory  Negligence 360

e.  Assumption  of  Risk 361

(2)  Beginnings  of  Industrial  Accident  Insurance  . . . 362

a.  German  System 363

b.  Methods  in  Other  Countries 366

c.  Inclusion  of  Occupational  Diseases . . .  367

(3)  Compensation  Legislation  in  the  United  States .  368

a.  Scale  of  Compensation:  (a)  Medical  Attend-

ance; (b)  Waiting  Period;  (c)  Compensa-
tion for  Total  Disability;  (d)  Compensa-
tion for  Partial  Disability;  (e)  Compensa-
tion for  Death 372

b.  Scope  of  Laws: (a)  Employments  Included;

(b)  Injuries  Included; (c)  Occupational

Diseases 378

c.  Method  of  Administration 381

d.  Security  of  Payment 382

2.  Health  Insurance 385

(i)  Early  Steps  in  Health  Insurance 386

(2)  Compulsory  Health  Insurance 387

(3)  Maternity  Insurance 393

(4)  Need  in  the  United  States' 394

3.  Old  Age  and  Invalidity  Insurance 397

(i)  Unassisted  Old  Age  Insurance 398

(2)  Assisted  State  Plans 399

(3)  Compulsory  Systems 400

(4)  Straight  Pensions 402

(5)  The  Problem  in  the  United  States 404

4.  Widows'  and  Orphans'  Insurance 406

(i)  Voluntary  Life  Insurance 406

(2)  Compulsory  Insurance 407

(3)  Mothers'  Pensions ,• • •  4o8

5.  Unemployment  Insurance 409

(i)  Voluntary  Out-of-Work  Benefits 409


CONTENTS

PAGS

(2)  The  Ghent  System 410

(3)  Compulsory  Unemployment  Insurance 410

Chapter  IX: ADMINISTRATION 415

1.  The  Executive 416

2.  The  Legislature 419

3.  The  Judiciary 422

4.  The  Industrial  Commission 430

(i)  Administrative  Investigations 430

(2)  Representation  of  Interests 443

(3)  Civil  Service 450

(4)  Bill  Drafting 452

5.  Penalties  and  Prosecutions 454

6.  Cooperation  by  Pressure 462

Select  Critical  Bibliography 465

Table  of  Cases  Cited 489

Index 497


PREFACE

The  growing  importance  of  labor  legislation  as  a  subject
for  careful  study  is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by  the  revolution-
ary adoption  within  five  years  of  workmen's  compensation  for
industrial  accidents  in  two-thirds  of  the  United  States.  Dur-
ing the  same  brief  period  eleven  of  these  states  enacted  mini-
miom  wage  laws.  There  appeared  also,  for  the  first  time  in
this  country,  protective  regulations  as  far-reaching  in  possi-
bilities as  the  prohibition  of  the  use  of  an  industrial  poison
by  the  federal  taxing  power;  the  regulation  in  several  states
of  seven-day  labor;  the  beginnings  of  effective  prohibition  of
night  work  following  closely  the  well-nigh  universal  spread
of  laws  placing  maximiun  limits  upon  the  length  of  the  work-
ing day  of  women;  and,  even  more  significant,  the  adoption
by  several  states  of  the  industrial  commission  form  of  adminis-
tration.

With  its  rapid  development,  the  mere  extent  and  multi-
plicity of  labor  legislation  present  to  the  citizen  who  would
keep  informed  a  task  that  is  truly  formidable.  At  the  be-
gintung  of  19 14  the  federal  Department  of  Labor  assembled
and  published  the  labor  laws  of  the  United  States  in  two
bulky  volumes  totaling  more  than  twenty -four  himdred
closely  printed  pages.  The  legislatures  of  the  following  two
years  added  to  this  list  no  fewer  than  five  hundred  new  labor
laws.  The  laws,  moreover,  are  growing  in  complexity  as  well
as  in  length  and  number,  and  to  the  maze  of  statutes  is  added
a  lengthening  list  of  administrative  orders  and  of  judicial  de-
cisions. Obviously,  only  a  few  specialists  can  hope  to  keep  pace
with  all  the  details  of  this  growth.  As  in  all  other  sciences,  it
is  necessary,  finally,  in  the  science  of  legislation  to  formulate
ftmdamental  principles  which  may  be  generally  applied.

This  book,  therefore,  is  written  from  the  standpoint  of  the
citizen  and  the  student  rather  than  from  that  of  the  lawyer.
With  regard  to  each  of  the  main  phases  of  the  modem  labor


PREFACE

problem — ^individual  and  collective  bargaining,  wages,  hours,
unemployment,  safety  and  health,  social  insurance,  and  ad-
ministration— it  endeavors  not  so  much  to  expound  technical
questions  of  legaUty  as  to  sketch  the  historical  background  of
the  various  labor  problems,  indicate  the  nature  and  extent  of
each,  and  describe  the  legislative  remedies  which  have  been
applied.  Throughout  it  is  the  principles  of  labor  law,  not  the
details  which  may  change  from  legislature  to  legislature,  which
are  emphasized.  And  this  procedure  has  been  followed  be-
cause in  a  democracy  it  is  the  people  themselves  whose  col-
lective opinion  finally  determines  what  the  laws  shall  be  and
how  effectively  they  shall  be  enforced.

The  work  is  intended  to  be  both  critical  and  constructive —
critical  in  that  it  points  out  the  good  and  bad  features  of  the
statutes,  constructive  in  that  it  shows  how,  in  the  light  of
experience,  the  good  is  being  strengthened  and  the  bad
remedied.  Finally,  it  is  in  full  recognition  that  a  law  is
really  a  law  only  to  the  extent  to  which  it  is  enforced  that
each  chapter  emphasizes  efficient  administration  and  that  the
closing  chapter  is  entirely  devoted  to  this  complex  and  all-
important  problem.

In  assembling  facts  and  preparing  chapters,  assistance  has
been  given  by  many  valued  co-workers,  including  E.  E.  Witte,
Olin  Ingraham,  David  J.  Saposs,  Anna  Kalet,  Margarett  A.
Hobbs,  and  the  following  students:  W.  H.  Burhop,  Mark
Greene,  Ora  Hamish,  A.  P.  Haake,  Harry  Jerome,  Gladys
Owen,  and  Stewart  Schrimshaw.  For  painstaking  reading  of
manuscript  and  proof,  acknowledgment  is  due  to  Jean  M.
Douglas  and  Solon  De  Leon.  Our  further  thanks  are  extended
to  the  following  persons,  to  whom  various  chapters  were  sub-
mitted and  who  have  given  valuable  criticisms  and  suggestions
for  improvement:  Richard  T.  Ely  and  H.  W.  Ballantine  of
the  University  of  Wisconsin,  Ernst  Freund  of  Chicago  Uni-
versity, Edwin  V.  O'Hara  of  the  Oregon  Industrial  Welfare
Commission,  Thomas  I.  Parkinson  and  Joseph  P.  Chamber-
lain of  Columbia  University,  Louis  D.  Brandeis  of  Boston,
and  Arthur  N.  Holcombe  and  Frank  W.  Taussig  of  Harvard
University.  ^^^^  ^ Commons

John  B.  Andrews
January,  igi6


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION

The  aim  of  the  Harper's  Citizen's  Series  is  to  supply  a  series
of  volvunes  which  will  serve  both  as  text-books  for  college
and  university  class-room  use,  and  as  interesting  and  instruc-
tive treatises  for  the  general  reader.  The  criteria  of  a  good
text-book  are,  indeed,  not  different  from  those  of  a  satis-
factory treatise  for  the  general  reader.  In  both  the  aim  is
to  present  in  clear  and  logical  form  the  essential  principles
which  furnish  the  basis  for,  and  give  scientific  consistency
and  unity  to,  the  subject  which  is  treated.

In  this  series  the  publishers,  editors,  and  authors  will  co-
operate in  the  preparation  of  a  number  of  volumes  which,
while  not  fixed  in  number,  will  constitute  a  unity  by  reason
of  their  harmony  of  purpose  and  their  similarity  in  mode
of  treatment.

The  general  purpose  of  the  volumes  is  indicated  by  the  title
"Citizen's  Series."  They  will  each  discuss  a  subject,  an  ade-
quate knowledge  of  which  is  indispensable  to  good  citizenship;
— a  topic,  therefore,  which  needs  to  be  taught  in  our  schools
and  universities,  and  which  should  be  interesting  to  all  per-
sons who  seek  to  understand  the  social,  economic,  and  politi-
cal phenomena  by  which  they  are  surrounded  and  the  prin-
ciples which  explain  the  conditions  that  so  largely  determine
the  welfare  of  every  member  of  an  organized  community.

The  mode  of  treatment  which  these  topics  will  receive  is
indicated  by  the  emplojmient  of  the  word  "Principles"  in
the  title  of  each  volume.  That  is,  the  aim  of  each  volume  will
be  to  reveal  the  fundamental  principles  which  lie  at  the  basis
of  the  topic  which  is  treated,  and  thus  to  provide  the  student
or  general  reader  with  the  instruction  and  information  which
will  enable  him  not  only  to  understand  the  facts  which  the
volumes  themselves  furnish,  but  to  appreciate  the  further


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

facts  which  his  other  reading  and  every-day  experiences  will
necessarily  present  to  him.  It  is  further  intended  that  the
topics  will  be  so  treated  that  the  student  or  reader  will  be
stimulated  to  continue  his  quest  for  knowledge  and  under-
standing beyond  the  class-room  and  outside  the  covers  of
books.  In  order  that  this  orientation  of  each  field  may  be
satisfactorily  secured,  and  this  indispensable  stimulus  to  fur-
ther study  supplied,  care  will  be  taken  that  the  discussion  of
each  subject  will  be  by  a  scholar  eminent  in  the  field  within
which  his  subject  lies.

W. F.  WiLLOUGHBY.


PRINCIPLES OF
LABOR LEGISLATION


PRINCIPLES OF
LABOR LEGISLATION

CHAPTER  I

THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW

Modem  industry  is  mainly  a  matter  of  buying  and  selling.
Scarcely  any  person  lives  on  the  things  which  he  alone  pro-
duces with  his  own  property.  Formerly  the  protection  of  his
person  and  his  physical  property  was  the  principal  part  of  the
law.  Now  the  protection  of  that  intangible  property  which
arises  through  buying  and  selling  and  is  defined  in  the  law  of
contract,  occupies  the  attention  of  lawmakers,  courts,  and
the  administrative  authorities.

I.  The  Labor  Contract

The  labor  contract  is  one  of  several  kinds  of  contract,  which
until  recently  has  differed  from  the  others  but  little  in  the
eyes  of  the  law.  Like'the  others  it  originates  in  an  agreement,
impUes  a  promise,  creates  rights  and  duties,  and  is  enforced,
if  need  be,  by  the  power  of  the  state.

But  the  labor  contract,  in  course  of  time,  has  come  to  be
recognized  as  something  peculiar.  When  a  bushel  of  wheat
is  bought  and  sold,  when  a  factory  or  farm  is  transferred,
when  a  banker  receives  deposits  or  lends  his  credit,  when  a
corporation  issues  stocks  or  bonds,  the  rights  and  duties  created
thereby  can  be  fulfilled  by  delivering  something  external  and/


2  PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

unhuman.  But  when  a  laborer  agrees  to  work  he  must  deliver
himself  for  a  time  into  the  control  of  another.  He  earns  his
living,  not  by  working  upon  his  own  property,  but  by  working
upon  the  property  of  another,  and  by  accepting  all  the  con-
ditions he  finds  there.  And,  if  he  has  no  property  of  his  own
sufficient  to  fall  back  upon,  he  is  under  an  iinperious  necessity
of  immediately  agreeing  with  somebody  who  has.  This  pe-
culiar relation  between  a  propertyless  seller  of  himself,  on  the
one  hand,  and  a  propertied  buyer  on  the  other,  coupled  as  it
is  with  equal  suffrage  of  both  in.  the  politics  of  the  country,
has  gradually  acquired  recognition  as  something  sufficiently
important  for  the  government  to  take  notice  of.  WhUe  the
courts  and  law  books  have  dealt  with  the  labor  contract  as
similar  to  other  contracts,  legislation  goes  behind  the  legal
face  of  things  and  looks  at  the  bargaining  power  which  pre-
cedes the  contract.  It  distinguishes  the  price  bargain,  the
investment  bargain,  the  real-estate  bargain,  and  others,  from
the  wage  bargain.  The  former  are  dealings  between  property-
owners.  The  latter  is  a  bargain  which  involves  not  only
wages,  but  also  hours  of  labor,  speed  and  fatigue,  safety  and
health,  accident  and  disease,  even  life  itself.  Unemployment
is  failure  to  make  such  a  bargain;  immigration,  child  labor,
education,  prison  labor,  collective  bargaining,  and  so  on,  are
conditions  which  determine  the  bargaining  power  of  tho-
laborer.  Every  topic  in  labor  legislation  is  a  phase  of  the
wage  bargain,  and  it  is  because  a  large  class  of  people  have
come  to  depend  permanently,  not  on  their  property  or  re-
sources, but  on  these  bargains  with  property-owners,  that
labor  legislation  has  significance.

This  spectacle  of  the  free  laborer,  without  property  but  with
the  ballot,  bargaining  for  his  livelihood  but  electing  his  rulers,
is  something  new  and  unaccustomed,  measured  by  the  life  of
nations.  It  has  come  about  through  what  may  be  called  in-
dustrial, legal,  and  political  changes.


(r)  Industry

Scarcely  a  generation  has  passed  since  the  natural  resources
of  the  country  were  sufficiently  free  to  permit  people  without


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  3

property  to  acquire  ownership  merely  by  labor,  ^he  home-
stead laws,  culminating  in  1862,  may  be  looked  upo"n~as  eaxly
labor  legislation,  for  they  were  intended  to  provide  "free
land"  by  preventing  the  public  domain  from  falling  into  the
hands  of  capitalists  and  slave-owners  and  so  to  furnish  an  out-
let to  laborers  from  the  East.  Workmen  who  cotdd  not  be-
come farmers  or  miners  could  become  tradesmen  and  inde-
pendent mechanics  in  the  new  towns.  But  since  the  lands
have  been  closed  by  occupation,  and  their  values  have  in-
creased, money  or  credit  is  required  to  purchase  them.  This
means  that  laborers  without  capital  must  seek  capitalists  to
employ  them.-

In  1869  the  first  Pacific  railway  was  completed,  and  im-
mediately Chinese  coolies  made  their  appearance  in  Massa-
chusetts as  strike-breakers,  and  the  manufactured  products  of
Massachusetts  contributed  to  unemployment  in  California.
The  railway  and  steamship  have  made  labor  almost  as  mov-
able as  capital,  and  any  bargaining  advantage  which  wage-
earners  have  in  one  section  of  the  country  is  quickly  levelled
by  migration.

Huge  factories  and  corporations  were  almost  unknown  a
generation  ago,  but  now  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation
has  some  200,000  employees,  and  single  establishments  have
thousands  and  ten  thousands.  The  special  bargaining  power
of  skilled  mechanics  is  levelled  down  to  that  of  the  lesser
skilled.

Thus  the  three  industrial  factors  of  closed  land, labor '
mobility,  and  large  scale^  production  have  produced  a  class
permanently  dependent  on  wages.


(2)  Labor  Law

.When  land  and  natural  resotirces  were  free,  labor  was  not
always  free.  Slave  labor  in  the  South,  indentured  labor  and
apprenticeship  in  the  North  and  South,  contract  labor  from
abroad,  were  based  on  legal  devices  by  which  the  laborer
could  be  kept  from  running  away.  Not  until  the  enactment
of  the  thirteenth  amendment,  following  the  Civil  War,  did
slavery  and  involuntary  servitude,  except  as  a  punishment


4  PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

for  crime,  become  everjrwhere  illegal.'  The  labor  contract
henceforth  has  its  peculiar  significance.  Although  in  theory
it  is  like  other  contracts,  yet  it  cannot  in  fact  be  enforced.
The  laborer  cannot  sell  hiinself  into  slavery  or  into  involim-
tary  servitude.  He  retains  the  right  to  change  his  mind,  to
quit  work,  to  run  away.  Certain  other  contracts  can,  in  the
absence  of  any  other  sufficient  remedy,  be  enforced  by  the
courts  by  compelling  "specific  performance."  *  But  specific
performance  of  the  labor  contract  is  involuntary  servitude.
Business  contracts,  if  violated,  are  ground  for  damages  which
the  court  orders  paid  even  to  the  extent  of  taking  all  of  the
business  property  of  the  debtor.  The  labor  contract  also,  if
violated,  is  ground  for  damages,  but  for  the  court  to  order
damages  paid  out  of  labor  property  would  be  to  order  the
laborer  to  work  out  the  debt.  This  is  involuntary  servitude.
Hence  the  employer  is  left  with  the  empty  remedy  of  bringing
stiit  against  a  propertyless  man.  He  can  protect  himself  by
making  contracts  which  he  also  can  terminate  at  any  time
by  discharging  the  workman  without  notice.

Thus  the  labor  contract  becomes,  in  effect,  a  new  contract
every  day  and  hotir.  It  is  a  continuous  process  of  wage  bar-
gaining. It  carries  no  effective  rights  and  duties  for  the
future  and  is  as  insecure  as  it  is  free.  After  land  has  ceased
to  be  free  the  laborer  becomes  free.  Closed  resources  and
freedom  with  insecurity  produce  in  time  a  permanent  _class
of  wage-earners.

(j)  Politics

In  the  northern  states  the  suffrage  was  granted  to  all  male
wage-earners  during  the  years  preceding  1845,  by  removing
the  property  qualifications.* This  was  as  much  as  forty  to


•Constitution  of  the  United  States,  Amendments,  Art.  XIII:

"Sec.  I.  Neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude,  except  as  a
punishment  for  crime,  whereof  the  party  shall  have  been  duly  con-
victed, shall  exist  within  the  United  States,  or  any  place  subject  to
their  jurisdiction.

"Sec.  2.  Congress  shall  have  power  to  enforce  this  article  by  ap-
propriate legislation."

The  exception  in  the  case  of  the  seaman's  contract  will  be  noted  later.

'See  Andrews,  American  Law,  1908,  Vol.  I,  pp.  582,  1586.

'Rhode  Island  was  the  only  northern  state-that  retained  the  property
qualification.


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  5

sixty  years  in  advance  of  other  nations,  and  was,  in  fact,  the
first  experiment  in  the  world's  history  of  iiniversal  admission
of  the  propertyless  laborer  to  an  equal  share  in  government
with  the  propertied  capitalist  or  employer.  A  similar  experi-
ment was  made  in  the  South  after  the  slaves  were  freed  by
war.  Henceforth  the  laborer  not  only  shares  in  electing  the
legislatiu-e  that  makes  the  law,  but  he  shares  in  selecting  the
judges  who  interpret  it  and  the  governors,  factory  inspectors,
sheriffs,  marshals  and  constables  who  enforce  it.  The  labor
contract  and  the  wage  bargain  become  as  much  a  question  of
the  control  of  politics  as  they  are  of  large-scale  industry  and
the  mobility  of  labor.  Wherever  property-owners  or  em-
ployers can  deprive  the  laborer  of  his  suffrage  or  can  control
his  vote,  there  they  can  more  effectively  control  his  bargaining
power.  He  may  be  disfranchised,  as  in  the  South,  or  intimi-
dated, as  in  some  towns  controlled  directly  by  corporations,  or
maniptilated  and  bought,  as  in  towns  controlled  indirectly
through  the  political  "machine."  So  the  struggle  for  the  suf-
frage, begun  ninety  years  ago  in  the  North,  renewed  in  the
struggle  of  twenty  years  ago  for  the  secret  ballot,  and  kept  up
in  the  struggle  against  poUtical  corruption,  is  both  a  cause
and  a  consequence  of  the  appearance  of  wage-earners  as  a
class  in  modem  industry.


2.  Individual  Rights

Federal  and  state  constitutions  contain  the  fundamental
laws  and  create  the  authorities  of  government  with  the  power
to  interpret,  amend,  and  enforce  them.  The  Declaration  of
Independence  and  most  of  the  state  constitutions  declare  that
all  men  are  created  equal.  Prior  to  the  Civil  War  certain  of
the  southern  states  declared  only  that  all  freemen  are  equal.
Those  constitutions  were  afterward  changed  to  read  all  men
are  equal.  Some  constitutions  say  that  they  are  "equally  free
and  independent."  If  they  are  equal,  they  have  equal  rights.
Some  of  these  rights  are  declared  to  be  natural,  essential,  in-
defeasible, inalienable.  Among  the  inalienable  rights  men-
tioned in  different  constitutions  are  life,  liberty,  the  purstiit
of  happiness,  acquiring,  possessing  and  protecting  property,


6  PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

reputation,  and  enjoyment  of  the  gains  or  proceeds  of  a  man's
own  labor.'

The  federal  constitution  guarantees  certain  means  for  pro-
tecting these  rights,  and  prohibits  certain  measures  that  vio-
late or  impair  them.  Among  the  protective  measures  are  the
writ  of  habeas  corpus,  trial  by  jury,  a  republican  form  of  gov-
ernment, freedom  of  speech  or  of  the  press,  the  right  peaceably
to  assemble  and  to  petition  the  government  for  a  redress  of
grievances,  the  right  to  keep  and  bear  arms,  sectirity  against
unreasonable  search  and  seizure  of  persons,  of  houses,  papers
or  effects,  indictment  by  a  grand  jury,  speedy  and  public
trial,  compensation  for  property  taken  for  public  use,  due
process  of  law,  equal  protection  of  the  laws.  Among  the  pro-
hibited measures  are  bills  of  attainder,  ex  post  Jacto  laws  and
laws  impairing  the  obligation  of  contracts.  Finally,  the
enunciation  of  certain  rights  cannot  be  construed  to  deny  or
disparage  others  retained  by  the  people.  These  restrictions,
however,  with  the  exception  of  those  insuring  equal  protection
of  the  laws  and  the  obligation  of  contracts,  are  binding  on
Congress  and  not  on  the  states.  The  fourteenth  amendment
prohibits  any  state  from  denying  due  process  of  law  and  equal
protection  of  the  laws,  but  under  the  decisions  of  the  courts
this  protection  does  not  extend  to  other  rights  guaranteed  in
the  early  amendments  to  the  constitution,  which,  as  has  just
been  said,  are  protected  only  against  infringement  by  Congress.^


'The  Declaration  of  Independence  is  "read  into"  the  constitutions,
where  it  says:  "We  hold  these  truths  to  be  self-evident,  that  all  men
are  created  equal,  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with  certain
inalienable  rights,  that  among  these  are  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of
happiness."  Twenty-eight  state  constitutions  declare  that  men  are
natujrally  equal.  Five  restricted  this  to  "freemen"  before  the  Civil
War  and  afterward  changed  the  phrase  (Kansas,  1858).  Three  states
assert  the  equality  of  all  men  framing  a  "social  compact."  Thirty-five
states  have  clauses  embodying  the  doctrine  of  natural  rights.  The
right  of  acquiring  property,  by  which  contract  is  understood,  is  claimed
as  an  inalienable  natural  right  by  twenty-six  states.  Three  states  in-
clude the  right  to  reputation,  which  may  be  considered  as  a  kind  of
property.  The  enjoyment  of  the  gains  of  a  man's  own  industry,  or
of  the  proceeds  of  his  labor,  is  an  inalienable  right  in  two  states.  Kansas
specifies  the  right  to  control  over  one's  own  person.  Montana,  when
mentioning  the  right  to  seek  and  obtain  safety  and  happiness,  adds  the
proviso  "in  all  lawful  things."

^WiUoughby,  Constitutional  Law  of  the  United  States,  loio.  Vol I
pp.  17s  ff.  '


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  7

If  certain  rights,  such  as  life,  liberty,  and  property,  are  strict-
ly and  literally  "inalienable,"  then  they  cannot  either  be
given  away  by  any  person  or  taken  away  by  any  other  person
or  by  government,  either  by  coercion  or  by  persuasion,  either
by  violence  or  by  voluntary  sale  and  compensation.  If  the
owner  sells  them,  they  are  worthless  to  the  buyer,  because  he
gets  no  title.  Of  course,  it  follows  that  these  rights  were
never  considered  strictly  "inalienable."  Only  an  impossible
anarchist  could  believe  this.  The  fourteenth  amendment
partly  clears  the  atmosphere.  " Privileges -and  immunities"
are  substituted  for  inalienable  rights.  Life,  Uberty  and  prop-
erty can  be  taken  provided  it  be  done  according  to  "due  proc-
ess of  law."  "Equality"  becomes  "equal  protection  of  the
laws."  In  other  words,  rights  become  "relative,"  not  "abso-
lute," alienable  but  protected.

But,  if  rights  are  relative,  then  their  meanings  and  defini-
tions are  liable  to  change  when  the  relationships  to  which
they  refer  happen  to  change.  The  rights  of  property  are  de-
fined in  several  constitutions  as  the  right  of  acquiring,  possess-
ing and  protecting  property.  These  were  the  significant  points
in  the  definition  when  people  were  isolated,  as  they  were  in
colonial  and  pioneer  times.  At  that  stage,  their  main  con-
cern was  in  getting  and  holding  physical  property,  like  lands,
crops  or  even  htunan  beings,  if  the  definition  of  property  in-
cluded slaves.  But  in  modem  society,  based,  as  it  is,  mainly
on  bujraig  and  selling,  the  right  to  withhold  property  from
others  becomes  significant.  It  is  this  that  protects  the  in-
dividual in  his  power  of  bargaining — his  power,  protected  by
law,  to  hold  back  and  wait  until  an  agreement  can  be  reached
upon  the  exchange  value  of  the  property  before  permitting
others  to  take  it  or  use  it.

This  right  to  withhold  property  is  like  the  laborer's  right
to  withhold  his  labor,  by  refusing  to  work  or  by  quitting
work.  But  in  the  case  of  the  laborer  this  is  also  "Uberty"—
a  "personal"  right  rather  than  a  "property"  right.  It  is  his
right  to  withhold  his  services  from  the  use  of  others  until
their  value  can  be  agreed  upon.  This  is  the  legal  basis  of  his
wage  bargain.

Hence  property  and  liberty  change  places  and  merge  their
meanings  when  industry  changes  from  the  agricultural  stage


8  PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  production  for  self  to  the  modem  stage  of  bargaining  with
others.  The  wage-eamer's  "property"  becomes  his  right  to
seek  an  employer  and  to  acquire  property  in  the  form  of
wages;  his  property  in  the  sense  of  Uberty  is  his  right  to
refuse  work  or  to  quit  work  if  the  conditions  are  not  satis-
factory. The  employer's  "property"  is,  in  part,  his  right  to
seek  laborers  and  acquire  their  services;  his  property,  in  the
sense  of  "Uberty,"  is  his  right  to  run  his  business  in  his  own
way,  that  is,  in  part,  to  withhold  employment  or  to  dis-
charge the  laborer  if  the  bargain  is  unsatisfactory.

These  definitions  of  property  rights  are  evidently  quite  dif-
ferent from  the  older  ideas  of  property  in  physical  things,  such
as  lands,  buildings,  machinery  or  slaves.  They  signify  rights
of  buying  and  selling,  of  access  to  a  market.  They  are  "in-
tangible" property,  and  not  "tangible."  They  are  like  the
"good  will"  of  a  business.  They  are  defined  as  "property"
because  they  are  necessary  to  give  to  things  and  services  that
value  in  exchange  which  in  modem  industry  depends  as  much
on  selling  them  as  it  does  on  "producing"  them.

Only  within  the  past  half-century  have  courts  and  legis-
latures distinguished  and  protected  such  intangible  property
as  good  will,  trade  marks  and  trade  names,  based  on  the
right  of  access  to  a  commodity  market,  and  still  more  re-
cently has  "access  to  a  labor  market"  been  treated  in  effect
as  a  property  right  of  both  the  laborer  and  the  employer,  in
addition  to  a  personal  right.'  Not  merely  the  contract  after
it  is  made  is  property,  but  the  right  to  be  tmhindered  by
others  in  order  to  make  a  labor  contract  is  a  property  right.
It  is  "intangible"  property  both  of  the  laborer  who  seeks  em-
ployers and  of  the  employer  who  seeks  laborers.  It  is  in-
tangible because  it  is  merely  the  act  of  offering  and  yet  with-
holding services  or  commodities.  It  is  property  and  becomes
capital  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  power  of  getting  value  in
exchange.  Just  as  the  employer's  property  is  both  his  phys-
ical factory  and  his  intangible  business,  so  the  laborer's
property  is  both  his  physical  body  and  his  intangible  labor.
This  "intangible"  property  has  come  to  mean  a  part  of  what

'See  also  Willoughby,  Constitutional  Law,  Vol.  II,  p.  872;  Hall,
Constitutional  Law,  1914,  pp.  134,  135;  "Doctrine  of  Conspiracy,"
p.  96.


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  9

was  formerly  known  as  personal  liberty.  It  is  that  kind  of
liberty  that  has  money  value.  It  gives  value  alike  to  the
laborer's  labor  and  the  employer's  business.

If  meanings  of  property  and  liberty  change  with  changes
in  industry,  so  does  the  meaning  of  equaUty.  Equality  for
the  colonist  and  the  pioneer  signified  mainly  equal  right  to
acquire  property  through  labor — ^now  it  signifies  equal  right
to  acquire  it  through  bargaining.  But  where  bargaining  power
on  the  one  side  is  power  to  withhold  access  to  physical  prop-
erty and  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  on  the  other  side  is  only
power  to  withhold  labor  by  doing  without  those  necessaries,
then  equality  of  rights  may  signify  inequality  of  bargaining
power.  The  gradual  recognition  of  inequalities  of  waiting
power  has  required  changes  to  be  made  in  the  legal  means  of
protecting  equality,  and  these  changes  underlie  the  history
of  labor  legislation.  They  occur  within  limits  prescribed  by
"due  process  of  law."

t

3.  Due  Process  of  Law

The  constitutions,  which  declare  private  rights  inalienable,
yet  provide  methods  and  standards  both  to  abridge  them  and
to  protect  them.  A  right  has  two  sides.  It  is  ajright  of  ong
and  a  duty  of  another,  or  of  all  others.  One  person  signs  a
note  agreeing  to  pay  $20  to  another  person.  The  second  per-
son has  a  right  to  receive  $20 — the  first  is  under  a  duty  to  pay
it.  One  person  owns  a  piece  of  land.  He  has  a  right  to  use
it  as  he  pleases — all  other  persons  are  under  the  duty  to  keep
off  and  let  him  alone.  To  protect  the  rights  of  one  is  to  en-
force the  duties  of  others.  If  a  right  of  one  is  abridged  or
reduced,  the  corresponding  duty  of  another  or  of  all  others
is  reduced.  If  a  debt  is  reduced  from  $20  to  $10,  both  the
right  to  receive  and  the  duty  to  pay  are  reduced.  If  a
person's  right  to  use  his  land  as  he  pleases  is  restricted,  then
the  corresponding  duties  of  others  are  reduced.  On  the  other
hand,  a  person's  duties  are  just  so  much  subtracted  from
the  total  of  his  rights,  and  so  to  reduce  the  amount  of  his
duties  is  to  enlarge  the  total  amount  of  his  rights.  To  reduce
the  rights  of  one  is  to  enlarge  the  corresponding  rights  of  others.

Here  must  be  noted  the  distinction  already  made  between.


lo PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  labor  contract  and  the  wage  bargain.  The  two  may  be
diametrically  opposed.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  wage
bargain,  if  an  employer's  right  to  require  a  woman  to  work
imlimited  hours  is  reduced,  then  the  woman's  duty  is  conse-
quently reduced  and  her  rip;hta  enlarged.  But,  from  the
standpoint  of  the  labor  contract,  she  loses  the  right  to  con-
tract for  imlimited  hours.  This  may  be  a  mere  fictitious
right  for  her,  existing  only  in  the  eyes  of  the  law,  whereas  it
is  in  reality  the  right  of  the  employer  to  compel  her  to  work.
From  the  legal  standpoint  her  rights  are  abridged — from  the
economic  standpoint  they  are  enlarged.  Likewise,  from  the
legal  standpoint  the  employer's  duty  is  reduced  when  her
hours  of  service  are  reduced.  From  the  economic  standpoint
his  duty  may  be  increased,  if  her  bargaining  power  is  in-
creased. It  is  this  contradiction  between  the  labor  contract
and  the  wage  bargain  that  labor  legislation  attempts  to
reconcile.!

The  state  exercises  the  great  and  sovereign  power  of  en-
larging and  abridging  rights  and  duties  without  consent  of
the  parties.  This  power  is  intended,  under  our  constitutions,
to  be  safeguarded  most  minutely  and  accurately.  The  safe-
guards are  developed  wdth  reference  to  an  all-inclusive  term,
"due  process  of  law."

Due  process  of  law,  along  with  the  provisions  of  the  con-
stitutions, determines  both  the  substance  and  the  procedure
of  government  in  three  principal  aspects:  first,  the  public
powers,  or  the  powers  of  government  under  which  authority
is  granted  to  protect,  enlarge  or  abridge  rights  and  duties;
second,  the  public  authorities,  or  the  powers  of  officials  acting
within  that  authority;  and  third,  the  principles,  standards  or
"maxims"  that  determine  the  limits  beyond  which  public
powers  and  public  authorities  shall  not  go.  Each  of  these
aspects  affects  labor  legislation.

(i)  Public  Powers

a.  Power  to  Preserve  Peace  and  Execute  the  Laws.  Govern-
ment exists,  first  of  all,  to  enforce  the  duty  to  keep  the  peace.

'  See  "Public  Benefit,"  p.  24;  "Equal  Protection  of  the  Laws,"  p.  28;
"Maximum  Daily  Hours,  Women,"  pp.  221-224.


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  ii

To  do  this  it  may  use  force.  It  is  the  custodian  of  physi-
cal coercion  and  the  authority  that  may  threaten  violence.
Only  in  actual  self-defense  or  in  extreme  urgency  has  an  in-
dividual the  right  to  resort  to  violence.  He  must  confine
himself  to  persuasion  in  every  other  case.  Groups  of  individ-
uals may  go  on  strike,  may  get  together  for  free  discussion,
or  for  agitation  and  joint  action,  but  they  must  assemble  and
act  peaceably.  Even  though  they  suffer  the  greatest  in-
justice they  must  not  go  beyond  the  duty  of  obedience  to
law  and  order.  The  authorization,  or  "power,"  of  the  state
to  use  violence  in  order  to  execute  the  laws,  to  protect  person
and  property,  to  punish  for  crime,  is  its  first  and  highest  justi-
fication, without  which  no  other  power  could  exist,  and  all
government  would  be  impossible.  This  is  its  exclusive  au-
thority, and  it  cannot  compromise  the  question  or  permit
private  violence,  except  at  the  peril  of  its  own  existence.
Under  the  justification  of  preserving  the  peace  and  executing
the  laws,  the  state  may  deprive  individuals  of  life,  Uberty,  or
property  without  consent  or  compensation.

b.  The  Taxing  Power.  The  taxing  power  is  an  authoriza-
tion under  which  government  takes  private  property  for  pub-
lic purposes  without  compensation.  By  this  authority  the
state  provides  for  the  most  fundamental  legislation  for  or
against  labor.  It  provides  free  schools,  compulsory  education
for  future  workers,  and  pays  the  salaries  and  expenses  of  all
ofiScials  who  enforce  the  labor  laws.  A  labor  law  is  defeated
as  surely  by  voting  against  taxes  to  enforce  it  as  by  voting
outright  against  the  law  itself.  But  the  taxing  power  is  used,
not  only  for  revenue,  but  also  for  purposes  which  otherwise
are  justified  under  the  poHce  power.  A  tariff  on  the  products
of  foreign  pauper  labor  is  designed  to  strengthen  the  bargain-
ing power  of  American  labor.  A  tax  on  poisonous  phosphor-
us matches  is  placed  so  high  that  it  brings  in  no  revenue  at
all,  and  serves  only  to  protect  the  health  of  employees.  Under
oiu-  form  of  government  the  police  power  belongs  to  the  states
and  not  to  the  federal  government.  But  the  federal  govern-
ment does,  under  the  justification  of  the  taxing  power,  what
the  states  might  do  under  the  police  power.

c.  Guardianship.  The  state  is  the  universal  trustee  or
guardian,  and  exercises  the  remnants  of  the  authority  which


12 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  monarch  had  as  parens  patricB,  the  "father  of  his  country."
In  mediasval  times  the  property  of  a  chief  tenant  reverted  at
death  to  the  king,  and  the  children  became  the  wards  of  the
king,  for  the  king's  benefit.  Now  the  state  is  trustee  for  the
benefit  of  the  children  and  the  people.  This  power  justifies
child  labor  legislation.  In  the  early  law  of  patria  potestas,  or
"power  of  the  father,"  the  natural  father  was  the  owner  of
his  child,  as  he  was  owner  of  his  wife,  lands,  slaves  and
chattels.  It  was  the  child's  duty  to  obey.  Now,  the  child
has  many  rights  against  its  parent,  and,  since  it  is  unable  to
enforce  these  rights  itself  when  the  parent  violates  them,  the
state  intervenes  as  its  guardian  on  behalf  of  the  people  of  the
future.*  It  takes  the  child  away  if  necessary;  it  deprives  the
parent  of  his  right  to  the  child's  earnings  by  prohibiting  its
emplo5mient  or  by  reducing  its  hours  of  labor;  it  enforces  the
parent's  duty  of  education  by  compulsory  school  attendance.
Patria  potestas  jdelds  to  the  authority  of  parens  patricB.

This  authority  of  the  state  is  nowadays  treated  as  a  branch
of  the  police  power.^  As  such,  it  is  a  justification  for  an  ex-
treme use  of  the  police  power  not  permitted  in  other  cases.
It  deals  with  children,  tmable  to  make  bargains  for  themselves.
The  police  power  primarily  interferes  with  the  bargains  of
adults.  Restrictions  which  the  courts  would  not  permit
under  other  classifications  within  the  police  power  are  im-
questionably  approved  when  the  justification  of  guardianship
is  merged  with  that  of  police.

d.  Eminent  Domain.  The  state  may  be  an  owner  of  prop-
erty and  business,  like  a  private  person.  It  may  acquire
ownership  by  various  methods,  all  of  which  rest  ultimately
on  its  sovereign  power  of  coercion.  Some  of  its  properties
are  acquired  by  conquest.  Others  are  purchased  by  voluntary
bargain;  others,  by  compulsory  bargain,  under  the  power  of
eminent  domain.  In  either  case  the  power  of  taxation  may
furnish  the  funds.

Eminent  domain  is  a  justification  of  the  state  in  taking
property  from  its  own  citizens  without  their  consent.  It  dif-
fers from  the  other  powers  in  that  it  applies  to  an  individual
rather  than  to  a  class,  and  therefore  our  constitutions  require

>See  Andrews,  American  Law,  pp.  652-654,  and  cases  there  cited.
'Freund,  Police  Power,  1904,  pp.  ?46-?53.


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  13

that  compensation  be  made  when  property  is  taken.  The
individual  has  no  inaHenable  right  to  withhold  his  property
from  the  state,  if  the  state  desires  it  for  a  public  purpose.
But  the  constitutions  protect  the  individual  against  the  state
by  requiring  just  compensation.

e.  Proprietorship.  Whether  it  acquires  physical  property
or  not,  the  state,  in  its  various  divisions  of  town,  city,  county,
state,  and  nation,  becomes  an  employer  of  thousands  of  wage-
earners.  It  fixes  their  wages,  hotu-s  and  conditions  of  labor
according  to  its  own  ideas  as  determined  by  its  legislatures,
executives,  or  cotirts.  It  is  not  restricted,  as  it  is  when  exer-
cising the  poUce  power,  because  it  is  not  taking  away  private
property  (except  perhaps  as  it  falls  back  on  the  taxing  power
to  pay  the  wages).  Consequently,  the  American  state,  under
universal  suffrage  and  the  power  of  proprietorship,  or  public
ownership  and  operation  of  pubUc  business,  supported  by  the
taxing  power,  has  gone  far  ahead  of  private  owners  in  raising
wages,  shortening  hours  and  improving  the  conditions  of  its
employees.  Even  contractors,  or  private  employers  who  work
for  the  state,  are  required,  under  laws  that  provide  for  "fair
wages,"  as  in  England,  or  for  the  "prevailing  rate  of  wages,"
as  in  America,  to  pay  higher  wages  or  observe  shorter  hours
than  they  might  in  their  work  for  private  capitalists.^

/.  The  Police  Power.  The  police  power  is  an  indefinite
authorization  for  the  American  state  to  abridge  liberty  or
property  without  consent  or  compensation  in  addition  to  its
other  more  definite  powers.  An  individual  is  sick  with  diph-
theria. The  state  draws  the  line  of  quarantine  beyond  which
his  family  and  friends  are  deprived  of  their  liberty  of  move-
ment. Valuable  anim4ls  have  the  foot  and  mouth  disease.
The  state  may  order  them  to  be  shot  and  buried  without  con-
sent or  compensatiom.  A  pubhc  utility  corporation  has  the
valuable  bargaining'' power  of  fixing  its  prices  for  gas,  elec-
tricity, water,  or  transportation,  and  withholding  service  if  the
price  is  not  paid.  /  The  state  reduces  the  price  and  compels
the  company  to  continue  or  increase  the  service.  The  em-
ployer has  valuable  rights  in  his  defenses  of  assumption  of
risk, fellow  servaint, and  contributory  negligence  in  suits

1  See  "Historical  Development  of  the  Miniimun  Wage,  United  States,"
p.  176;  "Maximum  Daily  Hours,  Men,"  p.  228.


14 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

brought  against  him  for  damages  caused  by  accident.  The
state  takes  away  his  defenses  and  increases  by  so  much  the
value  of  the  rights  belonging  to  his  employees.'  Other
examples  might  be  given.  The  bulk  of  labor  legislation  by
the  states  looks  for  authorization  to  the  police  power.

The  police  power  in  the  United  States  differs  from  other
powers  in  the  miscellaneous  and  indefinite  range  of  subjects
that  it  may  cover.  It  is  defined  rather  by  what  it  does  not
cover  than  by  what  it  does.  It  differs  from  the  taxing  power
in  that  it  reduces  the  owner's  liberty  to  use,  acquire,  or  own
property,  rather  than  the  revenues  derived  from  it.  It  dif-
fers from  eminent  domain  in  that  it  applies  to  a  class  rather
than  to  an  individual  and  does  not  require  compensation  to
be  made.  While  it  includes  guardianship,  it  differs  from  it
in  that  it  abridges  or  enlarges  the  rights  of  adults  and  full
citizens  instead  of  those  of  children.  It  differs  from  public
ownership  and  operation,  or  proprietary  power,  in  that  it
abridges  or  enlarges  the  powers  of  private  persons  over  their
own  persons  or  property  instead  of  the  power  of  the  state
over  its  own  property  or  business.  It  differs  from  the  power
to  use  violence  in  order  to  keep  the  peace  and  execute  the
laws,  in  that  it  is  one  of  the  justifications  or  reasons  advanced
according  to  which  the  state  is  authorized  to  enact  the  laws
themselves,  rather  than  the  physical  power  to  enforce  them
after  enactment.  It  is  the  police  power,  not  the  police
man.

The  other  powers  of  the  state,  previously  mentioned,  are
in  theory  definitely  limited.  Either  they  accomplish  only
a  specific  object  of  government,  such,  as  conquest,  peace,  the
execution  of  laws,  the  acquisition  of  re^/'enues,  or  the  purchase
of  property,  or  they  extend  only  to  a  limited  class  of  people,
such  as  children  or  public  employees.  ;  But,  in  addition  to
these  objects  and  persons,  there  are  those  large  and  indefinite
purposes  of  pubhc  safety,  health,  morals,  welfare,  and  pros-
perity, and  those  many  but  indefinite  classes  of  producers  and
consumers,  buyers  and  sellers,  employers  and  employees,
who  often  are  restrained  by  government  imder  the  police  power.
Moreover,  these  purposes  and  classes  are  continually  changing


'  See  "Industrial  Accident  Insurance,"  p.  372.


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  15

as  industry  changes  from  agriculture  to  commerce,  or  as  prop-
erty changes  from  physical  things  to  bargaining  and  con-
tracts, or  as  population  becomes  more  congested  and  people
interfere  with  one  another,  or  as  public  opinion  regarding
righte  and  duties,  morals  and  welfare,  advances  from  igno-
rance to  intelligence,  from  servitude  to  liberty.  It  is  the  police
power,  for  the  most  part,  that  affords,  in  the  case  of  the  state
governments,  that  elastic  justification  by  which  the  state
abridges  or  enlarges  liberty  or  property  without  compensation,
in  order  to  achieve  a  newly  recognized  public  purpose  through
a  newly  recognized  class  of  persons  or  things.

g.  Commerce  Power  and  Federal  Powers.  The  police  power
is  not  isolated  from  the  other  powers.  All  of  them  are  but
different  ways  of  looking  at  the  single  power  of  sovereignty.
But,  under  our  system  of  government,  sovereignty  is  divided
between  the  federal  government  and  the  state  governments.
The  federal  govenmient  has  specific  delegated  powers  of  taxa-
tion, of  regulation  of  foreign  and  interstate  commerce,  while
the  states  have  the  taxing  power,  and,  in  addition,  the  "police
power. ' '  But  the  federal  government  uses  its  delegated  powers
to  accomplish  the  same  ptirposes  that  the  states  accomplish
with  their  reserved  police  power.  The  taxing  power  is  used
by  the  federal  government,  not  merely  to  secure  revenue,  but
to  protect  industry  and  labor  against  foreign  competition,  or
to  suppress  state  bank-notes,  colored  oleomargarine,  or  poison-
ous phosphorus  matches.  The  "commerce"  power  is  used  to
regulate  railroad  rates  and  services,  to  restrict  hours  of  labor
and  to  require  the  adoption  of  safety  devices  by  railroad  or
steamship  companies.  New  lines  of  legislation  protecting
labor,  such  as  child  labor  and  workmen's  compensation,  if
adopted  by  state  governments,  are  justified  by  the  poUce  power
— ^if  adopted  by  the  federal  government,  they  are  justified  by
the  taxing  power  or  the  commerce  power.  Yet  aU  powers  are
but  the  single  power  of  sovereignty  split  up  to  fit  the  constitu-
tional divisions  of  govemment.i

h.  Police  Power  and  the  Constitution. From  the  foregoing.


'  For  detailed  history  of  the  conflict  between  the  commerce  and  police
powers,  see  Hastings,  "The  Development  of  Law  as  Illustrated  by
the  Decisions  Relating  to  the  Police  Power  of  the  State,"  in  Proceedings
of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  1900,  Vol,  XXXIX,  p.  349,


i6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

it  will  be  seen  how  impossible  it  is  accurately  to  define  the
police  power,  the  taxing  power,  or  the  commerce  power.  Com-
paring the  police  power  with  the  principles  of  the  common
law  Freund  says^  the  state  "exercises  its  compulsory  powers
for  the  prevention  and  anticipation  of  wrong  by  narrow-
ing common-law  rights  through  conventional  restraints  and
positive  regulations  which  are  not  confined  to  the  prohibi-
tion of  wrongful  acts.  It  is  the  latter  kind  of  state  con-
trol which  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  police  power.  The
maxim  of  this  power  is  that  every  individual  must  submit  to
such  restraints  in  the  exercise  of  his  liberty  or  of  his  rights
of  property  as  may  be  required  to  remove  or  reduce  the  dan-
ger of  the  abuse  of  these  rights  on  the  part  of  those  who  are
imskilful,  careless,  or  unscrupulous."

Describing  this  power  as  developed  under  American  institu-
tions, Ely  says:^  "It  is  that  power  of  the  courts  committed
to  them  by  American  constitutions  whereby  they  must  shape
property  and  contract  to  existing  social  conditions  by  settHng
the  question  of  how  far  social  regulations  may,  without  com-
pensation, impose  burdens  on  property."

Comparing  it  with  other  powers  of  government,  Hastings
says:*  "It  is  not  necessary  to  adopt  Treitschke's  oft-repeated
declaration,  that  the  state  is  force,  in  order  to  conclude  that
the  'police  power'  is  a  fiction.  Every  judge  whom  we  have
seen  attempt  to  analyze  it  finds  in  it  Madison's  'indefinite
supremacy'  of  the  state.  The  doctrine  of  faculties  and
separate  powers  of  the  state  may  not  be  as  essentially  absurd
as  Treitschke  thinks,  but  in  our  case  the  term  is  certainly  a
mere  abstract  and  collective  one  for  the  state,  where  regarded
as  employed  in  certain  functions."  Hastings  also  says  that
the  police  power  is  "a  branch  of  constitutional  law  peculiar
to  countries  having  legislatures  with  limited  power.  It  is  an
outgrowth  of  the  American  conception  of  protecting  the  in-
dividual from  the  state."  *

We  may  not  say  that  the  police  power  is  a  fiction,  for  it  is
a  necessary  part  of  the  reasoning  by  which,  under  our  federal


^Police  Power,  p.  8.

2  Property  and  Contract  in  Their  Relations  to  the  Distribution  of  Wealth
1914,  Vol.  I,  p.  220.  '

'Hastings,  op.eit.,p.  349.  *Ibid.,  p.  360.


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  17

constitution,  the  distinction  is  made  by  the  courts  between
those  powers  that  belong  to  the  states  and  those  that  belong  to
the  federal  government.  Yet,  from  another  point  of  view,  it
is  a  fallacious  distinction  if  it  pretends  to  assign  to  the  states
a  different  land  of  power  from  that  exercised  by  the  federal
government.  We  have  just  said  that  the  federal  government
accompUshes,  under  the  name  of  "taxing  power"  or  "com-
merce power,"  what  the  states  accomplish  tmder  the  name  of
pohce  power.  While  the  refinements  of  legal  logic  may  seem
to  make  these  powers  difEerent,  they  are  identical  from  the
standpoint  of  the  kind  of  legislation  and  the  public  purpose
which  they  justify.  The  poUce  power  has  sometimes  narrowly
been  held  to  be  limited  to  matters  of  health  and  morals.  But
legislatures  and  Congress  refuse  to  be  limited  in  this  way.
They  regulate  the  bargaining  power  of  individuals  and  cor-
porations where  no  justification  can  be  found  in  the  protec-
tion of  health  and  morals.  From  this  standpoint  the  theory
of  the  poUce  power  is  used  by  the  courts  to  determine  how  far
the  state  legislattire  may  be  permitted  to  go.  But  they  use
similar  standards  or  principles  to  determine  how  far  Con-
gress may  go  in  using  the  taxing  power  and  the  commerce
power.

Hereafter,  for  our  purposes,  in  speaking  of  the  police  power,
we  shall  use  the  term  in  this  broad  sense,  to  imply  all  the
powers  of  government,  whether  state  or  federal,  whether  of
police,  taxation,  or  interstate  commerce,  in  so  far  as  they  are
used  to  justify  that  indefinite  extension  of  power  to  abridge
liberty  or  property  without  compensation  for  some  newly
recognized  pubUc  purpose.  The  practical  problem  with  which
we  are  concerned  is  not  so  much  the  technical  legal  distinc-
tions between  different  powers,  as  the  extent  to  which  these
powers  are  increasingly  used  to  determine  the  bargaining  re-
lations between  employers  and  employees.  In  this  way,  with-
out formal  amendment,  the  American  constitutions  are  un-
consciously amended  by  the  poUce  power  through  the  change
of  pubhc  opinion  regarding  the  rights  and  duties  of  labor.
This  change  works  its  way  into  the  constitutions,  partly
through  the  discretion  of  public  authorities,  and  partly
through  the  application  of  old  principles  of  justice  to  new  con-
ditions.
?


i8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(2)  Public  Authorities

Here  the  issue  is  between  the  amount  of  discretion,  or
power  to  enforce  one's  own  opinion,  allotted  to  the  execu-
tive, legislative,  and  judicial  branches  of  government.  Shall
the  legislature  or  Congress  use  its  sovereign  power  to  the
extreme  limit  of  equalizing  fortunes  and  giving  labor  a  high
preference  over  capital,  or  shall  it  be  restricted  to  narrower
limits?  In  other  words,  can  the  legislature,  under  whatever
power  of  taxation,  commerce,  or  police,  put  inta  force  its  own
notions  of  "general  welfare"  and  "social  expediency,"  or
must  it  be  limited  to  the  notions  held  by  the  courts?

In  monarchical  countries,  or  countries  whose  executives  in-
herit monarchical  powers,  executive  discretion  still  remains  to
the  monarch,  or  president,  or  the  executive  council,'  after  legis-
lative powers  have  been  taken  away  by  Parliament.  This
power  of  discretion  is  the  executive's  power  to  decide  when  and
where  a  law  applies,  and  to  issue  rules,  regulations,  ordinances,
or  orders  which  have  the  effect  of  law,  which  are  needed  to  en-
force the  law,  or  even  are  thought  by  the  executive  necessary
to  fill  any  gaps  which  Parliament  has  left  in  the  scheme  of
laws.  Indeed,  in  enforcing  a  law,  every  executive  officer  must
exercise  some  discretion,  which  he  does  as  his  own  opinion
directs.  Discretion  is  the  power  to  act  without  interference
according  to  one's  own  opinions,  or  policy,  or  theory  of  things.
It  is  not  supposed  to  be  capricious  or  changeable.  It  is  power
to  adopt  and  follow  a  policy,  not  power  to  be  arbitrary  and
unreasonable.  Even  a  policeman  must  make  up  his  mind
whether  a  man  is  drunk  or  not,  before  applying  the  law  against
public  intoxication.  Policemen  may  differ  in  their  opinions
on  this  matter,  even  though  the  facts  do  not  differ,  and  their
differences  are  the  little  germs  of  what,  in  the  case  of  a  mayor,
governor,  president,  or  king,  would  be  called  executive  policy,
or  executive  discretion.

Under  the  theory  of  our  constitution,  however,  the  execu-
tive officers  have  no  discretion  to  follow  a  policy  of  their  own.
The  legislature  is  the  policy-making  branch  of  government.
It  has  discretion; it  can  put  its  opinions  into  effect ; it  can


'Switzerland,


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  19

adopt  a  policy,  because  it  is  supposed  to  represent  all  inter-
ests in  society  and  to  know  all  the  facts.  The  effort  is  there-
fore made  in  our  country  to  limit  the  executive  discretion  as
narrowly  as  possible,  in  order  that  it  may  be  said  that  the
executive  merely  enforces  the  law  as  he  finds  it.  To  do  other-
wise would  be  to  delegate  legislative  power  to  an  authority
that  is  not  legislative  under  the  constitution.

But  with  us,  not  even  the  legislattire  is  the  supreme  legis-
lative power.  The  written  constitutions  are  the  fundamental
laws,  enacted  directly  by  the  people  themselves.  Being  laws,
they  also  express  a  policy,  based  on  the  opinion  of  the  people
who  adopted  them.  And  their  policy  must  prevail  against
the  legislative  discretion.  The  policy  of  the  constitutions  is
extremely  individualistic.  It  asserts  inalienable  and  natural
rights  of  individuals  against  all  others  and  against  the  state
itself.  When  a  policy  of  the  legislature  set  forth  ia  a  statute
comes  into  conflict  with  this  individualistic  policy  of  the
constitutions,  some  one  must  be  called  upon  to  decide  which
shall  prevail.  The  supreme  courts,  at  first  with  hesitation,
but  afterward  with  assurance,  have  made  these  decisions.  If
a  statute  of  the  legislature  fixing  the  hours  of  labor  conflicts
with  the  constitution,  the  courts  merely  refuse  to  enforce  it —
they  enforce  the  constitution  itself.  They  declare  the  law
' '  unconstitutional. ' ' '

But  there  is  a  principle  of  our  courts  to  the  effect  that  a
law  is  not  unconstitutional  if  a  way  can  be  found  to  sustain
it.  Hence,  if  there  is  an  apparent  conflict  between  the  con-
stitution and  the  attempt  of  the  legislatiure  to  abridge  private
rights,  and  if  the  coxirt  cannot  support  the  legislature  under
the  other  limited  justiflcations  of  taxation,  guardianship,
proprietorship,  eminent  domain,  or  protection  of  person  and
property,  it  may  see  its  way  to  support  it  under  the  elastic
justification  of  the  police  power.  Thus  the  police  power  in
America  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  courts'  justification  for
gradually  amending  the  constitution  by  interpretation  so  that  it
may  conform  to  the  new  objects  and  new  restrictions  on  prop-

'For  history  of  laws  declared  unconstitutional  see  Moore,  "The
Supreme  Court  and  Unconstitutional  Legislation,"  Columbia  Uni-
versity Studies  in  History,  Economics,  and  Public  Law,  Vol.  LIV,  1 913,
No,  2.


20 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

erty  which  the  legislattire  deems  important.  A  similar  justi-
fication and  gradual  amending  of  the  constitution  takes  place
when  the  court  permits  Congress  to  extend  the  taxing  power
or  the  commerce  power  to  the  regulation  of  rates,  services,
wages,  hours  of  labor,  safety,  health,  and  compensation  for
accidents.

This  distinction  between  discretion  on  the  part  of  the  legis-
lature and  interpretation  on  the  part  of  the  courts  is  a  dis-
tinction not  so  much  between  the  several  powers  of  govern-
ment as  between  the  functions  peculiar  to  the  several  branches
of  government.  It  leads  us  to  distingiiish  the  public  authori-
ties who  share  in  the  exercise  of  the  pubUc  powers.

Government  can  interpret  and  exercise  its  powers  only
through  individuals.  Each  of  these  individuals  takes  an  oath
appropriate  to  his  office,  agreeing  to  support  the  constitution,
to  execute  the  law,  to  maintain  order.  For  the  time  being
his  acts  are  the  acts  of  the  state,  provided  he  keeps  withia  the
authority  granted  to  him.  To  the  legislature  is  granted  the
authority  of  deciding  on  public  policy  for  the  future,  and,  in
doing  so,  it  exercises  discretion.  To  the  courts  belongs  the
power  of  deciding  particular  cases  as  they  arise,  and  in  doing
so  they  interpret  the  laws.  The  executive  enforces  the  law.
But,  to  a  fourth  and  new  branch  of  government,  unrecognized
in  the  original  constitutions,  which  may  be  called  the  adminis-
tration,'  is  coming  to  be  assigned  the  function  of  investigation
of  those  economic  and  social  conditions  upon  which  the  several
branches  of  government  base  their  decisions.  While  these
functions  cannot  be  separated  in  practice,  yet  they  stand  out
as  characteristic  of  each  branch  of  government.  Execution,
discretion,  interpretation,  and  investigation  are  the  four  great
divisions  in  the  functions  of  officials,  and  the  executive,  the
legislature,  the  judiciary  and  the  administration  are  the  four
branches  that  are  specialized  for  these  ftmctions.

a.  The  Executive.  The  executive  authorities  are  entitled  to
use  violence  if  necessary,  and  to  deprive  individuals  of  Ufe,
liberty,  and  property  without  their  consent.  Private  individ-
uals may  not  even  resist  an  officer  of  the  law. The  army,

^Die  Verwalturtg.  The  term  "administration"  has  been  used  by  the
Supreme  Court  in  this  sense,  224  U.  S.  474  (191 1);  230  U.  S.  196,  274
(1912).


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  21

navy,  and  militia  may  be  called  upon  by  the  governor  or  pres-
ident in  time  of  strike  or  riot.  Sheriffs,  marshals,  their
deputies  and  poHcemen,  may  arrest  and  imprison  individuals
in  order  to  prevent  violence  and  to  execute  the  orders  of  the
court  in  the  administration  of  civil  and  criminal  justice.  They
belong  to  the  mihtary  or  "police"  force  of  the  state,  which,
under  ovur  theory,  is  subordinate  to  the  civil  authorities.  The
police  force,  as  already  stated,  differs  from  the  police  power,
in  that  the  police  power  is  the  authorization,  or  justification,
under  which  civil  authorities  are  entitled  to  exercise  discre-
tion in  enacting  laws  and  issuing  orders,  while  the  police  force
is  the  agency  which  exercises  coercion  as  directed  by  these
laws  and  orders.

While  in  law  the  military  and  police  forces  have  no  dis-
cretion, but  must  follow  orders,  yet,  in  the  tirgency  of  im-
mediate action,  they  must  exercise  discretion  before  their  acts
can  be  passed  upon  by  the  civil  authorities.  Only  in  case  of
war  can  executives  legally  set  aside  the  superior  authority  of
the  courts,  but  war  can  be  declared  only  by  the  legislature,  a
civil  authority.^  The  arbitrary  discretion  of  the  executive  is
sought  to  be  held  in  check  by  that  greatest  instrument  of
freedom,  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus.  By  means  of  this  writ  the
coiu^,  a  civil  authority,  orders  the  executive,  or  military  power,
to  bring  out  a  prisoner  for  hearing  and  for  release  if  wrongly
imprisoned.  If  the  executive  refuses,  then  the  civil  authority
ipso  facto  becomes  subordinate  to  nailitary  force.  In  so  far
as  the  executives  and  the  military  and  poHce  authorities  exer-
cise discretion,  their  opinion  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  em-
ployer and  employee  is  sometimes  the  deciding  factor  one
way  or  the  other  in  determining  the  relative  power  of  the
two  in  the  wage  bargain  as  affected  by  strikes,  lockouts,  pub-
lic assembly,  public  speaking,  agitation,  arrest  of  leaders,
protection  of  strike-breakers,  picketing,  the  use  of  the  streets,
and  otherwise.

b.  The  Legislature.  The  legislature  is  the  authority  which,
acting  within  limits,  is  entitled  to  exercise  discretion  in  de-


^This  has  apparently  been  denied  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  West
Virginia,  which  sustained  the  acts  of  a  "military  commission"  in  sen-
tencing strikers  to  prison.  State  ex  rel.  Mays  v.  Brown,  71  W.  Va.  519,
77  S.  B,  243  (1912);  ex  par(e  Jongs,  71  W,  V»,  567.  77  S,  B,  1029  (1913).


22 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ciding  upon  public  policy  and  enacting  laws  to  carry  the
policy  into  effect.  It  is  the  one  branch  of  government  where
the  representatives  of  conflicting  opinions  are  entitled  to  ex-
press their  joint  opinion  in  the  form  of  law  that  shall  be  en-
forced on  all  persons  with  or  without  their  consent.  Other
branches  of  government  are  considered  to  be  impartial  and
limited  to  the  execution  of  the  law  as  the  legislature  prescribes.
But  the  legislatiire  may  be  partisan  in  politics  and  partial
between  employers  and  employees.  It  is  considered  that,  if
partisans  meet  and  discuss  in  an  orderly  way  their  points  of
antagonism,  the  outcome  will  be  a  compromise  in  which  the
arbitrary  power  of  no  individual  or  class  wUl  dominate  others.
Yet,  in  fear  that  the  legislature  may  not  act  justly,  and  may
override  minorities  or  those  not  represented,  the  people  have
enacted  the  higher  law  known  as  the  constitution,  with  its
bill  of  rights  and  its  limitations  on  the  legislature.  This  leads
to  the  judiciary.

c.  The  Judiciary.  Under  our  constitutional  system  the
judicial  branch  holds  a  high  and  unique  position.  In  order
that  it  may  be  removed  from  the  heat  of  partisanship  and
partiality  it  is  made  independent  of  the  executive  and  legis-
lative branches.  In  order  that  the  federal  system  of  a  cen-
tral government  and  forty-eight  state  governments,  each  su-
preme in  its  own  field,  may  operate  in  harmony,  the  federal
court  is  made  the  final  authority  to  determine  how  far  the
field  of  each  extends.  By  the  fourteenth  amendment  to  the
constitution,  all  persons  bom  or  naturalized  in  this  country
enjoy  a  double  citizenship — ^that  of  the  United  States  and  of
the  state  wherein  they  reside.  By  this  amendment  the  federal
courts  have  authority  to  prevent  any  state  from  abridging
the  rights  which  the  federal  constitution  and  laws  grant  to
them  as  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  to  prevent  any
state  from  depriving  any  person  of  life,  liberty,  or  property
without  due  process  of  law.  The  federal  courts  interpret  and
apply  treaties  with  foreign  nations  and  protect  the  rights  of
aliens.  Finally,  since  the  acts  of  the  federal  Congress  6r^ ex-
ecutive may  conflict  with  the  constitution,  the  federal  court
may  declare  them  unconstitutional  and  hence  refuse  to  apply
them,  in  order  to  protect  the  constitution.

In  this  many-sided  jurisdiction  over  states,  over  Congress,


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  23

over  the  executive,  over  inferior  courts,  and  over  private
citizens,  and  in  thfe  interpretation  of  these  many  laws,  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  exercises  authority  not
only  judicial,  but  also,  in  fact,  legislative  and  executive.  So
with  the  supreme  courts  of  the  states  within  their  proper
jurisdictions.  When  deciding  between  a  law  of  the  legisla-
ture and  the  law  of  the  constitution,  they  necessarily  decide
between  the  policy  of  the  legislature  and  their  own  opinion,
based  on  previous  decisions,  of  the  poUcy  contained  in  the
constitution.  When  nulUfying  an  act  of  the  executive  they
interpose  their  opinion  of  the  law  and  the  constitution  against
the  executive's  opinion.  Yet  they  are  but  performing  the
judicial  fvmction  of  interpreting  the  laws  and  making  their
appUcation  to  the  facts  of  each  particular  case,  as  it  arises.
Their  legislative  and  executive  functions  arise  because  they
have  authority  to  apply  their  interpretation  to  cases  in  which
the  acts  of  legislatures  and  executives  are  called  in  question,
as  well  as  cases  where  only  private  citizens  are  the  litigants.
In  this  way  is  estabUshed,  as  the  court  has  said,  "a  govern-
ment of  laws  and  not  of  men.''^

But  the  courts,  just  as  legislatures  and  executives,  are  com-
posed of  £nen.  They,  too,  are  guided  by  opinions,  and  their
opinions  change  with  change  in  experience  and  change  in
judges.  The  difiEerence  consists  in  the  procedure,  the  stand-
ards, and  the  safeguards  by  which  the  judges  arrive  at  their
opinions,  compared  with  those  which  restrain  the  more  hasty
opinions  of  lawmakers  and  executives.  It  is  merely  "opin-
ions," after  all,  rather  than  written  constitutions,  that  pro-
tect, enlarge,  and  abridge  rights  and  duties.

d.  The  Administration.  But  opinions  of  individuals  are  so
capricious,  fluctuating,  and  uncertain,  so  Uable  to  be  bent  by
bias,  passion,  and  interest,  that  our  constitutional  system  of
government  imposes  methods  and  principles  designed  to  re-
duce them  to  an  orderly  system  based  on  reason.  These
methods  are  investigation  or  the  accurate  discovery  of  facts
and  conditions,  and  in  more  recent  times  the  administrative
branch  of  government  has  been  devised  with  investigation  as
its  main  purpose. Investigation  is  so  involved  in  all  the


>Marbury  ».  Madison,  I  Cranch  137,  at  p.  163  (1803).


24 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

topics  of  labor  legislation  that  the  treatment  of  administra-
tion is  reserved  for  the  concluding  chapter.


(j)  Principles

The  other  essential  to  an  orderly  system  of  reason  in  place
of  capricious  opinion  is  the  principles,  standards,  or  "maxims"
that  underlie  due  process  of  law.  Under  the  theory  of  our
courts,  the  principles  of  law  and  justice  are  immutable  and
unchanging.  Facts  and  conditions  change,  and  these  are  re-
vealed by  investigation,  but  the  principles  remain  the  same,
though  their  application  changes  when  the  facts  change.  The
leading  principles  that  concern  us  are  "public  benefit"  and
"equal  protection  of  the  laws."

a.  Public  Benefit.  The  effect  and  purpose  of  the  police
power  is  to  impose  a  duty  on  some  individual  which  redounds
to  the  benefit  of  other  individuals.'  In  despotic  or  oligarchic
governments  these  benefited  individuals  are  likely  to  be  the
favorites  and  courtiers  of  the  monarch  or  the  privileged  and
aristocratic  classes.  In  a  democratic  or  republican  govern-
ment they  are  likely  to  be  political  partisans,  monied  interests,
employers'  organizations,  trade  unions,  or  other  classes  who
get  control  of  the  legislature  and  enact  laws  merely  for  the
benefit  of  their  private  interest  at  the  expense  of  other  private
interests.  But  if  a  thing  of  this  kind  happens,  then  the  legis-
lature is  doing  the  very  thing  which  revolutions  and  written
constitutions  were  designed  to  prevent  when  despots  and
aristocrats  were  the  offenders.  Hence  it  is  that  every  act
of  the  legislature  must  be  tested  by  a  standard  which  shall
determine  whether  the  persons  or  classes  of  persons  to  be
benefited  are  so  benefited  merely  because  they  have  power  in
the  legislature  to  impose  burdens  on  others,  or  because  the
benefit  to  them  is  also  a  benefit  to  that  body  of  the  whole
people  which  we  call  "the  public."  If  the  benefit  goes  only  to
private  persons  for  their  private  benefit,  then  the  legislation
is  unconstitutional,  because  it  employs  the  sovereign  power  of
goveniment  for  private  purposes. But  if  those  persons  who


»  See  "The  Police  Power,"  p.  13.


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  25

are  benefited  are  either  the  entire  population  or  such  a  sig-
nificant part  of  the  population  that  their  benefit  is  also  a
public  benefit,  then  the  powers  of  government  are  put  to
their  proper  use  of  performing  a  public  purpose.'

Thus  we  have  a  series  of  terms  closely  related  or  synony-
mous, aU  of  them  implying  public  benefit,  such  as  public  utility,
pubHc  interest,  pubhc  use,  public  value,  public  service,  pub-
He  welfare,  public  piirpose.  These  indicate  the  most  funda-
mental principle,  standard,  or  maxim,  which  measures  or  limits
the  extent  to  which  the  legislature  my  go  in  exercising  its
police  power.

But  public  benefit  is  not  something  fixed  and  unchangeable.
The  police  power  particularly  is  that  justification  by  which
the  definition  of  public  benefit  may  be  changed  or  enlarged
as  time  goes  on.  In  the  final  analysis  this  enlargement  of  the
definition  of  public  benefit  is  merely  an  enlargement  of  the
court's  opinion  as  to  what  constitutes  a  public  purpose.  But,
behind  the  change  in  the  court's  opinion  is  the  change  in
conditions  and  the  change  in  public  opinion.  Among  the
changes  in  conditions  which  lead  to  changes  in  opinion  are
those  industrial  changes  already  mentioned,  such  as  the  change
from  free  land  to  closed  land,  the  changes  in  transportation
and  mobility  of  labor,  the  development  of  large-scale  indus-
try, all  of  them  throwing  large  masses  of  labor  together  into
active  competition.  The  increasing  congestion  of  population,
whether  in  towns  or  factories,  has  brought  a  change  of  opinion
as  to  the  need  of  extending  the  police  power  in  matters  of
health,  safety,  and  morals.

Accompanjdng  these  changes  in  outward  conditions  may  be
noted  significant  changes  in  public  opinion  and  court  opinion
regarding  labor.  In  the  colonial  or  agricultural  stage  of  in-
dustry the  man  without  property  was  looked  upon  as  partly
shiftless,  partly  vagabond,  partly  criminal,  and  the  opinion  of
the  time  supported  many  kinds  of  coercive  laws  by  which
both  adults  and  children  might  be  captured  or  enslaved  or
otherwise  compelled  to  work.  In  this  way  it  was  considered
that  propertyless  laborers  would  be  trained  in  the  habits  of

'The  term  "public  purpose''  is  usually  limited  to  taxation  and
eminent  domain,  but  in  this  book  it  is  also  applied  to  other  powers,
especially  the  police  power.


26 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

industry  and  thrift  by  which  they  could  rise  to  the  position
of  proprietor  and  could  share  in  the  rights  and  civilization  of
their  superiors.

A  citizenship  stage  followed,  beginning  in  the  decade  of
1820,  when  the  propertyless  man  was  granted  the  suffrage.
This  produced  at  once  a  revolutionary  change  in  the  atti-
tude of  labor  toward  itself,  shown  in  the  first  series  of  strikes
on  a  large  scale  for  reduction  of  hours  of  labor  with  the  demand
for  more  leisure  for  the  duties  of  citizenship  as  well  as  the
demand  for  free  schools,  for  the  abolition  of  imprisonment
for  debt,  of  indentured  service,  and  other  remnants  of  the
servile  stage.

Immediately  following  this  period  and  the  failure  of  ag-
gressive methods,  after  the  panic  of  1837,  came  what  may  be
called  the  humanitarian  period.  Labor,  for  the  time  being,
lost  its  power  of  attack  and  became  incapable  of  self-help.
So  the  long  period  of  unemployment,  until  the  gold  discoveries
of  1849,  produced  a  class  of  eminent  men  in  sympathy  with
labor,  and  brought  about  the  beginning  of  legislation  abolish-
ing imprisonment  for  debt,  providing  wage  and  homestead
exemptions,  free  schools,  protective  tariffs  against  foreign
pauper  competition,  and  generally  removing  the  opinions  of
servility,  dissoluteness,  and  criminality  theretofore  held  re-
garding propertyless  labor.  This  remarkable  period  cul-
minated in  the  CivU  War,  which  freed  the  slaves.  It  was
accompanied  by  similar  movements  in  Europe,  and  altogether
was  nothing  less  than  a  revolution  in  public  opinion  regard-
ing labor.  1

With  the  decade  of  the  'sixties  began  again  an  aggressive
movement  of  labor,  headed  in  Europe  by  the  International
Workingmen's  Association,  which  later  split  into  socialism,
anarchism,  and  trade-unionism,  and  in  the  United  States  by
the  National  Labor  Union,  which  finally  split  into  green-
bacldsm,  socialism,  and  trade-unionism.  This  period,  ex-
tending into  the  twentieth  century,  may  properly  be  char-
acterized as  a  period  of  class  struggle,  in  which  new  and
enormous  fortunes  derived  from  industry  were  pitted  against
unprecedented  organizations  of  labor  in  many  deadly  strug-

'See  Chapters  II,  "Individual  Bargainiag,"  and  III,  "Collective  Bar-
gaining."


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  27

gles,  and  in  which  legislatures  responded  to  the  demands  of
labor  for  legislation,  and  the  courts  responded  to  the  demands
of  capital  by  declaring  such  laws  "class  legislation"  and  there-
fore unconstitutional.

This  period,  to  a  considerable  extent,  continues  to  the  pres-
',  ent  time,  but  the  beginning  of  another,  which  may  be  called
the  public  benefit  period  of  labor  legislation,  dates  from  1898,
when  the  Supreme  Court  decided  the  case  of  Holden  v.  Hardy."
Hitherto  the  poHce  power  was  recognized  mainly  as  an  au-
thority to  enforce  protective  restrictions  against  producers
in  behalf  of  constuners.  i  This  decision  affirmed  the  power  to
enforce  such  restrictions  on  employers  and  consumers  in
behalf  of  producers.  In  other  words,  whereas  formerly,  for
the  most  part,  the  health  of  consumers,  but  not  the  health  of
producers,  was  a  public  benefit,  now  the  health  of  the  laborer
as  a  producer  is  considered  to  be  as  much  a  public  benefit  as
the  health  of  the  consumer  of  his  product.  If  this  De^oT  then
the  Uberty  of  both  the  employer  ^nd  the  employee  to  make  a
labor  contract  may  be  restricted  and  regulated,  if  it  is  found
that  the  contract  is  injurious  to  the  laborer.  The  protection
of  labor  becomes  a  public  purpose.^

In  the  Holden  v.  Hardy  case  the  court  also  stated  the  prin-
ciples on  which  the  powers  of  government  are  enlarged  as
conditions  change  and  new  facts  are  brought  to  the  attention
of  the  court  through  investigation:  "This  cotirt  has  not  failed
to  recognize  the  fact  that  the  law  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  a
progressive  science;  that  in  some  of  the  states  methods  of
procedure  which,  at  the  time  the  constitution  was  adopted,
were  deemed  essential  to  the  protection  and  safety  of  the
people,  or  to  the  liberty  of  the  citizen,  have  been  found
to  be  no  longer  necessary;  that  restrictions  which  had  for-
merly been  laid  upon  the  conduct  of  individuals,  or  of  classes
of  individuals,  have  proved  detrimental  to  their  interests,
while,  upon  the  other  hand,  certain  other  classes  of  persons


V169  U.  S.  366  (1898).  The  decision  affirmed  the  constitutionality
of  legislation  reducing  the  hours  of  labor  of  men  who  work  in  smelters
and  underground.

2  This  was,  of  course,  not  the  first  time  that  this  doctrme  was  as-
serted. Indeed,  it  was  implied  whenever  a  court  sustained  a  law  pro-
tecting labor.  But  it  was  the  first  broad  statement  by  the  highest
court  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  "the  law  of  the  land."


28 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(particularly  those  engaged  in  dangerous  or  unhealthful  em-
ployments) have  been  found  to  be  in  need  of  additional  pro-
tection. ...  It  is  impossible  to  forecast  the  character  or  ex-
tent of  these  changes;  but  in  view  of  the  fact  that,  from
the  day  Magna  Charta  was  signed  to  the  present  moment,
amendments  to  the  structure  of  the  law  have  been  made  with
increasing  frequency,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  they  will
not  continue,  and  the  law  be  forced  to  adapt  itself  to  new
conditions  of  society,  and  particularly  to  the  new  relations
between  employers  and  employees,  as  they  arise.  "^  Two
state  courts  have  said,  "While  the  principles  of  justice  are
immutable,  changing  conditions  of  society  and  the  evolution
of  employment  make  a  change  in  the  application  of  principles
absolutely  necessary  to  an  intelligent  administration  of
government."^

Finally  a  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  in  1911,  is  able  to
identify  a  public  benefit  with  public  opinion  regarding  not
only  the  health  of  a  class  of  producers,  but  also  regarding  the
welfare  of  any  class  of  people,  and  to  declare  that  the  police
power  is  shaped  "by  the  prevailing  morality  or  the  strong  and
preponderant  opinion"  as  to  what  is  "greatly  and  immedi-
ately necessary  to  the  public  welfare."^

b.  Equal  Protection  of  the  Laws.  Another  respect  in  which
the  case  of  Holden  v.  Hardy  is  the  headlight  of  a  new  period
is  found  in  its  opinion  regarding  the  inequality  of  bargaining
power  of  employer  and  employee.  The  opinion  declared  that
a  law,  such  as  the  one  then  before  the  court,  limiting  the  work-
ing hours  of  men,  was  not  class  legislation  and  therefore  did
not  conflict  with  the  constitution  which  guarantees  to  each
individual  the  equal  protection  of  the  laws. The  reason  is,

1  Holden  v.  Hardy,  169  U.  S.  366,  at  pp.  385-387  (1898).

^Ritchie  v.  Wayman,  244  111.  509,  91  N.  E.  695  (1910);  quoted  with
approval  from  Washington  v.  Buchanan,  59  L.  R.  A.  342  (1902).

5  Noble  State  Bank  v.  Haskell,  219  U.  S.  104  (1911),  at  p.  in.  Also
contrary  opinion  in  Ives  v.  South  Buffalo  R.R.  Co.,  201  N.  Y.  271,  94
N.  E.  431  (191 1),  at  p.  448,  where  the  highest  court  of  New  York  said
in  part:  "As  to  the  cases  of  Noble  State  Bank  v.  Haskell  and  Assaria
State  Bank  v.  Dolly,  we  have  only  to  say  that  if  they  go  so  far  as  to
hold  that  any  law,  whatever  its  effect,  may  be  upheld  because  by  the
'prevailing  morality'  or  the  'strong  and  preponderant  opinion'  it  is
deemed  'to  be  greatly  and  immediately  necessary  to  the  public  welfare,'
we  cannot  recognize  them  as  controlling  of  our  construction  of  our  own
constitution."


THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW  29

as  declared  by  the  court,  that  the  employers  and  their  laborers
do  not  stand  upon  an  equality;  that  "the  proprietors  lay  down
the  rules  and  the  operatives  are  practically  constrained  to
obey  them";  that  "the  latter  are  often  induced  by  the  fear
of  discharge  to  conform  to  regulations  which  their  judgment,
fairly  exercised,  wotild  pronounce  to  be  detrimental  to  their
health  and  strength,"  and  that,  even  though  "both  parties
are  of  full  age  and  competent  to  contract,"  yet  the  legislature
may  interfere  "where  the  parties  do  not  stand  upon  an
equality,  or  where  the  public  health  demands  that  one  party
to  the  contract  shall  be  protected  against  himself."  '■

In  this  opinion  the  court  recognized,  Iwhat  had  been  dimly
seen  or  implied  from  the  beginning  of  labor  legislation,  that
inequality  of  bargaining  power  is  a  justification  under  which
the  state  mav  come  to  the  protection  of  the  weaker  party  to
the  bargain.y  In  earlier  periods  the  courts  had  often  held  that
capital  and  labor  were  equal,  that  laws  favoring  labor  against
capital  were  class  legislation,  and,  even  where  certain  courts
held  otherwise,  the  law  books  severely  criticized  them  as
yielding  to  the  pressure  of  politics  instead  of  bravely  stand-
ing by  the  constitution.^  But  inequality  of  bargaining  power
has  long  been  a  ground  for  legislative  and  judicial  protection
of  the  weaker  party,  even  though  the  courts  found  other
grounds  on  which  to  base  their  opinions.  It  was  early  con-
ceded as  a  justification  of  usiu-y  laws,  protecting  the  weak
debtor  against  the  strong  creditor;  latterly  of  public  utility
laws,  protecting  the  weak  consumer  against  the  powerful  cor-
poration; and  now  it  only  needs  a  recognition  of  facts  to
justify  labor  legislation  protecting  the  weak  wage-earner
against  the  more  powerful  capitaHst. Such  legislation  could

'A  similar  opinion  had  been  stated  in  1892  by  a  state  court  (Peel
Splint  Coal  Co.  v.  State,  36  W.  Va.  802,  15  S.  E.  1000  (1892),  at  p.  1009:
"When  a  few  persons  are  engaged  in  an  extensive  business  and  they
have  a  multitude  of  customers  or  dependent  employees  and  it  appears
that  the  business  is  of  such  a  character  that  the  parties  do  not  deal
upon  an  equal  footing  and  that  the  many  are  at  a  disadvantage  in
their  contractual  relations  with  the  few,  the  legislature  may  regulate
these  relations,  with  a  view  to  prevent  fraud,  oppression,  or  undue  ad-
vantage." See  also  State  v.  Brown  &  Sharpe  Manufacturing  Co.,
18  R.  I.  16,  25  Atl.  246  (1892);  Avent  Beattyville  Coal  Co.  v.  State,  96
Ky.  218,  28  S.  W.  502  (1894).

»Eddy,  Low  of  Combinations,  1901,  Vol.  I,  pp.  245-247,  277!  Vol,  II,
p.  1023.


30 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

be  held  to  deny  equal  protection  of  the  laws  only  where  the
facts  showed  that  both  parties  were  actually  equal.  But
where  the  parties  are  unequal  (and  a  public  purpose  is  shown),'
then  the  state  which  refuses  to  redress  the  inequality  is
actually  den3dng  to  the  weaker  party  the  equal  protection
of  the  laws.

It  is  by  recognizing  this  inequality  of  bargaining  power,
coupled  with  a  public  purpose,  that  the  coiirts  pass  over,  in
any  particular  case,  from  the  theory  of  class  legislation  to  the
theory  of  reasonable  classification.  The  two  are  identical  in
one  respect ;  all  classification  is  class  legislation,  but  the  kind
of  class  legislation  which  the  courts  condemn  is  that  which
they  consider  to  be  "  unreasonable ' '  classification.  Class  legis-
lation benefits  or  burdens  one  class  against  others  where  there
is  no  real  inequality  or  no  public  benefit.  "Reasonable"
classification  benefits  or  burdens  a  class  where  there  is  real
inequality  to  be  overcome  and  a  public  benefit  to  be  attaine^l'
That  which  is  class  legislation  at  one  time  may  become  rS-
sonable  classification  at  a  later  time,  if  the  court  perceives
that  what  it  once  thought  was  equality  is  really  inequality,
and  what  it  once  thought  was  merely  private  benefit  is  also
public  benefit.

Thus  the  history  of  the  constitutionality  of  labor  legislation
in  the  United  States  has  been  a  history  of  the  theory  of  classifi-
cation. ,-The  conflicting  opinions  of  various  courts  on  the  ex-
tent of  the  police  power  over  private  property  are  usually
conflicting  opinions  on  the  equality  or  inequality  of  bargain-
ing classes  and  on  the  pubUc  or  private  piurpose  subserved  by
the  legislation.;  In  proportion  as  certain  classes  of  la-
borers, such  as  women  or  mine-workers,  are  recognized  by
the  courts  as  suffering  an  injury,  and  in  proportion  as  the  in-
jured persons  are  deemed  to  be  of  importance  to  the  public
as  well  as  tmable  to  protect  themselves,  then  legislation  re-
quiring the  employer  to  remove  the  injury  and  prohibiting  the

'In  the  recent  case  of  Coppage  v.  Kansas,  35  Sup.  Ct.  240  (1915),  the
Supreme  Court  denied  the  application  of  the  doctrine  of  inequality  of
bargaining  power,  but  this  was  a  case  where  the  purpose  was  to  protect
trade  unions  against  disruption  by  employers.  What  the  court  in
effect  decided  was  that  a  trade  union  performed  a  private  and  not  a
public  purpose. See  "The  Law  of  Conspiracy,"  p.  113.

2  See  also  Freund,  Police  Power,  pp.  626-755.


THE  BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  31

laborer  from  even  voluntarily  consenting  to  the  injiary  ceases
to  be  overruled  as  "class  legislation"  aad  begins  to  be  sus-
tained as  "reasonable  classification." j^ven  though  the  in-
dividual liberty  of  both  employer  and  employee  to  make  so-
called  volimtary  contracts  is  restricted  by  the  law,  yet  each
continues  to  have  "equal  protection  of  the  laws"  because
each  individual  is  treated  equally  with  aU  other  individuals
of  his  own  class.  The  bargaining  power  of  the  employee  is
increased  while  that  of  the  employer  is  reduced,  yet  all  em-
ployers in  a  given  class  are  treated  alike  and^all  employees
in  their  class  are  similarly  treated  alike.  ^

This  gradual  transition  from  the  time"  when  labor  was
treated  as  equal  to  capital  to  the  modem  time  when  labor  is
given  privileges  superior  to  those  of  capital  may  be  described
as  a  transition  from  the  law  of  master  and  servant  to  the  law
of  employer  and  employee.  Prior  to  the  decade  of  the  'thirties
the  laborer  could  be  imprisoned  for  debt.  In  other  words,  his
creditor  had  rights  over  his  body,  which  was  looked  upon  as
property  justly  belonging  to  the  creditor  as  was  the  laborer's
other  property  sufl&cient'to  pay  the  debt.  This  reduced  the
laborer  to  a  servile  state  while  pretending  that  he  was  equal
and  free.  No  distinction  was  made  between  the  fraudulent
debtor  and  the  unfortunate  debtor.  Now  the  laborer  is  not
treated  as  a  criminal  tinless  proved  to  be  so,  and  his  creditor
consequently  has  no  remedy  which  reduces  the  laborer  to  the
servile  state.

Next,  in  the  decade  of  the  'forties,  the  law  went  further  and
the  wage  exemption  laws  prevented  the  creditor  from  taking
even  the  minimum  wages  of  the  laborer  in  payment  of  a  debt.


1  This  principle  may  be  seen  in  the  workmen's  compensation  laws.
Under  the  former  law  of  employers'  hability  the  laborer  carried  aU  the
expense  incurred  by  reason  of  the  risk  of  accident.  The  employer  had
certain  defenses  by  which  he  could  throw  the  cost  of  accidents  on  the
employee.  (See  "Rules  of  Employers'  Liability,"  p.  358.)  These  de-
fenses were  held  to  be  property  rights,  because  they  were  valuable  to
the  employer.  But  the  legislature  abolished  these  defenses  and  requires
the  employer  to  compensate  all  laborers  for  all  disabling  accidents.  The
employers  are  thus  compelled  to  pay  the  cost  of  insurance  against  aU  of
these  risks,  where  formerly  the  laborer  carried  the  insurance  as  best  he
could.  In  this  way  the  employer's  increased  cost  of  insurance  may  be
said,  so  far  as  the  law  is  concerned,  to  have  increased  the  bargaining
power  of  the  employee  and  reduced  the  bargaining  power  of  the  employer
or  of  the  consumer  to  the  same  extent.


32 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Finally,  the  thirteenth  amendment  to  the  constitution,  by
prohibiting  involuntary  servitude  except  for  crime,  confirmed
the  preceding  privileges  as  well  as  the  privilege  of  a  laborer
even  to  break  his  contract  to  labor  without  being  forced  to
"specific  performance."  In  these  respects  labor  has  been
given  a  preference  over  capital,  in  that  while  both  the  em-
ployer and  the  employee  can  bring  suits  for  damages  on
account  of  breaking  a  contract,  the  employer's  suit  is  against
the  laborer  whose  small  property  is  exempt  from_attachment,
but  the  laborer's  suit  is  against  an  employer  whose  business
property  as  such  has  no  exemption.'

Other  laws  are  mentioned  in  the  following  chapters,  showing
the  transition  from  the  master-servant  notion  of  law  to  the
employer-employee  notion.  The  master  and  servant  law,
while  pretending  to  treat  employer  and  employee  alike,  re-
tained marks  of  that  servile  status  in  which  the  laborer's  body
was  the  physical  property  of  employer  or  creditor.  But  the
law  of  employer  and  employee,  as  it  develops,  not  only  grad-
ually removes  those  vestiges  of  past  servitude,  when  the
master  could  compel  the  servant  to  work,  but  also  gives  the
latter  a  preference  over  capital  in  bargaining  and  a  privilege
to  break  contracts  without  effective  penalty  which  the  em-
ployer does  not  possess.  In  other  words,  the  nattual  in-
equality of  employer  and  employee  reduces  the  latter  to  a
servile  state,  reinforced  by  the  law  of  master  and  servant,
but  the  legislature,  by  giving  preference  to  the  weaker  party,
overcomes  in  part  the  inequalities  of  natirre  and  secures  a
more  real  equality  protected  by  the  law  of  employer  and
employee.^

Thus  it  may  be  affirmed  that  the  equality  of  bargaining
power  toward  which  the  law  of  employer  and  employee  is
directed  is  a  principle  so  important  for  the  public  benefit  that

'  Of  course,  the  bankrupt  employer  has  the  same  exemptions  as  the
laborer.

'  This  distinction  between  the  law  of  master  and  servant  and  that  of
employer  and  employee  is  not  technically  correct.  The  law  books  in-
clude both  under  "master  and  servant."  But  the  legislatures  have
broken  away  from  these  terms.  In  recent  legislation  of  the  more  indus-
trial states  the  terms  used  are  employer  and  employee.  This  goes  along
with  popular  usage  and  serves  to  bring  out,  not  so  much  the  legal  form
of  the  labor  contract,  as  the  underlying  purpose  of  equality  in  the  wage
bargain.


THE BASIS  OF  LABOR  LAW  33

it  becomes  in  itself  a  public  purpose.  Many  decisions  of  the
courts  base  the  justification  of  the  police  power,  not  merely
upon  the  protection  of  health,  safety,  and  morals,  but  squarely
upon  strengthening  the  bargaining  power  of  laborers.  In  sus-
taining a  law  requiring  wages  to  be  paid  in  cash,  the  Supreme
Court  of  Tennessee  said:  "The  legislature  evidently  deemed
the  laborer  at  some  disadvantage  under  existing  laws  and
customs,  and  by  this  act  undertook  to  ameliorate  his  condi-
tion in  some  manner  by  enabling  him, ...  at  his  election  and
at  a  proper  time,  to  demand  and  receive  his  impaid  wages  in
money  rather  than  in  something  less  valuable.  Its  tendency,
though  slight  it  may  be,  is  to  place  the  employer  and  employee
upon  equal  groimd  in  the  matter  of  wages."  '  The  coiirt  again
approved  the  passage  in  Holden  v.  Hardy  bearing  on  bargain-
ing equality.

Upon  similar  grounds  was  upheld  as  constitutional  an
Arkansas  law  forbidding  coal  operators  "from  using  screens
or  other  devices  to  reduce  the  amount  of  wages  that  would
be  due  on  the  basis  of  weight  of  coal  actually  mined  and
accepted  by  the  operator."  The  court  said:  "  We  are  unable
to  say,  in  the  light  of  the  conditions  shown  in  the  public  in-
quiry referred  to,  and  in  the  necessity  for  such  laws,  evinced
in  the  enactments  of  the  legislatures  of  various  states,  that
this  law  had  no  reasonable  relation  to  the  protection  of  a  large
class  of  laborers  in  the  receipt  of  their  just  dues  and  in  the
promotion  of  the  harmonious  relations  of  capital  and  labor
engaged  in  a  great  industry  in  the  state."  ^

The  court  argued  in  a  like  tenor  in  upholding  an  Iowa
statute  denying  effect  to  any  contract  restricting  liability  or
the  acceptance  of  any  insurance  benefits  as  a  defense  to  per-
sonal injury  actions  brought  against  railroads  by  their  em-
ployees. In  dealing  with  the  relation  of  employer  and  em-
ployed the  court  held  that  "the  legislature  has  necessarily  a
wide  field  of  discretion  in  order  that  there  may  be  suitable
protection  of  health  and  safety,  and  that  peace  and  good  order


iKnoxville  Iron  Co.  v.  Harbison,  183  U.  S.  13  (1901).  For  cases
declaring  similar  laws  unconstitutional,  see  Preund,  Police  Power,  pp.
305,  306.

^McLean  v.  Arkansas,  211  U.  S.  539  (1909),  at  p.  550,  reprinted  in
Hall,  Cases  on  Constitutional  Law,  1913,  p.  424.

3


34 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

may  be  promoted  through  regulations  designed  to  insure
wholesome  conditions  of  work  and  freedom  from  oppression.
What  differences  as  to  the  extent  of  this  power  may  exist  with
respect  to  particular  employments  and  how  far  that  which
may  be  authorized  as  to  one  department  of  activity  may  ap-
pear to  be  arbitrary  in  another  must  be  determined  as  cases
are  presented  for  decision.  But  it  is  well  estabhshed  that,
so  far  as  its  regulations  are  valid,  not  being  arbitrary  or  un-
related to  a  proper  purpose,  the  legislature  undoubtedly  may
prevent  them  from  being  nullified  by  prohibiting  contracts
which,  by  modifications  or  waiver,  would  alter  or  impair  the
obligation  imposed." '  The  court  here  also  quotes  with  ap-
proval the  passage  from  Holden  v.  Hardy  relating  to  inequality
and  conflicting  interest.

As  summarized  by  Ernst  Preund:  ^  "Our  whole  economic
system  is  based  upon  a  very  wide  liberty  of  dealing  and  con-
tract, and  it  is  deemed  perfectly  legitimate  to  use  liberty  for
the  purpose  of  securing  special  advantage  over  others.  The
resulting  disparity  of  conditions  is  not,  on  the  whole,  regarded
as  inconsistent  with  the  welfare  of  society.  Yet  a  different
view  seems  to  be  taken  of  this  liberty  of  dealing,  where
economic  superiority  is  used  to  dictate  oppressive  terms,  or
where  a  degree  of  econonaic  power  is  aimed  at  that  is  liable
to  result  in  such  oppression.  The  theory  of  legislative  inter-
ference seems  to  be  in  some  cases  that  oppression  in  itself,
like  fraud,  is  immoral  and  wrong  either  against  the  individ-
ual affected  thereby  or  against  the  public  at  large;  in  other
cases,  that  the  excessive  dependence  of  whole  classes  of  the
community  threatens,  though  perhaps  only  remotely,  the
social  fabric  with  grave  disturbance  or  ultimate  subversion
and  ruin."


'Chicago,  Burlington  &  Quincy  R.R.  Co.  v.  McGuire,  219  U.  S.  549
(191 1 ),  at  p.  570,  reprinted  in  Hdl,  Cases  on  Constitutional  Law,  p.  518.
^Police  Power,  p.  285.


CHAPTER II
INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING

In  the  broadest  sense  of  the  term  a  debt  is  that  which  is
due  from  one  person  to  another,  whether  money,  goods,  or
services. 1  The  laborer  as  debtor  may,  therefore,  be  looked
upon  as  owing  either  labor  or  money  to  another.  But  modem
law  does  not  force  a  laborer  to  work  out  his  debt.  It  con-
verts a  labor  debt  into  a  money  debt,  or  "damages,"  and  en-
forces payment  of  the  latter.  Furthermore,  under  "exemp-
tion" laws,  the  law  does  not  always  enforce  even  the  total
pajrment  of  a  money  debt.

On  the  other  side,  the  laborer  is  a  creditor  to  the  extent
that  the  employer  owes  him  money  for  his  labor.  Here,  too,
modem  legislation  gives  him  certain  privileges  or  protection,
not  usually  given  to  other  creditors.

It  is  in  this  twofold  relation  of  debtor  and  creditor  that
we  trace  the  history  of  labor  law  from  the  servile  stage,  through
the  stage  of  master  and  servant,  to  the  modem  stage  of
employer  and  employee.

I.  The  Laborer  as  Debtor

If  we  classify  the  legal  relations  of  the  laborer  as  debtor
we  shall  begin  with  the  employment  of  labor  in  its  elementary
form  of  slavery,  where  all  of  the  rights  were  on  the  side  of
the  owner  and  all  the  obligations  on  that  of  the  laborer.
This,  and  a  succeeding  or  contemporary  stage  of  serfdom,
are  known  as  a  period  of  status. The  laborer  is  bora  to  the


'Kimpton  v.  Bronson,  45  Barb.  625  (1866).


36 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

position  and  does  not  enter  it  by  agreement  or  contract.  But
status  often  merges  into  contract,  or  the  fiction  of  a  contract,
and  we  may  therefore  speak  of  a  servility  stage,  or  a  stage
of  servile  contracts,  preceding  that  of  free  contracts.  Here
would  be  classified  slavery,  serfdom,  and  peonage.  These
conditions  of  labor,  even  if  based  on  contract,  may  be  so
evidently  the  outcome  of  coercion  that  they  may  rightly  be
considered  as  belonging  to  a  pre-contract  or  servile  stage.

A  second  stage,  which  we  may  designate  as  that  of  master
and  servant,  emerges  gradually  from  the  more  liberal  forms  of
servile  contracts,  although  retaining  vestiges  of  servile  rela-
tions. Some  of  the  contracts  of  this  stage,  especially  the
seaman's  contract,  have  continued  down  to  the  present  day,
while  others,  such  as  apprenticeship,  indentured  service,  and
contract  labor,  can  with  difficulty  be  distinguished  from  those
of  the  servile  stage.  The  ameliorating  character  of  both  the
servile  and  master  stage  is  that  of  paternalism,  and  both  of
them  are  closely  connected  with  the  institution  of  the  family,
in  which  the  wife  and  children  occupy  a  position  of  status,
afterward  modified  by  contract,  express  or  impHed.

Modem  labor  legislation,  as  understood  in  this  book,  be-
gins with  a  conscious  effort  on  the  part  of  the  legislature  to
remove  both  the  servile  and  paternal  vestiges  of  the  master
and  servant  stage  and  to  substitute  a  stage  of  real  equality,
as  far  as  possible.  This  we  designate  as  the  employer  and
employee  stage.

(r)  Servile  Labor

a.  Slavery.  The  worker  under  primitive  slavery  is  re-
garded as  the  property  of  his  master.  In  Roman  law  a
slave  was  regarded  not  as  a  person,  but  as  a  thing.'  In  1776
Mr.  Justice  Chase  of  Maryland  said:  "Negroes  are  property,
and  no  more  members  of  the  state  than  cattle."  ^

In  England,  in  1772,  it  was  held  by  the  court  that  slavery
could  not  exist  in  the  mother  country.  The  slave  trade  was
aboUshed  by  statute  there  in  1807,  and  in  the  colonies  in  1833.

'  Sohm,  Institutes  of  Roman  Law,  tr.  Ledlie,  1901,  p.  171.
"  Wilson,  History  of  the  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Slave  Power  in  America,
n.  d.,  Vol.  I,  p.  15.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  37

The  example  of  Great  Britain  in  regard  to  her  colonies  was
gradually  followed  by  other  European  states,  by  France  in
1848,  Portugal  in  1858,  Holland  in  1863.  Spanish-American
states  abolished  slavery  after  securing  independence.  In  the
United  States  the  slaves  were  freed  in  1865  by  the  thirteenth
amendment  to  the  federal  constitution,  as  an  outcome  of  the
Civil  War,  and  Brazil,  the  South  American  state  which  re-
tained slavery  longest,  abolished  it  by  decree  of  the  Chambers
in  1888.

b.  Serfdom.  Slavery  aims  at  the  subjection  of  the  whole
man.  Another  degree  of  unfreedom,  namely,  serfdom  or
villeinage,  does  not  attempt  to  cover  the  entire  range  of
htiman  life.  It  is  concerned  only  with  certain  relations,  gen-
erally economic  in  character.  Compulsory  labor — compul-
sion as  to  the  kind  of  service  and  the  time  and  place  where  it
is  to  be  rendered — ^is  the  essential  note  of  serfdom  or  villeinage.
A  serf  was  boimd  to  the  land  and  bought  and  sold  with  it,
like  cattle.  But  he  might  secure  freedom  by  "commuta-
tion," that  is,  by  paying  to  the  lord  or  master  who  had  the
title  to  the  soil  a  sum  of  money  or  an  annual  pajrment  pre-
sumably equivalent  to  the  value  of  the  service  which  he
renderoi  his  lord.  He  substituted  a  money  debt  for  a  labor
debt — ^in  other  words,  he  bought  his  freedom.  Serfdom  ap-
pears as  a  corollary  of  feudalism.  It  grew  up  as  a  conse-
quence of  customary  subjection  in  an  agricultural  system  and
melted  away  with  the  advent  of  the  industrial  age.

c.  Peonage.  Peonage  has  been  defined  as  a  "status  or
condition  of  compulsory  service  based  upon  the  indebtedness
of  the  peon  to  the  raaster."  •  The  basic  fact  is  indebtedness.
In  Mexico,  after  the  Spanish  conquest,  slaves  were  used  in
mines  and  on  roads,  while  serfs  or  peons  were  used  for  agri-
culture. The  condition  of  the  latter,  though  differing  little
from  slavery,  was  theoretically  more  humane  and  right-
respecting.  Together  with  peonage  a  system  of  large  estates
grew  up.  The  peons  got  food  and  clothing  from  their  mas-
ters.^ These  Mexican  peons  are  descendants  of  natives  en-
slaved by  the  Spaniards,  and  are  often  merely  bondsmen.'


»Clyatt  V.  U.  S.,  197  U.  S.  207  (1904)-

2  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  38, 1902,  p.  23.

'  W.  E.  Carson,  Mexico,  1914,  p.  185.


38 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Their  wages  are  so  low  that  they  are  always  without  money,
and  they  are  compelled  to  deal  at  the  store  of  the  estate.
They  are  always  kept  in  debt,  and,  according  to  Mexican  law,
an  Indian  workman  owing  his  employer  becomes  the  prop-
erty of  the  latter.  1  Sometimes  peons  are  induced  to  contract
for  work  to  be  done  in  tropical  parts,  and  here  they  get  into
debt  at  once  and  are  prevented  by  armed  guards  from  escap-
ing.2

In  the  United  States,  after  the  abolition  of  slavery  by
the  thirteenth  amendment  in  1865  the  proprietors,  being  de-
prived of  their  property  right  in  the  services  of  the  slave,
sought  in  some  cases  to  effect  the  same  purpose  by  indirect
means,  such  as  enforcing  indebtedness  and  compelling  the
working  out  of  the  debt.  These  subterfuges  gave  added  im-
petus to  the  agitation  which  led  to  the  adoption,  two  and  a
half  years  later,  of  the  fourteenth  amendment,  which  created
a  citizenship  of  the  United  States  in  addition  to  that  of  the
state,  and  prohibited  any  state  from  depriving  a  citizen  of
the  United  States  of  "hfe,  liberty,  or  property  without  due
process  of  law,"  or  denying  "to  any  person  within  its  jurisr
diction  the  equal  protection  of  the  laws."^

In  1875  the  United  States  Congress  passed  statutes  which
have  been  thought  to  enforce  the  meaning  of  the  thirteenth
amendment.  That  they  do  not  entirely  accomplish  this  is
pointed  out  by  the  Immigration  Commission  of  1911.^  One
statute  provides  heavy  fines  for  those  who  "conspire  to  in-
jure, oppress,  threaten,  or  intimidate  any  citizen  in  the  free
exercise  or  enjoyment  of  any  right  or  privilege  secured  him
by  the  constitution  of  the  United  States";^  and  another  for
"every  person  who  kidnaps  or  carries  away  any  other  person,
with  the  intent  that  such  person  be  sold  into  involvmtary
servitude,  or  held  as  a  slave."*  But,  as  the  Immigration
Commission  shows,  "if  a  person  simply  places  or  holds  another
in  slavery,  it  is  impossible  for  the  federal  courts  to  impose

'  W.  E.  Carson,  Mexico,  1914,  pp.  188,  189.

'  Ibid.,  p.  191. See  also  Ely,  Property  and  Contract,  1914,  Ch.  X.
'Constitution  of  the  United  States,  Fourteenth  Amendment,  Sec.  i,
in  force  July  28,  1868.

*  Immigration  Commission,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  191 1,  Vol.  II,  p.  446.
'  United  States  Revised  Statutes,  1898,  Sec.  5508.
» Ibid.,  Sec.  5525.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  39

penalties  under  statutes  at  present  in  vogue  (191 1),  unless
the  placing  or  holding  be  for  the  purpose  of  forcing  the  settle-
ment of  a  debt,  no  matter  how  great  may  be  the  abuses  per-
petrated upon  the  person  held.  In  the  Clyatt  case  the
Supreme  Covut  decided  unmistakably  that  the  peonage
statute  (R.  S.  5526)  referred  only  to  cases  where  the  return
or  arrest  or  holding  has  been  for  the  purpose  of  paying  a
debt."i

The  chief  origins  of  the  enforced  indebtedness  upon  which
peonage  rests  are  advances  made  by  the  employer  to  the
laborer,  misrepresentations  made  to  laborers  by  unscrupulous
employment  agents,  the  payment  by  an  employer  of  fines
and  costs  in  cases  of  misdemeanor,  especially  violations  of
vagrancy  laws,  and  the  operation  of  contract  labor  laws.
Advances  to  laborers  might  include  payments  for  transporta-
tion, working  equipment  of  various  sorts,  and  any  payment
in  land,  such  as  food,  clothing,  or  housing,  accomplished
through  company  stores  and  land  ownership.  An  example
is  found  in  the  state  of  Maine,  where  advances  are  made  to
laborers  sent  out  by  employment  agents  who  "misrepresent
conditions  in  the  woods,  and  frequently  tell  the  laborers  that
the  camps  will  be  but  a  few  miles  from  some  town  where  they
can  go  from  time  to  time  for  recreation  and  enjoyment.
Arriving  at  the  outskirts  of  civilization,  the  laborers  are
driven  in  wagons  a  short  distance  into  the  forests,  and  then
have  to  walk  sometimes  sixty  or  seventy  miles  into  the  in^
tenor,  the  roads  being  impassable  for  vehicles.  The  men  will
be  kept  in  the  heart  of  the  forest  for  months  throughout  the
winter,  Uving  in  the  most  rugged  fashion  and  with  no  recrea-
tion whatever."^  Similar  practices  of  deceit  were  exercised
by  the  agencies  which  send  labor  from  New  York  to  the
South.

Abuses  of  the  vagrancy  laws  were  found  to  occur  in  the
South,  involving  both  negro  and  white  laborers.*  In  Florida,
for  instance,  "common  pipers  and  fiddlers,  common  railers
and  brawlers"  may  be  arrested  under  the  vagrancy  law  of

1  Immigration  Commission,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  Vol.  II,  p.  446.  See
also  Clyatt  v.  U.  S.,  197  U.  S.  207  (1904).

^  Immigration  Commission,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  Vol.  II,  p.  447.

'  United  States  Department  of  Justice,  Annual  Report  of  the  Attorney-
Qeneral,  1907,  Exhibit  17,  pp.  207-213.


40 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

igos,  and  fined  not  more  than  $250  or  imprisoned  not  more
than  six  months.  Other  states  of  the  South  make  it  quite
easy  for  arrests  to  be  made  under  these  statutes.  The  victim
is  usually  a  negro  who,  for  a  trivial  offense,  or  no  offense  at
all  except  being  unemployed,  will  be  arrested  and  charged
with  vagrancy.  He  gets  little  consideration  from  the  local
justices,  and  his  fines  are  so  high  that  he  is  unable  to  pay  them.
An  employer  appears  and  advances  the  fine  on  the  condition
that  the  laborer  will  work  out  his  debt.  When  the  debt  is
worked  out,  and  the  negro  is  again  unemployed,  he  will,  per-
haps, be  rearrested  on  similar  charges,  and  in  such  manner
becomes  virtually  a  peon.  Occasionally  a  victim  is  not  al-
lowed to  pay  the  fine  when  he  has  the  money;  he  will  be
imprisoned  and  word  sent  to  a  planter,  who  comes  in  and
pays  his  fine  and  then  takes  possession  of  the  unfortunate
criminal,  who  is  obliged  to  work  off  his  debt.  In  most  cases
this  is  as  hopeful  a  proceeding  as  borrowing  from  a  mediaeval
ustirer,  for  at  the  end  of  months  of  toil  the  laborer  may  find
himself  as  deeply  in  debt  as  ever.^

Although  the  Immigration  Commission  reported  that  in
every  state  except  Connecticut  and  Oklahoma  there  had
occurred  sporadic  cases  which,  if  supported  by  legal  evidence,
would  constitute  peonage  as  the  Supreme  Court  has  defined
it,  nevertheless  no  general  system  of  peonage,  and  no  senti-
ment supporting  it,  were  found.  In  the  South,  where  such
practices  were  most  frequent,  prosecution  by  United  States
district  attorneys  was  vigorous  and  usually  successful.^


(2)  From  Master  and  Servant  to  Employer  and  Employee

In  the  master  and  servant  stage  we  have  the  beginnings
of  the  contract.  In  some  cases  the  contract  is  very  elementary
in  form,  while  in  others  it  approximates  closely  the  free  labor
contract.  It  is  the  first  expression  of  the  idea  of  equality
between  the  laborer  and  his  employer.  The  master  was  at
liberty  to  hire  whomsoever  he  wished,  and,  on  the  other

»M.  C.  Terrell,  "Peonage  in  the  United  States,"  Nineteenth  Century
and  After,  Vol.  LXII,  1907,  pp.  312,  313.

2  Immigration  Commission,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  Vol.  II,  p.  445.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  41

hand,  the  servant  could  work  for  any  master  he  chose.  The
master  was  not  free  to  discharge  his  servant  during  the  term
of  the  contract,  nor  the  servant  free  to  quit  his  master  and
to  work  for  another.  The  laborer  was  to  serve  the  master
faithfully,  keep  his  secrets,  obey  his  lawful  commands,  and
guard  his  interests.  On  the  other  hand,  the  master  was  to
give  his  servant  a  living,  to  protect  him  and  look  after  his
welfare.

a.  Indentured  Service.  The  slave,  the  serf,  and  the  peon
perform  their  labor  under  a  fixed  status,  and  the  individual
has  little  or  nothing  to  say  about  it.  The  indentured  servant
had  in  some  particulars  the  right  of  a  servant  in  making  a
contract,  and  in  other  respects  he  was  little  more  than  a  slave,
except  that  his  chances  for  ultimate  freedom  were  more  real.
Indentured  labor  is  peculiar  to  new  countries  where  labor  is
scarce,  and  where  opportunity  for  individual  enterprise  is
great.  To  the  American  colonies  people  were  shipped  from
the  old  world  to  supply  the  need  for  yotmg,  healthy,  energetic
laborers  for  the  development  of  the  new.  Children  were
sometimes  shipped  \mder  the  Elizabethan  statute  of  appren-
tices.' White  indentured  service  is  mentioned  in  laws  of  all
the  thirteen  colonies.*  The  dates  i6ig  to  1819  may  be  taken
as  indicating  roughly  the  begiiming  and  end  of  the  system.
Competition  with  slavery  destroyed  it  in  the  South  before  the
end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  but  it  continued  to  exist  in
the  northern  states  into  the  nineteenth  century.  White  ser-
vitude was  hampered  by  too  many  considerations  in  favor  of
the  laborer;  above  all,  the  white  servant's  labor  belonged  to
his  master  only  for  a  term  of  years,  after  which  he  was  as  free
as  any  one  else,  while  the  slave's  services  were  property  during
the  term  of  his  life.

b.  Apprenticeship.  Apprenticeship  proper  differs  from  in-
dentured service  in  that  the  master  obligates  himself  to  teach
the  apprentice  a  trade.  If  this  obligation  does  not  appear
in  the  contract,  or  is  not  enforced,  the  apprentice  becomes  in
fact  an  indentured  servant.'  Thus  many  who  came  to
America  under  what  purported  to  be  apprenticeship  contracts


•sEliz.,  C.  3and4(i563).

^  Hurd,  Law  of  Freedom  and  Bondage  in  the  United  States,  1858,  Ch.  VI.

'  Abbott,  Wotnen  in  Industry,  19 10,  p.  331.


42 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

were  in  reality  indentured  servants.  The  two  merged  into
each  other  in  another  direction,  in  that  an  apprentice  could  be
bound  for  seven  years  to  learn  a  trade  which  could  be  learned
as  well  in  three.  Four  years'  enforcement  of  such  a  contract
would  be  really  indentured  service  and  only  three  years'
would  be  true  apprenticeship. '

c.  Contract  Labor.  Midway  between  indentured  service,  on
one  hand,  and  the  padrone  system  on  the  other,  is  contract
labor.  This  form  of  labor,  although  apparently  buUt  on  free-
dom of  contract,  results  in  compulsory  service  or  in  peonage
practices.  It  is  the  kind  of  labor  contract  whose  perform-
ance can  be  enforced  at  law,  and  has  been  quite  common
where  large  numbers  of  natives  of  backward  races  have  been
employed,  as  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  the  Philippines,  the
West  Indies,  and  in  South  Africa,  where  Chinese  coolies  were
employed  in  the  mines.

In  many  respects  contract  labor  closely  resembles  peonage,
as  we  have  previously  suggested,  for  it  places  the  laborer  in
the  position  of  a  debtor  owing  services,  yet  there  is  a  differ-
ence between  the  two.  Peonage  involves  continuous  or  in-
definite service,  as  long  as  a  balance  of  debt  continues,  which
may  be  permanent.  But  contract  labor  pertains  to  a  term
of  years  only,  after  which  the  laborer  caimot  be  compelled  to
work.  Furthermore,  shotild  the  laborer  renew  his  contract
because  of  economic  presstire,  still  it  is  only  for  another  term
of  years.  Contract  labor  results  in  servitude  for  a  definite
period  only,  while  it  leaves  the  way  open  to  freedom.  It  is
possible,  however,  that  abuses  of  the  system  may  lead  very
easily  to  a  state  almost  as  bad  as  peonage,  and  it  is  this  pos-
sibility that  has  made  contract  labor  unpopular  in  freedom-
loving  countries  and  has  led  to  legislation  aiming  at  its  re-
striction and  abolition.

In  the  Hawaiian  Islands  a  condition  of  contract  labor
existed  for  fifty  years.  In  order  to  solve  the  problem  raised
by  the  scarcity  of  labor  combined  with  the  opportunity  for
industrial  development,  the  employing  class  got  a  law  enacted
in  1850  by  which  laborers  over  twenty  years  of  age  could

'  See  chapter  on  governmental  regulation  of  apprentices  in  J.  M.
Motley,  Apprenticeship  in  American  Trade  Unions,  Johns  Hopkins  Uni-
versity Studies,  Vol.  XXV,  1907,  p.  494.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  43

contract  themselves  to  service  for  not  more  than  five  years.
Refusal  to  work  on  the  part  of  such  a  person  was  punished
by  imprisonment  with  hard  labor.  The  man  who  tried  to
escape  and  was  caught  could  be  bound  to  double  the  original
term  of  service.  A  later  amendment  added  to  the  punish-
ment for  a  second  desertion  three  months'  hard  labor  for  the
state.'  This  condition  of  contract  labor  was  abolished  in
1900  by  a  clause  in  the  organic  act  settling  the  conditions  of
annexation  to  the  United  States.

While  the  performance  of  labor  caimot  be  compelled  by
direct  means,  except  where  life  and  property  are  endangered,
or  public  necessity  and  convenience  demand  it,  yet  indirect
devices  are  invented  to  effect  the  same  thing.  Statutes  which
deal  with  "employers'  advances"  make  it  a  misdemeanor  for
the  employee  to  fail  in  the  performance  of  his  contract  to
work  off  a  debt.  As  imprisonment  for  debt  has  been  pro-
hibited by  law,  the  only  means  by  which  these  contract  labor
laws  can  be  made  effective  is  to  couch  them  in  such  terms  as
to  make  the  laborer  breaking  his  contract  appear  to  be  guilty
of  getting  money  or  provisions  under  false  pretenses.  Intent
to  defraud  must  be  shown,  since  a  mere  breach  of  the  labor
contract  is  not  a  crime.^

The  law  of  Alabama  provides  that  "the  refusal  of  any  per-
son who  enters  into  such  contract  to  perform  such  act  or  ser-
vice, or  refund  such  money,  or  pay  for  such  property  without
just  cause,  shaU  be  prima  facie  evidence  of  the  intent  to  injure
his  employer,  or  to  defraud  him."  ^  The  statute  of  Maine,
enacted  in  1907,*  treating  of  contract  labor,  does  not  state  that
failure  to  perform  the  debt  is  prima  facie  evidence  of  intent  to
defraud,  but  judicial  interpretation  has  had  the  same  result.^

Prosecutions  under  such  statutes,  however,  have  been  in-
validated by  a  sweeping  decision  of  the  United  States  Supreme
Court  in  a  leading  case.* Here  the  court  stated: "The  fact


'Katherine  Coman,  "Contract  Labor  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands,"
American  Economic  Association  Publications,  3d  Series,  Vol.  IV,  1903,
pp.  492-493,  531.

«  Ex  parte  Riley,  94  Ala.  82  (1891).

'Alabama,  Code  1896,  Sec.  4730,  as  amended  1903  and  1907.

*  Maine,  Laws  1907,  C.  7.

'  Immigration  Commission,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  Vol.  II,  p.  448.

•Bailey  ».  Alabama,  219  U.  S.  219  (1910),  at  p.  242.


44 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

that  the  debtor  contracted  to  perform  the  labor  which  is
sought  to  be  compelled  does  not  withdraw  the  attempted  en-
forcement from  the  condemnation  of  the  statute  (prohibiting
peonage).  The  full  intent  of  the  constitutional  provision
could  be  defeated  with  obvious  facility  if,  through  the  guise
of  contracts  imder  which  advances  had  been  made,  debtors
could  be  held  to  compulsory  service.  It  is  the  compulsion  of
the  service  that  the  statute  inhibits,  for  when  that  occurs  the
condition  of  servitude  is  created,  which  would  be  not  less
involuntary  because  of  the  original  agreement  to  work  out
the  indebtedness.  The  contract  exposes  the  debtor  to  liability
for  the  loss  due  to  the  breach,  but  not  to  enforced  labor.  .  .  .
The  act  of  Congress  (Act  of  1875)  deprives  of  effect  all  legis-
lative measures  of  any  state  through  which,  directly  or  in-
directly, the  prohibited  thing,  to  wit,  compulsory  service  to
secure  the  payment  of  a  debt,  may  be  established  or  main-
tained." This  decision  delivered  in  1910  invalidated  laws  of
like  nature  in  other  states,'  for  the  court  observed:  "No
question  of  a  sectional  character  is  presented  and  we  may
view  the  legislation  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  had  been
enacted  in  New  York  or  Idaho.  Opportunities  for  coercion
and  oppression  in  varying  circiunstances  exist  in  all  parts  of
the  union,  and  the  citizens  of  all  these  states  are  interested
in  the  maintenance  of  the  constitutional  guarantees  the  con-
sideration of  which  is  here  involved."  ^

Until  very  recently  seamen  have  generally  stood  on  a  dif-
ferent footing  from  other  employees,  for  with  them  enforced
contracts  were  permitted  and  the  law  as  to  involuntary  servi-
tude has  not  been  applicable.  In  the  case  of  Robertson  v.
Baldwin^  the  court  stated:  "Seamen  are  treated  by  Congress
as  well  as  by  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  as  deficient  in
that  full  and  intelligent  responsibility  for  their  acts  which  is
accredited  to  ordinary  adults,  and  as  needing  the  protection  of
the  law  in  the  same  sense  in  which  minors  and  wards  are  en-
titled to  the  protection  of  their  parents  and  guardians." How-


'  Arkansas,  Florida,  Georgia,  Louisiana,  Michigan,  Minnesota,  New
Mexico,  North  Dakota,  and  South  Carolina.  See  United  States  Bureau
of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  148,  1914,  "Labor  Laws  of  the  United  States."

2  Bailey  v.  Alabama,  219  U.  S.  219  (1910),  at  p.  231.

*  Robertson  v.  Baldwin,  165  U.  S.  287,  17  Sup.  Ct.  326  (1897).


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  45

ever,  since  the  date  of  that  case  the  law  of  the  United  States
affecting  seamen  has  been  changed  and  more  freedom  has  been
granted.  A  law^  of  the  63d  Congress  abolishes  arrest  and
imprisonment  as  a  penalty  for  desertion.  It  goes  so  far  as
to  stipulate  that  it  shall  be  unlawful  in  any  case  to  pay  any
seaman  wages  in  advance  of  the  time  when  he  has  actually
earned  the  same,  or  to  pay  any  person  for  the  shipment  of
seamen  when  pajmient  is  deducted  or  to  be  deducted  from
seamen's  wages.  This  is  a  clear  effort  to  prevent  the  obliga-
tion of  indebtedness  on  which  involuntary  servitude  is  based.

The  law  goes  further  and  provides  that  for  quitting  the
vessel  without  leave  after  her  arrival  at  the  port  of  her  de-
livery and  before  she  is  placed  in  security  a  seaman  forfeits
from  his  wages  not  more  than  one  month's  pay.  This  ap-
proaches the  free  contract  perhaps  as  far  as  the  conditions  of
seafaring  will  permit.  Congress  regulates  the  nature  of  the
contract,  the  term  of  service,  the  payment  and  assignment
of  wages,  advance  payments  and  credits,  the  regulation  of
sailors'  lodging-houses,  of  shipping-masters,  quarters  on  board
ship,  rations,  and  many  other  details.

Railroad  employees  also  come  within  the  power  of  Con-
gress, and  it  was  a  federal  court  which,  while  reiterating  the
general  right  of  employees  to  quit  work,  suggested  by  way  of
dicta  that  "his  quitting  would  not  be  of  right  and  he  would
be  liable  for  any  danger  resulting  from  a  breach  of  his  agree-
ment and  perhaps  in  some  cases  subject  to  criminal  prosecu-
tion for  loss  of  life  and  limb,  by  passengers  or  others,  directly
resulting  from  his  abandoning  his  post  at  a  time  when  care
and  watchfulness  were  required  upon  his  part  in  the  dis-
charge of  a  duty  he  had  undertaken  to  perform."^  Laws  on
this  subject,  excepting  that  of  Connecticut,  connect  the  cessa-
tion of  work  with  combinations  and  strikes,*  and  forbid  en-
gineers and  railroad  employees  to  abandon  locomotives  under

'United  States  Laws  1914-1915,  C.  153;  Revised  Statutes,  Sees.
4529.  4530,  4596,  4610,  4611.  Title:  An  act  to  promote  the  welfare  of
American  seamen  in  the  merchant  marine  of  the  United  States;  to  aboHsh
arrest  and  imprisonment  as  a  penalty  for  desertion,  and  to  secure  the
abrogation  of  treaty  provisions  in  relation  thereto ;  and  to  promote
safety  at  sea.

"  Arthur  v.  Oakes,  63  Fed.  Rep.  317  (1894).

'  Delaware,  Illinois,  Kansas,  Maine,  Minnesota,  New  Jersey,  Penn-
sylvania.


46 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

circumstances  of  this  nature,  under  penalty  of  fine  and  im-
prisonment.

d.  Padrone  System.  The  padrone  system  is  one  step  re-
moved from  contract  labor.  Those  who  work  under  this
system  permit  a  leader,  the  padrone,  to  make  their  contracts,
yet  the  agreement  is  not  enforceable  at  law.  It  is  enforced
only  by  their  own  necessities.  The  system  started  first  with
Italian  laborers.  The  padrone  brought  over  laborers  from
Italy,  advancing  the  cost  of  their  transportation,  and  hired
them  out  to  a  contractor.  He  rented  to  them  the  shanties
in  which  they  lived  while  at  work,  and  sold  them  supphes  of
food.

Italian  laborers  formerly  made  contracts  with  their  padrone
to  serve  him  for  one  to  three  years,  and  occasionally  for  a
longer  period.'  The  report  of  the  Immigration  Investigating
Commission  of  1895  shows  that  Italians  and  other  foreigners
had  been  imported  "by  the  cargo"  into  the  Michigan  iron-
mines  and  worked  on  the  padrone  system  in  the  early  'nine-
ties.^ This  was  probably  the  time  when  the  padroni  were
the  most  numerous  and  flourishing.

Formal  agreements  among  the  laborers  and  the  padroni  are
being  discontinued,  and  for  this  there  are  perhaps  three  rea-
sons. First,  because  the  ahen  contract  labor  laws  make  their
agreements  not  only  unenforceable  at  law,  but  actually  punish-
able if  discovered  by  the  government.  Secondly,  spontane-
ous immigration  from  Italy  has  now  become  so  great  that  it
is  not  worth  the  padrone's  while  to  risk  a  conviction  under
the  contract  labor  laws,  so  that  he  is  now  merely  a  middle-
man. Thirdly,  there  is  the  condition  of  dependence  on  one
side  and  assistance  on  the  other.  The  padrone  does  not  es-
tablish his  control  over  a  man,  strictly  speaking,  either  by
force  or  fraud.  Dr.  Rossi  calls  the  padrone  system ' '  the  forced
tribute  which  the  newly  arrived  pays  to  those  who  are  ac-
quainted with  the  ways  and  language  of  the  country."^  The
system  is  founded  on  an  inequality  more  deeply  rooted  than
the  usual  inequality  between  the  employer  and  the  laborer.
The  races  which  work  under  this  method  are  ignorant  and


'  Industrial  Commission,  Report,  Vol.  XV,  1901,  pp.  430-432.
2  Immigration  Investigating  Commission,  Report,  1895,  p.  26.
'Industrial  Commission,  Report,  Vol.  XV.,  1901,  p.  432.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  47

accustomed  to  be  commanded,  and  it  is  on  their  dependence
and  lack  of  knowledge  that  the  power  of  the  padrone  rests.
Seen  from  the  standpoint  of  the  immigrant,  a  remedy  is  to
be  found  not  so  much  in  legal  rights,  as  in  better  education,
American  habits  of  thought,  efficient  emplo3mient  bureaus,
and  more  adequate  administration  of  existing  laws.

e.  Imprisonment  for  Debt.  Not  only  as  a  debtor-laborer,
but  also  as  a  debtor-consumer,  the  laborer  receives  considera-
tion. Imprisonment  for  debt  originally  had  no  particular
bearing  on  the  labor  contract  or  its  history.  The  fundamental
idea  in  the  ancient  German  imprisonment  for  debt  is  the  in-
direct compulsion  to  pay.  The  debtor  was  to  be  encouraged
to  pay  what  he  owed  by  being  made  uncomfortable  tmtil  he
did  so.  Compulsion  to  work  had  given  place  to  compulsion
to  pay.»

The  abolition  of  imprisonment  for  debt  was  one  of  the
issues  raised  by  the  early  workingmen's  parties  in  1827.
Kentucky,  the  first  state  to  abolish  imprisonment  for  debt,
had  already  done  so  in  182 1.  New  York  followed  ten  years
later,  and  a  series  of  legislative  and  constitutional  provisions
followed  at  intervals  throughout  the  country.  Inability  to
pay  one's  debts,  if  not  accompanied  by  embezzlement  or  other
fraudulent  conduct,  is  now  no  longer  a  reason  for  imprison-
ment in  civilized  covintries.^

/.  Wage  Exemption.  Following  the  abolition  of  imprison-
ment, for  debt  is  the  wage  exemption  legislation  which  took
on  large  proportions  in  the  United  States  in  the  'forties.  At
the  present  time  every  state  in  the  tmion  has  legislation
exempting  wages  from  attachment  and  execution  for  debt.
In  other  words,  the  authority  given  to  the  sheriff  or  other
administrative  officer  to  seize  from  the  property  of  the  de-
fendant (debtor)  a  sufficient  amount  to  satisfy  the  judgment
in  favor  of  the  creditor,  is  invalid  when  applied  to  wages
under  the  exempt  amount.  The  persons  covered  by  these
laws  are  differently  specified  in  different  states.  Several  pro-
vide for  exemption  of  "all  laborers,  mechanics,  and  day  labor-


'Th. Niemeyer, "Schuldhaft," Handworterhuch der Staatswissen-
schaften,  Vol.  V,  191 1,  p.  593.

'  An  important  discussion  of  existing  imprisonment  for  debt  in  Eng-
ird is  found  in  E.  A.  Parry,  The  Law  and  the  Poor.


48 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ers,"  as  in  Georgia;  "residents  of  the  state,"  as  in  Idaho;
"resident  debtor,"  as  in  Iowa;  all  "householders,"  as  in  In-
diana; "judgment  debtor,"  as  in  New  York;  and  "all  who
support  themselves  and  their  families  by  the  labor  of  their
hands,"  as  in  Wisconsin.

The  amount  of  wages  exempted  varies  somewhat  from  state
to  state.  Some  exempt  sixty  days'  wages,  others  thirty
days',  while  still  others  stipulate  a  certain  percentage  of  wages
due  as  exempt,  or  state  how  large  a  per  cent,  may  be  col-
lected for  a  given  period.  The  exempted  amount  runs  from
$20,  as  in  Massachusetts,  to  not  more  than  $100,  as  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  The  usual  period  of  exemptions,  in
so  far  as  the  time  is  specified  at  all,  is  the  two  months  pre-
ceding attachment.  In  all  cases  it  is  clear  that  the  purport
of  the  laws  is  to  protect  the  minimum  earnings  of  the  work-
ingman  whc?  has  nothing  to  depend  upon  except  his  wages.

Wage  exemption  applies  not  only  against  execution  or  at-
tachment, but  also  against  garnishment. ^  This  is  a  proceed-
ing by  which  the  plaintiff  in  an  action  seeks  to  reach  the  rights
and  effects  (wages  in  this  case)  of  the  defendant' by  calling
into  court  some  third  party  (employer)  who  has  such  effects
(wages)  in  his  possession  or  who  is  indebted  to  the  defend-
ant.^ Should  the  employer  imwarrantedly  make  payments
from  his  employee's  wages,  he  will  still  be  left  liable  to  the
employee  himself  for  a  second  payment  of  the  wages.*

g.  Homestead  Exemption.  All  American  states  have  pro-
vided that  the  means  of  earning  a  livelihood,  that  is,  the
tools  of  one's  trade  or  profession,  shall  be  exempt  from  execu-
tion. Along  with  the  exemption  of  personal  property  goes
homestead  exemption.  This  legislation  is  designed  to  keep
intact  the  family  unit  in  society,  to  prevent  entire  destruction,
and  to  encourage  a  debtor  who  has  been  reduced  to  the
last  term  to  try  again.  However,  these  laws  are  not  for
laborers  alone,  but  for  any  person.  In  most  states  a  man
must  be  a  householder  or  the  head  of  a  family  in  order  to  get

'  Clark,  Law  of  the  Employment  of  Labor,  191 1,  p.  56.

"^  Cydopadia  of  Law  and  Procedure,  Vol.  XX,  1901-1914,  p.  978.
"While  a  garnishment  proceeding  accomplishes  the  same  purpose  as  an
attachment  or  execution,  it  is  in  no  sense  a  levy  on  property,  but  a
judicial  proceeding  by  which  a  new  judgment  is  obtained,

'  See  Clark,  Ibid.,  p.  55,  and  cases  cited,


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  49

the  exemption,  but  in  a  few  states  any  person  may  be  entitled
to  the  exemption.  The  limitations  on  the  homestead  exemp-
tion are  in  both  acreage  and  value.  Rural  homesteads  may
vary  in  acres  from  forty  to  100,  and  city  homesteads  from  one
lot  to  one  acre  (five  acres  in  one  state).  Maximum  monetary
limits  are  $500  to  $5,000.

In  1848  English  statutes  provided  only  that  tools  and
actual  necessaries  of  judgment  debtors  were  not  to  be  seized
in  execution.  In  1883  ^  statute  carried  the  exemption  a  little
further,  so  as  to  include  "the  tools  (if  any)  of  his  trade  and
the  necessary  wearing -apparel  and  bedding  of  himself,  his
wife  and  children,  to  a  value,  inclusive  of  tools  and  apparel
and  bedding,  not  exceeding  twenty  pounds  ($100)  in  the
whole."  1  These  provisions  have  parallels  in  most  of  the
British  colonies,  and  the  exempted  property  amounts  to
about  the  same.  Nowhere,  however,  is  the  exemption  as
liberal  as  in  the  United  States.  Homestead  exemptions  are
peculiar  to  the  United  States,  but  the  tools  of  a  debtor's
trade,  at  least,  are  exempted  in  most  English-speaking
countries.

h.  Assignment  of  Wages.  Assignment  of  wages  grows  out
of  the  legal  act  of  transferring  or  making  over  to  another  of
the  whole  or  part  of  any  property,  real  or  personal,  in  pos-
session or  in  action,  or  of  any  estate  or  right  therein.  But  if
the  wage-earner  is  to  have  effective  exemption  of  wages  from
attachment  and  garnishment,  it  is  consistent  that  he  be  pre-
vented from  making  an  assignment  of  his  future  wages.
Assignments  of  unearned  wages  are  safeguarded  in  various
ways,  as  by  requirement  that  they  must  be  recorded,  that
copies  must  be  filed  with  the  employer,  or  even  that  the
employer's  consent  must  be  obtained,  or  that  the  wife  must
join  in  the  husband's  assignment,  or  vice  versa.  Missouri
affords  a  good  example  of  effort  to  modify  this  evil.  An
act  of  191 1  provides  that  "all  amounts  of  wages,  salaries,
or  earnings  must  be  in  writing  with  the  correct  date  of  the
assignment  and  the  amount  assigned,  and  the  name  or  names
of  the  party  or  parties  owing  the  wages,  salaries,  and  earnings
so  assigned,  and  all  assignments  of  wages,  salaries,  and  earnings


'46  and  47  Vict.,  C.  31,  Pt,  IV,  Sec  44,
4


so PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

not  earned  at  the  time  the  assignment  is  made  shall  be  null
and  void."  Assignments  to  secure  loans  or  future  advances
are  invalid  in  Georgia  and  Massachusetts,  and  all  assignments
of  future  earnings  are  prohibited  in  Indiana.


2.  The  Laborer  as  Creditor

Modem  industry  is  conducted  mainly  "on  credit."  The
employer  is  the  middleman,  whose  creditors  are  those  who
advance  the  capital  he  uses,  and  whose  debtors  are  those  who
buy  his  product.  When  the  laborer  starts  to  work  for  him,
he  also  becomes,  for  a  time,  a  creditor.  He  contributes  his
services  in  advance  of  compensation.  He  is  a  temporary  in-
vestor in  the  business.  While  he  works  he  passes  over  to  the
employer  the  title  to  his  product,  and  retains  a  claim  for  wages.
When  his  wages  are  paid  his  investment  is  liquidated.

Other  investors  advance  money  or  "credit."  Their  con-
tracts are  secured  by  notes,  bonds,  mortgages,  giving  to  them
a  preferred  claim  on  the  property  and  earnings  of  the  busi-
ness. They  invest  "capital"- — the  laborer  invests  "labor."
Laws  regidating  the  time,  place,  and  medium  of  payment,
laws  providing  for  mechanics'  liens,  wage  preference,  and
so  on,  are  intended  to  guarantee  to  the  laborer  as  creditor,
regardless  of  contract,  that  certainty  of  payment  which  the
capitalist  as  creditor  seciires  in  the  ordinary  enforcement
of  contracts.

(r)  Time  of  Payment

Legislation  has  not  until  recently'  ventured  to  interfere
directly  and  set  the  amotmt  of  wages,  but  it  makes  the  amount
of  wages  greater  or  less  by  indirect  methods.  Whatever  the
nominal  amount  may  be,  the  frequency  of  the  time  of  pay-
ment is  a  matter  of  concern  to  the  laborer.  The  longer  he
must  wait  for  his  wages  the  greater  is  the  extent  of  his  need
for  credit,  and,  accordingly,  the  higher  will  be  his  cost  of
living  and  the  lower  his  real  wages. The  advantages  of  fewer


1  See  Chapter  IV,  "The  Minimum  Wage,'


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  gi

pay  days  are  obvious  to  the  employer.  His  cost  of  book-
keeping is  less,  and  his  required  circulating  capital  will  be  less.

Over  the  entire  world  in  industrial  states  there  are  statutes
requiring  a  regular  pay  day,  which  may  be  once  a  month,
semi-weekly,  or  weekly.  Many  of  the  European  laws  are  so
phrased  that  modifications  may  be  introduced  according  to
local  custom.i  The  Swiss  government  makes  it  incumbent
upon  the  master  to  pay  wages  at  any  time  according  to  work
done,  so  as  to  enable  the  servant  to  meet  any  special  need,  and
the  interpretation  of  the  law  is  left  to  administrative  officers.'

Two-thirds  of  the  states  of  the  United  States,  and  Hawaii,
have  laws  dealing  with  time  and  mode  of  payment  of  wages.
Most  of  these  laws  provide  for  semi-monthly  payment,  and
most  of  them  stand  without  being  contested  in  the  courts
to  determine  their  constitutionality.  Some  cases  have  reached
the  coxirts,  and  different  decisions  have  been  rendered.

In  favor  of  the  validity  of  such  laws,  it  has  been  argued  that
semi-monthly  payment  of  wages  is  required  by  the  actual
necessities  of  employees,  and  that  regular  payment  of  wages
at  short  intervals  is  much  more  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to
a  workingman  with  a  family  dependent  on  him  than  to  the
©tnplo5dng  corporation.^  The  purpose  of  the  Rhode  Island
weekly  payment  law  was  laid  down  by  the  court  as  being  pro-
tection of  the  worker  from  "the  greed  of  corporate  capital."
Poverty  and  weakness,  it  was  said,  "can  wage  but  an  unequal
contest  with  corporate  wealth  and  power";  and  the  act  was
considered  to  be  for  the  prosperity  and  comfort  of  the  work-
ingmen,  who  depend  entirely  on  their  weekly  wages,  and  are,
like  other  people,  obliged  to  pay  for  credit.*

The  cases  in  which  laws  relating  to  time  of  wage  payment
have  been  held  unconstitutional  show,  as  might  be  expected,
that  less  consideration  was  given  to  the  practical  economic
facts  of  the  situation.  In  these  cases  appears  the  usual  argu-
ment that  the  liberty  of  contract  of  the  workingman  is  en-


^  For  exanw)le,  the  Netherlands,  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor
Office,  Vol.  if,  1907,  p.  411.

*  Federal  act  to  supplement  the  Swiss  federal  code,  March,  191 1,
Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  VI,  191 1,  p.  96.

"Arkansas  Stave  Co.  v.  State,  94  Ark.  27  (1910).

« State  V.  Brown  &  Sharpe  Mfg.  Co.,  18  R.  1. 16,  25  Atl.  286  (1892),  at
p.  252.


52 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

croached  upon  by  legislation.  In  the  case  of  Johnson  v.
Goodyear  Mining  Co.'  an  indignant  protest  was  raised  by
the  court  against  any  interference  with  the  liberty  of  con-
tract. "The  workingman  of  intelligence,"  it  was  said,  "is
treated  as  an  imbecile.  Being  over  twenty-one  years  of  age,
and  not  a  lunatic  or  insane,  he  is  deprived  of  the  right  to
make  a  contract  as  to  the  time  when  his  wages  shall  fall  due."

There  are  several  states  which  legislate  to  the  effect  that
wages  shall  be  paid  during  working  hours.  This  accompUshes
two  things:  it  saves  the  time  of  the  employee  and  precludes
payment  in  bar-rooms.  In  Austria  the  time  for  payment  of
wages  to  mine  workers  is  reckoned  within  the  duration  of  the  .
shift."  In  Massachusetts,  where  there  are  loo  or  more  per-
sons employed  in  any  estabHshment,  wages  are  to  be  paid
during  working  hours.  In  France  payment  of  wages  must
not  be  made  on  days  kept  as  rest  days  for  employees.'  The
law  of  Greece  is  fairly  representative  of  those  of  some  other
countries:  it  provides  that  wages  shaU  be  paid  not  later  than
the  time  when  daily  work  is  concluded,  and  that  in  under-
takings with  more  than  200  workers  the  manner  of  paying
wages  may  be  regulated  by  administrative  order.^

Most  of  the  states  and  countries  provide  that  an  employee
shall  be  paid  immediately  upon  discharge,  and  for  delay
thereafter  is  entitled  to  interest  charges — ^in  the  case  of  Iowa
$1  a  day  penalty  up  to  twice  the  amount  of  the  wages  due.
In  some  cases  this  penalty  is  5  per  cent,  a  year  to  be  added
for  the  cost  of  the  delay,  and  the  attorney's  fee  if  his  services
are  necessary  to  procure  wages  withheld  from  an  employee.
When  an  employee  qmts,  the  law  generally  stipulates  that
he  shall  be  paid  at  the  next  regular  pay  day.


(2)  Place  of  Payment

The  evil  attached  to  the  payment  of  men  in  saloons  needs
no  elaboration,  and  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  this  evil  is  partly

1  Johnson  v.  Goodyear  Mining  Co.,  127  Cal.  4,  59  Pac.  304  (1899).
'  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  VII,  1912,  p.  246.
^  Lois,  Decrets,  Arrites  concernant  la  Reglementation  du  Travail,  Bk.  I,
Ch.  II,  Sec.  II,  Art.  46.
*  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  VII,  1912,  p.  290.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  53

taken  care  of  in  some  places  by  providing  that  wages  shall
be  paid  upon  the  premises,  as  in  Servia  and  Berne.  This
coincides  with  most  of  the  legislation  of  the  American  states
on  the  subject.  CaUfomia  and  Nevada,  however,  specifically
provide  that  payment  of  wages  shall  be  made  to  no  one  in
bar-rooms  except  it  be  those  employed  therein.  Austria,
Belgium,  France,  Germany,'  and  Great  Britain  ^  have  all
legislated  against  payment  of  wages  in  public  houses  and
taverns.

(j)  Basis  of  Payment

In  the  United  States  there  are  some  statutes  that  prohibit
the  screening  of  coal  before  it  is  weighed,  the  loss  of  coal
through  the  screen  being  regarded  as  causing  an  unjust  loss
to  the  miner,  whose  contract  calls  for  payment  by  the  weight
of  coal  mined.  The  validity  of  such  laws  has  been  both  up-
held and  denied  by  different  state  courts,  but  in  the  case  of
McLean  v.  State  of  Arkansas  ^  the  Supreme  Court  held  the
law  to  be  within  the  poHce  power  of  the  states.


(4)  Medium  of  Payment

Carlyle  declaimed  against  a  modem  civilization  whose  only
bond  of  tmion  is  the  cash  nexus.  Yet,  from  a  different  point
of  view,  it  may  be  said  that  liberty  depends  on  cash.  Indeed,
the  transition  from  slavery  to  freedom  is  a  transition  from
payment  in  lodging,  board,  and  goods,  or  "truck,"  to  pay-
ment in  legal  tender  or  in  a  medium  convertible  into  money
on  demand  at  its  face  value.  Cash  means  freedom.  It  per-
mits the  wage-earner  to  buy  what  and  where  he  wants.  It
also  means  earnings,  for  it  exposes  and  corrects  tmwarranted
deductions,  such  as  high  prices,  through  bookkeeping  ac-
counts.

a.  "Living  In." Under  systems  of  slavery,  serfdom,  in-


•  Great  Britain,  Departmental  Committee  on  Truck  Acts,  Report,
1908,  pp.  96,  97.
2  46  and  47  Vict.,  C.  31  (1883).
'McLean  v.  Arkansas,  211  U.  S.  535  (1906).


54 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

dentured  service,  and  apprenticeship  the  laborer  lived  on  the
premises  of  his  master.  The  most  complete  survival  of  these
systems  in  modem  industry  is  known  in  England  as  "Uving
in,"  where  the  employee  receives  part  payment  in  board  and
lodging  at  his  place  of  emplojonent.  The  system  is  en-
countered in  all  coimtries,  and  is  characteristic  of  domestic  ser-
vice. Very  often  "living  in  "  is  made  a  condition  of  employ-
ment, either  express  or  implied,  and  the  board  and  lodging
accommodations  provided  are  often  inferior  and  inadequate.
The  system  may  rob  the  employees  of  their  sense  of  personal
responsibility  and  check  individuality  and  independence  of
character.  There  is  frequently  no  freedom  of  complaint,  for,
if  the  workers  ventxire  to  remonstrate  about  food  or  lodging,
they  render  themselves  liable  to  dismissal  and  "spoiling"  their
references.  In  Great  Britain  the  committee  on  the  truck
acts  in  1908  recommended  regulations  as  to  accommodations
provided  in  "Uving  in"  establishments,  but  did  not  seem  to
have  a  clear  case  for  the  aboUtion  of  the  system.  However,
a  minority  report  advocated  its  entire  abolition. ^

In  Berne  the  law  of  1908^  requires  that  food  provided  for
the  employees  must  be  sufficient  and  wholesome  and  that
the  accommodation  must  satisfy  all  sanitary  requirements.
In  Austria  the  administrative  authority  may  determine  by
order  that,  in  the  case  of  undertakings  of  a  certain  kind  or
situation  in  certain  districts  it  shall  be  tmlawful  to  provide
board  or  lodging  for  the  employees  as  a  part  of  their  remu-
neration.' In  South  Australia  the  occupier  of  an  establish-
ment and  the  members  of  his  family  are  prohibited  from  lodg-
ing and  boarding  adult  persons  in  his  service,  in  the  case  of
those  whose  wages  are  fixed  by  wage  boards,  exception  being
made  in  the  case  of  hotels,  clubs,  restaurants,  and  the  like.''

In  the  United  States  the  subject  of  "living  in"  has  not  yet
come  into  the  realm  of  legislation,  but  it  exists  in  hotels,
restaurants,  bakeries,  and  clubs.

b.  Company  Houses  and  Labor  Camps. The  employer  may


'  Great  Britain,  Departmental  Committee  on  the  Truck  Acts,  Report,
1908,  Vol.  I,  p.  78; Minority  Report,  Vol.  I,  p.  84.
'  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  Ill,  igo8,  p.  122.
'  Ibid.,  Vol.  V,  1910,  p.  203.
•  Ibid.,  Vol.  VII,  1912,  p.  20.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  55

bmld  "company  houses"  for  his  workmen  which  they  must
occupy,  and  the  rent  is  then  deducted  from  wages.  Fre-
quently these  houses  are  better  than  those  which  the  em-
ployees would  provide,  but  they  have  counteracting  dis-
advantages in  contractual  ties  of  dependence.  In  New  York,
where  factory  operatives  are  given  Uving  quarters,  these  may
be  regulated  by  the  industrial  commission,  which  has  power
to  enter  and  inspect. '  Labor  camps  for  certain  kinds  of  work
have  received  attention  in  CaUfomia,^  New  York,'  and
Hawaii.^  In  the  case  of  California  the  state  board  of  health
is  ordered  to  condemn  any.  camps  which  are  dangerous  to
public  health.

c.  Company  Stores.  The  "truck"  system,  or  "truck"  in
English  usage,  is  the  term  which  denotes  pajnnent  in  land,
or  otherwise  than  in  cash.*  In  the  United  States  this  is
generally  treated  under  such  terms  as  "store  orde'rs,"  "pay-
ment in  scrip,"  or  "company  stores."  Payment  in  alcoholic
drinks  would  scarcely  be  tolerated  in  the  United  States.
This  is  not  because  of  laws  directly  forbidding  it,  for  there
are  none,  but  American  industries  are  united  in  keeping  liquor
from  their  employees  and  many  of  them  refuse  to  hire  work-
men who  use  Uquor.  However,  payment  in  such  a  manner  is
indirectly  prevented  by  statutes  which  call  for  payment  in
cash  and  payment  on  the  premises.  Laws  regulating  or  pro-
hibiting company  stores,  and  disallowing  coercion  as  to  em-
ployees' trading,  have  the  same  effect.

Legislation  respecting  the  truck  system  falls  into  three
classes:  (i)  laws  that  would  eliminate  it  altogether,  at  least
in  business  establishments  where  it  is  a  real  evil,  such  as
mining,  manufacturing,  and  railroad  corporations;  (2)  laws
which  permit  the  system,  but  which  regulate  the  prices
charged  and  the  quality  offered;  (3)  laws  which  allow  the
institution  to  exist,  but  which  endeavor  to  eliminate  coercion
of  employees  to  make  use  of  the  system.

Among  the  first  class  would  come  the  laws  of  Colorado,

'  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  195.
2  California,  Laws  1913,  C.  182.
'  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  195.
*  Hawaii,  Laws  1911,  No.  123.

'  Great  Britain,  Departmental  Committee  on  the  Truck  Acts,  Report,
1908,  p.  4.


S6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Maryland,  Massachusetts,  New  Jersey,  New  York,  and  Penn-
sylvania, and  France  of  the  European  countries — ^the  latter
having,  perhaps,  the  most  complete  law  aiming  at  the  aboli-
tion of  the  entire  system. ^

The  second  class  includes  Connecticut,  Indiana,  and  Vir-
ginia. Here  prices  must  not  be  unreasonable,  or  higher  to
-the  employees  than  to  others  who  are  not  employees.'  Of
course,  if  the  town  should  be  owned  by  the  corporation,  the
law  could  not  have  much  effect,  and,  for  that  matter,  no  anti-
truck  legislation  can  accomplish  much  for  the  laborer  in  a
town  where  the  land  and  buildings  are  all  owned  by  the
emplo5dng  corporation.

In  the  third  class  would  fall  the  laws  of  Iowa,  Kentucky,
Montana,  Nevada,  New  Mexico,  Ohio,  Oregon,  the  Philip-
pines, Porto  Rico,  Texas,  Utah,  Washington,  West  Virginia,
and  the  laws  of  practically  all  the  foreign  countries,  omitting
Holland  and  Italy,  which  have  no  such  general  laws.

The  last  two  groups  have  this  in  common,  that  both  regu-
late prices.  Although  penalties  provided  seem  to  be  ample,
yet  in  the  United  States  the  administrative  featiu-es  are  weak,
as  typified  by  the  case  of  Colorado,^  where,  if  the  attomSy-
general  should  fail,  neglect,  or  refuse  to  act  after  a  demand  by
a  responsible  party,  any  citizen  has  a  right  to  institute  pro-
ceedings upon  giving  bonds  for  cost  of  suit.  Obviously,  the
workman  is  in  no  position  to  give  bonds  or  to  bring  suit,  for
he  can  neither  afEord  the  expense  nor  the  loss  of  the  job
which  such  a  procedtire  would  entail.'


(5)  Deductions

The  problem  of  deductions  from  wages  involves  (i)  de-
ductions in  respect  to  fines,  (2)  deductions  as  pa5Tnent  for

^Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  V,  1910,  p.  377;  Act
suppressing  truck  shops  and  prohibiting  employers  from  selling,  directly
or  indirectly,  to  their  workmen  and  employees  supplies  and  goods  of
any  kind,  March  25,  1910.

2  Colorado,  Revised  Statutes,  1908,  Sec.  6995.

3  Respecting  the  variety  of  decisions  on  the  constitutionality  of  this
class  of  legislation,  see  Preund,  Police  Power,  1904,  pp.  305-308;  Clark,
Law  of  the  Employment  of  Labor,  pp.  65-72;  Stimson,  Handbook  to  the
Labor  Laws  of  the  United  States,  1896,  pp.  104-110.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  57

damages,  (3)  deductions  for  use  of  material  and  tools,  (4)
deductions  for  benefits.

Fines  are  imposed,  presumably,  for  disciplinary  reasons,  and
vary  in  application  and  amount  in  different  establishments
and  with  the  caprice  of  the  individual  employer.  They  may
not  always  be  a  real  deterrent,  but  may  on  the  other  hand
lead  to  carelessness,  suggesting  to  the  worker  that  he  has  paid
for  what  he  has  done.  They  may  be  unfairly  imposed,  creat-
ing a  sense  of  injustice  and  irritating  the  workers,  and  they
may  even  prove  to  be  a  sotirce  of  petty  profits  to  the  unscru-
pulous employer.  At  aU  events,  they  decrease  the  income  of
the  wage-earner.

Deductions  as  payment  for  damages  may  be  for  bad  or
negligent  work,  mjwry  to  materials  and  to  other  property  of
the  employer.  Abuses  are  very  general,  for  the  employer  de-
termines the  amotint  of  damage  done  and  puts  the  price  on
materials  spoiled.  It  is  humanly  impossible  to  do  perfect
work,  and  no  matter  how  good  a  worker  may  be  at  his  trade,
faults  will  occur  at  times.  Such  faults  are  part  of  the  manu-
facturers' risk  and  should  be  dealt  with  as  such.  The  em-
ployer is  himself  often  to  blame  for  setting  an  inexperienced
hand  to  do  work  for  which  he  is  not  competent.

The  case  of  charges  for  materials  and  tools  used  by  em-
ployees involves  the  same  principle  as  in  the  previous  case.
This  system  is  intended  to  secure  economy  in  the  use  of  ma-
terial by  making  the  worker  responsible.  However,  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  worker  the  system  is  objectionable  be-
cause of  the  possibility  of  overcharge,  which  no  regulation,
however  strict,  can  altogether  prevent.

Deductions  for  benefits  received,  such  as  medical  atten-
tion, hospital  care,  and  sickness  insurance,  are  allowed  by  all
states  and  coimtries,  but  some  provide  (as,  for  instance.  New
South  Wales  and  Western  Australia)  that  the  deduction  must
not  exceed  the  value  of  the  thing  supplied,  and,  when  not
stated,  this  is  generally  implied  by  all  countries.  Usually,
also,  these  deductions  from  wages  are  in  pursuance  of  a
previous  contract.  Of  the  United  States,  Indiana,  Iowa,
Maryland,  Michigan,  New  Jersey,  Nevada,  and  Ohio  specifi-
cally legislate  against  forced  contributions  for  certain  enu-
merated benefits  as  a  condition  of  employment. With  the


S8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

possible  exception  of  Ohio,  the  administration  of  these  laws
is  left  to  the  cotirts.

A  corporation  may  furnish  instirance,  lessening  many  hard-
ships of  life  for  the  workingman  and Jiis  family;  but  this  in-
surance is  enjoyed  only  as  a  result  of  continuous  employment,
which  in  turn  often  involves  oppressive  dependence.  Espe-
cially is  this  true  when  after  a  number  of  years  the  working-
man  has  acquired  rights  which  may  be  lost  by  change  of
employment.  Thus  the  burden  may  become  great  with  in-
creasing years,  as  new  employment  with  insurance  becomes
more  and  more  difficult  to  secure.  ^

Provisions  are  found  in  some  laws,  in  connection  with
employers'  liability,  and  sometimes  confined  to  railroads,
which  regulate  or  prevent  the  payment  of  benefits  to  injured
employees  as  a  means  of  escaping  from  such  liability.  About
half  the  states,  the  Philippine  Islands,  and  the  federal  govern-
ment have  enacted  that  no  contract  of  insurance  or  relief
benefit  shall  constitute  a  bar  to  action  by  an  employee  for
damages  in  case  of  injury  or  death.  ^  Florida  directly  says
that  the  existence  of  a  relief  department,  by  which  the  em-
ployer pays  benefits  to  the  workers,  shall  not  relieve  such
employer  from  responsibility  in  case  of  death.'  It  is  some-
times added,  however,  that  the  employer  may  set  off  against
such  a  claim  any  sums  he  has  contributed  as  benefit.^  In
Georgia  the  payment  of  wages  up  to  $ioo  on  the  death  of  ah
employee  is  a  sufficient  release  on  the  employer's  part.^

In  the  act  of  1896*  the  first  attempt  was  made  in  England
to  protect  the  worker  from  harsh  and  unreasonable  fines.
This  act  provided  that  there  must  be  formal  agreement  for
the  fines;  that  the  fine  must  be  for  something  which  causes,
or  is  likely  to  cause,  damage  or  loss  to  the  employer  or  inter-

'  Ely,  Property  and  Contract,  1914,  Vol.  II,  p.  714.

^  Alabama,  Arizona,  Arkansas,  California,  Colorado,  Florida,  Georgia,
Indiana,  Iowa,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Michigan,  Mississippi,  Missouri,
Montana,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  New  Mexico,  New  York,  North  Carolina,
North  Dakota,  Ohio,  Oklahoma,  Philippine  Islands,  South  Carolina,
Texas,  Virginia,  Wisconsin,  Wyoming,  United  States.

'  Florida,  Laws  1914,  C.  6520.

'  Alabama,  Georgia,  Indiana,  Michigan,  Montana,  Nebraska,  Nevada,
North  Carolina,  North  Dakota,  Ohio,  Texas,  Wisconsin,  United  States,

'Georgia,  Code  1910,  Sees.  3134-3136.

*  59  and  60  Vict.,  C.  44.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  59

ruption  or  hindrance  to  his  business;  that  it  must  be  fair  and
reasonable,  having  regard  to  all  the  circumstances  of  the
case;  that  written  particulars  must  be  given  to  the  worker
each  time  a  fine  is  exacted;  and,  finally,  that  there  shall  be
a  register  of  fines  open  to  inspection. »

In  the  United  States  there  is  little  legislation  dealing  with
deductions  as  fines — a  dozen  states  in  all.^  Michigan  pro-
hibits fines  altogether,  while  Massachusetts  says  fines  shall
not  be  levied  except  for  imperfect  work,'  and  Louisiana  pro-
hibits them  except  when  employees  wilfully  or  negligently
damage  goods  or  property  of  the  employer.  Arkansas  and
Connecticut  regulate  discount  of  wages  because  of  early  pay-
ment. The  rest  of  the  states  permit  no  deductions  unless  in
accordance  with  certain  procedure  and  with  full  consent  of
workers.  The  Australasian  countries  have  no  legislation  on
fines.  In  Austria,  Belgiimi,  Germany,  and  Holland  fines  are
regulated  in  pursuance  of  a  previous  contract  or  published
rules.  In  France  fines  cannot  exceed  one-fourth,*  and  in
parts  of  Switzerland  not  more  than  one-half,  of  the  daily
wage.^  In  both  these  cases  as  well  as  in  Holland  the  fines
must  go  toward  a  workers'  benefit  fund.

A  clause  deahng  with  deductions,  not  levied  for  inferior
work  or  for  destruction  of  property,  appears  in  Massa-
chusetts,* where  no  deductions  are  to  be  made  from  the  wages
of  women  and  minors  when  there  is  a  stoppage  of  work  owing


'  Great  Britain,  Departmental  Committee  on  the  Truck  Acts,  Report,
1908,  Vol.  I,  p.  6.

'  Arkansas,  Connecticut,  Hawaii,  Indiana,  Louisiana,  Maryland,
Massachusetts,  Michigan,  Mississippi,  New  Jersey,  Nevada,  Ohio,  and
Texas.

'Massachusetts,  Laws  1909,  C.  514,  Sec.  114.  Under  the  terms  of
this  act  fines  for  imperfect  weaving  may  be  levied  only  after  the  imper-
fections have  been  pointed  out  and  the  amount  agreed  upon  by  both
parties.  Apparently  these  provisions  did  not  sufficiently  protect  the
weavers,  for  in  191 1  another  act  was  passed  stating  that  "No  employer
shall  impose  a  fine  upon  an  employee  engaged  at  weaving  for  imperfec-
tions that  may  arise  during  the  process  of  weaving"  (Laws  191 1,  C.  584).
The  court,  however,  rendered  the  new  law  nugatory  by  its  hmited  in-
terpretation of  the  word  "fine."  (Commonwealth  v.  Lancaster  Mills,
212  Mass.  315,  98  N.  E.  364  [1912].)

*  Great  Britain,  Departmental  Committee  on  the  Truck  Acts,  Report,
1908,  Vol.  I,  p.  95.

'  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  Ill,  1908,  p.  125.

•Massachusetts,  Laws  1909,  C.  514,  Sec.  119.


6o PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

to  a  breakdown  of  machinery,  and  the  workers  are  not  allowed
to  leave  the  mill.  Foreign  countries,  while  they  sometimes
limit  the  extent  of  deductions  for  materials  used,  still  do  not
prohibit  them.  Although  the  labor  codes  generally  state  that
prices  shall  not  be  excessive,  this  is  a  goal  reached  only  by
effective  administration.


(6)  Mechanics'  Liens  and  Wage  Preference

The  idea  that  wages  are  to  receive  special  treatment,  that
they  are  to  be  paid  before  other  claims,  that  security  is  to
be  given  for  their  payment,  and  that  they  shall  be  exempt  up
to  a  certain  amoimt  from  execution,  underlies  legislation  on
mechanics'  liens,  on  wages  as  preferred  claims,  and  on  wage  ex-
emption. The  last  of  these  subjects  is  treated  elsewhere ; '  here
we  consider  the  preferential  treatment  of  the  laborer  as  creditor.

Mechanics'  lien  laws  represent  a  stage  in  the  progress  to-
ward wage  preference,  but  they  should  not  be  confused  with
it.  They  are  founded  on  the  still  older  practice  of  giving
contractors  and  builders  a  claim  for  payment  on  houses  they
built  and  the  land  that  these  were  built  on.

In  1830  the  first  mechanics'  lien  law  was  passed  by  the  New
York  legislature  ^  and  was  based  on  the  following  considera-
tions, set  forth  in  a  committee  report:

"The  committee  are  credibly  informed  that  the  severe  and
heavy  losses  sustained  by  the  laboring  interests  have  arisen
far  more  frequently  from  insufficient,  reckless  contractors,
having  nothing  to  lose,  than  from  contractees.  .  .  .  They
would  be  distinctly  imderstood,  declaring  it  as  their  un-
divided opinion  that  a  mortgage  given  to  secure  the  pajmient
of  money  lawfully  borrowed,  the  justice  of  which  no  one  will
presume  to  dispute,  is  not  a  more  equitable  claim  than  that
of  the  mechanic  and  laborer  on  the  dweUing-house  and  other
buildings,  and  ground  on  which  the  same  are  erected,  so  far
as  their  claim  and  demand  can  be  correctly  ascertained."  '

Mechanics'  lien  legislation  seeks  to  give  the  laborer  a  claim
for  the  pajnuent  of  what  is  due  to  him,  backed  by  the  security

'  See  "Wage  Exemption,"  p.  47.

'  New  York,  Laws  1830,  C.  330.

^  New  York  Assembly,  Documents,  1830,  No.  24.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  6i

of  the  structure  or  land  on  which  he  has  been  employed.  It
exists  in  all  the  states,  and  extends  to  labor  performed  on
pubUc  works,  railroads,  in  mines,  and  on  the  land,  as  well  as
to  liimbering,  construction  and  repair  of  vessels,  sawmilling,
and  other  occupations.  Such  liens  are  generally  ranked  as
coming  before  other  payments;  and  in  many  cases  where
contractors  and  subcontractors  are  entitled  to  benefit  in  a
similar  way,  the  wage-earner's  claim  is  put  first. '

The  next  step  was  the  provision  that  wages  should  be  con-
sidered as  preferred  claims.  Nearly  all  the  states  and  the
federal  government  have  laws  providing  that  in  cases  of
assignments,  administrations,  and  receiverships  due  to  death
or  bankruptcy,  the  wages  of  servants  and  employees,  up  to  a
definite  sum  and  for  work  done  within  a  limited  time,  shall  be
paid  next  after  fees,  costs,  and  taxes.^  France  has  a  law  giving
preference  to  wage  payments.'  Great  Britain  and  her  colo-
nies include  in  their  bankruptcy  laws  preferential  payment
claims,  providing  usually  that  salaries  of  clerks  not  exceeding
$500  and  wages  of  laborers  not  exceeding  $125  shall  have
equal  claim  to  pa3Tiient  with  taxes  and  expenses.  The  British
bankruptcy  law*  now  includes  national  insurance  contribu-
tions and  amoimts  due  for  workmen's  compensation  in  this
category.  New  Zealand  has  a  bona  fide  contractors'  and
workmen's  lien  act  resembling  the  American  legislation.^

3. The  Laborer  as  Tenant

(7)  Classes  of  Agricultural  Workers

Of  the  30,000,000  males  over  ten  years  of  age  engaged  in
gainful  occupations  in  1910,  10,700,000,  or  more  than  one-

1  California,  Colorado,  Idaho,  Illinois,  Louisiana,  Nevada,  New  Jersey,
New  Mexico,  North  Dakota,  Ohio,  Oklahoma,  Oregon,  Pennsylvania,
Washington,  West  Virginia.

2  Alabama,  Arizona,  Arkansas,  California,  Colorado,  Connecticut,
Delaware,  Georgia,  Idaho,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Louisiana,
Maryland,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Michigan,  Minnesota,  Missouri,
Montana,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  New  Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  New  Mexico,
New  York,  North  darolina.  North  Dakota,  Ohio,  Oregon,  Rhode  Island,
South  Dakota,  Pennsylvania,  Texas,  Utah,  Washington,  Wisconsin,  the
Philippine  Islands,  and  the  United  States. '

'  Lois,  Decrets,  ArritSs  concernant  la  Reglementation  du  Travail,  Bk.  I,
Ch.  II,  Sec.  II,  Art.  46,  47.  *  4  and  5  Geo.  5,  C.  59,  1914-

'  New  Zealand,  Statutes  1892,  No.  25.


62 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

third,  were  employed  in  agriculture.  Of  this  number  some-
thing less  than  4,000,000  were  owners  operating  their  farms.
More  than  2,000,000  were  tenants,'  and  4,700,000  were  IE"
borers  working  for  owners  and  tenants.  But  these  figures  do
not  represent  the  actual  proportions  of  wage-earners  and  em-
ployers in  the  sense  of  the  wage  bargain  as  tmderstood  in
manufactures  and  other  industries.  Of  the  4,700,000  laborers,
2,100,000  were  members  of  the  family  of  the  owner  or  tenant,
and,  therefore,  their  labor  contracts  do  not  exhibit  the  strictly
business  relation  of  employer  and  employee  in  the  modem
wage  bargain.  Such  labor  problems  as  they  present,  from
the  standpoint  of  legislation,  are  mainly  those  of  child  labor.

a.  Hired  Laborers.  The  remaining  2,600,000  are  hired  la-
borers, and  to  them  would  be  appHcable  labor  laws  similar
to  those  enacted  to  protect  laborers  in  other  industries.  How-
ever, as  a  matter  of  fact,  labor  legislation  in  the  United  States
has  had  very  little  to  do  with  farm  labor.  Laws  like  those
regarding  workmen's  compensation,  safety,  health,  or  hours
of  labor  sometimes  either  specifically  exclude  agricultural
labor  from  their  operation  or  are  not  applicable.  Other  laws,
such  as  laborers'  liens,  wage  exemption,  prohibition  of  in-
voluntary servitude,  and  the  like,  are  so  general  or  funda-
mental that  they  apply  to  farm  labor.

Hired  laborers  are  of  two  classes,  considerably  different  in
their  condition.  About  200,000  of  those  enumerated  appear
to  be  "casual"  laborers,  hired  usually  by  the  day,  and  2,400,-
000  are  hired  by  the  month  or  year.  The  number  of  casual
laborers  is  doubtless  greatly  underestimated,  for  the  Census
enumeration  is  made  in  April,  whereas  the  largest  ntmiber  of
this  class  of  laborers  is  employed  during  the  harvest  seasons
from  July  to  November.  They  are  enumerated  in  April  in
other  industries,  and  are  the  migratory  laborers  who  appear
in  the  logging-camps  and  ice  harvests,  as  well  as  temporary
laborers  in  other  occupations.

The  number  of  2,400,000  farm  hands  regularly  employed
is  also  understated,  because  an  uncertain  number  of  tenants

'  Thirteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  Vol.  IV,  1910,  p.  302.  This
figure  is  obtained  by  combining  the  estimates  for  agriculture  and  animal
husbandry.  The  Census  distinguishes  the  number  of  farms  operated  by
owners  and  tenants,  not  the  number  of  owners  and  tenants;  hence  these
numbers  are  estimated.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  63

are  really  hired  laborers  under  a  special  form  of  tenant  con-
tract and  should  be  classed  as  employees  rather  than  tenants.

b.  Tenants.  The  Census  gives  the  numbers  of  two  kinds
of  tenants,  712,000  "cash"  tenants  and  1,528,000  "share"
tenants.^  By  cash  tenant  is  meant  not  one  who  pays  rent
in  actual  cash,  but  one  whose  rent  is  definitely  fixed  and  cer-
tain and  is  stipulated  in  advance  in  the  contract  either  in
dollars,  in  labor,  or  in  products.  It  may  be  $7,  ten  bushels  of
wheat,  or  100  pounds  of  cotton  per  acre.  Evidently  the
"cash"  tenant  is  a  small  capitalist,  a  contractor,  or  an  em-
ployer, since  he  invests  his  own  money  or  labor  and  takes  all
of  the  risks  of  the  business.  His  gains  are  profits  rather  than
wages;  his  bargain  with  the  landlord  is  a  price  bargain,  not
a  wage  bargain.

The  share  tenants  are  more  difficult  to  classify.  They  maj
be  either  small  capitalists  or  simply  farm  laborers,  and  the
Census  does  not  distinguish  between  the  two.  A  share  tenant
pays  the  landlord  as  rental  a  certain  share  of  the  product,  as
one-half,  one-third,  or  one-quarter.  In  making  such  a  con-
tract the  tenant  would  appear  to  be  a  contractor  or  capitalist,
who  takes,  not  indeed  the  whole  risk  of  the  business,  but  a
part  of  the  risk.  Such  is  the  case  if  he  actually  invests  his
own  capital,  such  as  horses,  cattle,  implements,  and  so  on,  and
runs  the  risk  of  losing  his  capital  on  the  chance  of  increasing
it. He  would  figure  the  outcome  as  profit  or  loss.

c.  "Croppers."  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  tenant
"invests"  nothing  but  his  own  labor,  and  the  landlord  fur-
nishes all  of  the  working  capital,  then  the  landlord  is  the
capitalist-employer,  the  tenant  is  a  laborer,  and  the  bargain
is  a  wage  bargain.  His  wages,  however,  are  not  the  stipulated
daily  or  monthly  wages  received  by  a  "hired  man,"  but  they
are  contingent  wages,  similar  to  those  paid  to  a  piece-worker,
or,  rather,  to  a  sailor  on  a  whaling-ship  who  receives  a  share
of  the  product  at  the  end  of  the  voyage.  This  system  of  wage
pajonent  is  spoken  of  as  "product  sharing,"  to  distinguish  it
from  "profit  sharing."  ^


'  Thirteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  Vol.  V,  1913,  p.  97.  This
includes  among  "share"  tenants  those  given  in  the  "leases"  as  "share-
cash" — an  intermediate  class.

'  D.  P.  Schloss,  Methods  of  Industrial  Remuneration,  1891,  p.  249.


64 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  terms  "cropper"  and  "cropping  contract"  will  be
used  herein  to  designate  this  kind  of  labor-tenant  under
the  system  of  share  tenancy.  The  terms  originated  in  the
southern  states,  where  share  contracts  are  most  prevalent
and  where  they  account  for  the  high  percentage  of  tenancy.
In  igio,  66.8  per  cent,  of  the  tenancy  in  the  South  was
share  tenancy,  including  both  fanners  and  laborers  on  shares,
while  only  31.6  per  cent,  of  northern  and  1.6  per  cent,  of
western  farms  were  operated  on  a  system  of  share  tenancy.'
In  popular  usage,  the  term  "cropper"  includes  both  the  share
farmer,  or  small  capitalist,  and  the  share  laborer.  Both  are
croppers.  The  courts,  however,  have  settled  upon  the  term
"cropper"  to  indicate  the  laborer,^  and,  adopting  this  usage,
we  can  distinguish  the  cropper,  as  a  laborer  whose  wages  are
measured  by  a  share  of  the  product  under  the  guise  of  a
lease,  from  the  share  tenant,  as  a  small  capitalist  paying  rent.

No  reliable  estimate  can  be  made  of  the  number  of  croppers.
Indeed,  the  amount  of  capital  owned  by  the  farmer  may  be
so  small  that  he  would  be  looked  upon  in  other  industries  as
scarcely  more  than  a  mechanic  furnishing  his  tools  and  taking
out  work  on  a  contract.  The  distinction  is  made  in  the  laws
of  Alabama'  which  define  a  share  tenant  as  one  who  owns  his
team,  and  the  cropper  as  one  whose  landlord  owns  the  team.
The  law  of  Texas,  enacted  in  1915,^  is  the  first  American  law
designed  to  regulate  the  rents  of  share  tenants.  It  attempts
to  prevent  the  landlord  from  charging  more  than  one-half
of  the  value  of  the  product  if  he  furnishes  everything  except
labor,  and  more  than  one-third  of  the  grain  and  one-fourth  of
the  cotton  if  the  tenant  furnishes  all  of  the  operating  capital.
Thus  it  distinguishes  and  regulates  both  the  rent  of  the
farmer  and  the  wages  of  the  cropper.

In  other  states,  where  the  legislature  has  not  attempted  to
standardize  or  regulate  the  share  contracts,  the  courts  have
been  compelled  to  decide  in  each  case  as  it  arises  whether  the
laborer  is  a  cropper  working  for  wages  under  a  labor  contract,

•Thirteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  Vol.  V,  1913,  p.  113.

2  Steel  V.  Prick,  56  Pa.  St.  172  (1867);  Harrison  v.  Ricks,  71  N.  C.  7
(1874);  Almand  v.  Scott,  80  Ga.  95,  4  S.  E.  892  (i888);  Hammock  v.
Creekmore,  48  Ark.  264  (1886).

3  Alabama,  Code  1907,  Sees.  4742,  4743.
*  Texas,  Laws  1915,  Article  5475  (3225).


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  65

or  a  tenant-farmer  paying  rent  under  a  lease.  If  he  is  a
cropper,  then,  in  case  of  dispute,  he  would  be  awarded  what
similar  laborers  in  the  locality  receive  as  wages,  regardless  of
the  value  of  the  crop.  If  he  is  a  tenant-farmer  he  is  awarded
his  share  of  the  crop,  regardless  of  what  he  might  earn  as  wages.

In  order  to  decide  the  point,  the  courts  look  into  the  con-
tract to  discover  which  party  has  the  control  and  direction
of  the  fanning  operations  and  the  legal  possession  of  the  crop
at  the  end  of  the  season.  In  brief,  if  the  landlord  gives  orders
as  to  cultivation,  and  has  legal  possession  and  the  right  to
divide  the  crop  and  give  the  tenant  his  share,  the  contract  is
a  labor  contract.'  But  if  the  tenant  is  "his  own  boss"  and
has  legal  possession  of  the  crop,  and  gives  the  landlord  his
share,  the  contract  is  a  lease.^  Generally  it  turns  out  that,
in  proportion  as  the  tenant  advances  a  larger  and  larger  share
of  the  working  capital,  the  contract  which  he  is  able  to  make
is  a  lease  and  gives  him  not  only  a  larger  share  of  the  product,
but  also  a  chance  to  make  a  profit  in  addition  to  wages;  whUe
the  smaller  the  proportion  of  capital  which  he  advances,  the
less  is  his  share  and  the  more  nearly  the  contract  becomes  a
labor  contract.

If  the  contract  is  a  lease,  the  landlord  has  a  preference  lien
on  the  crop  for  his  rent.'  If  it  is  a  labor  contract,  the  laborer
has  a  laborers'  lien  on  it  for  his  wages.*


(2)  Agricultural  Labor  Legislation

The  foregoing  distinctions  indicate  differences  in  the  kind
of  legislation  needed  to  protect  agricultural  labor  compared
with  that  protecting  industrial  labor.  The  one  modifies  main-
ly the  law  of  landlord  and  tenant,  the  other  that  of  employer


'  Shoemaker  v.  Crawford,  82  Mo.  App.  487  (1900);  Kelly  v.  Rummer-
field,  117  Wis.  620  (1903);  Bowman  v.  Bradley,  151  Pa.  St.  351  (1892);
Chase  v.  McDonnell,  24  111.  237  (i860) ;  Cutting  v.  Cox,  19  Vt.  517  (1847).

2  Taylor  v.  Bradley,  39  N.  Y.  129  (1868);  Neal  v.  Brandon,  70  Ark.
79,  66  S.  W.  200  (1902);  Almand  ».  Scott,  80  Ga.  95,  4  S.  E.  892  (1888).

'  Randall  v.  Ditch,  123  la.  582,  99  N.  W.  190  (1904) ;  Hooper  v.  Haines,
71  Md.  64,  18  Atl.  29,  20  Atl.  159  (1889);  Keoleg  v.  Phelps,  80  Mich.  466,
45  N.  W.  350  (1890);  Wilson  V.  Stewart,  69  Ala.  302  (1881);  Noe  ».
Layton,  69  Ark.  551,  64  S.  W.  880  (1910).

*  Grisson  v.  Pickett,  98  N.  C.  54.  3  S.  E.  921  (1887).

6


66 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

and  employee.  Fanning  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  small-scale
industry,  and  there  is  opportunity  for  individuals  to  rise  into
the  position  of  independent  owners.  Beginning,  perhaps,  as
a  casual  laborer,  the  next  step  is  that  of  the  farm  laborer  hired
by  the  month  or  by  the  year,  and  living  with  the  family  of  the
owner.  Next,  with  a  family  of  his  own,  the  steps  upward  are
cropper,  share  tenant,  cash  tenant,  owner  with  mortgage,  and,
finally,  ownership  tmencumbered.  Legislation  may  aid  or
obstruct  this  upward  movement.

If  the  share  tenant,  whether  cropper  or  farmer,  is  not  per-
mitted to  acquire  any  title  to  such  permanent  improvements
as  he  adds  to  the  land,  his  condition  is  practically  the  same
as  that  of  the  wage-earner,  who  has  no  title  to  his  own  prod-
uct. Like  the  laborer,  he  tends  to  be  kept  permanently  in
that  class.  This  is  the  condition  of  croppers  and  share
tenants  in  the  United  States,  and  the  result  is  seen  in  their
frequent  movement  from  farm  to  farm.  Such  tenants,  with-
out title  to  their  "savings"  in  the  form  of  improvements,  can
do  but  little  in  the  way  of  accumulating  the  capital  necessary
to  rise  to  the  higher  steps,  and  their  instability  and  lack  of
incentive  are  equally  serious  factors  in  their  own  deterioration
and  in  that  of  the  soil.

This  condition  received  legislative  attention  first  in  Eng-
land. There  had  been  a  strong  agitation  favoring  the  enact-
ment of  legislative  measttres  to  compensate  tenants  for  im-
provements made  on  the  landlord's  estate,  but  not  until  1850
was  a  biU  introduced  into  Parliament  favoring  a  reasonable
allowance  for  such  improvements.  The  bill  did  not  pass,  but
similar  measures  were  brought  before  that  body  several
times,  and  in  1875  an  act  was  obtained  stipulating  the  con-
ditions under  which  an  outgoing  tenant  was  to  be  paid  for
improvements.  However,  no  provision  was  made  compeUing
landlords  to  contract  under  the  law,  and  as  a  consequence  the
statute  was  ineffective.

In  1883,  a  new  bill,  known  as  the  agricultural  holdings  act,
was  passed,  compelling  all  landlords  to  make  their  leases  with
tenants  subject  to  compensation  for  improvements.

Even  with  compensation  for  improvements  it  requires  time
and  trials  for  the  tenant  or  purchaser  to  find  a  suitable  farm.
Finding  the  tenant  a  farm  has  a  direct  relationship  with  the


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  67

finding  the  laborer  his  job.^  The  importance  of  this  prob-
lem is  keenly  felt,  as  is  shown  in  an  investigation  made  by
the  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture.^  In  accord-
ance with  a  statute  enacted  in  1905,  New  York  state^  estab-
hshed  a  bureau  of  information  regarding  farms  for  rent  and
sale  and  positions  for  agricultural  laborers.  It  was  claimed
that  this  bureau  had  secured  work  for  about  15,000  men  on
farms  during  the  first  three  and  a  half  years  of  its  existence.*
The  bureau  also  issues  a  bulletin  dealing  with  the  farms  to
be  disposed  of  throughout  the  state.

Legislation  of  various  countries  also  provides  credit  agencies
to  enable  the  tenant  or  farmer  to  acquire  advances  of  capital
necessary  to  secture  permanency  in  his  position.  The  Schtiltze
DeHtsch  and  Raiffeisen  banks  in  Germany  and  Austria,  the
Credit  Foncier  in  France,  the  cooperative  banks  in  Italy  and
Russia,  are  private  cooperative  credit  systems  operating  under
government  supervision.^  New  Zealand,  Australia,  Ireland,  and
the  provinces  of  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick  in  Canada
make  loans  to  farmers,  as  do  also  Idaho,  Indiana,  Iowa,  North
Dakota,  Oklahoma,  Oregon,  South  Dakota,  and  Utah.®

In  New  Zealand  the  "advances  to  settlers"  system  is  ad-
ministered by  the  New  Zealand  State-guaranteed  Advances
Office.  Loans  are  repaid  to  the  advances  office  in  semiannual
instalments  of  principal  and  interest.  Interest  is  charged  at
the  rate  of  5  per  cent,  a  year,  but  this  rate  is  reduced  to  4^
per  cent,  if  payments  of  interest  and  principal  are  promptly
made.^

In  regulating  the  contract  of  landlord  and  tenant  the  prob-
lem of  administration  is  similar  to  that  of  regulating  the
contract  of  employer  and  employee.  At  first  the  matter  is
left  to  the  courts  as  is  the  case  with  the  Alabama  and  Texas


'■  See  "  Public  Employment  Exchanges, ' '  pp.  270-278.

2  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  g4,  1912,  "Supply  of
Farm  Labor,"  George  K.  Holmes.

2  New  York,  Laws  1905,  C.  243.

*  New  York  State  Commissioner  of  Agriculture,  Seventeenth  Annual
Report,  1 910,  p.  164.

'  American  Commission  on  Agricultural  Cooperation  and  Rural  Credit
in  Europe,  Report,  Part  I,  1913,  pp.  24,  181,  182,  237,  438,  63d  Congress,
1st  Session,  Senate  Document  No.  214.

^  Wisconsin  State  Board  of  Public  Affairs,  Bulletin  on  State  Loans  to
Farmers,  1913,  p.  4.

^Ibid.,  pp.  14  flf.


68 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

laws  and  the  British  legislation  above  mentioned.  Afterward
it  is  found  that  the  tenant,  like  the  wage-earner,  is  unable  to
avail  himself  of  the  aid  of  the  courts.  Then,  an  administrative
body  or  commission  is  created  to  deal  with  each  contract  as
it  arises.  In  the  case  of  the  tenant  contract,  it  is  the  highly
inflated  value  of  land  that  offers  the  chief  obstacle  to  the
laborer  or  cropper  in  advancing  to  the  position  of  owner.
This  obstacle  was  attacked  in  Ireland,  in  1881,  by  the  crea-
tion of  a  land  cornmission  to  fix  rents.  The  commission
reduced  rents  15  to  ^o  per  cent.  Later,  when  the  govern-
ment began  to  make  loans  at  low  rates  of  interest,  in  order  to
encourage  farm  ownership,  and  then  began  to  compel  the
landlords  to  sell  to  their  tenants,  the  land  commission  fixed
the  fair  value  of  the  land.  Otherwise,  the  government  loans,
at  3  per  cent,  interest,  would  have  served  only  to  inflate  land
values  fxirther,  and  the  landlord  would  have  absorbed  the
benefit  intended  for  the  tenant.  Thus  the  Irish  Land  Com-
mission does  for  landlord  and  tenant  what  a  public  utility
commission  does  for  corporation  and  consiuner,  or  a  naini-
laam.  wage  commission  for  employer  and  employee.^


4.  The  Laborer  as  Competitor

From  one  point  of  view  all  labor  legislation  has  as  its  ob-
ject the  protection  of  the  laborer  as  a  competitor.  The  wage-
bargaining  power  of  men  is  weakened  by  the  competition  of
women  and  children,  hence  a  law  restricting  the  hours  of
women  and  children  may  also  be  looked  upon  as  a  law  to
protect  men  in  their  bargaining  power.  The  same  is  true  in
a  different  way  of  industrial  education  and  free  schools,  for
they  tend  to  reduce  the  competition  for  the  poorly  paid  jobs
by  increasing  the  efficiency  and  the  wage-earning  power  of
laborers  who  otherwise  would  be  serious  competitors.  But
for  these  classes  of  legislation  the  protection  of  the  laborer  as
a  competitor  is  not  the  main  object. There  are  two  classes  of


'See  Irish  land  acts  of  1881,  1885,  1903,  and  1909  in  the  English
statutes;  Cant-Wall,  Ireland  under  the  Land  Acts;  American  Com-
mission on  Agricultural!  Cooperation  and  Rural  Credit,  Report,  1913,
p.  865,  63d  Congress,  ist  Session,  Senate  Dociiment  No.  214.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  69

legislation,  however,  of  which  it  may  be  said  that  the  main
purpose  has  been  to  protect  the  American  workman  from
competition  of  poorly  paid  laborers:  (i)  legislation  on  immi-
gration, especially  the  laws  against  induced  immigration  and
the  Chinese  exclusion  laws;  (2)  legislation  as  to  the  sale  of
goods  manufactured  by  convicts.


(7)  Protection  against  Immigrants

Immigration  legislation  tends  more  and  more  to  develop
along  protective  lines.  At  first  a  country  encourages  people
to  come,  in  order  to  develop  its  resources;  later  means  have  to
be  found  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  the  existing  population.

There  are  four  protective  purposes  which  are  served  by
immigration  legislation.  The  first  is  the  social  protection  of
the  community  generally.  It  is  obvious  that  every  state  will
regard  certain  classes  as  objectionable;  hence  the  prohibitions
that  the  United  States  puts  on  the  landing  of  prostitutes  (since
187s),  criminals  (1875),  professional  beggars  (1903).  Polyga-
mists  (1891)  and  anarchists  (1903)  are  excluded,  partly  on
social  and  partly  on  political  groimds.  The  exclusion  of
Orientals  (1882),  again,  may  be  justified  on  the  principle  that
they  are  unlikely  to  live  successfully  together  with  the  other
races  in  America.  Since  political  offenders  are  on  a  different
level  from  ordinary  offenders  against  the  law,  they  have  al-
ways been  exempt  from  such  exclusion  (1875).

A  second  kind  of  protection,  that  of  the  national  health,
is  afforded  by  the  laws  which  attempt  to  keep  out  those
immigrants  suffering  from  contagious  disease  (1891),  es-
pecially from  tuberculosis  (1907).

A  third  type  of  excluded  class  is  made  up  of  those  persons
who  are  looked  upon  as  constituting  a  danger  to  the  tax-
pa3dng  classes.  Legislation  designed  to  keep  out  persons  likely
to  become  a  public  charge  (1882)  aims  at  protecting  the  tax-
payer from  having  to  support  such  individuals.  The  fear  that
lunatics,  idiots,  or  epileptics  may  also  become  charges  on  the
community  is  chiefly  accountable  for  the  prohibition  (1891)
against  their  coming  into  the  country.  Again,  the  repeated
efforts  which  have  been  made  to  introduce  a  literacy  test  may


^o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

have  been  inspired  partly  by  a  feeling  that  the  illiterate  are
more  likely  to  become  destitute  than  others.  A  head  tax,
generally  used  for  revenue  alone,  may  at  times  become  a  sort
of  property  qualification.  In  the  United  States  it  was  at
first  so  cents  (1882)  and  has  been  gradually  raised  to  $4
(1907),  which  is  not  exactly  a  prohibitive  figure;  but  in
Canada,  it  is  fixed  at  $500  for  Chinese  who  do  not  belong  to
one  of  several  enumerated  professional  classes.  *  Finally,  per-
sons traveling  on  assisted  passages  who  cannot  prove  that
they  do  not  belong  to  any  of  the  excluded  classes  are  not  al-
lowed to  land  (1891);  after  being  dependent  on  others  such
persons  might  easily  come  to  be  dependent  on  the  state.

The  fourth  kind  of  protection  put  forth  by  the  law  over
the  people  of  this  country  is,  from  the  standpoint  of  labor
legislation,  the  most  important.  The  contrast  between  the
protection  afforded  to  American  goods  in  the  commodity
market  and  the  lack  of  any  such  effort  to  lessen  the  competi-
tion of  labor  in  the  labor  market  was  early  noticed,  and  efforts
have  been  made  since  1868  to  control  immigration  after  the
example  of  the  tariff.  In  that  year  the  act  of  1864  encourag-
ing immigration  was  repealed^  and  a  start  was  given  to  a
new,  negative,  policy  with  regard  to  immigration.  This  new
policy  had  particular  reference  to  what  is  commonly  but  in-
accurately called  "contract  labor,"  or  induced  immigration.

a.  Induced  Immigration.  The  eighteenth  century  type  of
immigration  had  been  very  largely  due  to  inducement,  some-
times, indeed,  to  compulsion.  After  the  first  quarter  of  the
nineteenth  century  indentured  labor  ^  had  practically  ceased
to  exist;  but  in  1864  a  stimulus  was  given  (owing  to  the  war-
time scarcity  of  labor)  to  a  similar  system  of  bringing  numbers
of  Europeans  here  to  work  under  contract,  by  a  law*  which
provided  that  such  contracts  should  be  valid  and  enforce-
able in  the  United  States  courts.  This,  it  must  be  remem-
bered, was  before  the  passage  of  the  thirteenth  amendment.
Employers  took  advantage  of  the  law  in  order  to  bring  over
foreign  laborers. Companies  were  formed  for  the  same  pur-


'  Immigration  Commission,  Reports,  Vol.  XL,  191 1,  p.  62.
2  United  States,  Laws  1868,  C.  38,  Sec.  4.
'  See  "Indentured  Service,"  p.  41.
•  United  States,  Laws  1864,  C.  246.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  71

pose;  and  the  American  labor  market  was  threatened  with  a
huge  oversupply  of  cheap  foreign  labor.  In  spite  of  agitation
in  Congress  and  feeling  in  the  country,  it  was  not  until  1868
that  this  act  was  repealed,  nor  xmtil  1885  that  the  inducement
of  immigration  was  formally  forbidden  by  law.

The  contract  labor  law  of  1885 '  forbade  the  assistance  or
encouragement  of  immigrants  coming  here  under  contract  to
work.  The  act  applied  solely  to  laborers,  for  those  professions
which  send  representatives  abroad  were  expressly  exempted,
as  were  also  domestic  servants  and  skilled  workmen  in  new
industries,  provided  labor  of  the  same  kind  could  not  be  ob-
tained otherwise.  Individuals  were  allowed  to  assist  friends
and  relatives  to  come  to  America.  This  successful  reversal
of  policy  from  the  act  of  1864  was  due  in  a  large  measure  to
the  efforts  of  the  Knights  of  Labor  and  the  trade  unions.
It  answered  the  demand  of  the  working  class  as  a  whole,  and
especially  that  part  of  it  which  was  organized,  for  effective
protection  against  the  competition  of  the  masses  of  immi-
grants who  were  now  entering  the  country.  The  number  of
immigrants,  which  had  decreased  during  the  'seventies,  rose
to  457,257  in  1880,  669,431  in  1881,  and  788,992  in  1882.^
Another  immigration  act  was  passed  in  1891,  which  had  as
one  of  its  objects  the  prevention  of  induced  immigration.*
The  government  was  beginning  to  make  it  more  difficult  for
a  man  who  had  previously  obtained  work  to  come  into  the
United  States.  Transportation  companies  were  now  for-
bidden to  solicit  or  encourage  immigration,  and  the  practice
of  issuing  advertisements  in  foreign  countries  promising  em-
ployment here  was  prohibited.  At  the  same  time  the  efforts  of
Congress  to  make  the  contract  labor  law  a  real  deterrent  were
met  by  a  silent  opposition  from  the  courts,  which  continued
to  construe  the  law  strictly  and  to  treat  it  as  of  limited  applica-
tion until  1907,  when  the  terms  of  the  law  itself  were  changed.

But  during  the  'eighties  and  'nineties  the  change  from  the
"old  immigration"  to  the  "new  immigration"  was  taking
place;  that  is,  the  great  bulk  of  the  people  no  longer  came
from  Germany,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Scandinavia,  but


*  United  States,  Laws  1885,  C.  164.

^  Immigration  Commission,  Reports,  Vol.  Ill,  1911,  p.  4.

'United  States,  Laws  1891,  C.  551.


72 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

from  southern  Italy,  Austria-Hungary,  Russia,  and  latterly
Greece.  These  people  had,  in  general,  a  lower  standard  of
life  than  the  Americans  and  the  earUer  immigrants.  While
it  is  true  that  in  many  cases  where  they  replaced  native  labor
this  adjustment  was  favorable  to  the  Americans,  in  that  these
were  raised  thereby  to  more  responsible  and  better  paid  posi-
tions, or  else  went  farther  west  or  southwest,  as  did  the
coal  miners,  attracted  by  better  wages,  still  it  cannot  be
denied  that  the  newer  immigrants  were  as  a  rule  willing  to
work  for  less  wages,  to  endure  harder  conditions,  and  to  lower
the  general  plane  of  living  of  unskilled  laborers.  It  is  on
account  of  this  displacement  of  American  labor  by  immigrant
labor,  a  phenomenon  which  has  been  at  times  emphasized  to
the  point  of  exaggeration,  that  the  working  class  has  so  eagerly
desired  the  restriction  of  immigration;^  and  the  contract  labor
laws  were  the  first  attempt  to  do  this.  It  was  not  necessary
to  enforce  the  law  against  farm  laborers,  because  from  them
no  such  competition  was  feared.

The  last  revision  of  the  contract  labor  law  was  made  in
1907,  when  a  general  immigration  act^  was  passed.  This  time
the  scope  of  the  words  "contract  laborer"  was  enlarged  to
include  any  one  induced  to  immigrate  by  any  kind  of  promise
or  agreement,  express  or  implied,  to  find  employment.  The
Immigration  Commission  of  191 1  said  that  "it  is  difficult  to
conceive  how  the  letter  of  the  law  respecting  the  importation
of  contract  laborers  could  be  more  stringent  than  at  present";
and  in  consequence  of  this  alteration  in  the  law  the  courts
have  been  obliged  to  give  up  their  attitude  of  considering
as  prohibited  by  the  law  only  those  transactions  in  which  a
contract  cotild  be  proved.

The  cases  on  the  subject  bring  out  the  increasing  strict-
ness of  the  law.  In  United  States  v.  Edgar,^  decided  under
the  law  of  1885,  the  prosecution  of  an  employer  who  had  im-
ported labor  from  abroad  failed,  because  no  contract  could
be  proved. In  United  States  v.  Gay  *  it  was  held  that  the


'  For  a  discussion  of  the  economic  effects  of  immigration  from  opposite
points  of  view,  see  J.  W.  Jenks  and  W.  J.  Lauck,  The  Immigration  Prol/-
Urn,  and  I.  A.  Hourwich,  Immigration  and  Labor.

''United  States,  Laws  1907,  C.  1134.

s  United  States  v.  Edgar,  48  Fed.  Rep.  91  (1891).

*  ynited  States  v,  Gay,  95  Fed.  Rep.  226  (1899).


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  73

law  of  1 89 1  was  intended  to  exclude  only  unskilled  manual
laborers.  After  the  act  of  1907,  as  already  pointed  out,  these
doctrines  could  no  longer  be  held,  and  in  19 14  we  have  a  case
in  which  a  fine  of  $1,000  was  exacted  for  each  of  forty-five
contract  laborers  brought  across  the  Mexican  border  for  the
purpose  of  helping  to  construct  a  railway.'

That  laws  against  induced  immigration,  although  in  force
for  thirty  years,  have  done  very  little  to  protect  the  American
laboring  man  from  the  competition  of  immigrants  is  evident
from  two  facts:  the  enormous  numbers  of  unskilled  laborers
who  have  since  entered  the  United  States,  and  the  efforts  that
are  constantly  being  made  to  secure  other  means,  notably  a
literacy  test,  for  creating  a  "labor  protective  tariff."^  With
regard  to  the  first  point,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  during  the
fiscal  year  from  June  19 13  to  June  19 14  the  number  of  un-
skilled workmen  who  entered  the  United  States  was  226,407,
and  the  nvmiber  of  skilled  workmen,  was  172,208.'

In  Australia  a  law  *  similar  to  the  American,  but  less  rigid,
excludes  persons  seeking  to  enter  the  country  on  a  contract
of  employment.  The  minister  for  external  affairs  may,  how-
ever, admit  such  an  immigrant  (a)  if  the  contract  is  not  made
in  contemplation  of  affecting  an  industrial  dispute;  (b)  if
the  remuneration  and  other  conditions  of  emplojonent  are  as
advantageous  as  those  current  for  workers  of  the  same  class
at  the  place  where  the  contract  is  to  be  performed.  A  further
clause,  which  applies  only  to  persons  not  British  subjects  or
their'  descendants,  and  therefore  to  very  few  emigrants  to
Australia,  provides  that  there  must  be  difficulty  in  the  em-
ployer's obtaining  within  the  Commonwealth  a  worker  of  equal
skill  and  efficiency.  The  states  belonging  to  the  Common-
wealth offer  assisted  passages  to  agricultural  workers  and  to
domestic  servants,  whose  ranks  are  by  no  means  overcrowded.^


» Grant  Bros.  Construction  Co.  v.  U.  S.,  232  U.  S.  647  (1914).

2  In  the  effort  to  secure  the  desired  protection  by  another  method,  the
people  of  Arizona  in  191 4  enacted  by  initiative  and  referendum  a  law
requiring  employers  of  more  than  five  persons  to  engage  at  least  80  per
cent,  qualified  electors  or  citizens.  This  statute  was  declared  uncon-
stitutional by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  as  denying  the  equal
protection  of  the  laws. (Truax  v.  Reach,  239  U.  S.,  33  (1915)-)

'  Commissioner  General  of  Immigration,  Report,  1914,  pp.  40,  41.

*  Act  No.  19  of  1905.

'  Commonwealth  of  Australia,  Official  Yearbook,  1914,  p.  1027.


74 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

In  the  Union  of  South  Africa,  the  government  endeavors
to  maintain  good  conditions  in  the  labor  market  by  preventing
unemplojonent  and  directly  assuring  itself  that  the  competi-
tion of  every  immigrant  is  "fair."  Every  immigrant  of  Euro-
pean descent  belonging  to  the  working  class  is  obliged  to  have
a  certificate,  stating  that  he  has  been  engaged  to  serve,  im-
mediately upon  his  arrival,  an  employer  of  repute  at  adequate
wages,  for  a  period  of  time  to  be  fixed  in  said  conditions,  but
not  to  be  less  than  one  year.^  The  terms  of  this  law  are  ex-
actly the  opposite  of  the  American  provisions  against  induced
labor;  yet  the  idea  of  protecting  the  laborer  from  competition
with  an  immigrant  of  lower  standards  is  common  to  both.

b.  Exclusion  of  Orientals.  The  danger  to  the  laborer  from
the  competition  of  European  immigrants  may  be  lessened
and  gradually  done  away  with  as  these  become  Americanized.
Trade  unionism,  especially,  is  a  force  which  is  giving  the  im-
migrant the  same  standards  as  the  American.  In  the  case
of  the  Oriental  races,  however,  this  "happy  ending"  to  the
story  is  not  to  be  expected.  Individual  Chinese,  Japanese,
and  Hindus  may  settle  down  to  lead  western  lives  and  adopt
western  ideas;  but  the  great  mass  of  their  countrymen  who
emigrate  do  so  without  any  desire  to  change  their  ways  of
living.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  these  ways  are  much  more
economical  than  those  of  an  American  or  European,  and  that
therefore  an  Oriental  can  accept  wages  which  to  a  white  man
wotdd  mean  starvation.  No  doubt  race  feeling  enters  to
some  extent  into  the  composition  of  laws  excluding  Chinese,
Japanese,  and  Hindus;  but  more  deep-lying  is  the  fear  of  the
competitive  worker.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the
emplojdng  classes  welcome  Orientals,  whom  they  find  efficient,
polite,  and  contented.  Miss  Eaves  says  of  the  early  Cali-
fomian  opposition  to  the  Chinese:

The  legislation  on  Oriental  labor  sprang  from  the  people.  .  .  .
The  laws  .  .  .  were  the  product  of  the  actual  experiences — sometimes
of  the  race  prejudices — of  those  in  the  humblest  ranks  of  society.
For  thirty  years  the  working  people  persistently  made  known  their
needs,  winning  at  last  a  practically  unanimous  support  in  the  state,  so
that  all  classes  united  to  urge  the  tardy  federal  legislation  for  exclusion."

'  South  Africa,  Laws  1913,  No.  22  (immigrants'  regulation  act).
'Lucile  Eaves,  History  of  California  Labor  Legislation,  1910,  p.  115.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  75

The  report  of  the  federal  Joint  Special  Committee  to  In-
vestigate Chinese  Immigration,  which  was  pubUshed  in  1877,
is  filled  with  complaints  against  the  Chinese  on  the  part  of
American  workingmen  who  asserted  that  they  coiild  not  com-
pete with  Chinese.  A  point  very  often  made  was  that  the
average  American  workman  is  a  married  man  with  a  family,
while  Chinamen  would  come  to  CaHfomia  alone  and  expect
to  earn  only  what  would  keep  a  single  man.  Others  said  that
Chinese  labor  was  less  efficient  than  white  labor.'  One  wit-
ness asserted  that  he  used  to  earn  from  $20  to  $21  a  week  at
broom  making,  but  that  in  competition  with  the  Chinese  he
could  make  only  $14.89.^

It  was  this  agitation  by  the  people  on  the  Pacific  coast,  who
had  learned  to  fear  the  industrial  competition  of  the  Chinese,
that  led  to  federal  legislation  and  finally  to  the  exclusion  of
the  Chinese  laborers.  The  BurUngame  Treaty  of  1868  had
settled  nothing,  for  it  merely  proclaimed  the  right  of  the
Chinese  to  settle  where  they  would,  while  denying  them  the
right  of  naturalization.'  Another  treaty,  concluded  in  1880,
gave  the  American  government  the  right  "to  regulate,  limit,
or  suspend"  Chinese  immigration,  but  not  absolutely  to  pro-
hibit it.  Two  years  later  the  exclusion  of  Chinese  laborers
went  into  effect,  when  an  act  was  passed  forbidding  them  to
enter  the  country  for  the  next  ten  years.*  This  policy  has
been  kept  up  ever  since  in  laws  and  treaties  which  have
gradually  grown  more  strict.  On  the  same  principle  Jap-
anese laborers  who  are  not  coming  to  the  United  States
in  order  "to  resume  a  formerly  acquired  domicile,  to  join  a
parent,  wife,  or  children  residing  there,  or  to  assume  active
control  of  an  already  possessed  interest  in  a  farming  enter-
prise in  this  country,"  are  refused  passports  by  the  Japanese
government,  in  accordance  with  a  treaty  agreement  of  1907.*

The  British  self-governing  colonies  have  had  a  similar  ex-
perience to  that  of  the  United  States,  and  have  met  it  by
practically  the  same  means. Canada  excludes  the  Chinese

'  Joint  special  Committee  to  Investigate  Chinese  Immigration,  Report,
pp.  346,  347,  44th  Congress,  2d  Session,  Senate  Report  No.  689,  1877.
^  Ibid.,  p.  360.

'Immigration  Commission,  Report,  Vol.  XXXIX,  191 1,  p.  69.
*  United  States,  Laws  1882,  C.  126.
s  United  States,  Laws  1907,  C.  1134.


76 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

laborers  by  making  them  pay  a  head  tax  of  $500 ;  the  Japanese,
by  an  agreement  with  the  government  of  that  cotmtry,  that
not  more  than  400  Japanese  are  to  enter  Canada  annually;
and  the  Hindus,  by  a  head  tax  of  $200  and  the  requirement
that  they  shall  come  by  a  "continuous  journey"  from  India,
which  cannot  be  done  by  the  existing  routes.'  Australia  and
New  Zealand  use  a  literacy  test  to  keep  out  Chinese,  who
must  write  fifty  words  (Australia)  or  a  signed  application  for
admission  (New  Zealand)  in  a  European  language.'

c.  The  Literacy  Test.  The  British  self-governing  colonies
have  found  in  the  hteracy  test  a  weapon  against  Asiatic  im-
migration. In  this  country  a  long  struggle  has  been  made  to
apply  to  all  immigrants  a  test  of  this  kind,  but  so  far  without
success.  Three  times  it  has  come  very  near  to  being  put  on
the  statute-book.

First  introduced  unsuccessfully  in  Congress  in  1892,  the
principle  of  the  literacy  test  was  embodied  in  a  bill  of  1895
and  survived  through  numerous  modifications  until  two  years
later  it  had  passed  the  House  and  Senate.  Persons  physically
capable  of  reading  and  over  sixteen  years  of  age  were  excluded
if  they  could  not  read  and  write  some  language,  with  the  ex-
ception of  near  relatives  of  admissible  immigrants.^  The  in-
tention of  the  bill  was  to  keep  out  not  only  the  criminal  and
pauper  classes,  but  also  the  southern  and  eastern  Europeans,
very  many  of  whom  were  illiterate.  President  Cleveland,
however,  vetoed  it  as  being  un-American  and  illiberal,  and
also  as  unlikely  to  have  any  good  effect  on  the  prevailing  de-
pression or  on  violence  in  labor  troubles  and  racial  degenera-
tion. The  House  passed  the  bill  over  the  President's  veto
by  a'  majority  of  193  to  37,  but  no  action  was  taken  in  the
Senate  and  the  bill  was  consequently  not  enacted  into  law.

The  next  attempt  to  secure  a  literacy  test  was  made  under
the  Taft  administration.  A  bill  was  introduced  into  the
Senate  in  191 1,  containing  a  clause  which  was  practically
copied  from  the  bill  mentioned  before.*  It  was  passed  by  the
House  and  Senate  but  President  Taft  vetoed  it,  February  14,

'  Immigration  Commission,  Reports,  Vol.  XL,  p.  73.
'^  Ibid.,  Abstracts  of  Reports,  Vol.  II,  pp.  633,  6V2.
'  lUd.,  Report,  Vol.  XXXIX,  p.  47.
*  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  XLVII,  1911,  p.  3669.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  77

1913.  The  Senate  thereupon  passed  the  bill  again,  but  in
the  House  the  vote  fell  short  of  the  required  two-thirds  ma-
jority and  the  bill  therefore  had  to  drop.^

The  latest  bill  including  a  literacy  test  of  the  usual  type
was  introduced  in  the  House  in  19 13.*  The  House  and
Senate  voted  favorably  on  this  bill  and  it  went  to  President
Wilson  on  January  16,  1915.  He  returned  the  bill  with  his
veto,  giving,  as  his  reason,  that  this  biU  embodied  a  radical
departure  from  the  traditional  policy  of  the  country,  in  almost
entirely  removing  the  right  of  political  asylum  and  in  ex-
cluding those  who  have  missed  the  opportunity  of  education,
without  regard  to  their  character  or  capacity.  Moreover,
he  did  not  believe  that  the  bill  represented  the  will  of  the
people,  and  for  these  reasons  he  refused  to  sign  it.'  The
House  again  could  not  raise  a  two-thirds  majority  in  favor
of  the  bill,  and  so,  like  its  predecessors,  it  came  to  nothing.*


(2)  Protection  against  Convict  Labor

Varying  estimates  have  been  made  at  different  times  of
the  number  of  convicts  engaged  in  productive  industry  in  the
United  States.  Perhaps  one  of  the  best  estimates  was  that
of  51,000,  made  by  the  Commissioner  of  Labor  in  1905.^  The
value  of  goods  sold  within  and  outside  the  state  in  which  the
labor  was  performed  amounted  to  $27,000,000  in  the  same
year.®  The  industries  mainly  affected  by  the  competition  of
convict  labor  are  the  manufacture  of  boots  and  shoes,  cloth-
ing, especially  workmen's  shirts  and  overalls,  furniture,
brooms  and  brushes,  stove  hollow  ware  and  stoves,  harness
and  whips,  binder  twine,  cooperage  (in  Chicago),  farm  wagons,
and  stone  work.  The  wages  paid  to  convicts  are,  of  course,
nothing  more  than  pocket  money;  the  maximum  amount
reached  is  75  cents  a  day.


«  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  XLIX,  1913,  p.  3429.

'  Ibid.,  Vol.  L,  1913,  P-  2013.

'  63d  Congress,  3d  Session,  H.  R.  Document  No.  1527.

•  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  LII,  1915,  p.  3078.

5  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor, Twentieth  Annual  Report,
1904,  p.  14.

•  im.,  pp.  474.  475-


78 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  problem  raised  by  pennitting  convicts'  work  to  be  sold
in  the  open  market  in  competition  with  the  product  of  free
labor  has  been  expressed  as  follows:

The  two  investigations  (of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  1885  and  1895)
showed  that  the  convict  product  as  a  whole  was  very  small  when
compared  with  the  entire  product  of  free  labor  in  the  United  States.
But  the  employers  of  free  labor  and  their  workmen  unite  in  affirming
that  when  any  convict-made  product  is  placed  in  competition  with
the  product  of  free  labor  the  market  becomes  demoraUzed,  even  a
small  sale  affecting  prices  far  out  of  proportion  to  the  amount  of
the  sale.  .  .  .  Every  state  objects  to  being  made  the  market  for  con-
vict-made goods  produced  in  other  states.^

The  prisons  do  not  stand  in  the  normal  relation  of  producers
to  the  commodity  market;  they  go  on  working,  regardless  of
the  fluctuations  of  business;  they  can  undersell  any  com-
petitor, for  they  do  not  have  to  meet  the  usual  costs  of  pro-
duction and  in  the  last  resort  they  can  always  fall  back  on
the  taxes.  Manufacturers  sometimes  assert  that  they  do  not
feel  the  competition  of  convict  labor  except  in  times  of  de-
pression.^

The  employer  of  "free  labor"  can  meet  this  competition
in  several  ways.  He  may  adulterate  or  otherwise  lower  the
quality  of  his  goods  so  as  to  lower  his  cost  of  production,  or
he  may  give  up  the  particular  branch  of  his  trade  in  which
the  competition  of  convict  labor  is  felt.  Instances  can,  how-
ever, be  given  of  whole  industries  which  have  been  practically
absorbed  by  convict  labor  in  certain  localities,  such  as  the
cooperage  industry  in  Chicago  during  the  'eighties.

The  problem  of  convict  labor  competition  takes  an  even
more  serious  aspect  when  it  is  considered  in  respect  to  inter-
state commerce.  Pressure  brought  to  bear  on  the  govern-
ment of  any  one  particular  state  is  often  successful  in  getting
a  law  passed  forbidding  the  sale  of  convict-made  goods  within
that  state;  but  this  only  means  that  convict-made  products
from  other  states  are  brought  in  and  sold  there.  In  fact,,
the  publicity  given  to  the  system  of  convict  contract  labor
when  a  biU  to  abolish  it  is  being  discussed  is  apt  to  attract

1  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twentieth  Annual  Report,
pp.  II,  23.

'  Ibid.,  p.  59  (statement  of  a  Minnesota  shoe  manufacturer).


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  79

attention  to  the  fact  that  a  new  market  will  be  opened  for
the  convict-made  goods  of  other  states.  It  has  been  estimated
that  only  34.7  per  cent,  of  convict-made  goods  are  sold  within
the  state  of  origin,  and  65.3  per  cent,  in  other  states.^

Many  of  the  states  have  laws  designed  to  put  some  restraint
on  competition  between  convict  and  free  labor.  No  law  has,
however,  yet  been  enacted  approaching  in  simplicity  a  pro-
posal made  in  the  last  Congress,  that  the  convict  should  be
put  to  remunerative  work,  charged  with  his  upkeep,  and  have
his  labor  credited  to  him;  that  he  should  in  fact  be  put  on
the  same  competitive  footing  as  an  ordinary  laborer.^  The
laws  bearing  directly  on  the  subject  of  competition  are  for
the  most  part  of  recent  origin  and  may  be  divided  into  three
main  classes:  (i)  The  general  statement  that  convicts  are
not  to  be  employed  where  their  work  conflicts  with  free  labor
(Illinois,  Minnesota,  Tennessee,  Utah);  (2)  the  prohibition
of  convict  labor  in  certain  forms  of  industry — e.  g.,  the  manu-
facture of  tin  cans  for  fruit-packing  (Iowa,  Maryland,  New
Jersey,  Oregon,  Wyoming) — ^Washington  has  a  provision  the
reverse  of  this,  by  which  it  refuses  to  allow  its  convicts  to
manufacture  anything  save  jute  fabrics  and  bricks,  while
Arizona  provides  that  convicts  shall  be  set  to  work  on  streets
and  highways,  when  they  do  not  compete  with  free  labor;
(3)  the  distribution  of  convicts  among  diversified  lines  of
industry,  sometimes  coupled  with  the  limitation  of  the  mmiber
to  be  employed  in  a  given  industry  (Indiana,  Massachusetts,
Nebraska,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania).  A  few  other  states  have
adopted  different  plans.  California  has  a  constitutional  pro-
vision forbidding  the  sale  of  convict-made  goods,  unless  spe-
cifically sanctioned  by  law.  Massachusetts,  in  addition  to
the  provision  mentioned  above,  stipulates  that  convict-made
goods  must  be  sold  at  not  less  than  wholesale  prices.  The
constitution  of  Michigan  forbids  the  teaching  of  a  trade  to
convicts,  excepting  only  the  manufacture  of  such  articles  as
are  mainly  imported  into  the  state.

Indirect  methods  of  legislating  against  the  competition  of
convict  labor  are  laws  providing  that  convict-made  goods  shall


'United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor, Twentieth  Annual  Report,

P-  497-
?  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  LI,  1914,  p.  4294.


8o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

be  labeled,  as  in  Pennsylvania,  Montana,  and  other  states,
or  that  dealers  in  such  goods  shall  have  a  license,  as  in  New
York.  The  most  effective  kind  of  law  is  probably  the  pro-
vision that  all  goods  mantifactured  in  prisons  shall  be  for  the
use  of  the  state  (the  "state  use"  system).  There  seems  to  be
no  good  reason  why  the  state  should  make  money  out  of  its
convicts,  and  on  the  other  hand  work  on  the  roads,  reclaiming
land,  or  manufacturing  for  state  use  provides  work  that  is
both  productive  and  non-competitive.

Federal  legislation  has  been  attempted  for  the  last  thirty
years,  but  nothing  has  as  yet  been  accompUshed.  In  the  last
(63d)  Congress,  the  proposal  was  made  to  subject  to  the  law
of  a  state  convict-made  goods  imported  into  it,'  which,  it  was
hoped,  would  check  interstate  commerce  in  these  goods.
The  opinion  has  often  been  expressed  that,  if  such  a  law
were  enacted,  the  competition  of  convict  labor  with  free
labor  would  cease.  Up  to  the  present,  however,  the  attempts
to  get  such  legislation  enacted  have  met  with  no  success.


5.  Legal  Aid  and  Industrial  Courts

We  have  seen  how  modem  legislation  has  attempted  to
give  to  the  individual  wage-earner  increasing  privileges  and
to  place  him  more  nearly  on  an  equaHty  with  his  employer.
Yet  these  privileges  are  available  to  him  only  so  far  as  the
state  actually  enforces  them.  We  shall  see  that,  in  the  case
of  factory  legislation,^  the  early  statutes  assumed  that  the
employee  would  initiate  proceedings  in  court,  with  the  aid
of  the  ordinary  officers  of  law,  to  enforce  the  safety  and  health
laws.  Not  until  many  years  had  passed  did  the  state  provide
special  police,  the  factory  inspectors,  to  relieve  the  laborer
of  this  impossible  obligation.  So  in  these  more  fundamental
rights  growing  out  of  the  labor  contract  the  state  leaves  to
the  laborer  the  duty  of  reaUzing  upon  them  through  the
ordinary  means  of  prosecution  in  court.

But  poverty,  ignorance,  and  the  technicalities  of  law  often
combine  to  set  the  remedies  beyond  his  reach. "From  birth

'  63d  Congress,  2d  Session,  H.  R.  5601.
2  See  Chapter  JX,  "Administration,"


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  8i

to  death,"  says  a  report  of  the  New  York  Legal  Aid  Society,'
"the  poor  man  is  the  prey  of  a  host  of  petty  swindlers.  He
is  educated  to  believe  that  justice  is  free,  and  he  finds  that,
to  get  it,  he  must  pay  a  lawyer  a  price  he  cannot  afford."  To
realize  justice  he  must  appeal  to  charity.  Attorneys,  in
coimtless  individual  cases,  have  given  their  aid  without  price,
but  it  caimot  be  expected  that  they  can  meet  the  need  with-
out neglecting  their  regular  clients.  Yet  without  their  aid  the
chance  of  the  laborer's  success  in  the  legal  battle  is  negligible.

The  reports  of  legal  aid  societies  are  filled  with  cases  of  in-
justice that  call  for  an  attorney.  Wages  are  withheld.  Pawn-
brokers and  "loan  sharks"  command  usurious  rates  of  interest
on  small  loans,  and  compel  their  victims  to  sign  papers,  such
as  chattel  mortgages  and  wage  assignments,  of  whose  contents
they  are  ignorant.  Wage  exemption  laws  are  nullified  by
garnishment  proceedings  brought  against  the  employer  to  at-
tach wages  not  yet  paid.  The  laborer  must  then  have  an
attorney  to  secure  the  release  of  his  wages,  and  he  may  lose
his  position,  for  employers  often  make  it  a  rule  to  discharge
employees  whose  wages  are  gamisheed.  Thus,  even  the  threat
of  garnishment  may  serve,  not  only  to  nullify  his  exemptions,
but  to  force  him  to  pay  unjust  claims  out  of  wages  not  exempt.
Foreigners  are  a  class  especially  exposed  to  fraud.  The
abuses  of  peonage,  vagrancy  laws,  and  the  padrone  system
have  already  been  mentioned.^

Against  these  invasions  of  their  legal  rights  wage-earners
are  for  the  most  part  helpless  to  defend  themselves.  The
majority  of  their  grievances  involve  smaU  amounts  which  do
not  justify  the  employment  of  a  lawyer.  Besides,  there  are
the  initial  court  costs,  such  as  fees  for  filing,  fees  for  serving
summonses  and  subpoenas  and  for  attaching  property,  and
fees  to  clerks  of  court  in  contested  cases.  To  the  man  with  a
small  claim  the  remedy  may  cost  more  than  the  resvilt.

(i)  Private  and  Public  Legal  Aid

To  remedy  these  abuses,  private  charity  has  foxmd  a  large
field. Legal  aid  societies  have  been  organized  in  some  forty

»  Thirty-eighth  Annual  Report,  1913,  p.  23.

'See  "Peonage,"  p.  37; "Padrone  System,"  p.  46,

6


82 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

American  cities.  Their  object  is  "to  render  legal  aid  and
assistance  gratuitously  to  all  who  may  appear  worthy  thereof,
and  who  from  poverty  are  imable  to  procure  it."  '  The  first
was  started  by  certain  German  merchants  in  New  York  in
1876  to  help  poor  German  immigrants,  and  was  called  the
German  Law  Protection  Society,  but  soon  extended  its  aid
to  others.  In  1890  Arthur  von  Briesen,  called  the  "father  of
the  legal  aid  society  movement,"  became  president  and  the
name  was  changed  to  the  Legal  Aid  Society  of  New  York.
The  society  has  confined  its  work  to  wage-earners,  but  with-
out regard  to  nationality,  race,  or  religion.  The  applicant
must  be  one  whose  claim  is  too  small  or  who  is  too  poor  to
hire  an  attorney,  a  poor  man  being  defined  as  one  whose  in-
come may  be  just  sufficient  to  maintain  him  but  not  sufficient
for  extraordinary  demands.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  society  to
cooperate  with  and  not  to  compete  with  other  lawyers.  Its
attorneys  are  under  agreement  to  have  no  other  legal  business
and  they  are  not  permitted  to  recommend  any  particular
attorney  to  applicants  whom  the  society  may  reject.  A  case
to  be  accepted  must  be  tinquestionably  meritorious,  and  this
is  ascertained  by  investigation  and  an  impartial  hearing  of
both  sides.  Finally,  the  society  makes  every  effort  to  settle
cases  out  of  court,  and,  up  to  the  moment  of  trial,  if  a  reason-
able offer  of  settlement  is  made,  advises  its  cHent  to  accept.
The  policy  is  to  discoiirage  Htigation  in  such  a  way  as  to  pro-
tect the  rights  of  all.  In  1914,  oidy  2,296  cases  were  taken
into  court,  out  of  a  total  of  40,430  handled  by  the  society.^

From  New  York,  legal  aid  societies  have  spread  throughout
the  United  States  and  Europe.  In  the  United  States  they  are
generally  unincorporated  voluntary  associations,  conducted,
with  one  exception,'  by  private  individuals.  In  1911  the  first
national  conference  of  legal  aid  societies  was  held  in  Pitts-
burgh, thirteen  of  the  forty  organizations  in  the  country  being
represented.  The  second  was  held  in  New  York  in  191 2,  with
delegates  from  sixteen  societies.  At  this  time  the  National
Association  of  Legal  Aid  Societies  was  established,  the  objects


'  Legal  Aid  Society  of  Philadelphia,  Thirteenth  Annual  Report,  1906,
Constitution,  Art.  I,  Sec.  2.

2  New  York  Legal  Aid  Society,  Thirty-ninth  Annual  Report,  igid,  p.  7.

3  Kansas  City,  Mo,  ■  r ,.  :,  t,  t-  1


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  83

being  to  give  publicity  to  the  work,  to  bring  about  coopera-
tion and  increased  efficiency,  and  to  encourage  the  formation
of  new  societies.^

The  legal  aid  movement  has  flourished  especially  in  Ger-
many. In  1911,  there  were  1,016  societies^  which  in  1910
had  1,546,971  cases.  In  1913,  they  held  a  convention  at
Nuremberg,  which  was  attended  by  delegates  from  the  United
States,  Denmark,  Holland,  Belgiimi,  Austria,  and  Switzerland.
In  London,  the  "Poor  Man's  Lawyer's  Association,"  with
"centres"  in  settlements  and  missions,  gives  gratuitous  legal
advice  to  persons  who  cannot  afford  a  solicitor,  but  does  not
furnish  assistance  in  covirt.*  It  is  sometimes  objected  that
legal  aid  will  encourage  litigation,  but  the  record  of  cases
settled  out  of  court  by  legal  aid  societies  does  not  support
this  view.

So  far  legal  aid  is  almost  entirely  a  private  enterprise,  and,
excellent  as  has  been  the  work,  it  is  restricted  to  a  few  of  the
larger  cities.  Even  there  the  work  has  been  seriously  ham-
pered by  lack  of  ftmds,  a  handicap  repeatedly  mentioned  in
the  reports.  There  is,  accordingly,  an  increasing  demand  that
legal  aid  be  made  a  function  of  government  and  thus  put
within  the  reach  of  all.  Several  attempts  in  this ,  direction
have  been  made  in  the  United  States.  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  has
the  distinction  of  possessing  the  only  municipal  free  legal  aid
bureau  in  the  United  States.  It  was  organized  as  a  depart-
ment under  the  board  of  public  welfare,  in  August,  1910.*
Los  Angeles  County,  Calif.,  has  established  the  office  of
public  defender,^  the  duties  in  civil  cases  being  the  prosecution
of  actions  for  the  collection  of  wages  and  other  demands
of  persons  who  cannot  afford  counsel,  in  cases  where  the
stun  involved  does  not  exceed  $100.  This  officer  also  de-
fends such  persons  in  civil  litigation,  when  they  are  being
unjustly  harassed.  Costs  are  paid  from  the  county  treasury.
While  the  office  is  efficacious  in  obtaining  justice  and  reducing


'  Chicago  Legal  Aid  Society,  Bulletin  No.  2,  1912-1913,  p.  3.

'W.  E.  Walz,  "Legal  Aid  Societies,  Their  Nature,  History,  Scope,
Methods,  and  Results,"  The  Green  Bag,  Vol.  XXVI,  1914,  p.  loi.

'Arthur  Blott,  "Legal  Dispensaries  in  London,"  Legal  Aid  Review,
Vol.  IV,  1906,  No.  3.

*  See  Board  of  Public  Welfare,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  Reports.

'  Los  Angeles  County  Charter,  Sec.  23. Became  effective  July  I,  1913.


84 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

its  expense  for  the  poor  man,  the  question  of  the  law's  delay
has  not  been  solved.  The  public  defender  does  not  have
power  to  hear  and  determine  questions  involving  the  payment
of  wages.  His  findings  might  be  made  final  on  all  questions
of  fact,  and,  when  the  findings  are  filed  in  court,  judgment
might  be  entered  accordingly.^  The  public  defender  would
thus  have  the  functions  of  an  industrial  court  as  later  de-
scribed.

A  provision  for  the  collection  of  wages  in  California  is  the
payment  of  wages  act  of  191 1.  It  provides  for  immediate
payment  of  wages  due  to  a  discharged  employee  and  for  pay-
ment in  five  days  to  an  employee  not  having  a  definite  con-
tract who  quits  or  resigns.^  AH  other  wages  fall  due  at  least
once  a  month,  and  must  not  be  withheld  more  than  fifteen
days  after  that  time.  As  the  legislature  made  no  provision
for  the  administration  of  the  act,  the  bureau  of  labor  statistics
undertook  to  enforce  it.  During  the  fiscal  year  1912,  no  fewer
than  1,899  claims  for  wages  were  filed  and  investigated,  and
1,292  claims  were  collected,  amounting  to  $24,445.59.*  The
majority  of  cases  are  settled  within  three  days  of  filing  the
claim.  A  special  agent  is  sent  to  the  employer  to  investigate.
If  the  latter  refuses  to  pay  the  wages  and  caimot  give  a  satis-
factory explanation,  he  is  cited  to  appear  before  the  labor
commissioner,  who  hears  both  sides.  This  is  necessary  in
80  per  cent,  of  the  cases.  If  no  settlement  can  be  reached,
the  employer  is  cited  to  appear  before  the  district  attorney
and  show  cause  why  a  warrant  should  not  be  issued  for  viola-
tion of  the  payment  of  wages  law.  Both  parties  and  a  repre-
sentative of  the  bureau  are  present.  If  the  employer  still
refuses  to  pay,  a  warrant  is  issued,  as  a  last  resort,  for  his
arrest. Twelve  arrests  were  the  total  for  the  year.

In  November,  19 14,  the  act  was  declared  unconstitutional
by  a  district  court  on  the  ground  that  in  effect  it  permitted
imprisonment  for  debt,  which  the  state  constitution  prohibits
except  in  case  of  fraud.* Although  the  statute  did  not  pro-

'  Recommended  by  the  public  defender  in  a  letter  to  the  Milwaukee
Bar  Association,  March,  191 4.

'California,  Laws  191 1,  C.  92.

3  California  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Fifth  Biennial  Report,  191 1-
1912.

*JSx  parte  Crane,  On  Habeas  Corpus,  Crim.  560,  November  23,  1914.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  85

vide  imprisonment  as  a  penalty  and  was  silent  as  to  the
process  by  which  the  court  might  obtain  jurisdiction  of  the
person  of  the  offender,  in  the  test  case  arrest  and  detention
pending  a  hearing  were  the  means  used.  Accordingly,  in  1915,
an  amendment  to  the  payment  of  wages  law  was  passed.*
Instead  of  the  earlier  $500  fine  for  violation  if  an  employer
fails  to  pay  in  full  within  five  days  after  the  same  are  due,
the  wages  of  an  employee  who  leaves  or  is  discharged  are  to
continue  at  the  same  rate  until  paid,  or  until  action  is  com-
menced, but  in  no  case  after  thirty  days.  No  employee  who
refuses  or  avoids  pajmient  is  entitled  to  benefit  under  the  act
for  such  time  as  he  avoids  pa5mient.  Wilful  refusal  to  pay
for  labor,  with  intent  to  secure  a  discount,  or  to  harass  or
defraud,  constitutes  a  misdemeanor.  The  constitutionality  of
this  new  act  is  believed  to  depend  largely  on  this  last  clause.
It  has  not  as  yet  (October,  1915)  been  tested  in  the  courts;
but  the  attorney-general,  when  drafting  the  bill,  had  a  study
made  of  similar  laws  and  their  constitutionality,  hoping  thus
to  secure  a  more  fortimate  career  for  this  act  than  its  pre-
decessor had.

In  1910,  following  the  recommendation  of  a  state  immigra-
tion commission  appointed  to  investigate  the  condition  of
aliens  in  the  state,  the  legislature  of  New  York  created  a
bureau  of  industries  and  immigration  subordinate  to  the  de-
partment of  labor,  whose  object  was  to  give  newly  arrived  im-
migrants a  fair  start.  This  was  to  be  done  by  securing  to
aliens  a  hearing  for  complaints  in  their  own  language,  the
bureau  to  act  as  mediator  in  securing  the  enforcement  of
existing  laws  to  prevent  exploitation.  The  chief  investigator
brings  the  parties  together  at  a  hearing  and  tries  to  adjust
the  differences.  If  he  fails,  a  civil  case  is  turned  over  to  the
Legal  Aid  Society.

This  system  of  state  legal  aid  for  immigrants  was  extended
to  all  wage-earners  by  a  section  of  the  New  York  industrial
commission  law  of  March,  1915:  "The  commission  shall  ren-
der all  aid  and  assistance  necessary  for  the  enforcement  of
any  claim  by  an  employee  against  his  employer,  which  the
commission  finds  reasonable  and  just  and  for  the  protection


» California,  Laws  1915,  C.  142.


86 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  employees  from  frauds,  extortions,  exploitation,  or  other
improper  practices  on  the  part  of  any  person,  public  or  private;
and  shaU  investigate  such  cases  for  the  purpose  of  presenting
the  facts  to  the  proper  authorities  and  of  inducing  action
thereon  by  the  various  agencies  of  the  state  possessing  the
requisite  jurisdiction."  *  Under  this  act,  the  state  industrial
commission  is  made  an  agency  for  providing  the  services  of  a
lawyer  to  wage-earners  unable  to  pay  for  them.  It  lacks,  how-
ever, a  provision  making  the  findings  conclusive  in  court
proceedings.

(2)  Industrial  Courts

In  Europe,  a  different  type  of  legal  aid  has  been  evolved,
taking  the  place,  not  of  the  lawyer,  but  of  the  judge.  This  is
the  industrial  cotut,  or  conseil  de  prud'hommes.  Industrial
courts  are  special  courts  for  the  settlement  of  disputes  arising
out  of  labor  contracts  between  employers  and  employees,  and
their  purpose  is  "to  settle  by  conciliation  whenever  possible
and  by  legal  judgment  when  conciliation  fails,  but  in  any
event  cheaply,  quickly,  and  by  means  of  a  covut  composed
in  part  or  in  whole  of  elected  representatives  of  the  two
classes,  all  individual  legal  cases  which  arise  from  the  re-
lations of  employer  and  employed."^  The  first  industrial
court  was  founded  at  Lyons,  France,  in  1806,  for  the  silk
industry.  The  law  creating  the  Lyons  court  provided  that
similar  cotuts  might  be  established  in  all  the  factory  cities
of  France,  and  accordingly  their  ntmiber  has  increased  steadily.
When  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  in  181 5,  and  Alsace-Lorraine
in  187 1,  became  German  territory,  the  industrial  courts  were
retained,  and  in  1890  a  general  law  provided  for  their  estab-
lishment throughout  the  empire.  Industrial  courts  similar  to
the  French  were  introduced  into  Belgium  in  1859,  while
Austria  followed  in  1869,  Italy  in  1893,  and  Spain  in  1908.
In  Switzerland,  Geneva  was  the  first  canton  to  take  up  the
idea,  creating  an  industrial  cotut  on  the  French  model  in


'  New  York,  Laws  1915,  C.  674,  Sec.  529.

^  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  q8,  January,  1912;
"Industrial  Courts  in  France,  Germany,  and  Switzerland,"  Helen  L.
Sumner,  p.  273.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  87

1882.  In  1910,  only  seven  of  the  Swiss  cantons  lacked  legis-
lation of  this  character.

There  are,  in  general,  three  types  of  industrial  courts:
(i)  The  French,  in  which  only  employers  and  workers  are  rep-
resented, and  the.  number  of  members  is  even;  (2)  the  Ger-
man, in  which  the  president  is  neither  an  employer  nor  a
worker,  and  the  number  of  members  is  odd;  (3)  the  Swiss,
which  is  an  adaptation  of  the  ordinary  court,  with  the
addition  of  special  "assessors,"  or  advisers,  to  the  judge.*
In  all  three  types  the  employers  and  workmen  are  equally
represented.

With  respect  to  jurisdiction,  a  labor  contract  of  some  kind
is  essential,  but  the  idea  is  interpreted  to  cover  any  relation-
ship between  wage-givers  and  wage-receivers.  The  great  ma-
jority of  cases  are  for  wages  due,^  but  discharge  without  notice
is  also  a  frequent  cause  of  complaint.  By  far  the  greater
number  of  complaints  are  made  by  workers.  In  1908,  in
Germany  as  a  whole,  5,672  cases  were  brought  by  employers
and  106,269  by  workers.  Most  of  the  complaints  are  for
small  sums.

Conciliation  being  the  chief  object  of  industrial  courts,
the  procedure  is  a  radical  departure  from  that  of  the  ordi-
nary cotirt.  Personal  appearance  of  the  parties  is  required,
except  for  a  good  excuse,  as  illness  or  absence  from  the  city.
In  Germany,  parties  may  be  represented  only  by  persons  in
the  industry,  but  in  France  lawyers  are  allowed  to  be  present,
either  to  represent  or  assist  the  parties.'  Lawyers  are  per-
mitted in  Spain  also,  but  not  in  Basel,  Zurich,  or  Geneva.
The  proceedings  are  much  less  formal  than  in  an  ordinary
court,  and  the  president  takes  an  active  part.  Preliminary
hearing  for  the  ptirpose  of  conciliation  before  a  section  of  the
court  is  provided  for  in  France  and  Germany.  More  than
half  the  cases  are  settled  by  conciliation,  and,  as  a  large  nvun-


'  Two  cantons  have  courts  based  on  the  French  model  (Geneva  and
Vaud),  and  four  have  the  German  type  (Lucerne,  Berne,  St.  Gall,  Neu-
chatel).

'  In  Berlin  in  igo8  more  than  one-half  the  complaints  were  for  wages
and  a  third  about  illegal  discharge.

'  In  practice  lawyers  appear  before  the  board  of  judgment  in  Paris
in  only  10  per  cent,  of  cases,  and  before  the  board  of  conciliation  in  only
5  per  cent.


88 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ber  are  not  contested,  or  are  settled  by  defatilt,  only  a  small
percentage  call  for  formal  judgment.'

The  salient  advantages  of  the  industrial  courts  are  rapidity
and  cheapness.  Cases  are  set  for  as  early  hearing  as  possible
after  complaint,  and  only  necessary  delays  are  permitted.
In  France,  cases  must  be  settled  in  four  months,  and  in  Ger-
many in  1908  only  1.5  per  cent,  of  cases  brottght  to  final  judg-
ment lasted  over  three  months.  Expenses  exceeding  the  fees
collected  are  met  by  the  municipalities  over  which  the  court
has  jtuisdiction,  or,  in  the  case  of  courts  with  wider  jurisdic-
tion, by  the  state.  In  such  cases  there  are  no  fees;  in  others
the  fees  are  low.  Members  of  the  courts  are  compensated  by
fees  or  salaries,  the  method  varying  within  the  country.  In
Germany  the  president  receives  a  salary,  and  the  representa-
tives of  employers  and  employees  receive  fees  for  time  in
court.

Wherever  established,  industrial  cottrts  are  held  indispen-
sable, the  fact  that  no  dispute  is  too  insignificant  for  them  being
regarded  as  a  special  advantage.  They  are,  however,  much
more  successful  with  small-scale  production  than  with  the
factory  system,  the  reasons  being  that  in  the  latter  case
standardization  of  conditions  obviates  many  disputes,  and
also  that  employees  fear  blacklisting  if  they  bring  suit.

No  such  institution  exists  in  English-speaking  countries.  In
Great  Britain  the  arbitration  act  of  1824  was  designed  to
cover  individual  disputes,  but  the  procedtare  was  too  intri-
cate and  costly  ever  to  be  applied.  The  "councils  of  con-
ciliation" act  of  1867  permitted  industrial  courts  like  the
French,  but  no  true  judicial  tribunal  was  ever  created  under
it.^  In  the  United  States,  a  Peimsylvania  law,  enacted  in
1883,  attempted  to  establish  a  sort  of  industrial  court,  but
none  was  ever  created  and  ten  years  later  the  law  was  re-
pealed. The  constitutions  of  New  York  and  a  few  other
states  contain  provisions  for  courts  of  voltmtary  arbitration,
but  no  courts  were  ever  established.


'  In  1908  only  17  per  cent,  of  cases  in  Paris  and  9  per  cent,  in  Berlin
required  formal  judgment.

2  See  also  "Mediation  by  Government,"  p.  124.  The  above  descrip-
tion applies  to  industrial  courts  in  their  relation  to  the  individual  bargaiUi
In  some  cases  they  also  deal  with  the  collective  bargain.


INDIVIDUAL  BARGAINING  89

A  few  attempts  have,  however,  been  made,  along  quite
difEerent  lines.  One  of  these  is  the  Conciliation  Court  of
Cleveland,  Ohio.  It  grew  out  of  a  provision  in  the  municipal
court  act,  designating  a  clerk  to  assist  persons  unable  to  hire
a  lawyer  in  preparing  and  filing  papers,  and,  if  possible,  to
bring  about  a  settlement.  An  experienced  man  was  selected
by  the  chief  justice,  and  he  often  acted  successfully  as  a
mediator.  In  19 12,  1,200  cases  were  thus  settled  out  of
court.  All  services  were  free.  Since  March,  1913,  a  concili-
ation branch  of  the  court  has  been  in  operation.  The  fee  is
usually  25  cents,  never  more  than  45  cents,  and  all  writs  are
served  by  registered  mail.  Lawyers  are  not  allowed  to  repre-
sent the  parties,  and  no  set  procedure  is  required.  Each
party  is  allowed  to  state  his  case  in  his  own  way.  When
both  sides  have  been  heard,  the  judge  must  seek  to  effect  an
amicable  adjustment  of  the  differences  between  the  parties.'
Ordinarily,  he  obtains  their  consent  that  he  shall  adjust  the
issue  himself.  The  Cleveland  court  differs  from  the  Etiropean
industrial  courts  in  that  neither  employers  nor  workmen  are
represented  on  the  bench,  the  judge  is  not  elected  by  the  two
classes,  and  the  court  does  not  confine  itself  to  disputes  arising
out  of  the  labor  contract.  It  resembles  them  in  that  it  is  an
authoritative  tribunal,  instead  of  being  merely  a  private
society,  like  the  legal  aid  agencies  of  the  United  States.

To  what  extent  it  wotild  be  possible  to  apply  the  European
industrial  court  system  in  the  United  States  is  as  yet  an  open
question.  People  have  not  awakened  to  the  need,  and  they
are  not  prepared  for  such  a  system  by  habits  of  organization
and  joint  action  of  interests.  It  is  improbable  that  industrial
courts  would  be  created  generally  by  local  initiative,  as  in
France,  and  even  if  the  system  were  made  mandatory  by  the
state  government,  as  in  Germany,  it  would  require  a  state
agency  to  guide  local  governments  in  starting  them.  It  is
possible  that  the  California  wage  pa3mient  law  and  the  New
York  industrial  commission  law,  above  referred  to,  may  lead
to  state  and  local  advisory  boards  of  employers  and  employees
to  assist  the  state  authorities  in  executing  the  laws,  and


'R.  C.  Moley,  "Justice  through  Conunon  Sense,"  The  Survey,  Oct;,
31,  1914,  p.  lOI,


90 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

that,  eventually,  through  the  enlightenment  of  public  opinion
and  through  practice  in  cooperation  between  employers  and
employees,'  the  industrial  court  may  be  successfully  modified
and  adapted  to  American  conditions.

'  See  Chapter  IX,  "Administration."


CHAPTER  III

COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING

Collective  bargaining  dates  back  as  far  as  individual  bar-
gaining. Its  first  examples  are  town  charters  and  merchant
gilds.  The  townspeople  through  a  collective  contract  secured
certain  rights  from  the  king  in  return  for  a  money  payment.
Among  these  rights  none  was  more  valuable  than  that  of  the
doctrine  "City  air  makes  free."  If  a  serf  had  been  in  a  free
city  for  a  year,  he  became  a  free  man.  Freedom  was  estab-
lished through  collective  bargaining.  Without  freedom  there
can  be  no  individual  contracts.  Historically,  individual  and
collective  bargaining  have  been  interdependent;  the  one  has
been  necessary  to  maintain  the  other.

I.  The  Law  op  Conspiracy

Yet  collective  bargaining  for  a  long  time  was  viewed  with
suspicion.  All  associations  were  treated  as  conspiracies.  They
were  much  more  powerful  than  individuals,  and  hence  were
considered  dangerous.  Moreover,  collective  bargaining  im-
plies a  restriction  of  the  freedom  to  make  individual  bargains.
To  bargain  collectively  there  must  be  a  contract  or  an  agree-
ment between  the  members  of  the  association  that  each  shall
give  up  his  right  to  make  an  individual  -contract,  and  shall
either  make  his  contracts  only  as  the  majority  decides  or  shall
permit  the  agents  elected  by  the  majority  to  make  his  con-
tracts for  him.  In  order  to  enforce  such  bargains  the  asso-
ciation must  have  full  disciplinary  powers  and  must  be  al-
lowed tx)  determine  who  shall  be  admitted  to  membership.
Non-tnembers  do  not  share  in  the  benefits  of  the  collective
bargain;  in  fact,  they  are  often  injured  thereby. Collective


92 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

bargaining  seriously  restricts  the  freedom  of  both  members
and  non-members  to  make  individual  bargains.


(i)  Origins  of  Collective  Bargaining

Collective  action  was  permitted  in  early  law  only  imder
grant  of  a  special  charter  from  the  king.  Thus,  the  king
granted  charters  to  free  citizens,  and  to  merchant  and  craft
gilds.  Armed  with  a  charter,  the  association  might  not  be
prosecuted  as  a  conspiracy,  and  was  conceded  the  great  privi-
leges of  acting  as  a  unit  and  continuous  existence  through
the  right  of  succession.

Of  these  early  associations  the  craft  gilds  were  the  nearest
approach  to  the  trade  unions  of  to-day;  yet  their  functions
were  very  different.  They  were  composed  of  three  classes:
the  masters,  the  journeymen,  and  the  apprentices.  The
masters  and  the  journeymen  worked  side  by  side,  with  the
same  tools.  It  was  easy  for  an  apprentice  to  become  first  a
journeyman,  then  a  master.  Hence  the  relations  of  the  mas-
ters to  the  journeymen  and  apprentices  received  but  little
attention  in  the  charters  which  created  gilds.  The  wage
bargain  which  the  master  made  with  the  joumejmian  and  the
apprentice  was  as  yet  not  a  matter  of  public  concern.  The
public  was  interested  primarily  in  the  other  bargaining  func-
tion of  the  masters;  their  merchant  function,  the  making  of
the  price  bargain  with  consumers.  The  constmiers  dominated
the  government;  and  it  was  their  concern  to  prevent  extor-
tionate prices  and  the  substitution  of  "bad  ware."'

With  the  gradual  expansion  of  markets,  the  merchants
gained  recognition  in  society.  Charters  were  granted  to  the
merchant  adventurers  who  risked  their  capital  in  foreign
enterprises,  and  patents  of  monopoly  were  granted  to  mer-
chants in  the  domestic  trade.  Later  came  the  special  charters
to  banks,  canal,  turnpike,  and  railway  companies  and  other
corporations.  Thus,  the  right  of  association  was  granted  to
capital.  With  freedom  from  the  taint  of  conspiracy,  the  cor-
poration charter  conferred  upon  the  incorporators  the  privilege

'See  Commons,  Labor  and  Administration,  1913,  "American  Shoe-
makers," p.  219  B.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  93

of  "limited  liability."  In  a  partnership  the  members  are  re-
sponsible to  the  ftill  extent  of  their  resources  for  the  contracts
and  torts  of  the  partnership.  But  the  members  of  corpora-
tions have  only  "limited  liability,"  usually  only  to  the  extent
of  their  subscription.  At  first,  incorporation  could  be  secured
only  through  special  act  of  the  legislature;  and  corruption  was
often  employed  to  secure  such  charters.  Finally,  in  the  dec-
ade of  the  'fifties,  general  corporation  laws  were  enacted.  It
is  now  the  privilege  of  all  persons  to  combine  their  capital
and  form  corporations,  with  but  few  restrictions.  So  com-
plete is  the  right  of  association  of  capitalists  that  the  law  has
introduced  the  fiction  that  corporations  are  persons,  entitled
to  many  of  the  advantages  of  natural  persons;  and  the  rule
of  "limited  liability"  lessens  the  responsibility  of  the  mem-
bers for  the  acts  of  the  corporation.

The  modem  corporation  has  taken  over  both  of  the  bar-
gaining functions  of  the  masters  of  old:  the  price  bargain  and
the  wage  bargain.  In  the  first  the  corporation  performs  the
merchant  function,  and  its  object  is  to  get  as  high  prices  as
possible  from  the  consumer.  In  the  second  it  performs  the
employer  function,  and  its  object  is  to  give  as  low  wages  as
possible  to  the  laborers.

Collective  action  by  capital  has  not  stopped  with  the  cor-
poration. The  corporations  have  themselves  become  mem-
bers of  associations.  In  these  associations  it  has  generally
been  found  advantageous  to  separate  the  two  bargaining  func-
tions. Manufacturers'  associations,  "pools,"  and  "trusts"  are
formed  to  deal  with  the  price  of  products  to  consumers.
Employers'  associations  deal  with  the  wages  paid  to  labor.
Practically  the  same  individuals  may  compose  these  associa-
tions; but  their  functions  are  totally  different.'

Labor  did  not  win  the  right  of  collective  bargaining  as
early  as  capital.  When,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  in  England,
the  laborers  combined  to  enforce  their  demands  for  higher
wages  they  were  prosecuted  for  "conspiracy."  In  the  jour-
neyman tailors'  case,^  for  example,  all  combinations  to  raise
wages  were  held  to  be  conspiracies.  This  common  law  doc-
trine was  inherited  by  our  fathers  from  England. In  the

'Commons,  Labor  and  Administration,  especially  p.  262.
28  Mod.  II  (1721).


94 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

mother  country  the  journeyman  tailors'  case  was  followed  by
the  enactment  of  statutes  to  penalize  combinations  to  raise
wages.  In  1824  and  1825  these  statutes  were  repealed,  and
a  considerable  degree  of  freedom  to  combine  was  conceded
to  labor.  In  18  71  trade  unions  were  declared  not  to  be  il-
legal combinations  in  restraint  of  trade.  In  1875  labor  was
entirely  freed  from  the  conspiracy  law  in  its  criminal  aspects.
Finally,  in  1906  the  law  of  civil  conspiracy  also  was  swept
away,  and  the  trade  unions  were  conceded  complete  exemp-
tion from  responsibility  for  damages  growing  out  of  tortious
acts  alleged  to  have  been  committed  in  their  behalf.

In  the  United  States,  also,  prosecutions  for  "conspiracy"
often  followed  the  early  strikes  for  higher  wages.  In  the
indictment  or  in  the  charge  to  the  jury  in  some  of  these  cases
there  was  presented  the  doctrine  of  the  common  law  that  all
combinations  to  raise  wages  are  illegal. 1  But  this  was  never
tmchallenged  law  in  the  United  States;  and  in  only  one  case
did  a  court  of  final  jurisdiction  hold  this  view.^  Yet  it  was
considered  that  there  was  something  unlawful  about  com-
binations of  laborers.  They  were  denounced  as  being  in-
jiuious  to  the  public,  because  they  were  injurious  to  employers
and  made  it  difhcult  for  them  to  compete  in  distant  markets.
Naturally  the  journeymen  looked  upon  all  of  these  cases  as
prosecutions  brought  by  the  masters  to  resist  increases  of
wages.  This  was  undoubtedly  the  real  motive  of  the  prosecu-
tion; but  in  most  of  these  cases  the  restrictive  rules  and  prac-
tices of  the  tmions  were  emphasized,  not  the  effort  to  raise
wages.

In  the  earliest  cases  the  juries  always  cpnvicted;  but  there
was  a  growing  public  sentiment  against  these  prosecutions.
After  the  decade  of  the  'thirties  it  was  generally  recognized
that  a  combination  to  raise  wages  is  not  of  itself  a  conspiracy.
In  1842,  in  Commonwealth  v.  Hunt,^  the  Massachusetts
Supreme  Court  even  held  that  it  was  lawful  for  laborers  to
go  on  strike  to  gain  a  closed  shop.  This  decision  was  very
much  more  favorable  to  the  workingmen  than  are  those  of


1  For  these  early  cases  see  Documentary  History  of  American  Industrial
Society,  Vols.  Ill  and  IV.

2  People  V.  Fisher,  14  WendeE  10  (1835).

^ Commonwealth  !i.  Hunt,  4  Metceilf  iii  (1842).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  95

the  Massachusetts  courts  of  recent  years.  After  Common-
wealth V.  Hunt  there  were  stiU  prosecutions  of  workingmen
for  "conspiracy,"  but  in  the  cases  of  the  'fifties  and  'sixties
acts  of  violence  were  usually  involved.  There  was  still  com-
plaint about  the  "conspiracy  laws,"  but  they  had  lost  their
meaning.

Thus,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  rights  which  the  workingmen
gained  in  England  through  legislation  in  the  'seventies  were
secured  to  them  in  the  United  States  -without  legislation  at  a
much  earlier  date.  But  there  was  the  vital  difference  that,
while  in  England  the  entire  conspiracy  law  in  its  application
to  labor  was  swept  away,  it  was  only  modified  in  this  country
by  common  consent  and  favorable  construction.  In  England
definite  statutes  replaced  the  vague  conspiracy  law;  in  the
United  States  the  conspiracy  law  remained,  without  ever
being  really  clarified.  The  few  statutes  which  were  enacted
in  reference  to  labor  combinations  did  little  more  than  to  re-
state the  common  law.


(2)  Doctrine  of  Conspiracy

In  the  'eighties  a  new  spirit  was  manifested  in  the  covirt
decisions  in  this  country  involving  labor  combinations.  These
decisions  made  clear  that  labor's  right  to  combine  was  still
seriously  restricted.  Part  of  the  explanation  of  the  changed
attitude  of  the  courts  is  the  aggressiveness  of  labor  at  that
time.  The  violence  and  riots  which  accompanied  the  strikes
of  that  period  made  the'iinions  seem  dangerous  combinations.
Another  factor  was  the  gradual  identification  of  "business"
with  "property."  "Good  wiU"  and  "trade  names"  have
been  recognized  as  property  only  within  the  last  century.
Not  until  the  last  few  decades  have  the  courts  gone  further
and  recognized  as  property  the  right  of  a  free  access  to  the
commodity  "market  and  to  the  labor  market.  Not  merely  are
contracts  already  made  treated  as  property,  but  also  the  right
to  be  unhindered  by  others  in  making  contracts.

It  is  this  right  "to  do  business"  which  is  of  greatest  im-
portance in  labor  disputes.  Strikers  may  attack  the  physical
property  of  employers;  but  the  poUce,  the  military,  and  the


96 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

criminal  laws  are  usually  adequate  to  deal  with  this  menace.
But  without  any  destruction  of  physical  property  the  em-
ployers  business  may  be  ruined.  Picketing  may  prevent  his
getting  new  employees,  and  boycotting  may  keep  him  from
selling  his  products.  While  the  modem  manufacturer  can
often  survive  the  destruction  of  his  physical  property,  ob-
struction of  access  to  the  labor  market  or  to  the  commodity
market  brings  with  it  certain  ruin.

The  recognition  of  "business"  as  "property"  afforded  an
easy  transition  to  the  use  of  injunctions  in  connection  with
labor  disputes.  But  it  is  to  prevent  strikes,  picketing,  and
boycotts  that  employers  chiefly  have  recourse  to  injunctions.
None  of  these,  however,  of  themselves  involve  injury  to
physical  property.  Hence,  in  the  complaint  in  injunction
cases  business  is  treated  as  property,  it  being  alleged  that
the  employer's  profits  will  be  seriously  impaired  unless
the  court  comes  to  his  aid.  It  is  the  fact  that  injunc-
tions protect  the  right  "to  do  business"  which  gives  them
importance.

Due  to  these  factors,  the  conspiracy  doctrine  assumed  new
meaning  in  the  'eighties.  It  became  once  more  a  serious
menace  to  collective  action  by  labor.  Within  the  last  two
decades  another  menace  has  arisen:  the  restraint  of  trade
doctrine,  as  expressed  in  the  Sherman  antitrust  act  of  1890.
This  statute  was  held  applicable  to  labor  early  in  the  'nine-
ties; but  not  until  the  Danbury  hatters'  case  in  1908 '  was
its  full  import  understood.  It  was  then  feared  that  the
Sherman  act  rendered  all  strikes  unlawful,  if  not  all  labor
organizations.  This  was  probably  beyond  the  thought  of  the
Supreme  Court;  but  the  decisions  of  some  district  courts
made  this  a  reasonable  fear.  Organized  labor  believes  that
the  Clajrton  act,  passed  in  1914,  has  placed  it  entirely  out-
side of  the  scope  of  the  antitrust  laws.  This  act  provides  that
the  antitrust  laws  shall  not  be  construed  to  forbid  the  exist-
ence of  labor  organizations,  nor  to  restrain  their  members
from  carrying  out  the  "legitimate  objects"  thereof.  During
the  debates  in  Congress  upon  its  passage,  this  provision  was
interpreted  as  merely  removing  the  menace  of  the  few  extreme


'  Loewe  v.  Lawlor,  28  Sup.  Ct.  301  (1908).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  97

decisions,  not  as  completely  exempting  la^r  from  the  anti-
trust laws.

However  that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  most  of  the  cases
of  which  labor  complains  have  been  premised,  not  upon  the
Sherman  act,  but  upon  the  common  law  doctrine  of  con-
spiracy. This  doctrine  makes  illegal  acts  done  in  pursuance
of  an  agreement  which  are  legal  when  done  by  one  person.
One  manner  of  explaining  this  result  is  that  when  men
combine  their  motives  become  of  importance.  Their  com-',
bination  is  legal  when  their  motive  is  primarily  to  benefiti'
themselves,  and  illegal  when  they  aim  primarily  at  thel
injury  of  another.  One  person  may  sever  all  business  re-
lations with  another,  if  not  under  contract  to  continue
them,  regardless  of  the  motives  which  may.  lead  him  to
take  this  step.  But  when  workingmen  combine  to  go  on
strike  or  to  boycott  an  employer,  the  courts  will  inquire
whether  their  primary  motive  is  injury  to  the  employer  or
benefit  to  themselves.

To  understand  the  full  import  of  the  conspiracy  doctrine,
it  is  necessary  to  note  two  of  its  corollaries.  One  is  the
proposition  that  where  the  purpose  of  the  combination  is
illegal  every  act  done  in  pursuance  thereof  is  rendered  illegal,  '
though  the  act  may  be  innocent  of  itself.  Acts  normally  pro-
tected by  the  constitutional  guarantees  of  free  speech,  free
press,  and  public  assembly,  become  unlawful  when  done  in
furtherance  of  an  imlawful  purpose.  As  put  by  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States :i  "No  conduct  has  such  absolute
privilege  as  to  justify  all  possible  schemes  of  which  it  may  be
a  part.  The  most  innocent  and  constitutionally  protected  of
acts  or  omissions  may  be  a  step  in  a  criminal  plot,  and  if  it  is
a  step  in  a  plot  neither  its  innocence  nor  the  constitution  is
sufficient  to  prevent  the  punishment  of  the  plot  by  law."  ^
Again,  if  an  illegal  plot  has  been  formed,  all  of  the  conspirators
are  responsible  for  the  acts  of  any  of  the  conspirators  done
in  pursuance  of  the  common  object.  Once  it  is  established  or
taken  for  granted  that  the  workingmen  have  conspired,  any
and  all  of  them  are  hable  for  acts  of  violence  which  may  be
committed  by  some  of  them.


'■  Aikens  v.  Wisconsin,  195  XJ.  S.  194  (1904).
7


9^- PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  soundness  of  the  doctrine  that  the  legality  of  a  com-
bination depends  upon  the  motives  which  actuate  it  has  been
often  questioned  in  recent  years.  It  is  most  difficult  to  de-
termine what  is  the  primary  motive  of  the  workingmen  in
undertaking  a  strike  or  a  boycott.  They  aim  both  to  injure
the  employer  and  to  benefit  themselves.  The  bias  of  the
judge  necessarily  plays  a  large  r61e  in  the  determination  of
which  of  these  is  the  controlling  motive.  The  doctrine  that
it  is  the  immediate  object  and  not  the  ultimate  purpose  which
is  controlling,  helps  but  little.  In  most  labor  disputes  many
questions  are  at  issue.  A  demand  for  the  closed  shop  may
be  coupled  with  the  demand  for  an  increase  in  wages.  The
latter  is  recognized  by  all  courts  to  be  legal,  while  the  former
is  held  iUegal  by  many  courts.  The  result  has  been  con-
fusion and  arbitrariness  in  the  law.  Where  one  judge  sees
only  a  lawful  combination,  another  discovers  an  unlawful
conspiracy.

The  fundamental  premise  in  the  conspiracy  doctrine  is
that  the  many  have  a  power  for  harm  which  no  one  person\
can  exercise.  Hence, "  while  in  the  class  of  acts  which  are'
involved  in  labor  disputes  the  motive  is  considered  unimpor-
tant when  they  are  done  by  one  person,  it  becomes  a  deter-
mining factor  when  they  are  done  in  pursuance  of  an  agree-
ment among  several.  But  in  American  law  the  corporation]
has  been  made  a  person.  This  makes  the  premise  of  the  con-
spiracy doctrine  an  absurdity.  The  power  of  the  large  cor-
poration, though  a  single  person  in  the  law,  is  greater  thail
that  of  the  combination  of  workingmen.

Considerations  such  as  these  have  led  some  courts  to
abandon  the  old  form  of  statement  of  the  conspiracy  doctrine.
They  start  with  the  proposition  that  the  employer  has  a  right
of  free  access  to  the  labor  market  and  to  the  commodity
market.  Intentional  interference  with  this  right  to  do  busi-
ness is  prima  facie  wrongful.  Only  when  the  injtay  done  to
the  employer  is  the  result  of  the  exercise  of  equ&It.pr  superior .
rights  by  the  workingmen  is  it  justified.  These  courts  dis-
tinguish between  malice  in  fact  and  malice  in  law.  Whether
personal  ill-wUl  and  spite,  malice  in  fact,  actuates  the  work-
ingmen, they  hold  to  be  of  no  importance.  Malice  in  law
determines  the  legality  of  their  actions ;  and  malice  in  law  is


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  99

merely  the  intentional  infliction  of  injury  wittiout  justifica-
tion. >

In  actual  application,  however,  malice  in  fact  is  an  impor-
tant factor  in  determining  whether  there  is  malice  in  law.
If  intentional  infliction  of  injury  without  justification  is  un-
lawful, everything  turns  upon  what  is  considered  a  sufficient
justification.  This  involves  an  evaluation  of  the  respective
rights  of  capital  and  labor.  The  employer  has  a  right  to  con-
duct his  business  without  interference.  The  non-unionist
has  a  right  to  earn  his  hving.  The  union  workman  has  a
right  to  work  or  not  to  work,  as  he  chooses.  Which  of  these
rights  is  to  prevail  when  the  union  workmen  go  upon  strike
to  compel  the  employer  to  discharge  the  non-unionist?  Com-
petition is  recognized  to  be  a  justification  for  interference  with
the  rights  of  others.  But  when  can  the  workingmen  be  said
to  compete  with  their  employers?  It  is  competition  when
the  workingmen  aim  primarily  to  benefit  themselves,  when
there  is  no  malice  in  fact.  Thus,  the  doctrine  that  intentional
injury  done  without  justification  is  unlawful  makes  the  motive
the  criterion  of  the  legality  of  the  acts  of  labor  combinations.
Though  it  differs  in  statement  from  the  older  conspiracy  doc-
trine, its  substance  is  the  same.  As  Dean  Lewis  has  put  it:
"Those  who  say  with  Justice  Wells  that  a  man  is  Uable  for
the  harm  he  does  if  he  does  it  maliciously,  meaning  by  malice
without  legal  excuse,  naturally  turn  to  the  defendant's  motive
as  at  least  one  of  the  elements  on  which  the  existence  of  a
'legal  excuse'  depends."  ^  Labor  has  profited  little  from
the  coming  in  of  the  "legal  excuse"  doctrine.  It  has  re-
phrased the  conspiracy  doctrine,  but  has  kept  its  spirit.

In  labor  cases  there  is  always  much  discussion  of  the  rights
of  the  respective  parties.  Thus,  it  is  said  that  employers
have  a  right  to  conduct  their  business  as  they  see  fit.  On
the  other  hand,  the  right  of  the  workingmen  to  quit  employ-
ment is  often  described  as  absolute.  These  abstract  state-
ments read  well;  but  the  trouble  is  that  in  labor  disputes


>  Doremus  v.  Hennessy,  176  111.  608  at  p.  615  (1898);  Berry  v.  Dona-
van,  188  Mass.  353,  74  N.  E.  603  (1905);  Barr  v.  Trades  Council,  53
N.J.  Eq.  loi  (1894).

«  Columbia  Law  Review,  February,  1905,  p.  118.  See  also  Trowbridge,
"  Leg^  Limitations  upon  Interference  with  the  Contract  Rights  of  a  Com-
petitor," in  Yale  Remew,  May,  J910,  pp.  SS-??.


100 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

these  rights  come  into  conflict.  This  clash  of  rights  has  led  the
courts  to  inquire  into  the  motives  which  actuate  the  working-
men.  To  justify  holding  against  labor  unions  recourse  has
been  had  to  the  theory  that  the  element  of  combination  radi-
cally changes  the  situation.  Where  the  court  holds  to  the
conspiracy  doctrine,  no  matter  how  it  may  be  expressed,  the
decision  is  apt  to  be  against  the  union.

There  are  a  large  number  of  cases,  however,  in  which  the
courts  have  held  that  the  fact  that  acts  are  done  in  pursuance
of  a  combination  does  not  affect  their  legality. ^  Other  cases
hold  that  a  bad  motive  cannot  render  illegal  acts  which  are
otherwise  lawful.^  Thus,  they  sweep  away  the  fotuidations
of  the  doctrine  of  conspiracy.  The  courts  of  California  have
gone  furthest  in  this  regard.  In  California  quitting  work  and
refusing  to  patronize  are  held  to  be  absolute  rights  of  the
workingmen,  and  the  fact  that  these  rights  are  exercised  in
pursuance  of  a  combination  is  treated  as  immaterial.'  The
only  limitation  upon  collective  action  is  that  labor  shall  not
resort  to  coercion  or  intimidation.  The  practical  conclusion
reached  in  California  is  that  all  strikes  and  all  boycotts  are
lawful.

Even  if  the  motive  of  the  workingmen  is  held  to  be  im-
material, there  is  wide  room  for  diversity  of  opinion  as  to
the  means  which  labor  may  employ  to  gain  its  ends.  There
is  agreement  that  coercion  and  intimidation  are  unlawful.
But  what  conduct  is  coercive  and  intimidating?  In  Cali-
fornia, pressure  brought  to  bear  upon  third  parties  through
sjnnpathetic  strikes  and  secondary  boycotts  is  treated  as
not  coercive.  On  the  other  hand,  picketing  is  held  to  be
necessarily  intimidating.*  In  other  jurisdictions  pressure  upon
third  parties,  other  than  that  resulting  from  persuasion,  is
treated  as  coercion,  while  picketing  is  often  considered  legal.
There  is  a  pronoimced  tendency  in  recent  cases  throughout
the  cotmtry  to  say  little  about  the  illegal  motives  of  the  work-


^  Cooke,  The  Law  of  Combinations,  Monopolies,  and  Labor  Unions,  1908,
p.  33  and  the  cases  tiiere  cited.

*  Ibid.,  p.  17  and  cases  cited.

s  Parkinson  Co.  v.  Building  Trades'  Council,  154  Cal.  581,  98  Pac.  1027
(1908);  Pierce  v.  Stablemen^s  Union,  156  Cal.  70,  103  Pac.  324  (1909).

•Pierce  v.  Stablemen's  Union,  156  Cal.  70,  103  Pac.  324  (1909).  E»
^rfc  Williams,  158  Cal.  550,  iii  Pac.  1035  (1910).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  loi

ingmen  and  to  find  the  illegality  of  their  conduct  in  the  iin-
lawful  means  they  employ.  This  may  seem  to  be  a  great
advance  for  organized  labor ;  but  the  gain  is  deceptive.  Prac-
tically it  makes  no  difference  whether  a  sjrmpathetic  strike
is  condemned  because  the  motive  of  the  workingmen  is  held
to  be  to  injure  the  employer,  or  because  it  amounts  to  an
effort  to  coerce  a  third  party.  "Coercion"  and  "intimida-
tion" are  so  vaguely  defined,  that  almost  any  conduct  can
be  considered  coercive  or  intimidating.

Thus,  there  are  three  theories  which  imderlie  most  of  the
cases  involving  collective  action  by  labor.  The  most  funda-
mental of  these  is  the  theory  that  when  men  combine  the
legality  of  their  acts  depends  upon  their  motives.  Another
holds  that  intentional  interference  with  the  rights  of  others
is  wrongful,  unless  it  results  from  the  exercise  of  equal  or
superior  rights.  The  third  theory  places  emphasis  upon  the
element  of  coercion  and  intimidation  involved  in  the  acts  of
combination.  In  thefr  manner  of  statement  these  theories
are  wide  apart;  but  their  practical  conclusions  have  been
much  the  same.  No  matter  which  theory  a  court  may  enter-
tain, there  is  great  latitude  in  its  application.  Under  each
theory  much  depends  upon  whether  the  demands  of  the  work-
ingmen are  justified  or  tmjustified.  Hence,  the  bias  of  the
judge  is  likely  to  be  determining.


(j)  Court  Decisions

a.  Strikes.  When  we  pass  from  the  abstract  theories  of  the
courts  to  their  practical  conclusions,  similar  diversity  of  state-
ment is  encountered.  In  part  this  is  due  to  real  differences
in  the  conclusions  reached.  In  different  states  the  rights  of
organized  labor  differ  widely.  Even  in  the  same  state  it  is
often  quite  impossible  to  reconcile  the  several  decisions.
Dissenting  opinions  are  very  common.  The  confusion  which
exists,  however,  is  due  not  only  to  real  differences  as  to  the
law,  but  also  to  the  use  of  common  terms  in  divergent  mean-
ings. Neither  the  term  "strike"  nor  the  term  "boycott"
has  a  standard  meaning  in  law.  Some  courts  speak  of  the
"strike"  as  involving  only  the  collective  quitting  of  work,


102 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Others  include  within  that  term  not  only  the  collective  quit-
ting, but  also  the  agreement  which  precedes  it.  Even  this
conception  is  too  narrow.  To  it  must  be  added  the  idea  that
the  quitting  is  but  temporary,  that  the  strikers  do  not  consider
that  they  have  permanently  quit,  but  that  they  expect  to
be  employed  again  on  different  terms,  through  coercion  of
their  employers.

As  to  the  term  "boycott"  it  has  been  truly  said  that
"scarcely  any  two  courts  treating  of  the  subject  formulate  the
same  definition."'  The  essential  idea  in  many  of  these
definitions  is  that  third  parties  are  illegally  coerced  to  sever
their  business  relations  with  the  employer  against  whom  the
union  is  waging  its  fight.  Thus,  it  was  said  in  one  case  that
"the  word  in  itself  impUes  a  threat." '  Similarly  Judge  Taft
defined  a  "boycott"  as  a  "combination  of  many  to  cause  a
loss  to  one  person  by  coercing  others,  against  their  will,  to
withdraw  from  him  their  beneficial  business  intercourse,
through  threats  that,  unless  those  others  do  so,  the  many
will  cause  similar  loss  to  them."  ^  Such  definitions  make  no
allowance  for  the  so-called  primary  boycott,  in  which  no
effort  to  coerce  third  parties  is  involved.  In  recent  years
boycotts  against  restaurants  have  been  more  frequent  than
any  other  boycotts,  but  they  would  not  fall  within  the  defini-
tion of  Judge  Taft.  On  the  other  hand,  sympathetic  strikes
and  strikes  against  the  use  of  non-union  material  are  by  this
definition  treated  as  "boycotts."  Trade  unionists  at  times
use  the  term  in  this  broad  sense,  but  more  commonly  only  in
reference  to  the  collective  refusal  to  buy  the  products  of  an
"utLfair"  manufacturer  or  merchant.  This  is  the  sense  in
which  this  term  wiU  be  used  in  this  chapter.

Upon  the  question  of  the  legality  of  trade  unions  per  se
there  is  general  agreement  among  the  courts.  In  only  two
cases  were  tmions  held  to  be  unlawful  organizations.  An
inferior  Ohio  court  in  1908  ordered  the  dissolution  of  the
Amalgamated  Window  Glass  Workers  of  America.* This

'  Lindsay  &  Co.  v.  Montana  Federation  of  Labor,  37  Mont.  264,  96
Pac.  127  (1908).

2  Brace  v.  Evans,  5  Pa.  Co.  Ct.  163,  at  p.  171  (1888).

'Toledo,  etc.,  Ry.  Co.  v.  Pennsylvania  Co.,  54  Fed.  730  (1893).

« Kealy  v.  Faulkner,  18  (Ohio)  Superior  and  Common  Pleas  Decision
498  (1908).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  103

action  was  taken  upon  the  theory  that  the  restrictive  rules
and,  practices  of  this  union  made  it  an  illeg?,!  combination  in
restraint  of  trade  at  common  law.  The  other  case  was  the
decision  of  United  States  Judge  Dayton  in  Hitchman  Coal
and  Coke  Co.  v.  Mitchell  in  19 12.1  Therein  it  was  held  that
the  United  Mine  Workers  of  America  is  an  illegal  organization
both  at  common  law  and  imder  the  Sherman  antitrust  act,
because  it  aims  at  a  monopoly  of  the  mine  labor  of  the  cotmtry
and  maintains  restrictive  rules.  The  United  States  Circuit
Court  of  Appeals,  however,  reversed  this  decision.^  Appeal
has  now  been  taken  by  the  Hitchman  Co.  to  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States.

With  the  exception  of  the  two  cases  noted  it  has  always
been  held  in  the  United  States  that  trade  unions  are  lawful
organizations.  The  theory,  entertained  in  England  before
187 1,  that  trade  unions  have  no  standing  in  court  because
they  are  illegal  combinations  in  restraint  of  trade,  never
gained  a  foothold  in  this  country.

But  while  the  legality  of  trade  unions  is  not  questioned,
there  have  been  serious  restrictions  upon  their  efEorts  to  make
themselves  effective.  The  strike,  the  most  essential  of  labor's
weapons,  has  often  been  condemned  as  illegal.  Much  con^
fusion  exists  as  to  the  legality  of  strikes,  due  principally  to  the
different  meanings  in  which  this  term  is  used.  Many  courts
hold  that  "striking,"  in  the  sense  of  collectively  quitting  work,
is  always  legal.  What  is  really  meant  is  that  quitting  work
caimot  be  directly  prevented.  The  thirteenth  amendment  has
forbidden  slavery  and  involtmtary  servitude.  The  specific
enforcement  of  labor  contracts  is  slavery.  Even  when  \mder
a  definite  time  contract,  workmen  may  not  be  compelled  to
labor  when  they  wish  to  quit.  But  an  action  would  still  lie
against  them  in  damages  for  the  breach  of  their  contract.
In  practice  but  few  workmen  labor  tmder  contracts  running
for  a  defimite  time.  Hence,  to  all  practical  intents  and  pur-
poses, quitting  work  is  always  lawful.  This  is  what  most
courts  mean  when  they  declare  that  it  is  lawful  to  strike  for
any  or  no  reason.

But  in  all  strikes  something  more  than  quitting  work  is


*  Hitchman  Coal  &  Coke  Co.  v.  Mitchell,  202  Fed.  512  (1912).

'  Mitchell  e(  al.  v.  Hitchman  Coal  &  Coke  Co.,  214  Fed.  685  (1914),


104 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

involved.  There  is  an  antecedent  agreement  to  quit,  tiiere
are  demands  upon  the  employer,  and  there  is  a  "threat"  that
unless  he  yields  a  strike  wiU  be  called.  The  element  of  com
bination  enters  into  the  strike.  Even  after  the  workmen  have
quit  they  still  act  in  concert.  It  is  the  entire  combination,
of  which  the  quitting  work  is  but  a  part,  which  constitutes
the  strike.

The  strike  in  this  sense  is  not  always  legal.  The  rule  most
generally  applied  is  that  when  the  purpose  of  the  strikers  is
primarily  to  injure  the  employer  or  non-union  workmen  the
strike  is  illegal.  The  Massachusetts  Supreme  Court  has  best
stated  this  rvtle:^  "To  justify  interference  with  the  rights  of
others  the  strikers  must  in  good  faith  strike  for  a  purpose
which  the  court  decides  to  be  a  legal  justification  for  such  in-
terference. ...  A  strike  is  not  a  strike  for  a  legal  purpose  be-
cause the  strikers  struck  in  good  faith  for  a  purpose  which
they  thought  was  a  sufficient  justification  for  a  strike.  As
we  have  said  already,  to  make  a  strike  a  legal  strike  the  pur-
pose of  the  strike  must  be  one  which  the  court  as  a  matter  of
law  decides  is  a  legal  purpose  of  a  strike,  and  the  strikers  must
have  acted  in  good  faith  in  striking  for  such  a  purpose."  In
other  cases  the  fact  that  the  strikers  aim  to  "coerce"  the
employer  and  "threaten"  him  with  loss  unless  he  complies
with  their  demands  is  emphasized.

The  result  of  the  application  of  these  doctrines  has  been
that  strikes  have  often  been  condemned  as  unlawful.  The
Massachusetts  cases  are  the  most  extreme  in  this  respect.
They  hold  vmlawful  all  strikes  to  procure  the  discharge  of
non-union  workmen  or  of  the  members  of  a  rival  imion.^
They  condemn  also  strikes  to  procure  the  removal  of  objec-
tionable foremen,  and  all  sympathetic  strikes.*  The  Massa-
chusetts cases  even  hold  that  though  the  strike  is  one  for
higher  wages  the  members  of  the  union  may  not  be  coerced

'De  Minico  v.  Craig,  207  Mass.  593,  94  N.  E.  317  (191 1).

"Plant  V.  Woods,  176  Mass.  492  (1900);  Berry  v.  Dona  van,  188  Mass.
353.  74  N.  E.  603  (1905);  Alberthaw  Construction  Co.  v.  Cameron,  194
Mass.  208,  80  N.  E.  478  (1907);  Reynolds  v.  Davis,  198  Mass.  294,  84
N.  E.  457  (1908);  Folsom  v.  Lewis,  208  Mass.  336,  94  N.  E.  316  (191 1).
Slightly  contrary,  Pickett  v.  Walsh,  192  Mass.  572  (1906).

=  De  Minico  v.  Craig,  207  Mass.  593,  94  N.  E.  317;  Hanson  ».  Innis,
211  Mass.  301,  97  N.  E.  756  (1912);  Reynolds  v,  Davis,  198  Mass.  294,
^  N.  E.  ^57  (1908),


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  log

to  participate  therein  through  threat  of  a  fine  or  of  expulsion
from  the  union.'  In  Connecticut  and  in  Vermont  strikes
agamst  non-unionists  have  been  condemned.'*^^  Closed  shop
strikes  have  been  held  unlawful  also  in  New  Jersey,  as  have
strikes  against  the  use  of  non-imion  material.'  In  Penn-
sylvania there  is  a  statute  which  reads  to  a  layman  as  though
it  legalized  all  strikes.  Yet  the  courts  of  that  state  have
held  unlawftd  strikes  growing  out  of  jurisdictional  disputes,
closed  shop  strikes,  and  strikes  against  non-imion  material.*-
In  Illinois  the  question  of  the  legaHty  of  a  strike  for  the  closed
shop  has  been  several  times  before  the  supreme  coiut.  In
1905  such  a  strike  was  held  to  be  unlawful;  in  19 12  the  court
spUt  evenly  upon  this  question.'--.  New  York  has  a  statute
legalizing  "peaceable  assembling  or  cooperation"  by  work-
ingmen  "for  the  purpose  of  securing  an  advance  in  the  rate
of  wages."  Elsewhere  such  strikes  are  held  lawful,  even
without  any  such  statute.  Strikes  for  many  purposes  have
been  condemned  by  the  New  York  courts.  The  court  of
appeals  has  held  unlawful  strikes  to  collect  fines  from  em-
ployers.*^ Inferior  courts  have  condemned  strikes  against  non-
union material.'  Some  New  York  cases  also  hold  sympathetic
strikes  to  be  unlawful.* The  question  of  the  legality  of  strikes


•Willicut  &  Sons  Co.  v.  Bricklayers' Benevolent  and  Protective  Union,
200  Mass.  no,  85  N.  E.  897  (1908);  Casson  v.  Mcintosh,  199  Mass.
443  (1908).

^Wyeman  v.  Deady,  79  Conn.  414  (1906);  Conners  v.  Connolly,  86
Conn.  641,  86  Atl.  600  (1913); State  v.  Dyer,  67  Vt.  790  (1894).

2  Booth  V.  Burgess,  72  N.  J.  Equity  181,  65  Atl.  226  (1906);  Brennan
V.  United  Hatters,  73  N.  J.  467,  65  Atl.  165  (1906);  Blanchard  v.  District
Coundl,  78  N.  J.  737,  71  Atl.  1131  (1909);  Ruddy  v.  Plumbers,  79  N.  J.
467,  75  Atl.  742  (1910).  , . .

*Erdman  v.  Mitchell,  207  Pa.  79,  56  Atl.  327  (1903);  House  Painters
».  Feeney,  13  Pa.  Dist.  335  (1904);  Bausbach  v.  Rieff,  237  Pa.  A82,  85
Atl.  762  (1912);  Patterson  v.  Trades'  Council,  11  Pa.  Dist.  500  (1902);
Purvis  V.  Carpenters,  214  Pa.  348,  63  Atl.  585  (1906).

'  O'Brien  v.  People,  216  111.  354,  75  N.  E.  108  (1905);  Kemp  v.  Division
No.  241,  Amal.  Association  of  Street  and  Electric  Ry.  Employees,  255
111.  213,  09  N.  E.  389  (1912).

'People  V.  Barondess,  133  N.  Y.  649  (1892).  See  also  People. ».  Wein-
sheimer,  102  N.  Y.  Supp.  579  (1907).

'  People  V.  McParlin,  89  N.  Y.  Supp.  527  (1904) ;  Newton  Co.  v.  Erick-
son,  126  N.  Y.  Supp.  949  (191 1).

8  Beattie  ».  Callanan,  73  N.  Y.  Supp.  518,  81  N.  Y.  Supp.  413  (1901-03);
Schlang  v.  Ladies'  Waist  Makers,  124  N.  Y.Supp.  289  (1910).  Contrary,
Searle  Mfg.  Co.  ».  Terry,  106  N.  Y.  Supp.  438  (1905).


io6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

for  the  closed  shop  has  often  come  up  in  New  York.  The  de-
cisions of  the  court  of  appeals  upon  this  issue  are  very  difficult
to  reconcile.  In  the  Curran  v.  Galen  case  in  J897 '  a  non-
union workman  who  lost  his  job  because  his  employer  entered
into  a  closed  shop  agreement  was  held  to  have  an  action
against  the  union.  In  the  Ctunming  case  in  1902  ^  the  ma-
jority of  the  court  squarely  sustained  a  strike  to  establish  a
closed  shop.  In  the  Jacobs  v.  Cohen  case  in  1905,^  however,
an  effort  was  made  to  reconcile  the  two  prior  decisions  and  to
consider  them  both  as  law.  The  doctrine  evolved  seems  to  be
that  the  closed  shop  is  lawful  as  long  as  it  does  not  give  the
union  a  monopoly  in  the  community  in  which  it  operates.

Enough  cases  have  been  cited  to  illustrate  the  attitude  of
the  courts  toward  strikes.  Strikes  solely  and  directly  involv-
ing the  rate  of  pay  or  the  hours  of  labor  are  everjnvhere  con-
sidered legal.  But  strikes  to  gain  a  closed  shop,  sympathetic
strikes,  and  strikes  against  non-union  material  have  been  con-
demned in  many  jurisdictions.  Only  in  California  is  it  settled
law  that  all  strikes  are  legal.

b.  Boycotts.  But  because  strikes  are  illegal  it  does  not
follow  that  there  is  any  effective  way  of  preventing  them.
Arthur  V.  Oakes  *  authoritatively  established  that  laborers
may  under  no  circumstance  be  enjoined  from  quitting  work.
In  some  injunctions,  however,  "conspiring  to  quit"  has  been
enjoined.  In  others  the  union  officers  have  been  prohibited
from  advising  or  ordering  the  workmen  to  go  upon  strike,  or
from  pajring  strike  benefits.  In  some  recent  cases  such  in-
JTonctions  have  been  condemned  as  an  indirect  method  of
compelling  the  workmen  to  labor.^  Usually  injunctions  are
not  taken  out  tmtil  after  the  workmen  have  quit.  Almost
never  have  the  courts  acted  upon  the  theory  that,  inasmuch
as  the  strike  is  unlawful,  all  efforts  of  the  workingmen  to

'  Curran  v.  Galen,  152  N.  Y.  33,  46  N.  E.  297  (1897).

2  National  Protective  Association  of  Stearnfitters  and  Helpers  v.
Gumming,  170  N.  Y.  315,  63  N.  E.  369  (1902).

'Jacobs  V.  Cohen,  183  N.  Y.  207,  76  N.  E.  5  (1905).

*  Arthur  v.  Oakes,  63  Fed.  310  (1894).

'  Thomas  t.  Cincinnati,  etc.,  Ry.  Co.,  62  Fed.  803,  817  (1894);  Wabash
R.R.  V.  Hannahan,  121  Fed.  563  (1903);  Barnes  v.  Berry,  157  Fed.  883
(1908);  Delaware,  etc.,  R.R.  Co.  v.  Switchmen,  158  Fed.  541  (1908);
Kemp  V.  Div.  No.  241  Amalgamated  Association  of  Street  and  Electric
Railway  Employees,  255  lU.  213,  99  N.  E.  389  (1912).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  107

make  it  effective  must  be  prevented.  Whether  the  strike
is  considered  lawful  or  unlawful  by  the  courts  makes  little
difEerens'ie  either  in  the  phraseology  of  the  injunction  or  in  its
enforcement.  In  reference  to  damage  suits  the  situation  is
djrferent.  Most  of  the  cases  in  which  closed  shop  strikes
have  been  condemned  grew  out  of  actions  for  damages  brought
by  non-union  workmen  who  had  lost  their  jobs  because  of
such  strikes.  The  suits  were  premised  upon  the  illegality  of
the  strikes,  not  upon  the  unlawful  conduct  which  may  have
accompanied  them.

The  boycott  was  condemned  as  imlawful  as  early  as  1886.'
Many  decisions  have  since  confirmed  this  view.  As  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  has  said,  the  courts  are
nearly  unanimous  in  condemning  boycotting  as  wrongful.''
In  a  few  states  it  is  specifically  prohibited  by  statute.'  The
reasoiung  relied  upon  in  condemning  the  boycott  has  gen-
erally been  that  it  amounts  to  an  effort  to  "coerce"  third
parties.  Hence  it  falls  within  the  category  of  conspiracies.
In  some  cases  an  effort  is  made  to  distinguish  the  primary
boycott  from  the  secondary  boycott,  the  latter  being  the
boycott  of  a  third  party,  usually  a  merchant  who  sells  the
product  of  the  employer  primarily  boycotted.  Many  courts
in  fact  use  the  term  "boycott"  as  embracing  only  secondary
boycotts.  But  this  distinction  in  practice  amounts  to  httle.
Few  employers  of  labor  sell  directly  to  the  consumers.  Hence,
there  can  be  but  few  primary  boycotts.  To  boycott  a  manu-
facturer pressure  must  usually  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the
dealers  who  handle  his  products.  This  introduces  the  third
party  and  the  element  of  the  secondary  boycott.  It  is  sig-
nificant that  all  of  the  statements  holding  primary  boycotts
legal  are  obiter  and  occur  in  cases  in  which  the  courts  found
an  illegal  secondary  boycott.

In California  boycotting  has  been held  to be  lawful.^


'  People  V.  Wazig,  4  N.  Y.  Crim.  403  (1886);  People  v.  Kostka,  4  N.  Y.
Crim,  429  (1886).

'  Loewe  v.  Lawlor,  208  U.  S.  274  (1908),

'  See  Harry  W.  Laidler,  Boycotts  and  the  Labor  Struggle,  1913,  pp.  174-
177.

*  Parkinson  Co.  ».  Building  Trades'  Council,  154  Cal.  581,  98  Pac.
1027  (1908);  Pierce  v.  Stablemen's  Union,  156  Cal.  70,  103  Pac.  324
(1909).


io8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Though  its  supreme  court  has  not  spoken,  this  seems  to  be
the  view  also  in  Oklalionia.'  Some  New  York  cases  also  have
sustained  the  boycott.^  Both  in  Missouri  and  in  Mo:itana  it
has  been  held  that  the  constitutional  guarantees  of  free  speech
and  free  press  give  laboring  men  the  right  to  refer  to  em-
ployers as  tmfair.'  Later  decisions  in  both  states,  however,
have  made  clear  that  this  does  not  mean  that  boycotting  is
legal,  but  only  that  the  printing  and  the  distribution  of  boy-
cott circulars  may  not  be  directly  enjoined.*

Though  boycotting  has  for  a  long  time  been  held  illegal
in  most  jurisdictions,  it  is  only  in  recent  years  that  organized
labor  has  taken  alarm  at  these  decisions.  Until  1908  boy-
cotts were  conducted  openly  and  fearlessly.  Sometimes  in-
junctions were  taken  out  against  boycotts,  but  they  only
increased  their  effectiveness,  through  giving  them  wider  pub-
licity. The  Danbury  hatters'  case  in  1908  ^  first  brought
home  to  labor  that  damages  might  be  collected  for  losses
sustained  through  boycotts.  The  American  Federation  of
Labor  at  once  discontinued  its  "We  Don't  Patronize"  list.
In  general,  fewer  boycotts  were  thereafter  undertaken  and
they  were  conducted  much  less  openly.  There  are  still
numerous  local  boycotts  and  some  conducted  upon  a  nation-
wide scale;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  attitude  of
the  cotorts  toward  the  boycott  seriously  restricts  labor's  use
of  this  collective  weapon.

c.  Picketing.  Strikes  cannot  be  effective  when  the  em-
ployer is  able  to  secure  a  sufficient  number  of  new  employees.
Hence  the  strikers  endeavor  to  prevent  the  employer  from
getting  them. They  may  do  this  either  through  persuasion


*  Laidler,  Boycotts  and  the  Labor  Struggle,  p.  414.

=  Sinsheimer  v.  Garment  Workers,  28  N.  Y.  Supp.  321  (1894) ;  People  v.
Radt,  71  N.  Y.  Supp.  846  (1900);  Cohen  v.  Garment  Workers,  72  N.  Y.
Supp.  341  (1901);  Foster  v.  Retail  Clerks,  78  N.  Y.  Supp.  860  (1902);
Butterick  Pub.  Co.  v.  Typographical  Union,  100  N.  Y.  Supp.  292  (1906).
To  contrary,  Matthews  v.  Shankland,  56  N.  Y.  Supp.  123  (1898);  Sun
Print.  &  Pub.  Co.  v.  Delaney,  62  N.  Y.  Supp.  750  (1900);  Mills  v.  U.  S.
Print.  Co.,  91  N.  Y.  Supp.  185  (1904).

'Jeans  Clothing  Co.  v.  Watson,  168  Mo.  133  (1902);  Lindsay  &  Co-  v.
Montana  Fed.  of  Labor,  37  Mont.  264  (1908).

<Lohse  Patent  Door  Co.  v.  Fuelle,  215  Mo.  421  (1908);  Iverson  v.
Dilno,  44  Mont.  270  (1911).

'  Loewe  v.  Lawlor,  208  U.  S.  274  (1908).


COLLECTIVE  BARCAlNmC  top

or  through  intimidation.  All  are  agreed  that  intimidation
is  unlawftil.  Persuasion,  on  the  other  hand,  is  generally  law-
ful. An  exception  must  be  made  when  the  employees  per-
suaded to  leave  work  are  under  definite  unexpired  contracts.
It  is  a  rule  of  the  common  law  that  action  lies  against  a  third
person  who  persuades  another  to  break  a  contract.  This  rule
has  quite  often  been  invoked  in  labor  cases  in  this  country.'
In  some  cases  this  rule  has  been  stretched  to  apply  to  the
persuasion  to  quit  employment  of  workmen  not  under  definite
contracts.^  The  theory  is  that  they  would  have  continued  at
work  but  for  the  interference  of  the  third  parties.  The  New
Jersey  courts  have  most  frequently  condemned  persuasion,
upon  this  theory,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  in  that  state
there  is  a  statute  declaring  it  to  be  legal  singly  or  collectively
to  persuade  another  to  work  or  abstain  from  working.^

The  more  generally  accepted  view  is  that  if  there  are  no
definite  contracts  the  strikers  may  persuade  the  new  employees
to  join  them.  They  naay  employ  persuasion,  but  must  not
resort  to  intimidation.  But  there  is  no  distinct  dividing  line
between  persuasion  and  intimidation.  In  strikes,  and  often
also  in  boycotts,  the  union  stations  pickets  near  the  employer's
premises  to  observe  and  speak  to  prospective  employees  or
customers.  Does  the  establishment  of  such  a  picket  line  of
itself  amount  to  intimidation?  One  view  was  forcibly  ex-
pressed by  United  States  Judge  McPherson:*  "There  is  and
can  be  no  such  thing  as  peaceful  picketing,  any  more  than
there  can  be  chaste  vulgarity,  or  peaceful  mobbing,  or  lawful
lynching.  When  men  want  to  converse  or  persuade,  they  do
not  organize  a  picket  line.  .  .  .  The  argument  seems  to  be  that
anything  short  of  physical  violence  is  lawful.  .  .  .  But  the


*  Haskins  v.  Royster,  70  N.  C.  601  (1874);  Bixley  v.  Dunlap,  56  N.  H.
456  (1876);  Beekman  v.  Marsters,  195  Mass.  205  (1907);  Flaccus  v.
Smith,  199  Pa.  128,  48  Atl.  894  (1901);  Employing  Printers'  Club  v.
Doctor  Blosser  Co.,  122  Ga.  509,  50  S.  E.  353  (1905);  Hitchman  Coal  &
Coke  Co.  V.  Mitchell,  202  Fed.  512  (1912).

2  Walker  v.  Cronin,  107  Mass.  555  (1871);  O'Neil  ».  Behanna,  182  Pa.
2361  37  Atl.  843  (1897);  Frank  v.  Herold,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  443,  52  Atl.  152
(1901);  George  Jonas  Glass  Co.  ti.  Glass  Bottle  Blowers,  77  N.  J.  Eq.
219,  79  Atl.  262  (1911);  Southern  R.R.  Co.  v.  Machinists,  ill  Fed.  49
(1901) ;  Machine  Co.  v.  Robinson,  84  N.  Y.  Supp.  837  (1903).

'  New  Jersey,  act  of  February  14,  1883.

•Atchison,  T.  &  S.  P.  Ry.  v.  Gee,  139  Fed.  582  (1905).


no PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

peaceful,  law-abiding  man  can  be  and  is  intimidated  by  gesticu-
lations, by  menaces,  by  being  called  harsh  names,  and  by  being
followed,  or  compelled  to  pass  by  men  known  to  be  unfriendly.
.  .  .  The  frail  man,  or  the  man  who  shuns  disturbances,  or  the
timid  man,  must  be  protected,  and  the  company  has  the  right
to  employ  such."

This  view,  that  picketing  always  amounts  to  intimidation,
has  been  adopted  also  by  the  coitrts  of  California.^  Though
they  recognize  the  strike  and  the  boycott  as  legal,  they  will
not  permit  picketing  in  furtherance  of  either.  In  a  Massa-
chusetts case  the  presence  of  two  pickets  at  a  factory  entrance
was  held  to  be  intimidating.^  Colorado  and  Washington  have
statutes  forbidding  picketing.'  AU  picketing  has  been  con-
demned also  by  the  supreme  courts  of  Illinois,  Michigan,  and
New  Jersey  and  in  several  federal  cases.*

There  are  even  more  cases  which  hold  that  peaceful  picket-
ing is  lawful.  There  have  been  definite  expressions  to  this
effect  from  the  supreme  courts  of  Indiana,  Missouri,  and  Vir-
ginia; and  it  is  well-established  law  in  New  York.^  But  this
still  leaves  open  the  question,  when  is  picketing  peaceful?  In
answer  to  this  question  a  federal  court  said:^  "The  defend-
ants claim  to  have  the  belief  that  physical  violence  alone  is
to  be  condemned.  But  all  persons  know  that  intimidation
by  words,  by  menaces,  by  numbers,  by  position,  and  by  many


'Pierce  ».  Stablemen's  Union,  156  Cal.  70,  103  ;Pac.  324  (1909).  Ex
^arte  Williams,  158  Cal.  550,  iii  Pac.  1035  (1910)1; ^

2  Vegelahn  v.  Gunther,  167  Mass.  92  (1896). '■"  "

'Colorado,  Laws  1905,  p.  161;  Washington,  Laws,  1915,  C.  181.

*  Franklin  v.  People,  220  111.  355  (1906);  Barnes  v.  Typographical
Union,  232  111.  402,  424  (1908);  Beck  v.  Railway  Teamsters,  118  Mich.
497.  77  N.  W.  13  (1898);  Ideal  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Ludwig,  149  Mich.  133,  112
N.  W.  723  (1907);  George  Jonas  Glass  Co.  v.  Glass  Bottle  Blowers,  72
N.J.  Eq.  653,  66  Atl.  953  (1907),  77  N.  J.  Eq.  219,  79  AtL  262  (1911);
Otis  Steel  Co.  v.  Molders,  no  Fed.  698  (1901);  Knudsen  v.  Benn,  123
Fed.  636  (1903); KoUey  v.  Robinson,  187  Fed.  415  (1911).

'Karges  Furniture  Co.  v.  Woodworkers,  165  Ind.  421,  75  N.  E.  877
(1905);  City  of  St.  Louis  v.  Gloner,  210  Mo.  502,  109  S.  W.  30  (1908);
Everett  Waddey  Co.  v.  Typographical  Union,  105  Va.  188,  53  S.  E.  272
(1906);  Krebsa.  Rosenstein,  66  N.  Y.  Supp.  42  (1900);  Rogers  v.  Evarts,
17  N.  Y.  Supp.  264  (1891);  Foster  v.  Retail  Clerks,  78  N.  Y.  Supp.  860
(1902);  Mills  V.  U.  S.  Printing  Co.,  91  N.  Y.  Supp.  185  (1904);  Searie
Mfg.  Co.  II.  Terry,  106  N.  Y.  Supp.  438  (1905);  Butterick  Pub.  Co.  v>
Typographical  Union,  100  N.  Y.  Supp.  292  (1906).

'  Union  Pacific  R.R.  Co.  v.  Ruef,  120  Fed.  102  (1903).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  iii

other  things  is  just  as  effective  as  by  using  clubs  or  brass
knuckles  or  knives."

It  is  the  manner  in  which  the  picketing  is  conducted  which
determines  its  legality.  VeUed  threats  toward  the  new  em-
ployees are  condemned  just  as  strongly  as  are  acts  of  physical
violence.  Many  courts  have  held  that  if  the  number  of  the
pickets  is  large,  the  picketing  is  necessarily  intimidating.''
Others  have  gone  so  far  as  to  assert  that  speaking  to  the  new
employees  against  their  will  is  intimidation.'  Often  the  pay-
ment of  union  benefits  to  induce  the  new  employees  to  join
the  strikers  has  been  prohibited  in  injunctions;  and  there  are
a  few  decisions  sustaining  such  prohibitions.*  In  most  cases
involving  picketing  which  come  before  the  courts  the  evidence
is  contradictory.  On  behalf  of  the  strikers  testimony  is  pre-
sented that  the  picketing  has  been  conducted  in  an  orderly
manner,  and  that  there  have  been  no  threats  or  acts  of  vio-
lence. The  employers  in  their  turn  allege  that  force,  threats,
and  violence  have  been  resorted  to,  and  often  they  are  able
to  point  to  specific  acts  of  this  character.  Usually,  however,
the  evidence  leaves  doubt  as  to  the  responsibility  of  the  union
for  the  acts  of  violence  which  have  occurred.  Such  respon-
sibility is  asstmied  in  many  cases.  There  are  few  standards
which  the  courts  may  employ  to  determine  whether  picketing
has  in  fact  been  peaceful  or  intimidating.  Hence,  again,  their
bias  is  often  determining,  and  the  decisions  have  more  fre-
quently gone  against  organized  labor  than  in  its  favor.

Strikes,  boycotts,  and  picketing  have  often  been  held  il-
legal. These  are  the  weapons  through  which  labor  secures
and  maintains  collective  bargains  with  employers. Collective

'American  Steel  &  Wire  Co.  v.  Wire  Drawers,  90  Fed.  608  (1898);
Union  Pacific  R.R.  Co.  v.  Ruef,  120  Fed.  102  (1903);  Pope  Motor  Car
Co.  V.  Keegan,  150  Fed.  148  (1906);  Allis-Chalmers  Co.  v.  Iron  Holders,
150  Fed.  155  (1906);  Foster  v.  Retail  Clerks,  78  N.  Y.  Supp.  860  (1902);
Searle  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Terry,  106  N.  Y.  Supp.  438  (1905);  O'Neill).  Behanna,
182  Pa.  236,  37  Atl.  843  (1897);  Jones  v.  Van  Winkle,  131  Ga.  336,  62
S.  E.  236  (1908).

^  Frank  v.  Herold,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  443,  52  Atl.  152  (1901);  Jersey  Printing
Co.  V.  Cassidy,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  759,  53  Atl.  230  (1902) ;  Goldfield  Mines  Co.
V.  Miners'  Union,  159  Fed.  500  (1908).

^Jersey  City  Printing  Co.  v.  Cassidy,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  759,  53  Atl.  230
(1902);  Tunstall  v.  Steans  Coal  Co.,  195  Fed.  808  (1911).  To  con-
trary. Levy  V.  Rosenstein,  66  N.  Y.  Supp.  101  (1900);  Everett- Waddey
Co.  ir.  Typographical  Union,  105  Va,  188,  53  S.  E.  272  (1906),


112 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

agreements  are  worthless  without  a  strong  union  to  back  them
up.  They  are  not  enforceable  in  courts  of  law.  The  unwill-
ing employer  is  kept  from  violating  them  only  through  fear
of  a  strike.  Real  collective  bargaining  implies  equal  strength
upon  both  sides."  It  fesijlts  only  when  each  side  is  aware  of
the  strength,  ability,  and  willingness  of  the  other.  Then  a
joint  conference  is  held  and  a  compromise  is  effected.  Neither
will  violate  the  agreement  while  the  other  party  maintains
its  strength.  Thus,  it  wHl  be  seen  that  restrictions  upon  the
weapons  which  labor  may  employ  in  trade  disputes  are  in
fact  limitations  of  its  right  to  bargain  collectively.


(4)  Restrictions  on  Employers  and  Employees

The  Clayton  act  of  1914^  many  believe  has  removed  the
restrictions  which  hamper  trade  unions.  The  most  tangible
gain  to  labor  is  the  provision  for  jury  trial  in  contempt  cases
where  the  ofEense  charged  is  also  indictable  as  a  crime.  This
act  further  provides  that  injunctions  issued  by  the  federal
courts  shall  not  prohibit  the  quitting  of  work,  the  refusal  to
patronize,  peaceful  picketing,  or  peaceful  persuasion.  Nor
are  these  acts  to  be  considered  "violations  of  any  law  of  the
United  States."  These  provisions  are  to  apply  whether  these
acts  are  done  "singly  or  in  concert."  Yet  those  in  charge  of
this  legislation  pointed  out  that  it  did  not  modify  the  law  of
conspiracy.  When  worldngmen  combine  to  injure  an  em-
ployer or  non-imionists,  their  illegal  purpose  colors  all  their
conduct.  Quitting  work,  for  instance,  though  ordinarily
lawful  whether  done  "singly  or  in  concert,"  becomes  unlawful
when  imdertaken  in  pursuance  of  an  tmlawful  conspiracy.
Hence,  the  Clayton  act  seems  to  make  no  material  modifica-
tions in  the  substantive  rights  of  employers  and  employees.
Certainly  it  does  not  affect  cases  in  the  state  courts,  which
far  outnumber  those  in  the  federal  courts.

Do  similar  restrictions  apply  to  employers?  In  theory,
yes,  in  practice,  no.  While  the  workingmen's  right  to  strike
is  restricted,  the  employers'  right  to  discharge  is  absplut^:


?  United  Stages,  Laws  1913-1914,  C.  321,


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  113

In  the  last  decades  many  states  have  enacted  statutes  pro-
hibiting employers  from  coercing  workmen  into  surrendering
their  right  to  belong  to  labor  unions  through  threatening
them  with  discharge  unless  they  comply  with  this  demand.
These  statutes  have  uniformly  been  held  unconstitutional,  and
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States  is  among  the  courts
holding  this  view.^  This  means  that  the  employer  may  es-
tablish a  shop  closed  to  all  union  workmen.  Some  recent
cases  even  hold  that  where  workmen  have  signed  an  agree-
ment to  the  effect  that  they  wiU  not  belong  to  any  imion,  all
efforts  made  thereafter  to  induce  them  to  join  a  union  are  il-
legal.^ With  these  decisions  must  be  contrasted  those  relat-
ing to  the  establishment  of  a  closed  shop  through  the  effort  of
the  union.  It  is  true  that  it  has  often  been  stated  that  there
is  nothing  unlawful  about  an  agreement  that  only  union  men
shall  be  employed,  if  the  employer  voltmtarily  enters  into  such
an  arrangement.  The  hub  of  the  situation  is  that  such  con-
tracts are  usually  not  entered  into  voluntarily,  but  are  gained
through  strikes.  As  has  been  noted,  such  strikes  have  often
been  condemned  as  an  effort  to  injure  non-unionists,  or  as
amounting  to  coercion.  Yet  the  Supreme  Cotirt  has  held
that  it  is  not  "coercion"  to  threaten  to  discharge  a  workman
unless  he  will  renounce  his  tinion  membership.'

The  theory  of  the  absolute  right  of  the  employer  to  dis-
charge results  also  in  the  virtual  legalization  of  the  blacklist.  /
Most  of  the  states  of  the  union  have  laws  prohibiting  black-
listing; but  they  have  been  dead  letters.  The  explanation
lies  in  the  fact  that  employers  may  discharge  or  refuse  to
employ  any  workman  who  is  an  "agitator"  or  who  belongs  to
a  union.  Antiblacklist  laws  which  merely  prohibit  the  circu-
lation of  information  as  to  who  are  union  members  are  prob-
ably constitutional,  although  one  federal  decision  does  not
even  grant  that  much.* He  who  circulates  this  information

•Adair  v.  United  States,  208  U.  S.  161  (1908);  Coppage  v.  Kansas,
35  Sup.  Ct.  240  (1915)-

^Flaccus  V.  Smith,  199  Pa.  128,  48  Atl.  894  (1901);  Hitchman  Coal
&  Coke  Co.  0.  Mitchell,  202  Fed.  512  (1912.  Overruled  in'214  Fed.  685,
but  further  appeal  taken  to  the  Supreme  Court).  This  is  also  the  basis
of  the  injunction  involved  in  the  case  of  Bittner  v.  Coal  Co.,  214  Fed.
716  (1914).

3  Coppage  V.  Kansas,  35  Sup.  Ct.  240  (1915).

*  Boyer  v.  Western  Unjon,  i2<^  Fed.  246  (1903),


114 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

may  be  punished;  but  the  employer  who  acts  upon  it  is  entirely
within  his  rights.  His  reasons  for  refusing  to  employ  or  for
discharging  cannot  be  questioned  in  any  court.  In  this  day
of  the  telephone,  the  telegraph,  water-marked  paper,  and  the
card  system,  it  is  well-nigh  impossible  to  prove  who  furnished
the  information  upon  which  a  blacklisted  workman  was  dis-
charged. Moreover,  the  supplying  of  such  information  by  a
former  employer  upon  the  request  of  the  present  employer
is  regarded  as  privileged.  It  is  expressly  declared  legal  in
the  antiblacklist  laws  of  many  states.  This  is  the  simplest
and  most  common  manner  in  which  an  employer  secures  in-
formation about  the  "records"  of  his  employees.  A  work-
man discharged  for  "union  activity"  as  a  result  of  informa-
tion secured  in  this  manner  has  no  redress  against  either  his
employer  or  his  former  employer.  If  the  information  wag
supplied  by  an  employers'  association  or  furnished  gratuitous-
ly by  the  former  employer,  the  blacklisted  workman  cannot
recover  imless  he  proves  who  furnished  the  information  and
that  he  was  discharged  as  a  result  thereof.  He  cannot  es-
tablish either  proposition  unless  the  employer  who  discharged
him  is  in  sjrmpathy  with  him.^  This  is  not  the  case  where
the  reason  for  the  discharge  was  membership  in  a  labor  union.
To  all  intents  and  purposes  blacklisting  is  legal  throughout
the  United  States.

That  the  blacklist  is  a  powerfxd  weapon  in  combating  labor
organizations  cannot  be  questioned.  To  offset  its  effects
unions  have  often  adopted  the  policy  of  giving  employment
as  organizers  to  members  who  have  been  blacklisted.  Nor
is  there  any  doubt  that  this  weapon  is  extensively  used.  There
is  no  industrial  center  in  which  there  are  not  scores  who  claim
to  have  been  blacklisted.  The  boycott  in  many  respects  is
the  counterpart  of  the  blacklist;  but  while  blacklisting  is  prac-
tically tmrestricted  by  the  laws  and  the  courts,  labor's  u^e
of  the  boycott  is  very  seriously  interfered  with.

In  theory  the  same  principles  are  applied  in  reference  to
the  activities  of  employers  as  to  those  of  labor.  The  absolute
right  of  employers  to  discharge  is  stated  to  be  paralleled  by

'  This  explains  why  workmen  who  were  discharged  upon  the  dejnand
of  employers'  liability  insurance  companies  have  sometimes  been  ^bl?
to  recover  from  these  companies.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  115

the  right  of  the  workmen  to  quit  for  any  or  no  reason.  In
all  the  cases  in  which  the  right  to  discharge  was  at  issue  no
element  of  combination  was  involved.  Hence,  it  may  be
said  that  employers  have  not  been  freed  from  the  conspiracy
laws.  But  the  important  fact  is  that  in  cases  involving  em-
ployers this  question  does  not  arise.  Even  when  employers
act  in  concert,  the  number  of  individuals  involved  is  usually
small,  and  the  proof  that  there  is  a  combination  is  difficult
to  obtain.  Because  of  their  small  numbers  employers  can
effectively  act  together  without  giving  much  publicity  to  their
combination.  In  fact,  in  the  case  of  the  blacklist,  its  success
depends  upon  secrecy.  On  the  other  hand,  every  collective
action  of  labor  must  necessarily  be  public.  A  strike  caimot
take  place  without  a  meeting  and  a  vote.  The  boycott  de-
pends for  success  upon  publicity.  The  union  must  resort  to
the  public  rights  of  free  speech,  free  press,  and  public  assembly;
but  the  employers'  association  succeeds  through  private  cor-
respondence. Again,  it  is  evident  that  the  collective  activities
of  labor  are  much  more  likely  to  interfere  with  the  rights
of  the  public  than  are  the  acts  of  the  employers.  Pickets
must  use  the  streets,  agitation  may  lead  to  violence,  but  the
procuring  of  new  employees  is  but  an  incident  in  the  regular
conduct  of  business.  Another  factor  operating  to  give  em^
ployers  a  real  advantage  is  the  difficulty  of  getting  the  ques-
tion of  the  legality  of  their  actions  before  the  courts.  The
strike  and  the  boycott  may  be  questioned  because  they  in-
vade the  rights  of  the  employers  to  free  access  to  the  labor
market  and  to  the  commodity  market.  But  no  right  of  the
Workingman  is  violated  when  he  is  discharged,  or  when  a  new
man  is  given  the  job  which  he  quit  in  order  to  go  on  strike.


(5)  Justification  of  True  Collective  Bargaining

Viewing  the  situation  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  practi-
cal results,  the  conclusion  is  reached  that  the  law  to-day
seriously  restricts  labor  in  its  collective  action,  while  it  does
not  interfere  with  the  parallel  weapons  of  the  employers.  Is
this  result  socially  desirable?  Fundamentally  the  question  is
whether  collective  bargaining  by  labor  should  be  encouraged


ii6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

or  discotiraged.  If  collective  bargaining  is  desirable,  or-
ganized labor  must  be  conceded  the  free  use  of  the  methods
through  which  it  can  secure  and  maintain  trade  agreements.
The  right  of  organization  is  valueless  unless  it  is  accompanied
by  the  right  to  make  the  organization  effective.

The  issue  of  the  desirability  of  collective  bargaining  by
labor  is  much  confused  by  the  parallel  of  the  combination  to
control  prices.  Combinations  to  monopolize  commodities  are
against  public  policy;  why  then  should  labor-unions  be  favored
in  the  law?  This  parallel  overlooks  the  vital  distinction  be-
tween commodities  and  labor.  The  commodity,  labor,  can
never  be  divorced  from  the  human  being,  the  laborer.  The
labor  contract  is  a  bargain,  not  only  for  wages,  but  also  for
hours  of  labor,  physical  conditions  of  safety  and  health,  risks
of  accident  and  disease.  Labor  cannot  be  placed  upon  the
sam.e  plane  with  commodities,  which  are  external  and  un-
human.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  public  that  the  most  favor-
able conditions  of  labor  shall  prevail.  Since  labor  constitutes
such  a  large  part  of  the  public,  the  general  welfare  depends
intimately  upon  its  advancement.  While  the  public  suffers
from  high  prices,  it  benefits  from  high  wages.

It  is  apparent  that  the  individual  laborer  is  at  a  great  dis-
advantage in  bargaining  with  an  employer.  The  employer
is  often  a  great  corporation,  which  is  itself  a  combination  of
capital.  But  the  disadvantage  of  the  laborer  is  even  more
fundamental.  Being  propertyless,  he  has  no  opportunity  to
make  his  living  but  to  work  upon  the  property  of  others.
Having  no  resources  to  fall  back  upon,  he  caimot  wait  until
he  can  drive  the  most  favorable  bargain.  It  is  a  case  of  the
necessities  of  the  laborer  pitted  against  the  resources  of  the
employer.  It  is  only  when  labor  bargains  collectively  that
its  bargaining  power  approximates  equality  with  that  of
capital.

,,-^  To  treat  labor  unions  as  being  in  the  same  category  with
combinations  to  control  prices  is  a  mistmderstanding  of  their
functions.  Labor  imions  are  not  business  organizations,  like
corporations  or  partnerships.  They  have  nothing  to  sell.
"When  they  enter  into  a  trade  agreement  they  do  not  obligate
themselves  to  furnish  a  given  number  of  laborers,  or  any
laborers,  at  the  terms  agreed  upon. They  cannot  do  so,


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  117

since  they  cannot  compel  their  members  to  labor  if  these  do
not  wish  to  work.  The  members  of  the  union  do  not  labor
for  the  organization,  but  for  themselves  and  their  families.
The  difference  between  a  labor  tinion  and  a  business  organiza-
tion, and  between  a  trade  agreement  and  an  ordinary  con-
tract, is  well  expressed  in  a  recent  decision  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  Kentucky:^  "A  labor  imion,  as  such,  engages  in  no
business  enterprise.  It  has  not  the  power,  and  does  not
tmdertake,  to  supply  employers  with  workmen.  It  does  not,
and  cannot,  bind  its  members  to  a  service  for  a  definite,  or
any  period  of  time,  or  even  to  accept  the  wages  and  regulations
which  it  might  have  induced  an  employer  to  adopt  in  the
conduct  of  his  business.  Its  function  is  to  induce  employers
to  estabHsh  usages  in  respect  to  wages  and  working  conditions
which  are  fair,  reasonable,  and  humane,  leaving  to  its  mem-
bers each  to  determine  for  himself  whether  or  not  and  for
what  length  of  time  he  will  contract  with  reference  to  such
usages.  ...  It  [the  trade  agreement]  is  just  what  it,  on  its  face, "
purports  to  be,  and  nothing  more.  It  is  merely  a  memoran-
dum of  the  rates  of  pay  and  regulations  governing,  for  the
period  designated,  'enginemen  employed  on  the  Chattanooga
division  of  the  company's  railway.  Having  been  signed  by
the  appellee,  it  is  evidence  of  its  intention,  in  the  conduct  of
its  business  with  enginemen  on  said  division,  to  be  governed
by  the  wages  and  rules,  and  for  the  time  therein  stipulated.
Enginemen  in,  or  entering,  its  service  during  the  time  limit
contract  with  reference  to  it.  There  is  on  its  face  no  con-
sideration for  its  execution.  It  is  therefore  not  a  contract.
It  is  not  an  offer,  for  none  of  its  terms  can  be  construed  as  a
proposal.  It  comes  squarely  within  the  definition  of  usage  as
defiiied  in  Bjnrd  v.  BeaU,  150  Ala.  122,  43  So.  749.  There
the  court,  in  defining  usage,  said  'usage'  refers  to  'an  estab-
lished method  of  dealing,  adopted  in  a  particular  place,  or
by  those  engaged  in  a  particular  vocation  or  trade,  which
acquires  legal  force,  because  people  make  contracts  with  ref-


*  Hudson  V.  Cincinnati,  etc.,  R.R.  Co.,  152  Ky.  711,  154  S.  W.  ^7
(1913).  See  also  Bumetta  v.  Marcelline  Coal  Co.,  l8o  Mo.  241  (1906);
Barnes  v.  Berry,  157  Fed.  883  (1908);  Pell  v.  Berry,  108  N.  Y.  Supp.  669
(1907). To  the  contrary,  Jacobs  v.  Cohen,  183  N.  Y.  207  (1905).


ii8 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  so-called  "contract"  which  a  trade  union  makes  with
an  employer  or  an  employers'  association  is  merely  a  "gentle-
men's agreement,"  a  mutual  understanding,  not  enforceable
against  anybody.  It  is  an  understanding  that,  when  the  real
labor  contract  is  made  between  the  individual  employer  and
the  individual  employee,  it  shall  be  made  according  to  the
terms  previously  agreed  upon.  But  there  is  no  legal  penalty
if  the  individual  contract  is  made  differently.  To  enforce  the
collective  contract  would  be  to  deny  the  individual's  liberty
tp  make  his  own  contract.

That  capital  and  labor  should  be  treated  equally  is  a  prop-
osition fundamental  to  American  law.  But  the  dual  bar-
gaining functions  of  capital  must  be  distinguished.  The  price
bargain  is  something  very  distinct  from  the  wage  bargain.
The  corporation  deals  with  both;  the  laborer  only  with  the
wage  bargain.  Manufacturers'  associations  deal  with  the  price
bargain;  employers'  associations  with  the  wage  bargain.
Trade  unions  do  not  deal  with  consumers  at  all.  Their  func-
tion is  to  offset  the  advantage  the  employer  enjoys  in  bar-
gaining about  wages  with  the  individual  laborer.  Equal  pro-
tection of  the  law  does  not  consist  in  treating  a  trade  union
like  a  manufacturers'  association,  but  in  treating  it  like  an  em-
ployers' association.  This  is  not  class  legislation,  but  sound
classification.  — -^ -  -

Unions  of  labor  are  fust  as  likely  to  abuse  their  power  as
are  unions  of  manufacturers.  No  organization  can  be  trusted
with  unlimited  power.  In  the  case  of  the  price  bargain  the
public  has  been  compelled  to  enact  railroad  commission  laws,
in  order  to  keep  down  the  prices  charged  by  corporations.  Is
there  similar  reason  for  public  interference  in  the  case  of  the
wage  bargain?  Trade  unions  have  hitherto  been  treated  as
organizations  for  private  purposes.'  Should  they  be  subjected
to  public  regtdation,  as  have  been  the  monopolistic  combi-
nations?

There  is  a  better  safeguard  than  public  regulation  against
the  abuse  of  power  by  trade  unions.  This  is  the  power  of  the
employers  to  resist  such  demands.  Herein  lies  the  raison
d'Stre  of  the  employers'  association. It  is  to  the  interest  of


'See  Coppage  v.  Kansas,  35  Sup.  Ct.  240  (1915).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  119

the  public,  not  only  that  labor  shall  be  free  to  bargain  collec-
tively, but  that  the  employers  should  also  be  allowed  to
combine.  Without  organization  upon  both  sides  there  is  only
one-sided  or  pseudo-collective  bargaining.  When  a  corpora-
tion deals  with  individual  consumers  or  individual  wage-
earners,  all  the  advantages  of  combination  are  on  one  side.
Similarly,  pseudo-collective  is  the  bargaining  maintained  by  the
so-called  "open  shop"  organizations  of  employers.  Each
wage-earner  is  compelled  to  accept  the  bargain  which  the
association  requires  its  members  to  demand  when  hiring  a
laborer.  Labor  unions  also  practise  one-sided  collective  bar-
gaining when  they  compel  employers  as  individuals  to  "sign
up"  the  agreements  they  offer.  They  use  the  power  of  their
combination  to  prevent  the  employers  from  acting  collec-
tively. The  labor  tmion  which  refuses  to  recognize  the  em-
ployers' association  is  setting  up  a  pretense  of  collective  bar-
gaining, similar  to  the  pretense  of  the  employers'  association
when  it  proclaims,  under  the  name  of  the  "open  shop,"  that
it  is  entirely  willing  to  employ  vmion  men  but  refuses  to  con-
fer with  the  tinion.  It  is  the  usual  outcome  of  such  practices
in  these  one-sided  bargains  for  the  union  to  insist  on  the
closed  shop  against  non-unionists,  and  for  the  employers  under
the  name  of  "open  shop"  to  run  a  non-union  shop.  Theoreti-
cal principles  of  freedom  are  proclaimed  to  gain  popular  or
legal  support;  but  in  actual  practice  each  side  when  pos-
sessed of  unlimited  power  rides  rough-shod  over  the  rights
of  others.

Real  collective  bargaining  is  something  very  different.  It
is  premised  upon  organization  on  both  sides.  This  requires
getting  together  in  a  joint  conference,  and,  through  represen-
tatives, making  a  trade  agreement  binding  upon  individuals
on  both  sides.  A  compromise  between  the  extreme  positions
is  the  result.  WhUe  it  is  in  force,  a  trade  agreement  is  the
supreme  law  of  the  industry.  It  may  even  override  the  con-
stitutions and  the  by-laws  of  the  two  associations.  Dictation
is  autocracy;  conference  is  democracy.  Trade  agreements
are  likely  to  be  tolerably  satisfactory  to  both  sides,  as  both
have  had  a  voice  in  framing  them.  In  real  collective  bargain-
ing also  lies  the  protection  of  the  public.  It  means  fair  condi-
tions  for  labor,  and  yet  conditions under  which  industry


120 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

can  operate. It  is  an  assurance  of  a  minimum  of  industrial
disturbance.

Restrictions  in  the  law  upon  collective  action  upon  either
side  are  inconsistent  with  collective  bargaining.  Complete
freedom  to  combine  should  be  given  to  both  employras-and
employees.  This  policy  reqtiires  no  change  in  the  status  in
law  of  employers'  associations  and  the  weapons  they  use
to  combat  labor.  Some  dead-letter  statutes  are  directed
against  them;  but  these  are  of  no  practical  importance.  It  is
otherwise  as  to  the  restrictions  upon  collective  action  by  labor.
Moreover,  these  restrictions  are  likely  to  be  even  more  seri-
ous in  the  near  future.  The  damage  suit  looms  up  as  a  new
menace  to  labor.  The  injunction  has  lost  many  of  its  terrors
on  account  of  the  frequency  of  its  use.  It  is  now  more  of  an
annoyance  than  a  real  obstacle  to  labor;  but  the  damage  suit
is  likely  to  mean  the  destruction  of  unionism  in  its  present
form.

((5)  Damage  Suits

While  there  were  earlier  damage  suits,  and  judgments  as
well,  this  menace  to  labor  escaped  notice  until  the  recent
Danbury  hatters'  case.^  As  a  result  of  the  decision  of  the
Supreme  Court  in  this  case,  a  judgment  of  nearly  $300,000
(including  interest)  is  outstanding  against  some  175  members
of  the  hatters'  union.  It  is  quite  probable  that  the  houses
and  bank  accoimts  of  these  union  members  which  have  been
attached  will  be  sold  to  meet  this  judgment.  The  damages
awarded  were  for  losses  sustained  through  a  boycott  conducted
by  the  union  officers.  Only  a  few  of  the  defendants  are
charged  with  having  had  any  direct  connection  with  this
boycott.  They  are  held  liable  because  they  remained  mem-
bers of  the  vmion  after  wide  pubUcity  was  given  to  the  boy-
cott.

The  importance  of  this  case  cannot  be  overstated.  It
establishes  the  principle  that  the  members  of  labor  tinions
are  responsible  without  limit  for  the  unlawful  actions  of  the
union  officers  and  agents  which  they  have  in  any  manner


1  Lawlor  v.  Loewe,  235  U.  S.  522  (1915).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  121

authorized  or  sanctioned.  Such  antecedent  authorization  or
subsequent  approval  of  unlawful  acts  does  not  require  to  be
expressed,  but  may  be  inferred  from  all  the  facts  in  the
situation.  Membership  in  the  union  constitutes  approval  of
unlawful  acts  of  the  officers  and  agents  when  they  have  been
given  wide  publicity.  The  Danbury  hatters'  case  arose  under
the  Sherman  antitrust  act;  but  the  menace  of  the  damage
suit  does  not  depend  upon  that  statute.  Damages  may  be
recovered  not  only  for  restraint  of  interstate  commerce,  but
for  any  wrongful  act  of  a  labor  union.  Under  the  Sherman
act  triple  damages  may  be  collected,  but  without  that  act
only  single  damages,  yet  even  single  damages  are  likely  to
bankrupt  all  unions.  Nor  can  damages  be  sectued  only  for
boycotting.  Recovery  can  be  had  also  for  losses  sustained
through  lawful  strikes,  or  through  picketing,  or  because  of
any  other  wrongful  conduct.

Within  the  next  few  years  there  are  likely  to  be  many
damage  suits  against  labor  unions  and  their  members.  Sev-
eral such  suits  are  already  pending  (1915).  The  principles
estabHshed  in  the  Danbury  hatters'  case  render  probable  that
judgments  will  often  be  recovered.  It  may  become  impos-
sible for  a  workman  with  a  little  property  to  belong  to  a
labor  union.  Union  funds  are  likely  to  be  exhausted  in  court
fights  and  to  satisfy  judgments.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the
unions  wUl  endeavor  to  offset  this  menace  by  greater  secrecy.
The  Danbtury  hatters'  case  turned  upon  the  point  that  so
much  publicity  had  been  given  to  the  boycott  that  all  the
members  of  the  imion  could  reasonably  be  presumed  to  have
knowledge  thereof.  Thus,  a  premium  is  put  upon  secrecy
and  encouragement  is  given  to  the  slugger.  But  this  means
the  end  of  conservative  unionism.  Collective  bargaining
cannot  be  conducted  in  secret.

The  menace  of  the  damage  suit  is  best  brought  out  in  the
contrast  between  the  position  of  the  members  of  labor  unions
and  that  of  stockholders  in  corporations.  It  is  evident  that
labor  unions  dir"?  Fery  much  looser  organizations  than  are  cor-
poratioas.  Unions  must  entrust  their  officers  with  great
power;  the  rank  and  file  of  the  members  know  little  about
wMt  the  officers  are  doing.  Even  when  members  disapprove
ievehe  actions  of  the  officers,  they  c^n  ill  afford  to  get  out  of


122 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  union,  as  they  woxdd  lose  their  insurance  benefits  and
in  many  industries  would  find  it  difficult  to  get  a  job.  These
are  reasons  why  the  members  of  labor  tmions^  should  not  be
held  to  the  same  accountability  for  acts  done  in  their  be-
half as  are  stockholders  in  corporations.  But  in  the  United
States  the  members  of  labor  unions  have  the  greater  liability.
For  a  tort  committed  in  behalf  of  a  corporation,  the  stock-
holders can  be  held  only  to  the  extent  of  their  stock  subscrip-
tion, or  double  the  amount,  under  certain  laws  regulating
banks.  The  members  of  labor  imions  are  responsible  without
limit  for  tortious  acts  done  in  their  behalf.


(7)  English  Law  of  Labor  Disputes

Very  nearly  the  same  situation  which  has  been  created  in
the  United  States  by  the  Danbury  hatters'  case  existed  in
England  subsequent  to  the  TafE  Vale-cas?  in  1901.^  In  that
case  a  union  of  railway  workers  was  assessed  damages  in  ex-
cess of  $200,000  on  account  of  injviry  to  the  company  through
acts  of  violence  during  a  strike.  The  upshot  of  this  case  was
the  enactment  of  the  l^ritish  trade  disputes  act  of  1906,.
This  act  places  labor  unions  upon  a  position  of  equality  with
employers'  associations,  and  distinguishes  both  from  com-
binations to  control  prices.  It  provides  that  acts  done  by
a  combination,  either  of  employers  or  employees,  "in  con-
templation or  furtherance  of  a  trade  dispute,"  shall  be  lawfvil
tmless  they  would  be  unlawful  if  done  by  one  person.  It
provides  further  that  such  acts  shall  not  be  deemed  unlawful
because  they  interfere  with  another's  free  access  to  the  labor
and  commodity  markets,  or  because  they  amotmt  to  med-
dling by  third  parties  with  contractual  rights.  Thus,  the  law
of  conspiracy,  in  all  its  forms  of  statement,  is  declared  not  to
be  applicable  to  labor  disputes.  Moreover,  in  lieu  of  vague
prohibitions  of  "violence,"  "intimidation,"  and  "coercion,"
England  has  definite  statutory  declarationo  as  VQ  the  con-
duct which  is  unlawful.  The  dividing  line  betwet^  lawful
persuasion  and  unlawful  coercion  is  fairly  definite,  sc\that


1 70  L.  J.  K.  B.,  905  (1901).


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  123

all  who  read  may  know.  Picketing  for  the  purpose  of  peace-
fully obtaining  or  communicating  information,  or  of  peace-
fully persuading  another  to  work  or  abstain  from  working,  is
lawful.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  unlawful  to  commit  acts  of
violence  or  sabotage,  or  persistently  to  follow  another.  Nor
may  any  one  quit  work  in  violation  of  a  contract  when  he
has  reason  to  know  that  the  consequence  of  his  leaving  will
be  to  endanger  human  life,  or  to  expose  valuable  property
to  injury,  or  to  deprive  a  city  of  gas  or  water.

.In^Enslish_lass:J±[ae_are  JiQ._doubts  as  to  the  legality  of
labor  unions  or  of  employers'  associations.  Both  the  lockout
and  the  strike  are  legal,  as  are  the  boycott  and  the  blacklist.
Parallel  to  the  right  of  employers  to  get  new  workmen  is  the
right  of  the  strikers  to  picket  peacefully  and  to  induce  them
to  abstain  from  working.  England's  policy  is  to  allow  both
sides  a  free  hand  for  a  fair  fight.  It  ignores  the  motives
which  underlie  labor  disputes.  It  does  not  interfere  until  the
line  of  intimidation  and  violence  has  been  crossed.  And  this
is  a  line  definitely  established  by  statute,  and  not  left  wholly
to  the  courts.  "Thus  the  English  law  has  the  merits  of  cer-
tainty and  practicality.

The  most  radical  departtire  in  the  British  trade  disputes
act  must  still  be  noted.  It  is  the  exemption  of  trade  unions
and  employers'  associations  and  their  members  from  all
liability  in  tort  for  wrongful  acts  alleged  to  have  been  com-
mitted in  their  behalf.  This  was  Parliament's  answer  to  the
TaflE  Vale  case.  It  made  it  impossible  to  maintain  any  dam-
age suit  against  a  trade  imion  or  an  employers'  association.
This  is  a  greater  privilege  than  the  limited  liability  of  busi-
ness corporations.  The  liability  is  not  merely  limited,  it  is
removed  in  toto.  Even  though  a  union  may  be  responsible
for  acts  of  violence,  it  cannot  be  sued  for  the  damage  it
caused.  Our  courts  hold  the  members  of  labor  Unions  to
the  tmlimited  Uability  of  partnerships;  in  England  they  are
not  liable  at  all.

The  position  given  in  England  to  trade  unions  and  em-
ployers' associations  violates  that  concept,  fundamental  in
law,  that  he  who  is  responsible  for  a  wrong  must  answer
therefor.  But  an  overwhehring  majority  of  Parliament  be-
lieved it  sound  policy  to  modify  this  principle  to  this  extent.


124 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Prior  to  the  Taff  Vale  case  damage  siiits  were  never  brought
in  England  against  trade  unions.  Whatever  may  have  been
the  law,  they  enjoyed  exemption,  to  all  practical  purposes,
from  actions  in  tort.  In  the  United  States,  also,  labor  unions
until  recently  occupied  much  the  same  position.  And  this
practical  exemption  of  unions  from  responsibility  in  damages
has  led  to  no  dire  consequences.  Exemption  of  trade  unions
and  employers'  associations  from  actions  in  tort  does  not
mean  that  wrongs  they  commit  are  allowed  to  go  un-
punished. The  union  members  who  are  guilty  of  acts  of
violence  can  be  held  therefor,  both  criminally  and  in  tort;
but  the  members  who  have  not  been  direct  participants
in  the  wrongdoing  cannot  be  held  civilly  liable  as  principals.
As  a  curb  upon  union  violence,  it  is  doubtless  much  more
effective  vigorously  to  prosecute  those  who  commit  the
violence  than  to  take  away  the  property  of  entirely  iimo-
cent  union  members.

The  exceptional  position  given  in  English  law  to  trade
unions  and  employers'  associations  rests  upon  the  proposition
that  collective  bargaining  is  socially  desirable.  Trade  unions
are  such  loose  organizations  that  a  rigid  application  of  the
principles  of  agency  law  is  unjust.  Such  a  doctrine  operates
to  destroy  the  unions.  This  is  even  more  true  in  the  United
States  than  in  England,  since  many  of  the  acts  of  unions
that  are  lawful  there  are  unlawful  here.

The  law  conceives  of  no  responsibility  other  than  financial
responsibility,  and  of  no  check  other. than  that  furnished  by
the  law.  But  a  more  satisfactory  check  upon  abuse  of  power
by  unions  is  the  like  power  of  employers.  The  protection  of
the  public  lies  in  the  equal  strength  of  both  parties  to  make
the  wage  bargain.  To  this  end  restrictions  upon  collective
action  upon  either  side  should  be  removed.  Thus  can  col-
lective bargaining  in  the  voltmtary  sense  be  maintained  and
extended.

2.  Mediation  by  Government

The  development  of  large  scale  production  and  the  growing
complexity  and  interdependence  of  the  social  order  have  vast-
ly increased  the  number  and  disastrousness  of  strikes  and


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  125

lockouts.^  For  settling  differences  and  avoiding  these  far-
reaching  conflicts  there  have  been  devised  four  main  meth-
ods: mediation  or  conciliation,  voluntary  arbitration,  com-
ptilsory  investigation,  and  compulsory  arbitration.


(7)  Definition  of  Terms

By  mediation  or  conciliation  is  usually  meant  the  bring-
ing together  of  employers  and  employees  for  a  peaceable
settlement  of  their  differences  by  discussion  and  negotia-
tion. The  mediator  may  be  either  a  private  or  an  official  in-
dividual or  board,  and  may  make  inquiries  without  com-
pulsory powers,  trying  to  induce  the  two  parties  by  mutual
concessions  to  effect  a  settlement.  The  successfiil  mediator
never  takes  sides  and  never  conmaits  himself  as  to  the  merits
of  a  dispute.  He  acts  purely  as  a  go-between,  seeking  to
ascertain,  in  confidence,  the  most  that  one  party  will  give
and  the  least  that  the  other  wiU  take  without  entering  on
either  a  lockout  or  a  strike.  If  he  succeeds  in  this,  he  is  really
discovering  the  bargaining  power  of  both  sides  and  bringing
them  to  the  point  where  they  would  be  if  they  made  an  agree-
ment without  him.  Where  the  difficulty  is  due  to  the  parties'
not  having  thoroughly  discussed  the  situation  together,  the
mediator  is  often  able  to  bring  them  into  joint  conference,
and,  in  practice,  most  of  the  settlements  have  been  arranged
through  compromise.  In  other  cases  the  parties  are  imwiUing
to  admit  to  each  other  the  utmost  concession  they  will  make.


'  In  the  German  Empire  there  were  10,484  strikes  in  the  years  1899  to
1905,  affecting  938,543  men,  and  583  lockouts,  affecting  207,800  men.
In  Austria  there  were  3,073  strikes  affecting  572,746  men  from  1894  to
1904,  and  69  lockouts  involving  43,395  men.  In  France,  from  1890  to
1904,  there  were  7,741  strikes  involving  1,865,620  men,  and  from  1900
to  1904,  7  lockouts  involving  1,031  men.  In  Belgium  there  were  961
strikes  affecting  274,654  men  from  1896  to  1904.  Italy  had  3,852  strikes
affecting  855,066  men  from  1895  to  1903.  In  Great  Britain  and  Ireland
there  were  6,030  strikes  and  lockouts  affecting  1,783,889  men  from  1895
to  1905  (Maximilian  Meyer,  Statistik  der  Streiks  und  Aussperrungen,
1907,  pp.  43,  45,  71.  78.  107.  "6,  133.  154.  158,  184).  Prom  1881  to
1905  there  were  in  the  United  States  36,757  strikes  involving  approxi-
mately 8,703,824  employees,  and  1,546  lockouts  affecting  825,610  em-
ployees (Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twenty-first  Annual  Report,  1906,  pp.
476,  477,  736,  737)-


126 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

fearing  to  weaken  their  position.  In  such  cases  a  mediator
whom  both  sides  can  trust  can  render  invaluable  service  as
an  intermediary.  Occasionally  parties  refuse  to  treat  with
each  other,  but  will  consent  to  make  each  a  separate  settle^
ment  with  the  mediator.  Finally,  mediators,  through  their
familiarity  with  methods  for  dealing  with  analogous  difficul-
ties in  different  trades,  are  sometimes  able  to  suggest  a  so-
lution. In  aU  cases  the  mediator  is  merely  ajxmSdential
^ai^iser.  Even  when  he  is  a  state  authority  he  does  not  exer-
cise any  of  the  compulsory  powers  of  the  state,  and  if  he  even
endeavors,  by  public  investigations  and  recommendations,
to  bring  public  opinion  to  bear  upon  the  disputants,  he  dis-
qualifies himself  for  further  mediation.

Voluntary  arbitration  occurs  when  the  two  parties,  unable
to  settle  the  controversy  by  themselves  or  with  the  assistance
of  a  mediator,  agree  to  submit  the  points  at  issue  to  an  imi-
pire  or  arbitrator,  by  whose  decision  they  promise  to  abide.
The  complete  procedure  of  arbitration  consists  of  a  number  of
steps:  (i)  The  submission  of  the  dispute  to  the  decision  of  a
third  party;  (2)  submission  to  an  investigation;  (3)  re-
fraining from  strike  or  lockout  pending  investigation;  (4)
drawing  up  an  award;  (5)  enforcement  of  the  award  and  re-
fraining from  strike  or  lockout  during  its  life.  Arbitration
remains  strictly  voluntary  even  if  at  every  step  except  the
first  the  state  uses  its  compulsory  power.  The  essential  thing
is  that  both  parties  consent  in  advance  to  calling  in  the  powers
of  government.  Hence  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea
of  voluntary  arbitration  for  the  state  to  use  its  power  of  com-
pelling testimony,  or  even  of  enforcing  an  award,  provided
that  both  sides  have  previously  agreed  that  this  be  done.

Under  the  system  of  compulsory  investigation  a  board
created  by  the  state  summons  witnesses  and  takes  testi-
mony on  the  initiative  of  one  party  to  the  dispute  without
the  consent  of  the  other,  or  upon  its  own  initiative  without
the  consent  of  either.  The  board  is  one  of  investigation  and
recommendation,  without  legal  power  to  enforce  its  awards.
Compulsory  investigation  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  pro-
hibition of  strikes  or  lockouts  pending  the  completion  of  the
investigation  and  the  publication  of  the  recommendations.
This  compulsory  postponement  is  the  characteristic  feature


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  127

of  the  Canadian  industrial  disputes  investigation  act  of  1907,
copied  by  Colorado  in  1915,  designed  to  prevent  sudden
strikes  or  lockouts.^  But  it  is  not  essential  to  compulsory
investigation.  The  alternative  is  comptilsory  investigation
without  the  prohibition  of  strikes  and  lockouts,  and  this  is
provided  for  in  the  laws  of  several  American  states.^  These
laws  are  generally  thought  to  establish  voluntary  systems  of
mediation,  but  they  go  beyond  that  point  when  they  take
testimony  without  the  consent  of  either  side.

Compulsory  arbitration  consists  in  the  government's  directly
or  indirectly  compelling  employers  and  employees  to  subnnit
their  disputes  to  an  outside  agency  for  decision.  In  a  com-
plete system  of  compulsory  arbitration,  government  coercion  is
exercised  at  all  five  of  the  steps  previously  mentioned.  Differ-
ences must  be  submitted  to  arbitration;  witnesses  must  testify
and  produce  papers ;  the  parties  must  refrain  from  strike  or  lock-
out during  the  investigation;  the  board  must  reach  a  decision
and  announce  an  award;  the  parties  must  observe  the  award
and  refrain  from  strike  or  lockout  during  its  life.  The  penal-
ties for  violation  are  fine  and  imprisonment,  not,  however,
imposed  on  a  workman  for  ordinarily  quitting  work  or  on  an
employer  for  the  ordinary  discharge  of  a  workman,  but  for
quitting  or  discharging  collectively  or  with  intent  to  obstruct
any  of  the  steps  essential  to  the  arbitration.


(2)  Foreign  Countries

VHnntf^^y  ?^^^+-<-n;t.inrt  atta^ined  its  most  characteristic  de-
velopment in  England.  Sir  Kupert  Kettle,  one  of  the  founders
of '£Ee  EngUsh  system,  wrote:  "  It  is  agreed  that  according  to
the  spirit  of  otu  laws  and  the  freedom  of  our  people,  any
procedure,  to  be  popular,  must  be  accepted  voluntarily  by
both  contending  parties,"*  and  the  whole  history  of  con-


1  See  "Coercion  by  Government,"  p.  160.

*  See  "  United  States,"  p.  132.

'Jos.  D.  Weeks,  "Report  on  the  Practical  Operation  of  Arbitration
and  Conciliation  in  the  Settlement  of  Differences  between  Employers
and  Employees  in  England,"  Pennsylvania  Doc.  1878-1879,  Legislative
Documents,  Vol.  II,  No.  8.


128 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ciliation  and  arbitration  in  England  verifies  his  assertion.  In
the  early  years  of  the  nineteenth  century  the  efiEects  of  the
industrial  revolution,  the  repeal  of  the  conspiracy  laws  in
1824  permitting  the  organization  of  many  new  unions,  and
the  panic  of  1828  with  the  ensuing  years  of  depression,  united
to  bring  about  a  series  of  violent  strikes  and  lockouts.  These
early  collective  disputes  were  envenomed  by  mistaken  legis-
lation to  control  the  workmen,  and  the  memory  of  the  period
embittered  the  relations  of  masters  and  workmen  for  years.
Gradually,  however,  both  sides  began  to  see  the  futility  of
these  destructive  methods,  and  the  idea  of  avoidance  or
peaceful  settlement  of  trade  disputes  by  means  of  joint  boards
of  employers  and  employees  took  root.  One  of  the  very
earliest  of  these  boards  was  established  for  the  Macclesfield
silk  trade  in  1849,  and  was  suggested  by  the  French  industrial
courts  {conseils  de  prud'hommes).^  It  proved  a  failure.  In
1856  and  i860  committees  of  the  House  of  Conamons  found  the
men  favorable  to  arbitration,  but  the  employers  opposed  to
state  intervention.  The  year  i860,  in  which  A.  J.  Mimdella
established  the  first  permanent  board  of  conciliation  and
arbitration,  marks  the  real  beginning  of  the  movement  for
conciliation,  and  between  1867  and  1875  countless  boards
were  established  without  legislation.

It  was  not  until  1896  that  Parliament  enacted  legislation
dealing  solely  with  collective  disputes.  The  act  of  1824^
applied  only  to  individtial  disputes  and  the  act  of  1867'
attempted  to  introduce  the  French  industrial  courts.  The
act  of  1872*  provided  for  conciliation  boards,  but  was  a  dead
letter.  In  1893  occurred  the  disastrous  coal  mine  strike  in
which  finally  the  government  intervened  and  arranged  a
conciliation  board  similar  to  those  which  had  been  so  widely
organized  without  govenunent  interference.  Following  this
came  the  conciliation  act  of  1896.  It  repealed  the  acts  of
1824,  1867,  and  1872,'  and  is  the  present  law.  It  entrusts  to
the  board  of  trade  *  certain  powers  of  mediation.  The  board
may  (i)  register  any  private  conciliation  or  arbitration  board
on  application. This  confers  no  additional  powers  on  these

'  See  "Industrial  Courts,"  p.  86.  '30-31  Vict.,  C.  105.

25  Geo.  4,  C.  96.  *  35-36  Vict.,  C.  46.

'  Similar  to  our  Departments  of  the  Interior,  Commerce,  and  Labor.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  129  i

boards.  (2)  If  the  means  of  conciliation  in  a  district  are  in-
adequate the  board  of  trade  may  appoint  mediators  to  con-
fer with  the  parties  as  to  the  formation  of  conciliation  boards.
(3)  In  case  of  an  industrial  dispute  the  board  of  trade  may  (a)  '
make  an  inquiry,  (b)  bring  the  parties  together,  (c)  on  the
application  of  one  party  appoint  one  or  more  conciliators,
(d)  on  the  application  of  both  parties  appoint  an  arbitrator.  '
All  expenses  are  paid  by  the  government.  ^

Since  the  passage  of  the  act  two  additions  have  been  made
to  the  conciliation  machinery  of  the  board  of  trade,  neither
of  which  necessitated  further  legislation.  In  1908,  the  presi-
dent of  the  board  sent  a  memorandtim  to  the  chambers  of
commerce  and  employers'  and  workmen's  associations,  stat-
ing that  the  scale  of  operations  of  the  board  under  the  con-
ciliation act  required  more  formal  and  permanent  machinery
and  announcing  the  creation  of  a  standing  court  of  arbitra-
tion. Three  panels  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  board,  the
first  comprising  "persons  of  eminence  and  impartiality"  from
whom  the  chairman  should  be  chosen,  the  second  employers,  :
and  the  third  workmen.  In  case  of  a  request  for  the  services
of  the  court,  it  should  be  nonanated  by  the  board  of  trade
from  these  panels,  either  selected  by  them  or  jointly  selected
by  the  parties,  and  should  consist  of  either  one  or  two  repre-
sentatives of  each  side,  and  a  chairman,  who  should  have  a
vote.  In  addition,  technical  assessors  or  experts  might  be
appointed  by  the  board  to  assist  the  court.  The  members  of
the  court  would  thus  be  unconnected  with  the  particular  dis-
pute but  representative  of  the  respective  classes.  In  1909
the  Forty-second  Trades  Union  Congress  adopted  a  resolution
that  the  congress  should  elect  the  members  of  the  workmen's
panel,  to  guard  against  political  influence,  but  the  board  of
trade  denied  the  request  on  the  ground  that  "public  con-
fidence in  the  impartiality  of  the  tribunal"  was  better  served
by  the  existing  arrangement.

The  court  nf  itrhitrntinn  -riiinillL  I  dlliiii  (iiii  iinlniliiil
council,  similar  to  that  requested  by  the-^rades  Union
Congress  in  1909,  was  created  in  191 1,  It  consists  of
"representatives  of  the  two  great  sides  of  the  industry  of
the  coim^?^''^''^^^'  Chairman  of  the  industrial  council  is
called "chief industrial commissioner." The reasons for

■I

9


130 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  creation  of  the  council  were  the  desirability  of  a  na-
tional representative  body,  and  the  fact  that  the  president
of  the  board  of  trada-isTiecessarfly^  politician.  The  covmcil
deals  with  cases  referred  to  it  for  its  opinion  upon  the  facts
only;  with  cases  referred  to  it  for  inquiry  and  recommenda-
tions, to  be  made  public,  or  accepted,  if  so  agreed  upon;  with
cases  referred  by  the  board  of  trade  or  the  government;  and
with  general  matters  referred  by  the  board  for  a  representa-
tive opinion.

Registration  of  conciliation  boards  has  been  far  from  com-
plete, but  most  unregistered  boards  furnish  the  board  of  trade
with  annual  returns.  The  first  report  of  the  board  of  trade
recorded  one  attempt  to  establish  a  board  where  none  existed,
but  the  later  reports  contain  no  such  information.  Evidently
that  feature  of  the  act  has  become  a  dead  letter.  In  the
settlement  of  disputes  the  board  of  trade  has  been  more  suc-
cessful. From  1896  to  1913,  696  cases  were  dealt  with,  of
which  3 45  involved  a  stoppage  of  work  and  351  involved  no
stoppage.  About  65  per  cent,  of  the  total  cases  occurred  in
the  last  six  years,  the  highest  number  recorded  being  for
1913.^^  Since  1907  conciliation  and  arbitration  of  railway  dis-
putes have  been  under  an  agreement  secured  through  the
board  of  trade.  This  agreement  broke  down  in  19 11  with
a  strike  on  every  railway  except  one.  It  was  then  revised,
so  that  a  central  chairman  or  arbitrator  might  be  chosen
from  a  panel  prepared  by  the  board  of  trade.

Present-legislation  concerning  arbitratioft-and  coseiliation^
in  Great  Britain  is  thus  entirely  permissive  and  ■^^J^*^'^
Employers  as  a  class  favor  negotiation  through  the  v^tmSr/
conciliation  boards,  but  many  of  them  condemn  the  inter-
ference of  the  state,  partly  on  the  ground  that  it  assumes
no  responsibility  for  enforcing  its  award,  and  partly  on  the
ground  that  the  arbitrator  is  likely  to  have  no  practical
knowledge  of  the  trade.  They  would  favor  compulsory  arbi-
tration, but,  regarding  this  as  premature  at  best,  they  are
inclined  to  oppose^state  intervention  altogether.

Englisti  trade  unions  have  "from  the  first  favored  concilia-
tion and  voluntary  arbitration,  but  they  are  opposed  to  com-

'  From  the  eleventh  Report  by  the  Board  of  Trade  of  Proceedings  under
Conciliation  Act  of  i8g6.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  131

piilsory  arbitration.  Several  efforts  have  been  made  in  the
trades  union  congress  to  secure  indorsement  of  compulsory
arbitration,  all  of  which  have  been  defeated  by  large  and
increasing  majorities.  In  1908  a  resolution  was  introduced
requesting  Parliament  to  amend  the  conciliation  act  of  1896
so  as  to  give  the  board  of  trade  powers  of  compulsory  in-
vestigation on  request  of  either  party,  no  stoppage  of  work  to
take  place  pending  inquiry  and  report.  It  was  defeated  by
a  large  majority  at  that  time  and  again  in  1909.

Legislation  providing  for  mediation  or  conciliation  and  for
volvmtary  arbitration  is  found  also  in  France,  Germany,
Austria,  Denmark,  Italy,  Sweden,  Belgium,  Roumania,  Servia,
Spain,  the  Netherlands,  Switzerland,  and  Argentina.^  The
French  law  of  1892  appUes  to  all  industries,  and  makes
justices  of  the  peace  mediators.  In  Germany  the  law  of
i8go,  revised  in  1901,  provides  that  the  industrial  courts^  shall
act  as  boards  of  arbitration.


(j)  United  States

a.  State  Legislation.  Thirty-one  states,  Alaska,  and  the
Philippine  Islands  have  legislation  providing  for  the  settle-
ment of  industrial  disputes,  and  Wyoming  has  a  constitutional
provision  to  the  same  effect.^  Many  of  these  states  have
permanent  boards  called  boards  of  conciliation  and  arbitra-
tion or  some  similar  title,  with  from  two  to  six  members,
although  three  is  the  usual  number.  It  is  provided  in  every
state  except  Alabama  that  one  member  shall  be  a  repre-
sentative of  the  employees,  while  all  but  Alabama  and  Con-
necticut provide  for  representation  of  employers.  The  Okla-
homa board  represents  farmers  in  addition. Many  states


'  See  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  60,  September,  1905,
"Government  Industrial  Arbitration,"  L.  W.  Hatch;  Bulletin  of  the
International  Labor  Office,  1906-1913;  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,
Bulletin  No.  (18,  January,  1912,  "Industrial  Courts,"  H.  L.  Stunner  (for
Germany).

2  See  "Industrial  Courts,"  pp.  86-88.

*  See  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletins  No.  148,
1914,  "Labor  Laws  of  the  United  States,"  and  No.  166, 1915, "Labor
Legislation  of  1 9 1 4. "


132 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

forbid  that  more  than  two  members  of  the  board  be  chosen
from  the  same  political  party.  In  other  states  the  labor  com-
inissioner  acts  as  mediator,  as  in  Idaho,  Indiana,  and  Mary-
land. In  states  having  industrial  commissions,  a  chief
mediator  is  appointed  along  with  temporary  boards  for
arbitration.

In  a  scQre--oiLgQ_of  ,states-4;oiapulsopy-«tvestigation  io-pro-
XJded  for.i  In  the  Philippine  Islands  general  powers  are  given
to  the  bureau  of  labor  to  investigate  "strikes,  suspensions  of
work,  and  other  labor  difficulties."  The  state  board  of  ar-
bitration must  proceed  to  make  an  investigation  (i)  on  failure
to  adjust  the  dispute  by  mediation  or  arbitration,  in  Idaho,
Indiana,  Maryland;  (2)  if,  in  the  opinion  of  the  governor,
the  dispute  is  likely  to  affect  the  public  welfare,  in  Maine;
(3)  when  notice  of  the  dispute  is  given  to  the  board  by  a
mayor  or  district  judge,  in  Louisiana;  or  (4)  simply  when
the  existence  of  the  dispute  comes  to  the  knowledge  of  the
board,  as  in  Massachusetts  and  Vermont.  In  other  states
such  investigation  is  permissive.  The  board  of  arbitration
may  investigate  (i)  when  it  is  deemed  necessary  by  the  gov-
ernor, in  Alabama  and  Nebraska,  or  the  commissioner  of  labor
in  New  York  (the  industrial  commission  since  May,  1915).
In  Ohio  the  industrial  commission  can  make  an  investigation,
if  it  deems  necessary,  where  a  strike  exists  or  is  threatened,
but  if  no  settlement  is  obtained  on  account  of  the  opposition
of  one  of  the  parties  investigation  is  to  be  made  only  if  re-
quested by  the  other  party.  Compulsory  investigation  may
be  employed  (2)  when  both  parties  refuse  arbitration  and  the
public  would  suffer  inconvenience,  in  Illinois  and  Oklahoma,
or  simply  where  the  parties  do  not  agree  to  arbitration,  in
New  Hampshire;  (3)  or  generally,  whenever  a  strike  occurs,
in  Connecticut,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  Montana,  and  Utah.

Provision  for  enforcement  of  an  arbitration  award  when
arbitration  has  been  agreed  to  by  representatives  of  both
sides  is  made  in  the  laws  of  eight  states.  In  Illinois,  if  the
court  has  ordered  compliance  with  an  award,  failure  to  obey
is  punishable  as  contempt,  but  not  by  imprisonment* In

•  Alabama,  Connecticut,  Idaho,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Louisiana,  Maine,
Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  Montana,  Nebraska,
New  Hampshire,  New  York,  Ohio,  Oklahoma,  Utah,  Vermont.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  133

Idaho  and  Indiana  the  award  is  filed  with  the  district  court
clerk,  and  the  judge  can  order  obedience,  violation  being  pun-
ishable as  contempt,  but  imprisonment  may  be  inflicted  only
for  wilful  disobedience.  In  Missouri  violation  of  a  binding
award  is  punishable  by  a  fine  or  jail  sentence,  and  in  Ohio
a  binding  award  may  be  enforced  in  the  county  court  of
common  pleas  as  if  it  were  a  statutory  award.  In  Nevada,
Texas,  and  Alaska  the  award  is  filed  with  the  district  court
clerk,  and  may  be  specifically  enforced  in  equity.  In  Nevada
appeal  is  made  to  the  supreme  court,  in  Texas  to  the  court  of
civil  appeals,  and  in  Alaska  to  the  United  States  Circuit  Court
of  Appeals.  Colorado  is  the  only  state  (19 15)  that  has  copied
the  Canadian  act  forbidding  strikes  or  lockouts  pending  in-
vestigation and  recommendation.

In  fourteen  states  and  Alaska  the  voluntary  agreement  to
arbitrate  must  contain  a  promise  to  abstain  from  strike  or
lockout  pending  arbitration  proceedings.^  In  Massachusetts
it  is  the  duty  of  the  parties  to  give  notice  of  impending  stop-
page of  work.  In  Nevada  and  Alaska  strikes  or  lockouts  dur-
ing arbitration,  and  in  Alaska  for  three  months  after,  with-
out thirty  days'  notice,  are  unlawful  and  grotmd  for  damages.

b.  Federal  Legislation.  Federal  legislation  on  mediation
and  arbitration  is  comprised  in  four  acts  concerning  inter-
state commerce  carriers,  the  act  of  1888,  the  act  of  1898  (the
Erdman  act),  the  act  of  19 13  (the  Newlands  act),  and  Sec-
tion 8  of  the  act  creating  the  Department  of  Labor,  also
enacted  in  1913.  The  act  of  1888  provided,  on  the  initiative
of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  fOT' voluntary  arbitra-
tion, comg«laQry  inveztigation,  and  jgyblieaSSSCSfTlie  de-
ciaon.  It  also  provided  that  the  President  might  appoint
two  commissioners,  who,  with  the  United  States  Commissioner
of  Labor,  should  investigate  controversies  and  make  to  the
President  and  to  Congress  a  report,  which  should  be,  pub-
lished. The  investigation  might  be  made  on  application  of
one  of  the  parties,  of  the  governor  of  the  state  concerned,  or
on  the  President's  own  motion.  The  act  of  1888  was  on  the
statute  books  ten  years  and  in  that  time  no  attempt  is  known


'  '  Alabama,  California,  Connecticut,  Iowa,  Louisiana,  Maine,  Massa-
chusetts, Montana,  Nebraska,  New  Hampshire,  Ohio,  Texas,  Utah,  Ver-
mont, Alaska.


134 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

to  have  been  made  to  apply  the  arbitration  provision.  Only
once  was  an  investigating  commission  appointed,  that  for
the  PiiUman  strike  at  Chicago  in  1894,  and  on  that  occasion
the  commission  took  no  action  toward  settling  the  dispute.
In  1898  the  Erdman  act*  was  passed,  repealing  the  earlier
law.  It  applied  to  common  carriers  and  their  officers  and
employees  except  masters  of  vessels  and  seamen,  engaged  in
interstate  commerce,  by  railroad  or  by  railroad  and  water,
the  term  "employees"  including  only  those  actually  engaged
in  train  operation.  The  act  was  therefore  restricted  to  en-
gineers, firemen,  conductors,  trainmen,  switchmen,  and  tele-
graphers. In  case  of  a  dispute,  the  chairman  of  the  Inter-
state Commerce  Commission  and  the  Commissioner  of  Labor
must  on  application  of  either  party  endeavor  by  mediation
to  adjust  the  difference.  Mediation  was  conditioned  on  re-
quest by  one  party,  and  on  acceptance  of  the  mediator's  offer
by  the  other  party.  If  mediation  proved  unsuccessful,  the
mediators  were  to  urge  arbitration,  and  if  the  parties  agreed
a  board  of  arbitration  was  formed,  one  member  being  named
by  each  party  and  the  third  by  these  two.  Failing  their  agree-
ment on  a  third,  he  was  to  be  named  by  the  commissioners.
The  submission  was  to  contain  the  following  provisions:
Pending  arbitration  the  status  existing  immediately  prior  to
the  dispute  was  not  to  be  changed;  the  award  was  to  be
filed  with  the  clerk  of  the  United  States  circuit  court  for  the
district  and  should  be  final  and  conclusive  except  for  error  of
law;  the  parties  must  be  bound  by  the  award  and  it  might
be  specifically  enforced  in  equity,  as  far  as  the  powers  of  a
court  of  equity  permit;  neither  side  was  to  cease  work  on
account  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  award,  for  three  months,
without  thirty  days'  notice;  the  award  should  continue  for
one  year  and  no  new  arbitration  should  be  had  on  the  same
subject  in  that  time.  The  award  being  filed,  judgment  was
to  be  entered  accordingly  at  the  end  of  ten  days,  unless  ex-
ceptions were  filled  for  matter  of  law.  Appeal  might  be  taken
from  the  decision  of  the  circuit  court  to  the  circuit  court  of
appeals,  whose  determination  should  be  final.  The  arbi-
trators were  given  powers  of  compulsory  investigation,  and


*  United  States,  Laws  1898,  C.  370.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  135

strikes  or  discharge  of  employees  except  for  good  cause  were
made  tmlawful  pending  arbitration  and  for  three  months
after  an  award.  Violation  subjected  the  offender  to  liability
for  damages.

During  the  first  eight  years  after  the  enactment  of  the
Erdman  law  only  one  attempt  was  made  to  invoke  it,*  and
that  proved  futUe;  but  since  1906  there  has  been  no  serious
strike,  actual  or  threatened,  in  which  one  of  the  parties  has
not  sought  settlement  under  the  act.  Only  one  failure  to
adjust,  when  mediation  was  accepted  before  a  strike  began,
is  recorded.  From  1898  to  1912,  forty-eight  applications  for
mediation  and  arbitration  were  received,  the  total  mileage
involved  having  been  over  500,000  and  the  number  of  em-
ployees over  160,000.  Nineteen  appUcations  were  made  by
employers,  thirteen  by  employees,  and  sixteen  by  both  to-
gether. Mediation  was  involved  in  forty-four  cases,  of  which
eight  were  carried  to  arbitration.  Four  cases  were  directly
submitted  to  arbitration.  Almost  invariably,  when  one  side
applied  for  mediation,  the  offer  was  at  once  accepted  by  the
other,  the  exceptions  having  been  comparatively  unimpor-
tant. At  the  time  the  Erdman  act  was  passed  the  arbitration
features  were  regarded  as  paramount,  but  in  practice  the
mediation  features  proved  more  valuable.  Mediation  pro-
ceedings were  made  as  informal  as  possible.  Conferences
were  held  with  the  two  parties  separately,  a  joint  meeting  being
held  only  when  complete  settlement  or  agreement  to  arbitrate
was  reached,  and  a  fixed  rule  was  observed  that  neither  side
should  know  what  concession  the  other  was  willing  to  make,
untn  the  final  agreement.  The  terms  of  settlement  were  not
published  without  authorization  of  the  parties.  In  the  twelve
arbitration  cases,  the  first  two  arbitrators  were  able  to  agree
on  the  third  in  only  three  instances.  In  no  case  was  there
repudiation  by  either  side  of  an  arbitration  award,  and  there
is  only  one  instance  of  an  appeal  to  the  court,  which  proved
most  unsatisfactory  on  account  of  the  prolonged  litigation
necessary.^


'  1899.

2  The  act  of  March  4,  1911,  authorized  the  President  to  designate  any
member  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  or  of  the  Court  of
Commerce  to  take  the  place  of  the  chairman.


136 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

In  July,  1 9 13,  the  Erdman  act  was  superseded  by  the  New-
lands  act.'  It  provides  that  a  Commissioner  of  Mediation  and
Conciliation  be  appointed  by  the  President  with  the  advice
and  consent  of  the  Senate,  his  term  to  be  seven  years.  The
President  is  also  to  designate  not  more  than  two  other  gov-
ernment ofHcials,  appointed  with  the  consent  of  the  Senate,
to  constitute,  with  the  commissioner,  the  United  States
Board  of  Mediation  and  Conciliation.  In  the  same  manner
the  President  must  appoint  an  assistant  cominissioner  of
mediation  and  conciliation,  to  take  the  place  of  the  com-
missioner if  he  be  absent  or  the  office  vacant,  and  otherwise
to  assist  him.  In  case  of  a  controversy  to  which  the  law
applies  either  party  may  apply  to  the  Board  of  Mediation
and  Conciliation,  which  must  seek  to  effect  an  amicable  ad-
justment and  if  unsuccessful  must  urge  arbitration.  If  in-
terruption of  traffic  is  imminent  and  wovild  prove  detrimental
to  the  public,  the  board  may  proffer  its  services  as  mediator.
In  case  of  a  dispute  over  any  agreement  reached  through  the
mediation  of  the  board,  either  party  may  apply  to  it  for  an
opinion.  On.^e  failure  of  mediation,  aHjCard  of  arbrftration
may  b6  formed,  corrtposed  of  sis  or  three  arbitrators.  Each
side  chooses  two  members,  or  one  member,  and  these  choose
together  the  remaining  two  or  one.  In  case  of  failure  to  agree,
the  Board  of  Mediation  and  Conciliation  names  the  remainder.
Unorganized  employees  may  choose  their  representative
through  a  committee.  The  agreement  to  arbitrate  must
comply  with  the  following  requirements:  (i)  It  must  be  in
writing,  (2)  it  must  state  arbitration  is  had  under  the  act,
(3)  it  must  specify  whether  there  are  to  be  three  or  six  arbi-
trators, (4)  it  must  be  signed  by  the  accredited  representatives
of  both  parties,  (5)  it  must  specify  the  questions  to  be  decided,
(6)  it  must  state  that  a  majority  award  is  vaHd,  (7)  it  must
stiptilate  the  maximum  interval  from  the  completion  of  the
board  to  the  beginning  of  hearings,  (8)  it  must  stipulate  the
maximimi  interval  from  the  beginning  of  the  hearings  to  the
handing  down  of  the  award,  this  time  to  be  thirty  days  unless
otherwise  agreed,  (g)  it  must  state  the  date  on  which  the  award
becomes  effective  and  the  life  thereof,  (10)  it  must  promise

lynjted  States,  Laws  1913,  C.  6,


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  137

faithftil  execution  of  the  award,  (11)  it  must  declare  that  the
award,  testimony,  etc.,  are  to  be  filed  with  the  clerk  of  the
appropriate  United  States  district  court,  and  (12)  it  may  pro-
vide that  differences  as  to  interpretation  be  referred  back  to
the  board,  their  ruling  to  have  the  force  of  the  original  award.
Upon  consent  of  both  parties  the  board  of  arbitration  is  given
powers  of  compulsory  investigation.  The  arbitration  agree-
ment must  be  acknowledged  before  a  notary  public,  the  clerk
of  a  United  States  district  or  circuit  court,  or  one  of  the  Board
of  Mediation  and  Conciliation.  The  award  is  to  become
operative  in  ten  days  after  being  filed,  unless  exception  be
taken  for  matter  of  law  apparent  upon  the  record.  Decision
is  rendered  by  the  district  court,  or,  on  appeal,  by  the  circuit
court  of  appeals.  Parties  may  jointly  ask  to  have  a  board
of  arbitration  reconvened.  Nothing  in  the  act  may  be  con-
strued so  as  to  require  service  of  any  employee,  and  no  in-
junction or  other  legal  process  may  issue  to  compel  perform-
ance by  any  employee  of  a  contract.^

The  act  of  March  4,  19 13,  creating  a  Department  of  Labor,
provides  that  the  Secretary  of  Labor  shall  have  power  to  act
as  mediator  and  to  appoint  commissioners  of  conciliation  in
labor  disputes,  whenever  in  his  judgment  the  interests  of
industrial  peace  may  require  it  to  be  done.^  No  appropriation
was  made  for  the  expenses  of  commissioners  till  October,  1913,
and  none  for  their  compensation  till  April,  1914.  Until  the
latter  date,  therefore,  it  was  necessary  to  detail  government
employees  from  their  regular  work.  An  executive  clerk  was
appointed  in  July,  19 14,  and  the  work  systematized.  Not-
withstanding obstacles,  the  mediation  work  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Labor  is  reported  to  have  been  successful  in  twenty-
three  disputes  out  of  a  total  of  thirty-two.'  In  three  im-
portant disputes  the  Secretary  of  Labor's  offer  of  mediation
was  rejected.  In  the  P^re  Marquette  Railroad  shop  strike,
the  Calumet  copper  miners'  strike,  and  the  Colorado  coal
strike,  mediation  was  desired  by  the  employees,  but  declined

'P.  H.  Dixon,  "Public  Regulation  of  Railway  Wages,''  American
Economic  Review,  Vol.  V,  1915,  pp.  245-269;  United  States  Bureau  of
Labor,  Bulletin  No.  98,  January,  1912,  "Mediation  and  Arbitration  of
Railway  Labor  Disputes  in  the  United  States,"  C.  P.  Neill.

'  United  States,  Laws  1912-1913,  C.  141,  Sec.  8.

'  Secretary  of  Labor,  Second  Annual  Report,  1914,  p.  48.


138 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

by  the  employers.  In  case  mediation  fails,  arbitration  may  ,
be  proposed  by  the  mediators,  but  they  do  not  themselves  act/
as  arbitrators.

A  semiofficial  instance  of  arbitration  occurred  in  the  case
of  the  great  anthracite  coal  strike  in  Pennsylvania  in  1902.
In  this  case  the  government  appointed  an  arbitration  com-
mission on  the  request  of  the  parties  without  any  special
authority  in  law.^  The  miners  wanted  an  agreement,  the
operators  felt  that  it  would  not  be  binding  and  that  the  union
obstructed  discipline.  In  October,  five  months  after  the  be-
ginning of  the  strike.  President  Roosevelt  appointed  the  An-
thracite Coal  Strike  Commission.  The  men  retiimed  to  work
and  the  commission  began  its  inquiry.  It  took  the  testi-
mony of  ss8  witnesses.  The  losses  of  the  strike  were  esti-
mated at  $25,000,000  in  wages,  $1,800,000  in  relief  funds,
$46,100,000  to  the  operators,  and  $28,000,000  in  freight  re-
ceipts to  transportation  companies.  The  commission  found
the  underlying  cause  of  the  strike  to  be  the  issue  of  recognition
of  the  union.  The  award  stated  that  the  commission  would
recommend  recognition  of  the  union,  were  the  anthracite
unions  separated  from  the  bituminous  unions,  but  that  diffi-
culties should  be  referred  to  a  permanent  joint  committee  of
miners'  and  operators'  representatives  with  an  umpire  ap-
pointed by  the  federal  court,  and  that  the  life  of  the  award
should  be  till  March,  1906.  The  commission  further  recom-
mended a  system  of  compulsory  investigation.  The  agree-
ment has  been  renewed,  with  modifications,  and  was  still  in
force  in  1915.

Much  the  best  results  of  state  or  govertmient  intervention
have  been  achieved  through  mediation.  Public  investigation
up  to  the  last  few  years  has  seldom  been  used.  On  the  whole
a  good  deal  has  been  accomplished  in  the  promotion  of  in-
dustrial peace,  the  chief  obstacle  in  the  way  of  success  having
been  aiackjjLcaafidence  r,n+he.  part  r.^  ^\]p  dirp^tant'"  in  the
impartiality  .i33;;,^^3ity~of'nie' state  or  government  officials.
The  powers  of  compulsory  mvestigation  and  publication  of
the  recommendations  without  consent  of  the  parties,  adopted

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  43,  November,  1902,
"Report  to  the  President  by  the  Commissioner  of  Labor  " ;  Bulletin  No. 46,
May,  1903,  "Report  of  the  Anthracite  Coal  Strike  Commission."


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  139

in  nearly  half  the  American  laws,  have  seldom  been  re-
sorted to.

There  still  remains  a  large  field  for  federal  legislation  which
the  Newlands  act  does  not  cover  and  where  provision  for
mediation  and  arbitration  seems  desirable,  namely,  disputes
involving  raUroad  employees  not  engaged  in  actual  train
operation,  disputes  involving  other  agencies  of  interstate
commerce,  and  disputes  in  which  the  President  is  requested
to  intervene  to  preserve  order.  State  agencies  cannot  cope
with  these  kinds  of  disputes.  The  Secretary  of  Labor  is  em-
powered to  intervene  in  such  cases,  but  his  intervention  brings
in  the  political  and  trade  union  partisanship  which  is  avoided
under  the  Newlands  act.  Cooperation  between  federal  and
state  agencies  for  the  settlement  of  industrial  disputes  is  also
needed.

3.  Coercion  by  Government

(r) Restrictions  on  Strikes  and  Lockouts

The  preceding  section  has  covered  the  mediatory  measures
which  governments  have  adopted  to  diminish  strikes  and
lockouts.  Their  essence,  whether  it  be  mediation,  conciliation,
or  arbitration,  is  the  voluntary  acquiescence  and  participation
of  both  the  employer  and  the  employees  acting  collectively.
As  long  as  arbitration  is  voltmtary  the  bargaining  power  of
neither  party  is  affected.

From  the  point  of  view  of  legislation  the  strike  and  lockout
have  two  aspects.  On  one  hand  they  create  injiuy  to  the
public.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  a  part  of  the  bargaining
process  by  which  wages  are  determined.  To  the  public  the
effects  of  the  strike  and  lockout  are  similar.  Both  cause  sud-
den stoppage  of  trade,  failure  to  pay  debts,  expense  of  public
relief,  and  sometimes  disorder  and  famine  prices.  Hence
legislation,  springing  simply  from  the  needs  ot  the  public,
treats  the  strike  or  the  lockout  as  a  public  nuisance.

But  as  methods  of  bargaining  these  two  are  not  equivalent.
To  the  employer  the  right  to  lock  out  is  comparatively  unim-
portant. He  may  use  it  to  discipline  an  unruly  set  of  em-
ployees, to  discourage  unionization  in  his  factory,  or  to  "get
the  start"  of  his  men. But  in  the  usual  bargaining  he  has  no


I40 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

need  of  it.  He  can  keep  his  factory  gates  open  even  though,
at  the  same  time,  he  may  be  reducing  wages  or  refusing  de-
mands for  higher  wages.  He  is  not  forced  to  lock  out  and  he
can  force  his  employees  to  strike  or  submit.  Legislation  which
prohibits  or  restricts  the  lockout  does  not  greatly  weaken  the
bargaining  power  of  the  employer.

But  to  the  employees  there  can  be  no  collective  bargaining
without  the  right  to  strike.  For  a  strike  is  nothing  but  the
collective  refusal  of  the  terms  of  the  employer.  Legislation
which  restricts  or  prohibits  strikes,  restricts  or  prohibits  col-
lective bargaining  itself.  It  leaves  the  employee  a  helpless
individual  in  the  face  of  an  aggregation  of  capital,  unless  the
same  law  which  restricts  or  prohibits  the  collective  bargaining
provides  an  adequate  substitute  in  its  place.

Consequently,  as  affecting  the  collective  bargain,  there  are
two  essentials  to  an  adequate  measure  of  compvilsory  arbitra-
tion. First,  the  power  to  restrict  strikes  and  lockouts.  This
is  directed  primarily  against  the  employees.  Second,  the
power  to  enforce  awards  as  to  wages  and  conditions  of  labor
while  the  plant  is  running.  This  is  directed  primarily  against
the  employer.  There  necessarily  goes  with  these  two-  powers
the  power  of  compulsory  investigation  where  one  of  the  parties
is  unwilling  to  submit  to  arbitration,  but  such  power  is  but
a  means  to  an  end  of  obtaining  a  just  award  and  is  as  essential
to  a  system  of  public  information,  like  the  Canadian  industrial
disputes  investigation  act  of  1907,  as  to  a  system  of  coercion,
like  the  Australian  arbitration  acts.  It  is  the  joint  presence
of  these  two  essentials  which  makes  the  difference  between
compulsory  arbitration  and  minimum  wage  boards  on  the
one  hand,  and  compulsory  arbitration  and  the  Canadian  dis-
putes act  on  the  other  hand.  The  wage  board  enforces  a
minimum  award,  but  does  not  restrict  the  right  to  strike.'
The  Canadian  disputes  act  restricts  the  right  to  strike  without
notice,  but  grants  no  power  to  enforce  an  award.

The  degree  of  restriction  upon  the  strike,  as  expressed
in  different  laws,  varies  widely.  Carried  out  in  administra-
tion it  varies  stiU  more  widely.  In  the  Canadian  disputes  act
and  in  the  Colorado  industrial  commission  act  of  1915,  only


'  Except  under  special  circumstances.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  141

strikes  without  notice  and  hearing  are  unlawful.  The  same  is
true  in  the  case  of  "unregistered"  unions  in  New  Zealand.
On  the  other  hand,  all  strikes  by  "registered"  unions  in  that
colony  and  strikes  by  anybody  in  most  of  the  Australian
states  are  unlawful.  But  because  of  administrative  weak-
ness, as  will  be  shown,  the  actual  coercion  is  very  much  less
than  is  indicated  on  the  face  of  the  laws.

Of  compulsory  awards  we  have  nothing  in  North  America,
except  that  in  acts  of  eight  states  '  and  in  the  Canadian  indus-
trial disputes  investigation  act,  there  are  provisions  for  en-
forcing awards  which  have  first  been  voluntarily  accepted
by  both  parties.  New  Zealand  goes  a  step  further  toward
coercion,  for  there  it  is  optional  for  either  employers  or  em-
ployees to  register,  but  one  of  the  parties  registered  can  ap-
peal for  an  award  which  will  be  enforced  agaiast  both  the
parties.  Finally,  in  Australia,  there  is  left  no  option  to  either
employers  or  unions.

(2)  Development  0/  Coercive  Intervention

a.  England.  This  development  toward  restriction  of  the
right  to  strike  and  the  substitution  of  wage  awards  is  some-
times treated  as  a  step  backward.  This  is  entirely  too  simple
a  view.  It  is  true  that  the  freedom  of  the  bargain  has  de-
veloped from  a  former  time  of  government  coercion  and  now
shows  tendencies  to  go  back  under  government  coercion  again.
But  the  modem  coercion  is  different  from  the  old  coercion,
since  the  modem  government  derives  its  authority  from  a
broader  range  of  classes  than  those  which  controlled  the  older
governments.  In  the  England  of  the  middle  ages,  at  first,
the  lord  of  the  manor  and  the  town  officials  determined  the
wages.  The  national  catastrophe  of  the  Black  Death  in  the
fourteenth  century  caused  Parliament  to  fix  wages  by  law  in
certain  occupations.  This  proved  unwieldy  and  Parliament
gave  the  right  to  declare  wages  to  the  local  justices  of  the
peace.  This  system  was  codified  in  the  Elizabethan  statute
of  apprentices,  1562.  England  therefore  was  under  a  local
wage  board  system,  but  on  this  local  wage  board  was  no

'  See  "Mediation  by  Governnaent,"  p.  132.


142 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

representative  of  labor.  The  wage  determined  was  not  the
minimum  wage,  as  at  present,  above  which  the  employee  can
bargain  and  below  which  the  employer  cannot  bargain.  It
was  a  fixed  wage.  It  was  as  unlawful  fer  the  employee  to
demand  more  as  for  the  employer  to  offer  less.  It  thus  gave
no  freedom  to  either  party  for  either  individual  or  collective
bargaining.

In  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  England  ceased
to  be  an  aggregation  of  local  markets  and  became  a  national
market. A  local  system  of  wage  determination  became  ab-

!  surd  and  fell  into  disuse.  In  spite  of  the  protests  of  the  in-
cipient trade  unions  of  the  time,  the  employer  was  freed  from
the  compulsory  wage,  and  obtained  the  right  to  bargain  with
the  individual  employee.  On  the  other  hand,  at  about  the
same  time,  the  right  of  collective  bargaining  by  employees  was
denied  both  by  statutes  and  by  judicial  decisions.  In  1720
Parliament  began  a  series  of  acts  against  combinations  of
labor.  In  1721  the  court  brought  within  the  common  law
doctrine  of  conspiracy  a  combination  of  laborers  to  raise  their
wages.  This  policy  reached  its  culmination  in  the  con-
spiracy acts  of  1799  and  1800. ^  But,  beginning  in  1824;  when
a  strike  to  raise  wages  was  partly  legalized,  the  nineteenth
century  showed  a  continuous  development  in  England  of  the
right  of  coHectiye  bargaining.  This  formal  right  has  been
backed  by  unions  which  are  both  strong  and  reUable.  The
public  has  been  saved  much  of  the  nuisance  of  the  strike  and"
lockout  by  a  long  series  of  voluntary  trade  agreements.  Yet,
recently  in  several  of  the  sweated  industries  and  in  coal  min-
ing ^  the  government  has  formed  minimum  wage  boards  which
both  protect  the  workers  against  the  individual  bargain  of  the
employer  and  give  a  basis  for  collective  action  by  the  em-
ployees. Thus  the  twentieth  century  opens  with  a  policy
exactly  opposite  to  that  of  the  eighteenth  century. Collec-

sitive  bargaining  is  free,  but  individual  bargaining,  when  likely
\o  be  oppressive  to  employees,  is  restricted.

b.  Australasia. In  Australasia,^  Canada  and  the  United

*  See  Bryan,  Law  of  Conspiracy,  1909,  for  a  general  discussion  of  the
subject.  f'*S— v^

'  See  "The  Minimum  Wage,"  pp.  lyA^l^sTji'V
^The  material  used  in  detennining^^g^Q^l^ncIusions  regarding


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  143

States  there  was  much  the  same  development  as  in  England
up  to  about  1890.  Since  1890,  however,  there  has  been  in
Australasia  a  complete  revolution  in  poUcy.  In  1894  New
Zealand  passed  its  compulsory  arbitration  act.  The  next  state
to  adopt  compulsory  arbitration  was  New  South  Wales  in
1 90 1.  It  was  followed  by  Western  Australia  in  1902,  by  the
Commonwealth  itself  in  1904,  and  by  South  Australia  and
Queensland  in  191 2.  Meanwhile  Victoria  and  Tasmania  had
adopted  compulsory  wage  boards.  In  twenty  years  all  of
Australasia  has  adopted  laws  which  are  coercive  either  of
the  individual  bargain,  the  collective  bargain,  or  both.  Even
in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  through  the  enactment  of
the  Canadian  act  of  1907  and  the  Colorado  act  of  1915,  there
has  been  reintroduced  coercion  against  strikes  or  lockouts
without  notice  in  industries  affected  with  a  public  interest.

No  single  reason  explains  this  new  development.  It  rests
in  part  on  the  comparative  failure  of  collective  bargaining  to
bring  about  collective  agreements,  in  part  on  the  broader
democratic  source  from  which  modem  governments  derive
their  authority  and  which  makes  their  coercion  less  oppres-
sive to  workmen,  in  part  on  the  growing  importance  of  indus-
tries affected  with  a  public  interest,  and  latterly,  in  part,  on
the  demand  of  employer^  for  protection  against  more  powerful
unions.  ' ~" '

The  evolution  of  coercion  in  Australasia  to  an  extent  far
greater  than  that  of  the  United  States  is  a  normal  result  of
a  development,  economic,  social,  and  political,  sharply  in  con-
trast with  our  own.  The  public  has'bepii.itsftl4-'^ae4argest  em-
ployer of  iabor  through  its  govenoBSit  railroads  and  other


Australasia  is  mostly  of  a  controversial  nature.  The  wages  boards  of
Australia  have  had  a  recent  thorough  and  impartial  treatment  by  Dr.
Hammond  ("Wages  Boards  in  Australia,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,
Vol.  XXIX,  1914,  pp.  98-148,  326-361,  563-630).  For  the  rest,  the
books  on  the  subject  are  either  too  old  (books  age  rapidly  in  regard  to
the  Australasian  labor  situation)  or  too  controversial,  or  if  government
publications,  too  colorless.  The  parliamentary  debates  which  are  given
in  full  for  the  Commonwealth,  Victoria,  and  New  Zealand  have  been
mainly  relied  upon.  Three  Australian  labor  papers  have  been  consvilted,
but  the  anti-labor  papers  have  been  accessible  only  in  the  forms  of
clippings  or  quotations,  of  which  the  most  valuable  is  the  report  of  the
American  Trade  Commission  of  the  National  Association  of  Mapu-
facturers  (see  Bibliography).


144 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

public  utilities.  Private  employers  of  labor,  particularly  indus-
trial employers,  have  been  men  of  small  capital,  emplojdng  few
hands  as  compared  with  those  in  the  United  States.  Appar-
ently the  capitalistic  power  which  the  Australasian  labor
leaders  attack  most  bitterly  is  that  of  the  shipper  and  the
merchant.  The  position  of  the  employer  is  somewhat  similar
to  that  in  the  United  States  in  1830.  But  the  position  of  the
employee  has  been  sharply  different.  In  1830  in  the  United
States  the  workingmen  were  striking  for  a  ten-hour  day.  In
Australasia,  before  compulsory  arbitration  had  come  into
existence,  the  eight-hout -day- -had  become  the  general  rule.
But  in  America  there  is  no  standard.  The  hoiu-s  range  from
eight  to  twelve,  the  days  from  five  and  a  half  to  seven  a  week,
the  pay  from  $2  to  $6  a  day  in  the  same  locality.  The  brick-
layer gets  from  two  to  even  four  times  as  much  as  the  hod-
carrier,  measured  by  the  hour,  and  an  even  higher  ratio  in
comparison  with  ordinary  laborers.^  In  Australasia  there  is
no  such  difference.  The  bricklayer  gets  but  20  per  cent,  to
-^o  per  cent,  more  than  the  building  laborer.^  In  the  United
States  labor  is  divided  both  politically  and  industrially  by  the
negro  and  the  immigrant.  During  the  last  twenty  years  the
bulk  of  piur  immigration  is  from  people  receiving  relatively  low
wages  even  for  Europe.  The  immigration  into  Australasia
has  been  comparatively  light.  It  has  almost  all  come  from
the  British  Isles,  from  a  people  receiving  the  highest  wages
in  Eiu-ope.  There  have  been  no  difficulties  presented  by  con-
flicting races  and  different  languages.  There  has  been  no
large  body  of  disfranchised  or  unnaturalized  laborers.  The
election  laws  have  been  continuously  more  favorable  to  labor
than  those  of  the  United  States.  In  New  South  Wales,  for
example,  an  immigrant  from  Great  Britain  can  vote  in  one
year,  from  any  of  the  Australian  states  in  three  months.  Pro-
vision is  made  for  absent  voting.  The  entire  labor  force,  not
merely  the  skilled  workmen,  as  in  some  of  oiur  eastern  and
southern  states,  can  be  mobilized  at  the  polls.


1  Great  Britain,  Board  of  Trade,  Report  on  Cost  of  Living  in  American
Towns,  191 1,  pp.  65,  107.

2  Australia,  Commonwealth  Bureau  of  Census  and  Statistics,  Labor
and  Industrial  Branch,  Report  No.  2,  1913,  "Trade  Unionism,  Unemploy-
ment, Wages,  Prices,  and  Cost  of  Living  in  Australia,"  p.  36.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  14s

■  ^'

The  power  of  labor  at  the  polls  was  first  shown  during

the  very  years  when  labor  proved  impotent  in  collective  bar-
gaining. Prom  1890  to  1893  labor  was  defeated  in  four  dis-
astrous strikes.  In  1890  a  maritime  strike  paralyzed  the
shipping  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  To  an  exporting
people,  like  the  Australasians,  a  maritime  strike  ties  up  busi-
ness as  completely  as  a  railroad  strike  in  the  United  States.
In  the  midst  of  the  strike  the  tmions  asked  for  arbitration.
The  employers  refused  and  the  unions  were  beaten.  The  next
year  there  was  a  sheep-shearers'  strike,  mainly  for  the  right
of  collective  bargaining.  There  was  great  public  disorder.
The  unions  were  defeated.  In  1892  the  miners  at  Broken
Hill,  New  South  Wales,  before  they  struck,  asked  for  volun-
tary arbitration.  This  the  employers  refused  and  in  the
strike  that  followed  the  men  were  defeated.  Another  tur-
bulent and  disastrous  sheep-shearers'  strike  marked  the  year
that  followed.  During  those  same  four  years  the  number  of
parliamentary  seats  held  by  labor  greatly  increased.

These  were  the  events  preceding  1894,  when  the  first  com-
pulsory arbitration  act  was  passed  in  New  Zealand.  Strikes
had  meant  loss  to  the  public,  and  defeat  to  the  employees.
Voluntary  arbitration  had  been  refused  by  the  employers.
With  a  progressive  Liberal  Party  dominant  in  New  Zealand,
with  the  Labor  Party  developing  in  Australia,  the  unions
turned  to  government  for  coercive  assistance  in  wage  deter-
mination.

Unlike  Australia,  New  Zealand  has  never  had  a  large  labor
party,  but  a  month  after  the  defeat  of  the  maritime  strike  a
progressive  Liberal  Party  came  into  power  to  hold  office  for
the  next  twenty  years.  It  was  under  this  party  that  the  first
compulsory  arbitration  act  was  passed,  as  well  as  all  the  suc-
.ceeding  acts  and  amendments  up  to  the  amendment  of  19 13.
The  first  act  had  the  support  of  the  representatives  of  labor,
but  was  opposed  by  the  employers.  New  South  Wales  had
passed  a  law  for  volvmtary  arbitration  in  1892  and,  in  the  next
large  strike  which  followed,  the  employers  had  refused  to
accept  arbitration  under  the  act.  So  at  that  period  there
was  little  to  show  that  voluntary  arbitration  laws  were  of
any  use.  It  seemed  that  if  strikes  were  to  be  dimiiushed  3,t
all  it  must  be  by  compulsioi),
10


146 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  New  Zealand  act  went  into  effect  in  1895.  Thence
until  1906  there  was  a  general  period  of  prosperity,  and  what
wotild  probably  have  been  a  series  of  victorious  strikes  on  a
rising  market  became  a  no  less  victorious  series  of  awards  of
the  court  of  comptilsory  arbitration.  Strikes  were  few  and
insignificant.  With  1907  the  prolonged  period  of  prosperity
ended.  Thereafter  the  awards  gave  little  or  no  increases  of
wages.  There  was  a  series  of  illegal  strikes  and  a  readjust-
ment of  the  law  in  1908.  In  19 13  and  19 14  the  law  was  put
to  a  new  trial.  There  was  a  spread  of  socialism  and  syndical-
ism among  the  employees.  A  waterside  strike  occurred,  ac-
companied by  many  sympathetic  strikes.  The  government's
answer  was  to  Unait  to  narrower  groiands  the  right  to  strike.
Compulsory  arbitration  has  now  had  twenty  years  of  trial
under  conditions  of  ease  and  under  conditions  of  stress.  It
started  with  a  law  which  was  just  over  the  borderline  of
volimtary  arbitration.  With  successive  periods  of  strain  the
act  has  been  strengthened  imtil  now  it  is  clearly  coercive.

The  act  as  passed  in  1894  provided  for  district  boards  of
conciliation,^  and  one  court  of  arbitration.  The  boards  of
conciliation  were  composed  of  an  equal  number  of  representa-
tives of  employees  and  employers.  The  representatives  of
both  employers  and  employees  were  nominated  by  the  regis-
tered unions  of  employers  and  employees  within  the  district.
The  court  of  arbitration  consisted  of  one  supreme  court  judge,
assisted  by  one  member  nominated  by  the  registered  unions
of  employers  and  one  member  nominated  by  the  registered
imions  of  employees.  Neither  the  boards  of  conciliation  nor
the  court  of  arbitration  was  authorized  to  receive  any  de-
mands except  from  unions  registered  under  the  act.  A  de-
mand received  from  a  registered  union,  either  of  employers
or  of  employees,  must  first  pass  before  a  board  of  conciliation,
but  if  the  award  was  unsatisfactory  to  either  party  an  appeal
could  be  taken  to  the  court  of  arbitration,  whose  award  was
binding.  During  the  hearings  and  imtil  the  expiration  of  the
award  it  was  imlawful  to  strike  or  lock  out.

The  experience  of  twenty  years  has  not  changed  materially
the  court  of  arbitration,  but  the  boards  of  conciliation  haye„


1  Seven  were  appointed..


Collective  bargaining  i4ir

been  transformed.  They  were  always  a  cause  of  irritation
and  legislative  tinkering,  as  they  seem  to  have  been  from
the  beginning  little  more  than  boards  of  argumentation.
Being  appointed  by  districts  rather  than  by  trades,  their
members  had  no  expert  knowledge  of  the  partictilar  disputes
brought  before  them.  In  the  present  law  of  compulsory  arbi-
tration, enacted  in  1908,  the  machinery  of  the  boards  in  the
Canadian  disputes  act  was  applied.  Commissioners  of  con-
ciliation are  appointed  who  receive  appeals  and  who  appoint
advisers  nominated  by  both  parties,  who  must  be  men  with
practical  experience  in  the  trade  concerned,  either  as  em-
ployers or  employees.  This  system  has  proved  to  be  more
successful  than  the  earlier  system.

As  to  strikes  and  lockouts,  the  first  act,  on  the  face  of  it,
implied  an  equal  restriction  on  employers  and  employees.
But,  as  employers  did  not  appeal  to  the  court,  and  as  the
registration  on  each  side  was  voluntary  and  could  be  with-
drawn on  short  notice,  the  act  meant  for  the  employees  vol-
imtary  arbitration  with  an  enforceable  award.  This  worked
smoothly  up  to  1906  while  wages  were  rising  and  the  coercion
of  the  act  was  all  upon  the  employer.

But  the  illegal  strikes  of  1907-1908  caused  Parliament  to
separate  penalties  for  strikes  by  a  provision  for  the  attach-
ment of  wages,  to  levy  comparatively  heavy  fines  on  unions
whose  members  struck,  and  to  penalize  all  strikes  or  lockouts,
whether  of  registered  unions  or  not,  which  were  made  with-
out sufficient  notice  in  public  utilities  and  in  certain  indus-
tries, the  steady  continuance  of  which  is  affected  with  a  public
interest.  This  was  adapted  from  the  Canadian  disputes  act
of  1907.  The  waterside  strike  of  1913-1914  caused  Parlia-
ment to  apply  a  somewhat  similar  provision  to  all  strikes  or
lockouts  in  all  industries.  For  tmregistered  unions  the  strike
without  due  notice  is  not  prohibited.  For  registered  tmions
all  strikes  are  prohibited.

As  far  as  one  can  judge  ^  the  enforcement  of  penalties  for
strikes  and  lockouts  has  been  pursued  coolly  and  persistently
under  a  system  of  moderate  fines. Half  the  strikes  which  have


1  Based  almost  entirely  upon  government  reports  and  parliamentary
debates.


148 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

occurred  are  perfectly  legal  strikes — strikes  of  unregistered
unions,  but  there  have  been  a  number  of  serious  illegal  strikes.
The  waterside  §trike  of  1913-1914  started  with  unions  which
had  a  perfect  right  to  strike  and  spread  by  sympathetic
action  to  other  unions  registered  under  the  award,  which
therefore  had  no  right  to  strike.  New  Zealand  has  not
achieved  industrial  peace.  One  might  question  whether  a
system  in  which  it  is  illegal  for  some  unions  to  strike  and
legal  for  others  can  ever  be  satisfactory.

The  act  of  1894  in  New  Zealand  recognized  registered
unions  only.  Neither  the  individual  employer  nor  employee
could  appeal  to  its  protection.  This  remains  true  for  the
employee  under  the  latest  amendment,  but  the  individual
employer  now  may  register.

Though  the  first  act  contained  no  reference  to  preference
to  unionists,  this  preference  was  granted  in  the  awards  as
early  as  1896  and  was  incorporated  in  the  law  of  1900.  In  the
earlier  awards  preference  to  unionists  simply  meant  that  if
there  were  a  vacancy  a  union  man  must  be  given  preference
over  a  non-tmion  man  of  similar  ability.  In  the  later  awards
preference  to  ttnionists  has  become  equivalent  to  a  closed  shop,
for  an  employer  is  ordered  to  discharge  a  non-union  man  in
favor  of  an  unemployed  union  man.  Union  preference  is  cus-
tomarily granted  where  the  union  can  show  that  it  had  a
strong  organization  previous  to  the  dispute.

With  the  right  to  strike  taken  away,  the  problem  of  pro-
tecting labor  leaders  against  victimization  has  consumed  con-
siderable attention  both  of  the  courts  and  of  Parliament,
without  results  satisfactory  to  the  unions.  Provisions  in  re-
gard to  victimization  have  repeatedly  been  changed.  Some-
times the  biu-den  of  proof  has  been  put  upon  the  employer,
sometimes  upon  the  employee.

Registered  unions,  therefore,  have  gained  a  preference
which  amounts  almost  to  a  closed  shop  and  some  protection
against  victimization,  but  at  the  expense  of  very  large  con-
trol through  court  decisions.  Initiation  fees,  membership
fees,  fines,  procedure  of  unions,  relations  to  other  unions,'
all  have  been  brought  either  within  the  awards  or  within  other


'  New  Zealand,  Journal  of  the  Department  of  Labour,  January,  1914,  p.  3.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  149

court  decisions.  A  recent  decision  which  applies,  however,
to  all  unions  whether  registered  or  not,  declares  that  union
funds  may  not  be  used  for  political  purposes.^  Thus  the
government  makes  politically  innocuous  the  labor  union  which
it  encourages.

It  might  be  answered  that  a  registered  union  is  free  to
cancel  its  registration  and  thus  to  escape  control  by  the
government,  if  obnoxious.  But  both  in  the  strikes  of  1908
and  in  the  strike  of  1913-1914  the  employers  coerced  the  em-
ployees into  registering  under  the  act  by  refusing  to  recognize
any  union  which  had  not  registered.  This  practical  coercion,
which  seriously  restricts  the  apparent  voluntary  character
of  the  law  on  the  side  of  unions,  is  at  present  the  chief  cause
for  complaint  by  labor  leaders.

Where  arbitration  is  voluntary,  the  awards  represent  an
adjustment  only  between  the  demands  of  the  two  parties  and
are  based  on  their  relative  strength.  With  the  element  of
coercion  the  third  party,  the  public,  enters  to  determine  that
the  awards  shall  not  be  inconsistent  with  its  notions  of  a
proper  standard  of  wages.  As  shown  above,  compulsory  ar-
bitration in  New  Zealand  has  been  largely  voluntary  on  the
part  of  the  employees.  Decisions,  therefore,  have  taken  into
accotmt  little  more  than  the  respective  demands  of  the  two
parties.  But  in  two  respects  there  has  been  a  change  of  policy.
Union  tactics  and  the  early  awards  limited  the  proportion  of
apprentices.  The  later  awards  generally  specify  no  limit,  but
very  sharply  raise  the  wages  of  apprentices.  The  public  pur-
pose of  open  opportunity  is  thus  subserved  without  being
turned  to  the  private  end  of  the  substitution  of  apprentices
for  joumejmien.  Again,  the  earlier  acts  allowed  slow  workers
to  receive  less  than  the  minimtim  wage  only  with  the  consent
of  the  secretary  or  president  of  the  union.  This  was  changed
in  1908  by  allowing  a  state  official  to  grant  permits  to  slow
workers.

The  law  was  originally  passed  by  the  Liberal  Party,  favored
by  the  labor  unions,  but  opposed  by  the  employers.  In  the
crisis  of  1908  the  Liberal  Party  revised  the  law  against  the
opposition  of  a  portion  of  the  Reform  Party  (the  chief  opposi-


^  Parliamentary  Debates,  4th  Session,  1914,  pp.  659-665.


ISO PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tion  party)  and  of  the  Labor  Party.  This  revision  the  em-
ployers favored.  In  the  debates  in  Parliament  the  leader  of
the  opposition  (later  the  premier)  declared  himself  against
compulsory  arbitration,  but  in  favor  of  an  act  somewhat
similar  to  the  Canadian  disputes  act.  During  the  strike  'of
1913-1914  the  Reform  Party,  now  in  power,  declared  in  favor
of  compulsory  arbitration  and  added  to  the  law  amendments
which  were  distasteful  to  the  Labor  Party.  At  the  present
time  (1915),  however  they  differ  in  details,  all  parties  in
Parliament  are  committed  to  the  principle  of  compulsory
arbitration,  the  only  opposition  being  from  groups  not  yet
represented  in  Parliament,  like  the  Socialists  and  Sjrndicalists.

Turning  from  New  Zealand  to  Australia,  three  chief  facts
appear  in  the  history  of  coercive  legislation:  (i)  The  laws  were
enacted  and  administered  in  the  presence  of  a  large  labor
party;  (2)  two  systems,  compulsory  arbitration  and  wage
boards,  have  grown  up  side  by  side,  until,  in  several  of  the
states,  the  two  have  merged;  (3)  Australia,  as  a  federal  com-
monwealth, has  had  both  federal  and  state  courts  of  arbitra-
tion. It  has  been  one  thing  to  enact  and  administer  laws  of
compulsory  arbitration  in  the  presence  of  an  insignificant  labor
party,  as  in  New  Zealand.  It  has  been  very  different  to  do
the  same  in  AustraUa,  where  the  Labor  Party  was  first  a  large
third  party,  later  a  large  second  party,  and  in  September,
1915,  was  in  control  of  the  Commonwealth  and  the  majority
of  the  states.

The  period  of  the  strikes  of  1 890-1 893  was  a  period  of  ex-
traordiaary  growth  of  a  ^socialistic  Labor  Party.  In  1890
there  was  but  one  labor  member  in  aU  the  legislatures  of
Australia.  In  1893  there  were  eighty  in  the  lower  houses.*
The  members  of  the  upper  houses  are  elected  or  selected  under
restrictive  conditions.

This  movement  was  a  flash  in  the  pan,  but  with  the  creation
of  the  Commonwealth  in  1899  a  much  more  solid  labor  move-
ment developed.  There  was  a  labor  ministry  for  a  few  months
in  1904,  another  labor  ministry  in  1910,  just  barely  defeated
by  the  popular  vote  of  19 13.  Again,  during  the  European
war,  there  was  another  appeal  to  the  polls  and,  upsetting  all


^  St.  Ledger,  Australian  Socialism,  1909,  p.  56.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  151

precedents  and  marking  the  distinction  between  the  Austra-
lian labor  movement  and  labor  movements  elsewhere,  the
Labor  Party  was  victorious  in  a  campaign  based  on  its  record
of  adopting  a  vmiversal  military  service  act.  Queensland,  New
South  Wales,  Western  Australia,  South  Australia,  and  even
conservative  Tasmania  are  also  now,  in  1915,  under  labor
ministries.  One  large  state,  Victoria,  remains  anti- labor.
With  labor  parties  taking  the  labor  vote,  with  anti-labor  parties
having  but  slight  chance  of  any  large  labor  vote,  with  or-
ganization of  labor  on  the  farms  as  well  as  in  the  workshops,
Australia  is  divided  politically  between  the  employer  and  the
employee.  This  means  that  any  law  affecting  wage  bargains
is  enacted  or  administered  by  a  party  which  unequivocally
represents  one  or  the  other  side  to  the  bargain.  If  a  labor
party  is  in'control  the  compulsion  of  a  compulsory  arbitration
law  is  not  very  real  to  the  employee  nor  is  it  very  real  to  the
employer  if  an  anti-labor  party  controls.

The  two  Australian  states  with  the  largest  population,
Victoria  and  New  South  Wales,  were  the  &st  to  adopt  coer-
cive measures,  but  one  adopted  the  wage  board  system,  while
the  other  adopted  the  compulsory  arbitration  system.  In
1896  Victoria  enacted  the  first  of  its  wage  board  laws.  In
1 90 1  New  South  Wales  enacted  its  first  law  of  compulsory
arbitration.  Here  we  may  contrast  the  workings  of  the  mini-
mum wage  boards  and  compulsory  arbitration  as  compared
with  the  theoretical  differences  between  the  two  systems.

In  the  early  'nineties  there  was  a  strong  htimanitarian  move-
ment in  Victoria,  increased  by  the  report  of  the  parliamentary
board  of  1893  on  the  existence  of  sweated  labor  in  Melbourne.
The  minimum  wage  bill,  as  originally  introduced,  applied  only
to  women  and  was  intended  solely  for  the  benefit  of  those  who
were  suffering  under  unfair  wage  conditions.  The  act  as
finally  passed  in  1896  appUed  to  both  sexes,  but  only  to  those
industries  particularly  notorious  for  low  wages.  Each  wage
board  consisted  of  a  chairman  and  an  equal  number  of  repre-
sentatives elected  by  the  votes  of  aU  employees  and  of  em-
ployers. The  employer  had  votes  in  proportion  to  his  aver-
age number  of  employees.  The  wage  board  fixed  wages,
hotirs,  and  certain  other  matters,  but  could  not  grant  union
preference. This  method  of  election  of  representatives  prac-


152 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tically  created  state  unions  of  employees  and  employers.  The
method  proved  unsuccessful.  The  elected  employees  and
employers  were  too  much  committed  to  their  electors.  In  the
present  system  the  employers  and  employees  on  the  board  are
appointed,  presumably  from  the  more  reputable  employers
and  less  ndlitant  employees.  Decisions  are  based  on  what
the  more  reputable  employer  pays  and  are.  designed  to  pro-
tect him  from  unfair  competition.  In  fact,  it  was  stated  in
one  of  the  laws,  since  amended,  that  wage  board  decisions
should  conform  to  what  was  "paid  by  reputable  employers  to
employees  of  average  capacity."  This  has  gradually  brought
employers  to  favor  the  law.  The  law  also  has  usually  been
favored  by  the  Labor  Party.  It  does  not  take  away  the
right  to  strike,  but  provides  such  a  ready  substitute  that
Victoria,  more  than  any  other  of  the  Australian  states,  can
claim  to  be  a  "country"  almost  "without  strikes."

The  original  wage  boards  were  created  in  industries  noto-
rious for  sweated  labor  and  brought  rapid  improvement  in  the
condition  of  workers.  But  wage  boards  have  since  greatly
increased  in  number  and  have  been  extended  to  industries
where  wages  are  high  and  labor  is  organized.  To  mark  the
change  of  purpose  in  the  creating  of  new  wage  boards  it  is
sufficient  to  say  that  two  of  the  new  boards  of  19 12  were
created  against  the  protest  of  the  labor  members  of  Parlia-
ment, one  of  them  at  the  petition  of  the  employers,  and  that
another  wage  board  was  given  authority  only  over  men
workers  because  the  women  petitioned  not  to  be  brought
under  it.  The  wage  board  system  of  Victoria,  therefore,  has
been  extended  beyond  its  original  piupose  and  has  become  a
method  of  protecting  reputable  employers  from  unfair  com-
petition and  insuring  industrial  peace  by  providing  a  ready
means  of  adjustment  of  grievances.

Turn  now  to  the  turbulent  history  of  New  South  Wales.
Before  compulsory  arbitration  was  adopted.  New  South  Wales
was  much  more  subject  than  Victoria  to  serious  strikes  and
such  it  has  remained.  This  one  state  furnishes  more  than  half
of  the  days  lost  by  strikes  in  all  of  Australia.^  Comptilsory
arbitration  cannot  be  said  to  have  increased  such  disputes,

'  Australia,  Commonwealth  Bureau  of  Census,  Labour  Bulletin.  No.  4,
February,  1914,  p.  262.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  153

but  simply  not  to  have  stopped  them.  After  a  futile  volun-
tary arbitration  law  of  1892,  New  South  Wales  passed  its  first
compulsory  law  in  1901.  This  act  was  especially  important
because  on  it  was  based  the  present  Commonwealth  act  of
1904.  Here  was  first  introduced  the  unique  feature  later
copied  in  the  Commonwealth  act,  that  the  court  itself  must
give  its  consent  before  any  prosecution  for  a  violation  of  the
nature  of  a  strike  or  lockout  could  be  commenced.  That
consent  was  not  frequently  granted.  For  the  rest,  the  act
provided  for  a  single  court  with  final  determinations  on  all
matters  within  the  scope  of  the  act.  Preference  could  be
granted  to  unionists.

The  act  expired  in  1908.  The  single  court  had  not  disposed
of  the  cases  brought  before  it  with  sufficient  rapidity.  The
anti-labor  nainistry  in  power  at  that  time  adopted  a  compre-
hensive system  of  wage  boards  modeled  after  the  Victorian
system,  whose  determinations  were  subject  to  appeal  to  a
special  court  of  arbitration.  All  strikes  were  declared  illegal.
A  system  of  fines  was  adopted  to  reach  the  union  funds.
Strikes,  almost  of  the  character  of  rebellion,  followed,  and
the  next  year  the  same  ministry  rushed  through  a  bill  ap-
plicable to  strikes  in  certain  necessary  industries,  like  coal
mining.  These  provided  a  penalty  of  not  exceeding  twelve
months'  imprisoimient  for  instigating  strikes  and  the  same
length  of  time  for  mere  participation  in  a  strike  meeting.
Inmiediately  there  followed  a  strike  of  all  the  coal  nainers  in
New  South  Wales.  The  situation  became  intolerable  and  the
Labor  Party  came  back  to  power.  A  new  act  was  passed  in
191 2.  The  severe  penalties  were  withdrawn  and  special  con-
ciliation boards  were  created  for  mine  workers.

But  neither  under  anti-labor  ministries  nor  under  the  present
labor  ministry  is  New  South  Wales  industrially  quiet.  Frantic
assertion  of  authority  has  been  followed  by  flabbiness  in  the
administration  of  the  law.  This  has  resulted  in  a  series  of
headless  strikes.^  The  officials  of  the  union,  who  might  be
prosecuted,  make  a  show  of  dissuading  the  men,  and  the  men
strike  with  neither  political  nor  economic  consequences,  as

'  Based  on  the  report  of  the  American  Trade  Commission  of  the
National  Association  of  Manufacturers  and  the  Australian  Worker ^
Sydney,


154 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  government  will  not  prosecute  the  rank  and  file,  and
the  employer  is  bound  by  the  awards.  Practically  the  com-
pulsory arbitration  system  of  New  South  Wales  has  become
an  imperfect  wage  board  system.

Among  the  other  states,  Western  Australia  copied  the  New
Zealand  model  in  its  first  law  of  1902.  But,  as  in  New  Zea-
land, the  district  conciliation  boards  proved  a  failure.  In  the
laws  of  191 2  they  were  abolished,  and  now  the  court  may  ap-
point advisers  or ' '  assessors ' '  to  assist  it.  Interestingly  enough,
union  preference,  provided  in  the  earlier  law,  disappears  from
the  later  one  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  new  law  was  passed
by  a  labor  ministry.  Reports  of  the  actual  working  of  the
law  are  contradictory.  The  two  other  states,  Queensland  and
South  Australia,  passed  their  first  law  in  1912,  in  both  cases
by  the  anti-labor  party.  The  Queensland  law  was  the  result
of  a  streetcar  strike.  The  South  Australian  law  is  noteworthy
for  its  severe  and  elaborate  penalties  for  acts  connected  with
strikes,  such  as  picketing.  These  systems  have  been  in  exist-
ence too  short  a  time  to  show  their  actual  working.

Among  the  provisions  of  the  new  Commonwealth  constitu-
tion of  Australia,  adopted  in  1899,  was  the  right  to  create  a
compulsory  arbitration  court  for  interstate  disputes.  This
right  was  made  substantial  in  1904  by  the  passage  of  the
industrial  arbitration  act.  The  law  was  modeled  on  the  1901
act  of  New  South  Wales.  There  was  no  system  of  wage
boards,  but  simply  a  single  cotirt  of  arbitration  with  its  presi-
dent the  sole  member.  This  court  not  only  hears  appeals,
but  can  on  its  own  initiative  stmimon  parties.  Its  determina-
tions are  final,  but  it  "may"  state  a  case  to  the  high  court
(the  supreme  court  of  the  Commonwealth)  for  advice.  As
in  the  New  South  Wales  law,  no  prosecution  can  be  started
against  any  one  for  a  strike  or  a  lockout  without  the  consent
of  the  coiirt.  Since  this  consent  has  never  been  given  in
the  case  of  a  strike  the  law  is  scarcely  more  than  a  minimum
wage  law.

The  scope  of  its  power  in  relation  to  the  state  courts  is,  for
us,  the  most  interesting  question.  The  law  gives  to  the  court
power  over  "disputes  extending  beyond  the  limits  of  any  one
state" — except  in  regard  to  disputes  in  agricultural  indus-
tries. Subsequent  acts  have  attempted  to  enlarge  its  scope,


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  155

but  have  been  declared  unconstitutional,  and  when  Justice
Higgins,  the  president,  has  submitted  a  case  to  the  high  court,
the  rulings  of  the  court  have  usually  been  restrictive  against
the  Commonwealth.  Uncertainty  has  remained  as  to  what
is  a  "dispute"  and  what  is  really  meant  by  "extending  be-
yond the  limits  of  one  state."  It  is  obvious  that  if  a  request
for  a  change  of  wages  paid  by  two  different  employers  in  two
different  states  constitutes  a  "dispute  extending  beyond  the
limits  of  one  state"  the  Commonwealth  court  can  strip  the
state  courts  of  any  real  power.  Already  the  court  has  deter-
mined wages  on  the  local  tramways  from  Perth  on  the  west
coast  to  Brisbane  on  the  east  coast.

A  curious  distinction  has  been  made  by  the  high  court,  by
which  wage  board  decisions  of  Victoria  are  considered  part
of  the  Victorian  law  and  have  restrictive  power  over  rulings
by  the  Commonwealth  Court  of  Arbitration,  where  applied
within  that  state,  while  the  awards  of  arbitration  courts  of  the
several  states  are  not  regarded  as  law  and  have  no  restrictive
power.  This  led  in  19 12  to  the  employers  of  Victoria  petition-
ing that  the  building  trade  laborers  of  that  state  be  brought
under  a  state  wage  board,  as  the  latter  were  seeking,  with  the
building  laborers  of  other  states,  to  come  under  the  Common-
wealth Coiurt  of  Arbitration.  The  Labor  Party  stands  com-
mitted to  the  aboHtion  of  state  courts  of  arbitration,  their  place
to  be  taken  by  district  courts  under  the  authority  of  the
Commonwealth.

Unlike  New  Zealand,  there  can  be  no  legal  strike  in  Aus-
tralia outside  of  Tasmania  and  Victoria,  since  the  compulsory
arbitration  laws  have  "blanket"  provisions  against  strikes
and  lockouts.  But,  with  governments  either  purely  labor  or
purely  anti-labor,  th  eadministration  of  these  laws  seems  to
have  been,  at  least  in  New  South  Wales,  either  absurdly  flabby
or  absurdly  frantic.  Instead  of  government  acting  as  a  judge
it  becomes  a  plaintiff  or  defendant  determining  the  adminis-
tration of  law.

More  Commonwealth  ministries  have  been  wrecked  on  both
sides  of  the  question  of  "union  preference"  than  on  any  other
question.  Union  preference,  which  is  used  as  a  harmless  bait
in  New  Zealand  to  bring  labor  unions  under  the  act,  becomes
a  grave  poUtical  question  in  the  states  and  in  the  Common-


iS6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

wealth,  where  the  vote  of  labor  and  its  opponent  is  very  close.
New  South  Wales  has  adopted  union  preference  in  its  com-
pulsory arbitration  acts.  Rather  curiously,  Western  Australia,
with  the  strongest  labor  party  of  all  the  states,  repealed,  in
1912,  the  provisions  regarding  union  preference  which  had
existed  in  the  act  of  1902.  The  Commonwealth  court  has  had
the  right  to  grant  union  preference,  but  Justice  Higgins,  al-
though once  a  member  of  a  labor  ministry,  grants  union  prefer-
ence, not  as  in  New  Zealand  in  cases  where  there  is  a  strong
union,  but  only  in  cases  where  a  union  has  been  oppressed.

In  most  of  the  states  decisions  are  based  on  existing  strength
of  the  parties,  and  are  similar,  therefore,  to  decisions  in  a  court
of  volimtary  arbitration.  But  Justice  Higgins  of  the  Com-
monwealth court  has  chosen  for  his  minimum  for  the  lowest
paid  laborers  not  the  customary  wage,  nor  a  wage  based  on
the  strength  of  the  union,  but  a  wage  based  on  a  standard  of
living.  This  was  most  sharply  shown  in  the  decision  in  1914
in  the  case  of  the  dock  laborers,  where  probable  annual  earn-
ings, taking  into  account  fluctuations  of  employment,  were
taken  as  the  basis  for  an  hourly  wage.'  We  have  thus  trav-
eled far  from  voluntary  arbitration  or  strikes,  with  wages  de-
termined by  the  strength  of  the  two  parties,  far  from  minimum
wages  based  on  what  the  more  reputable  employers  pay,  to  a
determination  of  wages  on  a  constmiers'  standard  of  living.

c.  Canada  and  the  United  States.  In  Canada  and  the  United
States  we  again  contrast  the  situation  of  the  classes.  Australia
is  ruled  by  a  labor  party.  Labor  in  the  United  States  has  never
been  a  chief  minority  party.  Where  it  has  been  a  straight
conflict  between  labor  on  one  side  and  the  other  elements  of
society  on  the  other  side,  labor  has  been  defeated  at  the  poUs.
Again,  in  regard  to  unionization,  the  unskiUed  and.£emisIaDed
are  unioiiized  ill  bUL  U  few  industries.  Organized  labor  is,
for  the  most  part,  organized  skUled  labor. 'Sttch  labor  is

stromz-a,t  industrial  harmmmgr-l 1 1 111, il Ih"  polls.

It  is  therefore  no  blindness  but  wise  calculation  which  has  set
the  leaders  of  organized  labonayainst  f>^ovemment  interference
in  industrial  disputes.  They  could  not  count  on  controlling
government,  and  they  cannot  predict  what  standard  the  gov-


^New  Statesman,  June  6,  1914,  p.  262.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  157

eminent  would  use  in  its  awards.  Unions  which  have  gained
for  their  members  the  more  desirable  conditions  of  labor  are
not  willing  to  risk  what  they  have  gained  for  a  doubtful  stand-
ard imposed  by  the  outside  pubhc  which  might  take  into
account  the  average  and  not  the  exceptional  condition  of
labor.

The  employers,  also,  are  afraid  of  compulsory  arbitration.
Through  their  voting  rights  alone  they  have  even  less  power
at  the  polls  than  the  skilled  workmen.  Only  by  other  means
and  by  the  aid  of  other  classes  can  they  control  politics.

There  is  but  one  class  which  would  be  likely  to  gain  by  en-
forcing higher  standards.  It  is  the  immense  but  miscellane-
ous class  of  unskilled  and  semiskilled  naen,  and  of  women  and
children. They  have  no  voice  to  make  their  wishes  known.

Against  the  joint  opposition  of  organized  labor  and  capital,
compulsory  arbitration  makes  no  headway  in  the  legislattures,
in  spite  of  the  agitation  that  follows  every  great  strike.  Only
once  has  it  been  within  the  zone  of  practical  politics.  The
anthracite  coal  strike  of  1902  put  the  voluntary  system  to
a  considerable  strain.  Arbitration  was  accepted  by  the
employers  only  after  pressure  was  put  upon  them  by  the
President  of  the  United  States.

In  the  report  on  the  arbitration  award  governing  the  de-
mands of  the  eastern  locomotive  engineers  in  191 2,  the  chair-
man, representing  the  pubhc,  advocated  a  permanent  wage
commission  and  added:  "Is  it  unreasonable  to  ask  that  men
in  the  service  of  public  utilities  shall  partially  surrender  their
liberty  in  the  matter  of  quitting  employment,  so  that  the
nation  as  a  whole  may  not  suffer  disproportionately?" '  The
sharpest  criticism  of  this  doctrine  came  from  the  minority
report  representing  the  engineers:  "To  insure  the  permanent
industrial  peace  so  much  desired  will  require  a  broader  states-
manship than  that  which  will  shackle  the  rights  of  a  large
group  of  our  citizens."  ^  When  the  western  railroad  arbitra-
tion of  1915  resulted  unsatisfactorily  to  the  brotherhoods  the
minority,  representing  them,  protested  that  "no  act  by  a


•  Report  of  the  Board  of  Arbitration  in  the  Matter  of  the  Controversy  be-
tween the  Eastern  Railroads  and  the  Brotherhood  of  Locomotive  Engineers,
1912,  p.  107.

^Ibid.,  p.  123.


iS8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

governmental  tribunal  could  more  keenly  bring  home  to  the
wage-earners  of  this  country  the  consideration  they  might  ex-
pect if  boards  under  governmental  supervision  and  control
were  to  review  and  adjust  their  wages  and  working  conditions
on  that  basis."  And  so  the  matter  stands :  the  employers  are
dissatisfied  with  what  they  consider  one-sided  compulsory  ar-
bitration, the  employees  attack  any  greater  measure  of
coercion.

One  of  the  objections  frequently  raised  against  compulsory
arbitration  is  its  unconstitutionality  in  violation  of  the  thir-
teenth amendment,  in  that  it  imposes  involuntary  servitude
other  than  punishment  for  crime.  This  objection  is  probably
not  sound.  We  have  already  seen  i  that  quitting  work  col-
lectively in  pxirsuance  of  an  unlawful  agreement  contains  the
element  of  conspiracy  which  makes  a  strike  essentially  diSer-
ent  from  the  ordinary  quitting  of  work.  Such  a  concerted
agreement  may  be  enjoined  and  punished  as  contempt,  and
there  are  sufficient  precedents  in  the  decisions  to  warrant  the
constitutionality  of  imposing  penalties,  should  a  compulsory
arbitration  law  be  shrewdly  drafted  and  popularly  supported.
It  is  not  enough  to  raise  the  objection  of  constitutionality,
for  constitutions  change  with  interpretation.  The  lasting  ob-
jections must  be  found  elsewhere.

While  Canada  and  the  United  States  have  not  adopted
systems  of  compulsory  arbitration,  they  have  adopted  coer-
cive featiures  at  three  different  steps  in  the  procedure  of  gov-
ernmental arbitration.  These  are  compulsory  investigation,
the  enforcement  of  awards  which  have  been  accepted  by  both
parties,  and  the  prohibition  of  sudden  change  of  terms  or
sudden  strikes  or  lockouts.

The  first  is  for  the  sake  of  official  and  public  information.
Directly  it  can  have  no  effect  on  the  bargaining  rights  and  the
bargaining  tactics  of  the  two  parties.  It  is  embodied  in  some
of  the  state  laws  of  voluntary  arbitration  and  was  a  part  of
the  federal  act  of  1888.^  But  when  it  was  proposed  in  the
Townsend  bill  in  1904  to  give  that  power  again  to  a  commission
appointed  by  the  President,  the  bill  was  defeated,  for  at  the


'  See  "The  Law  of  Conspiracy,''  pp.  101-104.
'  See  "Mediation  by  Government,"  pp.  132,  133.^


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  159

hearing  appeared  against  it  the  representatives  of  the  American
Federation  of  Labor,  the  railroad  brotherhoods,  and  of  the
American  Anti-boycott  Association.

It  is  only  with  the  Canadian  industrial  disputes  investiga-
tion act  that  collective  bargaining  itself  is  subject  to  the  coer-
cion of  government.  That  act  makes  a  sudden  change  of
terms  and  a  strike  or  lockout  without  sufficient  notice  un-
lawful in  a  certain  class  of  industries  affected  with  a  public
interest.  The  industries  are  public  utilities  and  mines.  In
1906,  the  year  before  its  passage,  there  had  been  a  prolonged
strike  in  the  Alberta  coal  mines  which  threatened  a  coal
famine.  The  act  makes  it  -unlawful  in  such  industries  to
change  the  terms  of  employment  without  thirty  days'  notice,
and  reqtdres  that,  if  within  that  time,  appeal  is  taken  to  the
minister  of  labor,  the  terms  of  employment  shall  remain  the
same  pending  an  investigation.  It  is  likewise  unlawful  to
strike  or  lock  out  until  after  a  hearing  and  findings  by  the
investigating  board.  Then  either  a'  change  of  terms,  or  a
strike,  or  a  lockout  is  perfectly  lawful.  The  act  is  coercive
only  against  the  sudden  strike  and  the  sudden  change  of  terms.
Upon  application  the  minister  of  labor  appoints  a  board  to
which  the  employees  nominate  one  man,  the  employers  an-
other, and  the  two  men  nominate  the  chairman.  In  case  of
failure  to  nominate  the  minister  does  the  selecting.

The  law  seems  to  have  been  successful  in  diminishing  the
number  of  strikes,  probably  more  through  conciliation  and
public  opinion  than  through  coercive  measures,  which  seem
not  to  have  been  seriously  enforced.  There  have  been  but
niaeteen  strikes  in  industries  under  the  act  from  1907  to  1915,
and  the  Labour  Gazette  ^hoasts  of  a  very  large  number  of  settle-
ments. The  employers  favor  the  law.  As  to  the  employees,
the  miners  are  hostile,  the  railroad  men  generally  favor  it.
Other  classes  of  labor  are  mild  in  their  attitude.

The  Canadian  disputes  act  instantly  appealed  to  the  public
or  to  the  employers  of  other  lands.  Part  of  its  machinery
was  adopted  the  following  year  (1908)  in  New  Zealand.  An
act  somewhat  similar  was  passed  in  the  Transvaal  in  1909.
Bills  based  on  its  principles  were  introduced  into  the  legisla-


'  Canada,  Labour  Gazette,  Vol.  XV,  1915,  pp.  1302-1312.


i6o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tures  of  New  York,  Wisconsin,  and  California,  but  it  was  not
until  the  upheaval  in  Colorado  in  1914-1915  that  a  law  was
actually  passed  in  the  United  States  embodying  restrictions  on
change  of  terms  and  on  strikes  and  lockouts.

The  law  of  1915'  gives  to  the  Industrial  Commission  of
Colorado,  among  its  other  powers,  the  power  to  compel  a
hearing  in  the  case  of  an  industrial  dispute,  and  to  deliver  an
award,  which,  like  those  under  the  Canadian  act,  is  not
mandatory.  As  in  the  Canadian  act,  change  of  terms  of  em-
ployment, strikes,  and  lockouts  are  prohibited  until  after  thirty
days'  notice  and  until  after  a  hearing  and  award  if  such  hear-
ing is  started  within  the  time  of  notice.  Going  beyond  the
Canadian  act,  which  is  limited  to  public  utilities  and  mines,
the  Colorado  law  covers  all  employees  except  those  in
domestic  service,  in  agriculture,  and  in  establishments  em-
ploying less  than  four  hands.  The  law  was  first  invoked^
when  a  large  cracker  company  announced  a  decrease  of  wages
to  take  efiEect  the  following  week.  Some  of  the  employees
struck  and  the  commission  ordered  the  employers  to  submit
their  proposed  reduction  to  the  commission  and  the  employees
to  resume  work.  Both  sides  obeyed.''  "  No  longer  is  a  strike
a  private  affair,"  was  the  editorial  comment  in  a  prominent
Denver  paper.*


4.  Unions  of  Government  Employees

With  the  broadening  scope  of  the  state  as  an  industrial
employer,  the  collective  bargain  is,  in  some  cases,  entered  upon
even  by  the  government  with  its  employees.  Here  it  presents
a  peculiar  problem.  The  state  ^  employs  permanently  larger
bodies  of  workers  than  any  other  single  employer.® It  is  not

1  Colorado,  Laws  1915,  C.  180.

''August,  1915.

^  Rocky  Mountain  News,  August  10,  1915.

'Ibid.,  August  II,  1915.

*  Meaning  the  governmental  unit,  national,  state  or  municipal.

^  The  United  States  government  on  June  30,  1914,  had  in  its  employ
482,721  persons  (United  States  Civil  Service  Commission,  Report,  191S,
p.  6),  approximately  the  same  number  as  employed  in  the  entire  iron  and
steel  industry  in  the  United  States.  To  this  number  should  be  added
the  employees  of  state  and  local  governments.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  i6i

subject  to  the  competition  that  Hmits  the  private  employer  in
his  bargain  with  labor,  and  it  is  the  medium  through  which
the  employee  with  the  suffrage  becomes  in  a  measure  his  own
employer.  In  such  states  as  allow  practically  universal  suf-
frage it  then  seems  less  necessary  for  the  public  employee  to
use  the  weapon  of  strike  or  boycott  employed  by  the  private
worker  in  his  struggle  for  better  wages  and  working  conditions.


(i)  RecogrCition  oj  Unions

The  right  of  the  public  employee  to  strike  is  not  conceded
by  government,  although  in  many  countries  the  right  of  gov-
ernment workers  to  organize  is  not  denied  them.  Russia,'
Turkey,^  and  Roumania^  forbid  concerted  action  on  the  part
of  government  employees  under  penalty,  and  even  in  republi-
can France  public  strikes  are  forbidden  and  punished,*  while
the  right  of  public  employees  to  organize  is  at  least  doubtful
and  certainly  restricted.^  Even  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in
Australasia  and  the  United  States,  where  government  em-
ployees are  nominally  allowed  to  combine,  trade  tmionism
among  public  employees  is  not  freely  tolerated,  there  being
still  a  general  sentiment  that  opposition  of  pubHc  employees
to  the  government  savors  strongly  of  insubordination  and  un-
patriotism.®  This  feeUng  is  especially  strong  in  France,  where
tmionism  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a  real  danger,  due  largely
to  the  great  postal  and  railway  strikes.^ At  the  same  time

1  Imperial  ukase  of  December,  1905  {Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor
Office,  Vol.  I,  1906,  p.  51).

2  Act  of  November  6,  1908  (Jbid.,  Vol.  Ill,  igo8,  p.  331).

'  Decree  of  December  19,  1909  {Ibid.,  Vol.  V,  1910,  p.  437).

*  Order  of  March  18,  1909,  relating  to  the  organization  of  disciplinary
committees  of  the  outdoor  staffs  of  the  postal  and  telegraph  service,
providing  penalties  for  "collective  or  concerted  refusal"  on  the  part
of  the  staff. {Ibid.,  Vol.  IV,  1909,  p.  293.)

'  The  minister  of  public  education  maintained  in  1912  that  under  the
law  of  1884,  which  gave  legal  standing  to  labor  unions,  syndicates  of
teachers  were  not  recognized,  and  such  a  syndicate  was  dissolved  by  the
French  government. See  American  Federationist,  February,  1913,  p.  136.

^  New  Statesman,  May  8,  1915,  special  supplement  on  "State  and
Municipal  Enterprise,"  p.  22.

'  An  account  of  the  postal  strike  and  its  cause  may  be  found  in  J.  H.
Harley,  New  Social  Democracy,  191 1,  pp.  122-143.  Also  see  Graham  Tay-
lor, "  Unionizing  Government  Employees,"  The  Survey,  May  8, 1909,  p.  226.
11


1 62 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  feeling  of  the  employees,  as  expressed  in  the  international
conference  of  public  employees  (August,  1907),  is  that  the
employee,  even  on  public  works,  has  a  right  to  organize  and
strike  as  a  means  of  obtaining  desired  concessions  as  to  con-
ditions of  employment.'  In  the  United  States,  in  1902,  the
President  by  executive  order,  amended  in  1906,  forbade  all
government  employees  directly  or  indirectly  to  solicit  an  in-
crease of  pay  or  to  influence  legislation  in  their  behalf,  save
through  the  heads  of  departments  in  which  they  served.  The
protest  of  the  unions^  led  to  the  act  of  1912,  adopted  as  a
rider  to  the  Post  Office  appropriation  act,^  which  permits
post  office  employees  to  petition  Congress,  but  forbids  them
to  affiliate  with  any  outside  organization  which  imposes  upon
them  an  obligation  to  strike,  or  purposes  to  assist  them  in
any  strike  against  the  government.*  The  executive  order
applies  only  to  the  activities  of  imions  of  public  employees  in-
fluencing Congress.  It  does  not  prevent  organizations  within
the  department  nor  collective  bargaining  with  the  depart-
ment. Such  collective  bargaining  exists  in  a  crude  form  in
departments  requiring  skilled  labor,  and,  in  the  case  of  the
War  Department,  a  complete  scheme  of  arbitration  has  been
worked  out  for  the  arsenal  at  Watertown,  Mass.,  for  aU  me-
chanical employees.  This  provides  for  a  mediation  board  of
an  equal  number  of  members  elected  by  the  employees  and
officers  appointed  by  the  commanding  officer.  There  is  a
supreme  Mediation  Board  at  Washington,  including  repre-
sentatives of  the  national  unions  to  which  the  arsenal  workers
belong,  and  officers  appointed  by  the  Chief  of  Ordnance.
Appeal  lies  to  the  Secretary  of  War.^  A  similar  arrangement
had  been  worked  out  in  the  street -cleaning  department  of
New  York  in  1896.^
Other  governments  have  found  it  necessary  to  adopt  forms


'  United  States  Department  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  88,  May,  1910,  p.  867.

2  See  American  Federalionist,  January,  1915,  p.  28;  also  January,  1912,
p.  36; January,  1914,  p.  51. ■

'  Congressional  Record,  Vol.  XLVIII,  1912,  p.  11819.

<  United  States,  Laws  1912,  C.  389,  Sec.  6.

*See  O.  O.  10225/582,  "Instructions  in  regard  to  Hearings  of  Griev-
ances, issued  January  9,  1915,  by  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  to  the  Com-
manding Officer,  Watertown  Arsenal."

^See  Commons,  Labor  and  Administration;  1913,  pp.  108-113.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  163

of  collective  bargaining  with  employees.  In  New  Zealand
the  act  of  1908  ^  provides  that  any  society  of  railway  employees
may  register  and  become  officially  recognized  by  the  govern-
ment. It  may  then  enter  into  an  "industrial  agreement"  with
the.  minister  of  railways  and,  by  registration,  the  articles  of
agreement  are  brought  imder  government  enforcement.  Any
appeal  goes  before  the  court  of  arbitration,  consisting  of  a
judge  and  representatives  of  the  government  and  employees.
After  a  hearing  the  award  takes  the  form  of  a  new  compulsory
agreement  or  an  enforcement  of  the  old.  There  are  appeal
boards  for  postal  and  telegraph  employees,^  tramway  em-
ployed,' and  for  public-school  teachers ;  and  any  ten  or  more
teachers  may  organize  a  society,  which,  like  the  railway  or-
ganization, registers  and  has  corporate  existence.^

The  French  plan  for  railway  administration  does  not  recog-
nize an  employees'  union  as  such,  but  goes  farther  than  the
New  Zealand  scheme  in  arranging  for  cooperation  between
government  and  employees.  Officials  and  workers  are  repre-
sented on  the  various  committees  by  their  chosen  delegates.
Thus,  in  the  coimcils  and  grades  committee  they  help  prepare
reports  and  Usts  of  premiums  and  promotions.  As  delegates
they  are  part  of  the  council  of  inquiry  whose  duty  it  is  to
express  an  opinion  on  all  important  questions  of  discipline
submitted  by  the  general  manager.^  In  addition  there  are
the  representative  district  councils,  which  act  as  buffers  be-
tween the  railway  administration  and  the  employees,  make
explanations,  and  administer  necessary  reprimands.  Officials
no  longer  reprimand  workmen.  Above  the  district  councils  is
the  Conseil  de  Reseau,^  the  supreme  advisory  board  of  the
whole  state  railway  system. Of  the  twenty-one  members


'  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  Ill,  1908,  p.  312.

2  Act  of  October  24,  1894.  New  Zealand  Statutes,  1894,  post  and
telegraph  department  act.

'  An  act  to  amend  the  tramways  act,  1908,  New  Zealand  Statutes,
1910,  p.  370.

*Act  of  October  31,  1895,  New  Zealand  Statutes,  1895.  School
teachers  in  the  United  States  have  also  organized  and  aflSliated  with
a  central  federation; American  Federationist,  January,  1903,  p.  15.

'  Report  of  State  Railways  Administration  for  1909.  {New  Statesman,
May  8,  1915,  special  supplement  on  "State  and  Municipal  Enterprise,"
P-  25.)

•Instituted  by  ministerial  decree  September  24,  191 1. {Ibid.,  p.  25.)


i64 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

appointed  by  the  minister  of  public  works,  four  are  working
employees.'

In  the  Prussian  railway  system,  autocratic  as  it  is,  there
have  been  since  1892  a  series  of  advisory  committees  appointed
by  the  minister  of  public  works,  whose  express  mission  it  is
to  smooth  the  working  of  the  system  by  advising  on  all  pos-
sible points  of  friction  between  management  and  operatives.^
In  the  Swiss  administration  it  is  said  to  be  an  invariable  cus-
tom for  the  general  secretary  of  the  railwaymen's  trade  union
to  be  appointed  a  full  member  of  the  board  of  administration,
the  supreme  governing  authority  of  the  railway  system.*

The  foregoing  are  instances  of  formal  agreements  sanctioned
by  law  or  established  by  admiritstrative  order.  Far  more  ex-
tensive than  these  formal  agreements  is  the  unofficial  recog-
nition ©f  unions,  especially  in  England  and  the  United  States,
where  the  head  of  the  department  deals  with  the  representa-
tives of  the  imion  and  then  issues  orders  conforming  to  the
agreement  but  not  mentioning  the  union.  In  this  respect  the
collective  bargain  is  similar  to  that  of  certain  large  railway  sys-
tems in  the  United  States  which  nominally  do  not  recognize  the
railroad  brotherhoods.'but  actually  issue  orders,  through  the  gen-
eral manager,  to  which  the  unions  have  previously  consented.

The  advantage  to  government  of  formal  recognition  of
imions  consists  in  establishing  permanent  boards  of  arbitra-
tion through  which  all  grievances  take  their  regular  course.
Without  such  boards  the  unions,  through  political  influence,
go  over  the  heads  of  the  departments  to  the  legislative  branch
of  government.  This  is  proper  enough,  and,  indeed,  is  inev-
itable under  imiversal  sviffrage,  no  matter  what  restrictions
the  administration  attempts  to  place  upon  them.  But,  with
permanent  boards  of  arbitration,  practically  all  grievances  and
demands  of  the  union  can  be  settled  within  the  department,
leaving  to  the  legislature  (municipal,  state,  or  federal)  only
the  general  policy  of  establishing  standards  of  hours  and
wages  *  to  be  enforced  through  the  arbitration  boards.

'  New  Statesman,  May  8, 1915,  p.  25  from  Emil  Davies,  The  Colkctimt
State  in  the  Making,  1914.

^ Ibid.,  p.  25.  See  also  E.  S.  Bradford,  "Prussian  Railway  Adminis-
tration," Annals  of  the  American  Academy,  Vol.  XXIX,  1907,  p.  310.

'  New  Statesman,  May  8,  1915,  special  supplement,  p.  25.

*  See  "The  Minimum  Wage,"  p.  179;  "Hours  of  Labor,"  pp.  259, 260.


COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING  165

Outside  the  compulsory  systems  of  Australasia,  the  final
appeal  from  arbitration  boards  lies  with  the  head  of  the
department.  In  the  war  department  it  is  the  secretary  of
war.  In  the  street-cleaning  department  it  is  the  commissioner.
This  is  essential  in  any  voluntary  system  of  arbitration  in
public  employment.  The  unions  retain  the  right  to  strike
if  th^y  are  not  satisfied  with  the  arbitration,  and  therefore  the
head  of  the  department  must  finally  decide  as  against  a
strike,  in  case  arbitration  fails.

Another  distinction  between  unions  of  public  employees  and
those  that  deal  with  private  employers  is  the  attitude  toward
the  closed  shop.  Government  cannot  discriminate  between
citizens,  as  can  private  employers,  and  must  maintain  the
open  shop.'  But,  since  government  is  not  forced  by  com-
petition to  cut  wages  or  lengthen  hours,  the  unions  do  not
need  the  protection  which  the  closed  shop  gives  them.  Yet,
under  the  compulsory  systems  of  New  Zealand  and  New  South
Wales,  a  preferential  union  shop  is  maintained,  which  ap-
proaches the  closed  shop.^

In  the  United  States  there  is  a  semblance  of  union  prefer-
ence in  the  statutory  requirements  of  three  states '  to  the
effect  that  the  label  of  the  typographical  union  be  affixed  to  all
public  printing.  However,  in  Maryland  this  law  seems  to  have
been  disregarded,*  while  in  Montana  and  Nevada,  the  remain-
ing two  states,  there  have  been  no  court  decisions  supporting
the  law,  although  it  has  been  observed.  In  at  least  eight
other  states  there  have  been  court  decisions  adverse  to  dis-
crimination in  favor  of  organized  labor,  in  regard  to  either
employment  on  public  works  or  the  use  of  the  union  label  on
public  printing,^  on  the  ground  that  the  restriction  of  em-
ployment thus  imposed  is  unconstitutional.

'  See  decisions  below.

^  New  Zealand,  act  of  1908,  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,
Vol.  Ill,  1908,  p.  312.  New  South  Wales,  industrial  arbitration  act.
Acts  of  Parliament,  1911-1912,  No.  17.

'  Maryland,  Public  General  Laws  191 1,  Art.  78,  Sec.  9;  see  also  Laws
1910,  C.  698,  Art.  78;  Montana,  Revised  Code  1907,  Sec.  254;  Nevada,
Revised  Laws  1912,  Sec.  4309.

*  Reports  of  state  oflficials  do  not  carry  the  label.

'  Illinois:  Adams  v.  Brennan,  177  111.  194,  52  N.  E.  314  (1898);  Holden
V.  Alton,  179  111.  318,  53  N.  E.  556  (1899);  Fiske  v.  People,  188  111.  206,
58  N.  E.  985  (1900). Iowa:  Miller  v.  City  of  Des  Moines,  143  la.  409,


i66 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(2) Cooperative  Employment

An  official  recognition  of  organizations  of  public  employees
is  found  in  the  cooperative  employment  system.  There  are
two  principal  methods,  the  first  of  which  is  the  cooperative
day  labor  system,  as  applied  in  New  Zealand.'  This  is  a  time
and  piece  work  system  under  which  men  out  of  employment
arrange  themselves  in  small  groups,  averaging  about  fourteen
(the  groups  were  at  first,  and  occasionally  still  are,  larger),
select  one  or  two  "headmen,"  and  enter  into  contracts  with
the  government  for  sections  of  public  work  at  "schedule
rates"  based  on  the  estimates  of  government  engineers  in
charge  of  the  work.  The  plan  seems  to  have  worked  well  in
New  Zealand,  but  not  so  well  in  New  South  Wales,  where  it
has  been  confined  to  the  lowest  and  least  efficient  stratum  of
workers.  Under  the  plan  the  government  is  responsible  for
the  checking  up  and  actual  direction  of  the  work.  Evidently
the  group  is  not  a  real  labor  union.

The  second  form  is  found  principally  in  France  and  Italy,^
where  workmen  organize  their  own  groups  and,  as  such,  con-
tract for  government  work.  The  group  constitutes,  therefore,
not  a  labor  union,  but  a  union  of  labor  contractors.  The
officials  of  the  government  are  not  in  charge  of  the  work,
but  they  turn  it  over  to  the  groups,  the  plan  being  a  modifica-
tion of  the  competitive  contract  system  rather  than  a  variety
of  direct  employment.  The  government  authorities  favor
these  societies  in  the  placing  of  contracts,  and  the  result  has
been  a  steady  and  appreciable  growth  in  their  number  and
undertakings.

122  N.  W.  226  (1900).  Tennessee:  Marshall  &  Bruce  Company  v.
Nashville,  109  Tenn.  495  (1902).  Michigan:  Lewis  v.  Detroit  Board  of
Education,  139  Mich.  306  (1905).  Georgia:  Atlanta  v.  Stein,  ill  Ga.
789,  36  S.  E.  932  (1900).  Nebraska:  Wright  v.  Hoctor,  95  Neb.
342,  145  N.  W.  704  (191 4).  Alabama:  Inge  v.  Board  of  Public  Works,
135  Ala.  187  (1902).  Ohio:  Cleveland  v.  Clements  Bros.  Construction
Co.,  67  Ohio  St.  197  (1902).

'  Great  Britain,  Board  of  Trade,  Labour  Department,  Report  on  Co-
operative Contracts  Given  out  by  Public  Authorities  to  Associations  of  Work-
men, Parliamentary  Papers,  VoJtLXXX,  1896.

2  Victor  von  Borosini,  "The  Italian  Triple  Alliance  of  Labor,"  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Sociology,  Vol.  XIX,  1913-1914,  p.  204  flf.


CHAPTER  IV
THE  MINIMUM  WAGE

Minimum  wage  legislation  marks  a  new  stage  in  the  long
line  of  attempts  to  equalize  the  power  of  employer  and  em-\,
ployee  in  maldng  the  wage  bargain.  In  contrast  with  con-
ciliation and  arbitration,  either  voluntary  or  compulsory,
which  take  place  only  after  a  demand  has  been  made  by  one
party  and  refused  by  the  other,  minimum  wage  laws  seek
to  regulate  the  wage  rate  before  any  dispute  over  the  terms
of  the  wage  bargain  has  arisen.  Moreover,  interference  by
the  state  between  the  parties  to  the  wage  bargain  through
conciliation  or  arbitration  usually  implies  the  organization  of
the  workers  and  the  existence  of  collective  bargaining.i  But
in  any  modem  industrial  community  large  numbers  of  un-
organized workers  are  found,  stiU  bargaining  individually,  em-
ployed at  low  wages  and  apparently  unable  to  make  any
effective  efforts  themselves  to  improve  their  condition.  If  they
are  to  be  helped  toward  an  equality  in  bargaining  power  with
the  employer,  the  state  must  take  the  initiative.  This  it  does
by  setting  standards  below  which  wages  may  not  be  depressed
— ^in  other  words,  by  passing  minimum  wage  legislation.^

From  a  slightly  different  point  of  view  the  legal  minimum
wage  fills  a  gap  in  our  code  of  laws  which  protect  the  employee
by  regulating  the  conditions  of  employment.  Minimum  stand-
ards for  safety  and  sanitation  have  been  enacted  in  many
states  and  the  maximum  length  of  the  working  day  has  often
been  fixed. Such  safeguards  have  long  been  familiar  and  are


'The  industrial  courts  of  Europe,  pr^ously  described,  employ  con-
ciliation in  both  collective  bargaining  ana  individual  contracts.

^  Modem  minimum  wage  legislation  is  not  comparable  to  the  mediaeval
fixing  of  wages  by  justices  of  the  peace,  which  prescribed  not  a  minimum,
but  the  actual  rates  to  be  paid. See  "Coercion  by  Government,"  p.  141.


1 68 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

generally  accepted  as  necessary  and  beneficial  to  the  health
and  welfare  of  the  workers.  There  exists  also  a  considerable
group  of  laws  which  determine  certain  conditions  of  the  wage
payment.  For  instance,  the  weekly  pa3Tiient  of  wages  may
be  required  or  payment  in  "store  orders"  may  be  forbidden,
as  described  in  Chapter  11.  But  any  legislative  interfer-
ence with  the  wage  rate  was  long  in  making  its  appearance,
though  equally  essential  to  a  complete  code  of  legislative
protection  for  the  workers.  Work  may  be  done  under  safe
and  sanitary  conditions  for  hours  not  too  long,  and  payment
of  wages  may  be  prompt  and  regular,  but  if  the  amount  re-
ceived is  too  small  to  secure  the  necessaries  of  life  the  worker's
health  and  welfare  are  menaced.  Therefore,  the  same  mo-
tives which  have  caused  most  of  otur  states  to  establish  mini-
mum standards  to  'guard  the  worker  against  unsafe  and
unsanitary  conditions  have  caused  many  of  them  to  set  up
standards  for  protection  against  the  evils  of  low  wages.

But  whether  one  emphasizes  the  protection  to  health  and
welfare  afforded  by  minimimi  wage  legislation  or  its  equaliza-
tion of  the  strength  of  the  parties  to  the  wage  bargain  it
appears  not  as  a  novelty  in  legislation,  but  as  an  extension  of
principles  whose  enactment  into  law  is  of  comparatively  long
standing.

I.  Economic  Basis

That  a  large  proportion  of  unskilled  workers  are  paid  wages
far  too  low  for  decent  self-support  is  a  fact  confirmed  by  many
wage  investigations  and  well  known  to  those  even  slightly
familiar  with  present-day  industrial  conditions.

(j)  Low  Wage  Scale

It  is  the  concensus  of  expert  opinion  at  the  present  time
that  a  weekly  wage  of  $8  or  more  is  necessary  under  urban
conditions  for  the  maintenance  of  a  self-supporting  woman  in
simple  decency  and  working  efficiency,  and  that  a  man  with
a  wife  and  three  children  requires  at  least  $15  to  $20  weekly
for  their  proper  support.' Yet  a  recent  study  on  woman's

'See  Howard  B.  Woolston,  "Wages  in  New  York,"  The  Suney,
February  6,  1915,  p.  510,


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  169

wages  in  the  United  States  concludes  that  75  per  cent,  of
female  wage-earners  receive  less  than  $8  weeldy,  50  per  cent,
less  than  $6  and  15  per  cent,  less  than  $4,  and  that  these
wages  are  further  reduced  approximately  20  per  cent,  through
lost  time  and  unemployment.'  The  pay  of  unskilled  male
workers  is  at  a  correspondingly  low  level.  Streightofi,  in  his
discussion  of  American  standards  of  living,  estimates  that  at
least  six  million  adult  men,  married  as  well  as  single,  receive
less  than  $600  a  year,  or  $12  a  week.^  More  intensive  in-
vestigations bear  out  these  figtures.  The  United  States  Im-
migration Commission  studied  a  large  ntimber  of  typical
households  representing  both  native  and  foreign-bom  in  six-
teen leading  industries.  More  than  half  of  the  male  heads
of  families  earned  less  than  $500  a  year,  and  nearly  two-thirds
less  than  $600.^  More  recently,  the  New  York  State  Factory
Investigating  Commission  examined  the  pay-rolls  of  over
2,000  stores  and  factories  during  the  fall,  winter,  and  spring
of  1913-1914.  Out  of  57, 000  women  and  girls,  approximately
34,000,  or  60  per  cent.,  earned  less  than  $8  in  a  typical  week.
Seven  thousand  out  of  14,000  married  men,  or  50  per  cent.,
earned  less  than  $15.*

It  seems,  then,  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  majority
of  low-skilled  industrial  workers  in  the  United  States  receive
wages  too  small  for  decent  self-support.  This  fact  explains
the  demand  for  minimum  wage  legislation  as  necessary  to
social  welfare;  the  causes  for  the  low  scale  form  the  economic
basis  which  determines  the  extent  to  which  the  demand  is
practicable  and  the  legislative  standards  enforceable.


(2)  Economic  Weakness  oj  Low-Paid  Workers

The  almost  entire  absence  of  strong  labor  organizations
and  collective  bargaining  among  this  group  of  wage-earners

'Charles  E.  Persons,  "Woman's  Work  and  Wages  in  the  United
States,"  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February,  1915,  p.  232.
^  Frank  H.  Streightoff,  Distribution  of  Incomes  in  the  United  States,  1912,

P- 137.

'Arthur  N.  Holcombe,  "The  Legal  Minimum  Wage  in  the  United
States,"  American  Economic  Review,  1912,  Vol.  II,  p.  33.

*  Howard  B.  Woolston,  "Wages  in  New  York,"  The  Survey,  February
6,  1915,  P-  510.


170 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

is  an  important  factor  in  producing  the  low  wage  scale.
Many  are  women  who  are  often  members  of  a  family  group,
unable  to  move  from  place  to  place  in  search  of  better  oppor-
tunities, but  remaining  at  home  to  overcrowd  the  few  lines
of  work  available  in  a  given  locality.  Then,  too,  the  ma-
jority of  women  workers  are  yovtng  and  inexperienced  and
their  frequent  withdrawal  from  industry  on  marriage  makes
them  look  upon  their  work  as  only  temporary.  On  the
whole,  it  has  been  extremely  difficult  to  form  stable  unions
among  women  workers.  Experience  both  in  England  and  in
this  country  shows  that  organization  among  low-skilled  men
workers  is  almost  equally  difficult.  In  the  absence  of  collec-
tive agreements  it  has  sometimes  been  possible  to  compel  the
workers  to  keep  their  wages  secret.  An  Oregon  department
store,  for  instance,  requires  each  applicant  for  employment
to  sign  an  agreement  which  includes  a  promise  to  "keep  my
salary  confidential."  *  Such  secrecy  obviously  makes  it
easier  to  depress  wage  scales.  Under  the  circumstances  it
is  also  not  surprising  that  among  this  group  of  workers  the
relation  between  wages  and  productivity  is  not  traceable,
but  that  "there  are  also  great  differences  in  wages  for  work
that  is  apparently  the  same.  Some  firms  pay  constantly  25
per  cent,  more  than  their  rivals  for  similar  operations."  ^  In
the  United  States  the  situation  is  further  compHcated  by  the
stream  of  immigration,  which  furnishes  an  abundant  supply
of  cheap  labor  and  which  puts  still  another  barrier,  in  the
shape  of  divergent  language  and  customs,  in  the  way  of  union
organization.

Another  reason  for  the  low  wage  scale,  largely  the  result
of  the  first,  is  the  cutthroat  competition  of  the  workers
for  work.  Among  the  unskilled,  unorganized  workers,  the
wage  that  the  cheapest  laborer,  such  as  the  partially  sup-
ported woman,  the  immigrant  with  low  standards  of  living  or
the  workman  oppressed  by  extreme  need,  is  willing  to  take,
very  largely  fixes  the  wage  level  for  the  whole  group.

A  third  reason,  the  obverse  of  that  just  discussed,  is  the


*  Report  of  the  Social  Welfare  Committee,  Consumers'  League  of  Oregon,
1913,  p.  26.

2  Fourth  Report  of  the  New  York  Factory  Investigating  Commtsston,
1915,  "The  Confectionery  Industry,"  Vol.  II,  p.  312.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  171

absence  of  active  competition  among  employers  for  workers.
With  a  plentiful  supply  of  the  lower  grades  of  labor  continually
seeking  employment,  the  employer  need  offer  no  induce-
ment in  the  form  of  higher  remuneration  in  order  to  fill  his
shop.

Moreover,  a  socially  undesirable  type  of  competition  be-
tween employers  floiuishes  when  the  bargaining  power  of
employees  is  weak.  The  encouragement  of  superior  ability
and  invention  has  always  been  pointed  out  as  one  of  the
chief  advantages  gained  by  the  community  from  the  c<zm-
petitive  system  of  production.  When  an  employer  can  Hire
workers  for  practically  his  own  price,  he  can  be  slack  and  in-
efficient in  his  methods,  and  yet,  by  reducing  wages,  re-
duce his  cost  of  production  to  the  level  of  his  more  able
competitor.

Minimum  wage  legislation,  therefore,  may  answer  the  de-
mands of  social  policy  in  two  ways.  By  setting  a  barrier
below  which  wages  may  not  fall,  it  lightens  the  pitiful  poverty
and  prevents  the  degeneration  in  body  and  spirit  of  those
forced  to  live  on  a  wage  too  small  to  supply  the  necessaries
of  Ufe.  Competition  among  them  no  longer  takes  the  form
of  offering  to  work  for  lower  wages,  but  that  of  developing
greater  efficiency.  At  the  same  time  employers  are  forced
to  compete  in  efficiency  of  management,  thus  sectuing  for
society  at  large  the  many  advantages  of  constantly  improved
methods  of  production.  Minimxim  wage  laws  attempt  neither
to  destroy  competition  nor  to  fix  wages  by  law;  they  merely
seek  to  set  the  lower  limits  to  both  in  the  interests  of  society
as  a  whole.

2. Historical  Development
(i)  Australasia

Australasia  is  the  birthplace  of  minimum  wage  legislation.
Though  it  is  a  new  and  prosperous  country,  as  long  ago  as
the  'eighties  the  sweating  system,  with  its  evils  of  low  wages,
long  hours  and  unsanitary  conditions,  was  discovered  to  be
alarmingly  prevalent.  The  Age,  the  leading  Melbourne- news-
paper, carried  on  a  crusade  against  these  conditions,  and  a
royal  commission  was  appointed  whose  report  in  1884  showed


172 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

that  hours  were  excessive  and  that  wages  were  constantly
reduced  by  the  miserable  rates  paid  to  home  workers.  Public
indignation  was  aroused  until  finally  determined  efforts  were
made  to  overcome  these  evils.

In  1894  New  Zealand  passed  a  law  providing  for  the  com-
pulsory arbitration  of  labor  disputes,  which,  while  primarily
intended  to  preserve  industrial  peace,  may  also  be  used  for
the  prevention  of  sweating.  The  district  conciliation  boards
established  by  this  law  have  authority  to  fix  minimum  wages,
and  if  sweated  workers  want  their  conditions  improved  they
need  only  file  a  statement  of  their  claims  in  the  office  of  the
nearest  conciliation  board.  By  means  of  this  machinery
tmderpaid  workers,  men  more  often  than  women,  have  sectu-ed
wage  increases.

However,  the  first  Australasian  law  whose  main  purpose
was  to  end  sweating  was  passed  by  Victoria  two  years  later,
and  since  it  is  the  Victorian  method  which  Great  Britain
and  the  United  States  have  adopted,  the  system  deserves
consideration  at  length.  The  public  feeling  against  the
sweating  system  in  Victoria  had  resulted  in  the  formation
of  an  Anti-Sweating  League.  Largely  as  a  result  of  the
league's  efforts  and  in  spite  of  bitter  opposition  from  the
employers  under  the  leadership  of  the  Victorian  Chamber  of
Manufactvu-es,  Victoria  passed  the  first  minimum  wage  law
in  1896.  Sir  Alexander  Peacock,  originator  of  the  system
and  later  minister  of  labor  in  Victoria,  has  written:  "It
was  alleged,  first,  that  all  work  would  be  driven  out  of  the
country;  secondly,  that  only  the  best  workers  would  be  em-
ployed; and  thirdly,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  en-
force^ such  provisions  at  all.  .  .  .  However,  the  government
managed  to  carry  the  biU  and  the  wage-board  system  was
inaugtirated."  1

The  law  required  that  representative  boards  fix  minimum
wages  in  certain  industries  designated  by  the  legislature.
Moreover,  being  frankly  an  experiment,  the  act  was  to  be
in  force  for  only  four  years.  Wage  boards  were  first  appointed
in  the  six especially  sweated  trades  of  boot-making  and

1  M.  B.  Hammond, "The  Minimum  Wage  in  Great  Britain  and  Aus-
tralia." Annals  of  the  American^  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,
July,  1913,  p.  28.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGfi  173

baking,  which  employed  mostly  men;  clothing,  shirt-making,
and  underclothing,  which  mostly  employed  women;  and  in
furniture-making,  in  which  the  competition  of  Chinese  labor
was  depressing  wages.  In  1900,  when  the  first  minimum
wage  law  came  to  an  end,  the  government  brought  in  a  bill
providing  for  the  extension  of  the  wage-board  system  to
other  trades.  The  Victorian  Chamber  of  Manufactures  pro-
tested violently,  tirging,  and  with  good  reason,  that  the  gov-
ernment's proposal  meant  the  extension  of  the  system  to
trades  in  which  there  was  no  evidence  of  sweating.  How-
ever, the  government  showed  that  it  had  received  a  number
of  applications  from  employers,  asking  for  the  appointment
of  special  boards,  and  that  sweating  had  disappeared  in  the
trades  in  which  boards  had  been  established.  Accordingly
the  bill  was  passed  and  an  extension  of  the  system  was  begun
which  has  continued  from  year  to  year  until  at  the  present
time  nearly  150  separate  boards  have  been  appointed,  fixing
minimum  wage  rates  for  over  150,000  employees  in  a  state
whose  total  population  is  less  than  a  million  and  a  half.  The
only  important  group  of  workers  whose  wages  are  not  regu-
lated are  those  in  agricultural  pursuits.  Minimixm  wage  rates
have  been  established  for  all  the  important  manufacturing
occupations  in  the  cities  and  also  for  street  railways,  mer-
cantile and  clerical  employments  and  mining.  .The  wage-
board  system  is  no  longer  regarded  as  an  emergency  measure
intended  to  secure  a  living  wage  where  conditions  are  excep-
tionally bad,  but  as  a  satisfactory  method  of  fixing  the  stand-
ard wage  in  any  trade.  The  act  was  again  renewed  in  1903,.
and  in  1904  was  made  permanent.  While  the  scope  of  the
law  has  been  widely  extended  the  opposition  of  the  employers
has  decreased,  until  in  April,  1912,  M.  B.  Hammond,  of  the
Ohio  Industrial  Commission,  as  a  result  of  first-hand  investi-
gations reported  that  both  employers  and  employees  "are
now  practically  unanimous  in  saying  that  they  have  no  de-
sire to  return  to  the  old  system  of  unrestricted  competition  in
the  purchase  of  labor."  '  South  Australia,  Queensland,  and
Tasmania  in  1900, 1908,  and  1910,  respectively,  adopted  legis-
lation similar  to  the  Victorian  act.

1  Ibid.,  p.  35.


174 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(2)  Great  Britain

One  of  the  most  important  developments  in  the  English
social  reform  movement  during  the  last  decade  is  the  accep-
tance of  minimitm  wage  legislation  as  a  practicable  policy.
While  ten  years  ago  the  fixing  of  minimum  wage  rates  by  law
was  apparently  outside  the  realm  of  practical  politics,  it  is
advocated  in  Great  Britain  to-day  not  only  by  the  Labor
Party,  but  also  by  the  Liberals  and  an  influential  group  of
Conservatives.

Among  the  chief  reasons  for  this  development  of  public
policy  is  the  increased  public  knowledge  of  conditions  among
sweated  workers.  Investigations  showed  that  large  numbers
of  low-skilled  unorganized  workers  were  receiving  less  than
the  wage  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  mere  physical
efficiency.  Attempts  were  made  to  extend  trade  unionism
among  them,  so  that  they  might  raise  their  wages  as  more
skilled  workers  had  done,  by  collective  bai-gaining.  But  the
formation  of  strong  unions  among  these  sweated  workers  was
generally  found  to  be  impossible.  The  market  for  their  labor
was  chronicalty  overstocked  and  the  struggle  for  bare  exist-
ence was  too  severe  to  permit  the  development  of  stable
organizations.  The  public  was  aroused  to  this  menace  of  in-
stifficient  wages,  which  its  victims  themselves  seemed  power-
less to  remedy,  mainly  through  the  efforts  of  the  National
Anti-Sweating  League,  which,  with  the  Labor  Party  and  cer-
tain other  organizations,  vigorously  urged  the  adoption  of
minimum  wage  legislation.  The  agitation  resulted  first  in  a
parliamentary  inquiry  and  finally  in  1909  in  the  passage  of
a  trade  boards  act,  modeled  on  the  Victorian  statute,  which
should  go  into  effect  the  following  year.

This  law  provided  that  wage  boards  may  be  established  by
order  of  the  board  of  trade,  subject  to  ratification  by  Parlia-
ment, for  all  employees  in  any  industry  in  which  the  prevail-
ing rate  of  wages  is  "exceptionally  low  as  compared  with
that  in  other  employments."  ^  The  first  four  trades  regu-
lated were  tailoring,  paper -box  making,  the  finishing  of
machine-made  lace,  and  the  manufacture  of  certain  kinds


"  Trade  boards  act,  9  Edw.  7,  C.  22,  Sec.  i  (2).


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  175

of  chain,  industries  which  employed  altogether  about  250,000
operatives.  By  1913  the  successful  operation  of  the  law  was
so  generally  recognized  that  the  formation  of  boards  was
ordered  in  four  additional  trades:  sugar  confectionery  and
food-preserving,  shirt-making,  hollow-ware  making,  and  cotton
and  linen  embroidery,  employing  nearly  150,000  more  workers.
It  was  hoped  also  to  include  certain  branches  of  the  latindry
trade,  but  the  bill  was  withdrawn  on  account  of  defects  in
terminology  and  has  not  yet  been  reconsidered.  At  the  time
of  writing  the  act  has  successfully  Aidthstood  the  strain  of  a
year  of  war-time.  *  The  tailoring  trade  board  has  even  raised
the  minimum  rate  for  "female  workers  other  than  learners,"
and  additional  branches  of  the  trade  have  been  brought  under
the  control  of  the  board.^  The  comparatively  slight  opposi-
tion to  the  original  law  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  by
its  terms  it  was  merely  a  means  of  dealing  with  unusual  cases,
where  wages  were  "exceptionally  low."  The  trades  covered
employ  chiefly  women  workers  and  before  regulation  condi-
tions of  emplo3mient  were  flagrantly  bad.  Wage  boards  for
them  did  not  seem  to  commit  the  nation  to  the  legal  regtda-
tion  of  wages  as  a  general  policy.

The  first  extension  df  the  wage-board  system  outside  the
sweated  trades  was  also  exceptional,  but  for  an  altogether
different  reason.  There  had  been  great  unrest  among  the
coal-miners  during  the  winter  of  1911-1912,  culminating  in  a
strike  in  the  spring  of  19 12  which  paralyzed  industry.  One
of  the  men's  principal  demands  was  a  flat  rate  weekly  mini-
mum wage.  In  the  interests  of  industrial  peace  the  govern-
ment was  forced  to  yield  to  the  principle  of  this  demand  by
passing  a  measure  establishing  representative  district  boards
to  fix  minimum  wages  and  other  working  conditions.  While
the  operation  of  this  act  is  said  to  have  proved  less  satis-
factory than  the  workings  of  the  trade  boards,  it  presents
the  issue  of  wage  regvilation  in  a  wider  form,  not  simply  as  a
means  of  protecting  the  sweated  workers  at  the  very  bottom
of  the  industrial  system,  but  as  a  supplement  to  voluntary
collective  bargaining  for  a  comparatively  well-placed  economic
group,  the  skilled  men  workers  in  a  well-organized  trade.

'  The  Women's  Industrial  News,  July,  1915,  p.  358.
?  The  Women's  Trade  Union  Review,  July,  1915,  p.  8,


176 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

So  far,  then,  English  minimum  wage  legislation  has  reached
some  of  the  hardest  pressed  and  some  of  the  most  fortunate
groups  of  industrial  workers.  A  further  extension  of  its  scope
which  would  in  part  cover  the  workers  between  these  two  ex-
tremes was  urged  by  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  Lloyd  George
in  the  spring  of  1914.  He  proposed  that  a  land  commission  be
empowered  to  fix  minimum  rates  on  a  living-wage  basis  for  all
agricultural  labor,  and  foreshadowed  the  extension  of  the  wage-
board  system  to  all  the  lower-paid  industries  in  the  towns.  If
these  plans  become  law,  the  English  system  of  trade  boards  will
have  followed  the  same  Une  of  development  as  the  Australian
system;  that  is,  from  a  special  device  for  remedying  imusually
bad  conditions  to  a  common  method  for  fixing  wage  standards
for  all  wage-eamers.i

(3)  The  United  States

In  America  a  wide-spread  demand  for  minimum  wage
legislation  dates  back  no  further  than  1910.  Two  factors
contributed  to  the  rise  of  popular  sentiment  in  favor  of  the
legislation  at  this  time.  One  was  the  increased  knowledge  of
conditions  among  sweated  workers,  resulting  from  such  investi-
gations as  that  of  the  federal  Bureau  of  Labor  on  Conditions
of  Women  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United  States.  The
other  was  the  successful  operation  of  the  British  trade-boards
act  under  conditions  not  unHke  those  in  our  own  country.

In  public  employment,  to  be  sure,  wages  in  this  country
had  for  several  years  been  regulated  both  by  state  laws  and
by  city  ordinances.  Most  commonly  these  regulations  fix  the
wage  rate  ^  or  require  that  "prevailing  rates"  be  paid,  which
are  usually  interpreted  as  union  rates  when  a  union  exists  in
the  locality. Several  statutes  and  ordinances,  however,  es-

1  Partly  as  a  war  measure,  Prance  passed  in  July,  1915,  a  minimum  wage
law  for  women  in  certain  branches  of  the  clothing  industry.  (United
States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Monthly  Review,  December,  1915,  pp.
36-41"^-

'  The  New  York  City  Board  of  Estimate  showed  a  broad  social  point
of  view  in  its  efforts  in  1915  to  fix  a  just  wage  for  street  cleaners,  who
are  among  the  lowest  paid  and  least  skilled  of  city  employees.  The  board
proposed  fixing  their  pay  in  harmony  with  the  results  of  a  thorough  in-
vestigation of  the  income  necessary  for  a  family  of  five  "hving  in  accord-
ance with  American  ideals."  Such  an  income  was  said  ^o  be  Jfvo  a  month
in  New  York  City,


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  177

tablish  a  true  minimum  wage.  For  example,  California  pro-
vides that  the  minimum  wage  for  all  public  employees  except
those  in  public  institutions  shall  be  at  least  $2  a  day.i  Massa-
chusetts stipulates  that  "women  cleaners  and  scrub  women"
employed  by  Siaffolk  County  must  be  paid  not  less  than  $8  a
week.^  In  1913  Spokane,  Wash.,  established  by  popular
vote  a  minimimi  wage  of  $2.75  a  day  on  public  work,  and  on
January  2,  1914,  the  state  supreme  court  sustained  this  or-
dinance. But  in  this  country  until  the  last  few  years  wage
rates  in  private  employment  were  seldom  considered  a  sub-
ject of  possible  legal  regulation.

There  were,  indeed,  sporadic  attempts  to  fix  minimum
wage  standards  by  law.  Typical  of  these  is  a  bill  introduced
in  the  Nebraska  legislature  in  February,  1909.  This  pro-
vided that  "for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  American  stand-
ard of  living,  and  to  insure  to  all  who  labor  that  they  shall
have  an  opportunity  to  improve  themselves,  to  educate  their
children  and  to  lay  by  a  sum  for  old  age,"  the  minimum  wage
"for  all  adult  labor,  male  or  female,"  should  be  20  cents  by
the  hour  or  $9  by  the  week,  with  25  cents  an  hour  for  over-
time. Such  proposals,  however,  received  but  little  serious
consideration.

The  first  American  state  to  pass  a  minimum  wage  law  was
Massachusetts.  An  investigating  commission  was  appointed
there  in  191 1,  and  its  report  resulted  in  legislation  in  19 12.
In  19 13,  as  a  result  of  further  investigations,  eight  states'
followed  the  example  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1915  two  more
were  added,*  in  spite  of  the  pending  decision  of  the  United
States  Supreme  "Court  on  the  Oregon  law,  which  probably
retarded  the  movement  in  the  latter  year.  Investigating  com-
missions have  been  at  work  in  several  other  states,  including
Connecticut,  Indiana,  Michigan,  New  York,  and  Ohio,  so  that
a  further  extension  of  legislation  is  foreshadowed.

Constitutional  amendments  specifically  allowing  minimum
wage  legislation  were  passed  by  California  in  19 14  for  women


1  California,  Code  igo6.  No.  2894,  Sec.  i.
'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1914,  C.  413.

'California,  Colorado,  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Oregon,  Utah,  Wash'
ington,  Wisconsin.
•  Arkansas,  Kansas,

12


178 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

and  minors,  and,  contrary  to  American  precedent,  by  Ohio
in  1912  for  all  classes  of  workers.  Ohio,  however,  had  in  1915
taken  no  step  toward  legislation  except  to  authorize  the  state
industrial  commission  to  investigate  working  conditions  among
women  and  minors  alone.  ^

Federal  legislation  of  several  kinds  has  also  been  proposed.
Bills  have  been  introduced  in  Congress  applying  to  em-
ployees in  the  District  of  Coltmibia,  to  employees  of  the
federal  government,  and  to  aU  workers  engaged  in  interstate
commerce,  but  these  measiures  have  not  as  yet  been  given
much  attention.

Thus  far  in  the  United  States  minimum  wage  legislation
has  been  even  more  restricted  in  scope  than  at  its  first  enact-
ment in  Great  Britain  or  Australia.  It  has  been  passed  to
remedy  sweating,  not  among  aU  workers  as  in  the  other
countries,  but  only  among  women  and  children.  In  this  re-
spect minimum  wage  laws  resemble  much  other  American
labor  legislation  which  also  when  first  passed,  in  part  for  con-
stitutional reasons,  in  part  perhaps  because  of  the  more  evi-
dent inabihty  of  this  class  of  workers  to  protect  themselves,
applied  only  to  women  and  minors.  Then,  too,  many  Ameri-
can representatives  of  labor  oppose  minimiom  wage  laws  for
men,  feeling  that  men  workers  can  obtain  better  wages  by
organization  without  the  aid  of  legislation.  In  addition  wage
investigations  in  this  country  have  far  more  often  dealt  with
women  than  with  men,  so  that  at  present  in  America  there
exists  a  much  greater  body  of  evidence  to  show  inadequate
wages  among  women  than  among  men  workers.

Minimum  wage  legislation  in  the  United  States,  then,  is
expressly  permitted  by  two  state  constitutions  and  exists  in
eleven  states.  It  is  regarded  entirely  as  a  remedy  for  ex-
ceptional conditions,  providing  only  a  bare  subsistence  wage
for  those  considered  the  most  helpless  class  of  sweated  workers
— namely,  women  and  children.  The  more  rigid  limitations
of  our  written  constitutions,  the  labor  union  opposition  and


*  The  department  of  investigation  and  statistics  of  the  Ohio  Industrial
Commission  had  issued  up  to  November,  191 5,  two  reports  on  the  sub-
ject— No.  I,  "Wages  and  Hours  of  Labor  of  Women  and  Girls  Eniplbyed
in  Mercantile  Establishments  in  Ohio  in  1913,"  and  No.  14,  "Cost  of
Living  of  Working  Women  in  Ohio."


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  179

the  inefficiency  of  administration  are  factors  which  may  work
against  such  an  extension  of  these  laws  in  the  United  States
as  has  taken  place  abroad.


3.  Standards

The  purpose  of  minimum  wage  legislation  is  the  raising
of  excessively  low  wages.  The  question  of  the  standards  of
wage  awards  is  therefore  an  important  one.  How  adequate
is  the  minimum  wage?  Is  it  always  a  "living  wage,"  and,  if
so,  is  account  taken  only  of  the  bare  physical  necessities  of
Ufe,  or  is  allowance  also  made  for  the  reqtdrements  of  mental
and  moral  welfare?  Is  provision  made  for  the  support  of  a
family  or  for  the  needs  of  the  individual  worker  alone?  Is
there  any  consideration  of  probable  periods  of  unemploy-
ment? On  what  basis  do  wage  boards  fix  the  pay  of  yotmg,
inexperienced,  and  handicapped  workers?


(i)  Australia

In  Australia  there  exists  no  statutory  definition  of  the
minimum  standard.  The  Victorian  law  of  1903  provided  that
the  "wages  paid  by  the  reputable  employer"  should  be  taken
as  the  basis,  but  this  clause  has  since  been  stricken  out.  A
standard  now  often  used  is  "the  normal  needs  of  the  average
employee  regarded  as  a  himian  being  living  in  a  civilized
community,"  ^  which  insures  a  living  wage  in  the  broader
sense  of  the  term,  not  a  mere  subsistence  wage.  Moreover,
since  the  extension  of  wage  boards  to  non-sweated  trades,
questions  of  relative  skUl  have  become  more  important  and
minimums  are  frequently  set  considerably  above  the  level  of
a  living  wage.

The  question  of  differing  wage  standards  for  men  and  for
women  has  been  clearly  worked  out  in  Australia.  Since  a
man  must  normally  maintain  a  family,  a  living  wage  for  male
workers  must  cover  the  cost  of  such  maintenance;  a  woman


■  Commonwealth  Arbitration  Reports,  Vol.  II,  p.  3.


i8o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ordinarily  supports  herself  alone,  so  that  the  minimiun  for
female  workers  is  fixed  on  that  basis.  "The  minimum  can-
not be  based  on  exceptional  cases."  '  For  the  same  reason
the  partial  support  of  some  women  workers  by  their  families
is  not  considered  in  fixing  their  wages.  When  both  men  and
women  are  employed  in  the  same  occupation,  the  wage  rate
is  fixed  for  the  sex  usually  found  therein.


(2)  Great  Britain

In  England,  where,  again,  no  standard  is  set  by  the  law
itself,  the  general  practice  is  "to  level  the  wage  for  the  whole
trade  in  each  district  up  to  the  standard  of  the  best  employer
in  that  district."  ^  In  the  badly  sweated  trades  for  which
boards  have  been  formed  this  means  a  considerable  increase
for  most  of  the  workers,  but  not  necessarily  a  living  wage.
For  instance,  in  chain-making,  a  large  increase  in  hourly
rates  for  time  work  provided  only  5  cents  an  hour  for  women
workers  or  approximately  $2.70  for  a  fxdl  week's  work  of  fifty-
four  hours.'

(j)  The  United  States

a.  Definition  oj  the  Living  Wage.  Nearly  all  the  American
laws,  unlike  those  of  Great  Britain  and  Australia,  define  in
general  terms  the  principle  to  be  followed  in  fixing  wages,
which  is  usually  that  of  a  living  wage.  In  a  majority  of  the
laws  phrases  such  as  "the  necessary  cost  of  proper  Hving"
and  "to  maintain  the  health  and  welfare"  are  used.*  In
working  out  wage  standards  on  this  basis,  the  English  practice
of  leveling  up  wages  to  those  paid  by  the  best  employer  in
the  trade  in  a  given  district  is  obviously  not  a  sufficient  guide.
Then,  too,  since  the  laws  apply  only  to  women  and  minors,
relative  standards  for  the  two  sexes  need  not  be  considered


'  Commonwealth  Arbitration  Reports,  Vol.  VI,  p.  71.
''John  A.  Hobson,  "The  State  and  the  Minimum  Wage  in  England,"
The  Survey,  February  6,  1915,  p.  503.
'  See  R.  H.  Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  Chain-Making  Industry,

1914.  P-  39-
*  California,  Laws  1913,  C.  324.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE


i8i


as  in  Australia.  One  finds,  howeva-,  America  on  the  whole
using  the  Australian  standard  for  women  workers — ^namely,
the  cost  of  living  of  the  entirely  self-supporting  woman.
American  employers  have  sometimes  asked  that  the  help  re-
ceived by  many  women  workers  from  their  families  be  taken
into  account  in  fixing  the  standard,  but  this  request  has  been
denied.

A  number  of  investigations  were  made  to  determine  the  cost
of  living  for  a  self-supporting  woman,  and,  notably  in  Massa-
chusetts and  Oregon,  budgets  were  carefully  worked  out  to
cover  all  the  items  considered  necessary.'  Such  estimates
cover  very  modest  amounts  for  food,  clothes,  shelter,  and
washing,  sometimes  but  not  always  medical  expenses  and  car
fare,  and  also  allow  a  meager  sum  for  recreation,  education,
and  a  short  vacation.  No  provision  is  made  for  insurance  or
savings,  yet  the  other  items  alone  mount  up  to  $8  or  $io
weekly.  It  becomes,  then,  a  matter  of  grave  social  concern
when  careful  studies  show  that  a  majority  of  women  wage-
earners  in  the  United  States  receive  less  than  this  amount.
Up  to  November,  1915,  the  rates  set  for  experienced  adult
workers  in  the  four  states  making  decrees  fell  between  the
two  figures  named.  The  highest  rate  reported  was  $10,  for
salesgirls  in  Washington;  the  lowest  was  $8  for  Massachusetts
laundry  workers  and  women  in  Minnesota  outside  of  first,
second,  third  and  fourth-class  cities.

"Necessary  cost  of  hving,"  therefore,  is  interpreted  in
American  minimum  wage  awards  as  little  more  than  the  cost


1  Minimum  weekly  budget  for  a
self-supporting  woman  in  Boston.
Wage  Board  in  the  Brush  Indus-
try, Massachusetts,  1914.  (Second
Annual  Report  of  the  Minimum
Wage  Commission,  p.  9.)

Board  and  lodging $5-50

Clothing 1.35

Laundry 20

Car  fare 60

Newspapers 08

Church 10

Theater  and  "movies" ... .09

Vacation 19

Other 17

Total  f  8.28


Minimum  yearly  budget  for  a
self-supporting  woman  in  Port-
land. (Oregon  Social  Survey,  1912,
p.  67.)


Room  and  board $300

Clothing 130

Laundry 25

Car  fare 30

Doctor 15

Church  and  lodge 10

Recreation  and  vacation ....  25

Education  and  reading 10


Total  $545


i82 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  physical  necessaries  to  an  entirely  self-supporting  woman.
The  standard  is  in  no  way  an  extravagant  one;  it  is  "not  a
wage  so  .  .  .  women  can  live  well,  not  enough  to  make  life
a  rich  and  welcome  experience,  but  just  enough  to  secure
existence  amid  drudgery  in  gray  boarding-houses  and  cheap
restaurants."  ^

b.  Wage  Losses  from  Unemployment.  In  fixing  standards
for  minimum  wages,  the  question  of  regiilarity  of  emplojmient
is  of  great  importance.  Whether  or  not  a  worker  can  secure
steady  employment  in  a  given  industry  is  the  factor  which
determines  whether  the  "living  wage"  prescribed  in  an  award
provides  a  "living  income"  throughout  the  year.  Until  re-
cently the  problem  has  received  but  little  attention  in  America,^
many  of  the  awards  thus  far  made  being  sufficient  only  for
the  needs  of  the  current  week.  As  no  provision  is  made  for
savings,  a  girl  who  receives  the  minimum  wage  must  run  into
debt  or  deny  herself  necessaries  if  she  loses  her  position.  Yet
many  low-paid  industries  whose  wage  rates  are  affected  by
minimum  wage  awards  are  notably  irregular,  as  for  example
candy-making  and  paper-box  making.  In  Massachusetts,  in
Oregon,  and  in  Washington,  however,  wage  losses  from  unem-
plojTnent  have  been  given  some  attention  by  wage  boards.
In  Australia  the  time  lost  from  industrial  causes  is  often  def-
initely computed  in  fixing  wages.  For  instance,  in  setting  the
minimimi  hourly  rate  for  dock  laborers,  the  necessary  cost  of
a  week's  living  was  divided  by  the  average  number  of  hours
of  work  obtained  weekly.^

c.  Profits  of  the  Business.  An  important  question  likely  to
arise  when  wage  standards  are  fixed  is  whether  or  not  the
financial  condition  of  the  industry  should  be  taken  into  ac-
cotmt.  Most  often  the  problem  comes  up  in  connection  with
the  struggling  business  which  claims  it  cannot  stirvive  if  its
workers  are  paid  a  living  wage.  The  issue  here  is  the  lowering
of  the  standard  of  wages  in  order  to  secure  the  continued
existence  of  such  an  industry. But  such  a  concession  enables

'  Walter  Lippmann,  "The  Campaign  against  Sweating,"  New  Republic,
March  27,  191 5,  Supplement,  p.  8.

2  See  Irene  Osgood  Andrews,  "The  Relation  of  Irregular  Employment
to  the  Living  Wage  for  Women,"  in  Fourth  Report  of  the  New  York
Factory  Investigating  Commission,  pp.  497-635.

2  New  Statesman,  June  6,  1914,  p.  263.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  183

an  industry  to  flourish  without  pa5ring  the  whole  cost  of
maintenance  of  those  whose  time  and  services  it  uses.  Its
workers  must  be  partly  supported  by  the  earnings  of  others,
who  are  thus  practically  subsidizing  the  underpaying  in-
dustry. Such  a  trade  has  well  been  called  "parasitic,"  since
its  existence  depends  on  the  bounty  of  others.  It  may  be
that  other  members  of  the  woman's  family  (and  the  better-
pa3dng  occupations  in  which  they  are  employed)  make  up  the
deficit  in  her  income;  it  may  be  that  society  as  a  whole  pays
the  bill  for  the  physical  and  moral  deterioration  of  the  workers
by  its  expenditures  for  hospitals,  charities,  and  reformatories.
On  the  other  hand,  in  Australia,  at  least,  it  has  been  urged
that  a  higher  minimum  should  be  set  in  an  unusually  pros-
perous industry.  In  that  country  a  clear  and  consistent  stand
has  been  taken  on  both  these  points.  The  living  wage  is
"sacrosanct."  "If  a  man  cannot  maintain  his  enterprise
without  cutting  down  the  wages  .  .  .  which  are  essential  for
[the  employees'] '  living,  it  would  be  better  that  he  should
abandon  the  enterprise."  '  But  "the  minimum  wage  must
be  primarily  based  on  the  needs  and  the  qualifications  of  the
class  of  workers  concerned — not  usually  on  the  affluence  of
the  employer."  ^  In  Australia,  then,  the  financial  condition
of  the  business  is  not  considered  in  fixing  the  minimum  wage.
Most  American  statutes,  through  the  stipulation  that  the
minimtmi  wage  shall  cover  the  cost  of  living,  take  the  same
stand.  In  Colorado,  Massachusetts,  and  Nebraska,  however,
"the  financial  condition  of  the  business"  is  to  be  considered
side  by  side  with  the  cost  of  living.  In  Massachusetts,  in  the
temporary  award  for  the  brush  industry,  this  resulted  in  fixing
a  minimum  less  than  a  living  wage.  The  cost  of  living  for
a  self-supporting  woman  was  found  to  be  over  $8  weekly.
But  on  account  of  the  condition  of  the  business  the  commission
was  obliged  to  make  the  hourly  rate  for  the  first  year  so  low
that  women  could  earn  only  about  $7  weekly  unless  they  ob-
tained more  than  the  usual  amount  of  work.^  In  retail  stores
also  the  wage  board  believed  the  necessary  cost  of  living  to  be


'  Commonwealth  Arbitration  Reports,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  31.
"  Ibid.,  Vol.  VII,  p.  72.

^Second  Annual  Report  of  the  Minimum  Wage  Commission  of  Massa-
chusetts, p.  II.


i84 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

"as  much  as  and  probably  somewhat  above"  the  minimum
recommended,  but  held  that  "the  schedule  of  wages  adopted
is  as  high  as  the  retail  stores  of  the  state  will  be  able  to  pay
until  industrial  and  business  conditions  shall  have  shown  a
marked  improvement."  ^  A  consideration  of  the  prosperity
of  the  industry  may  thus  retard  the  process  of  raising  the  wage
to  the  necessary  minimum  or  even  at  times  overthrow  the
whole  principle  of  the  hving  wage.

d.  Substandard  Workers.  Nearly  all  minimum  wage  laws
permit  the  fixing  of  special  rates  for  young  workers,  for  ap-
prentices, and  for  inexperienced  workers.  As  a  guide  in  fixing
these  special  rates,  most  American  laws  contain  only  the
provision  that  rates  for  children  and  apprentices  shall  be
"suitable."  The  usual  practice  is  to  name  the  rates  for
young  workers  and  for  apprentices  in  the  award  along  with
the  regular  minimtmi  rate.  For  example,  in  Oregon  the
minimum  wage  for  women  of  over  a  year's  experience  was
set  at  $8.25  to  $9.25  weekly,  according  to  occupation  and
locality;  but  young  girls  between  sixteen  and  eighteen  and
inexperienced  women  workers  may  be  employed  for  $6  weekly
in  any  occupation  an3^vhere  in  the  state.  In  some  cases  where
these  lower  rates  have  been  set,  especially  in  trades  requiring
little  skiU,  there  have  been  attempts  to  substitute  young  girls
and  inexperienced  workers  for  adults.^  To  overcome  this
difficulty  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  specify  the  length
of  the  period  of  apprenticeship  and  sometimes  also  the  pro-
portion of  apprentices  allowed.  Rates  are  frequently  in-
creased as  the  period  of  apprenticeship  progresses.  Thus  in
Massachusetts  candy  factories  the  minimum  rate  fixed  for
beginners  is  $5  weekly;  for  those  who  have  worked  from  a
year  to  a  year  and  a  half,  $6.75;  for  those  with  less  than  two
years'  experience,  $7.75.  The  rate  for  ' '  experienced ' '  workers
is  $8.75.  In  November,  1915,  this  two-year  period  was  the
longest  apprenticeship  established;  the  period  in  other  states
and  industries  was  but  one  year. In  order  to  avoid  any  such


'  Massachusetts  Minimum  Wage  Commission,  Statement  and  Decree
Concerning  the  Wages  of  Women  in  Retail  Stores  in  Massachusetts,  1915,
P-  3-

^  See  discussion  by  Theresa  S.  McMahon,  American  Economic  Review,
March,  1915,  pp.  291-295.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  185

premium  on  the  employment  of  children  Minnesota  established
the  same  minimum  rates  for  all  ages.

The  employment  of  slow  or  infirm  workers  at  lower  rates
is  generally  permitted  only  by  special  license  from  the  com-
mission. For  further  protection  against  the  abuse  of  the
privilege,  certain  of  the  laws  specify  the  proportion  of  such
workers  in  a  single  establishment  for  whom  licenses  may  be
issued.

In  Australia,  as  the  scope  of  wage  boards  widens  and  the
fixing  of  a  legal  minimum  becomes  a  common  method  of  set-
ting wage  standards  instead  of  merely  a  remedy  for  sweating,
a  variety  of  factors  become  more  and  more  important  in
determining  such  standards.  The  relative  skiU  and  training
required  in  different  occupations  is  considered,  the  respon-
sibility exercised,  the  danger  of  illness  or  accident  and  the
probable  perquisites  or  deductions.  In  .^\merica  such  ele-
ments as  these  have  so  far  not  been  considered  in  determining
wage  standards.  Minimum  wage  standards  in  the  United
States  as  yet  do  not  go  farther  than  an  attempt  to  insure  the
individual  woman  worker  the  bare  necessaries  of  life.


4.  Methods  of  Operation

There  are  two  types  of  minimimi  wage  law.  One,  the
"flat  rate"  law,  prescribing  the  legal  minimum  in  the  statute
itself,  is  very  rare,  while  the  other  type,  under  which  a  board
or  commission  after  proper  investigation  fixes  rates  for  one
industry  or  group  of  industries  at  a  time,  includes  the  vast
majority  of  these  laws  now  in  existence.


(r)  Flat  Rate  Laws

Laws  which  directly  fix  the  flat  minimum  rate  are  found
only  in  certain  of  the  Australian  states,  in  Arkansas,  and  in
Utah.  In  Australia,  in  addition  to  the  system  of  wage
boards,  laws  sometimes  establish  very  low  flat-rate  mini-
mums,  frequently  of  not  more  than  2  or  3  shillings  a  week,
intended  principally  to  protect  children,  learners,  and  ap-


i86 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

prentices  from  being  put  to  work  without  wages  and  dismissed
when  they  ask  for  pay.  In  America,  only  the  Utah  statute,
which  requires  a  daily  wage  of  75  cents  for  females  under
eighteen,  90  cents  for  inexperienced  women,  and  $1.25  for
experienced  women  over  that  age,  fixes  a  universal  flat  rate.'
In  Arkansas  a  flat  rate  of  $1.25  a  day  for  experienced  workers
and  $1  a  day  for  females  having  less  than  six  months'  experi-
ence is  fixed  by  the  law,  but  the  commission  may,  after  in-
vestigation and  public  hearing,  either  raise  or  lower  these
rates.'  This  method  of  fixing  uniform  flat  rates  prevents
the  more  careful  adjustment  for  various  industries  and  lo-
calities which  is  elsewhere  undertaken  by  wage  boards,  and
the  method  is  therefore  held  by  most  students  of  the  problem
to  be  disadvantageous.


(2)  Wage  Board  Laws

Representative  of  the  second  type  of  minimum  wage  laws,
those  which  fix  rates  for  various  industries  through  wage
boards,  are  the  laws  of  Great  Britain  and  of  most  Australian
and  American  states.  In  Great  Britain'  the  board  of  trade
is  authorized  to  appoint  representative  "trade  boards"  to
fix  minimum  rates  in  any  industries  in  which  wages  are  "un-
reasonably low"  as  compared  with  other  trades  and  where
"other  circumstances"  make  the  appointment  "expedient."
Trade  boards  may  fix  general  minimum  time  rates  or  mini-
mum piece  rates  which  may  differ  for  different  classes  of
workers,  for  different  districts,  and  for  different  processes.
District  committees  may  be  appointed  to  advise  the  trade
board  in  fixing  rates  for  their  respective  localities.

When  a  trade  board  proposes  to  fix  a  certain  rate,  three
months'  notice  must  be  given,  within  which  period  objections
to  the  rate  proposed  may  be  raised.  On  the  conclusion  of
this  period  the  rate  comes  into  operation  to  a  limited  extent,
being  obligatory  for  all  firms  engaged  on  public  contracts,  and


'Utah,  Laws  1913,  C.  63. Enforcement  is  placed  with  the  com-
missioner of  labor.

'  Arkansas,  Laws  1915,  No.  291.
39  Edw.  7,  C.  23,


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  187

for  other. firms  in  the  absence  of  a  written  contract  signed
by  the  worker  providing  for  a  lower  rate.  Six  months  later
the  board  of  trade  has  power  to  make  the  rate  obligatory
in  all  cases.  Special  exemptions  can  be  procured  under  the
act  for  old  or  infirm  workers.

The  act  provides  for  the  appointment  of  inspectors  for  en-
forcing the  payment  of  the  nunimum  rates,  and  for  fines  for
employers  not  paying  the  rate.  An  employee  who  has  not
received  the  legal  minimum  rate  may  recover  the  balance
due  him.

In  Great  Britain  the  board  of  trade,  which  is  the  general
administrative  body,  has  less  power  over  the  work  of  its  trade
boards  than  have  American  administrative  commissions  over
their  wage  boards.  A  British  trade  board  fixes  a  rate  and
the  board  of  trade  decides  only  whether  or  not  the  rate  shall
be  made  obHgatory.  An  American  wage  board  has  power  to
recommend  rates  which  the  commissions  may  declare  effective,
or  modify,  or  reject  altogether.  In  some  states  the  com-
mission may  fix  minimum  rates  without  the  intervention  of  a
wage  board.  So  far  the  American  method  is  rather  a  regula-
tion by  commissions  than  by  wage  boards  pure  and  simple.

These  commissions  —  called  minimum  wage  commissions,
industrial  welfare  commissions,  or  industrial  commissions —
are  usually  unsalaried  and  composed  of  from  three  to  five
persons,  one  of  whom  must  usually  be  a  woman,  appointed  by
the  governor.  Their  jurisdiction  extends  over  females  and
male  minors  up  to  eighteen  or  twenty-one,  and  over  all  in-
dustries, except  in  Colorado  and  Arkansas  where  specified
lists  exist.  Arkansas,  also,  is  the  only  state  specifically  exempt-
ing certain  industries,  those  excluded  being  cotton  factories,
fruit  and  vegetable  canning,  and  establishments  employing
fewer  than  four  women  at  the  same  sort  of  work.  The  com-
missions are  authorized  to  subpoena  witnesses,  administer
oaths,  and  examine  books  and  papers,  and  employers  are  re-
q-uired  to  keep  records  of  the  names,  addresses,  and  wages
of  women  and  minor  employees.  If  the  commission  learns
by  investigation — ^which  is  sometimes  compulsory  on  petition
-^that  wages  are  insufficient  to  maintain  the  specified  stand-
ard of  living,  it  must  proceed  either  to  determine  a  minimum
rate  or  to  establish  a  subordinate  wage  board  for  the  industry.


i88 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  subordinate  board  must  be  representative  of  employers,
employees,  and  the  "public."  Unlike  the  foreign  acts,  which
provide  for  the  nomination  of  representatives  by  employers
and  employees,  American  laws  generally  leave  the  method  of
selection  to  be  determined  by  the  commission.  The  com-
mission may,  of  cotirse,  ask  both  parties  to  elect,  and  this
democratic  method  is  required  in  the  Minnesota  law  "so  far
as  practicable."  While  in  theory  it  has  been  felt  desirable
that  in  the  interests  of  democracy  employers  and  employees
should  elect  their  representatives  to  the  wage  boards,  in  prac-
tice it  has  proved  exceedingly  difficult  to  depend  entirely
upon  election  for  securing  proper  representatives  for  un-
organized workers.  Their  lack  of  acquaintance  and  the  fear
of  losing  their  places  on  account  of  their  service  on  the  boards
make  them  reluctant  to  serve,  and  timid  in  conference.  For
the  present  it  has  therefore  been  found  more  effective  to  leave
the  enforcing  authority  free  to  select  representatives  from
lists  submitted  by  the  employees  or  from  those  formerly  in
the  trade  as  well  as  through  election.  Employers,  also,  have
often  been  unwilling  to  elect  their  representatives.'

The  subordinate  wage  board  may  use  the  investigations  of
the  commission  in  determining  wage  rates  or  may  make
further  investigations  of  its  own.  It  must  make  a  report  of
its  work  with  recommendations  to  the  commission,  which
may  accept  the  recommendations  in  whole  or  in  part  or  may
refer  them  back  to  the  board  for  further  consideration  or  may
convene  a  new  board.  When  the  report  of  the  wage  board
has  been  accepted  by  the  commission  a  public  hearing  must
be  held;  if  after  public  consideration  no  change  is  deemed
necessary  in  the  recommendations  they  are  promulgated  as
orders  which  become  effective  in  thirty  or  sixty  days.  Nearly
all  the  laws  grant  rehearings  on  petition  of  either  side.  Copies
of  orders  issued  by  a  commission  must  in  most  cases  be  for-
warded to  the  employer  concerned,  who  is  required  to  post
them  in  a  conspicuous  place.  Minimum  wage  rates  may  apply
either  to  time  or  to  piece  work,  and  in  Kansas,  Minnesota,  and

'  In  Minnesota  the  commission  was  obliged  to  choose  representatives
of  both  employers  and  employees  for  the  wage  boards,  and  to  select
several  of  the  latter  from  outsiders.  See  John  A.  Ryan,  "The  Task  of
Minimum  Wage  Boards  in  Minnesota,"  The  Survey,  November  14,
1914,  p.  171.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  189

Oregon  orders  may  be  issued  for  a  given  locality  or  area.  In
Wisconsin  the  industrial  commission  has  power  to  classify
industries  for  the  purpose  of  adjusting  wage  rates.

The  commissions  are  authorized  to  make  special  exemptions
for  women,  and  in  Wisconsin  for  minors  also,  who  are  physi-
cally handicapped.  Special  licenses  may  be  issued  to  learn-
ers and  apprentices  in  all  states  except  California  and  Colo-
rado, and  in  Oregon  and  Washington  the  life  of  these  licenses
may  be  limited.  In  Kansas,  minors  may  be  employed  at
lower  rates  than  adults  only  by  special  license.

The  interests  of  employers  and  employees  are  usually
further  safeguarded  by  provisions  for  a  court  appeal  from
the  commissions'  rulings,  the  procedure  and  the  subjects  for
court  review  being  carefully  specified.  In  most  of  the  states
rulings  may  be  set  aside  if  unreasonable  or  unlawftil;  in
Oregon  and  Washington  only  questions  of  law  may  be  re-
viewed, while  in  Massachusetts  and  Nebraska  an  employer
may  have  an  award  set  aside  in  his  particular  case  by  filing
a  declaration  under  oath,  in  Nebraska  that  compliance  would
"endanger  the  prosperity  of  his  business,"  but  in  Massa-
chusetts that  it  would  prevent  a  "reasonable  profit."  In
most  instances,  the  findings  of  fact  by  the  commissions  are
held  prima  facie  reasonable,  and  any  new  evidence  must  be
referred  back  to  them  for  consideration.

The  commissions,  except  in  Colorado  and  Arkansas,  are
authorized  to  enforce  their  own  rulings.  Most  of  the  states
provide  fines  of  $10  to  $100  for  employers  who  fail  to  pay
the  minimum  wage  or  who  violate  any  sections  of  the  act  or
any  commission  ruling.  It  has  also  been  found  necessary  to
penalize  by  a  fine  of  $25  to  $1,000  employers  who  discrimi-
nate against  employees  because  they  have  testified  in  wage
investigations  or  served  on  wage  boards.  In  Massachusetts
and  Nebraska,  however,  the  commission  must  rely  on  the
compulsion  of  publicity  to  enforce  its  wage  rulings.  In  these
two  states  employers  cannot  be  compelled  to  pay  the  mini-
mum; and  the  mere  publication  in  a  given  number  of  news-
papers throughout  the  state  of  the  names  of  those  pajdng
less  than  indicated  as  a  minimum  is  mandatory  in  Nebraska
but  only  optional  in  Massachusetts.  Publishers  in  either
state  refusing  to  print  the  names  of  such  employers  are  liable


igo PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

to  a  fine  of  $ioo.  In  all  other  states,  employees  who  have
not  been  paid  the  legal  minimum  rate  may  recover  the  un-
paid balance  through  a  civil  suit.

In  America,  then,  the  establishment  of  minimum  wage
rates  is  a  long  and  fairly  complicated  process.  First  there  is
the  investigation  by  the  commission,  then  generally  further
investigations  and  deliberation  by  a  representative  wage
board,  next  public  hearings,  and  finally  a  possible  court  re-
view before. the  minimum  rate  goes  into  effect.


S-  Results

c

It  is  still  alleged  in  some  quarters  that  wages  are  fixed  by
economic  laws,  any  legislative  interference  with  which  can
result  only  in  disaster.  At  present  all  that  can  be  said  is
that  experience  covering  twenty  years  in  Victoria  and  shorter
periods  elsewhere  has  failed  to  confirm  these  dire  predictions.

(z)  Changes  in  Wage  Rates

Perhaps  the  first  question  to  be  considered  is  whether  the
laws  have  succeeded  in  raising  wage  rates.  Nearly  all  the
evidence  so  far  collected  goes  to  show  that  they  have.  Some
instances  of  failure  are  known.  In  Victoria,  for  instance,  it
has  proved  difficult  to  maintain  the  legal  rate  in  the  furniture
trade  among  the  Chinese,  where  neither  employees  nor  em-
ployers welcomed  the  establishment  of  the  wage  board,*
and  in  England  the  custom  of  distributing  work  through
middlemen,  and  the  depression  of  the  industry,  led  to  evasions
in  the  lace-finishing  trade.  ^  Similar  evasions  have  been  sus-
pected with  regard  to  homeworkers  in  the  British  tailoring
industry.*  But  on  the  whole,  in  the  different  countries  and
in  the  various  industries,  the  awards  of  the  wage  boards  have
been  found  to  be  effective. In  Victoria,  official  reports  show,

iM.  B.  Hammond,  "Where  Life  Is  More  Than  Meat,"  The  Sumy,
February  6,  1915,  p.  498.

*  Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  Anti-Sweating  League,  p.  6.

'  See  R.  H.  Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  1915,
pp.  202-210.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  191

average  wage  rates  increased  7.6  per  cent,  in  thirteen  board
trades  in  a  period  of  about  five  years  before  awards  were
made,  but  16.5  per  cent,  in  these  and  in  six  additional  board
trades  during  a  similar  period  after  awards  were  made.  In
six  trades  a  period  of  decline  in  wage  rates  became  a  period
of  advance  after  the  making  of  awards.  During  the  whole
time  wage-rate  advances  in  twelve  non-board  trades  amotmted
to  II. 6  per  cent.^  In  the  English  chain-making  industry  56.7
per  cent,  of  the  male  mastermen  and  61.3  per  cent,  of  the
jpumeymen  earned  less  than  15  shillings  a  week  in  191 1.  In
1913,  after  the  award  by  the  trade  board,  only  1.3  per  cent,  of
the  mastermen  and  0.7  per  cent,  of  the  joumejmien  earned
so  little.^  In  the  branches  of  the  EngUsh  tailoring  trade  cov-
ered by  the  trade  board,  it  is  estimated  that  about  one- third
of  the  women  and  between  one-fourth  and  one-fifth  of  the  men
have  received  increases  in  their  earnings.'  In  Washington
the  industrial  welfare  commission  states  that  in  twenty-four
stores,  before  the  minimum  wage  award,  1,758  women  re-
ceived less  than  $10  weekly,  while  after  the  award  only  561
women  received  less  than  $10  weekly,  the  number  of  workers
remaining  approximately  the  same.*  A  report  of  the  United
States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  on  the  effect  of  minimum
wage  determinations  in  Oregon  retail  stores  indicated  that
average  weekly  earnings  of  women  were  8.6  per  cent,  higher
in  the  face  of  a  business  depression  which  caused  an  8  per  cent,
decrease  in  the  sales  of  these  stores.^  A  year  after  its  decree  in
the  brush  industry,  the  Massachusetts  Minimum  Wage  Com-
mission found  that  only  five,  or  i  per  cent,  of  the  employees
whose  wage  records  it  took,  were  receiving  less  than  the  legal
minimimi.®


'  Ernest  Aves,  Report  to  ihe  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
on  the  Wages  Boards  and  Industrial  Conciliation  and  Arbitration  Acts
of  Australia  and.  New  Zealand,  1908,  p.  30.

^  R.  H.  Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  '  Chain  -  Making  Industry,
p.' 83.

°  R.  H.  Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  p.  95.

*  First  Biennial  Report  of  the  Industrial  Welfare  Commission,  State  of
Washington,  1915,  pp.  13,  79.

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  176,  July,

1915,  P-  33-

'  Massachusetts  Minimum  Wage  Commission,  The  Effect  of  the  Mint-
mum  Wage  Decree  in  the  Brush  Industry  in  Massachusetts,  1915,  p.  5.


192 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(2)  Changes  in  Wages  above  the  Minimum

It  is  frequently  declared  that  legal  minimum  wage  rates  tend
to  become  maximum  wage  rates,  thus  injuring  those  whom
they  are  expressly  designed  to  benefit.  This  does  not,  how-
ever, appear  to  be  generally  the  case.  Both  the  chief  factory
inspector  at  Melbourne,  Victoria,  and  the  secretary  of  the
British  Board  of  Trade  declare  that  as  far  as  their  experience
goes  current  wages  are  not  held  down  to  the  minimum  set
by  law."-  The  former  official  even  declares  that  "the  average
wage  in  a  trade  is  invariably  higher  than  the  minimum
wage."  In  one  Victorian  industry,  clothing,  after  an  award
had  been  in  force  for  six  years,  wages  averaged  nearly  20  per
cent,  higher  than  the  legal  minimum.^  The  establishing  of
minimum  rates  in  the  clothing  trades  in  Great  Britain  led
in  several  districts  to  trade  union  action  which  fixed  standard
rates  considerably  above  the  legal  minimum.'  In  Portland,
Ore.,  also,  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics
found  that  the  proportion  of  women  getting  more  than  the
legal  minimum  increased  after  the  law  went  into  efifect.^

(3)  Efect  on  Unemployment

It  is  further  argued  against  minimum  wage  laws  that  they
force  workers  out  of  industry,  either  because  the  workers  are
considered  by  the  employer  tmprofitable  at  the  legal  rate,  or
because  they  can  be  replaced  by  apprentices  or  by  specially
Hcensed  workers  at  a  lower  rate,  or  perhaps  because  they  have
been  active  on  the  wage  boards.  While  all  three  abuses  have
probably  taken  place  at  various  times,  they  are  not  universal
and  are  not  inherent  in  the  laws.  On  the  first  point,  the
testimony  of  the  chief  factory  inspector  at  Melbourne,  pre-
viously quoted,  is  that  "this  dislocation  [of  the  less  speedy
workers]  is  not  serious,  and  that  as  a  rule  things  regulate


'  Irene  Osgood  Andrews,  Minimum  Wage  Legislation,  pp.  62-63,  77-78-
^Henry  R.  Seager,  "Theory  of  the  Minimum  Wage,"  American  Labor
Legislation  Review,  February,  1913,  p.  89.

'  R.  H.  Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  p.  96.
*  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  176,  p.  33.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  193

themselves  fairly  satisfactorily."*  The  Oregon  investigation
made  by  the  United  States  Btireau  of  Labor  Statistics  showed
that  experienced  women  workers  were  neither  thrown  out  of
employment  by  the  operation  of  the  law  nor  supplanted  by
men.^  In  sixteen  brush  factories  in  Massachusetts  the  total
number  of  women  increased  from  332  to  334  between  1913
when  the  first  wage  investigation  was  made  and  1915,  the  year
following  the  minimum  wage  decree;  the  number  of  men  de-
creased from  472  to  417.'  The  system  of  issuing  special  per-
mits for  less  efficient  workers  to  be  employed  at  lower  rates,
which  is  provided  for  by  most  of  the  statutes,  is  tmdoubtedly
helpful  in  making  the  adjustment.  On  the  other  hand,  the
displacement  of  adult  skilled  workers  by  apprentices  or  by
defective  workers  at  a  lower  rate  can  be  checked  by  limiting
the  percentage  of  employees  in  any  establishment  who  may
work  at  such  lower  rates,  as  is  already  done  in  Minnesota
with  regard  to  defectives.  The  matter  of  discrimination
against  workers  who  serve  on  wage  boards  is  more  difficult
to  handle,  although  most  American  laws  establish  penalties
for  it.  This  discrimination  is  a  severe  handicap  to  securing
a  proper  representation  of  the  employees  on  wage  boards.
However,  this  is  no  serious  argument  against  minimum  wage
legislation,  as  the  same  sort  of  discrimination  often  takes
place  against  the  leaders  of  the  workers  in  any  concerted  move-
ment for  higher  wages.


(4)  Effect  on  Industry

From  the  side  of  employers  it  is  frequently  declared  that
minimum  wage  laws  will  put  them  under  such  a  handicap
that  they  will  be  forced  to  move  to  freer  territory  or  be
driven  out  of  industry  altogether.  Neither  seems  to  have
taken  place  to  any  appreciable  extent.  The  officials  of  the
Victorian  Chamber  of  Manufactures  and  of  the  Victorian
Employers'  Association,  the  two  bodies  which  originally  led
the  opposition  to  the  wage-board  system,  now  declare  that


'  Quoted  by  Irene  Osgood  Andrews,  Minimum  Wage  Legislation,  p.  63.
'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  176,  pp.  8,  g.
'  Massachusetts  Minimum  Wage  Commission,  Bulletin  N0.7, 1915,?.  1 1.

13 .„


194 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

they  have  no  wish  to  see  the  system  abandoned. »  In  1903
and  1904,  eleven  of  the  thirty-eight  special  boards  then  in  oper-
ation in  that  country  were  established  upon  the  application
of  employers.^  Only  a  single  instance  is  recorded  of  a  plant
leaving  the  state  because  of  the  minimum  wage  law.'  In
Great  Britain,  also,  in  the  industries  having  wage  boards,
the  "employers  have  not  been  ruined  or  even  injured  in  their
profits,"*  and  the  board  of  trade  reports  that  it  is  "not
aware  of  any  tendency  of  maniifacturers  to  transfer  their
business  to  foreign  countries,  or  in  cases  where  lower  wage
rates  have  been  fixed  for  Ireland  than  for  Great  Britain,  to
transfer  their  business  from  Great  Britain  to  Ireland."^  The
actual  cost  of  the  necessary  changes  is,  after  all,  not  burden-
some. In  Oregon  retail  stores  the  increased  labor  cost  was
found  to  be  only  three  mills  on  each  dollar  of  sales.®  In  the
Massachusetts  brush  industry  both  the  amount  of  capital
invested  and  the  value  of  the  product  increased  in  the  year
following  the  decree.^


(5)  Efed  on  Trade  Unionism

Certain  trade  union  officials,  especially  in  the  United  States,
have  feared  that  minimum  wage  legislation  would  hinder  the
trade  union  movement  by  enabling  the  workers  to  secure
wage  gains  without  the  aid  of  organization.  Their  fears  have
not  proved  true. Instead,  the  formation  of  wage  boards  has


'  M.  B.  Hammond,  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  February,  19131
p.  113.

^Victor  S.  Clark,  The  Labor  Movement  in  Australasia,  1907,  p.  I47.

'"A  brush  manufacturer  from  England,  who  had  recently  come  to
Victoria  to  establish  his  business,  was  so  enraged  at  the  idea  that  the
wages  he  was  to  pay  were  to  be  regulated  by  law  that  he  moved  across
Bass  Strait  to  Tasmania.  What  has  happened  to  him  since  Tasmania
has  adopted  the  same  system  of  wage  regulation,  I  do  not  know." — M.  B.
Hammond,  "The  Minimum  Wage  in  Great  Britain  and  Australia,"
Annais  of  the  American  Academy  0/  Political  and  Social  Science,  July,
1913,  p.  32.

*  John  A.  Hobson,  "The  State  and  the  Minimum  Wage  in  England,
The  Survey,  February  6,  1915,  p.  503.

'  Quoted  by  Irene  Osgood  Andrews,  Minimum  Wage  Legislation,  p.  78-

'  IJnited  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  176,  p.  10.

'  Massachusetts  Minimum  Wage  Commission,  Bulletin  No.  7,  p.  14.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  195

often  acted  as  a  stimulus  to  the  organization  of  unions,  through
which  the  workers  have  in  some  cases  been  enabled  to  make
further  gains  above  the  legal  minimum  rate.  This  is  the  testi-
mony of  Australian  observers  and  of  the  British  Board  of
Trade,  and  it  has  been  stated  that  in  the  brief  experience  of
Massachusetts  "the  conspicuous  featiure  is  the  impetus  given
to  workers  in  the  candy  and  brush  trades  to  form  organizations
where  none  had  been  before."  '


((5)  Effect  on  Efficiency

A  final  point  to  consider  is  whether  guaranteeing  to  every
worker  a  legal  minimum  wage  reduces  incentive  and  output.
The  preponderance  of  evidence  is  that  it  does  not,  but  that
it  even  has  the  opposite  effect,  due  in  part  to  the  employisr's
insistence  on  greater  returns  for  increased  wages,  and  in  part
to  the  workers'  spontaneous  response  to  the  improved  rate  of
remuneration.^  Some  employers  in  Australia  feel  that  out-
put has  been  reduced  in  recent  years,  but  they  ascribe  the  de-
cline to  trade  union  policy  rather  than  to  wage  awards,  while
the  employees  deny  the  charge  altogether.*  In  England  and
in  the  United  States  it  is  believed  that  efficiency  ha^  gone  up
rather  than  down.  Thus  the  British  Board  of  Trade  declares
that  "there  are  indications  that  in  many  cases  the  efficiency
of  the  workers  has  been  increased,"  *  and  the  Industrial  Wel-
fare Commission  of  Washington  concludes  that  "the  whole
standard  of  efficiency  and  discipline  has  been  raised."* In


'  Florence  Kelley,  "  Status  of  [Minimum  Wage]  Legislation  in  the
United  States,"  The  Survey,  February  6,  1915,  p.  489.

*  "'Output  per  head  has  increased,'  said  another  [firm];  "as  a  general
rule  the  girls  work  better  if  they  are  paid  more.'  Indeed,  the  psydiologi-
cal  eflEect  of  relatively  high  and  low  rates  on  the  workers  would  appear
to  be  exactly  the  reverse  of  that  often  ascribed  to  them.  So  far  from
low  rates  'making  them  work,'  they  often  produce  listlessness  and  de-
spair. So  far  from  high  rates  'encouraging  slackness,'  they  stimulate  the
workers  to  earn  as  much  as  possible  while  at  work  upon  them."  (R.  H.
Tawney,  Minimum  Rates  in  the  Tailoring  Industry,  p.  133.)

'M.  B.  Hammond,  "Where  Life  Is  More  Than  Meat,"  The  Survey,
February  6,  1915,  p.  502.

*  Quoted  by  Irene  Osgood  Andrews,  Minimum  Wage  Legislation,  p.  78.

*  First  Biennial  Report  of  the  Industrial  Welfare  Commission,  State  of
Washington,  p.  13.


196 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

fact,  it  may  be  said  that  the  beneficial  results  of  minimum
wage  legislation  have  been  largely  due  to  the  transfer  of  em-
phasis from  competition  for  low  wages  to  efficiency  on  the
part  of  both  employer  and  employee.

Among  the  better-established  results  of  minimum  wage
legislation,  therefore,  may  be  mentioned  (i)  that  it  has  raised
wages;  (2)  that  minimum  wage  rates  do  not  in  general  tend
to  become  maximtim  rates;  (3)  that  it  does  not  necessarily
force  workers  out  of  industry;  (4)  that  it  does  not  undtdy
handicap  employers;  (5)  that  it  does  not  undermine  trade
union  organization;  and  (6)  that  it  does  not  decrease  efficiency.


6.  Constitutionality

The  constitutionality  of  minimum  wage  legislation  involves
a  new  application  of  the  principle  of  the  police  power  of  the
'  state. While  it  is  an  accepted  constitutional  principle  that
:  the  employee's  right  freely  to  contract  for  the  disposition  of
1  his  own  labor  cannot  be  limited  except  by  "due  process  of
'  law,"  yet  the  police  power  of  the  state  can  restrict  the  free-
i  dom  of  contract  for  the  protection  or  betterment  of  the  pub-
lic health,  morals,  peace  and  welfare. Enactments  of  the
legislature  which  reasonably  tend  to  that  end  have  been
commonly  sustained  by  the  courts. Are  minimum  wage  laws
a  legitimate  extension  of  this  power?

The  courts  have  already  sanctioned  under  the  police  power
principle  state  interference  with  the  wage  bargain  by  limiting
working  hours  for  all  classes  of  employees,  and  by  regulating
certain  conditions  of  the  wage  payment,  such  as  the  frequency
of  payment,  store  orders,  or  payment  in  cash.^ Justification


1  As  early  as  1859,  in  a  wage  exemption  case,  the  court  said:  "The  idea
underlying  the  ultimately  developed  sentiment  of  the  people  upon  that
subject  ...  is  that  the  citizen  is  an  essential  elementary  constituent  of
the  state;  that  to  preserve  the  state  the  citizen  must  be  protected;  that
to  live  he  must  have  the  means  of  living;  to  act  and  to  be  a  citizen  he
must  be  free  to  act  and  to  have  somewhat  wherewith  to  act,  and  thus
to  be  competent  to  the  performance  of  his  high  functions  as  such.  Hence
it  would  seem,  as  no  doubt  it  was,  a  matter  of  the  gravest  state  policy
to  invest  the  citizen  with,  and  to  secure  to  him,  those  essential  perquisites,
without  which  the  state  could  not  demand  of  him  at  all  times  his  instant
service  and  devoted  allegiance." Maxwell  v.  Reed,  7  Wis.  594  (1859).


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  197

for  state  interference  to  fix  minimum  wage  rates  has  been
sought  on  the  same  grounds  on  which  other  protective  legis-
lation has  been  upheld.

In  public  employment,  indeed,  it  has  been  frequently  de-
cided that  the  legislaturerhay  rightfully  regulate  wage  rates
as  well  as  other  conditions  of  labor  both  on  direct  work  and
on  work  done  by  contractors.  On  work  done  by  contract
the  wage  regulation  has  commonly  taken  the  form  of  stipu-
lating that  the  current  rate  of  wages  shall  be  paid,  and  the
constitutionality  of  this  form  of  regidation  is  now  well  estab-
lished.' In  19 14,  moreover,  the  Washington  State  Supreme
Court  sustained  a  more  drastic  wage  regulation  for  public
works.  Spokane  had  fixed  by  ordinance  a  minimum  wage
rate  of  $2.75  a  day  for  common  labor  on  all  public  improve-
ments. Though  this  rate  was  higher  than  the  current  rate
for  similar  work,  the  court  upheld  the  ordinance  even  when
applied  to  work  done  by  contractors,  as  neither  unreasonable
nor  in  violation  of  the  public  policy  of  the  state.^

These  cases,  however,  are  based  on  the  proprietary  power
of  government,  and  not  on  the  police  power.  The  legality
of  state  regulation  of  wage  rates  in  private  employments  is
less  certain.  The  only  minimum  wage  case  in  private  em-
ployments which  has  yet  reached  a  decision  in  a  state  supreme,
cotirt  is  that  involving  the  Oregon  minimimi  wage  law  of
1913.  In  this  case  ^  the  cotort  took  judicial  notice  of  the
"common  belief"  that  many  women  are  employed  at  exces-
sively low  wages  and  that  health,  morals,  and  the  public  wel-
fare are  injured  thereby.  Accordingly,  the  law  was  held  con- 1
stitutional  on  the  same  grounds  on  which  laws  restricting  the
hours  of  labor  for  women  have  been  sustained.  The  court
held  that  "Every  argument  put  forward  to  sustain  the  maxi-
mum hours  law  or  upon  which  it  was  established  applies
equally  in  favor  of  the  constitutionality  of  the  minimxmi  wage
law  as  also  within  the  poUce  power  of  the  state  and  as  a
regulation  tending  to  guard  the  public  morals  and  the  public
health."

In  the  lower  court  this  point  was  made  even  more  forcibly


■  See  Atkin  ».  Kansas,  191  U.  S.  207,  24  Sup.  Ct.  124  (1903).

2  Malette  v.  City  of  Spokane,  77  Wash.  205,  137  Pac.  496  (1913).

3  Stettler  v.  O'Hara,  69  Ore.  519,  139  Pac.  743  (1914).


ipS PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

when  the  judge  said  that  the  two  classes  of  regulation  were
"inseparably  linked  together.  .  .  .  The  purpose  of  the  act  in
limiting  the  maximum  hours  of  labor  and  the  minimtmi  wage
for  women,  is  evidently  the  same,  viz.,  to  preserve  and  con-
serve their  health  and  morals.  Is  the  preservation  and  con-
servation of  the  health  and  morals  of  women  workers  a
public  concern,  or  is  it  merely  a  matter  that  concerns  the
individuals  employed?  If  the  enactment  is  for  the  public
health,  peace,  morality,  and  general  welfare,  it  falls  within
the  police  power  of  the  state  to  regulate.  The  complexity
and  intimate  relations  of  our  present-day  civilization  are  such
that  there  is  a  necessary  dependency  of  the  public  welfare
upon  the  health,  morality,  and  vigor  of  our  women  and
children,  when  considered  from  physiological,  sociological,
and  moral  standpoints.  The  women  are  and  are  to  be  the
mothers  of  our  future  citizens,  and  the  children  of  to-day
will  be  the  citizens  of  to-morrow,  and  when  any  considerable
number  of  them  are  employed  at  wages  which  reduce  them
to  beggary  or  deny  a  sufficient  compensation  to  preserve
health,  the  insufficiency  of  such  wages  becomes  a  powerful
factor  in  determining  the  social,  moral,  and  physical  status  of
the  body  poUtic  and  is  a  matter  of  public  concern."'

In  addition  to  the  health  argument  the  argument  justifying
state  interference  on  account  of  inequality  of  bargaining  power
between  the  parties  concerned  in  the  wage  bargain  was  em-
phasized by  the  Oregon  Supreme  Court.  "The  worker  in
such  a  case  has  no  voice  in  fixing  the  hours  or  wages  or  choice
to  refuse  it,  but  must  accept  it  or  fare  worse."  Therefore  the
law  could  be  sustained  on  the  same  grounds  as  the  women's
ten-hour  law  had  been  as  "within  the  police  power  of  the
state,  and  as  a  regulation  tending  to  guard  the  public  morals
and  the  public  health."

The  method  of  establishing  minimum  wages  has  also  given
rise  to  constitutional  uncertainty.  In  enacting  minimum
wage  legislation  the  majority  of  the  legislatures  recognized
the  need  of  discovering  the  facts  concerning  wages  and  living
conditions  before  wage  rates  could  be  reasonably  and  scientifi-
cally adjusted. They  therefore  established  general  standards

*  Opinion  of  Judge  T.  J.  Cleeton  in  Stettler  v.  O'Hara,  Oregon  Circuit
Court,  County  of  Multnomah,  November  7,  1913.


THE  MINIMUM  WAGE  199

for  living  wages  and  delegated  to  commissions  and  boards
the  work  of  ascertaining  the  facts,  and,  except  on  questions
of  law,  made  the  findings  of  the  commission  conclusive.
This  procedure  was  also  sustained  by  the  Oregon  Supreme
Court  when  it  held  that  the  law  does  not  "delegate  legisla-
tive power  to  the  commission.  It  is  authorized  only  to  ascer-
tain facts  that  will  determine  the  localities,  businesses,  hours,
and  wages  to  which  the  law  shall  apply. ' '  Nor  is  the  fact  that
the  findings  of  the  commission  are  made  conclusive  on  ques-
tions of  fact  denial  of  due  process  of  law.  ' '  Reasonable  notice
and  a  fair  opportunity  to  be  heard  before  some  tribunal  be-
fore it  decides  the  issues  are  the  essentials  of  due  process  of
law,"  and  these  are  provided,  the  commission  itself  being  an
adequate  tribunal  "proper  to  deal  with  the  subject  in  hand." '

In  an  opinion  upholding  the  constitutionality  of  the  mini-
mum wage  law  of  Minnesota,  the  state  attorney-general
pointed  out  that  these  powers  are  nearly  equivalent  to  those
given  state  railroad  commissions,  which  are  commonly  held
legal.  For  instance,  the  power  to  fix  different  minimum  rates
for  different  localities  is  paralleled  by  the  power  of  railroads
to  fix  different  rates  .for  different  roads  and  for  different
classes  of  traffic."

In  recent  years  the  courts  have  shown  a  marked  tendency
to  recognize  the  fact  that  new  conditions  of  life  and  labor
require  the  new  application  of  existing  principles.  While
lower  courts  in  Minnesota  and  Arkansas  have  declared  mini-
mum wage  legislation  unconstitutional,  it  is  on  the  Oregon
case  that  the  future  of  this  legislation  in  the  United  States
probably  hinges,  for  the  favorable  decision  of  the  Oregon
Supreme  Court,  returned  March  17,  19 14,  was  immediately
appealed  to  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  where  it  was
still  pending  in  the  autimm  of  1915.  .

'  See  also  Louisville  &  N.  R.  Co.  v.  Garrett,  231  U.  S.  298,  34  Sup.  Ct.
48  (1913).  The  Oregon  court  pointed  out  that  in  the  commission  regu-
lation held  unconstitutional  in  the  Minnesota  rate  cases  there  was  no
provision  for  hearings  by  parties  affected,  and  that  therefore  due  process
of  law  was  not  provided  for,  "which  is  the  principal  ground  upon  which
the  state  court  was  reversed"  by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court.

*  Opinion  of  state  attorney -general  on  constitutionality  of  Minnesota
minimum  wage  law,  p.  8.  See  also  Minneapolis,  St.  Paul  &  Sault  Ste.
Marie  R.  R.  Co.  v.  R.  R.  Commission  of  Wisconsin,  136  Wis.  146,  116
N,  W.  905  (1908).


CHAPTER V

HOURS  OF  LABOR

In  spite  of  the  general  tendency  in  this  country  toward  a
shorter  workday,  the  old  ideal  of  "eight  hours  for  work,  eight
hours  for  rest,  eight  hours  for  what  you  will"  has  not  yet
been  realized  by  the  majority  of  American  wage-earners.
Out  of  the  6,615,046  wage-earners  enumerated  in  1909  by  the
Census  of  Manufactures,  only  7.9  per  cent,  were  employed  in
establishments  where  the  eight-hour  day  prevailed.^  "Pre-
vailing hoiirs"  for  three-quarters  of  them  were  from  fifty-four
to  sixty  weekly.  But  no  fewer  than  344,011,  or  5.2  per  cent.
of  the  whole  number,  worked  where  prevaihng  hours  were
between  sixty  and  seventy-two  weekly;  116,083  worked  in
establishments  where  the  seventy-two-hour  week  prevailed,
and  114,118  where  the  prevailing  hours  were  more  than
seventy-two.  Out  of  the  eighty-six  principal  manufacturing
industries  employing  more  than  10,000  wage-earners  in  1909,
twenty  employed  over  10  per  cent,  of  their  workers  more
than  sixty  hours  a  week.  Among  those  exacting  more  than
seventy-two  hours  weekly  from  several  thousand  employees
were  beet-sugar,  cement,  chemical,  glucose,  and  sugar  and
molasses  factories,  coke-works,  gas-plants,  the  manufacture
of  ice  and  Hme,  petroleum  refineries,  blast-furnaces,  and
roUing-mills.  Among  railroad  employees,  also,  continuous
service  for  long  periods  is  very  common.  Records  of  the
Interstate  Commerce  Commission  show  that  during  the  year
ending  June  30,  1913,  261,332  railroad  men  were  reported  as
on  duty  for  periods  exceeding  the  legal  limit  of  sixteen  hours,
and  that  over  33,000  of  them  worked  more  than  twenty-one

1  See  Thirteenth  Census  of  the  Unikd  States,  Vol.  VHI,  "Manufactures,"
pp.  306-313.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  201

hours  continuously.'  Hours  of  labor  on  street  railways  also
extend  over  excessive  periods  through  the  swing  run  system
which  employs  a  man  a  few  hours  during  the  morning  rush
and  then  lays  him  off  till  the  evening  rush.  During  the  in-
terim he  must  be  on  call  and  usually  cannot  go  home,  so  that
his  actual  working  day  extends  from  the  time  he  starts  work
in  the  morning  till  he  is  through  with  his  last  trip  at  night.

Then,  too,  many  employees  are  working  seven  days  a  week.
Investigations  show  that  much  of  the  present-day  continuous
operation  of  industries  involves  seven -day  labor.  For
instance,  in  Minnesota  in  1909,  98,558  men,  or  approximately
14  per  cent,  of  the  gainfully  employed  males  in  that  state,
were  working  every  day  in  the  week.^  In  New  York  in
1910,  out  of  179,000  imion  members  in  a  number  of  specified
industries,  almost  20  per  cent,  were  engaged  in  seven-day
labor.'

Worst  of  all,  many  establishments  which  operate  continu-
ously, such  as  iron  and  steel  plants,  paper-mills,  and  glass  and
chemical  works,  combine  the  twelve-hour  day  with  the  seven-
day  week,  and  in  not  a  few  cases  require  their  employees  to
alternate  weekly  or  fortnightly  between  day  and  night  shifts,
working  twenty-four  hours  without  rest  when  the  change  is
made.  So  glaring  are  the  evils  of  this  condition  that  under
the  auspices  of  the  International  Association  for  Labor  Legis-
lation a  special  conference  on  the  subject  was  held  in  London
in  Jtme,  191 2,  and  resolutions  were  adopted  favoring  inter-
national action  to  secure  eight-hour  shifts  in  continuous  in-
dustries.*

Under  modem  industrial  conditions  such  excessive  hours
of  work  break  down  health.  Even  with  short  hours  the  strain
of  modem  industry,  with  its  speed,  its  piece-work,  its  division
of  labor,  involving  the  monotonous  repetition  of  the  same
process,  sometimes  even  of  the  same  movement,  is  a  heavy
tax  on  the  worker. But  with  the  eleven-  or  twelve-hour  day


•Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  A  Statistical  Analysis  of  Carriers'
Monthly  Hours  of  Service  Reports,  1913,  p.  10.

2  Minnesota  Bureau  of  Labor,  Twelfth  Biennial  Report,  pp.  104-119.

'  New  York  State  Department  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  45,  Sept.,  1910,
pp.  450,  451.

*  Report  of  Special  Commission  on  Hours  of  Labor  in  Continuous  In-
dustries, 1912,  pp.  16,  17.


202 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

or  the  seven-day  week,  a  man  must  go  back  to  his  job  before
he  has  had  sufficient  rest  to  recover  from  the  excessive  fatigue
of  the  long  work  period,  and  a  progressive  decUne  in  health
results.  "In  my  judgment,"  said  a  former  official  of  a  large
steel  company,  "a  large  proportion  of  the  steel-workers,  who
from  early  manhood  work  twelve  hours  a  day,  are  old  men  at
forty."!

Though  it  is  the  health  dangers  of  long  hours  which  are
most  often  emphasized,  the  lack  of  leisure  for  family  life,  for
recreation,  for  all  the  requirements  of  citizenship,  is  no  less
an  evil.  It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  time  spent  in
going  and  coming  from  work  and  the  dinner  hour  often  add
two  hours  to  the  length  of  the  workday  proper,  and  that  an
eleven-hour  day  is  likely  to  mean  thirteen  hours  away  from
home.  Said  a  Pittsburgh  steel-worker  of  the  results  of  such
a  workday,  "Home  is  where  I  eat  and  sleep. "^  The  ultimate
effects  of  such  hours  of  labor  were  thus  summed  up  by  the
Supreme  Co^xct  of  Georgia  in  upholding  a  Sunday  rest
law:  "Without  specific  leisure  the  process  of  fonning  char-
acter can  only  be  begun;  it  can  never  advance  or  be  com-
pleted; people  would  be  merely  machines  of  labor — ^nothing
more."'

Aside  from  their  weaker  physique,  the  "long  day  "  is  especial-
ly onerous  for  women  workers  because  of  the  double  burden
of  domestic  duties  and  wage  work  which  many  of  them  carry.
Ordinarily  men  can  rest  when  their  day's  toil  is  over,  but
there  are  few  working-girls  who  do  not  have  at  least  mending
and  laundering  to  do  in  the  evenings,  and  many  married
women  must  take  the  entire  care  of  their  homes  and  children
before  and  after  work.

Moreover,  long  hours  do  not  necessarily  make  for
the  greatest  economy  and  efficiency  in  production.  It  is
sometimes  argued  that  if  hours  are  reduced  output  will  decline
proportionately.  This  might  be  true  if  human  beings  were
mere  machines  and  not  living  creatures  who  grow  tired.  But
as  a  matter  of  fact  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  operates

'William  B.  Dickson,  former  vice  -  pres  dent,  United  States  Steel
Corporation,  The  Survey,  January  3,  1914,  p 376.

"  Quoted  by  John  A.  Fitch,  "The  Steel  Industry  and  the  Labor  Prob-
lem," The  Survey,  March  6,  1909,  p.  1091.

'Hennington  v.  State,  90  Georgia  396,  17  S.  E.  1009  (1892).


HOURS  OF  LABOR  203

nowhere  more  strikingly  than  in  regard  to  hours  of  labor.
Studies  of  output  before  and  after  a  shortening  of  hours  show
that  where  the  human  element  enters  into  production  hour
reductions  by  no  means  necessarily  imply  a  decrease  in  out-
put. For  instance,  the  federal  Industrial  Commission  of  1898
made  special  comparisons  between  the  output  of  bituminous
coal  mines  before  and  after  the  introduction  of  the  eight-hour
day,  and  found  that  output  even  increased  imder  the  shorter
workday.^  In  Illinois  in  1895  and  1896  under  the  ten-hour
system,  the  average  daily  output  for  each  mine  employee  was
2-53  to  3  tons;  in  1898,  1899,  and  1900  with  an  eight-hour  day
the  average  output  was  3. 11  to  3.21  tons,  though  the  propor-
tion of  coal  mined  by  machinery  was  not  increased.

In  the  New  England  textile  industry,  also,  it  was  found
that  the  shorter  workday  consequent  upon  the  enforcement
of  the  ten-hour  law  improved  either  the  quality  or  quantity
of  the  output,  or  both.^  Similar  evidence  has  been  gathered
for  a  number  of  other  industries,  showing  the  beneficial  effect
of  a  full  day's  rest  each  week.*  This  increase  of  output
through  increased  efficiency  probably  largely  explains  why
wages  have  seldom  fallen,  but  have  frequently  even  risen  after
a  reduction  of  hours,  and  why  the  industries  in  which  wages
are  highest  are  often  those  in  which  hours  are  shortest.  Prac-
tical experience,  therefore,  gives  weight  to  the  old  eight-hour
league  slogan:

Whether  you  work  by  the  piece  or  the  day.
Decreasing  the  hours  increases  the  pay.

Shorter  hours  likewise  tend  to  steady  employment.  When
no  restrictions  are  placed  on  hours  of  work  in  a  seasonal  in-
dustry, the  tendency  is  to  concentrate  the  work  in  a  brief  .
busy  season  with  long  hours  of  overtime.  Hour  regulation,
except  in  the  case  of  perishable  products  and  those  subject
to  changes  in  fashion,  forces  a  more  even  distribution  of  the
work  over  a  longer  period. When  the  woman's  eight-hour  law


'  Final  Report  of  the  Industrial  Commission,  1902,  Vol.  XIX,  p.  770.

2  See  Reports  of  the  Chief  of  the  Massachusetts  District  Police,  for  the
year  ending  December  31,  1883,  pp.  17,  18;  for  the  year  ending  De-
cember 31,  1886,  pp.  71,  72.

'  See  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  December,  1012,  pp.  524-527.


204 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

was  in  force  in  Illinois  factory  inspectors  noted  "a  greater
uniformity  of  work  and  rest"  as  one  of  its  results.^  In  cer-
tain occupations,  also,  where  the  time  of  attendance  and  not
the  speed  of  the  worker  is  the  essential  factor  (ticket-chopping
and  streetcar  work,  for  example),  the  reduction  of  excessive
hours  would  increase  to  a  certain  extent  the  demand  for  labor.
Aside  from  voluntary  reductions  by  individual  employers
there  are  two  methods  by  which  the  desirable  goal  of  shorter
daily  and  weekly  hours  has  been  reached,  by  labor  organiza-
tion and  by  labor  legislation.  Many  workers,  prominent
among  whom  in  this  country  are  printers,  granite-cutters,
cigar-makers,  and  building-trades  workmen,  have  gained  the
nine-  or  eight-hour  day  by  organization.  But  the  present
prevalence  of  longer  hours  of  labor  in  the  United  States  shows
that  the  tinions  alone  have  not  been  everywhere  adequate
to  the  task.  It  has  so  far  proved  difficult  to  form  stable
labor  organizations  among  women  and  among  some  classes
of  unskilled  men  workers.  In  some  cases,  too,  as  in  the  Pitts-
burgh steel  plants,  large  scale  business  has  used  its  power  to
stamp  out  labor  organization.  After  a  century  of  effort
probably  four-fifths  of  those  employed  in  trade,  transportation,
and  manufactviring  are  still  unorganized,  and  in  recent  years
there  has  been  a  growing  demand  for  the  protection  of  un-
organized workers  by  legislation.


I.  Maximum  Daily  Hours

(i)  Children

The  first  legislative  regulation  of  the  hours  of  labor  in  this
country  applied  to  children.  In  1842  a  petition  was  presented
to  the  Massachusetts  legislature  by  certain  citizens  of  FaU
River  who  pointed  out  that  the  existing  hours  of  labor  must
be  permanently  injurious  to  the  health  of  children  and  detri-
mental to  their  education,  and  prayed  that  prohibitory  legis-
lation be  enacted.  The  agitation  resulted  in  the  passage
during  the  same  year  of  a  ten-hotar  law  for  children  under


'  Report  of  the  Illinois  Factory  Inspectors,  1893,  p.  18.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  205

twelve  years  of  age  in  manufactttring  establishments.^  In  the
same  year,  also,  Connecticut  enacted  a  ten-hour  law  for  chil-
dren under  fotirteen  in  cotton  and  woolen  mills.^

By  the  begiiming  of  the  Civil  War  laws  limiting  the  hours
of  children  in  manufacturing  establishments  to  ten  a  day
had  been  enacted  in  the  five  additional  states  of  New  Hamp-
shire,^ Maine,*  Pennsylvania,^  New  Jersey,^  and  Ohio.'  The
Connecticut  statute  of  1842  was,  however,  superseded  thirteen
years  after  passage  by  a  new  law  which  set  back  the  limit  to
eleven  hours,*  followed  within  a  year  by  an  amendment  which
still  further  lowered  the  standard  to  twelve  hours  a  day.'
Like  the  first  Connecticut  law,  the  early  Pennsylvania  laws
appHed  only  to  textile  mills,  but  in  the  other  states  the  acts
covered  manufacturing  in  general.  The  ages  of  the  children
affected  varied  from  twelve  in  Massachusetts  to  twenty-one
in  New  Jersey  and  Peimsylvania.  In  addition  to  the  states
already  mentioned,  Rhode  Island  enacted  in  1853  an  eleven-
hour  law  for  children  from  twelve  to  fifteen.^"

These  early  laws  were,  however,  to  a  great  extent  unenforced
and  even  vmenforceable.  The  stiU  frequent  provision,  for
example,  that  only  violations  committed  "knowingly"  are
punishable,  which,  to  quote  a  government  report,  has  "  put
a  premitmi  on  ignorance  and  .  .  .  served  to  balk  the  intent  of
so  much  labor  legislation,"  '^  originated  in  the  Massachusetts
law  of  1842  and  was  copied  in  New  Jersey  and  Rhode  Island.
In  New  Hampshire  children  under  fifteen  could  work  longer
than  the  statutory  ten  hours  if  provided  with  the  "written
consent  of  the  parent  or  guardian."  ^^ In  New  Jersey,  and  in


•  Massachusetts,  Laws  1842,  C.  60.

2  Connecticut,  Laws  1842,  C.  28.

'  New  Hampshire,  Laws  1846,  C.  318.  *  Maine,  Laws  1848,  C.  83.

I*  Pennsylvania,  Laws  1848,  No.  227;  Laws  1849,  No.  415;  Laws  1855,
No.  501.  *New  Jersey,  Laws  1851,  p.  321.

'  Ohio,  Laws  1852,  p.  187.  *  Connecticut,  Laws  1855,  C.  45.

» Connecticut,  Laws  1856,  C.  39. ">  Rhode  Island,  Laws  1853,  p.  245.

"  Report  on  the  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the
United  States,  Senate  Document  No.  645,  6lst  Congress,  2nd  Session,
1910,  Vol.  VI,  "The  Beginnings  of  Child  Labor  Legislation  in  Certain
States,"  Elizabeth  Lewis  Otey,  p.  78.

"  Of  this  law  Horace  Greeley  said:  "Why  should  'the  consent  of  the  (?)
parent  or  guardian  of  such  minor'  'be  allowed  to  overrule  the  demands
of  Justice,  Humanity,  and  the  Public  weal'?  .  .  .  We  believe  nothing  less
than  a  peremptory  prohibition  of  the  employment  of  Minors  for  more


2o6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Pennsylvania  under  the  earliest  laws,  a  child  could  not  be
"holden  or  required"  to  work  more  than  ten  hours  a  day,
but  if  the  child  worked  longer  the  employer,  in  order  to  escape
all  responsibiHty,  needed  only  to  declare  that  the  extra  labor
was  not  required,  but  voltmtary.  Ohio  even  went  so  far  as  to
legitimatize  this  subtle  distinction  by  declaring  that  minors
imder  eighteen  might  not  be  "compelled,"  but  that  minors
under  fourteen  might  not  be  "permitted,"  to  work  more  than
ten  hours.  Only  in  two  states  were  any  provisions  made  for
enforcement:  in  Coimecticut  constables  and  grand  jurors
were  to  inquire  after  violations,  and  in  Pennsylvania  con-
stables could  take  action — ^but  only  after  complaint.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  early  hour  legislation  for
children  resulted  almost  altogether  from  interest  in  education
and  from  the  efforts  of  adult  male  workers  to  secure  such
regulations  as  a  first  step  toward  obtaining  similar  laws  for
themselves.  Sometimes,  also,  the  men  workers  undoubtedly
believed  that  restrictions  on  the  hours  of  women  and  children
would  result  in  decreased  emplojmient  of  these  classes  of  wage-
earners,  with  consequent  advantages  to  themselves.  It  was
not  until  later  that  the  main  emphasis  came  to  be  put  on  the
necessity  of  shortening  children's  hours  to  protect  the  health
of  the  children.

The  greatest  progress  in  legislation  regarding  the  hours  of
labor  for  children  has  been  made  in  the  last  decade.  Begin-
ning with  IlHnois  in  1903,  the  eight-hour  standard  for  chil-
dren under  sixteen  has  been  established  in  the  majority  of
important  industrial  states.^  Eighteen  states  and  the  District
of  Columbia  allow  no  exemptions  from  their  eight-hour  laws
for  children;  but  in  Washington  the  law  applies  only  to  girls;
in  Colorado  children  may  be  exempted  by  the  judge  of  the
juvenile  court;  and  in  Indiana  children  may  be  legally  em-
ployed nine  hours  a  day  on  affidavit  of  the  parent,  giving  them

than  10  hours  per  day,  without  regard  to  the  consent  of  parents  or
guardians,  will  effect  much,  if  anything.  Still,  we  are  willing  to  see
a  trial  made  even  of  this  milk  and  water  enactment."  (New  York
Tribune,  August  11,  1847.)

'This  standard  existed  in  1915  in  twenty-three  jurisdictions,  namely:
Arizona,  Arkansas,  California,  Colorado,  District  of  Columbia,  Illinois,
Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Kentucky,  Massachusetts,  Minnesota,  Missis-
sippi, Missouri,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  New  Jersey,  New  York,  North  Dakota,
Ohio,  Oklahoma,  Washington,  Wisconsin,


HOURS  OF  LABOR  207

permission.  Of  the  remainder  of  the  states,  about  half  have
nine-hotir  laws  and  half  allow  work  for  ten  hours  a  day  or  more.
Only  Montana,  which  forbids  factory  work  for  children  under
sixteen,  and  West  Virginia,  do  not  regulate  hoiurs.  Some  of
the  southern  textile  states,  however,  stiU  allow  children  to
work  legally  eleven  hours  a  day,  and  because  of  lack  of  en-
forcement the  hours  in  some  of  these  states  are  reported  to
be  even  longer.

Legislation  for  shorter  hours  for  children  has  sometimes
been  combined  with  that  for  women,  but  at  present,  except
in  states  where  there  is  an  eight-hour  law  for  females,  the
workday  is  nearly  always  shorter  for  children  than  for  adult
women.  The  child  labor  laws,  however,  not  infrequently
give  more  protection  to  young  working-girls  under  sixteen
or  even  eighteen  or  twenty-one  than  to  working-boys  of  the
same  ages.^  Hour  limitations  usually  apply  to  all  occupa*
tions  except  domestic  service,  agriculture,  and  frequently
fruit  and  vegetable  canneries.  Occasionally  the  law  covers
factories,  but  not  stores.  The  hours  during  which  children
may  be  employed  are  further  regulated  by  the  very  common
prohibition  of  night  work.^

Opposition  from  employers  against  limitation  of  hours
has  been  even  stronger  than  against  any  other  restriction  on
child  emplojTnent,  the  common  argument  being  that  manu-
facturers will  not  be  able  to  hold  their  own  against  com-
petitors in  neighboring  states  where  longer  hours  are  per-
mitted. With  regard  to  the  eight-hour  day,  especially,  an
additional  argument  frequently  advanced  is  that  it  would  not
be  practicable  to  employ  children  for  so  short  a  period  in
a  plant  where  adults  work  a  longer  day.  After  eight-hour
legislation  has  been  passed,  however,  it  has  usually  been  found
that  the  industries  soon  adjusted  themselves  thereto.' Finally,


'  The  absence  of  any  hour  restriction  for  boys  along  with  an  eight-
hour  law  for  all  females  in  Washington  has  already  been  noted.  Simi-
larly in  Texas  there  is  a  nine-hour  law  protecting  all  females,  but  no
protection  for  working-boys.

^  See  "Night  Work,"  pp.  248-251,  for  a  fuller  discussion  of  these  pro-
hibitions.

'  In  order  to  ascertain  the  grounds  for  the  objection  that  children
could  not  be  worked  shorter  hours  than  adults  in  the  same  factory,  a
special  investigation  was  made  by  an  agent  of  the  National  Child  Labor
Committee  in  three  states,  Ohio,  Illinois,  and  New  York,  where  an  eight-


2o8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

partly  in  order  to  meet  the  interstate  competition  objec-
tion, and  partly  in  the  interest  of  more  thorough  enforcement,
the  trend  is  now  toward  federal  regulation,  through  the  power
vested  in  Congress  to  regulate  commerce  between  the  states.'
Since  all  minors  are  for  certain  purposes  wards  of  the  state,
which  is  empowered  to  act  for  their  protection  when  neces-
sary, the  constitutionality  of  laws  limiting  their  working  hours
is  not  questioned.  As  a  minor  is  legally  incapable  of  entering
into  a  free  contract,  such  laws  caimot  be  said  to  abridge  with-
out "due  process  of  law"  his  freedom  to  dispose  of  his  labor.
The  broad  power  possessed  by  the  state  to  regulate  the  work-
ing conditions  of  minors  was  thus  summed  up  by  the  judge
in  the  case  of  People  v.  Ewer:  "So  far  as  such  regulations
control  and  limit  the  powers  of  minors  to  contract  for  labor,
there  never  has  been  and  never  can  be  any  question  as  to
their  constitutionality."  ^

(2)  Women

In  this  country  agitation  for  the  limitation  of  women's  hours
followed  close  on  the  heels  of  the  movement  to  regulate  the
hours  of  children.  As  early  as  the  'thirties  the  labor  press
had  protested  against  the  long  hours  of  work,  and  strikes  for
reduction  of  hours  had  been  called.^ Naturally  enough  the

hour  law  for  children  had  been  in  operation  for  several  years.  The  re-
port of  the  committee  reads  as  follows:  "Information  was  sought  in
factories  representing  the  industries  in  which  the  largest  numbers  of
children  were  employed.  It  was  fovmd  that  children  were  employed
eight  hours  at  the  same  kinds  of  work  at  which  they  had  been  employed
before  the  law  went  into  effect,  while  the  adults  continued  to  work  for
longer  hours.  With  practical  unanimity  employers  reported  that  they
had  found  no  difficulty  in  readjusting  schedules  to  obey  the  law  and
the  eight-hour  day  for  children  had  not  been  a  handicap  upon  business,
and  no  cases  of  failure  or  removal  from  the  state  had  resulted.  On  the
contrary,  the  industries  involved  have  steadily  grown."  (^Bulletin
National  Child  Labor  Committee, ydi.  II,  No.  4,  February,  1914,  p.  44.)

'  The  federal  child  labor  bill  introduced  in  Congress  in  19 14  provided
that  no  goods  could  be  shipped  in  interstate  commerce  in  the  manu-
facture of  which  children  under  fourteen  had  been  employed  at  any  time
or  children  between  fourteen  and  sixteen  had  been  employed  more  than
eight  hours  a  day  or  between  7  p.m.  and  7  a.m.

^  People  V.  Ewer,  141  N.  Y.  129,  36  N.  E.  4  (1894).

^  Report  on  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United
States,  Vol.  IX,  "History  of  Women  in  Industry,"  Helen  L.  Sumner,
p.  67.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  209

agitation  centered  around  the  textile  mills,  as  they  were  the
earliest  large  factories  and  their  working  hotirs  were  twelve
or  more  daily.  In  1834  a  delegate  discussing  the  condition
of  women  in  factories  before  the  Trades'  Union  National  Con-
vention in  Boston,  said  of  the  mill-owners:  "They  must  be
forced  to  shut  their  mills  at  a  regular  hour;  there  must  be  a
certain  time  over  which  they  shall  not  work;  that  all  the
inmates  may  have  an  opportunity  to  rest  their  weary  limbs,
and  to  enjoy  free  and  wholesome  air."'

By  the  'forties,  when  many  humanitarian  movements  were
rife,  the  ten-hour  cause  had  made  progress  and  legislative
action  was  asked  for.  For  example,  in  1842,  1843,  and  1844
petitions  asking  for  a  ten-hour  law  were  presented  to  the
Massachusetts  legislature.^  This  early  movement  came  al-
most entirely  from  the  ranks  of  the  workers  themselves,  who
sought  legislation  limiting  hours  for  both  men  and  women.
Organized  working-women  played  a  prominent  part  in  the
campaign.  The  New  England  Workingmen's  Association,  an
organization  of  wage-earners,  encouraged  by  a  few  public-
spirited  citizens,  which  soon  became  the  New  England  Labor
Reform  League,  was  active  in  the  agitation.  Closely  con-
nected with  it  was  the  New  England  Female  Labor  Reform
Association,  formed  in  January,  1845,  almost  aU  of  whose
members  were  women  workers  in  the  textile  miUs  and  whose
activities  centered  at  Lowell.  They  organized  meetings,
wrote  for  the  labor  press,  and  petitioned  the  legislature  for
the  ten-hour  day.  The  association  cooperated  with  other
women  workers  and  started  branches  in  Fall  River,  Mass.,
Dover  and  Manchester,  N.  H.,  and  perhaps  other  places.  In
184s  the  women  textile  workers  of  Pittsburgh  were  unsuccess-
ful in  a  strike  for  a  ten-hour  day,  but  were  told  by  their  em-
ployers it  would  be  given  them  when  other  localities  also  re-
duced their  hours.  Accordingly,  the  women  wrote  to  New
England  for  help.  The  girls  of  Lowell  and  Manchester  re-
sponded and  all  resolved  to  work  only  ten  hours  after  July


'  National  Trades'  Union,  September  13,  1834,  p.  2.  Quoted  in
Documentary  History  of  American  Industrial  Society,  John  R.  Commoils
and  Helen  L.  Sumner,  ed..  Vol.  VI,  p.  219.

*  Charles  E.  Persons,  "The  Early  History  of  Factory  Legislation  in
Massachusetts,"  in  Labor  Laws  and  Thfir  Enforcement^  Susan  M.  Kings-
bury, ed.,  pp.  24-27,


2IO PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

4,  1846.  But  on  account  of  the  opposition  of  the  manu-
facturers their  efforts  failed,  and  they  once  more  tried  to
secure  legislation.  These  organized  women  workers  first
succeeded  in  New  Hampshire,  where  "by  vigorous  personal
efforts  they,  more  than  any  other  group,  secured  the  ten-
hour  law  of  1847,  the  first  of  its  land  in  the  country."  *  Similar
acts  were  passed  in  Maine  and  in  Pennsylvania  in  1848,  in
New  Jersey  and  in  Rhode  Island  in  1851.^  Massachusetts
passed  no  ten-hour  law  until  over  twenty  years  later,  per-
haps partly  because  the  leaders  there  insisted  on  effective
legislation,  which  these  earlier  measures  did  not  prove  to  be.

These  first  acts  were  all  of  a  similar  type.  They  set  ten
hours  as  the  standard,  generally  for  all  workers,  for  "a  day's
work"  in  the  absence  of  "an  express  contract  requiring  greater
time."  ^  In  New  Hampshire,  three  days  before  the  law  went
into  effect  the  manufacturers  submitted  such  express  con-
tracts to  their  employees,  and  though  meetings  were  held  and
active  agitation  carried  on  to  prevent  the  operatives  from
signing,  all  who  refused  were  discharged  and  their  places
were  soon  filled  by  new  workers.  In  Pennsylvania  and  New
Jersey,  notably  at  Allegheny  City,  Gloucester,  and  Paterson,
the  operatives  carried  on  severe  and  prolonged  strikes  to
secure  the  enforcement  of  the  laws.  They  were  successful
in  some,  though  not  in  all  factories^. but  where  the  hours  were
shortened  they  siiffered  'd"cofresponding  reduction  in  wages.
On  the  whole  these  early  acts  "were  practically  dead  letters,
owing  to  their  contracting-out  clauses."  *

From  the  'fifties  until  after  the  Civil  War,  social  reform  was
largely  forgotten  in  absorption  in  the  anti-slavery  question.
After  the  CivU  War,  when  the  movement  for  protective  legis-
lation revived,  the  laws  asked  for  applied  only  to  women
and  children,  and  were  of  the  modem  type,  forbidding  em-
plojiment  in  excess  of  a  specified  number  of  hours. The  first


'  Report  on  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United
States,  Vol.  X,  "History  of  Women  in  Trade  Unions,"  John  B.  Andrews,
p.  80.

^  Ibid.,  Vol.  IX,  "History  of  Women  in  Industry, "  Helen  L.  Sumner,
p.  69.

'See,  for  instance,  New  Hampshire,  Laws  1847,  C.  488.

^  Report  on  Condition  of  Woman  a,nd  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United
States,  Vol.  IX,  p.  73.


Hours  op  labor  ^n

of  these  had  been  passed  by  Ohio  in  1852  ^  and  set  a  ten-hour
day  for  women  workers,  but  was  rendered  unenforceable  by
penalizing  oiily  when  a  woman  was  compelled  to  work  in  exi
cess  of  legal  requirements.  As  most  employees  will  volun-
tarily work  for  twelve  or  more  hours  a  day  when  they  cannot
find  any  one  to  employ  them  for  ten  hours,  the  law  became
almost  entirely  inoperative.  In  Massa^lmsettSj  active  agita-
tion was  recommenced  by  i864<'  By  that  time  the  women
in  the  mills  were  largely  Irish  and  French  Canadians  who  took
little  or  no  part  in  the  movement.  After  strong  opposition
a  bill  was  passed  in  1874  ^  limiting  the  hours  of  women  and
minors  in  factories  to  ten  daily  and  sixty  weekly.  But  even
this  law  was  ineffective  because  only  "wilful"  violations  were
penalized.  It  was  not  till  1879,^  when  an  amendment  re-
moved the  "wUful,"  that  an  American  state  had  an  enforce-
able law  limiting  the  hours  of  women's  employment.  By
that  time  also  state  bureaus  of  labor  and  factory  inspection
were  being  created  in  the  principal  industrial  states  and  were
aiding  in  the  enforcement  of  labor  laws.  ■"

Since  that  time  fairly  enforceable  hour  limitation  laws  for
women  have  been  secured  in  one  state  after  another.  In
1908,  when  the  Oregon  ten-hour  law  for  women  was  upheld
by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  this  legislation  was
placed  upon  a  secure  footing,  and  since  that  date  the  move-  ,
ment  has  gone  steadily  forward.  By  1915  only  seven  statS,
in  most  of  which  comparatively  few  women  were  industrially
employed,  had  placed  no  restrictions  on  women's  hours  of
work,*  many  had  limited  hours  to  eight  or  nine  a  day  and  the
majority  had  a  weekly  limit  of  less  than  sixty  hours.

Present-day  hour  legislation  for  women  runs  in  general
along  similar  lines  in  the  different  states.  Most  statutes  fix
the  same  daily  and  weekly  maximxim  hours  for  all  occupations
covered  and  generally  include  the  principal  industrial  occupa«.
tions  for  women.  Thus  in  Pennsylvania  hours  in  "any  estab-
lishment" are  limited  to  ten  daily  and  fifty-four  weekly,  and
"any  establishment"  is  defined  as  "any  place  within  this


'  Ohio,  Laws  1852,  p.  187.  ^  Massachusetts,  Laws  1874,  C.  221.

'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1879,  C.  207.

*  These  states  were  Alabama,  Florida,  Indiana,  Iowa,  New  Mexico,
Nevada,  and  West  Virginia.


212 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

commonwealth  where  work  is  done  for  compensation  of  any
sort,  to  whomsoever  payable"  ^  except  homes  and  farms.  In
only  a  few  cases,  however,  do  the  laws  define  the  time  during
which  the  work  period  must  fall,  either  by  naming  the  spread
of  hours  allowed,  by  fixing  opening  and  closing  hours,  or  by
forbidding  night  work.

American  laws,  therefore,  seem  extremely  simple  when  com-
pared with  the  mass  of  detail  fotmd  in  European  legislation
on  this  subject.  General  laws  exist  in  most  European  coun-
tries, but  either  by  special  statutes  or  by  administrative  orders
work  periods  longer  or  shorter  than  those  of  the  general  law
are  fixed  for  many  industries  and  occupations,  and  frequently
even  for  special  processes.  This  principle  is  often  so  far  ex-
tended as  to  prohibit  entirely  the  emplo5mient  of  women  in
kinds  of  work  especially  dangerous  to  their  health  or  safety.
For  example,  the  English  factory  act  of  igoi  gives  the  home
secretary  power  to  make  any  limitation  of  hours  whatever
or  to  forbid  the  employment  of  any  class  of  workers  in  dan-
gerous trades.^  On  the  other  hand,  in  certain  cases,  as  where
perishable  materials  must  be  handled  at  once  to  prevent
spoiling,  special  orders  lengthening  the  permitted  period  of
employment  may  be  issued.^  In  addition,  night  work  is,  in
general,  forbidden,  and  opening  and  closing  hours,  not  neces-
sarily the  same  for  every  trade,  are  almost  always  fixed.

The  number  of  employments  covered  by  hour  legislation  in
America  appears  to  depend  largely  on  what  occupations  public
opinion  considers  dangerous  to  the  health  of  women.  Thus
the  exclusion  of  farm  work  and  domestic  service  from  regula-
tion is  at  least  in  part  due  to  the  belief  that  they  in  no  way
endanger  health.  The  earlier  laws,  both  those  passed  be-
fore the  Civil  War  to  fix  a  standard  of  hours  and  the  first  acts
of  the  modem  type,  applied  mainly  to  manufacturing  estab-
lishments. Such  a  limitation  in  the  scope  of  the  early  laws
was  natural  enough.  At  that  time  women  were  employed  in
large  numbers  outside  the  home  only  in  textile  factories.  The
Census  of  1870  shows  that  but  i  per  cent,  of  all  the  women
"gainfully  employed"  were  found  in  "trade  and  transporta-
tion." It  was  in  the  factories  that  complaint  was  made  of

'  Pennsylvania,  Laws  1913,  No.  466,  Sees.  I  and  3.

2 1  Edw.  7,  C.  22,  Sees.  79-83.  *  Ibid.,  Sees.  49-52.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  213

the  overlong  hours  of  work,  and  it  was  the  factory  operatives
who  carried  on  the  bulk  of  the  early  agitation  for  legislation.
Thus  in  New  Hampshire  the  first  hour  limitation  law,  passed
in  1847,  applied  only  to  manufacturing  establishments,^  and
the  Pennsylvania  law  of  1848  affected  only  "cotton,  woolen,
silks,  paper,  bagging,  and  flax  factories."  ^  Likewise  the
Massachusetts  ten-hour  law  of  1874  covered  only  "manu-
facturing estabhshments." '  It  was  not  until  the  end  of  the
'seventies,  when  the  number  of  saleswomen  had  largely  in-
creased, that  the  dangers  of  constant  standing  and  long  hours
were  noticed  and  agitation  was  begun  for  legislation  covering
this  occupation.*  In  1883  the  Massachusetts  law  was  amend-
ed to  include  "mechanical  and  mercantile  estabhshments."  ^
In  the  same  way,  as  the  field  of  women's  employment  broad-
ened, the  dangers  of  excessive  hoxirs  and  injtiry  to  health  were
discovered  in  one  occupation  after  another,  and  the  need  for
extending  protective  legislation  became  correspondingly  ap-
parent, until,  in  the  laws  passed  in  the  last  few  years,  prac-
tically every  form  of  industrial  employment  has  been  cov-
ered at  the  same  time  and  by  the  same  restrictions.

The  Illinois  ten-hour  law  of  1909  was  one  of  the  first  to  do
this.  It  includes  not  only  factories,  mechanical  and  mer-
cantile establishments,  but  also  any  "laundry,  or  hotel,  or
restaurant,  or  telegraph  or  telephone  establishment  or  office
thereof,  or  any  place  of  amusement,  or  by  any  person,  firm,
or  corporation  engaged  in  any  express  or  transportation  or
pubHc  utility  business,  or  by  any  common  carrier,  or  any  pubUc
institution,  incorporated  or  unincorporated."  ^  Similarly  in-
clusive acts  are  fovmd  in  half  a  dozen  other  states,  and  almost
every  act  now  covers  at  least  "manufacturing,  mechanical,
and  mercantile  establishments."

There  are  also  occasional  instances  of  classification  by
cities,  exempting  the  smaller  places  from  the  operation  of  the
law. The  Missouri  law  of  1909 ''  and  the  Texas  law  of  19 13  ^


'New  Hampshire,  Laws  1847,  C.  488.
^  Pennsylvania,  Laws  1848,  No.  227.
^  Massachusetts,  Laws  1874,  C.  221.

*  Report  on  the  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the
United  States,  Vol.  IX,  p.  238.
'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1883,  C.  157. '  Illinois,  Laws  1909,  p.  212.
'  Missouri,  Laws  1909,  p.  616. '  Texas,  General  Laws  1913,  C.  175.


214 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

both  applied  only  to  cities  of  more  than  5,000  poptilation.
The  Minnesota  law  applies  only  to  first  and  second  class
cities  (over  20,000  population). '  Establishments  of  various
sorts  employing  fewer  than  three  or  five  persons  have  also
sometimes  been  excepted.  Until  1914  the  Louisiana  law  ap-
plied only  to  establishments  emplojdng  more  than  five  per-
sons.''

Such  exemptions  may  perhaps  also  be  explained  on  health
grounds.  It  might  be  expected  that  the  need  for  legislation
in  smaller  places  would  be  lessened  by  a  supposed  easier  pace
of  work  and  the  greater  personal  contact  between  employer
and  employee.  Investigation  shows,  however,  that  excessive
hours  are  often  worked  in  small  estabhshments  and  out-of-
the-way  places  where  public  opinion  is  not  active,  and  such
exceptions  are  becoming  fewer.^

Certain  exemptions  have  also  been  made  because  of  special
industrial  reqtiirements,  the  most  important  of  which  have
to  do  with  work  in  canneries.  On  account  of  the  perishable
nature  of  the  materials,  operators  of  canneries  have  vigor-
ously opposed  any  legislation  which  would  limit  hours  of  work
dviring  the  summer  months,  and  because  of  this  opposition
a  mmiber  of  states,  including  most  of  those  in  which  the
industry  is  important,  have  allowed  women  and  children  to
work  unlimited  hours  in  this  industry.

In  the  degree  of  restriction  placed  upon  hours  of  women's
daytime  labor,  many  American  states  have  gone  further
than  European  countries.  Most  of  the  important  industrial
states  still  follow  early  English  and  American  precedent  and
fix  a  daily  limit  of  ten  hours,  though  a  majority  have  reduced
the  worldng  week  to  less  than  sixty  hotirs.  In  recent  years,
however,  as  the  eight-hour  day  movement  has  spread  and
standards  for  protective  legislation  have  risen,  several  pro-
gressive states  have  limited  the  workday  to  nine  and  even  to
eight  hours.  New  York  is  the  most  important  industrial
state  having  the  nine-hour  day  and  the  fifty-four  hour  week.

'  Minnesota,  Laws  1913,  C.  581,  Sec.  i.

'Louisiana,  Laws  1908,  No.  301,  Sec.  i.

'  For  instances  of  bad  conditions  in  the  smaller  establishments  see
reports  of  the  New  York  State  Factory  Investigating  Commission,  the
Senate  Wage  Commission  for  Women  and  Children  in  the  State  of
Missouri,  the  Oregon  Social  Survey,  and  similar  investigations.


HOURS  OP  LABOR  215

The  eight-hour  limits  are  found  in  a  few  western  states  and  in
the  District  of  Columbia,  but  only  California  and  the  District
have  the  forty-eight  hour  week  as  well  as  the  eight-hour  day.*


'On  January  i,  1916,  the  situation  with  regard  to  women's  hours
was  as  follows:

State Hours  a  Day  Hours  a  Week

I.  Eight-Hour  States:

California 8  48

District  of  Columbia 8  48*

Colorado 8  —

Washington 8  —

Arizona 8  56

II.  States  Allowing  More  than  Eight  hut  Less  than  Ten  Hours:

State Hours  a  Day  Hours  a  Week

(81/3  mercantile  50

Oregon •<  8  1/2  ofBces  51

(  9  any  other  industry 54

(By  rulings  of  Industrial

Welfare  Commission)

Arkansas 9  54

Maine 9  54

Missouri 9  54

Nebraska 9  54

New  York 9  54*

Texas 9  54

Utah 9  54

Minnesota [^  ^ct^S:  '''■ H

Idaho 9  —

Montana 9  —

Oklahoma 9  —

///.  States  Allowing  Ten  or  More  Hours:

State Hours  a  Day  Hours  a  Week

Connecticut 10  55i  58

Delaware 10  55

Massachusetts 10  54*

Michigan 10  54

Ohio 10  54

Pennsylvania 10  54*

Rhode  Island 10  54

Wisconsin 10  55

New  Hampshire 10  1/4  55

Wyoming 10  56

Tennessee 10  1/2  57

Vermont 11  58

Georgia 10  60

Kentucky 10  60

Louisiana 10  60

Maryland 10  60

Mississippi 10  60

New  Jersey 10  60*

North  Carolina 11  60


2i6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Most  American  laws  omit  one  great  aid  to  enforcement  in
failing  to  set  a  legal  closing  hour.*  A  few  states  fix  the  in-
cidence of  the  working  day  indirectly  through  the  prohibition
of  night  work.^  In  Arizona  and  Wyoming  the  permitted
hours  must  fall  within  a  twelve-hour  period,  but  as  a  general
rule  regulations  of  the  sort  are  not  found  in  America.

Though  a  niunber  of  states  still  permit  overtime  work,  the
general  tendency  seems  to  be  toward  doing  away  with  all
such  exceptions.  In  1909,  half  the  state  laws,  fourteen  out
of  twenty-eight,  allowed  a  certain  amount  of  overtime  work.
In  1915,  similar  exceptions  were  found  in  only  about  a  third
of  the  statutes.  The  actual  working  of  the  laws,  both  in  this
country  and  abroad,  has  shown  that  aU  such  exceptions  are
often  a  decided  handicap  to  the  enforcement  of  the  law,  being
used  to  cover  violations,  or  that  at  best  they  often  defeat  its
purpose  by  legalizing  hours  so  excessive  as  to  be  a  danger
to  health.  Therefore,  the  tendency  of  recent  legislation  is
against  overtime  work  under  any  circimistances.

The  conditions  under  which  overtime  work  is  stiU  allowed
seem  to  fall  under  three  main  heads.  The  overtime  work  on
account  of  the  stoppage  of  machinery,  allowed  in  several
states,  and  a  few  similar  exceptions,  are  all  permitted  for  the


State  Hours  a  Day  Hours  a  Week

South  Carolina 11,12  60

Illinois 10  —

North  Dakota 10  —

South  Dakota 10  —

Virginia 10  —

Kansas  (By  Industrial  Welfare  Commission)
IV.  States  Having  No  Laws  Regulating  Hours  of  Labor  for  Women:

Alabama,  Florida,  Iowa,  Indiana,  Nevada,  New  Mexico,  West
Virginia.

In  the  states  marked  with  an  asterisk  work  is  limited  to  six  days  a
week.

'  In  a  few  states  the  danger  that  a  woman  may  be  employed  by  two
or  more  establishments  a  total  length  of  time  in  excess  of  the  legal  maxi-
mum is  recognized.  In  Massachusetts,  for  instance,  until  recent  years,
it  was  not  uncommon  in  the  textile  mills  for  a  woman  to  work  ten  hours
during  the  day  in  one  mill,  and  then  for  several  hours  in  the  evening  in
another.  The  practice  was  called  "swapping."  The  Delaware  statute
(Laws  1913,  C.  175,  Sec.  2)  contains  a  prohibitive  provision  in  efifective
form,  applying  to  aU  classes  of  work  and  placing  the  responsibility  for
discovering  any  previous  employment  in  the  same  day  entirely  on  the
employer.

'See  "Night  Work,"  pp.  248-251.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  217

r

purpose  of  making  up  lost  time.  Several  states  allow  over-
time to  meet  the  pressure  of  special  industrial  requirements,
notably  the  Christmas  rush  in  retail  stores,  where  aU  hour
limitations  may  be  removed  during  that  period,  as  in  New
Jersey,!  or  a  limited  amotmt  of  overtime  may  be  allowed  as
in  Montana.^  Finally,  a  very  few  states  fix  the  amount  of
overtime,  but  not  the  conditions  under  which  it  may  be
worked,  for  example  New  York,  which  allows  an  hour  of  over-
time in  factories  on  each  of  three  days  a  week,  provided
the  weekly  total  of  hours  is  not  exceeded  thereby.^

As  previously  stated,  American  statutes  usually  set  the
same  daily  hour  limit  for  a  large  and  varied  group  of  indus-
tries. That  the  requirements  and  the  strain  of  various  occu-
pations may  differ  widely,  and  that  the  same  limitation  of
hours  may  not  equally  well  meet  the  needs  of  the  workers
in  all  of  them,  has  been  given  but  little  consideration.  For
example,  while  it  is  apparent  that  in  some  occupations  eight
or  even  ten  hours  a  day  may  not  be  physically  injurious,
in  others,  such  as  those  involving  exposure  to  poisons,  ex-
tremes of  temperature  or  humidity,  or  excessive  nervous
strain,  a  much  shorter  work  period  may  be  seriously  harmful
to  health.  In  certain  brancehs  of  the  telephone  service,  for
example,  the  nervous  strain  is  particularly  severe.  In  1907,
in  Toronto,  Canada,  a  royal  commission  was  appointed  to
investigate  a  dispute  between  the  BeU  Telephone  Company
and  its  operators.  From  the  evidence  given  by  physicians,
the  commission  decided  that  if  the  health  of  the  workers  was
to  be  preserved,  the  workday  should  not  be  more  than  six
hours,  spread  over  a  period  of  about  eight  hours.*  Yet  no
American  state  has  on  account  of  special  dangers  placed  the
statutory  restriction  for  any  selected  occupation  in  which
women  are  employed  below  that  stated  in  the  general  law.

But  very  recently  a  few  states  have  adopted  a  new  method
of  regulating  women's  hours,  together  with  minimum  wages
and  working  conditions. These  states  lay  down  in  their


1  New  Jersey,  Laws  1912,  C.  216,  Sec.  i.

^  Montana,  Laws  1913,  C.  108,  Sec.  i.

s  New  York,  Laws  1909,  C.  36,  Sec.  78  (l).

'Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  a  Dispute  Respecting  Hours  of
Employment  between  the  BeU  Telephone  Company  of  Ccinada,  Ltd.,  ana
Operators  at  Toronto,  Ontario,  1907,


2i8 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

statutes  the  general  principle  that  a  woman  is  not  to  be  em-
ployed for  any  period  of  time  dangerous  to  her  health,  safety,
or  welfare.  A  commission  is  then  given  the  power  to  deter-
mine after  investigation  maximum  periods  for  different  in-
dustries and  even  for  different  localities,  if  desired.  Such  a
law  may  become  an  instrument  for  the  protection  of  the
worker's  health  much  superior  to  the  ordinary  flat  rate  law.
A  commission  regulating  hours,  through  its  powers  of  in-
vestigating and  setting  standards,  can  take  account  of  special
factors  in  certain  lines  of  work  which  might  cause  serious
injury  to  the  workers  in  the  usual  work  period,  and  can  adjust
hours  according  to  the  strain  of  each  specific  occupation.

While  all  laws  of  this  type  conform  to  this  same  general
principle,  they  difEer  in  one  important  provision.  Califor-
nia *  and  Oregon  permit  their  commissions  to  fix  only  shorter
hours  than  those  established  by  the  general  statute.  "No
such  order  of  said  commission  shall  authorize  or  permit  the
employment  of  any  woman  for  more  hours  per  day  or  per
week  than  the  maximum  now  fixed  by  law."  ^  But  in  Ohio
and  Wisconsin  the  hours  fixed  may  be  either  above  or  below
those  of  the  general  law.  Kansas  has  no  law  limiting  hours
for  women  except  the  act  empowering  the  commission  to  make
regulations.

In  Oregon  and  Washington,  the  only  states  in  which  really
important  action  on  hours  of  labor  has  been  taken  by  these
commissions,  a  considerable  amount  of  flexibility  has  been
secured  in  the  determination  of  daily  hours  by  commission
rulings.  In  Oregon,  for  example,  where  the  statutory  limit
for  females  over  sixteen  is  ten  hoiirs  a  day,  the  industrial  wel-
fare commission  has  fixed  women's  daily  hours  for  the  city
of  Portland  at  nine  in  manufactviring,  and  at  eight  and  a
third  in  stores.  Even  in  canneries,  which  are  often  excluded
altogether  from  maximum  hour  laws,  the  commission  permits
overtime  in  excess  of  nine  hours,  for  only  one  hour  daily  and
six  hours  weekly,  for  not  more  than  six  weeks  during  the  year,
and  all  such  overtime  must  be  paid  for  at  increased  rates.

The  possibilities  of  still  more  detailed  adjustment  to  the
needs  of  specific  industries  are  evident,  and  therefore  the

'  California,  Laws  1913,  C.  324.
^  Oregon,  Laws  1913,  C.  62,  Sec.  9.


HOURS  OF  LABOR-  219

method  of  regtilating  hours  through  administrative  rulings,
provided  the  precaution  is  taken  of  preserving  a  statutory
limit  of  hours,  marks  a  decided  advance  toward  accomplish-
ing the  real  purpose  of  hour  limitation,  the  prevention  of
fatigue  by  forbidding  excessive  hours  of  work.

Most  of  the  special  problems  in  the  administration  of
woman's  work  laws  center  about  the  enforcement  of  hoiar
legislation.  Violations  of  laws  regulating  a  continuing  con-
dition like  hours  of  work  are  obviously  more  difficult  to  de-
tect than  violations  of  safety  or  sanitary  laws  which  can  be
discovered  by  a  single  inspection.  Therefore,  various  aids
to  enforcement  have  long  been  found  necessary.  The  most
common  of  these  is  the  posting  of  notices,  stating  the  per-
mitted hotu-s  of  work,  a  requirement  which  the  United  States
Supreme  Court  sustained  as  constitutional  in  1914.'  Such  a
provision  had  long  been  in  the  laws  of  a  number  of  states.
Massachusetts,  following  English  precedent,  had  found  it
necessary  to  require  the  posting  of  notices  as  early  as  1880.^
The  law  stipulated  that  printed  notices  containing  the  daily
hours  of  work  shoidd  be  posted  "in  a  conspicuous  place"  in
every  room  where  employees  coming  under  the  ten-hour  law
were  at  work.  Immediately  an  attempt  was  made  to  evade
the  intent  of  the  act.  A  report  of  the  enforcing  authority,  the
chief  of  the  district  police,  says  that  notices  were  found  il-
legibly written,  "on  cards  fotu-  or  five  inches  square,  sometimes
without  a  single  break  between  the  words,  and  placed  over  a
doorway  or  some  other  inaccessible  place." '  Extra  time  was
also  worked  on  the  pretense  that  it  was  necessary  to  stop  and
start  the  machinery.  Two  amendments,  in  1886  ^  and  1887,  ^
were  necessary  in  order  to  overcome  these  difficulties.  The
law  then  provided  that  the  notices  must  be  put  on  forms  ap-
proved by  the  attorney-general  and  supplied  by  the  enforc-
ing authority,  and  must  contain  the  hoiu-s  of  beginning  and
ending  work  and  of  meal-times,  as  well  as  the  number  of
hours  worked  each  day.  Similar  provisions  as  to  the  posting
of  notices  have  been  found  essential  in  other  states.

>  Riley  v.  Commonwealth,  232  U.  S.  671,  34  Sup.  Ct.  469  (1914).

'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1880,  C.  194.

»  Report  of  the  Chief  of  the  District  Police,  1884,  pp.  14-18.

*  Massachusetts,  Laws  1886,  C.  90.

'  JMd.,  Laws  1887,  C.  280.


220 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

A  more  recent  device  which  provides  additional  help  in
enforcing  the  law  is  that  of  a  record  book,  open  to  inspection
by  the  authorities  and  containing  the  actual  hours  worked
each  day  by  each  female.  Few  states  rely  exclusively  on
this  device  for  help  in  enforcing  the  law.*  Several  states,
however,  require  the  keeping  of  record  books  in  addition  to
posting  notices,^  or  as  a  substitute  where  daily  hours  are  so
irregular  that  they  cannot  be  determined  in  advance.^

Even  the  wording  of  the  penalty  clause  is  of  importance  in
relation  to  the  enforceability  of  the  law.  Massachusetts's  first
ten-hour  law  cotdd  not  be  enforced  as  long  as  only  "wilful"
violations  were  penalized.  Several  states  still  render  their
laws  inoperative  by  similar  clauses.  For  instance,  in  South
Dakota  only  the  employer  who  "compels"  a  woman  to  work
overtime  is  responsible.*  Experience  shows  that  it  is  prac-
tically impossible  to  prove  such  comptdsion  and  that  con-
victions can  be  secured  only  when  "permitting"  excessive
hours  is  also  a  violation  of  the  law.  The  enforceability  of  the
laws  in  a  few  southern  states,  which  penalize  only  "contract-
ing" to  work  overtime,  also  seems  doubtfxil.^  Even  among
the  enforceable  laws  there  is  a  difEerence  in  effectiveness.  It
is  clearly  easier  to  obtain  proof  of  violation  in  a  state  like
New  Hampshire,*  where  the  emplojmient  of  a  woman  "out-
side" the  posted  hours  is  a  violation  of  the  law,  than  where
the  inspector  must  prove  that  she  worked  "longer"  than  the
posted  number  of  hours,  as  in  Tennessee.'^  It  may  also  be  of
importance  in  successful  prosecutions  to  note  whether  the
employer  alone,  "his  agent"  or  "any  person"  may  be  held
responsible,  and  whether  only  the  working  of  excess  hours  is
penalized  or,  in  addition,  a  failure  to  post  notices,  the  making
of  false  statements  in  notices  and  time-books  and  the  like.

Equitable  and  necessary  as  legal  limitations  on  the  daily
hours  of  working-women  are  generally  recognized  to  be,  they
have  frequently  been  contested  as  out  of  harmony  with  our


'  One  of  these  is  Illinois,  Laws  191 1,  p.  328.

2  See  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  200,  Sec.  5.

'  See  Kentucky,  Laws  1912,  C.  77,  Sec.  5.

*  South  Dakota,  Laws  1913,  C.  240,  Sec.  i.

•See  Virginia,  Laws  1914,  C.  158,  Sec.  i.

°  New  Hampshire,  Laws  1913,  C.  156,  Sec.  3.

'  Tennessee,  Laws  First  Extra  Session,  1913,  C.  121.


HOURS  OP  LABOR  221

state  and  federal  constitutions.  Clearly,  limiting  the  hours
during  which  a  woman  may  be  employed  does  abridge  her
freedom  to  use  her  capacity  for  work  to  its  utmost  extent.
The  courts  seem  to  hold  in  general  that  such  a  limitation  may
be  made  through  the  state's  exercise  of  its  police  power  only
if  excessive  hours  involve  some  appreciable  danger  to  the
class  of  workers  involved  or  to  the  community.

The  conflict  of  judicial  decisions  on  the  subject  appears  to
arise  from  differing  opinions  as  to  the  existence  of  such  danger.
Opinions  opposed  to  legal  restriction  emphasize  the  interfer-
ence with  woman's  freedom  to  contract  to  work  each  day  as
long  as  she  pleases,  implying  that  employer  and  employee
stand  on  an  equal  footing  in  determining  working  conditions
and  that  an  employee  works  long  hours  of  her  own  free  will.
Such  a  restriction  of  freedom  of  contract,  they  hold,  deprives
a  woman  worker  without  due  process  of  law  of  the  valuable
property  right  of  disposing  of  her  own  labor  as  she  sees  fit,
and  furthermore  is  class  legislation  because  it  denies  her  privi-
leges accorded  to  men  workers.  The  favorable  decisions  take
cognizance  of  actual  industrial  conditions  and  point  out  that
the  labor  contract  is  not  freely  made  between  equals,  but  that
its  terms  are  settled  largely  by  the  employer  and  that  the
state  may  therefore  interfere  in  the  interests  of  the  public
welfare.

The  first  important  decision  on  the  constitutionaUty  of  hour
legislation  for  women  was  rendered  in  Massachusetts  in  1876,
upholding  the  ten-hoitr  law.  In  this  case,  says  Professor
Ernst  Freund,!  "the  court  was  obviously  a  good  deal  puz-
zled how  to  deal  with  the  objections  raised,  disposing  of
them  in  a  rather  offhand  and  not  altogether  satisfactory
fashion."  In  a  brief  opinion  ^  the  court  pointed  out  that  the
legislature  had  evidently  considered  factory  work  "to  some
extent  dangerous  to  health,"  and  that  the  statute  was  there-
fore a  health  or  police  measure.  This  decision,  however,  held
that  the  legislation  did  not  prevent  women  from  working  as
long  as  they  saw  fit,  but  only  from  working  more  than  ten
hours  continuously  in  a  factory.

•  Preund,  "Constitutional  Limitations  and  Labor  Legislation,"  in  Third
Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Association  for  Labor  Legislation,  p.  51.
'  Commonwealth  v.  Hamilton  Mfg.  Co.,  120  Mass.  383  (1876).


22  2 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  next  important  decision  on  the  constitutionality  of  hour
legislation  for  women  was  not  rendered  until  1895,  almost
twenty  years  later.  During  the  interval  the  principle  of  en-
tire freedom  of  contract  between  capital  and  labor  had  been
developed.^  This  doctrine  was  reinforced  by  the  idea  that
the  right  to  dispose  of  one's  labor  freely  is  a  property  right,
not  to  be  abridged — according  to  the  fotirteenth  amendment
to  the  constitution  of  the  United  States — "without  due
process  of  law."  It  was  on  this  ground  that  in  1895  the
Illinois  Supreme  Court  declared  invalid  an  eight-hour  law
for  women  in  factories.^  The  court  could  see  no  "fair,  just,
and  reasonable  connection  between  such  limitation  and  the
public  health,  safety,  or  welfare  proposed  to  be  secured
by  it."

But  three  years  later,  in  1898,  the  United  States  Supreme
Court  showed  the  fallacy  of  the  doctrine  of  freedom  of  con-
tract between  employer  and  employee,^  and  within  the  next
few  years,  in  1900  and  1902,  three  decisions  by  state  courts^
brought  out  in  addition  reasons  why  women  as  a  special  class
of  workers  particularly  need  protection.  These  decisions  took
into  accoimt  the  fact  that  women  are  physically  weaker  than
men  and  that  therefore  their  health  is  more  likely  to  suffer
from  excessive  hours  of  work.  Any  injury  to  the  health  of
women  workers  is  of  particular  social  importance,  since  it  is
on  their  health  that  the  vigor  of  the  next  generation  directly
depends.

The  year  1908,  however,  finally  settled  the  question  as  far
as  the  restriction  of  daytime  hours  to  a  maximum  of  ten  was
concerned.  The  United  States  Supreme  Court  unequivocally
upheld  the  constitutionality  of  the  Oregon  ten-hour  law  as  a
health  measiure.*  "As  healthy  mothers  are  essential  to  vig-
orous offspring,  the  physical  well-being  of  women  becomes  an
object  of  public  interest  and  care  in  order  to  preserve  the

•  First  laid  down  in  1886  in  Godcharles  v.  Wigeman,  113  Pa.  St.  431,
6  Atl.  354;  Millet  V.  People,  117  111.  294,  7  N.  E.  631  (1886).

^  Ritchie  ir.  People,  155  111.  98,  40  N.  E.  454  (1895).
'  Holden  v.  Hardy,  169  U.  S.  366,  18  Sup.  Ct.  383  (1898). See  "Hours
of  Labor,  Men,"  p.  240.

*  Commonwealth  v.  Beatty,  15  Super.  Ct.  (Pa.)  5  (1900);  Wenham  v.
State,  65  Neb.  395,  91  N.  W.  421  (1902);  State  v.  Buchanan,  29  Wash.
603,  70  Pac.  52  (1902).

5  Mueller  i;.  Oregon,  208  U.  S.  4I2,  28  Sup.  Ct.  324  (1908).


HOURS  OF  LABOR  223

strength  and  vigor  of  the  race.  .  .  .  The  limitations  which  this
statute  imposes  upon  her  contractual  powers,  upon  her  right
to  agree  with  her  employer  as  to  the  time  when  she  shall  labor,
are  not  imposed  solely  for  her  benefit,  but  also  for  the  benefit
of  all."  In  this  case  and  succeeding  ones  of  a  similar  nature
the  influence  of  the  method  by  which  the  legislation  was  de-
fended should  not  be  overlooked.  Exhaustive  briefs  were
prepared  by  Mr.  Louis  D.  Brandeis  and  Miss  Josephine  Gold-
mark,  not  so  much  emphasizing  the  legal  aspects  of  the  case
as  presenting  a  mass  of  extracts  to  show  the  actual  effects  of
excessive  hours  of  work  on  the  health  of  women.  In  1909,
Illinois,  whose  working  -  women  had  been  left  unprotected
from  excessive  hours  since  its  eight-hour  law  was  over-
thrown in  189s,  passed  a  ten-hour  bill.  The  constitution-
ality of  the  statute  was  immediately  attacked.  This  time,
however,  the  lUinois  Supreme  Court  did  find  a  clear  con-
nection between  the  measure  and  the  protection  of  the
public  health.  It  recognized  not  merely  a  theoretical  free-
dom of  contract,  but,  as  well,  the  facts  as  to  the  effects
of  excessive  hours  on  the  health  of  women.  "What  we
know  as  men,"  said  the  court,  "we  cannot  profess  to  be
ignorant  of  as  judges."  ^

The  constitutionality  of  a  ten-hour  workday  was  now  es-
tablished, but  the  reasonableness  of  further  restriction  was
still  in  doubt.  In  1915,  however,  the  United  States  Supreme
Court  upheld  the  constitutionality  of  the  CaUfomia  law  which
fixed  an  eight-hour  day  as  the  maximum  for  women  workers.
The  court  said  that  the  same  principles  were  at  stake  as  in
the  previous  cases,  and  that  while  "a  limitation  of  the  hours
of  labor  of  women  might  be  pushed  to  a  whoUy  indefensible
extreme  .  .  .  there  is  no  grotmd  for  the  conclusion  here  that
the  limit  of  the  reasonable  exertion  of  protective  authority
has  been  overstepped."  ^

Hovu:  legislation  for  women  has  also  been  attacked  on  the
ground  that  it  is  class  legislation,  discriminating  unreason-
ably between  various  classes  of  workers,  and  denying  that
"equal  protection  of  the  laws"  which  was  promised  to  all  per-
sons by  the  fourteenth  amendment. The  statutes  have  been  /

'  Ritchie  V.  Wayman,  244  111.  509,  91  N.  E.  695  (1910).
"  Miller  v.  Wilson,  236  U.  S.  373i  35iSup.  Ct.  342  (1915).


224 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

attacked  both  because  they  included  certain  employments
and  because  they  failed  to  include  certain  others.  The  con-
stitutionality of  the  Illinois  law  was  questioned  because  it
included  employees  in  hotels  and  in  public  institutions.  One
of  the  chief  points  raised  against  the  constitutionality  of  the
California  law  was  its  inclusion  of  student  nurses.  On  the
other  hand,  different  laws  have  at  various  times  been  called
"class  legislation"  because  they  included  only  factories  and
laundries,  and  because  they  excluded  mercantile  establish-
ments, canneries,  stenography,  and  domestic  service.  The
courts  have  given  but  little  weight  to  this  type  of  objection,
asserting  the  freedom  of  the  legislature  either  to  use  discretion
;  in  enlarging  the  scope  of  the  laws  ^  or  to  single  out  those  groups
of  workers  most  in  need  of  protection.^

In  an  Oregon  case  the  constitutionality  of  regulation  of
women's  hours  by  a  commission  has  been  attacked  on  the
ground  that  substituting  commission  for  court  authority  on
questions  of  fact  takes  property  without  "due  process  of
law."  The  state  supreme  court  sustained  the  method,  hold-
ing that  it  contained  the  essentials  of  due  process,  which  it
defined  as  "reasonable  notice  and  a  fair  opportunity  to  be
heard  before  some  [proper]  tribunal."  ^  The  case  was  ap-
pealed to  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  where  in  the
fall  of  19 IS  it  was  still  pending.

Thus  the  working-woman's  theoretical  freedom  of  contract
to  dispose  of  her  labor  under  whatever  conditions  she  pleases
has  been  restricted  by  the  state  through  its  police  power.
Such  a  limitation  is  rightfully  applied  to  women  workers  as
a  class,  because  as  workers  they  do  not  stand  on  equal  footing
with  their  employers  in  bargaining  and  because  as  women
their  health  is  more  quickly  injured  by  excessive  hours  of
work.  Furthermore,  the  community  suffers  if  the  health  of
any  large  number  of  women  is  endangered,  for  on  the  health
of  women  depends  the  vigor  of  the  race.  The  reasonableness
of  the  range  of  employments  included  in  the  laws  has  been
affirmed,  and  hours  may  now  be  limited  to  as  few  as  eight  in
dajrtime  work.


1  People  V.  Elerding,  254  111.  579,  98  N.  E.  982  (1912).

2  See  Withey  v.  Bloem,  163  Mich.  419,  128  N.  W.  913  (1910).
'  Stettler  v.  O'Hara,  69  Ore.  519,  139  Pac.  743  (1914).


HOURS  OF  LABOR  225

0)  Men

In  contrast  with  the  considerable  development  of  hour
regulations  for  women  and  children  is  the  fragmentary  condi-
tion of  legislation  affecting  the  working  hours  of  adult  men.
One  of  the  main  reasons  for  the  halting  growth  of  this  type,
of  law  has  been  the  doubtful  attitude  of  the  courts.  In  this,
matter,  however,  the  courts  merely  reflect  prevailing  public-,
opinion,  which  is  as  yet  hardly  awake  to  the  need  of  restrict-^
ing  men's  hours  in  general  employments.  Even  trade  union-
ists are  sometimes  opposed  to  shortening  hours  for  men  by
the  legislative  method,  through  fear  that  it  will  weaken  union
organization.

Most  men's  hour  laws  cover  employees  on  pubhc  works,
or  in  transportation.  In  the  former  case  the  state  is  merely
fixing  the  working  conditions  of  its  own  employees;  in  the
latter,  the  element  of  public  safety  is  involved.  Where  public
safety  is  not  directly  concerned,  legislation  is  common  only
for  the  peculiarly  hazardous  occupation  of  mining.  As  with"
other  forms  of  protective  legislation,  however,  and  in  view
of  our  increasing  knowledge  of  the  dangers  of  overwork,  es-
pecially in  continuous  industries,  the  principle  of  hour  re-
striction, first  established  for  women  and  children,  may
eventually  be  extended  to  cover  all  wage-earning  men.  The
new  laws  for  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  and  recent  legislation  in
Mississippi  and  Oregon  for  ten  hours  in  manufactiiring,  make
it  not  unlikely  that  a  period  of  hour  regulation  for  adult  male
workers  has  begun.

a.  Public  Work.  The  first  attempt  legally  to  regulate  the
working  hours  of  men  in  the  United  States  was  the  executive
order  of  President  Van  Buren  in  1840,  stipulating  a  ten-hoiur
day  in  government  navy-yards.'  Since  the  early  'thirties
special  pressure  had  been  brought  to  bear  upon  the  federal
government  to  shorten  the  working  day,  partly  because  it  was
felt  that  the  short  workday  in  public  employments  would"
have  a  strong  influence  in  reducing  hours  in  private  employ-
ments, and  partly  because  there  was  Uttle  doubt  of  the  gov-
ernment's right  to  regulate  the  hours  of  its  own  employees.

'  Documentary  History  of  American  Industrial  Society,  John  R.  Com-
mons, ed.,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  85.
15


226 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

In  1840,  therefore,  while  the  eleven-  and  twelve-hour  days  were
the  rule  in  private  industry,  Van  Buren  was  induced  to  issue
the  order  referred  to.  Although  this  was  done  at  a  time  of
industrial  depression,  he  requested  that  no  corresponding
reduction  in  wages  be  made.

It  was  not,  however,  until  1868  that  Congress  took  action
on  the  question  and  provided  that  "eight  hours  shall  con-
stitute a  day's  work  for  all  laborers,  workmen,  and  mechanics
who  may  be  employed  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  government  of
the  United  States."  *  The  law  did  not  work  as  well  as  its
advocates  had  hoped.  Although  it  applied  to  contractors
and  subcontractors,  it  failed  to  prohibit  agreements  for  over-
time work.  Its  ineffectiveness  in  actually  reducing  the  hours
of  any  considerable  number  of  government  employees  soon
became  apparent,  but  it  was  not  until  August  i,  1892,  that  a
more  effective  law  covering  these  classes  of  employees  was
passed.  This  act^  was  mandatory,  applied  to  contractors  and
subcontractors,  and  provided  a  heavy  penalty  for  violations.
It  did  not,  however,  apply  to  work  done  on  that  very  large
class  of  goods  or  materials  purchased  by  the  government,
such  as  army  and  navy  equipment,  vessels  of  war,  clothing,
boots,  shoes,  and  paper.  The  attorney-general  also  ruled  that
the  act  did  not  apply  to  work  done  on  materials  purchased
by  contractors.  Moreover,  contractors  themselves  were  con-
stantly making  use  of  the  undefined  term  "emergency"  as  an
excuse  for  working  employees  overtime.'  Agitation  for  a  more
inclusive  measure  was  initiated  and  continued  for  twenty
years  before  the  law  was  rewritten.  Finally  the  act  of  June
19,  19 12,  provided  that  an  eight-hour  provision  must  be  in-
serted in  all  contracts  which  may  involve  the  employment  of
laborers  or  mechanics  when  made  by,  for,  or  on  behalf  of  the
federal  government,  its  territories  or  the  District  of  Columbia.
Exception  was  made  in  the  case  of  contracts  for  transportation
by  land  or  water,  for  the  transmission  of  intelligence  or  for
the  piirchase  of  supplies  which  could  be  bought  in  the  open
market,  except  armor  and  armor  plate.* Provision  was  also

1  United  States,  Revised  Statutes,  1878,  Title  43,  Sec.  3738.  See
United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Second  Special  Report,  1896.

2  United  States,  Compiled  Statutes,  1901,  Sec.  3738.

'  Report  0}  Industrial  Commission,  1902,  Vol.  XIX,  p.  792.

*  See  opinions  of  attorney-general  since  1912. One  opinion  held  that


HOURS  OF  LABOR  227

made  for  "emergencies  caused  by  fire,  famine,  or  flood,  by
danger  to  life  or  property,"  or  by  any  other  extraordinary
event  or  condition  on  account  of  which  the  President  shall
subsequently  declare  the  violation  to  have  been  excusable.
One  year  later  dredging  and  rock  excavating  in  rivers  and  har-
bors of  the  United  States,  which  had  been  excluded  from  the
eight-hour  law  of  1892  by  a  Supreme  Court  decision,^  were
specifically  brought  imder  the  operation  of  the  new  federal
act.

Effective  restriction  of  hours  of  labor  was  secured  for
certain  groups  of  post  office  employees  before  it  was  for
federal  laborers  and  mechanics.  As  early  as  1888  hours  of
city  letter-carriers  were  reduced  from  ten  to  eight,  with  the
proviso  that  pay  be  not  reduced  and  that  extra  remuneration
at  the  new  rate  be  given  for  overtime.  In  1912  the  eight-hour
day  was  extended  to  clerks  in  first  and  second  class  post  offices,
work  to  be  performed  within  ten  consecutive  hoiurs.

In  1915  legislation  to  restrict  the  amount  of  work  which
might  be  exacted  of  federal  employees  took  a  new  turn.
In  addition  to  the  earlier  laws  limiting  the  number  of  hours
a  day  that  could  be  worked,  clauses  were  enacted  tending  to
limit  the  speed  and  intensity  of  the  labor.  In  the  appropria-
tion bills  for  both  the  army  and  the  navy,  provisos  were  in-
serted that  none  of  the  money  was  to  be  used  to  pay  any
officer  "while  making  or  causing  to  be  made,  with  a  stop-
watch or  other  time-measuring  device,  a  time  study  of  any
job  of  any  .  .  .  employee  ...  or  of  the  movements  of  any  such
employee  while  engaged  upon  such  work."  It  was  also  stipu-
lated in  both  bills  that  money  was  not  to  be  used  to  pay
bonuses  or  cash  rewards,  except  for  suggestions  resulting  in
improvements  in  the  service.^

The  movement  for  a  shorter  workday  on  public  employ-
ments was  early  taken  up  by  the  various  states,  tmtil  by  the


under  the  appropriation  act  of  June  6, 1912,  where  contracts  for  ammuni-
tion are  made,  the  eight-hour  provision  relates  to  employees  only  when
they  are  engaged  on  that  particular  government  work  and  that  they
may  work  longer  hours  for  their  employers  (when  contractors)  on  non-
government work.

»  Ellis  V.  United  States,  206  U.  S.  246,  27  Sup.  Ct.  600  (1907).

2  United  States,  Laws  1914-1915,  C.  83,  section  on  Increase  of  the
Navy;  C.  143,  section  on  Ordnance  Department.


228 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

end  of  the  'nineties  a  dozen  states  and  several  cities  had  eight-
hour  enactments.*  But  the  early  state  laws,  like  those  of  the
federal  government,  were  often  faulty  and  unenforceable.
The  turning-point  was  the  Kansas  law  of  1891,  which  con-
tained practically  all  of  the  essentials  of  an  enforceable  act.
This  measiu-e  not  only  fixed  hours  of  labor  on  direct  work  for
the  state,  but  also  extended  its  provisions  to  municipal  cor-
porations and  to  contractors  for  public  works,  and  imposed
a  penalty  for  violations  by  any  public  official  or  contractor.

At  present  over  half  of  the  states  have  eight-hour  laws  for
employees  on  public  works.^  In  practically  all  cases  the  laws
apply  to  both  direct  and  contract  work,  to  "the  state  or  any
political  subdivision  thereof,"  and  cover  "all  manual  labor-
ers" or  aU  "laborers,  workmen,  and  mechanics,"  and  oc-
casionally all  classes  of  labor.  Frequently  certain  classes  of
employees  are  excepted,  as  firemen,  policemen,  and  certain
classes  of  workmen  in  state  institutions.  Provision  is  almost
always  made  for  overtime  in  case  of  "emergencies,"  frequently
defined  as  "imminent  danger  to  property,  life,  or  limb";  but
unless  a  clear  definition  of  the  term  is  given,  advantage  may
easily  be  taken  of  the  exception  to  permit  unnecessary  over-
time.

Massachusetts  adopted  a  somewhat  different  principle  when
the  legislature  in  1909  fixed  a  nine-hour  day  for  cities  and
towns,  but  gave  them  the  privilege  of  changing  to  the  eight-
hour  day  by  popular  vote.  Four  years  later  the  legislature
provided  that  in  any  city  or  town  which  had  not  yet  accepted
the  eight-hotar  day  the  question  must  be  submitted  to  referen-
dum at  the  next  municipal  election,  and  if  defeated  must  be
resubmitted  every  two  years  upon  securing  a  given  number  of
petitioners.*

In  addition  to  the  state  laws  regulating  hours  on  public
works,  a  large  niunber  of  cities  have  embodied  eight-hour
provisions  in  their  charters  or  have  enacted  eight-hour  ordi-

>  Baltimore  (1866)  was  the  first  city,  and  California  (1868)  perhaps  the
first  state,  to  adopt  this  legislation.

'  One  of  the  latest  of  these  went  into  effect  in  Ohio  on  July  i,  191 5,
and  during  the  last  few  weeks  before  that  date  contracts  aggregating
millions  of  dollars  were  let  by  state  and  city  departments  in  order  to
take  advantage  of  the  lower  cost  possible  under  the  old  ten-hour  system.

2  Massachxisetts,  Laws  1913,  C.  822.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  229

nances  to  cover  municipal  work.  These  measures  follow  the
main  lines  of  the  state  laws  and  in  addition  frequently  specify,
among  other  things,  the  kinds  of  work  which  may  be  done
directly  by  the  city  and  those  which  must  be  done  by  con-
tract, rates  of  wages,  the  method  of  selecting  employees,
whether  by  civil  service,  citizenship,  or  trade  union  member-
ship, and  occasionally  provide  for  physical  examination  of
applicants.

b.  Private  Employments.  In  private  employments  the
movement  for  legislative  restrictions  upon  the  length  of  the
working  day  for  men,  although  associated  with  the  ten-houj
campaigns  in  the  interests  of  both  men  and  women  in  the
reform  agitations  of  the  'forties,  did  not  attain  national  im-
portance before  the  period  of  the  Civil  War,  when  Ira  Steward,
a  Boston  machinist,  inaugurated  a  nation-wide  movement  for
the  universal  eight-hour  day  by  law.^  Scores  of  eight-hour
leagues  sprang  up,  the  National  Labor  Union,  the  predecessor
of  the  Knights  of  Labor,  indorsed  Steward's  plan,  and  during
the  next  few  years  laws  were  actually  passed  by  a  number
of  states.  First  among  these  was  Illinois  in  1867.  These
laws  were  not  enforceable,  and  the  movement  died  down
until  it  was  revived  by  the  growing  Knights  of  Labor,  which,
however,  soon  turned  the  course  of  action  away  from  the
legislative  to  the  trade  union  method.

During  the  past  generation  progress  has  been  made  mainly
through  collective  bargaining  instead  of  by  legal  enactment.^
There  have  been,  however,  important  exceptions.  Over  half
the  states  have  enacted  laws  shortening  the  hours  of  employees


'  For  a  full  description  of  the  history  and  philosophy  of  this  movement
see  Documentary  History  of  American  Industrial  Society,  Vols.  IX  and  X,
John  R.  Commons  and  John  B.  Andrews,  ed.

*  At  the  November  elections  of  19 14  in  the  Pacific  coast  states  of
Washington,  Oregon,  and  California,  the  Socialists  secured  a  vote  on
initiated  measures  for  the  universal  eight-hour  day.  All  of  these  measures
were  defeated,  largely  through  the  opposition  of  the  farmer  vote.  The
Alaska  legislature  of  191 5  referred  the  question  to  the  voters  at  the
next  election.  Resolutions  favoring  the  legal  eight-hour  day  for  men
were  defeated  at  both  the  1914  and  1915  conventions  of  the  American
Federation  of  Labor,  although  the  vote  on  the  second  occasion  was  closer.
This  action  was  taken  largely  on  the  alleged  ground  that  if  the  legisla-
ture may  fix  maximum  hours  of  work  it  will  also  fix  minimum  hours.
•  The  real  basis  of  opposition  appeared  to  be  the  fear  that  legislative
action  would  weaken  the  movement  for  trade  organization.


230 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

on  steam  and  on  electric  railways,  and  more  than  a  dozen
states  have  eight-hour  laws  for  the  protection  of  workers  in
mines  and  smelters.  In  two  states,  also,  Mississippi  and
Oregon,  ten-hour  laws  were  passed  in  19 12  and  19 13  for
workers  in  manufacturing  industries.

(a)  Transportation.  The  regtdation  of  hours  of  labor  on
railroads  presents  peculiar  difficulties.  Almost  invariably  em-
ployees in  other  industries  live  sufficiently  near  their  work  to
enable  them  to  return  home  at  night.  But  the  engineer  or
fireman  may  find  himself  several  hundred  miles  away  from
home  or  even  away  from  food  and  shelter  at  the  end  of  a
stated  number  of  hours'  work.  The  problem  therefore  is  to
arrange  "runs"  so  that  employees  may  at  the  end  of  their
work  period  find  themselves  in  habitable  quarters.  The
length  of  the  "run"  must,  of  course,  depend  somewhat  upon
the  length  of  the  railway  division  and  upon  the  character  of
the  coiintry  through  which  the  road  extends.

One  of  the  early  court  decisions  dealing  with  hoiu-s  on
railroads  involved  the  case  of  an  engineer  who,  after  he  had
been  on  duty  for  nearly  seventeen  hours,  was  summoned  by
the  master  mechanic  of  the  road  to  take  out  another  train
which  it  was  assumed  would  require  only  five  or  six  hours  of
work.  In  reality  the  second  run  lasted  for  a  much  longer
time,  and  on  his  return  after  thirty-one  hotu-s'  service  his
train  collided  with  another  train  on  the  company's  road.  On
the  ground  of  contributory  negligence  the  court  denied  the
engineer's  claim  for  damages  for  injuries  he  sustained.*  Such
situations  have  not  been  infrequent  and  runs  of  thirty-six,
fifty,  seventy,  and  at  times  even  100  hours  have  been  re-
corded.^ These  excessive  hours  have  often  resulted  in  serious
accidents  and  great  loss  of  life,  and  accordingly  the  first  dec-
ade of  the  twentieth  century  saw  the  enactment,  under  the
influence  of  the  powerftil  railroad  brotherhoods,  of  many  laws
regulating  the  length  of  the  working  day  for  railroad  em-
ployees.

Although  the  legislation  is  of  comparatively  recent  date,


'Smith  V.  Atchison,  Topeka  and  Santa  Fe  Railway  Co.,  39  Tex.
Civ.  App.  468,  87  S.  W.  1052  (1905).

'  For  a  vivid  description  of  this  subject  see  paper  by  A.  B.  Garretson,
American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  Vol,  IV,  No.  I,  pp.  120-128.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  231

already  over  half  of  the  states  of  the  union  have  placed  such
acts  upon  their  statute  books.  This  legislation  relates  usually
to  two  classes  of  employees,  those  directly  connected  with  the
handling  of  trains,  such  as  engineers,  firemen,  conductors,  and
brakemen,  and  those  connected  with  directing  the  movements
of  trains,  such  as  despatchers,  telegraphers,  and  signal-men.

Considerable  tmiformity  exists  in  these  legal  restrictions.
For  men  actually  handling  the  trains  the  majority  of  states
make  sixteen  hours  the  maximiim  limit  for  a  day's  work,  to
be  followed  by  eight  or  ten  consecutive  hotors  of  rest.  Cer-
tain classes  of  employees,  such  as  those  on  sleeping-cars,
baggage-cars,  or  wrecking-trains,  are  frequently  excluded,
while  a  few  roads  under  a  specified  length  are  exempted,  as
in  New  York,  where  the  law  applies  only  to  lines  of  thirty
or  more  miles.  Practically  all  states  make  exceptions  in  case
of  "emergencies,"  a  necessary  exemption,  but  one  which,  if
not  defined,  can  easily  be  used  as  an  excuse  for  disregarding
all  legal  limitations.

The  second  class  of  railroad  employees  for  whom  hour
limitations  have  been  established  by  law  are  those  connected
with  the  movement  of  trains,  such  as  telegraphers,  despatchers,
and  signal-men.  Great  irregularity  of  employment  exists
among  this  class  of  workers,  since  an  operator's  work  and  dis-
tribution of  time  will  depend  entirely  upon  the  frequency  of
train  service  at  his  particular  station.  Here  again  legal  hours
depend  upon  whether  or  not  employment  is  continuous.  In
the  case  of  continuous  employment  hours  are  usually  limited
to  eight  a  day,  and  frequently  the  three-shift  system  is  used,
partictdarly  in  the  larger  railroad  centers.  If  employment  is
not  continuous,  or  if  offices  are  open  only  in  the  daytime,
hours  are  usually  limited  to  twelve  or  thirteen  a  day,  to  be
followed  by  a  rest  period  of  eight  or  ten  hours,  as  with  train-
men. Most  states  make  a  few  exceptions  or  allow  overtime
for  limited  periods,  while  two  or  three  restrict  hours  only
where  a  certain  number  of  trains,  as  eight  passenger  or  twenty
freight-trains,  pass  daily.

Railroad  employees  on  interstate  lines  are  protected  by  a
federal  statute,  enacted  on  March  4,  1907,  applying  to  all
"persons  actually  engaged  in  or  connected  with  the  move-
ment of  any  train"  in  the  District  of  Coltunbia,  or  in  any


232 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

territory  of  the  United  States,  or  on  interstate  lines.*  By
this  act  hours  are  limited  to  sixteen  a  day,  with  certain  pro-
visions for  rest  periods;  ^  but  no  traiti-despatcher,  telegrapher,
or  any  employee  who  transmits  messages  or  orders  by  tele-
graph or  telephone  "shall  be  required  or  permitted  to  be  or
to  remain  on  duty  for  a  longer  period  than  nine  hours"  in
places  continuously  operated  day  and  night,  nor  for  more  than
thirteen  hours  in  places  operated  only  during  the  daytime.
Overtime  in  cases  of  emergency,  which  is  carefully  defined  in
the  act,  may  be  permitted  for  four  additional  hours  on  not
more  than  three  days  a  week.  The  Interstate  Commerce
Commission  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  enforcing  the  act,
and  it  may  require  reports  of  violations  and  of  the  causes  for
overtime,  and  may  after  full  hearing  extend  the  period  of
permitted  overtime  in  special  cases.  By  the  operation  of  the
federal  act  the  great  majority  of  railroad  employees,  even  in
states  without  hour  limitation  laws,  are  protected,  since  but
few  employees  are  engaged  in  intrastate  train  service  ex-
clusively.

Somewhat  akin  to  the  problem  of  the  trainman  is  that  of
the  motorman  and  conductor  on  street  railways.  Until  the
early  'eighties,  hours  for  streetcar  employees  were  commonly
from  twelve  to  fourteen  a  day,  and  often  ran  as  high  as  sixteen
to  eighteen.  In  1864  a  coroner's  jury  in  the  city  of  Philadel-
phia, passing  upon  a  fatal  accident,  said:  "Nor  should  we
expect  vigilance  and  attention  from  employees  worn  out  by
seventeen  hours  of  incessant  labor. . . .  The  constant  occurrence
of  passenger  railway  accidents  demands  from  this  jury  an
unequivocal  condemnation  of  the  companies  who  compel  men
to  do  work  to  which  the  bodily  and  mental  frame  is  not  usual-
ly equal."  '

Dviring  the  'eighties  the  states  began  to  enact  legislation
on  the  subject,  until  now  about  a  dozen  laws  have  been  passed
limiting  hours  usually  to  ten  or  twelve  a  day.  Most  of  these
acts  provide  for  overtime  in  case  of  unexpected  emergencies,
and  many  require  extra  compensation  for  such  emergency


'  United  States,  Laws  1906-1907,  C.  2939.
"  See  "RestjPeriods,"  p.  247.

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  S7,  March,  1905,  "Street
^.ailway  Employment;  in  the  United  States,"  Walter  E.  Weyl,  p.  610,


HOURS  OF  LABOR  233

work,  but  very  few  give  adequate  attention  to  the  equitable
distribution  of  working  time.  Although  streetcar  service  is
one  of  the  most  constant  forms  of  employment,  the  public
demands  not  only  regularity,  but  also  additional  service  at
the  rush  periods  of  the  day,  on  Sundays  and  holidays,  after
the  theater,  for  excursions,  public  games,  or  special  celebra-
tions, and  on  many  other  occasions,  most  of  which  do  not
occur  with  any  degree  of  regularity.  Men  must  be  employed
to  meet  these  irregular  and  often  unexpected  demands.  For
this  purpose  a  long  waiting-list  is  usually  kept,  and  men  are
employed  and  paid  often  for  only  two  or  three  hours  at  a
time.  The  presence  of  these  extra  men  acts  as  a  stimulus  to
the  regular  men,  who  for  fear  of  losing  their  jobs  will  work
for  a  longer  time  than  the  normal  period.  This  situation  fur-
nishes an  additional  reason  for  the  enactment  of  legislation
in  several  states  definitely  fixing  the  maximum  number  of
hours  within  which  the  legal  day's  work  must  be  performed.
Rhode  Island  in  1902  provided  that  a  day's  work  should  not
be  longer  than  ten  hours,  completed  within  twelve  consecu-
tive hovus'  time.^  Although  this  measure  specifically  per-
mitted contracts  for  overtime,  the  supreme  court  of  the
state  held  the  ten-hour  day  binding  upon  aU  companies,  since
the  legislature  had  expressly  stated  its  intention  to  limit
the  hours  of  all  employees  covered  by  the  act.^  Massa-
chusetts is  among  the  more  recent  states  which  have  at-
tempted to  meet  effectively  the  problem  of  proper  distribu-
tion of  time.  In  1913  the  legislature  limited  working  hours
to  nine  a  day  and  set  eleven  consecutive  hours  as  the  maxi-
mum time  within  which  the  labor  must  be  performed.^  More-
over, this  act  specifically  provides  that  threat  of  loss  of  em-
plojnnent  or  refusal  of  future  work  or  hindering  an  employee
in  securing  other  work  will  be  considered  as  "requiring"
overtime,  which  is  punishable  by  a  heavy  penalty.

Another  method  of  regtilating  hovirs  of  service  on  street
railways  is  by  the  insertion  of  labor  clauses  in  franchises

1  Rhode  Island,  Laws  1902,  Cs.  1004,  1045.

'^  Opinion  to  the  governor  {In  re  Ten- Hour  Law  for  Street  Ry.  Corpora-
tions), 24  R.  I.  603,  54  Atl.  602  (1902).  "The  law  before  us  is  more  clearly
within  such  power,  for  the  triple  reason  that  it  deals  with  pubUc  corpora-
tions, the  use  of  a  public  franchise,  and  a  provision  for  public  safety."

'Massachusetts,  Laws  1912,  C.  533,  as  amended  by  Laws  1913,  C. 833.


234 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

granted  to  railway  companies.  This  method  is  much  less
common  in  America  than  in  Etiropean  cities.  In  Paris,
for  instance,  one  of  the  labor  conditions  stipulated  in  the
franchise  for  the  subway  was  that  daily  hours  should  not  ex-
ceed ten.  Among  the  few  American  cities  which  have  adopted
this  plan  are  Dallas,  where  a  twelve-hour  day,  and  Cleveland
and  Detroit,  where  a  ten-hour  day  were  secured  on  local  car
lines.

Regulation  of  hours  in  water  transportation  is  fotmd  in  a
federal  act  of  19 13,  limiting  hours  of  deck  officers  to  nine  out
of  twenty-foiu-  while  in  port,  and,  except  in  emergencies,  to
twelve  out  of  twenty-four  while  at  sea.*  The  federal  law  of
1915  regulating  the  working  conditions  of  seamen  provides
that  when  a  vessel  is  in  a  "safe  harbor,  nine  hours,  inclusive
of  the  anchor  watch,  shall  constitute  a  day's  work."  ^

(&)  Mines  and  Tunnels.  During  the  past  generation  several
states  have  taken  still  another  step  and  have  enacted  legisla-
tion regulating  the  hours  of  labor  for  men  in  private  employ-
ments where  the  safety  or  welfare  of  the  general  public  is  not
involved.  This  class  of  legislation  has  been  applied  particu-
larly to  mines,  smelters,  and  related  industries.

The  mining  industries  occupy  an  important  position  in  the
industrial  Ufe  of  this  country,  since  they  employ  over  one  and
one-half  million  workmen,  practically  all  being  adult  males.
Coal-mining  alone  claims  nearly  one-half  the  total  number.
Trade  union  organizations  in  both  the  coal  and  the  metalli-
ferous branches  of  this  industry  have  been  among  the  largest
and  most  powerful  in  America.

The  special  dangers  of  mining  have  been  frequently  pointed
out,  as  well  as  the  greater  hazard  in  American  than  in  foreign
mines.  It  has  been  shown,  for  instance,  that  the  average
fatality  rate  in  coal-mining  in  the  United  States  during  the
ten  years  ending  with  1910  was  3.74  a  1,000,  in  comparison
with  a  rate  of  2 .92  for  Japan,  2 . 1 1  for  Germany,  1.69  for  France,
1.36  for  Great  Britain,  1.04  for  Austria,  and  1.02  for  Belgium.'


1  United  States,  Laws  1912-1913,  C.  118.

'  Ibid.,  Laws  1914-1915,  C.  153.

3  United  States  Bureau  of  Mines,  Bulletin  No.  6q,  1913,  "Coal-Mine
Accidents  in  the  United  States  and  Foreign  Countries,"  Frederick  W.
Horton,  p.  87.


HOURS  OP  LABOR  235

The  speed  of  the  American  miner  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that
he  produces  about  five  times  as  much  coal  in  a  day  as  does
the  miner  of  either  France  or  Belgium.  This  is  partly  due,
however,  to  greater  use  of  machinery  and  to  the  more  recent
development  of  American  mines,  which  permits  a  greater
proportion  of  work  to  be  done  near  the  surface.  These  lat-
ter conditions  are,  however,  partly  offset  by  the  fact  that
American  miners  work  about  eighty  days  less  a  year  than  do
the  French  and  Belgian  miners.^  Investigations  of  health
conditions  in  the  various  branches  of  this  industry  have  re-
vealed the  presence  of  injurious  and  explosive  dusts,  noxious
gases,  poisonous  metals  or  chemicals,  sudden  and  wide  varia-
tions of  temperatiure  and  moisture,  and  impure  air  often  vi-
tiated by  powder  smoke;  in  addition  nainers  are  commonly
exposed  to  diseases  arising  from  soil  pollution  due  to  inade-
quate sanitary  facilities.  ^

Safety  and  health  dangers  in  the  mining  industries  have
become  so  well  known  that  at  the  present  time  over  a  dozen
states,  including  practically  all  in  which  the  mining  industry
is  important,  limit  hours  in  the  various  classes  of  this  work
to  eight  in  one  day.  Many  mines  operate  on  the  two-or
three-shift  system  and  a  few  of  the  laws  make  special
provision  for  additional  hours  at  the  time  of  changing  shifts.
These  eight-hour  laws  very  frequently  apply  to  all  under-
ground workings,  to  smelters,  or  to  any  employment,  includ-
ing that  of  hoisting  engineers,  involved  in  the  mining,  smelt-
ing, or  refining  of  ores  or  metals.^  Surface  excavations,  and
work  carried  on  at  less  than  a  specified  depth,  such  as  150  feet
in  shaft  work  or  200  feet  in  tunnel  work,  are  occasionally
exempted.  Although  in  some  of  the  deeper  mines  the  heat,
moisture,  and  the  difficulties  of  proper  ventilation  make  even
eight  hours  of  work  a  positive  menace  to  health,*  no  mining

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Mines,  Bulletin  No.  6q,  1913,  "  Coal-Mine
Accidents  in  the  United  States  and  Foreign  Countries,"  Frederick  W.
Horton,  p.  88.

*S.  C.  Hotchkiss,  "Occupational  Diseases  in  the  Mining  Industry,"
American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  February,  1912,  p.  131.  See  also
publications  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Mines,  Washington,  D.  C.

'  See  Arizona,  Laws  1912,  C.  28.

*  In  the  Comstock  silver  mines  in  Nevada,  at  a  depth  of  2,000  feet,
work  has  been  carried  on  in  short  shifts  at  a  temperature  of  150°  P.,  the
men  being  freely  supplied  with  ice-water.


236 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


law  in  this  country  has  attempted  to  make  any  scientific  ad-
justment of  hours  based  on  the  degrees  of  danger  in  different
classes  of  mines.

The  beginnings  of  such  adjustment  are,  however,  to  be
seen  in  the  laws  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey  governing  work
in  compressed  air.  Under  both  of  these  statutes  not  only  are
daily  working  hours  reg\ilated  by  the  degree  of  pressure  under
which  the  work  is  done,  but  they  are  divided  into  two  equal
periods,  the  rest  interval  between  which  also  varies  according
to  the  pressure,  as  follows:


//  the  pressure

But  does  not

Number  of  hours'

Interval  between

exceeds:

exceed:

work  in  24:

•working periods:

Normal

21

pounds

8  hours

yi  hour

21  pounds

30

6

I

30 "

35

4

2 hours

35

40

3

3

4°

45

2 "

4

45 "

50

15^ "

5 "

(c)  Factories  and  Workshops.  As  indicated  in  the  preceding
section,  when  legal  restrictions  do  not  directly  affect  public
health  or  safety,  but  apply  mainly  to  the  health  of  the  in-
dividual adult  male  workers,  we  find  fewer  legal  regulations.
The  general  declarations  that  eight  or  ten  hours  shall  con-
stitute a  day's  work  in  the  absence  of  special  contracts  or
agreements,  found  in  the  constitutions  or  statutes  of  about
half  the  states,  amount  merely  to  a  statement  of  principles.
They  have  practically  no  effect  upon  the  actual  length  of  the
working  day,  since  they  do  not  attempt  to  prevent  either  im-
plied or  written  contracts  for  overtime,  nor  do  they  often  pro-
vide a  penalty  for  violation.

Only  about  a  dozen  states  have  succeeded  in  regulating  by
legislation  the  hours  of  adult  males  in  one  or  more  employ-
ments in  factories  and  workshops.  Eight-hour  laws  are  fovmd
for  laundries  and  electric  plants  in  Arizona,  for  stationary  fire-
men in  Louisiana,  for  plaster  and  cement  mills  in  Nevada,
while  a  ten-hotir  limit  is  placed  in  saw-  and  planing-nulls  in
Arkansas,  in  bakeries  in  New  Jersey,  in  brick-yards  in  New
York,  in  certain  textile  mills  in  Georgia,  North  and  South
Carolina,  and  in  a  few  states  in  drug  and  grocery  stores.

Only  two  states,  Mississippi  in  1912,^  and  Oregon  in  1913,^


'Mississippi,  Laws  1912,  C.  157.


2  Oregon,  Laws  1913,  C.  102.


HOURS  OP  LABOR  23?

have  limited  hours  for  all  classes  of  employees  in  general
manufacturing  industries.  Both  states  adopted  the  ten-hour
day  (with  certain  exceptions),  but  the  Oregon  statute  allows
three  hours'  overtime  provided  a  50  per  cent,  increase  in  pay
is  given,  while  the  Mississippi  act  as  amended  in  1914^  per-
mits twenty  minutes'  overtime  on  each  of  the  first  five  days
of  the  week,  this  time  to  be  deducted  from  the  last  day  of
the  week.

c.  Constitutionality.  The  two  main  legal  principles  involved
in  the  constitutionality  of  maximum  hour  laws  for  women  are
equally  important  in  coimection  with  hour  legislation  for  men.
There  is,  on  one  side,  the  right  of  free  contract  for  the  disposal,
of  one's  own  labor,  and  on  the  other  the  possible  limitation  of
this  right  by  the  police  power  in  the  interests  of  social  welfare.
While  it  is  now  definitely  settled  that  hour  legislation  for
women  is  a  rightfvd  exercise  of  the  police  power  of  the  state,
the  question  is  somewhat  more  uncertain  in  regard  to  hour  laws
for  men.  The  constitutional  status  of  the  latter  type  of  laws
seems  to  depend  on  the  purpose  of  the  restriction  and  the  class
of  workers  covered.  The  courts  usually  uphold  hour  legisla-
tion which  apphes  to  public  work,  and  to  private  business  if
the  public  safety  is  directly  concerned,  as  with  railroad  train-
men, but  opinions  are  conflicting  on  hour  legislation  for  pri-
vate emplojmient  where  the  safety,  health  or  welfare  of  the
employees  alone  is  involved.

Although  several  earlier  decisions  were  unfavorable,  in  1903
the  United  States  Supreme  Court  upheld  the  Kansas  act  of
1 89 1,  which  established  the  eight-hour  day  in  public  employ-
ment both  for  direct  and  for  contract  work.  "It  belongs,"
said  the  court,  "to  the  state,  as  guardian  and  trustee  for  its
people,  and  having  control  of  its  affairs,  to  prescribe  the  con-
ditions upon  which  it  wiU  permit  work  to  be  done  on  its  be-
half, or  on  behalf  of  its  municipalities."^

But  while  this  decision  supported  the  right  of  the  state  to
control  the  action  of  its  political  subdivisions,  state  courts  have
not  always  followed  its  precedent  on  this  point.  In  New
York,  for  instance,  this  right  was  denied  on  the  ground  that
municipal  corporations  are  local  bodies  supported  by  local

1  Mississippi,  Laws  1914,  C.  169.

«  Atkin  V.  Kansas,  191  U.  S.  207,  24  Sup.  Ct.  124  (1903).


238 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

taxes,  and  are  therefore  on  the  same  footing  as  private  cor-
porations.* In  order,  therefore,  that  there  might  be  no
future  question  on  these  points,  the  people  of  the  state  in
1905  amended  their  constitution  expressly  giving  the  legisla-
ture the  power  to  fix  all  conditions  of  labor  on  public  work,
whether  done  directly  by  the  state  or  through  contractors.^
A  similar  amendment  to  the  Pennsylvania  constitution  was
voted  down  by  the  people  in  19 13.  But  on  the  whole,  de-
cisions have  in  recent  years  followed  the  main  principles  of  the
decision  in  Atkin  v.  Kansas.

In  private  emplojrments,  when  the  element  of  public  safety
is  clearly  and  directly  involved,  as  in  legislation  regulating
working  hours  in  transportation,  the  courts  have  raised  but
few  objections.  Though  during  the  early  days  of  this  class
of  legislation  opinions  varied  considerably,  the  close  connection
between  the  safety  and  welfare  of  the  traveling  public  and
the  physical  condition  of  these  employees  has  now  been  so
well  established  that  recent  decisions  almost  invariably  up-
hold the  main  principle  of  hour  limitation  as  a  valid  exercise
of  the  police  power.  Ir.  a  decision  given  in  191 1  the  United
States  Supreme  Court  said:  "The  length  of  hours  of  service
has  direct  relation  to  the  efficiency  of  the  human  agencies
upon  which  protection  to  life  and  property  necessarily  de-
pends. ...  In  its  power  suitably  to  provide  for  the  safety  of
employees  and  travelers.  Congress  was  not  limited  to  the
enactment  of  laws  relating  to  mechanical  appUances,  but  it
was  also  competent  to  consider,  and  to  endeavor  to  reduce,
the  dangers  incident  to  the  strain  of  excessive  hours  of  duty
on  the  part  of  engineers,  conductors,  train-despatchers,  teleg-
raphers, and  the  persons  embraced  within  the  class  defined
by  the  act."  ^

Various  related  questions  arise  from  time  to  time  involving
such  points  as  the  definition  of  emergency,*  and  the  liability


*  People  V.  Grout,  179  N.  Y.  417,  72  N.  E.  464  (1904).

2  New  York,  Laws  1906,  C.  506.  Upheld  in  People  ex  rel.  Williams
Eng.  Co.  V.  Metz,  193  N.  Y.  198,  85  N.  E.  1070  (1908).

'  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  Co.  v.  Interstate  Commerce  Com-
mission, 221  U.  S.  612,  31  S.  C.  621  (1911).

*  United  States  v.  Chicago,  Milwaukee  and  Puget  Sound  R.  R.  Co.,
197  Fed.  624  (1912);  United  States  v.  Kansas  City  Southern  R.  R.  Co.,
202  Fed.  828,  121  C.  C.  A.  136  (1913).


HOURS  OF  LABOR  239

of  the  railroad  company  in  case  of  accidents  connected  with
overtime  work.  The  courts  have  also  had  to  consider  the
legality  of  the  so-called  "split  trick."  They  have  held  that
under  the  federal  law  the  permitted  hours  of  service  may  be
divided  into  two  parts  within  the  same  twenty-four  hours.^
In  some  cases  this  rule  has  led  to  much  practical  difficulty  in
the  enforcement  of  the  law,  and  a  number  of  cases  have  been
brought  into  court  in  which  train  crews  have  had  their  time
of  service  extended  beyond  the  maximtim  sixteen  hours  by
temporary  "releases"  at  places  where  trains  were  delayed
en  route.  In  a  recent  case  the  United  States  Circuit  Court
of  Appeals  for  the  ninth  circuit  guarded  against  an  abuse  of
this  practice  by  ruling  that  such  a  "release,"  to  constitute  a
break  in  the  continuity  of  service,  must  be  sufficiently  long  to
insure  "a  substantial  and  opportune  period  of  rest"  under  all
circumstances.  Whether  or  not  a  "release"  was  for  such  a
period  was  a  question  for  the  jury  to  decide  in  each  case.^

Another  important  point  frequently  raised  is  the  division
of  jurisdiction  between  state  and  federal  laws.  In  case  of
conflict  between  the  provisions  of  a  state  law  and  the  federal
act,  the  higher  courts  have  practically  always  given  precedence
to  the  federal  act,  largely  because  of  the  diffictilty  of  separat-
ing interstate  from  intrastate  operations.  But  where  no  con-
flict exists  both  laws  may  operate  at  the  same  time.  Among
the  later  decisions  on  this  subject  is  a  New  York  case,  carried
to  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  involving  the  validity
of  the  New  York  eight-hour  law  for  train-despatchers.  In  this
case  the  New  York  court  held  that  the  act  was  a  valid  exer-
cise of  the  police  power,  and  that  no  conflict  existed  between
state  and  federal  authority  since  the  federal  law  limiting  hours
to  nine  a  day  "prescribed  a  general  minimum  limit  of  safety
applicable  to  average  conditions  throughout  the  country,"
whereas  the  New  York  statute  limiting  hours  to  eight  a  day
"simply  supplemented"  the  federal  act  by  raising  the  limit
of  safety  in  response  to  conditions  prevailing  within  the  limits

'  United  States  v.  Atchison,  Topeka  and  Sante  Fe  R.  R.  Co.,  220  U.  S.
37,  31  Sup.  Ct.  362  (191 1).  In  this  decision  the  United  States  Supreme
Court  upheld  the  practice  of  a  railroad  company  in  requiring  telegraph
operators  to  be  on  duty  from  6.30  a.m.  to  12  m.  and  again  from  3  to
6.30  P.M.

f  United  States  v.  Southern  Pacific  Co.,  220  Fed.  745  (1915),


240 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  the  state.^  On  appeal  the  United  States  Supreme  Court
on  May  25,  19 14,  gave  a  unanimous  opinion  denying  the  con-
stitutionaUty  of  the  New  York  act,  as  in  direct  conflict  with
the  federal  act,  holding  that  "Where  there  is  conflict  the  state
legislation  must  give  way.  Indeed,  when  Congress  acts  in
such  a  way  as  to  manifest  its  purpose  to  exercise  its  con-
stitutional authority  the  regulating  power  of  the  state  ceases
to  exist."  ^  On  the  point  made  by  the  New  York  court  that
the  state  law  merely  supplemented  the  federal  act,  the  federal
coitrt  said:  "  It  is  not  that  there  may  be  a  division  of  the  field
of  regulation,  but  an  exclusive  occupation  of  it  when  Con-
gress manifests  a  purpose  to  enter  it.  .  .  .  It  [the  federal  act]
admits  of  no  supplement;  it  is  the  prescribed  measure  of  what
is  necessary  and  sufficient  for  the  public  safety  and  of  the  cost
and  burden  which  the  railroad  must  endure  to  secure  it."
Another  contention  made  by  the  New  York  court  was  that
in  any  case  the  federal  law  had  not  become  operative  at  the
time  of  the  alleged  violation,  November  1,  1907.  But  the
federal  court  said  that  it  "considered  it  elementary  that  the
police  power  of  the  state  could  only  exist  from  the  silence  of
Congress  upon  the  subject  and  ceased  when  Congress  acted
or  manifested  its  purpose  to  caU  into  play  its  exclusive  power."'
The  important  question  as  to  whether  the  New  York  act  was
a  valid  exercise  of  the  control  reserved  by  the  state  over  cor-
porate charters  was  also  raised  in  these  cases,  but  no  conclu-
sive decision  was  reached  in  either  court.

The  right  to  limit  the  working  hours  of  men  in  mines  has
been  practically  undisputed  since  the  case  of  Holden  v.  Hardy
in  1898  upholding  the  Utah  eight-hour  law  for  this  group  of
workers.* This  case  has  such  an  important  bearing  upon  the

•  People  V.  Erie  R.  R.  Co.,  198  N.  Y.  369,  91  N.  E.  849  (1910).  See
also  Smith  v.  Alabama,  124  U.  S.  465,  8  Sup.  Ct.  564  (1888).

2  Erie  R.  R.  Co.  v.  New  York,  233  U.  S.  671,  34  Sup.  Ct.  756  (1914).
See  also  Minnesota  Rate  Cases,  230  U.  S.  352,  33  Sup.  Ct.  729  (1913).

^  See  also  Northern  Pacific  Ry.  v.  Washington,  222  U.  S.  370,  32  Sup.
Ct.  160  (1912).

<  Holden  v.  Hardy,  169  U.  S.  366,  18  Sup.  Ct.  564  (1898).  Immediately
after  this  favorable  decision  by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  Colo-
rado enacted  a  law  identical  with  the  Utah  statute.  One  year  later  the
Colorado  Supreme  Court  in  an  elaborate  opinion  refused  to  conform  to
the  opinion  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  and  declared  the  act
unconstitutional  on  the  ground  that  public  welfare  was  not  involved,
since  only  tbe  employee  hirtiself  js  injured  by  long  hours  {In  re  Morgan,


HOURS  OF  LABOR  241

right  to  limit  the  hours  of  adult  men  in  general  employments
that  it  should  be  given  special  attention  at  this  point.  In
connection  with  the  custom  of  passing  upon  the  validity  of
state  legislation  under  the  fourteenth  amendment  to  the
federal  constitution,  the  coiirt  said:  "This  court  has  not  failed
to  recognize  the  fact  that  the  law  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  a
progressive  science;  that  in  some  of  the  states  methods  of
procedure  which,  at  the  time  the  constitution  was  adopted,
were  deemed  essential  to  the  protection  and  safety  of  the
people,  or  to  the  liberty  of  the  citizen,  have  been  found  to
be  no  longer  necessary;  that  restrictions  which  had  formerly
been  laid  upon  the  conduct  of  individuals,  or  of  classes  of  in-
dividuals, had'  proved  detrimental  to  their  interests,  while,
on  the  other  hand,  certain  other  classes  of  persons  (partictilarly
those  engaged  in  dangerous  or  unhealthful  employments)  have
been  found  to  be  in  need  of  additional  protection."

Two  far-reaching  conclusions  were  set  forth  in  the  opinion
given  in  this  case.  The  first  involved  the  question.  Are  the
health  dangers  coimected  with  the  occupation  of  mining  suffi-
ciently serious  to  justify  the  legislature  in  separating  out  this
class  of  employees  and  interfering  with  the  right  of  free  con-
tract under  the  police  power  of  the  state?  On  this  point  the
court  said:  "But  if  it  be  within  the  power  of  a  legislature  to
adopt  such  means  (provisions  for  proper  ventilation,  speaking-
tubes,  protection  of  cages,  etc.)  for  the  protection  of  the  lives
of  its  citizens,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  precautions  may  not
also  be  adopted  for  the  protection  of  their  health  and  morals.
It  is  as  much  for  the  interest  of  the  state  that  the  public
health  should  be  preserved  as  that  life  should  be  made  secure.
.  .  .  While  the  general  experience  of  mankind  may  justify  us
in  believing  that  men  may  engage  in  ordinary  employments
more  than  eight  hours  per  day  without  injury  to  their  health,

26  Colo.  415,  58  Pac.  1071  (1899).  So  determined  were  the  miners  of
Colorado  to  have  the  shorter  workday  guaranteed  them  by  legislation
that  they  succeeded  in  1902  in  securing  an  amendment  to  the  constitu-
tion providing  for  the  eight-hour  day  (Art.  5,  Sec.  25a).  Despite  this
fact,  it  was  not  until  1905  that  the  legislature  finally  enacted  an  eight-
hour  law.  But  not  tintil  191 1  was  an  enforceable  act  passed  which
was,  however,  immediately  subjected  by  the  efforts  of  the  operators  to  a
referendum  vote.  Not  until  1913  was  the  question  finally  settled  and
an  effective  act  in  force.  These  unfortunate  events  have  played  no  small
part  in  creating  the  notorious  situation  recently  existing  in  Colorado,
10


242 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

it  does  not  follow  that  labor  for  the  same  length  of  time  is
innocuous  when  carried  on  beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth,
where  the  operative  is  deprived  of  fresh  air  and  sunlight,  and
is  frequently  subjected  to  foul  atmosphere  and  a  very  high
temperature,  or  to  the  influence  of  noxious  gases  generated
by  the  processes  of  refining  or  smelting."

The  second  conclusion  relates  to  inequality  of  bargaining
power,  already  treated  in  Chapter  I.

As  to  regidation  of  men's  hours  in  general  factory  employ-
ments, before  further  widespread  gains  can  be  secured  through
the  legislative  method  more  definite  information  as  to  the
health  dangers  of  excessive  hours  must  be  obtained,  so  that
greater  encouragement  wUl  be  given  to  legislators  by  the
higher  courts  of  the  land.  Up  to  the  present  time  court  de-
cisions have  been  so  varied  that  great  uncertainty  exists  as
to  the  possibilities  of  the  legal  limitation  of  hours  for  adult
males.

The  early  unenforceable  eight-  and  ten-hour  laws  were  gen-
erally upheld  by  the  courts,  but  when  Nebraska  in  1891  at-
tempted to  make  such  a  law  enforceable  by  requiring  double
pay  for  all  work  in  excess  of  eight  hours,  farm  and  domestic
labor  being  excluded,  the  law  was  declared  vmconstitutional
by  the  supreme  court  of  the  state  in  1894  both  on  the  ground
of  class  legislation  and  as  an  interference  with  the  right  of
free  contract.'-

The  only  case  directly  concerned  with  the  work  of  adult
males  in  factories  or  workshops  to  reach  the  United  States
Supreme  Court  is  the  bakers'  case  of  Lochner  v.  New  York.^
The  decision  in  this  case  overthrew  an  earlier  decision  of  the
New  York  Court  of  Appeals'  upholding  the  constitutionality
of  a  ten-hour  law  for  all  bakery  employees.  In  upholding  the
act  as  a  legitimate  use  of  the  police  power  in  protecting  the
welfare  of  the  state,  the  New  York  covirt  said:  "Again,  many
medical  authorities  classify  workers  in  bakeries  or  con-
fectioners'  establishments  with  potters, stone-cutters, file-


1  Low  V.  Reese  Printing  Co.,  41  Neb.  127,  59  N.  W.  362  (1894).

2  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.  S.  45,  25  Sup.  Ct.  539  (1905).

'  People  V.  Lochner,  177  N.  Y.  145,  69  N.  E.  373  (1904).  It  is  interest-
ing to  note  that  in  both  courts  the  decisions  were  reached  by  majorities
of  only  one,  making  altogether  eight  judges  in  favor  of  the  constitutional-
ity of  the  law  and  eight  against  it.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  243

grinders,  and  other  workers  whose  occupation  necessitates  the
inhalation  of  dust  particles  and  hence  predisposes  its  members
to  consumption.  The  pubUshed  medical  opinions  and  vital
statistics  bearing  upon  that  subject  standing  alone  fully  justify
the  section  under  review  as  one  to  protect  the  health  of  the
employees  in  such  establishments."

A  careful  reading  of  the  opinion  of  the  federal  court  dis-
closes the  fact  that  the  court  did  not  feel  that  sufficient  evi-
dence was  presented  to  it  indicating  the  injurious  effects  upon
the  health  of  the  men  who  work  long  hours  in  bakeries  to
justify  the  state  in  singling  out  bakers  and  interfering  with
their  freedom  of  contract.  "Viewed  in  the  light  of  a  purely
labor  law,"  said  the  court,  "with  no  reference  whatever  to  -
the  question  of  health,  we  think  that  a  law  like  the  one  before
us  involves  neither  the  safety,  the  morals,  nor  the  welfare,
of  the  pubUc,  and  that  the  interest  of  the  public  is  not  in
the  slightest  degree  affected  by  such  an  act.  The  law  must
be  upheld,  if  at  all,  as  a  law  pertaining  to  the  health  of  the
iiidividual  engaged  in  the  occupation  of  a  baker.  .  .  .  We  think
that  there  can  be  no  fair  doubt  that  the  trade  of  a  baker,  in
arid  of  itself,  is  not  an  unhealthy  one  to  that  degree  which
would  authorize  the  legislature  to  interfere  with  the  right  to
labor,  and  with  the  right  of  free  contract  on  the  part  of  the
individual,  either  as  employer  or  employee."  In  view  of
more  recent  decisions  of  the  federal  court  the  opinion  has  fre-
quently been  stated  that  a  similar  case  might  now  be  decided
in  the  affirmative,  particularly  if  sufficient  evidence  concern-  ,
ing  health  dangers  of  the  trade  existed  and  were  presented  /
to  the  court  in  a  thorough  and  scientific  manner.^

In  191 2  the  Supreme  Court  of  Louisiana  declared  an  hour
law  unconstitutional  on  the  grounds  of  unwarranted  classifica-
tion of  industries.  This  act  limited  the  hours  of  stationary
firemen  to  eight  a  day  in  manufacturing  or  business  establish-
ments, offices,  or  warehouses  operating  day  and  night,  but
exempted  certain  other  industries,  as  the  petroleum,  saw-
mill, and  cotton-gin  industries,  and  sugar  plantations.^  This
classification  of  industries  appeared  to  the  court  to  be  purely


^On  the  subject  of  judicial  investigation,  see  Chapter  IX,  "Admin-
istration."
*  Louisiana,  Laws  1912,  No.  245.


244 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

arbitrary,  since  it  was  difficult  to  see  why  long  hoiirs  were
not  as  injurious  in  sawmills  as  in  warehouses  or  offices.  On
this  point  the  judge  said:  "There  is  no  suggestion  in  the
record  that  the  occupation  of  stationary  firemen  is  dangerous
or  unhealthy  to  such  a  degree  as  to  warrant  the  interference
of  the  state.  .  .  .  The  toil  per  se  coiild  not  have  warranted  the
interference  of  the  legislature  because  it  permitted  unlimited
toil  in  the  plants  excepted  from  the  operation  of  the  act.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  motive  for  the  passage  of  the
act,  we  are  satisfied  that  it  was  not  based  on  health  con-
siderations."^

Here  again  the  court  did  not  feel  that  stofficient  evidence
was  presented  to  justify  the  classification  of  industries  as
contained  in  the  law,  and  after  this  decision  the  legislature
amended  the  original  law,  making  it  apply  to  all  stationary
engineers  in  cities  with  a  population  of  50,000  or  more.^

The  Mississippi  law  of  1912,^  limiting  hours  of  all  employees
engaged  in  manufacturing  or  repairing  to  ten  a  day,  but  ex-
cepting cases  of  emergency  or  public  necessity,  was  taken  to
the  state  supreme  court  three  different  times  and  was  each
time  upheld.  The  court  held  that  it  was  not  bound  by
Lochner  v.  New  York,  since  in  the  law  decided  against  in
that  case  no  provision  was  made  for  emergencies  under  which
the  "lightest  violation  of  the  provisions  of  the  act  wotild  be
innocent."  The  court  also  called  attention  to  the  physical
and  mental  strain  of  present-day  industry  as  compared  with
earlier  methods  and  declared:  "It  is  also  well  known  that  in
the  progress  of  society  the  relations  between  employer  and  em-
ployee have  changed.  Such  law  as  that  before  us  in  the  in-
stant case  may  not  have  been  needed  half  a  century  ago,  but
may  be  needed  at  the  present  time.  ...  It  is  well  known  that,
in  the  work  connected  with  the  running  of  machinery,  the
operator  is  subjected  to  a  mental  as  well  as  physical  strain.
In  many  cases  the  nearness  to  machinery  makes  the  work
dangerous  in  case  of  an  overtaxing  of  the  strength  of  the  "
worker,  or  any  lessening  in  his  alertness.  We  can  readily
understand  that  all  this  was  in  the  minds  of  the  legislatiu'e

'  State  V.  Barba,  32  La.  768,  61  So.  784  (1913).
'  Louisiana,  Laws  1914,  No.  201.
8  Mississippi,  Laws  1912,  C.  157.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  245

when  the  law  now  under  discussion  was  considered.  Besides,
it  would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the  legislatitre  to  decide
that  it  would  promote  the  health,  peace,  morals,  and  general
welfare  if  they  were  not  permitted  to  extend  their  labor  over
ten  hours  a  day,  and  the  legislature  could  also  decide  that  the
best  interests  of  the  people  in  the  state  would  be  promoted  by
limiting  the  time  of  work  of  this  numerous  class  of  its  citizens
to  the  time  mentioned.  In  fact,  when  we  consider  the  present
manner  of  laboring,  the  use  of  machinery,  the  apphances,
requiring  intelligence  and  sldll,  and  the  general  present-day
manner  of  life,  which  tends  to  nervousness,  it  seems  to  us  quite
reasonable,  and  in  no  way  improper,  to  pass  such  a  law  so
limiting  a  day's  labor.''^

One  of  the  few  instances  where  a  court  has  specifically  recog-
nized the  right  to  leisure  occurred  in  this  case,  when  the  court
said:  "We  pause  here  to  remark  the  notable  fact  that  it  is  rare
for  the  seller  of  labor  to  appeal  to  the  courts  for  the  preserva-
tion of  his  inalienable  rights  of  labor;  this  inestimable  privi-
lege is  generally  the  object  of  the  buyer's  disinterested  soUci-
tude.  Some  day,  perhaps,  the  inalienable  right  to  rest  wiU
be  the  subject  of  Utigation,  but  as  yet  this  phase  of  individual
liberty  has  not  sought  shelter  under  the  state  or  federal  con-
stitutions."

In  1 9 14  the  Oregon  Supreme  Court  upheld  the  state  ten-
hour  law  for  advilt  males  in  factories.^  The  case  was  then  ap-
pealed to  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  but  was  still
pending  in  the  autumn  of  1915.  The  decision  will  be  the  first
by  this  court  on  an  hour  law  for  men  in  general  employments,
and  will  to  a  large  extent  define  their  constitutional  status.
If  it  follows  its  own  opinion  in  the  case  of  Holden  v.  Hardy,'
declaring  the  inequality  of  bargaining  power  between  em-
ployer and  employee,  the  way  is  probably  opened  for  much
greater  regulation  of  the  work  of  adult  males  than  has  here-
tofore been  undertaken  in  this  country.  Equality  of  bargain-
ing power  may  be  secured  in  some  cases  by  freeing  labor  or-

*  State  V.  J.  T-  Newman  Co.,  103  Miss.  263,  59  So.  923  (1912).

2  State  V.  Bunting,  71  Ore.  259,  139  Pac.  731  (1914).

'  See  p.  27.  See  also  Adair  v.  United  States,  208  U.  S.  161,  28  Sup.
Ct.  277  (1908);  State  V.  Browne  and  Sharpe  Mfg.  Co.,  18  R.  I.  16,  25
Atl.  246  (1892);  Knoxville  Iron  Co.  w.  Harbison,  183  U.  S.  13,  22  Sup.  Ct.
1  (1901).


246 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ganizations  from  ejdsting  restrictions  upon  acts,  not  in  them-
selves unlawful,  which  are  necessary  to  carry  out  effectively
the  purposes  of  organization.^  But  where  organization  fails
to  protect  any  considerable  group  of  workers  or  where  this
protection  is  not  provided  in  a  reasonable  manner,  the  sub-
stitution of  the  power  of  the  state  becomes  a  justifiable  and
necessary  interference  with  the  right  of  free  contract,  for  the
protection  of  health,  welfare,  and  citizenship.  Such  inter-
ference, an  analysis  of  the  various  decisions  shows,  has  been
generally  held  legitimate  by  the  courts.


2.  Rest  Periods

In  spite  of  the  considerable  development  of  maximxim
hour  legislation  in  this  country,  only  slight  attention  has  been
paid — except  for  the  recent  agitation  for  one  day  of  rest  in
seven  and  some  efforts  to  exclude  women  and  children  from
night  work— to  the  important  question  of  legal  rest  periods.


(i)  Daily  Rest  and  Meal-times

The  most  common  form  of  legal  requirement  for  daily  rest
periods  in  private  employments  is  found  in  the  laws  regulating
hours  of  labor  for  women.  A  number  of  states  merely  specify
that  from  one-half  hour  to  one  hoiu-  shall  be  allowed  for  the
noon  meal.  Under  such  laws,  which  do  not  restrict  the  num-
ber of  hours  of  continuous  employment,  women  have  been
employed  with  no  time  for  rest  and  meals  for  periods  so  long
as  to  be  definitely  harmful  to  their  health.  Several  states
therefore  make  the  provision  more  effective  by  prescribing
that  the  noon  rest  period  shall  be  given  after  six  or  six  and
one-half  hours'  work.  If  overtime  is  worked  in  the  evening,
a  few  states  require  a  rest  period  of  twenty  or  thirty  minutes
after  6  or  7  p.m.  Most  of  the  laws  apply  to  all  females  and
a  few  apply  both  to  boys  and  to  girls,  but  the  inclusion  of
adult  men  workers  is  very  rare.


1  See  "Justification  of  True  Collective  Bargaining,"  pp.  115-118.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  247

In  addition  to  the  noon  rest  period  a  few  employers  have
voluntarily  granted  to  employees,  especially  to  women,  a
fifteen-  or  twenty-minute  rest  in  the  middle  of  the  morning
and  again  in  the  afternoon;  but  no  legal  regulations  to  this
effect  exist  in  America.  In  European  cotintries,  however,  the
beneficial  effects  of  these  shorter  breaks  in  the  workday  have
been  recognized  in  legislative  enactments.  In  Belgium,  for
instance,  women  in  fruit-preserving  must  be  allowed  at  least
fifteen  minutes'  rest  in  every  five-hour  work  period  in  addition
to  the  noon  rest.  In  the  chocolate  and  confectionery  industry
a  second  rest  period  of  fifteen  minutes  in  addition  to  the  noon
rest  must  be  allowed  if  the  working  day  is  between  nine  and
ten  hours  long,  and  a  third  rest  period  of  the  same  length
must  be  given  if  the  hours  exceed  ten.  Such  rest  periods  may,
under  the  increasing  strain  and  complexity  of  modem  industry,
add  much  to  both  the  physical  welfare  and  the  efficiency  of
the  worker.

For  men  workers  in  America  a  daily  rest  period  is  oc-
casionally required  by  laws  in  the  interest  of  health  or  public
safety.  Thus  a  daily  rest  period  as  well  as  the  maximum  limit
of  daily  hours  is  fixed  by  law  for  railroad  employees.  Train-
men must  be  allowed  ten  hours'  rest  after  sixteen  hours'  con-
secutive employment,  but  if  they  have  been  at  work  for  an
aggregate  of  sixteen  hours  with  brief  intervals  between,  the
rest  period  need  be  only  eight  hours.  Several  states  make  no
distinction  between  consecutive  and  aggregate  employment,
but  set  a  fixed  period  of  eight  or  ten  hours'  rest  after  sixteen
hours  of  work,  while  a  few  other  states  require  this  rest  period
after  thirteen,  fourteen,  or  fifteen  hours  on  duty.  In  addition
a  few  states,  including  Massachusetts,  Maryland,  and  New
York,  have  enacted  laws  requiring  that  telegraphers,  switch-
men, and  others  directing  the  movement  of  trains  be  given  a
rest  period  of  twenty-four  consecutive  hoiurs  twice  each
month,  without  reduction  of  pay.^ In  New  York  and  New


'  The  New  York  law  was,  however,  held  unconstitutional  by  the  state
appellate  division,  third  department,  in  People  v.  N.  Y.  C.  &  H.  R.  R.  R.
(5).,  163  App.  Div.  79  (1914),  on  the  ground  laid  down  by  the  United
States  Supreme  Court  in  Erie  R.  R.  Co.  v.  New  York,  233  U.  S.  671,  34
Sup.  Ct.  756  (1914),  that  "there  can  be  no  valid  state  legislation  covering
the  same  field  where  the  federal  authority  has  asserted  its  right  to  act."
(See  p.  239.)


248 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Jersey,  where  tunnel  and  caisson  operations  have  been  scien-
tifically regulated,  the  hotirs  of  workers  in  compressed  air
must  be  equally  divided  by  a  rest  period  varying  in  length
from  one-half  hour  to  five  hotus,  according  to  the  degree  of
air  pressure.^

(2)  Night  Work

Night  work  legislation  applies  only  to  women  and  minors,
there  being  no  regulation  of  the  work  of  adult  men  in  this
respect.

The  investigations  of  the  International  Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  begun  in  1901,  showed  that  serious  physical  and
moral  dangers  stirrounded  the  work  of  women  at  night.  It  was
clearly  demonstrated  that  recovery  from  fatigue  is  obtained
mainly  through  rest  and  sleep,  and  that  sound  sleep  can
rarely  be  sectired  in  the  daytime,  especially  in  the  noisy  and
crowded  homes  of  many  working  people  in  industrial  cities.
The  lack  of  sunlight  tends  to  produce  ansmia  and  tuberculosis
and  to  predispose  to  other  Uls.  Night  work  brings  increased
liability  to  eye  strain  and  accident.  Serious  moral  dangers
also  are  likely  to  result  from  the  necessity  of  traveling  the
streets  alone  at  night,  and  from  the  interference  with  normal
home  life.  From  an  economic  point  of  view,  moreover,  the
investigations  showed  that  night  work  was  unprofitable,  being
inferior  to  day  work  both  in  quality  and  in  quantity.  Wher-
ever it  had  been  aboHshed,  in  the  long  run  the  efficiency  both
of  the  management  and  of  the  workers  was  raised.^  Further-
more, it  was  found  that  night  work  laws  are  a  valuable  aid
in  enforcing  acts  fixing  the  maximtrm  period  of  employment.

As  a  result  of  these  investigations,  the  association  called,
through  the  Swiss  Federal  Council,  in  Berne,  in  1906,  a  con-
ference on  woman's  night  work.  This  conference  was  at-
tended by  representatives  of  fourteen  leading  European  pow-
ers,' and  an  international  convention  was  drawn  up  by  which

1  See  table,  p.  236.

^  See  the  brief  in  the  case  of  People  v.  Charles  Schweinler  Press,  by
Louis  D.  Brandeis  and  Josephine  Goldmark,  pp.  260-307.

'  Austria,  Hungary,  Belgium,  Denmark,  France,  Germany,  Great
Britain,  Italy,  Luxemburg,  Portugal,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzeriand,  and
the  Netherlands.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  249

the  various  countries  agreed  to  provide  as  soon  as  possible  that
women  industrial  workers  over  eighteen  be  allowed  at  least
eleven  consecutive  hours  of  rest  at  night,  seven  of  which  must
fall  between  10  p.m.  and  5  a.m.  In  practically  all  of  the  signa-
tory countries  the  necessary  legislation  was  enacted  and  the
prohibition  was  in  force  by  January  i,  1912.  A  number  of
other  states  and  dependencies  have  passed  similar  legislation.
Even  in  India  the  night  work  of  women  in  factories  is  for-
bidden between  7  p.m.  and  5.30  a.m.;  Argentina  forbids  it
between  9  p.m.  and  6  a.m.  Several  of  the  signatory  states
have  enacted  legislation  far  beyond  the  provisions  of  the
treaty.  France,  Belgium,  and  Spain,  for  instance,  have  for-
bidden many  kinds  of  industrial  work  between  9  p.m.  and
5  a.m.,  and  in  Holland  the  prohibited  hours  are  between  7  p.m.
and  6  a.m.  Most  of  these  European  countries  permit  excep-
tions under  certain  conditions,  especially  when  a  delay  in
handling  perishable  materials  would  cause  great  financial
loss,  but  such  exceptions  are  as  a  rule  very  carefully  safe-
guarded.

The  backwardness  of  America  in  prohibiting  night  work
forms  a  striking  contrast  to  the  activity  of  Europe,  the
American  states  forbidding  such  work  by  women  being  less
than  ten  in  number.^  Massachusetts  was  the  pioneer,  for-
bidding in  1890  the  employment  of  women  in  manufacturing
and  mechanical  establishments  between  10  p.m.  and  6  a.m.^
In  1907  the  law  was  extended  to  forbid  work  in  textile  mills
between  6  p.m.  and  6  a.m.' — the  strictest  regulation  fottnd  in
the  United  States.  Not  one  of  these  statutes,  however,  is
an  inclusive  night  work  prohibition.  The  Indiana  law,  for
example,  applies  only  to  factories,*  while  the  South  Carolina
law  applies  only  to  stores.*  New  York,  by  two  separate
statutes,  covers  both  stores  and  factories,^  while  Nebraska
covers  a  wider  range  of  employment  by  including  also  laun-
dries, hotels,  restaurants,  and  offices.'' There  is  no  statute


•  Connecticut,  Indiana,  Massachusetts,  Nebraska,  New  York,  Oregon,
Pennsylvania,  and  South  Carolina.

^  Massachusetts,  Laws  1890,  C.  183.  '  Ibid.,  Laws  1907,  C.  267.

*  Indiana,  Annotated  Statutes  1908,  Sec.  8021.
'South  Carolina,  Code  1912,  Sec.  430.

"New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  83; Laws  1914,  C.  331.

'  Nebraska,  Statutes  1907,  Sec,  6940  (as  amended  by  L^ws  1913,  C.  131),


2  so PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

law  in  Oregon  forbidding  night  work,  but  the  industrial  wel-
fare commission,  by  administrative  order,  has  forbidden  it
in  stores,  factories,  and  laundries.'

In  some  cases,  however,  these  laws  are  so  worded  as  to
prove  unenforceable.  In  Connecticut,  for  example,  the  law
simply  forbids  the  employment  of  women  in  certain  lines  of
work  "after  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening."  ^  Therefore  a  manu-
facturer believed  that  he  was  observing  the  letter  of  the  law
by  requiring  women  to  stop  work  at  lo  p.m.,  *but  putting
them  to  work  again  from  midnight  till  early  morning.'  It  is
necessary  that  the  law  to  be  effective  specify  the  entire  period
during  which  work  is  forbidden.

Another  small  group  of  states  recognize  the  strain  of  em-
ployment at  night  for  women  and  seek  to  discourage  it  by
shortening  the  period  which  may  be  so  worked.  The  Mary-
land statute  is  typical  of  this  class  of  legislation.  While  by
day  women  may  work  up  to  ten  hours,  if  any  part  of  their
work  falls  between  lo  p.m.  and  6  a.m.  the  hours  of  employ-
ment are  limited  to  eight.^  With  these  exceptions,  which
are  confined  to  a  few  states  and  a  few  industries,  the  night
work  of  women  is  entirely  unregulated  in  America.

Perhaps  the  slow  progress  of  American  laws  forbidding  night
work  of  women  may  be  in  part  accounted  for  by  the  unfavor-
able attitude  of  certain  of  the  courts.  In  1907,  eight  months
after  the  international  agreement  to  forbid  night  work,  the
New  York  State  Court  of  Appeals  declared  such  a  prohibition
unconstitutional.^  The  doctrine  of  entire  freedom  of  con-
tract between  employer  and  employee  applying  alike  to  men
and  to  women  was  emphasized  and  the  court  was  unable  to
trace  any  connection  between  the  law  and  the  promotion  of
health.  No  account  was  taken  of  inherent  sex  differences
between  men  and  women.  Since  this  decision  legislatures  have
naturally  been  reluctant  to  pass  night  work  laws.  However,
as  the  dangers  of  night  work  for  women  become  more  widely


'  Industrial  Welfare  Commission  of  Oregon,  Orders  No.  3  and  5.
2  Connecticut,  Laws  1913,  C.  179.

'  See  Report  of  the  State  Factory  Inspector,  1914,  p.  29. It  is  reported
that  this  practice  became  general  in  munition  plants  during  the  boom

of  1915-
*  Maryland,  Public  General  Laws  191 1,  Sec.  14.
6  People  V.  Williams,  189  N.  Y.  131,  81  N.  E.  778  (1907).


HOURS  OP  LABOR  251

known,  judicial  opinion  seems  to  be  changing  in  respect  to
the  constitutionality  of  prohibiting  it.  A  brief  by  Mr.
Brandeis  and  Miss  Goldtnark,  bringing  out  the  facts,  was  pre-
sented in  defense  of  the  new  night  work  law  passed  by  New
York  in  1913.  The  highest  state  cotirt,  the  court  of  appeals,
unanimously  reversed  its  former  decision,  and  taking  cog-
nizance of  the  facts  presented  to  it  in  regard  to  modem  in-
dustrial conditions,  upheld  the  law  as  a  necessary  protection
to  the  health  of  women,  both  for  their  own  sakes  and  for  the
sake  of  posterity.^  The  case  was  then  carried  to  the  United
States  Supreme  Court,  where  it  was  pending  in  the  fall  of

1915-

The  injurious  eflEects  of  night  work  are  even  more  pronounced
on  children,  whose  strength  and  powers  of  resistance  are  not
fully  developed,  than  they  are  on  women  workers.  Children
are,  however,  fortunately  better  protected  in  this  respect  than
women,  there  being  no  constitutional  difficulty  in  their  case.
About  forty  states  have  prohibited  the  night  work  of  children
under  sixteen,  generally  between  7  p.m.  and  6  a.m.,  and  in
addition,  in  Washington,  where  there  were  no  statutory  re-
strictions except  in  bake-houses,  the  industrial  welfare  com-
mission by  administrative  orders  forbade  the  night  work  of
minors  under  eighteen  in  laimdries  and  telephone  and  tele-
graph offices.  The  greatest  abuses  in  connection  with  the
night  work  of  children  have  been  foimd  in  textile  mills  and
glass  works,  and  on  account  of  the  strong  opposition  of  the
manufacturers  the  states  where  conditions  were  worst  have
frequently  been  the  last  to  pass  the  necessary  legislation.
However,  by  19 15  all  the  northern  textile  states  forbade  the
work  of  children  at  night,  and  West  Virginia  was  the  only
important  glass-manufacturing  state  which  still  allowed  chil-
dren under  sixteen  to  work  on  night  shifts.


(j)  Saturday  and  Legal  Holidays

While  more  than  a  dozen  states  have  made  Saturday  after-
noon a  legal  holiday,  few,  if  any,  have  made  effective  pro-

» People  V.  Charles  Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395  (1915). See  also
Chapter  IX, "Administration."


2^2 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

vision  for  the  enforcement  of  this  or  other  laws  fixing  legal
holidays.  The  extension  of  the  Saturday  half-holiday  in
private  employment  during  recent  years  is  often  due  to  vol-
untary action  by  employers.  The  short  workday  on  Satur-
day is  more  often  found  in  summer  than  in  winter,  and  more
often  among  clerical  and  mercantile  ^  than  among  industrial
workers.  Occasionally  strong  labor  organizations,  such  as
those  in  some  of  the  building  trades,  have  secured  the  forty-
four  hoiu-  week,  which  means  the  Saturday  half-holiday.

But  probably  women's  hour  laws  have  been  one  of  the
strongest  single  influences  in  securing,  though  indirectly,  a
shorter  workday  on  Saturday  to  certain  workers.  During  the
past  decade  many  efforts  to  improve  standards  took  the  form
of  cutting  down  the  sixty-hour  week,  though  still  retaining
the  ten-hour  day;  this  in  actual  operation  often  meant  a
Saturday  haH-holiday.  Over  a  dozen  states  are  stUl  found
which  allow  ten  or  eleven  hours  of  work  daily,  but  set  a
weekly  limit  of  fifty-foiu-  to  fifty-eight  hotirs.^  Several  laws
also  permit  an  increase  in  daily  hours  to  secure  a  shorter  work-
day one  day  in  the  week.

In  public  employment,  as  in  private,  the  Saturday  half-
holiday  has  become  a  common  custom  for  clerical  employees.
In  addition,  a  few  laws  are  found  extending  it  to  laborers  as
well.  For  instance,  Massachusetts  in  1914  by  popular  vote
provided  a  Saturday  half-holiday  without  loss  of  pay  for
all  laborers,  workmen,  and  mechanics  employed  permanently
by  the  state  or  by  any  of  its  boards  or  commissions.

In  continental  Europe  the  working  week  of  five  and  a  half
days  is  generally  known  as  "the  English  week"  because  it
is  more  widely  enforced  by  law  in  England  than  in  any  other
coimtry.  Thus  in  Great  Britain  laws  are  found  forbidding
the  employment  of  women  and  young  persons  on  Saturday
after  i  p.m.  in  textile  mills,  and  for  more  than  eight  hours  in


'  The  Consumers'  League  has  been  especially  active  in  securing  the
Saturday  half-holiday  for  salesgirls.  In  1914  it  for  the  first  time  induced
most  of  the  large  New  York  stores  to  close  all  day  Saturday  during  July
and  August.

2  Connecticut,  Delaware,  Massachusetts,  Michigan,  Minnesota  (mer-
cantile), New  Hampshire,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  South
Carolina,  Tennessee,  Vermont,  Wisconsin,  Wyoming.  See  "Women's
Hours,"  p.  215.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  253

non-textile  factories  and  workshops.  So  important  is  the
Saturday  half-holiday  considered  in  Europe  that  it  was  pro-
posed as  a  subject  for  international  treaty  at  the  latest  meet-
ing of  the  International  Association  for  Labor  Legislation  in
1912.

(4)  One  Day  of  Rest  in  Seven

It  has  been  pointed  out  ^  that  under  modern  industrial
conditions  many  thousands  of  wage-earners  are  obliged  to
work  seven  days  a  week,  a  practice  which  deprives  them  of
proper  leisure  and  tends  to  break  down  their  health.  Remedial
legislation  in  the  United  States  has  been  of  two  kinds.  The
type  of  law  found  in  nearly  all  the  states  is  a  descendant  of
the  old  Puritan  "blue  laws"  and  attempts  to  forbid  all  Sun-
day work,  primarily  from  religious  motives.  Such  laws,
however,  drafted  before  the  rise  of  modem  industry,  general-
ly fail  to  protect  either  the  worker  or  the  Sabbath.  Many  of
them  are  meaningless  because  filled  with  exceptions;  others
'remain  dead  letters  on  the  statute  books;  all  fail  to  provide
proper  means  of  enforcement.  A  few  enforceable  laws  have
been  passed  prohibiting  Sunday  emplo5niient  in  a  single  occu- .
pation,  generally  that  of  bakers  or  barbers,  but  have  generally
failed  in  their  purpose  because  the  courts  have  tended  to  de-
clare them  unconstitutional  as  making  an  arbitrary  classifica-
tion of  industries,  which  violates  the  equal  protection  clause
of  the  fourteenth  amendment  to  the  federal  constitution.^
But  it  is  hardly  practicable  or  desirable,  at  the  present  day,
to  realize  the  aim  of  the  old-time  Sunday  law  and  stop  all  Sun-
day work.  Public  necessity  demands  the  continuous  operation
of  such  services  as  telephone  and  telegraph  lines,  heat,  light
and  power  plants,  steam  and  electric  railways,  and  hotels  and
restaurants.  Another  large  group  of  industries,  important
among  which  are  iron  and  steel  works,  cement  factories,  paper
and  pulp,  flour  and  grist  mills,  usually  operate  continuously
on  account  of  technical  requirements  or  sometimes  simply  for


'See  p.  201.

'See  Lindley  M.  Clark,  "Labor  Laws  Declared  Unconstitutional,"
United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  gi,  November,  1910,  pp.
951-952.


2S4 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

economy.  To  remedy  this  situation  an  entirely  new  form  of
law  has  been  devised  which  recognizes  that  much  seven-day
work  is  a  necessity  and  that  the  objectionable  feature  is  the
seven-day  worker.  This  tjqie  of  law,  therefore,  simply  re-
quires that  all  employees  be  given  a  weekly  day  of  rest,  those
employed  on  Sunday  being  given  a  free  day  at  some  other
time  in  the  week.  Since  such  a  law  generally  necessitates  an
addition  of  one-sixth  to  the  working  force,  it  tends  to  elimi-
nate aU  tmnecessary  seven-day  labor  at  the  same  time  that
it  secures  to  every  workman  a  weekly  rest  day.

This  modem  legislative  movement  began  in  Switzerland,
where  a  law  was  passed  in  1890  requiring  each  railway  em-
ployee to  be  given,  without  loss  of  pay,  fifty-two  weekly  rest
days  each  year,  seventeen  of  them  to  fall  on  Sunday.  Be-
girming  at  about  1905  enforceable  rest-day  measures  were
enacted  in  almost  all  the  leading  European  countries.'  These
laws  generally  name  Sunday  as  the  day  of  rest,  but  permit
the  operation  of  continuous  industries  on  that  day  provided
every  employee  gets  some  other  day  in  the  week  free.  As
with  many  other  classes  of  European  labor  legislation,  only
the  general  principle  is  laid  down  in  the  laws  and  special
extensions  or  exceptions  are  largely  determined  by  adminis-
trative rulings.^

In  America  four  states  and  the  federal  government  have
passed  laws  embodying  this  principle  of  one  day  of  rest  in
seven.  The  federal  law  applies  only  to  post  office  employees.'
The  California  and  Connecticut  statutes  are  nullified  by  ex-
empting "any  case  of  emergency,"^  and  in  addition  the  Con-
necticut law  specifically  excepts  a  long  hst  of  occupations.
There  remain  the  Massachusetts  and  New  York  acts  of  1913,'
which  are  similar  in  character  and  represent  the  most  effec-


'  The  list  of  foreign  countries  with  such  laws  includes  Austria,  Bos-
nia and  Herzegovina,  Denmark,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Portugal,
Roumania,  Spain,  Switzerland,  British  India,  Canada,  Cape  of 'Good
Hope,  Chile,  and  Argentina.  (See  New  York  State  Department  of
Labor,  Bulletin  No. 49,  December,  1911,  "Rest-Day  Legislation  Abroad,"
John  A.  Fitch. See  also  Bulletins  of  the  International  Labor  Office.)

2  These  orders  and  decrees  may  be  found  in  detail  in  the  Bulletins  oj
the  International  Labor  Office.

'United  States,  Laws  1911-1912,  C.  389,  Sec.  5.

*  California,  Code  1906,  p.  722; Connecticut,  Laws  191 1,  C.  162.

»  Massachusetts,  Laws  1913,  C.  619;  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  740.


HOURS  OF  LABOR  255

tive  rest-day  legislation  yet  passed  in  the  United  States.
Both  apply  to  factories  and  mercantile  establishments  only,
but  exclude  janitors,  watchmen,  superintendents,  foremen  in
charge,  employees  caring  for  live  animals,  maintaining  fires
or  making  repairs  to  boilers  or  machinery,  and  employees
working  not  more  than  three  hours  on  a  seventh  day  in  setting
sponges  in  bakeries.  In  addition  Massachusetts  excludes  a
long  list  of  such  occupations  as  those  connected  with  news-
paper work,  restaurants,  drug  stores,  livery  stables  or  garages,
the  sale  or  distribution  of  gas,  electricity,  or  rmllc,  or  any
ernergency  which  could  not  reasonably  have  been  expected,
and  New  York  excludes  workers  in  milk  and  cheese  plants
with  not  more  than  seven  employees.  New  York  furthermore
provides  that  if  there  are  practical  difSculties  or  unnecessary
hardships  in  carrying  out  the  law,  the  industrial  commission
may  make  variations  "if  the  spirit  of  the  act  be  observed
and  substantial  justice  done,"  and  if  the  variations  apply  to
all  cases  in  which  conditions  are  substantially  the  same.'  An
earlier  amendment  giving  the  commissioner  of  labor  power  to
exempt  necessarily  continuous  processes  in  which  no  one  was
employed  for  more  than  eight  hoiu-s  a  day  was  declared  un-
constitutional by  the  court  of  appeals  on  the  ground  that  it
constituted  a  delegation  of  legislative  power.  ^  As  an  aid  to
enforcement  employers  in  both  states  must  post  a  schedule
containing  a  list  of  employees  who  are  to  work  on  Sunday
and  designating  the  day  of  rest  given  them.

Investigations  carried  on  by  the  American  Association  for
Labor  Legislation '  in  these  states  after  the  law  had  been  in
force  a  year  showed  that  its  provisions  were  being  generally
observed  and  that  many  employees  who  had  previously  been
obliged  to  work  seven  days  a  week  were  obtaining  a  weekly
rest  day  without  undue  hardship  to  industry.

Women  and  children  are  also  sometimes  protected  from
seven-day  labor  through  the  provisions  of  those  maximtmi
hour  laws  which  limit  work  to  six  days  a  week;  other  stat-
utes seek  to  insure  a  weekly  rest  day  by  fixing  weekly
hours  at  six  times  daily  hours  or  less. A  few  women's  hour


1  New  York,  Laws  1915,  C.  648.

2  People  V.  Klinck  Packing  Co.,  214  N.  Y.  121,  108  N.  E.  278  (1915).
5  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  December,  1914,  pp.  615--626.


2S6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

laws,  however,  leave  the  way  open  for  seven-day  labor  by
setting  a  daily  but  not  a  weekly  limit,  and  one  state,  Arizona,^
invites  it  by  making  the  weekly  working  period  seven  times
the  permitted  daily  hours.

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  Sunday  laws  applying  to
single  occupations  have  sometimes  been  set  aside  as  class
legislation.  General  Sunday  laws,  however,  have  almost
universally  been  upheld  by  the  higher  courts.  Two  distinct
lines  of  reasoning  have  been  followed.  In  the  first  half  of
the  nineteenth  century,  beginning  with  a  New  York  case  in
i8ii,^  the  constitutionality  of  the  laws  was  seldom  directly
involved,  but  was  assumed  on  religious  grounds  in  connec-
tion with  the  settlement  of  such  questions  as  the  scope  of
their  application,  the  validity  of  contracts  made  on  Sunday,
the  definition  of  "works  of  necessity  or  charity,"  or  the  classi-
fication of  employments.  In  1844  in  North  Carolina  a  case
first  came  up  which  was  sustained  on  the  grounds  of  the  police
power  of  the  state.  For  the  next  twenty  years  both  lines  of
reasoning  fo\m.d  their  way  into  court  decisions,  but  since
1866  the  state  courts  in  sustaining  these  laws  have  relied  al-
most entirely  upon  the  police  power,  and  all  acts  passed  upon
by  the  federal  Supreme  Court  have  been  upheld  on  this  same
ground.^

Representative  of  the  reasoning  by  which  Sunday  laws
have  been  held  a  legitimate  exercise  of  the  police  power  is
the  opinion  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  Hennington  v.
Georgia,^  later  quoted  by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court:

"There  can  be  no  well-founded  doubt  of  its  being  a  police
regulation,  ...  for  the  frequent  and  total  suspension  of  the
toils,  cares,  and  strain  of  mind  or  muscle  incident  to  pursuing
an  occupation  or  common  emplojmient  is  beneficial  to  every
individual,  and  incidentally  to  the  community  at  large,  the
general  public.  Leisure  is  no  less  essential  than  labor  to
the  well-being  of  man. Short  intervals  of  leisure  at  stated


^  Arizona,  Penal  Code  1913,  Sec.  717.

^  People  V.  Ruggles,  8  Johnson's  Rep.  (N.  Y.)  290  (181 1).

"As  late  as  1915  a  general  Sunday  law  was  attacked  in  Oregon  as  class
legislation  and  as  a  violation  of  the  fourteenth  amendment,  but  was  up-
held by  the  state  supreme  court  (State  v.  Nichols,  151  Pac.  473).

*  Hennington  v.  State,  90  Ga.  396,  17  S.  E.  1009  (1892);  Hennington  11.
Georgia,  163  U.  S.  299,  16  Sup.  Ct.  1086  (1896).


HOURS  OP  LABOR  257

periods  reduce  wear  and  tear,  promote  health,  favor  cleanli-
ness, encourage  social  intercourse,  afford  opportunity  for
introspection  and  retrospection,  and  tend  in  a  high  degree
to  expand  the  thoughts  and  sympathies  of  people,  enlarge
their  information,  and  elevate  their  morals.

"If  a  law  which,  in  essential  respects,  betters  for  all  the
people  the  conditions,  sanitary,  social,  and  individual,  tmder
which  their  daily  life  is  carried  on  and  which  contributes  to
insure  for  each,  even  against  his  own  will,  his  minimimi
allowance  of  leisure,  cannot  be  rightfully  classed  as  a  police
regulation,  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  law  that
could."

The  new  one-day-rest-in-seven  laws  have  been  so  recently
passed  that  in  only  one  state  has  a  test  case  reached  a  higher
court.  A  priori  it  would  seem  that  these  laws  could  be  sus-
tained as  police  power  regiilations  as  the  Sunday  laws  have
been,  and  in  the  main  such  a  position  was  taken  by  the  New
York  State  Coiut  of  Appeals  on  February  5,  1915.  The
court  said:  ^  "Can  we  say  that  the  provision  for  a  full  day  of
rest  in  seven  for  such  employees  is  so  extravagant  and  un-
reasonable, so  disconnected  with  the  probable  promotion  of
health  and  welfare,  that  its  enactment  is  beyond  the  juris-
diction of  the  legislature?  .  .  .  We  have  no  power  of  decision
of  the  question  whether  it  is  the  wisest  and  best  way  to  off-
set these  conditions  and  to  give  to  employees  the  protection
which  they  need,  even  if  we  had  any  doubt  on  that  subject.
Our  only  inquiry  must  be  whether  the  provision  on  its  face
seems  reasonable,  fair,  and  appropriate,  and  whether  it  can
fairly  be  believed  that  its  natural  consequences  will  be  in  the
direction  of  the  betterment  of  public  health  and  welfare,  and
therefore  that  it  is  one  which  the  state  for  its  protection  and
advantage  may  enact  and  enforce."  The  classifications  made
by  the  act  have  likewise  been  upheld,  as  meeting  the  actual
conditions  of  modem  industrial  life.  Its  linaitation  to  em-
ployees of  factories  and  mercantile  establishments  was  rea-
sonable because  "We  know  as  a  matter  of  common  obser-
vation that  such  labor  is  generally  indoors  and  imposes  that
greater  burden  on  health  which  comes  from  confinement


1  People  V.  Klinck  Packing  Co.,  214  N.  Y.  121,  108  N.  E.  278  (1915).

n


2s8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

many  times  accompanied  by  crowded  conditions  and  impure
air."  The  exemption  of  dairies,  creameries,  and  similar  plants
employing  not  more  than  seven  workers  was  also  reasonable,
because  of  the  perishable  nature  of  the  product,  the  heavier
burden  of  the  necessary  increase  in  the  force  of  a  small  estab-
lishment, and  because  of  the  closer  personal  relation  between
employer  and  employee  and  lessened  strain  in  such  small  es-
tablishments. The  power  given  to  the  commissioner  of  labor
to  exempt  continuous  industries  in  which  daily  hours  were  not
more  than  eight,  was,  however,  held  to  be  an  unconstitutional
delegation  of  legislative  power.  Thus  the  attitude  of  the
courts  is  apparently  favorable  to  the  extension  of  laws  sectu"-
ing  industrial  workers  a  weekly  day  of  rest.


(5)  Annual  Vacations

The  average  salaried  worker  wotild  consider  himself  ill-used
if  he  failed  to  receive  an  annual  paid  vacation  of  two  weeks
or  more.  But  ordinarily  no  such  provision  is  made  for  the
wage-earner.^  In  this  respect  employees  of  state  and  federal
governments  fare  better  than  workers  in  private  employment.
About  half  a  dozen  states  have  laws  providing  annual  vaca-
tions for  several  classes  of  employees.  Representative  of
these  is  the  California  statute,  which  allows  an  annual  vaca-
tion of  fifteen  days  with  pay  to  all  regular  employees  of  state
hospitals,  state  commissions  and  boards,  and  the  state  print-
ing-office.^ The  federal  government  likewise  provides  annual
paid  leaves  of  absence  for  several  classes  of  employees,  in-
cluding the  employees  of  the  Bureau  of  Engraving  and  Print-
ing, and  the  Government  Printing  Office,  workers  in  navy-
yards,  gun  factories  and  arsenals,  and  railway  postal  clerks.
In  Massachusetts  in  19 14  an  act  providing  a  fortnight's  paid
vacation  for  laborers  employed  by  cities  and  towns  was  sub-
mitted to  popular  vote  and  accepted  by  over  half  of  the  cities
and  towns  of  the  commonwealth. Another  method  some-

1  In  May,  191 5,  the  Milk  Wagon  Drivers'  Union  of  Chicago  signed  an
agreement  with  their  employers  which  included  a  provision  for  two
weeks'  annual  vacation  with  pay.  This  is  said  to  be  the  first  such  pro-
vision in  a  signed  trade  agreement.

2  California,  Laws  1909,  C.  250,  Sec.  i.


HOURS  OP  LABOR  259

times  used  to  seciire  vacations  to  city  employees  is  that  of
inserting  such  provisions  in  city  charters.  For  example,  the
New  York  City  charter  gives  executive  heads  at  their  dis-
cretion power  to  grant  employees  annual  vacations  of  not
less  than  one  week,  but  per  diem  employees  may  not  be  given
more  than  two  weeks.

Laws  reqmring  annual  vacations  have  in  this  country  cov-
ered only  public  employment,  but  in  Europe  they  have  some-
times been  extended  to  private  industry  as  well.  Thus  in  the
canton  of  Berne,  Switzerland,  every  woman  who  has  been
employed  on  time  rates  in  the  same  business  for  more  than
one  year  must  be  given  six  consecutive  holidays  with  pay,
after  the  second  year's  work  eight  holidays,  after  the  third
year  ten  days,  and  after  the  fourth  year  twelve  days.  An-
other method  of  providing  vacations  sometimes  used  abroad
is  the  insertion  of  labor  clauses  in  public  service  franchises.
For  instance,  the  subway  franchise  in  Paris  requires  that  all
employees  be  given  ten  days'  vacation  annually  with  pay.

The  foregoing  discussion  indicates  that  legal  regulation  of
the  working  hours  and  of  the  rest  periods  for  the  different
classes  of  employees  in  America  has  tended  toward  uniform
provisions,  the  same  limitations  usually  being  appUed  to  all
industries  covered  by  the  law.  In  European  countries,  on
the  other  hand,  in  addition  to  broad  maximum  and  minimum
regulations,  frequent  use  is  made  of  the  method  of  determin-
ing the  length  of  the  work  and  rest  periods  in  accordance  with
the  special  hazards  of  each  industry  or  occupation.  Scientific
adjustment  of  hours  of  labor  requires  thorough  and  often  con-
tinued investigations  of  actual  conditions,  and  should  com-
bine the  practical  knowledge  of  workers  and  employers  with
the  technical  knowledge  of  experts.  In  many  occupations
dusts  and  gases,  poisons,  or  extreme  temperatures,  make  it
safe  to  work  consecutively  for  only  short  periods.^  The  pres-
ence in  America  of  hazardous  industries  fraught  with  danger
to  the  life  and  health  of  thousands  of  employees  working  long
hours  and  frequently  seven  days  a  week,  but  as  yet  imregu-


•  The  strike  in  the  oil  plants  of  Bayonne,  N.  J.,  for  instance,  during
.the  summer  of  1915,  brought  to  public  knowledge  the  work  of  the  still-
jcleaners  who  must  toil  in  a  temperature  of  200°  F.  cleaning  the  huge  vats
in  whidi  oil  is  refined.


26o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

lated  either  by  trade  organizations  or  by  state  control,  indi-
cates the  need  for  a  system  whereby  permanent  bodies  will
be  authorized  to  investigate  scientifically  such  conditions  of
employment  and  fix  varjdng  hours  of  labor  on  a  basis  which
will  adequately  protect  the  health  and  welfare  of  the  em-
ployees and  the  state.  The  fact  already  noted,  that  in  some
of  the  leading  states  of  the  coimtry  industrial  boards  or  com-
missions have  lately  been  created  with  authority  to  make
special  investigations  and  to  regulate  hours  in  the  various
industries,  is  significant  of  the  direction  which  future  progress
may  be  expected  to  take.^


j'  See  Chapter  IX,  "Administration."


CHAPTER  VI

UNEMPLOYMENT

A  careful  canvass  in  March  and  April,  1915,  of  about  400,000
families  in  fifteen  American  cities  showed  11.5  per  cent,  of
the  wage-earners  imemployed  and  an  additional  16.6  per  cent,
working  only  part  time.  A  similar  investigation  in  New  York
City  earlier  in  the  year  indicated  that  18  per  cent,  of  the
wage-earners  were  unemployed,  and  it  was  estimated  that
the  total  army  of  unemployed  wage-earners  in  New  York  City
at  that  time  numbered  about  442,000.1  -pjjg  United  States
Census  for  1900  showed  that  6,468,964  working  people,  or
nearly  25  per  cent,  of  aU  engaged  in  gainful  occupations,  had
been  unemployed  some  time  during  the  year.  Of  these,
3>i77>7S3  lost  from  one  to  three  months'  work  each;  2,554,925
lost  from  iour  to  six  months  each;  736,286  lost  from  seven  to
twelve  months  each.^

The  employee's  loss  from  this  irregularity  of  work  is  two-
fold. Besides  his  enormous  immediate  loss  in  wages  and.
the  residting  distress,  there  is  the  equally  serious  loss  in  the
weakening  of  moral  fiber  which  comes  with  uncertainty,  habits
of  irregular  work,  and  occasional  lapses  into  destitution.  Un-
employment is  a  culture  bed  for  pauperism  and  all  its  accom-
panying evils.

Moreover,  in  addition  to  the  losses  by  employees  is  the
direct  financial  loss  to  employers  through  the  expense  of
"hiring  and  firing."  A  number  of  employment  managers
recently  estimated  the  cost  of  hiring  and  "breaking  in"  a
new  employee  at  from  $50  to  $200;  in  only  one  case  was  the


1  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  172,  191 5,  p.  7.
'  Similar  data  were  collected  by  the  government  in  1910,  but  are  stUl
unpublished.


262 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

estimate  as  low  as  $30.  A  machine-tool  builder  to  whom  the
matter  had  been  suggested  declared  after  a  careful  study  of
his  plant  that  the  hiring  of  1,000  new  persons  in  one  year,
while  the  permanent  additions  to  his  force  were  fewer  than
fifty,  had  reduced  his  profits  by  at  least  $150,000,  or  about
$150  for  each  new  worker  hired.*  When  many  factories  are
known  to  hire  as  many  as  1,000  men  a  year  to  keep  up  a  per-
manent force  of  300,  the  magnitude  of  the  resulting  waste
becomes  apparent.

Even  this  general  statement  of  the  wastes  of  unemploy-
ment indicates  the  imperative  need  of  preventive  measures.
Hence  we  are  asking  with  increasing  insistence,  is  unemploy-
ment a  necessary  evil?  If  not,  to  what  extent  is  legislation
a  solution?

In  Chapter  I  it  was  suggested  that  unemployment  may  be
defined  as  the  failure  to  make  a  labor  contract.  This  failure
may  be  traced  to  one  of  three  causes:  (i)  cessation  of  work
arising  from  trade  disputes;  (2)  unemployability,  or  disability,
owing  to  sickness,  old  age,  or  other  personal  conditions;  and
(3)  inability  of  men  who  are  willing  and  able  to  work  to  find
employment.

The  present  discussion  relates  only  to  the  third  part  of
the  whole  problem  of  idleness.  Legislation  intended  to  mini-
mize idleness  due  to  labor  disputes  is  discussed  in  Chapter
III.  The  problems  of  unemployability  and  unemployment
are  by  no  means  identical,  but  are  related  to  the  extent  that
much  chronic  unwillingness  to  work  has  restilted  from  the
demoralizing  influence  of  unemployment,  and  therefore  a
reduction  of  unemplo3anent  may  decrease  the  additions  to
the  raiiks  of  the  unemployable.  How  to  provide  satisfactory
means  of  caring  for  the  shiftless  and  the  criminal  is  primarily
problem  of  charity  and  correction,  but  the  prevention  of
unemployment  is  a  problem  of  industrial  organization.  In
this  chapter  the  purpose  is  to  describe  the  more  direct  legis-
lative remedies  for  unemployment  due  to  the  inability  of
normal  workers  to  obtain  employment.  These  remedies  may
deal  either  with  (i)  the  regulation  of  private  employment
offices,  (2)  the  establishment  and  operation  of  public  employ-

'  Magnus  W.  Alexander,  "Hiring  and  Firing:  The  Economic  Waste
and  How  to  Avoid  It,"  American  Industries,  August,  1915,  p.  19.


UNEMPLOYMENT  263

ment  offices,  (3)  systematic  distribution  of  public  work,  or
(4)  the  regularization  of  iadustry.  A  fifth  important  legisla-
tive remedy,  unemployment  insurance,  will  be  discussed  in
the  chapter  on  "Social  Instirance."

A  study  of  the  comparative  possibilities  of  the  various  pro-
posed or  attempted  remedies  for  unemployment  would  be
much  facilitated  by  statistics  indicating  the  total  amotmt  of
involuntary  idleness  and  what  proportion  is  due  to  each  one
of  the  several  factors,  such  as  cyclical  and  seasonal  fluctuations,
unnecessarily  frequent  changes  in  the  personnel  of  the  work-
ing force  and  other  preventable  irregularity  in  employment,
and,  lastly,  to  the  lack  of  a  centraUzed  market  for  labor.  But
accurate  and  comprehensive  figures  of  this  nature  are  not
available  in  the  United  States.  The  existence  of  unemploy-
ment to  a  significant  degree  is  undoubted,  but  unforttmately
it  is  impossible  at  the  present  time  to  make  more  than  a  rough
guess  as  to  the  relative  proportion  of  unemployment  due  to
each  of  the  several  causes  mentioned^

In  New  York  and  Massachusetts,  however,  the  state  labor
departments  regularly  collect  fairly  reliable  statistics  in  re-
gard to  unemployment  among  organized  workers.  The  mean
percentage  of  idleness  in  New  York  among  the  members  of
"representative  unions"  ^  at  the  end  of  each  month  from  1904
to  1 9 14,  due  to  causes  other  than  labor  disputes  or  disability,
ranged  from  6.8  to  28  per  cent.^  In  all  but  two  years  the
percentage  was  over  12.  In  the  same  period  the  unemploy-
ment resulting  from  other  causes  was  comparatively  small,
ranging  from  0.3  to  4.2  per  cent,  for  labor  disputes  and  from
I  to  1.4  per  cent,  for  disability.  Of  the  18.3  per  cent,  of
members  of  local  trade  unions  reported  as  imemployed  in
Massachusetts  on  December  31,  1914,  aE  but  3.4  per  cent,
were  unemployed  because  of  "lack  of  work"  rather  than  be-
cause of  labor  disputes  or  disability.'

It  should  also  be  noted  that  there  is  a  wide  seasonal  varia-


'  In  1914  these  representative  trade  unions  numbered  232  and  had
140,406  members  or  25.4  per  cent,  of  the  total  union  membership  in  the
state  of  New  York.

*  New  York  Department  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  6g,  1915,  "Idleness  of
Organized  Wage  Earners  in  1914,"  p.  6.

'  Massachusetts  Bureau  of  Statistics,  Twenty-eighth  Quarterly  Report
qn  Unemployment,


264 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tion  in  the  demand  for  labor.  Statistics  collected  in  New  York
as  to  idleness  of  the  members  of  labor  organizations  indicate
that  the  mean  percentage  of  idleness  during  the  period  1897  to
19 13  was,  in  all  but  three  years,  over  5  per  cent,  at  the  end
of  September,  and  over  15  per  cent. — that  is,  three  times  as
large — ^at  the  end  of  March.  The  federal  Census  of  Manu-
factiires  for  1905  showed  from  the  manufacturers'  records
that  in  one  month  7,017,138  wage-earners  were  employed,
while  in  another  month  there  were  only  4,599,091,  leaving  a
difference  of  2,418,047.  That  is  to  say,  nearly  two  and  a  half
million  fewer  workers  were  employed  at  one  period  of  the  year
than  at  another.

In  addition  to  the  irregularity  of  emplojmient  due  to  cyclical
fluctuations  in  the  demand  for  labor,  or  industrial  "crises,"
and  that  due  to  seasonal  variations,  a  third  important  type  of
idleness  results  from  the  casual  or  short  time  nature  of
many  occupations.  The  New  York  commission  which  stud-
ied unemployment  reported  in  191 1  that  two  out  of  every
five  wage-earners  are  obliged  to  seek  new  places  one  or  more
times  every  year.^  In  brief,  the  best  available  evidence  in-
dicates that  unemployment  is  chronic  and  the  amount  never
insignificant,  even  when  industrial  conditions  are  at  their
best.

I.  Regulation  of  Private  Employment  Offices

To  the  extent  that  there  is  somewhere  a  suitable  "manless
job"  for  each  "jobless  man,"  the  solution  of  imemployment
is  simply  the  proper  distribution  of  the  labor  supply.  Per-
haps the  commonest  method  of  seeking  to  bring  about  this
distribution  is  by  unsystematic  individual  search.  A  man
not  recommended  for  a  position  by  a  relative  or  friend  often
follows  the  easiest  course,  that  which  involves  the  least  im-
mediate expenditure  of  money  and  thought.  He  starts  from
home  and  drops  in  at  every  sign  of  "Help  wanted."

"Help  wanted,"  scrawled  on  a  piece  of  cardboard,  is  the
symbol  of  inefficiency  in  the  organization  of  the  labor  market.
The  haphazard  practice  of  tramping  the  streets  in  search  of

'  New  York  Commission  on  Employers'  Liability  and  Other  Matters,
Third  Report; Unemployment  and  Lack  of  Farm  Labor,  191 1,  p.  38,


UNEMPLOYMENT  265

work  is  no  method  at  all.  It  assures  success  neither  to  the
idle  worker  in  his  search  for  work,  nor  to  the  employer  in  his
search  for  labor.  On  the  contrary,  by  its  very  lack  of  system,
it  needlessly  swells  the  tide  of  imemployment,  and  through  the
foot-weary,  discouraging  tramping  which  it  necessitates  often
leads  to  vagrancy  and  to  crime.

Another  common  method  of  connecting  employer  and  em-
ployee is  through  the  meditmi  of  advertising.  Every  large
newspaper  in  the  country  carries  yearly  hundreds  of  columns
of  "Help  wanted"  and  "Situations  wanted,"  at  a  cost  to
employers  and  employees  estimated  at  about  $5  for  every
worker.  If  the  money  spent  brought  commensurate  results,
there  would  be  less  ground  for  complaint.  But  at  present
an  employer  advertises  for  help  in  several  papers,  because  not
all  the  workers  read  the  same  paper.  The  employee  lists
the  positions  advertised  and  then  starts  on  the  day's  tramp.
At  one  gate  fifty  or  a  hundred  men  may  be  waiting  for  a  single
job,  while  in  other  places  a  hundred  employers  may  be  wait-
ing each  for  a  single  employee.  Unnecessary  duplication  of
work  and  expense  by  both  parties  is  evident.  In  addition
to  the  expense,  newspaper  advertising  also  possesses  inherent
possibilities  of  fraud.  It  is  difHcult  for  the  newspaper,  even
if  it  always  tries,  to  detect  misrepresentations,  and  the  vic-
timized employee  very  rarely  seeks  legal  redress.

In  recognition  of  the  need  of  more  systematic  means  of
connecting  the  man  with  the  job,  private  employment  offices
of  various  sorts  have  long  been  established.  Private  bureaus
which  charge  no  fees  are  conducted  by  various  philanthropic
and  semi-philanthropic  agencies  in  all  cities  of  importance,
but  their  activities  consist  largely  in  finding  casual  employ-
ment for  near  tinemployables.  In  addition,  many  trade
unions  and  employers'  associations  maintain  employment
bureaus  for  workers  in  special  occupations.  Some  of  them
are  very  efficiently  organized  and  conducted.  Notable  ex-
amples are  the  printers'  tmion  "day  rooms,"  and  the  chain  of
employment  bureaus  conducted  by  the  National  Metal
Trades  Association  in  fourteen  principal  cities  of  the  United
States.  The  latter  offices  charge  no  fees,  their  registrations
number  into  the  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  it  is  claimed  by
the  employers  that  they  are  not  strike-breaking  or  blacklisting


266 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

institutions.'  Nevertheless,  the  usefulness  of  employment
bureaus  under  the  partisan  control  of  either  trade  unions  or
employers  is  limited  by  their  potential  or  actual  use  as  wea-
pons in  a  trade  dispute.  They  lack  the  neutrality  essential
to  the  satisfactory  organization  of  the  labor  market.


(/)  Abuses  of  Private  Agencies

Private  employment  agents,  doing  business  for  profit,  have
sprung  up  in  all  large  centers.  In  191 2  there  were  249  of
them  licensed  and  in  operation  in  Chicago;  in  New  York
they  number  about  700;  and  in  all  the  states,  probably  about
S,ooo.  Aside  from  a  few  specialized  agencies,  they  handle
chiefly  unskilled,  domestic,  and  theatrical  labor.

Many  abuses  are  charged  against  the  commercial  agencies,
particularly  misrepresentation  of  wages  and  conditions  of
work,  exaction  of  extortionate  fees,  sending  applicants  to
immoral  resorts,  and  "splitting  fees"  with  foremen  and  thus
inducing  frequent  discharges  in  order  to  get  fees  from  men
employed  to  fill  the  vacancies.  In  the  testimony  in  the  hear-
ing on  the  petition  for  an  injunction  against  the  Washington
referendimi  practically  abolishing  commercigi^  agencies,  it  was
stated  that  some  of  the  private  offices  were  so  conducted  as
to  "have  three  men  for  one  job;  one  upon  the  job,  one  going
to  the  job,  and  one  coming  from  the  job,  and  receiving  com-
pensation from  all."  There  are  frequent  instances,  also,
where  the  commercial  agencies  accept  fees  and  send  the  work-
men to  distant  points  where  there  is  no  demand  for  laborers.
For  example,  in  Kansas,  the  director  of  employment  bureaus
states  that  diiring  the  harvest  rush  it  became  known  that
"private  employment  agents  were  imposing  upon  men  who
came  to  the  state  in  search  of  work  in  the  harvest  fields,  exact-
ing a  fee  from  men  seeking  employment  and  then  directing
them  to  parties  who  had  not  authorized  the  emplo}nment  agent
to  engage  hands."  ^ In  the  year  ending  May  i,  1913,  the

1  A.  J.  Allen,  secretary  of  the  Associated  Employers  of  Indianapolis,
in  address  before  the  American  Association  of  Public  Employment
OfBces,  1914.

2  Twenty-ninth  Annual  Report  of  the  Kansas  Department  of  Labor  and
Industry,  1913,  p.  220.


UNEMPLOYMENT  267

commissioner  of  licenses  of  the  city  of  New  York  reported
the  investigation  of  1,932  complaints  against  registered  em-
ployment agents,  restilting  in  nine  convictions,  the  refunding
of  more  than  $3,000  to  victimized  applicants,  and  the  revoca^
tion  of  thirteen  licenses.^  Among  the  charges  for  which  li-
censes were  revoked  were  fraudtdent  conduct,  misrepresentaT
tion,  failure  to  refund  fees,  and  sending  girls  to  questionable
places.

(2)  Restrictive  Legislation

In  the  majority  of  states  the  abuses  of  the  profit-making
agencies  have  brought  aEout  restrictive  legislation  designed
to  prevent  fraud  and  extortion  and  to  insiire'Sioral  surround-
ings. Under  this  legislation  no  one  may  carry  on  an  employ-
ment office  for  profit  without  depositing  a  bond  with  the
state  department  of  labor  or  the  city  authorities  and  sectoring
a  Uq^ise.  The  amount  of  the  bond  varies  from  $joo  to
$5,000,  and  the  aimual  license  fee  from  $10  to  $100,  often  both
being  graded  according  to  the  size  of  the  city  or  the  sort  of
labor  handled.  Licenses  are  issued  only  if  the  premises  are
found  proper,  and  may,  together  with  the  bond,  be  forfeited
for  violation  of  the  law.  About  a  dozen  states  prohibit  the
location  of  agencies  in  saloons.  Association  with  lodging-
houses  or  restaurants  is  also  frequently  prohibited,  and  Colo^
rado  extends  the  prohibition  to  gambhng-places.  In  several
states  the  sending  of  minors  or  women  to  immoral  resorts  is
forbidden.  In  many  jtuisdictions  the  law  fixes  a  maximum
charge,  usually  either  a  certain  per  cent,  of  the  first  month's
wages  or  a  fixed  amount.  Other  related  provisions  are  require^
ments  as  to  form  of  receipt,  and  provisions  for  return  of  all  or
part  of  the  fee  if  work  is  not  soon^obt^jned  or  if  a  workman
is  dischargedliTa  shofTTime.  In  Cafiforma  and  the  District
of  Columbia  traveling  expenses  as  well  as  the  fee  must  be
returned.  Frequently  it  is  specified  that  all  advertisements
or  other  information  shall  be  truthful.^  In  a  number'oritates
a  record  of  aU  applicants  registered  is  required,  but  rarely
are  the  requirements  comprehensive  enough  to  give  informa-

•  Report  of  the  Commissioner  of  Licenses,  New  York  City,  1913,  p.  19.
=  Wisconsin  (Laws  1915,  C.  457)  specifies  in  addition  that  advertise-
ments of  private  bureaus  must  state  the  existence  of  a  strike  or  lockout.


268 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tion  valuable  for  statistical  purposes.  Among  the  notable
exceptions  is  New  York,  where  to  assist  in  the  publication  of
a  labor  market  bulletin  by  the  department  of  labor,  private
employment  agents  must  keep  their  records  "in  such  form
as  may  be  required  by  the  commissioner  of  labor  in  order
to  supply  the  same  information  as  that  supplied  by  state
offices."

The  validity  of  state  regulation  of  private  employment
agencies  has  seldom  been  denied  by  the  courts.  A  California
statute  limiting  the  amount  of  charges  was  declared  an  un-
constitutional infringement  on  the  right  to  contract,^  but
similar  provisions  in  other  states  have,  as  far  as  is  known,
been  uniformly  upheld.  The  requirement  of  a  license  has
been  sustained,  even  when  the  license  fee  was  placed  so  high
as  to  be  practically  prohibitive.  Thus  a  Georgia  law,  fixing
a  fee  of  $500  for  each  county  in  which  the  agent  operated,
was  upheld  by  the  supreme  courts  both  of  the  state  ^  and  of
the  United  States,'  the  latter  decision  being  followed  in  other
southern  jiuisdictions.*  The  prevailing  view  is  that  Hcense
regulations  have  for  their  object  the  promotion  of  public
health,  safety,  morals,  and  convenience,  that  they  tend  to
prevent  fraud  and  extortion,  and  hence  that  they  are  within
the  police  power  of  the  legislattares  even  though  they  may
somewhat  restrict  the  right  to  carry  on  a  lawful  business
without  legislative  interference.*

The  almost  imanimous  testimony  of  investigators  and  public
officials,  however,  is  that  these  provisions  have  not  been  suc-
cessful in  stamping  out  the  abuses  of  private  offices,  and  the
result  has  been  a  widespread  movement  for  the  abolition  of
such  offices  altogether.  Complete  suppression  of  private  em-
ployment bureaus  was  recommended  by  the  Trades  and
Laboiu-  Congress  of  Canada  at  its  annual  meeting  in  1 9 1 3  ,*  and  a

•  Ex  parte  Dickey,  144  Cal.  243,  77  Pac.  934  (1914).  The  statute  in-
validated was  California,  Laws  1903,  C.  11.

'  Williams  v.  Fears,  1 10  Ga.  584,  35  S.  E.  699  (1900).
'  Williams  w.  Fears,  179  U.  S.  270,  21  Sup.  Ct.  128  (1900).

•  State  V.  Napier,  63  S.  C.  60,  41  S.  E.  13  (1902) ;  State  v.  Roberson,
136  N.  C.  587,  48  S.  E.  595  (1904).

'  People  ex  rel.  Armstrong  v.  Warden  of  the  City  Prison  of  N.  Y.,  183
N.  Y.  223,  76  N.  E.  II  (1905);  Price  v.  People,  193  III.  114,  61  N.  E.  844
(1901).

•  Dominion  of  Canada  Labour  Gazette,  Vol.  XIV,  p.  448.


UNEMPLOYMENT  269

resolution  of  similar  tenor  was  adopted  at  the  19 14  convention
of  the  American  Association  of  Public  Employment  Offices.
The  popular  protest  against  the  abuses  of  private  commercial
agencies  was  voiced  by  the  adoption  in  the  state  of  Washing-
ton of  an  initiative  measure  prohibiting  the  collection  of  fees
from  workers  by  an  employment  agent.  The  reason  assigned
in  the  measure  is  that  "The  system  of  collecting  fees  from
the  workers  for  furnishing  them  with  emploj^nent  .  .  .  results
frequently  in  their  becoming  the  victims  of  imposition  and
extortion  and  is  therefore  detrimental  to  the  welfare  of  the
state."  ^  This  measure  was  expressly  based  on  the  police
power,  and  the  United  States  District  Court  upheld  the  pro-
hibition inasmuch  as  "The  state,  under  its  police  power,  can
adopt  any  act  which  reasonably  protects  its  citizens,  or  a
class  of  citizens,  from  fraud  and  extortion."  ^  A  similar  law
was  passed  by  the  Idaho  legislature  in  1915,  forbidding  private
employment  offices  except  philanthropic  or  professional
agencies.'

In  a  mraiber  of  other  countries  also,  dissatisfaction  with  the
private  commercial  agencies  has  led  to  more  or  less  complete
steps  for  their  repression.  A  German  act  of  19 10  states  that
licenses  must  be  refused  to  private  employment  agencies
when  there  is  no  absolute  need  for  them,  and  further  declares
that  the  need  does  not  exist  when  a  public  exchange  is  working
normally  in  the  locality.*  Licenses  in  Austria  are  conditioned
on  the  absence  of  a  public  employment  office  in  the  vicinity.
The  province  of  Quebec  seeks  to  restrict  the  ntimber  of  private
employment  offices  by  charging  a  fee  of  $200  where  there  is
a  public  office,  otherwise  only  $25.  A  French  law  of  1904
authorizes  the  establishment  of  public  offices  by  the  com-
munes and  at  the  same  time  authorizes  the  closing  of  the
private  registry  (commercial)  offices  upon  payment  of  dam-
ages.* The  actual  achievements  vmder  this  law  have,  however,
been  slight.


*  Initiative  Measure  No.  8,  adopted  November  3,  1914.
'  Wiseman  v.  Tanner,  221  Fed.  698  (1915).

'  Idaho,  Laws  1915,  C.  169.

*  Report  of  the  Union  of  German  Employment  Offices,  International
Conference  on  Unemployment,  1910,  Report  No.  3,  p.  31.

'Law  of  March  14,  1904,  Art.  11. See  Bulletin  of  the  International
Labor  Office,  1904,  French  edition,  p.  48.


270 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

2.  Public  Employment  Exchanges

The  agitation  for  public  employment  oflBces  has  been  due
partly  to  the  search  for  a  remedy  for  the  abuses  of  private
agencies  and  partly  to  a  deepening  conviction  that  it  is  a
proper  function  of  the  state  to  help  the  unemployeci  find  work.
The  first  American  state  to  make  provision  for  emplojmient
offices  was  Ohio  in  1890,  followed  by  Montana  in  1895,  and
New  York  in  1896.*  The  majority  of  the  present  laws  have
been  enacted  since  1900.

(i)  State  and  Municipal  Offices

There  were  in  existence  in  the  country  in  1915  between
eighty  and  ninety  state  and  municipal  employment  exchanges,
maintained  by  some  twenty-three  states  ^  and  by  more  than
a  dozen  cities.'

Some  few  states  create  a  state  employment  office,  but  make
no  provision  for  local  branches.  Since  the  work  of  such  an
ofiice  must  be  conducted  almost  entirely  by  the  slow  and
unsatisfactory  "mail  order"  method,  this  type  of  law  has  not
yielded  very  important  results.  The  West  Virginia  bureau  at
Wheeling  placed  about  2,000  applicants  each  year^  in  the

'iThe  original  Montana  and  New  York  laws  were  soon  repealed.

'  By  the  end  of  191 5  provision  for  state  employment  exchanges  had
been  made  in  California,  1915;  Colorado,  1907;  Connecticut,  1905;
Illinois,  1899;  Indiana,  1909;  Iowa,  1915;  Kansas,  1901;  Kentucky,
1906;  Maryland,  1902  and  1914;  Massachusetts,  1906;  Michigan,  1905;
Minnesota,  1905;  Missouri,  1899;  Nebraska,  1897;  New  Jersey,  1915;
New  York,  191 4;  Ohio,  1890;  Oklahoma,  1908;  Pennsylvania,  19I5;
Rhode  Island,  1908;  South  Dakotaj  1913;  West  Virginia,  1901;  and
Wisconsin,  1901.

'In  1915  public  employnient  exchanges  maintained  by  municipalities
wei*e  to  be  found  in  Phoenix,  Ari^. ;  Los  Angeles,  Sacramento,  and  Sail
Francisco,  Calif. ;  Kansas  City,  Mo. ;  Butte,  Great  Falls,  and  Missoula,
Mont.;  Newark,  N.  J.;  New  York,  N.  Y.;  Portland,  Ore.;  Pittsburgh,
Pa.;  Richmond,  Va.;  Aberdeen,  Everett,  Hoquiam,  Seattle,  Spokane,
and  Tacoma,  Wash.;  and  perhaps  in  a  few  additional  cities.  The  three
states  of  Montana,  Louisiana^  and  Idaho  respectively  authorize,  en-
courage, and  require  cities  to  set  up  such  agencies,  but  provide  for  no
dentraJ  administrative  control.

*  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  zoo,  1912,
"Statistics  of  Unemployment  and  the  Work  of  Employment  Offices,"  p.
137.


UNEMPLOYMENT  271

eleven  years  following  its  establishment,  but  the  office  con-
ducted in  Baltimore,  Md.,  tmder  the  law  of  1902  has  had
only  a  nominal  activity,^  and  the  Nebraska  law  establishing
a  public  emplo3anent  office  in  the  btu-eau  of  labor  has,  because
of  lack  of  funds,  been  practically  a  dead  letter.^  So  ineffec-
tive was  the  Maryland  office  that  in  1914  a  special  depart-
ment was  created  in  the  local  immigration  bureau,  for  the
purpose  of  seciuring  "efficient  farm  help  to  meet  the  demands
for  such  labor  in  the  agricxiltural  communities  of  the  state."

The  remaining  states  which  have  legislated  upon  this
subject  authorize  the  estabhshment  of  local  offices,  usually
under  control  of  the  bureau  of  labor.  This  is  the  most  im-
portant type  of  public  employment  bxureau  law  in  this  country,
and  is  well  exemplified  by  the  New  York  statute  of  1914.^

By  this  statute  a  bureau  of  employment  is  established  in
the  state  department  of  labor,  under  the  immediate  charge
of  a  director,  who  must  be  under  civil  service  and  who  must
have  "recognized  executive  and  managerial  ability,  technical
and  scientific  knowledge  upon  the  subject  of  unemplo5anent
and  administration  of  public  employment  offices  and  recog-
nized capacity  to  direct  investigations  of  unemployment
and  public  and  private  agencies  for  remedjang  the  same."  *
The  commissioner  of  labor  may  establish  such  local  offices  as
he  deems  necessary,  each  to  be  in  charge  of  a  superintendent
under  the  general  supervision  of  the  director.  These  local
offices  are  to  register  applications  from  those  seeking  employ-
ment or  employers  seeking  employees,  and  make  periodic
reports  to  the  director.  Any  office  may  be  subdivided  into
separate  departments  for  men,  women,  and  juveniles,  or  other
class  of  workmen,  as  farm  laborers.  The  service  is  to  be  free
and  penalties  are  prescribed  for  the  acceptance  of  fees  by  the
officials. A  coordination  of  the  activities  of  the  local  bureaus


'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  Bulletin  No.  lop,  1912,
"Statistics  of  Unemployment  and  the  Work  of  Employment  Offices,"
pp.  127-129.

*  Ibid.,  p.  131.

'  New  York,  Laws  1914,  C.  181.

^  The  desire  of  the  framers  of  the  New  York  law  to  assure  the  selection
of  specially  trained  men  for  the  work  of  managing  the  state  employment
bureau  resulted  in  the  appointment  of  a  director  who  had  many  years  of
experience  as  an  investigator  of  the  organization  ^nd  methods  of  employ-
ment bureaus.


272 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

is  to  be  facilitated  by  a  labor  market  bulletin  and  the  inter-
change and  publication  of  lists  of  vacancies.  Partial  recog-
nition is  given  to  the  common  European  policy  of  joint  control
by  directing  the  commissioner  of  labor  to  appoint  for  each
office  a  representative  committee  composed  of  employers  and
employees,  with  a  chairman  agreed  upon  by  the  majority.
On  the  request  of  a  majority  of  either  side  the  voting  on  any
question  must  be  so  conducted  that  there  shall  be  an  equality
of  voting  power  between  employers  and  employees,  notwith-
standing the  absence  of  any  member.  Similar  committees
have  under  the  Wisconsin  Industrial  Commission  been  for
years  an  indispensable  adjunct  to  the  public  exchange  at
Milwaukee,  and  are  provided  for  in  the  1915  laws  of  Illinois'
and  Pennsylvania.^

Perhaps  the  most  controversial  point  in  the  administration
of  a  bureau  is  the  policy  to  be  pursued  in  time  of  strike  or
lockout.  The  first  Illinois  law  establishing  state  exchanges
in  1899'  was  four  years  later  declared  unconstitutional  be-
cause of  the  provision  that  applications  to  fill  places  vacant
because  of  a  strike  were  not  to  be  received.*  The  court  held
that  this  provision  deprived  citizens  of  the  equal  protection
of  the  laws  guaranteed  by  the  fourteenth  amendment,  inas-
much as  it  discriminated  between  employers  whose  men  were
on  strike  and  other  employers,  and  also  between  workmen
who  wished  to  take  places  vacant  because  of  a  strike  and  work-
men who  did  not.  Wisconsin  had  a  similar  experience.  The
healthy  instinct  of  which  this  prohibitory  clause  was  an  un-
skilful manifestation  has  been  satisfied  in  most  American
exchanges  by  pubhcity.  Under  the  New  York  law,  for  in-
stance, either  party  to  a  trade  dispute  may  file  a  statement,
which,  with  any  answer,  must  be  exhibited  at  the  exchange.
The  prospective  employee  is  informed  of  the  statements  at
the  same  time  that  he  is  informed  of  the  position,  and  it  is
left  for  him  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  take  the  work.  In
Massachusetts  it  is  even  the  practice  in  case  of  an  industrial
dispute  to  stamp  the  introduction  card  which  the  employee


'Illinois,  Laws  1915,  p.  414.

*  Pennsylvania,  Laws  1915,  No.  373.
'  Illinois,  Laws  1899,  p.  268.

*  Mathews  V.  People,  202  111.  389,  67  N.  E.  28  (1903),


UNEMPLOYMENT  ^  2  73


is  to  present  to  the  employer  with  thef  words,  "There  is  a
strike  on  at  this  establishment."  Under  the  publicity  policy
very  few  applicants  take  strike-breaking  jobs.  Employers
and  labor  union  representatives  are  thoroughly  satisfied,  and
consequently  the  exchange  escapes  the  rocks  of  disaster  on
either  side.  As  an  important  corollary  to  this  method  of
handling  a  strike  situation,  the  New  York  law  includes  the
ftuther  stiptilation  that  no  applicant  is  to  suffer  any  dis-
qualification or  prejudice  at  an  exchange  if  he  refuses  to  accept
an  offered  job  on  the  ground  that  a  strike  or  lockout  exists
or  because  the  wages  offered  are  lower  than  those  current  in
the  district  for  the  same  work.'

Careful  registration  of  aU  applicants  is  provided  for,  and
the  commissioner  of  labor  may  also  specify  the  form  of  regi-
sters for  private  agencies,  which  must  furnish  information  on
request.  Five  per  cent,  of  the  annual  appropriation  for  the
bureau  may  be  spent  in  advertising.

A  special  feature  of  the  law  is  the  provision  for  assistance
to  juveniles  somewhat  similar  to  the  English  system.  Chil-
dren of  working  age  may  register  at  the  schools,  and  a  sub-
committee composed  of  employers,  workmen,  and  persons
familiar  with  education  or  other  conditions  affecting  juveniles,
must  be  appointed  by  the  advisory  committee  to  advise  in
regard  to  the  management  of  the  juvenile  department  of  the
employment  offices  and  otherwise  to  assist  parents  and  chil-
dren with  respect  to  the  choice  of  employment.  No  other
American  law  contains  an  exactly  similar  provision,  though  in
a  few  offices  energetic  superintendents  are  endeavoring  to  de-
velop this  side  of  their  work,  and  in  the  Pennsylvania  act  of
1915  special  arrangements  are  made  for  cooperation  with
school  placement  bureaus  and  with  the  school  authorities
generally.

Often,  as  has  been  recognized  in  the  British  and  German
systems,  lack  of  railroad  fare  to  reach  an  offered  position  is


'  The  Illinois  court,  however,  following  its  line  of  argument  in  the
Mathews  case  (see  p.  272),  has  declared  even  the  requirement  of  pub-
licity on  labor  disputes  to  be  unconstitutional,  on  the  ground  of  threefold
discrimination  between  certain  employers  and  others,  between  certain
workmen  and  others,  and  between  employers  and  other  persons  making
contracts.  (Josma  v.  Western  Steel  Car  &  Foundrjr  Co.,  249  111.  508,
94  N.  E.  945  (1911).)
IS


2  74 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

a  serious  obstacle  to  a  willing  but  moneyless  worker,  yet  no
American  state  authorizes  its  employment  bureau  officials  to
advance  the  needed  transportation.  A  few  superintendents
do,  however,  advance  fares  in  exceptional  cases,  and  the  Wis-
consin exchanges  frequently  turn  over  to  applicants  the  trans-
portation advanced  by  the  prospective  employer,  checking
the  man's  baggage  to  the  employer  as  a  safeguard.

In  Wisconsin  and  Ohio  a  merging  of  the  state  and  city  plans
has  been  arrived  at,  in  accordance  with  which  the  state  pays
the  salaries  and  administrative  expenses  while  the  town  pro-
vides the  premises,  both  governmental  units  being  represented
on  the  joint  board.  The  success  of  this  method  in  securing
both  local  interest  and  efficient  administration  is  marked,  and
the  next  few  years  may  see  its  adoption  in  a  number  of  states.

Of  the  exchanges  initiated  by  municipalities  under  their
own  charters,  the  Seattle  office  established  in  1894  has  been
among  the  most  successful,  filling  33,342  positions  in  1913.'
An  important  part  of  the  activity  of  this  office  has  been  the
shipment  of  unskilled  workers  to  hop-fields  and  lumber-camps
in  large  groups,  which  has  helped  to  keep  the  per  capita  cost
of  filling  positions  down  to  the  phenomenally  low  figure  of
4  cents.

The  public  employment  offices  now  in  operation  in  the
United  States  are  filling  thousands  of  positions  yearly
at  a  cost  ranging,  according  to  official  reports,  from  4  cents
to  $2  apiece.  In  Wisconsin,  where  there  are  four  state  ex-
changes, well  organized  on  the  most  approved  lines,  the  cost
in  lyii  was  about  35  cents  per  position  filled.  In  Illinois,
during  the  twelve  years,  1900-1911,  there  were  589,084  ap-
plications for  employment,  599,510  applications  for  workers,
and  512,424  positions  filled.  Illinois  now  appropriates  over
$50,000  a  year  for  direct  support  of  its  state  labor  exchanges,
of  which  eight  have  already  been  established,  and  a  similar
sum  is  expended  in  New  York.

During  the  winter  of  1914-1915,  also,  several  public  em-
ployment bureaus  and  labor  department  officials  in  the  grain-
raising  states  organized,  in  cooperation  with  the  United
States  Departments  of  Labor  and  of  Agriculture,  the  National


fwentieth  Annual  Report  of  Public  Employment  Office,  Seattle,  1913.


tJNEMPLOYMENT  nS

Parm  Labor  Exchange  for  the  efficient  placing  of  harvest
hands.  Since  harvesting  begins  two  months  earlier  in  the
southern  than  in  the  northern  part  of  the  country,  and  fur-
nishes at  most  only  a  few  weeks'  work  in  any  one  place,  it
was  felt  necessary  to  develop  some  means  for  more  carefully
directing  the  large  numbers  of  workers  who  "foUow  the
crops,"  and  for  preventing  hardship  to  them  by  loss  of  time
and  by  congestion  in  districts  already  flooded  with  workers.
The  work  of  the  exchange  is  carried  on  from  the  offices  of
the  labor  officials  interested,  and  farmers,  civic,  and  business
associations  are  associated  with  it.  Further  beginnings  of
interstate  cooperation  are  to  be  seen  in  the  Eastern  Labor
Clearing  House,  initiated  in  the  same  winter  through  the
New  York  City  municipal  exchange,  and  in  the  American
Association  of  Public  Employment  Offices,  organized  in  1913
to  promote  closer  connections  and  uniform  methods.

Notwithstanding  the  good  work  of  a  few,  however,  the  state
and  municipal  bureaus  are  still  far  from  ftimishing  an  ade-
quate meditmi  for  the  exchange  of  information  on  oppor-
tunities for  emplojmient.  Only  about  half  the  states  are
represented.  Due  to  lack  of  civil-service  requirements,  many
of  the  managers  are  political  place-holders  of  worse  than
mediocre  attainments.  Some  of  the  offices  exist,  as  has  been
seen,  only  on  paper,  others  are  poorly  located,  in  out-of-the-
way  places,  and  inadequately  heated,  lighted,  and  ventilated.
Many  have  therefore  driven  away  the  better  class  of  workers,
and  deal  only  with  casuals.  Appropriations  are  usually  too
small  for  efficiency.  A  uniform  method  of  record-keeping  has
yet  to  be  adopted.  Statistics  are  non-comparable,  and  fre-
quently unreliable,  if  not  wholly  valueless.^  There  is  prac-
tically no  interchange  of  information  between  various  offices
in  a  state  or  between  states.  In  short,  workmen  are  stiU
undergoing  want,  hardship,  and  discouragement  even  though
often  within  easy  reach  of  the  work  which  would  support
them,  if  they  but  knew  where  to  find  it.

Nor  does  the  evU  end  there.  Every  one  who  has  studied
the  problem  realizes  that  method  and  system  in  putting  men

■  For  a  full  discussion  of  these  statistics,  see  "Operation  of  Public  Em-
ployment Exchanges  in  the  United  States,"  American  Labor  Legislation
Review,  May,  1914,  pp.  359~37i-


276 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

and  opportunities  for  work  in  touch  with  each  other  will  not
of  themselves  prevent  oversupply  of  labor  or  of  jobs.  They
will  do  so  no  more  than  the  cotton  exchange  guards  against
an  over-  or  an  undersupply  of  cotton.  They  will  serve  merely
as  levelers  in  the  scales  of  labor  supply  and  labor  demand.
Besides  the  unemployment  which  is  due  to  the  failtire  of  men
and  jobs  to  find  each  other,  there  is  much  due  to  other  causes
which  even  the  best  system  of  emplojmient  exchanges  would
not  directly  eliminate.

But  close  students  agree  that  these  other  causes  of  unem-
ployment cannot  be  successfully  attacked  without  a  basis  in
comprehensive,  conscientiously  collected  information  such  as
cannot  be  furnished  by  our  present  machinery  for  dealing
with  the  problem.  Under  present  methods  there  exists  no
automatic,  cumulative  means  for  collecting  the  facts.  This
restilts,  of  course,  in  exaggerated  statements  in  both  direc-
tions. Our  paucity  of  information  on  this  complex  and  vital
question  has  continued,  even  though  labor  problems  in  one
form  or  another  have  taken  the  lead  as  subjects  for  legisla-
tion. Any  scientific  lawmaking  on  the  programs  of  social
insurance — especially  unemployment  insurance — and  of  vo-
cational guidance  must  be  grounded  on  facts  of  relative  em-
ployment and  unemployment  of  the  workers,  by  trades,  by
sexes,  and  by  ages.  Without  a  nation-wide  system  of  labor
exchanges,  no  basis  can  exist  for  anticipating  in  an  accurate
manner  the  ebbs  and  flows  of  the  demand  for  labor.  With-
out concentration  of  the  information  now  collected  and  now
held  separately  in  thousands  of  separate  organizations  through-
out the  land,  the  possibility  of  looking  into  the  future,  or  of
profiting  by  the  past,  is  out  of  the  question.


(2)  Federal  Activity

Growing  realization  of  the  foregoing  facts  has  led  to  the
demand  for  a  federal  system  of  public  employment  bureaus.
Such  a  system  would  cover  the  whole  country.  Without
superseding  either  the  state  or  the  municipal  exchanges,  it
would  supplement  and  assist  the  work  of  both,  dovetailing
them  into  an  efficient  whole. Country-wide  cooperation  and


UNEMPLOYMENT  277

exchange  of  information  would  then  be  an  accomplished  fact
instead  of  merely  a  hope.  Statistics  for  the  study  of  unem-
ployment and  for  the  progressive  development  of  new  tactics
in  the  campaign  against  it  would  be  coextensive  with  the
national  boundaries  and  comparable  between  different  parts  of
the  nation.  Regulation  of  private  agencies  doing  an  interstate
business  would  be  an  additional  function  of  a  federal  system.

There  was  in  1915  no  direct  or  adequate  federal  legislation
for  a  national  system  of  employment  offices,  but  the  par-
ticipation of  the  federal  government  in  the  National  Farm
Labor  Exchange  has  already  been  mentioned,  and  in  addition
promising  activities  on  a  growing  scale  had  been  initiated
by  cooperation  between  the  Department  of  Labor  and  the
Post  Office  Department.  A  clause  of  the  inunigration  act
of  1907  created  in  the  Bureau  of  Immigration  a  Division  of
Information,  ■  which  was  to  secure  and  pubUsh  information
"to  promote  a  beneficial  distribution  of  aliens."  Misappre-
hension and  antagonism  hampered  the  early  work  of  the
division,  but  since  the  passage  of  the  act  of  March  4,  1913,
creating  the  Department  of  Labor,  a  new  start  has  been  taken.
The  new  department  was  required,  among  other  duties  look-
ing to  the  benefit  of  the  coimtry's  wage-earners,  to  "advance
their  opportunities  for  profitable  emplo3mient,"  and  the
Division  of  Information,  together  with  the  whole  Immigra-
tion Bureau,  was  transferred  to  its  jurisdiction.  Under  the
system  which  has  been  developed,  the  country  is  divided
into  eighteen  zones.  Each  zone  has  its  headquarters,  in
charge  of  an  immigrant  inspector  and  one  assistant,  and
usually  one  or  more  subbranches."^  In  cooperation  with  the
Departments  of  Agriculture,  Interior,  and  Commerce,  infor-
mation is  secured  as  to  opportimities  for  work,  and  the  Post
Office  Department  assists  by  displaying  in  the  local  post
offices  placards  calling  attention  to  the  work  of  the  division
and  bearing  instructions  for  applying.  The  form  postal
cards  requesting  information  are  transmitted  through  the
post  office  free.

This  expansion  of  work  was  begun  in  February,  1915.
During  the  six  years  just  preceding,  the  Division  of  Informa-

'  See  Monthly  Review  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,
Vol.  I,  No.  I,  July,  1915,  p.  9-


278 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tion  used  to  receive  from  19,000  to  30,000  applications  for
positions  annually.  In  the  first  nine  months  of  the  new  system
the  number  of  applications  rose  to  137,858,  and  positions  were
found  for  34,142  persons.,^  Steps  are  under  way  for  the
further  development  of  the  plan.

(3)  European  National  Systems


In  a  number  of  European  countries  a  national  network  of
employment  offices  is  much  further  developed  than  in  the
United  States.  By  1910,  for  instance,  there  were  in  Germany
444  public  labor  exchanges,  325  of  which  were  maintained  by
mimicipalities  and  the  remainder  by  voluntary  associations,
with  a  government  subsidy.^  Over  200  of  the  more  impor-
tant exchanges  are  affiliated  in  a  loose  voluntary  federation,
the  Union  of  German  Employment  Offices,  founded  in  1898.
The  member  exchanges  vary  considerably  as  to  control,
organization,  and  methods.  The  majority  are  trader  the  joint
management  of  employers  and  workmen,  usually  with  the
chairman  of  the  governing  board  appointed  by  the  municipal
authorities.  The  number  of  these  jointly  managed  exchanges
has  been  on  the  increase,  and  by  19 10  eighty-four  of  the  131
municipal  exchanges  affiliated  with  the  federation  were  jointly
controlled.

Similar  local  federations  exist  in  most  of  the  states  of  the
empire.  Until  recently,  however,  the  organization  of  the
labor  market  in  Germany  was  still  very  imperfect.  Two
essential  principles  of  a  national  system  of  labor  exchanges —
neutrality  and  centralization — were  far  from  being  realized.
The  principle  of  neutrality  was  broken  down  particularly  by
the  employment  bureaus  of  employers  and  of  employees,'  and
it  was  realized  that  for  the  success  of  their  work  the  federa-
tions needed  to  be  established  by  law  and  given  power  to
inspect  and  to  establish  employment  bureaus.^ Shortly  after

'  Monthly  Review  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Novem-
ber, 1915,  p.  20;  December,  1915,  p.  5.

''International  Conference  on  Unemployment,  1910,  Report  No.  I,  p. 6.

'  The  trade  unions  alone  had  about  1,000  exchanges  in  1910.

*  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  International  Association  on  Unemployment,
July-September,  1913,  pp.  689-690.


UNEMPLOYMENT  279

the  outbreak  of  the  war  in  19 14  greater  centralization  was
obtained  by  the  creation  of  an  imperial  employment  bureau
to  cooperate  with  the  municipal  exchanges,  the  trade  unions,
and  other  interested  bodies.^

The  subsidies  to  German  labor  exchanges  are  given  by  cities,
states,  and  the  imperial  government,  the  amount  received  in
1908  by  the  offices  in  the  national  federation  being  $62,500.
To  this  sirni  should  be  added  subsidies  in  other  forms,  as  free
telephone  service,  especially  in  the  southern  part  of  the  em-
pire.

National  subsidies  play  an  important  r61e  in  European  em-
ployment btireau  legislation.  Several  countries  try  to  raise
the  efficiency  of  local  public  employment  bureaus  by  grant-
ing subsidies  only  to  "recognized"  offices,  that  is,  offices  which
have  conformed  to  the  standards  fixed  by  the  national  govern-
ment. Switzerland,  Belgium,  and  the  three  Scandinavian
countries  have" legislation  of  this  character.  In  the  Swedish  law
subsidies  were  authorized  to  meet  the  expense  of  special
measures  adopted  to  place  workmen  on  the  land,  and  the
public  bureaus  have  in  consequence  been  especially  useful  in
agriculture,  drawing  back  into  the  country  the  superfluous
labor  of  the  towns.  In  1912  of  the  105,000  positions  filled
by  the  thirty-two  bureaus,  26,000  were  in  agricultural  pur-
suits.^ The  Danish  act  of  April  29,  1913,  is  one  of  the  most
important  of  European  laws  relating  to  public  employment
offices.'  It  provides  for  the  establishment  of  a  central  ex-
change at  Copenhagen,  and  authorizes  branch  exchanges  to
be  conducted  by  towns,  counties,  or  groups  of  towns.  The
minister  of  the  interior  is  authorized  to  designate  some  of
the  recognized  offices  to  act  as  central  exchanges  for  sec-
tions of  the  country.  To  supervise  the  entire  system  the  king
must  appoint  a  director  of  labor  exchanges,  among  whose
duties  is  that  of  maintaining  cooperation  among  the  recog-
nized local  exchanges.

The  first  legislation  to  establish  a  well-unified  and  distinctly
national  system  of  employment  bureaus,  however,  was  the


1  Mix  Westerkamp,.  The  Survey,  January  23,  1915,  p.  441.
^  Erik  Sjostrand,  Quarterly  Bulletin  on  Unemployment,  July-September,
1913,  p.  885.
'  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  1914,  pp.  1-5.


28o PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

British  labor  exchanges  act  of  September  20,  1909.^  Earlier
efforts  at  establishing  such  biireaus  were  made  by  the  Central
Unemployed  Body  for  London  in  1906,  tonder  authority  of
the  unemployed  workmen  act  of  1905,  and  the  resulting  offices,
for  which  the  German  exchanges  were  taken  as  models,  sup-
pUed  the  main  essentials  of  the  present  British  system.

The  act  of  1909  gives  to  the  board  of  trade,  a  body  corre-
sponding somewhat  to  oiu:  federal  Departments  of  the  In-
terior, Commerce,  and  Labor,  large  discretionary  powers  as
to  the  details  of  the  system.  The  board  is  authorized  to
establish  or  take  over  labor  exchanges  wherever  it  thinks  fit,
to  make  regulations  for  the  management  of  these  agencies,
to  assist  bureaus  maintained  by  any  other  authorities,  and  to
establish  advisory  committees  to  assist  in  the  management  of
the  exchanges.  With  the  approval  of  the  treasury,  it  may
authorize  loans  to  cover  traveUng  expenses  of  workers  for
whom  employment  has  been  fotind  through  an  employment
exchange.

The  general  regulations  ^  made  by  the  board  under  au-
thority of  the  act  set  forth  in  great  detail  the  ndes  of  organiza-
tion and  management  of  the  offices.  Registrations  of  appli-
cants must  usually  be  made  in  person  and  renewed  after  seven
days  if  employment  is  not  obtained.  In  conformance  with  the
practice  followed  in  the  majority  of  the  German  offices,  during
a  labor  dispute  the  parties  are  permitted  to  file  statements  in
regard  to  the  dispute  and  applicants  are  to  be  informed  of  its
existence.  Applicants  who  refuse  positions  because  of  labor
disputes,  or  because  the  wages  offered  are  lower  than  those
current  in  the  trade,  do  not  sacrifice  any  of  their  privileges  to
future  services  of  the  exchanges.  The  offices  ' '  shall  undertake
no  responsibility  with  regard  to  wages  or  other  conditions"
beyond  supplying  what  information  may  be  in  their  possession.

The  general  regtdations  also  prescribe  the  conditions  on
which  railroad  fares  may  be  advanced  as  loans  to  workmen
who  are  sent  to  other  towns  to  take  employment.  No  ad-
vances are  to  be  made  unless  the  distance  to  be  traveled  is


'  9  Edw.  7,  C.  7.  For  full  text  see  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor
Office,  1910,  p.  21.

'  General  Regulations  for  Labour  Exchanges  Managed  by  the  Board
of  Trade,  January  28,  1910.


UNEMPLOYMENT  281

more  than  five  miles,  nor  to  points  where  a  labor  dispute  is
in  progress  or  when  the  wages  ofiEered  are  below  the  current
rates.  Care  is  also  to  be  taken  to  avoid  "unduly  encourag-
ing rural  laborers  to  migrate  from  the  cotmtry  to  towns."
In  the  first  thirty-eight  months  of  the  operation  of  the  ex-
changes they  made  advances  to  28,321  workmen,  totaling
$40,360,  of  which  svim  only  1.6  per  cent,  had  been  written  off
as  irrecoverable.'

The  general  regulations  also  provide  in  some  detail  for  the
constitution,  procedvire,  and  functions  of  the  advisory  com-
mittees. These  are  to  consist  of  equal  numbers  of  persons
representing  employers  and  workmen,  appointed  by  the  board
of  trade,  with  a  chairman  agreed  upon  by  a  majority  of  repre-
sentatives of  the  employers  and  of  the  representatives  of  work-
men, or,  in  default  of  such  agreement,  appointed  by  the  board.
On  request  of  a  majority  of  the  representatives  of  either,  there
shall  be  equahty  of  voting  power  on  the  part  of  employers  and
workmen,  and  in  such  cases  the  chairman  is  to  have  no  vote.
In  practice,  these  advisory  committees  are  not  attached  to
individual  exchanges,  but  are  appointed  for  large  areas.  One
or  more  have  been  appointed  in  each  of  the  eight  main  dis-
tricts of  the  system.  The  subjects  referred  to  them  are  main-
ly questions  of  principle,  affecting  the  exchanges  generally,
rather  than  questions  of  detail  afiEecting  any  particular  ex-
change or  branch  of  the  work.

Special  recognition  has  been  given  in  Great  Britain  to  the
need  of  agencies  for  assisting  juvenile  workers  in  choosing
an  occupation,  finding  emplo3anent  in  that  occupation,  and
avoiding  frequent  changes  in  the  early  years  of  their  working
experience.  Under  the  labor  exchanges  act  and  under  the
education  (choice  of  employment)  act  of  19 10  two  distinct
methods  for  the  organization  of  juvenile  exchanges  have
been  developed.

Under  the  labor  exchanges  act  the  board  of  trade  issued  in
April,  1913,  its  special  rules  with  regard  to  the  registration
of  juvenile  applicants.  These  rules  provide  that  the  board
may  appoint,  after  consultation  with  the  local  advisory  trade
committees,  special  advisory  committees  for  juvenile  employ-

•  W.  H.  Beveridge  and  C.  F.  Rey,  Quarterly  Jourml  on  Unemployment,
July-September,  1913,  p.  77.  '


282 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ment,  to  be  composed  of  persons  representing  employers  and
workmen,  and  of  persons  familiar  with  education  and  other
conditions  affecting  juveniles.  In  addition  to  advising  the
board  with  regard  to  juvenile  employment,  the  committees
assist  boys  and  girls  with  respect  to  their  choice  of  occupation.
Thus  the  juvenile  exchange  is  made  an  integral  part  of  the
adult  exchange,  cooperation  with  the  schools  is  sectxred
through  the  special  advisory  committee,  and  duplication  of
effort  is  avoided.  This  system  is  perhaps  the  one  best  adapted
to  American  needs.

Under  the  education  act,  on  the  other  hand,  the  situation
is  reversed.  The  law  authorizes  "local  education  authorities
to  give  girls  and  boys  information,  advice,  and  assistance  with
respect  to  the  choice  of  emplo3Tnent, ' '  ^  if  such  work  is  not  being
done  by  any  other  agency.  Under  this  system,  accordingly,
the  juvenile  labor  exchange  is  a  part  of  the  school  system,
frequently  its  offices  are  in  the  education  building,  and  co-
operation with  the  adult  exchange  established  by  the  board
of  trade  is  secured  through  the  advisory  committee.  The
system  has  many  good  features,  such  as  the  close  supervision
of  the  educational  authorities  over  the  placement  work,  but
is  weakened  by  imperfect  correlation  between  the  two  ex-
changes. Liverpool  furnishes  a  good  example  of  this  method,
while  the  London  offices  typify  the  first.^

The  exchanges  in  the  British  system  number  over  400.
Although  the  area  of  the  country  is  only  one  twenty-fifth  of
ours,  the  kingdom  has  been  divided  for  their  better  adminis^
tration  into  eight  districts — six  for  England  and  Scotland,  one
for  Wales,  and  one  for  Ireland.  Each  district  has  its  divisional
office  or  clearing  house,  which  is  in  turn  coordinated  with  the
central  office  in  London,  thus  connecting  all  the  exchanges  in
one  national  system.  In  addition,  the  exchanges  proper  are
linked  with  over  1,000  local  agencies  which  assist  in  the  ad-
ministration of  unemployment  insurance.  In  this  way  the
exchanges  are  brought  in  close  touch  with  workers  in  aU  parts
of  the  kingdom.


•  Quotation  from  title  of  act,  10  Edw.  7  &  I  Geo.  5,  C.  37.  For  full
text  see  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  Vol.  VI.  p.  36.

^  See  Elsa  Ueland,  "Juvenile  Employtaent  'Kxcha.nges,"  American  Labor
Legislation  Review,  June,  19 15,  pp.  203-237.


UNEMPLOYMENT


283


Thfe  beneficial  results  of  the  exchanges  are  undoubted.  Ex-
cluding certain  occupations  of  a  pecioliarly  casual  nature,  they
were  filling  before  the  war  over  17,000  vacancies  weekly,  most
of  which  were  vacancies  for  skilled  labor,'  and  the  ntimber  has
since  increased.  The  following  table  shows  the  number  of
applications  for  employment,  the  number  of  vacancies  notified
by  employers,  and  the  number  of  vacancies  filled,  for  the
month  of  March  diuring  each  of  the  first  six  years:

OPERATIONS OF BRITISH LABOR EXCHANGES,  BY SPECIFIED MONTHS


Month

Applications

for
Employment

Vacancies
Notified  by
Employers

Vacancies
Filled

March,  1910

126,119
142,382

178,317
209,901
222,204
213-464

47,811'
72,650
95,862
99,089
137,908

20,395

March,  1911 '

37,711

March.  IQ12  .

55,650

March,  1913

68,783

March,  1914

74,578

March,  1915  .

99,188

'  Five  weeks.


The  following  table  shows  the  usefulness  of  the  exchanges
for  the  first  five  years  of  their  existence:

OPERATIONS OF BRITISH LABOR EXCHANGES, BY YEARS


Year


I910I.
I9II..
1912. .
1913..
I914..


Applications
for

Vacancies
Notified  by

Vacancies

Employment

Employers

1,590,017

458,943

374,313

2,010,113

886,242

719,043

2,423,213

1,286,205

1,051,861

2,739,480

1,158,391

874,575

3,251,646

1,425,174

1,076,575

1  Eleven  months.

The  proportion  in  19 14  of  vacancies  filled  to  vacancies  noti-
fied was  76  per  cent.


3.  Systematic  Distribution  op  Public  Work

A  weU-developed system  of  labor  exchanges cannot,  of
course,  create  jobs,  but  in  addition  to  bringing  the  jobless

» Pitnphlet  on  Board  of  Trade  Labour  Exchanges,  issued  by  Board  of
Tfadej  May,  1914.


284 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

workers  qtiickly  and  smoothly  in  contact  with  such  opportuni-
ties as  exist  it  can  register  the  rise  and  fall  in  the  demand  for
labor.  This  knowledge  would  make  possible  intelligent  action
for  the  prevention  and  relief  of  unemployment  through  the
systematic  distribution  of  pubUc  work  and  the  pushing  of
necessary  projects  when  private  industry's  demand  for^abor
is  at  a  low  level.  Public  work  would  then  act  as  a  strange,
absorbing  the  reserves  of  labor  in  bad  years  and  slack  seasons,
and  setting  them  free  again  when  the  demand  for  them  in-
creases in  private  business.


(7)  Emergency  Work

Probably  ever  since  unemplojrment  became  a  modem  in-
dustrial problem  there  have  been  more  or  less  insistent  de-
mands that  the  machinery  of  government  be  used  for  putting
temporarily  to  work  those  who  were  displaced  from  private
industry  during  a  period  of  depression.  It  was  felt  that  sup-
porting the  unemployed  in  this  way,  or,  rather,  thus  giving
them  the  chance  under  community  direction  to  support  them-
selves, was  preferable  to  supporting  them  either  by  public
relief  or  by  private  charity.  It  was  not  likely  to  cost
any  more,  the  stigma  of  pauperism  would  not  be  fastened
upon  self-respecting  persons  out  of  work  through  no  fault  of
their  own,  and,  finally,  some  improvement  of  permanent  value
to  the  community  would  have  been  fxirthered.  I

As  early  as  the  panic  year  of  1857,  when  70,000  were  esti-
mated to  be  tmemployed  in  New  York  alone,  Mayor  Wood
of  that  city  sent  to  the  common  coimcil  a  message  in  which
he  said:

"I  recommend  that  the  comptroller  be  authorized  to  adver-
tise for  estimates  for  furnishing  the  corporation  with  50,000
barrels  of  flour  and  a  corresponding  quantity  of  corn-meal
and  potatoes,  to  be  paid  for  by  the  issue  of  a  public  construc-
tion stock  redeemable  in  fifty  years,  and  paying  7  per  cent,
interest;  these  provisions  to  be  disposed  of  to  laborers  to  be
employed  upon  public  works,  at  their  cost  price  to  the  cor-
poration, all  these  works  to  be  commenced  forthwith  under
the  proper  departments. Twenty-five  per  cent,  should  be


UNEMPLOYMENT  285

paid  in  cash.  Every  man  who  will  labor  should  be  employed
at  a  fair  compensation,  and  the  supplies  thus  provided  be
distributed  in  retiun."  '

Apparently  the  mayor's  suggestion  was  not  acted  upon,
but  Central  Park  was  then  under  construction  and  the  city
comptroller  arranged  to  advance  to  the  park  commissioners
$1,000  a  day  until  such  time  as  the  city  should  take  $25,000
of  the  bonds.  The  commissioners  agreed  in  return  to  select
not  exceeding  1,000  of  their  workmen  proportionally  from  the
residents  of  each  ward.^  In  this  way  a  considerable  portion
of  the  work  was  made  available  when  it  could  exert  the  largest
influence  in  preventing  destitution  and  demoralization.

Dtiring  the  severe  tmemployment  crisis  of  1914-1915  over
100  cities  throughout  the  country  made  special  provision  for
carrying  on  pubhc  work  of  various  sorts,  such  as  sewer-build-
ing, street  and  road-making,  quanying,  forestry,  drainage,
waterworks,  building,  painting,  and  even  clerical  duties.  The
work  was  maintained  for  periods  ranging  from  less  than  a
month  to  more  than  six  months,  thousands  of  men  were  em-
ployed in  from  two-day  to  two-week  shifts,  and  hours  and
rates  of  pay  were  as  a  rule  the  same  as  for  regular  employees
on  the  same  grade  of  labor.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the
officials  in  charge  declared  that  they  had  secured  full  efficiency
from  the  workmen,  and  some  even  stated  that  necessary  work
had  been  done  at  a  distinct  saving.

Experiences  with  emergency  work  have  not  always  been
gratifying.  Poor  work,  increased  expense  to  the  community,
and  poUtical  favoritism  in  the  selection  of  applicants  are
among  the  faults  which  have  frequently  interfered  with  its
accomplishing  what  was  expected  of  it.  On  the  whole,  how-
ever, the  opinion  has  been  growing  that  these  flaws  are  not
inherent,  but  due  to  poor  administration,  and  that,  if  properly
managed,  emergency  work  can  be  made  an  important  agency
in  maintaining  during  slack  periods  the  labor  reserves  needed
when  industry  is  booming.

The  policy  of  giving  temporary  reUef  employment  is  em-
bodied into  law  in  the  English  imemployed  workmen  act  of

'  Report  of  the  Massachusetts  Board  to  Investigate  the  Subject  of  the  Un-
employed, 1895,  Part  IV,  pp.  7-8.
*  Ibid.,  pp.  9-10.


286 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

1905,  by  which  the  central  administrative  body  for  London
was  authorized  to  provide  temporary  work  for  the  imem-
ployed.^  An  attempt  was  made  in  this  statute  to  differentiate
relief  employment  from  charity  by  stipulating  that  laborers
accepting  work  were  not  to  be  disfranchised.

In  Germany  relief  work  for  the  non-resident  imemployed
is  often  associated  with  hotels  for  itinerant  workers.  Several
himdred  of  these,  known  as  Herbergen,  are  private  enterprises,
but  a  more  modest  type  of  relief  stations,  or  "home  shelters,"
is  conducted  by  the  public  authorities.  Legislation  has  been
enacted  in  Prussia  looking  to  the  establishment  of  a  system
of  these  smaller  relief  stations  (Verpflegungssiationen)  through-
out that  kingdom.^  The  Prussian  provinces  may  require  rural
and  urban  districts  to  establish  "labor  homes  for  itinerant
workmen,"  '  a  portion  of  the  expense  to  be  borne  by  the
provinces  and  the  state.  These  labor  homes  are  to  act  as
employment  registries  for  destitute  men  seeking  work  outside
their  places  of  abode  and  to  provide  temporary  board  and
lodging  in  return  for  work  dcHie. .

There  is  no  similar  legislation  in  this  coimtry,  but  som^
experiments,  notably  that  of  the  city  of  Seattle  during  the
winter  of  1914-1915,  may  lead  to  further  development  of
agencies  for  caring  for  the  itinerant  worker.  In  Seattle  public
funds  were  advanced  to  maintain  an  itinerant  workers'  home,
popularly  known  as  "Hotel  Liberty,"  and  arrangements  were
made  for  work  in  clearing  grounds,  grading  roads,  and  work  on
the  pipe-line  right-of-way.  For  two  days'  work  on  one  of  these
jobs  a  man,  registered  at  the  hotel,  was  given  a  ticket  good  for
twenty-one  meals.  The  work  was  rotated  so  as  to  give  all
a  chance  to  earn  their  board.  The  hotel  was  ably  managed
and  more  than  repaid  expenses.  The  Seattle  Chamber  of
Commerce  has  recommended  that  the  institution  be  made
permanent,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  a  chain  of  similar
hotels  for  itinerant  workers  might  be  estabUshed  along  the
coast.


15  Edw.  7,  C.  18,  Sec.  I  (5).

^  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  76,  May,  1908,  "What
Is  Done  for  the  Unemployed  in  European  Countries,"  W.  D.  P.  Bhss,
p.  742.

°  Act  of  June  29,  1907,  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,  1907,
p.  184.


UNEMPLOYMENT  287

(2)  Adjustment  of  Regular  Work

It  is  fast  becoming  recognized,  however,  that  to  wait  until
the  emergency  has  overtaken  the  community  before  the  move-
ment to  provide  public  work  is  set  on  foot  is  wasteful  and
productive  of  unnecessary  hardship.  Public  officials  are
therefore  more  and  more  turning  their  attention  to  prepar-
ing in  ordinary  times  for  the  period  of  stress  which  experi-
ence has  shown  is  likely  to  follow  in  a  few  months  or  a  few
years.

One  of  the  earliest  American  experiments  in  this  direction
grew  out  of  an  attempt  to  meet  a  specific  emergency.  In  the
winter  of  1910-1911  the  city  of  Duluth,  Minn.,  confronted
by  an  tinusual  number  of  seasonal  workers  turned  adiift  by
the  closing  of  transportation  on  the  Great  Lakes,  decided  to
anticipate  its  need  and  cut  through  a  wall  of  rock  which
blocked  the  chief  thoroughfare.  Drilling  and  blasting  were
done  by  regular  city  employees,  but  preparation  of  the  rock
for  the  crusher  was  assigned  to  the  unemployed,  who  were
given  an  average  of  three  days'  work  each.  Applicants  were
hired  and  retained  only  if  they  were  fit  and  willing  to  work,
and  wages  were  set  at  $1.20  a  day,  a  little  less  than  the  cur-
rent rate  in  order  not  to  attract  those  who  could  find  employ-
ment elsewhere.  Payment  in  meals,  clothing,  employment
agency  fees  or  railroad  fare  was  given  by  the  associated
charities,  which  referred  the  men  to  the  work  and  was  reim-
bursed by  the  city.^  The  plan  worked  so  successfully  that
it  was  followed  in  subsequent  years,  and  in  addition  the  city
has  shifted  much  of  its  sewer  building  to  the  winter  season
to  assist  in  equalizing  the  amount  of  employment.

Such  foresighted  arrangement  of  public  work  is  capable  of
considerable  extension,  and  may  be  efficaciously  used  to
counteract  cyclical  as  weU  as  seasonal  fluctuations.  The  Eng-
lish statistician  Bowley  estimates  that  if  in  the  United  King-
dom a  ftmd  were  set  aside  for  public  work  to  be  pushed  ahead
in  times  of  depression,  an  average  of  $20,000,000  yearly,  or
only  3  per  cent,  of  the  annual  appropriation  for  public  works
and  services,  would  be  sufficient  to  balance  the  wage  loss  from

'W.  M.  Leiserson,  "The  Duluth  Rock  Pile,"  The  Survey,  September
20,  1913,  pp.  729-731-


288 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

commercial  depression.'  If  his  suggestion  were  generally  ac-
cepted, in  each  community  or  country  a  program  of  the
amotmt  of  public  work  contemplated  for  several  years  in  ad-
vance would  be  laid  out  and  then  carefully  planned  to  be
executed  in  the  lean  years.  Thus  public  work,  instead  of
declining  and  thereby  accentuating  the  depression,  as  is  now
often  the  case,  would  exert  a  strong  influence  toward  stabil-
ity. Eitropean  experience  shows  that  it  is  essential  to  the
success  of  such  a  program  that  the  work  be  done  in  the  or-
dinary way,  the  workers  being  employed  at  the  standard
wage  and  under  the  usual  working  conditions  and  hired  on
the  basis  of  efficiency,  not  merely  because  they  happen  to  be
unemployed.

Within  the  last  few  years  the  nttmber  of  American  cities
acting  upon  this  principle  has  steadily  grown.  Several  pro-
gressive commimities  have  made  definite  plans  to  reserve
work  on  imimproved  parks,  sewers,  and  streets  for  future
dtill  periods.  Several,  also,  without  planning  definite  imder-
takings,  have  issued  bonds  or  established  contingent  funds
to  provide  the  resources  when  needed.  In  Alameda,  Calif.,
a  special  annual  tax  of  i  cent  on  each  $ioo  of  taxable  property
was  established  in  1915  to  provide  a  reHef  fund  for  hiring  on
public  work  "unemployed  or  indigent  residents."

One  of  the  most  interesting  developments,  however,  is  the
Idaho  law  of  191 5  ^  which,  for  probably  the  first  time  in  the
history  of  the  country,  recognizes  the  "right  to  work."  Every
United  States  citizen  who  has  been  a  resident  of  the  state  for
six  months,  and  who  does  not  possess  more  than  $1,000  worth
of  property,  is  guaranteed  sixty  days'  emergency  employment
on  the  highways  or  other  public  work  yearly.  Application  is
made  through  the  county  commissioners,  who  must  fix  the
rate  of  compensation  and  may  deduct  half  of  the  total  ex-
penditure aimually  from  the  county  taxes  due  the  state.
Careftil  records  must  be  kept,  and  persistent  shirkers  are  dis-
qualified for  a  year.'

'  Great  Britain,  Royal  Commission  on  the  Poor  Laws,  Minority  Report,
1909,  p.  1 195.

'  Idaho,  Laws  1915,  C.  27.

'  For  further  details  on  the  activity  of  American  cities  in  1914-19IS  to
adjust  their  public  work  in  preparation  for  future  crises,  see  American
Labor  Legislation  Review,  November,  1915,  pp.  573-581.


UNEMPLOYMENT  289

As  the  use  of  public  work  as  a  means  of  relieving  unemploy-
ment has  spread,  city  officials  have  increasingly  felt  the  ham-
pering effect  of  charter  limitations  on  the  expenditure  of
money.  Many  makeshift  devices  have  been  adopted  for
defeating  these  restrictions,  such  as  raising  money  by  public
subscription,  borrowing  without  interest,  or  transfer  of  funds
between  departments,  and  in  some  cases  business  men  have
had  to  furnish  bonds  to  save  the  city  officials  from  liability.
Consequently  the  conviction  has  been  growing  that  budgetary
methods  and,  if  need  be,  city  charters  must  be  modified  to
permit  greater  freedom  in  the  use  of  money  for  these  under-
takings.

For  some  years  the  policy  of  consciously  planning  ahead
and  reserving  necessary  public  work  for  periods  when  the
wheels  of  private  industry  slacken  has  been  finding  favor
with  European  administrative  bodies.  Perhaps  the  most  sig-
nificant restdts  have  been  achieved  in  Germany,  where  as
early  as  1894  this  procedure  was  recommended  by  a  Prussian
decree.  Now  nearly  half  a  hundred  German  cities  make  a
practice  of  systematically  adjusting  their  public  work  so  as
to  come  in  the  slack  seasons.  At  Nuremburg,  for  example,
between  800  and  900  men  have  been  employed  through  the
winter  on  public  developments  held  in  reserve  for  that
season.!  -p^e  same  policy  is  followed  by  the  government
departments,  particularly  the  railway  administrations.  In
France,  also,  public  work  to  alleviate  unemployment  has
had  considerable  development,  and  the  prefects  of  the  vari-
ous communes  must  report  annually  thereon  to  the  minister
of  commerce.

In  Great  Britain  the  use  of  public  work  on  a  national
scale  as  an  equalizing  reservoir  for  the  labor  market  is  partially
authorized  by  the  development  and  road  improvement  funds
act  of  1909.^  This  law  sets  aside  sums  of  money  which  may
be  advanced  either  as  grants  or  as  loans  to  associations  not
organized  for  profit,  for  the  piUT)ose  of  aiding  and  developing
agriculture  and  rural  industries,  forestry,  land  reclamation


'  M.  W.  F.  Treub,  "L'adjudication  des  travaux  publics  et  la  lutte
centre  le  ch6mage,"  Quarterly  Bulletin  on  Unemployment,  January-March,

19 1 4.  P-  249-
'  9  Edw.  7,  C.  47.
19


290 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

and  drainage,  rural  transportation,  harbors,  inland  navi-
gation and  fisheries.  The  act  was  not  passed  primarily
as  an  unemployment  measure,  but  contains  the  provision
that  when  the  execution  of  any  work  involves  the  em-
plo3Tnent  of  labor  on  a  considerable  scale  the  commis-
sioners must  take  into  consideration  "the  general  state
and  prospects  of  employment."  Under  this  clause  a  cer-
tain amoimt  of  influence  can  be  exerted  toward  the  timely
initiation  of  pubUc  improvements,  but  its  scope  is  usually
overestimated.  1

The  principle  under  discussion  has,  however,  taken  firm
hold  among  those  interested  in  combating  involuntary  idle-
ness, and  in  19 13,  as  the  result  of  careful  studies  in  many
countries,  the  following  recommendations  were  laid  before
the  International  Conference  on  Unemployment:  (i)  That
public  works  be  distributed,  as  far  as  possible,  in  such  a  way
that  they  may  be  undertaken  in  dull  seasons  or  during  in-
dustrial depression;  (2)  that  budget  laws  be  revised  to  facili-
tate the  accumvilation  of  reserve  funds  for  this  purpose;  (3)
that  permanent  institutions  be  created  to  study  the  symptoms
of  depression  in  order  to  advise  the  authorities  when  to
initiate  the  reserved  work;  (4)  that  such  work  as  land  rec-
lamation and  improvement  of  the  means  of  communication,
which  would  tend  to  increase  the  permanent  demand  fof
labor,  be  especially  undertaken;  and  (5)  that  in  order  to  secure
the  fullest  benefits  from  the  reserved  work,  contracts  shoidd
be  awarded  not  as  units  but  separately  for  each  trade.


4.  Regularization  of  Industry

While  methods  of  utiUzing  public  work  to  counteract  the
fluctuations  of  employment  in  private  industry  have  for  some
time  occupied  the  attention  of  lawmakers,  recently  the  de-
mand has  found  legislative  expression  that  private  industry
turn  some  attention  to  solving  the  problem  at  its  source  by
reducing,  if  not  eliminating,  these  fluctuations. Regulariza-


^A.  D.  Hall,  "The  Development  Act  and  Unemployment,"  National
Conference  on  the  Prevention  of  Destitution  (Great  Britain),  Report  oj
the  Proceedings  0}  the  Unemployment  Section,  191 1,  p.  245.


UNEMPLOYMENT  291

tion  of  industry  is  demanded  by  the  interests  of  employer  and
employee  alike.  The  employer,  with  an  expensive  plant,  re-
quires steady  production  to  keep  down  overhead  expenses
and  to  secure  the  best  returns  from  the  business;  the  em-
ployee needs  steady  work  to  prevent  destitution  and  conse-
quent demoraUzation.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  to  find
government  exerting  pressure  to  the  end  that,  as  far  as  pos-
sible, every  job  be  made  a  steady  job.  Society  has  in  the
past  attempted  to  adjust  itself  to  the  ups  and  downs  of
business;  it  is  now  beginning  to  insist  that  business  avoid
ups  and  downs.

Methods  of  regularization  are  as  various  as  the  industries
concerned,  if  not  as  various  as  the  individual  establishments.
Many  employers  have  found  it  economical  to  organize  em-
ployment departments  ■  for  the  purpose  of  studying  and
remedying  fluctuations  in  the  size  of  the  working  force,  and
in  Boston,  New  York,  and  Philadelphia  associations  of  em-
ployment managers  have  been  formed  to  discuss  their  common
problems.  Through  these  departments  considerable  hardship
has  been  avoided  by  reducing  excessive  "turnover"  of  labor,
by  transferring  workers  from  slack  departments  to  busy  ones
instead  of  discharging  them,  and  by  employing  the  whole
force  on  part  time  rather  than  part  of  the  force  on  full  time.
Careful  planning  of  output  for  months  or  even  for  a  year
ahead,  the  development  of  supplementary  hues  such  as  tennis
shoes  and  rubber  tires  in  a  rubber-shoe  factory,  and  special
measures  to  overcome  weather  conditions,  such  as  the  intro-
duction of  artificial  drying  in  the  brick  industry,  have  also
been  found  helpful.  Through  cooperation  with  other  em-
ployers for  the  maintenance  of  a  common  reserve  of  labor  in-
stead of  a  separate  supply  for  each  firm,  the  intermittent  char-
acter of  such  occupations  as  the  building  trades  and  dock
work  has  been  effectually  reduced.

Employers,  however,  are  frequently  no  more  far-sighted
than  are  other  persons  in  the  community,  and  may  neglect
what  is  obviously  to  their  own  and  other  persons'  economic
advantage  if  it  requires  much  additional  exertion  or  fore-
thought. Hence  arises  the  need  for  governmental  stimulus
toward  regularization  which  is  found  in  some  of  the  newer
legislation  on  tmemployment.


292 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(i)  The  Liverpool  Dock  Scheme

Perhaps  the  most  striking  illustration  of  what  can  be  done
to  "decasualize"  casual  employment  is  the  system  now  in
operation  on  the  Liverpool  docks,  where  thousands  of  men
used  to  eke  out  a  precarious  and  irregular  'longshoreman's
livelihood.  Each  ship  company  sought  to  attract  enough  men
every  day  to  meet  the  need  on  the  busiest  days,  and  it  has
even  been  alleged  that  some  employers  deliberately  parceled
out  the  work  so  that  many  more  than  the  usual  number  em-
ployed were  encouraged  to  be  on  hand  and  available  when
wanted.'

To  counteract  the  demoralizing  results  of  this  chronic
underemployment,  what  is  known  as  the  Liverpool  dock
scheme  was  inaugurated  by  the  British  Board  of  Trade  in
July,  1912,  under  authority  of  the  unemployment  insurance
part  of  the  national  insurance  act.  In  the  first  year  of  its
operation  sixty-eight  employers  became  parties  to  the  plan,
and  31,000  dockers  were  registered.^  A  metal  tally  was
issued  to  each  man;  only  men  holding  tallies  are  employed,
and  new  tallies  can  be  issued  only  with  the  approval  of  the
joint  committees  of  workmen  and  employers  which  are  assist-
ing to  administer  the  scheme.  Workmen  who  fail  to  be  hired
at  the  employers'  regular  stands  go  to  one  of  fourteen  "sur-
plus stands,"  which  are  in  communication  by  telephone  with
one  another  and  with  the  six  sectional  clearing  houses  that
have  been  established  in  connection  with  the  government
labor  exchange.  The  system  makes  it  possible  to  do  the
same  work  with  fewer  men,  but  these  are  employed  much  more
regularly.  The  adjustment  is  said  to  have  caused  temporary
hardship  for  some  workihen,  but  it  is  hoped  that  in  time  each
employer  will  keep  the  nucleus  of  a  force  on  regular  wages
and  rely  for  extra  men  on  a  fluid  reserve  to  be  maintained
jointly  by  all  the  employers  of  the  port.*  The  advantages  of
maintaining  one  reserve  for  the  industry  as  a  whole  instead
of  separately  for  each  employer,  are  obvious. Somewhat

•  R.  Williams,  Tfie  Liverpool  Docks  Problem,  1912,  pp.  10-12.

*  Beveridge  and  Rey,  "Labour  Exchanges,"  Quarterly  Bulletin  on  Unem-
ployment, July-September,  1913,  p.  789.

'  See  R.  Williams,  First  Year's  Working  of  the  Liverpool  Dock  Scheme,
1 9 14.


unemployMn


Manches


extent
encouTj
yurii^g-tfee


similar  schemes  are  in-slorce  aijio^
of  Sunderland,  the  clo^^^r  "
repairers  of  Cardifl^and  Swai

Headway  can  be  made
fluctuations  also,  under  the
cient  labor  exchange  system/
it  has  been  suggested  that  building  laborer^
to  take  up  ice-cutting  or  logging,  or  to  secure
less  skilled  work  in  shoe,  textile,  or  other  factorii
busier  at  that  season. Through  the  London  em;
changes  women's  work  in  ready-made  tailori:
busiest  in  the  spring  and  fall,  has  been  dovetai]
ironing  in  laundries,  which  is  heaviest  during


ot  CbiW^  and

ir,  and  the  ship-


(2)  Recent  Progress

Distinct  progress  is  shown  in  the  laws  of  1915  establishing
state  employment  bureaus  in  IlHnois  and  Pennsylvania,  both
of  which  instruct  the  administrative  authorities  to  take  steps
toward  the  regularization  of  emplo3mient.  The  Illinois  stat-
ute is  particularly  comprehensive  on  this  point,  reading  as
follows:"

"The  said  general  advisory  board  in  cooperation  with  the
secretary  of  the  bureau  of  labor  statistics  and  the  local  ad-
visory boards  shall  place  themselves  in  communication  with
large  employers  of  labor,  including  municipal  and  other  pub-
lic authorities,  and  attempt  to  bring  about  such  cooperation
and  coordination  between  them  by  the  dovetailing  of  in-
dustries, by  long-time  contracts,  or  otherwise,  as  will  most
efiEectively  distribute  and  utilize  the  available  supply  of  labor
and  keep  it  employed  with  the  greatest  possible  constancy
and  regularity.  They  shall  devise  plans  of  cooperation  with
this  object  in  view  and  shall  seek  to  induce  the  organization
of  concerted  movements  in  this  direction.  They  shall  also
endeavor  to  enlist  the  aid  of  the  federal  government  in  ex-
tending these  movements  beyond  the  state."


"  Beveridge  and  Rey,  Quarterly  Bulletin  on  Unemployment,  July-Sep-
tember, I9i3,,pp.  795-799-  „ ,  ,
« Illinois,  Laws  1915,  S.  B.  24,  Sec.  I  (c).


294 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

It  will  be  noticed  that  this  clause  contemplates  the  adjust-
ment of  public  as  well  as  of  private  work.  Much  good  should
come  of  it,  if  properly  administered,  and  its  operation  will
be  watched  with  close  interest.  A  more  definite  inducement
to  the  regularization  of  industry  on  a  comprehensive  scale
is  offered  through  the  establishment  of  unemployment  in-
surance.'


'See  "Unemployment  Insurance,"  p.  409.


CHAPTER  VII
SAFETY  AND  HEALTH

Prominent  among  the  problems  which  the  industrial  revo-
lution brought  in  its  wake  is  that  of  maintaining  safety  and
health  in  work-places.  As  long  as  industry  was  chiefly
agricultural,  or  carried  on  about  the  family  hearth,  with  tools
relatively  few  and  simple,  the  individual  laborer  might  con-
trol the  physical  conditions  under  which  he  worked.  But  the
drift  during  the  late  eighteenth  and  the  early  nineteenth  cen-
turies from  farming  to  manufacturing,  and  from  homestead
to  factory  methods,  placed  a  growing  proportion  of  wage-
earners  in  a  new  environment.  They  toiled  now  upon  prem-
ises controlled  not  by  themselves,  but  by  another — the  em-
ployer. Instead  of  working  in  isolation  or  in  small  groups,
hundreds  were  collected  under  one  roof  where  the  error  or
illness  of  one  might  affect  all  his  neighbors.  New  machinery,
new  chemical  processes,  new  forces  such  as  electricity  and  com-
pressed air,  have  been  ceaselessly  developed,  each  involving
its  own  special  dangers.  Upon  all  production,  speed,  the  rul-
ing spirit  of  a  machine  age,  has  imposed  its  exactions.  Nor
have  subjective  factors  been  without  their  influence.  Igno-
rance, recklessness,  and  inertia,  manifested  now  by  the  leaders
of  technical  research,  now  by  the  masters  of  industry,  and
not  infrequently  by  the  workers  themselves,  have  contrib-
uted to  create  a  situation  in  which  the  statistics  of  industrial
accident  and  disease  are  often  justly  compared  with  those
of  the  world's  great  battles.

Conservation  of  the  Ufe,  health,  and  energy  of  our  millions
of  wage-earners  is  not  an  individual  question.  It  is  a  social
question,  demanding  social  action.  This  does  not  mean  that
private  or  volxmtary  efforts  of  the  workmen,  or  of  their  em-
ployers, or  of  their  physicians,  should  be  in  any  way  dis-


296 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

couraged.  On  the  contrary,  such  voluntary  efforts  should  be
vastly  increased.  But  the  prevention  of  industrial  accidents
and  diseases  is  too  great  an  undertaking  to  be  left  entirely  to
individual  action.

Though  more  than  half  the  waking  hours  of  the  ordinary
wage-earner  are  spent  at  his  place  of  emplo3mient,  it  is  one
of  the  fundamental  disharmonies  of  present-day  industry
that  he  has  little  or  no  control  over  the  conditions  which  there
surround  him,  and  which  so  profoundly  affect  his  well-being
and  even  his  life.  Individual  complaint  frequently  leads  to
loss  of  emplojmient  rather  than  to  improvement  of  conditions.
As  a  member  of  a  labor  union  the  worker's  power  is  potentially
increased,  but  is  often,  for  various  reasons,  not  effectively
exerted.  Regulation  of  the  physical  conditions  of  employ-
ment cannot,  on  the  other  hand,  be  safely  entrusted  to  the
individual  employer,  whose  principal  business,  under  com-
petitive conditions,  is  to  sectu-e  profits.  While  many  em-
ployers are  exercising  the  utmost  consideration  for  their
work-people  out  of  motives  of  humanity,  and  many  more  are
doing  so  on  grounds  of  efficiency,  such  motives  cannot  be  said
to  have  developed  into  a  controlling  principle  of  industrial
life.  Nor  can  the  industrial  accident  and  disease  problem
be  left  to  medical  treatment  alone,  for  prevention  and  not
after-care  is  the  solution.  Not  only  on  accotmt  of  the  mag-
nitude of  the  problem,  but  also  because  of  its  nature,  the  pro-
tection of  the  wage-earner  from  dangerous  conditions  of  em-
ployment is  a  proper  function  of  government.

Frequently  it  happens  that  without  the  aid  of  tmiform  legal
regulations  to  force  the  recalcitrant  minority  into  line,  even
a  vast  majority  of  the  manufactiurers  in  an  industry  are  power-
less to  bring  about  reforms  which  they  freely  admit  are  de-
sirable. A  striking  example  of  this  was  revealed  by  the  three-
year  campaign  which  culminated  successfully  in  the  poisonous
phosphorus  prohibition  act.  Match  manufacturers  represent-
ing 95  per  cent,  of  the  total  product  testified  before  Congress
that  they  could  not  substitute  a  harmless  compound  for  the
slightly  cheaper  poison  without  a  uniform  law  compelling  all
employers  in  that  industry  to  abandon  the  poison.  All  of
the  other  match  manufacturers,  representing  the  remaining
5  per  cent,  of  the  product,  stood  out  stoutly  to  the  last,  eyen


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  297

declaring  that  they  would  close  their  factories  before  they
would  submit  to  this  sanitary  measiu-e,  already  in  compulsory
operation  in  practically  all  civilized  countries  of  the  world.
It  required  labor  legislation  to  end  the  use  of  this  unnecessary
deadly  poison  before  "phossy  jaw,"  the  most  loathsome  of
all  industrial  diseases,  could  be  abolished.

Legislative  activities  for  the  control  of  industrial  accidents
and  occupational  diseases  have  developed  in  all  important
countries  along  four  main  lines,  namely,  (i)  reporting,  (2)
prohibition,  (3)  regulation,  and  (4)  compensation  or  insur-
ance. All  four  lines  of  activity  are  closely  interrelated,  and
depend  for  success  largely  upon  one  another.  Reporting  of
accidents  and  diseases  is  purposeless  unless  it  leads  to  pro-
hibition or  regulation  of  the  sources  of  danger,  and  is  likely
to  be  incomplete  if  not  made  part  of  a  proper  system  of  com-
pensation administration.  Effort  for  prohibition  and  regula-
tion gropes  in  the  dark  without  the  light  of  experience  made
available  through  thorough  reporting,  and  is  apt  to  be  feeble
unless  stimulated  by  the  cooperative  financial  pressure  exerted
by  compensation.  Compensation,  in  turn,  is  deprived,  by  lack
of  careful  reports,  of  the  necessary  actuarial  basis  for  success-
ful operation,  and  accomplishes  but  the  minor  part  of  its  pur-
pose if  the  payment  of  benefits  fails  to  lead  to  systematic  efforts
at  prohibition  or  regulation.  Upon  the  combined  development
of  all  foiu:  devices  depends  the  efficacy  of  the  essentially  mod-
em movement  for  the  protection  of  the  industrial  worker's
life,  limb,  and  health.  Leaving  the  fourth  step,  compensa-
tion, for  treatment  under  "Social  Insurance,"  this  chapter
will  concern  itself  with  the  first  three  methods  of  attack.


I.  Reporting

While  in  many  matters  of  social  interest  the  gathering  of
statistics  is  well  developed,  in  others  only  the  beginnings  have
been  made.  In  industry,  for  example,  we  know  much  about
the  value  of  the  raw  materials  and  of  the  product,  but  com-
paratively little  about  the  accidents  and  diseases  which  are
entailed  upon  the  workers  in  the  creation  of  that  product.
Yet  there  can  be  no  more  important  link  in  the  whole  chain


298 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  social  effort  for  the  prevention  of  industrial  death  and
disability  than  the  securing  of  acciu^ate  data  as  to  the  nature
of  the  hazards,  their  extent,  and  the  particular  industries
and  estabhshments  in  which  they  are  most  rife.  The  acquisi-
tion of  this  knowledge  is  an  integral  part  of  the  modem
movement  for  the  protection  of  life  and  health.  It  re-
veals the  "sore  spots"  of  industry.  Not  only  does  it  point
out  conditions  introduced  by  changing  methods  in  manufac-
ture and  elsewhere  which  call  for  correction,  but  after  cor-
rective legislation  has  been  secured  it  acts  as  a  valuable  guide
to  and  check  upon  the  efficacy  of  the  administrative  authori-
ties.

Such  information,  however,  until  comparatively  recent
years,  had  been  intelligently  sought,  if  at  all,  only  incidentally
by  special  commissions  which  investigated  some  more  press-
ing phase  of  industrial  abuse,  submitted  their  reports,  and
disbanded.  The  idea  of  a  permanent  census  on  the  matter
is  of  tardy  development.


(i)  Accidents

It  was  not  until  1886  that  any  American  state  placed  an
accident-reporting  law  upon  its  statute  books,  and  again,  as
in  many  other  matters  of  labor  legislation,  it  was  Massa-
chusetts which  took  the  lead.  By  the  act  of  June  i,  1886,
manufacturing  and  mercantile  corporations  were  required  to
report  to  the  chief  of  the  district  police,  the  organization  which
then  had  charge  of  factory  inspection,  accidents  occurring  in
their  estabhshments  and  causing  death  or  four  or  more  days'
disability.  A  penalty  was  provided  for  failure  to  comply.
Four  years  later  the  law  was  extended  to  apply  to  all  pro-
prietors of  the  designated  classes  of  establishments,  instead
of  only  to  corporations.  Similar  statutes  were  enacted  in
Ohio  in  1888,  Missouri  in  1891,  Rhode  Island  in  1896,  and
elsewhere  during  the  same  decade.

These  early  laws  did  not  bring  satisfactory  results.  Fees
have  seldom  been  offered  for  accident  reports,  and  employers
have  appeared  reluctant  to  give  their  establishments  an  tin-
enviable  reputation  for  danger. Official  enforcement,  too,  has


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  299

been  lax.  Prosecutions  for  failure  to  report  have  been  rare,
and  the  imposition  of  the  stated  penalties  stiU  rarer.  "In
none  of  them,"  said  a  federal  investigator  in  1897,  of  eight
states  which  then  had  reporting  laws,  "is  there  any  pretense
that  anything  like  complete  returns  of  accidents  are  ob-
tained." 1

Since  that  time,  in  spite  of  its  shortcomings  and  inade-
quacies, so  useful  has  reporting  proven  itself  as  a  guide  for
inspection,  safeguarding  and  advanced  legislation,  that  it  has
steadily  spread  not  only  to  new  states,  but  to  new  branches  of
industry.^  The  kind  of  accidents  to  be  reported  varies  great-
ly, ranging  from  all  injuries  in  the  more  advanced  states  to
only  those  which  result  in  death  or  in  the  incapacity  of  the
injured  workman  for  a  stated  length  of  time,  as  for  two  days,
one  week,  and  in  rare  cases  for  two  weeks.  The  time  of  re-
porting is  variously  fixed  at  "immediately,"  twenty-four  or
forty-eight  hoiors,  two  weeks,  once  a  month,  and,  in  Louisiana,
"  semi-annually."  Accidents  occurring  to  employees  under
the  workmen's  compensation  acts  must  usually  be  reported
immediately.  Notification  by  mail  on  a  blank  provided  by
the  proper  state  authority  is  in  most  cases  stif&cient,  but  in
connection  with  fatal  railway  and  streetcar  accidents  a  tele-
phone or  telegraph  report,  followed  by  a  detailed  written
statement,  is  often  obligatory.  Reports  are  usually  made  to
the  state  department  of  factory  inspection,  and  a  wide  range  of
questions  must  be  answered.  A  standard  schediole  adopted
for  use  in  important  industrial  states  containing  about  half
the  manufacturing  wage-earners  of  the  covmtry  is  divided
into  sections  on  (i)  employer,  place,  and  time,  (2)  injured
person,  (3)  cause,  and  (4)  nature  and  extent  of  injury,  and
each  section  asks  a  number  of  questions  found  by  long
experience  and  careful  study  to  be  most  successftd  in  eliciting
the  desired  information.'

1  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  12,  September,  1897,
p.  565.

^  A  standard  bill  for  industrial  accident  rBports,  drafted  by  the  Ameri-
can Association  for  Labor  Legislation  in  1912,  has  been  passed  in  several
states.  See  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  iS7,
1915,  "Industrial  Accident  Statistics,"  Frederick  L.  Hoffman,  p.  151.

'  This  schedule  was  prepared  by  the  American  Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  and  has  been  indorsed  by  the  American  Statistical  Associar
tion,  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  the  Workmen's  Com-


300 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

While  much  progress  has  been  made  since  the  beginning  of
the  reporting  movement  in  1886,  much  remains  to  be  done  in
the  direction  of  extending  and  of  introducing  uniformity  into
the  system.  In  a  few  states,  and  for  a  limited  number  of
industries,  good  work  is  being  done.^  but  the  failure  to  cover
all  dangerous  occupations  and  the  wide  differences  in  the
meaning  of  reportable  accident  still  render  the  data  confus-
ing and  incomparable  as  between  states.  For  a  comprehen-
sive view  of  the  situation  in  all  industries  and  throughout  the
country  dependence  must  for  the  present  be  placed  on  the  more
or  less  scholarly  estimates  which  appear  from  time  to  time.

What  is  perhaps  the  most  accurate  as  well  as  one  of  the
most  recent  of  these  studies  is  based  upon  insurance  experi-
ence with  nearly  38,000,000  lives,  and  places  the  number  of
fatal  industrial  accidents  for  1913  at  25,000,  and  the  number
of  injuries  involving  disability  of  more  than  fotir  weeks  at
700,000.^  The  detailed  figures  are  shown  in  the  chart  on
the  following  page.

Eight  industries,  it  appears,  are  more  hazardous  than  ser-
vice in  the  United  States  Army,  and  of  these  mining,  with
metal  mining  predominating,  is  the  most  dangerous.  Rail-
roading, electrical  work,  and  quarrying  are  high  on  the  list,
while  general  manufacturing,  including  ordinary  factory
work,  is  apparently  safer  than  agriculture,  in  which  the  in-
troduction of  power-driven  machinery  has  of  late  been  add-
ing peculiar  new  hazards  to  those  previously  involved  in  the
handling  of  live  animals.  What  these  thousands  of  acci-
dents, occurring  in  every  industrial  state  and  country,  mean
in  terms  of  suffering,  interrupted  wage-earning,  lowering  of
efficiency  and  deterioration  of  standard  of  Hying,  our  com-
pensation laws  are  at  last  beginning  to  reveal  with  something
like  scientific  accuracy.


pensation  Service  Bureau,  and  the  National  Council  for  Industrial
Safety.  Up  to  October  i,  191 5,  it  had  been  adopted  by  the  labor  depart-
ments of  California,  Iowa,  Massachusetts,  Minnesota,  Nevada,  New
Hampshire,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Washington.

1  Especially  excellent  is  the  reporting  work  done  by  several  industrial
accident  or  workmen's  compensation  boards,  notably  those  of  California,
Massachusetts,  New  York,  Ohio,  and  Wisconsin.

» United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  157,  p.  6.


5a


9

&


r
t


1 1  i  s  .i  .§  I  I  a  §  I  R  I  I  B  I  I  §11


'^ ^  M  5  I  §


s  §


§ Ug


302 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

(2)  Occupational  Diseases

Hardly  less  serious,  if  any,  than  the  misery  and  waste  caused
by  industrial  accident  is  that  entailed  through  the  more  in-
sidious danger  of  occupational  disease.

Occupational  disease  has  been  defined  as  "morbid  results  of
occupational  activity  traceable  to  specific  causes  or  labor  con-
ditions, and  followed  by  more  or  less  extended  incapacity  for
work."  1  American  interest  in  the  subject  is  mainly  a  product
of  the  last  few  years.  In  19 10  it  was  possible  to  record  only
the  appointment  of  the  Illinois  Occupational  Disease  Com-
mission, the  completion  of  an  investigation  of  phosphorus
poisoning  in  the  match  industry,  and  the  holding  of  the  First
National  Conference  on  Industrial  Diseases,  an  expert  com-
mittee of  which  drew  up  a  memorial  on  the  subject  for  presen-
tation to  the  President  of  the  United  States.  Practically
all  of  the  many  interesting  American  investigations  and  re-
ports on  this  subject  have  been  made  since  that  time.

The  principal  industrial  health  risks,  as  far  as  we  now  know
them,  may  be  conveniently  classified  according  to  their  nature
as  follows:  (i)  dangerous  gases,  acids,  and  dusts  (poisonous
and  non-poisonous);  (2)  harmful  bacteria  and  micro-organ-
isms; (3)  compressed  or  rarefied  atmospheres;  (4)  improper
lighting;  (5)  extremes  of  temperature  and  humidity;  (6)  ex-
cessive strain.  Almost  every  calling  involves  danger  from
one  or  more  of  these.

Considering  merely  the  industrial  poisons,  "those  raw  ma-
terials and  products,  by-products,  and  waste  products  which,
in  their  extraction,  manufacture,  and  use  in  industrial  proc-
esses may,  notwithstanding  the  exercise  of  ordinary  pre-
caution, find  entrance  into  the  body  in  such  quantities  as  to
endanger  by  their  chemical  action  the  health  of  the  work-
man employed,"  we  fiind  already  prepared  a  carefiil  list  of
fifty-four,*  one  of  which  alone,  lead,  is  in  daily  use  in  more
than  150  trades,  causing  "painters'  coHc,"  "wrist  drop,"  or


'"Memorial  on  Occupational  Diseases,"  American  Labor  Legislation
Review,  Vol.  I,  No.  I,  January,  1911,  pp.  125-143.

''United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  100,  May,  1912,  "List
of  Industrial  Poisons  and  Other  Substances  Injurious  to  Health  Found
in  Industrial  Processes,"  Th.  Sommerfeld  and  R.  Fischer,  pp.  733-759.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  303

even  death.  Connected  with  dusty  trades  of  all  sorts,  from
silk-weaving  to  quarrying,  are  found  the  non-poisonous  dusts
which  by  infiltration  and  mechanical  irritation  produce  the
various  occupational  lung  diseases.  Moreover,  the  bacillus
of  anthrax  may  infect  tanners  and  workers  on  hair  goods,
while  ankylostomiasis,  or  "miners'  hookworm,"  menaces
those  who  toil  in  warmth  and  moisture  tmderground.  The
tunnel  and  caisson  worker  dreads  compressed-air  illness.
Less  easy  to  trace,  but  perhaps  even  more  widespread,  are  the
obscure  ailments  which  may  arise  in  any  industry,  from  in-
sufficient or  excessive  lighting,  from  extremes  of  heat,  cold,
and  humidity,  or  from  work  too  heavy,  too  persistent,  and
too  intense  without  adequate  periods  of  rest.

Incomplete  as  is  our  information  on  the  prevalence  and  seri-
ousness of  industrial  accidents,  even  more  incomplete  is  it
with  regard  to  specific  trade  maladies,  some  of  which  are
now  being  recorded  in  our  hospitals  and  dispensaries.  The
first  American  law  for  the  compulsory  reporting  of  these
diseases  was  drafted  by  the  Association  for  Labor  Legislation
after  investigation  of  similar  legislation  in  England  and  was
enacted  in  California  in  March,  igii.  Within  five  years,  as
the  result  of  vigorous  and  sustained  efiEort,  sixteen  states
enacted  similar  legislation. ^  The  earliest  of  these  laws  called
for  reports  on  all  cases  of  anthrax,  compressed-air  illness,  and
poisoning  from  lead,  phosphorus,  arsenic,  mercury,  or  their
compounds,^  to  which  were  later  added  brass  and  wood  alco-
hol poisoning.'  The  most  recent  tendency,  however,  is  to
make  the  laws  include  "any  ailment  or  disease  contracted  as
a  result  of  the  nature  of  the  patient's  employment,"  *  in  which
form  they  will  probably  be  productive  of  more  important
results.

The  duty  of  reporting  falls  upon  the  physician,  who  may
be  either  a  general  practitioner  treating  the  case,  or,  in  states
requiring  a  monthly  medical  examination  of  workers  in  special-
ly hazardous  trades,  the  physician  making  such  examination.

'  California,  Connecticut,  Illinois,  Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,
Michigan,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  New  Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  New  York,
Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  and  Wisconsin,

^  California,  Laws  1911,  C.  485.

'  Connecticut,  Laws  1913,  C.  14;  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  145,

« Massach^setts,  Laws  1913,  C.  813,  Sec.  6^


304 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

A  standard  certificate  has  been  adopted  in  a  majority  of  the
reporting  states,'  and  requires  the  name  and  address  of  both
employee  and  employer,  the  nature  of  the  business,  the  diag-
nosis and  symptoms  of  the  disease,  and  other  pertinent  in-
formation. In  most  cases  reports  must  be  made  to  the  state
labor  department,  but  occasionally  they  go  to  the  board  of
health,  which  transmits  them  to  the  labor  department.  In
a  very  few  cases  ^  a  small  fee  of  50  cents  is  allowed  for  send-
ing in  notices,  but  even  where  this  is  not  done  it  is  not  felt
that  any  tmdue  hardship  has  been  caused  to  the  medical  pro-
fession by  placing  upon  them  this  added  duty.

Reliable  statistical  data  for  the  country  as  a  whole  are,
however,  stiU  lacking.  Again  we  must  fall  back  on  estimates,
and  careful  American  authorities  declare,  on  the  basis  of  Ger-
man experience,  that  numbering  our  gainfully  occupied  popu-
lation at  33,500,000  no  fewer  than  284,000,000  days'  ill-
ness occur  annually,  causing  a  social  and  economic  waste  of
nearly  $750,000,000.'  Of  this  enormous  waste  fuUy  one-
quarter,  it  is  computed,  could  be  prevented  by  deliberate
effort,  largely  in  the  direction  of  greater  care  and  cleanliness
in  the  nation's  workshops.  Many  unhealthful  conditions  in
industry,  also,  while  they  may  not  lead  to  actual  absence
from  work,  are  nevertheless  productive  of  unnecessary  physi-
cal discomfort  which  reacts  badly  on  the  worker's  health  and
strength.  The  effects  of  these  daily  minor  drains  upon  in-
dustrial efficiency  are  necessarily  difficult  to  trace  or  to  meas-
ure, but  they  must  in  the  aggregate  be  enormous.


2.  Prohibition

The  method  of  prohibition  for  the  safeguarding  of  indus-
trial workers  is  usually  resorted  to  only  under  severe  provoca-
tion. But  at  times  it  appears  to  be  the  only  effective  way  of
removing  an  intolerable  industrial  hazard,  and  instances  of
its  use  are  multiplying.

I  California,  Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  New  Hampshire,  New
Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  and  Wisconsin.  Like  the  standard  accident
schedule,  this  certificate  was  drafted  after  careful  study  by  the  Associa-
tion for  Labor  Legislation.  '  California  and  Connectjcuti

'  ^ftriorial  on  Occufatiorial  Difgases,


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  305

There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  prohibitive  method  may
be  applied.  First,  it  may  be  used  to  exclude  from  employ-
ment those  most  susceptible  to  danger,  whether  children,
women,  or  certain  classes  of  men.  Second,  it  may  be  used  to
outlaw  the  substances  or  instruments  which  render  employ-
ment dangerous.


(i)  Exclusion  of  Persons

a.  Children.  Provisions  for  the  exclusion  of  persons  from
industrial  pursuits  have  been  carried  further  with  regard  to
children  than  with  regard  to  any  other  group  of  wage-earners,
on  the  general  theory  that  the  child  is  the  special  ward  of  the
state  and  most  in  need  of  special  measures  of  protection.
The  dangers  thus  sought  to  be  guarded  against  may  be
to  the  child's  hfe,  limb,  health,  or  morals,*  and  the  restric-
tions which  have  grown  are  based  on  considerations  of  age,
physique,  and  education.

(a)  Age  Requirements.  The  past  century  has  witnessed  an
almost  complete  reversal  of  public  opinion  as  to  the  proper
age  at  which  children  should  become  breadwinners.  With-
out scruple,  and  even  in  the  belief  that  they  were  acting
charitably,  the  American  colonists  received  from  England  as
bound  apprentices  large  numbers  of  orphans  and  children  of
the  poor,  ten  to  sixteen  years  of  age,  some  even  as  young  as
seven  years.  Laws  were  passed  to  keep  these  boys  and  girls
profitably  employed,  partly  for  the  benefit  of  the  community
and  partly  to  save  them  from  the  dangers  of  idleness.  When
manufactures  arose  Alexander  Hamilton  approved  of  them  as
rendering  children  "more  useful  and  .  .  .  more  early  useful
than  they  would  otherwise  be."  ^

These  colonial  traditions  have  now  gone  down  before  a
standard  of  working  age  based  on  the  observed  harmful  effects
of  premature  labor.  In  1848  '  Pennsylvania  forbade  the  em-
ployment in  textile  establishments  of  children  under  twelve,
a  standard  which  it  the  following  year*  raised  to  thirteen.

'  See,  for  instance,  Kansas,  General  Statutes  1909,  Sec.  5095.

'  Alexander  Hamilton,  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  207.

'Pennsylvania,  Laws  1 8;^8,  No.  327. ' < /J»y.,  Laws  1849,  No.  415.

20


3o6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Within  the  next  decade  a  twelve-year  limit  was  established
in  Rhode  Island,*  and  a  ten-year  limit  in  New  Jersey  ^  and
Connecticut;  ^  in  all  three  states  the  law  covered  manufac-
tures, and  in  Connecticut  it  covered  mechanical  establish-
ments also.  In  none  of  these  states  was  any  proof  of  age
required,  and  enforcement  was  everywhere  very  lax.

The  first  state  to  provide  a  special  officer  to  see  that  its
age  restrictions  on  the  employment  of  children  were  obeyed
was  Massachusetts,  in  its  law  of  1867.^  The  previous  year,
following  a  report  by  a  commission  on  hours  of  labor,  a  law
had  been  passed  forbidding  the  emplo3mient  of  children  under
ten  years  of  age  in  manufacturing  establishments.  The  gov-
ernor at  his  discretion  might  instruct  the  state  constable  and
his  deputies  to  enforce  the  law.  It  seems,  however,  that  the
governor  did  not  see  fit  to  give  such  instructions,  and  in  1867,
when  the  act  was  amended  to  cover  mechanical  establish-
ments as  well  as  manufacturing,  it  was  made  a  duty  of  the
state  constable  to  detail  a  deputy  to  enforce  all  laws  regulating
the  emplojmaent  of  children.

About  this  same  period  the  national  labor  organizations
became  active  in  demanding  the  legal  prohibition  of  child
labor  below  a  nninimum  age  limit.  In  1876  laws  against  the
employment  of  children  under  fourteen  years  of  age  were
advocated  by  the  Working  Men's  Party  at  a  congress  in
Philadelphia,  and  about  the  same  time  the  Knights  of  Labor
took  a  stand  for  the  prohibition  by  law  of  their  employment
under  fifteen  years  of  age  in  workshops,  mines,  and  factories.
The  American  Federation  of  Labor,  organized  later,  indorsed
the  same  standard.  Since  then  many  influential  societies
and  women's  clubs,  as  well  as  labor  organizations,  have  sup-
ported and  worked  for  the  legal  prohibition  of  child  labor.
In  1904  the  National  Child  Labor  Committee  was  formed  to
act  as  a  clearing  house  for  information  on  child  labor,  to  in-
vestigate conditions,  to  educate  public  opinion,  and  to  pro-
mote legislation.

The  result  of  the  work  of  this  national  committee  and  the


'  Rhode  Island,  Laws  1853,  p.  245.
2  New  Jersey,  Laws  1851,  p.  321.
'  Connecticut,  Laws  1856,  C.  45.
♦Massachusetts,  Laws  1867,  C.  285.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  307

various  agencies  that  have  cooperated  with  it  is  a  large  body
of  legislation  restricting  the  employment  of  children.  AH
states  now  forbid  the  employment  of  children  in  one  or  more
kinds  of  work  until  they  have  passed  a  fixed  age  limit.  The
fourteen-year  minimum  age  limit  is  established  for  general
factory  work  in  aU  except  six  states.^  In  most  states  docu-
mentary proof  of  a  child's  age  is  demanded,  and  working
permits  or  employment  certificates  must  be  obtained  by
the  children  and  placed  on  file  in  the  establishment  before
they  can  be  employed  therein.

The  age  limit  in  some  of  the  earliest  child  labor  laws  ap-
plied only  to  cotton  and  woolen  factories  and  to  a  few  other
special  industries  where  the  evils  of  child  labor  were  sup-
posed to  be  most  flagrant.  In  other  laws  the  prohibition  was
general  for  all  work  in  "manufacturing  or  mechanical  estab-
lishments." It  is  only  in  comparatively  recent  years  that
the  minimum  age  limit  for  emplo5raient  has  been  applied  in
the  majority  of  states  to  mercantile  establishments  and  other
places  of  emplojnnent  as  well  as  to  factories.  Several  states
still  have  a  different  age  limit  for  the  employment  of  children
in  stores  and  offices  from  that  for  emplo3rment  in  factories.^
In  most  states  children  under  fourteen  years  of  age  are  now
excluded  from  employment  in  a  list  of  establishments  in-
cluding, in  addition  to  factories,  miUs,  workshops,  and  stores,
certain  other  places — such  as  hotels,  restaurants,  laundries,
bowling-alleys,  and  theaters — ^where  conditions  appeared  to
warrant  such  exclusion.

Nevertheless,  most  of  the  state  laws  are  defective  in  that
they  fail  to  cover  all  the  occupations  from  which  children
should  be  excluded.  In  fact,  the  rapidly  changing  industrial
conditions  render  it  practically  impossible  to  draw  up  a  list
of  occupations  that  wiU  be  complete  for  any  length  of  time,
even  though  it  is  complete  at  the  time  the  law  is  enacted.
The  tendency  of  those  who  are  experienced  in  drafting  child
labor  laws  now  is  to  use  the  general  term  "in  any  gainful  oc-

'  Utah  has  no  age  limit  for  general  factory  work;  New  Mexico,  North
Carolina,  and  South  Carolina  have  a  twelve-year  limit;  in  Georgia
widows'  children  and  orphans  between  twelve  and  fourteen  may  be
eniployed  on  special  permission  of  a  commission  of  three  public  officials;
tod  in  Mississippi  the  age  limit  is  twelve  for  boys  and  fourteen  for  girls.

^  See,  for  instance,  Alabama,  Laws  1915,  C.  169.


3o8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

cupation, ' '  instead  of  a  specified  list.  Agriculture  and  domestic
service  are  exempted  from  this  general  prohibition,  except  in
the  Arkansas  law  enacted  by  initiative  and  referendtmi  in  1914.

The  fact  that  so  much  progress  has  been  made  in  the  last
decade  in  the  enactment  of  child  labor  legislation,  and  that
the  fourteen-year  limit  has  been  so  generally  established,
especially  for  factory  work,  does  not  mean  that  premature
employment  of  children  is  eradicated.  There  is  serious  danger
that  since  the  most  sensational  stages  in  the  fight  against
child  labor  have  passed,  public  opinion  will  become  apathetic
and  not  perceive  the  inadequacies  of  laws  that  may  have  at
one  time  been  a  great  step  in  advance.  Unfortunately  most
of  the  laws  bear  the  scars  of  confiicts  with  short-sighted  legis-
lators as  well  as  with  powerful  interests  who  either  looked  upon
the  emplojrment  of  children  as  necessary  to  their  prosperity
or  considered  prohibitive  legislation  an  encroachment  on
their  business  rights.  Exemptions — chief  of  which  has  been
the  exemption  of  the  "poor  widow's"  child  and  children  of
"dependent  parents,"  a  relic  of  the  days  of  the  Elizabethan
poor  law — have  been  the  ctirse  of  child  labor  laws.

In  addition  to  the  minimum  age  of  fourteen  for  entrance
to  general  factory  work,  many  states  set  a  limit  of  sixteen
years  for  certain  more  dangerous  processes,  and  in  some
states  an  additional  two  years'  maturity  is  required  for  en-
trance to  a  number  of  extra-hazardous  occupations.  The
first  group  of  occupations  may  include  such  employments  as
the  cleaning  and  oiling  of  machinery,  the  adjusting  of  belts,
the  operation  of  machine  saws  or  of  stamping,  washing,  grind-
ing, and  mixing  machines,  and  the  manufacture  of  lead  prod-
ucts or  of  compositions  containing  poisonous  acids,'  while  in
the  second  group  is  work  in  mines,  at  blast  furnaces,  or  on
railroads,  in  the  outside  erection  of  electric  wires,  or  ia  the
manufacture  of  explosives.^  Some  states  have  established
minimum  limits  as  high  as  eighteen  or  even  twenty-one  for
night  messenger  service  or  other  morally  dangerous  work.'

1  Connecticut,  Laws  1911,  C.  123.

"  Arizona,  Revised  Statutes  1913,  Sec.  3127.

'  New  York,  for  instance,  has  a  twenty-one  year  minimum  for  night
messenger  service  (Laws  1910,  C.  342),  and  Michigan  a  similar  minimum
for  work  in  theaters  or  the  like  where  intoxicants  are  sold  (Laws  1915,
No.  255).


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  309

A  growing  tendency  is  manifest  to  give  to  state  boards  of
health  or  state  labor  departments  power  to  add  to  the  lists
of  dangerous  and  extra-hazardous  employments.'  Age  re-
strictions for  entrance  to  dangerous  occupations  have  been
repeatedly  upheld  as  a  vaHd  exercise  of  the  police  power,^
and  in  some  states  illegal  employment  of  a  child,  deprives  the
employer  of  the  defenses  of  asstunption  of  risk'  and  con-
tributory negligence.^  The  provision  empowering  health
authorities  and  others  to  extend  the  lists  of  prohibited  occupa-
tions for  children  of  certain  ages  has  been  held  not  to  be  an
unwarranted  delegation  of  legislative  authority.*

All  the  important  countries  of  Europe  possess  similar  grad-
uated restrictions  upon  engaging  in  remunerative  employ-
ment at  too  extreme  youth,  and  the  principle  of  adding  to  the
lists  of  prohibited  occupations  by  administrative  authorities
is  well  established.  Frequently,  also,  the  authorities  are  per-
mitted to  allow  exemptions  from  the  application  of  the  laws.*

A  serious  shortcoming  of  most  of  our  child  labor  laws  is
their  failure  to  deal  adequately  with  child  labor  on  city
streets.  We  have  more  or  less  thoroughly  prohibited  the  pre-
mature employment  of  children  in  factories,  stores,  and  other
places,  but  have  inconsistently  allowed  boys  and  girls  of  ten-
der years  to  be  exposed  to  perhaps  a  worse  moral  and  physical
environment  in  vending  newspapers,  gums,  and  other  articles
on  the  streets,  without  sufficient  regulation.  At  present  only
one  state,  Kentucky,  has  the  same  age  limit,  fourteen  years,
for  all  street  trades  as  for  other  employment.  Several  states
have  a  fourteen-year  limit  for  bootblacking  and  peddling,
and  a  twelve-year  limit  for  newsboys.  So  far  only  about  half
the  states^  have  passed  laws  regulating  the  employment  of

'  As  in  Massachusetts,  Laws  1913,  C.  831,  Sees.  4,  6.

"  Lenahan  v.  Pittston  Coal  Mining  Co.,  218  Pa.  311,  67  Atl.  642  (1907).

'  Sterling  v.  Union  Carbide  Co.,  142  Mich.  284,  105  N.  W.  755  (1905).

'  StrafiEord  v.  Republic  Iron  &  Steel  Co.,  238  lU.  371.  87  N.  E.  358
(1909).

"Louisville,  Henderson  &  St.  Louis  R.  Co.  v.  Lyons,  155  Ky.  396,
159  S.  W.  971  (1913).

'  For  extended  discussions  of  this  matter  see  Bulletins  No.  80  and  Sp  of
the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  on  "Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners
in  Great  Britain"  and  "Child  Labor  Legislation  in  Europe,"  respectively.

'In  1 91 5  legislation  on  this  subject  was  found  in  Alabama,  Arizona,
Colorado,  Delaware,  District  of  Columbia,  Florida,  Iowa,  Kentucky,
Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Missouri,  Nevada,  New  Hampshire,  New


310 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

children  in  street  trades,  and  in  these  the  prevailing  age  linait
for  newsboys  is  twelve  years.  Because  of  the  additional  moral
danger  to  girls  the  age  limit  for  them  is  usually  four  or  six
years  higher  than  for  boys.

Suggestions  have  frequently  been  made  that  a  uniform  age
limit  for  all  regular  gainful  occupations  is  not  scientific,  as
some  children  are  more  mattire  and  fit  to  work  at  thirteen  years
of  age  than  others  are  at  fifteen.  No  practical  method  has
yet  been  found,  however,  of  determining  the  physiological
age  of  children,  and  the  age  limit  will  probably  always  prove
the  most  satisfactory  standard.  The  purpose  of  the  minimum
age  is  to  prevent  improper  toil  before  the  child  has  passed
the  most  formative  period  of  adolescence,  and  also  to  give
the  child  a  chance  for  a  necessary  minimum  of  education.
Recent  scientific  studies  of  the  physical  effects  of  modem  in-
dustry on  children,  and  recent  investigations  ^  of  the  educa-
tional needs  of  children  in  industry,  have  seemed  to  indicate
that  the  fourteen-year  Umit  is  not  adequate  in  either  of  the
above  respects.  There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  the  more  ad-
vanced states  to  eliminate  all  children  under  sixteen  from  in-
dustry. Ohio  had  for  several  years  a  fifteen-year  limit  for
boys  and  a  sixteen-year  limit  for  girls.  A  new  law  with  a
fifteen-year  minimum  age  limit  has  been  passed  in  Michigan,^
chiefly  through  the  efforts  of  the  Employers'  Association  of
Detroit.  Industries  of  the  best  type  are  finding  that  children
under  sixteen  do  not  pay.  Organized  labor,  also,  has  taken  a
determined  stand  for  the  sixteen-year  n:iinimum  age  during
the  months  in  which  the  public  schools  are  in  session,  and  for
a  sixteen-year  compulsory  education  limit.  Educators  are
generally  accepting  this  as  the  standard  that  must  eventually
be  adopted.

(6)  Physical  Requirements,  While  it  may  be  impracticable
to  substitute  a  physiological  for  the  ordinary  chronological

Jersey,  New  York,  Oklahoma,  Pennsylvania,  Porto  Rico,  Rhode  Island,
Utah,  Virginia,  Wisconsin.  In  Nevada  the  law  merely  makes  children  in
street  employment  subject  to  the  control  of  the  juvenile  courts.

•  See,  for  instance.  Child  Labor  Bulletin,  Vol.  I,  No.  i,  "Child  Labor  and
Education";  United  States  Bureau  of  Education,  Bulletin  IQ13,  No.  IQ,
"German  Industrial  Education  and  Its  Lesson  for  the  United  States,"
Holmes  Beckwith;  Seattle  Children  in  School  and  in  Industry,  published
.in  191 5  by  the  Seattle,  Wash.,  Board  of  School  Directors.

2  Michigan,  Laws  1915,  No.  255.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  311

age  test,  it. is  nevertheless  true  that  physical  development  as
well  as  age  should  detennine  the  child's  eligibiUty  for  em-
ployment. So  far  state  laws  have  not  designated  any  stand-
ard physical  reqtdrements,  but  have  naerely  contained  the
rather  meaningless  provision  that  children  must  be  physically
fit.  A  physical  examination  of  aU  applicants  for  certificates
is  now  required  by  the  laws  of  ten  leading  states.^  In  several
other  states  the  official  granting  emplojmient  certificates  is
authorized  to  ask  for  the  physical  examination  of  the  appli-
cant if  he  considers  him  of  doubtftil  health  and  strength.

Because  of  the  lack  of  definite  standards  these  examinations
depend  for  their  value  almost  entirely  on  the  physician  who
happens  to  make  them.  In  New  York  City,  for  instance,  the
physical  examination  of  applicants  for  certificates  is  well
standardized.  Blanks  are  used  in  the  examination  of  each
child  which  include  not  only  the  height  and  weight,  but  a
test  of  the  eyesight  and  hearing,  and  an  examination  of  the
condition  of  the  teeth,  the  heart,  the  lungs,  throat,  and  nostrils,
and  the  general  physical  condition.  The  same  blanks  are
used  throughout  the  state,  but  in  smaller  towns  they  are  usual-
ly very  poorly  fiOiled  out.

If  the  physical  examination  is  to  be  a  real  test  of  the  child's
fitness,  the  medical  examiner  must  know  the  prospective  place
of  emplojnnent  and  have  a  knowledge  of  the  conditions  and
processes  in  the  various  industries  in  which  children  are  em-
ployed. Under  the  English  law,  accordingly,  the  certifying
surgeon  must  examine  the  child  in  the  factory  where  he  is
entering  employment,  and  if  the  child  changes  employment  he
must  be  re-examined  in  the  same  manner.^  Wherever  medical
examination  of  children  in  the  public  schools  is  extensively
developed,  the  records  of  the  child's  physical  progress
should  be  kept  in  such  form  that  they  can  be  compared  with
the  examination  at  the  time  the  child  proposes  to  leave  school.
In  smaller  cities  the  simplest  arrangement  is  for  the  school
medical  examiner  to  make  the  examinations  of  children  apply-
ing for  certificates. In  New  York  state,  where  certificates  are


'  Iowa,  Kentucky,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Minnesota,  New  Hamp-
shire, New  Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  and  Pennsylvania.  The  Massa-
chusetts act  (Laws  1906,  C.  502)  was  the  first  of  this  type.

2  Factory  and  workshop  act,  1901  (i  Edw.  7,  C.  22,  Sec.  64  (3) ).


312 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

issued  by  the  boards  of  health  instead  of  by  the  public  schools,
the  examinations  are,  of  course,  supposed  to  be  made  by  the
health  officers,  or  under  their  supervision,  and  there  is  seldom
any  cooperation  with  the  school  examiners.

A  single  examination  at  the  time  of  application  for  em-
ployment certificates  wiU  not,  however,  even  when  it  has  been
put  on  a  more  scientific  basis  than  at  present,  be  sufficient
protection  for  the  health  of  working  children.  In  order  that
children  may  not  be  injured  by  the  work  they  do,  exanaina-
tions  must  be  repeated  periodically.  New  York  has  recently
recognized  this  fact  by  establishing  a  corps  of  medical  ex-
aminers imder  the  department  of  labor,  who  have  authority
to  examine  children  in  any  industry,  and  on  their  recommenda-
tion the  employment  certificate  of  any  child  found  to  be  un-
fit for  the  work  he  is  doing  is  canceled.  This  provision  will
probably  be  embodied  in  the  laws  of  other  states  as  public
opinion  gradually  comes  to  realize  the  necessity  of  safe-
guarding the  child's  health  after  he  has  entered  industry
in  the  same  way  as  is  now  being  done  to  a  large  extent  up  to
the  time  that  he  leaves  school.

(c)  Educational  Requirements.  Merely  to  compel  the  'child
to  go  to  school  until  it  is  fourteen  years  of  age  does  not  guar-
antee the  attainment  of  any  definite  minimum  of  education.
Hence  a  number  of  states  forbid  the  employm.ent  of  children
who  do  not  come  up  to  certain  standards  of  knowledge.
These  standards,  however,  vary  considerably.  About  half
the  states  require  only  that  applicants  for  emplo5mient  certif-
icates be  able  to  read  and  write  English.  Illinois  requires  liter-
acy, but  not  necessarily  in  English.  Several  states  require
the  attainment  of  certain  grades  in  the  public  schools,  or
equivalent  instruction.  The  completion  of  the  sixth  grade
is  the  generally  accepted  standard,  though  five  states  already
require  the  completion  of  the  eighth  grade.^

A  greater  number  of  states  require  attendance  at  school  for
a  minimum  period  either  diuing  the  year  previous  to  the  birth-
day at  which  the  child  becomes  old  enough  to  go  to  work,  or
during  the  year  previous  to  the  time  the  certificate  is
issued. This  required  period  of  attendance  may  vary  from

'  California,  Colorado,  Nebraska,  New  Hampshire,  and  Vermont,
though  applicable  to  children  fifteen  years  of  age  in  California.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  313

the  entire  school  year  *  to  twelve  weeks  or  less.^  Instruction
in  certain  specified  subjects,  usually  reading,  writing,  spelling,
geography,  and  arithmetic  through  common  fractions,  is  re-
quired in  some  states.'

The  provision  that  children  who  have  been  granted  "work-
ing papers"  but  are  under  sixteen  years  of  age  shall  attend
school  unless  regularly  employed  is  common,  but  Uttle  atten-
tion has  been  paid  to  its  enforcement.  Once  an  employment
certificate  has  been  secured  the  child  is  usually  forgotten  by
the  school  authorities,  unless  the  law  requires  that  the  certifi-
cate be  sent  direct  to  the  employer  and  returned  by  him  to
the  issuing  office  when  the  child's  employment  terminates,
the  certificate  at  no  time  becoming  the  property  of  the  child.
The  principal  benefit  of  such  a  provision  is  that  it  tends  to
check  children  from  leaving  school  to  enter  temporary  "blind
alley"  jobs.

Much  of  the  time  of  the  child  under  sixteen  who  drifts
from  one  duU,  monotonous  job  to  another  is  wasted,  as  far
as  education  and  training  are  concerned.  Consequently  the
completion  of  the  eighth  grade  seems  Uttle  enough  schooling
to  require  of  children  who  go  to  work  tmder  sixteen.

(d)  Special  Problems  in  Enforcing  Restrictions  on  Child  Labor.
Difficult  as  it  has  been,  and  still  is,  to  place  comprehensive
child  labor  laws  on  the  statute  books,  it  is  even  more  difficult
to  build  up  their  effective  administration.

The  principal  agencies  for  the  enforcement  of  child  labor
laws  are  the  departments  of  labor,  the  school  authorities,  and
in  some  states  the  boards  of  health.  Probation  officers  and
private  child  welfare  agencies  may  sometimes  aid.  In  some
states  special  child  labor  inspectors  are  appointed;  in  fact,
factory  inspection  has  usually  begun  with  the  enforcement  of
the  child  labor  law  before  other  labor  legislation  was  estab-
lished. In  all  cases,  however,  enforcement  rests  primarily
with  the  factory  inspection  organizations.

Few,  if  any,  states  have  an  adequate  corps  of  inspectors,^
and  in  the  southern  states,  where  the  child  labor  problem  is


'  In  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Ohio,  and  Oklahoma.

'  In  Alabama,  Florida,  Georgia,  and  South  Dakota.

'  In  Florida,  Kentucky,  Maine,  North  Dakota,  and  Oregon,

<§ee  Chapter  IX,  "Admi^iistration,"  p.  415.


314 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

most  serious,  the  provision  for  enforcement  is  most  meager.'
The  experience  of  state  after  state  has  demonstrated  that
without  state  inspection  child  labor  laws  are  dead  letters.

The  issuance  of  employment  certificates  is  the  first  step
in  the  administration  of  the  minimvun  standards  for  entrance
to  industry.  In  most  states  where  certificates  are  required
they  are  issued  by  the  local  school  authorities.  In  New  York
they  are  issued  by  the  boards  of  health,  which  has  proven
very  unsatisfactory  for  the  state  as  a  whole,  as  the  health  ofiEcers
are  for  the  most  part  poorly  paid  and  busy  with  their  other
duties,  and  look  upon  the  issuing  of  certificates  as  a  tedious
task  thrust  upon  them  without  compensation.  In  seven  states
only  no  employment  certificates  are  required,  the  affidavit
of  the  parent  being  accepted  as  proof  of  age.^

Under  the  prevailing  method  of  issuance  through  the  school
authorities  uniformity  is  secured  by  the  use  of  standard  blanks
throughout  the  state,  by  regular  monthly  or  more  frequent
reports  either  to  the  commissioner  of  labor  or  to  the  state
superintendent  of  education,  and  by  a  certain  amoimt  of
centralized  supervision  on  the  part  of  these  officials.  This
method  is  the  most  practical  because  the  school  office  is  the
most  convenient  place  for  the  children  and  their  parents  to
go  to  obtain  the  certificates;  because  the  local  school  authority
knows  the  child  through  his  record  or  through  personal  con-
tact, and  thus  there  is  less  Hkely  to  be  falsification  in  regard


1  In  North  Carolina  the  commissioner  of  labor  statistics  has  no  power
to  inspect  if  the  employer  chooses  to  prevent  him.  In  Alabama  the  en-
forcement of  the  child  labor  law  has  been  entrusted  to  the  state  prison
inspector,  who  must  divide  his  time  with  the  inspection  of  jails  and  alms-
houses. An  investigation  made  in  Mississippi  by  the  National  Child
Labor  Committee  in  1914  disclosed  in  nearly  every  factory  in  the  state
wholesale  violations  of  the  law  passed  in  19 12,  which  by  way  of  enforce-
ment merely  provided  that  the  county  sheriffs  were  to  inspect  the  fac-
tories "at  least  once  each  month,"  and  the  county  health  officers  to  in-
spect "at  least  twice  each  year."  Only  two  of  these  local  officials  were
found  who  had  ever  been  inside  the  places  they  were  supposed  to  inspect,
and  not  a  single  one  knew  the  provisions  of  the  law.  Those  who  had  paid
any  attention  at  all  to  it  had  contented  themselves  with  naively  asking
the  owner  of  the  mill  if  he  was  living  up  to  the  law.  (See  Child  Labor
Bulletin,  Vol.  II,  No.  4,  February,  1914,  "The  Majesty  of  the  Law  in
Mississippi,"  Edward  N.  Clopper.)  Following  the  exposure  the  Missis-
sippi legislators  finally  passed  a  law  providing  a  factory  inspector.

^  Mississippi,  New  Mexico,  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Tennessee,
Texas,  and  Wyoming.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  315

to  age;  and  because  the  local  school  authority  is  likely  to  be
much  more  interested  in  keeping  the  child  in  school  and  will
make  more  of  an  effort  to  point  out  the  inadvisabUity  of  al-
lowing it  to  leave  for  some  temporary  and  unnecessary  em-
plo3mient.  The  enforcement  of  the  compulsory  education
law,  also,  is  so  closely  connected  with  the  enforcement  of  the
child  labor  law  that  the  two  should  be  coordinated  under
the  school  authorities  in  each  community.  The  same  sets
of  records  are  necessary  for  the  issuance  of  certificates  and
for  the  enforcement  of  the  compulsory  education  law.  The
school  census,  the  record  of  the  child's  age  on  entering  school,
and  its  progress  in  school  are  equally  important  to  the  en-
forcement of  both  laws.  Applicants  who  have  been  refused
employment  certificates  should  be  reported  at  once  to  the
School  attendance  department  in  order  that  they  may  be  re-
turned to  school,  and  the  names  of  all  children  to  whom  cer-
tificates have  been  granted  should  be  reported  to  the  princi-
pals of  the  schools.  In  the  regulation  of  children's  work  in
street  trades,  badges  to  be  worn  conspicuously  and  renewed
annually  have  been  found  essential  to  enforcement,  and  the
responsibility  for  administration  rests  chiefly  with  the  edu-
catiohal  authorities.

Cooperation  between  the  child  labor  inspectors  and  the
schools  is  necessary  that  both  may  discharge  their  respon-
sibility to  the  best  advantage  of  the  child.  A  careful  issuance
of  emplojonent  certificates  and  a  thorough  enforcement  of
the  compulsory  education  law  make  the  work  of  the  labor
inspector  much  easier.  It  is  desirable,  furthermore,  that
truant  officers  have  the  power  to  inspect  establishments  where
children  are  employed,  and  they  should  be  the  local  represen-
tatives of  the  state  child  labor  inspectors,  reporting  to  them
all  violations  and  aiding  them  in  getting  evidence  to  bring
prosecutions.  The  actual  presentation  of  evidence  in  the
courts  should  always  be  done  by  the  state  inspector,  who  is
free  from  local  pressure.

The  important  provisions  of  what  has  been  called  a  model
law  in  regard  to  emplojmient  certificates  are  as  follows  :i
No  child  under  sixteen  should  be  employed  unless  the  child

■  Practically  the  provisions  of  the  Ohio  law  (General  Code,  igio,  Sees,
776S-7771).


3i6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

presents  to  the  employer  an  employment  certificate,  which
shotild  be  kept  on  file  dtiring  the  child's  employment  and  re-
turned to  the  issuing  office  when  the  employment  terminates.
These  certificates  shotdd  be  issued  only  by  the  local  super-
intendent of  schools,  or  by  some  one  designated  by  him  in
writing,  and  should  be  given  only  after  the  following  docu-
ments have  been  received  and  placed  on  file:

(i)  The  pledge  of  the  employer  that  he  expects  to  employ
the  child  and  will  return  the  certificate  to  the  issuing  office
as  soon  as  the  child  leaves  his  employ.

(2)  The  child's  school  record,  stating  the  age,  ability  to
read  and  write,  and  school  grade,  signed  by  the  principal  of
the  school  that  the  child  last  attended.

(3)  Evidence  of  age^  in  the  following  order:  (a)  birth  cer-
tificate; (b)  baptismal  record  or  passport;  (c)  school  record
or  other  documentary  evidence;  (d)  in  the  absence  of  anything
else,  affidavit  of  the  parent,  with  one  or  two  disinterested
citizens.  The  child  should  personally  appear  before  the  issu-
ing officer  for  examination,  and  the  officer  should  satisfy  him-
self that  the  child  is  at  least  fourteen  years  of  age,  is  able  to
read  and  write  English,  and  has  had  a  course  of  instruction
equivalent  to  seven  yearly  grades  in  the  public  schools.

(4)  A  certificate  from  the  school  physician,  board  of  health,
or  a  licensed  physician  appointed  by  the  board  of  education,
in  the  order  named,  showing  that  the  child  is  physically  able
to  do  the  work  for  which  it  is  to  be  employed.

The  certificate  should  be  transmitted  by  the  issuing  officer
to  the  employer,  and  should  not  at  any  time  come  into  pos-
session of  the  child,  to  be  used  as  a  Ucense  for  idleness.  The
blanks  should  be  furnished  by  the  state  commissioner  of  labor,
to  whom  should  be  sent  monthly  a  list  of  the  names  of  chil-
dren for  whom  certificates  have  been  issued,  returned,  or  re-
fused. Such  lists  should  give  the  names  and  addresses  of
the  prospective  employers  and  the  nature  of  the  occupations
in  which  the  children  intend  to  engage.  Factory  inspectors
and  truant  officers  should  be  empowered  to  demand  that
certificates  be  obtained  to  prove  the  age  of  children  apparently
under  sixteen  who  claim  to  be  over  that  age.^

•  The  federal  Children's  Bureau  has  commenced  the  publication  of
thorough  investigations  of  the  administration  of  child  labor  laws  in


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  317

Even  more  for  the  sake  of  tmiformity  in  enforcement  than
for  iiniformity  in  restrictions  on  child  labor,  federal  legislation
is  needed.  The  plan  of  the  Palmer-Owen  biU  pending  in  the
third  session  of  the  63d  Congress  was  to  place  the  enforcement
in  the  hands  of  the  federal  department  of  labor,  whose  in-
spectors would  be  free  from  local  bias  or  pressure.  The  work
of  these  inspectors,  it  is  believed  by  those  who  promoted  the
bill,  would  not  obviate  the  need  of  state  factory  inspectors
or  of  interest  in  the  enforcement  of  the  law  by  local  school
officials  and  others,  but  it  would  support  the  local  authorities
and  aid  them  in  resisting  any  influences  which  might  be
brought  to  bear  to  prevent  their  prosecuting  for  violations.
Advocates  of  the  measure  believe,  also,  that  the  federal
courts  would  be  more  likely  to  find  against  a  man  who  vio-
lated a  federal  law  regarding  the  employment  of  children  than
the  local  courts  are  to  convict  for  violation  of  state  laws.
This  would  be  an  important  gain,  because  it  is  not  at  aU  an
uncommon  thing  for  the  state  factory  inspector  to  have  a
case  dismissed  by  the  judge  after  the  most  careftil  evidence
has  been  presented,  merely  because  the  judge  does  not  see
that  any  great  injustice  has  been  done  the  individual  child.

For  the  better  enforcement  of  child  labor  laws  cooperation
between  all  the  different  agencies  that  are  interested  is  es-
sential. The  standards  which  have  been  and  will  be  estab-
lished in  regard  to  the  entrance  of  children  into  industry  will
never  be  thoroughly  enforced  tintil  the  problem  of  adminis-
tration is  taken  up  with  the  same  enthusiasm  and  persist-
ence which  have  marked  the  campaigns  for  legislation.

b.  Women.  The  exclusion  of  women  from  various  branches
of  industry  is  based  primarily  on  their  inherently  weaker  re-
sistance to  certain  health  dangers,  and  sometimes  upon  moral
grounds  or  upon  their  special  need  for  protection  at  certain
periods,  as  just  before  and  after  childbirth.  Legislation  to
this  end  is  much  less  extensively  developed  in  America  than
in  Europe.

(a)  Prohibited  Employments.  In  America  almost  all  laws
forbidding  the  employment  of  women  in  designated  occupa-

various  states,  pointing  out  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the  laws.  The
first  of  these  to  appear  was  "Employment  Certificate  System  in  Con-
necticut," Helen  L.  Sumner  and  Ethel  E.  Hanks,  1915.


3i8 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tions  or  tinder  designated  conditions  relate  to  work  in  niines
and  saloons.  Work  in  mines  is  forbidden  to  women  in  most
of  the  mining  states,^  and  work  in  saloons  (except  by  mem-
bers of  the  family)  in  about  fourteen  states,^  but  in  neither
of  those  occupations  has  the  problem  of  female  labor  been  as
serious  as  it  is  in  England  and  in  some  other  European  coun-
tries where  similar  prohibitions  are  in  force.  In  addition,  a
few  scattered  provisions  of  various  sorts  are  fotmd.  Two  or
three  states  have  forbidden  the  emplojTnent  of  women  in
cleaning  moving  machinery.^  Arizona  forbids  the  work  of
women  "in  any  capacity"  in  which  they  must  remain  standing
constantly,*  and  New  York  and  Ohio  forbid  women  to  oper-
ate certain  kinds  of  emery  and  other  polishing  wheels.*  New
York  also  forbids  the  employment  of  women  coremakers  in
foundries  if  the  cores  are  baked  ia  the  room  where  they  are
made.^

In  Etirope  the  evil  effects  of  certain  kinds  of  work  are  much
better  known  than  in  this  country,  and  it  is  well  recognized
that  even  the  most  careful  regulation  of  working  conditions
in  these  occupations  would  not  suffice  to  prevent  injury  to  the
health  of  women  employed  therein.  Accordingly,  European
legislation  forbids  the  work  of  women  in  a  fairly  wide  list  of
occupations,  most  of  which  involve  the  presence  of  dusts,
fumes,  vapors,  gases  or  substances  of  a  poisonous  or  clearly
harmful  character.  Among  women  workers  in  white  lead,
for  instance,  it  was  discovered  that  a  serious  derangement  of
the  reproductive  organs  frequently  occurred,  and  that  the  per-
centage of  miscarriages  and  still-births  among  married  women
was  exceedingly  high.  Therefore,  in  most  European  countries,
and  also  in  Argentina,  women  are  forbidden  to  work  in  the
dangerous  processes  in  which  this  poison  is  used. In  France


1  Alabama,  Arizona,  Arkansas,  Colorado,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Maryland,
Missouri,  New  York,  Oklahoma,  Pennsylvania,  Utah,  Virginia,  Wash-
ington, West  Virginia,  Wisconsin,  Wyoming.

*  Connecticut,  Idaho,  Iowa,  Louisiana,  Maryland,  Michigan,  Missouri,
Montana,  New  Hampshire,  New  Mexico,  New  York,  Texas,  Utah,
Vermont.

'  Louisiana,  Minnesota,  West  Virginia.

^Arizona,  Revised  Statutes  1913,  Sec.  3115.

"  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  464;  Ohio,  General  Code  1910,  Sec.  1027;
15  (as  amended  by  Laws  1911,  p.  428).

5  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  464.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  319

females  are  forbidden  even  to  enter  a  place  in  which  any  one
of  forty-six  especially  dangerous  processes  is  carried  on,  and
nearly  one  hundred  additional  occupations  are  forbidden
except  tinder  special  protective  conditions.  Similar  lists  are
found  in  the  more  important  European  countries  and  even
Spain,  long  backward  in  social  legislation,  has  forbidden  the
employment  of  women  and  minor  children  in  a  long  list  of
occupations.  While  it  is  true  that  women  in  foreign  countries
often  engage  in  work  done  only  by  men  in  this  country,  yet
many  women  are  undoubtedly  at  work  here  in  industries  so
dangerous  to  their  health  that  an  extension  of  prohibitory
legislation  is  urgently  needed.

(6)  Childbirth  Protection.  It  was  not  until  191 1  that  the
prohibition  of  the  industrial  employment  of  women  for  a
stated  period  before  and  after  childbirth  became  the  subject
of  legislation  in  America.  Such  statutes  were  passed  by
Massachusetts  in  191 1,  New  York  in  191 2,  and  Connecticut
and  Vermont  in  1913'  The  Massachusetts  act  is  a  rep-
resentative one.  It  forbids  "knowingly"  employing  any
woman  in  "a  manufacturing,  mechanical,  or  mercantile
establishment"  within  two  weeks  before  or  four  weeks  after
childbirth.i

The  desirability  of  such  additional  protection  for  working-
women  at  the  time  of  childbirth  has  been  recognized  by  most
European  countries  and  by  several  outside  of  Europe.  The
prohibited  period  is  generally  similar  to  that  found  in  America,
from  two  to  four  weeks  before  and  from  four  to  six  or  eight
weeks  after  confinement.  European  laws  are  also  rendered
more  effective  than  the  American  by  their  frequent  connec-
tion with  provisions  for  maternity  insurance.^  For  instance,
under  the  German  system  of  health  insurance,  a  woman
worker  is  paid  benefits  of  half-wages  for  eight  weeks  follow-
ing confinement,  or  longer  if  she  is  unable  to  return  to  work
at  the  end  of  that  time.  Such  instuance  is  needed  partly  to
make  up  for  the  income  loss  during  the  enforced  period  of
idleness,  and  may  also  be  an  important  aid  in  the  enforce-
ment of  the  law.  The  necessity  for  such  law  in  effective  form
is,  however,  undoubtedly  less  in  this  country  than  abroad,

1  Massachusetts,  Laws  191 1,  C.  229.

2  See  "Maternity  Insurance,"  p.  393.


320 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

where  the  employment  of  women  with  young  children  is  much
more  frequent.

c.  Men.  Legal  regulations  for  the  exclusion  of  men  from
dangerous  employments  are  never  of  universal  application,
as  they  are  in  the  case  of  children  and  women,  but  are  limited
to  certain  classes  or  groups  of  individuals  who  must  be  ex-
cluded on  definite  grounds,  usually  ascertained  by  examina-
tion. The  grounds  of  exclusion  may  be  either  physical  or
technical.  Although  the  distinction  does  not  always  hold,
physical  requirements  are  in  the  main  intended  to  protect
the  worker  who  is  debarred,  while  in  the  case  of  technical
qualifications  the  protection  of  fellow-workmen  or  of  the  gen-
eral public  is  an  added  if  not  the  main  consideration.  Physi-
cal qualifications,  also,  are  usually  concerned  with  health;
technical  qualifications  with  safety.

(a)  Physical  Qualifications.  Physical  qualifications  estab-
lished by  law  are  of  foiu-  kinds:  (i)  reasonable  immunity  from
the  trade  malady  characteristic  of  the  emplojmient;  (2)  free-
dom from  a  trade  malady  contracted  in  the  cotirse  of  em-
ployment; (3)  freedom  from  a  contagious  disease  which  might
be  passed  on  to  other  workmen  or  to  consumers  of  the  product;
and  (4)  freedom  from  physical  defect  of  such  natiire  as  to
interfere  with  the  proper  performance  of  duty.  It  wiU  be
noted  that  the  first  two  qualifications  look  toward  the  health
of  the  workman  himself,  and  that  the  last  two  look  maiiJy
toward  the  health  and  safety  of  other  persons.

The  qualification  of  immunity  from  a  particular  occupation-
al disease  was  found  in  19 15  in  only  two  American  laws,  but
is  more  common  abroad.  The  New  York  ^  and  New  Jersey  ^
statutes  regulating  work  in  compressed  air  reqtiire  that  ap-
plicants must  be  found  physically  qualified  by  a  physician
paid  by  the  employer,  and  these  laws  also  exclude  persons
addicted  to  the  excessive  use  of  intoxicants.  In  Europe
examinations  for  entrance  to  compressed-air  work  are  re-
quired in  Prance  and  in  Holland,  the  latter  country  specify-
ing a  long  list  of  ailments,  such  as  obesity,  heart  or  limg  dis-
eases, and  affections  of  the  nose  and  ears,  any  one  of  which
debars  from  the  work. Austria  bars  from  work  in  paper-

1  New  York,  Laws  1909,  C.  291.
'  New  Jersey,  Laws  1914,  C.  121.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  321

mills  all  workers  with  open  wounds,  persons  with  delicate
respiratory  organs,  and  consumptives.  Still  more  common  is
the  requirement  of  a  medical  certificate  of  fitness  as  a  condi-
tion of  entering  the  more  dangerous  lead  trades,  which  is
found  in  Austria,  France,  Germany,  Great  Britain,  and  Russia.
Germany  specifically  prohibits  the  employment  in  these
trades  of  applicants  with  lung,  kidney,  or  stomach  trouble,  a
generally  weak  constitution,  or  an  addiction  to  alcohol;  France,
of  those  who  exhibit  symptoms  of  lead  poisoning  or  of  any
complaint  hkely  to  be  dangerously  aggravated  by  pltmibism.
Belgiimi  also  forbids  the  emplojmient  of  alcohohcs  in  the
white  lead,  lead  oxide,  or  lead  paint  trades.

It  is  obvious,  however,  that  merely  debarring  from  entrance
to  an  unhealthy  trade  those  demonstrably  susceptible  to  its
dangers  is  insufficient  protection.  The  worker's  real  power  of
resistance  to  a  specific  hazard  often  cannot  be  determined
until  he  has  been  exposed  to  it,  and  if  he  begins  to  show
symptoms  of  succumbing  he  cannot  be  too  quickly  removed.
Hence  arises  the  necessity  for  the  second  qualification,  free-
dom from  a  trade  malady  contracted  in  the  course  of  em-
ployment.

Most  common  occupational  diseases  are  of  such  slow  in-
ception that  a  capable  physician  can  detect  them  in  the  early
stages  before  their  cumulative  effects  have  become  serious.
To  make  sure,  therefore,  that  the  originally  healthy  employee
is  in  fact  successfully  resisting  the  risk  with  which  he  is  sur-
roimded,  the  initial  examination,  when  it  is  given,  must  be
supplemented  by  periodical  re-examinations  at  intervals  grad-
uated according  to  the  degree  of  risk.  Sometimes  periodic
examinations  are  required  even  when  there  are  no  restrictions
upon  entrance  to  the  trade.

Such  is  the  case  with  the  monthly  exanoinations  required
under  the  "lead  laws"  of  the  important  lead  using  states.
The  Ohio  ^  and  Pennsylvania  ^  laws  apply  to  the  manufacture
of  certain  of  the  more  poisonous  lead  salts,  such  as  white
lead,  red  lead,  and  arsenate  of  lead  (Paris  green),  while  the  later
New  Jersey '  statute  covers  also  the  manufactiure  of  pottery,

•Ohio,  Laws  1913,  p.  819.
'Pennsylvania,  Laws  1913,  No.  851.
, '  New  Jersey,  Laws  1914,  C.  162.
21


322 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tiles,  or  porcelain-enameled  sanitary  ware  in  so  far  as  lead  is
used.

In  all  three  of  these  states  the  physician  who  discovers  a
case  of  lead  poisoning  must  report  it  not  only  to  the  state
departments  of  labor  and  of  health,  but  also  to  the  employer,
who  after  five  days  must  not  continue  the  "leaded"  employee
in  a  dangerous  process  nor  return  him  thereto  without  a
physician's  written  permit.^

Provision  for  regular  re-examination  is  also  found  in  the
two  American  compressed-air  laws  already  mentioned.  Under
these  the  examination  must  be  repeated  after  the  first  half-
day's  work,  on  returning  to  work  after  ten  days'  absence
from  any  cause,  and  after  three  months'  continuous  employ-
ment, and  workmen  who  have  ceased  to  be  qualified  must
be  excluded.

In  the  more  dangerous  lead  trades  workers  are  subject  to
regular  examination  in  nearly  all  European  countries.  Eng-
land and  Germany,  moreover,  require  examinations  both  in
alkali  chrome  works,  where  corrosions  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane are  common,  and  in  rubber  vulcanizing  works,  where
there  is  danger  from  the  noxious  gas  bisulphide  of  carbon.
Prance  reqvdres  similar  examinations  in  compressed-air  work.
The  frequency  of  examination  varies  from  once  a  week  in
the  British  white  lead  industry,  to  every  six  months  among
German  painters,  although  once  a  month,  as  in  the  American
lead  trades,  is  the  most  usual  period.  In  the  Netherlands
stone  masons  are  entitled  to  medical  examination  at  the  em-
ployer's expense  once  a  year.  In  order  that  the  advantages
of  cumulative  experience  may  not  be  lost,  a  factory  record  of
the  results  of  medical  examinations,  especially  if  they  result
in  findings  of  disease,  is  nearly  always  required,  and  must
usually  be  kept  by  the  examining  physician.^

'  Similar  laws  in  Illinois  (Laws  1911,  p.  330),  and  Missouri  (Laws  1913,
p.  402)  cover  wider  ranges  of  related  industries,  including  zinc  smelting
and  work  with  arsenic,  brass,  mercury,  and  phosphorus,  but  do  not  re-
quire the  removal  from  danger  of  workmen  who  show  symptoms  of  the
resultant  diseases.

2  In  Germany  this  record  is  called  a  "control  book,"  and  must  con-
tain the  name  of  the  person  keeping  it,  first  and  last  name,  address  and
age  of  each  workman,  date  of  his  entering  and  leaving  the  employment,
date  and  nature  of  his  illness,  date  of  his  recovery,  name  of  the  factory
physician,  and  dates  and  results  of  the  medical  examinations. The  em-


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  323

The  third  physical  qualification,  absence  of  contagious  dis-
ease, is  applied  occasionally  in  bakeshops  ^  and  in  other  food
establishments,^  while  the  fourth,  freedom  from  physical  de-
fect which  might  interfere  with  proper  performance  of  duty,
is  mentioned  in  a  few  states  which  require  an  examination
of  railroad  employees  for  color  bhndness  or  other  defective
sight.'

(6)  Technical  Qualifications.  Far  more  numerous  than  the
examinations  to  test  an  adult  workman's  fitness  for  a  given
occupation  upon  physical,  or  health,  grounds,  are  those  re-
qviired  in  nearly  aU  states  for  the  licensing  of  men  to  carry
on  certain  trades  after  a  test  of  experience,  skill,  or  general
education.  Laws  for  the  examination  and  registration  of
barbers,*  horseshoers,^  plumbers,^  electricians,'  moving-picture
machine  operators,*  chauffeurs,^  railroad,^"  streetcar,"  and
steamboat  ^^  employees,  elevator  operators,^'  and  even  aero-
nauts,^* are  designed  primarily  for  the  protection  of  the  pub-
lic, and  need  only  be  mentioned.  More  closely  related  to  the
subject  are  technical  examinations  for  miners  and  for  firemen
and  engineers  in  charge  of  stationary  boilers.

Statutes  requiring  the  examination  and  registration  or
licensing  of  certain  classes  of  coal  mine  employees  exist  in


ployer  is  responsible  for  the  correctness  of  the  record,  and  must  show  it
to  the  factory  or  medical  inspector  on  demand.  The  Austrian  health
register  goes  into  even  more  detail.

'  See,  for  instance,  Connecticut,  General  Statutes  1902,  Sec.  2570.

'  Maryland,  Laws  1914,  C.  678,  Sec.  i  (e).

'  For  example,  Ohio,  General  Code  1910,  Sec.  12548.

*  Found  in  19 15  in  fifteen  states.

'  Found  in  191 5  in  four  states  and  in  Hawaii.  These  laws  have  been
declared  unconstitutional  in  Illinois,  New  York,  and  Washington,  as
unduly  interfering  with  a  calling  not  requiring  regulation  on  groimds  of
public  health  and  comfort.

'Found  in  19 15  in  twenty-one  states,  the  District  of  Columbia,  and
Porto  Rico.

'  Found  in  1915  in  Louisiana,  Acts  1908,  No.  178.

'  Pound  in  191 5  in  three  states.

'  Found  in  191 5  in  twenty-two  states  and  in  the  Philippine  Islands.

"  Found  in  1915  in  seventeen  states.

''  Found  in  1915  in  only  three  states — Louisiana,  New  York,  and
Washington.

"Found  in  191 5  in  the  United  States, eight  states, and  the  Philippine
Islands.

"  Found  in  1915  in  Minnesota  alone.

"  Found  ia  1915  in  ^s  one  state  of  Connecticut,  Lawa  1911,  C.  86.


324 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

practically  all  of  the  important  mining  states.'  Managers,
foremen  or  bosses,  fire  bosses,  mine-examiners,  and  hoisting
engineers  are  the  employees  for  whom  licenses  are  usually
required,  but  some  of  the  newer  laws  cover  all  miners,  each  of
whom,  however,  is  allowed  one  unlicensed  apprentice.^  Candi-
dates must  present  affidavits  attesting  their  good  character
and  sobriety,  must  have  a  specified  number  of  years'  experi-
ence, must  be  residents  of  the  state,  and  must  pass  the  exami-
nation prescribed  by  an  examining  board.  The  increase  of
foreign-bom  workmen  among  the  miners  is  reflected  by  the
growing  number  of  states  which  require  ability  to  read  and
speak  English.'  A  fee  ranging  from  $i  to  $s  is  charged  for
the  examination  and  Hcense.  The  examining  boards  are  com-
posed of  from  three  to  five  men,  one  of  whom  is  usually  a
state  mine  inspector,  the  others  being  miners  and  mine-
owners  or  superintendents  in  equal  ntimber.

Finally,  in  a  number  of  states*  and  in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia no  one  may  serve  as  fireman  or  engineer  in  connection  with
a  stationarj'-  boiler  who  has  not  been  found  qualified  by  a
state  or  local  examining  board.  Moral  character  and  tem-
perate habits,  one  to  three  years'  experience,  and  a  minimum
age  limit  are  specified  in  a  few  instances,  and  the  license  is
generally  revokable  for  negligence,  intoxication,  or  violation
of  law  or  regulations.

Because  they  fear  loss  of  employment  if  found  to  be  suffer-
ing from  some  disqualifying  ailment,  workmen  have  at  times
protested  against  medical  examinations  conducted  by  the  em-
ployer. Aside  from  possible  abuse  of  such  information,  how-
ever, the  advantages  to  be  gained  by  the  workman  through
exclusion  or  timely  removal  from  a  disease-breeding  occupation
would  outweigh  the  hardship  due  to  temporary  loss  of  wages
while  awaiting  recovery  or  securing  other  work. Even  the

I  Such  statutes  existed  in  1 9 1 5  in  the  fifteen  states  of  Alabama,  Colorado,
Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Kentucky,  Missouri,  Montana,  Ohio,  Oklahoma,
Pennsylvania,  Tennessee,  Utah,  Virginia,  and  Wyoming.

=  Illinois,  Laws  1913,  p.  438,  Sec.  i.

'  See,  for  example,  Kentucky,  Laws  1914,  C.  79,  Art.  XVI,  Sec.  I.

*  In  19 1 5  licenses  for  stationary  firemen  and  engineers  (exclusive  of
those  in  mines)  were  required  in  the  ten  states  of  Georgia,  Maryland,
Massachusetts,  Minnesota,  Missouri,  Montana,  Nevada,  New  Jersey,
Ohio,  and  Pennsylvania.  Many  cities  also  require  licenses  under  city
ordinances.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  325

wage  loss,  when  exclusion  is  due  to  illness,  can  be  in  large  part
taken  care  of  by  the  extension  of  workmen's  compensation
to  embrace  occupational  diseases  and  by  the  institution  of
systems  of  public  health  insurance.^  For  the  physician,  also,
the  practice  of  examining  large  bodies  of  men  at  the  place  of
employment  will  lead  to  added  insight  into  the  trade  causes
of  disease,  an  insight  which  unfortunately  is  as  yet  only
rudimentary.  In  any  compulsory  system  of  medical  examin-
ation the  physician  should  be  employed  by  the  state.

(2)  Prohibition  of  Substances  or  Instruments

The  most  notable  example  of  the  apphcation  of  the  method
of  prohibition  to  a  dangerous  substance  is  the  world-wide
banishing  of  poisonous  phosphorus  from  the  match  industry.
Within  eleven  years  after  the  commercial  introduction  of  the
phosphorus  match  in  1827  the  disease  known  as  "phossy  jaw"
or  phosphorus  necrosis  was  attracting  the  attention  of  govern-
ment investigators.  Various  efforts  to  eliminate  the  disease
by  regulation  having  signally  failed,  Finland  in  1872  forbade
the  use  of  white  phosphorus  in  match  factories,  and  similar
action  was  taken  by  Denmark  in  1874.  In  France,  where
match-making  is  a  government  monopoly,  the  profits  from  the
industry  were  wiped  out  by  sickness  and  death  claims  until
a  harmless  substitute  was  discovered  and  the  dangerous  in-
gredient prohibited  in  1897.  Other  countries  followed,  and  in
1906,  on  account  of  the  diffictdty  of  eliminating  poisonous  phos-
phorus in  countries  with  an  important  export  trade,  the  Inter-
national Association  for  Labor  Legislation  secured  an  inter-
national conference  at  Berne  which  resulted  in  the  unique
expedient  of  an  international  convention^  providing  for  the
absolute  prohibition  of  the  manufacture,  importation,  or  sale
of  matches  made  from  white  phosphorus.  This  treaty  was
,  signed  at  once  by  Deimiark,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Luxem-
■'  burg,  the  Netherlands,  and  Switzerland,  and  a  few  years  later
by  Great  Britain,  Spain,  and  mmierous  colonies.' Canada

iSee  "Health  Insurance,"  p.  385-

^  For  text  of  this  convention  see  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor
Office,  Vol.  I,  1906,  pp.  275-276.

'  For  complete  list  see  table,  Bulletin  of  the  International  Labor  Office,
Vol.  VII,  1912,  following  p.  503.


326 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

and  Mexico  also,  without  becoming  signatories  to  the  treaty,
have  prohibited  the  poisonous  substance  in  the  match  industry.

In  the  United  States  the  question  was  first  given  national
prominence  in  1910  by  the  report  of  a  federal  investigation.'
Two  years  later,  in  April,  1912,  Congress  placed  a  prohibitory
tax  of  2  cents  a  hundred  on  matches  containing  white  phos-
phorus, and  prohibited  their  import  or  export.^  The  power  of
internal  revenue  taxation  which  Congress  had  previously  exer-
cised for  the  benefit  of  bankers  and  farmers  was  thus  for
the  first  time  used  for  protecting  the  health  of  wage-earners.

Against  only  one  other  industrial  substance — ^lead — has
the  drastic  method  of  prohibition  been  invoked,  and  in  this
case  the  prohibitory  legislation  is  found  only  in  Europe.
Austria  was  first  to  act,  forbidding  in  igo8  the  use  of  lead  in
all  paints,  colors  or  cement  used  for  interior  work,  and  the
same  year  the  Swiss  administrative  departments  were  ordered
to  forbid  the  use  of  white  lead  in  painting  carried  on  in  their
behalf.  The  most  thoroughgoing  action  in  this  regard,  how-
ever, has  been  taken  by  France,  which  in  igog  declared  that
after  July  20,  1914,  the  use  of  "white  lead,  of  linseed  oil  mixed
with  lead,  and  of  all  specialized  products  containing  white
lead,  will  be  forbidden  in  aU  painting,  no  matter  of  what
nature,  carried  on  by  working  painters  either  on  the  outside
or  on  the  inside  of  buildings."  '  Belgium,  France,  and  Ger-
many also  forbid  the  removal  of  lead  paint  by  any  dry  rub-
bing or  scraping  process.

A  few  prohibitions  apply  not  to  substances,  but  to  instru-
ments of  work.  One  of  these  is  contained  in  the  Massachusetts
statute  intended  to  protect  textile  mill  operatives  from  "the
kiss  of  death."  This  law,  in  order  to  prevent  the  transfer
from  worker  to  worker  of  tuberculosis  and  other  infections,
prohibits  the  use  of  any  form  of  shuttle  "in  the  use  of  which
any  part  of  the  shuttle  or  any  thread  is  put  in  the  mouth  or
touched  by  the  lips  of  the  operator."  ^  Contagious  diseases
among  glass-blowers  are  guarded  against  in  France  and  Portu-

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  86,  January,  1910,
"Phosphorus  Poisoning  in  the  Match  Industry,"  John  B.  Andrews,
pp.  31-146.

2  United  States,  Laws  1911-1912,  C.  75.

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  p5,  July,  1911,  p.  180.

*  Massachusetts,  Laws  1911,  C.  281.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  327

gal  by  prohibitions  against  the  use  by  more  than  one  person
of  the  same  blowpipe.


3.  Regulation

The  method  of  regulation,  in  the  prevention  of  occupational
accident  and  disease,  as  in  other  social  problems,  is  based  on
the  principle  of  toleration  within  limits.  The  majority  of  the
people  may  believe  that  certain  dangerous  machines  or  proc-
esses are  so  necessary  a  part  of  our  industrial  life  that  their
prohibition  is  at  present  undesirable  or  at  least  impracticable.
In  dealing  with  industrial  accidents  and  diseases  the  adoption
of  this  principle  leads  in  the  work-places  to  the  installation  of
machine  guards,  fire-escapes,  dust  and  fume  removal  systems,
separate  wash-rooms  and  eating-rooms;  and  for  the  work-
people  to  the  limitation  of  working  hours.  As  the  latter
point  has  been  considered  in  the  chapter  on  "  Hours  of  Labor  "  '
only  the  regulation  of  work-places  need  be  treated  here.

Furnishing  a  reasonably  safe  place  in  which  to  work  is  plain-
ly the  duty  of  the  employer,  and  was  so  recognized  under  the
common  law  and  by  the  employers'  liability  statutes.  Not
aU  employers,  however,  are  equally  watchful  and  energetic,
even  if  all  were  equally  alive  to  their  social  responsibility  in
the  matter,  and  hence  has  arisen  the  need  of  standards,
drafted  and  enforced  by  public  authority,  which  wiU  throw
about  the  work-people  the  necessary  protection.  So  diversi-
fied are  the  various  branches  of  industry  and  the  accident  and
disease  hazards  in  each  that  separate  codes  have  grown  up
about  them.  These  codes  deal  in  the  main  with  (i)  factories
and  workshops,  (2)  mines  and  tunnels,  and  (3)  transportation.


(i)  Factories  and  Workshops

Modifying  to  meet  its  own  conditions  a  mass  of  legislation
already  existing  in  Great  Britain,  Massachusetts  passed  on
May  II,  1877,  the  first  American  law  requiring  factory  safe-

^  See  p.  200.


328 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

guards.  This  pioneer  law  touched  on  nearly  all  of  the  points
now  covered  by  our  most  advanced  statutes  for  the  prevention
of  factory  accidents.  It  provided  for  the  guarding  of  belting,
shafting,  and  gearing,  prohibited  the  cleaning  of  moving  ma-
chinery, required  elevators  and  hoistways  to  be  protected,
and  called  for  sufficient  means  of  egress  in  case  of  fire.  Prac-
tically every  state  in  the  union  now  has  a  factory  and  work-
shop act  prescribing  minimum  conditions  of  safety.

a.  Machine  Guards.  The  point  perhaps  most  frequently
dealt  with  is  safeguarding  of  machinery.  Mechanism  for
the  transmission  of  power,  like  belting,  shafting,  and  gearing,
as  well  as  active  parts  of  machines,  such  as  saws,  planers,
mangles,  and  emery-wheels,  must  usually  be  securely  guarded,
but  if  this  is  not  considered  possible  it  is  sometimes  required
that  notice  of  the  danger  be  conspicuously  posted.  Set-screws
or  other  projections  must  be  coimtersunk  beneath  the  level
of  the  shaft  or  otherwise  guarded,  while  shafts  and  belts,  and
floor  openings  through  which  they  pass,  must  be  cased  or
railed  off.  A  statute  found  only  in  the  great  textile  state  of
Massachusetts  requires  looms  to  be  provided  with  guards
which  will  prevent  injury  from  flying  shuttles.^  It  has  often
but  not  tmiformly  been  held  by  the  courts  that  failure  to  pro-
vide the  reqtiired  safeguards  is  negligence  per  se,'  and  that
the  worker  does  not  assume  the  risk  of  the  employer's  negligent
disregard  of  duty,  even  though  he  is  aware  of  it.°  Many  safe-
guards can  be  applied  best  and  most  economically  during  the
original  building  of  the  machine,  and  Minnesota  has  pro-
hibited the  manufacture  or  sale  of  mechanism  with  danger
points  unguarded.^  The  same  idea  is  found  in  the  laws  of
some  Exiropean  countries,  and  a  growing  number  of  American
dealers  are  acting  upon  it  without  legislative  compvdsion.^

It  is  not  siifficient,  however,  for  a  safeguard  to  be  attached
to  a  machine. If  it  is  to  do  its  work  it  must  be  actually  used.


'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1909,  C.  514,  Sec.  loi.

^  Davis  V.  Mercer  Lumber  Co.,  164  Ind.  413,  73  N.  E.  899  (1905).

'Evansville  Hoop  &  Stave  Co.  v.  Bailey,  43  Ind.  App.  153,  84  N.  E.
549  (1908).

*  Minnesota,  Laws  1913,  C.  316,  Sec.  5.

'John  R.  Commons,  "How  the  Wisconsin  Industrial  Commission
Works,"  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  February,  1913,  p.  13;
Ijabor  and  Administration,  1913,  Ch.  JCXXI.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  329

A  number  of  states  have  therefore  passed  provisions  forbid-
ding any  person  to  move,  displace,  or  destroy  any  safety  de-
vice except  under  rules  established  by  the  employer,  and  some
specify  immediate  repairs  as  the  only  cause  for  which  a  machine
guard  may  be  removed  during  the  active  operation  of  the
machine.  A  related  clause  forbids  employees  to  operate  or
tamper  with  machines  with  which  they  are  not  familiar  or
which  are  not  connected  with  their  regular  duties.

In  case  of  accident  it  is  important  that  the  operative  be
able  to  stop  the  machine  at  once.  It  is  commonly  required,
therefore,  that  shafting  be  fitted  with  tight  and  loose  pulleys,
and  that  belt-shifters  or  poles  be  supplied  for  shifting  the
belt  quickly  and  safely  from  one  to  the  other.  Some  states
require  friction  clutches  for  stopping  machinery,  and  in  ad-
dition to  all  these  means  of  safety  Illinois,  among  other  states,
requires  speaking-tubes,  electric  bells,  electric  colored  lights
or  other  means  of  communication  between  the  workroom
and  the  engine-room.  Other  regulations  governing  moving
machinery  forbid  cleaning  or  repairing  it  while  in  motion,
and  overcrowding.  Closely  related  to  the  foregoing  provi-
sions are  those  dealing  with  covers  or  other  safeguards  on  such
stationary  equipment  as  vats  and  pans.

Among  other  provisions  against  accident  are  frequent  re-
quirements that  stairs  must  be  properly  screened  at  sides  and
bottom,  must  have  rubber  treads  if  thought  necessary  by  the
commissioner  of  labor,  and  must  be  furnished  with  sub-
stantial hand-rails.  Stair  openings  on  each  floor  must  be
closed,  as  well  as  entrances  to  elevator  shafts.  Trap-doors,
fences,  gates,  or  other  safeguards  may  be  required  for  hoist-
ways,  hatchways,  and  well-holes.  It  is  often  required  that
elevators  be  provided  with  automatic  catches  to  prevent  fall-
ing. In  Wisconsin  the  industrial  commission  had,  in  19 15,
issued  no  fewer  than  fifty-four  separate  orders  all  looking  to
the  safe  construction  and  operation  of  passenger  and  freight
elevators.*

Protection  against  explosions  of  stationary  boilers  is  best
exemplified  by  the  methods  of  the  Massachusetts  Board  of
Boiler  Rules. This  board,  one  of  the  earliest  forerunners  of

'  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  148,  1914,
"Labor  Laws  of  the  United  States,"  pp.  2313-2320.


330 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  industrial  commission  plan  of  drafting  and  enforcing
safety  measures,  was  established  in  1907.^  It  is  composed  of
five  members:  the  chief  inspector  of  the  boiler  inspection
department,  who  serves  as  chairman;  one  representative  of
the  boiler  manufacturing  interests;  one  representative  of  the
boiler-using  interests;  one  representative  of  the  boiler-insur-
ance interests;  and  one  operating  engineer.  The  duties  of  the
board  include  the  formulation  of  rules  for  the  construction,
installation,  operation,  and  inspection  of  steam-boilers.  For
this  purpose  public  hearings  and  private  conferences  are  held,
and  the  rules  as  formulated  are  submitted  to  the  governor
for  approval.  When  approved  they  are  published  and  have
the  full  force  of  law.  The  success  of  this  system  in  reducing
the  number  of  boiler  explosions  has  led  to  its  adoption  in
many  states  and  cities,  even  as  far  away  as  Manila.

b.  Protection  against  Fire.  Though  the  prevention  of  fire  is
of  far  more  importance  than  providing  means  of  escape,  legal
provisions  covering  this  point  are  of  comparatively  late  devel-
opment. It  was  not  tmtil  191 1,  for  instance,  that  New  Jersey
ordered  cans  to  be  provided  for  combustible  waste,  and  it  was
not  until  191 2  that  New  York  required  gas-jets  to  be  inclosed
in  globes,  wire  cages,  or  other  protection,  and  forbade  smoking
in  factories.  Meanwhile,  disastrous  factory  fires  in  both
states,  due  in  part  to  lack  of  these  safeguards,  had  attracted
the  attention  of  the  country,  and  resiilted  in  much  legislation.
In  some  states  floors  must  now  be  swept  daily  and  the  sweep-
ings removed,  and  the  quantity  of  explosives  that  may  be
kept  in  a  btdlding  is  carefully  regulated.  Sometimes  fac-
tories must  be  equipped  with  an  automatic  gas-cock  or  ap-
pliance by  which  in  case  of  fire  the  supply  of  gas  may  be  shut
ofE  without  entering  the  building.

Required  means  of  extinguishing  fires  include  pails  of  water
or  sand,  a  standpipe  and  hose  of  specified  dimensions,  fire
extinguishers  or  automatic  sprinkler  systems.  The  major
part  of  fire  laws,  however,  is  devoted  to  provisions  for  prompt
escape.  In  the  early  days  of  this  legislation,  since  no  one  had
taken  the  time  to  study  out  what  would  constitute  effective
egress,  lawmakers  contented  themselves  in  most  cases  with


*  Massachusetts,  Laws  1907,  C.  465,  Sees.  24-28.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  331

ordering  "suitable  and  sufficient"  exits  and  escapes.  Now
the  most  elaborate  details  as  to  material  and  construction
are  found.  Balcony  escapes,  fire  towers,  or  chutes  or  to-
boggans may  be  used  in  diflEerent  states.  Doors  must  be  con-
structed to  open  out  or  slide,  and  must  not  be  fastened  in  any
way  during  working  hours.  Sometimes  the  nimiber  of  em-
ployees to  the  floor  is  regulated,  periodical  fire  drills  are  called
for,  and  gongs,  and  red  lights  or  other  "Exit"  signs,  must  be
installed.  A  growing  number  of  states  require  plans  for  fire
egress  in  new  buildings  to  be  passed  upon  by  labor  or  building
department  officials.

c.  Lighting,  Heating,  and  Ventilation.  Although  proper
lighting  affects  both  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  work-
man and  his  liability  to  accident,  less  attention  has  been  paid
to  this  phase  of  industrial  safety  and  hygiene  than  to  al-
most any  other  point  of  similar  importance.  Comparatively
few  states  have  enacted  any  legislation  on  the  subject,  and
most  of  those  limit  themselves  to  meaningless  and  unenforce-
able provisions  such  as  that  factories  must  be  "well  and
sufficiently  lighted."  *

Artfficial  lighting  in  factories  is  notoriously  bad  because  of
poor  quality,  insufficient  quantity,  haphazard  distribution
resulting  in  spots  of  excessive  intensity  separated  by  danger-
ous shadows,  and  glare  caused  by  lack  of  shades  or  diffusing
mediums.  Many  eye  specialists  assert  that  from  80  to  90
per  cent,  of  headaches  are  due  to  eye  strain,  and  in  the  pro-
duction of  eye  strain  improper  lighting  is  an  important  factor.
The  effects  of  poor  illumination  are  particularly  severe  upon
women  workers,  because  of  their  more  delicate  nervous  or-
ganization. Yet  at  the  present  stage  of  the  art  all  harmful
light  conditions  in  factories  could  be  done  away  with  easily
and  cheaply.  "It  can  easily  be  shown,"  declares  one  ex-
pert, "that  a  workman  earning  only  $2  per  day  of  ten  hotu-s
would  have  to  lose  but  three  minutes  of  his  time  to  make  a


'  Connecticut  (General  Statutes  1902,  Sec.  4518)  adds  that  painted,
stained  or  corrugated  glass  in  factory  windows  must  be  removed,  "  where
the  same  is  injurious  to  the  eyes  .  .  .  upon  the  order  of  the  factory  in-
spector." In  other  words,  Connecticut  permits  any  factory-owner  to
block  out  light  by  any  one  of  the  three  methods  named  until  ordered  to
desist  by  the  inspector,  who  tnuat,  however,  first  prove  that  the  dark-
ness is  injuriouBi


332 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

loss  to  the  manufacturer  equal  to  the  cost  of  all  the  artificial
light  he  could  possibly  require  during  the  entire  day."  '

Indications  of  what  a  really  scientific  law  on  factory  light-
ing might  be  are  found  in  the  Holland  statute.  There  women
and  children  are  forbidden  to  work  in  establishments  where
artificial  illtmiination  is  ordinarily  required  between  9  a.m.
and  3  P.M.  For  processes  exceptionally  trjang  to  the  eyes,
such  as  embroidering,  typesetting,  and  instrument-making,
a  minimtmi  light  of  one  and  one-half  foot-candles  is  specified,
while  for  less  exacting  occupations  the  minimum  is  one  foot-
candle.

A  few  states  authorize  the  inspector  to  require  changes  in
heating  apparatus  found  dangerous  to  health,  but  no  stand-
ards of  proper  or  permissible  temperature  are  set  up.  Massa-
chusetts has  established  for  certain  textile  processes  a  grad-
uated standard  of  humidity  permissible  at  certain  tempera-
tures,^ but  only  there  and  in  Illinois  is  the  subject  of  humidity
mentioned.  Yet  apart  from  the  presence  of  dusts  and  fimies,
the  only  atmospheric  condition  which  has  been  thoroughly
proven  harmftil  is  the  combination  of  excessive  heat  with  ex-
cessive humidity.

Recognition  of  the  importance  of  ventilation  is  more  wide-
spread. Industrial  dust  and  fume,  whether  metallic,  chemical,
vegetable,  or  animal  in  origin,  and  whether  poisonous  or  not,
are  among  the  most  insidious  and  serious  of  modem  health
hazards,  and  the  illness  and  death  of  wage-earners  vary  almost
in  direct  proportion  to  the  contamination  of  the  air  supply.
Hence  about  half  the  states  have  enacted  provisions  that  fac-
tories shall  be  ventilated.  The  wording,  however,  is  in  most
cases  so  vague  that  it  means  but  little.  Among  the  first  laws
which  attempted  to  establish  even  an  elementary  standard
of  ventilation  was  the  Illinois  statute  of  1909.  Under  this
act  the  amount  of  fresh  air  to  be  supplied  depends  upon  the
kind  of  illumination  used,  the  cubic  air  space  furnished  for
each  employee,  and  the  window  area  of  workrooms.'  Pro-
visions for  from  250  to  600  cubic  feet  of  air  space  for  every


ip.  Leavenworth  Elliott,  "Factory  Lighting,"  American  Labor  Legis-
lation Review,  June,  1911,  p.  116.
'  Massachusetts,  Laws  1910,  C.  543.
'  Illinois,  Laws  1909,  p.  202.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  ' 333

employee  are  now  foiind  in  a  few  state  laws,  but  more  impor-
tant are  the  newer  regulations  providing  for  the  retention  and
removal  of  dangerous  dust  and  fume  at  the  point  of  produc-
tion by  specially  constructed  hoods,  hoppers,  exhausts,  and
fans.  Regulations  of  this  type  have  been  established  either
as  statute  laws  or  by  administrative  order  principally  in  the
large  lead-using  states,  such  as  Illinois,  Missouri,  New  Jersey,
New  York,  Ohio,  and  Pennsylvania.^  As  additional  precau-
tions, most  of  these  laws  require  wet-cleaning  methods,  the
use  of  respirators,  and  separate  lunch-rooms,  and  forbid  bring-
ing any  food  or  drink  into  the  workrooms.  Similar  provisions
in  the  laws  of  other  countries  have  helped  reduce  the  risk  of
lead  poisoning  far  beneath  previous  American  expectations.
For  instance,  in  an  American  white  and  red-lead  factory,
employing  eighty-five  men  under  unregulated  conditions,  the
doctors'  records  for  six  months  showed  thirty-five  men  "lead-
ed," while  an  English  plant  of  the  same  nature,  with  ninety
employees,  but  under  strict  supervision,  reported  no  cases
for  five  years.^

,  In  at  least  two  cases  ventilation  statutes  have  been  de-
clared unconstitutional  by  state  courts,  but  both  times  upon
issues  not  related  to  the  purpose  or  benefits  of  the  laws,  and
in  both  cases  they  were  soon  replaced  by  amended  acts.  In
1901  the  California  law  of  1889  was  challenged  on  the  ground
that  it  made  the  commissioner  of  labor  the  judge  not  only  of
the  need  for  means  of  dust  removal,  but  also  of  the  character
of  the  appliance  to  be  installed.  The  supreme  court  upheld
the  objection,'  but  the  invalid  statute  was  immediately  re-
placed by  a  new  law,  giving  the  commissioner  power  to  order
only  proper  appliances  instead  of  some  particular  contrivance.
In  Illinois  a  19 11  statute  forbade  the  use  of  emery  or  similar
wheels  "in  any  basement  so  called,  or  in  any  room  lying
wholly  or  partly  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground."  This
provision  the  Supreme  Court  of  Illinois  held  to  be  an  "un-
warranted discrimination,"  since  it  condemned  all  rooms  of
the  class  named  without  reference  to  their  adequate  ventila-


'Por  a  comprehensive  act  of  this  type  see  New  Jersey,  Laws  1914,
C.  162.
*  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  December,  1914,  p.  539.
'  Schaezlein  v.  Cabaniss,  135  Cal.  466,  67  Pac.  755  (1901).


334 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

tion  or  lighting.^  The  legislature  of  1915,  however,  reenacted
substantially  the  same  provision,  with  a  change  of  wording
designed  to  overcome  the  objection.

d.  Seats,  Toilets,  and  Dressing-Rooms.  In  safety  and  health
legislation,  as  well  as  in  legislation  on  hours  and  wages,  a  dis-
tinct tendency  is  noticeable  to  single  out  women  for  special
protection,  on  the  grounds  of  their  greater  physical  weakness
and  their  comparative  helplessness  as  wage  bargainers.  The
possibilities  of  injury  from  unsafe  or  insanitary  conditions
are  more  apparent  and  it  is  easier  to  make  a  conclusive  case
in  their  behalf.  Not  infrequently  health  and  safety  laws  ap-
plied only  to  women  when  first  passed,  but  were  later  extended
to  protect  all  workers.  For  instance,  in  Colorado  a  law  which
originally  required  hand-rails  on  stairways  only  in  buildings
where  women  were  employed  was  extended  in  191 1  to  cover
all  work-places.^  Or  in  some  cases  a  law  affording  some  pro-
tection to  all  workers  may  be  of  wider  scope  in  its  application
to  women.  Thus  in  Missouri  mechanical  means  for  dust
removal  must  be  installed  in  all  factories  carrying  on  dusty
processes  where  five  or  more  "persons"  are  employed,  and
also  in  dusty  workshops  if  the  five  or  more  employees  are
"children,  young  persons,  or  women."  '

Particularly  striking  is  the  special  protection  of  women
manifested  in  the  laws  on  seats,  toilets,  and  dressing-rooms.
In  fact,  legislation  with  regard  to  seats  exists  only  for  women.
As  far  back  as  the  end  of  the  'seventies  the  dangers  of  con-
stant standing  for  salesgirls  were  recognized,  and  it  was  urged
that  they  be  furnished  seats  and  allowed  to  use  them.  A  law
containing  such  provisions  was  passed  by  New  York  as  early
as  1 88 1.  Almost  every  state  now  requires  suitable  seats  for
females  in  at  least  mercantile  establishments.*  The  majority
of  laws  extend  this  requirement  to  manufacturing  or  to  manu-
facturing and  mechanical  establishments,  and  several  states
cover  practically  all  employments.^ The  proportion  of  seats


'  People  V.  Schenck,  257  111.  384,  100  N.  E.  994  (1913).

"Colorado,  Laws  1911,  C.  132.

'  Missouri,  Revised  Statutes  1909,  Sees.  7858-7859.

*  By  the  end  of  1915  only  Idaho,  Mississippi,  Nevada,  and  New  Mejdco
were  without  such  legislation.

'  Arizona,  Arkansas,  California,  Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Missouri,
Montana,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Texas,  Washington,  West  Virginia.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  335

to  workers  is  sometimes  fixed  and  in  many  cases  the  law
specifies  that  employers  must  permit  the  use  of  the  seats
when  work  will  not  thereby  be  interfered  with.^  These  laws
are  of  little  real  importance  in  protecting  health,  however,
since  it  is  practically  impossible  to  see  that  employers  and  fore-
men allow  the  seats  to  be  used  even  when  provided.^

Nearly  all  the  states  likewise  require  sanitary  and  separate
toilets  for  women  workers  in  addition  to  those  for  men,  and
about  a  third  make  provision  for  women's  dressing-rooms.
These  provisions  form  a  very  important  factor  in  maintaining
the  health  and  morals  of  women  workers  in  any  establish-
ment; the  character  of  the  employment  frequently  naakes
necessary  a  change  from  street  clothes  to  work  clothes,  and
it  is  also  highly  desirable  that  a  suitable  place  be  provided
where  women  and  girls  may  eat  lunch,  secure  a  little  rest  at
the  noon  period,  and  retire  in  case  of  illness.

For  the  lead  industries,  especially,  careful  wash-room
standards  have  been  worked  out,  specifying  hot  and  cold
water,  a  definite  ratio  of  basins  or  of  trough  length  to  the
number  of  employees,  soap,  nail-brushes,  and  towels.  In  the
best  lead  laws,  also,  such  as  those  of  New  Jersey,  Ohio,  and
Pennsylvania,  hot  and  cold  shower-baths  are  required,  to  be
used  at  least  twice  a  week  on  the  employer's  time,  and  to  in-
sure the  use  of  the  baths  a  bath  register  must  be  kept.  A
few  states  require  a  sufficient  supply  of  pure  drinking-water
to  be  kept  in  a  readily  accessible  place.  Sometimes,  es-
pecially in  connection  with  foundries  and  casting-rooms,  the
lead  trades  and  compressed-air  work,  the  dressing-rooms  must
be  properly  heated  and  ventilated,  and  often  supplied  with
lockers  and  with  facilities  for  drying  clothes.

e.  Protection  from  Infectious  Disease.  Modem  industrial
processes  subject  large  numbers  of  employees  not  only  to
dangerous  dusts  and  vapors,  but  also  to  a  variety  of  disease-
breeding  organisms,  carried  either  by  fellow-workmen  or  by
the  materials  worked  upon.  As  a  protection  against  such  in-
fection a  ntimber  of  legal  regulations  have  been  adopted.

'■  See  Kentucky,  Laws  1912,  C.  77,  Sec.  3,  for  both  such  provisions.

'  A  law  of  this  class  which  plainly  defeats  its  own  intent  is  the  Dela-
ware statute  of  1913  (C.  176)  which  provides  that  no  girl  under  eighteen
may  work  in  any  employment  which  "compels  her  to  remain  standing
constantly,  unless  seats  are  provided."


336 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Several  states,  for  example,  forbid  sleeping  in  workrooms,
some  require  cuspidors  to  be  furnished  and  to  be  cleaned  and
disinfected  daily.  Massachusetts  in  1913  required  that  cloths
or  other  material  provided  for  cleaning  printing-presses  must
be  sanitary,'  and  a  California  law  of  the  same  year  laid  down
the  rule  that  all  wiping-rags  must  be  sterilized.^  In  every
industrial  state  htmdreds  of  cases  of  infection  or  "  blood-poison-
ing" occur  yearly,  and  about  six  out  of  every  seven  of  these
are  the  result  of  small  scratches.  The  requirement  now  found
in  some  states  for  a  first-aid  kit  in  factories,  workshops,  and
mercantile  establishments  should  assist  in  reducing  this  need-
less danger.

Prominent  among  the  infectious  diseases  of  industry  is
anthrax,  which  arises  in  the  handling  of  infected  hides  or  hair.
Austria,  Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Great  Britain,  and  Italy
have  all  turned  their  attention  to  eradicating  this  malignant
malady,  but  the  United  States  remains  inactive.  The  com-
monest legal  safeguards  are  provisions  for  thorough  washing,
for  overalls,  neck-coverings,  and  gloves,  and  for  treating  in-
stantly scratches  and  slight  woimds  which  offer  an  entrance
to  the  bacillus.  Disinfection  of  bristles  and  bales  of  hair  from
suspected  locaUties  before  any  work  is  done  on  them  is  in-
sisted on  in  some  countries.

/.  Tenement  House  Manufacture.  DifBctdt  as  are  the  prob-
lems cotmected  with  the  regulation  of  labor  conditions  in
factories,  they  are  not  more  troublesome  than  those  en-
coimtered  in  the  regulation  of  tenement  workshops,  where  the
work  is  done  by  the  family  group  in  its  customary  living-
quarters.

Tenement  house  manufacture  is  often  looked  upon  as  a
pleasant  and  easy  method  whereby  the  mothers  of  the  poor
may  add  to  the  family  income  in  their  leisure  moments.  The
fact  is  that  such  work  has  usually  proven  a  menace  to  health,
to  wage  standards,  and  to  the  existing  labor  laws.  Conges-
tion, insanitary  quarters,  lack  of  restriction  on  child  labor,  ab-
solutely unregulated  hours,  and  miserable  pay  combine  to
create  a  condition  which  endangers  the  Uves  not  only  of  the
workers,  but  of  the  purchasers  of  their  product. Often  tene-

1  Massachusetts,  Laws  1913,  C.  472,

2  Qalifornia,  Laws  1913,  C.  81,


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  337

ment  dwellers  have  been  found  at  work  on  garments  and  arti-
cles of  food  while  suffering  from  contagious  diseases.'

As  early  as  1885  New  York  sought  to  end  the  "sweating"
or  tenement  workshop  system  by  prohibiting  the  manu-
facture of  cigars  and  other  tobacco  products  in  tenement
houses  in  cities  of  the  first  class.  The  law  was  declared  un-
constitutional, the  court  holding  it  an  abuse  of  the  police
power  and  an  infringement  of  the  cigar-maker's  liberties  in
that  it  sought  to  force  him  "from  his  home  and  its  hallowed
associations  and  beneficent  influences,  to  ply  his  trade  else-
where." ^  Had  this  pioneer  statute  been  sustained,  the  entire
problem  of  tenement  house  labor  might  have  been  disposed  of
almost  at  its  beginning.

The  setback  in  the  Jacobs  case  radically  changed  the  method
of  attack  on  the  sweating  system.  Prohibition  having  been
declared  invalid,  for  three  decades  nearly  all  effort  was  di-
rected toward  regulation  and  the  imposing  of  minor  restric-
tions through  a  licensing  system.  In  1891  Massachusetts
passed  "An  act  to  prevent  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  cloth-
ing made  in  tmhealthy  places,"  and  the  following  year  New
York  inserted  in  its  newly  codified  labor  law  a  provision  for
the  licensing  and  regulation  of  tenement  workshops.  Similar
provisions  now  exist  in  about  a  dozen  states.'

These  statutes  ordinarily  reqviire  that  home  work  on  gar-
ments, foodstuffs,  and  tobacco  must  be  done  only  in  rooms
licensed  by  the  factory  inspection  department.  Only  mem-
bers of  the  immediate  family,  which  is  carefully  defined,  may
be  employed,  and  licenses  may  be  issued  only  if  fire-escape,
toilet,  and  all  other  health  and  safety  laws  have  been  com-
plied with.  In  case  of  disease,  work  must  cease  until  the
board  of  health  has  declared  the  illness  at  an  end  and  has
fumigated  the  apartment.  A  register  must  be  kept  of  names
and  addresses  of  persons  taking  out  work,  and  goods  given


'  See  Second  Report  of  the  New  York  State  Factory  Investigating  Com-
mission, "Manufacturing  in  Tenements,"  Vol.  I,  pp.  90-123;  Report
on  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United  States,
Vol.  II,  "Men's  Ready-Made  Clothing."

'  In  re  Jacobs,  98  N.  Y.  98  (1885).

'In  1915: Connecticut,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,
Michigan,  Missouri,  New  Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  and
Wisconsin.
22


338 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

out  must  be  labeled  with  the  name  and  address  of  the  manu-
facturer. Licenses  are  revokable  for  failure  to  comply  with
the  law,  or,  in  some  of  the  newer  acts,  "if  the  health  of  the
community  or  of  the  persons  employed  thereunder  requires  it."  ^

The  results  of  attempted  regulation  under  even  the  best
of  these  laws  have,  however,  never  been  satisfactory.  On
February  i,  1915,  for  instance,  there  were  almost  13,000
licensed  tenements  in  New  York  City  alone,  and  over  500  in
the  rest  of  the  state.  As  the  working  day  of  a  factory  in-
spector is  eight  hours  long,  it  would  require  three  inspectors
to  each  tenement,  or  an  army  of  over  40,000  in  all,  to  set  a
continuous  day  and  night  watch  upon  these  dwellings  to  see
that  no  violations  of  the  law  were  going  on;  and  this  estimate
takes  no  account  of  the  fact  that  home  work  is  covertly  car-
ried on  in  imhcensed  as  weU  as  in  licensed  houses.  "After
twenty-one  years,"  declare  those  who  have  long  been  S3Tn-
pathetic  observers  of  this  legislation,  "the  difficulties  of  in-
spection have  been  proved  insuperable."  ^

In  1913,  therefore,  after  the  able  investigations  of  the  state
factory  investigating  commission.  New  York  once  more  re-
ttimed  to  the  prohibitory  method  in  dealing  with  this  ques-
tion, and  forbade  work  in  tenement  homes  on  food  products,
dolls  or  dolls'  clothing,  and  children's  or  infants'  wearing-ap-
parel.^ The  prohibition  covered  both  work  done  directly  for
a  factory  and  indirectly  through  a  contractor,  and  was  applied
to  these  articles  first  because  of  their  close  relation  to  public
health,  especially  the  health  of  children.  There  is  little  doubt
that  in  the  present  state  of  public  knowledge  these  restrictions
will  be  followed  by  others.


(2)  Mines  and  Tunnels

Underground  work  of  any  sort  obviously  subjects  the  work-
man to  greater  dangers,  both  as  to  health  and  to  safety,  than

'  See,  for  instance,  Maryland,  Laws  1914,  C.  779,  Sec.  248.

^  Constitutional  Amendments  Relating  to  Labor  Legislation  and  Brief
in  Their  Defense,  submitted  to  the  Constitutional  Convention  of  New
York  State,  June  9,  191 5,  by  a  committee  organized  by  the  America.n
Association  for  Labor  Legislation,  p.  51.  '

^  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  260.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  339

do  most  of  the  manufacturing  industries.  Distance  beneath
the  surface,  artificial  light,  poisonous  gases,  explosive  dusts,
dampness,  intestinal  parasites,  extreme  heat,  and  in  some
kinds  of  work  abnormal  air  pressure  amotmting  often  to  sev-
eral atmospheres,  all  contribute  to  render  underground  occu-
pations extraordinarily  hazardous.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
the  validity  of  hour  legislation  for  adult  men  has  become
thoroughly  established  in  the  mining  industry,  although  in
many  other  lines  of  work  such  restrictions  are  still  subject
to  attack  on  the  score  of  unconstitutionality.

a.  Mining.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  surprising
that  mining  furnishes  a  higher  fatal  accident  rate  than  any
of  the  other  main  groups  of  industry.  Metal-mining  has  a
higher  death-rate  than  coal-mining,  and  employment  in  an-
thracite coal  mines  is  more  dangerous  than  in  bituminous
mines,  since  the  former  are  deeper  and  more  subject  to  ac-
cvimulations  of  noxious  and  explosive  gases.

Coal-mining  appears  to  be  more  dangerous  in  America  than
in  any  other  country.  Standing  second  with  regard  to  num-
bers employed,  the  United  States  leads  aU  other  important
coal-producing  countries  both  in  total  number  and  in  rate
of  fatal  accidents.  Diuing  the  ten  years  ending  with  19 10
the  average  fatal  accident-rate  per  1,000  employed  in  coal-
mining was  3.74  for  the  United  States,  2.92  for  Japan,  2. 11  for
Germany,  1.69  for  France,  1.36  for  Great  Britain,  1.04  for
Austria,  and  1.02  for  Belgium.^

Health  dangers  and  occupational  diseases  among  miners
have  been  given  much  less  legislative  attention  than  has  the
subject  of  accidents.  Accidents  are  usually  more  spectacular,
their  causes  are  more  certain  and  more  easily  located,  and,
moreover,  an  employer  may  be  held  in  damages  for  accidental
injuries  to  mine  workmen,  while  only  two  American  states
have  provided  compensation  for  occupational  diseases.^
Among  the  more  important  legal  provisions  for  safeguarding
the  life  and  health  of  miners  are  the  requirements  for  detailed


'United  States  Bureau  of  Mines,  Bulletin  No.  69,  "Coal-Mine  Acci-
dents in  the  United  States  and  Foreign  Countries,"  Frederick  W.  Horton,
p.  87.

'For  a  further  discussion  of  this  subject  see  Chapter  VIII,  "Social
Insurance."


340 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

maps  of  mines  showing  all  workings  and  open  at  all  times
to  mine  inspectors,  for  a  sufficient  number  of  escapement
shafts,  for  proper  ventilation  and  a  supply  of  pure  air,  and
frequently  for  a  special  employee  to  inspect  the  mine  daily
for  explosive  or  poisonous  dusts  or  gases.  Precautions  against
falling  rock  or  coal  must  also  be  taken  by  carefully  timbering
dangerous  places  as  far  as  known.  Rules  are  laid  down  in
regard  to  proper  methods  of  drilling  and  blasting,  and  hoist-
ing-gears and  cages  for  carrying  men  in  and  out  of  the  mine
must  conform  to  specific  requirements.  Safety-lamps,  shelter-
holes,  fencing  of  machinery,  telephone  connections,  restrictions
upon  the  storing  of  explosives  and  upon  the  quality  of  il-
luminating oils — these  and  many  more  safeguards  are  fre-
quently required  and  carefully  defined  by  law.  In  the  newer
laws  provision  is  usually  made  for  a  rather  limited  first-aid
equipment.

"^he  enforcement  of  these  provisions  in  the  various  states
is  usually  entrusted  to  a  special  body  of  mine  inspectors,  who
either  form  a  separate  bureau  of  mine  inspection  or  are  at-
tached to  the  state  department  of  industrial  inspection.  Mine
inspection  protects  the  property  of  the  employer  as  well  as
the  lives  of  the  employees,  and  many  states  require  of  in-
spectors a  certain  number  of  years'  experience  and  also  civil-
service  examinations  conducted  by  an  examining  board  fre-
quently composed  of  representatives  of  employers  and  em-
ployees. The  authority  of  the  inspectors  is  sometimes  far
reaching,  extending  even  to  the  power  of  stopping  work  if  the
mine  regiilations  have  not  been  obeyed.  The  best  results  in
the  enforcement  of  mine  safety  and  health  legislation  have
been  achieved  in  states  where,  as  in  Illinois,  joint  conferences
of  miners  and  mine-owners  have  been  brought  together  for
the  administration  as  well  as  the  drafting  of  the  laws.

A  significant  step,  which  may  in  time  lead  to  national
regulation  of  mining  conditions,  was  the  estabhshment  by  Con-
gress in  1 910  of  the  federal  Bureau  of  Mines  with  the  function,
among  others,  of  conducting  "scientific  and  technologic  in-
vestigations concerning  mining,"  with  a  view  to  improving
health  conditions  and  increasing  safety  and  efficiency.  The
bureau  has  no  authority  to  do  anything  except  conduct  in-
vestigations, publish  reports,  and  furnish  advice,  all  enforce-


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  341

ment  of  mine  laws  being  left  in  the  control  of  the  states,  but
within  its  limited  field  it  has  already  performed  valuable  ser-
vices. Series  of  bulletins  and  technical  papers  distributed  free
to  miners  present  the  results  of  the  latest  scientific  inquiries
into  the  causes  and  prevention  of  mine  explosions  and  other
accidents,  and  some  half-dozen  mine  rescue  stations  have
been  estabhshed,  one  in  each  of  the  more  important  coal  fields
of  the  country.  Coimected  with  each  station  is  a  fully  eqmpped
mine  rescue  car,  in  charge  of  a  mining  engineer  and  two  es-
pecially trained  miners,  which  tours  the  district,  giving  prac-
tical instruction  in  safety  work,  and  is  dispatched  at  once  to
the  scene  of  any  disaster.  Previous  to  creating  this  bureau,
Congress  had  enacted  a  code  for  the  regulation  of  mining  con-
ditions in  the  federal  territories,  which  is  still  in  force  in
Alaska  and  in  the  insular  possessions.'

b.  Work  in  Compressed  Air.  An  industrial  hazard  brought
into  prominence  by  the  increasing  construction  of  tunnels,
subways,  bridges,  and  skyscrapers  is  compressed-air  illness,
or  the  "bends."  An  investigator  for  the  Illinois  Commission
on  Occupational  Diseases  secttred  interviews  with  161  men
who  had  sustained  attacks  of  the  malady,  and  the  medical
director  at  the  construction  of  the  Pennsylvania-East  River
timnels  in  New  York  in  1909  reported  3,692  cases,  of  which
twenty  were  fatal.

Thus  far  only  two  states.  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  have
attempted  to  control  the  disease  by  legislation,  although  in
other  states  similar  steps  have  been  taken  through  the  method
of  administrative  orders.^  The  customary  provisions  include
physical  examinations  of  all  applicants  for  work  and  of  all
employees  at  stated  intervals,  a  sliding  scale  of  working  hours,
decreasing  as  the  pressure  increases,^  and  a  period  of  gradual
"decompression,"  ranging  from  one  minute  for  emergence
from  a  pressure  of  ten  pounds  above  normal  to  twenty-five
minutes  for  emergence  from  a  pressiure  of  fifty  potmds  above
normal.  Work  under  more  than  fifty  pounds'  pressure  is
forbidden.  The  employer  must  maintain  dressing-rooms  with
lockers,  hot  and  cold  shower-baths,  and  provision  for  drying

■  United  States,  Laws  1 890-1 891,  C.  564.

'Seep.  351.

'  See  "  Hours  of  Labor,  Men,"  p.  236.


342 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

clothes.  Medical  attendants  are  also  required,  as  well  as  a
hospital  lock  for  the  recompression  and  treatment  of  suflEerers
from  the  disease.

(j)  Transportation

Protective  legislation  regulating  working  conditions  in
transportation  relates  mainly  to  safety.  The  development
of  aerial  transportation  had  in  1915  led  to  no  labor  laws  ex-
cept the  Connecticut  provision  that  aeronauts  be  licensed  ^
and  a  Pennsylvania  clause  that  they  be  over  eighteen  years  of
age/  but  in  carriage  by  land  and  water  a  large  body  of  statutes
has  gradually  grown  up.  These  measures  may  either  be  de-
signed for  the  protection  of  employees,  as  in  the  case  of  auto-
matic couplers  on  railroads,  and  the  provision  for  emergency
exits  for  seamen,  or  they  may  be  intended  primarily  for  the
protection  of  the  traveling  public,  as  in  the  case  of  boiler
inspection  in  both  kinds  of  transportation.  A  few  measures
such  as  the  fuU-crew  laws  on  railroads  and  in  navigation  have
been  lu-ged  as  a  direct  protection  for  both  laborers  and  travelers.

The  majority  of  transportation  employees  are  engaged  in
traffic  which  is  interstate  or  international  in  character.  The
more  important  legislation  affecting  this  class  of  workmen  has
therefore  been  federal  rather  than  state.  Railway  employees
have  been  more  often  brought  under  state  laws  than  have
seamen,  but  when  any  question  has  arisen  over  the  respective
jurisdiction  of  state  or  federal  authority  the  latter  has  prac-
tically always  been  given  precedence  by  the  courts.

a.  Navigation.  "While  slavery  and  serfdom  have  been
abolished  for  the  majority  of  workmen  in  most  civilized
countries,  until  1915  the  seaman  in  America  was  kept  in
a  position  of  semi-slavery  through  employment  under  a  con-
tract enforceable  by  imprisonment.  This  position  of  invol-
\intary  servitude  gave  him  but  Uttle  effective  voice  in  regulat-
ing the  conditions  imder  which  he  worked.  In  the  early  days
of  sea  travel  a  ship-owner's  interest  impelled  him  to  secure
an  intelligent  and  competent  crew  which  could  protect  his
cargo.  But  with  the  substitution  of  steam  for  saUs,  the  spread
of  lighthouses  and  channel  markings, and  the  growth  of

•  See  "  Technical  Qualifications,"  p.  ;}23.

'In  the  child  labor  code,  Pennaylvaam,  Lawa  1915,  No>  177,  Seo.  $>


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  343

marine  insurance  and  limited  liability  legislation,  the  quality
of  seamanship  has  gfeatly  declined.  In  the  majority  of  serious
sea  disasters  in  recent  years  the  lack  of  both  skill  and  numbers
in  the  working  force  has  been  officially  reported.  There  has
apparently  been  a  steady  increase  in  the  size  of  the  load  carried
without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  number  and  skill  of
those  employed  to  handle  it.  The  "seaman"  has  been  dis-
placed by  the  "deck-hand,"  the  American  by  the  northern
European,  and  the  latter  by  the  immigrant  of  the  southern
races.

In  a  few  states  legislation  looking  toward  general  marine
safety  has  been  enacted,  such  as  provisions  for  boiler  inspec-
tion and  signal  lights,  but  most  of  the  legislation  affecting
seaman  has  been  federal.  As  early  as  1798  Congress  recog-
nized the  need  of  special  protection  for  this  class  of  work-
men, many  of  whom  are  single  and  homeless.  In  that  year
the  federal  government  established  a  marine-hospital  fund
to  maintain  hospitals  for  the  care  of  disabled  seamen  of  ships
belonging  to  the  United  States.  During  the  latter  half  of
the  nineteenth  centiiry  Congress  continued  its  protective
policy  toward  seamen  by  legislation,  regulating,  among  other
matters,  the  conditions  of  living  and  working  on  shipboard,
the  size  and  experience  of  crews,  and  the  construction  and  in-
spection of  vessels.  But  despite  these  regulations  the  position
of  seamen  was  held  to  be  most  unsatisfactory,  and  it  was  not
until  the  passage  of  the  federal  seamen's  act  of  1915  that  the
grosser  injustices  were  removed.'

While  the  outstanding  features  of  this  act  related  rather  to
the  personal  freedom  of  seamen,^  additional  provisions  were
made  for  the  health  and  comfort  of  employees  through  the
requirement  of  proper  washing-places  and  sleeping-rooms,
hospital  space,  fumigation,  heating,  lighting,  ventilation,  and
drainage.

It  has  been  repeatedly  pointed  out  that  in  case  of  accidents
at  sea,  such  as  fires  or  boiler  explosions,  a  ship  cannot  sum-
mon assistance  as  a  manufacturing  establishment,  for  in-
stance, is  able  to  do  on  land,  but  must  rely  upon  its  own  crew
and  the  chance  aid  of  near-by  vessels. For  this  reason  the

'  United  States,  Laws  1914-1915,  C.  153.
'  See  "Contract  Labor,"  pp.  44,  45.


344 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

only  way  really  to  safeguard  human  life  at  sea  is  to  provide
an  equipment  and  crew  adequate  to  meet  any  reasonable
emergency.  The  seamen's  act  of  1915,  therefore,  provided
for  a  substantial  increase  in  the  size  of  the  crews  employed,
for  a  certain  percentage  of  able  seamen,  for  "certified  life-
boat men,"  and  for  properly  constructed  life-boats,  the  num-
ber to  be  fixed  according  to  the  size  and  character  of  the  ship
and  its  cargo.

b.  Railroads  and  Streetcars.  In  the  early  days  of  railroad-
ing, reports  of  deaths  and  mutilations,  partictilarly  in  connec-
tion with  the  coupling  of  cars,  were  repeatedly  made  public,
and  the  need  of  protective  legislation  became  apparent,  es-
pecially as  the  length  and  complexity  of  lines  developed  and
as  speed  increased.  At  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century
only  about  9,000  miles  of  railroad  existed.  In  1869  a  through
route  to  California  was  opened,  and  by  1880  the  total  mileage
had  increased  to  86,000.  Between  1880  and  1890  more  miles
of  new  road  were  built  than  during  the  entire  period  previous
to  187s,  and  in  the  early  'eighties  a  few  states  enacted  protec-
tive legislation.  It  soon  became  apparent,  however,  that  state
legislation  alone  would  result  in  long  delays  and  in  a  great
lack  of  uniformity.  As  the  occurrence  of  serious  accidents
continued  and  as  interstate  commerce  developed,  the  need
of  federal  regulation  became  more  apparent.

Many  experiments  were  carried  on  in  search  of  proper
safety  devices,  and  as  early  as  1868  a  successful  application
of  air-brakes  was  made.  But  the  most  serious  danger  to
employees  resulted  from  their  being  required  to  go  between
cars  in  order  to  couple  or  uncouple  them.  It  was  not  until  1887
that  a  satisfactory  automatic  coupler  was  devised  for  general
use.  In  order  to  compel  the  general  adoption  of  the  standard
coupler  the  necessity  of  federal  legislation  was  recognized.

Although  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  created
by  the  federal  act  of  February  4,  1887,  had  power  to  investi-
gate and  to  regulate  rates,  the  act  made  no  mention  of  safety
appliances  or  the  protection  of  employees.  The  absence  of
authority  over  these  matters  was  remedied  by  the  federal
act  of  March  2,  1893,  and  several  subsequent  acts'  made

1  United  States,  Laws  1892-1893,  C.  196;  Laws  1902-1903,  C.  976;
Laws  1906-1907,  C.  225.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  345

it  obligatory  upon  all  roads  engaged  in  interstate  traffic  to
equip  all  cars  and  locomotives  with  approved  automatic
couplers,  and  to  provide  other  safeguards  such  as  power-
brakes  and  grab-irons.*  In  this  particular,  American  labor
legislation  was  far  in  advance  of  European.  The  results  of  the
coupler  legislation  are  particularly  striking.  In  1890,  when
only  about  10  per  cent,  of  railway  cars  were  equipped  with
automatic  couplers,  accidents  in  the  coupling  of  cars  amounted
to  nearly  half  of  all  casualties  to  trainmen.  By  1912,  when
over  99  per  cent,  of  all  cars  were  so  equipped,  the  proportion
of  accidents  from  this  cause  was  reduced  to  about  8  per  cent.
The  majority  of  early  regulations  imposed  by  the  federal
government,  however,  left  open  to  the  various  roads  the  de-
termination of  the  kind  and  character  of  devices  to  be  in-
stalled. The  absence  of  a  central  standardizing  authority
resulted  in  lack  of  uniformity,  and  at  times  in  the  adoption
of  inadequate  or  ineffective  devices.  In  1910,  therefore,  an
act  of  Congress,  in  addition  to  making  new  safety  provisions,
gave  to  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  power,  after
proper  hearings,  to  "designate  the  number,  dimensions,  loca-
tion, and  manner  of  application  of  the  appliances, "  and  there-
after such  determinations  were  to  remain  as  "the  standards
of  equipment,"  and  any  failure  to  comply  with  any  require-
ment of  the  commission  was  subject  to  a  "like  penalty  as
failure  to  comply  with  any  requirement  of  this  act."  ^  At
the  same  session  of  Congress  the  commission  was  given  au-
thority to  investigate  all  collisions,  derailments,  or  other
accidents,  to  subpoena  witnesses,  administer  oaths,  take  testi-
mony, and  to  require  the  production  of  all  papers,  books,  and
other  evidence.  It  might  also  make  a  public  report  "together
with  such  recommendations  as  it  deems  proper."  One  year
later  $25,000  was  appropriated  for  the  use  of  the  commission
in  making  tests  and  establishing  standards  ^  and  a  maximum

•  For  the  further  protection  of  employees  and  as  a  stinralus  to  the
roads  to  use  every  possible  safety  precaution  Congress  also  provided
that  no  employee  injured  on  a  train  not  equipped  according  to  law  could
be  held  to  have  assumed  the  risk  of  his  employment  even  though  he
knew  of  the  violations.  This  provision  has  been  upheld  in  the  North
CaroUna  case  of  Greenlee  v.  Southern  R.  Co.,  122  N.  C.  977,  30  S.  E.
H5  (1898).

'  United  States,  Laws  1909-1910,  C.  160.

'  United  States,  Laws  igio-1911,  C,  285.


346 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  $300,000  a  year  was  appropriated  to  provide  for  proper
boiler  inspection  by  a  staff  of  fifty-three  inspectors  working
in  close  cooperation  with  the  commission. ^

Beginning  with  the  great  increase  in  railroad  mileage  in  the
early  'eighties,  state  legislation  grew  in  volume  and  developed
along  two  lines,  one  mainly  for  the  protection  of  employees,
and  the  other  mainly  for  the  protection  of  the  traveling
public.  Measures  for  the  protection  of  travelers  are  of  two
kinds.  The  first  relates  to  mechanical  devices  for  the  pre-
vention of  accidents,  such  as  automatic  bell-ringers,  brakes,
headlights,  and  signal  lights,  while  the  second  relates  to  the
qualifications  and  training  of  employees.

Among  the  measures  which  have  been  passed  primarily
for  the  protection  of  employees  are  found  such  requirements
as  those  for  the  installation  of  grab-irons,  ladders,  ruiming-
boards,  storm  windows  in  engines,  the  maintenance  of  a
proper  temperature  in  mail  or  baggage  cars,  the  regulation  of
the  height  of  bridges  or  other  overhead  structures,  the
maintenance  of  a  proper  clearance  around  tracks,  particularly
in  railroad  yards,  the  blocking  of  frogs  and  switches,  and,  for
employees  engaged  in  repairing  tracks,  the  erection  of  sheds
to  protect  them  from  inclement  weather.  For  the  safety  and
convenience  of  employees  who  are  frequently  required  to
travel  long  distances  on  freight  or  stock  trains  caboose-cars
must  be  provided,  which  must  be  constructed  according  to
certain  rules  of  size,  strength,  safety,  and  comfort.

Employees  on  street  or  interurban  railways  are  also  fre-
quently protected  through  state  legislation  or  municipal
ordinance.  Such  measures  relate  usually  to  inclosed  vesti-
bules during  the  winter  months,  seats  for  motormen,  and
proper  automatic  brakes,  and  occasionally  to  equipment  for
the  sanding  of  rails,  to  the  examination  of  employees,  and  to
minimum  age  limits.

Dxuing  the  past  few  years  the  sharpest  debate  in  matters
of  protective  railway  legislation  has  centered  about  the  full-
crew  laws,  which  are  held  to  protect  both  the  public  and  the
employee.  More  than  twenty  states  have  enacted  such
legislation. These  acts  usually  apply  to  both  passenger  and


'  United  States,  Laws  1910-1911,  C.  103.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  347

freight  service  on  roads  of  given  lengths,  and  fix  the  number
of  employees — priiicipaUy  of  brakemen — ^in  proportion  to  the
ntimber  and  kind  of  cars  in  the  train.  Full-crew  laws  have
been  initiated  by  the  railway  men's  organizations  and  have
been  vigorously  opposed  by  the  railroad  owners,  who  have
contended  that  as  a  rule  larger  crews  are  imnecessary  because
of  the  reduction  in  the  amount  of  work  required  of  employees
since  the  introduction  of  safety  devices,  the  formation  of
special  switching  crews,  and  the  generally  improved  methods
of  handling  trains.  They  point  also  to  the  increase  in  operat-
ing cost,  resulting  in  reduced  dividends  and  in  curtailment  of
improvements.!

On  the  other  hand,  the  traiimien  point  to  the  large  nvimber
of  both  fatal  and  non-fatal  accidents,  and  to  the  increasing
strain  upon  railway  employees  due  to  the  increase  in  the
weight  of  trains,  in  the  number  of  tons  per  train,  and  in  the
number  of  cars  per  man.  They  hold  that  by  these  increases
the  railroads  have  made  their  greatest  economies.  The
trainmen  maintain,  therefore,  that  full-crew  legislation  serves
practically  the  same  pturpose  as  legislation  restricting  hours  of
labor,  in  that  both  reduce  the  physical  strain  and  thereby
the  frequency  of  accidents.

This  is  the  view  which  was  adopted  by  the  Supreme  Court
of  Pennsylvania  when  in  1913  ^  it  upheld  the  full-crew  law
of  that  state,  enacted  in  1911,^  as  having  a  real  and  sub-
stantial relation  to  the  safety  of  passengers  and  employees
on  railroad  trains.  The  company  presented  evidence  as  to
the  cost  of  the  legislation,  but  the  court  held  that  "Uncom-
pensated obedience  to  a  regulation  enacted  for  the  pubUc  wel-
fare or  safety  under  the  police  power  of  the  state  is  not  taking
property  without  due  compensation,  and  any  injury  sustained
in  obeying  such  a  regulation  is  but  damnum  absque  injuria."  *

'  For  a  full  discussion  of  this  subject  see  bulletin  Consecutive  No.  73
of  the  Bureau  of  Railway  Economics,  Washington,  D.  C,  "Arguments
for  and  against  Train-Crew  Legislation,"  1915.

"  Pennsylvania  R.  Co.  v.  Ewing  et  al.,  241  Pa.  581,  88  Atl.  775  (1913).
A  similar  decision  was  rendered  in  Chicago,  Rock  Island  knd  Pacific
R.  Co.  V.  Arkansas,  219  U.  S.  453,  31  Sup.  Ct.  275  (1911),  upholding  the  ,
1907  law  in  that  state.

'  Pennsylvania,  Laws  1911,  No.  811.

*  In  1914  the  railroad  companies  succeeded  in  repealing  by  a  referendum
vote  the  Missouri  full-crew  law  of  1913;  and  in  Pennsylvania  they  in-


348 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

During  the  year  1915  bills  were  introduced  in  a  number
of  states  fixing  the  maximum  length  of  trains.  This  legislation
is  also  strongly  opposed  by  the  railroads,  on  the  ground  that
they  have  expended  large  simis  of  money  for  improved  road-
beds, yard  and  switching  facilities,  and  for  increased  tractive
power  of  locomotives,  which  will  be  rendered  useless  if  they
are  not  allowed  to  increase  the  length  and  weight  of  their
trains.

State  provisions  for  railroad  safety  have  frequently  been
contested  on  the  ground  that  regulations  which  apply  to  inter-
state commerce  are  a  subject  for  federal  legislation.  But  the
courts  have  uniformly  held  that  where  Congress  has  not  legis-
lated upon  these  questions  the  states  were  entirely  within  their
rights.  An  interstate  road,  therefore,  might  either  make  such
changes  as  were  necessary,  as  it  passed  from  one  common-
wealth to  another,  to  meet  the  minimum  requirements  of  each
commonwealth,  or  it  might  comply  everywhere  with  the
maximum  provision  found  in  any  of  the  states  through  which
it  passed.

Although  much  of  the  protective  railroad  legislation  is
mainly  for  the  benefit  of  employees,  it  is  recognized  that  the
safety  of  the  public  depends  in  large  part  upon  the  safety
of  those  who  are  entrusted  xvith  the  care  and  management  of
trains.  It  is  this  aspect  of  the  matter  which  has  largely  in-
fluenced the  courts  in  rendering  favorable  decisions  on  safety
and  health  laws  for  railway  employees.

The  enforcement  of  protective  regulations  in  relation  to
railway  labor  has  in  the  majority  of  states  been  entrusted  to
railway  or  public  utility  commissions  created  primarily  to
supervise  or  regulate  rates.  In  this  class  of  legislation,  as  in
the  regulation  of  conditions  in  factories,  workshops,  and
mines,  it  has  been  found  impracticable  to  embody  in  the
statute  law  specifications  which  will  be  effective  under  diverse
and  constantly  changing  conditions.  For  this  reason  many
legislatures  have  delegated  to  the  railroad  commissions  power
to  work  out  details  of  provisions  and  to  prescribe  safety  rules
I  and  regulations.  This  method  of  protection  has  repeatedly
been  sustained  by  the  courts. In  1913  the  law  creating  the

duced  the  191 5  legislature  to  pass  a  repealing  act,  which,  however,  was
vetoed  by  the  governor.


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  349

Railroad  Commission  of  Indiana,  and  an  early  ruling  of  the
commission  fixing  a  1,500  candle-power  standard  for  locomotive
headlights,  were  both  attacked  as  tmconstitutional.  The  case
was  carried  to  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,  which  upheld
the  delegation  of  legislative  powers,  declaring  that  "The  de-
cisions of  this  court  and  the  courts  of  other  states  in  this
regard  are  clearly  against  the  appellant's  contention."  '


4.  Development  of  Standards

A  careful  study  of  the  early  laws  to  preserve  industrial
safety  and  health,  as  passed  by  Congress  and  by  the  legis-
latiures  of  the  fifty  American  states  and  territories,  discloses
at  once  four  fvmdamental  defects.


(r)  Defects  of  Early  Legislation

First  among  these  defects  is  the  incompleteness  of  these  laws.
It  was  long  the  custom  of  legislattires  to  specify  in  the  law
the  industries  and  danger-points  which  were  to  be  safeguarded,
and  to  confine  the  inspectors'  authority  to  the  places  and
conditions  mentioned.  Under  this  method  many  industrial
danger-points  were  overlooked.  Perhaps ' '  buzz-saw  "  or  "  dan-
gerous dusts"  or  "foundry"  was  omitted  from  the  law,  in-
advertently or  otherwise.  Although  often  fraught  with  harm
to  the  worker,  these  unmentioned  points  were  outside  the
authority  of  the  inspection  ofl&cials,  and  the  workers  received
no  protection  until  the  law  could  be  changed.  Frequently,
too,  a  qualifying  phrase  greatly  limited  the  operation  of  a
good  law.  For  example,  the  law  in  one  state  required  poison-
ous fumes  generated  "in  the  course  of  the  manufacturing
process"  to  be  removed. While  varnishing  the  interior  of


"Vandalia  R.  Co.  v.  Railroad  Commission  of  Indiana,  182  Ind.  382,
loi  N.  E.  85  (1913).  This  case  was,  however,  appealed  to  the  United
States  Supreme  Court  where,  in  November,  1915,  it  was  still  pending.
For  a  clear  opinion  on  the  delegation  of  legislative  authority  see  Minne-
apolis, St.  Paul  and  Sault  Ste.  Marie  R.  Co.  ».  Railroad  Commission  of
Wisconsin,  136  Wis.  146, 116  N.  W.  905  (1908).


3  so PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

vats  in  a  brewery  two  men  died  and  one  was  totally  blinded
for  life,  due  to  inhaling  the  poisonous  fumes  of  wood  alcohol
used  in  the  varnish.  But  because  varnishing  vats  is  in  the
nature  of  repair- work  and  does  not  come  "in  the  course  of  the
manufacturing  process,"  the  inspectors  could  not  legally
remedy  the  dangerous  situation.  It  was  necessary  to  wait  an
entire  year  (in  most  states  it  would  have  been  two  years)
before  the  legislature  convened  and  the  law  could  be  amended.
These  illustrations  indicate  a  common  weakness  of  early
safety  and  health  laws  in  many  states.

The  second  ftindamental  defect  is  the  absence  of  direct  re-
sponsibility. Many  laws  placed  no  obligation  whatever  upon
an  employer  to  safeguard  danger-points  nor  upon  the  em-
ployee to  aid  in  maintaining  safety  except  "in  the  discretion
of  the  commissioner  of  labor,"  or  unless  "the  commissioner
so  directs, "  or  "if  in  the  opinion  of  the  commissioner  of  labor
it  is  necessary."  This  type  of  legislation  placed  no  duty  upon
the  employer  to  provide  nor  upon  the  employee  to  maintain
proper  protection  until  required  to  do  so  by  the  inspector.
No  protective  devices  had  to  be  provided  vmtU  the  inspector
called  and  ordered  them  installed.  Scarcely  a  state  but  has
had  laws  of  this  character.

The  third  fimdamental  defect  is  the'  absence  of  well-defined
standards.  The  old  theory  of  factory  inspection  legislation
assumed  that  the  legislatures,  often  made  up  largely  of  lawyers
and  farmers,  would  define  in  the  law  the  exact  nature  of  pro-
tection to  be  provided  in  factory,  workshop,  or  mine.  But  be-
cause of  inadequate  information,  and  possibly  also  because  of
fear  of  adverse  covirt  decisions,  our  lawmakers  vaguely  re-
quired merely  that  dangerous  machinery  be  "  sufficiently  guard-
ed," usually  "where  practicable,"  and  left  it  to  the  poorly
trained  and  poorly  paid  inspector  to  enforce  these  indefinite
laws,  usually  "in  his  discretion."  This  discretionary  power,
when  placed  in  the  hands  of  tminformed  officials,  brought  this
method  of  lawmaking  into  disrepute  among  employers,  em-
ployees, and  the  public.

The  fourth  fundamental  defect  is  the  lack  of  responsiveness
to  changing  industrial  conditions.  When  it  had  become  ap-
parent that  many  of  the  early  laws  were  failing  of  their  pur-
pose because  of  the  foregoing  blemishes,  there  followed  a


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  351

comparatively  brief  period  during  which  efforts  were  made
to  frame  comprehensive,  scientific  provisions,  free  from
"jokers"  and  loopholes,  and  to  secure  their  passage  by  the
legislatures.  Perhaps  the  most  noteworthy  example  of  such
legislation  was  the  standard  law  enacted  in  several  states
providing  for  the  protection  of  workers  in  the  lead  trades.
In  this  instance,  after  careful  investigation  by  the  federal
government  supplemented  by  private  studies  and  many  con-
ferences, a  very  specific  bill  was  drafted  to  apply  to  the  various
processes  in  the  manufacture  of  lead  salts,  and  the  restdting
legislation  served  a  very  useful  educational  purpose.  In  a
few  states  also  the  laws  tmdoubtedly  hastened  the  efforts  of
employers  to  make  their  work-places  sanitary.  But  it  was
foimd  that  some  specific  safeguards  minutely  prescribed  in
the  statutes  were  very  quickly  out  of  date.  In  order  that
they  might  be  superseded  by  unproved  devices  or  methods
there  was  once  more  required  the  slow  and  expensive  action
of  legislatures,  which  in  most  states  might  not  be  in  session
again  for  more  than  an  entire  year.  The  impracticability  of
embodying  in  statute  law  specific  danger-points  and  specific
remedies  became  clear.


(2)  The  Method  of  Administrative  Orders

Legislators  themselves  began  to  recognize  the  futility  of
attempting  to  formulate  in  the  short  and  busy  sessions,  con-
vening in  most  states  only  once  in  two  years,  proper  protective
measures.  They  saw  that  the  proper  persons  to  accomplish
this  work  efficiently  were  those  who  had  an  opportunity  to
familiarize  themselves  with  changing  industrial  conditions.
Therefore,  in  several  states,  legislators  decided  that  they  would
no  longer  attempt  to  enact  laws  specif  jdng  in  detail  what  shall
be  done,  but  instead  would  ask  that  work-places  be  made
safe.  To  carry  out  the  will  of  the  legislature  they  provided
a  commission  to  work  out  with  employers  and  employees  the
best  possible  methods  of  protection.  After  public  hearings,
the  methods  agreed  upon  were  issued  by  the  commission  in
the  form  of  administrative  orders  or  regulations  to  apply
state  wide  and  to  have  the  force  of  law. Here  we  find  the


352 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

very  foundation  of  effective  safety  inspection  work.  The
key-note  is  cooperation.  The  experience  of  the  worker,  the
knowledge  of  the  employer,  and  the  critical  constructive  ability
of  the  expert  are  all  needed  in  the  formation  of  effective  stand-
ards of  health  and  safety  and  in  the  enforcement  of  these
standards.

This  new  method  of  regulating  industrial  conditions  through
administrative  orders  cooperatively  formulated  and  issued  by
a  permanent  commission,  has  resulted  in  several  states  in  a  pro-
gressive and  accurate  adjustment  of  factory  inspection  to  the
changing  methods  and  new  risks  that  accompany  modem  in-
dustry. Concerning  this  method  a  former  chief  factory  in-
spector has  said:  "As  a  state  inspector,  my  experience  has.
demonstrated  that  the  arbitrary  imposition  of  rules  of  law  will ''
not,  in  itself,  produce  satisfactory  standards  for  the  safety  and  '
health  of  employees  in  factories,  mills,  and  workshops. .  .  .  The
observations  which  I  have  made  emphasize  the  importance  of
cooperation  and  of  education  of  both  parties  to  the  labor
contract  as  to  what  are  ideal  factory  conditions.  This  co-
operation must  be  brought  about  if  substantial  results  with
reference  to  safety  standards  are  to  be  obtained  through  state
inspection."  Fortunately  scientific  accident  prevention  has
recently  been  brought  into  the  foreground  by  the  adoption
of  workmen's  compensation  acts,  and  it  has  quickened  the
movement  for  reorganization  of  administrative  boards  in
many  states.

No  longer  is  it  necessary  in  states  like  Ohio  and  Wisconsin,
for  example,  to  wait  two  long  years  for  a  session  of  the  legis-
latiure  in  order  to  submit  proposals  for  the  proper  protection
of  the  workers.  No  longer  need  specific  rigid  provisions  be
drafted  into  bills  and  thrust  upon  the  bewildered  attention  of
the  legislators  while  temporarily  in  session  at  the  state  capitol.
The  legislature  has  laid  down  the  law  in  a  broad  way;  the  in-
dustrial commission,  as  rapidly  as  circumstances  permit,  may
fill  in  the  administrative  detail.  Under  this  new  system  the
industry  itself  makes  the  laws  for  its  own  shop  government.
Employers  and  employees,  with  the  aid  of  impartial  experts,
are  learning  through  self-expression  the  importance  and  the
practicability  of  the  now  popular  motto,  "Safety  first."  The
prevention  of  industrial  accidents  and  diseases,  particularly


SAFETY  AND  HEALTH  353

when  accompanied  by  social  insurance,  is  becoming  a  matter
of  enlightened  selfishness;  the  general  and  the  specific  statu-
tory requirements  of  former  years  are  being  supplanted  by
scientific  standards  developed  through  administrative  orders
based  on  continuing  investigations.'

» See  Chapter  IX,  "Administration."

23


CHAPTER  VIII
SOCIAL  INSURANCE

For  most  of  the  economic  hazards  of  life  there  has  been
developed  an  appropriate  method  for  the  distribution  of  losses
and  the  subsequent  elimination  of  risks.  Marine  insurance,
for  the  financial  protection  of  those  who  send  their  goods  down
to  the  sea  in  ships,  was  the  first  to  be  developed  on  an  exten-
sive basis.  Insurance  against  loss  by  fire  is  now  a  regularly
accepted  precaution  in  every  community.  By  this  common
method  of  insuring  against  loss,  each  individual  in  the  or-
ganized group  is  assured  that  in  case  of  the  destruction  or
damage  of  his  property  he  will  be  reimbursed  from  a  fund
contributed  little  by  little  by  the  whole  group.  Insurance,
accordingly,  has  been  defined  as  an  arrangement  for  distribu-
tion among  many  of  the  losses  sustained  by  a  few.

By  this  thin-spreading  of  individual  losses  over  a  large
group,  the  man  receiving  an  income  from  property  destroyed
by  shipwreck  or  by  fire  is  in  a  position  to  reinvest.  Even
more  necessary  than  for  the  property-owner  is  insurance  for
the  workingman,  whose  ability  to  labor  is  his  only  asset  and
who  is  peculiarly  liable  to  be  deprived  of  his  income.  When
the  laborer,  no  matter  how  efficient  he  may  be,  has  as  a  result
of  either  individual  or  collective  bargaining  secured  a  job  for
himself  even  if  at  a  wage  and  under  hour  limitations  which  are
temporarily  acceptable,  his  economic  position  is  still  pre-
carious. He  and  his  family  are  still  face  to  face  with  excep-
tional economic  risks  including  the  sufEering  and  want  fol-
lowing accident,  illness,  invalidity  or  premature  old  age,
normal  old  age,  premature  death,  and  unemployment.

Peculiarly  necessary,  therefore,  is  this  common  arrangement
for  group  or  social  action  known  as  insurance,  when  those  who
suffer  the  losses  are  workingmen  solely  dependent  for  support


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  355

upon  their  ability  to  labor.  When  provision  for  such  in-
surance is  made  through  legislation,  it  marks  the  development
of  a  settled  policy  on  the  part  of  society  to  provide  protection
for  one  group  in  the  community  which  either  is  in  greatest
need  of  the  protection  or  which  on  accotmt  of  insufficient
income  or  forethought  fails  to  buy  such  protection  through
private  commercial  channels.  It  is  therefore  natural  to  term
this  insvirance  social  insurance.

The  most  substantial  reason  why  wage-earners  do  not
voluntarily  instu-e  themselves  against  the  risks  of  accident  and
,  illness,  invaUdity  and  old  age,  early  death  and  unemploy-
ment, is  insufficient  income.  ReHable  information  from  con-
servative private  and  public  reports  amply  confirms  the
statement  that  the  average  wage-earner  with  a  family  is  not
receiving  pay  for  his  labor  sufficient  "to  secure  the  elements
of  a  normal  standard  of  living.  "^

A  ftirther  reason  for  the  failure  of  the  underpaid  masses  to
insure  themselves  is  indifference  or  lack  of  foresight  concern-
ing the  problems  of  the  future.  Although  thrift  in  the  pres-
ence of  subnormal  living  occasioned  by  low  wages  may  at
times  become  a  positive  social  vice,  provision  for  the  futiure
is  on  the  whole  necessary  and  beneficial.  Furthermore,  it
is  recognized  that  for  millions  of  laborers  saving  wiU  take
place  only  under  a  distinct  incentive.  This  "enforced  sav-
ing" against  the  inevitable  rainy  day  in  the  life  of  the  work-
ingman  is  most  effectively  brought  about  through  the  periodi-
cal collection  of  dues  or  premiums  for  the  support  of  the  various
forms  of  social  insurance.  Moreover,  it  has  been  discovered
that  community  of  interest  in  directly  bearing  the  financial
cost  of  insurance  furnishes  a  kind  of  cooperative  pressure  on
employers^  which  can  be  utilized  effectively  in  the  elimination
of  risks  in  so  far  as  they  are  preventable.  The  rapid  develop-
ment of  the  "Safety  first"  movement  which  followed  so
closely  the  enactment  of  workmen's  compensation  laws  is
sufficient  evidence  of  the  preventive  power  of  social  insurance.

Thus,  although  beginning  in  each  case  with  some  form  of
private  organization,  there  has  been  developed,  to  meet  the
peculiar  risks  which  modem  industrial  workers  must  endure,

1  See  Chapter  IV,  "The  Minimum  Wage."
'  See  Chapter  IX,  "Administration."


3S6 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

a  special  kind  of  insurance,  depending  for  its  inclusiveness,
its  financial  security,  its  economical  administration,  and  its
effectiveness  in  reducing  the  cause  of  each  particular  evil,
upon  an  element  of  social  compulsion.

Various  countries  have  social  insurance  against  accident
and  occupational  disease,  against  sickness,  against  old  age  and
invaUdity,  against  death  and  the  consequent  dependency  of
widows  and  orphans,  and  finally  against  unemployment.  In
all  of  this  social  action  an  important  element  of  self-defense
is  not  lacking.  It  is  clearly  recognized  that  insurance  is
the  most  effective  device  for  protecting  society  itself  against
the  pressure  of  incapacitated  individuals  who  otherwise  would
be  thrown  upon  the  community  for  maintenance.  And  while
attempting  to  avoid  the  demoralizing  round  of  charity,  by
means  of  an  insurance  program  which  aims  at  nothing  less
than  eventual  abolition  of  poverty,  there  is  consciously  pro-
moted a  system  of  individual  care  aimed  at  the  scientific  pro-
motion of  the  worker's  efficiency.

These  advantages  to  society  in  protecting  workmen  against
the  suffering  and  loss  resulting  from  their  being  incapacitated
in  any  way  for  manual  labor.  Emperor  William  I  of  Germany
had  principally  in  mind  when  on  November  17,  1881,  he  sent
to  the  imperial  legislature  the  historic  message  outlining  a
complete  system  of  social  insurance.  This  document  has  been
so  important  in  its  influence  in  Germany  and  throughout  the
world  that  it  has  been  called  by  some  enthusiasts  "the  monu-
ment of  the  new  social  order."  It  marked  the  beginning  of
a  great  new  movement  in  labor  legislation.


I.  Industrial  Accident  Insurance

The  first  kind  of  social  insurance  to  be  developed  exten-
sively through  legislation  in  the  United  States,  probably  be-
cause of  the  comparative  ease  of  recognizing  both  the  indus-
trial cause  and  the  far-reaching  extent  of  the  evil,  is  insur-
ance against  occupational  accidents  and  diseases,  or  as  it
is  more  popularly  termed  in  this  country,  workmen's  com-
pensation.

Compensation  to  the  injured  workman  is  based  upon  the


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  357

theory  that  the  consumer  of  economic  goods  should  bear  all
the  expenses  incurred  in  the  production  of  such  goods.  Among
those  expenses  must  be  included  the  pecuniary  losses  from
deaths  and  injuries  occurring  in  the  regular  course  of  produc-
tion. Wages  lost,  medical  attendance,  and  biirial  expenses,
in  case  of  accidental  injury  or  death  are  all  losses  which  should
be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  expense  of  production.  If
these  losses  are  to  be  borne  by  the  workman,  he  indirectly
carries  part  of  the  expense  of  production.  In  order  to  avoid
this,  the  expense  of  work  accidents,  it  is  now  generally  agreed,
should  be  treated  like  all  other  expenses  of  production;  it
should  be  borne  by  the  employer  in  the  first  instance,  and
be  shifted  by  him,  in  the  form  of  increased  prices,  upon  the
consumer  of  those  goods  in  the  production  of  which  the  in-
juries were  sustained.

Our  present  compensation  laws  have  passed  through  a  long
period  of  development,  and  have  many  precedents.  As  min-
ing and  navigation  developed  in  Europe,  the  workmen  of  these
two  industries  formed,  in  the  eighteenth  century  and  some-
times even  earlier,  mutual  accident  insurance  associations  for
their  own  protection.  The  above  industries  were  the  pioneers
in  forming  such  mutual  associations  largely  because  each  man
was  greatly  dependent  for  his  safety  upon  the  care  of  his  fel-
low workmen.'

In  the  handicraft  production  of  the  middle  ages,  not  only
were  the  workmen  very  closely  related,  but  there  was  also
a  close  connection  between  the  master  and  his  servants.
Manufacturing  in  the  gilds  was  conducted  on  a  small  scale,
and  each  master  had  but  few  helpers.  Accidents  were  not
nvimerous  because  machinery  was  not  developed,  and  produc-
tion was  carried  on  at  low  speed.  When  injuries  did  occur,
the  master,  at  least  theoretically,  took  care  of  the  disabled.

This  personal  relation  of  employer  and  employee  to  a  great
extent  (isappears  with  the  development  of  large  scale  industry.
As  the  number  of  employees  to  each  establishment  increased,
the  owner  could  no  longer  give  them  his  personal  attention
and  care. The  workman  gained  more  personal  freedom,  but


'  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twenty-fourth  Annual  Report,
1909,  "Workmen's  Insiirance  and  Compensation  Systems  in  Europe,
Vol.  I,  p.  977.


358 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

lost  the  aid  of  his  employer  in  case  of  sickness  and  accident.
To  recover  damages  he  now  had  to  seek  relief  by  legal  proceed-
ings, either  under  the  common  law  or  under  statutes  estab-
lishing employers'  liability;  he  had  to  bring  suit  against  his
master.

(i)  Rules  of  Employers'  Liability

The  conditions  under  which  the  injured  could  recover  in
court  were  based  upon  a  series  of  rules  which  included  (a)  the
duties  of  the  employer;  (b)  the  burden  of  occupational  risks;
(c)  the  fellow  servant  rule;  (d)  contributory  negUgence;  and
(e)  assumption  of  risks.^

a.  Duties  of  the  Employer.  It  was  considered  the  duty  of
the  employer  to  use  reasonable  care  in  protecting  his  em-
ployees against  injury  while  engaged  in  his  service.^  Nu-
merous court  decisions  defined  this  obligation  of  the  employer
in  considerable  detail.  He  was  required  to  provide  a  safe
place  to  work,  to  furnish  safe  tools  and  appliances,  to  con-
duct his  business  in  a  safe  manner,  and  to  select  competent
fellow  servants.  But  reasonable  care  required  the  guarding
of  only  those  dangerous  conditions  of  which  the  employer  had
knowledge  or  of  which  by  the  exercise  of  reasonable  care
he  shoiild  have  had  knowledge.^  It  is  held  by  many  experts
that  no  matter  how  great  caution  is  taken  against  accidents,
many  mishaps  will  occur  which  result  in  death  or  injury  to
the  workman.  Establishments  in  which  every  machine  is
guarded  and  where  safety  work  is  carried  on  ably  and  con-
scientiously, will  nevertheless,  it  is  declared,  have  ntimerous
accidents.  These  injuries  are  said  to  be  due  to  the  inherent
hazards  of  the  industry;  nothing  will  prevent  them.

b.  Burden  of  Occupational  Risks.  It  is  to  these  accidents
that  the  principle  of  the  burden  of  occupational  risks  applies.
The  employee  assumes  the  ordinary  risks  of  the  employment
in  which  he  engages.  In  an  early  American  case  the  court
stated  that  "The  general  rule,  resulting  from  considerations


'  See  E.  H.  Downey,  History  of  Work  Accident  Indemnity,  1912,  p.  17.
"  Priestly  V.  Fowler,  3  Meeson  and  Welsby,  I,  6  (England,  1837).
2  Magee  v.  Chicago  &  Northwestern  R.  R.  Co.,  82  Iowa  249,  48  N.  W.
92  (1891).


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  359

as  well  of  justice  as  of  policy,  is,  that  he  who  engages  in  the
emplojmient  of  another  for  the  performance  of  specified  duties
and  services,  for  compensation,  takes  upon  himself  the  natural
and  ordinary  risks  and  perils  incident  to  the  performance  of
such  services,  and  in  legal  presumption  the  compensation  is
adjusted  accordingly." '  Freeing  the  employer  from  liability
thus  left  a  vast  number  of  injuries  and  deaths  as  a  direct
burden  upon  the  workmen  and  their  dependents,  with  no
chance  of  obtaining  damages.

c.  Fellow  Servant  Rule.  The  rules  holding  the  employer
responsible  for  exercising  reasonable  care  in  protecting  his
employees,  and  exempting  him  from  liability  for  inherent  oc-
cupational hazards,  were  recognized  imiformly  by  the  courts.
The  third,  or  fellow  servant  rule,  involved  more  serious  dif-
ficulty. The  usual  rule  of  law  is  that  a  master  is  responsible
for  the  negligence  or  carelessness  of  his  servants  in  the  course
of  their  duties.  Since  very  many  accidents  to  workmen  can
be  traced  to  the  carelessness  or  negligence  of  a  co-employee,
the  application  of  the  rule  as  between  fellow  servants  was  felt
to  be  harsh.  ^  Exception  to  the  general  rule  was  first  taken
by  the  English  Exchequer  Court  in  1837  in  the  case  of  Priestly
V.  Fowler.'  A  butcher  driver's  helper  was  injiued  by  the
breaking  down  of  the  wagon.  He  brought  suit  against  the
butcher  for  damages  on  the  grotmds  that  the  wagon  was  in-
sufficient for  its  purpose,  and  that  it  had  been  overloaded.
Damages  were  denied  on  the  ground  that  if  they  were  allowed
the  master's  liability  would  extend  very  far.  He  might  be
held  liable  to  the  footman  who  was  injured  by  a  defective
wagon  due  to  the  negligence  of  the  coachmaker,  or  to  the
servant  for  the  negligence  of  the  cook  in  not  properly  cleaning
copper  vessels  in  the  kitchen.  Besides,  the  opinion  states,
the  driver's  helper  "must  have  known  as  well  as  his  master
and  probably  better"  that  the  wagon  was  insufficient,  or
overloaded,  and  might  have  refused  to  use  it.

A  similar  decision  was  rendered  four  years  later  in  America,

'  Farwell  v.  Boston  &  Worcester  R.  R.,  4  Metcalf  (Mass.)  49,  57  (1842).

*  Consequently  the  courts,  declare  Shearman  and  Redfield  in  The  Law
of  Negligence,  "boldly  invented  an  exception  to  the'  general  rule  of
masters'  liabUity,  by  which  servants  were  deprived  of  its  protection."
(p.w.)

"Priestly  ».  Fowler,  3  Meeson  and  Welsby  i,  5  (England,  1837).


36o PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

without  mentioning  the  Priestly  case.  In  this  case'  damages
were  denied  a  locomotive  fireman  who  had  been  injured  owing
to  the  negligence  of  the  engineer  under  whom  he  worked.
It  was  held  that  the  railroad  company  was  not  a  guarantor
to  one  employee  against  the  negligence  of  other  employees;
that  the  fireman  should  have  been  aware  of  the  perils  of  his
employment,  and  that  the  plaintiff  was  paid  for  his  labor
and  for  the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed.

In  1842  Chief  Justice  Shaw  of  Massachusetts  gave  the  fel-
low servant  rule  a  definite  formulation  and  a  wide  application
in  deciding  the  case  of  Farwell  v.  Boston  and  Worcester  Rail-
road Corporation^  in  favor  of  the  defendant.  An  engineer
brought  action  for  damages  because  he  had  lost  a  leg  due  to
the  switchman's  neglecting  to  change  a  switch.  Justice  Shaw
argued  that  any  servant  might  reasonably  anticipate  that
his  associates  will  at  times  be  careless  and  negligent;  that  this
is  one  of  the  risks  of  employment,  to  which,  in  legal  pre-
siunption,  the  compensation  is  adjusted.  Want  of  care  can
be  anticipated  as  much  as  a  coupling  out  of  repair.  The
brakeman  can  guard  against  one  as  much  as  against  the
other — being  powerless  against  both.

This  chain  of  reasoning  was  accepted  as  sound  and  con-
clusive, and  numerous  later  decisions  were  based  on  it.  It
relieved  the  master  from  all  liability  for  an  injury  sustained
on  accoimt  of  the  negligence  or  carelessness  of  a  fdlow  ser-
vant provided  the  master  had  exercised  reasonaKecsie  in
his  selection.*  "^^" "  '  .^•^-.

d.  Contributory  Negligence.  According  to  the  doctrine  of
contributory  negUgence  a  plantiff  for  damage^  for  an  injury
occasioned  by  the  fault  of  the  employer  must,  in  order  to  win
his  case,  estabUsh  his  own  freedom  from  iiegligence.  Any
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  injured,  no  matter  how  slight  in
comparison  with  that  of  the  employer,  will  cause  him  to  lose
the  suit,  if  without  that  negligence  the"'accident  would  not
have  occurred.  Such  negligence  exists  if  the  employee  con-
tinues to  work  under  conditions  which  are  apparently  danger-

'  Murray  v.  South  Carolina  Ry.  Co.,  i  McMullan  385  (1841).

2  Farwell  v.  Boston  and  Worcester  R.  R.  Corporation,  4  Metcalf  (Mass.)
49  (1842).

'  Seymour  D.  Thompson,  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Negligence,  1901-
1905,  Vol.  IV,  p.  270,  §40^8,


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  361

ous  and  which  a  reasonably  prudent  man  would  avoid,  or  if
his  own  want  of  due  care  contributed  as  a  proximate  cause
to  the  accident.^

e.  Assumption  of  Risk.  As  a  last  resort  to  free  himself
from  liability  the  employer  could  set  up  the  defense  that  the
injured  workman  had  "assumed"  the  risk.  The  risk  referred
to  in  this  coimection  is  not  the  ordinary  inherent  hazard  of
the  occupation,  but  an  abnormal  danger  of  which  the  em-
ployee was  fully  aware,  but  in  spite  of  which  he  continued  to
work.  The  principle  of  asstunption  of  risk  has,  however,
been  modified  in  several  states  by  statutes  in  favor  of  the
workman.  This  is  particularly  true  in  case  of  children  and
of  railroad  workers.

It  can  easily  be  seen  that  with  these  last  four  rules  all
aiming  to  relieve  the  employer  of  liability  it  is  extremely  dif-
ficult for  the  injured  workman  to  win  a  suit  for  damages.
In  order  to  gain  a  favorable  verdict  he  must  be  able  to  show
that  the  injury  was  the  immediate  result  of  the  employer's
failure  to  exercise  ordinary  care,  and  that  it  was  not  contrib-
uted to  in  any  degree  by  his  own  want  of  ordinary  care.
Moreover,  he  cannot  recover  if  the  accident  was  due  to  an
ordinary  hazard  of  the  employment,  or  to  the  negligence  of
a  fellow  workman,  or  to  a  defect  due  to  the  negligence  of  the
employer  that  was  known  to  the  injured  and  that  created  a
condition  under  which  a  prudent  man  would  not  have  con-
tinued to  work.

Satisfactory  statistics  are  not  available  to  show  definitely
the  proportion  of  injured  men  who  received  indemnity  under
these  liability  doctrines.  From  the  meager  investigations
which  have  been  made,  however,  it  may  be  concluded  that
but  few  recovered  damages,  and  that  the  amounts  were  in
many  cases  shamefully  small.  Under  the  liability  system
insurance  companies  have  engaged  in  carrying  the  employer's
risk.  They  have  expert  legal  advice,  and  are  able  to  con-
test wage-earners'  claims  even  more  effectively  than  the
average  employer.  It  is  true  that  ntmierous  laws  have  been
enacted  in  most  countries  attempting  to  place  more  liability
upon  the  employer; Germany  passed  a  law,  wide  in  scope,

•  Butterfield  v.  Forester,  11  East  60  (England,  1809);  Haley  v.  Chicago
&  Northwestern  Ry.  Co.,  21  Iowa  15  (1866).


362 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

to  that  effect  in  187 1,  and  Great  Britain  followed  in  1880.
Notwithstanding  all  attempted  legal  regulation,  the  position
of  the  injured  workman  was  not  much  improved.  To  recover
he  had  to  go  to  the  courts  and  had  to  meet  the  strong  legal
opposition  of  insurance  companies  or  of  his  employer.

Not  only  are  the  injured  man's  chances  to  win  his  case  very
small  and  the  machinery  too  slow  to  bring  relief  when  it  is
most  needed,  but  the  system  is  extremely  wasteful.  The  fol-
lowing figures  taken  from  the  records  of  ten  insurance  com-
panies for  a  three-year  period  will  substantiate  this  state-
ment :  ^

Collected  from  employers $23,523,585

Absorbed  by  companies  in  profits  and  expenses.  .  14,963,790
Received  by  plaintiffs'  attorneys  (approximately) .  i  ,900,000
Received  by  injured  workmen  or  their  dependents

(approximately) 6,660,000

Of  every  $100  paid  by  the  employer  in  premiums,  but  $28
reached  the  workman,  and  that  amount  only  after  a  long
legal  action.

An  investigation  of  327  firms  in  New  York  in  1907  showed
that  these  companies  paid  out  on  account  of  accidents  $255,-
153,  of  which  56  per  cent,  reached  the  workmen,^  the  other
44  per  cent,  being  consumed  by  court  costs,  insurance  com-
pany's profits,  legal  fees,  and  other  charges.

Without  question  but  a  small  proportion  of  cases  are  taken
to  court,  because  the  injured  knows  an  attempted  recovery
is  but  a  gamble  with  all  odds  against  him.  As  a  rule  the  in-
surance companies  act  as  if  their  duty  under  employers'
liability  is  not  to  compensate  the  injured,  but  to  defeat  their
claims.


(2)  Beginnings  of  Industrial  Accident  Insurance

Germany  was  the  first  country  to  realize  that  in  order  to
give  certain  and  adequate  relief  to  the  injured  workman  it
was  necessary  to  provide  insurance  for  all  laborers,  and  for
all  accidents. The  first  bill  to  this  effect  was  introduced  in


•  New  York  Commission  on  Employers'  Liability  and  Other  Matters,
First  Report,  1910,  pp.  29-31.

*  E.  H.  Downey,  History  of  Work  Accident  Indemnity,  pp.  82,  83.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  363

the  Reichstag  in  188 1,  but  failed  to  be  adopted.  The  follow-
ing year  a  second  bill  was  introduced  providing  for  sickness
and  accident  insurance.  The  sickness  clauses,  including  pro-
visions for  accident  compensation  during  the  first  thirteen
weeks  of  disability,  were  passed  in  1883,  but  the  accident
insiu-ance  was  again  defeated.  Finally  in  1884  a  bill  pro-
viding compulsory  insiu-ance  against  accidents  was  passed
which  became  effective  in  October,  1885.

a.  German  System.  The  German  law  has  been  frequently
amended  and  extended  in  scope,  and  to-day  practically  every
industry  of  that  cotmtry  is  included.  The  federal  council
may  exempt  non-hazardous  establishments  upon  application,
but  as  late  as  1909  no  such  exemptions  had  been  made.i

An  accident  is  held  to  exist  "if  because  of  a  sudden  event,
taking  place  at  a  definite  time,  the  physical  or  mental  con-
dition of  a  workman  is  injured  through  an  external  wound
or  an  organic  disablement."  All  accidents' occurring  in  the
course  of  employment  and  causing  a  disability  of  three  days
or  more  are  covered.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  injured
was  actually  working  when  the  accident  occtirred.  For
example  a  man  may  be  exposed  to  certain  accidents  during
the  noon  hour,  such  as  a  boiler  explosion,  in  which  case  he
is  entitled  to  compensation.  An  injury  due  to  some  external
force  such  as  lightning  is  considered  a  compensable  accident
if  the  injured  is  exposed  to  such  risk  to  a  higher  degree  be-
cause of  the  nature  of  his  employment.  Accidents  by  fault
of  a  third  party  are  included  if  the  origin  or  degree  is  ma-
terially influenced  by  the  characteristics  of  the  establish-
ment. This  clause  is  broadly  interpreted,  and  covers  all
accidents  due  to  negligence  or  lack  of  care  of  a  fellow  servant.

Under  the  German  system  the  compensation  of  the  injured
workman  for  the  first  thirteen  weeks  of  disability  comes  from
the  sick  funds.  During  the  first  four  weeks  he  receives  50
per  cent.,  and  from  the  fifth  to  the  thirteenth  week  inclu-
sive 66^  per  cent,  of  his  wages,  and  the  latter  proportion  is
continued  from  the  accident  funds  until  temporary  dis-
ability ceases.  The  sick  funds  are  maintained  by  contri-
butions two-thirds  of  which  are  paid  by  the  workmen  and

1  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twenty-fourth  Annual  Report,
Vol.  I,  p.  993.


364 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

one-third  by  the  employers. From  the  fifth  to  the  thirteenth
week  the  additional  16%  per  cent,  of  wages  is  paid  by  the
employer  in  whose  establishment  the  accident  occurred.
Thus  accident  compensation  comes  from  three  sources:
(i)  From  the  first  to  the  fourth  week  of  disability,  inclusive,
from  the  sick  funds;

(2)  From  the  fifth  to  the  thirteenth  week,  inclusive,  from
the  sick  fund  and  the  additional  16%  per  cent,  from  the
employer;

(3)  After  the  thirteenth  week  from  the  accident  insurance
associations  composed  of  employers.

During  the  decade  1886  to  1895  accidents  causing  a  dis-
ability of  less  than  thirteen  weeks  formed  84  per  cent,  of  the
total,  and  the  cost  of  these  injuries,  paid  from  the  sick  funds,
is,  according  to  Dr.  Bodeker's  estimate,  16%  per  cent,  of  the
total  cost  of  accident  insurance.  Since  the  insured  work-
men pay  two-thirds  of  the  expense  of  the  sick  funds,  they
therefore  provide  about  11  per  cent,  of  the  cost  of  accident
insurance  and  the  employers  89  per  cent.'

In  addition  to  the  monetary  benefit,  free  medical  attend-
ance, medicines,  and  appliances  are  provided.  During  the
first  thirteen  weeks  these  costs  are  paid  by  the  sick  fund,  and
after  that  by  the  insurance  associations.  To  bring  about  a
speedy  recovery,  and  to  avoid  large  pensions  which  would
result  if  the  injured  were  permanently  disabled,  the  insur-
ance associations  have  established  numerous  hospitals,  con-
valescent homes,  and  similar  institutions.

In  case  of  permanent  total  disability  the  injured  workman
receives  66%  per  cent,  of  wages  for  life.  For  permanent
partial  disablement  he  receives  a  pension  in  proportion  to
the  degree  of  disablement.  In  computing  the  amount,  the
nature  of  his  occupation  and  training  are  taken  into  considera-
tion; for  example,  the  loss  of  a  finger  would  affect  a  linotype
operator  much  more  seriously  than  a  foundry  laborer,  and
accordingly  he  would  receive  a  larger  pension.

Benefits  are  based  on  wages  in  the  last  employment.  If
wages  exceed  $428.40  a  year,  only  one-third  of  the  excess  caay
be  calculated.

•  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twenty-fourth  Annual  Report,
Vol.  I,  p.  999.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  36s

If  the  accident  results  in  death  a  ftineral  benefit  is  paid  in
all  cases,  whether  the  deceased  has  left  dependents  entitled
to  survivors'  benefits  or  not.  The  amount  paid  is  one  fif-
teenth of  the  annual  earnings,  but  not  less  than  $11.90.  This
benefit  must  be  paid  within  one  week  after  occvuxence  of
death,  even  if  burial  is  impossible,  as  in  case  of  drowning  or
burning.  A  liberal  pension  is  provided  for  surviving  depend-
ents. The  widow  receives  20  per  cent,  of  the  average  annual
earnings  of  her  husband,  for  life.  If  she  remarries  she  is  given
three  times  the  annual  amount,  or  60  per  cent.,  in  a  limip
sum,  but  then  her  benefits  cease.  If  a  woman  supporting  a
dependent  husband  is  killed,  he  receives  20  per  cent,  of  her
wages  as  long  as  he  is  unable  to  support  himself.  Each  child
receives  20  per  cent,  of  the  wages  of  the  kiUed  parent  until
the  age  of  fifteen,  but  the  total  benefits  may  not  exceed  60
per  cent,  of  the  average  annual  earnings.  If  there  are  more
than  two  dependent  children  in  addition  to  the  widow,  the
benefits  are  divided  equally  so  as  to  total  60  per  cent.

The  cost  of  insurance  is  defrayed  by  assessments  on  em-
ployers based  on  the  amount  of  wages  paid  to  employees  and
the  nature  of  the  risk.  The  board  of  directors  of  the  insur-
ance association  classifies  the  risks,  and  adopts  a  schedule  of
charges  which  must  be  approved  by  the  imperial  insurance
office.  Premiums  collected  are  based  upon  the  cost  of  the
previous  year.  It  is  evident  that  under  such  "a  system  the
cost  will  increase  every  year  until  a  maximum  is  reached.
Each  year  more  widows  are  added  to  those  already  drawing
pensions,  and  each  year  more  are  added  to  the  list  of  per-
manently disabled.  Until  approximately  as  many  widows
and  disabled  die  as  are  added  each  year,  the  cost  of  insurance
will  increase.  The  argument  is  often  made  that  under  such
a  system  the  new  concerns  do  not  receive  justice.  They  are
assessed  the  same  amounts  as  the  older  ones,  and  consequently
are  obUged  to  pay  for  losses  of  the  past,  and  for  accidents  to
which  they  did  not  contribute.  The  fallacy  of  this  argument
is  easily  seen  when  we  look  at  the  underlying  theory.  The
burden  of  insurance  must  be  borne  by  the  industry,  and  not
by  its  individual  members.  When  a  new  company  becomes
a  member  of  a  trade  association,  that  industry  has  already
caused  a  certain  number  of  accidents  and  must  bear  the


366 fRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

losses.  The  individual  employer  finds  remuneration  in  ad-
vanced prices,  by  which  the  cost  of  insurance  has  been  shifted
upon  the  consumer.  The  premium  should  be  regarded  more
in  the  nature  of  a  tax  upon  industry.  A  new  company  knows
in  advance  what  that  tax  is,  and  is  able  to  make  provision
for  it  when  it  is  organized.

The  most  important  branch  of  the  administrative  ma-
chinery of  the  German  compulsory  insurance  law  is  the  mutual
trade  associations.  Employers  in  related  trades  organize  their
own  associations,  fix  their  own  rates,  and  enforce  their  own
safety  requirements,  and  to  the  special  faciUties  which  this
method  affords  is  mainly  due  the  conspicuous  success  of  the
German  system  in  promoting  accident  prevention.  Each
Berufsgenossenschaft  or  trade  association  has  its  own  constitu-
tion, but  is  closely  regulated  by  the  state  and  the  imperial
insurance  office.  The  last  named  authority,  whose  expenses
the  government  assists  in  defraying,  is  supreme  over  the  whole
field  of  industrial  insurance,  and  has  its  office  at  Berlin.  It  is
composed  of  a  president,  and  permanent  and  temporary  mem-
bers. The  president  and  permanent  members  are  appointed
for  life  by  the  emperor  upon  nomination  by  the  federal  coun-
cil. Of  the  thirty-two  temporary  members,  eight  are  chosen
by  the  federal  council,  at  least  six  of  whom  are  from  its  own
membership,  twelve  are  selected  by  employers,  and  twelve  by
the  instired.  Subordinate  to  the  imperial  insurance  office  is  a
system  of  local  and  superior  insurance  offices,  each  composed  of
public  officials  with  associates  elected  by  and  from  employers
and  employees  respectively.  Judicial  and  administrative
matters  passed  upon  by  the  local  office  may,  subject  to
certain  restrictions,  be  appealed  to  the  superior  office,  and
from  that  to  the  imperial  office,  whose  decision  is  usually
final.

According  to  the  report  of  the  imperial  statistical  bureau
issued  in  1914,  over  28,000,000  workmen  were  insured  against
accidents  in  1912,  and  $42,500,000  was  paid  in  indemnity.
The  system  is  cheaply  administered  and  cases  are  settled
quickly,  giving  relief  when  it  ife  most  needed.

b.  Methods  in  Other  Countries.  The  German  insurance
system  has  been  described  in  detail  because  it  was  the  first
to  be  introduced,  is  one  of  the  most  efficient,  and  was  the


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  367

experiment  upon  which,  in  various  degrees,  other  countries
based  their  acts.

Great  Britain  passed  a  compensation  law  in  1897  which  was
frequently  amended  and  amplified  in  scope  until  the  present
law  was  enacted  in  1906.^  All  employments,  and  all  injuries
arising  out  of  and  in  the  course  of  employment,  are  covered.
In  case  of  death  three  years'  wages  are  paid  in  a  lump  sum
to  the  dependents.  DisabiHty  benefits  are  Umited  to  50  per
cent,  of  wages,  but  continue  for  life  if  the  disability  is  per-
manent. The  employer  bears  the  entire  cost  of  compensation,
and  may  either  carry  his  own  risk  under  proper  safeguards
or  insure  in  a  private  or  mutual  company.

The  principle  of  industrial  accident  insurance,  or  workmen's
compensation  as  it  is  usually  called,  is  now  so  generally  ac-
cepted that  over  forty  foreign  countries,  including  practically
all  of  any  industrial  importance,  have  laws  of  this  character,
covering  together  some  50,000,000  wage-earners.^  Benefits
range  from  50  per  cent,  to  80  ^  per  cent,  of  wages,  and  in  most
of  the  important  cotmtries  medical  and  stugical  aid  is  ren-
dered. To  secure  the  payment  of  benefits,  employers  are
usually  required  to  insure  their  risk,  often  in  institutions  pre-
scribed and  controlled  by  the  state.

c.  Inclusion  of  Occupational  Diseases.  Though  workmen's
compensation  laws  originally  concerned  themselves  only  with
mechanical  injuries,  such  as  cuts,  broken  bones,  or  loss  of
members,  it  soon  became  obvious  that  elementary  justice
required  the  extension  of  similar  relief  to  the  victims  of  specific
industrial  diseases  contracted  in  the  course  of  employment.
The  first  country  to  take  this  forward  step  was  Great  Britain,


'  For  complete  summary  of  this  and  other  European  laws  see  United
States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No.  126,  1914,  pp.  131-179.

"Among  the  more  important  foreign  countries  with  workmen's  com-
pensation systems  are:  Austria,  Belgium,  Denmark,  France,  Germany,
Great  Britain,  Hungary,  Italy,  Japan,  Netherlands,  New  Zealand,  Nor-
way, Portugal,  Queensland,  Russia,  South  Australia,  Spain,  Sweden,
Switzerland,  and  Western  Australia.

'This  latter  percentage  occurs  only  in  the  Swiss  law  of  191 1,  Sec.  74,
and  is  payable  only  during  the  period  of  illness  immediately  following  an
accident,  after  which  the  compensation  for  permanent  total  disability  is
reduced  to  70  per  cent,  of  wages.  Under  both  the  Swiss  and  the  German
laws,  however,  indemnity  may  be  increased  to  100  per  cent,  of  wages  in
exceptional  cases  requiring  special  care.


368 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

which  in  the  act  of  1906  included  for  compensation  a  schedule
of  six  of  the  commonest  occupational  maladies.  While  South
Australia'  and  Ontario^  have  followed  this  example,  the
mother-country  has  three  times  expanded  its  original  schedule
until  in  191 5  no  fewer  than  twenty-five  diseases  were  there
compensable.  These  include  poisoning  by  lead,  mercury,
phosphorus,  or  arsenic,  compressed-air  illness,  anthrax,  a  num-
ber of  miners'  ailments,  glass  workers'  cataract,  and  teleg-
raphers' and  writers'  cramp.  In  other  countries,  also,  the
beginnings  of  similar  consideration  for  victims  of  occupational
maladies  are  to  be  noted.  Because  of  the  peculiarly  in-
fectious nature  of  the  disease  and  its  close  connection  with  the
occupations  in  which  it  occurs,  both  France  and  Germany
now  class  anthrax,  for  compensation  purposes,  as  an  accident.
In  France,  also,  by  the  financial  law  of  191 1,  employers  of
miners  suffering  from  ankylostomiasis,  or  "miners'  hook-
worm," are  required  to  bear  the  expense  of  treatment  and  to
pay  compensation.  Foundations  for  a  broad  system  of
occupational  disease  indemnity  have,  moreover,  been  laid  in
Germany  ^  and  Switzerland.*  In  the  former  country  the
federal  council  has  been  given  permission,  and  in  the  latter
it  has  been  ordered,  to  draw  up  a  list  of  trade  diseases  which
shall  be  compensated  for  at  the  same  rate  as  trade  accidents.
Up  to  the  beginning  of  19 16,  however,  neither  country  had
drawn  up  its  Hst.


(j)  Compensation  Legislation  in  the  United  States

As  in  other  forms  of  social  insurance,  to  be  considered  later,
the  United  States  is  far  behind  European  countries  in  provid-
ing for  the  injured  workman.  The  first  legislation  providing
for  stated  benefits  without  suit  or  proof  of  negligence  was
enacted  in  Maryland  in  1902,  in  the  form  of  a  cooperative
insurance  law.*  The  law  was  narrow  in  scope,  covering  only
a  small  specific  list  of  industries,  and  was  declared  unconstitu-

'1911.  "1914.

'  German  workmen's  insurance  code,  191 1,  Article  547.
*  Swiss  federal  law  relating  to  sickness  and  accident  insurance,  191 1,
Article  68.
f  Vnited  States  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Bulletin  No,  is6,  p.  30,


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  369

tional  in  1904.*  In  1908  Congress  enacted  a  law  granting  to
certain  employees  of  the  United  States  the  right  to  compensa-
tion for  injuries  sustained  in  the  course  of  employment.  In
1 9 10  an  act  was  passed  in  Montana  providing  for  the  mainte-
nance of  a  state  cooperative  insurance  ftmd  for  miners  and
laborers  in  and  about  mines.  This  also  was  declared  un-
constitutional.^

The  first  law  of  general  application  was  passed  by  New
York  in  19 10.  It  was  made  elective  for  most  occupations,  but
compulsory  for  an  enumerated  list  of  hazardous  employments.
This  statute  was  declared  unconstitutional  in  191 1  in  the
case  of  Ives  v.  South  Buffalo  Railway  Company,'  but  an
amendment  to  the  constitution  made  possible  the  enactment
of  a  compulsory  law  in  19 14,  Other  states  followed  New
York's  lead,  and  during  the  five  years  1911-1915  compensa-
tion laws  were  enacted  in  thirty-one  states  and  two  territories
of  the  union.'*  Moreover,  the  1908  law  covering  federal  em-
ployees was  extended  to  several  additional  classes  of  workmen,
including  those  on  the  Alaskan  railways,  and  in  1907  the
United  States  Philippine  Commission  established  limited  com-
pensation for  public  employees  in  those  islands.

One  of  the  main  obstacles  to  the  enactment  of  effective  com-
pensation laws  has  been  the  question  of  constitutionality.  It
is  maintained  that  to  require  a  person  to  pay  damages  for
an  accident  for  which  he  was  not  to  blame  is  taking  property
without  due  process  of  law,  that  both  employer  and  employee
are  deprived  of  the  right  of  trial  by  jury,  and  that  the  em-
ployer is  charged  with  liability  without  fault.

Before  the  end  of  the  year  1915  the  constitutionality  of
compensation  laws  had  been  tested  by  the  highest  courts  of


'Franklin  v.  United  Railways  and  Electric  Co.  of  Baltimore  (1904).
Stimmarized  in  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  Bulletin  No.  57,  1905,
pp.  689,  690.

'Cunningham  v.  Northwestern  Improvement  Co.,  44  Mont.  180,  119
Pac.  554  (1911).

»Ives  V.  South  Buffalo  R.  Co.,  201  N.  Y.  271,  94  N.  E.  431  (1911).

•Alaska,  Arizona,  California,  Colorado,  Connecticut,  Hawaii,  Illinois,
Indiana,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Louisiana,  Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,
Michigan,  Minnesota,  Montana,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  New  Hampshire,
New  Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  Oklahoma,  Oregon,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode
Island,  Texas,  Vermont,  Washington,  West  Virginia,  Wisconsin,  and
Wyoming.

24


370 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

no  fewer  than  twelve  states.  Four  state  courts  declared  such
laws  unconstitutional,'  upon  the  above  grounds,  while  all  the
others  upheld  them/  Moreover,  of  the  four  states  which  suf-
fered an  adverse  decision,  three — Maryland,  New  York,  and
Mctitana — subsequently  enacted  laws  which  remained  in  force,
and  the  New  York  law  was  upheld  by  the  same  court  which
in  igii,  before  the  constitution  was  amended,  ruled  out  the
earlier  act.  The  only  point  in  a  compensation  law  which  had
been  passed  upon  by  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  was  the
Ohio  provision  excluding  from  the  obligation  of  the  act  shops
employing  fewer  than  five  persons,  which  was  upheld  as  not
an  arbitrary  or  unreasonable  classification.^

Among  recent  decisions,  none  is  more  indicative  of  a  pro-
gressive attitude  on  the  part  of  the  bench  than  that  in  the
Jensen  case,  upholding  the  present  New  York  law.  The
decision,  rendered  in  July,  1915,  establishes  no  new  doctrine.
On  the  question  of  conflict  of  laws  in  interstate  commerce
it  reiterates  the  principle  that  regulations  affecting  such
commerce  are  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state  imtii
Congress  by  entering  the  field  excludes  state  action,  and
it  emphasizes  the  well-established  doctrine  that  no  one  has
a  vested  right,  under  the  constitution,  in  the  maintenance
of  the  common  law.

On  the  question  of  the  violation  of  the  fourteenth  amend-
ment of  the  federal  constitution,  the  Oklahoma  case  of  Noble
State  Bank  v.  Haskell  is  considered  to  be  decisively  controlling.
Although  it  may  be  admitted  that  there  is  a  taking  of  property
under  the  compulsory  compensation  law,  it  is  less  direct  and


•  The  unfavorable  decisions  in  Maryland,  New  York,  and  Montana
have  already  been  cited;  the  fourth  was  in  Kentucky:  Kentucky  State
Journal  v.  Workmen's  Compensation  Board,  161  Ky.  562,  170  S.  W.  1 166

(1914)-

■  2  The  most  important  favorable  state  decisions  are:  In  re  Opinions  of
Justices,  209  Mass.  607,  96  N.  E.  308  (1911);  State  ex  rel.  Davis-Smith
Co.  V.  Clausen,  65  Wash.  156,  117  Pac.  iioi  (1911);  Borgnis  v.  Falk  Co.,
147  Wis.  327,  133  N.  W.  209  (191 1);  State  ex  rel.  Yaple  v.  Creamer,
85  O.  349,  97  N.  E.  602  (1912);  Sexton  v.  Newark  District  Telegraph
Co.,  84  N.  J.  85,  86  Atl.  451  (1913);  Mackin  v.  Detroit-Timkin  Axle  Co.,
Michigan,  153  N.  W.  49  (1915);  Jensen  v.  Southern  Pacific  Co.,  215  N.  Y.
514,  109  N.  E.  600  (1915);  Western  Indemnity  Co.  v.  Pillsbury,  Cah-
fomia,  151  Pac.  398  (1915);  Hunter  v.  Colfax  Consolidated  Coal  Co.,
Iowa  (1915).
3  Jeffrey  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Bkgg,  235  U.  S.  571  (1915)-


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  371

at  least  as  much  in  the  pubHc  interest  as  the  taking  which
occTirred  in  the  Oklahoma  case.  "The  theoretical  taking,"
says  the  coiirt,  "no  doubt  disappears  in  practical  experience
...  a  compulsory  scheme  of  insurance  to  secure  injured  work-
men and  their  dependents  from  becoming  objects  of  chanty
certainly  promotes  the  pubhc  welfare  as  directly  as  does  an
insurance  of  bank  depositors  from  loss."

It  is  the  frequent  recognition  of  the  changed  conditions  and
their  effect  upon  legal  doctrine  that  constitutes  the  distinctive
quality  of  the  New  York  decision.  "In  the  way  modem
undertakings  are  conducted  it  is  rarely  possible  to  trace  the
personal  fault  to  the  employer,  but  he  has  been  held  liable
for  wrongs  of  others  under  the  doctrine  of  respondeat  superior,"
says  the  judge.  And  again:  " This  subject  should  be  viewed
in  the  light  of  modem  conditions,  not  those  under  which  the
common  law  doctrines  were  developed.  With  the  change  in
industrial  conditions  an  opinion  has  gradually  developed
which  almost  universally  favors  a  more  just  and  economical
system  of  providing  compensation  for  accidental  injuries  to
employees  as  a  substitute  for  wasteful  and  protracted  damage
suits,  usually  unjust  in  their  results  either  to  the  employer  or
the  employee,  and  sometimes  to  both.  Surely  it  is  competent
for  the  state  in  the  promotion  of  the  general  welfare  to  re-
quire both  employer  and  employee  to  yield  something  toward
the  establishment  of  a  principle  and  a  plan  of  compensation
for  their  mutual  protection  and  advantage."

The  opinion  ends  with  a  reassuring  note  on  the  probable
attitude  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court:  "Fortunately
the  courts  have  not  attempted  to  define  the  limits  of  the  pohce
power.  Its  elasticity  makes  progress  possible  under  a  written
constitution  guaranteeing  individual  rights.  The  question  is
often  one  of  degree.  The  act  now  before  us  seems  to  be
fundamentally  fair  to  both  employer  and  employee.  ...  It
is  plainly  justified  by  the  amendment  to  our  own  state  con-
stitution, and  the  decisions  of  the  United  States  Supreme
Court,  notably  in  the  Noble  State  Bank  case,  make  it  reason-
ably certain  that  it  will  be  found  by  that  court  not  to  be
violative  of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States."

Owing,  however,  to  the  adverse  decision  on  the  early  New
York  compulsory  law  in  the  Ives  case,  most  American  com-


372 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

pensation  acts  have  been  made  elective.  That  is,  the  em-
ployer is  given  his  choice  of  accepting  the  act  or  of  operating
under  the  liability  law;  but  as  an  encouragement  to  the  em-
ployer to  elect  compensation,  the  old  liability  defenses  of  fel-
low servant's  fault,  contributory  negligence,  and  assumption
of  risk,  discussed  earlier  in  this  chapter,  are  abrogated  or
greatly  modified.  This  is  frequently  called  by  its  opponents
"club"  legislation,  but  the  courts  have  sustained  it  as  a  valid
exercise  of  legislative  power  for  a  public  end.

The  relief  which  a  compensation  act  gives  to  the  injured
workman  depends  upon  (a)  the  scale  of  compensation,  (6)  the
scope  of  the  law,  (c)  the  method  of  administration,  and  (d)  the
security  for  pa3mient  oi  awards.  A  liberal  law,  that  is,  one
which  provides  a  high  rate  of  indemnity,  will  be  of  little
service  unless  it  applies  to  many  cases  of  accidents,  and  con-
versely a  law  covering  many  or  all  cases  will  not  accomplish
what  is  intended  unless  the  benefits  provided  are  reasonably
high.  Again,  the  practical  results  obtained,  no  matter  how
liberal  the  law,  will  be  seriously  impaired  unless  means  are
provided  for  effective  administration  and  for  securing  the
actual  payment  to  the  injured  worker  or  to  his  dependents  of
the  amount  awarded.

a.  Scale  of  Compensation.  The  object  of  indemnity  is  two-
fold— first  and  more  important,  to  restore  the  workman's
earning  power  as  completely  and  quickly  as  possible,  so  that
society  will  not  be  biirdened  with  disabled  htunan  beings,
and  second,  to  provide  for  the  support  of  the  family  while  the
surgical  and  medical  treatment  is  being  given.  To  effect
the  former  it  is  imperative  that  he  receive  efficient  medical
and  surgical  care.

(a)  Medical  Attendance.  The  importance  of  medical  at-
tendance is  often  underestimated.  Proper,  immediate  care
tends  not  only  to  reduce  the  period  of  disabiUty,  but  also  to
diminish  the  number  of  serious,  perhaps  permanent  complica-
tions. Lifelong  impairment  of  earning  capacity  frequently  re-
sults from  improper  care  of  fractures;  infections  or  "blood-
poisoning"  covild  be  almost  eliminated  by  efficient  immediate
attention.  Of  721  infections  reported  to  the  Wisconsin  In-
dustrial Commission  during  a  two-year  period  ending  Sep-
tember I,  1913,  about  600  were  the  result  of  small  scratches


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  373

and  breaks  of  the  skin.'  These  cases  represented  a  total  of
12,500  working  days  lost,  and,  under  the  Wisconsin  law,  a  com-
pensation of  about  $40,000.  Had  proper  care  been  provided
this  large  loss  of  time  and  money  could  have  been  avoided.

Full  medical  aid  at  the  employer's  cost  is  of  benefit  to  the
workman  in  that  it  relieves  his  suffering,  reduces  the  period
of  disability,  and  permits  his  return  to  fuU  earning  capacity
in  shorter  time;  at  the  same  time,  in  virtue  of  this  fact,  it
is  beneficial  to  the  employer  inasmuch  as  the  amount  of
compensation  is  reduced.  If  the  wage-earner  is  required  to
provide  medical  treatment  himself,  he  will  not  receive  as  good
care.  The  average  laborer  has  little  means  to  pay  for  good
service,  even  when  earning  full  wages.  When  disabled  and
receiving  only  a  part  of  his  wages,  he  is  even  less  able  to  pro-
vide himself  with  proper  care.

The  amount  of  medical  aid,  in  proportion  to  the  total  in-
demnity, is  large.  During  1914  a  total  indemnity  of  $1,254,-
000  was  paid  to  injured  workmen  in  Wisconsin.  Of  this
amotmt  $420,000,  or  33.3  per  cent.,  was  for  medical  aid.^
Other  states  and  insurance  companies  report  the  amount  of
medical  aid  at  from  29  per  cent,  to  43.8  per  cent,  of  the
total  cost  of  compensation.*  Thus  it  is  evident  that  medical
care  is  a  very  important  factor  in  a  compensation  law  and
should  not  be  underestimated.  It  is  of  such  importance  to  the
welfare  of  the  injured  and  their  dependents  that  the  law  should
require  the  giving  of  full  free  medical  attendance,  medicines
and  appliances,  and  should  impose  a  limit  neither  in  time  nor
in  araotmt.  Such  is  the  requirement  under  the  German  law,
and  besides  vastly  benefiting  the  injured  it  has  achieved  mar-
velous results  in  preventing  permanent  impairment.

The  laws  of  our  states  are  not  so  liberal  in  this  respect.
While  raost  states  provide  for  medical  care,  they  also  impose
either  a  time  limit,  an  amount  limit,  or  both.  The  time  limits
range  from  one  week  to  ninety  days,  while  the  amount  varies
from  $25  to  $250.  In  several  states  the  administrative  boards
have  control  over  the  amounts,  and  may  extend  the  maximums
at  their  discretion.


'  Industrial  Commission  of  Wisconsin,  Shop  Bulletin  No.  5.
'  Figures  obtained  from  Wisconsin  Industrial  Commission.
•  Workmen's  Compensation,  Senate  Document  419,  pp.  32,  33.


374 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

It  is  evident  that  with  such  low  limits  a  large  part  of  the
medical  care  must  be  borne  by  the  injured.  The  amotmts
may  be  sufficient  to  take  care  of  the  less  serious  injuries,  but
in  case  of  accidents  resulting  in  fractiores,  dislocations,  and
serious  sprains  a  large  part  of  the  burden  falls  on  the  work-
man himself.

(b)  Waiting  Period.  It  is  customary,  in  compensation  laws,
to  provide  no  monetary  benefits  for  the  first  few  days  of  dis-
ability. The  intervening  time  is  known  as  the  "waiting
period"  and  its  object  is  to  prevent  malingering;  that  is,  to
prevent  a  slightly  injured  man  from  pretending  inability  to
work,  with  the  expectation  of  drawing  part  of  his  wages.  On
the  other  hand,  if  the  period  is  too  long  it  will  prove  a  hard-
ship to  the  injured.  The  proper  length  of  the  period  is  hard
to  determine  and  varies  with  individual  cases,  but  it  seems
that  three  days  is  sufficient.^  This  view  is  upheld  by  actual
accident  experience.  Studies  of  accidents  made  by  Dr.  I.  M.
Rubinow  and  by  the  Wisconsin  Industrial  Commission  show
that  about  three-quarters  of  all  accidents  requiring  medical
attendance  terminate  within  two  weeks,  and  that  two-thirds
terminate  within  one  week.  Of  these  two-thirds,  one-half
cause  no  disability  other  than  on  the  day  when  the  accident
occurs,  and  one-quarter  cause  disability  lasting  from  one
to  three  days,  while  only  one-quarter  result  in  disability  ex-
tending over  more  than  three  days.  For  example,  a  total  of
36,000  accidents  requiring  medical  attendance  would  be  dis-
tributed about  as  follows:

Length  of  Disability Number  of  Accidents  Per  C(nl.

Two  weeks  and  more 9,000  25

More  than  one  but  less  than  two  weeks 3,000  8-1/3

More  than  three  days  but  less  than  one  week.  .  . 6,000  16-2/3

More  than  one  but  less  than  three  days 6,000  16-2/3

One day  (day  of  accident) I2,ooo  33-1/3

Total 36,000  100

Hence,  if  the  waiting  period  is  two  weeks  only  about  a  quarter,
and  if  it  is  seven  days,  only  one-third,  of  the  injured  receive

'■  The  American  Association  for  Labor  Legislation  recommends  a
waiting  period  of  not  less  than  three  nor  more  than  seven  days.  See
"Standards  for  Workmen's  Compensation  Laws,"  American  Labor  Legis-
lation Review,  December,  1914,  p.  587.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  375

compensation. By  reducing  the  period  to  three  days,  one-
half  of  those  injvired  would  be  entitled' to  benefits.

In  a  small  number  of  states  there  is  no  waiting  period  and
compensation  begins  on  the  day  of  accident.  A  few  states  set
a  seven-day  period,  and  most  of  the  others  provide  for  two
weeks.  In  some,  however,  compensation  is  paid  from  the
day  of  injttry  in  case  disability  continues  for  more  than  a
specified  period,  as  two,  four,  or  eight  weeks.  Since  the  large
majority  of  accidents  cause  disability  which  terminates  in  a
short  time,  it  is  important  that  the  period  during  which  no
compensation  is  paid  be  made  short.  A  short  waiting  period
is  also  an  inducement  for  the  employer  or  insurance  company
to  render  the  best  treatment  to  the  injured.  The  sooner  the
man  is  able  to  return  to  work  the  less  the  compensation  will
be,  hence  small  accidents  will  be  taken  care  of  in  a  much
better  way.

(c)  Compensation  for  Total  Disability.  Injuries  for  which
compensation  is  paid  may  be  divided  on  the  basis  of  their
severity  into  three  large  groups,  namely  (i)  death;  (2)  partial
disability  or  impairment  of  earning  capacity  such  as  the  am-
putation or  loss  of  function  of  a  member;  and  (3)  total  dis-
ability of  either  a  permanent  or  a  temporary  nature.  The
vast  majority  of  accidents  result  in  disability  of  the  last-
named  sort.

The  best  American  laws,  such  as  are  found  in  New  York
and  Ohio,  award  to  the  disabled  workman  66^  per  cent,  of
wages  (within  certain  limits)  during  the  entire  period  of  dis-
ability. In  permanent  cases,  of  course,  this  means  a  pension
for  life.  The  limits  referred  to  are  in  New  York  a  maximxun
pajmient  of  $20  a  week  and  a  minimum  of  $5  a  week,  except
that  if  full  wages  be  less  than  $5  full  wages  are  paid.  _

Most  of  the  laws,  however,  contain  provisions  far  less  liberal.
In  some  states  the  percentage  of  wages  paid  is  65,  60,  or  55
per  cent.,  and  in  the  majority  of  American  commonwealths
which  have  compensation  laws  it  is  still  as  low  as  50  per  cent.
The  rate  in  the  law  of  1908  covering  federal  employees  was
100  per  cent  (for  one  year  only),  but  the  executive  order  of
March  20,  1914,  applying  to  employees  in  the  Panama  Canal
Zone,  where  nearly  half  of  the  accidents  to  government  em-
ployees occurred,  changed  it  to  50  per  cent,  in  that  district.


376 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  weekly  maximum,  also,  is  often  lower  than  in  New  York,
being  sometimes  $15  or  $10,  and  in  the  Colorado  act  passed
as  late  as  1915  the  weekly  maximvim  was  as  shamefully  low  as
$8.  Besides  granting  a  low  percentage  of  wages,  frequently
held  down  by  a  weekly  maximum  limit,  most  states  still  fur-
ther restrict  the  total  amount  to  be  recovered,  either  directly
or — what  amounts  to  the  same  thing — ^by  stating  a  maximum
period  beyond  which  compensation  is  no  longer  payable.
Time  Hmitations  vary  from  260  weeks  to  eight  years,  and
money  limitations  from  $3,000  to  $6,000.

The  reason  for  these  unprogressive  restrictions  is  not  hard
to  find.  It  is  that  our  compensation  laws  are  based  upon  the
idea  of  merely  keeping  the  injured  and  his  family  from  star-
vation, rather  than  upon  the  principle  of  replacing  wage  loss.
The  common  50  per  cent,  scale  is  obviously  insufficient  to
keep  a  family  from  hardship.  Most  workmen  hardly  receive
when  employed  enough  to  pay  their  current  living  expenses,
and  when  their  income  is  cut  in  two  these  expenses  cannot  be
met.  The  low  weekly  maximtmis  fixed  in  many  states  in-
tensify the  deprivation.  A  family  whose  head  receives  or-
dinarily $25  or  $30  a  week  has  a  fairly  high  standard  of
living,  and  if  in  case  of  accident  the  maximum  recoverable  is
limited  to  $10  or  $12  weekly,  that  standard  cannot  be  main-
tained. This  is  especially  true  if  disability  is  of  long  contin-
uance, yet  some  states  which  fix  a  $10  maximum  for  the  first
300  or  400  weeks  of  disability  reduce  that  sum  thereafter  to
$8  or  even  as  low  as  $5  a  week.

These  excessive  limitations  upon  the  amount  of  compensa-
tion work  considerable  hardship  to  the  cases  which  they
affect,  and  should  not  be  included  in  the  law.  If  the  accident
results  in  permanent  total  disabihty,  the  injured  should  receive
two-thirds  of  his  wages  for  life,  as  is  the  case  in  Germany.
Nothing  short  of  this  will  bring  the  proper  relief.  With  a
two-thirds  normal  income  the  family  will  be  deprived  of  some
things,  but  still  the  amoimt  is  sufficient  to  maintain  about
the  same  standard  of  living,  and  even  in  the  lower  paid  classes
to  keep  the  family  from  dependence  on  charity.  Under  our
system  of  laws  children  are  required  to  go  to  school  until  a
certain  age,  which  means  considerable  expense.  If  in  case  of
accident  causing  a  total  loss  of  earning  capacity  no  proper


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  377

compensation  is  provided,  or  if  the  compensation  period  is
limited,  it  frequently  means  disintegration  of  the  family.

(d)  Compensation  for  Partial  Disability.  Compensation  for
permanent  partial  disability  is  based  in  most  states  upon  a
fixed  schedule  of  a  certain  niunber  of  weeks'  benefit  for  each
specific  dismemberment,  such  as  fifteen  weeks  for  the  loss  of
a  little  finger,  125  weeks  for  an  eye,  or  215  weeks  for  a  leg.
While  this  system  of  a  fixed  charge  for  each  dismemberment,
regardless  of  its  effect  upon  earning  power,  is  easily  adminis-
tered, it  is  open  to  serious  criticism  on  the  grounds  of  arbitrari-
ness and  injustice.  A  system  like  the  German,  in  which  par-
tial disability  is  defined  as  a  proportion  of  the  loss  of  earning
power,  is  more  difficult  to  administer  but  results  in  more  eqiii-
table  settlements.  In  response  to  the'  criticism  that  the  num-
ber of  weeks'  benefit  allowed  by  the  fixed  injury  schedule  is  too
small  there  has  been  a  tendency  to  increase  the  specific  peri-
ods, but  the  best  thought  is  now  against  this  method  and  in
favor  of  indemnifying  on  the  basis  of  the  loss  of  earning  power.
California  for  this  purpose  has  worked  out  a  schedule  estimat-
ing the  percentage  of  impairment  in  earning  capacity  caused
by  each  specific  injury  to  workers  of  various  age  groups  in
each  industry  in  the  state.  If  the  injured  suffering  a  perma-
nent impairment  of  earning  capacity  is  a  minor,  his  compensa-
tion should  be  increased  until  he  reaches  the  age  of  twenty-
one,  as  his  wages  would  probably  have  increased  had  he  not
been  injured.  Several  of  our  states  already  take  cognizance
of  this  fact,  and  the  nimiber  is  growing.

(e)  Compensation  for  Death.  If  the  injtiry  results  in  death
a  funeral  benefit  should  be  paid  in  all  cases,  whether  or  not
the  deceased  had  dependents  entitled  to  compensation.
About  $100  is  sufficient  to  cover  all  essential  funeral  charges.
Some  states  have  laws  providing  funeral  benefits  only  if
there  are  no  dependents  entitled  to  compensation,  but  most
grant  funeral  benefits  in  all  cases.

Our  states  have  thus  far  not  been  very  liberal  in  prescribing
the  amount  of  compensation  to  be  paid  to  dependents.  Very
few  of  them  grant  pensions  to  widows  for  life  or  until  remar-
riage. New  York,  the  most  Uberal  state  in  191 5,  prescribed
30  per  cent,  of  wages  for  the  widow  until  death  or  remarriage
and  10  per  c^t=  additional  for  each  child,  the  total  not  tQ


378 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

exceed  66%  per  cent.  A  few  states  limit  the  death  benefit  to
a  specified  monthly  amoimt,  such  as  $3  s  or  $50,  while  others
set  a  maximum  for  the  total,  varjdng  from  $2,000  to  $6,000.

A  life  benefit  to  the  widow  and  additional  amounts  for
each  chUd  up  to  the  age  of  eighteen  is  the  only  rational  sys-
tem to  adopt.  Statistics  show  that  the  average  age  of  in-
jured workmen  is  about  thirty-two  years.  A  young  family
which  loses  its  supporter  at  such  an  age  caimot  exist  very
long  on  $3,000  or  less.  So  small  an  amount  will  mean  that
the  family  must  lower  its  standard  of  living,  and  that  the
children  will  not  receive  the  proper  care  and  education.  Here
again  compensation  is  regarded  more  in  the  light  of  a  means
of  preventing  starvation  than  as  a  reimbursement  for  the  loss
of  earning  power.  The  rates  adopted  by  New  York,  men-
tioned above,  are  the  most  liberal  in  America,  conforming
closely  to  those  of  the  German  law.  It  may  be  expected  that
in  the  future  other  states  will  follow  New  York's  example  and
grant  to  the  widow  a  pension  for  life  or  during  the  period  of
widowhood.  If  there  are  no  dependents,  the  death  benefit
should  be  paid  to  the  state  insurance  fund  if  there  is  one,  or
to  the  administration  fund  or  to  some  other  proper  body.
This  last  provision  is  found  in  one  or  two  laws,  but  if  there
are  no  dependents  all  other  states  provide  for  funeral  benefit
only.  Full  death  benefits  in  all  cases  would  tend  to  wipe  out
the  desirability  to  employers  of  engaging  single  men  with  no
dependents,  or  foreigners  if  the  law  excludes  non-resident  alien
dependents.  To  what  extent  this  discrimination  is  practised
is  difiicult  to  discover.

The  question  as  to  whether  alien  non-resident  dependents
should  be  entitled  to  death  benefit  has  been  considerably  dis-
cussed, and  a  few  states  still  expressly  exclude  them.  In  a
ntunber  of  other  states  they  are  expressly  included,  and  else-
where, as  no  mention  is  made  of  them,  they  are  apparently
included  by  implication.  There  seems  to  be  little  justifica-
tion for  excluding  non-resident  dependents;  if  our  industry
has  been  responsible  for  the  loss  of  a  family  supporter,  due
remuneration  should  be  made  regardless  of  nationality  or
residence.

b.  Scope  of  Laws.  A  compensation  system  should  apply
to  all  employments,  and  cover  all  injuries. In  the  early  days


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  3^9

of  the  movement,  however,  partly  because  of  administrative
difficulties  and  partly  because  of  the  incompleteness  of  public
education  on  the  subject,  the  exclusion  of  certain  classes  of
workers,  and  of  certain  sorts  of  injuries,  was  found  temporarily
advisable.

(o)  Employments  Incltided.  The  four  large  groups  of
workers  commonly  excluded  from  the  protection  of  early
American  compensation  laws  were  farm  laborers,  domestic
servants,  casual  employees,  and  workers  in  employments  not
carried  on  for  the  profit  of  the  employer.  In  fixing  the  employ-
ments to  be  covered,  three  different  methods  have  been
followed.  One  is  to  enimierate  the  employments  to  which
the  act  applies,  another  is  specifically  to  exclude  certain
emplojmients,  and  the  third  is  to  exclude  establishments  with
less  than  a  certain  number  of  employees.  Often  two  of
these  methods  are  found  in  the  same  law.  Of  the  three  the
first,  the  "entunerated  industries"  plan,  is  the  most  objec-
tionable. It  is  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  hazardous
and  non-hazardous  industries.  A  laborer  may  be  killed  no
matter  how  non-hazardous  the  occupation  seems.  As  has
often  been  stated,  it  is  that  industry  in  which  a  person  is
injured  which  is  hazardous.  The  enumeration  system  is  not,
therefore,  in  harmony  with  the  theory  on  which  compensation
is  based.  Of  the  other  two  methods,  the  "minimtim  number
of  employees"  plan  is  perhaps  the  better.  By  specifically
enumerating  the  excluded  industries  frequently  a  large
employer,  as  for  example  a  large  farm  operator,  is  left  out.
If  the  law  appHed  to  all  employing  four  or  more  persons,
such  an  operator  would  be  included.

In  interpreting  the  exclusion  of  casual  laborers  the  term
casual  is  often  misconstrued.  It  should  apply  only  to  the
employment  and  not  to  the  laborer.  Freight  handlers  at  a
dock,  who  work  only  when  a  boat  is  to  be  loaded  or  unloaded,
are  for  compensation  purposes  by  no  means  casual  laborers.
The  irregularity  of  their  employment  is  inherent  in  and  a
necessary  part  of  shipping  by  sea,  and  should  in  no  way  operate
to  bar  them  from  accident  indemnity.

(b)  Injuries  Included.  AU  injuries  sustained  in  the  course  of
employment  should  be  compensated,  except  those  occasioned  by
the  wilful  intention  of  the  employee  to  bring  about  the  injury


38o PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

or  death  of  himself  or  his  fellow  workmen.  These  are  clearly
not  a  hazard  of  the  industry,  and  shotild  not  be  compensated.
Some  states  also  exclude  accidents  caused  in  part  by  the
intoxication  of  the  injured  employee.  Such  exclusion  is  likely,
however,  to  cause  litigation  over  the  question  of  whether  or
not  the  employee  was  "intoxicated";  and  since  compensation
legislation  aims  at  preventing  litigation  and  securing  prompt
aid,  limitations  of  this  sort  are  to  be  deprecated.  Moreover,
the  safety  of  fellow  workmen  reqtiires  that  the  employer  be
discouraged  from  hiring  men  who  are  prone  to  intoxication,
and  an  excellent  method  of  accomplishing  this  result  is  to
make  subject  to  compensation  all  accidents  occurring  to  such
employees.

In  order  to  induce  the  workman  to  make  use  of  the  safety
appliances  supplied  by  his  employer,  the  compensation  may  be
reduced  if  he  wilfully  fails  to  use  such  guards  and  appliances.
On  the  other  hand,  the  compensation  should  be  increased  in
the  same  proportion  if  the  employer  fails  to  provide  the  proper
devices,  and  the  laws  of  some  states  include  penalties  of  this
nature.  In  Wisconsin,  for  example,  the  injiured  receives  an
increase  of  15  per  cent,  in  compensation  if  the  employer  did
not  provide  guards  as  required  by  law,  but,  on  the  other  hand,
his  compensation  is  reduced  15  per  cent,  if  he  faUs  to  use  the
guards  when  they  are  provided.

(c)  Occupational  Diseases.  The  inclusion  of  occupational
diseases  in  compensation  laws  has  been  much  discussed  in
America.  It  is  recognized  that  numerous  diseases  are  con-
tributed to  by  the  work  which  a  man  is  doing.  Working  at
a  dusty  occupation  causes  tuberculosis.  EmplojTnents  re-
quiring sudden  changes  in  temperature  are  instrumental  in
bringing  about  pnetmionia  and  other  organic  ailments.  To
cover  all  these  diseases  would,  however,  make  a  compensa-
tion law  very  complex  and  difficult  to  administer,  and  such
disabilities  are  probably  better  taken  care  of  under  health
insurance.^  Nevertheless  there  are  some  diseases  which  are
so  plainly  and  directly  caused  by  the  nature  of  the  emplojmient
that  they  should  unquestionably  be  included.  Among  these
are  lead,  mercury,  and  phosphorus  poisoning,  compressed-air


'  See  "Health  Insurance,"  p.  385.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  381

illness,  anthrax,  and  a  number  of  fatigue  diseases  such  as
miners'  nystagmus  and  telegraphers'  cramp.  Massachusetts
has  been  pajdng  compensation  for  such  injuries  regularly  under
its  act,  and  in  1915  the  California  law  was  amended  to  permit
similar  payments.  In  1915,  also,  Peimsylvania  amended  its
constitution  to  allow  the  passage  of  laws  establishing  com-
pensation for  occupational  disease,  and  a  clause  to  the  same
effect  was  embodied  in  the  proposed  new  constitution  for  the
state  of  New  York  which  failed  of  adoption.

c.  Method  of  Administration.  There  are  two  general  ways
of  administering  compensation  laws.  One  is  to  appoint  a  cen-
tral board  with  general  powers  of  enforcing  the  law,  and  the
other  is  to  create  no  machinery  for  the  administration  of  the
act,  but  to  provide  that  all  questions  arising  shall  be  settled
by  the  courts.  Of  the  states  now  having  laws,  less  than  a
third,  most  of  which  are  of  little  industrial  importance,  have
no  central  administrative  body  and  leave  the  administration
to  the  courts.  All  other  states  have  adopted  the  central  ad-
ministrative plan.

Recent  investigations  made  by  the  National  Civic  Federa-
tion and  the  American  Federation  of  Labor,^  and  by  the
American  Association  for  Labor  Legislation,^  indicate  that  the
administrative  board  plan  is  much  superior  to  the  court  pro-
cedure scheme.  The  two  studies  agreed  in  estimating  that
in  New  Jersey  not  over  60  per  cent,  of  the  amoimts  payable
under  the  statute  were  being  paid,  and  the  report  of  the
Association  for  Labor  Legislation  made  it  clear  that  the  court
procedure  plan  was  mainly  at  fault  for  this  defeat  of  the
legislative  intent.  The  chief  flaws  in  the  court  system  were
pointed  out  to  be  (i)  the  delay  of  court  procedure,  (2)  the
cost  of  court  procedure,  and  (3)  the  unfitness  of  the  courts
for  the  settlement  of  compensation  claims.

Prompt,  honest,  and  fuU  compensation,  and  medical  aid  as
reqttired,  are  the  vital  factors  in  bringing  relief  as  desired  by
the  law,  and  to  achieve  these  purposes  a  central  board  with
broad  powers  is  essential. States  with  central  boards  having


•  Report  upon  Operation  of  State  Laws,  Senate  Document  No.  419, 63d
Ooii£rr€ss  2d.  session.

«  "Three  Years  under  the  New  Jersey  Workmen's  Compensation  Law,"
American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  March,  1915,  pp.  31-102.


382 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

fiill  power  to  make  rules  and  regulations  require  receipts  to
be  filed  showing  actual  payment  of  compensation,  and  since
they  provide  for  arbitration  hearings  in  cases  of  dispute  there
is  little  danger  of  fraud  and  deception  of  workmen,  and  pay-
ments are  promptly  made.  The  board  shoidd  consist  of  three
or  five  members  appointed  by  the  governor  and  should  have
power  to  employ  necessary  assistants.  To  insure  their  ade-
quate attention  to  the  responsible  duties  of  their  position,  its
members  should  be  required  to  devote  their  entire  time  to
its  work.

d.  Security  of  Payment.  In  order  to  protect  the  employer,
as  well  as  the  workmen,  liability  under  the  compensation  laws
is  commonly  carried  by  an  insurance  company.  Should
several  of  his  men  meet  with  a  serious  accident  at  one  time,
the  small  shopowner  or  contractor  would  not  be  financially
able  to  pay  the  compensation.  For  this  reason  most  states
compel  employers  to  insure  their  risk  unless  they  can  give
satisfactory  evidence  that  they  are  able  to  bear  losses  due  to
accident  even  if  very  serious.  This,  of  course,  means  that
practically  all  small  employers  will  carry  insurance,  while
many  large  companies  will  carry  their  risk  themselves.

The  carrying  by  a  concern  of  its  own  risk  is  sometimes
called  "self -insurance,"  and  in  addition  thereto  three  other
methods  have  been  developed:  (i)  insurance  in  a  state  fund;
(2)  insurance  in  a  stock  company;  and  (3)  insurance  in  a
mutual  or  interinsurance  company.

State  insurance  funds  have  been  established  in  a  number
of  the  more  advanced  states,  including  California,  New  York,
Ohio,  Oregon,  and  Washington.  Sometimes,  as  in  Washington
and  Oregon,  insurance  in  this  fund  is  compulsory,  while  other
states  permit  insurance  in  authorized  private  companies.
Short  as  their  experience  has  been,  the  success  of  the  eflficiently
managed  state  fund  is  undoubted.  One  of  the  latest  of  these
to  be  started,  that  in  New  York,  found  its  expenses  in  its  first
six  months'  experience  to  be  only  17  per  cent,  of  premiums,
and  even  this  low  proportion  was  shortly  afterward  cut  to
12  per  cent.  Notwithstanding  its  rates  were  20  per  cent,
lower  than  those  of  the  casualty  companies,  the  fund  declared
dividends  averaging  20  per  cent,  on  its  first  six  months'
business,  and  estimated  that  New  York  employers  had  saved


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  383

half  a  million  dollars  by  selecting  state  insurance.  At  the  end
of  the  first  year  two  of  the  largest  corporations  in  the  state
transferred  their  insurance  to  the  state  fund,  and  others  were
contemplating  similar  action.

Stock  companies  carry  on  business  for  the  profit  of  their
stockholders.  As  a  consequence  of  their  large  business  solicit-
ing organization,  comprising  thousands  of  agents,  their  manag-
ing expenses  are  excessively  high.  In  Wisconsin  in  1914  the
operating  expenses  of  these  companies  were  38  per  cent,  of
earned  premiums,  or  79  per  cent,  of  compensation  benefits.

Mutual  insvirance  companies  seek  the  protection  of  their
own  members,  who  are  the  policyholders.  They  do  not  need
the  large,  expensive  organization  which  a  stock  company  must
have,  and  therefore  their  managing  expenses  are  lower.
Mutual  insurance  is  insurance  at  actual  cost,  any  excess  of
premium  remaining  the  property  of  the  pohcyholder  and  being
refimded  in  the  form  of  dividends.  In  the  state  last  cited
the  operating  expenses  of  these  companies  were  only  18  per
cent,  of  earned  premiums.  As  a  resiilt  of  these  low  operating
expenses  mutuals  can  sell  insurance  at  about  25  per  cent,
lower  rates  than  stock  companies.  A  strong  feature  of  the
mutual  insurance  method,  provided  it  be  made  general  and
brought  under  close  supervision  as  in  Germany,  is  the  added
inducement  to  employers  to  do  their  own  factory  inspection.
Such  voluntary  inspection,  if  stimulated  by  the  financial  in-
ducement of  reduced  insurance  rates  for  safer  conditions,  has
generally  been  found  even  more  effective  than  state  inspec-
tion.

Interinsurance  companies,  commonly  called  "exchanges,"
are,  like  the  mutuals,  operated  purely  for  the  protection  of
their  members,  but  are  more  expensive.  They  provide  in-
surance to  a  stated  amotmt,  and  members  become  liable  to
limited  assessment,  commonly  to  twice  the  amount  of  pre-
miums. The  business  is  transacted  through  a  manager,
called  the  attorney-in-fact,  who  receives  a  fixed  percentage  of
premiums,  commonly  30  per  cent.,  for  his  services.  Besides
this  30  per  cent.,  the  subscribers  must  pay  for  the  expense  of
claim  adjusting,  amounting  in  the  state  of  Wisconsin  to  7  per
cent,  during  1914.  Thus,  the  total  cost  of  operating  expenses
was  37  per  cent.,  or  over  twice  that  of  mutuals,  and  yet  the


384 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

members  received  no  greater  protection  than  the  mutuals
provide.

Insurance  rates  are  quoted  on  the  basis  of  $100  wages
paid  by  the  employer.  A  rate  of  $4.50  means  that  for  every
$100  which  the  workmen  receive  in  wages,  the  employer  must
pay  the  insurance  carrier  $4.50.  Rates  obviously  depend
greatly  upon  the  benefits  provided  by  the  compensation  act,
and  thus  we  have  different  rates  in  the  various  states.  An-
other factor  which  largely  determines  the  insurance  rate  is
the  hazard  of  the  industry.  Thus  we  have  one  rate  for  logging,
one  for  machine  shops,  one  for  breweries,  and  so  on.  But
even  in  establishments  of  the  same  industrial  group  widely
different  hazards  will  be  found.  One  company  may  perhaps
take  great  interest  in  safety  work,  while  another  does  not.
The  former  would  be  a  better  risk  than  the  latter  and  is  en-
titled to  a  lower  rate.  This  allowance  is  accomplished  under
a  merit  rating  system.  Instead  of  one  flat  rate  for  an  entire
industry,  this  system  seeks  to  adjust  the  rate  of  each  em-
ployer to  the  hazard  of  his  particular  establishment.  A  sched-
ule of  credits  and  charges  is  provided,  so  that  the  employer
receives  credit  for  conditions  tending  to  reduce  or  prevent
accidents,  and,  conversely,  he  is  charged  for  conditions  con-
ducive to  accidents.  American  experience  in  accident  in-
surance is  so  limited  that  rates  have  heretofore  been  little
more  than  estimates.  Gradually  experience  is  growing,  how-
ever, and  with  it  rates  are  constantly  being  reduced.

The  feature  of  accident  prevention  just  alluded  to  is  too
often  underestimated  when  discussing  compensation  laws.
After  all,  to  prevent  the  injury  is  of  greater  significance  than
to  provide  compensation  for  it;  accident  prevention  is  the
greatest  feature  of  a  comprehensive  accident  indemnity  plan.

The  accident  prevention  or  safety  movement  has  spread
rapidly  in  the  last  few  years,  and  the  chief  factor  in  this  de-
velopment is  the  growing  correlation  between  accident  pre-
vention and  compensation.  State  agencies  are  usually  effec-
tive in  accident  prevention  work  to  the  degree  that  they
secure  the  cooperation  of  employers  and  of  workmen.  Their
main  function  consists  in  educating  these  two  in  methods  of
safety.  State  agencies  can  order  the  application  of  mechani-
cal  safeguards. Their rules afford standards. But their


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  385

inspectors  can  do  but  little  in  comparison  with  what  the  em-
ployer and  employee  can  do,  under  the  stimulus  of  an  ade-
quate compensation  system.

Insiurance  companies  have  no  power  to  compel  the  safe-
guarding of  machinery,  but  they  can  frequently  attain  the
same  end  by  increasing  or  reducing  the  insurance  rates  under
the  merit  rating  system  previously  discussed.  Many  com-
panies now  have  a  force  of  inspectors  who  investigate  the  risk
before  the  final  rate  is  computed.  During  1914  the  amount
expended  on  factory  inspection  and  accident  prevention  by
insurance  companies  in  Wisconsin  equaled  2.6  per  cent,  of
the  total  earned  premium.  What  has  been  accomplished
through  the  cooperation  of  these  agencies  cannot  be  determined
because  accident  statistics  in  this  cotmtry  have  never  been
adequately  compiled  in  a  comparable  manner  until  recent
years.  The  indications,  however,  are  that  the  number  of
fatalities  and  serious  injuries  is  gradually  being  reduced.

In  order  to  secure  more  satisfactory  industrial  accident  and
occupational  disease  statistics  for  purposes  of  prevention  as
well  as  for  rate  making,  a  number  of  government  bureaus  and
interested  organizations  are  now  jointly  engaged  in  working
out  uniform  industry  classifications  and  uniform  methods  of
reporting.^  If  the  classifications  agreed  upon  are  finally
adopted  in  all  states,  the  occupational  accident  and  disease
statistics  will  be  comparable,  and  a  vast  amount  of  valuable
information  will  then  be  available.  ''^


2.  Health  Insurance

The  development  of  machinery,  the  expansion  of  industry,
and  the  growth  of  the  wage-earning  class  have  not  only  brought
into  existence  the  problem  of  industrial  accident,  but  have
also  added  importance  to  the  question  of  the  wage-earner's
ill  health.  Since  a  large  amount  of  the  worker's  time  and
energy  are  expended  in  the  workshop,  it  is  natural  that  in-
dustry and  the  conditions  connected  with  it  are  among  the
important  factors  seriously  affecting  his  health. Foresight,


'See  "Reporting,"  pp.  297-304.
25


386 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

consequently,  has  led  to  the  introduction  of  health  insurance,
which  is  gradually  being  extended  to  cover  all  occupations,
even  those  in  which  the  risk  to  health  is  less  obvious.


(i)  Early  Steps  in  Health  Insurance

The  importance  of  adequate  provision  in  case  of  illness  or
invalidity  was  recognized  by  the  workers  long  before  the  era
of  social  insurance.  As  early  as  the  middle  ages  the  insuffi-
ciency of  individual  action  was  realized,  and  a  more  satis-
factory arrangement,  that  of  insurance,  was  initiated  by
the  mediffival  gilds.  Under  these  early  plans  insurance  was
purely  voluntary  and  the  workers  had  to  bear  the  full  cost.
This  optional  unassisted  form  of  health  insurance  still  exists
in  many  civilized  countries.  In  this  country  it  is  provided
to  a  limited  extent  by  trade  vmions,  fraternal  societies,  estab-
lishment funds, 1  and  insurance  companies.  It  is  the  only
form  of  health  insurance  so  far  in  practice  here.  But  under
optional  insurance  most  workers  are  either  unwilling  or  unable
to  make  regular  outlays  for  the  premium,  and  thus  are  left
without  the  much-needed  insiurance  protection.  Other  weak-
nesses frequently  charged  against  the  system  are  inefficiency
of  management,  inadequacy,  lack  of  state  supervision,  finan-
cial instability,  and,  in  the  case  of  profit-making  insurance
companies,  excessive  cost.

A  remedy  for  these  defects  was  ofEered  in  the  device  of
government  subsidies  and  control.  This  measure  marked  the
beginning  of  the  second  stage  in  the  history  of  health  insur-
ance and  directly  prepared  the  way  for  the  compulsory  prin-
ciple. The  aim  of  government  subsidises  is  to  relieve  the
worker  from  a  part  of  the  burden  and  thus  to  stimulate  in-
stuance;  the  aim  of  control  is  to  secure  efficient  management.
Subsidies  are  usually  given  to  the  so-called  recognized  societies,
that  is,  health  instirance  organizations  which  answer  certain
requirements  and  submit  to  government  regulations.

The  system  of  subsidized  insurance  was  first  introduced  in


'  Funds  organized  among  the  workers  in  one  plant  or  establishment,
usually  under  the  control  of  the  employer.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  387

Sweden  in  189 1,  and  existed  in  1915  in  six  countries:  Sweden,
Denmark,  Belgium,  France,  Iceland,  and  Switzerland.  The
financial  assistance  granted  in  these  countries  and  the  gov-
ernment supervision,  potent  though  they  are,  cannot  be  ex-
pected to  be  a  very  vigorous  stimiilus  to  insurance  among  the
classes  most  in  need  of  it.  Obviously  compulsory  insurance,
transferring  a  considerable  part  of  the  burden  to  industry  and
including  in  the  system  those  workers  who  most  require  this
protection,  is  a  more  effective  way  of  meeting  the  need.


(2)  Compulsory  Health  Insurance

Although  Germany  was  the  first  country  to  introduce  com-
pulsory health  insurance,  the  principles  of  this  reform  had
been  previously  worked  out  elsewhere.  Long  before  1883,  the
first  date  in  the  official  history  of  social  insurance,  there
existed  in  several  states  of  Europe  insurance  associations  in
which  the  elements  of  compulsory  state  supervised  insiurance
were  found.  It  was  left,  however,  for  Germany  to  gather
these  dispersed  components  into  one  coordinated  unit  and
thus  to  become  the  fatherland  of  social  insurance.  Among
the  illustrious  thinkers  connected  with  this  forward  step  Bis-
marck occupies  a  conspicuous  place.  The  "  Iron  Chancellor"
keenly  realized  the  need  of  adequate  protection  of  the  working
people  and  recommended  to  statesmen  and  legislators  that  they
accustom  themselves  to  think  continually  of  the  workman  and
to  make  his  welfare  a  direct  object  of  national  policy.  There
was  another  motive  which  stimulated  Bismarck's  interest  in
the  problem.  This  was  his  desire  to  deter  the  working  class
from  Socialism,  "to  bribe  the  working  classes,  or,  if  you  like,
to  win  them  over  to  regard  the  state  as  a  social  institution
existing  for  their  sake  and  interested  in  their  welfare."  ^

On  November  17,  1881,  Emperor  William  I  in  his  celebrated
message  to  the  Reichstag  announced  his  intention  of  intro-
ducing, among  other  reforms,  a  bill  for  health  instirance.
The  bill  became  law  in  1883.  Besides  Germany,  compulsory
health  insurance  existed  in  1915  in  Austria,  Hungary,  Lux-


'  W.  H.  Dawson,  Social  Insurance  in  Germany,  1912,  p.  11.


388 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

emburg,  Norway,  Servia,  Great  Britain,  Russia,  Roumania,
and  Holland.  In  several  other  countries,  including  our  own,
the  principle  of  health  insurance  is  under  consideration  and
its  adoption  in  the  near  future  is  predicted  by  close  students  of
the  subject.

The  German  system  was  more  or  less  closely  followed  in  the
laws  of  the  other  countries.  In  all  of  them  the  existing
mutual  sick  benefit  funds  of  various  kinds,  such  as  fraternal
societies,  trade  unions,  and  establishment  funds,  were  al-
lowed to  continue  business,- provided  they  compUed  with  the
regulations  imposed  upon  them  by  the  new  law.  In  a  few
countries,  Germany  among  them,  the  law  also  brought  into
existence  new  insurance  associations,  the  local  sick  funds,  for
the  insurance  of  persons  not  claiming  membership  in  any
other  society.

The  sdope  of  the  law  varies  slightly  in  the  different  countries.
In  Germany  the  law  of  1883  was  very  limited,  but  subsequent
additions,  the  latest  of  which,  the  insurance  consoUdation
act,  was  passed  in  191 1,  have  considerably  extended  its  ap-
plication. At  present  it  embraces  practically  all  industries,
including,  (i)  workmen,  helpers,  joumejnnen,  apprentices,
and  servants;  (2)  establishment  officials,  foremen  and  other
officials;  (3)  clerks  and  apprentices  in  commercial  establish-
ments and  pharmacies;  (4)  actors  and  musicians;  (5)  teachers
and  tutors;  (6)  homeworkers;  (7)  crews  of  German  vessels.
In  groups  two  to  five,  inclusive,  the  law  is  compulsory  only
for  those  whose  annual  incomes  are  less  than  $595.  By  this
comprehensive  trade  grouping  just  over  14,000,000  workers,
or  22  per  cent,  of  the  total  population,  were  insured  in  19 12.*
Approximately  the  same  classification  is  made  in  Austria;  in
Norway  all  wage-earners  are  included  whose  annual  earnings
are  less  than  $321  in  rural  districts,  and  less  than  $375  in
urban  areas;  in  Russia  the  act  applies  to  employees  in  fac-
tories, mines,  iron  and  railway  works,  inland  navigation
imdertakings,  and  tramways.

The  noteworthy  act  of  Great  Britain,  passed  in  191 1,  in-
cludes within  its  scope  all  manual  laborers  between  sixteen
and  seventy. Persons  not  employed  at  manual  labor,  such

'"Social  Insurance  in  Germany  in  1912,"  Board  of  Trade  Labour
Gazette,  July,  1914.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  389

as  clerks  and  agents,  are  compelled  to  insure  if  their  earnings
are  less  than  $800  a  year.  Credit  should  be  given  to  the  legis-
lators and  administrators  who  found  it  possible  to  include  from
the  outset  both  casual  workers  and  homeworkers,  even  though
this  necessitated  special  arrangements  for  collecting  contri-
butions. Within  the  insured  groups,  persons  may  be  exempted
if  they  can  prove  that  they  have  a  regular  income  from
other  soiu-ces  equal  to  $130  a  year,  or  that  they  are  not  de-
pendent for  a  livelihood  upon  the  earnings  of  their  insured
occupation.  In  addition,  certain  classes  of  occupations  are
excluded,  such  as  employment  under  the  crown,  because  the
terms  of  employment  already  offer  provision  in  case  of  ill-
ness. The  exceptions  have  proven  numerically  unimportant,
so  that  during  the  first  year  of  operation  13,742,000  individ-
uals were  insured,  or  nearly  30  per  cent,  of  the  total  popula-
tion.i

The  cost  of  insurance  is  usually  distributed  between  the
worker  and  the  employer,  and  in  some  countries  the  govern-
ment also  contributes  a  share.  By  this  device  the  employer
is  compelled  to  bear  some  portion  of  the  cost  of  sickness  among
his  employees,  and  the  worker  receives  larger  benefits  than  he
could  purchase  unaided.  In  Germany  the  worker  pays  two-
thirds  of  the  premium  and  the  employer  the  remaining  third.
The  same  proportion  has  been  adopted  in  Austria  and  in
Russia,  with  the  exception  that  here  the  employer  also  pays
the  cost  of  medical  attendance.  In  Norway  the  worker  con-
tributes six-tenths,  the  employer  one-tenth,  the  commune
one-tenth,  and  the  state  the  remaining  two-tenths.  In  Ger-
many, Austria,  Hungary,  and  Norway  the  premiimi  is  cal-
culated as  a  percentage  of  wages.  The  employees  are  divided
into  wage  groups,  and  the  premiimis  and  benefits  vary  with
an  increase  in  the  worker's  income.  Great  Britain,  however,
has  not  followed  the  continental  practice,  but  has  adopted  a
uniform  rate  of  contributions,  regardless  of  wage  differences.
The  insured  male  worker  pays  weekly  8  cents,  the  female
worker  6  cents;  in  either  case  the  employer  adds  6  cents  and
the  state  4  cents. To  mitigate  the  hardship  of  the  low  paid

'  For  an  excellent  study  of  the  actual  operation  of  the  British  act  and
of  its  administrative  problems,  see  The  New  Statesman,  "Special  Supple-
ment on  the  Working  of  the  Instirance  Act,"  March  14, 1914.


390 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

worker,  special  rates  are  provided  for  those  earning  less  than
62>^  cents  a  day,  whereby  the  worker's  contribution  is  dimin-
ished, and  that  of  the  employer  and  state  increased.

In  return  for  their  contributions,  workers  usually  receive
both  a  money  benefit  and  medical  care.  The  cash  benefits
paid  in  time  of  sickness  are  not  equal  to  the  full  wage,  but
are  50  per  cent,  in  Germany,  and  60  per  cent,  in  Norway.
England  has  been  consistent  with  her  flat  rate  contributions
and  has  adopted  a  system  of  uniform  benefits  of  $2.50  a  week
for  men,  and  $1.87  a  week  for  women.  In  general,  benefit
is  not  allowed  for  the  first  three  days  of  illness,  and  is  paid  for
only  a  limited  nimiber  of  weeks  in  a  year — in  Germany  and
England  twenty-six.  Benefit  is  usually  made  conditional
upon  a  doctor's  certificate  stating  that  the  applicant  is  in-
capable of  work.  When  the  attending  physician  certifies
that  the  patient  has  recovered,  sick  benefit  ceases.

The  German  and  British  acts  differ  in  the  character  of  the
disabilities  which  they  include.  Germany,  in  common  with
Sweden  and  the  proposed  Norwegian  scheme,  has  included
"invalidity" — chronic  illness  or  impairment  of  earning  ca-
pacity— ^in  the  old  age  insurance  act,  so  that  only  temporary
illnesses  are  covered  by  the  health  insurance  act.  Great
Britain,  on  the  other  hand,  has  included  "invaUdity"  in  the
pro\'ision  for  health  insurance.  The  invalidity  contemplated
by  the  British  legislators,  however,  is  hmited  to  incapacity
for  work  because  of  disease  or  disablement,  as  distinguished
from  reduction  in  earning  power.  The  British  grouping  of  in-
validity with  sickness  benefit  is  probably  due  to  the  existence
of  a  state  system  of  old  age  pensions.  As  the  recipients  do
not  contribute  to  the  pension,  it  was  desirable  to  make  pro-
vision for  invalidity  in  the  health  insurance  system,  which
is  contributory.  The  British  invalidity  benefit  consists  of  a
weekly  payment  of  $1.25  as  long  as  incapacity  for  work  con-
tinues, though  it  ceases  when  the  beneficiary  reaches  the  age
of  seventy  and  becomes  entitled  to  an  old  age  pension.

Medical  attendance  is  furnished  by  many  insurance  systems,
including  those  of  Germany,  Great  Britain,  and  Norway.  If
an  insxirance  system  is  to  accomplish  its  tdtimate  object  of
improving  the  health  of  the  workers,  it  is  of  great  importance
that  they  receive  treatment  whereby  they  may  be  restored  to


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  391

health.  Furthermore,  it  is  financially  important  to  the  in-
surance funds  that  sick  members  shall  recover  as  quickly  as
possible  and  so  reduce  the  amounts  expended  upon  sick
benefit.

In  Germany  each  society  makes  its  own  arrangements  for
medical  attendance,  usually  by  means  of  a  contract  open  to
all  qualified  physicians,  with  payment  by  some  form  of
capitation  fee.'  Members  are  then  free  to  select,  with  some
restrictions,  any  one  of  the  contract  or  panel  doctors.  The
provision  is  generally  liberal,  the  funds  arranging  for  the  ser-
vices of  speciahsts  and  hospital  care  when  necessary.  In
Great  Britain,  where  the  medical  service  is  less  efficient,  ar-
rangements with  the  doctors  are  made  not  by  the  "approved
societies,"  but  by  local  insurance  committees.  This  method
secures  fairly  uniform  conditions  of  service  and  rates  of  pay
throughout  the  kingdom.  Insured  persons  have  unrestricted
choice  of  panel  doctors  practising  in  their  neighborhoods.
The  system  of  capitation  pajonents  as  adopted  in  England
had  led  to  the  charge  of  hasty  and  inadequate  diagnosis,  es-
pecially when  there  is  an  inefficient  system  of  "control"  of
doctors,  which  is  not  comparable  to  the  control  exercised  in
Germany  by  the  funds  employing  a  doctor.  A  whoUy  satis-
factory solution  of  the  relation  of  the  medical  profession  to
insurance  has  not  yet  been  found,  for  in  Norway,  where  the
doctors  are  paid  by  the  visit,  a  new  problem  arises.  Here
the  alleged  tendency  is  for  doctors  to  make  unnecessary  visits,
thereby  increasing  their  own  incomes  at  the  expense  of  the
provision  for  medical  care.

Drugs  and  appliances,  such  as  spectacles,  trusses,  and
crutches,  are  usually  provided  as  a  part  of  medical  benefit.
The  provision  in  Germany  is  particularly  generous.

In  the  organization  of  the  carriers  of  insurance  each  coun-
try has  adapted  itself  to  existing  conditions.  Germany  found
already  in  existence  mutual  aid  funds  and  an  effective  system
of  compvdsory  insurance  among  miners.  The  former  it  al-
lowed to  serve  as  a  substitute  for  compulsory  insurance,
providing  that  employers  might  be  exempted  from  contrib-
uting for  workers  so  insured; it  also  permitted  establish-


'  I.  G.  Gibbon,  Medical  Benefit  in  Germany  and  Denmark,  1912,  p.  54.


392 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

ment  funds,  under  certain  conditions,  to  carry  the  insurance.
The  system  was,  however,  based  in  the  main  on  self-governing
local  mutuals,  organized  by  the  law,  which  it  has  been  the
poHcy  to  encourage,  so  that  they  are  now  overwhelmingly
predominant.

Great  Britain  built  its  insurance  system  around  the  volun-
tary friendly  societies,  utilizing  their  organization  and  per-
mitting them  to  establish  separate  sections  for  national  in-
surance. Accordingly  many  societies  have  both  a  "private"
and  a  "state"  section.  In  contrast  to  the  German  method,
the  insured  are  not  grouped  according  to  trade  or  locality,
but  are  given  unrestricted  choice  of  society.  As  a  result
of  this  freedom,  the  members  of  some  of  the  large  societies
are  distributed  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  through  vari-
ous industries.  Segregation  by  locality,  and  in  some  large
cities  by  trade,  as  carried  on  in  Germany  has  many  practical
and  technical  advantages,  such  as  more  precise  distribution
of  the  risk  and  greater  ease  of  administration.

The  methods  of  establishing  security  of  payments  in  the
two  countries  are  quite  different.  In  Germany  the  dues  are
calculated  so  as  to  cover  the  current  expenditure  on  benefits
and  to  accumulate  a  small  reserve  fund.  It  is,  however,  a
recognized  fact  that  sickness  increases  with  age  and  that  any
voltmtary  fund  organized  on  this  basis  would  be  compelled
to  increase  its  dues  as  the  members  advanced  in  years  in
order  to  cover  the  increasing  costs — unless  the  fund  is  able
to  attract  a  sufficient  number  of  young  lives.  These  younger
members,  paying  the  same  dues  as  the  older  members,  do
not  claim  the  same  amount  of  sick  benefit,  hence  from  their
contributions  a  surplus  would  accrue  which  could  be  devoted
to  making  up  the  deficit  caused  by  the  older  members.  This
system  is  practicable  in  Germany,  since  each  local  or  trade
society  is  practically  assured  of  a  due  proportion  of  young
lives  which  will  pay  for  the  older  members.

In  Great  Britain  the  contributions  are  calculated  so  that  the
surplus  accumulated  during  the  early  life  of  each  worker  may
be  applied  for  his  own  benefit  in  later  years.  That  is,  con-
tributions are  not  calculated  on  the  simple  basis  of  covering
expenditures,  but  upon  the  basis  of  covering  the  estimated
liability  for  the  average  person  throughout  life, This  involves


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  393

the  accumvilation  of  an  "actuarial  reserve"  for  each  insured
person.  This  method,  resulting  in  complex  financial  prob-
lems, is  not  considered  as  satisfactory  as  the  German  method.


(3)  Maternity  Insurance

An  important  part  of  health  insurance  laws  is  the  payment
of  maternity  benefits  to  insured  women,  usually  irrespective
of  marital  condition,  and  in  some  countries,  such  as  Great
Britain,  Russia,  and  Roumania,  also  to  uninsiured  wives
of  insured  men.  In  Germany  a  maternity  benefit  equiv-
alent in  amount  to  sick  benefit  is  paid  for  eight  weeks,  six  of
which  must  be  after  delivery.  With  the  consent  of  the
woman  the  ftuid  may  in  place  of  maternity  benefit  provide
medical  treatment  and  maintenance  in  a  hospital;  or  treat-
ment at  home  may  be  given,  for  which  the  fund  may  deduct
not  more  than  half  of  the  maternity  benefit.  The  funds  are
also  allowed  to  provide  for  a  pregnancy  and  a  nursing  bene-
fit. In  Norway,  Himgary,  and  Russia  the  regular  sick  benefit
is  paid  for  six  weeks,  in  Austria  for  four  weeks.  Usually  the
benefits  received  by  uninsured  wives  of  insured  men  are
smaller  than  those  payable  to  women  who  are  themselves
members  of  the  funds.

In  some  cases  the  benefit  is  paid  in  a  lump  sum  instead  of
in  weekly  instalments.  Great  Britain,  for  instance,  allows
the  sum  of  $7.20  to  all  insured  women,  and  $7.20  to  wives  of
insured  men,  making  a  total  of  $14.40  for  the  insured  wife  of
an  insured  man.  An  interesting  exception  to  the  general  plan
of  including  maternity  benefit  in  the  health  insurance  system
occurs  in  Italy.  There  the  problem  was  considered  so  urgent
that  even  in  the  absence  of  a  general  compulsory  health  in-
surance measure  a  compulsory  scheme  of  maternity  insur-
ance was  introduced  in  1910.  All  wage-earning  women  be-
tween fifteen  and  fifty  years  of  age  are  included,  and  annual
premiums  of  19.3  cents  for  women  between  fifteen  and  twenty
and  38.6  cents  for  women  of  all  other  ages  are  divided  equally
between  the  employer  and  the  worker.  The  benefit  is  a  Itimp
sum  of  $7.72,  of  which  the  state  contributes  one-quarter.

Although  in  this  country  four  states,  beginning  with  Massa-


394 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

chusetts  in  191 2,  prohibit  the  industrial  employment  of  women
for  a  period  of  several  weeks  immediately  before  and  after
childbirth,*  no  American  state  has  yet  recognized  the  justice
and  necessity  of  furnishing  maternity  benefits  during  such
periods  of  enforced  idleness.  If  insurance  is  to  accomplish
its  object  of  conserving  the  health  and  life  of  a  nation,  it  is
desirable  that  maternity  benefits  be  extended  as  widely  as
possible.

(4)  Need  in  the  United  States

It  is  sometimes  urged  that  in  this  country,  with  its  expand-
ing industries  and  higher  level  of  wages,  such  measures  as
compulsory  health  insurance  are  unnecessary.  But  those  who
know  the  facts  recognize  that  Ulness  is  a  cause  of  destitution
here  as  it  is  in  England  and  in  Germany.  The  reports  of  the
New  York  State  Board  of  Charities  show  that  in  1910  nearly
one-third  of  the  300,000  applicants  were  driven  by  sickness
to  ask  for  relief.^  The  records  of  the  Charity  Organization
Society  in  New  York  City  show  that  ill  health  is  directly  or
indirectly  responsible  for  three-quarters  of  the  applications
for  aid  which  come  to  it.^

These  figures  are  sufficient  to  suggest  that  sickness  in  a  wage-
earner's  family  means  privation.  Unfortunately,  there  are
no  statistics  showing  the  amoimt  of  sickness  among  the  Ameri-
can working  class;  such  figures  are  available  only  for  European
countries  which  have  had  compulsory  insurance  in  operation.
On  the  basis  of  European  figures  it  is  estimated  that  about
40  per  cent,  of  the  workers  of  this  country  suffer  from  illness
every  year,  and  that  the  total  time  lost  through  this  cause,
distributed  over  the  entire  industrial  population,  averages
about  nine  days  per  person.  Upon  this  basis,  the  loss  in
wages,  the  medical  cost,  and  the  loss  to  the  employer  total
nearly  $750,000,000  annually,  most  of  which  falls  upon  the  em-
ployees.* A  just  compulsory  insurance  measure  would  enable

1  See  "Childbirth  Protection,"  p.  319.

'  Rubinow,  Social  Insurance,  p.  205.

'  Edward  T.  Devine,  Misery  and  Its  Causes,  1909,  pp.  225-230.

*" Memorial  on  Occupational  Diseases,"  prepared  by  a  committee
of  the  American  Association  for  Labor  Legislation,  American  Labor  Legis-
lation Review,  January,  1911,  p.  127.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  39S

the  workers  to  bear  the  loss  of  wages  more  easily,  and  would
distribute  more  equitably  the  cost  of  sickness  among  the
workers,  the  employers,  and  the  state.

After  many  conferences,  at  which  all  sides  of  the  problem
were  thoroughly  discussed,  the  American  Association  for  Labor
Legislation  formidated  in  the  summer  of  1914  the  following
tentative  standards  which  it  later  followed  in  the  drafting
of  a  health  instirance  bill  for  introduction  in  the  state  leg-
islatures:'

1.  To  be  effective  health  insurance  should  be  compulsory,  on  the
basis  of  joint  contributions  of  employer,  employee,  and  the  state.

2.  The  compulsory  insurance  should  include  aU  wage  workers  earning
.  less  than  a  given  annual  sum,  where  employed  with  sufficient  regularity

to  make  it  practicable  to  compute  and  collect  assessments.  Casual  and
home  workers  shoiild,  as  far  as  practicable,  be  included  within  the  plan
and  scope  of  a  compulsory  system.

3.  There  should  be  a  voluntary  supplementary  system  for  groups  of
persons  (wage  workers  or  others)  who  for  practical  reasons  are  kept  out
of  the  compulsory  system.

4.  Health  insurance  should  provide  for  a  specified  period  only,  pro-
visionally set  at  twenty-six  weeks  (one-half  a  year),  but  a  system  of  in-
validity insurance  shoiild  be  combined  with  health  insurance  so  that  all
disability  due  to  disease  will  be  taken  care  of  in  one  law,  although  the
funds  should  be  separate.

5.  Health  insurance  on  the  compulsory  plan  should  be  carried  by
mutual  local  fimds  jointly  managed  by  employers  and  employees  under
public  supervision.  In  large  cities  such  locals  may  be  organized  by
trades  with  a  federated  bureau  for  the  medical  relief.  Establishment
funds  and  existing  mutual  sick  funds  may  be  permitted  to  carry  the
insurance  where  their  existence  does  not  injure  the  local  funds,  but
they  must  be  under  strict  government  supervision.

6.  Invalidity  insurance  should  be  carried  by  funds  covering  a  larger
geographical  area  comprising  the  districts  of  a  number  of  local  health
insurance  funds.  The  administration  of  the  invalidity  fund  should  be
intimately  associated  with  that  of  the  local  health  funds  and  on  a  repre-
sentative basis.

7.  Both  health  and  invalidity  insurance  should  include  medical  ser-
vice, supplies,  necessary  nursing,  and  hospital  care.  Such  provision
shoiild  be  thoroughly  adequate,  but  its  organization  may  be  left  to  the
local  societies  under  strict  governmental  control.

8.  Cash  benefits  should  be  provided  by  both  invalidity  and  health
insurance  for  the  insured  or  his  dependents  during  such  disability.


1  American Association for Labor Legislation, Health Insurance;
Standards  and  Tentative  Draft  of  an  Act,  1915,  pp.  5,  6.


396 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

9.  It  is  highly  desirable  that  prevention  may  be  emphasized  so  that  the
introduction  of  a  compulsory  health  and  invalidity  insurance  system
shall  lead  to  a  campaign  of  health  conservation  similar  to  the  safety
movement  resulting  from  workmen's  compensation.

In  addition  to  the  relief  value  of  such  a  measure,  it  contains,
as  indicated  in  the  closing  paragraph  of  the  standards,  impor-
tant possibilities  for  the  prevention  of  illness.  After  a  century
of  rapid  industrial  growth  and  increasing  urban  population
we  are  just  beginning  to  value  as  a  social  factor  the  sanitation
which  drains  cities,  provides  pure  water  and  pure  milk,  and
quarantines  infectious  diseases.  We  have  too  long  failed  to
realize  that  the  ill  health  of  the  individual,  even  though  he
may  not  be  suffering  from  a  contagious  disease,  is  a  matter
of  public  concern.  Medical  care  of  adtdts  is  no  less  important
for  a  state  which  values  the  lives  of  its  citizens  than  is  the
medical  examination  of  school  children  which  we  have  already
adopted  in  the  larger  cities.

More  general  medical  consultation  will  reveal  unsuspected
tendencies  which,  if  allowed  to  develop,  will  have  as  pernicious
effects  as  the  adenoids  we  are  so  careful  to  remove  from  school
children.  Here,  as  in  England,  there  are  many  wage-earners
who  are  tmable  to  afford  a  doctor's  fee.  Nor  is  the  dispensary
service  given  in  the  large  cities  sufficient  to  meet  the  need.
A  socialized  medical  service,  whereby  all  who  require  the  ser-
vices of  a  physician  may  have  access  to  the  necessary  treat-
ment, has  been  found  very  effective  in  some  countries.  Great
Britain's  health  insurance  act  has  revealed  a  mass  of  human
suffering,  especially  among  women,  which  hitherto  had  re-
ceived no  medical  attention.  Because  of  the  increased  use  of
doctors,  a  far  larger  number  of  persons  have  been  discovered
who  need  operations  and  hospital  care — ^persons  whose  ills
previously  wotild  have  gone  without  treatment  until  the  suf-
fering had  become  acute  and  the  chances  of  recovery  had
been  diminished.  Socialized  medical  service,  especially  in
Germany,  has  resulted  in  prophylactic  treatment  for  the
individual  and  in  the  conservation  of  national  vitality.

Great  Britain's  health  insturance  act  has  been  an  incentive
for  imdertaking  a  national  campaign  against  tuberculosis.
By  means  of  a  sanatorium  benefit  for  every  insured  worker
suffering  from  this  disease,  more  adequate  treatment  is  being


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  397

provided.  In  Germany,  particularly,  the  health  insurance
law  has  been  an  important  factor  in  the  anti-tuberculosis
campaign.  German  authorities  even  attribute  "the  progress
which  has  been  made  in  the  crusade  against  tuberculosis  more
to  the  industrial  insiirance  laws  than  to  any  other  cause,
owing  to  the  fact  that  those  laws  have  placed  within  the  reach
of  the  working  classes  resources  of  healing  which  were  never
dreamt  of  before.  "^

Furthermore,  the  necessity  of  spending  money  on  prevent-
able disease  is  in  itself  a  stimiilus  to  prevention.  Various  Eng-
Hsh  bodies  have  been  aroused  by  this  factor  to  a  keen  interest
in  the  relation  between  tuberculosis  and  housing.  The  finan-
cial pressure  on  "approved  societies"  is  a  direct  inducement
to  demand  thorough  inspection  of  dwellings  and  workplaces,
especially  since  the  delinquent  authority  can  be  made  to  pay
the  cost  of  the  sickness  produced  by  the  poor  sanitary  condi-
tions which  it  has  allowed  to  exist.

It  is  also  possible,  as  is  done  in  Germany,  to  levy  a  higher
premium  upon  the  industry  or  particular  establishment  in
which  the  sickness  rate  is  higher  than  normal.  This  is  a
means  tending  to  persuade  the  employer  of  the  economy  of
factory  sanitation  which  will  improve  the  health  of  the  worker
and  thereby  reduce  his  insurance  premium.  It  is  the  same
inducement  of  low  insurance  premiums  for  workmen's  com-
pensation which  is  partially  responsible  for  the  "Safety  first"
movement  and  the  installation  of  safety  appliances.  With-
out a  compulsory  health  insurance  system,  the  economy  of
health  preservation  carmot  be  made  an  effective  lever  for
reform.

3.  Old  Age  and  Invalidity  Insurance

The  rapid  development  of  industry  has,  among  its  other
results,  placed  emphasis  on  the  individual's  physical  vigor  and
wage-earning  capacity.  It  has  deprived  old  age  of  the  esteem
bestowed  upon  it  under  more  primitive  patriarchal  conditions,
and  after  a  life  of  productive  toil  it  relegates  to  the  back-
ground the  aged  or  incapacitated  man  as  a  useless,  uneconomic


'  Dawson,  Social  Insurance  in  Germany,  p.  202.


398 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

factor.  Failing  health,  inability  to  find  employment,  lack
of  means,  often  absence  of  friends  willing  or  able  to  help  him
— such  is  the  prospect  which  confronts,  in  the  great  majority
of  cases,  the  aged  worker.


(i)  Unassisted  Old  Age  Insurance

In  response  to  the  gravity  of  this  situation  three  main
measures  of  relief  have  been  developed:  charity,  saving,  and
insurance.  Charity  has  been  known  since  ancient  times,  and
no  doubt  has  relieved  a  deal  of  destitution.  But  the  modem
opinion  is  that  charity,  both  private  and  public,  is  insufficient
in  amoimt  and  unsatisfactory  in  quality;  that  it  exercises  a
degrading  effect  upon  the  recipient  and  is  repugnant  to  the
self-respecting  person.  The  serious  difficulties  in  the  way  of
saving  are  also  well  known.  The  low  standard  of  wages  sel-
dom, if  ever,  allows  any  surplus;  most  often  the  immediate
demands  outweigh  the  argtunents  in  favor  of  saving.  Be-
sides, the  very  remoteness  of  old  age  and  the  uncertainty  of
attaining  it  discourage  many  people  from  making  preparation
for  the  future  at  the  expense  of  the  present.  In  this  problem,
as  in  that  of  provision  for  illness,  the  collective  process  of
insurance  is  considered  much  more  satisfactory  than  the  in-
dividualistic method  of  savings.  Professor  Seager  has  said
that  "for  every  wage-earner  to  attempt  to  save  enough  to
provide  for  his  old  age  is  needlessly  costly.  The  intelligent
course  for  him  is  to  combine  with  other  wage-earners  to  ac-
cumulate a  common  fund  out  of  which  old  age  annuities  may
be  paid  to  those  who  live  long  enough  to  need  them."*

The  development  of  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance  is
similar  to  that  of  health  insurance.  The  first  stage  in  the
movement  was  marked  by  optional  unassisted  insurance,
which  is  still  furnished  by  some  fraternal  societies,  trade
unions,  establishment  funds,  and  insurance  companies.  How-
ever, the  number  of  fraternal  societies  and  trade  unions,
either  here  or  abroad,  which  undertake  the  complicated  busi-
ness of  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance  is  small. In  many


■Henry  R.  Seager,  Social  Insurance,  1910,  pp.  118,  119.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  399

states  of  this  country  fraternal  societies  are  prohibited  from
dealing  in  it.  Only  forty-two  out  of  182  general  or  national
fraternal  benefit  societies  in  the  United  States  promise  old
age  benefits,  and  these  usually  do  not  begin  until  the  age  of
seventy  has  been  reached.^  As  to  American  trade  unions,  out
of  the  approximately  no  national  organizations  four  are
known  to  pay  a  superannuation  benefit.  These  are  the  Inter-
national Typographical  Union,  the  Granite  Cutters'  Inter-
national Association,  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Carpen-
ters and  Joiners,  and  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Engineers,
the  last  two  being  branches  of  English  unions.  In  a  few  other
unions  the  introduction  of  this  form  of  insurance  is  being  con-
sidered, and  in  some  old  age  benefits  are  paid  by  individual
locals.  Nineteen  tmions,^  the  majority  of  which  consist  of
transportation  workers,  pay  a  permanent  disability  benefit.
Business  concerns  furnishing  old  age  insurance  for  their  em-
ployees are  also  rare,  especially  in  this  country,  as  are  those
granting  straight  old  age  pensions.  Insurance  companies  do
a  considerable  old  age  annuity  business  in  Europe,  chiefly
among  the  middle  class;  in  the  United  States,  on  the  con-
trary, commercial  instirance  for  old  age  is  Uttle  known.


(2)  Assisted  State  Plans

Obviously,  voluntary  unassisted  old  age  insurance  reaches
only  a  small  part  of  the  wage-earners.  As  a  consequence,  as
in  the  other  branches  of  social  insiu-ance,  it  came  to  be  con-
sidered the  duty  of  the  state  to  assist  its  aged  citizens,  and  the
principle  of  state  insurance,  sometimes  aided  by  subventions,
was  devised.

This  form  of  voluntary  old  age  insurance  is  known  in  France,
Belgium,  England,  Italy,  and  Spain,  and  in  America  in  the
states  of  Massachusetts  and  Wisconsin,  and  in  Canada.
France,  Belgitmi,  Italy,  and  Spain  grant  subventions  in  the
form  of  a  substantial  rate  of  interest,  and  to  certain  classes


'  Lee  W.  Squier,  Old  Age  Dependency  in  the  United  States,  1912,  p.  67.

2  United  States  Commissioner  of  Labor,  Twenty-third  Annual  Report,
"Workmen's  Insurance  and  Benefit  Fwndg  in  the  United  States,"  1908,
?•  31.


400 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  insured  direct  subsidies  are  given.  The  state  also  fur-
nishes the  administrative  machinery  and  running  expenses.
The  Massachusetts  plan  is  a  system  of  voluntary  old  age  in-
surance through  the  savings  banks  under  state  supervision,
while  the  Wisconsin  system  provides  for  the  issuance  of  an-
nuities by  the  state  life  fund  under  the  supervision  of  the  in-
surance commissioner.

But  even  state  assistance  and  supervision  failed  to  secure
for  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance  any  large  measure  of
popular  acceptance.  Experts  commonly  agree  that  even  gen-
erous subsidies  do  not  seem  to  attract  more  than  a  small
part  of  the  wage-earners;  that  in  a  large  number  of  cases  the
payments  are  either  made  irregularly  or  are  after  a  while  sus-
pended, and  that  the  benefits  paid  are  very  small.

In  view  of  the  insufficiency  of  state  control  and  subsidy,
two  other  very  significant  elements  of  social  insiu-ance  were
added,  namely,  compulsion  and  the  requirement  of  the  em-
ployer's contribution.


(5)  Compulsory  Systems

Compulsory  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance  have  not  yet
found  so  wide  an  application  as  has  compulsory  health  in-
surance, being  established  at  present  in  only  the  six  countries
of  Germany,  Luxemburg,  France,  Roumania,  Sweden,  and
Holland.  Here  again,  as  in  the  two  previously  discussed
branches  of  social  insurance,  Germany  took  the  lead,  enacting
its  first  law  in  1889.  All  wage-earners  in  the  designated  oc-
cupational groups,  regardless  of  size  of  income,  are  compelled
to  insure  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  seventy,  after  which
exemption  from  insurance  may  be  granted  on  application.
The  groups  covered  are  the  same  as  those  under  health  in-
surance,^ except  that  of  the  homeworkers  only  tobacco  and
textile  operatives  are  as  yet  included.  Salaried  workers  re-
ceiving more  than  $476  a  year  are  not  required  to  insure,  but
may,  in  common  with  other  classes,  take  out  volimtary  in-
siu-ance. Contributions  are  of  five  grades,  ranging  frona  4


'  §?9  "  Healtl}  Insurance,"  p.  388,


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  401

cents  to  iij^  cents  a  week  according  to  the  worker's  income,
and  are  paid  in  equal  parts  by  employer  and  employee.  The
pensions  also  are  divided  into  five  groups,  corresponding  to  the
five  grades  of  contributions.  The  state's  contribution  is  made
in  a  novel  way,  consisting  in  the  payment  of  $11.90  annually
to  each  person  in  receipt  of  a  pension.  Thus  the  total  bene-
fits range  from  $26.18  to  $54-74  a  year— an  allowance  which
obviously  cannot  go  very  far  even  with  a  low  standard  of
living.  A  necessary  condition  for  receiving  a  pension  is  the
payment  of  contributions  for  not  less  than  1,200  weeks.
To  meet  the  need  of  persons  who  were  already  of  advanced
age,  transitory  provisions  were  introduced,  reducing  the  re-
quired 1,200  weeks'  payments  by  forty  for  each  year  of  age
over  forty  when  the  law  went  into  effect.

In  the  German  law  provisions  for  old  age  are  subsidiary  to
those  for  invalidity  insurance.  An  insured  person  of  any
age,  who  on  account  of  diminished  strength  is  unable  to  earn
one-third  of  the  wages  usually  paid  to  normal  workers  in  his
occupation,  is  entitled  to  an  invalidity  pension.  The  benefits
are  larger  than  the  old  age  benefits,  and  this,  together  with  the
fact  that  they  are  paid  irrespective  of  age,  tempers  the  hard-
ship which  would  otherwise  result  from  the  high  age  of  seventy
necessary  for  eligibility  to  a  pension  for  superannuation.  In
fact,  in  1908,  894,000  persons  were  in  receipt  of  invalidity  pen-
sions as  against  102,000  who  were  drawing  old  age  pensions,
or  nearly  nine  times  as  many.^  The  government  has  always
met  requests  for  a  reduction  of  the  seventy-year  limit  with
refusal  because  the  law  regards  the  old  age  feature  as  a  minor
matter,  and  has  stated  that  any  additional  expenditures  should
be  devoted  to  enlarging  the  invalidity  benefits.

For  the  purposes  of  this  insurance  the  empire  is  divided
into  large  districts  for  each  of  which  is  created  an  insurance
institute,  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  imperial  insur-
ance office.  Each  institute  is  managed  by  a  board  of  di-
rectors, in  part  appointed  by  a  public  authority,  in  part  chosen
equally  from  employers  and  employees  by  the  committee,
itself  an  elective  body  composed  of  equal  numbers  of  em-
ployers and  employees,  with  supervisory  duties. While  far


'Rubinow,  Social  Insurance,  p.  359,
26


402 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

more  bureaucratic  than  the  sickness  funds,  the  administration
of  the  institutes  is  still  largely  supervised  by  the  persons
affected  as  contributors  and  beneficiaries.

Two  tmique  points  in  the  German  old  age  invalidity  insur-
ance system  are  sickness  pensions  and  sanatorium  treatment.
Sickness  benefits,  equivalent  in  amount  to  invalidity  benefits,
are  paid  to  persons,  not  permanently  incapacitated,  who  have
exhausted  their  claims  to  sick  pay  and  are  still  unable  to
work.  However,  it  is  entirely  apart  from  cash  payments,
and  in  the  realm  of  prevention,  that  the  most  significant  fea-
ture of  the  whole  German  social  insurance  plan  is  to  be
found.  Under  the  local  pension  boards  is  maintained  a
country-wide  network  of  sanatoria,  rest  homes,  and  health
resorts.  Persons  who  have  drawn  all  their  sick  benefits  but
who  are  still  unable  to  work  are  entitled  to  maintenance  in
these  institutions,  and  the  timely  and  efficient  care  there
fiunished  to  the  patients  has  proven  a  powerful  factor  in  the
prevention  of  invalidity.

Other  compulsory  old  age  insurance  laws  do  not,  on  the
whole,  differ  much  from  the  German  plan.  The  conditions
for  the  receipt  of  invalidity  pensions,  however,  are  much
stricter  in  the  other  countries  than  they  are  in  Germany;
only  persons  completely  tmable  to  earn  a  living  are  entitled
to  benefits.  Ailother  point  of  difference  is  the  rather  unusual
apphcation  of  the  Swedish  law,  which  is  extended  to  "every
Swedish  man  or  woman."  It  is  also  worthy  of  remark  that
in  none  of  these  countries  has  even  an  attempt  been  made  to
emulate  the  admirable  German  methods  of  invaHdity  pre-
vention.

(4)  Straight  Pensions

Another  much  discussed  method  of  meeting  the  problem
of  old  age  poverty  is  that  of  "straight,"  or  non-contributory,
pensions.  Such  pensions,  their  opponents  charge,  tend  to
keep  wages  at  a  low  level,  destroy  the  habit  of  thrift,  and
have  an  injurious  effect  on  family  solidarity.  As  for  the
last  argument,  it  is  difficvdt  to  see  how  the  parents'  depend-
ence can  add  to  the  filial  affection  of  the  struggling  wage-
earner. The  habit  of  thrift,  also,  'can  hardly  be  destroyed


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  403

by  the  remote  and  uncertain  possibility  of  attaining  old  age
with  a  pension  which  is  hardly  sufficient  to  keep  body  and
soul  together.  With  regard  to  the  possible  effect  on  wages,
the  persons  in  receipt  of  old  age  pensions  are  a  very  unim-
portant factor  in  the  labor  market,  and  as  to  the  workingmen
who  have  not  yet  reached  pensionable  years  it  is  doubtful
whether  the  prospect  of  a  very  meager  assistance  in  their  old
age  would  alone  be  sufficient  to  make  them  accept  lower  wages.
Some  champions  of  social  insurance  also  object  to  straight
pensions  on  the  apparently  more  valid  ground  that  the  straight
grant  resembles  charity  and  is,  therefore,  less  desirable  than
a  system  by  which  the  worker  is  asked  to  contribute.

Straight  old  age  pensions  are  granted  sometimes  to  all
persons  meeting  certain  personal  requirements,  and  sometimes
for  the  performance  of  a  definite  period  of  service.  Six
cotmtries — Denmark,  New  Zealand,  Belgium  (temporarily),
Prance,  Australia,  arid  Great  Britain — and  Alaska  and  Arizo-
na ^  in  the  United  States,  had  by  1915  enacted  legislation
providing  such  aid  to  all  persons  possessing  certain  moral,
economic,  or  civil  qualifications.  Under  most  of  these  laws  a
definite  period  both  of  residence  and  of  citizenship  is  a  prereq-
uisite. New  Zealand  demands  twenty-five  years',  Australia
twenty.  Great  Britain  twelve,  Alaska  ten,  and  Arizona  five
years'  residence,  while  in  Belgium  one  year  is  sufficient.  In
Australia  the  applicant  must  have  been  a  citizen  three  years,
in  Arizona  five  years,  and  in  Great  Britain  twenty  years.
All  but  the  French  and  the  two  American  acts  embody  a
number  of  moral  qualifications.  Family  desertion,  neglect
of  children  under  foiurteen  years,  drunkenness,  and  a  prison
sentence  are  some  of  the  grounds  which  disqualify  an  appli-
cant either  permanently  or  temporarily  from  receiving  an  old
age  pension.  The  requirements  as  to  the  economic  status
of  the  pensioner  also  vary  widely.  In  AustraUa  an  income  of
$300  a  year  debars  one  from  receiving  an  old  age  pension;
much  less  liberal  are  the  provisions  in  the  other  countries.
In  France  an  income  of  $92.64  is  the  highest  allowed,  while
in  Denmark  it  is  but  $26.80.  Similar  regulations  exist  with
regard  to  the  amount  of  property  owned. The  grants  are

'  In  November",  1915,  this  act  had  been  held  unconstitutional  by  the
Superior  court,  and  was  on  appeal  before  the  supreme  court  of  the  state.


404 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

far  from  generous.  In  Great  Britain  the  pension  ranges
from  24  cents  to  $1.22  a  week,  varying  inversely  with  the
amount  of  income  received  from  other  sources,  and  in  Alaska
the  maximum  is  set  at  $12.50  a  month.  In  other  cotmtries
no  definite  level  of  pensions  is  established  by  law,  and  the
local  authorities  are  permitted  to  exercise  their  judgment  in
the  individual  cases.

Pensions  for  service  are  granted  both  by  governments  and
by  private  employers.  In  this  coimtry  pensions  are  provided
by  the  federal,  state,  and  municipal  governments  for  several
classes  of  employees,  especially  policemen,  firemen,  and
teachers.  The  necessity  of  pensions  for  all  civilian  employees
is  now  frequently  urged  not  only  as  a  matter  of  justice  to  the
employee,  but  also  as  a  means  of  retiring  the  older  workers
and  thus  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  force.  The  federal
government  has  also  established  pensions  in  the  army  and
navy,  with  particular  generosity  toward  civil  war  veterans.
In  several  European  countries,  furthermore,  workers  in  the
government  owned  industries  are  granted  pensions,  as  for
example,  in  the  tobacco  works  of  Italy  and  France  and  in  the
Russian  liquor  monopoly.  Finally  pensions  are  granted  to
their  employees  by  some  private  concerns.  Establishment
pension  funds  exist  practically  in  every  country  of  industrial
prominence,  but  in  the  United  States  their  number  is  relatively
small.  The  transportation  industry  can  boast  of  the  largest
number,  there  being  at  least  eighteen  steam  railroads  with
such  pension  systems,  as  well  as  several  electric  street  rail-
ways and  a  few  steamship  lines.  The  number  of  manufac-
turing establishments  granting  pensions  is  much  smaller.
The  social  value  of  these  provisions  is  almost  negligible,  first,
because  of  their  small  number,  and  second,  because  of  their
defects,  some  of  which  are  arbitrariness  on  the  part  of  the
employer,  lack  of  certainty  as  to  the  receipt  of  the  pension,
and  their  injurious  effect  on  the  independence  and  mobility
of  labor.

(5)  The  Problem  in  the  United  States

Clearly  the  total  results  accomplished  by  all  these  organiza-
tions are  of  little  or  no  consequence. "Strange  as  it  may


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  405

seem,"  declares  a  leading  American  authority,  "the  United
States  is  the  only  great  industrial  nation  in  the  civilized  worid
that  has  not  already  attempted  a  practical  and  permanent
solution  of  this  problem  of  old  age  and  dependency."'  This
neglect  of  the  problem  of  old  age  poverty  caimot,  however,
be  explained  by  the  absence  of  conditions  calling  for  attention.
On  the  basis  of  an  investigation  of  old  age  poverty  made  in
Massachusetts  by  a  special  commission  on  old  age  pensions
of  that  state,  it  is  estimated  that  "approximately  1,250,000
of  the  people  of  the  United  States  above  sixty-five  years  of
age  are  dependent  upon  public  and  private  charity,  to  the
amount  of  about  $250,000,000  aimually.  Thus  far  one  person
in  eighteen  of  oiu:  wage-earners  reaches  the  age  of  sixty-five  in
penury;  and  the  indications  are  that  the  proportion  of  in-
digent old  is  increasing."^

But  this  admittedly  conservative  estimate  can  hardly  give
a  correct  conception  of  the  extent  of  old  age  poverty.  The  age
of  sixty-five  is  somewhat  high,  as  the  exhausting  effect  of  in-
dustry on  the  worker  and  the  well-known  prejudice  against
the  employment  of  older  men  throws  out  of  industry  a  large
nxmiber  of  people  before  that  age.  If  we  include  also  the
number  of  invaUds  of  all  ages,  the  quoted  figures  will  be  far
too  low.  Existing  arrangements  for  the  care  of  old  age  do
not  affect  more  than  one-third  of  the  wage-earners;  of  the
remaining  two-thirds,  those  who  grow  old  without  having
saved  enough  to  support  them  must  resort  to  charity,  either
of  their  children  and  families  or  of  some  organized  agency.
The  dependence  of  large  numbers  of  people  on  such  an  un-
certain, insufficient,  and  morally  degrading  method  of  relief
as  charity  is  a  grave  injustice  to  the  toiling  wage-earner  and
a  serious  menace  to  the  community.

This  failure  of  the  United  States  to  provide  an  organized
policy  for  the  protection  of  its  citizens  at  the  close  of  their
life  of  productive  work  appears  the  more  striking  when  we
see  that  eleven  European  countries,  together  with  Canada,
Australia,  and  New  Zealand,  have  enacted  national  measures,
either  in  the  form  of  insurance  or  straight  pensions,  for  the
solution  of  this  problem.

'  Squier,  Old  Age  Dependency  m;  the  United  States,  p.  325.
•  Ibid.,  p.  324.


4o6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

4.  Widows'  and  Orphans'  Insurance

Insurance  for  the  protection  of  widows  and  orphans,  or,
as  it  is  ordinarily  called,  life  insurance,  is  furnished  by  prac-
tically all  fraternal  societies,  many  trade  unions,  some  estab-
lishment funds,  and  by  private  life  insurance  companies.  In
some  countries,  such  as  Great  Britain,  France,  Italy,  Russia,
and  Canada,  the  government  has  undertaken  the  business  of
life  insurance;  in  the  United  States  we  have  state  life  in-
surance in  Wisconsin,  and  in  Massachusetts  there  is  a  system
of  life  insurance  administered  by  savings  banks  tmder  state
supervision.

(i)  Voluntary  Life  Insurance

Life  insurance,  sometimes  for  enormous  amounts  and  paid
for  by  annual  or  quarterly  contributions  or  premiimis,  is  now
a  well-established  method  of  providing  for  the  future  among
the  moderately  well  to  do  and  the  wealthy.  But  in  order
to  bring  the  poorly  paid  wage-earner  under  the  system,  a
special  form  of  life  insurance  had  to  be  devised,  known  as
"industrial"  or  "prudential"  insiirance  as  opposed  to  the
"ordinary"  type.  Under  industrial  insurance  the  policy
amoxmts  are  much  smaller,  usually  providing  only  for  the
burial  of  the  insured,  and  to  facilitate  payment  premiums  are
collected  weekly,  by  a  vast  army  of  agents.^  This  method
of  collection,  however,  results  in  the  increase  of  administra-
tive expenses  and,  consequently,  in  higher  rates.  Another
cause  of  higher  rates  in  industrial  insurance  is  the  assumption
of  a  higher  death  rate  among  wage-earners.  Thus  even  in
purchasing  decent  burial  the  wage-earner  is  obliged  to  pay  a
higher  rate  of  insturance  than  does  his  more  prosperous  neigh-
bor.

State  insurance,  as  well  as  insurance  furnished  by  fraternal
societies,  trade  unions,  estabUshment  funds,  and  mutual
assessment  societies,  is  less  expensive  but  still  outside  of  the
reach  of  many  working  people. Moreover,  because  the  in-

1  The  1910  Census  gives  the  total  number  of  insurance  agents  in  the
country  as  88,463.  Not  all  of  these,  of  course,  deal  in  industrial  insur-
ance.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  407

surance  is  voluntary,  the  very  families  most  in  need  of  pro-
tection are  often  left  without  it.  These  defects,  as  in  the
other  branches  of  social  insurance,  have  led  to  the  introduction
of  the  compulsory  principle.


(2)  Compulsory  Insurance

Compulsory  widows'  and  orphans'  insurance,  the  newest
branch  of  social  insurance,  is  so  far  practically  in  operation
in  only  two  coimtries,  France  and  Germany.

In  France  the  compulsory  old  age  insurance  law  of  1910
provides  for  benefits  to  widows  and  orphans  of  the  insured.
The  total  benefits  vary  from  $29  to  $58  according  to  the
number  of  dependents,  and  are  paid  in  monthly  instalments
of  $9.65  until  the  entire  amoimt  has  been  paid.

In  the  following  year,  191 1,  the  German  law  was  passed.
As  in  France,  benefits  are  furnished  to  certain  survivors  of
those  carrying  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance.  The  amount
of  the  pension  depends  on  the  amount  of  invalidity  pension
to  which  the  insured  was  entitled.  The  widow,  but  only  if
she  is  herself  an  invalid,  receives  30  per  cent,  of  the  invalidity
pension  to  which  her  husband  was  entitled.  Only  children
under  fifteen  are  eligible  for  pensions,  the  amotmt  being  15
per  cent,  for  the  first  child  and  2^  per  cent,  for  each  of  the
others.  In  addition,  the  state  aimually  pays  the  widow  $11.90
for  herself  and  $5.95  for  each  child.  The  cost  is  met  by  an
increase  of  the  premiums  for  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance.
This  increase  varies  for  the  five  different  wage-groups  estab-
lished for  that  type  of  insurance,  and  runs  from  ^  cent  to
nearly  3  cents  a  week,  equal  shares  of  this  amount  being  con-
tributed by  the  employer  and  the  employee.  It  has  been
estimated  that  the  average  annual  pension  of  a  widow  with
three  children  is  $37,*  a  sum  which  cannot  be  considered  as
substantial.  An  increase  in  the  amount  of  benefits  paid  in
this  and  in  other  branches  of  social  insurance  is  urged  as  the
next  step  in  the  development  of  the  system.

In  a  third  country,  Holland,  the  old  age  and  invalidity  in-


'  Rubinow,  Social  Insurance,  p.  434.


4o8 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

surance  law  of  19 13  allows  benefits  to  the  orphans  of  men  or
women  who  carried  old  age  and  invalidity  insurance.  These
benefits  depend  on  the  amount  of  the  parent's  pension;  they
are  paid  to  the  orphans  until  of  the  age  of  thirteen  and  only
when  the  father  was  already  receiving  a  disability  pension  or
if  forty  weekly  contributions  were  credited  to  him.  The
same  limitations  hold  true  in  the  case  of  death  of  an  insured
widow.

In  Austria  the  compulsory  old  age  and  invalidity  law  of  1906
provides  for  pensions  to  the  widows  and  orphans  of  the  in-
sured. But  this  law  applies  only  to  salaried  employees,  and  is,
therefore,  of  relatively  small  importance.


(j)  Mothers'  Pensions

A  more  popular  method  of  dealing  with  the  problem  of
widowhood  and  orphanhood  is  by  means  of  mothers'  or  wid-
ows' pensions,  paid  to  certain  classes  of  mothers  with  de-
pendent children.  These  pensions,  however,  are  straight
grants  by  the  state.  "  Such  systems  exist  in  several  European
countries,  in  New  Zealand,  and  in  a  nimiber  of  American
states.

The  movement  in  this  country  is  particularly  interesting.
Here  the  pressing  problem  of  widows'  and  orphans'  poverty
and  helplessness  has,  instead  of  giving  rise  to  social  insurance
measures,  resulted  in  a  sudden  wave  of  legislation  providing
straight  pensions,  usually  upon  condition  that  the  mother
is  found  capable  of  providing  a  proper  home  for  her  child.
Indeed,  a  leading  argument  in  behalf  of  this  legislation  is
that  it  is  better  to  pay  the  mother  for  taking  care  of  her  child
than  to  expend  the  same  amount  in  financing  institutions,  in
even  the  best  of  which  the  death  rate  is  abnormally  high.  In
the  five  years  191 1-1915  nearly  thirty  American  states  enacted
such  laws.  The  surprising  rapidity  with  which  this  provision
has  gained  recognition  in  American  legislatures  is  a  significant
indication  both  of  the  great  need  of  public  action  and  of  the
growing  conception  of  the  state  as  having  a  duty  toward  its
citizens,  two  of  the  underlying  ideas  of  social  insiirance.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  409

5.  Unemployment  Insurance

Finally,  the  destitution  due  to  unemployment,  until  recent-
ly considered  a  matter  of  purely  individual  concern,  or  at  best
as  an  occasion  for  charitable  activity,  is  now  beginning  to  be
recognized  as  an  evil  which  must  be  met  by  the  coordinated
forethought  of  society  as  a  whole.  The  demoraUzation  of
individuals  and  communities  by  prolonged  and  widespread
deprivation  of  income  due  to  involuntary  idleness,  it  is  now
rather  generally  agreed,  should  no  longer  be  allowed  to  con-
tinue unchecked.


(/)  Voluntary  Out-of-Work  Benefits

In  warding  off  the  financial  hardships  of  unemployment,
individual  action  and  charity  have  been  found  just  as  inade-
quate as  they  were  in  protecting  against  the  financial  hard-
ships due  to  accident,  ill  health,  or  old  age.  Here  again  the
collective  method  of  instuance  has  demonstrated  its  su-
periority. Unemployment  insurance  originated  among  labor
organizations,  and  at  first  the  cost  of  this  insurance  was  borne
by  the  workers  themselves  without  any  outside  assistance.
This  form  of  unemployment  insurance  has  achieved  a  con-
siderable success  in  the  important  European  countries.  In
the  United  States,  on  the  contrary,  only  a  few  unions  are
known  to  pay  out-of-work  benefits.  Of  the  no  national
organizations  affiliated  with  the  American  Federation  of  Labor
the  Cigar  Makers'  Union  alone  is  known  to  have  a  national
system  of  imemplojnneint  insurance.  Two  other  important
unions  which  pay  out-of-work  benefits,  the  Amalgamated
Society  of  Carpenters  and  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  En-
gineers, are  both  branches  of  British  organizations.  In  a
number  of  national  unions  only  certain  locals  are  paj^ng  such
benefits;  several  unions  pay  a  traveling  benefit;  others  limit
themselves  to  excusing  their  unemployed  members  from  the
payment  of  dues.

In  addition  to  trade  unions,  fraternal  societies  in  some
countries  pay  a  regular  out-of-work  benefit.  One  coimtry,
Germany,  furnishes  an  interesting  example  of  9.  different  way


410 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  meeting  a  part  of  the  unemployment  insurance  problem,
namely,  through  funds  established  by  some  employers  for  their
own  employees.

(2)  The  Ghent  System

Unassisted  trade  tmion  unemployment  insurance,  however,
with  the  cost  borne  by  the  workers  alone,  is  a  heavy  burden
on  them  and  only  a  comparatively  small  part  of  the  workers
are  able  or  willing  to  insure.  In  order  to  encourage  insurance,
a  plan  was  devised  by  which  government,  most  often  munici-
pal, subsidies  are  granted  to  trade  unions  furnishing  unem-
ployment insurance.  This  is  the  principle  of  the  famous
Ghent  system,  which  was  first  introduced  in  the  city  of  Ghent
in  Belgivim  in  igor.  The  Ghent  idea  was  rapidly  adopted,
with  some  modifications,  not  only  in  a  number  of  cities  in
Belgium,  but  also  in  Great  Britain,  Germany,  France,  Switzer-
land, Italy,  Holland,  Denmark,  and  Norway.  The  subsidies
vary  in  the  different  countries  from  33  J^  per  cent,  to  100  per
cent,  of  the  benefits  paid  by  the  unions.  In  Great  Britain
the  trade  unions  which  are  outside  of  the  compulsory  unem-
plojTuent  insurance  law  receive  a  state  subsidy  of  not  over
one-sixth  of  the  total  amount  of  the  out-of-work  benefits  paid.

The  system  of  government  subsidized  unemployment  insur-
ance has  undoubtedly  stimulated  provision  against  unemploy-
ment.' On  the  other  hand,  it  is  generally  recognized  that
the  advantages  of  optional  subsidized  insurance  are  not  far-
reaching  enough  to  offset  its  limitations,  the  most  important
of  which  is  its  failure  to  attract  a  sufficiently  large  number  of
workers.  The  lesson  taught  by  the  other  branches  of  social
insurance  points  to  compulsory  insurafice  as  the  solution  of
the  problem.


(j)  Compulsory  Unemployment  Insurance

Compulsory  unemployment  insurance  was  first  introduced
in  the  city  of  St.  Gall,  Switzerland,  in  1894. After  a  two  years'


'  See  I.  G,  Gibbon,  Unemployment  Insurance,  pp.  104, 105.


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  411

trial  the  system,  owing  to  defective  administration,  was  ad-
judged a  failure  and  was  discontinued.  The  only  country
where  compulsory  unemployment  insurance  is  now  in  force
is  Great  Britain,  under  the  national  insurance  act  of  191 1,
which  went  into  operation  on  Jtily  15,  191 2.

The  unemployment  insurance  part  of  this  act  applies  to
seven  groups  of  trades,  but  the  administrative,  authorities  are
permitted  to  extend  the  range  of  the  system.  The  selected
trades  are  (i)  building,  (2)  construction  of  works,  (3)  ship
building,  (4)  mechanical  engineering,  (5)  iron-founding,  (6)
construction  of  vehicles,  and  (7)  saw-milling,  and  they  were
chosen  because  in  them  the  extent  of  unemployment  was
greatest  and  most  accurately  known.  About  2,500,000  work-
men are  included,  out  of  15,000,000  in  the  country,  or  16^
per  cent.  The  employer  and  employee  contribute  equal
amounts  of  5  cents  each  week;  to  this  the  government  adds
3j/^  cents,  which  is  one-third  of  the  combined  contribution
of  employer  and  employee.  This  premitim  entitles  the  worker
in  case  of  unemployment  to  the  sum  of  $1.75  a  week  for  not
more  than  fifteen  weeks  in  any  one  year.  No  benefit  is  paid
for  the  first  week  of  unemplojnnent,  and  the  worker  must  be
insured  five  weeks  for  every  week  of  benefit  he  claims.  The
limitation  to  fifteen  weeks  a  year  has  not  in  practice  worked
any  serious  hardship.  In  a  study  of  130,000  cases  of  unem-
ployment it  was  found  that  only  .5  per  cent,  of  the  recorded
unemplojmient  among  union  men  and  only  1.2  per  cent,  among
non-union  men  was  left  without  benefit  because  of  this
restriction.  1

To  safeguard  the  workers'  interests  an  unemployed  man  is
not  compelled  to  take  work  in  a  place  where  a  trade  dispute
is  on,  or  at  wages  below  those  he  usually  received  or  less  than
those  current  in  the  community.  Another  clause  with  a
similar  purpose  provides  that  any  insured  workman  over
sixty  years  of  age,  who  has  been  insured  for  ten  years  and
who  has  paid  500  contributions,  is  entitled  to  a  refund  of  his
total  pajrments,  less  his  total  benefits,  with  compound  in-
terest at  2^  per  cent.

As  a  protection  to  the  employer,  a  worker  is  refused  benefit


» First  Annual  Report,  p.  13,


412 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

if  he  strikes,  qtiits  work  without  due  cause,  or  is  discharged
for  bad  conduct  or  inability  to  do  the  work.  Furthermore,
an  incentive  to  regularize  work,  to  avoid  large  tium-overs  of
labor,  and  thus  to  prevent  unemployment,  is  held  out  to  the
employer  in  the  clause  entitling  him  to  a  refund  of  one-third
of  his  own  contributions  for  each  worker  retained  in  his  em-
ploy not  less  than  forty-five  weeks  in  a  year.  This  amounts
at  present  to  not  less  than  75  cents  a  year  for  each  employee
so  retained,  and  the  principle  is,  of  course,  capable  of  ex-
tension.

The  administrative  machinery  of  the  act  is  simple.  The
employee  must  secure  an  unemplojmient  insurance  book,
which  on  taking  employment  is  deposited  with  the  employer.
The  latter  must  paste  in  the  book  on  pay  day  the  stamps
representing  his  own  and  the  employee's  contribution,  de-
ducting the  worker's  portion  from  his  wages.  The  weekly
payments  are  transmitted  through  the  post  office,  which  sells
the  stamps,  to  the  unemployment  insurance  fund,  which,  in
spite  of  the  smallness  of  the  individual  contributions,  totals
about  $12,500,000  a  year  for  the  2,500,000  insured  workers.  If
the  insured  worker  loses  his  place,  he  receives  from  his  em-
ployer his  insurance  book,  which  he  must  then  deposit  in  the
nearest  labor  exchange  or  insurance  office,  one  of  which  is
within  five  miles  of  every  considerable  group  of  workers  in
the  kingdom.  He  is  thus  automatically  registered  as  looking
for  work,  and  so  an  abuse  of  the  system  by  the  "work-shy"
man  is  avoided.  In  the  year  ending  January  17,  1914,  the
sum  of  $2,488,625  was  paid  out  by  this  system  in  unemploy-
ment benefits.

In  America,  as  well  as  in  Europe,  the  importance  of  com-
pulsory unemployment  insurance  is  rapidly  gaining  recogni-
tion. The  oft-recurring  periods  of  general  industrial  de-
pression and  the  prevalence  of  unemployment  in  the  numer-
ous seasonal  trades  are  emphasizing  the  need  for  organized
social  action.  In  the  winter  of  1914-1915,  particularly,  the
alarming  extent  of  unemployment  called  forth  general  and
deep  interest,  and  among  the  methods  most  often  urged  for
dealing  with  this  evil  was  state  supervised  insurance.  Dur-
ing the  same  winter  unemployment  insurance  bills  were
drafted  for  introduction  in  several  states. These  bills  provided


SOCIAL  INSURANCE  413

for  compulsory,  contributory  insurance,  jointly  administered
by  employers  and  employees  under  public  supervision,  and
with  subsidies  to  organizations  voluntarily  entering  the  system.
Ten  weeks'  benefit  was  tentatively  proposed,  with  the  proviso
that  the  amoimt  should  be  as  large  as  possible.  Refunds  to
employers  who  ran  their  plants  steadily,  and  to  workmen
who  were  rarely  out  of  employment,  and  corresponding  penal-
ties for  casual  labor,  were  included  for  the  purpose  of  stimu-
lating regularization  of  industry.  To  obviate  unnecessary
claims,  close  dependence  upon  an  efficient  system  of  public
employment  exchanges  was  insisted  upon.

Insurance  provides  a  dignified  method  of  financial  assist-
ance to  unemployed  wage-earners,  the  majority  of  whom
would  be  forced  either  to  seek  charity,  with  all  its  objection-
able consequences,  or  to  suffer  privation.  The  out-of-work
benefit,  although  amounting  to  but  a  fraction  of  the  regular
wage,  is  still  sufficient  to  ward  ofE  for  a  time  complete  destitu-
tion; it  thus  contributes  materially  toward  the  preservation
of  the  workers'  character  and  physique  during  times  of  un-
employment, and  prevents  their  falling  into  the  ranks  of
the  unemployable  where  they  woiild  constitute  a  much  more
difficiilt  problem.

But  of  equal  significance  with  these  financial  arrange-
ments is  the  power  of  compulsory  insurance  to  prevent  un-
emplo3rment.  Workmen's  compensation  laws  have  stimu-
lated the  development  of  the  "Safety  first"  movement.  The
activity  of  the  German  sickness  insiurance  funds  affords  an
effective  demonstration  of  the  preventive  possibilities  of
compulsory  health  insurance.  Somewhat  similar  results  can
be  secured  from  compulsory  insurance  against  unemployment.
An  indispensable  part  of  such  insurance  is  a  system  of  labor
exchanges,  the  activity  of  which  is  a  powerftd  means  of  re-
ducing the  amount  of  involimtary  idleness.  The  financial
claims  of  unemployment  insurance  on  industry  call  the  em-
ployers' attention  to  the  regularization  of  business,  for  such
regularization  would  reduce  the  amount  of  unemplojonent  and
also  the  cost  of  insurance.  Refunds  to  employers  for  steadily
employed  workers,  as  provided  by  the  English  act,  would  also
be  an  inducement  to  preventive  measures.  The  indications
are  that  this  branch  of  social  insurance  can  be  made  to  accom-


414 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

plish  with  respect  to  involuntary  idleness  a  very  considerable
prevention  of  the  evil  itself,  which  from  every  point  of  view
is  far  more  important  than  the  payment  of  benefits.  As  elo-
quently stated  by  L6on  Bourgeois,  president  of  the  Inter-
national Association  on  Unemployment:  "To  relieve  is  to
wait  until  the  evil  has  befallen,  to  attempt  to  repair  it.  To
relieve  is  to  wait  till  misery  has  come,  to  give  alms  to  the
miserable.  But  alms  remains  at  best  a  meritorious  deed,  not
a  social  act."*  Elimination  of  the  condition  which  makes
relief  necessary  is  the  social  act  contemplated  by  any  adequate
system  of  social  insurance.

But  in  this  matter,  as  in  all  inatters  of  labor  legislation,  the
results  attained  depend  in  the  last  analysis  upon  efficient
administration.


'  Address  delivered  at  the  Ghent  International  Exposition,  1913,  Ameri-
can Labor  Legislation  Review,  March,  1914,  p.  186.


CHAPTER  IX

ADMINISTRATION

Notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  said  regarding  the  prog-
ress of  legislation  for  the  protection  of  the  workers,  it  is
scarcely  worth  consideration  if  the  laws  are  not  enforced.
More  important  than  the  hasty  enactment  of  additional  laws
is  the  adoption  of  methods  of  administration  that  will  enforce
them.  It  is  easy  for  politicians,  or  reformers,  or  trade  tinion
ofEcials,  to  boast  of  the  laws  which  they  have  secured  for
labor,  and  it  is  just  as  easy  to  overlook  the  details,  or  appro-
priations, or  competent  officials,  that  are  needed  to  make
them  enforceable.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  little  or  nothing  can
be  done  by  changing  the  "machinery  of  government"  and
that  the  real  thing  to  do  is  to  get  "better  officials"  to  enforce
the  laws  and  better  judges  to  interpret  them.  But  it  is  only
through  the  "machinery  of  government"  that  such  officials
are  found  and  selected,  and  that  judges  can  have  the  facts
needed  for  interpretation.  Administration  is  more  than  mech-
anism. It  is  a  method  of  legislation.  It  is  the  means  of
investigating,  drafting,  and  adopting  enforceable  laws.  It  is
the  means  of  getting  and  keeping  competent  officials.  It  is
the  method  of  determining  what  authority  or  powers  the
officials  shall  have,  how  they  shall  execute  the  laws,  what
procedure  they  shall  foUow  in  court,  what  facts  they  shall
investigate  for  the  use  of  the  court  in  its  duty  of  interpretation.
Administration  is  legislation  in  action.

In  a  constitutional  government,  executive  officers  are  not
supposed  to  go  out  with  a  club  and,  on  their  own  initiative,
force  people  into  obeying  what  they  happen  to  think  is  the
law.  Before  they  act,  they  are  supposed  to  investigate.  The
legislature,  too,  is  assumed  to  be  a  body  possessed  of  all  the
facts  and  its  acts  are  unconstitutional  when  they  disregard


4i6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

essential  facts  that  could  be  ascertained  by  investigation.  The
court,  through  many  centuries  of  experience,  has  developed
the  law  of  evidence  and  the  procedure  of  investigation  for  the
trial  of  individuals  who  are  charged  with  the  violation  of  law.
Finally,  when  the  higher  court  passes  upon  the  constitutional-
ity of  the  law  itself,  it  does  so  with  reference  to  whether  the
facts  are  such  as  call  for  the  law  and  whether  the  law  deals
with  the  facts  in  accordance  with  the  higher  law  of  the  con-
stitution.

Thus  each  department  of  government  is  an  investigating
body.  Only  by  investigation  can  each  be  restrained  from  the
arbitrary  and  capricious  acts  that  make  despotism  abhorrent.
This  is  the  significance  of  "reasonableness,"  which  runs
through  every  requirement  of  the  constitution.  Reasonable-
ness is  ascertained  by  investigating  all  the  facts  and  giving
to  them  "such  weight  as  may  be  just  and  right  in  each  case."  '
Thus  we  have  executive,  judicial,  and  legislative  investigations,
designed  to  guide  each  department  of  government  in  dealing
with  all  the  facts  in  its  own  field.

But  modem  industrial  conditions  have  become  so  complex,
and  the  laws  deal  with  such  a  variety  of  facts,  that  a  fourth
department  of  government  is  emerging  whose  purpose  is  pri-
marily investigation.  This  is  administration.  If  administra-
tion is  legislation  in  action,  it  is  because  administration  is  in-
vestigation. It  unites  in  one  department  the  investigating
activities  of  all  departments.  First,  as  to  the  executive  de-
partment and  its  field  of  investigation.


I.  The  Executive

The  history  of  the  so-called  "factory  acts"  shows  the  be-
ginnings of  the  special  kind  of  investigation  needed  for  the
enforcement  of  labor  law.  The  term  "factory  act"  or  "fac-
tory legislation"  covers  all  legislation,  whether  applied  to
factories  or  to  other  establishments,  respecting  such  matters
as  health  and  safety  of  workers,  hours  of  labor,  child  labor,
payment  of  wages,  company  stores,  and  so  on. Factory  acts

'Smyth  V.  Ames,  169  U.  S.  466  at  p.  547  (1897);  Freund,  Police  Power,
1904,  p.  58.


ADMINISTRATION  417

are  distinguishable  from  those  laws  which  determine  the
fundamental  rights  and  duties  of  master  and  servant,  em-
ployer and  employee  in  the  labor  contract,  such  as  mechanics'
lien,  wage  exemption,  employers'  Hability,  and  the  law  of
conspiracy.  The  distinction  is  not  always  clear  because  the
line  between  the  two  is  drawn  differently  at  different  times
and  in  different  countries.  In  general,  we  may  say  that  by
factory  legislation  is  meant  that  side  of  labor  legislation  which
requires  officials  for  continuous  inspection  and  enforcement,
whereas  other  labor  laws  are  enforced  only  when  a  private
individual  brings  a  case  in  court.  The  distinction  tends  to
disappear  in  proportion  as  special  administrative  machinery
is  adopted  for  the  enforcement  of  other  laws.  For  this  reason
the  term  "labor  legislation"  is  taking  the  place  of  "factory
acts."

The  early  factory  laws  provided  no  special  officers  for  their
enforcement.  It  was  .assumed  that  complaints  would  be
made  by  the  injured  employees,  and  it  was  merely  provided
that  the  ordinary  officers  attached  to  the  court,  such  as
sheriffs,  policemen,  prosecuting  attorneys,  should  attend  to
the  prosecutions  on  complaint.  Such  is  even  now  the  theory
and  practice  in  some  states,  especially  in  the  South.

It  required  several  years  to  discover  the  futility  of  this  kind
of  administration.  Employees  would  not  make  complaints
for  fear  of  being  discharged.  The  officials  had  other  duties
more  urgent.  They  were  local  officials,  usually  afraid  of  the
voters.

The  next  step,  beginning  in  the  decade  of  the  'seventies,
was  the  creation  of  a  class  of  special  state  pohce,  known  as
factory  inspectors,  whose  duty  it  was  to  investigate  the  con-
ditions in  the  factories,  to  get  their  own  evidence  of  violations
and  then  to  conduct  the  prosecutions  without  calling  upon
employees  to  testify.

The'  first  state  to  appoint  this  class  of  special  police  was
Massachusetts,  in  1879.  Since  that  time  the  method  has  been
adopted  in  half  of  the  states  and  the  largest  force  of  inspectors
in  any  state  is  that  in  New  York,  numbering  over  150.

The  investigations  made  by  executive  officials,  whether
they  are  the  ordinary  officials  or  special  poHce,  have  a  limited
and  special  purpose. The  object  is  to  secure  evidence  for

27


41 8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

prosecutions  against  violators  of  the  law.  Having  secured
their  evidence  they  must  take  it  to  the  prosecuting  attorney
or  district  attorney,  who  then  reinvestigates  the  facts  in  order
to  determine  if  there  is  a  case  made  out  that  will  probably
result  in  a  conviction  when  tried  in  court.  Finally,  when  the
case  is  brought  to  trial,  the  court  again  investigates  all  the
facts,  calling  witnesses  on  both  sides  and  providing  for  .their
cross-examination.  It  follows  precise  rules  of  evidence,  re-
jecting what  is  immaterial  to  the  point  to  be  decided.  This
evidence  may  be  heard  and  passed  upon  by  a  jury.  The  en-
tire procedure  of  the  executive,  the  prosecutor  and  the  court
in  reaching  a  decision  and  enforcing  the  law  tiuns  upon  an
investigation  of  the  facts  of  violation.

For  various  reasons,  the  enforcement  of  labor  law  in
American  states  through  investigations  by  factory  inspectors
has  come  to  be  recognized  as  inefEective.  The  inspectors  are
not  trained  for  their  work;  they  are  frequently  changed;
they  are  -poorly  paid,  and  they  have  but  little  opportunity
for  promotion  and  a  professional  career.  Their  number  is
often  inadequate  for  the  amotuit  of  work  required.  Much
of  their  time  is  often  given  to  gathering  and  publishing  large
volumes  of  belated  statistics  that  have  but  little  value  as  an
aid  either  to  their  own  administration  or  to  the  legislature  in
improving  the  laws.  Considerable  attention  has  been  given
recently  to  these  deficiencies  and  they  are  justly  considered  to
be  the  most  important  problem  of  labor  legislation.  Useless
statistics  are  giving  way  to  timely  bulletins  on  safety,  health ,
and  other  specific  conditions  of  labor.  The  New  York  State
Factory  Investigating  Commission  was  created,  after  a  deadly
factory  fire,  to  inquire  why  it  was  that  the  laws  were  not  en-
forced.' The  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor  investigated  the
enforcement  of  woman  and  child  labor  laws.^  The  American
Association  for  Labor  Legislation  devotes  a  large  part  of  its
attention  to  the  improvement  of  administration.^  Out  of
these  investigations  and  a  widespread  distrust  of  the  existing

1  See  New  York  State  Factory  Investigating  Commission,  Preliminary
Report,  1912,  pp.  13,  14.

'^  Report  on  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the  United
States  (Senate  Doc.  645,  6ist  Congress,  2d  Session),  1910-1913.

2  See  its  official  organ,  the  American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  pub-
lished quarterly,  beginning  1909.


' ADMINISTRATION  419

methods  of  factory  inspection  havfe  come  the  beginnings  of
serious  attempts  to  improve  the  character  of  administration.
The  more  promising  of  these  attempts  are  described  in  the
following  pages.  They  involve  not  only  the  executive  branch
of  government,  but  also  the  legislative  and  judicial  branches.


2.  The  Legislature

In  an  executive  investigation  no  question  is  raised  as  to
the  reasons  for  the  enactment  of  the  law  itself.  The  question
is  merely  whether  the  law  was  violated  or  not.  Investigations
take  a  much  wider  scope  when  the  matter  is  being  prepared
for  the  legislature  upon  which  it  shall  proceed  to  enact  a  law.
The  first  investigations  on  a  subject  of  legislation  are  usually
made  by  private  parties  or  by  persons  whose  object  it  is  to
secure  legislation.  In  the  field  of  labor  the  American  working-
men's  organizations,  as  early  as  1832,  published  reports  upon
the  conditions  of  labor  showing  the  need  of  new  laws  for  their
correction.  These  crude  investigations  have  been  followed
and  multiplied  by  a  great  variety  of  associations  and  organiza-
tions. In  the  decades  of  the  'forties  and  'fifties  industrial
congresses  were  held  in  different  cities  and  investigations  of
shop  and  factory  conditions  were  made.  The  International
Workingmen's  Association,  founded  by  Karl  Marx  and  the
British  trade  unionists  in  1864,  and  spreading  to  the  United
States,  contained  as  one  of  its  objects  the  collection  of  informa-
tion and  carrying  on  of  investigations  of  labor  conditions  in
different  coimtries  of  the  world.  The  National  Labor  Union
in  1868,  the  industrial  congresses  of  1873  and  1874,  the  Elnights
of  Labor  and  the  American  Federation  of  Labor  have  aU  in
txim  conducted  investigations  on  all  the  aspects  of  labor
problems  that  in  their  opinion  needed  legislation.

In  the  decade  of  the  'eighties  private  organizations  Uke  the
Consumers'  League  began  investigations,  especially  of  child
labor  and  sweating  systems.  The  National  Child  Labor  Com-
mittee, founded  in  1904,  has  had  a  systematic  plan  and  a  wide
field  of  investigation.  In  1900  the  first  international  associa-
tion for  the  investigation  of  labor  conditions  in  all  countries
was  organized  at  the  Paris  Exposition,  imder  the  name  of  the


420 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

International  Association  for  Labor  Legislation.  It  has  or-
ganized sections  in  fifteen  countries.^  In  some  cases  affiliations
are  made  with  previously  existing  private  organizations  such
as  the  Union  for  Social  Reform  in  Germany.  The  object  of
the  International  Association  is  to  bring  about  uniform  legis-
lation through  treaties  entered  upon  by  independent  govern-
ments. Its  procedure  is  to  hold  international  biennial  con-
gresses in  Switzerland,  at  which  the  conditions  of  labor  and
the  laws  of  different  countries  are  reported  upon  and  plans
for  uniform  laws  are  drafted.  Through  the  courtesy  of  the
government  of  Switzerland  the  diplomatic  representatives
of  the  different  nations  are  then  invited  to  meet  and  formu-
late "conventions"  carrying  out,  as  far  as  possible,  the  plans
recommended  by  the  preceding  congress  of  the  Association.
When  these  "conventions"  are  agreed  upon  the  several
countries  enact  the  desired  legislation  and  enforce  it  in  their
own  jurisdiction.  When  any  country  has  adopted  the  recom-
mendations of  a  convention  it  becomes  equivalent  to  a  treaty
between  that  and  other  countries  that  have  acted  in  the  same
way.  The  first  international  "conventions"  of  this  kind
were  those  forbidding  the  night  work  of  women  ^  and  the
use  of  poisonous  phosphorus  in  the  manufacture  of  matches.'
The  former  has  been  adopted  by  fourteen  nations  and  the
latter  by  eleven.

The  American  section  of  the  International  Association  was
organized  in  1906  with  the  object  of  investigating  conditions
underlying  labor  laws  and  disseminating  information  leading
to  the  enactment  and  efficient  enforcement  of  protective  legis-
lation. It  has  conducted  investigations,  held  national  con-
ferences, published  reports,  drafted  bills,  and  secured  the
enactment  into  law  of  progressive  standards.

The  characteristic  of  the  activities  of  the  International
Association  and  its  fifteen  national  sections  is  scientific  in-
vestigations conducted  with  the  definite  object  of  securing
needed  legislation.  Like  other  private  associations  its  work
is  largely  propagandist  and  does  not  carry  official  weight.


'  Austria,  Belgium,  Denmark,  England,  Finland,  France,  Germany,
Holland,  Hungary,  Italy,  Norway,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the
United  States.  ^See"  Night  Work,"  p.  248.

'  See  "Prohibition  of  Substances  or  Instruments,"  p.  325.


ADMINISTRATION  421

However,  the  International  Association,  with  permanent
headquarters  in  a  government  building  at  Basel,  Switzerland,
receives  subventions  from  twenty -two  different  national
governments.  In  this  respect  it  marks  the  beginning  of  an
affiliation  between  private  investigations  and  those  conducted
by  government.^

As  early  as  1838  the  state  legislature  of  Pennsylvania  con-
ducted an  investigation  of  woman  and  child  labor  in  the
factories  of  that  state.^  Massachusetts  followed  in  1845.
Many  states  and -the  national  government  have  at  different
times  carried  on  investigations  of  this  kind  for  special  purposes
by  temporary  committees  of  the  legislature  or  by  commissions
appointed  for  the  purpose.  During  the  years  1910  to  1915
there  were  nearly  thirty  state  commissions  and  one  federal
commission  for  the  study  of  industrial  accidents  and  the  draft-
ing of  laws  on  workmen's  compensation.  Another  notable
example  is  the  Factory  Investigating  Commission  of  New
York,  whose  careful  investigation  led  to  the  adoption  in  1914
of  a  large  number  of  labor  laws  by  the  legislature  of  that
state.  In  the  broader  field  of  federal  investigations,  a  com-
mittee of  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  in  1885  held  extended
hearings  on  the  subject  of  capital  and  labor.  The  Industrial
Commission,  composed  of  members  of  Congress  and  ap-
pointees of  the  President,  made  a  report  of  nineteen  voltunes
on  the  same  and  other  subjects  in  1901.  Other  temporary
federal  commissions  have  been  the  one  on  Immigration
in  191 1,  and  the  Commission  on  Industrial  Relations  of

1913-

The  origin  of  these  temporary  legislative  investigations  was
either  a  demand  on  the  part  of  private  organizations  for
definite  legislation  or  for  official  inquiry  which  would  have
greater  weight  through  the  power  of  compelling  witnesses  to
testify  and  the  conclusiveness  which  could  not  be  secured  by
private  societies..  Their  intent  was  both  to  inform  the  pubUc
and  to  aid  the  legislature.

The  first  state  in  the  world  to  establish  a  permanent  bureau
for  the  investigation  of  labor  conditions  was  Massachusetts
in  1869. Under  the  name  of  bureau  of  labor  statistics,  or

'  See  Bibliography,  p.  488.

'Pennsylvania  Senate,  Journal,  Vol.  II,  1837-1838.


422 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

bureau  of  labor,  such  permanent  machinery  of  investigation
has  been  established  in  about  forty  states,  by  the  federal
government  with  its  Department  of  Labor,  first  established
in  1884,  and  by  all  national  governments  where  the  problem
of  labor  and  capital  has  become  prominent.  These  bureaus
were  at  first  established  primarily  on  the  petition  of  labor  or-
ganizations.i  Their  scope  has  been  broadened  in  some  cases
but  their  largest  activity  has  been  the  collection  of  statistics
of  wages,  hours,  and  conditions  of  labor.  At  times  they  are
called  upon  by  the  legislature  to  make  investigations  which
otherwise  would  have  been  conducted  by  legislative  commit-
tees or  temporary  commissions,  such  as  the  investigation  of
woman  and  child  labor  by  the  federal  Bureau  of  Labor  in  1908.
A  certain  ineffectiveness  of  these  bureaus  has  sprung  from
their  desire,  as  permanent  bureaus,  to  maintain  a  non-com-
mittal attitude  in  presenting  facts,  and  they  generally  refrain
from  making  recommendations  for  legislative  action.  An  ob-
stacle, also,  in  the  way  of  these  bureaus  for  purposes  of  legis-
lative investigation  arises  from  the  fact  that  they  are,  in  near-
ly all  cases,  combined  with  the  special  police  or  factory  in-
spection department,  whose  business  is  investigation  for  the
purpose  of  prosecution.  A  person  investigated  for  crime  does
not  readily  furnish  the  same  investigator  with  information
for  statistics.

3.  The  Judiciary

In  the  United  States  the  judicial  branch  of  government
may  be  called  upon  to  make  investigations  of  labor  condi-
tions in  order  to  render  decisions  on  the  constitutionality  of
laws  enacted  by  the  legislature.  These  investigations  are
quite  different  in  character  from  those,  previously  described,
in  a  trial  for  the  violation  of  statutes.  In  a  trial  the  question
to  be  decided  is  that  of  a  particular  violation  of  a  law.  In
questions  of  constitutionality  the  question  *  the  conformity
of  the  law  with  the  constitution.  Here  the  court  must  in-
vestigate the  question  as  to  whether  there  is  really  an  evil
condition  that  needs  to  be  remedied;  whether  this  condition


iPowderly,  Thirty  Years  of  Labor,  1889,  p.  303.


ADMINISTRATION  423

is  a  menace  to  the  public  or  whether  the  statute  is  merely  a
benefit  to  private  individuals  without  a  public  pui-pose;
whether  under  the  actual  conditions  the  legislature  confiscates
property,  discriminates  between  individuals,  and  thus  denies
the  equal  protection  of  the  laws.^

In  making  such  an  investigation  the  court  might  appoint  a
referee  or  master  in  chancery  to  take  evidence  and  investigate
the  facts.  This  procedure  is  often  followed  in  the  regulation
of  public  utilities.  The  referee,  usually  a  lawyer  appointed
by  the  court,  calls  before  him  accountants,  engineers,  experts,
as  needed,  and  makes  a  report  to  the  court  of  the  facts.  Such
a  practice,  however,  has  not  been  followed  in  cases  where  the
constitutionality  of  labor  laws  is  called  in  question.  This  is
probably  owing  to  the  fact  that  legislation  of  this  character
covers  a  large  variety  of  subjects,  requires  a  variety  of  wit-
nesses and  extended  technical  investigations,  and  that  the
court  is  not  itself  equipped  with  the  staff  of  investigators  com-
petent to  secure  and  furnish  the  information.  The  result  is
that  social  and  economic  conditions  are  not  investigated  by
the  court  and  it  is  compelled  to  fall  back  upon  the  principles
of  constitutional  law,  without  full  knowledge  of  the  conditions
to  which  the  statute  applies.  Examples  of  decisions  without
investigation  of  conditions  are  as  follows:

The  Colorado  Supreme  Court  in  declaring  unconstitutional
a  law  which  limited  the  hours  of  labor  in  smelters  to  eight
a  day  said:
This  act  is  an  unwarrantable  interference  with,  and  infringes,  the  right

'  "The  principle  involved  in  these  decisions  is  that  where  the  legisla-
tive action  is  arbitrary  and  has  no  reasonable  relation  to  a  purpose
which  it  is  competent  for  government  to  effect,  the  legislature  transcends
the  limits  of  its  powers,  in  interfering  with  liberty  of  contract;  but  where
there  is  reasonable  relation  to  an  object  within  the  governmental  au-
thority the  exercise  of  lefi;islative  discretion  is  not  subject  to  judicial
review." (C.  B.  &  Q.  Railroad  Co.  v.  McGuire,  219  U.  S.  549  (191 1).)

"In  every  case  that  comes  before  this  court,  therefore,  where  legisla-
tion of  this  character  is  concerned,  and  where  the  protection  of  the
federal  constitution  is  sought,  the  question  necessarily  arises:  Is  this  a
fair,  reasonable,  and  appropriate  exercise  of  the  police  power  of  the
state,  or  is  it  an  unreasonable,  unnecessary,  and  arbitrary  interference
with  the  right  of  the  individual  to  his  personal  liberty,  or  to  enter  into
those  contracts  in  relation  to  labor  which  may  seem  to  him  appropriate
or  necessary  for  the  support  of  himself  and  his  family."  (Lochner  v.
New  York,  198  U.  S.  56  (1905).)  See  also  "Public  Benefit,"  p.  24,  an4
"Equal  Protection  of  the  Laws,"  p.  28,


424 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  both  the  employer  and  employee  in  making  contracts  relating  to  a
purely  private  business,  in  which  no  possible  injury  to  the  public  can
result.'

Likewise  Judge  Gray  explained  in  the  following  language
why  the  New  York  court  nullified  a  law  prohibiting  night  work
for  women:

I  think  that  the  legislature,  in  preventing  the  employment  of  an  adult
woman  in  a  factory,  and  in  prohibiting  her  to  work  therein  before  six
o'clock  in  the  morning,  or  after  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  has  over-
stepped the  limits  set  by  the  constitution  of  the  state  to  the  exercise  of
the  power  to  interfere  with  the  rights  of  citizens. ...  It  is  clear,  as  it  seems
to  me,  that  this  legislation  cannot,  and  should  not,  be  upheld  as  a  proper
exercise  of  the  police  power.  It  is,  certainly,  discriminative  against
female  citizens,  in  denying  to  them  equal  rights  with  men  in  the  same
pursuits.^

In  the  following  cases  the  court  clearly  states  that  sufficient
facts  have  not  been  presented  to  prove  that  legislation  of
that  character  is  necessary  to  conserve  the  public  welfare:

In  the  first  Ritchie  case  the  Illinois  Supreme  Court  said:

There  is  no  reasonable  ground — at  least  none  which  has  been  made
manifest  to  us  in  the  arguments  of  counsel — for  fixing  eight  hours  in  one
day  as  the  limit  which  woman  can  work  without  injury  to  her  physique,
and  beyond  which  if  she  works,  injury  will  necessarily  follow.  But  the
police  power  of  the  state  can  only  be  permitted  to  limit  or  abridge  such
a  fundamental  right  as  to  make  contracts,  when  the  exercise  of  such
power  is  necessary  to  promote  the  health,  comfort,  welfare,  or  safety  of
society  or  the  public,  and  it  is  questionable  whether  it  can  be  exercised
to  prevent  injury  to  the  individual  engaged  in  a  particular  calling.'

In  the  Lochner  case,  where  a  ten-hour  law  for  bakers  was
tested,  the  court  had  before  it  only  a  limited  amount  of  gen-
eral information  on  the  subject,  without  any  special  investiga-
tion. The  majority  ruled  that  the  facts  were  not  conclusive
to  warrant  such  legislation  for  the  following  reasons:

We  think  the  limit  of  the  police  power  has  been  reached  and  passed  in
this  case.  There  is,  in  our  judgment,  no  reasonable  foundation  for  hold-
ing this  to  be  necessary  or  appropriate  as  a  health  law  to  safeguard  the


'  In  re  Morgan,  26  Col.  415,  47  L.  R.  A.  52  (1899).

2  People  V.  Williams,  189  N.  Y.  131,  81  N.  E.  778  (1907).

'  Ritchie  V,  People,  153  111.  98,  at  p,  113,  40  N,  E.  454  (1895).


ADMINISTRATION  425

public  health,  or  the  health  of  the  individuals  who  are  following  the
trade  of  a  baker.  . .  .  We  think  that  there  can  be  fair  doubt  that  the  trade
of  a  baker,  in  and  of  itself,  is  not  an  unhealthy  one  to  that  degree  which
would  authorize  the  legislature  to  interfere  with  the  right  to  labor,  and
with  the  right  of  free  contract  on  the  part  of  the  individual,  either  as
employer  or  employee.  In  looking  through  statistics  regarding  all  trades
and  occupations  it  may  be  true  that  the  trade  of  a  baker  does  not  appear
to  be  as  healthy  as  some  other  trades,  and  is  also  more  healthy  than  still
others.  To  the  common  understanding  the  trade  of  a  baker  has  never
been  regarded  as  an  unhealthy  one.  .  .  .  There  must  be  more  than  the
mere  fact  of  the  possible  existence  of  some  small  amount  of  unhealthiness
to  warrant  legislative  interference  with  liberty  .^

The  foregoing  cases  illustrate  the  attitude  of  the  courts
where  investigations  of  the  facts  have  not  been  brought  to
their  attention,  or  where  they  have  been  compelled  to  de-
pend upon  such  knowledge  as  they  themselves  might  have
regarding  such  facts.  In  such  a  case  the  court  might  take
what  it  calls  "judicial  notice"  of  facts  even  though  they  are
not  presented  in  evidence,  and  might  rely  upon  what  it  con-
siders "common  knowledge,"  or  that  kind  of  knowledge  which
a  reasonable  person  ordinarily  well  informed  might  be  sup-
posed to  have  upon  the  subject.  Common  knowledge  may
go  still  ftirther  and  include  investigations  made  by  private
societies  or  by  individuals  or  attorneys  which  appear  to  the
court  as  presenting  the  facts  pertaining  to  the  case.  "Courts
will  take  notice  of  whatever  is  generally  known  within  the
limits  of  their  jurisdiction."  ^  "A  common  belief,  like  com-
mon knowledge,  does  not  require  evidence  to  establish  jts
existence,  but  may  be  acted  upon  without  prqof  by  the  legis-
lature and  the  courts.  While  the  power  to  take  judicial  notice
is  to  be  exercised  with  caution  and  due  care  taken  to  see  that
the  subject  comes  within  the  limits  of  common  knowledge,
stiU,  when  according  to  the  memory  and  conscience  of  the
judge,  instructed  by  recourse  to  such  sources  of  information
as  he  deems  trustworthy,  the  matter  is  clearly  within  those
limits,  the  power  may  be  exercised  by  treating  the  fact  as
proved  without  allegation  or  proof."  ^


1  Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.  S.  45,  at  p.  58  (1905)- , ^, ,

2  Quoted  from  Brown  v.  Piper,  91  U.  S.  37  (1875).  m  People  v.  Charles
Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395,  108  N.  E.  641  (1915).

'  Quoted  from  In  re  Viemeister,  179  N.  Y.  235,  at  p.  240,  72  N.  E.  97
(1904),  in  People  v.  Charles  Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395,  108  N.  E.


426 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

The  first  notable  example  of  a  decision  on  the  constitution-
ality of  a  law  based  upon  investigations  of  this  kind  is  that
of  the  Holden  v.  Hardy  case,  in  1898.  In  that  case  the  at-
torney in  defense  of  the  law  made  a  partial  investigation  of
the  health  of  workmen  in  mines  and  smelters  which  was  pre-
sented in  his  brief  to  the  court.  Upon  this  information  the
court  took  exactly  the  opposite  view  of  the  Colorado  court
above  cited,  and  held  that  the  law  was  constitutional  upon
the  following  groimds:

While  the  general  experience  of  mankind  may  justify  us  in  believing  that
men  may  engage  in  ordinary  employments  more  than  eight  hours  per
day  without  injury  to  their  health,  it  does  not  follow  that  labor  for  the
same  length  of  time  is  innocuous  when  carried  on  beneath  the  surface
of  the  earth,  when  the  operative  is  deprived  of  fresh  air  and  sunlight,  and
is  frequently  subjected  to  foul  atmosphere  and  a  very  high  temperature,
or  to  the  influence  of  "refining  or  smelting.^

It  is  to  be  noticed  that  while  the  Supreme  Court  held  that
the  questions  of  law— that  is,  the  principles  of  public  benefit
and  equal  protection  of  the  laws — were  identical  in  the  Loch-
ner  case  and  the  Holden  v.  Hardy  case,  the  former  was  de-
clared unconstitutional  while  the  latter  was  upheld  because
of  difference  in  fact.  Similarly,  Mr.  Brandeis  in  his  brief
in  Mueller  v.  Oregon  quotes  the  law  as  propounded  in  the
Lochner  case  but  argttes  that  the  facts  "establish  .  .  .  con-
clusively, that  there  is  reasonable  ground  for  holding  that
to 'permit  women  in  Oregon  to  work  in  a  'mechanical  estab-
lishment, or  factory,  or  laundry'  more  than  ten  hoiurs  in  one
day  is  dangerous  to  the  public  health,  safety,  morals,  or  wel-
fare." The  court,  which  sustained  the  law,  concurred  in
counsel's  contention,  as  indicated  by  the  following  quotation:

In  patent  cases  counsel  are  apt  to  open  the  argument  with  a  discussion
of  the  state  of  the  art.  It  may  not  be  amiss,  in  the  present  case,  before
examining  the  constitutional  question,  to  notice  the  course  of  legislation,
as  well  as  expression  of  opinions  from  other  than  judicial  sources.  In
the  brief  filed  by  Mr.  Louis  D.  Brandeis  for  the  defendant  in  error  is  a
very  copious  collection  of  all  these  matters,  an  epitome  of  which  is  found


641  (1915). See  also  cases  quoted  in  Mr.  Brandeis'  brief,  published  by
the  National  Consumers'  League  in  Mueller  v.  Oregon,  208  U.  S.  412
(1908).
1  Holden  v.  Hardy,  169  U.  S.  395  (1898).


ADMINISTRATION  427

in  the  margin.  .  . .  The  legislation  and  opinions  referred  to  in  the  margin
may  not  be,  technically  speaking,  authorities,  and  in  them  is  little  or  no
discussion  of  the  constitutional  question  presented  to  us  for  determina-
tion, yet  they  are  significant  of  a  widespread  belief  that  woman's  physi-
cal structure,  and  the  functions  she  performs  in  consequence  thereof,
justify  special  legislation  restricting  or  qualifying  the  conditions  under
which  she  should  be  permitted  to  toil.  .  .  .  When  a  question  of  fact  is
debated  and  debatable,  and  the  extent  to  which  a  special  constitutional
limitation  goes  is  affected  by  the  truth  in  respect  to  that  fact,  a  wide-
spread and  long-continued  belief  concerning  it  is  worthy  of  considera-
tion. We  take  judicial  cognizance  of  all  matters  of  general  knowledge.'

A  supreme  court  may  even  squarely  reverse  itself  when  it
finds  that  a  former  decision  was  made  without  full  knowledge
of  the  facts.  We  have  quoted  above  the  language  of  the
New  York  court,  in  1907,  in  the  case  of  People  v.  Williams,
in  which  the  court,  without  the  aid  of  official  investigation,
held  that  a  law  prohibiting  night  work  for  women  was  un-
constitutional. Eight  years  later  the  same  court  overthrew
its  former  decision,  when  the  legislature  had  again  enacted  a
similar  law,  this  time,  however,  following  the  recommendations
of  the  state  factory  investigating  commission.  The  court
justified  itself  as  follows:^

It  is  urged  that  whatever  might  be  our  original  views  concerning  this
statute,  our  decision  in  People  v.  Williams  ...  is  an  adjudication  which
ought  to  bind  us  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  unconstitutional.  While  it
may  be  that  this  argument  is  not  without  an  apparent  and  superficial
foundation  and  ought  to  be  fairly  met,  I  think  that  a  full  consideration
of  the  Williams  case  and  of  the  present  one  wiU  show  that  they  may  be
really  and  substantially  differentiated,  and  that  we  should  not  be  and
are  not  committed  by  what  was  said  and  decided  in  the  former  to  the
view  that  the  legislature  had  no  power  to  adopt  the  present  statute.  .  .  .
While  theoretically  we  may  have  been  able  to  take  judicial  notice  of
some  of  the  facts  and  of  some  of  the  legislation  now  called  to  our  atten-
tion as  sustaining  the  belief  and  opinion  that  night  work  in  factories  is
widely  and  substantially  injurious  to  the  health  of  women,  actually  very
few  of  these  facts  were  called  to  our  attention,  and  the  argument  to
uphold  the  law  on  that  ground  was  brief  and  inconsequential.

Especially  and  necessarily  was  there  lacking  evidence  of  the  extent
to  which,  during  the  intervening  years,  the  opinion  and  belief  have
spread  and  strengthened  that  such  night  work  is  injurious  to  women;


'Mueller  v.  Oregon,  208  U.  S.  419  (1908).

^  People  V.  Charles  Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395,  108  N.  E,  643
(1915)-


428 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  the  laws,  as  indicating  such  belief,  since  adopted  by  several  of  our
own  states  and  by  large  European  countries  and  the  report  made  to
the  legislature  by  its  own  agency,  the  factory  investigating  commission,
based  on  investigation  of  actual  conditions  and  study  of  scientific  and
medical  opinion  that  night  work  by  women  in  factories  is  generally  in-
jurious and  ought  to  be  prohibited.'

Not  only  have  the  courts  changed  their  opinion  as  to
actual  conditions  because  of  investigations,  but  as  the  in-
vestigations educated  the  pubUc  and  created  sentiment  in
favor  of  such  legislation,  courts  have  even  indirectly  reversed
themselves  on  principles  of  law.  The  two  Ritchie  cases  in
Ilhnois  ofEer  an  instance.  In  the  first  case  (1895)  one  of  the
determining  objections  that  the  court  raised  was  that  "it  is
questionable  whether  it  (the  police  power)  can  be  exercised
to  prevent  injury  to  the  individual  engaged  in  a  particular
calling."^  In  other  words,  the  court  ruled  that  legislation
protecting  the  health  of  the  public  or  society  was  a  proper
exercise  of  the  police  power,  but  that  it  was  improper  when
aimed  to  protect  individuals  against  themselves.'  The  court,
in  the  second  Ritchie  case  (19 10),  found  it  convenient  to  avoid
reference  to  this  principle  and  scrupulously  omits  that  portion
in  quoting  from  the  case.  According  to  the  second  opinion
the  difference  turned,  not  on  principle,  but  on  fact.  The  court
said:

The  second  proposition  upon  which  the  cases  differ  is  this:  the  act  of
1893  provides  for  an  eight-hour  day  in  which  women  shall  be  permitted
to  work  in  mechanical  establishments,  or  factories  or  laundries.  Can
it  be  said  if  the  limitation  upon  the  number  of  hours  which  women  were
permitted  to  work  in  the  designated  callings  in  the  act  of  1893  had  been


1  See  also  McLean  v.  Arkansas,  211  U.  S.  539  (1909),  in  which  the
court  upholds  a  screen  law  on  the  basis  of  investigations  made  by  a
commission;  and  State  ex  rel.  Yaple  v.  Creamer,  85  Ohio  St.  349,  39
L.  R.  A.  (N.  S.)  694  (1912),  where  the  court  accepts  the  findings  of  a
special  investigating  committee  as  conclusive  "to  sustain  the  exercise
of  the  police  power"  in  workmen's  compensation  legislation.

2  Ritchie  v.  People,  155  111.  98,  40  N.  E.  454  (1895).

'  For  a  critical  discussion  of  this  principle  see  Freund,  Police  Power,  p.
141 ;  for  an  acceptable  presentation  see  In  re  Morgan,  26  Col.  415  (1899) ;
and  In  re  Jacobs,  98  N.  Y.  98  (1885).  In  Holden  v.  Hardy  the  United
States  Supreme  Court  repudiates  this  principle,  holding  that  it  is  con-
stitutional under  the  police  power  to  enact  legislation  e_ither  to  protect
the  public  or  to  protect  individuals  against  themselves  or  acts  of  others.
See  "Public  Benefit,"  p.  24.


ADMINISTRATION  429

fixed  at  ten  hours  instead  of  eight  hours  the  court  would  have  held  the
act  unconstitutional  as  an  unreasonable  exercise  of  the  police  power  of
the  state  or  that  the  act  would  have  been  held  obnoxious  to  the  consti-
tution as  special  or  class  legislation?  We  do  not  think  it  can  be  so  said,
as  there  is  throughout  the  opinion  a  veiled  suggestion  which  indicates
that  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  court  that  the  limitation  of  the  right  to
work  longer  than  eight  hours  was  an  unreasonable  limitation  upon  the
right  of  contract.'

The  principle  that  the  police  power  cannot  be  exercised  to
protect  individuals  against  themselves  would  overthrow  a  ten-
hour  law  as  well  as  an  eight-hour  law.  But  the  fact  that  a
ten-hour  law  is  less  restrictive  than  an  eight-hour  law  causes
the  lUinois  court  to  abandon  the  principle  and  to  inquire
into  the  facts.  By  a  similar  reliance  on  facts  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  holds  that  an  eight-hour  law  is
constitutional  and  reasonable.^

The  foregoing  illustrations  have  been  cited,  among  many
that  might  be  given,  on  account  of  the  pectdiarly  high  position
occupied  by  American  courts  through  their  power  to  veto
legislation  on  the  ground  of  unconstitutionality.  Abtmdant
criticism  of  the  courts  for  exercising  this  power,  and  insistent
demands  for  constitutional  amendments  abrogating  the  power,
have  been  repeatedly  made  for  more  than  a  hundred  years.
Without  pretending  to  enter  upon  a  full  discussion  of  these
criticisms  and  demands,  one  thing  is  apparent:  they  disregard
the  great  importance  which  the  court  ascribes  to  reliable  and
complete  investigations  of  actual  conditions.  The  foregoing
illustrations,  as  well  as  others  found  in  this  book,  indicate
that  criticism  should  be  directed  rather  against  legislatures
and  administrative  authorities  who  enact  and  administer  laws
without  reliable  knowledge  of  the  conditions  with  which  they
are  dealing.  The  principles  of  the  constitution  and  the  inter-
pretations by  the  Supreme  Court  are,  on  the  whole,  broad
enough  to  admit  labor  legislation  in  so  far  as  based  on  au-
thenticated facts,  and  much  broader  than  is  necessary  to
admit  legislation  that  is  actually  enforceable  by  the  existing
defective  machinery  of  administration. For  the  present,  at


» Ritchie  v.  Wayman,  244  111.  509,  9i  N.  E.  695,  at  p.  700  (igip)- ,
» Miller  V.  Wilson,  236  U.  S.  373.  35  Sup.  Ct.  342  (1915)- See Maxj-
tnum  Daily  Hours,  Women,"  p.  223.


430 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

any  rate,  it  is  not  so  much  attacks  on  the  courts  that  may
be  expected  to  bring  progressive  labor  legislation  as  reliable
investigation  of  actual  conditions  by  competent  administra-
tive authorities  whose  work  will  command  the  respect,  not
only  of  courts,  but  of  legislatures,  of  employers  and  employees,
of  the  people  at  large.  It  is  this  gap  in  the  American  system
of  labor  law  that  is  sought  to  be  filled  by  the  so-called  industrial
commission.

4.  The  Industrial  Commission

In  all  of  the  investigations  above  mentioned,  even  those
carried  on  by  the  best  qualified  experts,  there  is  lacking  the
important  feature  of  prima  facie  evidence,  or  of  evidence  that
is  conclusive  as  to  the  facts  in  a  trial  in  court.  Those  in-
vestigations were  not  conducted  tmder  the  rules  of  evidence
which  the  court  relies  upon,  and  it  therefore  treats  them
merely  as  common  knowledge.  Even  the  factory  investiga-
ting commission  of  New  York,  although  created  by  the  legis-
lature, did  not  make  an  investigation  that,  in  the  eyes  of  the
law,  had  binding  force  upon  the  court.  It  indicates,  how-
ever, the  kind  of  investigations  which  are  the  next  step  in  the
administration  of  labor  laws.  This  is  the  transformation  of
the  bureaus  of  labor  statistics  into  permanent  "factory  in-
vestigating" commissions,  with  the  object,  not  only  of  fur-
nishing information  to  the  legislature  and  to  the  people,  but
also  of  furnishing  conclusions  or  findings  of  fact  which  shall
be  prima  facie  evidence  of  the  truth,  or  even  conclusive  and
binding  upon  the  court.  This  object  is  sought  to  be  obtained
through  the  powers  granted  to  an  industrial  commission.'


(j)  Administrative  Investigations

One  reason  for  the  breakdown  of  administration  is  the  fail-
ure to  provide  for  that  executive  discretion  which  is  as  in-


'  To  what  extent  this  object  can  be  accomplished  constitutionally  is
not  here  discussed.  The  court  is  itself  both  an  investigating  body  and
independent  of  the  legislature.  It  can  evidently  refuse  to  be  bound  by
a  creature  of  the  legislature. At  the  same  time  the  ingenuity  of  bill-


ADMINISTRATION  431

evitable  and  necessary  as  legislative  discretion.  The  Ameri-
can theory  of  separation  of  branches  of  government  assigns
to  the  legislature  the  investigation  of  conditions  upon  which
its  policy  or  principle  is  adopted  and  enacted  into  statute
law.  With  the  growing  complexity  of  conditions  the  legisla-
ture has  been  compelled  to  go  into  the  investigation  of
minute  details,  legislation  on  which,  if  applied  to  every  estab-
lishment, would  be  unenforceable.  Consequently  the  factory
inspectors  or  special  police  are  compelled  to  decide  upon
their  own  executive  investigations  whether  or  not  they  will
enforce  these  details.

The  situation  is  similar  to  the  history  of  railroad  regulation.
In  the  early  "Granger  laws"  of  forty  years  ago  it  was  at-
tempted to  enact  a  detailed  actual  schedule  of  each  rate  for
every  shipment  on  every  road,  and  then  it  was  left  to  the
individual  shipper  to  bring  suit  in  the  courts  to  enforce  the
schedule.  The  later  legislatures  of  the  past  twenty  years
have  omitted  these  technical  details  and  have  contented
themselves  with  la5dng  down  general  rules  such  as  that  all
rates  and  services  shall  be  reasonable  as  between  the  roads
and  the  shippers.  They  have  then  created  railroad,  or  pub-
lic utility  commissions,  whose  powers,  in  the  light  of  the  con-
stitution, are  neither  legislative,  executive  nor  judicial,  but
investigational.

The  problem  which  the  legislature  sets  to  these  commissions
for  investigation  is  that  of  reasonable  rates  and  services  in  each
particular  case  where  the  question  arises.  The  principles
which  enter  into  reasonableness  are  being  continually  laid
down  by  the  courts  In  long  Hnes  of  decisions.  Consequently
the  commission  needs  no  power  of  discretion.  It  must  follow
the  law — that  is,  the  principles.  It  only  investigates  and
ascertains  the  facts  which  those  principles  call  for.  The  legis-
lature meanwhile  has  enacted  that,  when  these  facts  are  ascer-
tained and  published,  then  the  law  shall  go  into  effect.  The
fact  is  the  rate  or  service  which  has  been  ascertained  by  the
investigations  of  the  commission  to  be  reasonable.  It  is  an-
nounced and  published  as  a  finding  of  fact,  a  "rule,"  or
"regulation,"  or  "order,"  not  a  statute,  but  having  the  force

drafters  has  worked  out  methods  of  procedure  which  go  far  toward
^.ccomplishing  the  object. These  are  considered  below.


432 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  a  statute.  This  is  the  finding  or  conclusion  of  the  commis-
sion's investigations.  It  is  prima  facie  valid  in  court  and  can-
not be  overthrown  except  by  overwhelming  evidence  to  thft
contrary.

Labor  legislation  has  now  reached  an  even  more  volu-
minous and  technical  stage  than  that  which  applies  to  rail-
road regulation.  The  legislature  cannot  possibly  consider  all
the  facts  and  details.  Yet  the  legislature  alone  should  de-
termine the  policies  and  the  standards,  and  should  go  only
into  such  details  as  have  general  application.  The  "indus-
trial commission"  corresponds  to  the  public  utiHty  or  railroad
commission.  The  latter  passes  upon  the  opposing  interests
of  corporations  and  consumers  or  shippers,  epitomized  in  the
price  bargain.  The  former  passes  upon  the  interests  of  em-
ployer and  employee,  epitomized  in  the  wage  bargain.  Such
a  commission  investigates  the  facts  and  works  out  the  details
which  the  legislature  cannot  pass  upon.

Various  states  have  begun  experiments  in  this  direction.
The  problem  is  much  more  diversified  than  that  of  establish-
ing reasonable  rates  and  services.  "Reasonableness"  in
railroad  regtilation  has  a  comparatively  definite  meaning.
But  reasonableness  in  labor  legislation  is  as  complicated  as
human  life  and  modem  industry.  A  reasonable  standard  in
one  field  has  no  meaning  in  another.  There  are  health,
safety,  and  welfare,  for  example,  which  require  a  variety  of
standards.  There  is  the  minimum  wage  for  women  and
minors  which  requires  several  standards.  There  are  hoiurs  of
labor,  days  and  periods  of  rest,  age  and  sex  of  workers,  with
varying  standards.  There  are  private  employment  offices,
workmen's  compensation  for  accidents,  and  many  other
matters.

To  meet  these  varying  needs,  and  to  set  these  different
standards,  the  states  have  established  special  commissions.
Ten  states  have  minimum  wage  commissions,  to  determine
by  investigation  the  living  wage  that  is  necessary  for  women
and  minors.  Twenty-two  states  have  workmen's  compensa-
tion commissions,  to  determine,  under  the  rules  laid  down  by
the  legislature,  just  how  much  is  the  loss  of  wages  for  which  the
employer  shall  make  compensation.

Usually  this  new  class  of  commission  has  been  created  in


ADMINISTRATION  433

addition  to  the  existing  department  of  labor  and  statistics.
The  existing  departments  continue  to  follow  their  old  line  of
executive  procedure,  and  consequently  the  states  have  an
imnecessary  number  of  bureaus  and  departments,  all  dealing
with  labor  law  by  different  methods,  and  often  overlapping  and
conflicting.  Thus  the  state  of  Illinois,  as  shown  in  the  chart
on  page  435,  has  nine  independent  agencies  dealing  with
labor.  In  the  federal  government  at  Washington,  besides  the
Department  of  Labor  and  its  bureaus  of  Labor  Statistics,
Immigration,  and  the  Children's  Bureau,  there  are  the  Public
Health  Service  of  the  Treasury  Department,  the  Bureau  of
Mines  of  the  Interior  Department,  the  Bureau  of  Standards
of  the  Commerce  Department,  the  Interstate  Commerce  Com-
mission, and  the  Board  of  Mediation  and  Conciliation,  all  of
them  dealing  directly  with  problems  of  labor.

This  multiplication  of  boards  and  commissions  began  to
attract  serious  attention  when  workmen's  compensation  for
accidents  was  added  to  the  list  of  laws.  Here  it  is  immediate-
ly seen  that  accident  prevention  is  as  important  as  accident
compensation  and  that  the  two  should  go  together.  Hence,
in  several  states  ^  the  compensation  commission  was  given
authority  to  make  rules  for  safety,  and  there  resulted  two
departments  with  the  same  purpose,  the  factory  inspection
department  enforcing  the  legislative  statutes  and  the  com-
pensation department  enforcing  its  own  rules.  According
to  the  legislative  method,  there  had  grown  up  a  complicated
code  of  safety  regxilations,  covering,  in  some  states,  the  entire
field  of  modem  industry.  These  laws  were  a  kind  of  patch-
work, amended  at  various  sessions  of  the  legislature,  adopted
after  legislative  hearings  where  the  lobb5dsts  appeared  for
or  against,  and  enacted  by  legislatures  whose  members  had
no  acquaintance  with  the  industries  to  be  regulated.  Such
laws  were  practically  unenforceable.

It  was  necessary  to  separate  legislation  from  administra-
tion. This  has  been  accomplished  by  the  creation  of  the  in-
dustrial commission  which  combines  compensation  with  ac-
cident prevention,  relieves  the  legislature  of  details,  and  takes
the  place  of  the  factory  inspection  department. The  legis-

1  California, Connecticut, Iowa, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland,
Massachusetts,  Nevada,  New  York,  Washington,
25


I.  Unified  Administjration.

Department  of  Labor, New  York,  1915

—

—

— ^

^

^

ss

Bureau  of
5tati5tics

and
Information.

—

Printing

and
Publi-
cation.

0

(0
C
0

1)
>

—

C o

-g  if

-=  3

3  .9 >

—

Bureau  of
Employment.
(Public  Employ-
mejit  Offices.)

—

Industrial
Accidents
and  Dis-
eases.

-

General
Labor
Statistics

—

Bureau  of  Indus-
trial Code

(Adnnini^trative

l^ules.)

Industrial
Investiga-
tion.

indu5triai  Commission.

(five  riembers)

0  o

to 4>

0

(0

c

0

in
>

D

—

Sub  Divis-
ion of
Engineer-
ing.

—

Bureau  of

Workmen's

Compensation

—

■ft -S  "5 •o

°  fe  ^  S

fill
«3  £  ,S  ^

—

factory
Inspection
Second
District

511;

—

Bureau  of

Industries

and

Immigration

—

factory
Inspection
First
District.

—

—

Bureau  of

Mediation

and

Arbitration

1

—

Hercan
tile

tstablish-
menls

—

—


1

_

o

I—*

ZI  I/)
E  c

tn
Q  c

NtJ

3i


g'


u


^ ^  •

n< O ^_

Cf  to  <


^ ""IS"


c

4)

o

<D

3

in

c

E

r

<u

E

q;

i3

ti  Vq"0
(0


■A/zr


C O


. "«3

1/)  .S-0
^  -S  If

Or;'"

<:  m  o


M


O


hi


a  <o

.9  -O


.5  E  "HO  c

—  =^  .!C  S  Q-


c
o

<


"to  tj
15 O.

•CI  J3

«J c

Q. —


"^

,

.0

5-

-eS

Ci»

Q_

Q)

VV-

L^

U-.

toi

r-

«w

-7=

.r?

-r;

Oi

fe

t^

.B

^

■^

c:

-a

1

•^

t^

■=t.

"fO

>o

c

O.

(C

^

ta a;  r


I +> o


tu  I

vS  o I p  o


436 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

lature  now  repeals  its  complicated  statutes  on  safety,  and  con-
tents itself  with  la3ang  down  the  general  state  policy  on  the
subject  and  leaving  the  details  to  the  commission.  The  Wis-
consin statute  of  igii,  amended  in  19 13,  for  example,  merely
requires  that  every  employer  shall  furnish  such  employment,
such  a  place  of  employment,  and  such  safety  devices,  safe-
guards, methods,  and  processes,  as  shall  protect  the  life,  health,
safety,  comfort,  decency,  and  moral  well-being  of  employees
to  the  extent  that  the  nature  of  the  employment  or  place  of
emplojmaent  will  reasonably  permit.'  The  law  then  gives  to
the  commission  authority  to  "investigate,  ascertain,  declare,
and  prescribe"  what  safety  devices,  safeguards,  or  other
means  or  methods  of  protection  are  best  adapted  to  render
the  employees  of  every  employment  and  place  of  employ-
ment safe  and  to  protect  their  life,  health,  safety,  comfort,
decency,  and  moral  well-being.^  The  orders  of  the  com-
mission go  into  effect  thirty  days  after  publication  and  are
prima  facie  lawful.  By  means  of  this  procedure  the  laws  can
be  adapted  to  every  detail  of  modem  industry.  They  can
be  changed  at  any  time  when  a  further  investigation  shows
new  dangers  or  new  methods  of  prevention.  The  commission
is  continually  in  session,  but  a  legislature  meets  only  at  stated
times.  The  commission  is  continually  investigating  while  it  is
enforcing  the  laws,  but  the  legislature  investigates  only  when
lobb3dsts,  petitioners,  or  members  succeed  in  getting  a  hearing.
Other  states  which  have  adopted  a  similar  form  of  com-
mission with  power  to  make  rules  and  issue  orders  on  safety
are  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and  Colorado.  These
states  have  also  consolidated  all  of  the  separate  boards  and
commissions  into  a  single  industrial  commission,'  and  for
each  branch  of  its  work  the  legislature,  as  in  the  branch  of
accident  prevention,  also  lays  down  the  general  policy  and
standard,  leaving  to  the  commission  the  investigations  and
findings  necessary  to  make  the  law  effective  for  each  employer
or  employee. The  following  illustrations,  taken  from  the

'  Wisconsin  in  this  respect  goes  further  than  other  states;  Laws  1913,
Sees.  2394-41,  2394-48.  ^  Ibid.,  Sec.  2394-52.

'Wisconsin,  1911;  Ohio,  1913;  New  York,  1913  and  1915;  Pennsyl-
vania, 1913;  Colorado,  1915.  Recommended  by  legislative  committee,
Missouri,  1914.  Similar  bills  introduced  in  New  Jersey,  Maryland,
Illinois.


ADMINISTRATION  437

laws  of  Wisconsin,  are  more  or  less  typical  of  laws  in  other
states:

For  compensation  in  case  of  accident  the  legislative  stand-
ard may  require  "reasonable"  medical  and  surgical  care,  65
per  cent,  of  the  average  weekly  earnings  lost  during  disability,
and  so  on,  to  be  determined  and  awarded  by  the  commission.

For  private  employment  offices  the  legislative  standard
may  prohibit  misleading  statements,  discriminatory  fees,  and
the  like,  and  then  give  the  commission  power  to  "fix  and  order
such  reasonable  rules  of  conduct  of  the  business  of  any  em-
ployment agent  as  may  be  necessary  adequately  to  carry
out"  the  sections  of  the  law.

For  the  wages  of  women  and  minors  the  legislature  may
require  employers  to  pay  a  "living  wage,"  or  such  compensa-
tion "whether  by  time,  piece-work  or  otherwise,"  as  shall  be
"sufficient  to  enable  the  employee  receiving  it  to  maintain
himself  or  herself  under  conditions  consistent  with  his  or  her
welfare."  The  commission,  then,  must  carry  on  extensive
investigations,  must  make  various  classifications  and  determine
for  each  the  amount  of  the  wage  that  the  legislature  intended.

For  the  hours  of  labor  for  women  the  legislature  may  pro-
hibit the  employment  of  any  female  "for  such  period  or
periods  of  time  during  any  day,  night,  or  week,  as  shall  be
dangerous  or  prejudicial  to  the  life,  health,  safety,  or  welfare
of  such  female,"  and  then  authorize  the  commission  to  "in-
vestigate, ascertain,  determine,  and  fix  such  reasonable  classi-
fication" and  such  periods  of  time  as  shall  carry  out  the
purposes  of  the  law.

For  dangerous  employments  the  legislature  may  provide
that  "no  employer  shall  employ,  require,  permit,  or  suffer
any  minor  or  any  female  to  work  in  any  place  of  employment,
or  at  any  employment,  dangerous  or  prejudicial  to  the  life,
health,  safety,  or  welfare  of  such  minor  or  female,"  and  then
authorize  the  commission  to  investigate,  classify,  and  deter-
mine the  specific  occupations  from  which  women  and  minors
shall  be  excluded.

For  the  regulation  of  apprenticeship  the  legislature  may
require  an  indenture  stipulating  the  hours  for  work,  the  hoturs
for  attendance  at  school,  the  compensation,  etc.,  and  authorize
the  commission  to  draft,  approve,  and  enforce  the  same.


438 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

For  industrial  and  vocational  education,  the  legislature
may  require  employers  to  permit  children  to  attend  continua-
tion schools  a  certain  number  of  hours  each  week  in  the  day-
time, without  deduction  of  pay,  and  then  authorize  the  com-
mission to  issue  and  revoke  permits  to  work  based  on  in-
vestigations showing  what  is  necessary  to  secure  compliance
with  the  law.

The  foregoing  illustrations  show  the  distinction  between  a
legislative  policy  which  sets  up  a  standard,  and  an  adminis-
trative investigation  which  applies  the  standard  to  each  case
or  each  class  of  cases.  The  principles  of  standardization  have
two  aspects,  which  may  be  designated  as  diversity  and  gen-
erality. There  is  a  wide  diversity  of  standards,  simply  be-
cause there  is  a  wide  diversity  in  the  subject-matter  of  legis-
lation, all  the  way  from  safety  and  health  to  wages  and  edu-
cation. Diversity  requires  specialization  on  the  part  of
investigators,  and  consequently  the  staff  of  a  commission
requires  physicians  and  hygienists  for  some  of  the  stand-
ards, accountants  and  actuaries  for  others,  engineers  and  me-
chanics, economists  and  statisticians,  business  men  and  work-
ingmen,  according  to  the  peculiarities  of  each  subject  and  the
special  or  general  knowledge  reqmred.

Much  more  difificult  and  debatable  is  the  question  of  gen-
erality of  the  standards.  The  most  general  standard  is
"reasonableness."  Reasonableness,  in  law,  means  simply
that  all  of  the  facts  must  be  investigated  and  due  weight  must
be  given  to  each.  If  the  legislature  merely  reqtaired  that
wages  or  hours  should  be  "reasonable,"  then  the  commission
would  have  almost  as  wide  discretion  as  the  legislature  itself.
If,  at  the  other  extreme,  the  legislature  prescribes  minute  de-
tails for  every  act  of  the  commission,  then  the  investigations
are  reduced  to  those  executive  investigations  already  de-
scribed as  the  means  of  securing  evidence  of  violations  for
prosecution.  Between  these  two  extremes  of  generality  and
particularization  there  is  room  for  wide  differences  of  opinion
and  policy.  In  some  subjects  the  legislative  standards  must
necessarily  be  much  more  general  than  in  others.  A  "living
wage"  can  scarcely  be  ascertained  as  precisely  as  the  age  of
a  child.  The  number  of  hours  of  continuous  work  that  are
injurious  to  the  health  of  women  cannot  be  as  accurately  de-


ADMINISTRATION  439

termined  as  the  dangerous  character  of  a  set  screw  or  a  buzz-
saw.  Only  this  is  to  be  noticed:  If  the  legislature  goes  too
far  in  specifying  details  of  each  standard  it  forces  widely  dif-
ferent factories,  shops,  ages,  conditions,  into  the  same  mold,
and  assumes  to  have  an  intricate  knowledge  of  conditions  and
a  foresight  of  changing  conditions  which  its  brief  and  crowded
sessions  do  not  permit.  Consequently,  the  law  is  unenforce-
able. On  the  other  hand,  the  commission  is  continuously  in
session.  It  is  not  hurried.  It  can  adopt  a  general  rule  or  can
go  into  the  details  as  far  as  it  has  information.  It  has  its
staff  of  investigators  and  inspectors  who  are  continually  fur-
nishing new  information,  and  it  can  change  its  rules  as  needed.
It  has  its  representatives  of  employers  and  employees  who
testify  to  the  actual  conditions  that  need  remed3dng  and  the
actual  workings  of  the  rules  already  adopted.  It  can  make
classifications  and  issue  different  rules  for  different  conditions,
and  can  change  its  rules  when  the  conditions  change  or  when
it  discovers  new  and  more  effective  remedies.

The  principal  value  and  importance  of  administrative  in-
vestigations is  their  conclusiveness.  No  matter  how  indef-
inite or  general  is  the  legislative  standard,  it  must  be  reduced
to  a  definite  rule  upon  which  prosecutions  and  penalties  can
be  based.  A  decision  must  be  reached  and  enforced.  We
have  seen  that  the  investigations  of  private  associations,  of
experts,  of  attorneys  on  either  side  of  a  case,  or  even  of  legis-
lative committees  and  temporary  commissions,  are  not  con-
clusive. If  the  court  accepts  these  investigations  it  does  so
as  facts  of  "common  knowledge"  of  which  the  judge  takes
"judicial  notice"  without  proof.  And,  in  so  doing,  every
reasonable  doubt  is  resolved  against  them  and  in  favor  of  the
alleged  violator.  To  be  conclusive,  an  investigation  must  be
clinched  by  proof,  and  the  procedure  by  which  this  is  accom-
plished is  prescribed  by  the  courts  in  their  decisions  on  due
process  of  law.  An  administrative  investigation  must  usually
follow  this  procedure:  First,  the  inspectors  and  investi-
gators assemble  their  facts.  The  commission  then  draws
its  tentative  conclusions  and  gives  notice  officially  of  a  pub-
lic hearing  for  all  persons  whose  interests  will  be  affected  by
the  rule.  Opportunity  to  be  heard  is  essential  to  due  proc-
ess of  law. After  the  public  hearing  the  commission  drafts


440 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

its  rules  in  final  form,  and,  when  they  are  officially  published,
they  go  into  effect  on  such  date  as  the  legislature  has  previously
designated.  But,  even  with  this  procedure,  the  rules  and
orders  of  the  commission  are  not  legally  conclusive  and  bind-
ing on  the  court.  If  an  employer  violates  them  and  then
attacks  them  in  court,  he  does  so  on  the  ground  that  they
are  imreasonable  in  some  respect,  such  as  class  legislation  or
discrimination,  instead  of  reasonable  classification.  If  they
are  unreasonable,  then  they  are  unconstitutional.  The
court  may  decide  to  reinvestigate  the  facts  on  its  own  ac-
coimt.  It  is  an  independent  branch  of  government  and  can-
not be  deprived  of  its  powers  by  the  legislature.  But  the
legislature  may  prescribe  the  court's  procedure  and  may  give
to  the  rules  of  the  commission,  when  based  on  full  investiga-
tion, a  preferential  position  as  proof.  It  makes  them  prima
facie  lawful,  valid,  and  reasonable,  so  that  the  burden  of  proof
is  on  the  employer  to  prove  affirmatively  that  they  are  un-
reasonable. It  may  require  the  court  to  send  the  case  back
to  the  commission  for  reinvestigation  if  the  employer  attempts
to  bring  to  the  court  any  evidence  that  he  had  withheld  from
the  commission.  The  commission  may  then,  if  it  so  decides,
change  its  orders  to  cover  the  omitted  facts.  In  these  and
various  other  ways  suggested  by  the  ingenuity  of  bill-drafters,
the  investigations,  findings,  and  orders  of  administrative  com-
missions are  given,  not  actually  binding  and  conclusive  weight
on  the  courts,  but  such  a  high  degree  of  conclusiveness  that  for
ordinary,  practical  purposes  they  are  final.^

In  this  respect,  administrative  investigations  are  a  necessary
aid  to  the  court  and  serve  to  place  in  evidence  the  industrial
facts  which  otherwise  would  not  receive  due  weight.  The
court  is  intrusted  with  the  final  authority  to  apply  the  prin-
ciples of  justice  and  the  constitution  to  the  acts  of  legislatures
and  administrative  commissions.  It  decides  whether  or  not
the  act  accomplishes  a  public  purpose  and  affords  equal  pro-
tection of  the  laws.  These  are  questions  of  fact  in  each  par-
ticular case. A  question  of  fact  resolves  itself  into  a  question

'  For  different  methods  of  securing  different  degrees  of  conclusiveness,
consult  the  minimum  wage  laws  of  various  states,  the  industrial  com-
mission laws  already  referred  to  and  the  laws  creating  state  public  utility
commissions,  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  and  the  Federal
Trade  Commission. See  also  "Penalties  and  Prosecutions,"  p.  454.


ADMINISTRATION  441

of  classification.  Does  the  particular  act  apply  to  some  people
and  not  to  others  who  are  similar?  Or,  does  it  enforce  the
same  arbitrary  rule  on  a  variety  of  persons  who  are  not  really
similar?  If  so,  it  is  discriminatory  and  unequal  in  that  it  is
based  on  a  false  classification.  Does  the  act  benefit  a  class  of
people  who  do  not  need  the  aid  of  the  police  power  and  whose
private  benefit  is  not  a  public  benefit?  Does  the  act  impose
burdens  on  some  that  are  so  far  in  excess  of  the  benefits  to
others  that  they  are  unreasonable  ?i  These  are  some  of  the
questions  of  classification  asked  by  the  courts,  and,  evidently,
they  require  accurate  investigation  and  well-established  facts
in  order  to  avoid  the  charge  of  false  classification.  Speaking
of  the  need  of  administrative  investigations  that  shall  approach
the  standard  of  conclusiveness  in  establishing  the  facts  for
classification,  Professor  Ernst  Freund  has  recently  said:^

The  equal  protection  clause  of  the  fourteenth  amendment  will,  of  course,
be  thought  of  at  once  as  a  possible  weapon  of  defense  against  unwarranted
class  legislation.  However,  a  study  of  the  operation  of  this  clause  in  the
past  must  produce  considerable  skepticism  as  to  its  availability  in  the
future.  There  are  some  states  in  which  it  plays  a  considerable  part  in
the  judicial  overthrow  of  statutes,  and  Illinois  is  conspicuous  in  this  re-
spect. In  that  state,  however,  the  application  of  the  rule  of  non-dis-
crimination has  been  so  capricious  that  the  impossibility  of  foretelling
what  kind  of  classification  for  purposes  of  welfare  legislation  will  stand
the  test  of  judicial  scrutiny  has  become  a  notorious  grievance.  The
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  on  the  other  hand,  having  applied
the  rule  in  one  case  (that  of  the  antitrust  act  of  Illinois,  Connolly  b.  Union
Sewer  Pipe  Co.,  184  U.  S.  540,  46  L.  ed.  679,  22  Sup.  Ct.  431)  with  sur-
prising strictness,  has  since  practically  taken  the  position  that  a  legisla-
tive classification  will  be  sustained  if  there  is  any  reasonable  possibility  of
its  justification,  and  in  the  last  ten  years  no  measure  has  been  declared
invalid  by  reason  of  undue  partiality  or  discrimination.  No  jurisdiction
has  developed  any  constructive  theory  of  classification  which  might  serve
for  guidance  or  protection.

The  reason  for  this  failure  is  tolerably  clear.  The  legitimacy  or
illegitimacy  of  classification  can  be  established  only  on  the  basis  of  social

1  In  passing  upon  the  law  prohibiting  night  work  for  women,  the  New
York  court  said:  "The  only  chance  for  debate  would  be  whether  the
prohibition  is  so  wide  and  so  universal  that  it  can  be  said  it  is  so  out  of
proportion  to  the  benefits  sought  that  it  is  burdensome  and  unreasonable
to  a  degree  which  transcends  the  discretion  of  the  legislature."  People
V.  Charles  Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395, 108  N.  E.  642  (igiS)-

2  "Problems  of  the  Police  Power,"  Case  and  Comment,  Vol.  XX,  1913,

P-  303-


442 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

or  economic  data  of  great  complexity.  It  presents  a  question  of  fact  for
the  examination  of  which  the  courts  are  not  equipped.  It  is  always  a
condition  as  well  as  a  theory  which  underlies  public  welfare  legislation;
and  while  the  courts  can  deal  adequately  with  the  theory,  the  condition
must  elude  them  unless  it  is  notorious,  and  at  present  the  causes  of  social
or  economic  grievances  are  rarely  notorious.

Conceivably  this  defect  of  judicial  action  might  be  overcome  by  new
powers  or  facilities  for  independent  inquiry  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the
courts;  but  it  is  not  likely  that  these  will  be  resorted  to  if  experience
shows  that  the  same  function  can  be  better  performed  by  other  organs.
And  the  remedy  appears  to  be  coming  from  another  direction.  In  an
increasing  number  of  cases  important  legislation  is  being  prepared  by
commissions  of  inquiry  composed  of  experts  and  having  adequate  re-
sources for  investigation  at  their  command.  The  conclusions  of  such  a
commission  will  carry  weight  which  unfortunately  has  long  ceased  to
attach  to  the  mere  fact  of  the  enactment  of  a  statute.  The  courts  may
of  course  still  reject  an  act  thus  recommended;  but  the  case  of  the  work-
men's compensation  law  of  New  York  shows  not  merely  with  what  un-
feigned respect  the  work  of  such  a  commission  wiH  be  commented  on  by
a  court,  but  also  that  public  opinion  wUl  not  be  inclined  to  treat  a  de-
cision adverse  to  its  conclusions  as  final.  A  proper  development  of  scien-
tific methods  of  legislation  will  reduce  the  conflict  between  legislation  and
adjudication  to  a  minimum.

A  similar  result  may  be  expected  from  the  growing  legislative  practice
of  delegating  in  appropriate  cases  powers  of  quasi-legislative  or  quasi-
judicial  determination  to  administrative  commissions.  It  is  now  gen-
erally conceded  that  no  other  form  of  railroad  control  is  adequate  or  satis-
factory, and  the  superseding  of  the  Massachusetts  advisory  railroad  com-
mission— for  many  years  the  model  of  its  type — by  the  mandatory  com-
mission act  of  the  present  year,  marks  the  final  victory  of  this  phase  of
railroad  legislation.  Again,  the  establishment  of  an  industrial  board  in
New  York,  likewise  in  the  present  year,  and  in  pursuance  of  the  recom-
mendations of  a  notable  commission,  marks  the  adhesion  of  the  leading
state  of  the  union  to  a  similar  method  of  labor  legislation,  first  introduced
in  Wisconsin.  And  it  is  noteworthy  that  of  the  minimum  wage  laws
enacted  during  the  year  only  one  does  not  pursue  the  commission  plan.

In  proper  hands  and  under  proper  safeguards  the  system  of  leaving  to
an  administrative  commission  the  development  of  principles  laid  down
by  the  legislature  in  broad  terms  carries  with  it  guaranties  of  reasonable-
ness and  impartiality  which  a  political  body  can  never  afford.  The  system
is  based  upon  the  theory  that  when  once  an  agreement  has  been  reached
regarding  the  principle  of  a  measure,  the  development  of  that  principle
into  detailed  rules  is  a  process  determined  by  the  logic  of  ascertained
facts.  It  thus  represents  a  separation  of  that  which  is  matter  of  choice,
or  expediency,  viz.,  the  adoption  of  a  policy,  from  that  which  is  matter
of  argument  and  judgment;  namely,  the  application  of  the  policy  to
particular  circumstances. Viewed  in  this  light  the  delegation  constitutes


ADMINISTRATION  443

not  a  violation,  but  a  more  perfect  development  of  the  principle  of  the
separation  of  powers,  and  this  should  be  borne  in  mind  when  the  system
is  attacked  as  an  unconstitutional  delegation  of  the  legislative  power.'
In  any  event  some  such  method  of  dealing  with  complex  social  and
economic  problems  seems  an  almost  indispensable  corrective  of  the  pos-
sible abuse  of  a  police  power  extending  to  every  interest  that  can  be
reached  or  affected  by  governmental  action.

(2)  Representation  of  Interests

From  what  precedes  it  will  be  seen  that  the  highest  place
in  the  American  scheme  of  constitutional  government  is  that
occupied  by  investigation.  But  the  investigations  required
are  not  merely  those  of  experts,  as  seems  often  to  be  assumed
when  the  term  ' '  scientific ' '  legislation  is  used.  The  investiga-
tions of  experts,  such  as  physicians,  engineers,  economists,
statisticians,  and  lawyers,  are  likely  to  end  in  conclusions
that  may  be  ideally  perfect  from  a  technical  point  of  view,
but  not  reasonable  from  the  constitutional  point  of  view.
They  do  not  include  all  of  the  facts.  The  latter  can  be  ascer-
tained only  through  adding  the  experience  and  testimony  of
employers  and  employees — ^those  who  are  daily  in  contact
with  the  facts,  and  whose  common  knowledge  corrects  the
narrow  knowledge  of  specialists.  The  public  hearings  re-
quired by  due  process  of  law  are  the  legal  and  constituted
devices  contrived  to  make  sure  that  all  sides  will  be  heard.
But  these  public  hearings  are  formal,  disputatious,  indis-
criminate, and  indecisive.  They  do  not  offer  the  common
man  an  equal  opportunity  with  the  lawyer  or  expert  to  get
his  common  experience  written  into  the  conclusions.  The
commission  is  not  bound  in  any  direct  way  by  what  was
offered  at  the  public  hearing.  The  latter  becomes  a  formality
and  a  mere  technical  compliance  with  the  constitutional  re-
quirement of  "due  process."  The  officials  withdraw  and
formulate  their  own  rules  as  they  please.

This  is  the  essence  of  bureaucracy. It  is  often  charged

•The  laws  which  were  invalidated  by  the  decisions  cited  in  "  One  Day
of  Rest  in  Seven,"  p.  255,  and  "  Lighting,  Heating,  and  Ventilation,"  p.
333  were  not  of  this  class.  They  made  no  provision  for  investigation  and
ascertaining  of  facts,  but  merely  stated  that  certain  action  might  be  taken
by  the  commissioner  of  labor  "  in  his  discretion  "  or  if  "  it  appears  "  to
bim  that  certain  results  could  be  obtained.


444 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

that  the  efficient  methods  of  administration  employed  in  lead-
ing Eviropean  countries  are  not  adapted  to  American  democ-
racy because  they  are  "bureaucratic."  But  American
officials,  as  a  rule,  are  more  truly  bureaucratic  than  those  of
Europe.  It  is  not  rotation  in  office  that  cures  bureaucracy.
The  most  democratic  of  Americans  become  bureaucrats  as
soon  as  installed  in  office.  Bureaucracy  is  just  the  ordinary
human  instinct  for  exclusive  possession  of  power.  Its  es-
sence consists  in  imposing  its  will  upon  others  without  really
consulting  them.  Whether  the  office-holder  is  an  expert,  a
democrat,  or  a  politician,  makes  little  difEerence.  It  seems
easier  to  reach  a  decision  in  one's  mind  and  then  to  force
others  to  obey  than  to  submit  to  the  criticism  or  to  profit  by
the  advice  of  those  who  are  not  officials.

The  situation  is  different  in  a  legislature  where  each  mem-
ber is  compelled  to  listen  to  his  opponents  as  weU  as  his
partisans,  and  to  modify  his  individual  opinion  in  order  to
get  a  majority  opinion.  A  similar  arrangement  is  called  for
in  the  administration  of  labor  law.  Here  the  conflict  of  in-
terest is  often  more  intense  than  it  is  in  a  legislature,  rising
at  times  to  the  pitch  of  incipient  civil  war.  It  is  not  sur-
prising, therefore,  that,  in  many  states  and  countries,  the
officials  who  administer  labor  law  are  required  to  submit  their
investigations  and  proposals,  before  action,  to  the  representa-
tives of  employers  and  employees.  These  representatives
owe  allegiance,  not  to  the  government  officials,  but  to  the
interests  which  select  them.  Wherever  these  interests  are
organized  into  employers'  associations  and  trade  unions,
there  the  representatives  may  be  elected  or  designated  and
recalled  in  some  way  by  the  organizations.  In  some  cases
these  representatives  have  an  actual  veto  on  the  proposals
of  the  officials ;  in  others  they  are  more  or  less  advisory,  but
entitled  to  participate  in  the  official  deliberations.  In
France,  Belgiimi,  Italy,  Germany,  and  Austria  a  large  part
of  the  labor  law  is  administered  in  this  way.  There  may  be
a  national  superior  council  of  labor,  as  in  Belgium,  France,
Switzerland,  Italy,  Norway,  and  other  countries,  nominated
in  such  a  way  as  to  represent  employers,  unions,  and  the
general  public.  Then  there  are  inferior  councils  in  districts
or  cities. These  councils  take  part  in  drafting  legislation,


ADMINISTRATION  445

formulating  decrees  and  adroinistrative  rules,  conducting  in-
vestigations, and  supervising  the  collection  of  statistics  on  all
subjects  connected  with  labor.  The  administration  of  free
emplo3mient  offices  is  more  and  more  conducted  by  joint  com-
mittees of  employers  and  employees,  going  so  far  in  Denmark
as  to  include  the  joint  selection  of  subordinate  officials.  The
Industrial  Council  of  Great  Britain  is  a  large  representative
body  of  employers  and  trade  unionists  selected  to  assist  the
board  of  trade  in  matters  of  mediation  and  conciliation.  The
industrial  courts  of  France,  Germany,  and  other  countries,
composed  of  employers  and  employees,  take  the  place  of  or-
dinary minor  courts  of  law  in  disputes,  whether  individual  or
collective,  growing  out  of  wage  bargains.  In  Germany  and
Austria  the  administration  of  social  insurance  is  entrusted  in
various  ways  to  organizations  of  employers  and  employees.
A  complete  list  of  these  arrangements,  adopted  during  the
past  twenty  years,  would  show  that  every  branch  of  labor
legislation  is  coming  to  be  administered  on  the  principle  of
representation  of  interests.

In  American  states  the  substitution  of  administrative  rules
for  legislative  details  makes  it  possible  to  adopt  similar  repre-
sentation of  interests.  If  the  legislature  lays  down  the  gen-
eral rule  that  every  place  of  emplojmient  shall  be  made
"safe"  it  naturally  follows  that  those  who  can  best  pass  upon
the  safety  devices  and  processes,  as  to  whether  they  are  prac-
tical, in  addition  to  being  scientific,  are  the  employers  and  em-
ployees who  must  install  and  use  them.  In  the  four  or  five
states  which  have  adopted  the  principle  of  administrative
investigations  these  joint  committees  actually  draw  up  the
rules  for  safety  and  health,  assisted  by  the  staff  of  the  commis-
sion and  the  various  classes  of  experts  who  may  be  called  in.
In  Wisconsin,  for  example,  there  is  a  general  committee  named
by  the  Merchants'  and  Manufacturers'  Association  and  the
state  Federation  of  Labor.  Under  this  general  committee  are
subcommittees  on  boiler  rules,  elevator  rules,  shop  lighting,
ventilation,  wood  working,  and  other  specialties.  These
committees  visit  the  factories,  try  out  all  devices  by  extensive
tests,  and,  when  they  have  finally  agreed  upon  a  recommenda-
tion, it  is  adopted  by  the  commission  and  issued  as  an  order
without  change.


446 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Thus  there  are  two  kinds  of  publicity,  the  public  hearing
usually  required  by  the  formalities  of  due  process  of  law,  and
the  representative  publicity  participated  in  by  the  chosen  agents
of  the  interests.  The  latter  is  the  more  effective,  because  it
is  carried  on  with  experiments  and  tests,  over  a  period  of  time,
by  those  whose  personal  interests  and  knowledge  are  keen.  It
is  a  process  of  cooperative  investigation.  And  when  an  in-
vestigation of  this  kind  is  completed  it  fulfils  all  the  constitu-
tional requirements  of  "reasonableness."  It  includes  all  of
the  facts,  because  it  is  conducted  by  those  whose  interests  are
opposite  on  some  points  and  common  in  others.  It  gives  "due
weight"  to  the  interests  of  employer  and  employee,  and  thus
conforms  to  the ' '  equal  protection  of  the  laws. ' '  Furthermore,
a  rule  thus  agreed  upon  has  the  backing  of  the  representative
employers  of  the  state,  and  their  approval  carries  such  weight
in  court  that  other  employers,  who  would  ordinarily  violate  the
laws  enacted  by  a  legislature,  do  not  violate  the  administra-
tive rules  approved  in  joint  conference.

What  is  true  of  safety  is  also  true  in  a  greater  or  less  degree
of  all  branches  of  labor  legislation  where  administrative  rules
can  be  substituted  for  legislative  statutes.  As  we  have  seen,
this  is  possible  in  minimum  wage  laws,  hours  of  labor,  excluded
employments,  public  and  private  employment  offices,  and
workmen's  compensation.  In  some  of  these  branches  the  op-
position of  interests  is  less  reconcilable  than  it  is  in  others,  and
there  the  commission  itself  must  exercise  greater  authority.
For  the  representative  committees  are,  after  all,  only  advisory.
They  have  no  legal  power,  no  veto,  on  the  commission.  The
rules  and  orders  that  carry  penalties  are  the  commission's
rules  and  orders,  and  not  those  of  the  representatives.  But,
while  the  committees  are  advisory,  the  legislature  may  make
it  mandatory  upon  the  commission  to  consult  them.  In  view
of  the  fact  that  the  bureaucratic  impulses  of  officials  stand  in
the  way  of  such  consultation  where  it  is  optional,  this  man-
datory provision  is  necessary.  The  industrial  commission  law
of  New  York,  enacted  in  1915,  has  taken  this  further  step  in
the  recognition  of  representatives.  It  requires  the  commission
to  submit  its  proposals  and  investigations  to  an  "industrial
council"  of  representative  employers  and  employees,  for  their
advice. Minimum  wage  laws  are  similar  and  require  investi-


ADMINISTRATION  447

gation  by  wage  boards  composed  of  employers  and  employees
of  the  district.

The  economic  principle  imderiying  this  representation  of  in-
terests is  the  well-known  fact  that  competition  tends  to  drag
down  aU  employers  to  the  level  of  the  worst.  But  labor  legis-
lation is  designed  to  bring  the  worst  employers  up  to  the  level
of  the  best.  Yet  it  cannot  be  expected  that  legislation  will
ever  be  able  fully  to  accomplish  this.  Individuals  here,  as
elsewhere,  will  always  be  ahead  of  what  the  state  can  do.
With  each  rise  in  the  level  of  standards  required  by  the  legis-
lature, individual  employers  will  be  free  to  rise  still  higher.
Here  is  exactly  where  the  field  of  administration  Ues.  An
industrial  commission,  with  representation  of  interests,  can
do  what  the  legislature  cannot  do.  If  it  is  given  leeway  in
drafting  rules  and  regulations,  it  can  call  upon  the  more  ad-
vanced employers  and  the  representatives  of  labor  to  assist
in  setting  higher  standards,  and  it  can  then  enforce  these
standards  on  the  more  backward  ones.  It  can  bring  out  the
divisions  that  already  exist  among  employers,  and,  instead  of
permitting  the  worst  to  set  the  standards  for  the  best,  it  can
assist  the  best  in  setting  standards  for  the  worst.  The  legis-
lative method  treats  all  employers  alike  as  criminals,  and
forces  all  to  combine  and  to  support  the  same  lobbyists,  in
order  to  resist  what  they  consider  destructive  laws.  The  ad-
ministrative method  permits  the  leading  representatives  of
employers  to  consult  with  the  representatives  of  labor  and
with  the  commissioners  who  represent  the  state,  regarding  all
of  the  details  necessary  to  carry  the  law  into  efEect  and  to  ad-
just it  to  all  conditions.  The  method  is  practically  that  of  the
voluntary  joint  conference  of  collective  bargaining  in  which
a  trade  agreement  between!  an  employers'  association  and  a
union  is  drawn  up.  Neither  the  union,  the  employer,  nor  the
politician  dominates.  The  decisions  are  not  hastily  adopted
by  a  majority  vote,  but  are  given  sufficient  consideration,  ac-
companied by  thorough  investigation  and  complete  publicity.
The  process  is  educational  and  cooperative,  rather  than  argu-
mentative and  coercive.  It  is  not  the  struggle  of  two  lobbies
to  win  over  a  committee  or  a  legislature,  but  it  is  a  substitute
for  the  lobbies,  sitting  in  continuous  conference,  under  state
supervision,  working  out the rules  and  regulations  which


448 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

give  effect  to  the  legislature's  standards  of  industrial  wel-
fare.

This  representation  of  organized  interests  in  the  adminis-
tration of  law  is  peculiarly  fitted  to  bridge  the  gaps  caused  by
our  constitutional  separation  of  the  branches  of  government.
In  other  parliamentary  countries  the  heads  of  executive  de-
partments, such  as  cabinet  officers  and  ministers  of  labor,  are
also  members  of  the  legislature.  Any  member  of  the  legisla-
ture, or  the  opposition  parties  in  the  legislature,  can  call  them
to  account,  on  the  floor  of  the  house  and  before  the  audience
of  the  people,  for  their  methods  of  administration.  A  hostile
vote  can  dismiss  them  from  office.  Thus  their  acts  are
scrutinized  and  their  responsibility  is  enforced.

But  in  the  American  system  the  "minister  of  labor"  is  the
"commissioner  of  labor,"  the  "state  factory  inspector,"  or  the
"Secretary  of  Labor."  In  theory  he  is  responsible,  but  in
practice  the  machinery  is  lacking  to  enforce  responsibility.
Those  who  are  most  concerned  in  holding  him  responsible  are,
not  "the  public"  at  large,  but  the  employers  and  employees
who  must  obey  the  laws  which  he  enforces.  At  the  same  time
they  have  no  voice,  no  representation,  that  is  theirs  as  a  matter
of  right  and  law.  They  can  only  exert  themselves  through  the
devious  ways  of  "politics"  and  lobbyists.

For  this  reason,  in  American  states  and  the  federal  govern-
ment, it  has  been  necessary  to  create  "commissions,"  where
in  foreign  countries  the  same  duties  would  be  entrusted  to
political  departments.  The  Interstate  Commerce  Com-
mission, the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  the  Federal  Reserve
Board,  the  public  utility  commissions  of  the  states,  are  fourth
branches  of  government,  separated  from  the  other  branches
and  performing  duties  which  in  other  countries  are  under  a
cabinet  officer,  such  as  the  chancellor  of  the  exchequer,  or  the
minister  of  commerce  and  industry,  who  has  a  seat  in  parlia-
ment. A  leading  object,  in  all  of  these  American  cases,  is  to
take  the  question  "out  of  politics " — that  is,  out  of  the  partisan
contests  that  go  on  in  the  legislature.  This  would  probably
not  be  necessary  if  the  chief  executive  officer  having  them  in
charge  were  a  member  of  the  legislature,  as  in  parliamentary
countries,  liable  to  be  dismissed  if  he  and  his  colleagues  fail
to  get  a  majority  vote  in  the  legislature.


ADMINISTRATION  449

The  situation  is  even  more  serious  in  dealing  with  labor
legislation.  Here,  the  conflict  of  classes  is  more  menacing
to  peace  than  it  is  in  matters  of  railroads,  trusts,  and  banks.
The  labor  question,  of  coiirse,  cannot  and  should  not  be  taken
out  of  the  legislature.  It  is  always  a  question  of  politics —
that  is,  of  public  policy — as  to  what  shall  be  the  standards
and  what  laws  shall  be  enacted.  But  the  industrial  commission
takes  out  of  the  legislature  the  intricate  details  of  investigation,
after  the  standards  have  been  enacted  into  law.  And,  most
important  of  all,  it  permits  the  creation  of  an  inferior  industrial
legislature,  composed  of  the  real  representatives  and  leaders
of  both  interests,  continually  in  session  under  state  supervision,
and  working  upon  those  details  of  administration,  which,  after
all,  are  the  actual  substance  of  such  legislation  as  is  enforced.

Of  course,  various  problems  arise  in  the  constitution  of
these  representative  councils.  One  is  the  representation  of
unorganized  workers.  As  yet,  no  device  has  been  discovered
by  which  they  can  be  directly  represented.  It  may  be  said,
perhaps,  that  they  are  partly  represented  by  employers  who
need  them  to  offset  the  unions,  partly  by  the  unions,  many  of
whose  demands  would  benefit  both  organized  and  unorganized
labor,  and  partly  by  the  commission  which  represents  the
public.

Another  problem  is  the  compensation  and  expenses  of  the
representatives.  If  they  are  compensated  by  the  state  their
allegiance  to  their  organizations  is  weakened.  One  of  the  dis-
asters of  trade  unionism  is  the  ambition  of  its  own  members
for  political  jobs  and  salaries.  To  be  truly  representative,  the
representative  must  depend  on  his  organization  for  his  com-
pensation and  expenses.  It  follows,  in  the  case  of  unions,
if  the  state  does  not  pay  salaries  or  expenses,  that  the  in-
dividuals named  on  the  representative  councils  are  usually
the  salaried  officials  and  business  agents  of  the  union.  These
are  their  representatives  already  chosen  for  the  purpose  of
dealing  with  employers,  and  it  is  but  a  short  step  from  dealing
with  employers  in  private  bargains  to  dealing  with  them  on
governmental  bodies.  In  all  cases  it  is  found  by  experience
that  the  representatives  on  either  side  should  not  be  lawyers.
The  object  is  not  to  win  a  case  in  court,  but  to  reach  an  agree-
ment by  conference.  Neither  should  the  employers'  repre-
29


450 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

sentatives  come  from  the  financial  or  commercial  side  of  the
business.  They  should  be  the  men  in  charge  of  production,
who  have  grown  up  in  the  industry  and  know  the  labor  con-
ditions. The  amount  of  time  required  is  not  so  great  as  to
prevent  attendance.  The  investigations  are  made  by  a  staff
continuously  employed  and  are  then  laid  before  the  representa-
tives, and  their  familiarity  with  the  business  enables  them
immediately  to  pick  out  the  weak  spots.  These  are  referred
back  for  further  investigation,  so  that  the  various  brief  meet-
ings of  the  representative  council  are  enough  to  accomplish
the  purpose.  Such  investigations  are  not  hastily  made,  as
they  are  in  the  case  of  legislatures  in  session.  The  conferences
are  not  required  to  act  within  a  limited  time,  and  if  they  can-
not cover  the  whole  grotind  they  cover  a  part  of  it  and  wait
for  future  investigations  to  make  the  necessary  amendments.
The  representatives  do  not  need  to  be  officials  with  govern-
mental powers  to  enter  factories,  but  they  must  have  a  stafE
in  which  they  have  confidence.  This  is  the  problem  of  civil
service.

(3)  Civil  Service

We  have  already  seen  how  the  administration  of  labor  laws
has  required  the  building  up  of  a  special  police.  This  was
an  advance  over  the  enforcement  of  law  by  general  officers,
but  it  brought  many  difficulties.  It  created  salaried  positions,
which  political  parties  seized  upon  for  political  purposes,  and
a  mere  ostensible  enforcement  of  the  law.  Even  more  serious
than  party  politics  was  the  struggle  of  employers  and  em-
ployees to  get  control  of  these  offices.  The  trade  unions
claimed  the  right  of  appointment,  because  largely  through
their  efforts  the  positions  had  been  created,  and  because  they
considered  that  the  laws  would  not  be  enforced  except  by
friendly  inspectors.  The  result  has  been  that,  in  many
states,  the  luiions  themselves  have  been  split  by  internal
politics  over  the  personal  candidacies  of  their  members  for
the  positions.  The  unions  also  have  been  compelled  to  make
alliances  or  compromises  with  the  political  parties,  and  thus
has  resulted  the  "labor  politician" — selected,  not  to  enforce
the  law  effectively,  but  to  get  the  "labor  vote." On  the  other


ADMINISTRATION  45 1

hand,  the  employers  also  make  their  political  alliances,  and
then  the  selection  of  factory  inspectors  is  often  designedly  made
to  prevent  the  enforcement  of  the  laws.  Thus  both  political
.  and  industrial  partisanship  have  joined,  either  to  defeat  alto-
gether the  factory  laws  through  hostile  inspectors,  or  to  make
them  ineffective  through  poUtical  trade  union  inspectors.

The  next  step  is  the  effort,  made  in  a  few  states  and  by  the
federal  government,  to  adopt  civil  service  examinations,  ten-
ure of  office  on  good  behavior  and  promotion  in  the  service,
as  a  substitute  for  political  appointments.  These  civil  ser-
vice laws,  beginning  in  the  decade  of  the  'eighties,  Were  de-
signed primarily  to  prevent  the  use  of  pubUc  offices  as  a  part
of  the  political  "machine."  Indirectly  they  have  seciired
greater  efficiency,  in  so  far  as  they  have  been  able  to  prevent
officials  from  being  changed  at  each  change  in  the  elections.
But  it  has  required  several  years  for  the  more  experienced  civil
service  commissions  to  reach  the  point  where  they  could  learn
to  conduct  examinations  directly  for  efficiency  and  for  the
peculiar  fitness  of  the  appUcant  for  the  particxilar  position.
This  point  has  not  even  yet  been  reached  in  the  case  of  ap-
plicants who  may  be  called  upon  to  enforce  the  labor  laws;
Here  industrial  antagonism  must  be  recognized,  just  as  politi-
cal antagonism  has  been  recognized  and  provided  against.
Factory  inspectors,  who  do  not  havis  the  confidence  of  both
employers  and  employees,  either  as  to  their  practical  knowl-
edge or  their  impartiality,  are  as  inefficient  for  their  positions
as  those  who  are  avowed  politicians.  And  this  distrust  of  civil
service  appointees  by  both  manufacturers  and  workmen  is  so
general  and  deep  that  it  is  almost  as  difficult  to  get  their  ap-
proval of  "civil  service  reform"  as  it  is  to  get  the  approval  of
this  poUticians.  Just  as  civil  service  reform  is  designed  to
secure  officials  who  are  non-partisan  as  respects  political  an-
tagonism, so  it  should  secure  factory  inspectors  who  are  im-
partial as  respects  industrial  antagonism.  It  is  in  the  legis-
latures and  Congress  that  organized  labor  and  organized
capital  should  fight  out  their  legal  battles.  There  it  is  proper
that  each  side  should  have  its  lobbies  and  its  recognized  lead-
ers, and  should  carry  its  fight  "to  a  finish."  It  is  there  that
jJubHc  poHcy  is  determined  and  that  opinions,  partisanship,
and  prejudice  have  fuU  play  in  working  dut  that  Itegislative


452 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

discretion  which  constitutes  public  policy.  But  when  the
law  is  once  enacted  the  battle  should  cease,  and  the  officials
selected  to  enforce  the  law  should  enforce  it  efficiently,  exactly
as  it  stands,  in  harmony  with  its  policy,  and  yet  impartially
as  between  the  two  interests.  This  is  the  present  problem  of
"civil  service  reform"  as  respects  labor  legislation.  Labor
law  cannot  be  enforced  if  either  employers  or  trade  unionists
distrust  the  officials,  on  account  of  either  their  incompetency,
their  politics,  or  their  partiality.  Even  in  states  having  civil
service  commissions  this  distrust  continues  to  exist.  This  is
partly  due  to  the  bureaucratic  exclusiveness  of  the  com-
missions theinselves.  An  essential  thing  in  their  method  of
administration  is  that  they  should  admit  the  recognized
leaders  of  employers  and  unions  to  a  share  in  conducting  the
examinations.  This  is  partly  provided  for  in  the  industrial
commission  law  of  New  York,  which  makes  the  representative
council  of  employers  and  employees  the  assistants  to  the  civil
service  commission  for  the  examination  of  applicants.  It  is
provided  for  in  the  free  employment  offices  of  Wisconsin  and
of  Denmark,  where  the  employment  officials  are  selected  by
the  joint  committees  of  employers  and  employees.

It  has  been  implied  above  that  the  inspectors  under  an  in-
dustrial commission  become  investigators  as  well  as  police.
They  cooperate  with  the  employers  and  workmen  in  drafting
the  rules.  Their  work  consists  more  of  instructing  employers
and  workmen  in  the  devices  and  processes  of  safety,  sanita-
tion, and  welfare  than  in  mere  prosecutions.  But  they  can
occupy  this  enviable  position  only  to  the  extent  that  they  are
skilful,  efficient,  and  impartial.  "Politics"  is  fatal.  As  soon
as  organized  employers  and  employees  have  become  accus-
tomed to  cooperate  in  the  administration  they  tend  to  exclude
the  politician,  because  he  drives  capital  and  labor  apart  in-
stead of  bringing  them  together.


(4)  Bill  Drafting

The  history  of  labor  legislation  is  the  history  of  an  art
as  highly  technical  and  expert  as  that  of  engineering  science
or  that  of  an  inventor  in  electricity  or  chemistry. Like  other


ADMINISTRATION  453

arts,  it  is  a  history  of  trial,  experiment,  failure,  until  some-
thing workable  is  produced.  In  early  days  an  inventor  might
be  merely  an  ingenious  mechanic.  Now  he  is  frequently  a
scientist,  with  a  staff  of  assistants,  supported  and  financed  by
large  expenditures  of  money.  Great  private  corporations
keep  ahead  of  competition  by  means  of  their  laboratories,
scientists,  investigators,  inventors.  When  the  government
takes  up  invention,  as  it  has  done  in  agriculture,  it  supports
costly  experiment  stations  and  sets  scientists  and  inventors
to  work.

Yet  in  the  equally  technical  field  of  legislation  the  drafting
of  bills  remains  largely  in  the  stage  of  the  mechanic.  There
are  two  very  distinct  divisions  in  the  process  of  legislation.
One  is  the  discussion  of  policy,  the  other  the  framing  of  bills
that  give  effect  to  policy.  The  former  is  the  division  belong-
ing to  the  legislattire,  drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the  people.
The  latter  is  the  technical  work  of  experts.  In  a  private  cor-
poration the  line  of  demarcation  corresponds  to  that  between
the  board  of  directors  and  the  engineers,  architects,  or  lawyers.
In  lawmaking  it  corresponds  to  that  between  the  legislature
and  an  administrative  commission.  The  latter  is  conducting
experiments  in  a  great  laboratory.  The  enforcement  of  law
is,  in  fact,  a  series  of  experiments  and  tests  upon  the  actual
workings  of  the  law.  The  commission's  investigations  reveal
the  gaps  and  defects.  When  the  legislature  meets,  these  tests
and  investigations  furnish  the  technical  information  for
amendments.  The  commission,  indeed,  when  it  drafts  its
own  rules  and  orders,  is  doing  the  same  kind  of  technical  work
as  when  it  assists  the  legislature  in  drafting  its  bills.

But  administrative  commissions  are  hke  the  courts  in  that
they  follow  precedents,  and  are  conservative  in  that  they  do
not  willingly  take  up  new  things.  Their  administrative  prob-
lems are  sufficiently  great,  so  that  they  will  not  of  their  own
volition  initiate  and  push  new  lines  of  public  policy.  Their
work  is  the  perfection  and  elaboration  of  policies  already
adopted.

The  business  of  pioneering  new  lines  of  labor  policy  belongs
to  the  legislature  and  to  private  associations,  or  to  a  legislative
reference  bureau  or  a  political  department  of  labor.  But
when  there  is  sufficient  public  opinion,  and  a  legislative  de-


454 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

mand  for  these  new  lines  of  legislation,  then  administrative
investigation  is  superior  to  any  that  has  been  devised  for
ascertaining  the  facts  and  preparing  machinery  for  adminis-
tration. It  follows  that  private  societies,  such  as  labor  unions,
associations  for  labor  legislation,  child  labor  committees  and
consumers'  leagues,  are  needed  not  only  to  watch  the  existing
administrative  machinery,  but  to  pioneer  on  new  Unes  of  legis-
lation. The  functions  of  such  private  associations  are  even
greater  than  they  have  been  before.  They  criticize  where
needed  and  assist  where  practicable.


(5)  Penalties  and  Prosecutions

Behind  all  laws  and  administrative  rules  having  the  force
of  law  lies  the  penalty  for  violation.  No  matter  how  efficient
the  administration  or  how  actively  employers  and  employees
may  assist,  the  administration  would  remain  but  a  voluntary
cooperative  society  if  not  supported  by  penalties  imposed  on
those  who  refuse  or  neglect  to  assist.

Yet  too  much  reliance  is  generally  placed  on  penalties  and
punishment.  Officials  sometimes  point  to  their  record  of
numerous  prosecutions  as  evidence  of  their  efficiency  in  office.
Such  a  record  may  prove  exactly  the  opposite.  Penalties
should  be  looked  upon  as  only  a  potential  power,  whose
strongest  evidence  of  actual  power  is  sometimes  found  in  the
least  necessity  of  resorting  to  them.  A  record  of  a  small
nimiber  of  prompt  and  impressive  convictions  may  mean
more  for  the  enforcement  of  law  than  several  pages  of  statis-
tics of  prosecutions.  At  the  other  extreme,  many  factory
inspectors  who  in  American  states  furnish  little  or  no  evidence
of  any  prosecutions  are  probably  not  enforcing  the  laws.'
No  subject  of  labor  legislation  is  more  uncertain  and  unsatis-
factory than  this  of  penalties  and  prosecutions.

The  difficulty  in  securing  convictions  is  shown  by  a  state-
ment of  the  commissioner  of  labor  in  New  York  in  1908.'


'  The  Report  on  Condition  of  Woman  and  Child  Wage-Earners  in  the
United  States,  Vol.  XIX,  1912,  pp.  23-88  (6ist  Congress,  2d  Session,  Senate
Doc.  No.  645),  gives  results  of  the  most  extensive  effort  yet  made  to  in-
vestigate the  subject  of  prosecutions.  2  Ibid.,  p.  44.


ADMINISTRATION  455

In  thirty-two  cases  of  illegal  employment  and  overtime  work
of  women  and  children  tried  before  juries  in  a  period  of  three
months  not  a  single  conviction  was  obtained,  although  it  was
shown  in  one  instance  that  a  woman  worked  seventeen  hours
in  one  day  and  in  another  that  a  child  was  only  seven  years
old.  The  inspector's  report  for  1907  showed  that  in  one-half
of  the  294  cases  where  conviction  was  secured  the  court  re-
liiitted  the  fine,  and  in  most  of  the  other  cases  only  the  mini-
mum fine  was  imposed,  averaging  about  $26  a  case.'  Other
states  show  a  similar  leniency.

In  American  labor  legislation,  little  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  careful  adjustment  of  penalties  to  offenses.  The
amount  of  penalty  seems  to  be  determined  very  largely  at
random,  and  there  is  a  great  variety  of  penalties  in  the  same
state  and  in  different  states.  Too  frequently  the  idea  seems
to  be  that  the  more  severe  the  penalty  the  greater  the  likeli-
hood of  enforcing  compliance.  This  frequently  fails  of  its
purpose,  because  courts  and  juries  often  permit  an  offender
to  escape  entirely  rather  than  subject  him  to  a  penalty  out
of  proportion,  as  they  see  it,  to  the  offense.

Yet  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  penalties  for  a
single  offense,  and  penalties  for  a  continuing  offense.  Failuris
to  return  a  child  worker's  emplo3mient  permit  may  be  treated
as  a  single  offense;  but  employment  of  the  child  beyond  work-
ing hours  may  be  treated  as  a  continuing  offense,  repeated
every  day  that  the  child  is  so  employed.  Here  is  a  cumula-
tive injtiry  to  the  child  which  the  law  seeks  to  prevent,  and,
very  properly,  a  cimiulative  penalty  might  be  imposed,  mak-
ing each  day  for  each  child  a  separate  and  distinct  offense.
If  the  penalty,  for  example,  is  $10  to  $100  for  each  offense,
even  the  minimum  penalty  would  accumulate  effectively.
Otherwise,  if  treated  as  a  single  offense  for  each  child,  no  mat-
ter how  long  continued,  the  penalty  might  bear  no  adequate
proportion  to  the  profit  derived  from  the  child's  labor.

This  method  of  cumulative  penalties  has  been  more  or  less
adopted  in  the  industrial  commission  laws  of  several  states,
thereby  making  each  day  during  which  an  employer  fails  to
observe  or  comply  with  any  order  of  the  commission  or  any

1  Jbid.,  p.  48.


4S6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

section  of  the  statute  a  separate  violation.^  Cumulative
penalty  provisions,  however,  are  construed  very  strictly  by
the  courts,  and  the  language  of  the  statute  must  be  made  per-
fectly clear.

Another  distinction  of  importance  is  that  between  a  crimi-
nal action  and  a  civil  action.  Formerly,  when  employers  were
mostly  small  employers  with  but  little  property,  the  criminal
penalties  of  fine  or  imprisonment,  which  are  the  ordinary
penalties  for  violation  of  police  regulations,  seemed  to  be  ap-
propriate. But  these  criminal  penalties  are  practically  out
of  date  when  it  comes  to  enforcing  the  law  against  corpora-
tions. Moreover,  in  criminal  prosecutions  the  individual  em-
ployer has  many  technical  defenses  based  on  the  presumption
of  innocence.  A  readier  and  simpler  method  is  the  "action
of  debt,"  a  civil  action  employed  to  recover  taxes  or  penalties
under  the  guise  of  a  debt  owing  the  state.^  This  form  of
action  is  now  generally  adopted  in  the  case  of  railroad  com-
missions and  industrial  commissions,  along  with  the  cimiula-
tive  penalty.  It  is  more  effective  against  corporations,  and
it  recognizes  the  cold  fact  that  courts  and  juries  are  loath  to
impose  criminal  penalties  on  employers  when  their  offense  is
the  violation  of  laws  enacted  for  the  protection  of  labor.

Prosecutions  are  generally  brought  in  justice  co\arts  or
other  inferior  criminal  courts.  It  is  obvious  that  such  courts
are  not  equipped  to  decide  technical  questions,  and  the  limita-
tions imposed  by  rules  of  evidence  on  the  admissibility  of
testimony  make  it  practically  impossible  for  the  court  to  ob-
tain the  expert  information  and  opinion  essential  to  intelligent
decision  of  such  cases.

There  are  two  classes  of  questions,  often  equally  technical.
One  is  the  question  of  fact,  the  other  of  constitutionality  of
a  statute  or  of  reasonableness  and  validity  of  an  administra-
tive rule.  A  technical  question  of  fact  is,  for  example,  whether
a  certain  room  is  sufficiently  ventilated,  or  sufficiently  lighted.
A  question  of  constitutionality  or  reasonableness  is  whether
a  statute  or  administrative  rule  limiting  a  woman's  work  to


'  Wisconsin,  Laws  191 1,  Sees.  2394-60;  Ohio,  Laws  1913,  Sees.  871-44;
Colorado,  Laws  1915,  C.  180,  Sees.  44,  45.

3  Stockwell  V.  U.  S.,  13  Wall  531  (1871);  Chaffee  v.  V.  S.,  i8  Wall  516
(1873);  Fla.  Central  Ry.  v.  Reynolds,  183  U.  S.  471  (1902),


ADMINISTRATION  4S7

a  certain  number  of  hours  is  valid.  Both  involve  questions
of  fact,  but  the  two  questions  can  be  separated.  If  a  justice's
court,  or  a  jury,  as  in  the  instance  above  referred  to,  refuses
to  convict  an  employer  who  is  shown  to  have  allowed  a  woman
to  work  seventeen  hoiu-s  in  face  of  a  law  restricting  her  work
to  ten  hours,  it  is  really  deciding  not  only  the  fact  of  violation,
but  also  the  reasonableness  of  the  law.  Hence  it  is  that  in
states  which  have  industrial  commissions  with  power  to  issue
rules  the  attempt  is  made  to  separate  the  two  questions.
The  question  of  fact  is  determined  in  a  lower  court.  But  the
question  of  reasonableness  or  validity  can  be  raised  only  in
a  different  suit  in  a  higher  court.  The  employer  is  permitted
first,  by  the  provisions  of  the  law,  to  test  the  reasonableness
or  validity  of  the  rule  in  a  hearing  before  the  commission.
Next  he  has  a  right  of  appeal  to  a  higher  court  on  questions  of
law.  If  no  such  hearing  or  appeal  is  taken  within  a  specified
time,  then  no  question  can  be  raised  in  the  inferior  court
except  the  fact  of  compliance  or  non-compliance  with  the  rule
or  order  of  the  commission. ^

A  similar  facility  is  afforded  to  the  inferior  court,  in  passing
upon  questions  of  fact,  by  the  provision  that  the  commission
may  draw  up  specific  standards  fitted  to  each  occupation,  or
even  to  a  single  shop,  where  the  legislative  standard  is  liable
not  to  take  into  account  real  differences.  These  standards,
if  previously  passed  upon  by  representative  committees  of
employers  and  employees,  can  be  made  both  definite  and  prac-
ticable, and  therefore  not  a  matter  of  such  controversy  or
opinion  as  to  require  expert  testimony  in  the  lower  court.

This  simplifies  the  work  of  the  factory  inspector  in  the
field.  He  is  the  prosecuting  witness^  His  opinion  of  whether
the  law  is  violated  or  not  is  set  up  against  the  opinion  of  the
employer  or  his  representative.  AU  doubts  are  resolved  in
favor  of  the  defendant.  But  with  the  more  precise  standards
set  by  a  commission  there  is  less  dependence  on  weight  of
opinion.  If  a  statute  merely  says  that  workshops  shall  be
"sufficiently  Hghted,"  the  factory  inspector  must  set  up  his
opinion  against  the  employer's  opinion  as  to  whether  the  light
in  his  shop  is  sufficient. The  jury  must  then  pass  upon  both


'  See  Wisconsin,  Laws  191 1,  Sees.  2394-57,  2394-59.


458 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

the  fact  of  violation  and  the  opinion  of  the  inspector.  But  if
the  commission  upon  investigation  ascertains  that  one-quarter
candle-power  for  every  square  foot  of  floor  space  is  sufficient
for  that  class  of  shops,  then  the  inspector  needs  to  prove
only  that  the  amount  of  light  was  less  than  this  standard.

These  provisions  do  not  mean  that  less  competent  inspectors
may  be  employed.  They  mean  that  much  more  time  may  be
given  to  actual  inspection  and  less  to  prosecutions.  The  in-
spector, in  the  ordinary  prosecutions,  wastes  an  incalculable
amount  of  time  in  assembling  and  producing  in  court  the  evi-
dence of  the  alleged  violation.  His  cturent  inspection  work
must  be  neglected  in  order  that  he  may  attend  court,  await-
ing the  trial  of  the  case,  or  attempting  to  convince  a  court  or
jury  of  the  accuracy  and  honesty  of  his  observation  of  con-
ditions out  of  which  the  alleged  violation  grew.  Where  he
shotild  be  engaged  in  discovering  violations  and  suggesting
means  of  compliance,  he  is  marshaling  evidence  and  trying
to  convince  third  parties  of  deviations  from  ambiguous
standards.

An  interesting  method  of  enforcing  compliance,  which  is
more  and  more  coming  into  prominence,  is  to  give  the  au-
thorities power  to  stop  work  on  a  machine  or  in  an  establish-
ment which  violates  the  law.  Thus  in  several  states  inspectors
may  place  upon  machinery  a  notice  forbidding  its  use  until
specified  safety  measures  have  been  taken.  In  some  states
mines  may  be  absolutely  closed,  and  in  1915  legislation  in
Montana  and  in  Delaware  extended  the  same  principle  to
certain  factories  and  workshops.  According  to  the  Delaware
statute,  a  cannery  violating  the  law  may  upon  a  third  con-
viction be  closed  by  the  court,  and  the  person  convicted  may
be  prohibited  from  engaging  in  the  cannery  business  until
further  court  order.  California,  also,  in  1915  authorized  the
closing  by  the  courts  of  labor  camps,  upon  their  failure  to
comply  within  reasonable  time  with  the  sanitary  provisions
laid  down  for  them.

Various  devices  have  been  invented  in  the  drafting  of  labor
laws  to  determine  whether  the  provisions  of  the  law  are  being
complied  with.  The  possibility  of  detecting  all  violations  by
official  inspection  are  obviously  limited.  An  army  of  in-
spectors making  constant  visits  would  be  required. The  pros-


Administration  4S9

ecution  may  be  relieved  of  a  portion  of  its  burden  of  proof
by  a  provision  that  certain  facts  shall  constitute  prima  facie
evidence.  The  burden  is  always  on  the  prosecution  to  prove
circumstances  which  constitute  a  violation  of  a  statutory  pro-
vision. Thus  where  a  statute  forbids  the  employment  of
children  under  sixteen  except  under  specified  conditions,  the
prosecution  for  an  alleged  ofEense  must  prove  the  employ-
ment of  the  child,  must  prove  that  the  child  was  under  six-
teen, and  must  prove  that  the  circmnstances  authorizing  the
employment  of  a  child  of  that  age  were  not  present.  This
ordinary  rule  respecting  the  burden  of  proof  may,  however,
be  altered  by  the  legislature.  The  difficulty  of  enforcing  the
one  day  of  rest  in  seven  law '  has  been  considerably  lessened
in  New  York  by  a  requirement  that  the  employer  shall  post
"  a  schedule  containing  a  hst  of  his  employees  who  are  required
or  allowed  to  work  on  Sunday  and  designating  the  day  of
rest  for  each,"  and  shall  file  a  copy  of  such  schedule  with  the
industrial  commission.  This  provision  reduces  the  necessity
of  inspection  to  the  single  question  whether  any  employee
named  on  the  schedule  as  entitled  to  rest  on  any  day  is  at
work  on  that  day.  That  in  itself  constitutes  a  violation  of  the
substantive  provision  that  "no  employee  shall  be  required
or  allowed  to  work  on  the  day  of  rest  so  designated  for  him."
Similar  provisions  are  employed  in  enforcing  laws  regulating
hoiu-s  of  labor.^  The  New  York  law  regulating  the  employ-
ment of  children  under  the  age  of  sixteen  requires  the  em-
ployer of  such  children  to  keep  a  record  of  the  name,  birth-
place, age,  and  residence  of  such  children  and  to  produce
such  record  for  inspection  by  the  agents  of  the  industrial
commission.  The  employer  is  also  required  to  keep  on  file
and  to  furnish  on  demand  of  the  commission  the  child's  em-
ployment certificate.  If  he  cannot  furnish  the  certificate  of
employment,  the  employer  is  required  within  a  specified  time
to  produce  satisfactory  evidence  that  the  child  is  over  six-
teen, or  to  discontinue  his  employment.  Proof  of  the  com-
mission's demand  for  evidence  of  the  age  of  the  child  and  of
the  employer's  failure  to  produce  such  evidence  is  made  prima
facie  evidence  in  a  prosecution  for  the  violation  of  a  provision

» See  "One  Day  of  Rest  in  Seven,"  p.  253.

2  See  "Maximum  Daily  Hours,  Women,"  p.  219.


46o PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

of  the  law  that  the  child  is  under  sixteen  and  unlawfully
employed.'

Of  the  devices  to  assist  the  officials  which  have  been  made
use  of  in  this  country,  those  which  impose  upon  the  employer
the  duty  to  keep  some  sort  of  current  record  of  conditions  or
happenings  in  his  plant  are  the  most  important  aids  to  official
inspection.  Records  of  accidents,  certified  daily  time  re-
ports, registers,  and  account  books  are  frequently  required
by  labor  laws.

There  is,  however,  a  limitation  on  the  extent  to  which  the
employer  can  be  compelled  to  collect  and  record  for  official
use  the  evidence  of  his  own  violation  of  the  law.  Our  con-
stitutions generally  protect  the  individual  against  a  require-
ment that  he  testify  against  himself.  When  the  requirement
of  records  becomes  practically  a  system  of  compelling  testi-
mony against  himself,  the  employer  may  refuse  to  comply
and  depend  upon  his  constitutional  guaranty.

Licensing  a  business  practice  or  place  of  employment  affords
another  means  of  increasing  the  possibilities  of  enforcement,
especially  if  the  licensee  be  required  to  give  bond.  This  method
is  employed  in  the  regvilation  of  employment  offices  and  sweat-
shops. License  requirements  are  ordinarily  supplemented  by
a  prohibition  of  action  without  the  license.  Failure  to  pro-
duce the  license  is  thereby  made  proof  of  violation.  The
license  is  usually  issued  on  condition  that  the  standards  im-
posed by  the  law  be  complied  with.^  Fear  of  loss  of  the  license
and  of  simmaary  recovery  on  the  bond  affords  strong  induce-
ment for  compliance.  The  license,  however,  does  not  entirely
obviate  the  necessity  for  inspection  or  other  means  of  obtain-


*  New  York,  Consolidated  Laws,  1909,  C.  31,  Sec.  76.

*  Examples  of  such  laws  applied  to  employment  offices  are  found  in
California,  Code,  1906,  Sec.  3580;  Colorado,  Laws  1909,  C.  164;  Massa-
chusetts, Revised  Laws  1902,  C.  102,  Sec.  23;  Minnesota,  Laws  1905,  C.
274.  Tenement -house  manufactures  must  be  licensed  in  Indiana,
Annotated  Statutes  1901,  Sec.  7o87n;  Maryland,  Public  General  Laws
1911,  Art.  XXVII,  Sec.  240;  Massachusetts,  Laws  1909,  Sec.  106;
Michigan,  Laws  1909,  No.  285,  Sec.  22;  New  Jersey,  Compiled  Statutes
1910,  Sec.  46;  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  260;  Pennsylvania,  Brightly's
Digest,  1893-1903,  p.  825,  Sec.  I.  A  similar  idea  is  expressed  in  the
"sanitary  certificate"  required  for  bakeries  and  establishments  manu-
facturing food  in  some  states,  for  example.  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  463;
Washington,  Codes  and  Statutes  1910,  Sec.  5487.


ADMINISTRATION  461

ing  evidence  as  to  compliance  by  the  licensee  with  the  require-
ments of  the  law  or  the  conditions  of  the  license.

In  the  effort  to  secure  enforcement  of  laws  prohibiting  or
regulating  sweatshops,  resort  has  been  had  to  the  device  of
tagging  the  products  of  sweatshops.^  In  some  cases  the  value
of  the  tag  is  not  due  so  much  to  the  fact  that  it  aids  en-
forcement of  provisions  regulating  the  sweatshop  industries
as  to  the  discouragement  of  that  industry  by  branding  its
products  and  discouraging  their  purchase  by  the  public.

After  the  evidence  of  violation  of  the  requirements  of  the
law  is  secured,  the  marshaling  and  presentation  of  that  evi-
dence to  the  court  in  which  a  prosecution  is  conducted  is  of
the  greatest  importance.  Ordinarily,  it  is  the  business  of  the
district  attorney  or  the  attorney-general  to  conduct  prosecu-
tions. The  department,  however,  which  administers  the  law
violated  is  under  obligation  to  secure  the  evidence  of  vio-
lation and  present  it  to  the  prosecuting  officer.  In  practice,
other  duties  so  absorb  the  time  and  attention  of  the  attorney-
general  and  the  district  attorney  that  they  give  little  considera-
tion to  the  preparation  of  prosecutions  for  violation  of  police
regulations.  The  rules  of  evidence,  especially  in  criminal
prosecutions,  are  very  technical.  It  is  diffictdt  even  for  a
lawyer  to  determine  what  is  relevant  testimony.  It  frequent-
ly happens  that  a  factory  inspector,  without  legal  training  or
sympathetic  legal  advice,  bases  a  prosecution  on  testimony
which,  because  of  technical  rules,  will  not  be  admitted  by  the
courts,  and  therefore  the  prosecution  falls.  This  need  of  sym-
pathetic, constant  legal  assistance  to  administrative  officials  in
securing  and  furnishing  the  evidence  of  violation  has  resulted,
in  many  jurisdictions,  in  the  assignment  of  a  special  assistant
attorney-general,  district  attorney  or  city  counsel  to  attend  to
prosecutions  for  violations  of  laws  enforced  by  a  particular
administrative  department.  An  assistant  to  the  corporation
coimsel  in  New  York  City  devotes  his  entire  time  to  advising
the  tenement  house  department  and  prosecuting  violations  of
the  tenement  house  law.  In  New  York,  instead  of  having  a
special  deputy  attorney-general  assigned  to  the  industrial  com-
mission, the  legislature  provided  for  a  counsel  and  three  as-


>  New  York,  Laws  1913,  C.  260.


462 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

sistants  whose  duty  it  is  to  assist  in  the  preparation  of  prosecu-
tions and  in  the  conduct  of  such  prosecutions  in  the  courts.
By  arrangements  with  district  attorneys,  counsel  to  the  com-
mission actually  conducts  the  prosecutions  in  the  criminal
courts,  but  he  does  this  subject  to  the  control  of  the  district
attorney.

(6)  Cooperation  by  Pressure

Penalties  and  prosecutions  are  coercive  methods  of  adminis-
tration. But  the  workmen's  compensation  laws  adopted  in
several  states  indicate  a  new  and  important  administrative
principle.  Prior  to  the  adoption  of  these  laws,  the  only  in-
ducements offered  to  the  employer  to  prevent  accidents  to  his
employees  were  the  liability  laws  and  the  factory  acts.  The
employer  was  treated  as  a  criminal,  and  naturally  he  revolted
and  obeyed  only  as  little  of  the  laws  as  he  might  be  exposed
to  on  account  of  his  lack  of  political  influence  or  the  in-
efSciency  of  inspectors.  But  the  compensation  laws,  by
requiring  him  to  pay  for  all  accidents,  instead  of  merely  those
he  cannot  escape,  tend  to  bring  upon  him  a  universal  pecimiary
pressure,  like  that  of  taxation,  which  induces  him  to  prevent
all  accidents  and  to  provide  for  early  recovery  of  the  victims.
This  is  especially  true  if  the  law  is  so  drafted  as  to  lay  the
emphasis  on  prevention  and  medical  and  siurgical  treatment.

This  class  of  legislation  is  cooperative,  instead  of  coercive.
The  employer  now  takes  as  much  interest  as  the  employee  in
having  the  factory  inspectors  efficient  and  helpftil.  Further-
more, he  establishes  his  own  "safety  department,"  which  is
always  watchful  and  far  more  efficient  than  the  small  number
of  state  inspectors  that  the  taxpayers  will  allow.  In  this  way
"social  insurance"  in  its  many  forms  of  accident,  health,
invalidity,  old  age,  and  unemployment  insurance,  may  be  ex-
pected, if  the  laws  are  properly  drafted  and  then  properly  ad-
ministered, to  bring  about  the  cooperation  of  employer,  em-
ployee, and  the  state,  where  the  older  methods  of  coercion
were  ineffective  and  productive  of  antagonism.

The  insurance  principle  also  provides  an  inducement  for
employers  and  employees  to  give  sufficient  of  their  time  to
the  administration  of  labor  law. This  is  the  peculiar  need  and


ADMINISTRATION  463

weakness  of  American  administration.  Private  citizens  leave
administration  to  professional  politicians.  Employers  hire
attorneys  to  represent  them  in  legislation.  A  kind  of  con-
stant pressure  is  needed  that  will  induce  them  to  take  part
themselves  in  public  administration  exactly  as  they  do  in  the
administration  of  their  factories.  Financial  gain  or  loss  is
this  universal  pressure,  not  depending  on  exhortation  or  pub-
lic spirit.  Social  insurance,  properly  organized  and  adinin-
istered  under  the  supervision  of  those  who  pay  the  bills,  con-
verts the  prevention  of  accidents  and  the  preservation  of
health  from  sentiment  and  humanitarianism  into  business  and
profits.  It  makes  it  worth  while  for  employers  to  give  time
to  public  service.

Thus  social  insurance  accomplishes  what,  in  France,  is
called  solidarism,  as  a  correction  of  individualism. *  The
health  and  welfare  of  every  wage-earner  is  "affected  by  a
public  interest"  when  the  industry  or  the  community  is  re-
quired to  make  good  the  loss.  Each  laborer  then  becomes  a
"public  utility."  Individualism,  while  it  highly  rewards  the
fortunate  individual,  carries  with  it  the  sole  responsibility  and
liability  for  his  own  misfortunes.  The  solidarism  of  social
insurance  enforces  the  joint  responsibility  of  employer,  em-
ployee, and  the  community.

But  social  insurance  is  an  administrative  rather  than  a
judicial  problem.  It  takes  the  question  of  individual  liability
out  of  the  hands  of  the  covirts  and  places  it  in  the  hands  of
executivfes.  It  avoids  litigation  over  past  misfortunes  and
substitutes  "social  prevention"  of  future  misfortunes.  For
this  reason,  the  administrative  officials  of  the  state  cannot
successfully  deal  with  social  insurance  except  through  the  co-
operation of  employers  and  employees,  and  the  latter  will  not
effectually  cooperate  except  through  the  inducement  of
financial  gain.  Hence  it  is  that  well-considered  schemes  of
social  insurance  distribute  the  burden  of  expense  between
employer,  employee,  and  the  state.  This  is  plain  in  the  form
of  health  insurance,  where  the  employee  contributes  a  share
of  the  insurance  premiums.  It  may  also  be  brought  about  in
non-contributory  schemes  of  accident  compensation,  where,  in

'Lfon  Bourgeois,  "International  Organization  of  Social  Policies,"
American  Labor  Legislation  Review,  March,  1914,  p.  186,


464 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

place  of  denjdng  the  employee  any  compensation  at  all  in  case
of  "wilful  misconduct,"  his  compensation  is  reduced,  say,
10  or  IS  per  cent.  This  minimizes  contests  in  court  over
"wilful  misconduct,"  but,  at  the  same  time,  forces  the  work-
man to  contribute  when  he  is  plainly  responsible.

This  and  other  devices  illustrate  the  differences  between
legislation  with  its  court  procediu-e,  which  penalizes  the  in-
dividual for  past  acts,  and  administration  based  on  insurance
which  induces  him  to  avoid  future  acts.  The  matter  resolves
itself  into  a  series  of  adjustments  which  balance  the  motive
of  pecuniary  gain  or  loss  against  the  carelessness,  greed,  or
oppression  that  produces  misfortune  and  suffering.  These
nice  adjustments  can  be  worked  out  only  through  the  ac-
cumulated tests  and  trials  of  administrative  investigations,
where  employers,  employees,  and  officials  join  together,  and
not  through  partisan  conflicts  in  legislatures  or  legal  battles
in  court.

Thus  "solidarism"  is  that  goal  of  labor  legislation,  where
it  can  be  truly  said  that  "an  injury  to  one  is  the  concern  of
all."  On  the  financial  side  it  is  such  an  arrangement  that  all
will  eqtiitably  bear  the  burdens  that  fall  upon  each  individual.
On  the  side  of  hiunan  motives  it  is  a  departure  from  litigation
and  the  fear  of  occasional  criminal  penalties  to  the  adoption
of  continuous  inducements  for  the  prevention  of  misfortune
and  oppression.  On  the  side  of  administration  it  is  the  co-
operative investigation  of  conditions  by  employers,  employees,
and  the  state  through  representatives  and  officials  in  whose
ability  and  integrity  all  have  confidence.  On  the  side  of  a
broader  social  philosophy  it  is  the  recognition  both  of  class
struggle  and  common  interest  as  permanent  facts,  and  then
the  adjustment  of  laws  and  administration  so  as  to  equalize
the  struggle  and  utilize  the  common  interest  for  a  public
benefit.


SELECT CRITICAL  BIBLIOGRAPHY

In  preparing  the  following  select  critical  bibliography,  ar-
ranged by  chapters  and  in  certain  cases  also  by  subdivisions
of  chapters,  an  effort  has  been  made  to  bring  together  only
the  most  helpful  and  the  most  accessible  works  on  labor
legislation.


I. THE  BASIS  OP  LABOR  LAW


Andrews,  J.  deWitt.  American
law,  a  commentary  on  the  juris-
prudence, constitution,  and  laws
of  the  United  States.  Chicago,
Callaghan,  1908. 2  v.

"Constructed  in  accordance  with  the
institutional  or  analytical  method,  with
the  object  of  producing  an  elementary
treatise  possessing  as  much  of  the  prac-
tical as  is  possible  within  the  space  de-
voted to  the  work."  Intended  to  pro-
vide a  classification  that  will  fit  American
conditions.
Chapman,  Sydney  J.  Work  and
wages;  in  continuation  of  Earl
Brassey's  "Work  and  wages"
and  "Foreign  work  and  English
wages."  Part  III,  "Social  bet-
terment." London,  Longmans,
Green,  1914. viii,  382  p.

Beginning  with  the  foundations  of
social  reform,  the  author  discusses  such
questions  as  industrial  training,  home
work,  woman's  labor.

Clark,  Lindley  D. The  law  of  the

employment  of  labor.  New  York,
Macnullan,  1911. xiv,  373  p.

Deals  with  the  principles  underiying
the  common  law  and  legislation  as  far
as  these  affect  the  relation  between  em-
ployer and  employee.  Written  from  a
legal  standpoint.  Appendix,  giving  a  code
of  the  common  law  affecting  employment.
Columbia  university.  Legisla-
tive drafting  research  fund.
Index  digest  of  state  constitutions.
Albany,  Lyon,  19 15. 1546  p.

Comparative  summary,  by  subjects,
prepared  for  the  New  York  state  con-
stitutional convention  commission.

3Q


Coman,  Katharine.  The  indus-
trial history  of  the  United  States.
New  York,  MacmiUan,  1912.
xi,  461  p.

Sketches  the  industrial,  commercial,
and  financial  development  of  the  nation
from  colonial  times  till  the  present  day
and  ends  with  two  chapters  on  con-
temporary problems  and  conservation.

Ely,  Richard  T.  Property  and
contract  in  their  relations  to  the
distribution  of  wealth.  New
York,  MacmiUan,  1914. 2  v.

Gives  a  wide  survey  of  the  theories  of
property  and  contract  held  at  different
times;  interprets  cases  on  police  power
according  to  a  progressive  theory.  Many
references.

Economic  theory  and  labor

legislation.  (Proceedings  Amer-
ican association  for  labor  legisla-
tion, 1st  annual  meeting,  p.  10-
39.) Madison,  Wis.,  1908.

Examines  the  attitude  of  the  classical
economists  toward  social  reform.  First
presidential  address  of  _  the  American
association  for  labor  legislation.

Farnam,  Henry  W.  Some  funda-
mental distinctions  in  labor  legis-
lation. (Proceedings  American
association  for  labor  legislation,
2d  annual  meeting,  p.  29-42.)
Madison,  Wis.,  1909.

Discusses  the  different  types  of  labor
laws  and  the  purposes  for  which  they  are
enacted.  Second  presidential  address  of
the  American  association  for  labor  legis-
lation.

Freund,  Ernst. The  police  povy^


466 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


er,  public  policy,  and  constitu-
tional rights.  Chicago,  Callaghan,
1904. xiii,  819  p.

A  thorough  and  learned  study  of  the
police  power  in  its  various  aspects.

Goodnow,  Frank  J.  Social  re-
form and  the  constitution.  New
York, Macmillan,  191 1.  xxi,365p.

An  attempt  to  determine  how  far  the
constitution  is  a  bar  to  social  progress;
with  a  chapter  on  the  attitude  of  the
courts.

Hall,  J.  p.  Cases  on  constitutional
law,  selected  from  decisions  of
state  and  federal  courts.  St.
Paul,  West  publishing  cc,  1913.
XX,  1452  p.

Over  350  selected  cases,  summarized
and  annotated.

Hastings,  William  G.  The  de-
velopment of  law  as  illustrated
by  the  decisions  relating  to  the
police  power  of  the  state.  (Pro-
ceedings of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  1900,  v.  39:  359-
554-)

Original  and  suggestive  treatment.

Hutchins,  B.  L.,  and  Harrison,
Amy.  A  history  of  factory  leg-
islation. London,  King,  1903.
xviii,  372  p.

History  of  factory  legislation  in  Eng-
land from  the  Elizabethan  poor  law  to
1903. Preface  by  Sidney  Webb.

International  labor  office.  Bul-
letin of  the  international  labor
office.  Jena,  1902-,  Paris,  1902-,
London,  1906-,  monthly.

Separate  editions  in  English,  French
and  German  give  texts  of  labor  laws  and
of  administrative  orders  in  all  countries.

Moore,  B.  F.  The  supreme
court  and  unconstitutional  legis-
lation. (Columbia  university
studies  in  history,  economics,  and
public  law,  V.  54,  no.  2:97-158.)
New  York,  1913.

A  study,  more  historical  than  critical.


of  the  cases  In  which  state  and  federal
laws  and  municipal  ordinances  have
been  declared  unconstitutional  by  the
supreme  court.  Analysis  of  the  causes
for  the  decisions  rendered.

PIc,  Paul.  Traits  fl^mentaire  de
legislation  industrielle;  les  lois
ouvri^res.  Paris,  Rousseau,  1912.
XV,  1206  p.

A  scholarly  collection  and  arrangement
of  laws  on  labor,  with  a  theoretical  and
historical  introduction.  Deals  primarily
but  not  exclusively  with  France.

Stimson,  Frederick  J.  Handbook
to  the  labor  laws  of  the  tJnited
States. New York, Scribner,

1907- 385  P-

First  attempt  to  set  forth  and  explain
in  a  popular  way  the  laws  of  the  United
States  relating  to  labor.

Thorpe,  Francis  N.  (comp.).  The
federal  and  state  constitutions,
colonial  charters,  and  other  or-
ganic laws  of  the  states,  terri-
tories, and  colonies  now  or  here-
tofore forming  the  United  States
of  America.  (H.  R.  doc.  357,
59th  Cong.,  2d  sess.)  Washing-
ton, Govt,  print.  oflE.,  1909.  7  v.

A  complete  collection  of  organic  laws,
lacking  only  the  constitutions  of  Arizona
and  New  Mexico,  which  were  adopted  in
1910.
United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  Bulletins.  Washing-
ton, Govt,  print,  off.,  1895-

Issues  giving  up-to-date  texts  of
American  labor  laws  and  court  decisions
thereon  are:  No.  1/^8,  "Labor  law3  of
the  United  States,  with  decisions  of  the
courts  relating  thereto"  (2  v.);  No,  152,
"Decisions  of  courts  and  opinions  af-
fecting labor,  1913";  No,  166,  "Labor
legislation  of  1914";  No.  169,  "De-
cisions of  courts  affecting  labor,  1914,"

Willoughby,  W.  W.  The  constitu-
tional law  of  the  United  States.
New  York,  Baker,  Voorhis,  1910.
2 V.

Deals  with  the  general  principles  un-
derlying constitutional, law.


11. INDIVIDUAL BARGAINING


I.  The  Laborer  as  Debtor;
2.  The  Laborer  as  Creditor

Anson,  William  R.  Principles  of
the  English  law  of  contract  and  of
agency  in  its  relation  to  contract.
Edited  with  American  notes  by


E.  W.  Huffcut.  New  York,  Ox-
ford university  press,  American'
branch,  1906. li,  462  p.

Standard  English  work  on  the  subject,
edited  for  American  use.
Ballagh,  James  C. White  servi-
tude in  the  colony  of  Virginia:
a  study  of  the  system  of  indei}-


BIBLIOGRAPHY


467


tured  labor  in  the  American
colonies.  Baltimore,  Johns  Hop-
kins press,  June -July,  1895.
(Johns  Hopkins  university  stud-
ies in  historical  and  political
science,  v.  13:259-357-)

Representative  picture  of  the  condi-
tions of  indentured  service  in  the  south;
includes  a  chapter  on  "The  freedman."

Coman,  Katharine.  History  of
contract  labor  in  the  Hawaiian
islands.  New  York,  Macnullan,
1903.  (Publications  of  the  Amer-
ican economic  association,  3d
series,  v.  4:477-552.)

Historical  account  of  the  contract
labor  system  as  applied  to  different  races,
with  an  analysis  of  its  principles  and  a
summary  describing  the  labor  system
now  in  force.  Based  to  some  extent  on
Information  obtained  by  the  author  dur-
ing a  visit  to  Hawaii.

Geiser,  Karl  F.  Redemptioners
and  indentured  servants  in  the
colony  and  commonwealth  of
Pennsylvania.  New  Haven,
Coim.,  Tuttle,  Morehouse  and
Taylor  co.,  n.  d.  (Supplement  to
the  Yale  review,  v.  10,  no.  2,
Aug.,  1901.) 128  p.

Account  of  the  countries  whence  the
early  immigrants  came,  the  conditions
of  their  voyage,  and  their  mode  of  liv-
ing in  this  country;  doing  for  the  north
what  Ballagh's  book  (q.  v,)  does  for  the
south.

Hurd,  John  C.  The  law  of  free-
dom and  bondage  in  the  United
States.  Boston,  Little,  Brown,
1858. 2  V.

Deals  exclusively  with  the  legal  aspect
of  the  question.

Ingram,  John  K.  A  history  of
slavery  and  serfdom.  London,
Black,  1895. xiv,  285  p.

Deals  with  slavery  in  ancient  Greece
and  Rome,  the  serfdom  of  the  middle
ages,  the  African  slave  trade  and  slavery
in  Russia  and  the  east.

Motley,  James  M.  Apprentice-
ship in  American  trade  unions.
Baltimore,  Johns  Hopkins  press,
1907.  (Johns  Hopkins  university
studies  in  historical  and  political
science,  v.  25: 482-604.)

Chapter  on  the  governmental  regula-
tion of  apprenticeship.

Parry, Edward  A. The  law  and

the  poor.  New  York,  Button,
1914. xxi,  316  p.


A  London  county  court  judge's
criticism  of  the  law's  treatment  of  the
working  class;  with  a  chapter  on  Im-
prisonment for  debt.
Terrell,  Mary  C.  Peonage  in  the
United  States:  the  convict  lease
,system  and  the  chain  gangs.
(Nineteenth  century  and  after,
1907. v.  62:306-322.)

Partly  founded  on  the  report  of  the
Georgia  state  prison  commission  for
1905-1906;  deals  with  conditions  in  the
south.

United  States.  Report  on  condi-
tion of  woman  and  child  wage-
earners  in  the  United  States.
(Senate  doc.  645,  6ist  Cong.,  2d
sess.)  v.  6,  '"The  beginnings  of
child  labor  legislation  in  certain
states:  a  comparative  study,"
Elizabeth  Lewis  Otey.  Washing-
ton, Govt,  print.  oflE.,  1910.
Chapter  on  apprenticeship.

Bureau  of  labor  statis-
tics. "  Labor  conditions  in  Mex-
ico," Walter  E.  Weyl.  (Its  Bul-
letin, V.  7,  no.  38.)  Washington,
Govt,  print  off.,  1902. 194  p.

Industrial  and  agricultural  situation
in  Mexico,  account  of  the  origin  and  de-
velopment of  peonage  and  Its  effect  oa
the  people.

Department  of  justice.

Annual  report  of  the  attorney-
general.  Exhibit  17,  p.  207-215.
Washington,  Govt,  print,  off.,
1907.

Short  report  on  peonage  conditions  re-
sulting from  an  investigation  by  the  as-
sistant attorney-general.

Immigration  commis-
sion. Reports.  "Contract  la-
bor and  induced  and  assisted  im-
migration," v.  2:371-386;  "The
Greek  padrone  system  in  the
United  States,"  v.  2:387-408;
"Peonage,"  v.  2:439-449;  "Im-
migrant banks,"  v.  37:197-350.
(Senate  doc.  747,  6ist  Cong.,
3d  sess.)  Washington,  Govt,
print,  off.,  191 1. 41  V.

The  commission's  complete  reports  on
these  subjects.

Ward,  H.  D.  Peonage  in  America.
(Cosmopolitan,  1905,  v.  39:423-
430.)

Summary  and  discussion  of  several
peonage  cases  in  the  south,  including
Clyatt  V.  U.  S.


468 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Wilson,  Henry.  History  of  the
rise  and  fall  of  the  slave  power
in  America.  Boston,  Houghton,
Mifflin,  n.  d. 3  v.

A  history  of  slavery  in  America  from
colonial  times  to  the  passage  of  the
fifteenth  amendment,  the  most  detailed
part  being  concerned  with  the  Civil  War.


3.  The  Laborer  as  Tenant

Cant-Wall,  Edward.  Ireland  un-
der the  land  act;  letters  contrib-
uted to  the  "Standard"  news-
paper; with  an  appendix  of  lead-
ing cases  under  the  act,  giving
the  evidence  in  full,  judicial
dicta,  &c.  London,  Chatto  and
Windus,  1882.

Excellent  material  illustrating  the
operations  of  the  Irish  land  commission.

Curtis,  Charles  E.,  and  Gordon,
Robert  A.  A  practical  handbook
upon  agricultural  tenancies,  for
the  use  of  landlords,  their  agents
and  tenants,  together  with  the
text  of  the  agricultural  holdings
acts,  1908  (English  and  Scottish),
and  the  small  holdings  and  allot-
ments acts,  1908.  London,  Crosby,
Lockwood,  1910. xii,  328  p.

Deals  with  the  English  law  of  landlord
and  tenant.

Haney,  Lewis  H.  (ed).  Studies
in  agricultural  economics  (Bul-
letin of  the  tmiversity  of  Texas,
no.  298,  general  series  no.  33.)
Austin,  Tex.,  University  of  Texas,
1913. 132  p.

Studies  of  farm  tenure  and  crop
mortgage  system  in  Texas,  cooperative
farming,  the  farm  labor  problem,  etc.,
by  members  of  the  Texas  applied  eco-
nomics club.

Taylor, Henry  C. An  introduc-
tion to  the  study  of  agricultural
economics. New York, Mac-
millan,  1905. viii,  327  p.
Chapters  on  landlord  and  tenant.

Tiffany,  Herbert  T.  The  law  of
landlord  and  tenant.  St.  Paul,
Keefe-Davidson,  igio. 2  v.

Exhaustive  legal  treatise  on  the  sub-
ject.

Underhlll,  H.  Clay.  A  treatise  on
the  law  of  landlord  and  tenant,
including  leases,  their  execution,


surrender,  and  renewal,  the  par-
ties thereto,  and  their  reciprocal
rights  and  obligations,  the  various
kinds  of  tenancy,  the  use  and  pos-
session of  the  premises,  the  char-
acter of  rent  and  the  remedies  for
its  recovery,  the  tenant's  right
to  fixtures,  etc.,  etc.:  with  full
references  to  the  latest  American
and  English  cases  and  to  relevant
American  and  English  statutes,
both  ancient  and  modern.  Chi-
cago, T.  H.  Flood,  1909. 2  V.

Seeks  to  give  a  treatment  of  the  sub-
ject in  the  light  of  modem  conditions
and  especially  to  bring  out  more  clearly
the  contractual  character  of  the  landlord-
tenant  relationship.

Wolff,  Henry  W.  Cooperation  in
agriculture.  London,  King,  1912.
X,  378  p.

Describes  in  detail  the  methods  of  co-
operation used  in  different  countries.
The  author  is  a  leading  authority  on  co-
operation.


4.  The  Laborer  as  Competitor

Commons,  John  R.  Races  and
immigrants  in  America.  New
York,  MacmUlan,  1913.  xiii,
242  p.

An  estimate  of  the  contribution  made
by  each  race  to  the  nation  as  a  whole.

Congressional  record,  containing
the  proceedings  and  debates  of
the  63d  Cong.,  2d  sess.,  v.  51:
4296-4300,  speech  of  J.  I.  Nolan,
Mar.  4,  1914.  Washington,  Govt,
print,  off.,  1914.

A  good  short  summary  of  the  various
attempts  at  legislation  on  the  subject  of
convict  labor.

Coolidge,  IVIary  R.  Chinese  im-
migration. New  York,  Holt,
1909- X,  531  p.

Sketches  the  history  of  the  anti-
Chinese  movement,  with  conclusions  in
favor  of  non -restriction.

Eaves,  Lucile.  A  history  of  Cali-
fornia labor  legislation,  with  an
introductory  sketch  of  the  San
Francisco  labor  movement.  Ber-
keley, The  university  press,  1910.
(University  of  California  pub-
lications in  economics.)  xiv,
461  p.

Several  chapters  on  the  Chinese,  with
special  reference  to  California.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


469


Hourwich,  Isaac  A.  Immigration
and  labor;  the  economic  aspects
of  European  immigration  to  the
United  States.  New  York,  Put-
nam, 1912. xvii,  544  p.

Presents  the  argument  against  re-
striction.

Jenks,  Jeremiah  W.,  and  Lauck,
William  J.  The  immigration
problem;  a  study  of  American
immigration  conditions  and  needs.
New  York,  Punk  and  WagnaUs,
1913. XXV,  551  p.

Based  on  the  report  of  the  Immigra-
tion commission  of  ipir.  Advocates
restriction.

Neame,  L.  E.  The  Asiatic  danger
in  the  colonies.  London,  Rout-
ledge,  1907. 192  p.

Discusses  the  Asiatic  problem  with
reference  to  British  Columbia.  South
Africa,  _  Australasia,  and  other  parts  of
the  British  empire.  Contains  interest-
ing documents.

Ross,  Edward  Aisworth. The  old

world  in  the  new;  the  significance
of  past  and  present  immigration
to  the  American  people.  New
York,  Century  co.,  1914. 327  p.

Analyzes  in  turn  the  racial  character-
istics of  each  immigrant  group.

United  States.  Commissioner  of
labor.  20th  Annual  report.
"Convict  labor."  Washington,
Govt,  print,  off.,  1905. 794  p.

The  fullest  and  most  recent  govern-
ment publication  on  the  subject.


5.  Legal Aid and Industrial
Courts

Chicago  legal  aid  society.  An-
nual reports.

Kansas  City,  Mo.,  free  legal  aid
bureau  of  the  board  of  public
welfare. Annual  reports.

Legal  aid  society  of  New  York.
Annual  reports.  Also  Legal  aid
review,  quarterly.

United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  "  Industrial  courts  of
Prance,  Germany,  and  Switzer-
land," Helen  L.  Sumner.  (Its
Bulletin,  v.  24,  no.  98:273-464.)
Washington,  Govt,  print,  off.,
1912.

A  careful  study  of  the  history,  or-
ganization, and  working  of  industrial
courts,  with  details  of  methods  of  elec-
tion, procedure,  jurisdiction,  judicial
and  administrative  functions,  methods
of  appeal.
Walz,  W.  E.  Legal  aid  societies,
their  nature,  history,  scope,  meth-
ods, and  results.  (Green  bag,
1914. V.  26:101.)

Deals  with  the  movement  in  the
United  States.

Wood,  Walter  J.  The  place  of  the
public  defender  in  the  adminis-
tration of  justice.  Oakland,  Cal.,
1914. 32  p.

Address  by  the  public  defender  of  Los
Angeles  county  before  the  California
bar  association.


III. COLLECTIVE  BARGAINING
General  Works  i.  The  Law  of  Conspiracy


Webb,  Sidney,  and  Webb,  Bea-
trice. Industrial  democracy.
London,  Longmans,  Green,  1902.
Ixi,  927  p. 2  V.  in  one.

Analyzes  trade  union  structure,  func-
tion, and  theory.  The  classic  work  on
collective  bargaining.

The  history  of  trade  union-
ism. London,  Longmans,  Green,
1911. Ixviii,  558  p.

A  narrative  of  the  facts  of  trade  union
history  in  England,  forming  the  com-
plement to  "Industrial  democracy."  A
new  introductory  chapter  recounts  the
story  of  the  Osborne  judgment  and  gives
a  general  survey  of  trade  unionism  in
1910.


Bryan,  J.  W.  The  development
of  the  English  law  of  conspiracy.
Qohns  Hopkins  university  studies
in  historical  and  political  science,
V.  27: 133-161.)  Baltimore,  Johns
Hopkins  press,  1909.

EListory  of  the  law  of  conspiracy  In
England.  Only  the  last  chapter  deals
especially  with  the  law  of  conspiracy  as
developed  in  labor  cases.

Proper  bounds  for  the  use

of  the  injunction  in  labor  dis-
putes. (Annals  of  the  American
academy  of  political  and  social
science,  v.  36:288-301.)  Phila-
delphia, 1910.


470 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION


A  lawyer's  criticism  of  the  law  of  con-
spiracy as  developed  in  American  cases.

Commons,  John  R.,  and  Gil-
more,  Eugene  A.  (ed.).  A  docu-
mentary history  of  American
industrial  society,  v.  3,  4,  and
supplement.  Cleveland,  Arthur
H.  Clark,  1910. 10  v.

Reprints  in  full  the  records  of  the
labor  cases  in  the  United  States  prior  to
Commonwealth  v.  Hunt  (1842).

Cooke,  F.  H.  The  law  of  combina-
tions, monopolies,  and  labor
unions.  Chicago,  Callaghan,
1908. Ixix,  a66  p.

The  law  applicable  to  labor  unions.
Argues  in  favor  of  a  liberalization  of
trade  union  law.

Groat,  George  G.  The  attitude
of  American  courts  in  labor  cases.
(Columbia  university  studies  in
history,  economics,  and  public
law,  V.  42,  no.  108.)  New  York,
Longmans,  Green,  191 1.  400  p.
An  economist's  criticism  of  American
trade  union  law  as  developed  under  court
interpretation.

Laldler,  Harry  W.  Boycotts  and
the  labor  struggle.  New  York,
Lane,  1914. 488  p.

Discusses  methods  of  boycotting,  and
the  principles  of  law  applied  in  boycott
cases.
Martin,  W.  A.  A  treatise  on  the
law  of  labor  unions.  Washington,
Byrne,  1910. xxv,  649  p.

Trade  union  law  as  applied  by  conser-
vative courts.  Gives  sample  forms  of
bills  of  complaint  and  injunctions.

Seager,  Henry  R.  The  legal
status  of  trade  unions  in  the
United  Kingdom,  with  conclu-
sions applicable  to  the  United
States.  (Political  science  quar-
terly, Dec,  1907,  V.  22:  611-629.)
Reasons  for  adopting  in  the  United
States  the  trade  disputes  act  of  Great
Britain.

Witte,  Edwin  E.  The  Clayton  bill
and  organized  labor.  (Survey,
1914,  V.  32:360.)

The  modifications  in  trade  union  law
made  by  the  Clayton  antitrust  act.

2.  Mediation  by  Government

Clark,  John  Bates.  Is  authorita-
tive arbitration  inevitable?  (Po-
litical science  quarterly,  Dec,
1902,  v. 17:553-567.)


A  closely  reasoned  discussion,  going
down  to  the  first  principles  of  wages,
and  concluding  that  the  unsatisfactori-
ness  of  present  conditions  calls  for  the
establishment  of  some  kind  of  wage
courts.
Dixon,  Frank  H.  Public  regula-
tion of  railway  wages.  (American
economic  review,  March,  191 5,
V.  5,  no.  I,  supp.:  245-269.)

American  experience  under  mediation
and  arbitration.

Gilman,  Nicolas  P.  Methods  of
industrial  peace.  Boston,  Hough-
ton, Mifflin,  1904. X,  436  p.

Written  from  an  unbiased  and  mod-
erate point  of  view,  and  illustrated  with
many  examples  drawn  from  different
countries.

Great  Britain.  Board  of  trade.
Reports  on  proceedings  under  the
conciliation  (trade  disputes)  act,
1896.  1st  report,  1897,  (C.
8533).  V.  83  of  1897,  55  p.;  2d
report,  1897-1899  (275),  v.  88  of
1899,  21  p.;  3d  report,  1899-1901
(296),  V.  74  of  1901,  129  p.;  4th
report,  1901-1903  (Cd.  1846),
V.  89  of  1904,  121  p.;  5th  report,
1903-1905  (335),  V.  76  of  1905,
81  p.;  6th  report,  1905-1907
(340),  V.  80  of  1907,  no  p.;  7th
report,  1907-1909  (5),  v.  21  of
1910,  172  p.;  8th  report,  1910
(96),  V.  13  of  ion,  104  p.;  9th
report,  191 1  (87),  v.  17  of  1912-
1913,  163  p.;  loth  report,  1912,
38  of  1913,  163  p.;  nth  report,
191 3  (89)  of  1914.  London,  1897-
A  short  survey  of  labor  conditions
throughout  the  year  with  special  refer-
ence to  disputes  and  their  settlement;  ap-
pendices giving  tabular  statements  and
detailed  summaries  of  cases  decided.

Knoop,  Douglas.  Industrial  con-
ciliation and  arbitration.  London,
King,  1905. xxiv,  241  p.

Mainly  a  study  of  voluntary  methods,
which  the  author  advocates  as  against
the  Australasian  compulsory  sj^stem.

Plgou,  Arthur  Cecil.  Prmciples
and  methods  of  industrial  peace.
New  York,  Macmillan,  1905,
XX,  240  p.

Desirability  of  industrial  peace,  anal-
ysis of  wage  problems,  and  methods  of
amicable  settlement.

Price,  Langford  L.  Industrial
peace,  its  advantages,  methods,
and  difficulties;  a  report  of  an
inquiry made for the Toynbee


BIBLIOGRAPHY


471


trustees.  London,  Macmillan,
1887. xxxi,  127  p.

One  of  the  first  attempts  to  sound  the
possibilities  of  arbitration  and  concilia-
tion. Based  on  an  investigation  of  the
coal  and  iron  industries  in  the  north  of
England.

United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  "Conciliation  and
arbitration  in  Great  Britain."
John  B.  M'Pherson.  (Its  Bulle-
tin, V.  5,  no.  28:457-548.)
Washington,  Govt,  print.  oflE.,
1900.

Investigation  into  the  machinery  of
conciliation  in  selected  English  trades,
such  as  engineering,  shipbuilding,  and
coal  mining.

"  Governmental  indus-
trial arbitration,"  L.  W.  Hatch.
(Its  Bulletin,  v.  11,  no.  60:389-
655-)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
oflf.,  1905.

"Mediation  and  arbitra-
tion of  railway  labor  disputes  in
the  United  States,"  Charles  P.
Neill,  p.  1-63;  "Canadian  in-
dustrial disputes  investigation
actof  1907,"  p.  64-81;  "Concilia-
tion and  arbitration  of  railway-
labor  disputes  in  Great,  Britain,"
p.  82-122;  "Conciliation  and  ar-
bitration in  Great  Britain,"  p.
123-160;  "Attitude  of  employ-
ing interests  toward  conciliation
and  arbitration  in  Great  Brit-
ain," A.  Maurice  Low,  p.  161-
178;  "Attitude  of  labor  toward
conciliation  and  arbitration  in
Great  Britain,"  Arthur  E.  Hol-
der, p.  179-202;  "Conciliation,
arbitration,  and  sanitation  in  the
cloak,  suit,  and  skirt  industry
in  New  York  city,"  Charles  H.
Winslow,  p.  203-272 ;  "Industrial
courts  in  France,  Germany,  and
Switzerland,"  Helen  L.  Sumner,
p.  273-464.  (Its  Bulletin,  v.  24,
no.  98.)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
off.,  1912.

Reports  of  government  investigations.

Industrial  commission.

Reports  on  labor  organizations,
labor  disputes  and  arbitration,
and  on  railway  labor,  v.  17,  pt.
Ill,  p.  325-546.  Washington,
Govt,  print,  off.,  190 1.


National  and  local  agreements  in
many  trades;  the  federal  and  state  laws
on  arbitration,  and  methods  of  arbitra-
tion in  foreign  countries.

Watney,  Charles,  and  Little,
James  A.  Industrial  warfare;
the  aims  and  claims  of  capital
and  labour.  London,  J.  Murray,
1912. X,  353  p.

Comprehensive  picture  of  unrest  in
various  fields  of  British  labor.

Weinstocic,  Harris.  The  best
way  to  minimize  strikes  and  lock-
outs. (Transactions  of  the  Com-
monwealth club  of  California,
v.  5:43-52.)  San  Francisco,
1911.

Argues  that  compulsory  arbitration  la
unsuited  to  American  conditions,  that
voluntary  arbitration  has  hitherto  failed,
and  that  the  plan  of  equal  representation
of  employers  and  enaployed  on  an  arbi-
tration board  is  likely  to  be  more  success-
ful than  either.

Willoughby,  William  F.  State
activities  in  relation  to  labor  in
the  United  States.  Qohns  Hop-
kins imiversity  studies  in  histor-
ical and  political  science,  v.  19:
178  -  269.)  Baltimore,  Johns
Hopkins  press,  1901.

Chapter  on  "Industrial  conciliation
and  arbitration,"  which  discusses  the
achievements  of  the  state  boards  of  con-
ciliation and  arbitration.


3.  Coercion  by  Government

Australia.  Bureau  of  census  and
statistics.  Labour  and  indus-
trial branch.  Labour  bulletin.
Melbourne,  quarterly.

No.  s  summarizes  the  history  of  the
commonwealth  conciliation  and  arbi-
tration acts  and  the  records  of  proceed-
ings during  January-March,  1914,  and
also  includes  a  statement  as  to  the  state
laws  regulating  wages  (p.  S3-67).

Broadhead,  Henry.  State  regula-
tion of  labour  and  labour  dis-
putes in  New  Zealand;  a  de-
scription and  a  criticism.  Christ-
church,  N.  Z.,  Whitcombe  and
Tombs,  1908. 230  p.

Written  by  the  secretary  of  an  em-
ployers' association,  who  has  been  a
member  of  a  conciUation  board.  Op-
posed to  the  arbitration  act.
Clark,  Victor  S.  The  labour
movement in Australasia; a


472 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


study  in  social  democracy.  New
York,  Holt,  1906. xi,  319  p.

Principally  concerned  with  labor  pol-
itics. Chapters  on  minimum  wage
boards  and  compulsory  arbitration,
which  are  criticized  dispassionately,  the
latter  also  from  a  legal  standpoint.
Gompers,  Samuel.  And  yet  they
would  "wish"  it  on  us.  (Amer-
ican federationist,  1915,  v.  22:
333-337-)

Criticizes  the  industrial  arbitration
court  of  New  South  Wales  for  its  action
in  reducing  wages  owing  to  the  war.
Australasian  labor  regu-
lating schemes.  (American  fed-
erationist, 1915,  V.  22:253-263.)

Expresses  the  view  that  the  arbitra-
tion courts  and  wages  boards  constitute
a  "judicial  despotism."

Great  Britain.  Home  office.  Re-
port to  the  secretary  of  state  for
the  home  department  on  the
wages  boards  and  industrial  con-
ciliation and  arbitration  acts  of
Australia  and  New  Zealand,  by
Ernest  Aves.  London,  Darling,
1908. 226  p.

A  detailed  authoritative  report  made
from  personal  observation.

Kennaday,  Paul.  Victorian  wage
boards  and  the  New  Zealand  con-
ciliation-arbitration act.  (Yale
review, 1911,  v. 19:32-54.)

Crisp  account  of  the  results  attained
in  Victoria  and  New  Zealand,  considered
with  reference  to  American  conditions.

King, W. L. Mackenzie. How

Canada  prevents  strikes.

(World's  work,  1913,  v.  26:438-
444-)

Short  explanation  of  the  Canadian
industrial  disputes  investigation  act,  its
purpose  and  result,  by  the  author  of  the
act.

Le  Rossignol,  J.  E.,  and  Stewart,

W.  D.  Compulsory  arbitration
in  New  Zealand.  (Quarterly
journal  of  economics,  1910,  v.
24:  660-712.)

Summary  of  origins,  working,  results,
and  criticisms.  Account  of  strikes  lead-
ing to  amendment  of  the  act  in  1908.
Lloyd,  Henry  D.  A  country  with-
out strikes;  a  visit  to  the  com-
pulsory arbitration  court  of  New
Zealand.  New  York,  Doubleday,
Page,  1900. xiv,  183  p.

Enthusiastic  appreciation  of  the  New
Zealand  system  in  its  early  days.

New  South Wales. The  official


year  book  of  New  South  Wales.
Sydney,  armually.

Edition  for  19 14  summarizes  the  his-
tory of  state  intervention  in  industry  in
New  South  Wales  ("Employment  and
industrial  arbitration,"  p.  906-920).

Department of labour

and  industry.  Industrial  ga-
zette. Sydney,  monthly.

V.  I  contains  all  awards  in  force,  July,
1912  (p.  7-1040).

New  Zealand.  The  New  Zealand
official  year  book.  Wellington,
annually.

Edition  for  19 14  contains  an  account
of  the  arbitration  court  and  of  the  con-
ciliation councils  ("Labour  laws,"  p.  70s
-709).

Department  of labour.

Awards,  recommendations,  agree-
ments, etc.,  made  under  the  in-
dustrial conciliation  and  arbitra-
tion act.  New  Zealand.  Welling-
ton, annually.

Designed  to  "serve  somewhat  the  pur-
pose which  the  law  reports  fulfil  in  re-
gard to  other  branches  of  legal  admin-
istration."

Reeves,  W.  Pember.  State  ex-
periments in  Australia  and  New
Zealand.  London,  Grant  Rich-
ards, 1902. 2  V.

Account  of  the  New  Zealand  arbitra-
tion act  and  its  working,  by  the  author
of  the  act.

St.  Ledger,  A.  Australian  social-
ism; an  historical  sketch  of  its
origin  and  developments.  Lon-
don, Macmillan,  1909. xv,  365  p.

Anti-socialist;  favors  wages  boards
but  considers  that  compulsory  arbitra-
tion has,,  proved  a  failure.

Siegfried,  Andre.  Democracy  in
New  Zealand.  Tr.  E.  V.  Bums.
London,  Bell,  1914.  xxiii,  398  p.
Brilliant  study  of  political,  social,  and
industrial  life  in  New  Zealand;  considers
the  arbitration  system  at  least  tempo-
rarily successful.

United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  "The  Canadian  in-
dustrial disputes  investigation
act  of  1907,"  Victor  S.  Clark.
(Its  Bulletin,  v.  16,  no.  76:657-
740.)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
off.,  1908.

"The  Canadian  industrial

disputes  investigation  act  of
1907,"  Victor  S.  Clark.  (Its
Bulletin, v. 20, no. 86: 1-29.)


BIBLIOGRAPHY


473


Washington, Govt, print, off.,
1910.

These  two  articles  explain  and  com-
ment on  the  Canadian  arbitration  system
and  attempt  to  estimate  its  success.

Victoria. Victorian year book.
Melbourne,  annually.

Edition  for  1913-1914  gives  account
of  the  law  and  a  list  of  existing  or  au-
thorized wages  boards.  ("Social  con-
ditions," p.  S18-S21)

See  also  under  The  minimum  wage:
Collier,  Hammond,  Webb.


4.  Unions  of  Government
Employees

Davies,  Emil.  The  coUectivlst
state  in  the  making.  London,
Bell,  1914. xviii,  267  p. "Col-


lectivism and  the  labor  problem,"
p.  190-202.

Discusses  participation  of  government
employees  in  determining  conditions  of
labor.
Great  Britain.  Board  of  trade.
Labour  department.  Report  on
contracts  given  out  by  public  au-
thorities to  associations  of  work-
men, by  D.  F.  Schloss.  (Par-
liamentary papers  of  1896,  v.  80
[C.  8233].)  London,  Eyre  and
Spottiswoode,  1896. 346  p.

Exhaustive  report  on  conditions  in
Great  Britain,  New  Zealand,  Victoria,
Russia,  France,  and  Italy.
Trades  union  congress.  Reports.
Published  by  the  authority  of  the
Congress  and  the  joint  committee.
Manchester,  Cooperative  print-
ing society,  annually.

Express  the  attitude  of  English  labor.


IV. THE MINIMUM  WAGE


Andrews,  Irene  Osgood.  Mini-
mum wage  legislation.  Albany,
Lyon,  1914.  219  p.  (Printed  also
as  Appendix  III  of  the  Third
report  of  the  New  York  state
factory  investigating  commission.
Albany,  1914. p.  169-385.)

History,  text,  analysis,  and  operation
of  American  and  foreign  laws;  decision
of  Oregon  supreme  court  upholding  the
state  law.

The relation  of  irregular

employment  to  the  Uving  wage
for  women.  (American  labor
legislation  review,  June,  1915,
V.  5:287-418.  Printed  also  as
Appendix  X  of  the  Fourth  report
of  the  New  York  state  factory
investigating  commission.  Al-
bany, 1915. p.  497-635-)

Need  of  considering  income  losses  of
women  workers  through  unemploymerit
and  underemployment  in  making  mini-
mum wage  awards;  table  of  minimum
wage  awards  to  January  i,  ipis.

Brandeis,  Louis  D.,  and  Gold-
marlc,  Josephine.  Appendix  to
briefs  filed  on  behalf  of  respond-
ents in  case  of  Stettler  v.  O'Hara
et  al.,  constituting  the  industrial
welfare  (minimum  wage)  com-
mission of  Oregon.  1914.  207  p.
Selection  of  extracts  favorable  to  the
legal  minimum  wage; sets  forth  evil  of


low  wages,  benefits  of  an  adequate  wage,
benefits  of  the  legal  minimum  wage,  and
analogy  with  other  labor  legislation.

Brown,  Rome  G.  The  minimum
wage.  Review  publishing  co.,
Minneapolis,  1914. xv,  98  p.

Theoretical  arguments  against  mini-
mum wage  legislation;  unconstitution-
ality of  the  Minnesota  statute.

Carey,  Margaret  Townsend.  Can

the  minimum  wage  be  safely
legalized?  Consumers'  league  of
Maryland,  Baltimore,  1914. 24  p.

Need  of  minimum  wage  legislation;
constitutionality: probable  effects.
The  Case  for  the  minimum  wage.
(Survey,  Feb.  6,  1915,  v.  33: 487-
515,  521-524-)

Symposium,  containing  articles  on  the
need,  extent,  and  operation  of  minimum
wage  legislation  in  this  country  and
abroad  by  well-known  experts,  including
Florence  Kelley,  Louis  D.  Brandeis,
M.  B.  Hammond,  John  A.  Hobson,
Howard  B.  Woolston,  N.  I.  Stone,  and
Esther  Packard.

Clark,  John  Bates.  The  minimum
wage.  (Atlantic  monthly,  Sept.,
1913,  p.  289-297.)

Theoretical  discussion  setting  forth
the  probable  operation  of  the  legal
minimum  wage,  with  particular  em-
phasis upon  those  who  might  be  thrown
out  of  work  by  such  laws.

Collier,  Paul  Stanley.  Minimum
wage legislation in Australia*


474 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


(Appendix  VIII  of  Fourth  report
of  the  New  York  state  factory
investigating  commission,  v.  4:
1845-2268.  Albany,  1915.  Also
reprint.)

Exhaustive  study  of  the  operation  and
effects  of  the  various  methods  of  wage
regulation  in  the  separate  Australian
states  and  in  the  commonwealth.
Hammond,  Matthew  B.  Judicial
interpretation  of  the  minimum
wage  in  Australia.  (American
economic  review,  June,  1913,  v.
3:259-286.)

Analysis  of  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples underiying  decisions  given  under
the  laws  establishing  minimum  wages  in
Australasia;  based  upon  studies  made
during  a  personal  visit  to  those  countries
in  the  winter  of  1911-1912.

The minimum wage in

Great  Britain  and  Australia.
(Annals  American  academy  of
political  and  social  science,  July,

1913,  v.  48:22-36.)

Results  secured  under  the  Victorian
and  British  wage  board  laws,  based
upon  personal  investigations.

Wages  boards  in  Australia.

I.  Victoria.  II.  Boards  outside
Victoria.  III.  Organization  and
procedure.  IV.  Social  and  eco-
nomic results  of  wages  boards.
(Quarterly  journal  of  economics,

1914,  V.  29:98-148,  326-361,
563-630.)

Contains  a  mass  of  detail  concerning
the  wage  boards  and  their  economic
effects.
Holcombe,  Arthur  N.  The  legal
minimum  wage  in  the  United
States.  (American  economic  re-
view, 1912,  v.  2:21-37.)

Foreign  systems  of  wage  regulation,
constitutional  outlook  in  America,
economic  need  of  minimum  wage  legisla-
tion, and  probable  effect  upon  the  rela-
tion between  employer  and  employees.

Lippman,  Walter.  The  campaign
against  sweating.  (New  repub-
lic, March  27,  1915,  v.  2,  no.  21,
part  2,  8  p.)

Popular,  forceful  article  on  the  need
for  minimum  wage  legislation.

Markham,  Arthur  B.  The  coal
strike. (Quarterly  review,  1912,

V.  216:  554-573-)

Causes  of  the  coal  strike  of  1913,  the
passage  of  the  coal  mines  minimum
wage  act,  and  the  probable  effect  of  the
operation  of  that  law.

Massachusetts. Commission  on


minimum  wage  boards. Re-
port. Boston,  1912. 326  p.

The  report  which  led  to  the  passage  of
the  first  American  minimum  wage  liw:
Investigation  of  wages  of  women  and
minors  in  Massachusetts  candy  fac-
tories, laundries,  and  retail  stores;  need
of  legislation.

Minimum  wage  com-
mission. First  annual  report.
Boston,  1914. 68  p.

Report  for  1913;  Includes  Investiga-
tions of  women's  wages  in  Massachu-
setts brush  and  corset  factories.

Second  annual  report.  Bos-
ton, 1915. 158  p.

Report  for  1914;  Includes  Investiga-
tions of  women's  wages  in  Massachu-
setts candy  factories,  laundries,  and  re-
tail stores;  operation  of  wage  board  in
brush  industry.

Nearing,  Scott.  Wages  in  the
United  States;  1908-19 10.  New
York,  Macmillan,  1911.  viii,
220  p.

First  American  study  popularizing
wage  data.  Concludes  that  average
wages  of  adult  males  were  in  neighbor-
hood of  $600  a  year.

New  York.  State  factory  Investi-
gating commission.  Fourth  re-
port. Albany,  1915.

Wages  in  New  York  state  In  mercan-
tile establishments;  In  the  shirt,  paper
box,  confectionery,  and  button  indus-
tries; in  New  York  city  in  the  millinery
trades;  relation  of  irregular  employment
to  the  living  wage  for  women;  cost  of
living;  living  conditions:  opinions  on
minimum  wage  legislation.

Oregon.  Industrial  welfare  com-
mission. First  bieimial  report.
Salem,  1915. 15  p.

Report  for  years  1913  and  191^;  In-
cludes orders  issued  by  the  commission.

Persons,  Charles  E.  Estimates  of
a  living  wage  for  female  workers.
(Quarterly  publications  of  the
American  statistical  association,
June,  1915,  V.  14:  567-577-)

Comparison  of  nine  studies,  and  con-
clusion that  18. 50  Is  a  working  basis.

Raynaud,  Barthelemy.  Vers  le
salaire  minimum:  6tude  d'^cono-
mie  et  de  legislation  industrielles.
Paris,  Librairie  de  la  socidt6  du
recueil  Sirey,  1913.

Detailed  theoretical  and  historical
study.

Ryan,  John  Augustine.  A  living
wage;  its  ethical  and  economic
aspects.  New  York,  Macmillan,
1906. 346  p.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


47S


Emphasizes  especially  the  ethical  and
economic  bases  and  the  present  need  for
minimum  wage  legislation  in  the  United
States.

Seager,  Henry  Rogers.  The  the-
ory of  the  minimum  wage.
(American  labor  legislation  re-
view, Feb.,  1913,  V.  3:81-91.)

A  statement  of  the  underlying  theory
of  minimum  wage  legislation  together
with  its  probable  results  upon  the  or-
ganization of  industry  and  upon  other
problems  of  labor  legislation;  contains
discussion  by  John  R.  Commons,  Paul
U.  Kellogg,  M.  B.  Hammond,  George  W.
Anderson,  Henry  Abrahams,  G.  W.
Noyes,  Edward  F.  McSweeney,  George
G.  Groat,  and  Emily  Green  Balch.

Smith,  Constance.  The  case  for
wages  boards.  National  anti-
sweating  league,  London,  1908.
94  P-

Principal  features  of  sweating  system
In  England  and  legislative  action  to
remedy  it.
Snowden,  Philip.  The  living
wage.  London,  Hodder  and
Stoughton,  1913. 189  p.

Discussion  of  the  benefits  of  the  legal
minimum  wage,  including  experience
gained  under  the  British  trade  boards
act  since  1910.

Streightoff,  Franic  Hatch.  Dis-
tribution of  incomes  in  the
United  States.  (Columbia  uni-
versity studies  in  history,  eco-
nomics, and  public  law,  v.  52,
no.  2.)  New  York,  Longmans,
Green,  1912. 171  p.

Analyzes  available  information  and
argues  for  better  information.  Esti-
mates that  at  least  half  the  males  aged
sixteen  or  over  in  gainful  occupations
are  earning  less  than  I626  a  year.

Tawney,  R.  H.  The  establishment
of  minimum  rates  in  the  chain-
making  industry  under  the  trade
boards  act  of  1909.  London,  Bell,
1914. 157  P-


Intensive  study  of  conditions  in  the
English  chain-making  industry  before
and  after  the  fixing  of  minimum  rates
by  a  trade  board.

The  establishment  of  mini-
mum rates  in  the  tailoring  indus-
try under  the  trade  boards  act  of
1909. London,  BeU,  19 1 5.  274  p.

Application  of  act  to  140,000  workers,
advance  in  wages,  effects  on  employment
and  on  trade  unionism,  administrative
diflSculties,  especially  in  case  of  home
workers.

United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  "Minimum  wage  leg-
islation in  the  United  States  and
foreign  countries,"  C.  H.  Verrill.
(Its  Bulletin,  no.  167.)  Wash-
ington, Govt,  print,  off.,  1915.

Text  of  laws,  awards,  and  experiences
In  administration.

"  Effect  of  minimum  wage

determinations  in  Oregon,"  Marie
L.  Obenauer  and  Bertha  von  der
Nienburg.  (Its  Bulletin,  no.  176.)
Washington, Govt, print, off.,

1915-

Detailed  study  of  the  Oregon  system
and  its  economic  effects.

Washington.  Industrial  welfare
commission.  First  biennial  re-
port. Olympia,  1915. 85,  m  p.

Report  for  the  years  1913  and  1914.
Operation  of  the  minimum  wage  law,
emphasizing  effect  on  wages  and  effi-
ciency.

Webb,  Sidney.  The  economic
theory  of  a  legal  minimum  wage.
(Journal  of  political  economy,
1912,  V.  20:973-998.)

Summary  of  the  theoretical  and  prac-
tical arguments  in  favor  of  the  minimum
wage,  Illustrated  by  experience  under
existing  laws;  comprehensive  statement
in  favor  of  minimum  wage  legislation.

See  also  under  Coercion  by  govern-
ment: Great  Britain,  Kennaday.


V. HOURS  OF  LABOR


American  association  for  labor
legislation.  One  day  of  rest  in
seven.  (Its  Leaflet,  no.  10.)
New  York,  1913. 4  p.

Arguments  in  favor,  and  standard  bill.

One  day  of  rest  in  seven.

(American labor legislation re-
view, Dec,  1914,  V.  4  :  611-630.)
Includes  report  of  operation  of  weekly


rest  day  law  in  New  York  and  Massa-
chusetts.
Ballard,  S.  Thruston. Eight-hour

shifts  in  the  milling  industry.
(American  labor  legislation  re-
view, March,  1914,  v.  4:117-
120.)

Gives  experience  of  one'lndustry  using
eight-hour  shifts.


476 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Bogardus,  E.  S.  The  relation  of
fatigue  to  industrial  accidents.
(American  journal  of  sociology,
1911-12,  V.  17:  206-222,  351-374,

512-539)

Study  of  the  effect  of  fatigue  on  the
system  and  an  attempt  to  correlate  work-
ing hours  and  accident  frequency.
Brandeis,  Louis  D.,  and  Gold-
mark,  Josephine.  Brief  in  the
case  of  Ritchie  v.  Wayman.  Illi-
nois, 1909.

The  dangers  of  long  hours,  benefits  of
short  hours,  desirability  of  uniformity,
reasonableness  of  the  ten-hour  law.

Brief  in  the  case  of  People

V.  Charles  Schweinler  Press.
New  York,  191 5.

Argues  the  constitutionality  of  pro-
hibiting night  work  for  women.

Commons,  John  R.,  and  An-
drews, John  B.  Documentary
history  of  American  industrial
society.  Cleveland,  Clark,  1910.
V.  8:8r-2io,  contains  documents  il-
lustrative of  the  movement  to  decrease
hours  of  labor;  v.  9:  24-33,  the  growth  of
the  philosophy  of  hour  limitation.

Conference  internationale  pour
la  protection  ouvriere.  Actes
de  la  conference.  Berne,  Staemp-
fli,  1913.

Proceedings  of  conference  held  Sept.
iS-25,  1913.

Fitch,  John  A.  Holding  fast  to
the  twelve-hour  day.  (Survey,
May  3,  1913,  V.  30:  165-166.)

Rest  periods  for  the  con-
tinuous industries.  (American
labor  legislation  review,  Feb.,
1913,  V.  3:53-62.)

Sunday  and  rest  day  labor

laws  in  the  United  States.  (New
York  Department  of  labor  bul-
letin no.  45:377-403.  Albany,
1910.)

A  review  of  court  decisions  on  Sunday
rest  day  laws  showing  that  their  justi-
fication by  virtue  of  the  police  power  ap-
plies even  more  clearly  to  the  one  day
of  rest  in  seven  laws.

Judicial  basis  for  legisla-
tive restriction  of  hours  of  labor
of  adult  males.  (New  York  De-
partment of  labor  bulletin  no.
46:90-121.  Albany,  1911.)
Critical  review  of  court  decisions.

The steel workers. The

Pittsburgh  survey. New  York,


Charities  publication  committee,
191 1. 380  p.

Treats  of  the  results  of  a  seven-day
week  and  twelve-hour  day.

Freund,  Ernst.  Constitutional
aspects  of  hour  legislation  for
men.  (American  labor  legisla-
tion review,  March,  1914,  v.  4:
129-132.)

Suggestion  of  possible  principles  on
which  to  base  hour  legislation.

Constitutional limitations

and  legislation.  (Proceedings  of
third  annual  meeting  of  the
American  association  for  labor
legislation,  p.  51-71.  New  York,
1910.)

Critical  discussion  of  development  of
theory  of  constitutionality  of  hour  legis-
lation.

The  constitutional  aspects

of  the  protection  of  women  in  in-
dustry. (Publications  Academy
of  political  science,  1910,  v.  i:
162-184.)
Garretson,  Austin  B.  Long  hours
in  railroading.  (American  labor
legislation  review,  March,  1914,
v.  4: 120-128.)

Personal  experiences  and  statistics  of
hours  and  casualties.
Go!dmari<,  Josephine.  Fatigue
and  efficiency;  a  study  in  indus-
try. New  York,  Charities  publi-
cation committee, 19 12. xvii,

591  P-

Shows  necessity  for  regulation  of
working  hours  to  prevent  overfatigue
and  e^diaustion.

Handbook  of  laws  regulat-
ing women's  hours  of  labor,  and
a  standard  law  embodying  the
best  provisions  of  the  most  ef-
fective statutes  now  in  force.
New  York,  National  consumers'
league,  1913. 56  p.

The inalienable right to

rest.  (Survey,  May  24,  1913,
V.  30: 264-266.)

Comment  on  favorable  decision  of
Mississippi  supreme  court  upholding
state's  ten-hour  law  for  factory  workers.

U.  S.  supreme  court  and

the  eight-hour  day.  (Survey,
Mar.  20,  1915,  V.  33:677-678.)

Brief  statement  of  recent  court  deci-
sions.

Great Britain. Home office.

Report of departmental com-


BIBLIOGRAPHY


477


niittee  on  the  night  employment
of  male  young  persons  in  factories
and  workshops.  Minutes  of  evi-
dence and  appendices.  London,
Wyman,  1913. 289  p.

Report  on  the  acts  for  the

regulation  of  the  hours  of  em-
ployment in  shops  in  Australia
and  New  Zealand,  by  Ernest
Aves. 1908. 218  p.

The  advantages  and  risks  of  limiting
hours  of  labor  compared;  decision  in
favor  of  limitation  based  on  increased
efficiency  of  service.

Groat,  George  G.  Judicial  views
of  women's  hours  of  labor.  (Po-
litical science  quarterly,  Sept.,
1910,  V.  25:  420-434.)

Changes  in  the  theory  of  the  police
power  as  applied  to  the  protection  of
women.

Hende,  Ludwig.  Der  Samstags-
Fruhschluss.  (Schriften  der  Ge-
sellschaft  ftir  soziale  Reform,  6
band,  heft  4-5.)  Jena,  1914.
201  p.

Investigation  into  the  extent  of  Satur-
day early  closing  In  public  and  private
enterprises

International  association  for  la-
bor legislation.  Report  of  the
special  commission  on  hours  of
labor  in  continuous  industries.
London,  Pioneer  press,  1912.
26  p.

Comparison  of  actual  conditions  in
different  countries  and  the  results  ob-
tained by  introducing  the  eight-hour,
three-shift,  system.

Kelley,  Florence.  The  sex  prob-
lems in  industrial  hygiene.  (Amer-
ican journal  of  public  hygiene,
June,  1910,  V.  20:252-257.)

Brief  plea  for  legal  regulation  of  the
hours  of  labor  of  women  to  prevent  ex-
cessive fatigue.

Manly,  Basil  M.  Work  periods  in
continuous  night  and  day  occu-
pations. (American  labor  legis-
lation review,  March,  1914,  v.  4:
109-116.)

Argues  for  eight-hour  shifts  In  con-
tinuous industries.

New  York.  Department  of  la-
bor. Bulletin  no.  49.  Albany,
igii.  "Rest  day  legislation  in
foreign  countries,"  p.  508-518.

Abstracts  of  the  laws  in  all  foreign
countries.


New  York.  State  factory  Investi-
gating commission.  Second
report.  Albany,  1913.  "Night
work  of  women  in  factories,"
p.  193-215.

Summarizes  investigations  and  the
legal  status  of  night  work.

Persons,  Charles  E.,  Parton,
Mabel, and Moses, Mabeile.

Labor  laws  and  their  enforce-
ment. New  York,  Longmans,
191 1.  "The  early  history  of  fac-
tory legislation  in  Massachu-
setts; from  1825  to  the  passage
of  pie  ten-hour  law  in  1874,"
p.  1-129.  "Hours  of  labor:  Of
women  and  children — Of  public
employees,"  p.  314-315.

Gives  history  of  the  agitation  for
shorter  hours  in  Massachusetts  and  the
situation  in  191 1.

Price,  George  M.  Night  work  of
women.  (In  Second  report  of
the  New  York  state  factory  in-
vestigating commission,  Albany,
1913.  P-  439-459-)

Investigations  in  a  cordage  mill,  and
analysis  of  the  personal  histories  of  lOO
women  night  workers.

Rochester,  Anna.  The  eight-hour
day  for  children.  (Child  labor
bulletin,  Feb.,  1914,  v.  2:40-53.)

Attitude  of  employers  toward  the
eight-hour  law  and  a  resum6  of  existing
state  laws.
United  States.  Pinal  report  of
industrial  commission.  Wash-
ington, 1902. "Hours  of  labor,"

V.  19:763-793-

EITect  of  reduction  of  working  time  on
output  and  development  of  legal  theory.

Report on condition of

woman  and  child  wage-earners
in  the  United  States.  (Senate
doc.  645,  6ist  Cong.,  2d  sess.)
Washington,  Govt,  print,  off.,
1910-1912. 19  V.

Report  of  extensive  official  investiga-
tions into  the  cotton,  clothing,  glass,  and
silk  industries,  laundries,  etc.

Report on conditions of

employment  in  the  iron  and  steel
industry  in  the  United  States.
(Senate  doc.  no,  62d  Cong.,  ist
sess.)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
off., 1911-1912.

V.  1  deals  with  wages  and  hours  of
labor;  v.  2  gives  detailed  tables  in  re-
gard to  the  same;  v.  3  treats  of  the  va-


478 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


rious  factors  affecting  the  health  and
efficiency  of  the  working  force,  such  aa
the  seven-day  week  and  the  twelve-hour
day.

Bureau  of  labor  statis-
tics- Bulletins.  Washington,
Govt,  print,  off.,  1895-

No.  52,  "Child  labor  in  the  United
States."  H.  R.  Sewall.  No.  96,  "Work-
ing hours,  earnings,  and  duration  of  em-
ployment of  women  workers  in  Maryland
and  California,  1911,"  Marie  L,  Oben-
auer.  No.  116,  "Hours,  earnings,  and
duration  of  employment  of  wage-earn-
ing women  in  selected  industries  in  the
District  of  Columbia."  No.  117,  "Pro-
hibition of  nightwork  of  young  persons."
No.  118,  "Ten-hour  maximum  working
day  for  women  and  young  persons."
No.  119-  "Working  hours  of  women  in
the  pea  canneries  of  Wisconsin."  No.
128,  "Wages  and  hours  of  labor  in  the
cotton,  woolen,  and  silk  industries,  1890-
1912."  No.  129,  "Wages  and  hours  of
labor  in  the  lumber,  miUwork,  and  furni-
ture industries,  1890-1912."  No.  131,
"Union  scale  of  wages  and  hours  of  la-
bor, 1907-1912."  No.  134,  "Wages  and
hours  of  labor  in  the  boot  and  shoe  and
hosiery  and  knit  goods  industries,  1890-
1912."  No.  I3S.  "Wages  and  hours  of
labor  in  the  cigar  and  clothing  indus-


tries, 1911 and 19 12." No. 137,

"Wages  and  hours  of  labor  in  the  buud-
ing  and  repairing  of  steam  railroad
cars."  No.  143,  "Union  scale  of  wages
and  hours  of  labor,  May  25,  1913."
No.  ISO,  "Wages  and  hours  of  labor  in
the  cotton,  woolen,  and  silk  industries,
1907-1913-"  No.  1ST,  "Wages  and
hours  of  labor  in  the  iron  and  steel  in-
dustry in  the  Unites  States,  1907-1912."
No.  IS3,  "Wages  and  hours  of  labor  in
the  lumber,  raillwork,  and  furniture  in-
dustries, 1907-1913,"  No.  IS4,  "Wages
and  hours  of  labor  in  the  boot  and  shoe
and  hosiery  and  knit  goods  industries,
1907-1913-"  No.  160,  "Hours,  wages,
and  conditions  of  labor  of  women  in
Indiana  mercantile  establishments  and
garment  factories."  No.  161,  "Wages
and  hours  of  labor  in  the  clothing  and
ci^r  industries,  1911-1913."  No.  163,
"Wages  and  hours  of  labor  in  the  build-
ing and  repairing  of  steam  railroid  cars,
1907-1913."

Van  Kleeck,  IVIary.  Working  hours
of  women  in  factories,  (Char-
ities, 1906-1907,  V.  17: 13-^1.)

Describes  actual  conditions,  non-en-
forcement of  ten-hour  law,  and  results  in
physical  condition  of  working  women.

See  also  under  Safety  and  health:
Keeling.


VI. UNEMPLOYMENT


American  association  for  labor
legislation.  Proceedings  of  the
first  national  conference  on  un-
employment. (American  labor
legislation  review,  May,  1914,
V.  4: 209-420.)

Proceedings  of  the  second

national  conference  on  unemploy-
ment. (American  labor  legisla-
tion review,  June,  191 5,  v.  5: 173-


463.)

Cont


ontain  articles  by  experts  on  the  sub-
ject of  unemployment  and  its  prevention.

Andrews,  John  B.  A  national
system  of  labor  exchanges.  (New
republic,  Dec.  26,  1914,  v.  i,
no.  8,  part  2,  8  p.  Also  printed  as
Senate  doc.  no.  956,  63d  Cong.,
3d  sess.)

Causes  leading  to  demand  for  a  na-
tional system; plan  of  organization  for


A  practical  program  for  the

prevention  of  unemployment  in

America. New  York,  1914.  24  p.

A  number  of  constructive,  practical

Guggestions  looking  to  the  prevention  of


unemployment  through  the  establish-
ment of  public  employment  exchanges,
systematic  distribution  of  public  work,
regularization  of  industry,  unemploy-
ment insurance,  and  other  hSpful
measures  including  constructive  care  of
the  unemployable.

D  e  r  Arbeitsnachweise  I  n
Deutschland.  Halbmonats-

schrift  der  Centralstelle  fur  Ar-
beitsmarktberichte.  Zugleich  Or-
gan des  Verbandes  deutscher  Ar-
beitsnachweise. (Formerly  "Der
Arbeitsmarkt.") Berlin,  1897-

The  leading  source  of  information  on
the  condition  of  the  German  labor
market  and  on  the  operations  of  the
German  labor  exchanges.

Beveridge,  William  Henry.  Un-
employment; a  problem  of  in-
dustry. London,  Longmans,
1912. 405  p.

Discusses  the  problem  and  its  limits,
sources  of  information,  seasonal  fluctua-
tions, cyclical  fluctuation,  the  reserve  of
labor,  loss  and  lack  of  industrial  quality,
the  personal  factor,  remedies  of  the  past,
and  principles  of  future  policy.  Valu-
able appendix  on  public  labor  exchanges
in  Germany.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


479


Beveridge,  W.  H.,  and  Rey,  C.  F.

Labor  exchanges  in  the  United
Kingdom.  (Quarterly  bulletin
of  the  international  association
on  unemployment,  July,  1913,
V.  3:767-825.)

Authoritative  description  of  British
employment  exchange  system  and  its
methods  of  operation.
California.  Commission  of  im-
migration and  housing.  Re-
port on  tinemployment.  State
print.  oflE.,  1914. 73  p.

Supplement  to  first  annual  report.
Recommendations  for  the  elimination  of
unemployment,  including  state  labor
exchanges,  regulation  of  private  employ-
ment agencies,  housing  regulation,  un-
employment insurance,  rural  _  credits,
state  land  bureau  and  other  points.

Chicago.  Commission  on  the
unemployed.  Report.  Chi-
cago, 1914.

Results  of  two  years'  intensive  study.
Great  Britain. Board  of  trade.

Seventeenth  abstract  of  labor
statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom.
London,  1915.

Contains  especially  fluctuations  in
employment,  unemployment  insurance.
Board  of  trade  labor  exchanges,  women's
employment  bureaus,  distress  commit-
tees, trade  union  unemployed  benefits.

Labour  gazette. London,

monthly,  1893-

Regularly  contains  sections  on  the
labor  market,  unemployrnent  insurance,
employment  in  the  principal  industries,
and  Board  of  trade  labor  exchanges.

Royal commission on

poor  laws  and  relief  of  dis-
tress. Report  of  the  Royal  com-
mission on  the  poor  laws  and
relief  of  distress.  Part  VI,  "Dis-
tress due  to  unemployment."
London,  1909. 303-445  P-

The  Minority  report  of  the

Poor  law  commission. . . .  London.
Printed  for  the  National  com-
mittee to  promote  the  break-up
of  the  Poor  law,  1909. 2  v.

Minority  report  by  Sidney  and
Beatrice  Webb;  part  2,  "Public  organi-
zation of  the  labor  market,"  contains:
The  able-bodied  under  the  unemployed
workmen  act,  the  distress  from  unem-
ployment,  proposals  for  reform.

Henderson,  Charles  Richmond.

The  struggle  against  unemploy-
ment. (American  labor  legisla-
tion review,  May,  I9i4i  v.  4:
294-<299.)


Popular  appeal  for  vigorous  and  united
action.

Recent advances in the

struggle  against  unemployment.
(American  labor  legislation  re-
view, Feb.,  1912,  V.  2:105-110.)

Progress  in  statistics,  preventive  meas-
ures, and  insurance.

International  association  on  un-
employment. Bulletin  trimes-
triel  de  1' Association  Interna-
tionale pour  la  lutte  contre  le
ch6mager  edited  by  Max  Laz-
ard. Paris,  191 1-

Contains  articles  by  European  and
American  specialists,  in  English,  French,
and  German.  The  issues  which  have
appeared  to  date  have  dealt  with  the  fol-
lowing topics:  1911,  no.  I,  unemploy-
ment insurance;  no.  2,  employment
bureaus.  1912,  no.  1-2,  relation  of
child  labor  to  unemployment;  _  no.  _  3,
relation  of  emigration  and  immigration
to  unemployment,  employment  bureaus
for  agricultural  workers;  no.  4,  proceed-
ings of  the  third  session  of  the  Interna-
tional committee  on  unemployment.
1913,  no.  I,  aid  to  the  unemployed;
no.  2,  statistics  of  unemployment;  no.  3,
results  of  the  international  study  of  pub-
lic employment  exchanges  in  1911;  no.  4,
reports  on  unemployment  and  migra-
tion. 1914.  no.  I,  international  reports
on  the  operation  of  unemployment  in-
surance systems,  reports  on  unemploy-
ment and  public  works;  no.  2,  working
of  unemployment  insurance  in  England,
equilibrium  between  production  and  con-
sumption, international  statistics  on
unemployment.

Kellor,  Frances  A.  Out  of  work.
New  York,  Putnam,  1915. 569  p.

Discussion  of  the  extent  of  unemploy-
ment in  America,  unemployment  among
women  and  children,  employment
agencies,  unemployment  insurance,  crit-
icism of  remedies  proposed,  and  a  pro-
gram.
Leiserson,  William  M.  The
theory  of  public  employment  of-
fices and  the  principles  of  their
practical  administration.  New
York,  Ginn,  1914.  27-46  p.
(Reprinted  from  Political  science
quarterly,  March,  1914,  v.  29,
no.  I.)

Comprehensive  review  of  the  subject,
with  suggestions  for  operation  of  efficient
6xcb  Alices  •

National employment bureau.

Hearings  before  the  Committee
on  labor,  House  of  representa-
tives, 63d  Cong.,  2d  sess.  Wash-
ington, Govt,  print,  off.,  1914.
112  p.


48o PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Three  parts;  hearings  on  June  5,
June  12,  and  July  13,  1914,  on  the
Murdock  and  MacDonald  bills.

New  York.  Commission  on
employers'  iiability  and  other
matters.  Third  report,  "  Unem-
ployment and  lack  of  farm  labor."
Albany,  191 1. 245  p.

Study  of  conditions  in  New  York  state
and  brief  description  of  unemployment
insurance  plans  in  force  abroad.

Rowntree,  B.  Seeboiim,  and
Lasker,  Bruno.  Unemploy-
ment, a  social  study.  London,
Macmillan,  1911. 317  p.

Account  of  a  detailed  investigation
of  unemployment  in  York,  together
with  suggestions  for  remedying  the  evils
which  it  disclosed.

United  States.  Bureau  of  edu-
cation. Juvenile  labor  bureaus
and  vocational  guidance  in  Great
Britain. (Its  Bulletin,  no.  482:

13-17-)

The  school  and  the  start  in

life:  a  study  of  the  relation  be-
tween school  and  employment  in
England,  Scotland,  and  Germany.
(Its  Bulletin,  1914,  no.  4,  whole
no.  575.)  Washington,  Govt,
print,  off.,  1914. 146  p.

Contains  much  information  of  value
In  regard  to  methods  of  juvenile  labor
exchanges  and  juvenile  placement  work.

Bureau  of  labor  statis-
tics. Statistics  of  unemployment
and  the  work  of  employment  of-
fices. (Its  Bulletin,  no.  109.)
147  p.

Comprehensive  study,  Including  work  of
private  and  of  philanthropic  exchanges.


Unemployment in New

York  City,  New  York. (Its  Bul-
letin, no.  172.) 24  p.

Report  of  a  study  conducted  in  Febru-
ary, 1915,  resulting  in  an  estimate  of
398,000  unemployed  in  that  city  alone
at  tJiat  time.

Von  iVIayr,  G.,  and  Varlez,  Louis.

Lastatistiqueduch6mage.  Ghent,
1913. 186  p.

Report  of  the  special  committees  ap-
pointed by  the  International  statistical
Institute  and  the  International  associa-
tion on  unemployment,  with  recommen-
dations for  more  frequent,  general,  and
uniform  gathering  of  statistics.

Webb,  Sidney.  Seasonal  trades,
by  various  writers,  with  an  intro-
duction by  Sidney  Webb.  Lon-
don, Constable, 1912. 410  p.

The  outcome  of  a  seminar  at  the  Lon-
don school  of  economics  and  political
science  during  the  session  of  1910.

Webb,  Sidney,  and  Webb,  Bea-
trice. The  prevention  of  desti-
tution. London,  191 1. 348  p.

Treats  of  sweating  and  unemployment
as  causes  of  destitution,  how  to  prevent
unemployment  and  underemployment,
insurance,  the  enlarged  sphere  of  vol-
untary agencies  in  the  prevention  of
destitution,  the  need  for  a  common
registrar  of  public  assistance,  the
"moral  factor.*

Williams,  R.  First  year's  work-
ing of  the  Liverpool  docks  scheme.
London,  King,  1914. 192  p.

Account  of  a  successful attempt  to

abolish  casual  labor on the  docks  of

Liverpool; the high water mark  of
efforts  in  this  direction.

See  also  under  The  minimum  wage:
Andrews.


VII. SAFETY  AND  HEALTH


American  association  for  labor

legislation. American  labor

legislation review. New  York,
1911-

_  Contains  articles  by  economists,  phy-
sicians, and  technical  experts;  pub-
lished quarterly.  Among  the  issues
which  deal  especially  with  safety  and
health  are:  V.  i,  no.  i.  Proceedings  of
fourth  annual  meeting,  ipio;  no.  2,
Comfort,  health,  and  safety  in  factories;
no.  4,  Prevention  and  reporting  of  in-
dustrial injuries.  V.  2,  no.  i.  Proceed-
ings of  fifth  annual  meeting,  191 1;  no.  2,
Second  national  conference  on  industrial
diseases  (includes  critical  bibliography) ;
no.  4,  Immediate  legislative  program.


Eastman,  Crystal.  Work-acci-
dents and  the  law.  New  York,
Charities  publication  committee,
1910. 345  p.

Chapters  on  the  "Personal  factor  in
Industrial  accidents,"  "Distribution  of
the  burden  of  income  loss,"  and  "The
effect  of  industrial  fatalities  upon  the
home."

Hayhurst,  Emery  R,  Industrial
health-hazards  and  occupational
diseases  in  Ohio.  Columbus,
Ohio  state  board  of  health,  191 5.

438  P-

Classification  of  industries  and  a  study


BIBLIOGRAPHY


481


of  the  causes  of  hazard  in  each,  hicluding
dust,  hghting,  ventilation,  sanitation
fatigue,  poisons.
Illinois.  Commission  on  oc-
cupational diseases.  Report.
Chicago,  1911. 219  p.

Authoritative  treatise  based  on  orig-
inal investigations  by  experts  with  gen-
eral description  of  the  work,  discussion
of  'principles  of  effective  legislation,  text
of  proposed  bills,  suggestions  for  cards
of  instruction  for  employees  in  dangerous
trades,  provisions  of  protective  laws  in
states  of  the  union  and  in  European
legislation.
International  congress  on  hy-
giene and  demography.  Trans-
actions of  the  15th  international
congress,  Washington,  Sept.  23-
28,  1912. 6  V.

V.  I,  part  2  contains  article  on  "In-
dustrial accidents  and  trade  diseases  in
the  United  States,"  by  Frederick  L.
Hoffman,  p.  763-803.  V.  3,  part  2  on
Hygiene  of  occupations  contains  a  col-
lection of  papers  dealing  with  various
phases  of  occupational  hygiene.  Among
the  subjects  considered  in  their  relations
to  industrial  hygiene  are  child  labor,
tenement  house  manufacturing,  and  in-
dustrial accidents. '

Keeling,  Frederic.  Child  labor  in
the  United  Kingdom,  a  study  of
the  development  and  administra-
tion of  the  law  relating  to  the  em-
ployment of  children.  London,
King,  1914. 307  p.

Gives  minimum  standards  required
for  entrance  to  dangerous  trades.

National  child  labor  committee.

Child  labor  bulletin.  New  York,
1912-

Quarterly,  dealing  with  prevalence  of
child  labor,  special  occupational  hazards,
and  enactment  and  enforcement  of  pro-
tective legislation.

National  council  for  industrial
safety.  Proceedings  of  safety
congresses,  191 2-

Articles  on  fire,  accident,  and  occupa-
tional disease  prevention,  effective  legis-
lation, and  organization  of  efforts  to
promote  safety.

New  York.  State  factory  inves-
tigating commission.  Reports,
1912-1915.

Results  of  investigations  into  fire
hazard,  tenement  labor,  occupational
diseases,  sanitary  conditions,  and  acci-
dent prevention  in  mercantile  and  manu-
facturing establishments.

Occupational mortality statis-
tics. Experience  of  thirty-four
life  companies  upon  ninety-eight
31


special  classes  of  risks.  Com-
piled and  published  by  the  Ac-
tuarial society  of  America.  New
York,  1903. xiv,  479  p.

Experience  of  leading  life  insurance
companies  with  regard  to  specially  haz-
ardous occupations  and  groups  of  per-
sons.
Oliver,  Thomas.  Dangerous
trades:  the  historical,  social,  and
legal  aspects  of  industrial  occu-
pations as  affecting  health,  by  a
number  of  experts;  edited  by
Thomas  Oliver.  London,  Mur-
ray, 1902. 891  p.

Authoritative  discussions  by  specialists
of  international  reputation.

Diseases of occupation

froin  the  legislative,  social,  and
medical  points  of  view.  London,
Methuen,  1908. xix,  427  p.

Comprehensive  clinical  and  industrial
descriptions.

Persons,  Charles  E.,  Parton,
Mabei, and IVIoses, Mabelle.

Labor  laws  and  their  enforcement.
New  York,  Longmans,  1911.
"Unregulated  conditions  in  wom-
en's work,"  p.  131-155.

Conditions  of  work  in  rubber,  cordage,
and  twine  factories,  and  instances  of
violation  of  health  laws.

Price,  George  M.  The  modem
factory.  New  York,  Wiley,  1914.
XX,  574  p.

Safety,  sanitation,  and  welfare  in  the
workplaces  as  affected  by  private  effort
and  by  legislation.

Schwedtman,  Ferdinand  C,  and
Emery,  James  A.  Accident
prevention  and  relief.  New  York,
National  association  of  manu-
facturers, 191 1, xxxvi,  481  p.

An  investigation  of  the  subject  In
Europe  with  special  attention  to  England
and  Germany,  with  recommendations
for  action  in  the  United  States.

Thompson,  W.  Gilman.  The  oc-
cupational diseases,  their  causa-
tion, symptoms,  treatment,  and
prevention.  New  York,  Apple-
ton,  1914. 724  p.

Detailed  study  of  causes  and  symp-
tom?, with  methods  of  treatment  and
prevention.

Tolman,  William  H.,  and  Ken-
dall, Leonard  B.  Safety;  meth-
ods for  preventing  occupational
and  other  accidents  and  disease.
New  York,  Harper,  1913. 422  p.


482 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


The  philosophy  of  safety,  and  sugges-
tive descriptions  of  the  need  for  and  suc-
cess of  preventive  devices.

United  States.  Report  on  condi-
tion of  woman  and  child  wage-
earners  in  the  United  States.
(Senate  doc.  645,  6ist  Cong.,
2d  sess.)  Washington,  Govt,
print,  off.,  1910-1912. 19  V.

Discusses  the  working  hours  and  haz-
ards in  the  cotton  textile  industry,
clothing,  glass,  silk  industry,  and  latm-
dries.

Report on conditions of

employment  in  the  iron  and  steel
industry  in  the  United  States.
(Senate  doc.  no,  62d  Cong.,  ist
sess.)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
off.,  1911-1913. 4  V.

V.  3  treats  of  various  factors  affecting
the  health  and  efficiency  of  the  working
force,  such  as  heat,  speed,  and  severity
of  work.  V.  4  treats  of  accident  rates,
relation  of  night  work  and  long  turns  to
accidents,  and  organization  for  safety.

Bureau  of  labor  statis-
tics. Bulletins.  Washington,
Govt,  print,  off., 1895-

Among  the  btdletins  containing  im-
portant articles  on  industrial  safety  and
health  are:  No.  44,  "Factory  sanitation
and  labor  protection,"  C.  F.  W.  Doeh-
ring;  No.  75.  "Industrial  hygiene,"
G.  M.  Kober;  No.  79,  "Mortality  from
consumption in  dusty trades," F. L.


Hoffman;  No.  86,  "Phosphorus  poison-
ing in  the  match  industry  in  the  United
States,"  J.  B.  Andrews;  No.  90,  "Fatal
accidents  in  coal  mining,"  F.  L.  Hoff-
man; No.  95,  "Industrial  lead  poison-
ing," T.  Oliver,  "White  lead  industry
in  the  United  States,"  A.  Hamilton,
"  Deaths  from  industrial  lead  poisoning,"
J.  B.  Andrews;  No.  100,  "List  of  in-
dustrial poisons,"  compiled  for  the  In-
ternational association  for  labor  legis-
lation by  T.  Sommerfeld  and  R.  Fischer;
No.  104,  "Lead  poisoning  in  potteries,
tile  works,  and  porcelain  enameled  sani-
tary ware  factories, ' '  A.  Hamilton ;
No.  120,  "Hygiene  of  the  painter's
trade,"  A.  Hamilton;  No.  127,  "Dan-
gers to  workers  from  dusts  and  fumes,
and  methods  of  protection,"  W.  C.
Hanson;  No.  141,  "Lead  poisoning  in
the  smelting  and  refining  of  lead,"  A.
Hamilton;  No.  157,  "Industrial  acci-
dent statistics,"  F.  L.  Hoffman;  No.  165,
"Lead  posioning  in  the  manufacture  of
storage  batteries,"  A.  Hamilton.

Bureau  of  mines.  Bulle-
tins and  technical  papers.  Wash-
ington, Govt,  print,  off.,  1910-

Especially  valuable  are  the  following
technical  papers:  No.  40,  "Metal  mine
accidents  in  the  United  States  during
.  .  .1911,"  A.  H.  Fay;  No.  46,  "Quarry
accidents  in  the  United  States  during  .  .  .
1911,"  A.  H.  Fay;  and  No.  48,  "Coal
mine  accidents  in  the  United  States,
1896-1912,"  F.  W.  Horton.  Bulletin
No.  333,  "Coal  mine  accidents:  their
causes  and  prevention , "  C.  Hall  and
W.  O.  Snelling,  is  also  noteworthy.


VIII. SOCIAL  INSURANCE


General  Works

American  medical  association.
Judicial  council.  Excerpts  from
the  report  of  the  judicial  council
submitted  to  the  house  of  dele-
gates at  San  Francisco,  June  21,
1 91 5.  (American  medical  asso-
ciation bulletin,  May  15,  1915,
V.  10:341-396.)

Report  on  development  of  all  branches
of  social  insurance,  statistics,  scale  of
benefits,  and  efifect  on  medical  profession.

Congres  international  des  assur-
ances sociaies.  Rapports,  Par-
is, 1889;  Berne,  1891;  Milan,
1894;  Brussels,  1897;  Paris,  1900;
Diisseldorf,  1902;  Vienna,  1905;
Rome,  1908; The  Hague,  1910.

The  name  of  this  congress  has  gone
through  several  changes.  The  name
given is the  latest. The proceedings


contain  valuable  articles  by  specialists
In  the  field  in  English,  French,  and
German.

Comity  permanent.  Bul-
letin des  assurances  sociaies.
Paris,  1889-

Contains  articles  of  specialists,  in  Eng-
glish,  French,  and  German.

Dawson,  William  H.  Social  in-
surance in  Germany,  1883-1911.
New  York,  Scribner,  1912.  xi,
283  p.

An  up-to-date  historical  and  critical
treatise  on  social  insurance  legislation  in
Germany,  with  special  emphasis  on  pre-
vention.

Frankel,  Lee  K.,  and  Dawson,
Miles  M.  Workingmen's  in-
surance in  Europe.  New  York,
Charities  publication  committee,
1910. xviii,  447  p.

A  study  offinsurance  systems  in  force
in Great Britain, Holland, Belgium,


BIBLIOGRAPHY


483


France,  Switzerland,  the  Scandinavian
countries,  Italy,  Germany,  Austria,  with
numerous  tables.  Convenient  for  refer-
ence and  international  comparison.

Henderson,  Charles  Richmond.

Industrial  insurance  in  the  United
States.  Chicago,  University  of
Chicago  press,  1911. x,  454  p.

A  revised  and  enlarged  version  of  the
author's  Die  Arbeiterversicherung  in  den
Vereinigten  Staaten  von  Nord  America,
Berlin,  1907.  Describes  the  various
forms  of  social  insurance  known  in  the
United  States  and  Canada.  Contains  a
summary  of  European  laws  on  working-
men's  insurance  against  accident,  sick-
ness, invalidity,  and  old  age,  with  statis-
tics to  igii.

Kennedy,  James  Boyd.  Bene-
ficiary features  of  American  trade
unions.  Baltimore,  Johns  Hop-
kins press,  1908. 126  p.

Description  of  benefit  systems  of
American  trade  unions.

Rubinow,  I.  M.  Social  insurance,
with  special  reference  to  Amer-
ican conditions.  New  York,
Holt,  1913. vii,  525  p.

Study  of  the  social  results  of  industrial
accident,  sickness,  old  age,  invalidity,
death,  and  unemployment,  with  the
principles  and  development  of  social  in-
surance against  these  contingencies.

Social  insurance  and the

medical  profession.  Qournal  of
the  American  medical  associa-
tion, Jan.  30,  1915,  V.  64:381-
386.)

Plea  addressed  to  physicians  for  sup-
port of  and  cooperation  with  social  in-
surance. -<
Seager,  Henry  Rogers.  Social  in-
surance. New  York,  Macmillan,
1910. 175  p.

A  sympathetic  discussion  of  the  need
and  the  principles  of  social  insurance  and
the  extent  to  which  it  can  and  should  be
Introduced  in  the  United  States.
United  States.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.  Bulletins.  Washing-
ton, Govt,  print.  oflE.,  1895-

These  contain  much  material  not  else-
where found.  No.  90  contains  a  sum-
mary of  foreign  compensation  acts  and
an  article  by  Miles  M.  Dawson  on  the
cost  of  workmen's  insurance  in  various
countries.  No.  91  contains  translations
of  the  old-age  and  invalidity  pension
acts  of  Germany  and  France,  and  a  re-
print of  the  Australian  act.  No.  92
on  "Industrial  accidents  and  loss  of  earn-
ing power:  German  experience,"  is  an
elaborate  analysis  of  accident  experience
in  1897  and  1907,  published  too  late  to
be  included  in  the  24th  annual. The


purpose  of  the  study  is  to  indicate  the
possible  measures  for  the  prevention  of
accidents,  medical  treatment,  etc.  No.  96
contains  a  translation  of  the  recent  in-
dustrial insurance  code  of  Germany,
1911.  No.  loi  forms  a  study  by  F.  L.
Hoffman  on  the  care  of  tuberculous
wage-earners  in  Germany  under  the  in-
validity insurance  act  of  January  i,  1900.
No.  102  is  a  reprint  of  the  British  na-
tional insurance  act,  1911.  No.  103  is
a  translation  of  the  Swiss  sickness  and
accident  insurance  law,  February  4,
1911.  No.  107  is  a  translation  of  the
law  relating  to  insurance  of  salaried
employees  in  Germany,  December  20,
1911.  No.  Ill  on  labor  legislation
for  1912  contains  the  compensation  laws
passed  in  that  year.  No.  126  contains  a
review  of  compensation  legislation  in  the
United  States,  with  a  summary  of  the
operations  of  the  recent  laws;  complete
texts  of  all  United  States  laws,  including
legislation  of  1913,  are  given,  with  sum-
maries of  all  foreign  laws.  No.  ISS,  on
"Compensation  for  accidents  to  em-
ployees of  the  United  States"  is  a  re-
port of  operations  under  the  act  of
May  30,  1908.

Workmen's  insurance  and

'  benefit  funds  in  the  United  States.
Twenty-third  annual  report  of
the  U.  S.  commissioner  of  labor.
Washington, Govt, print, off.,

1908.  Slop.

Study  of  1200  relief  funds  or  insurance
societies  established  by  trade  unions,  by
groups  of  workingmen,  by  employers,
and  by  the  last  two  conjointly.  The
final  chapter  treats  of  the  legal  status  of
benefit  and  relief  organizations.  Valu-
able descriptive  material  and  many
otherwise  unpublished  statistics.

Workmen's  insurance  and

compensation  systems  in  Europe.
Twenty-fourth  annual  report  of
the  U.  S.  commissioner  of  labor.
Washington, Govt, print, off.,

1909.  2  v.,  2749  p.

Contains  extensive  information  on
social  insurance  in  Austria,  Belgium,
France.  Germany,  Great  Britain,  Italy,
Norway,  Russia,  Spain,  and  Sweden.
Texts  of  the  laws  on  compensation  for  In-
dustrial accidents  In  twenty-four  coun-
tries.

I.  Industrial  Accident  Insurance

American  association  for  labor
legislation.  Standards  for  work-
men's compensation  laws.  (Amer-
ican labor  legislation  review,
Dec,  1914,  v.  4:  585-594-  Also  ■
reprint. Revised  ed.  Sept.,  igiS-)


484 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Essential  features  of  satisfactory  law,
with  annotations  showing  states  already
possessing  such  provisions.

Three  years  under  the  New

Jersey  workmen's  compensation
law.  (American  labor  legislation
review,  Mar.,  1915,  v.  5:31-102.
Also  reprint.)

Striking  picture  of  Inadequacy  due  to
court  method  of  administration,  lack  of
security  for  payments,  and  low  scale  of
compensation.

American  federation  of  iabor
and  National  civic  federation.

Report  of  commission  on  work-
men's compensation.  (Senate
doc.  419,  63d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)
Washington,  Govt,  print,  off.,
1914.

Report  on  operation  of  state  laws.
Andrews,  John  B. Compensation
for  occupational  diseases. (Sur-
vey, Apr.  5,  1913,  V.  30: 15-19.
Also  reprint.)

Concise,  popular  argument  for  exten-
sion of  the  compensation  principle  to
cover  occupational  diseases.

Downey,  E.  H.  History  of  work
accident  indemnity  in  Iowa.
Iowa  City,  State  historical  society
of  Iowa,  1912. xiii,  337  p.

Traces  the  development  of  legal  respon-
sibility for  work  accidents  in  Europe  'and
America,  with  special  reference  to  Iowa.

Eastman,  Crystal.  Work-acci-
dents and  the  law.  New  York,
Charities  publication  committee,
1910. xvi,  345  p.

A  study  of  the  causes  of  industrial  ac-
cidents, and  the  remuneration  therefor,
in  Allegheny  county.  Pa.,  in  1906-1907,
with  argument  for  a  more  just  law.

Fisher,  Willard  C.  The  field  of
workmen's  compensation  in  the
United  States.  (American  eco-
nomic review,  June,  1915,  v.  5:
221-278.)

Argues  for  uniformity  and  compre-
hensiveness in  the  field  of  employments
covered  by  compensation  laws.

Friedensburg,  Ferdinand. ,  The

practical  results  of  workingmen's
insurance  in  Germany.  Trans-
lated from  the  German  by  Louis
H.  Gray.  New  York,  The  work-
men's compensation  service  and
information  bureau,  191 1.  62  p.
(Published  originally  in  Zeit-
schrift  fur  politik,  Berlin,  1911,
V.  4:329-369.)


A  severe  attack  on  the  German  system.
McGlllicuddy,  Daniel  J.  Work-
men's compensation  for  federal
employees.  (American  labor  leg-
islation review,  Mar.,  1915,  v.  5:
11-14.)

Shortcomings  of  law  of  igo8  and  ad-
vantages of  proposed  measure  to  replace
it.
Progressive  national  service.
Standards  on  workmen's  com-
pensation —  with  annotations.
New  York,  Progressive  natl.  serv.,
1915. 64  p.

Detailed  analysis  of  effective  pro-
visions.
See  also  under  General  works:
Dawson,  Henderson,  Rubinow,
IT.  S.  Bureau  of  labor  statistics;
under  Safety  and  health:  Schwedt-
man  and  Emery.


2.  Health  Insurance

American  association  for  labor
legislation.  Health  insurance;
standards  and  tentative  draft  of
an  act.  New  York,  1915.  28  p.
Outline  in  bill  form  with  explanatory
notes.

Fabian  research  department.
Committee  of  enquiry.  The
working  of  the  insurance  act.
(New  statesman.  Mar.  14,  1914,
v.  2,  no.  49,  special  supplement.

32  P-)

Discusses  operation  of  the  health  in-
surance part  of  the  British  national  in-
surance act,  points  out  shortcomings,
and  suggests  important  improvements.

Fuerth,  Henriette.  Die  Mutter-
schaf  tsversicherung.  Jena,  Fisch-
er, 191 1. 220  p.

A  presentation  of  the  case  for  mater-
nity insurance  and  a  r^sum€  of  maternity
insurance  legislation  in  all  countries.

Gibbon,  I.  G.  Medical  benefit;  a
study  of  the  experiences  of  Ger-
many and  Denmark.  London,
King,  1912. XV,  296  p.

A  critical  work  on  the  health  Insur-
ance laws  of  Germany  and  Denmark,
their  operation,  and  benefits  resulting
from  them.

Great  Britain.  Departmental
committee  on  sickness  benefit
claims  under  the  national  insur-
ance act.  Report.  London,
Unwin,  1914. 87  p.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


48s


Excellent  report  upon  the  alleged  ex-'
cessive  claims  on  the  sickness  benefit
funds,  with  an  analysis  of  causes  and
suggestions  for  readjustment.

National  health  insur-
ance joint  committee.  Re-
ports on  the  administration  of  the
national  insurance  act,  part  I,
health  insurance.  London,  Dar-
ling, 1912-1913,  1913-1914,-

Detailed  descriptive  and  statistical
reports  on  numbers  Insured,  methods  of
operation,  finances,  and  administrative
problems.

Progressive national service.

Sickness  insurance.  New  York,
Progressive  natl.  serv.,  191 5.  64  p.
Suggestions  as  to  adequate  provisions
In  America,  and  citations  from  European
laws.

Warren,  B.  S.  Sickness  insurance:
its  relation  to  public  health  and
the  common  welfare.  (Reprint
no.  250  from  the  Public  health  re-
ports.) Washington,  Govt,  print,
off.,  1915. 16  p.

Brief,  pointed  study  of  economic
needs,  contributions,  and  relations  to  the
medical  profession.

See  also  under  General  works:
Dawson,  Henderson,  Kennedy,
Rubinow,  Seager,  U.  S.  Bureau
of  labor  statistics.


3.  Old  Age  and  Invalidity
Insurance

Alden,  Percy.  Democratic  Eng-
land. New  York,  MacmiUan,
1912. xii,  271  p.

Accounts  of  insurance  against  sickness
and  old  age  in  England,  together  with
references  to  insurance  legislation  in
Australia,  p.  122-165.

Coman,  Katharine.  Sweden  and
old  age  pensions.  (Survey,  Dec.
14,  1913.  V.  31:318-321.)

Massachusetts.  Commission  on
old  age  pensions,  annuities,
and  insurance.  Report.  Bos-
ton, 1910. 409  p.

The  report  covers  the  origin  of  old  age
pensions,  foreign  systems,  proposed
plans  and  their  estimated  costs.  The
commission  concludes  that  It  would  be
inexpedient  for  an  individual  state  to
adopt  a  system  of  old  age  pensions,  and
that  only  national  legislation  can  prove
effective..

Commission on pen-


sions. Report.  House  doc.  no.
2450. Boston,  1914. 345  p.

Describes  pension  systems  In  effect  In
Massachusetts  and  other  states,  with  an
Investigation  of  probable  costs.  Recom-
mends a  compulsory  contributory  pen-
sion system  for  employees  in  the  public
service.

Nassau,  Mabel.  Old  age  poverty
in  Greenwich  village :  a  neighbor-
hood study.  New  York,  Revell,
1915- 105  p.

Description  of  lOO  Individuals  over
60  years  of  age,  a  study  of  the  effects  of
dependency  where  It  exists,  and  argu-
ments in  favor  of  an  old  age  pension  sys-
tem, contributed  to  by  the  state,  em-
ployers, and  some  employees.

Squier, Lee Welling. Old age

dependency  in  the  United  States.
New  York,  MacmiUan,  191 2.
xii,  361  p.

The  author  treats  of  the  causes  of  old
age  dependency,  the  efforts  at  relief,  and
plans  for  prevention,  and  concludes  that
old  age  pensions  are  the  best  solution  for
the  problem  in  the  United  States.

Wisconsin.  Industrial  commis-
sion. Report  on  old  age  relief.
Madison,  1915. 76  p.

Study  of  the  condition  of  the  aged  In
Wisconsin,  with  suggestions  for  volun-
tary state  insurance.  Contains  a  de-
scription of  foreign  systems  of  old  age
relief.

See  also  under  General  works:
Dawson,  Kennedy,  Rubinow,  U.
S.  Bureau  of  labor  statistics.


4.  Widows'  and  Orphans'
Insurance

Carstens,  C.  C.  Public  pensions
to  widows  with  children ;  a  study
of  their  administration  in  several
American  cities.  New  York,
RusseE Sage foundation, 1913.

36  p.

An  adverse  analysis  of  the  workings
of  widows'  pensions  in  several  states  and
cities,  with  suggestions  for  other  methods
of  meeting  the  problem.  An  advance
report  by  Mr.  Carstens  appeared  In  the
Survey,  Jan.  4,  1913,  v.  29:459-466.

Devine,  Edward  T.  Report  of  an
investigation  of  matters  relating
to  the  care,  treatment,  and  relief
of  dependent  widows  with  depend-
ent children  in  the  city  of  New
York.  New  York,  The  commit-
tee, 1914. 58  p.


486 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Recommends  social  insurance  to  pre-
vent commitment  of  children.

New  York.  State  commission
on  reiief  for  widowed  moth-
ers. Report.  Albany,  Lyon,
1914. 584  p.

A  careful  study  of  the  provisions  for
the  support  of  dependent  widows  and
children  in  New  York  state  and  in
European  countries.  Recommendations
for  county  boards  of  child  welfare  with
power  to  grant  allowances  to  deserving
widows  with  children.

New  Zealand.  Government  in-
surance department.  A  brief
survey  of  New  Zealand's  state
life  insurance. Wellington,  1906.

36  p.

Description  of  regulations  and  man-
agement of  the  department,  with  tables.
United  States.  Cliildren's  bu-
reau. Report  of  laws  relating  to
mothers'  pensions  in  the  United
States,  Denmark,  and  New  Zea-
land, 1914.  (Its  pub.,  no.  7.)
Washington,  Govt,  print,  off.,
1914. 102  p.

History  and  texts  of  laws,  with  concise
report  of  their  operation.

Wisconsin.  Insurance  investi-
gation committee.  Report.
Madison,  1907.  Majority  report
of  the  senate  committee  on  the
practicability  of  government  and
state  insurance,  iv,  52  p.  Mi-
nority report  of  the  senate  com-
mittee on  the  practicability  of
government  and  state  insurance,
ii,  18  p.  (Printed  separately  but
bound  in  back  of  joint  committee
report.)

Majority  report  gives  arguments  for
and  against  state  life  insurance,  and
recommends  postponement.  Minority
report  makes  a  vigorous  argument  for
immediate  steps  toward  establishing
state  life  insurance.

See  also  under  General  works:
Dawson,  Rubinow.


5.  Unemployment  Insurance

American  association  for  labor
legislation.  Present  status  of
unemployment  insurance:  pre-
pared by  the  German  imperial
statistical  bureau.  (American
labor  legislation  review,  May,
1914,  V.  4: 373-387.)


Tabular  summary  of  European  laws,
number  of  persons  covered,  and  amount
of  benefits  paid.
Bailward,  W.  A.  Some  impres-
sions of  the  first  six  months'
working  of  compulsory  insurance
against  unemployment  in  Eng-
land. (Quarterly  bulletin  of  the
International  association  on  un-
employment, April,  19 14,  V.  4:
480-499.)

Interesting  study  of  operation  of  Eng-
lish act  and  of  problems  arising  under  it.
Beveridge,  William  H.,  and  Rey,
C.  F.  State  unemployment  in-
surance in  the  United  Kingdom.
(Quarterly  bulletin  of  the  Inter-
national association  on  unem-
ployment, Jan.,  1914,  v.  4:  129-
187.)

Detailed  statistical  study  of  operations
under  the  act.
Coman,  Katharine.  Unemploy-
ment insurance:  a  summary  of
European  systems.  New  York,
Progressive  natl.  serv.,  191 5.
21  p. (Also  Survey,  1913-1914.)

Discusses  briefly  the  Ghent  system,
Norway,  Denmark,  France,  and  Great
Britain.

Gibbon,  I.  G.  Unemployment  in-
surance. London,  King,  191 1.
xvi,  354  p.

A  study  of  the  various  schemes  of
unemployment  insurance  in  continental
Europe,  with  the  author's  conclusion  of
the  necessity  of  state  voluntary  un-
employment Insurance.  The  advis-
ability of  encouraging  the  formation  of
private  voluntary  insurance  associations,
and  of  labor  exchanges  to  cooperate  with
the  state  system,  is  discussed.
Great  Britain.  Board  of  trade.
Unemployment  insurance.  First
report  on  the  proceedings  of  the
Board  of  trade  under  part  II  of
the  National  insurance  act,  191 1.
London,  Darling,  1913. 82  p.

A  complete  descriptive  and  statistical
statement  of  the  operation  of  national
unemployment  insurance  in  Great  Brit-
ain during  the  year  ending  July,  1913.

Sixteenth  abstract  of  la-
bour statistics  of  the  United
Kingdom.  London,  1913.  "Un-
employment insurance,"  p.  12-
21 ;  Seventeenth  abstract,  p.  169-

175-

National insurance act,

1911, part  II, Unemployment


BIBLIOGRAPHY


487


insurance.  London,  Eyre  and
Spottiswoode,  1913. 82  p.

Unemployed benefits of

trade unions. London, 191 1.

327  P-

Gives  unemployed  benefits  of  trade
unions  and  earnings  in  insured  trades,
with  tables  showing  the  rules  and  ex-
penditure of  trade  unions  in  respect  of
tinemployed  benefits  and  also  showing
earnings  In  the  insured  trades.

Unemployment insurance

(umpire  regulations).  London,
Eyre  and  Spottiswoode,  191 2.
6  p.

Contains  regulations,  dated  March
26,  1912,  made  by  the  Board  of
trade  under  section  91  of  the  National
Insurance  aet,  1911.

Unemployment  insurance.

Regulations  made  by  the  Board
of  trade  under  part  II  of  the
National  insurance  act,  191 1.
London,  Eyre  and  Spottiswoode,
1912. 27  p.

Decisions  given  by  the  um-


pire respecting  claims  to  benefit.
London,  Darling,  1914.  v.  I,
327  p.

Halsey,  Olga  S.  Compulsory  un-
employment insurance  in  Great
Britain.  (American  labor  legis-
lation review,  June,  1915,  v.  5:
265-278.)

Workings  of  English  act.

Pigou,  Arthur  Cecil.  Unemploy-
ment. New  York,  Holt,  1913.
256  p.  "Unemployment  insur-
ance," p.  203-228.

Popular  statement  of  subject.

Schloss,  David  F.  Insurance
against  unemployment.  London,
King,  1909. X,  132  p.

Suggestions  for  organizing  a  national
system  of  unemployment  insurance,  by
trades,  in  cooperation  with  labor  regis-
tries.

See  also  under  General  works:
Frankel  and  Dawson,  Kennedy,
Rubinow,  U.  S.  Bureau  of  labor
statistics.


IX. ADMINISTRATION


American  association  for  labor
legislation.  American  labor  leg-
islation review. Quarterly,  191 1-

Issues  which  have  dealt  especially  with
administration  are  v.  2,  no.  4,  Dec,  1912,
"Immediate  legislative  program,"  and
V.  3,  no.  4,  Dec.  1913,  "Administration
of  labor  laws."

American  bar  association.  Spe-
cial committee  on  legislative
drafting.  Report.  (Senate  doc.
262,  63d  Cong.,  2d  sess.)  Wash-
ington, Govt,  print.  o£E.,  1913.

Andrews,  Irene  Osgood.  The
new  spirit  in  factory  inspection.
(Survey,  Dec.  21, 1912,  v.  29:

355-359-)

Handicaps  of  policing  method,  and
principles  for  reorganization.

Andrews,  John  B.,  and  Andrews,
Irene  Osgood.  Scientific  stand-
ards in  labor  legislation.  (Amer-
ican labor  legislation  review,  June,
1911,  V.  I,  no.  2: 123-134.)

Defects  of  early  legislation  and  ad-
vantages of  advisory  board  method.

Bourgeois,  Leon.  The  interna-
tional organization  of  social  poli-
cies. (American  la,bor  legislation


review,  March,  1914,  v.  4:186-
202.)

Necessity  for  international  cooperation
in  labor  legislation.

Brown,  Edward  F. The  efficiency

of present factory inspection

machinery  in  the  United  States.

(American  labor  legislation  review,

Feb.,  1913,  V.  3:24-28.)

Inadequacy  of  then  existing  adminis-
trative agencies.

Calder,  John.  Scientific  accident
prevention.  (American  labor  leg-
islation review,  Dec,  1911,  v.  i,
no.  4: 14-24.)

Emphasizes  need  for  cooperation  be-
tween employer,  employee,  and  engineer-
ing expert.

Commons,  John R. Labor  and

administration.  New  York,  Mac-
millan,  1913. vii,  431  p.

Essays  on  various  labor  questions,  the
last  in  the  book  taking  up  the  subiect
of  administration  in  connection  with  the
Wisconsin  workmen's  compensation  act.

The  industrial  commission

of  Wisconsin.  (American  labor
legislation  review,  Dec,  1911,
V.  I,  no.  4:  61-69.)

Principles  of  commission  plan^


488 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


How  the  Wisconsin  indus-
trial commission  works.  (Amer-
ican labor  legislation  review,  Feb.,

1913,  V.  3:9-14-)
Operation  of  commission  plan.

Gettemy,  Charles  F.  The  Massa-
chusetts bureau  of  statistics,
1869-1915;  a  sketch  of  its  his-
tory, organization,  and  functions,
together  with  a  Ust  of  its  publica-
tions and  illustrative  charts.
Boston,  1915. 115  p.

Written  by  the  director  in  connection
with  the  exhibit  of  the  bureau  of  statis-
tics at  the  Panama-Pacific  exposition.

Goodnow,  Frank  J.  Comparative
administrative  law;  an  analysis
of  the  administrative  systems,
national  and  local,  of  the  United
States,  England,  France,  and
Germany.  New  York,  Putnam,
1897. 2  v.

Detailed  comparative  account  of  the
organization  and  working  of  the  admin-
istration in  these  countries,  describing
also  the  relations  between  the  adminis-
trative, judicial,  and  legislative  branches
of  government.

International  association  for
labor  legislation.  Publications.
In  addition  to  the  Bulletin  of  the
international  labor  office,  published
monthly  in  English,  in  French,  and  in
German,  the  fifteen  national  sections,
including  that  in  America,  issue  periodi-
cally reports  on  labor  legislation  and  its
adroinistration.

Kaiser,  John  Boynton.  Law,  leg-
islative, and  municipal  reference
libraries.  Boston,  Boston  book
CO.,  1914.

Comprehensive  exposition  of  the  legis-
lative drafting  research  movement,
Kingsbury,  Susan  M.  (ed.).  La-
bor laws  and  their  enforcement,
with  special  reference  to  Massa-
chusetts. New  York,  Longmans,
Green,  191 1. xxii,  419  p.

Historical  and  critical  studies  on  the
administration  of  labor  laws  in  Massa-
chusetts, special  chapters  being  devoted
to  woman  and  child  labor  and  employ-
ment offices.


McNeill,  Joseph  H.  The  Massa-
chusetts board  of  boiler  rules.
(American  labor  legislation  re-
view, Dec,  191 1,  V.  I,  no.  4:70-
80.)

Description  of  the  joint  board  plan
and  its  operation.

United  States.  Report  on  condi-
tion of  woman  and  child  wage-
earners  in  the  United  States.
(Senate  doc.  645,  6ist  Cong.,
2d  sess.)  V.  19,  "  Labor  laws  and
factory  conditions."  Washing-
ton, Govt,  print,  off.,  1912.
I 125  p.

Summary  of  laws  on  child  labor,
safety,  health,  and  comfort,  and  study  of
their  enforcement.

Senate  hearings  on  a  legis-
lative drafting  bureau  and  legis-
lative reference  division  of  the
library  of  Congress.  (Senate
rept.  no.  1271,  62d  Cong.,  3d
sess.)  Washington,  Govt,  print,
off.,  1911.

Testimony  of  experts  from  all  parts
of  the  country.

Bureau  of  labor  statis-
tics. "Administration  of  labor
laws  and  factory  inspection  in
certain  European  countries,"
George  M.  Price.  (Its  Bulletin,
no.  142.)  Washington,  Govt,
print,  off.,  1914. 310  p.

Deals  mainly  with  factory  inspection.
The  countries  included  are:  Great
Britain,  Germany,  France,  Austria,  Bel-
gium, Switzerland.

Commission  on  indus-
trial relations.  Final  report.
Washington,  1915.  448  p.  "Re-
port of  commissioners  John  R.
Commons  and  Florence  J.  Harri-
man,"  p.  307-403.

Breakdown  of  existing  labor  laws  and
proposals  for  securing  more  thorough
enforcement.

Wisconsin.  Industrial  commis-
sion. Report  on  allied  functions.
Madison,  Wis.,  1914. 102  p.

Summary  of  work  done  1912-191^,
together  with  a  statement  of  expendi-
tures.


TABLE  OF  CASES  CITED

In  the  following  table  of  cases,  wherever  possible,  the  refer-
ence to  the  official  (state,  circuit  court,  or  United  States)  re-
porter is  given  first ;  for  the  convenience  of  those  to  whom  the
official  reporters  are  inaccessible,  references  to  the  unofficial
(sectional,  federal,  supreme  court,  etc.)  reporters  are  added.

Adair  v.  United  States,  208  U.  S.  161,  28  Sup.  Ct.  277  (1908) 113,  245

Adams  v.  Brennan,  177  111.  194,  52  U.  S.  314  (1898) 165

Aikens  v.  Wisconsin,  195  U.  S.  194,  25  Sup.  Ct.  3  (1904) 97

Alberthaw  Construction  Co.  v.  Cameron,  194  Mass.  208,  80  N.  E.  478

(1907) 104

Allis-Chalmers  Co.  v.  Iron  Holders,  150  Fed.  155  (1906) iii

Almand  v.  Scott,  80  Ga.  95,  4  S.  E.  892  (1888) 64,  65

American  Steel  &  Wire  Co.  v.  Wire  Drawers,  90  Fed.  608  (1898) ill

Arkansas  Stave  Co.  v.  State,  94  Ark.  27,  125  S.  W.  looi  (1910) 51

Arthur  v.  Oakes,  63  Fed.  310  (1894) 45t  106

Atchison,  T.  &  S.  F.  R.  Co.  v.  Gee,  139  Fed.  582  (1905) 109

Atkin  V.  Kansas,  191  U.  S.  207,  24  Sup.  Ct.  124  (1903) 197,  237

Atlanta  v.  Stein,  iii  Ga.  789,  36  S.  E.  932  (1900) 166

Avent-Beattyville  Coal  Co.  v.  State,  96  Ky.  218,  28  S.  W.  502  (1894)  29

Bailey  v.  Alabama.,  219  U.  S.  219,  31  Sup.  Ct.  145  (1910) 43.  44

Baltimore  &  O.  R.  Co.  0.  Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  221

U.  S.  612,  31  Sup.  Ct.  621 (1911) 238

Barnes  v.  Berry,  157  Fed.  883  (1908) 106,  117

Barnes  v.  Typographical  Union,  232  111.  402,  424,  83  N.  E.  932,  940

(1908) "o

Barr  v.  Trades'  Council,  53  N.  J.  Eq.  loi,  30  Atl.  881 (1894) 99

Bausbach  v.  Rieff,  237  Pa.  482,  85  Atl.  762  (1912) 105

Beattie  v.  CaUanan,  73  N.  Y.  Supp.  518,  81  N.  Y.  Supp.  413  (1901-3)  •  I05

Beck  V.  Railway  Teamsters,  118  Mich.  497,  77  N.  W.  13  (1898) no

Beekman  v.  Marsters,  195  Mass.  205,  80  N.  E.  817  (1907). 109

Berry  v.  Donovan,  188  Mass.  353,  74  N.  E.  603  (1905) 99,  104

Bittner  v.  West  Virginia-Pittsburg  Coal  Co.,  131  C.  C.  A..  22,  214

Fed.  716  (1914) "3

Bixley  V.  Dunlap,  56  N.  H.  456  (1876) 109


490 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Blanchard  v.  District  Council,  78  N.  J.  737,  71  Atl.  1 131  (1909) 105

Booth  V.  Burgess,  72  N.  J.  Eq.  181,  65  Atl.  226  (1906) 105

Borgnis  v.  Falk  Co.,  147  Wis.  327,  133  N.  W.  209  (1911) 370

Bowman  v.  Bradley,  151  Pa.  St.  351,  24  Atl.  1062  (1892) 65

Beyer  v.  Western  Union,  124  Fed.  246  (1903) 113

Brace  v.  Evans,  5  Pa.  Co.  Ct.  163  (1888) 102

Brennan  v.  United  Hatters,  73  N.  J.  467,  65  Atl.  165  (1906) 105

Brown  v.  Piper,  91  U.  S.  37  (1875) 425

Burnetta  v.  Marceline  Coal  Co.,  180  Mo.  241,  79  S.  W.  136  (1906) ...  117

Butterfield  v.  Forester,  1 1  East  60  (England,  1809) 366

Butterick  Pub.  Co.  v.  Typographical  Union,  100  N.  Y.  Supp.  292
(1906) 108,  110

Casson  v.  Mcintosh,  199  Mass.  443,  85  N.  E.  529  (1908) 105

Chafiee  v.  United  States,  18  Wall,  516  (1873) 456

Chase  v.  McDonnell,  24  111.  237  (i860) 65

Chicago,  B.  &  Q.  R.  Co.  v.  McGuire,  219  U.  S.  549,  31  Sup.  Ct.  259

(1911) 34

Chicago,  R.  I.  &  P.  R.  Co.  v.  Arkansas,  219  U.  S.  453,  31  Sup.  Ct.  275

(1911) 347

Cleveland  v.  Clements  Bros.  Construction  Co.,  67  Ohio  St.  197  (1902) .  166
Clyatt  V.  United  States,  197  U.  S.  207,  25  Sup.  Ct.  429  (1904). .  .37,  39

Cohen  v.  Garment  Workers,  72  N.  Y.  Supp.  341  (1901) 108

Commonwealth  v.  Beatty,  15  Super.  Ct.  (Pa'.)  5  (1900) 222

Commonwealth  v.  Hamilton  Mfg.  Co.,  120  Mass.  383  (1876) 221

Commonwealth  v.  Hunt,  4  Metcalf  iii  (1842) 94,  95

Commonwealth  v.  Lancaster  Mills,  212  Mass.  315,  98  N.  E.  364  (1912)  59

Conners  v.  Connolly,  86  Conn.  641,  86  Atl.  600  (1913) 105

CoimoUy  v.  Union  Sewer  Pipe  Co.,  184  U.  S.  540,  22  Sup.  Ct.  431  (1902)  441

Coppage  V.  Kansas,  236  U.  S.  1,  35  Sup.  Ct.  240  (1915) 30,  113,  118

Ex  parte  Crane,  on  Habeas  Corpus,  Crim.  560  (California,  1914).  . .  84
Cunningham  v.  Northwestern  Improvement  Co.,  44  Mont,  180,  119

Pac. 554 (1911) 369

Curran  v.  Gallen,  152  N.  Y.  33,  46  N.  E.  297  (1897) 106

Cutting  V.  Cox,  19  Vt.  517  (1847) 65

Danbury  hatters'  case. See  Lawlor  v.  Loewe,  Loewe  v.  Lawlor.

Davis  V.  Mercer  Lumber  Co.,  164  Ind.  413,  73  N.  E.  899  (1905) 328

Davis  Machine  Co.  v.  Robinson,  84  N.  Y.  Supp.  837  (1903) 109

Delaware,  L.  &  W.  R.  Co.  v.  Switchmen,  158  Fed.  541  (1908) 106

De  Minico  v.  Craig,  207  Mass.  593,  94  N.  E.  317  (191 1) 104

Ex  parte  Dickey,  144  Cal.  243,  77  Pac.  924  (1914) 268

Doremus  v.  Hennessy,  176  111.  608,  52  N.  E.  924,  54  N.  E.  524  (1898)  99

Ellis  V.  United  States,  206  U.  S.  246,  27  Sup.  Ct.  600  (1907) 227

Employing  Printers'  Club  ti.  Doctor  Blosser  Co.,  122  Ga.  509,  50  S.  E.

353 (1905) 109

Erdman  v.  Mitchell,  207  Pa.  79,  56  Atl.  327  (1903) 105

Erie  R.  Co.  v.  New  York,  233  U.  S.  671,  34  Sup.  Ct.  756  (1914)  .240,  247


TABLE  OP  CASES  CITED  491

Evansville  Hoop  and  Stave  Co.  v.  BaUey,  43  Ind.  App.  153,  84  N.  E.

549  (1908) 328

Everett-Waddey  Co.  v.  Typographical  Union,  105  Va.  188,  53  S.  E.  272

(1906) no,  III

Farwell  v.  Boston  &  W.  R.  Co.,  4  Metcalf  (Mass.)  49  (1842).  .359,  360

Pell  V.  Berry,  108  N.  Y.  Supp.  669  (1907) 117

Piske  V.  People,  188  111.  206,  58  N.  E.  985  (1900) 165

Flaccus  V.  Smith,  199  Pa.  128,  48  Atl.  894  (1901) 113

Plorida  C.&  P. R. Co. W.Reynolds,  183  U.S. 471, 22  Sup.Ct.  176  (1902)456

Folsom  V.  Lewis,  208  Mass.  336,  94  N.  E.  316  (191 1) 104

Poster  V.  Retail  Clerks,  78  N.  Y.  Supp.  860  (1902) 108,  no,  in

Prank  v.  Herold,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  443,  52  Atl.  152  (1901) 109,  in

Pranklin  v.  United  Railways  &  Electric  Co.  of  Baltimore,  Balto.

Common  Pleas  Ct.,  April  27,  1904 369

Franklin  Union  v.  People,  220  111.  355,  77  N.  E.  176  (1906) no

George  Jonas  Glass  Co.  v.  Glass  Bottle  Blowers,  72  N.  J.  Eq.  653,  66

Atl.  952  (1907);  77  N.  J.  Eq.  219,  79  Atl.  262  (1911) 109,  no

Godcharles  v.  Wigeman,  113  Pa.  St.  431,  6  Atl.  354  (1886) 222

Goldfield  Mines  Co.  v.  Miners'  Union,  159  Fed.  500  (1908) in

Grant  Bros.  Construction Co.  v.  United  States,  232  U.  S.  647,  34

Sup.  Ct.  452  (1914) 73

Greenlee  v.  Southern  R.  Co.,  122  N.  C.  977,  30  S.  E.  115  (1898) 345

Grisson  0.  Pickett,  98  N.  C.  54,  3  S.  E.  921  (1887) 63

Haley  v.  Chicago  &  N.  R.  Co.,  21  la.  15  (1866) 361

Hammock  v.  Creekmore,  48  Ark.  264,  3  S.  W.  180  (1886) 64

Hanson  v.  Innis,  21 1  Mass.  301,  97  N.  E.  756  (1912) 104

Harrison  v.  Rioks,  71  N.  C.  7  (1874) 64

Haskins  i;.  Royster,  70  N.  C.  610  (1874) , 109

Hitchman  Coal  &  Coke  Co.  v.  Mitchell,  202  Fed.  512  (1912) 103,

109,  113

Holden  v.  Alton,  179  lU.  318,  53  N.  E.  556  (1899) 165

Holden  v.  Hardy,  169  U.  S.  366,  18  Sup.  Ct.  383  (1898).. 27,  28,  222,

240,  426,  428

Hooper  v.  Haines,  71  Md.  64,  18  Atl.  29,  20  Atl.  159  (1889) 65

House  Painters  v.  Feeney,  13  Pa.  Dist.  335  (1904) 105

Hudson  V.  Cincinnati,  N.  O.  &  T.  P.  R.  Co.,  152  Ky.  711,  154  S.  W.

47  (1913) ■/■••; • "7

Hunter  v.  Colfax  Consolidated  Coal  Co.,  Iowa  (1915) 37o

Ideal  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Ludwig,  149  Mich.  133,  112  N.  W.  723  (1907)-  •  no
Inge  V.  Board  of  Public  Works  of  Mobile,  135  Ala.  187,  33  So.  678

(1902) 166

Interstate  Commerce  Commission  v.  U.  S.  ex  rel.  Humboldt  Steam-
ship Co.,  224  U.  S.  474,  32  Sup.  Ct.  556  (i9n) 20

Iverson  v.  Dilno,  44  Mont.  270,  119  Pac.  719  (1911) 108

Ives  V.  South  Buffalo  R.  Co.,  210  N.  Y.  271,  94  N.  E.  431  (1911)  .28,  369


492 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Jacobs  V.  Cohen,  183  N.  Y.  207,  76  N.  E.  5  (1905) io5,  117

In  re  Jacobs,  98  N.  Y.  98  (1885) 337,  428

Jeans  Clothing  Co.  v.  Watson,  168  Mo.  133,  67  S.  W.  391  (1902). .  .108

Jeffrey  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Blagg,  235  U.  S.  571,  35  Sup.  Ct.  167  (1915) 370

Jensen  v.  Southern  Pacific  Co.,  215  N.  Y.  514,  109  N.  E.  600  (i9i5).37o
Jersey  Printing  Co.  v.  Cassidy,  63  N.  J.  Eq.  759,  53  Atl.  230  (1902).  in
Johnson  v.  Goodyear  Mixing  Co.,  127  Cal.  4,  59  Pac.  304  (1899). ...  52

Jones  V.  Van  Winkle,  131  Ga.  336,  62  S.  E.  236  (1908) in

Ex  parte  Jones,  71  W.  Va.  567,  77  S.  E.  1029  (1913) 21

Josma  V.  Western  Steel  Car  &  Foundry  Co.,  249  111.  508,  94  U.  S.  945

(1911) 273

Journeymen  tailors'  case,  8  Mod.  (England,  1721) 93

Karges  Furniture  Co.  v.  Woodworkers,  165  Ind.  421,  75  N.  E.  877

(1905) 1 10

Kealey  v.  Faulkner,  18  (Ohio)  Superior  and  Common  Pleas  Decisions

498  (1908) 102

Kelly  V.  Rummerfield,  117  Wis.  620,  94  N.  W.  649  (1903) 65

Kemp  V.  Div.  No.  241  Amal.  Ass'n  of  Street  and  Electric  Ry.  Em-
ployees, 255  111.  213,  99  N.  E.  389  (1912) 105,  106

Kentucky  State  Journal  v.  Workmen's  Compensation  Board,  161  Ky.

562,  170  S.  W.  1166  (1914) 370

Keoleg  V.  Phelps,  80  Mich.  466,  45  N.  W.  350  (1890) 65

Kimpton  v.  Bronson,  45  Barb.  625  (1866) 35

Knoxville  Iron  Co.  v.  Harbison,  183  U.  S.  13,  22  Sup.  Ct.  I  (i90i).33,  245

Knudsen  v.  Benn,  123  Fed.  636  (1903) no

Kolley  V.  Robinson,  187  Fed.  415  (1911) no

Krebs  v.  Rosenstein,  66  N.  Y.  Supp.  42  (1900) no

Lawlor  ti.  Loewe,  235  U.  S.  522,  35  Sup.  Ct.  170  (1915) 120

Lenahan  v.  Pittson  Coal  Mining  Co.,  218  Pa.  311,  67  Atl.  642  (1907). 309

Levy  V.  Rosenstein,  66  N.  Y.  Supp.  loi  (1900) in

Lewis  V.  Detroit  Board  of  Education,  139  Mich.  306,  102  N.  W.  756

(1905) 166

Lindsay  &  Co.  v.  Montana  Federation  of  Labor,  37  Mont.  264,  96  Pac.

127  (1908) 102,  108

Lochner  v.  New  York,  198  U.  S.  45,  25  Sup.  Ct.  539  (1905) 242,  425

Loewe  v.  Lawlor,  208  U.  S.  274,  28  Sup.  Ct.  301  (1908).  . .  .96,  107,  108
Lohse  Patent  Door  Co.  v.  Fuelle,  215  Mo.  421,  114  S.  W.  997  (1908) .  108
Louisville  &  N.  R.  Co.  v.  Garrett,  231  U.  S.  298,  34  Sup.  Ct.  48  (1913) .  199
Louisville,  H.  &  St.  L.  R.  Co.  v.  Lyons,  155  Ky.  396,  159  S.  W.  971

(1913) 309

Low  i;.  Reese  Printing  Co.,  41  Neb.  127,  59  N.  W.  362  (1894) 242

McLean  v.  Arkansas,  211  U.  S.  539,  29  Sup.  Ct.  206  (1909).  .33,  53,  428
Mackin  v.  Detroit-Timkin  Axle  Co.,  (Michigan),  153  N.  W.  49  (1915)  .37°

Magee  v.  Chicago  &  N.  R.  Co.,  82  la.  249,  48  N.  W.  92  (1891) 358

Malette  v.  City  of  Spokane,  77  Wash.  205,  137  Pac.  496  (1913) 197

Marbury  v.  Madison, I  Cranch  137  (1803) 23


TABLE  OP  CASES  CITED  493

Marshall  &  Bruce  Co.  v.  Nashville,  109  Tenn.  495,  71  S.  W.  815

(1902) 166

Mathews  v.  People,  202  111.  389,  67  N.  E.  28  (1903) 272

Matthews  v.  Shankland,  56  N.  Y.  Supp.  123  (1898) 108

Maxwell  v.  Reed,  7  Wis.  594  (1859) 196

Miller  v.  Wilson,  236  U.  S.  373,  35  Sup.  Ct.  342  (1915) 223,  429

Millet  V.  People,  117  111.  294,  7  N.  E.  631  (1886) 222

Mills  V.  U.  S.  Printing  Co.,  91  N.  Y.  Supp.  185  (1904) 108,  no

Minneapolis,  St.  P.  &  S.  Ste.  M.  R.  Co.,  v.  Railroad  Commission  of

Wis.,  136  Wis.  146,  116  N.  W.  905  (1908) 199,  349

Minnesota  rate  cases. See  Simpson  v.  Shepard.

Mitchell  0.  Hitchman  Coal  and  Coke  Co.,  214  Fed.  685  (1914) 103

In  re  Morgan,  26  Colo.  415,  58  Pac.  1071  (1899) 240,  241,  424,  428

Mueller  v.  Oregon,  208  U.  S.  412,  28  Sup.  Ct.  324  (1908). 222,  426,  427
Murray  v.  South  Carolina  R.  Co.,  i  McMuUen  385  (1841) 360

National  Protective  Ass'n  of  Steamfitters  &  Helpers  v.  Cumming,  170

N.  Y.  315,  63  N.  E.  369  (1902) 106

Neal  V.  Brandon,  70  Ark.  79,  66  S.  W.  200  (1902) 65

Newton  Co.  v.  Erickson,  126  N.  Y.  Supp.  949  (191 1) 105

Noble  State  Bank  v.  Haskell,  219  U.  S.  104,  31  Sup.  Ct.  299  (1911) . .  28

Noe  II.  Layton,  69  Ark.  551,  64  S.  W.  880  (1910) 65

Northern  P.  R.  Co.  v.  Washington,  222  U.  S.  370,  32  Sup.  Ct.  160
(1912) 240

O'Brien  v.  People,  216  111.  354,  75  N.  E.  108  (1905) 105

O'Neill  V.  Behanna,  182  Pa.  236,  37  Atl.  843  (1897) 109,  in

In  re  Opinions  of  Justices,  209  Mass.  607,  96  N.  E.  308  (191 1) 370

Otis  Steel  Co.  v.  Molders,  no  Fed.  698  (1901) no

Parkinson  Co.  v.  Building  Trades'  Council,  154  Cal.  581,  98  Pac.  1027

(1908) 100, 107

Patterson  v.  Trades'  Council,  n  Pa.  Dist.  500  (1902) 105

Peel  Splint  Coal  Co.  v.  State,  36  W.  Va.  802,  15  S.  E.  1000  (1892) ....  29
Pennsylvania  R.  Co.  v.  Ewing,  241  Pa.  581,  88  Atl.  775  (1913)-  •  •  -347
Pennsylvania  R.  Co.  v.  International  Coal  Mining  Co.,  230  U.  S.  185,

33  Sup.  Ct.  893  (1912) 20

People  V.  Barondess,  133  N.  Y.  649,  31  N.  E.  240  (1892) 105

People  V.  Chas.  Schweinler  Press,  214  N.  Y.  395,  108  N.  E.  641

(1915) 248,  251,  425,  427,  441

People  V.  Elerding,  254  lU.  579.  98  N.  E.  982  (1912) 224

People  i>.  Erie  R.  Co.,  198  N.  Y.  369,  91  N.  E.  849  (1910) 240

People  V.  Ewer,  141  N.  Y.  129,  36  N.  E.  4  (1894) 208

People  V.  Fisher,  14  Wendell  10  (1835) 94

People  V.  Grout,  179  N.  Y.  417.  72  N.  E.  464  (1904) 238

People  ».  Khnck  Packing  Co.,  214  N.  Y.  121,  108  N.  E.  278  (1915)

255.  257

People  V.  Kostka,  4  N.  Y.  Crim.  429  (1886) 107

People  V.  Lochner,  177  N.  Y.  145.  ^9  N.  E.  373  (1904) 242


494 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION

People  V.  McFariin,  89  N.  Y.  Supp.  527  (1904) loS

People  V.  New  York  C.  &  H.  R.  R.  Co.,  163  App.  Div.  79  (1914) 247

People  V.  Radt,  71  N.  Y.  Supp.  846  (1900) 108

People  V.  Ruggles,  8  Johnson  (N.  Y.)  290  (1811) 256

People  V.  Schenck,  257  111.  384,  100  N.  E.  994  (1913) 334

People  V.  Weinsheimer,  102  N.  Y.  Supp.  579  (1907) 105

People  V.  Williams,  189  N.  Y.  131,  91  N.  E.  778  (1907) 250,  424

People  V.  Wilzig,  4  N.  Y.  Crim.  403  (1886) 107

People  ex  rel.  Armstrong  v.  Warden  of  the  City  Prison  of  New  York,

183  N.  Y.  223,  76  N.  E.  1 1  (1905) 268

People  ex  rel.  Williams  Eng.  Co.  v.  Metz,  193  N.  Y.  198,  85  N.  E.  1070

(1908) 238

Pickett  V.  Walsh,  192  Mass.  572,  78  N.  E.  753  (1906) 104

Pierce  p.  Stablemen's  Union,  156  Cal.  70, 103  Pac.  324  (1909)  100,  107,  no

Plant  V.  Woods,  176  Mass.  492,  57  N.  E.  ion  (1900) 104

Pope  Motor  Car  Co.  v.  Keegan,  150  Fed.  148  (1906) in

Priestly  v.  Fowler,  3  Meeson  &  Welsby  i,  6  (England,  1837).  .358,  359
Purvis  V.  Carpenters,  214  Pa.  348,  63  Atl.  585  (1906) 105

Randall  v.  Ditch,  123  la.  582,  99  N.  W-  190  (1904) 65

Reynolds  ».  Davis,  198  Mass.  294,  84  N.  E.  457  (1908) 104

Riley  V.  Commonwealth,  232  U.  S.  671,  34  Sup.  Ct.  469  (19I4). . .  .219

Ex  parte  Riley,  94  Ala.  82,  10  So.  528  (1891) 43

Ritchie  v.  People,  155  lU.  98,  40  N.  E.  454  (1895) 222,  424,  428

Ritchie  v.  Wayman,  244  111.  509,  91  N.  E.  695  (1910) 28,  223,  429

Robertson  v.  Baldwin,  165  U.  S.  287,  17  Sup.  Ct.  326  (1897) 44

Rogers  v.  Evarts,  17  N.  Y.  Supp.  264  (1891) llo

Ruddy  V.  Plumbers,  79  N.  J,  467,  75  Atl.  742  (1910) 105

St.  Louis  V.  doner,  210  Mo.  502,  109  S.  W.  30  (1908) no

Schaezlein  v.  Cabaniss,  135  Cal.  466,  67  Pac.  755  (1901) 333

Schlang  v.  Ladies'  Waist  Makers,  124  N.  Y.  Supp.  289  (1910) 105

Searle  Mfg.  Co.  v.  Terry,  106  N.  Y.  Supp.  438  (1905). .  .105,  no,  in
Sexton  V.  Newark  District  Telegraph  Co.,  84  N.  J.  85,  86  Atl.  451

(1913) 370

Shoemaker  v.  Crawford,  82  Mo.  App.  487  (1900) 6$

Simpson  v.  Shepard,  230  U.  S.  352,  33  Sup.  Ct.  729  (1913) 240

Sinsheimer  v.  Garment  Workers,  28  N.  Y.  Supp.  321  (1894) 108

Smith  V.  Alabama,  124  U.  S.  465,  8  Sup.  Ct.  564  (1888) 240

Smith !).  Atchison,  T,  &  S.  F.  R.  Co.,  39  Tex.  Civ.  App.  468,  87  S,  W.

1052  (1905) 230

Smyth  V,  Ames,  169  U.  S,  466,  18  Sup.  Ct.  418  (1897) 416

Southern  R.  Co.  v.  Machinists,  ill  Fed.  49  (1901) 109

State  V.  Barba,  32  La.  768,  61  So.  784  (1913) 244

State  V.  Brown  &  Sharpe  Mfg.  Co.,  18  R.  I.  16,  25  Atl.  246  (1892)  .29,  51,

24S

State  V.  Buchanan,  29  Wash.  603,  70  Pac.  52  (1902) 28,  222

State  V.  Bunting,  71  Ore.  259,  139  Pac.  731  (1914) 245

State  V.  Dyer,  67  Vt.  796,  32  Atl.  814  (1894) 105


TABLE  OF  CASES  CITED  495

State  V.  J.  J.  Newman  Co.,  103  Miss.  263,  59  So.  923  (1912) 245

State  V.  Napier,  63  S.  C.  60,  41  S.  E.  13  (1902) 268

State  w.  Nichols,  (Oregon),  151  Pac.  473  (1915) 256

State  V.  Roberson,  136  N.  C.  587,  48  S.  E.  595  (1904) 268

State  ex  rel.  Davis  Smith  Co.  v.  Clausen,  65  Wash.  156,  117  Pac.  lioi

(1911) 370

State  ex  rel.  Mays  ».  Brown,  71  W.  Va.  519,  77  S.  E.  243 21

State  ex  rel.  Yaple  v.  Creamer,  85  Ohio  St.  349, 97  N.  E.  602  (1912) .  .370,

428

Steel  ».  Frick,  56  Pa.  St.  172  (1867) 64

Sterling  v.  Union  Carbide  Co.,  142  Mich.  284,  105  N.  W.  755  (1905). 309

Stettler  v.  O'Hara,  69  Ore.  519,  139  Pac.  743  (1914) 197,  224

Stettler  v.  O'Hara,  Ore.  Circuit  Ct.  Multnomah  County,  Nov.  7,  1913 .  198

Stockwell  V.  United  States,  13  Wall.  531  (1871) 456

Strafford  v.  Republic  Iron  &  Steel  Co., 238  111.  371, 87 N. E.

358  (1909) 309

Sun  Ptg.  &  Pub.  Co.!!.  Delaney,  62  N.  Y.  Supp.  750  (1900) 108

Taff  Vale  case,  70  L.  J.  K.  B.  95  (England,  1901) 122

Taylor  v.  Bradley,  39  N.  Y.  129  (1868) 65

In  re  Ten  Hour  Law  for  Street  Ry.  Corporations,  24  R.  I.  603,  54

Atl.  602  (1902) 233

Thomas  v.  Cincinnati,  N.  O.  &  T.  P.  R.  Co.,  62  Fed.  803  (1894) 106

Toledo,  A.  A.  &  N.  M.  R.  Co.  v.  Pennsylvania  Co.,  54  Fed.  730  (1893) .  102

Tniax  V.  Raich,  239  U.  S.  33  (1915) 73

Tunstall  v.  Steans  Coal  Co.,  195  Fed.  888  (1911) ill

Union  Pacific  R.  Co.  v.  Ruef,  120  Fed.  102  (1903) no,  in

United  States  v.  Atchison,  T.  &  S.  F.  R.  Co.,  220  U.  S.  37,  31  Sup.

Ct.  362 (1911) 239

United  States  v.  Chicago,  M.  &  P.  S.  R.  Co.,  197  Fed.  624  (1912). .  .238

United  States  v.  Edgar,  48  Fed.  91  (1891) 72

United  States  v.  Gay,  95  Fed.  226  (1899) 73

United  States  v.  Kansas  C.  S.  R.  Co.,  121  C.  C.  A.  136,  202  Fed.

828  (1913) 238

United  States  v.  Southern  Pacific  Co.,  220  Fed.  745  (1915) 239

Vandalia  R.  Co.  v.  Railroad  Commission  of  Indiana,  182  Ind.  382,  loi

N.  E.  85 (1913) 349

Vegelahn  v.  Gunther,  167  Mass.  92,  44  N.  E.  1077  (1896) no

In  re  Viemeister,  179  N.  Y.  235,  72  N.  E.  97  (1904) 425

Wabash  R.  Co.  v.  Hannahan,  121  Fed.  563  (1903) 106

Walker  v.  Cronin,  107  Mass.  555  (1871) 109

Wenham  v.  State,  65  Neb.  395,  91  N.  W.  421  (1902) 222

Western  Indemnity  Co.  v.  Pillsbury  (California),  151  Pac.  398  (191S)  -370
WiUiams  v.  Fears,  no  Ga.  584,  35  S.  E.  699;  179  U.  S.  270,  21  Sup.

Ct.  128  (1900) 268

$x  parte  Williams,  158  Cal.  550,  in  Pac.  1035  (1910) .100,  no


496 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

Willicut  &  Sons  Co.  v.  Bricklayers'  Benevolent  and  Protective  Union,

200  Mass.  1 10,  85  N.  E.  897  (1908) 105

Wilson  V.  Stewart,  69  Ala.  302  (i88i) 65

Wiseman  v.  Tanner,  221  Fed.  698  (1915) 269

Withy  V.  Bloem,  163  Mich.  419,  128  N.  W.  913  (1910) 224

Wright  V.  Hoctor,  95  Neb.  342,  145  N.  W.  704  (1914) 166

Wyeman  v.  Deady,  79  Conn.  414, 65  Atl.  129  (1906) 105


INDEX


A

Aberdeen,  Wash.,  municipal  em-
ployment office,  270.

Accident  prevention,  in  relation  to
workmen's  compensation,  433-

Accident  reporting,  need  for  system
in,  297,  298;  laws,  298,  299;
statistics,  300,  301.

Action  of  debt,  used  in  enforcing
labor  laws,  456.

Administration,  in  relation  to  in-
vestigation, 20,  23,  24,  415,  416;
improvements,  47;  of  minimum
wage  laws,  185-190;  of  restric-
tions on  hours  of  labor,  205,  216-
220;  of  child  labor  laws,  205, 313-
317;  of  workmen's  compensation
laws,  366,  381,  382;  of  social  in-
surance, 387-393,  399-404;  of  un-
employment insurance,  412;  in
relation  to  legislation,  415,  430;
unified  and  decentralized.charts,
434.  435;  cooperative  pressiu-e  in,
462-464.

Aeronauts,  ejcamination  and  regis-
tration of,  323,  342;  minimum
age  limit,  342.

Agricultural  holdings  act  (England),
66.

Agriculture,  workers,  62-65;  credit
agencies,  67;  no  contract  labor
law  needed  for,  72;  proposed
minimum  wage,  176;  excluded
from  hour  legislation,  212;  in
relation  to  employment  offices,
271,274,275,279;  accidents,  300,
301;  child  labor,  308;  excluded
from  workmen's  compensation
legislation,  379. See  also  Land.

Alabama,  contract  labor  law,  43;
pajntnent  of  benefits  by  employers,
58;  wage  preference,  61;  agri-
cultural tenancy  law,  6^,  67;
32


conciliation  and  arbitration,  131-
133;  no  limitation  of  women's
hours,  211,  216;  child  labor,  307,
3091  313.  314;  women  forbidden
to  work  in  mines,  318;  safety
regulations  for  mines,  324.

Alameda,  Cal.,  tax  to  provide  work
for  the  unemployed,  288.

Alaska,  conciliation  and  arbitra-
tion, 131-133;  mining  regula-
tions, 341 ;  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 369; old  age  pensions,  403.

Alberta,  strike  in  mines,  159.

Alien  contract  labor.  See  Induced
immigration.

Allegheny  City,  Pa.,  ten  -  hour
strikes,  210.

Allen,  A.  J.,  on  employment  offices,
266.

Alsace-Lorraine,  industrial  courts,
86.

Amalgamated  Society  of  Carpen-
ters, out-of-work- benefits,  409.

Amalgamated  Society  of  Engineers,
out-of-work  benefits,  409.

Amalgamated  Window  Glass  Mak-
ers of  America,  102.

American  Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  investigates  one  day
of  rest  in  seven  laws,  255;  work
on  accident  reporting,  299,  300;
on  occupational  diseases,  303,
304;  on  workmen's  compensation,
374,  381;  on  standards  for  health
insurance,  395;  on  administration
of  labor  laws,  418;  organization,
420.

American  Association  of  Public  Em-
ployment Offices,  266,  269,  275.

American  Federation  of  Labor,  ef-
fect of  Danbury  hatters'  case  on,
108;  opposes  compulsory  arbi-
tration, 159;  opposes  eight-hour
laws,  229; opposes  child  labor,


498 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


306;  investigates  workmen's  com-
pensation, 381;  in  relation  to  un-
employment insurance,  409;  in-
vestigates labor  conditions,  419.

American  Statistical  Association,  in-
dorses standard  accident  report-
ing schedule,  299.

Anarchism,  development  of,  26.

Anarchists,  forbidden  to  enter
United  States,  69.

Ankylostomiasis,  in  mining  indus-
try, 303; compensation  for,  368.

Anthracite  coal  strike,  arbitration
in,  138,  157.

Anthrax,  as  cause  of  occupational
disease,  303,  336;  compensation
for,  368,  381.

Apprentices,  Elizabethan  statute  of,
41,  141.

Apprenticeship,  as  unfree  status,  3,
36;  characteristics,  41,  42,  54;
in  relation  to  minimum  wage,
184-186,  189,  193;  in  colonial
times,  305;  Wisconsin  regula-
tions for,  437'

Arbitration,  voluntary,  126-139;
compulsory,  127,  1,40-160;  among
public  employees,  164,  165.

Argentina,  mediation  and  arbitra-
tion, 131;  night  work  of  wom-
en, 249;  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,
254;  restrictions  on  women's
work,  318.

Arizona,  payment  of  benefits  to  in-
jured employees,  58;  wage  pref-
erence, 61;  convict  labor,  79;
hours  of  labor  for  women,  216,
256;  child  labor,  206,  308,  309;
hours  of  labor  in  laundries
and  electric  plants,  236;  restric-
tions on  women's  work,  318;
seats  for  women,  334;  workmen's '
compensation,  369;  old  age  pen-
sions, 403. See  also  Phoenix.

Arkansas,  coal  screening  law,  33;
contract  labor  laws,  44;  payment
of  benefits  to  injured  employees,
58;  fines  from  employees,  59;
wage  preference,  61;  minimum
wage,  185-187,  199;  child  labor,
206,  308 ;  hours  of  labor  for  wom-
en, 215;  hours  of  labor  in  saw
and  planing  mills,  236;  women  for-
bidden to  work  in  mines,  318;
seats  fQr  women,  334.


Assignment  of  wages. See  Wages.

Associated  Employers  of  Indianap-
olis, 266.

Assumption  of  risk,  13,  14,  361,
372;  in  relation  to  child  labor,
309;  in  relation  to  safety,  328.

Australasia,  eight-hour  day,  144;
public  employment,  161,  165;
See  also  Australia,  Melbourne,
New  Zealand,  South  Australia,
Tasmania,  Victoria,  Western  Aus-
tralia.

Australia,  state  loans  to  farmers,  67;
contract  labor  law,  73;  literacy
test  against  Chinese,  76;  arbi-
tration legislation,  140-145,  150-
156;  parliamentary  debates,  143;
labor  situation,  143-145;  mari-
time strike,  145,  150;  sheep-
shearers' strike,  145;  parties,  150,
151.  155.  156;  constitution,  154;
federal  court  of  arbitration,  154-
156;  minimum  wage,  179,  181-
183,  185,  186,  195;  old  age
pensions,  403,  405.  See  also  Aus-
tralasia, Melbourne,  New  Zea-
land, South  Australia,  Tasmania,
Victoria,  Western  Australia.

Austria,  wage  payment  laws,  52-
54;  fines  from  employees,  59;
agricultural  credit,  67;  emigra-
tion from,  72;  legal  aid,  83;  in-
dustrial courts,  86;  statistics  of
strikes  and  lockouts,  125;  media-
tion and  arbitration,  131;  coal
mine  accidents,  234,  339;  night
work  of  women,  248;  one  day  of
rest  in  seven,  254;  private  em-
ployment offices,  269;  health  re-
quirements for  industry,  321,  323,
326,  336;  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 367;  health  insurance,  387-
389;  maternity  insurance,  393;
widows'  and  orphans'  insurance,
408;  International  Association
for  Labor  Legislation,  420;  rep-
resentation of  interests,  444,
445;  social  insurance,  445.


B

Bakeries,  workers  in,  54;  minimum
wage,  173;  hours  of  labor,  236,
242,  243,  424; Sunday  employ-.


iNDiEX


495)


ment  forbidden,  253;  health  reg-
ulations, 323,  460.

BaUot,  struggle  for  secret,  5.

Baltimore,  eight-hotir  day,  228;
public employment oflSce, 271.

Bankruptcy  laws,  61.

Banks,  charters  granted  to,  92.

Barbers,  Sunday  employment  for-
bidden, 253;  examination  and
registration  of,  323.

Bargaining  power,  inequality  of,  9,
28-34,  "6,  198,  242,  245,  246.

Bar-rooms,  payment  of  wages  in,
52,  53-

Bayonne,  N.  J.,  oil  plants  strike,
259-

Beet  sugar  industry,  hours  of  labor,
200.

Beggars,  professional,  forbidden  to
enter  United  States,  69.

Belgium,  wage  payment  law,  53;
fines  from  employees,  59;  legal
aid,  83;  industrial  courts,  86,
445;  statistics  of  strikes  and  lock-
outs, 125;  mediation  and  arbi-
tration, 131;  coal  mine  accidents,
234i  235,  339;  rest  peribds  for
Women,  247;  night  work  for
women,  248,  249;  employment
offices,  279;  lead  poisoning,  321,
326;  anthrax,  336;  workmen's
compensation,  367;  health  in-
surance, 387;  old  age  insurance,
399,  403;  International  Associa-
tion for  Labor  Legislation,  420;
representation  of  interests,  444,
445;  superior  council  of  labor,
444. See  also  Ghent.

Berlin,  industrial  courts,  87;  im-
perial insurance  office,  366.  See
also  Germany,  Prussia.

Berne,  wage  payment  laws,  53, 54;  in-
dustrial courts,  87 ;  conference  on
night  work  of  women,  248;  vaca-
tions for  women,  259;  conference
on  poisonous  phosphorus,  325,

Beveridge,  W.  H.,  on  employment
offices,  281.

Bill  drafting,  methods  of,  430,  431,
440,  452-454-

Bill  of  rights,  22.

Bills  of  attainder,  prohibited  by
constitution,  6.

Bismarck,  in  relation  to  social  in-
surance, 387.


Black  Death,  effect  on  wages,  141.

Blacklist,  in  relation  to  industrial
courts,  88;  virtually  legal,  I13,
114;  in  relation  to  boycott,  114,
115; legal  in  England,  123.

Blast  furnaces,  hours  of  labor,
200.

Blue  laws,  for  Sunday  observance,
253-

Bodeker,  Dr.,  on  German  accident
insurance  system,  364.

Boiler  explosions,  measures  against,
329.  330.

BootmakiQg,  minimum  wage,  172.

Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  one  day  of
rest  in  seven,  254.

Boston,  Trades'  Union  National
Convention,  209;  association  of
employment  managers,  291.

Bowley,  A.  L.,  on  regularization  of
public  employment,  287,  288.

Box  industry,  minimimi  wage,  174,
182.

Boycott,  as  used  against  intangible
property,  96;  aim  of,  98;  legal  in
California,  100,  107;  uncertainty
of  term,  loi,  102;  attitude  of
judiciary  towards,  107,  108;  pri-
mary and  secondary,  107;  legality
of.  III,  115;  in  Clajrton  anti-
trust act,  112;  in  relation  to
blacklist,  114,  115;  union  re-
sponsibility for,  120,  122;  legal
in  England,  123.

Brandeis,  L.  D.,  briefs  supporting
labor  legislation,  223,  251,  426.

Brazil,  abolishes  slavery,  37.

Briesen,  Arthur  von,  president  of
New  York  Legal  Aid  Society,
82.

British  colonies,  tool  exemption
laws,  49;  wage  preference,  61.
See  also  Australia,  Canada,  India,
South  Africa,  West  Indies.

Broken  HUl,  Australia,  strike  at,

145-

Brush  mdustry,  mmimum  wage,
181,  183,  191-195-

Building  trades,  hours  of  labor,  204;
unemployment  insurance,  411.

Bureaucracy,  in  administration  of
labor  laws,  443,  444.

Burlingame  treaty,  75.

Butte,  Mont.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270.


goo PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


California,  Pacific  railroad,  3,  344;
wage  payment  law,  53,  84,  85,
89;  sanitary  requirements  for
labor  camps,  55,  458;  payment
of  benefits  to  injured  employees,
58;  mechanics'  liens  and  wage
preference,  61;  opposes  Chinese
immigration,  74,  75;  convict
labor,  79;  legalizes  strike  and
boycott,  100,  106,  107;  picketing
illegal,  100;  conciliation  and  ar-
bitration, 133,  160;  minimum
wage,  177,  178,  180,  189;  child
labor,  206,  312;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  215,  218,  223,  224;
eight-hour  day,  228,  229;  one
day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;  vaca-
tions for  pubHc  employees,  258;
regulation  of  private  employ-
ment offices,  267,  268;  public  em-
ployment offices,  270,  460;  ac-
cident reporting,  300;  occupa-
tional disease  reporting,  303,  304;
factory  ventilation  and  sanita-
tion, 333,  336;  seats  for  women,
334;  worfanen's  compensation,
369,  381,  382;  commission  for
safety  and  workmen's  compen-
sation, 433.  See  also  Alameda,
Los  Angeles,  Sacramento,  San
Francisco.

Calumet  copper  strike,  137.

Canada,  head  tax  on  Chinese,  70,
75i  76;  excludes  Japanese  and
Hindus,  76;  industrial  disputes
investigation  act,  127,  140,  141,
143,  147,  150,  159,  160;  collec-
tive bargaining,  142,  156;  ar-
bitration, 158;  BeU  Telephone
Co.  industrial  dispute,  217;  one
day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;  Trades
and  Labour  Congress,  268;  em-
ployment offices,  268;  prohibi-
tion of  poisonous  phosphorus,
325,  326;  old  age  insurance,  399,
405;  government  life  insurance,
406.  See  also  New  Brunswick,
Nova  Scotia,  Ontario,  Quebec.

Canadians,  French,  in  Massachu-
setts textile  industry,  211.

Canal  companies,  charters  granted
to,  92.

Canneries, hours of labor, 218,


224;  enforcement  of  labor  laws,
458.

Cardiff,  Wales,  decasualization  of
ship-repairers,  293.

Carlyle,  on  cash  nexus,  53.

Casual  laborers,  in  Census,  62;
decasualization,  292,  293;  ex-
cluded from  workmen  s  com-
pensation legislation,  379;  in-
cluded in  British  health  insurance
law,  389.

Cement  industry,  hours  of  labor,
200.

Chain  industry,  minimum  wage,  175,
180,  191.

Chase,  Justice,  on  slavery,  36.

Chauffeurs,  examination  and  regis-
tration of,  323.

Chemical  industry,  hours  of  labor,
200,  201.

Chicago,  cooperage  industry  and
convict  labor,  78 ;  Pullman  strike,
134;  milk  wagon  drivers'  union,
258;  private  employment  agen-
cies, 266.

Child  labor,  competitive  character,
2,  68;  in  indentured  service,  41;
in  agriculture,  62;  in  relation  to
compulsory  arbitration,  157;
minimum  wage,  178,  180,  184,
186, 189, 437;  hours  of  labor,  204-
208,  211,  246,  248,  251,  252;  in
relation  to  contract,  208;  in  re-
lation to,  interstate  commerce,
208;  age  requirements,  305-310;
in  relation  to  tenement  house
manufacture,  336;  safety  regu-
lations, 437.

Child  labor  legislation,  justified  by
guardianship  power  of  state,  12;
in  relation  to  commerce  and  police
powers,  15;  problems  of  enforce-
ment, 307-317;  character,  416;
cumidative  penalties,  455.

Chile,  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,

254-

Chinese,  as  strike  breakers,  3;  in
Canada,  70;  in  Australia,  173;
in  relation  to  minimum  wage,  190.

Chinese  exclusion  laws.  See  Orien-
tals, exclusion  of.

Cigar  Makers'  Union,  unemploy-
ment benefits,  409.

Cigarmaking,  hours  of  labor,  204;
in  tenement  workshops,  337,


INDEX


SOI


Citizenship  stage  of  labor  legisla-
tion, 26.

Civil  War,  mentioned,  3,  5,  26,  37,
205,  210,  229.

Class  legislation,  labor  legislation
considered  as,  27-30.

Class  struggle  in  labor  legislation,
26,  449,  464.

CivU  service,  in  relation  to  adminis-
tration of  labor  laws,  450-454.

Clayton  antitrust  act,  96,  112.

Clerical  employment,  minimum
wage,  173;  Saturday  half -holiday,
252;  social  insurance,  388,  389.

Cleveland,  O.,  conciliation  court,
89;  hours  on  street  railroads,  234.

Cleveland,  President,  vetoes  literacy
test,  76.

Closed  shop,  legality  of  demand,  98,
106,  113;  in  relation  to  damage
suits,  107;  in  New  Zealand,  148,
in  public  employment,  165.  See
also  Collective  bargaining.  Open
shop.  Trade  unions.  Union  pref-
erence.

Clothing  industry,  minimum  wage,

173-175.  190-192-

Coal  mines. See  Mining.

Coal  screening  laws,  53,  428.

Coke-works,  hours  of  labor,  200.

Collective  bargaining,  in  relation  to
labor  contract,  2;  history,  91-
124;  as  restricting  liberty,  91,
92;  as  conspiracy,  91,  93-101;
by  capital,  92,  93;  by  labor,  93-
124,  115-120;  true  kind  of,  112,
119,  120;  legal  (iiscrimination,
112-116;  in  relation  to  minimum
wage,  167,  169,  170;  representa-
tion of  interests,  447.  See  also
Closed  shop.  Open  shop.  Trade
unions.  Union  preference.

Colonial  stage  of  labor  legislation,
25,  26.

Colorado,  anti-truck  laws,  55,  56;
payment  of  benefits  to  injured
employees,  58;  mechanics'  liens
and  wage  preference,  61 ;  picket-
ing illegal,  no;  compulsory  ar-
bitration, 127,  140,  143,  160;
coal  strike,  137;  minimum  wage,
183,  187,  189;  child  labor,  206,
309,  312;  hours  of  labor  for
women,  215;  hours  of  labor  for
miners,  240,  241,  423.  424;  reg-


ulation of  private  employment
offices,  267,  460;  public  employ-
ment offices,  270;  women  forbid-
den to  work  in  mines,  318;  safety
regulations,  324,  334;  workmen's
compensation,  369,  376;  indus-
trial commission,  436;  cumulative
penalty  provisions,  456.

Commerce,  regidated  by  govern-
ment, 15.

Commerce  court,  135.

Commerce  power,  how  used,  15;
indefinite  character,  16.

Commission  plan  as  applied  to
safety,  330,  351-353.  433.  43^;
place  in  governmental  system,
448.  See  also  Industrial  com-
missions. Railroad  commission
laws.

Commutation  of  service,  37.

Company  houses,  as  medium  of
payment,  55.

Company  stores,  in  relation  to  peon-
age. 39;  character  of  legislation
on,  55.  56.  416.

Competition,  in  relation  to  labor
legislation,  2,  68-80,  445;  of
women  and  children,  2,  68,  170;
of  immigrants,  2,  69-77,  17°;  of
convicts,  2,  77-80;  in  relation  to
doctrine  of  conspiracy,  99;  in
relation  to  minimum  wage,  170,
171.

Compressed  air  work,  health  regu-
lations for,  303,  320,  322,  335,
341,  342;  included  under  work-
men's compensation,  368,  380,
381.

Comstock  silver  mines,  conditions
in,  235.

Conciliation,  defined,  125,  126;
board  of  mediation  and,  136,  137.

Conciliation  act  of  1867  (England),
88; of  1896  (England),  128.

Confectionery  industry,  minimum
wage,  175,  182,  195;  rest  periods,

247-  ...
Congress,  m  relation  to  constitu-
tion, 6,  22,  23;  in  relation  to
police  power,  17;  in  relation  to
thirteenth  amendment,  38;  in
relation  to  contract  labor  laws,
44,  71.  79.  80;  treatment  of  sea-
men, 44,  45,  343,  344;  railway-
men,  45,  344,  345,  348;  literacy


502 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

test, 76, 77; postal  employees,  ing  examination  and  registration
162; minimum  wage  bills, 178;  of  workers, 323; of  workmen's
hours of labor, 226, 238-240;  compensation  laws,  368-371.
Poisonous phosphorus prohibi-  Consumers' League,  obtains  half-
tion,  296,  326; child  labor  bill,  holiday for salesgirls, 252; in-
317;  estabhshes  Bureau  of  Mines,  vestigates  labor  conditions,  419;
340;  health  and  safety  legislation,  publishes  L. D.  Brandeis'  brief
349; workmen's compensation,  in  Mueller  v.  Oregon,  426.
369,  370; represented  on  Indus-  Contagious  disease,  as  reason  for
trial  Commission,  421;  organized  excluding immigrants, 69; as
labor  and  capital  in, 451. See  reason  for  exclusion  from  certain
also  Legislative.  occupations,  323.
Connecticut, anti-truck law, 56;  Continuous  industries,  hours  of  la-
fines  from  employees,  59; wage  bor,  225,  231,  253,  255,  258.
preference, 61; decisions on  Contract, in relation to intangj-
strikes,  105; conciliation  and  ar-  ble  property,  i,  95;  interference
bitration, 131, 133; minimum  with,  6,  31,  51,  52,  221-224,  237,
wage commission, 177; child  246;  development,  36;  croppers',
labor,  205,  206,  306,  308;  hours  64,  65; in  relation  to  labor  dis-
of  labor  for women, 215, 252;  putes,  109.
night  work  of  women,  249,  250;  Contract  labor,  servile  characteris-
one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;  tics,  36; in  relation  to  peonage,
public  employment  offices,  270;  42.

occupational  disease  reporting.  Contract  labor,  alien.  See  Induced
303i  304;  women  forbidden  to  immigration,
work  in  saloons,  318;  childbirth  Contractors'  liens,  60,  61;  for  gov-
protection  of  women,  319;  health  emment  supplies,  226,  228.
and  safety,  323,  342,  433;  fac-  Contributory  negligence,  13,  14,
tory  Ughting,  331;  tenement  230,360,361,372;  in  relation  to
house  manufacture,  337;  work-  child  labor  legislation,  309.  See
men's  compensation,  369,  433.  also  Employers'  liability,  Work-
Conspiracy, collective bargaining  men's  compensation.

treated  as,  91,  93-101,  158;  com-  Convict  labor,  in  relation  to  labor

mon  law  doctrine,  97;  modifica-  contract,  2; numbers  involved,

tions,  98-101; not affected by  77; industries affected, 77-79;

Clayton antitrust act, 112; in  in relation to interstate com-

England, 122. See  also  CoUec-  merce,  78-80; legislation  on,  79,

tive  bargaining.  Trade  unions.  80.

Constitution, guarantees natural  Copenhagen, employment oflSce,

rights,  6;  in  relation  to  Congress,  279.

6,22,23;  thirteenth  amendment.  Corporations,  own  towns,  56;  fur-
3i  4.  32,  37,  38,  70,  103,  158;  nish  insurance,  58;  historical  de-
fourteenth  amendment,  6,  7,  22,  velopment,  93;  have  legal  per-
38,  222,  223,  253,  256,  272,  370.  sonality,  98;  distinguished  from
See  also  State  constitutions.  trade  unions,  116,  117.
Constitutionality  of  laws,  how  de-  Court  procedure,  in  administration
termined,  19,  24,  25,  27,  416,  of  workmen's  compensation  laws,
422-430,  456-458;  of  labor  laws,  381.

30.  31. 51, 53; of  compulsory  Courts. See Damage suits, Ju-

arbitration  laws, 158; of  mini-  diciary.

mum wage laws, 196-199; of  Craft  gilds. See  Gilds,

laws  regi3ating  hours  of  labor.  Credit  Foncier,  system  of  agricul-

220-225,  237-245,  253,  256-258;  tural  credit,  67.

of  laws  relating  to  employment  Criminals,  forbidden  to  enter  United

offices,  268,  272; of  laws  requir-  States,  69.


INDEX


503


Croppers,  agricultural  labor-ten-
ants, 63-66.

D

Dallas,  Tex.,  hours  on  street  rail-
roads, 234.

Damage  suits,  in  relation  to  closed
shop  strikes,  107;  influence  on
trade  unionism,  120-122;  in
English  trade  union  law,  123,  124.

Dayton,  Judge,  decision  on  United
Mine  Workers,  103.

Debt,  imprisonment  for.  See  Im-
prisonment for  debt.

Declaration  of  Independence,  equal-
ity clausBj  5,  6.

Delaware,  raflroad  employees'  law,
45;  wage  preference,  61;  hours
of  labor  for  women,  215,  216,  252;
child  labor,  309;  seats  for  women,
335;  enforcement  of  labor  laws,
458.

Democracy,  in  relation  to  represen-
tation of  interests,  188.

Denmark,  legal  aid,  83;  mediation
and  arbitration,  131;  night  work
of  women,  248;  one  day  of  rest
in  seven,  254;  employment  offices
279,  443,  450;  prohibition  of
poisonous  phosphorus,  325;  work-
men's compensation,  367;  health
insurance,  387;  old  age  pensions,
403 ;  unemployment  insurance,
410;  International  Association
for  Labor  Legislation,  420.  See
also  Copenhagen.

Detroit,  Mich.,  hours  on  street  rail-
roads, 234;  Employers'  Associa-
tion, 310.

Development  act  of  1909  (England),
289,  290.

Dickson,  William  B.,  on  hours  of
steel  workers,  202.

Diminishing  returns,  law  of,  in  re-
lation to  industrial  fatigue,  202,
203.

Discharge,  employers'  right  to,  112-

115-
District  of  Columbia,  wage  exemp-
tion law,  48;  proposed  minimum
wage  law,  178;  child  labor,  206,
309;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
215;  hours  of  labor  on  public
works,  236; hours  of  labor  for


railwaymen,  231;  regulation  of
employment  offices,  267;  licens-
ing of  plumbers,  323;  of  station-
ary engineers,  324.  See  also
Washington,  D.  C.

Dockers,  minimum  wage,  182;  de-
casualization,  292,  293.

Domestic  service,  characteristics,
54;  excluded  from  hour  legisla-
tion, 212,  224;  from  child  labor
legislation,  308;  from  workmen's
compensation  legislation,'  379.

Dover,  N.  H.,  agitation  for  shorter
hours,  209.

Dredging,  hours  of  labor,  227.

Dressing-iooms,  legislation  provid-
ing, 334,  335,  341.

Due  process  of  law,  guaranteed  by
constitution,  6;  meaning  of,  9-
34; in  relation  to  investigation,

^439.  443-  446.

Duluth,  Minn.,  regularization  of
public  work,  287.

Dust,  as  cause  of  occupational  dis-
ease, 303.

E

Eastern  Labor  Clearing  House,  275"

Education,  in  relation  to  labor  con-
tract, 2;  in  relation  to  taxation,
11;  demand  for,  26;  in  relation
to  padrone  system,  47;  in  relation
to  competition,  68;  in  relation
to  child  labor,  312-317.  See  also
Industrial  education,  Vocational
guidance.

Education  (choice  of  employment)
act,  1910  (England),  281,  282.

Efficiency,  how  affected  by  mini-
mum wage,  195,  196;  by  hours
of  labor,  202,  203.

Eight-hour  day,  in  Australasia,  144;
in  United  States,  200;  in  con-
tinuous industries,  201,  203;  for
children,  206-208;  in  public  em-
ployment, 226-228,  237;  early
agitation  for,  229;  in  mines  and
smelters,  230,  235;  for  railroad
employees,  231;  in  factories  and
workshops,  236;  constitution-
ality, 237-243,  423,  424.

Electrical  industry,  accidents  in,
300,  301;  examinations  and  li-
censes, 323.


S04 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Elevator  operators,  examination
and  registration  of,  323.

Embroidery  industry,  minimum
wage,  175.

Emergency  work,  as  relief  for  un-
employment, 284-286.

Eminent  domain,  defined,  12,  13;
differs  from  police  power,  14.

Employer  and  employee  law,  31,  32,
36.

Employers'  advances,  39,  43.

Employers'  associations,  as  controll-
ing legislature,  24;  deal  with  wage
bargain,  93,  118;  check  abuses
of  trade  unionism,  118,  120;  in
English  law,  122-124;  employ-
ment offices  of,  265,  266,  278;  in
relation  to  representation  of  in-
terests, 442-445.

Employers'  liability  laws,  31,  358-
362;  in  relation  to  payment  of
benefits,  58;  in  relation  to  safety,
327,  358;  character  of,  417.  See
also  Assumption  of  risk.  Con-
tributory negligence.  Fellow  ser-
vant rule.

Employment,  methods  of  finding,
264-284;  regularization  of,  290-
294.

Employment  agencies,  misrepre-
sentation by,  39,  266.

Employment  certificates  for  work-
ing children,  307,  311-317.

Employment  offices,  in  relation  to
padrone  system,  47;  private,  265-
269,  435;  state  and  municipal,
270-276;  federal  activities,  277,
278;  national  systems,  278-283,
293,  294;  for  juveniles,  281,
282;  licenses  for,  458;  in  rela-
tion to  unemployment  insurance,
413-

Enforcement  of  labor  laws.  See
Labor  legislation,  Enforcement.

Engineers,  hours  of  labor,  231.

England. See  Great  Britain.

EpUeptics,  forbidden  to  enter
United  States,  69.

Equality,  in  relation  to  labor  con-
tract, 9;  before  the  law,  28-34.

Erdman  act,  working  of,  133-135.

Europe,  humanitarian  movement
in,  26;  war  in,  279,  283.

Everett,  Wash.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270.


Evidence,  rules  of,  in  enforcement

of  labor  laws,  458,  459,  461.
Ex  post  facto  laws  prohibited  by

constitution,  6.
Executive,  enforces  laws,  18-21;  in

relation to investigation, 416-

419.


Factory  act  of  1901  (England),  212.

Factory  legislation,  80,  416-418;  in-
spection, 80,  417-419.

Fair  wage  clauses  in  contracts,  13.

Fall  River,  Mass.,  agitation  for
shorter  hours,  204,  209.

Family,  in  relation  to  status,  36.

Fellow  servant  rule,  13,  14,  359,
360,  372.  See  also  Employers'
liability,  Workmen's  compensa-
tion.

Feudalism,  serfdom  connected  with,

37-
Fines,  as  deductions  from  wages,

57-59-

FirHand,  prohibition  of  poisonous
phosphorus,  325 ;  International
Association  for  Labor  Legisla-
tion, 420.

Fire,  protection  against,  330,  331.

Firemen,  excluded  from  eight-hour
law,  228;  hours,  on  railroads,  231.

First  aid  lat,  provided  in  industrial
establishments,  336;  in  mines,
340.

Florida,  vagrancy  law,  39,  40;  con-
tract labor  law,  44;  payment  of
benefits  to  injured  employees,  58;
no  limitation  of  women's  hours,
211,  216;  child  labor,  309,  313.

France,  abolishes  colonial  slavery,
37;  wage  payment  law,  52,  53;
anti-truck  law,  56;  fines  from  em-
ployees, 59;  wage  preference,  61;
agricultural  credit,  67;  industrial
courts,  86-88,  445;  strikes  and
lockouts,  125,  161,  162;  media-
tion and  arbitration,  131 ;  public
employment,  161,  163,  164;  co-
operative contracts,  166;  coal
mine  accidents,  234,  235,  339;
night  work  of  women,  248,  249;
one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;
employment  offices,  269;  public
employment  as  relief  for  unem-


INDEX


505


ployment,  289;  protection  of
women,  318,  319;  compressed  air
work,  320;  lead  industry,  321;
prohibition  of  poisonous  phos-
phorus, 325,  326;  glass  blowing,
326;  anthrax,  336,  368;  work-
men's compensation,  367,  368;
health  insurance,  387;  old  age
insurance,  399,  400,  403;  gov-
ernment employees'  pensions,
404;  government  life  insurance,
406;  widows'  and  orphans'  in-
surance, 407;  vmemployment  in-
surance, 410;  International  As-
sociation for  Labor  Legislation,
420;  representation  of  interests,
444,  445;  superior  council  of  la-
bor, 444. See  also  Lyons,  Paris.

Freedom  of  speech,  guaranteed  by
constitution,  6,  97;  in  relation
to  unionism,  115.

Fruit  preserving  industry,  rest  peri-
ods, 247.

Furniture  making,  minimum  wage,
173,  190.


Garnishment,  in  relation  to  wage
exemption,  48,  81.

Garretson,  A.  B.,  on  hours  of  rail-
road employees,  230.

Gas  plants,  hours  of  labor  in,  200.

Geneva,  industrial  courts,  86,  87.

Georgia,  contract  labor  law,  44;
wage  exemption  law,  47,  48;
wage  assigimient  law,  50;  pay-
ment of  damages  to  injured  em-
ployees, 58;  wage  preference,  61;
Svmday  rest  law,  202;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  215;  homs  of
labor  in  textile  mills,  236;  regu-
lation of  private  employment
offices,  268;  childlabor,  307,  313;
safety,  324.

German  Law  Protection  Society,
82.

Germany,  wage  payment  law,  53;
fines  from  employees,  59;  agri-
cultural credit,  67;  emigration
from,  72;  legal  aid  societies,  83;
industrial  courts,  86-88,  131,  445;
statistics  of  strikes  and  lockouts,
125;  mediation  and  arbitration,
131; co^l  mine  accidents,  234,


339;  night  work  of  women,  248;
one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;
private  employment  offices,  269;
public  employment  offices,  278-
280;  Union  of  German  Employ-
ment Offices,  278;  hotels  for
itinerant  workers,  286;  regulari-
zation  of  municipal  work,  289;
maternity  insurance,  319;  lead
poisoning,  321,  326;  occupational
diseases,  322,  368;  prohibition  of
poisonous  phosphorus,  325;  an-
thrax, 336,  368;  WiUiam  I's  mes-
sage on  social  insurance,  356,  363,
387;  social  insurance,  362-368,
376-378,  383.  387-397.  400-402.
413;  mutual  trade  associations,
366;  unemployment  insurance,
409,  410;  International  Associa-
tion for  Labor  Legislation,  420;
representation  of  interests,  444,
445.  See  also  Alsace-Lorraine,
Berlin,  Bismarck,  Bodeker,  Nur-
emburg,  Prussia,  Rhine  territory.

Ghent,  International  Exposition,
address  by  L^on  Bourgeois,  414;
system  of  unemployment  insur-
ance, 410.

Gilds,  in  relation  to  collective  bar-
gaining, 91,  92;  compared  with
trade  unions,  92,  93;  methods  of
production,  357;  early  health  in-
surance, 386.

Glass  industry,  hours  of  labor,  201 ;
night  work  of  children,  251 ;  safety
regulations,  326,  327.

Gloucester,  N.  J.,  ten-hour  strikes,
210.

Glucose  industry,  hours  of  labor,
200.

Goldmark,  Josephine,  briefs  sup-
porting labor  legislation,  223,
251.

Good  Hope,  Cape  of,  one  day  of
rest  in  seven,  254.  See  also  South
Africa.

Good  will,  as  intangible  property,  8,

9.'5-

Goole,  England,  decasualization  of
dockers,  293.

Government,  may  use  force,  10,  11,
20,  21 ;  as  employer,  13;  branches
of,  18-24;  as  interfering  in  wage
bargain,  29.  See  also  Public  em-
ployment,


5o6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

"Granger  laws"  for  railroad  regu-  Greece, wage payment law, 52;

lation,  431.  emigration  from,  72.

Granite  cutting  industry,  hours  of  Greeley, Horace, on child labor

labor,  204.  legislation,  205,  206.

Gray, Judge, on night work for  Greenbackism,  development  of,  26.

women,  424.  Guardianship  of  state,  how  devel-

Great  Britain,  fair  wage  clauses  in  oped,  11,  12;  differs  from  police

contracts,  13; slave  trade  abol-  power,  14.
ished,  36; tool  exemption  laws,

49; wage payment laws, 53;  H
fines  as  deductions  from  wages,

58,  59;  landlord  and  tenant  law.  Habeas  corpus,  writ  of,  guaranteed

66;  emigration  from,  72;  history  by  constitution,  6,  21.

of  collective bargaining, 93-95,  Hair  goods industry,  anthrax in,

103, 122-124, 142; statistics  of  303.

strikes  and  lockouts,  125;  history  Hamilton,  Alexander,  indorses  child

of voluntary arbitration, 127-  labor,  305.

131; board  of  trade, 128 -131,  Hawaiian Islands, contract  labor,

174,  186,  187,  192,  195,  280-282,  42, 43; regular wage payment

292; history  of  wage  determina-  law,  51; labor  camps,  55; fines

tion, 141, 142; public  employ-  from  employees,  59;  examination

ment,  161; minimum  wage,  172,  and  registration of  horseshoers,

174-176,  180,  186,  187,  190-196;  323; workmen's compensation,

National  Anti-Sweating  League,  369.

174; coal  mine  accidents, 234,  Head  tax  on  immigrants,  as  prop-

339; night  work  of  women,  248;  erty  qualification,  70.

Saturday  half -holiday,  252;  pub-  Health,  protected  by  immigration

lie  employment  offices,  279-283;  legislation,  69;  justifies  regulation

public  work  for  unemployed,  285,  of  women's  wages,  198; effect  of

286,  289,  290; apprentices  sent  long  hours,  201,  202; in  relation

to  colonies,  305; children's  em-  to  women's  work,  212,  214,  217,

ployment  certificates,  311; lead  218,  221-224,  317-319; a  social

poisoning, 321, 322, 333, 368;  question,  295-297; protected  by

prohibition of poisonous phos-  internal revenue taxation, 326;

phorus,  325,  368; anthrax,  336,  in relation to tenement house

368; exdiequer  court,  359; em-  manufacture, 336-338; char-

ployers'  liability,  359,  362;  work-  acter  of  legislation,  416.

men's compensation, 367, 368;  Health  insurance,  in  relation  to  oc-

health  insurance, 388-390,  392,  cupational  disease,  325,  380;  his-

396;  friendly  societies,  392;  ma-  tory,  385-393; standards,  394-

ternity  insurance,  393; old  age  397.

insurance,  399; old  age  pensions.  Heating,  in  factories,  332.

403, 404; government life in-  Herbergen, hotels for itinerant

surance,  406; unemployment  in-  workers,  286.

surance, 410-414; trade  union-  Herzegovina. See  Bosnia.

ists, 419; International Asso-  Higgins,  Justice,  on  minimum  wage,

ciation for Labor Legislation,  155,  156.

420;  industrial  council,  445. See  Holland. See  Netherlands.

also Goole, Ireland, Liverpool,  Hollow -ware industry, minimum

London,  Macclesfield,  Manches-  wage,  175.

ter. Parliament, Scotland, Sun-  Homestead  laws,  character,  3,  26;

derland,  Swansea,  Wales.  purpose,  48,  49.

Great  Falls,  Mont.,  municipal  em-  Homeworkers,  included  in  health  in-

ployment  office,  270.  surance,  388,  389. See  also  Tene-

GreatLakes,tuiemploymenton,287.  m?nt  house  manufacture.


INDEX


S07


Moquiam,  Wash.,  municipal  em-
ployment office,  270.

Horseshoers,  examination  and  regis-
tration of,  323.

"Hotel  Liberty,"  Seattle,  286.

Hotels,  workers  in,  54;  child  labor,
307-

Hours  of  labor,  how  regulated,  15;
early  strikes,  26,  209,  210;  legis-
lation on,  27,  204-260;  statis-
tics, 200,  201;  for  men,  200-
202,  225-248,  252,  254,  258,  424,
425;  for  women,  202-204,  208-
224,  246-252,  255,  256,  259,  424,
428,  429,  437;  in  relation  to
efficiency,  202,  203;  in  relation
to  trade  unions,  204;  for  children,
204-208,  211,  246,  248,  251,  252,
437;  administration  of  laws  regu-
lating, 216-220;  constitutional-
ity, 220-246;  character  of  legis-
lation on,  416.

Humanitarian  stage  of  labor  legis-
lation, 26.

Himiidity,  in  factories,  332.

Hungary,  night  work  for  women,
248;  workmen's  compensation,
367;  health  insurance,  387,  389;
maternity  insurance,  393;  In-
ternational Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  420.


Ice  industry,  hours  of  labor,  200.

Iceland,  health  insurance,  387.

Idaho,  wage  exemption  law,  48;
mechanics'  hens  and  wage  pref-
erence, 61 ;  state  loans  to  farmers,
67;  conciliation  and  arbitration,
132;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
215;  employment  offices,  269,
270;  "right  to  work,"  288;
women  forbidden  to  work  in
saloons,  318;  no  provision  for
seats  for  salesgirls,  334.

Ilhnois,  railroad  employees'  law,  45;
mechanics'  liens  and  wage  pref-
erence, 61;  convict  labor,  79;
picketing  illegal,  no;  concilia-
tion and  arbitration,  132;  hours
of  labor  in  coal  mines,  203;  child
labor,  206-208,  312;  hours  of  la-
bor for  women,  213,  216,  222-224,
424, 428, 429; supreme  court.


223,  333;  eight-hour  law,  229;
pubHc  employment  offices,  270,
272-274,  293;  occupational  dis-
ease commission,  302,  341;  oc-
cupational disease  reporting,  303 ;
women  forbidden  to  work  in
mines,  318;  lead  poisoning,  322;
examination  and  registration  of
horseshoers,  323;  sSety  regula-
tions for  mines,  324,  340;  safety
regulations  for  factories,  329;
standards  of  humidity,  332;  fac-
tory ventilation,  332,  333;  tene-
ment house  manufacture,  337;
workmen's  compensation,  369;
agencies  deaHng  with  labor,  433;
decentralized  administration  of
labor  law,  chart,  435;  Industrie
commission  biU,  436.

Immigration,  in  relation  to  com-
petition, 2,  69-77;  protective
legislation  on,  69,  70;  increase  in,
71;  change  in  race  composition,
71,  72,  343;  proportion  of  skilled
to  unskilled  workers,  73;  legal
aid,  85;  American  compared  with
Australian,  144;  suppUes  cheap
labor,  170.

Immigration  Commission,  72,  421;
studies  wages,  169.

Imprisonment  for  debt,  26,  31,  47.

Indentm'ed  service,  characteristics,
3,36,41,54;  abolition  demanded,
26;  a  form  of  induced  immigra-
tion, 70.

India,  night  work  of  women,  249;
one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254.

Indiana,  wage  exemption  law,  48;
wage  assignment,  50;  anti-truck
law,  56;  deductions  from  wages
for  benefits,  57;  payment  of  bene-
fits to  injured  employees,  58;
fines  from  employees,  59;  wage
preference,  61;  state  loans  to
farmers,  67;  convict  labor,  79;
picketing  lawful,  no;  concilia-
tion and  arbitration,  132;  mini-
mum wage  commission,  177;
hours  of  labor  for  children,  206,
207;  women's  daily  hours  unre-
stricted, 211,  216;  night  work  of
women,  249;  pubhc  employment
offices,  270;  women  forbidden  to
work  in  mines,  318;  safety  regu-
lations for  mines,  324;  tenement


So8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION

house  manufacture,  337,  458;
railroad  commission,  348,  349;
workmen's  compensation,  369;
commission  for  safety  and  work-
men's compensation,  433.

Individualism,  in  constitutions,  19.

Induced  immigration,  as  unfree
status,  3;  laws  against,  70-74;
effects,  73.

Industrial  Commission,  investigates
labor  conditions,  421.

Industrial  commissions,  origin,  430-
433;  functions,  436-438;  meth-
ods, 439-443;  compared  with
legislative,  439;  use  cumulative
penalties,  455,  456.

Industrial  congresses,  investigate
labor  conditions,  419.

Industrial  courts,  purpose,  86;  his-
tory, 86,  87;  methods,  87,  88,
167;  imitated  in  England,  128.

Industrial  education,  effect  on  com-
petition, 68;  Wisconsin  regula-
tions, 438.

Industrial  Relations  Commission,
mentioned,  421.

Industry,  character  of  modem,  I,
50,  295,  296.

Initiative  and  referendum,  child
labor  law  enacted  by,  308.

Injunctions  against  striking,  106;
in  Cla)rton  antitrust  act,  112;
waning  power  of,  120.

Inspection,  of  child  labor,  313-317;
of  mines,  340;  of  railroads,  346;
old  theory  of,  349,  350;  new
methods,  351-353.  457-462;  par-
tisanship in  appointments,  450-

452-

Insurance,  in  relation  to  work  ac-
cidents, 31;  in  relation  to  em-
ployers' liability,  33;  furnished
by  corporations,  58 ;  principle  of,
354;  in  relation  to  workmen's
compensation,  365-367,  382-385;
in  administration  of  labor  legis-
lation, 462-464;  voluntary  life,
406,  407.  See  also  Social  insur-
ance, Workmen's  compensation.

International  Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  investigates  continu-
ous industries,  201;  treaty  on
night  work  for  women,  248,  249;
advocates  Saturday  half-holiday,
253; obtains  prohibition  of  poi-


sonous phosphorus,  325;  how
organized,  419-421.

International  Conference  on  Un-
employment, recommendations,
290.

International  Workingmen's  Asso-
ciation, 26,  419.

Interstate  commerce,  in  relation  to
convict  labor,  78-80;  in  relation
to  child  labor,  208;  in  relation
to  workmen's  compensation,  370.

Interstate  commerce  commission,
I34i  135.  433.  440;  in  relation
to  railroad  employees,  232,  344,
345;  place  in  governmental  sys-
tem, 448.

Interurban  railroads,  safety  regu-
lations, 3^6.

Invalidity  insurance.  See  Health
insurance.

Investigation,  in  relation  to  admin-
istration, 23,  24,  415,  416;  in
relation  to  judiciary,  27,  422-
430;  in  voluntary  arbitration,
126;  compulsory,  126,  127;  in
relation  to  executive,  419-422;
in  relation  to  industrial  commis-
sions, 430-464;  procedure,  439,
440; character,  443.

Iowa,  law  relating  to  insurance
benefits  and  employers'  liability,
33;  wage  exemption  law,  48;  wage
payment  law,  52 ;  anti-truck  law,
56;  deductions  from  wages  for
benefits,  57;  payment  of  bene-
fits to  injured  employees,  58;
wage  preference,  61;  state  loans
to  farmers,  67;  convict  labor,  79;
conciliation  and  arbitration,  133;
child  labor,  206,  309,  311;  no
limitation  of  women's  hours,  211,
216;  public  employment  offices,
270;  accident  reporting,  300;
women  forbidden  to  work  in
saloons,  318;  safety  regulations
for  mines,  324;  workmen's  com-
pensation, 369;  commission  for
safety  and  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 433.

Ireland,  land  system,  67,  68;  land
commission,  68;  emigration  from,
72;  statistics  of  strikes  and  lock-
outs, 125;  employment  offices,  282.

Irish  textile  workers  in  Meissa-
chusetts,  271.


INDEX


S09


Iron  industry,  hours  of  labor,  201 ;
unemployment  insurance,  411.

Italians,  padrone  system  among,  46.

Italy,  agricultural  credits,  67;  emi-
gration from,  72 ;  industrial  courts
86,  445;  statistics  of  strikes  and
lockouts,  125;  mediation  and  ar-
bitration, 131;  cooperative  con-
tracts, 166;  night  work  of  women,
348;  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,
254;  prohibition  of  poisonous
phosphorus,  325;  anthrax,  336;
workmen's  compensation,  367 ;
maternity  insurance,  393 ;  old  age
insurance,  399;  government  em-
ployees' pensions,  404;  govern-
ment Hfe  insurance,  406;  unem-
ployment insurance,  410;  Inter-
national Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  420;  representation
of  interests,  444,  445;  superior
council  of  labor,  444.


Japan.'coal  mine  accidents,  234, 339;
workmen's  compensation,  367.

Japanese,  exclusion  of.  See  Orien-
tals, exclusion  of.

Judiciary,  in  relation  to  police  pow-
er, 17;  in  relation  to  legislative,
18-20;  interprets  laws  and  con-
stitutions, 19,  20;  authority,  22,
23;  guided  by  opinions,  23,  25,
28;  changing  opinions  on  labor,
25-28;  in  relation  to  investiga-
tion, 27,  422-430;  considers
labor  legislation  class  legislation,
29;  uses  theory  of  reasonable
classification,  30,  31;  enforces
laws  on  deductions  from  wages,
57,  58;  defines  "cropper,"  64;  in
relation  to  agricultural  labor  law,
67,  68;  in  relation  to  contract
labor  law,  71-73;  inadequacy  to
secure  laborers'  rights,  80,  81;
treatment  of  collective  bargain-
ing, 93-115.  See  also  Constitu-
tionality.

Jury  trial. See  Trial  by  jury.


Kansas, constitution, 6; railway
employees'  law,  45; wage  pref-


erence, 61;  minimum  wage,  188,
189;  hours  of  labor  for  children,
206;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
216,  218;  eight-hour  day,  228,
237.  238;  employment  agencies,
266,  270;  child  labor  regulation,
305; workmen's compensation,

369-

ICansas  City,  Mo.,  municipal  legal
aid  bureau,  83;  municipal  em-
ployment office,  270.

Kentucky,  abohshes  imprisonment
for  debt,  47;  anti-truck  law,  56;
child  labor,  206,  309,  313;  hours
of  labor  for  women,  215;  public
employment  offices,  270;  safety
regulations  for  mines,  324;  seats
for  women,  334,  335;  work-
men's compensation,  370;  com-
mission for  safety  and  workmen's
compensation,  433.

Kettle,  Sir  Rupert,  on  voluntary
arbitration,  127.

King,  as  parens  patriae,  11,  12.

Knights  of  Labor,  oppose  contract
labor,  71;  indorse  eight-hour
movement,  229;  oppose  child
labor,  306;  investigate  labor
conditions,  419.


Labor  contract,  characteristics,  1,
2,  4,  116;  in  relation  to  politics,
4,  5;  in  relation  to  liberty  and
property,  7-10;  in  relation  to
equality,  9;  restrictions  on,  27;
specific  performance,  32;  in  re-
lation to  industrial  courts,  87.

Labor  exchanges  act  of  1909  (Eng-
land), 279-283.

Labor  legislation,  relation  to  labor
contract,  2,  10;  relation  to  tax-
ing power,  II,  15;  relation  to
police  power,  13-18;  stages,  25-
28;  considered  as  class  legisla-
tion, 28-30;  aims  at  equality,
36;  relation  to  agriculture,  62,
65-68;  relation  to  competition,
68-80;  exemptions  from,  216,
217,  224,  307,  308;  enforcement,
298,  299,  415,  417-419.  454-462;
solidarism  in,  463,  464.  See  also
Administration,  Constitutional-
ity.


Sio PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Labor  market,  right  of  access  to,
8,  95.  96; influences  on,  25.

Labor,  Secretary  of,  mediation
work  of, 137-139.

Lace  industry,  minimum  wage,  174,
190.

Land,  in  relation  to  labor  market,
2-4,  25;  laborers'  lien,  61.  See
also  Agriculture.

Landlord  and  tenant,  law  of,  66-
68.

Large  scale  production,  influence
on  labor  market,  3,  25.

Laundry  industry,  minimum  wage,
175,  181;  hours,  213,  224,  236,
251; child  labor,  307.

Lead  industry,  302,  303;  effect  on
women,  318;  examination  of
workers,  321,  322,  333;  prohibi-
tion of,  326;  washrooms  and
dressing-rooms  for  workers,  335;
character  of  legislation,  351;  in
relation  to  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 380,  381.

Legal  aid,  societies,  81;  history,  82,
83;  as  government  fiinctioc,
83,  84.

Legislation,  when  unconstitutional,
19.  24.  25.  27,  416,  422-430,  456-
458. See  also  Labor  legislation.

Legislative,  in  relation  to  judiciary,
18-20;  function,  22,  224,  432,
45i>  453;  investigates  labor  con-
ditions, 421,  422;  compared  with
industrial  commission,  439.

Liberty,  in  relation  to  labor  con-
tract, 7-10;  in  relation  to  prop-
erty, 7,  8;  in  relation  to  police
power,  15;  of  contract,  6,  31,  51,
52,  221-224,  237,  246;  personal,
in  relation  to  collective  bargain-
ing, 91.

Liens.  See  Contractors'  liens,  Me-
chanics' liens.

Lime  industry,  hours  of  labor,  200.

Limited  liability,  doctrine  of,  92,
93-

Literacy  test,  for  immigrants,  69,
70.  73.  76,  77;  for  child  workers,
312.

Liverpool,  juvenile  employment
offices,  282;  decasualization  of
dock  labor,  292,  293.

"Living  in"  system,  53,  54.

Lloyd  George,  D.,  urges  extension


of  minimum  wage  legislation,  176.

Lockouts,  in  relation  to  executive,
21;  in  England,  123,  128;  in-
creased number,  124,  125;  in
arbitration  proceedings,  126,  127;
compared  with  strikes,  139,  140,

Locomotive  engineers,  arbitration
award,  157,  158.

London,  legal  aid,  83;  conference
on  hours  in  continuous  industries,
201;  central  unemployed  body,
280;  employment  offices,  282;
provision  of  work  for  unemployed,
285,  286.

'Longshoremen. See  Dockers.

Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  municipal  em-
ployment office,  270.

Los  Angeles  County,  Cal.,  public
defender,  83,  84; charter,  83.

Louisiana,  contract  labor  law,  44;
fines  from  employees,  59;  me-
chanics' liens  and  wage  prefer-
ence, 61;  conciliation  and  arbi-
tration, 132,  133;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  214,  215;  hours  of
labor  for  firemen,  236,  243,  244;
emplojrment  offices,  270;  accident
reporting,  299;  restrictions  on
women's  work,  318;  safety,  323;
seats  for  women,  334;  work-
men's compensation,  369.

Lowell,  Mass.,  factory  women's
agitation,  209.

Lumbering,  mechanics'  lien  in,  61.

Lucerne,  industrial  courts,  87.

Lunatics,  forbidden  to  enter  United
States,  69.

Luxemburg,  night  work  of  women,
248;  prohibition  of  poisonous
phosphorus,  325;  health  insur-
ance, 387,  388;  old  age  and  in-
validity insurance,  400.

Lyons,  industrial  court,  86.

M

Macclesfield,  England,  conciliation
board,  128.

MacMahon,  T.  S.,  discusses  mini-
mum wage,  184.

McPherson,  Judge,  on  picketing,
109.

Madison,  James,  cited,  16.

Magna  Charta,  mentioned,  28.

Maine,  peonage,  39 ;  contract  labor


INDEX


S"


law,  43;  railroad  employees'  law,
45;  payment  of  benefits  to  in-
jured employees,  58;  wage  pref-
erence, 61;  conciliation  and  ar-
bitration, 132,  133;  child  labor,
205,  313;  limitations  on  women's
hours,  210,  215;  occupational
disease  reporting,  303,  304;  work-
men's compensation,  369.

Malice,  in  labor  cases,  98,  99.

Manchester,  England,  decasualiza-
tion  of  cloth  porters,  293.

Manchester,  N.  H.,  agitation  for
shorter  hours,  209.

Manila,  P.  I.,  boiler  regulations,  330.

Manor,  lord  of,  determines  wages,
141.

Manufacturers'  associations,  con-
trol prices,  93,  118.

Manufacturing,  minimum  wage,
1 73 ;  hours  of  labor,  225,  230,  236,
237,  242-246;  accidents,  300,
301 ;  child  labor,  306-308.

Maryland,  Justice  Chase,  36;  anti-
truck  laws,  56;  deductions  from
wages  for  benefits,  57 ;  fines  from
employees,  59;  wage  preference,
61;  convict  labor  law,  79;  con-
ciliation and  arbitration,  132;
union  preference,  165;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  215;  hours  of
labor  for  railroad  employees,  247;
night  work  of  women,  250;  em-
ployment offices,  270,  271;  oc-
cupational disease  reporting,  303,
304;  child  labor,  309,  311,  313;
restrictions  on  women's  work,
318;  health  and  safety,  323,  324;
tenement  house  manufacture,
337,  338,  458;  workmen's  com-
pensation, 368-370;  commission
for  safety  and  workmen's  com-
pensation, 433;  industrial  com-
mission bill,  436.  See  also  Balti-
more.

Marx,  Karl,  founds  International
Workingmen's  Association,  419.

Massachusetts,  Pacific  railroad,  3;
wage  exemption  law,  48;  wage
assignment  law,  50;  wage  pay-
ment law,  52;  anti-truck  law,
56;  payment  of  benefits  to  in-
jured employees,  58;  fines  from
employees,  59;  women's  wages,
59,  60;  child  labor,  59,  60,  204-


206,  306,  309,  311,  313;  wage
preference,  61;  convict  labor,
79;  supreme  court,  94;  decisions
on  strikes,  104,  105 ;  on  picketing,
110;  conciHation  and  arbitra-
tion, 132,  133;  minimum  wage,
177.  181-184,  189-191,  193-195,
ten-hour  law,  209-211,  213,  215,
216,  219-221,  252;  posting  no-
tices, 219;  hours  in  public  work,
228,  252,  258;  hours  on  street
railroads,  233;  hours  of  railroad
employees,  247;  night  work  oj
women,  249;  one  day  of  rest  in
seven,  254,  255;  unemplo5mient
statistics,  263;  emplojnment  offi-
ces, 270,  272,  273,  460;  accident
reporting,  298,  300;  occupational
disease  reporting,  303,  304;  child-
birth protection  of  women,  319,
393.  394;  safety,  324,  326-330,
433;  board  of  boiler  rules,  329;
sanitary  standards,  332,  336;
tenement  house  manufacture,
337,  460;  feUow  servant  rule,
360;  workmen's  compensation,
369,  381;  old  age  insurance,  399,
400,  405;  life  insurance  406;
appoints  first  factory  inspectors,
417;  investigates  woman  and
chid  labor,  421;  establishes  first
bureau  of  labor  statistics,  421;
railroad  commission,  442.  See
also  Boston,  Fall  River,  Lowell,
Suffolk  County.

Master  and  servant,  stage  in  in-
dustry, 36,  40-50.

Matches,  poisonous  phosphorus  in
manufacture  of. See  Phosphorus.

Maternity  insurance,  connection
with  childbirth  protection,  319;
provisions  for,  393,  394.

Mechanical  engineering,  unemploy-
ment insurance  in,  411.

Mechanics'  Uen  laws,  50, 60,  61, 417.  ,

Mediation. See  Conciliation.  ■

Medical  benefit,  deductions  from
wages  for,  57,  58;  in  German
social  insurance  system,  364,  373,
390,  391;  importance  of,  372,
373; in  United  States,  373,  374,

437-
Melbourne, Victoria, sweating  in,
151; Age, 171; chief factory
inspector,  192.


512 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Mercantile  employments,  minimum
wage,  173,  181,  183,  184,  191,
194;  hours  of  labor,  213,  217,  218,
224;  Saturday  half -holiday,  252;
child  labor,  307;  seats  for  women,

334.  335-

Merchant  adventurers,  92.

Merchant  gilds. See  Gilds.

Mexico,  slavery  and  peonage,  37;
contract  laborers  imported  from,
73;  prohibition  of  poisonous
phosphorus,  326.

Michigan,  padrone  system,  46;  con-
tract labor  law,  44;  deductions
from  wages  for  benefits,  57 ;  pay-
ment of  benefits  to  injured  em-
ployees, 58;  fines  from  employees,
59;  wage  preference,  61;  con-
vict labor,  79;  picketing  illegal,
no;  minimum  wage  commission,
177;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
215,  252;  public  employment
offices,  270;  occupational  disease
reporting,  303,  304;  age  limits,
308,  310;  women  forbidden  to
work  in  saloons,  318;  tenement
house  manufacture,  337,  460;
workmen's  compensation,  369.
See  also  Calumet,  Detroit.

Milk  wagon  drivers'  union  of
Chicago,  trade  agreement,  258.

Milwaukee,  Wis.,  Bar  Association,
84;  public  employment  office,
272.

Minimum  wage,  in  England,  142,
174-176,  180;  basis,  169-171;
in  Australia,  171-173,  179,  180;
for  men,  172-177,  185,  187,  191;
for women, 173-175, 177-182,

184,  186,  187,  191-193.  197.  198,
437;  in  United  States,  176-199,
440; for  children,  178,  180,  184,

185,  189,  437;  in  relation  to
profits,  182-184;  in  relation  to
unemployment,  182,  192,  193;
exemptions,  184;  administration,
185-190;  dat  rate  laws,  185,  186;
commissions,  187-190,  430;  re-
sults, 190-196;  constitutionality,
196-199.

Mining,  labor  legislation,  27,  30,
31;  wage  payment  laws,  52,  53,
142;  mechanics' liens,  61 ;  strikes,
153.  159.  175;  minimum  wage,
I73i 175! effect of eight-hour


day,  203;  hours  of  labor,  203, 225,
230,  234-236,  240-242,  426;  in-
dustrial accidents,  300,  301,  339;
occupational  disease,  303;  child
labor,  306,  308;  women's  work
forbidden,  318;  safety  regula-
tions, 324,  339-341 ;  early  mutual
accident  insurance,  357.

Minnesota,  contract  labor  law,  44;
railroad  employees'  law,  45;  wage
preference,  61 ;  convict  labor  law,
79;  conciliation  and  arbitration,
132;  minimum  wage,  181,  185,
188,  193,  199;  seven  day  labor,
201 ;  hours  of  labor  for  children,
206;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
214,  215,  252;  employment  of-
fices, 270,  460;  accident  report-
ing, 300;  occupational  disease  re-
porting, 303 ;  restrictions  on  wom-
an's work,  318;  safety,  323,  324,
328;  workmen's  compensation,
369. See  also  Duluth.

Minors.  See  Child  labor.  Child
labor  legislation.

Missoula,  Mont.,  municipeil  em-
ployment office,  270.

Missouri,  wage  assignment  law,  49;
wage  preference,  61;  boycott
cases,  108;  picketing  lawful,  no;
conciliation  and  arbitration,  132;
child  labor,  206;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  213-215;  wage  com-
mission for  women  and  children,
214;  public  employment  offices,
270;  accident  reporting,  298;  oc-
cupational disease  reporting,  303 ;
restrictions  on  women's  work,
318;  lead  poisoning,  322;  safety,
324 ;  factory  ventilation,  333 ;  seats
for  women,  334;  tenement  house
manufacture,  337;  railroad  full
crew  law,  347;  industrial  commis-
sion bill,  436.  See  also  Kansas
City.

Montana,  constitution,  6;  anti-
truck  law,  56;  payment  of  bene-
fits to  injured  employees,  58;
wage  preference,  61;  convict-
made  goods,  79,  80;  boycott
cases,  108;  conciliation  and  ar-
bitration, 132,  133;  union  pref-
erence, 165;  child  labor  legisla-
tion, 207;  hours  of  labor  for
women, 215, 217; employment


INDEX


513


offices,  270;  women  forbidden  to
work  in  saloons,  318;  safety,
324;  seats  for  women,  334;  work-
men's compensation,  369,  370;
enforcement  of  labor  laws,  458.
See  also  Butte,  Great  Falls,
Missoula.

Mothers'  pensions,  408.

Moving  picture  machine  operators,
examination  and  registration,
323-

Mundella,  A.  J.,  establishes  board
of  conciliation  and  arbitration,
128.

Municipalities, maintain employ-


ished,  37;  regular  wage  payment
laws,  51;  fines  from  employees,
59;  legal  aid,  83;  mediation  and
arbitration,  131;  night  work  of
women,  248,  249;  compressed
air  work,  320;  stone  masons,
322;  prohibition  of  poisonous
phosphorus,  325;  factory  Ught-
i^g,  332;  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 367;  health  insurance,  388;
invalidity  and  old  age  insurance,
400;  orphans'  pensions,  407,  408;
unemployment  insurance,  410;
International  Association  for  La-
bor Legislation,  420.


ment  offices,  270; provide  work Neuchatel,  industrial  courts,  87.
for  unemployed,  288,  289. _ _ Nevada, wage payment  law, 53;


Munition  plants,  night  work  of
women  in,  250.

N

National  Association  of  Legal  Aid
Societies,  82,  83.

National  Child  Labor  Committee,
306,  314,  419.

National  Civic  Federation,  investi-
gates workmen's  compensation,
381.

National  Conference  on  Industrial
Diseases,  302.

National  Council  for  Industrial
Safety,  indorses  standard  accident
reporting  schedule,  299,  300.

National Farm Labor Exchange,

„274,  275,  277.

National  Labor  Union,  26;  indorses farmers,  67,
eight-hour movement, 229; in- New  England  Female  Labor  Re-
vestigates  labor  conditions,  419. form  Association,  209.

National  Metal  Trades'  Association, New  England  Labor  Reform  League
employment  offices,  265,  266.  209.

Navy  yards,  ten-hour  day,  225. New  England  Workingmen's  Asso-

Nebraska,  payment  of  benefits  to ciation,  209.
injured employees, 58; wage New  Hampshire,  wage  preference,
preference,  61;  convict  labor,  79; 61; concihation  and  arbitration,


anti-truck  law,  56;  deductions
from  wages  for  benefits,  57;  pay-
ment of  benefits  to  injured  em-
ployees, 58;  fines  from  employees,
59;  mechanics'  liens  and  wage
preference,  61;  conciliation  and
arbitration,  133;  union  prefer-
ence, 165;  child  labor,  206,  309,
310;  no  limitation  of  women's
hours,  211,  216;  Comstock  silver
mines,  235;  hours  of  labor  in
plaster  and  cement  mills,  236;
accident  reporting,  300;  safety,
324;  no  provision  for  seats  for
salesgirls,  334;  workmen's  com-
pensation, 369;  commission  for
safety  and  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 433.
New Brunswick, state loans to


conciliation  and  arbitration,  132,
133;  proposed  minimum  wage,
I77i  183,  189,  190;  child  labor,
206,  312;  hours  of  labor  for
women,  215;  hours  of  labor  in
manufacttuing,  242;  night  work
of  women,  249;  pubUc  employ-
ment offices,  270,  271;  work-
men's compensation,  369.


132,  133;  child  labor,  205,  309,
311;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
210,  213,  215,  220,  252;  accident
reporting,  300;  occupational  dis-
ease reporting,  303,  304;  women
forbidden  to  work  in  saloons,
318;  workmen's  compensation,
369.  See  also  Dover,  Manchester.
New Jersey, railroad employees'


Netherlands,  colonial  slavery  abol- law,  45;  anti-truck  law,  56;  de-
33


514 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION


ductions  from  wages  for  benefits,
57;  fines  from  employees,  59;
mechanics'  liens  and  wage  pref-
erence, 61;  convict  labor  law,
79;  decisions  on  strikes,  105;  on
picketing,  109,  iio;  child  labor,
205,  206,  306,  309,  311 ;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  215,  217;  com-
pressed air  work,  230,  248,  320,
322,  341,  342;  hours  of  labor  in
bakeries,  236;  public  employ-
ment offices,  270;  occupational
disease  reporting,  303,  304;  lead
poisoning,  321,  322;  safety,  324;
fire  protection,  330;  ventilation,
333;  tenement  house  manufac-
ture, 337,  460;  workmen's  com-
pensation, 369,  381;  industrial
commission  bill,  436.  See  also
Bayonne,  Gloucester,  Newark,
Paterson.
New  Mexico,  contract  labor  law,
44;  anti-truck  la w,  56 ;  payment
of  benefits  to  injured  employees,
58;  mechanics'  liens  and  wage
preference,  61;  no  limitation  of
women's  hours,  211,  216;  child
labor,  307,  314;  women  forbid-
den to  work  in  saloons,  318;  no
provision  for  seats  for  salesgirls,

334-

New  South  Wales,  deductions  from
wages  for  benefits,  57;  compul-
sory arbitration,  143,  151-155;
suffrage  law,  144;  strikes,  145,
152;  labor  ministry,  151;  union
preference,  156,  165;  coopera-
tive contracts,  166.  See  also
Australasia,  Australia.

New  York  City,  employment
agencies,  39,  267,  270,  275;  legal
aid,  82,  85;  street  cleaning  de-
partment, 162;  board  of  estimate
fixes  street  cleaners'  wages,  176;
cost  of  Hving,  176;  vacations  for
public  employees,  259;  unem-
ployment, 261,  284,  285;  asso-
ciation of  employment  managers,
291;  children's  employment  cer-
tificates, 311;  tenement  house
manufacture,  338;  compressed
air  iUness,  341;  Charity  Organi-
zation Society,  394.

New  York  state,  abolishes  imprison-
ment for  debt,  47;  wage  exemp-


tion law,  48;  inspection  of  work-
ers' living  quarters,  55;  anti-
truck  law,  56;  payment  of  bene-
fits to  injured  employees,  58;
mechanics'  liens  and  wage  pref-
erence, 60,  61;  bureau  of  agri-
cultural information,  67;  convict-
made  goods,  80;  bureau  of  in-
dustries and  immigration,  85;
legal  aid,  85,  86,  88;  industrial
commission,  85,  86,  89,  436,  446,
452,  461,  462;  minimum  wage
commission,  177;  seven  day
labor,  201;  child  labor,  206-208,
310,  311,  312,  459,  460;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  214,  215,  217;
hoiws  of  labor  for  railroad  em-
ployees, 231,  239,  247;  hours  of
labor  in  compressed  air,  236,  248;
hours  of  labor  in  brickyards,  236;
public  employment,  237,  238;
bakeries,  242,  243,  458;  night
work  of  women,  249-251,  424,
427,  428,  441;  court  of  appeals,
250,  251,  257,  258;  Saturday
half -holiday  in  stores,  252;  one
day  of  rest  in  seven,  254-258,
459 ;  unemployment  statistics,
263,  264;  employment  offices,
268,  270-274;  accident  reporting,
300;  occupational  disease,  303,
304,  320,  381;  night  messenger
service,  308;  children's  employ-
ment certificates,  311,  312;  re-
strictions on  women's  work,  318,
319;  compressed  air  work,  320,
322,  341,  342;  safety,  323;  fire
protection,  330;  factory  ventila-
tion, 333;  seats  for  salesgirls,
334;  tenement  house  manufac-
ture, 337,  338,  460;  employers'
liability,  362;  workmen  s  com-
pensation, 369-371,  375-377,  38 1 1
382;  board  of  charities,  394;
number  of  factory  inspectors,  417;
commission  for  safety  and  work-
men's compensation,  433,  442;
unified  administration  of  labor
law,  chart,  434;  prosecutions,
454,  455;  tagging  sweatshop
products,  461.
New  Zealand,  mechanics'  liens,  61;
state  loans  to  farmers,  67;  liter-
acy test  against  Chinese,  76;
trade  union  law,  141,  143; par-


INDEX


SIS


liamentary  debates,  143;  labor
situation,  143-150;  arbitration
acts,  146-150,  154,  159,  163;
parties,  149,  150;  union  prefer-
ence, 148,  155,  156,  165;  co-
operative contracts,  166;  work-
men's compensation,  367;  old
age  pensions,  403,  405;  mother's
pensions,  408.

Newark,  N.  J.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270.

Newlands  act,  working  of,  133,  136,

137.  139-

Newsboys. See  Street  trades.

Night  messenger  service,  age  stand-
ards for,  308.

Night  work,  prohibited  for  women,
207,  212,  216,  248-251,  420,  424,
427,  428,  441;  for  children,  251;
for  young  persons,  308.

North  Carolina,  payment  of  bene-
fits to  injured  employees,  58;
wage  preference,  61;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  215;  hours  of
labor  in  textile  rmlls,  236;  Sun-
day law,  256; child  labor,  307,

313,  314-

North  Dakota,  contract  labor  law,
44;  payment  of  benefits  to  in-
jured employees,  58;  mechanics'
liens  and  wage  preference,  61;
state  loans  to  farmers,  67;  child
labor,  206,  313;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  216.

Norway,  employment  offices,  279;
workmen's  compensation,  367;
health  insurance,  388-391;  ma-
ternity insurance,  393;  unem-
ployment insurance,  410;  Inter-
national Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  420;  superior  council
of  labor,  444.  See  also  Scandi-
navia.

Nova  Scotia,  state  loans  to  farmers,
67.

Nuremberg,  convention  of  legal
aid  societies,  83;  regularization
of  municipal  employment,  289.

Nurses,  included  in  hour  legisla-
tion, 224.

O

Occupational  diseases,  defined,  302;
investigations, 303, 303; legis-


lation, 303;  reporting,  303,  304;
statistics,  304;  examinations,
320-322;  in  relation  to  work-
men's compensation,  325,  339,
356,  367,  368,  380,  381;  in  rela-
tion to  health  insurance,  325,
380.

Ohio,  anti-truck  law,  56;  deduc-
tions from  wages  for  benefits,
57i  58;  payment  of  benefits  to
injured  employees,  58 ;  fines  from
employees,  59;  mechanics'  liens
and  wage  preference,  61 ;  convict
labor,  79;  concihation  and  arbi-
tration, 132,  133;  industrial
commission,  173,  178,  352,  436;
minimum  wage,  177,  178;  child
labor,  205-208,  310,  311,  313, 315;
ten-hour  law  for  women,  211,  215,
252;  eight-hour  day,  228;  pub-
he  employment  offices,  270,  274;
accident  reporting,  298,  300;  oc-
cupational disease  reporting,  303,
304;  restrictions  on  women's
•work,  318;  lead  poisoning,  322,
323;  safety,  323,  324;  factory
ventilation,  333 ;  seats  for  women,
334;  tenement  house  manufac-
ture, 337;  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 369,  370,  375,  382;  cumula-
tive penalty  provisions,  456.  See
also  Cleveland.

Oklahoma,  payment  of  benefits  to
injured  employees,  58;  me-
chanics' liens,  61;  state  loans  to
farmers,  67;  boycotts  probably
legal,  108;  conciliation  and  ar-
bitration, 131,  132;  child  labor,
206,  310,  313;  public  employ-
ment offices,  270;  women  for-
bidden to  work  in  mines,  318;
safety  regulations  in  mines,  324;
wortanen's  compensation,  369.

Old  age  insurance,  state  assisted,
399,  400;  compulsory,  400-402;
pensions,  402-404.

Oleomargarine,  colored,  suppression
of.  15.

Ontario,  includes  occupational  dis-
ease under  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 368.

Open  shop,  true  character  of,  119.

Oregon,  anti-truck  law,  56;  me-
chanics' liens  and  wage  prefer-
ence, 61 ;  state  loans  to  farmers,


Si6 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


67;  convict  labor  law,  79;  sScrecy
regarding  wages,  170;  minimum
wage  law,  177,  181,  182,  184,
188,  189,  191-194,  197-199;  hours
of  labor  for  women,  211,  215,  218,
222-224,  426,  427 ;  social  survey,
214;  hours  of  labor  in  manu-
facturing, 225,  230,  236,  237,
245,  246;  eight-hour  day,  229;
night  work  of ''women,  249,  250;
Sunday  law,  256;  supreme  court,
256;  child  labor,  313;  workmen's
compensation,  369,  382.  See  also
Portland.

Orientals,  exclusion  of,  69,  74-76.

Orphans,  special  regulations  for
emplojrment  of,  307;  social  in-
surance for,  365,  406-408.


Pacific  railroad,  completion,  3.

Padrone  system,  46,  47,  81.

Palmer-Owen  child  labor  bill,  317.

Panama  Canal  Zone,  workmen's
compensation  for  government  em-
ployees, 375.  "

Panic  of  1837,26.

Paper  industry,  hours  of  labor,  201.

Parasitic  industries,  182,  183.

Paris,  industrial  courts,  87;  labor
clause  in  subway  franchise,  234,
259;  exposition  of  1900,  419.

Parliament,  treatment  of  seamen,
44;  enacts  trade  disputes  act,
123;  fixes  wages,  141;  opposes
labor  combinations,  142;  in  re-
lation to  trade  boards,  174.  See
also  Great  Britain.

Parties,  in  New  Zealand,  149,  150;
in  AustraUa,  150,  151,  155,  156;
in  United  States,  156,  157;  in
Great  Britain,  174.

Partnerships,  distinguished  from
trade  unions,  116,  117,  123.

Paterson,  N.  J.,  ten-hour  strikes,
210.

Patria  potestas,  12.

Pawnbrokers,  abuses  by,  81.

Peacock,  Sir  Alexander,  on  mini-
mum wage  boards,  172.

Penalties  for  violating  labor  laws,
454-462;  cumulative,  455,  456;
civil  and  criminal  actions,  456.

Pennsylvania,  railroad  employees'


law,  45;  anti- truck  law,  56;  me-
chanics' liens  and  wage  prefer-
ence, 61;  convict  labor  law,  79,
80;  attempt  to  establish  indus-
trial courts,  88;  decisions  on
strikes,  105;  anthracite  coal  strike,
138;  ten-hour  law  for  children,
205,  206;  ten-hour  law  for  women,
210,  211,  213,  215,  252;  public
employment,  238;  night  work  of
women,  249;  public  employment
offices,  270,  272,  273,  293;  ac-
cident reporting,  300;  occupa-
tional disease  reporting,  303;
childlabor,  305,  310,  311;  women
forbidden  to  work  in  mines,  318;
lead  poisoning,  321,  322;  safety,
324;  factory  ventilation,  333;
seats  for  women,  334;  tenement
house  manufacture,  337;  rail-
road fuU  crew  law,  347,  348;
workmen's  compensation,  369,
381;  investigates  woman  and
child  labor,  421;  industrial  com-
mission, 436.  See  also  Phila-
delphia, Pittsburgh.
Pennsylvania-East River tunnels,

341-
Peonage,  as  stage  in  industry,  36-

41; characteristics, 37; causes,

39,  40,  81 ;  in  relation  to  contract

labor,  42.
Pfere Marquette railroad strike,

137-

Petroleum  refinenes,  hours  of  labor,
200.

Philippines,  contract  labor,  42;
anti-truck  law,  56;  payment  of
benefits  to  injured  employees,  58;
wage  preference,  61 ;  conciliation
and  arbitration,  131,  132;  safety,
323;  workmen's  compensation,
369. See  also  Manila.

Philadelphia,  American  Federation
of  Labor  convention,  229;  street
railroads,  232 ;  association  of  em-
ployment managers,  291;  Work-
ing Men's  Party  congress,  306.

Phoenix,  Ariz.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270.

Phosphorus,  prohibition  of  poison-
ous, II,  15,  296,  297,  302,  325,
326,  380,  420.

Picketing,  in  relation  to  executive,
21 ; as  used  against  intangible


INDEX  517

property,  96; illegal  in  Calif  or-  Portugal,  abolishes  colonial  slavery,

nia,  100,  no; judicial  views  on,  37; night  work  of  women,  248;

108-112; when  legal, no, in;  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;

in Sherman  antitrust  act, 121;  health  in  glass  industry,  326,  327;

in  English  law, 123; in South  workmen's  compensation,  367.

Australia,  154.  Postal  employees,  unionism  among,

Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  conference  of  legal  161-163; hours  of  labor, 227;

aid  societies,  82;  steel  workers,  202,  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254.

204;  women  textile  workers,  209;  Preferential  imion  shop. 5ee  Union

municipal  employment  office,  270.  preference.

Plumbers,  registration  and  examina-  President,  powers  regarding  media-
tion of,  323.  tion  and  arbitration, 133, 135,

Poisons,  list  of  industrial,  302. See  136,139,157,158;  issues  execu-

also  Lead,  Occupational  Disease,  tive  orders, 162; memorial  to.

Phosphorus.  on occupational diseases, 302;

Police  power,  belongs  to  states,  II,  appoints  members  of  industrial
15; in  relation  to  guardianship,  commission,  421.
12,  14; defined,  13; in  relation  Price  bargain,  history,  92,  93;  con-
to  labor  legislation, 13-15,  441;  trasted  with  wage  bargain,  116-
in  relation  to  eminent  domain,  118.

14; in  relation  to  taxing  power,  Printing  industry,  hours  of  labor,

14; in relation  to  liberty  and  204; employment  offices,  265.

property,  14,  15;  indefinite  char-  Prison  labor. See  Convict  labor,

acter,  16,  17;  in  relation  to  other  Profits, in relation to minimum

governmental  powers,  17; in  re-  wage,  182-184.

lation  to  public  benefit,  25; in  Property,  varying  conceptions, i,

relation  to  health,  27;  in  relation  7-9,  25,  26,  95,  96; in  relation

to shifting population, 25; in  to  labor  contract,  7-10; in  rela-

relation  to  inequality  of  bargain-  tion  to  police  power,  14,  15.

ing  power,  33; in  coal  screening  Prosecutions, for violating labor

laws,  53;  in  minimum  wage  laws,  laws,  417,  454-462.

196-198; in  relation  to  hours  of  Prostitutes, forbidden to enter

labor, 237, 256, 257; in child  United  States,  69.

b,bor  legislation,  309;  in  relation  Prussia, railroad employees, 164;

to  investigation,  428,  429.  labor  homes  for  unemployed,  286;

Policemen, excluded from eight-  decree  recommending  municipal

hour  law,  228.  work  for  unemployed,  289. See

Political offenders, not excluded  also  Berlin,  Germany.

from  United  States,  69.  Public benefit, as a  principle of

Politics,  in  relation  to  labor  con-  government, 24-28, 441; stage

tract,  4,  5.  in  labor  legislation,  27.

Polygamists,  .  forbidden to enter  Public  domain,  in  relation  to  home-
United  States,  69.  stead  laws,  3.

Poor  law,  Elizabethan,  308.  Public employment, mechanics'

Poor  Man's  Lawyer's  Association,  liens,  61;  unions,  160-166;  mini-

83.  mum  wage,  176,  177,  197;  hours

Population,  shifting  of,  in  relation  of  labor,  225-229; annual  vaca-
te police  power,  25.  tions,  258,  259; as  remedy  for

Portland, Ore., working woman's  unemployment,  284-290; work-
budget,  181;  minimum  wage,  192;  men's compensation, 369, 375;
maximum  hours,  218; mvmicipal  pensions,  404.
employment  office,  270.  Public  opinion,  on  labor,  25-28;  in-

Porto Rico, anti-truck law, 56;  fluences  judicial  opinion,  25,  28.

child  labor, 310; plumbing  in-  Public  utilities,  controlled  by  gov-

dustry,  323.  emment,  13;  laws  regulating,  29;


Si8 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


labor  clauses  in  franchises,  233,
234; commissions,  440,  448.
Pullman  strike,  134.

Q

Quarrying  industry,  accidents,  300;
occupational  disease,  303.

Quebec,  private  employment  offices,
269.

Queensland,  compulsory  arbitra-
tion, 143,  154;  labor  ministry,
151 ;  minimum  wage,  173;  work-
men's compensation,  367.  See
also  Australasia,  Australia.

R

Raiffeisen  banks,  67.

Railroad  brotherhoods,  oppose  com-
piitsory  arbitration,  159;  in  re-
lation to  corporations,  164;  se-
cure reduction  of  hours,  230.

Railroad  commission  laws,  118,  348,
349;  compared  with  minimum
wage  laws,  199;  origin  of,  431;
compared  with  industrial  com-
mission laws,  432.

Railroad  corporations,  charters
granted  to,  92.

Railroads,  terms  of  service,  15,  45,
46;  work  accidents,  33,  300,  301;
payment  of  benefits,  58;  me-
chanics' liens,  61;  hours  of  labor,
200,  201,  229-232,  238-240,  247,
254;  in  Germany,  289;  accident
reporting,  299;  safety  regula-
tions, 323,  342,  344-349-

Reasonableness,  as  a  standard  for
labor  legislation,  30,  31,  432,  436,

443.  446.

Referendum,  used  agamst  full-crew
law,  347.

Representation  of  interests,  in  wage
boards,  188,  446,  447;  in  employ-
ment offices,  272,  281,  282,  445,
446;  in  adminstration  of  labor
laws,  443-450;  in  mediation  and
conciliation,  445;  in  social  insur-
ance, 445;  in  safety  work,  445,
446;  in  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 446.

Republican  government,  guaranteed
by  constitution,  6.

Responsible  government,  in  relation


to  administration  of  labor  laws,
448.

Rest,  weekly  day  of,  253-258.

Rest  periods,  225,  246-260.

Restraint  of  trade  doctrine,  as  ap-
plied to  labor,  96.

Rey,  C.  F.,  on  employment  offices,
281.

Rhine  territory,  industrial  courts,
86.

Rhode  Island,  suffrage,  4;  weekly
wage  payment  law,  51;  wage
preference,  61;  early  child  labor
laws,  205;  hours  of  labor  for
women,  215,  252;  hours  on  street
railways,  233;  public  employ-
ment offices,  270;  accident  re-
porting, 298;  occupational  dis-
ease reporting,  303;  child  labor,
306,  310;  workmen's  compensa-
tion, 369.

Richmond,  Va.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270.

Right  to  work,  Idaho,  law,  288.

Rolling  mills,  hours  of  labor,  200.

Roman  law,  on  slavery,  36.  See
also  Patria  potestas.

Roosevelt,  President,  appoints  an-
thracite coal  strike  commission,
138.

Rossi,  D.,  on  padrone  system,  46.

Roumania,  mediation  and  arbitra-
tion, 131;  government  employees,
161;  one  day  of  rest  in  seven,
254;  health  insurance,  388;  ma-
ternity insurance,  393;  invalidity
and  old  age  insurance,  400.

Rubinow,  I.  M.,  study  of  work  ac-
cidents, 374.

Russia,  agricultural  credits,  67;  em-
igration from,  72;  government
employees,  161;  lead  poisoning,
321;  workmen's  compensation,
367;  health  insurance,  388;  ma-
ternity insurance,  393;  govern-
ment employees'  pensions,  404;
government  life  insurance,  406.


Sacramento, Cal., municipal em
ployment  office,  270.

Safety,  adoption  of  devices,  15;  a
social  question,  295-297;  pro-
hibitive method,  304-327;  in  re-


INDEX


S19


lation  to  employers'  liability,
327.  358;  regulative  methods,
327-349;  defects  of  early  legis-
lation, 349-352;  administrative
orders,  352,  353;  movement  for,
353.  355;  encouraged  by  work-
men's compensation  legislation,
413; employers'  work  for,  462.

St.  Gall,  industrial  courts,  87..

Saloons,  women  forbidden  to  work
in,  318.

San  Francisco,  Cal.,  municipal  em-
ployment office,  270.

Saturday  half-holiday,  251-253.

Sawmilling,  mechanics'  liens,  61.

Scandinavia,  emigration  from,  72.
See  also  Norway,  Sweden.

Schultze  Delitsch  banks,  67.

Scientific  management.  See  Time
study.

Scotland,  employment  offices,  282.

Seamen,  contracts  of,  4,  36,  44,  45,
342,  343;  hours  of  labor,  234;
safety,  323,  342-344;  early  mu-
tual  accident insurance  among,

357-

Seattle,  Wash.,  municipal  employ-
ment office,  270,  274;  provision
for  itinerant  workers,  286;  cham-
ber of  commerce,  286.

Seats, legislation providing, 334,

335-
Senate committee on labor and

capital,  421.
Separation  of  powers,  22.
Serfdom,  as  stage  in  industry,  35-

37,  53-
Servia, wage payment law, 53;

mediation  and  arbitration, 131;

health  insurance,  388.
Servitude,  gradual  transition  from,

31.  32.

Shaw, Chief  Justice, decision on

fellow  servant  rule,  360.
Sherman antitrust act, 96, 103,

121.
Silk  weaving,  occupational  disease

in,  303-

Sjostrand,  Erik,  on  Swedish  em-
ployment offices,  279.

Slavery,  in  southern  states,  3,  41;
as  stage  in  industry,  35-37,  53;
in  England,  36;  abolition,  36-38.

Sleeping  in  workrooms  forbidden,
336.


Social  insurance,  against  unemploy-
ment, 263,  276,  282,  294,  409-
414;  defined,  354,  457;  against
industrial  accidents,  356-385;
against  illness,  385-397;  mater-
nity, 393, 394;  against  old  age  and
invalidity,  397-405;  for  widows
and  orphans,  406-408;  coopera-
tive character  of,  462-464.

Socialism,  development  of,  26;
movement  for,  in  New  Zealand,
150;  in  relation  to  eight-hour  day,
229;  in  relation  to  social  insur-
ance, 387.

Solidarism,  in  labor  legislation,
463,  464.

South  Africa,  coolie  labor  in,  42;
immigration  law,  73,  74.  See  also
Good  Hope,  Cape  of.

South  Australia,  medium  of  pay-
ment law,  54;  compulsory  arbi-
tration, 143,  154;  labor  ministry,
151;  minimum  wage,  173;  work-
men's compensation,  367,  368.

Southern  states,  slavery  3,  41;  pe-
onage, 39,  40;  indentured  service,
41;  enforcement  of  labor  laws,
417.

South  Dakota,  wage  preference,  61;
state  loans  to  farmers,  67;  hours
of  labor  for  women,  216,  220;
public  employment  offices,  270;
child  labor,  313.

South  Carolina,  contract  labor  law,
44;  payment  of  benefits  to  in-
jured employees,  58;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  216,  252;  hours
of  labor  in  textile  mills,  236;  night
work  of  women,  249;  child  labor,

307,  314-

Sovereignty,  in  American  constitu-
tional system,  15.

Spain,  industrial  courts,  86,  87;
mediation  and  arbitration,  131;
night  work  of  women,  248,  249;
one  day  of  rest  in  seven,  254;
protection  of  women  and  chil-
dren, 319;  prohibition  of  poison-
ous phosphorus,  325;  workmen's
compensation,  367;  old  age  in-
surance, 399;  International  Asso-
ciation for  Labor  Legislation,  420.

Spaniards,  in  Mexico,  37.

Specific  performance  of  contracts,
4.32-


S20 PRINCIPLES  OP  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Spokane,  Wash.,  minimum  wage,
I77i  197;  municipal  employment
office,  270.

State,  constitutions,  on  natural
rights,  5,  6;  bank-notes,  15;  su-
preme courts,  19,  23.

"State  use"  system  of  convict
labor,  80.

Stationary  firemen  and  engineers,
safety  regulations,  324.

Status,  in  relation  to  industry,  35,
36.

Steel  industry,  hours  of  labor,  201,
204.

Stenography,  hours  of  labor,  224.

Steward,  Ira,  inaugurates  eight-hour
movement,  229.

Street  cleaners'  organization,  162,
165.

Street  railroads,  organization  of  em-
ployees, 163;  minimum  wage,
173;  hours  of  labor,  201,  232-
234;  accident  reporting,  299;
examination  and  registration  of
employees,  323;  safety  regula-
tions, 346.

Street  trades,  regulation  of,  309,
310.

Strikes,  in  relation  to  executive,  21;
for  shorter  hours,  26;  violence
in,  95;  aim  of,  98;  legal  in  Cali-
fornia, 100;  sympathetic,  100-
102,  104;  uncertainty  of  term,
loi,  102;  opinions  as  to  legality,
103-106,  III;  in  Clayton  anti-
trust act,  112;  publicity,  115;
in  Sherman  antitrust  act,  121;
increased  number,  124,  125;  in
arbitration  proceedings,  126,  127;
in  England,  128-130,  175;  com-
pared with  lockouts,  139,  140;  in
Australasia,  145-156;  in  relation
to  employment  offices,  272,  273,
280,  281. See  also  Arbitration.

Suffolk  County,  Mass.,  minimum
wage,  177.

Suffrage,  effect  of  equal,  2,  161,  164;
extension,  4,  5,  26.

Sugar  and  molasses  industry,  hours
of  labor  in,  200.

Sunday  rest  laws,  202,  253,  254.

Sunderland,  England,  decasualiza-
tion  of  dockers,  293.

Supreme  Court,  powers,  23;  de-
cision in  Holdeu  v.  Hardy,  27, 222,


426;  on  public  benefit,  28,  371;
on  trade  unions,  30,  113;  on
peonage,  39,  40,  43,  44;  on  coal
screening  laws,  53;  on  Sherman
antitrust  act,  96;  on  conspiracy
doctrine,  97;  on  boycotts,  107,
120;  pending  decision  on  Oregon
minimum  wage  law,  177,  199;  de-
cision on  Oregon  ten-hour  law,
211,222-224;  on  CaUfomia  eight-
hour  law,  223;  on  hours  of  labor,
227,  237-245,  429;  pending  deci-
sion on  night  work  of  women,  251 ;
on  Sunday  laws,  256,  257;  pend-
ing decision  on  railroad  commis-
sion, 349.

"Swapping,"'  in  textile  industry,
216.

Swansea,  Wales,  decasualization  of
ship-repairers,  293.

Sweating  system,  in  Victoria,  151,
152,  171-173;  in  England,  174,
180;  in  United  States,  176,  178,
336-338;  licenses,  460;  tagging
products,  461.

Sweden,  mediation  and  arbitration,
131;  night  work  of  women,  248;
employment  offices,  279;  work-
men's compensation,  367;  health
insurance,  387,  390;  invalidity
and  old  age  insurance,  400;  In-
ternational Association  for  Labor
Legislation,  420.  See  also  Scan-
dinavia.

Switzerland,  executive  council,  18;
regular  wage  payment  law,  51;
fines  from  employees,  59;  legal
aid,  83;  industrial  courts,  86;
mediation  and  arbitration,  131;
railroad  employees,  164;  night
work  of  women,  248;  federal
council,  248,  368;  one  day  of
rest  in  seven,  254;  employment
offices,  279 ;  prohibition  of  poison-
ous phosphorus,  325;  workmen's
compensation  and  occupational
diseases,  367,  368;  health  insur-
ance, 387;  unemployment  in-
surance, 410;  International  As-
sociation for  Labor  Legislation,
420;  superior  council  of  labor,
444.  See  also  Berne,  Geneva,
Lucerne,  Neuchatel,  St.  Gall,
Vaud,  Zurich.

Syndicalism,  in  New  Zealand,  150.


INDEX


S2I


Taft,  President,  vetoes  literacy  test,
76; defines  boycotts,  102.

Tailoring. See  Clothing  trade.

Tanning  industry,  anthrax  in,  303.

TarifE,  in  relation  to  labor,  11,  15,
26,  70.

Tasmania,  minimum  wage,  143,
I73f  194;  labor  ministry,  151;
strikes,  155.  See  also  Austral-
asia, Australia.

Taxation,  as  basis  of  labor  legisla-
tion, II,  15;  in  relation  to  gov-
ernment property,  12,  13;  place
in  constitutional  system,  14,  15;
used  for  health  purposes,  326.

Taxpayer,  protected  by  immigra-
tion legislation,  69,  70.

Teachers,  organizations  of,  163.

Telegraph  establishments,  hours  in,
2i3i  251.

Telephone  establishments,  hours  in,
213,  217,  251.

Tenants,  agricultural,  63,  65-68.
See  also  Landlord  and  tenant.

Tenement  house  manufacture,  evils
of>  336;  regulation  and  prohibi-
tion of,  337,  338,  460.

Tennessee,  supreme  court,  33;  con-
vict labor  law,  79;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  215,  252;  child  labor,
314;  safety  regulations  in  mines,

324-

Texas,  anti-truck  law,  56;  payment
of  benefits  to  injured  employees,
58;  fines  from  employees,  59;
wage  preference,  61 ;  agriciHtural
tenancy  law,  64,  67;  hours  of
labor  for  women,  207,  213-215;
child  labor,  314;  women  forbid-
den to  work  in  saloons,  318;
seats  for  women,  334;  workmen's
compensation,  369.  See  also  Dal-
las.

Textile  industry,  fines,  59;  hours,
203,  236,  252;  early  agitation  for
shorter  hours,  208-211;  woman
labor,  212,  213,  216;  child  labor,
251,  305i  307;  safety  regulations,
326,  328.

Thrift,  in  relation  to  social  insur-
ance, 355.

Time  study,  of  federal  employees,
forbidden,  227.


Toilets,  legislation  regarding,  334,

^335-

Tools,  exempted  from  seizure,  49;
charges  for,  57.

Toronto,  Bell  Telephone  Co.  dis-
pute, 217.

Towns,  in  relation  to  collective  bar-
gaining, 91,  92.

Townsend  bill,  for  compulsory  ar-
bitration, 158.

Trade  agreements,  characteristics
of,  1 16-120.

Trade  boards  act  of  1909  (Eng-
land), 174,  175.

Trade  disputes. See  Strikes.

Trade  disputes  act  of  1906  (Eng-
land),  122.

Trade  marks,  as  intangible  prop-
erty, 8.

Trade  names,  as  intangible  prop-
erty, 8,  95.

Trade  unions,  as  controlling  legis-
lature, 24;  development,  26;
judicial  opinion  of,  30,  102,  103;
oppose  contract  labor,  71;  bene-
fits, III;  eflfect  of  Clayton  anti-
trust act  on,  112;  workmen's
right  to  belong  to,  113;  dis-
tinguished from  partnerships  and
corporations,  116,  117,  123;  func-
tions, 118;  safeguards  against
abuses  of,  118,  119;  effect  of
Danbury  hatters'  case  on,  120-
122;  position  in  England,  122-
124;  in  relation  to  damage  suits,
124;  oppose  compulsory  arbitra-
tion, 130,  131;  of  public  em-
ployees, 161-166;  in  relation  to
minimum  wage,  178,  192,  194,
195;  in  relation  to  hour  regula-
tions, 225,  229;  unemployment
statistics,  263,  264;  employment
offices,  265,  266,  278,  279;  in-
crease power  of  worker,  296;  pro-
vide health  insurance,  386,  398;
in  relation  to  unemployment  in-
surance, 410;  in  relation  to  repre-
sentation of  interests,  444-447,
449;  in  relation  to  civil  service,
450-452.  See  also  Closed  shop.
Collective  bargaining.  Open  shop.
Union  preference.

Trades  Union  Congress,  129,  131.

Trades'  Union  National  Conven-
tion, 209.


S22 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


Transportation,  influence  on  labor
market,  25;  hours  of  labor,  225.
See  also  Railroads,  Seamen,  Street
railroads.

Transvaal,  compulsory  arbitration,
159. See  also  South  Africa.

Treitschke,  H.,  cited,  16.

Trial  by  jury,  guaranteed  by  con-
stitution, 6;  in  Clayton  anti-
trust act,  112.

Truck  system,  55,  56.

Trusts,  fix  prices,  93.

Tuberculosis,  reason  for  excluding
immigration,  69;  health  insur-
ance helps campaign against,

396,  397-

Tunnel  workers,  occupational  dis-
ease among,  303.

Turkey,  public  employees,  161.

Turnpike  companies,  charters  grant-
ed to,  92.

Typographical  union  label,  165.

U

Unconstitutionality  of  legislation.
See  ConstitutionaUty.

Unemployment,  defined,  2;  his-
tory, 3,  26;  in  relation  to  mini-
mum wage,  182,  192,  193;  sta-
tistics, 261-264;  waste  of,  261,
262;  causes,  262;  insurance
against,  263,  276,  282,  294,  409-
414;  lack  of  information  on,  263,
275,  276;  in  relation  to  pubhc
employment,  283-290.  See  also
Employment,Employmentoffices.

Unfreedom,  stage  in  economic  de-
velopment, 3,  4.

Union  preference,  156,  165.

Unionism. See  Trade  unions.

United  Mine  Workers,  decision
against,  103.

United  States,  abolishes  slavery,  37,
38;  statistics  of  strikes  and  lock-
outs, 125;  Commissioner  of  Labor,
133,  134;  Department  of  Labor,
133,  137,  274.  277,  422,  433;  par-
ties, 156,  157;  arbitration,  156-
160;  public  employment,  161,
162;  War  Department,  162,  165;
minimum  wage,  176;  Census  of
1870,212;  statistics  of  mine  acci-
dents, 234,  339;  Bureau  of  En-
graving and  Printing,  258; Gov-


ernment Printing  Office,  258;
Census  of  1900,  261;  Census
of  Manufactures,  264;  Depart-
ment of  Agriculture,  274,  275;
Department  of  the  Interior,
277,  433;  Department  of  Com-
merce, 277,  433;  Post  Office  De-
partment, 277;  Bureau  of  Immi-
gration, 277,  278,  433;  Bureau  of
Labor  Statistics,  299,  433;  army,
300;  Children's  Bureau,  316,  317,
433;  Bureau  of  Mines,  340,  341,
433 ;  workmen's  compensation,
368-385;  Bureau  of  Labor,  418,
422 ;  International  Association
for  Labor  Legislation,  420;  Treas-
ury Department,  PubHc  Health
Service,  433;  Board  of  Media-
tion and  ConciHation,  433 ;  Trade
Commission,  440,  448;  Federal
Reserve  Board,  448.

United  States  Steel  Corporation,  3.

Unorganized  workers,  representa-
tion of  on  joint  councils,  449.

Unskilled  workers,  and  compiHsory
arbitration,  157.

Usury  laws,  29.

Utah,  anti-truck  law,  56;  wage
preference,  61;  state  loans  to
farmers,  67;  convict  labor,  79;
conciliation  and  arbitration,  132,
133;  minimum  wage,  185,  186;
hours  of  labor  for  women,  215;
eight-hour  law  for  miners,  240-
242;  child  labor,  307,  310;  re-
strictions on  women's  work,  318;
safety  regulations  in  mines,  324.


Vacations,  provision  for  annual,
258-260.

Vagrancy  laws,  as  cause  of  peonage,
39.  40,  81.

Van  Buren,  President,  establishes
ten-hour  day,  225,  226.

Vaud,  industrial  courts,  87.

Vermont,  decisions  on  strikes,  105;
conciliation  and  arbitration,  132,
133;  hours  of  labor  for  women,
215,  252;  child  labor,  312;  re-
strictions on  women's  work,  318,
319;  no  provision  for  seats  for
salesgirls,  334;  workmen's  com-
pensation, 369.


J


INDEX


523


Verpflegungsstationen,  relief  sta-
tions for  unemployed,  286.

Vessels,  construction  of,  mechanics'
liens,  ,61;  unemployment  insur-
ance, 411.

Victoria,  minimum  wage,  143,  151-

153.  155,  171-174.  179.  190-193;
anti-labor  ministry,  151;  Anti-
Sweating  League,  172;  Chamber
of  Manufactures,  172,  173,  193;
Employers'  Association,  193.  See
also  Australasia,  Australia,  Mel-
bourne.

Villeinage. See  Serfdom.

Violence,  in  strikes,  95,  123,  124.

Virginia,  anti-truck  law,  56;  pay-
ment of  benefits  to  injured  em-
ployees, 58;  picketing  legal,  no;
hours  of  labor  for  women,  216;
child  labor,  310;  women  forbid-
den to  work  in  mines,  318;  safety
regulations  in  mines,  324.  See
also  Richmond.

Vocational  guidance,  in  relation  to
employment  offices,  276,  281,
282.  See  also  Education,  In-
dustrial education.

W

Wage  bargain,  history,  92,  93;  con-
trasted with  price  bargain,  116-
118. See  also  Labor  contract.

Wage-earners,  development  as  class,

4-

Wage,  minimum.  See  Minimum
wage.

Wages,  prevailing  rate,  13,  176;
exemption  laws,  26,  31,  47,  48,
60,  81,  416;  payment  laws,  33,
50-56,  168,  416;  assignment,  49,
50;  preference  laws,  50,  60,  61;
deductions  from,  56; rates,  144,

169,  355-

Wages  boards. See  Minimum  wage.

Wales,  employment  offices,  282.
See  also  Cardiff,  Swansea.

Washington,  anti-truck  laws,  56;
mechanics'  liens  and  wage  prefer-
ence, 61;  convict  labor  law,  79;
minimum  wage,  181,  182,  189,
191,  197;  hours  of  labor  for  girls,
206,207;  hours  of  labor  for  wom-
en, 215,  218;  eight-hour  day,
229;  night  work  prohibited,  251;


private  employment  agencies  pro-
hibited, 266,  269;  accident  re-
porting, 300;  women  forbidden
to  work  in  mines,  318;  safety,
323;  seats  for  women,  334;  work-
men's compensation,  369,  382;
commission  on  safety  and  work-
men's compensation,  433;  sani-
tary requirements  for  bakeries,
460.  See  also  Aberdeen,  Everett,
Hoquiam,  Seattle,  Spokane,  Ta-
coma.

Washington,  D.  C,  government
departments,  162,  433.  See  also
District  of  Columbia.

Watertown,  Mass.,  arsenal  arbitra-
tion plan,  162.

West  Indies,  contract  labor,  42.

West  Virginia,  supreme  court,  21;
anti-truck  law,  56;  mechanics'
liens,  61;  no  regulation  of  chil-
dren's hours,  207,  251;  no  limita-
tion of  women's  hours,  211,  216;
public  employment  office,  270;
restrictions  on  women's  work,
318;  seats  for  women,  334;  work-
men's compensation,  369.  See
also  Wheeling.

Western  Australia,  deductions  from
wages  for  benefits,  57;  compul-
sory arbitration,  143,  154;  labor
ministry,  151;  union  preference,
156; worlonen's compensation,

367-

Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  employment
office,  270.

Widows,  pensions  for,  365,  406.

Wilson,  President,  vetoes  literacy
test,  77.

Wisconsin,  wage  exemption  law,  48;
payment  of  benefits  to  injured
employees,  58;  wage  preference,
61;  compulsory  arbitration,  160;
minimum  wage,  189;  child  labor,
206,  310;  hours  of  labor  for
women,  215,  218,  252;  public  em-
ployment offices,  270,  272,  452;
industrial  commission,  272,  329,
352,  372,  374.  436,438,442;  acci-
dent reporting,  300;  occupational
disease  reporting,  303,  304;  wom-
en forbidden  to  work  in  mines,
318;  safety,  329;  tenement  house
manufacture,  337;  workmen's
compensation,  369,  373.  374.  380,


524 PRINCIPLES  OF  LABOR  LEGISLATION


383,  385;  old  age  insurance,  399,
400;  state  life  insurance,  406;
Merchants'  and  Manufacturers'
Association,  445;  State  Federa-
tion of  Labor,  445;  cumulative
penalty  provisions,  456.  See  also
Milwaukee.
Women,  basis  of  labor  legislation
for,  30,  31,  317,  334;  as  com-
petitors, 68;  in  relation  to  com-
pulsory arbitration,  157,  172;
rates  of  wages,  168-170;  unions
among,  170;  minimum  wage  for,
173-175.  177-182,  184,  186,  187,
191-193,  197,  198,  437;  budgets,
181 ;  on  minimum  wage  commis-
sions, 187;  legislation  on  hours  for,
197,  202-204,  207-224,  246-252,
255.  256,  259,  424,  426-429,  437,
441 ;  organizations,  209-21 1 ;  free-
dom of  contract,  221-224;  em-
ployments forbidden,  317-319,
437;  childbirth  protection,  319,
320; maternity  insurance, 393,

394-

Wood,  mayor  of  New  York  City,
message  on  unemployment,  284,
285.

Work  accidents.  See  Employers'
liability,  Workmen's  compensa-
tion.

Working  Men's  Party,  opposes  child
labor,  306.


Workmen's  compensation,  in  rela-
tion to  police  and  commerce  pow-
ers,i5,428;  in  relation  to  equ^iza-
tion  of  bargaining  power,  31;  in
relation  to  occupational  disease,
325,  339,  356,  367,  368,  380,  381 ;
develops  out  of  employers'  liabil-
ity, 356-362;  German  system,
362-366;  American  laws,  3''8-385;
scale  of  compensation,  372-378;
scope  of  laws,  378-381 ;  adminis-
tration, 381,  382;  insi
382-385;  encourages  ;  jty
movement,  413;  investigations
on,  421;  commissions,  432,  433,
437;  in  relation  to  accident  pre-
vention, 433;  introduces  co-
operative pressure,"  462-464.

Workmen's  Compensation  Service
Bureau,  indorses  standard  acci-
dent reporting  schedule,  299,  300.

Wyoming,  payment  of  benefits  to
injured  employees,  58;  convict
labor  law,  79;  conciliation  and
arbitration,  131;  hours  of  labor
for  women,  215,  216,  252;  child
labor,  314;  women  forbidden  to
work  in  mines,  318;  safety  regu-
lations in  mines,  324;  workmen's
compensation,  369.


Zurich,  industrial  courts,  87.


THE  END


:
