LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


NEW YORK - BOSTON - CHICAGO + DALLAS
ATLANTA + SAN FRANCISCO


MACMILLAN & CO., LimitED


LONDON + BOMBAY + CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE


THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Lt.
TORONTO


LEGAL FOUNDATIONS
OF CAPITALISM


BY
JOHN R. COMMONS


PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN


Nem York
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


1924


All rights reserved


CopyricHt, 1924
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY


Set up and electrotyped. Published January, 1924.


Printed in the United States of America


To My FRIEND
CHARLES R. CRANE


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2026


httos://archive.org/details/unsetO000unse_d4a7


PREFACE


The aim of this volume is to work out an evolutionary and be-

havioristic, or rather volitional, theory of value. It was commenced

~ thirty-five years ago at Johns Hopkins University under my stimulat-
~~ ing teacher, Richard T. Ely.

Thirty years ago I published a book under the name of Distribu-
tion of Wealth in which I tried to mix things that will not mix—
the hedonic psychology of BOhm-Bawerk, and the legal rights and
social relations which he had himself analyzed and then excluded from
his great work on the psychological theory of value. Afterwards I
had various opportunities for the investigation of labor problems and
problems connected with the regulation and valuation of public utili-
ties. This led to a testing of economic and legal theories in the drafting
of bills as an assistant to legislative committees in Wisconsin.

It was this experience, shared by my students, that led directly to
the theoretical problems of this book. We had to study the decisions
of the courts, if the new laws were to be made constitutional, and that
study ran into the central question, What do the courts mean by rea-
sonable value? Somehow the answer was tied up with reasonable
conduct. None of us could find much in the writings of economists
except those of Professor Ely that threw light on the subject. From
the court decisions it seemed that anything “reasonable” would be
sustained, and so we had to use the words reasonable value, reason-
able safety, reasonable wage, and fix up reasonable conduct for public
officials and private citizens, whether we knew what it meant or not.

I had read Veblen’s brilliant criticisms, beginning in 1895, on the
theories of the classical, socialistic, and psychological economists, and
his suggestion that an evolutionary theory of value must be constructed
out of the habits and customs of social life. But he had not studied
the decisions of the courts which are based on these customs, and I
went to work with my students digging directly out of the court de-
cisions stretching over several hundred years the behavioristic theory
of value on which they were working. We were puzzled, for we tried
to reconcile the economists from Quesnay to Cassel with the lawyers
from Coke to Taft. We found eventually that what we were really


viii PREFACE


working upon was not merely a theory of Reasonable Value but the
Legal Foundations of Capitalism itself.

This work is essentially theoretical, dealing only with concepts
derived from the decisions of the English and American courts, but
with an eye on the concepts of leading economists from the Physio-
crats to modern times. Another volume is in contemplation re-
viewing these theories of the economists and leading up to practical
applications of a theory of Reasonable Value to current problems.

In these researches, I have had important assistance and criticism
from Wesley C. Mitchell of Columbia University, Arthur L. Corbin
of the Yale Law Faculty, and William H. Page of the Wisconsin Uni-
versity School of Law.

JOHN R. COMMONS.

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN,

July, 1923.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE

CHAPTER I. MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES........... I

GHAprer LL PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE... 000...0ss 200s oc II

I. Use-Value and Exchange-Value............... II

II. Opportunity and Encumbrance............... 21

TEES Rowerteen, eee meee cece: Bo ob arts oor, 23

EVES COnOniy > Seearatcin st eenardones: Sm Stare eee ae 36

CHAPTER III. Puysicat, Economic AND MorAL PoWER........... 47

(CHAPTER G! View DRANSACTTONSG mers aire ey see Rese Aeris We secs ae eee 65

Evie: Parties trac ohne gat ets ee wedewee 65

II. Performance, Avoidance, Forbearance......... 69

TIT. Actual, Potential, Possible, Impossible........ 79

TVET auc nonzede transaction sae eee eee 83

V_»Authoritativediransactions.).)... 2-6 44se- 100

tee Collective LOWelee ora Rrier irene era 100

Ze Nemedial POW ets a, wae ace se i teer ae 108

Ba SUbStamtlve: POW Crs eer eee er eraer ee aes II4

Zoe ctermining Owes, a aera cseeee aoe ten

Probability: aw cen. waa ere ere 121

Purpose ites pe sculn tear erect one ee acres 127)

IRECIPIOCIt Ysa eins eee ester ee 129

Vilas Workin ois tl esi aerate cae nine eS ce 5 ten ontaie pets ae 134

CHAPTER V7. GOING CONCERNS says setse in Naira a ead Oo eA Orin 143
I. Working Rules of Political, Industrial and Cul-

tural \GomCennsice in toes ote ceaies ese anee e 143

tie BPaculties and Opportunitiesen «ere aie 153

[iieANssets and: Liabilities ae en aoa er cy)

IV. Valuation, Apportionment, Imputation........ 165

Va her Unite R Ul Gta cons cre Rete ariciee tise 172

VI. Going Plant and Going Business............. 182

TV EAluMigss Common, cali wer yasciiclrsee « 182

Z EMV SICAL COMDCCUIONS owt seis Ghac-t hts lien 186

3. Lawfulness and Unlawfulness............. 188

Ma Good willeandmetiviles Gavia tire sara LOL

Se, COM CONCETE W ALUE¢ yo ace os anatase amine 195

GmUneompensatedsServicese. jae aarti: 203

CHAPTER VI. THE RENT BARGAIN—FEUDALISM AND USE-VALUE.... 214
CHAPTER VII. THE Price BARGAIN—CAPITALISM AND EXCHANGE-

VEA TUE eerie fees Net ley ere ose cet cer our py bveRar Sa touaionn st 225


x TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE

II. Incorporeal Property—Encumbrances..........- 235
Toe PTOMISES a oeeeee eh ar eee ee ey een 235

oe Legal el end ergata nee 240

III. Intangible Property—Opportunities........... 246
LayNevotiabilitys nye ee cei sees arrest 246

2. Commodity Tickets and Price Tickets... .. 254

2.) GoodwilltandsPriviles @aeanants tee 261

4a Copynichtsandi Patents se cee eee 274
CHAPTER VIII. THE WAGE BARGAIN—INDUSTRIALISM.........-.-.. 283
ieindividualiBarsaining a= aes eet tere ete 283
II. Associated Persons and Associated Property.... 288
Li Customband Wawa wae ec ce ee eee 208
LVeeindustnalkGoyernmen tae eee 306
CHAPTER LX; PURLIC)PURPOSE Ba paee eh aoe eo eee cee eee 313
1 Concernstand PositionSeee mses aoe 213
Ie Glassifi cations oe acca tctstae mio es oceans ane ens 321
III. The Working Rules of Going Concerns........ 331
Ves Due Erocesston eDbinlem goa eee ee 342
Ves Discreton Sane emacs ee creer rae et teen ere Bog
VI. Economic Theory of Going Concerns.......... 359


ST. OLAF COLLEGE LIBRARY,
NORTHFIELD, MINN.
2336)


LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


CHAPTER I
MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES


Economic theory deals with two concepts, Value and Economy.
Abstract reasoning regarding these concepts rests ultimately on
mathematical concepts of quantity, time and energy. The three
are inseparable, for quantity and time are dimensions of energy. The
quantity relationships of energy, usually termed “statics,” turn on the
probiem of the relation of the parts to the whole, while the time rela-
tionships, usually termed ‘‘dynamics,” are the relations of a process
that connects past, present and future.

Value and Economy are distinguishable as two quantitative rela-
tionships of the parts to the whole. The whole is always a function of
its parts, but the whole may be the sum of its parts or the whole may
be a multiple of its parts. The former is the quantitative concept of
Value, the latter of Economy. A “fund of value” is the sum of the
values of all the parts that constitute the whole. A certain quality
which we call Value is abstracted from other qualities of commodities,
is measured in money as prices, and these are then added together, so
that the sum of the partsis the sum of a similar quality of all the parts.

But Economy is the proportioning of parts that have different
qualities yet are complementary to each other, such that one kind
of energy acts upon another kind, and the resultant is larger or even
smaller than the sum, according to the good or bad proportions in
which the limiting and complementary parts are combined. Value
is a sum of similar values, but economy is a proportioning of dis-
similar values.

These two quantitative relationships of the parts to the whole
run everywhere in economic theory. A sum of individuals is the
total population, but a proportioning of different kinds of activity
of different individuals is a society. A sum of prices is the total
business assets of a firm, but a proportioning of land, labor, cap-

I


2 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ital and management is a going concern. Wages are a sum of money
paid for periods or pieces of work, but a proportioning of different
kinds of activity in acquiring the wages is a job. A sum of all the
prices of all kinds of commodities is the total nominal wealth of a
nation, but the proportion existing between one commodity and all
the others is supply and demand.

The concept of good or bad economy is so self-evident, and its
psychological equivalent, the sense of fitness or unfitness, which is
“common sense,” or “good sense,” or merely habit and approved
custom, is so continually present in every act that, in the history
of economic thought, good economy, which is merely a good propor-
tioning of the parts, has often been either taken for granted or erected
into an entity existing outside or above the parts. For, is it not an
astonishing and blessed thing that the whole should be greater than
the sum of its parts? And, how can the parts be greater than their
sum unless a benevolent deity or “law of nature” organize them
harmoniously? But a mark of the progress that has occurred in
economic theory, from the time of Quesnay and Adam Smith, has
been the emergence of the concept of good or bad political economy
out of mythical entities such as nature’s harmony, natural law,
natural order, natural rights, divine providence, over-soul, invisible
hand, social will, social-labor power, social value, tendency towards
equilibrium of forces, and the like, into its proper place as the good
or bad, right or wrong, wise or unwise proportioning by man him-
self of those human faculties and natural resources which are limited
in supply and complementary to each other.

An accompanying mark of progress in economic theory is in-
dicated by changing views as to the Time dimensions of value and
economy. Early economists found the “cause” and “ substance ”
of value in the stored-up energy of the past, either Quesnay’s vital
forces of nature, or Ricardo’s and Marx’s stored-up labor power.
Then followed the hedonic economists who found value in the pains
and pleasures of the present, aided perhaps by a calculating mechanism
of the future, while the later theories find value in the hopes, fears,
probabilities and lapse of time of the future, depending on the will
of persons existing in the present. The progress has been from
“efficient causes” flowing from the past into the present, to “final
causes” originating in the purposes and plans for the future and
guiding the behavior of the present. While the earlier theories were


MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES 3


quantity theories of value and economy, the later are expectancy
theories.

These changes in concepts of quantity and time have accompanied
changes in the concept of the energy itself which is the “substance”
of value and the “cause” of economy. Early theories attempted to
get away from the human will, since that was conceived to be internal,
Capricious, not subject to law, and therefore economics should be
reduced to one of the nature sciences, analogous to chemistry, physics,
or physiology. It should be a theory of commodities or mechanisms,
not a theory of the will. But a larger knowledge of the human will,
derived from the human-nature sciences of psychology, ethics, law
and politics, begins to find the will, not in an unknowable caprice,
but merely in human behavior, and this behavior begins to be for-
mulated into natural laws of its own.

These many sciences of human nature furnish increasingly a foun-
dation for economic theory, which is concerned with both physical
nature and human nature. In one direction economy is a relation
of man to nature, in another it is a relation of man to man. The first
is Engineering Economy; the second is Business Economy and Po-
litical Economy. The first has given us theories of Production,
Exchange and Consumption of Wealth, while Business Economy and
Political Economy give usa variety of theories specialized in different
branches of learning. Theories of Psychology deal with the relations
both of man to nature and man to man—his feelings, intellect and
will, his persuasions and coercions, his commands and obedience.
These are inseparable from Morals, or Ethics, which deals with the
good or bad, virtuous or vicious, right or wrong, uses that man makes
either of nature or of other persons. This leads to Jurisprudence
which concerns itself with both the rights, duties and liberties of
Property and the powers and responsibilities of Sovereignty, which,
again, are relations of man to man. And, finally, Politics deals
with the mass movements and mass psychologies which define, enact
and enforce private rights and official responsibilities according to
notions pertaining to ethics, politics and economics.

Thus economic theory runs into other theories of man and nature,
or else assumes certain common-sense notions regarding them. Early
economists, whose outstanding theorists were Quesnay, Smith,
Ricardo, Karl Marx and Proudhon, started with man’s relation to
nature, or engineering economy, in the form of commodities which


4 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


are produced, exchanged and consumed. But these commodities
involved certain notions, express or implied, of human nature, of
use-value, utility, scarcity, exchange-value, labor, saving, expectation,
private property, liberty, government and economy, which split
these physical or technological economists into the several schools
of Physiocrats, Classical Economists, Socialists and Anarchists.

They were followed or accompanied by a school of Hedonists,
or Hedonic Economists, whose outstanding names are Bentham,
Senior, Gossen, Jevons, Menger, Walras, Bohm-Bawerk, Clark, and
these concerned themselves with the subjective side of economic
theory. Instead of a commodity their starting point was a feeling
of pleasure or pain, of satisfaction or sacrifice, but these feelings
turned out to be commodities after all. And while the later hedonists,
by the device of diminishing and marginal utility, were able to in-
terpret the concept of value as a function of economy, yet their in-
dividualistic point of approach required certain notions, express or
implied, of ethics, law, private property, liberty, society, government,
which the hedonists either took for granted without investigation,
or avoided as being ‘‘non-economic”’ or “‘anti-economic,”’ or erected
into an entity such as “social value” or “fund of value.”

These two classes of theories we designate mechanistic theories
of value and cost, since they look to the physical sciences for their
models of economic theory, and they work out their solutions on
what may be designated the Principle of Mechanism. Finally,
another class of theories, which we designate Volitional Theories,
whose initial thinkers are Hume, Malthus, Carey, Bastiat, Cassel,
Anderson, but especially the Supreme Court of the United States,
start, not with a commodity or with a feeling, but with the purposes
of the future, revealing themselves in rules of conduct governing trans-
actions which give rise to rights, duties, liberties, private property,
governments and associations. ‘These are the reciprocal promises
and threats, express or implied, of man to man which determine the
limits of human behavior in its social and economic transactions.
Instead of a commodity or a feeling, their unit of observation becomes
a Transaction between two or more persons looking towards the
future. Theirs becomes a theory of the human will-in-action, and of
value and economy as a relation, partly of man to nature but mainly
of man to man; partly of quantities and partly of expectancies de-
pending on future quantities.


MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES 5


Meanwhile, ethical, philosophical and psychological, as well as
economic theories, have been approaching a volitional theory.
Psychology is becoming ‘“behavioristic,” philosophy and_ ethics
“realistic” or “ pragmatic,” and economics has become historical, ex-
perimental and idealistic in that it deals with past, present and hoped-
for or dreaded transactions as well as commodities and feelings. In
fact, transactions have become the meeting place of economics, physics,
psychology, ethics, jurisprudence and politics. A single transaction
is a unit of observation which involves explicitly all of them, for it is
several human wills, choosing alternatives, overcoming resistance,
proportioning natural and human resources, led on by promises or
warnings of utility, sympathy, duty or their opposites, enlarged,
restrained or exposed by officials of government or of business con-
cerns or labor unions, who interpret and enforce the citizen’s rights,
duties and liberties, such that individual behavior is fitted or misfitted
to the collective behavior of nations, politics, business, labor, the
family and other collective movements, in a world of limited resources
and mechanical forces.

Thus economic theory began with a Commodity as its ultimate
scientific unit, then shifted to a Feeling, in order to explain a Trans-
action which is its practical problem.

Underlying all of these concepts of commodities, feelings and
transactions have been certain principles of explanation, which the
theorists either avowedly assumed or took for granted out of the
prevailing habits of mind or ways of thinking of the time when they
wrote. These may be distinguished as the Principle of Mechanism,
the Principle of Scarcity and the Principle of Working Rules of Going
Concerns. The principle of mechanism, established by Sir Isaac
Newton, became the principle of explanation not only for all phys-
ical sciences, but also for biology, physiology and.the human sciences
of psychology, ethics, law, economics and politics. Gradually,
however, the principle of scarcity, always taken for granted but not
always definitely incorporated, began to be pointed out along with
the principle of mechanism, first by David Hume and Robert Malthus,
then was generalized by Darwin for biology and by Gossen, Jevons
and the hedonic economists for psychology and economics.

The principle of scarcity did not materially change the habit of
mind that relied on principles of mechanism, but rather gave to the
latter a more precise formulation in the theories of marginal utility.


6 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


This was because commodities and feelings were concepts related to
the wants and efforts of individuals rather than groups or as-
sociations of individuals, and the theories could be worked out on
Adam Smith’s mechanical principles of individualism, selfishness,
division of labor, exchange of commodities, equality, fluidity, liberty
and that divine providence which led individuals to benefit each
other without intending to do so.

But later theories have had to account for the incoming of cor-
porations, trade unions, voluntary associations of all kinds, said
to number 25,000 in America in the field of business alone, as well
as the interference of government through taxes, the police power,
and the legal tender power. Consequently later theories have con-
cerned themselves with what may broadly be named the Working
Rules of Going Concerns, taking many forms and names, such as
the common law, statute law, shop rules, business ethics, business
methods, norms of conduct, and so on, which these governing or
regulating groups of associated individuals have laid down for the
guidance of transactions.

Consequently, it is not only principles of mechanism and scar-
city conceived as working themselves out automatically and benefi-
cently, through commodities, feelings and individual selfishness,
but also principles of the collective control of transactions through
associations and governments, placing limits on selfishness, that are
more recently included in economic theory. For a working rule
lays down four verbs for the guidance and restraint of individuals
in their transactions. It tells what the individuals must or must
not do (compulsion or duty), what they may do without interference
from other individuals (permission or liberty), what they can do
with the aid of the collective power (capacity or right), and what
they cannot expect the collective power to do in their behalf (inca-
pacity or exposure). In short, the working rules of associations and
governments, when looked at from the private standpoint of the
individual, are the source of his rights, duties and liberties, as well as
his exposures to the protected liberties of other individuals.

These changes from mechanism to scarcity and thence to working
rules as the underlying principles of economics have had a profound
effect upon the concept of property, changing that concept from a prin-
ciple of exclusive holding of physical objects for the owner’s private
use, into a principle of control of limited resources needed by others


MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES 7


for their use and thus into a concept of intangible and incorporeal
property arising solely out of rules of law controlling transactions.
The change was gradually accomplished in American jurisprudence
between the years 1872 and 1897, and consisted in changing the
definitions, by the Supreme Court, of the terms “property,” “lib-
erty” and “due process of law,” as found in the Fourteenth Amend-
ment to the Constitution.

Thus both legal theory and economic theory, in modern times,
have based their explanations first on Newton’s principle of mech-
anism, then on Malthus’ principle of scarcity, then on juristic prin-
ciples of common rules that both limit and enlarge the field for in-
dividual wills in a world of mechanical forces and scarcity of resources.
Since transactions are the economic units, and working rules are
the principles on which the Supreme Court of the United States
has been working over its theories of property, sovereignty and
value, and since that court occupies the unique position of the first
authoritative faculty of political economy in the world’s history,
we shall begin with the court’s theory of property, liberty and value.
For it is mainly upon that theory that modern business is conducted
and that American legislatures, executives and inferior courts are
held in conformity to the Constitution of the United States, which,
as latterly interpreted by the Supreme Court, prohibits the taking
of property, liberty or value without due process of law or equal
protection of the laws.!

While the economists start with a commodity or an individual’s
feelings towards it, the court starts with a transaction. Its ultimate
unit of investigation is not an individual but two or more individuals
—plaintiff and defendant—at two ends of one or more transactions.
Commodities and feelings are, indeed, implied in all transactions,
yet they are but the preliminaries, the accompaniments, or the
effects of transactions. The transaction is two or more wills giving,
taking, persuading, coercing, defrauding, commanding, obeying,
competing, governing, in a world of scarcity, mechanism and rules
of conduct. The court deals with the will-in-action. Like the modern


1 Fifth Amendment (1791) applicable to the Federal Government:—No person shall be
“deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property
be taken for public use without just compensation.” Fourteenth Amendment (1868) ap-
plicable to State Governments:—‘“‘Nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty,
or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws.”


8 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


physicist or chemist, its ultimate unit is not an atom but an electron,
always in motion—not an individual but two or more individuals
in action. It never catches them except in motion. Their motion
is a transaction.

A transaction occurs at a point of time. But transactions flow
one into another over a period of time, and this flow is a process.
The courts have fully developed the notion of this process in the
concept of a “going concern,”’ which they have taken over from the
customs of business, and which is none other than a technological
process of production and consumption of physical things and a busi-
ness process of buying and selling, borrowing and lending, command-
ing and obeying, according to shop rules or working rules or laws of
the land. The physical process may be named a “going plant,” the
business process a ‘‘going business,’’ and the two constitute a “going
concern”? made up of action and reaction with nature’s forces and
transactions between human beings according to accepted rules.

Thus economic theory has passed from commodities to feelings,
and finally to a process, and from principles of mechanism to prin-
ciples of scarcity, and then of working rules that apportion the conduct
of individuals. Value and economy become verbs instead of nouns.
Value becomes valuing; economy becomes economizing. Econo-
mizing becomes the operation of rules of conduct in the nation or
the business concern. A transaction is a unit picked out of the
process for minute examination. Value and economy become mil-
lions of people valuing and economizing through billions of trans-
actions in conformity to numberless working rules over a stretch of
time that has no beginning and no ending. The mathematical con-
cepts of deductive reasoning become statistical concepts of quantity
and time, of correlations, probabilities, lags and forecasts, respecting
billions of valuations in billions of transactions, moving forward
on that energy which we call the will, within limits set by the accepted
rules of conduct.

This process has three attributes which give us three meanings
of value, each of which was separately emphasized by different
schools of economists. Value has that subjective or volitional mean-
ing of anticipation which may be named psychological value and
which is the moving force. It has next that objective meaning of
commodities produced, exchanged and consumed, which may be
named real value. It has lastly that behavioristic meaning of prices


MECHANISM, SCARCITY, WORKING RULES 9


which emerge in the transactions of buying, borrowing and hiring,
in terms of standards of weights and measures prescribed by the
working rules, which may be named nominal value.

The system of prices is like the system of words or the system of
numbers. Words, prices and numbers are nominal and not real.
They are signs and symbols needed for the operation of working
rules. Yet each is the only effective means by which human beings
can deal with each other securely and accurately with regard to the
things that are real. But each may be insecure and inaccurate.
Words are deceptive if they do not convey the meaning intended;
numbers are liars if they do not indicate the actual quantities; prices
are inflated or deflated if they do not reflect the course of real value.
Every transaction has these three aspects of valuing. It is a meet-
ing of wills, a transfer of commodities, a determination of their prices.
A transaction is thus a compendium of psychological value, real
value and nominal value. The courts, in their decisions, endeavor,
by means of common rules, to make the nominal value or prices,
represent, as nearly as practicable, the psychological value, or antic-
ipation, and the real value, or quantity, of commodities and services.
Their goal is a scheme of “reasonable value.”

But the court does not cover the whole of the will-in-action. Indi-
viduals deal with the forces of nature as well as with other persons.
This dealing with nature may be distinguished as action and reaction,
so that the behavior of individuals consists in two kinds of acts,
action and reaction with nature’s forces and transactions with other
persons. The one is production and consumption of wealth, the
other is buying and selling, borrowing and lending, leasing, renting,
“hiring and firing,” exchanging, competing and governing.

Now, a transaction may be looked upon from several points of
view, each of which is related to the others, though with widely different
implications. It may be looked upon as the activity of one of the
forces of nature, say, will-power, operating like other forces, in
which case we have a physical or mechanical equivalent of the will-
in-action. It may be looked upon as accompanied by anticipation
and memories which are its psychological equivalent. These expec-
tations may be looked upon as induced by and inducing others to
act or avoid action, giving us an equivalent in social psychology.
This social psychology of two or more individuals is influenced, in
turn, by a mass psychology, or collective psychology, giving us


i
i


10 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ethical, juristic or political grounds for the working rules. Finally,
both the individual and the mass psychology are an adaptation of
the will to the principle of scarcity, and this point of view gives us
an economic equivalent of the transactions and the working rules.
The words which express one order of phenomena are tinged with
meanings projected from the others. We simply look upon the same
process from different angles, always seeing the same outline, but
with different shapes, colors and shades.

We thus have two concepts with which economic theory deals,
the concepts of Value and Economy. ‘These are inseparable from
the subject-matter which various schools have picked out for inves-
tigation, namely, Commodities, Feelings and Transactions. And
three ultimate principles have been relied upon, the principles of
Mechanism, of Scarcity and of the Working Rules of associations,
concerns and governments. Hence, while we begin with the working
rules that underlie the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United
States, we shall find the economic and juristic dimensions derived
from those rules shading off into mechanical, psychological, ethical
and political dimensions.


CHAPTER II
PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE
I. USE-VALUE AND EXCHANGE-VALUE


In the year 1872 the Supreme Court of the United States was
called upon, in the Slaughter House Cases,! to interpret the meanings
of the words Property and Liberty as used in the Constitution of
the United States. The Thirteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution, adopted in 1865, prohibited slavery and involuntary
servitude except as punishment for crime, and the Fourteenth Amend-
ment, adopted three years later, prohibited a state from depriving
any person of “‘life, liberty, or property” without ‘due process of
law,” and gave to the federal courts jurisdiction. The legislature
_of Louisiana had granted to a corporation a monopoly to maintain
slaughtering places for stock in the city of New Orleans, and had
regulated the charges to be made to other butchers who used these
facilities. The latter, through their attorneys, contended that the
statute deprived them of both their property and their liberty with-
out due process of law. The Supreme Court divided. If the court
should hold that property meant exchange-value, then the federal
court would take jurisdiction under the Amendments. But if prop-
erty meant only the use-value of physical things, then the court
would not interfere with the legislature of Louisiana. Justice Miller,
for the majority, declared that the act was not a deprivation of
property or liberty as the terms were used in the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Amendments. The term “liberty,” he said, should be
construed with reference to the well-known purpose of those Amend-
ments, namely, to establish freedom from slavery or personal servitude.
Even conceding that the term “liberty,” as popularly used, might
mean ‘‘civil liberty” or the right to buy and sell, yet that aspect of
liberty was not included in the meaning of the term as used in the
Amendments. Prior to the adoption of these amendments the
liberty of citizens, whether personal, civil or economic, was, for the

176 Wall. 36 (1872).
ats


12 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


most part, in the keeping of the states. The Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Amendments only transferred from the states to the
federal government the protection of such fraction of the total concept
of liberty as was comprehended in freedom from personal slavery.
All other aspects of liberty were left, as they had been, to the keep-
ing of the states.1_ And as to the meaning of the term “property,”
as used in the Fourteenth Amendment, he held that the term retained
its common-law meaning of physical things held exclusively for
one’s own use. Property, according to the Fourteenth Amendment
meant use-value, not exchange-value. “Under no construction of
that provision that we have ever seen,” he said, “can the restraint
imposed by the state of Louisiana upon the exercise of their trade
by the butchers of New Orleans be held to be a deprivation of prop-
erty within the meaning of that provision.” ? The state of Louisiana
had not deprived the butchers of the use-value of their property—
it had deprived them of its exchange-value.

The minority of the court, however, contended that the police
power (which they admitted, of course, might justly deprive a person
of liberty or property for public purposes without compensation),
could have been exercised in this case without resorting to a monopoly,
by merely regulating all of the butchers alike in the interest of public
health, but that the monopoly feature of the law deprived the other
butchers of their liberty and property and turned it over to the monop-
olist. They then went on to define the property and liberty which
was thus unjustly taken away, not by a proper exercise of the police
power, but by a special privilege granted to the slaughter-house
monopolist. A man’s “calling,” his “occupation,” his “trade,”
his “labor,” was property, as well as the physical things which he
might own; and “liberty” included his “right of choice,” his right
to choose a calling, to choose an occupation or trade, to choose the
direction in which he would exercise his labor. Justice Bradley,
of the minority, for example, declared that the “right to choose
one’s calling is an essential part of that liberty which it is the object
of government to protect; and a calling, when chosen, is a man’s
property and right. . . . Their right of choice is a portion of their
liberty; their occupation is their property.” (116, 122.) Justice
Field, also of the minority, desired to change the meaning of “slavery”
from physical coercion to economic coercion. He said, “A person


116 Wall. 60-73. 236 Wall. 81.


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 13


allowed to pursue only one trade or calling, and only in one locality
of the country, would not be, in the strict sense of the term, in a
condition of slavery, but probably none would deny that he would
be in a condition of servitude. ... The compulsion which would
force him to labor even for his own benefit only in one direction,
or in one place, would be almost as oppressive and nearly as great
an invasion of his liberty as the compulsion which would force him
to labor for the benefit or pleasure of another, and would equally
constitute an element of servitude.” (90.) Thus Justice Field de-
scribed slavery as physical coercion and servitude as economic coercion.
And Justice Swayne declared, “Property is everything which has
exchangeable value, and the right of property includes the power
to dispose of it according to the will of the owner. Labor is property,
and as such merits protection. The right to make it available is
next in importance to the rights of life and liberty.” (127.) Thus
Justice Swayne defined property as the exchange-value of one’s
ability to work, and liberty as the right to realize that exchange-
value on the labor market.

These minority definitions of liberty and property as exchange-
value were unavailing in the Slaughter House Cases. The majority
held to the older meaning of use-value. Twelve years later the
municipal authorities of New Orleans, acting under a new constitu-
tion for the state, granted to another company privileges in con-
flict with those of the original monopolist, thus infringing upon their
exclusive right. This time, therefore, the Slaughter House company
was plaintiff against the municipality. The majority of the court
now retained its original definition of property and liberty, but now
held that not only the original act, as they had contended before,
but also this annulling act were a proper exercise of the police power."
But Justices Bradley and Field, while concurring in the court’s
decision, placed it on the grounds of their dissenting opinions in the
original Slaughter House Cases, and repeated their earlier views
that the original act was itself an unlawful deprivation of liberty
and property. In their earlier dissent the minority had not cited
any cases where the term property had been used in the sense of a
trade, occupation, calling, or one’s labor, whose value to the owner
is in its exchange-value, though they asserted that it ought to have
that meaning. Thus, in the constitutional sense of the term, they

1 Butchers’ Union Co. v. Crescent City Co., rrr U.S. 746, 751 (1884).


14 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


had not been able to controvert Justice Miller’s denial that that
meaning had ever been given to it. In the later case, however, they
suggested the origin of their new definition. Justice Field now
stated that this meaning of property was derived from Adam Smith
who had said: “‘The property which every man has in his own labor,
as it is the original foundation of all other property, so it is the most
sacred and inviolable.”1 And Justice Bradley contented himself
with saying, “If a man’s right to his calling is property, as many
maintain, then those who had already adopted the prohibited pur-
suits in New Orleans, were deprived, by the law in question, of their
property, as well as their liberty, without due process of law.” Thus
the new meanings of property and liberty were found in Adam Smith
and the customs of business, and not in the Constitution of the
United States.

After the Slaughter House Cases the minority definitions of property
and liberty began to creep into the constitutional definitions given
by state and federal courts,’ as indeed was inevitable and proper
if the thing itself was thus changing. Finally, in the first Minnesota
Rate Case, in 18904 the Supreme Court itself made the transition
and changed the definition of property from physical things having
only use-value to the exchange-value of anything.

This decision was a partial reversal of the decision of the court
in the case of Munnz. Illinois in 1876.° In the Munn case the Supreme
Court had held, agreeably to its holding in the Slaughter House Cases,
that when a state legislature reduced the prices which a warehouse
company charged for the use of its services the resulting reduction
in exchange-value of the business was not a deprivation of property
in the sense in which the word was used in the Fourteenth Amend-
ment and therefore was not an act which the federal courts might
restrain. It was only a regulation of the ‘use and enjoyment” of
property under the police power of the state. The court went so
far as to declare that, if the legislature abused its power, “the people
must resort to the polls, not to the courts.” ®

That the state legislatures might possibly abuse their power had


lint U.S. 746, 757; SmitH, Wealth of Nations, 1:123 (Cannan ed., 1904).

2r11 U. S. 765 (my italics).

* Powell v. Penn., 127 U.S. 678, 684 (1887); Matter of Jacobs, 98 N. Y. 98 (1885); People
Marx, 99 N. Y. 377 (1885); People v. Gillson, 109 N. Y. 399 (1888).

4 Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co. ». Minnesota, 134 U.S. 418 (1890).

5o4 U. S. 113 (1876).

S94 U. S. 113, 134,


=


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 15


been clearly suggested in the decision of the Supreme Court of Illinois
in sustaining the act of the Illinois legislature, when the Munn Case
was before that court. The Illinois court had held ! that the author-
ity was not abused in that case by the Illinois legislature, since the
property of the owner was not “taken” from him, in that he was not
deprived of the “title and possession” of the property. In this
respect the Illinois court adhered to the primitive definition of prop-
erty as the mere holding of physical objects for one’s own use and
enjoyment. The legislature, under the police power of the state,
might reduce the charges which a warehouse company had estab-
lished for its services, but that was not “taking” their property.
The owners continued to hold their physical property even though
deprived of the power to fix the prices for its use. To this Justice
Field had rightly answered, ‘‘There is indeed no protection of any
value under the constitutional provision which does not extend to
the use and income of the property, as well as to its title and posses-
sion.”* For, of course, the title of ownership or the possession of
physical property is empty as a business asset if the owner is deprived
of his liberty to fix a price on the sale of the product of that property.

But Justice Field in the Munn Case had gone too far. He denied
the authority of both the legislature and the courts to fix the compen-
sation. The majority had only denied the authority of the court
to fix it. Fourteen years after Munn 2. Illinois this further issue
came up in the Minnesota Rate Case,*? and the petitioners for the
railroads asked the court to review the decision in the Munn and
similar cases and to restrain the state legislature from fixing finally
the prices charged for the use of property. (445.) The court now
acceded, and Justice Blatchford, for the majority, wrote, ‘This
power to regulate [police power] is not a power to destroy, and lim-
itation is not the equivalent of confiscation.” (456.) And confiscation,
or the reasonableness of a rate, ‘‘is eminently a question for judicial
investigation, requiring due process of law for its determination.”
(458.) Thus Justice Field’s definition of property as the exchange-
value of property was approved and, therefore, the protection of
that property was brought under the jurisdiction of the federal
courts conformably to the Fourteenth Amendment.


1 As interpreted by Justice Field, 94 U. S. 139; Munn 2. People, 69 IIl. 80 (1873).


204 U.S. 143.
3 Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co. v. Minnesota, 134 U.S. 418 (1890).


16 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


But Justice Bradley, who in the Slaughter House Cases had agreed
with Justice Field, now again dissented (supported by two other
justices) and held that the majority opinion asserted an “‘assumption
of authority on the part of the judiciary which. . . it has no right
to make.” (418, 463.) ‘If not in terms, yet in effect,” he said, “the
present cases are treated as if the constitutional prohibition was,
that no state shall take private property for public use without just
compensation—and as if it was our duty to judge of the compensation.
But there is no such clause in the Constitution of the United States.”
(465.) ‘There was,” he said, “in truth, no deprivation of property
in these cases at all. There was merely a regulation as to the enjoy-
ment of property, made by a strictly competent authority, in a matter
entirely within its jurisdiction.” (466.) In this respect he, like the
Illinois court in the Munn Case, continued to adhere to the prim-
itive definition of property as the mere exclusive holding of objects
for one’s own use, a kind of property that is not taken from the
owner unless he is deprived of its title and possession, for which he
is entitled to just compensation.

The majority, however, now held, as they had not held in the
Munn Case, that not merely physical things are objects of property,
but the expected earning power of those things is property; and prop-
erty is taken from the owner, not merely under the power of eminent
domain which takes title and possession, but also under the police
power which takes its exchange-value. To deprive the owners of the
exchange-value of their property is equivalent to depriving them of
their property. Hence, differently from the Munn Case decision,
they now held that, under the Fourteenth Amendment, it is the
province of the court and not the legislature, to determine the extent
to which that “taking” of the value of property might go and yet
not pass beyond the point of confiscation. They thus extended to the
exercise of the police power the judicial authority to ascertain just
compensation which the judiciary had exercised over the power of
eminent domain.!

Thus the transition in the definition of property from physical
objects to exchange-value was completed. “ Title and possession”
of physical property could be taken from its owner for public pur-
poses under the power of eminent domain, but only on condition


Under the original constitutional provision that no state should take private property
for public use without just compensation.


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 17


that equivalent value should be paid, such that the owners’ assets
should not be reduced; and this equivalent value, or just compensation,
is a judicial question. Now it is enlarged to read: The exchange-
value of property may be taken from its owners under the police
power, but only to the extent that they retain sufficient bargaining
power to maintain the same exchange-value that they had, and
this also is a judicial question. The definition of property is changed
from physical things to the exchange-value of anything, and the
federal courts now take jurisdiction.

Evidently, however, the exchange-value of property has no exist-
ence if either the owner or expected purchasers are forbidden access
to markets where they can sell and buy the property. Hence lib-
erty of access to markets is essential to the definition of exchange-
value. This attribute was finally added seven years after the Minne-
sota Rate Case, in the Allgeyer Case, and the minority definition
of liberty in 1872 became the unanimous definition of liberty in 1897.1
The court new said: “The liberty mentioned in that Amendment
[Fourteenth] means not only the right of the citizen to be free from
physical restraint of his person, but the term is deemed to embrace
the right of the citizen to be free in the enjoyment of all his faculties;
to be free to use them in all lawful ways; to live and work where
he will; to earn his livelihood by any lawful calling; to pursue any
livelihood or avocation, and for that purpose to enter into all con-
tracts which may be proper, necessary, and essential to his carrying
out to a successful conclusion the purposes above mentioned... .
His enjoyment upon terms of equality with all others in similar
circumstances of the privilege of pursuing an ordinary calling or
trade, and of acquiring, holding, and selling property is an essential
part of liberty and property as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amend-
ment.” ”

Furthermore, while liberty of access to markets on the part of an
owner is essential to the exchange-value of property, too much lib-
erty of access on the part of would-be competitors is destructive of
that exchange-value. During the past three hundred years this


1 Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 165 U. S. 578, 589 (1807).

2 Tbid., at 580, 580. This latter sentence was quoted in part from earlier decisions cited
above, Powell v. Pennsylvania, 127 U. S. 678, 684 (1888); quoted in 165 U.S. 578, 590.
For a discussion of the change in meaning of these terms while the process was going on,
in 1891, see Shattuck, C. E., “The True Meaning of the Term ‘Liberty’ in those clauses in
the Federal and State constitutions which protect life, liberty and property.” 4 Harv. Law
Rev. 365 (1891).


18 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


excessive liberty has been restrained by the courts in the long line
of cases going under the name of “goodwill’’ or “unfair competition.”
Evidently, these decisions of the courts had been designed to protect
the exchange-value of property, and now that the definition of prop-
erty itself had been changed from physical things to the exchange-
value of anything, it was an easy step to change the definition of
goodwill from “fair competition” to “property.” The long-rec-
ognized goodwill of a business which had always possessed exchange-
value, but which was merely the expected beneficial behavior of
other people, now became simply a special case of property. Other
courts followed, and the transition from the meaning of property as
physical things to that of the most ethereal invisibility was reached
in 1902 in a case involving the right to exclusive telephonic commu-
nication of news to the daily press by mere word of mouth. The
lower court then said, ‘Property ... is not, in its modern sense,
confined to that which may be touched by the hand, or seen by the
eye. What is called tangible property has come to be, in most great
enterprises, but the embodiment, physically, of an underlying life—
a life that, in its contribution to success, is immeasurably more effect-
ive than the mere physical embodiment.”? And, in 1911, by another
lower court, Justice Swayne’s definition in 1872 of labor as property
became “the right to labor in any calling or profession in the future.’’”

The foregoing cases, it will be noted, have turned on a double
meaning of property, and the transition is from one of the meanings
to both of the meanings. Property, in the popular ordinary usage,
the usage of the old common law and the one adhered to in the Slaugh-
ter House Cases and the Munn Case, meant any tangible thing owned.
Property, in the later decisions, means any of the expected activities
implied with regard to the thing owned, comprehended in the activ-
ities of acquiring, using and disposing of the thing. One is Property,
the other is Business. The one is property in the sense of Things
owned, the other is property in the sense of exchange-value of things.
One is physical objects, the other is marketable assets.

Thus it is that “corporeal property,” in the original meaning of
the term, has disappeared, or, rather, has been relegated to what
may be described as the internal “economy” of a going concern or


National Telephone News Co. v. Western Union Tel. Co., 119 Fed. 294, 299 (1902), by
Justice Grosscup.
2 Gleason v. Thaw, 185 Fed. 345, 347 (1011).


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 19


a household in the various processes of producing and consuming
physical objects, according to what the economists call their “use-
value.” And, instead of the use-value of corporeal property, the
courts are concerned with its exchange-value. This exchange-value
is not corporeal—it is behavioristic. It is the market-value expected
to be obtained in exchange for the thing in any of the markets where
the thing can or might be sold. In the course of time this exchange-
value has come to be known as “intangible property,” that is, the
kind of property whose value depends upon right of access to a
commodity market, a labor market, a money market, and so on.!
Consequently, in conformity with the customs and usages of business,
there are only two kinds of property, both of them invisible and
behavioristic, since their value depends on expected activities on
the commodity and money markets. One of these may technically
be distinguished as “incorporeal property,’ consisting of debts,
credits, bonds, mortgages, in short, of promises to pay; the other
may be distinguished as “intangible property” consisting of the
exchange-value of anything whether corporeal property or incorporeal
property or even intangible property. The short name for intangible
property is assets. Assets is the expected exchange-value of anything,
whether it be one’s reputation, one’s horse, house or land, one’s abil-
ity to work, one’s goodwill, patent right, good credit, stocks, bonds
or bank deposit, in short, intangible property is anything that enables
one to obtain from others an income in the process of buying and
selling, borrowing and lending, hiring and hiring out, renting and
leasing, in any of the transactions of modern business. We shall
identify these two classes of property as “encumbrances” and “ oppor-
tunities.” Encumbrances are incorporeal property, that is, promises
to pay, enforced by government; opportunities are intangible property,
that is, accessibility to markets, also enforced by government.
Going back, therefore, to the common-law meaning of property
as physical things held for the owner’s use, we find that what property
really signified, even in that original sense, was not the physical
thing itself but the expected “uses” of the thing, that is, various
activities regarding the thing. These uses, or activities, arose from
the producing and consuming power of a person in control of, or
working with, the thing. The legal terms carry this futuristic,
behavioristic meaning. The legal term ‘‘use,” is said to have been
1 Below, Chap. VII, Sec. UI.


20 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


derived from the Latin opus, meaning work or working, through
the Anglo-French oeps and the Old French ves.’ It means the work
a person can do with a thing, his behavior respecting the thing.
Thus it differs from the economic term, “utility,” which is derived
from the Latin usus, through the French wtilité, and means the
satisfaction a person gets in using a thing. Use is behavior. Utility
is feeling. The early feudal grants of land to tenants were granted
ad opus—that is, “to the use” of the tenant in production and con-
sumption. Then when property began to yield exchange-value as well
as use-value, the term ‘“‘uses” was simply enlarged by the courts to in-
clude it. It now means both the expected use-values of production and
consumption and the expected exchange-values of selling and buying.

The difference is unimportant in the law of private property.
In fact, the term ‘‘uses”’ has a social meaning and a business mean-
ing. Socially it means what we understand by producing and con-
suming things; that is, increasing the supply and enjoyment of things.
But in the business sense it means also acquiring and disposing of
the thing in transactions with other people. This explains the easy
transition from the common-law meaning of property as physical
things, valuable to owners on account of the expected physical uses
of production and consumption, to the business-law meaning of
property as assets, valuable to owners on account of their expected
bargaining uses as purchasing power in buying and selling.

The common-law and popular notion of property as physical
things is, therefore, but an elliptical statement of what common-
sense can take for granted without the pedantry of explaining every
time that what is meant by property is the wses and not the thing.
The trouble is that, by using this common-sense notion of uses, not
only the courts and business men, but also theoretical economists, pass
over from the significance of “‘uses” in the sense of producing an
increase in the supply of goods, to its exact opposite meaning in the
business sense of an increase in the power of owners to command
goods from other persons in exchange. The one is producing power
which zmcreases the supply of goods in order to increase the quantity
of use-values; the other is bargaining power which restricts the supply
of goods in proportion to demand, in order to increase or maintain
their exchange-value. Bargaining power is the willful restriction


‘PoxLock, F., Principles of Contract, 5 (gth ed., 1921); 3 Law. Quar. Rev., 115 (1887);
Bouvier’s Law Dictionary, title “Use.”


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 21


of supply in proportion to demand in order to maintain or enlarge
the value of business assets; but producing power is the willing increase
of supply in order to enlarge the wealth of nations.

Hence the transition in the meaning of property from the use-value
to the exchange-value of things, and therefore from the producing
power that increases use-values to the bargaining power that increases
exchange-values, is more than a transition—it is a reversal. The
reversal was not at first important when business was small and
weak—it becomes important when Capitalism rules the world.

The transition in meanings of property and liberty applies to
agriculture as well as manufactures, commerce and transportation,
and to individuals, partnerships and associations as well as corpo-
rations. Farming has become a going-business, or a bankrupt busi-
ness, like other businesses. The isolated, colonial, or frontier farmer
might produce and consume things, attentive only to their use-value,
but the modern farmer lives by producing “social-use-values”’ and
buying other social-use-values produced and sold by other business
men. In this way he also “produces” exchange-value, that is, assets.
He farms for sale, not for use, and while he has the doubtful alternative
of falling back on his own natural resources if he cannot sell his
products, yet his farm and crops are valuable because they are busi-
ness assets, that is, exchange-values, while his liabilities are his debts
and his taxes, all of them measured by his expectations and real-
izations on the commodity markets and money markets, in terms of
exchange-value or price.

This, we take it, is the substance of Capitalism distinguished
from the Feudalism or Colonialism which it displaced—production
for the use of others and acquisition for the use of self, such that the
meaning of property and liberty spreads out from the expected uses
of production and consumption to expected transactions on the
markets where one’s assets and liabilities are determined by the ups
and downs of prices. And this is, in substance, the change in the
meanings of Property and Liberty, from the Slaughter House Cases
in 1872 to the Allgeyer Case in 1897, a change from the use-value
of physical things to the exchange-values of anything.


II. OpporRTUNITY AND ENCUMBRANCE


If the meaning of property (as distinguished from rights of property),
is not merely that of a thing, but is the liberty of expected activity


22 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


in acquiring, using and disposing of things, then the significance of
property is in the behavior expected with regard to the thing, and the
value of the thing is in the expected desirable behavior regarding it.
In other words, value resides in the expected will-in-action, and the
expected will-in-action is its expected actions and transactions. We
shall name this a going concern,! consisting of two inseparable com-
ponents, a Producing Organization turning out use-values, and a Going
Business bringing in exchange-values.

The transition from rights of property in the use-values of things,
to rights of property in their exchange-value is a change from physical
things to a going business and, first in point of significance is the fact
that it unites property and liberty in an identical concept. Property
means anything that can be bought and sold, and since one’s liberty
can be bought and sold, liberty is assets, and therefore liberty is
property. A person may sell a portion of his liberty in two ways.
You agree to pay me a thousand dollars a year from now. Originally
such a promise was a matter of conscience and the confessional.
Now the state will physically compel you to pay, if your conscience
and the priest do not morally do so. You have sold a part of your
liberty, and I, in turn, can sell it to a third party.

Or you sell to me the goodwill and trade-name of your business
by agreeing to refrain from competing with me or using your name
in your business. Originally one or both of us might have been
imprisoned or fined for making such a contract in restraint of trade.”
Now the court will punish you if you do not keep your promise and
it will punish others who make use of that trade-name in competing
with me. Again you have sold to me a part of your liberty and I, in
turn, can sell it to a third party.

What is it that I have bought and now own in each of these cases?
It is not a physical thing. It is a promise of future behavior on your
part and a permission to me to get the officers of the law to compel
you to behave as you promised if you do not do so willingly. You
have sold to me a part of your liberty. Let us call it an Encumbrance
on your Liberty. An encumbrance has two ends exactly equal in
size. One end of it is my right, my asset, the other end is your duty,
your liability.

I now may own two kinds of encumbrances on your liberty, both


1 Below, Chap. V.
2 Bouvier’s Law Dictionary, under title “Restraint of Trade.”


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 23


of which constitute my assets, or the exchange-value of my property.
One is positive, the other is negative. One is your promise to
do something, the other your promise to not-do something—your
promise to pay and your promise not to compete. One is a debt, the
other is a goodwill. Each is an encumbrance on the field of your
expected behavior. One restricts your liberty of action by requir-
ing a performance, usually described as compulsion; the other re-
stricts your liberty by compelling an avoidance, usually described as
restraint. Each has a present value to me. Each is my property,
which I have acquired, am holding and can sell. The exchange-
value of each is my asset.

But the two objects which I buy, hold and sell are different. When
I buy or sell your indebtedness I am buying or selling your positive
duty to do something at a future date measured by, say, one thousand
dollars. When I buy your promise of to do something I am appar-
ently buying nothing at all. Iam evidently not buying your cus-
tomers. I do not own my customers, you did not own yours. I do
not own any duty or encumbrance imposed upon them requiring
them to do anything positive for me. They are not my assets. My
customers still have their liberty to buy elsewhere. They are not
compelled to buy of me. What I own is not an encumbrance on
them. Let us call it an Opportinity to deal with them if I can. I
simply own the opportunity to sell my goods or services to them if
I can. And I do not own it against all the world—I own it only
against you, to the extent that you have promised not to try to
sell to them, and against competitors only to the extent that they
are prohibited from using my trade-name, or otherwise unfairly
competing with me. Outside these rights I am exposed to competi-
tors.

Thus the meaning of property has spread over from visible things
to invisible things. The invisible things are encumbrances and
opportunities. Encumbrances are the duties that other people owe
to me, and opportunities are their liberties, their absence of duties
to me. Yet both are valuable to me and valuable to third parties
who buy them of me, and are therefore property in the sense of
exchange-values, or assets.

These two kinds of property are rightly described as intangible,
incorporeal, invisible. They cannot be seen by the naked eye like
physical things, and they are not always even symbolized by words


24 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


written out on paper as evidences of ownership. They may be
created by word of mouth. They may even be implied from the
conduct of the parties. Their intangibility is the invisibility of the
promised and expected behavior of people, which is felt, not seen, by
the inner eye of confidence.

These intangible and incorporeal properties are more valuable
than all physical things, in a land whose government and people
are stable, for upon them are built both the credit system and the
business initiative that have displaced feudalism by capitalism.
They have arisen in manifold varieties. Encumbrances range from
merely implied promises inferred only from simple acts, to elaborate
bonds that bind a business or a nation for a century to come. Oppor-
tunities range from the simple choices between alternatives made
daily in every transaction, to that expanse of enduring market oppor-
tunities known variously as goodwill, patent rights, the right to
continue in business or to continue business connections, the right
to a labor market, the right to liberty of contract, and the many
kinds of public franchises, corporation charters, and public utility
franchises.

Generally, as we noted above, the encumbrances are coming to
be known as “incorporeal”’ property, or debts; the opportunities
as “intangible” property, or exchange-value. Each is invisible,
for each exists only in the unseen future. One is the invisibility of
future behavior of creditors and debtors, the other the invisibility of
future behavior of buyers and sellers, whether they be borrowers
and lenders, merchants and customers, landlords and tenants,
principals and agents, employers and employees. In the one case
they are the expected beneficial performance of duty; in the other
they are the expected beneficial exercise of liberty; in both cases they
are expected beneficial actions or transactions. In both cases they
are assets, since they are the exchange-values of things.

Though invisible and in the future, they are more substantial
than even the physical property which we see in the present, for it
is they that have produced all physical capital, that reproduce it when
it wears out, and that enlarge it faster than the growth of population.
Though physical capital may disappear through war or other catas-
trophy, yet if these invisible expectations of beneficial behavior
remain intact, then the physical capital will be shortly reproduced.

The invisible capital of many a going concern is more valuable


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 25


than all of its machinery, lands, buildings, stock on hand, and, indeed,
if that invisible capital loses its value all of the visible capital is
likely to sink at once to the value of old iron and scrap. It would
not be incorrect to say that all capital is invisible value, in that it
is the present value, not of physical things, but of the hopes of the
future aroused through confidence in the now invisible but expected
transactions of the future.

For, what is the value of lands, buildings, machinery, commodities,
but the value of their expected “uses”? And what are their uses
but the uses not yet made but yet to be made of them, either in
using them directly or in selling their products for money or other
products? One is use-value, the relation of man to nature. The
other is exchange-value, the relation of man to man. Both of them
lie in the future but have a value in the present. We may call them
Expectancies. All value is expectancy. Use-value is the expected
behavior of things in man’s activity of production and consumption.
Exchange-value is the expected behavior of people in buying and
selling, lending, hiring, borrowing and paying debts.

The meaning of property has thus expanded so that it includes
expectancies of two kinds of future behavior of other people, one
of which is the expected restraint or compulsion placed on others
in my behalf; the other is opportunities afforded by them and open
to me. Both of these are measured off and determined by that
power superior to both of us, the state, and therefore one of them,
the encumbrances, is recognized as their legal duties; the other,
the opportunities, as their legal liberties. Expected restraints and
compulsions by the state, that is, encumbrances, are legal duties;
expected absence of restraint or compulsion, that is, opportunities,
are legal liberty.

If liberty is the absence of duty, that is, of compulsion or restraint,
then this absence of something, paradoxical though it seem, must
contain something in order to be valuable. What it “contains” is
an economic equivalent. My liberty is valuable to me to the extent
of the different economic objects which may happen to be its equiv-
alent. What it contains is not things but expected transactions.
Liberty is the legal equivalent of expected transactions. If I sell
the goodwill of my business to you, I am selling a part of my liberty.
Here my liberty is valuable in exchange. Its value consists in what
I can get for it when I part with it. I am at liberty to sell my liberty


SS ——————


26 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


to a limited extent. I am not at liberty to sell a// of my liberty. The
value of liberty is its exchange-value in terms of money—realized
assets. Here I capitalize my expected liberty and sell it.

Another way in which my liberty is valuable is in using it or leasing
it for the sake of increasing my income. When I own the goodwill
of a business what I own is my absence of restraint, compulsion,
or duty in selling things that I own. The valuable equivalent of
this absence of duty is the more profitable bargains I can make by
using my liberty than I could make if I did not have that liberty.
That profit is the difference between the prices I could get for my
products, if I did not own and keep the goodwill, and the prices I
can get by keeping and owning it. Likewise with others. If lama
laborer and my present employer pays me $3.00 a day, but another
employer offers me $3.50 a day, the daily income from my liberty
to leave one employer and to work for another is 50 cents a day.
The valuable content of this part of my liberty is therefore exchange-
value measured by money. But in this case it is a surplus that gives
greater value to the thing sold. What I sell is the use of my labor
power. The exchange-value of my labor power is my assets. Yet I
am not permitted to sell all of it permanently. I cannot capitalize
it. I can only hire it out for a daily income. It is of greater value
to me at $3.50 a day than at $3.00. The liberty to choose between
opportunities is worth the difference between the higher and lower
value received in exchange. Thus the value of liberty in this case
is the surplus exchange-value one can get by choice of opportunities.

Yet in either case I give up a part of my liberty. The practice of
selling or leasing a part of one’s liberty goes along with all transactions.
The sale of liberty is a necessary part of every sale. Liberty is thrown
in with every valuation in making an exchange. The owner who
sells his horse, or the investor who lends his purchasing power, or
the laborer who sells the use of his labor power, sells with it a part
or the whole of his liberty to use his horse, or his purchasing power,
or his labor power. The landlord leases to the tenant his liberty
to use the farm and impliedly agrees to obey the commands of the
tenant to keep off. The lender sells to the borrower his liberty to
use his right to draw checks on a bank. The agent or employee
who sells the use of his labor power sells a part of his liberty by accept-
ing obedience to the commands of the other. Each sale is the accept-
ance of a duty either of avoidance or performance, and each duty


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 27


is a deduction from liberty, and therefore a sale of a part of one’s
liberty.

In these cases the value of the liberty when sold seems to be wholly
absorbed by the value of the thing sold. The sale of liberty is not
distinguished from the sale or lease, or loan, of the horse, of the bank
deposit, or of the labor power. Value received seems to have a
positive basis for exchange only in the positive thing that is sold
and not in such a negative thing as the absence of restraint or com-
pulsion. But in the sale of goodwill the value of liberty often vis-
ibly separates itself out from the value of the plant and merchandise,
and is computed as a separate or additional value. The physical
plant of a certain newspaper, for example, is worth $100,000. Its
goodwill is separately worth $900,000. The goodwill is not in the
plant but in the customers.

Yet is it so very different? When a person sells his ‘‘business”’
the courts usually infer that he sells his goodwill with the physical
plant, for gvodwill is nothing more or less than the profitable or
beneficial exercise of the will over the thing sold. So when I sell
my horse I sell the liberty to exercise my will over my horse, which
is something that would have been profitable or beneficial to me
and therefore good, but is henceforth to be the beneficial exercise
of the buyer’s will over the horse, and therefore a goodwill for him.

So it is with the sale of my bank deposit or labor power. When
I sell either of these peculiar objects I sell the beneficial or profitable
exercise of my will over it, and the borrower or employer buys the
expectation of a profitable exercise of iis will over it. My goodwill—
not sentimentally good but economically good, not good-will but
goods-will, because good for my benefit or profit—becomes his good-
will, good for him.

Hence the sale of that part of one’s liberty that goes along with
every transaction is not such a paradoxical sale of the absence of
something as it seemed at first, but is the transfer of something
very positive, substantial and good, namely, an economic equivalent
in the expected free exercise of one’s will in acquiring things from
the world and people about us.

This is the economic equivalent of liberty and property, and it
is this that has come to be known as “intangible” property, dis-
tinguished from “‘incorporeal” property. Intangible property is
opportunity. Incorporeal property is debt. Here is where value


28 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


lies—not in the visible things or persons, but in the will to acquire,
to use, to control, to enjoy and so to get an expected benefit or profit
out of things or persons. What we buy and sell is not things, but
our goodwill over things. And when we say that liberty is valuable
and liberty is therefore property, what we mean is that the free and
beneficial exercise of the will in dealings with nature and other people
is economically valuable and therefore is property.

Thus it is that the terms Property, Value, Capital, Assets, Liberty,
and The Will have come to mean the same thing from different
points of view. Property is none other than the beneficial exercise
of the will in dealing with nature or other persons. But dealings
with nature are “corporeal property” and “corporeal property”
has dropped out of sight. The business man is not interested in
his corporeal property except as a means to an end and that end
is its exchange-value. The right to have this exchange-value is
simply the right of access to markets. And it is these rights of access
to markets that were named “liberty” in the Slaughter House Cases
but are now known as “intangible property.”” But intangible prop-
erty is merely the expected beneficial behavior of other people to
be obtained by way of expected transactions with them, while in-
corporeal property is their expected fulfillment of promises which they
have made to us. And this is Capital. Capital is the present value
of expected beneficial behavior of other people. Property has become
intangible and incorporeal; liberty has become intangible property;
duties are incorporeal property; each is the expected beneficial beha-
vior of others in dealings with self, and the present value to self
of that expected behavior is capital or assets.


Ill. Power


We have seen that liberty is valuable, and liberty is property,
in two directions. It is valuable because it will bring in something
in exchange for something. The two are equivalent. The value
of the liberty is the exchange-value of the thing given in exchange.
The other direction in which liberty is valuable is by bringing in a
surplus equivalent to the difference. The first of these directions
is power in exchange, purchasing power, or bargaining power, that
is, economic power, or briefly power. The other direction is choice
of opportunities, that is choice of alternatives, or, briefly, opportunity.

Thus, liberty is absence of restraint, or compulsion, or duty, and


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 29


is equivalent to the exercise of power and the choice of opportunities
which it permits. But choice of opportunities is, in fact, but a choice
between two degrees of power. If I can sell the use of my labor for
$3.00 a day, that is one degree of power over my employer. If I can
sell it for $3.50 a day that is another degree of power. If a railway
corporation charges 3 cents a mile, that is one degree of power over
passengers; if it charges 2 cents that is a lesser degree of power.
The economic equivalent of liberty, therefore, is freedom to choose
between two degrees of power over other persons.

In some cases this power dimension of property attracts more
attention than the opportunity dimension. Public-utility laws,
usury laws, labor laws, are designed sometimes to curb the bargain-
ing-power of property where it seems to be excessive. The courts
have declared certain of these laws unconstitutional or void, on the
ground that they restricted liberty. They do indeed restrict liberty,
for liberty is absence of restraint, compulsion or duty, and these
laws are the presence of restraint, compulsion or duty. But these
decisions of the courts failed to distinguish “liberty” from the eco-
nomic equivalent which is the “content” of liberty. Liberty itself
is empty and meaningless. Its meaning is in its content. Its con-
tent is freedom to choose. But even this is empty, and the will
does not exist in vacuum. It exists in its choice of opportunities.
But its opportunities are degrees of power over nature or man. The
economic equivalent of liberty is liberty to choose between degrees
of economic power. Liberty is inseparable from power. Courts,
in more recent decisions, have discovered that liberty is economic
power, as well as economic opportunity.’

We may designate opportunity and power as the external dimen-
sions of the will in action, to be distinguished from ‘‘economy,”
the internal dimension of property. They are external in that they
are the dimensions that come into contact with other persons. They
are the dimensions which tell us whether property, including its
liberty to exercise the will, is enlarged or diminished in dealings
with other people. For this reason they may be named the expansion
side of the will and property. Property, then, the free exercise of
the will, is expanded by one and the same act, which, however, has
the two dimensions of opportunity and power.

But opportunity and power differ greatly in their method of expan-


1 Below, Chap. III.


30 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


sion. Opportunity is expansion without cost to self. It is the costless
enlargement of power by merely choosing between two degrees of
power, both of which are accessible at the moment. It is the passive
aspect of choosing. But power itself costs something. It is effort,
outgo, as well as income. It means that something is given up, that
something is giveninexchange. It may be a day’s labor that is given
up; it may be a horse or a bushel of wheat that has been owned; it may
be a part of one’s liberty that is sold. One school of economists re-
duces all costs to commodity costs, including the commodity money
paid out; another reduces them to pain-costs, the pain endured. But
all costs are property-costs. The laborer does not sell his pain—he
sells his labor power; it is the same when he sells his horse or a part of
his liberty. In all cases he gives up property and throws in liberty.

But the sale has a purpose. It is something given up in order to in-
duce something else to come back. It is outgo of property, in exchange
for income of property. It is power-in-exchange. It is realization of
assets. We measure the degree of power by a ratio of exchange. I sell
a day’s labor for $3.00. The ratio is one day’s work = $3.00. I sell
it for $3.50. The ratio is 1 = $3.50. I sella bushel of wheat for two
bushels of oats. The ratiois1 bu. = 2bu. Isell it for 3 bushels—the
ratio is 1:3. I sell my goodwill for $1000. The ratio is 1: 1000. I
sell it for $2000. The ratio is 1 : 2000. The ratio of exchange measures
the degree of power because it measures the ratio between what I give
up and what I get back in the exercise of power.

But when I merely choose between two ratios of exchange, both of
which are accessible at the moment, I give up nothing in addition.
I choose between the power ratio of 1 : 3 and 1 : 3.50, between 1 : 2
and 1:3, between 1 : 1000 and 1: 2000. I give up, in either case,
only the identical day’s labor, or bushel of wheat, or part of my liberty.
But I gain a pure surplus, a costless addition to my property. We may
designate this costless increment a ratio of surplus, or ratio of oppor-
tunity. My ratio of opportunity is the ratio which the surplus bears to
what I would have had were it not for the costless choice. When I
gain 50 cents by merely choosing to sell my labor for $3.50 instead of
$3.00, my ratio of opportunity is 50 : 300, that is t : 6 or 16”/s per cent
pure costless gain.

Thus, while the ratio of exchange is a measure of power, the ratio of
opportunity is a measure of the difference between two degrees of
power. The two ratios are merely the measurement of two dimensions


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 31


of the same transaction, like two dimensions of a box. The ratio of
exchange measures the cost side of a transaction, the ratio of oppor-
tunity the coséless side. The one measures the sacrifice, the other the
“velvet.” But in measuring sacrifice the ratio of exchange also meas-
ures power, and in measuring velvet the ratio of opportunity measures
the costless choice of opportunities that goes along with the exercise of
power.

But power may be increased directly without choice of oppor-
tunities. Suppose the laborer has his employer at a disadvantage
where the employer has no alternative opportunity. The laborer de-
mands and receives $3.50 instead of $3.00; or the corporation demands
and receives 3 cents a mile instead of 2 cents, if the passenger has no
alternative. In either case one has increased his power, not by choos-
ing between two persons, but by a direct increase of power over the
same person. The same service is given to the same person, but at a
higher ratio of exchange, a greater degree of power.

Thus liberty and property have two meanings, either of which sig-
nifies expansion of power. One is choice of opportunities, a passive,
indirect, costless increase of power. The other is choice of greater or
less degree of power. Liberty applies to both. Liberty is the absence
of restraint, compulsion, or duty, but in one case liberty is expansion
through choice of two degrees of power over two others: in the other it
is expansion through choice of two degrees of power over one other.

In either case, likewise, the increase of power is, in modern business,
expressed in terms of price, and prices are referred to a standard of
money. We say that money is a measure of value and a medium of
exchange. But it isa peculiar medium. Money is a kind of universal
container of everything within reach at the option of its owner and the
prices of commodities. It is a medium and a measure because it is a
universal power of acquisition at certain prices. As such it becomes
the measure of one’s assets and liabilities, as wellas the medium through
which one’s assets are usually realized on the markets in the form of
other things to be acquired in exchange. We may, therefore, speak
of assets as the quantity of other things expected from the prices to be
obtained by sale of the things owned, and money as the medium by
which those things are obtained. The things owned are simply Things.
The quantity of other things expected in exchange for them is the ex-
pected prices to be obtained for things owned; and expected prices are
book assets, that is, assets hoped for. Money is the medium and


32 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


measure for changing hopeful assets into realized assets. So that an in-
crease of power over others in terms of price is an increase in one’s
assets or diminution of one’s liabilities, and this is the expansion
equivalent of property and liberty through opportunity and power.
Inversely, the diminution of power or absence of opportunity is the
contraction-equivalent of property and liberty, or rather exposure,’
which reduces one’s assets or enlarges one’s liabilities.

Thus we see that the legal term “liberty” has a two-fold economic
content, namely, opportunity and power. Yet these two are really
but two aspects of one act of the will, namely, choice between two
degrees of economic power. This concept of the economic power of
property and liberty was first admitted to the decisions of the Supreme
Court in the case already cited, of Munn 2. Illinois, in 1876. Prior to
that decision the term power had meant only the physical power of
the sovereign in enforcing the laws, out of which power came the
grants of special privileges or monopolies which were not property, but
were arbitrary infringements upon the rights of property. The con-
cept of property itself had come up out of the common law and carried
with it the idea of a natural, or common-law right of liberty to acquire,
use and dispose of physical things. Hence property was not power—
property was liberty, and there was a world of difference between the
power of the sovereign and the liberty of the subject. But, in the
Munn Case, for the first time, it came to be seen that this liberty of
private property meant also the economic power of private property.
The power of sovereignty was the physical power to compel obedience;
the power of property was the economic power to withhold from others
what belongs to self but is needed by others. The legislature of Ili-
nois had fixed the maximum charges permitted to be made by grain
elevator and warehouse companies for the handling and storage of
grain. This business of a warehouse had always been a private busi-
ness, and had never been granted any special privilege or franchise by
the sovereign either in England or America. The majority and the
minority in the Supreme Court agreed that in the case of a special
grant of sovereign power, the power of the sovereign to regulate the
charges went along with the grant. The charges must be reasonable
and this was the common-law rule applying to all special grants or
licenses, whether express, implied, or claimed by prescription through
long usage and consent, such as public ferries, bridges, turnpikes,

1 Below, Chap. IV.


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE as


wharfingers, or hackmen and draymen who made use of the King’s
highways.’ The judges disagreed as to whether this sovereign power
could lawfully be extended to a grain elevator and warehouse which
did not need and did not have a special grant of sovereign power to
carry on its business.

The majority introduced a new principle of law, as charged by
the minority, in order to sustain the power of the Illinois legislature
to fix the prices for handling and storage of grain, and to compel the
owners to furnish service at those prices. This was, in effect, the
principle that it was economic conditions and not a special grant of
soverergnty that determined the right of the sovereign to regulate
prices. The Munn Case was not the case of a railway depending on a
public franchise, but of a private business. These warehouses, with-
out a special grant of sovereign power, had become strategic centers
for control of the prices of grain shipped from the Northwest, by the
mere fact of location, character of the business, and power to withhold
service. The majority, recognizing this economic fact, held that prop-
erty lost its strictly private character and became ‘“‘clothed with a
public interest when used in a manner to make it of public consequence
and affect the community at large.”’ Thus the fact of economic power
over the public in withholding service and thus fixing prices need not
proceed from a sovereign grant of a privilege, but proceeds, in this
case, from the circumstance that the public had come to depend on the
use of the owner’s private property, and that therefore the owner had
employed his property, not merely to his own use and enjoyment, but
had devoted it to use by the public. To that extent he must submit
to be controlled by the public. (113, 126.)

Justice Field, who, in the Slaughter House Cases, had denied the
right of the state to restrain liberty, now denied its right to restrain
the power to withhold services. He distinguished both between a
sovereign privilege and private property, and between the use and
enjoyment of the property by the owner and the price that the owner
could charge for its use and enjoyment by others. A sovereign priv-
ilege, he agreed, might be regulated as to the compensation, or prices,
derived from its exercise, and indeed such regulation was implied in
such a grant. “When,” however, “the privilege ends, the power of
regulation ceases.”” (147.) And the owner of the private property
might be restrained, under the police power, as to its use and enjoyment

194 U. S. 113, 149 (1876).


34 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


if that became dangerous to the life and health of others, but ot as to
the compensation or price charged for its use by others. The police
power, he thus held, extended only to the use and enjoyment, that is to
the use-value of things, and ot to the compensation for the use, that
is, the prices of things, except in cases where some right or privilege is
conferred by the government which gives the beneficiary special
_ advantage over others. “In the case of the warehousemen of Chicago
no right or privilege is conferred by the government upon them.”
(113, 149.) ‘‘ Their buildings are not nuisances.” (148.) ‘‘The busi-
ness of a warehouseman was, at common law, a private business, and
is so in its nature.” (154.)

Notwithstanding these cogent and accurate historical objections of
Justice Field, supported by two other justices, the majority of the
court recognized that the coercive power of property emerges with
changes in economic conditions, even when not supported by a special
grant of sovereignty. For it was evidently not the health of the
public that was menaced by the warehouses but the prices that the
public as producers and consumers should receive and pay for food.
And so, in sustaining the authority to restrain that economic power,
they reduced the scope of property by enlarging the police power of
the state legislatures. But the property which they reduced in scope
was not the ownership of physical property—it was the ownership cf
the exchange-value of that property.

The decision in Munn 2. Illinois recognized for the first time the
economic power of property, or power to withhold, growing out of
economic conditions, as distinguished from the physical power of
sovereignty, or power to compel, exercised on behalf of citizens as
their privilege or “liberty.” henceforth, it would require, not a
special, personal favor of the sovereign in order to justify the legislature
in regulating the prices to be derived from that favor, but a mere
showing that the citizen had engaged in business upon which other
citizens depended for their liberty and property. The grant of power
over citizens in fixing prices now comes, not from the sovereign di-
rectly, but indirectly from the citizen’s ownership of a kind of property
to which that economic power attaches. The transition is made from
a legal monopoly, the ancient “liberty” of the subject to exercise
sovereign power, to a “natural” monopoly, the modern liberty to
exercise economic power, since it proceeds automatically from eco-
nomic conditions rather than designedly from an act of the sovereign.


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 35


Previously it was only the grant of a special privilege that gave to the
sovereign the right to prevent extortion by regulating the prices
charged, and private property was not such a grant from the sovereign
but was a natural right derived from the common law, which ex-
pressed the common usages of the people without privilege, and there-
fore carried the natural right of liberty in fixing prices. Now, when
the grant of special privilege no longer avails, another source of author-
ity, the “police power,” which had been used only to prevent excessive
nuisance, is enlarged to prevent excessive economic power.

Where the decisions that followed the minority in the Slaughter
House Cases enlarged property at the expense of sovereignty, the
police power enlarges sovereignty at the expense of property. The
citizen himself, since the Munn decision, now takes the initiative
without waiting for the sovereign to act, and of his own free will grants
to the sovereign the authority to regulate his prices, because he no
longer uses his property only for his own use and enjoyment, but he
devotes it to the use of other citizens who necessarily depend upon it
for the prices that give value to their liberty and property. Liberty
is no longer defined merely by the dimensions of choice of opportunity,
as was done by the minority in the Slaughter House Cases. It is now
defined also by the dimension of economic power.

This dimension was not conceded by the minority in the Munn
Case. Had that case been one of a railroad with a franchise to operate
a highway, the minority would doubtless not have dissented, for such
a franchise is a special grant of sovereign power. But the case was
that of a warehouse without a public franchise, and the minority could
not see that mere property as such, when not aided by a franchise,
could possess a similar kind of power. If, however, property, as per-
ceived by the majority, did possess this similar kind of power, it fol-
lowed, by a stretch of the implied powers of sovereignty, that the
sovereign should have power to restrain the owner of that property.
This the majority affirmed, and in doing so, enlarged the definition of
the “police power”’ beyond the mere control of the use and enjoyment
of property where prejudicial to health or comfort, to the control of
the bargaining power of property where prejudicial to the bargaining
power of others. The police power was thus extended from use-value
to exchange-value, from physical things to business assets.?


1 See Justice Field’s criticism that the police power had never before been extended to
the compensation for the use of property except where “some right or privilege’? was con-


36 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Yet the decision in the Munn Case left the authority to exercise this
enlargement of the police power solely in the hands of the legislature.
This was because, as we noted above, the court had not yet changed
the definition of property from physical things to the prices of things.
Not until the first Minnesota Rate Case,’ already referred to, fourteen
years after the Munn Case, was this change made. The result was,
after 1890, that the judicial branch of government, rather than the
legislative branch, took jurisdiction of the police power in determining
how far the legislature might go in exercising it. The Munn Case
recognized the economic power of property, distinguished from the
economic power of a monopoly; the Minnesota Rate Case defined this
economic power, or exchange-value, as the essence of property, which
therefore could not be taken from its owner except by judicial process
instead of legislative process. The rate case reversed the Munn Case
as to the limits of the police power, but not as to the definition of
economic power.


IV. Economy


We have considered two economic or volitional dimensions of the
legal concepts, liberty and property, the one being choice of oppor-
tunities, the other choice of greater or less degrees of economic power.
When these two dimensions are joined together, they constitute what
may be named the principle of Expansion, since they signify an en-
largement of economic power through dealings with other persons. A
person may expand the field of his will or resources in the threefold
dimensions of (1) a costless choice between alternative degrees of
power over opposite persons, a dimension measured by a ratio of
opportunity; (2), the degree of power chosen, however, is a costful
expansion measured by a ratio of exchange; but this ratio of exchange
may be reduced by, (3), a forbearance ? which is a choice of a less
instead of a greater degree of power over a single person. Liberty
therefore means absence of constraint or compulsion in the Expansion
of one’s will or resources. But liberty also signifies the absence of


ferred by government, 94 U.S. 146. At a later date the Supreme Court of Oregon, in the
minimum wage case, referring to this concept of the police power, said, ‘‘when new condi-
tions arise which injuriously affect the health or morals or welfare of the public, we no
longer say that we will expand the police power to reach and remedy the evil. Instead we
say that a new evil has arisen which an old principle of government—the police power—
will correct.” Stettler v. O'Hara, 69 Ore. 510, 532 (1014).

1 Chicago, M. & St. P. Ry. Co. v. Minn., 134 U. S. 418 (1890).

2 Below Chap. IV, Sec. II.


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 37


constraint or compulsion in a fourth dimension of the will-in-action,
which is the obverse of Expansion, namely, Economy.

A worker receives a salary of $1000 a year. This marks the limit of
his economic expansion through choice of opportunities and economic
power. If he received $1200 his economic power would be expanded;
if he received $900 his power would be contracted. Supposing his
power of expansion is measured by $1000 per year, he distributes this
$1000 among food, clothing, shelter, amusement, tobacco, whiskey,
religion, books, education, etc. He spends 4o per cent for food, 20 per
cent for clothing, 25 per cent for shelter, 15 per cent miscellaneous.
Another man spends 4o per cent for whiskey, ro per cent for tobacco,
and the rest on his family for food, clothing, shelter.

We infer from this scheme of proportioning his purchasing power
something as to the character of the man. One person spends 4o per
cent for food, the other 40 per cent for whiskey. Their power and op-
portunity are equal, but their proportioning of that power and oppor-
tunity is different. Each presumably proportions his expenditures so
as to get what for himself he judges to be the maximum satisfaction.
His personality reveals itself in his scheme of proportioning his pow-
ers and opportunities. His scheme of proportioning resources is his
plan of life. It is his scheme both of economy and of ethics. Eth-
ically it is his moral character, his personality, his individuality, his
selfishness, sympathy or sense of duty towards other people. Econ-
omically, it is the proportioning of resources so as to obtain the
maximum expansion of that personality.

It is remarkable how much both nature and man accomplish by
mere economy without expansion. It is believed that nature does not
enlarge the total quantity of the elements in the universe, but she
accomplishes all of her work by merely re-proportioning them. Her
economy, in one respect, is precise and effective. The several chemical
elements unite or repel in fixed proportions. Water is always H2O.
Protoplasm is always a certain CHNO. An explosion of TNT gives
off a definite amount of gas. Heat, electricity, motion, life, are the
kinds of work these elements perform when uniting and repelling in
predetermined proportions.

Each element or part in a group is, not an item added to a lot of
others, but each element is in turn a limiting factor and a complemen-
tary factor. Each is complementary to the work of all the others and
each places a limit on the work of the others. A surplus of one factor


38 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


does no work of that kind. It is wasted. The limiting factor limits
the total amount of work of the complementary factors. For this
reason nature is wasteful. She does not hunt around for methods to
increase the supply of the limiting factors in order to produce the kind
of result desired. She lets them come along as they happen. The sun
turns out more heat than anybody can use. But when they do come
along, the elements combine and repel in definite, powerful propor-
tions. Nature’s economy, from man’s standpoint, is exact and power-
ful, but wasteful.

Animal and vegetable life is different, or rather, additional. Uncon-
sciously the primitive protoplasm exerts itself to supply the limiting
factors. The rootlet pushes itself downward where it finds food,
and the leaves and blossoms bend toward the sun. The internal
constitution of a living creature is a proportioning of chemical
elements, and the creature must obtain a similar proportion from
the world about. It seeks out the limiting factors, avoids the
useless factors, acquires without effort the complementary fac-
tors, and thus unconsciously enlarges life both by expansion and
economy.

Conscious life advances a step. More highly organized, pecul-
iarly guided cr warned by pleasure or pain, it maximizes the pleasure
and minimizes the pain by proportioning the limiting and comple-
mentary factors in its endeavor to get the best proportioning under
the circumstances. Each separate pain or pleasure is a part of the
whole, and the best proportioning of the parts is the maximum
contentment of the animal.

Self-conscious life is a further step upwards. It is the life of man
in society, the life of expansion of the individual through oppor-
tunities and power available mainly through transactions with
others, and the life of economy through proportioning these oppor-
tunities and powers. It is this scheme of proportioning, as already
suggested, that reveals character, individuality, personality, and
coérdinates ethics with economics. For, morally and ethically, this
proportioning of opportunities and powers is the means of self-expres-
sion, self-development, “self-realization.”” Economically it is econ-
omizing one’s power over the services of others in order to obtain
the maximum result as determined by the character of the man
who is thus realizing himself. The ethical aspect is the scheme of
human values that centers about his personality. The economic


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 30


aspect is the proportioning of all the external factors according to
their instrumental value in realizing this scheme of human values.

In all of this ascending scale of economy from the lowest to the
highest, a proper proportioning may be said to multiply all of the
complementary factors by the limiting factor. For economy is not

_the mere addition of separate units whose result is an arithmetic
sum, but economy is similar to a multiplication of one factor into
the complementary factors. Five and six are arithmetically eleven,
but five times six are geometrically thirty. Hydrogen and oxygen
may be a numerical sum of atoms, but hydrogen and oxygen rightly
proportioned are thunder, lightning, and rain. Salt is but a small
item in the economy of life, but a deprivation of salt means decay
and corruption of all parts of the body. Potash is a small item in
agricultural economy, but without potash the yield may be five
bushels per acre, with it twenty bushels. Coal and oil are relatively
small quantities of material in a manufacturing plant, but the total
product is limited by the amount of coal under the boilers and the
oil on the bearings. Managerial ability is but one of several kinds
of ability and it costs relatively little in terms of money, compared
with the total cost, but without it a thousand men are a mob—with
it they are a going concern. Physical capital is often a small item
in a business compared with labor, but without the willingness of
investors and capitalists the concern goes bankrupt. The business
man proportions his product to his market. If he furnishes too
many potatoes and not enough cabbages, he loses on the one and
misses on the other. He proportions also his factors within the
concern. If he pays too much for capital and not enough for labor,
or hires too many laborers and not enough capital, his concern winds
up in the courts.

It is said that nature takes no leaps. She does not jump from
one species to another entirely different. No, she does not, but when
she reproportions her existing factors she jumps from gases to liquids,
from liquids to solids, from physics to biology, biology to psychology,
psychology to sociology. Pantaleoni has well said:!


““The law of definite proportions is one of the most generally applicable of
natural laws, and economic science only recognizes a particular aspect of it.
It is well known that bodies combine chemically only in definite propor-
tions, and that any quantity of an element in excess of that required for


1 PANTALEONI, MAFFEO, Pure Economics, 83, 85 (18098).


40 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


combination with other elements present in definite quantities, remains
free. Ifthe quantity of one element is deficient with respect to that of other
elements present, the combination only takes place to the extent the former
element admits of. Just in the same way, any quantity of a commodity, in
excess of the proportion in which nature, or any technical art, can combine
it with a determinate quantity of other complementary commodities present,
is useless or noxious as regards the economic result; and if all the comple-
mentary commodities requisite for the production of a direct commodity
are present in various quantities, then the quantity of the complementary
commodity that is present in a lesser quantity than any other, is that which
determines the quantity that can be produced of the direct commodity in
question; the superfluous quantities of the other complementary commod-
ities being, for this purpose, destitute of utility. This law of definite propor-
tions is of capital importance in explaining a very frequent form of economic
crisis, consisting in the disproportionate production of complementary
commodities. It must, however, not be understood as if there were only
one definite proportion in which complementary commodities can be com-
bined. There are generally a great many, but only one gives a maximum
hedonic result. This maximum combination is the one towards which
every economic effect fends. . . . If an instrumental commodity cannot be
transformed forthwith into a direct commodity, but requires the concur-
rence of other instrumental commodities, as is generally the case, we cannot
discuss its utility, as such, singly, because it is subject to the law of com-
plementary commodities. Here, too, recurs the phenomenon, that the
single element that is lacking may come to possess the total utility [value]
due to the complex of instrumental commodities required for the production
of a direct commodity. Instrumental commodities are also subject to the law
of definite proportions.” 1


Here we must distinguish between a part-opportunity and a whole
opportunity. Each transaction of buying or selling is a part of the
total opportunity. To sell a bushel of potatoes to one customer is
a single transaction. To sell a thousand bushels to a thousand buyers
is a total of which each sale is a part. Yet the total is not a mere
addition of a thousand bushels. The total is the exchange-value
of a thousand bushels, that is, their purchasing power, that is, the
assets of their owner. Ten bushels may sell for fifty dollars, but a
thousand bushels may overstock the market and sell for less than
ten dollars. The diminishing value of the added bushel is ot added
to the preceding value of the ten bushels, but it actually changes
their value and brings it down, and it does this even before they are

1 Pantaleoni ascribes the original statement of this law to Ortes, 1774, but not made cur-


rent until 1871, by Menger, who, however, “added nothing to it.” It was explained, in
1854, “in the most masterly fashion by Gossen.”


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 4i


sold. The one is a multiple of the other, not a mere addition to it.
Each added increment affects the value of all the other increments.
Its own diminished value diminishes the value of the entire stock
on hand. Here the limiting factor is the demand of other persons.
But the demand of other persons is not their mere psychic wish,
it is the supply of other things they offer in exchange. Hence the
limiting factor is the supply of other commodities. The comple-
mentary factor is the supply of one’s own commodity. Proportion-
ing supply to supply is business economy by which assets are enlarged
in value, and the total opportunity of a business is not a physical
problem of adding separate items to obtain a total, but is a psycho-
logical and social problem of proportioning factors, each one of
which changes the dimensions of all the others and thus changes,
not things, but assets and liabilities, which are the exchange-values
of things.

So it is with happiness and virtue. A single glove on the one
hand may yield a certain pleasure, but if there is no glove for the
other hand the total happiness is grievously impaired. The whole
is not the sum of the parts but an amazing multiple of them. Through-
out the entire scheme of proportioning food, clothing, shelter, whis-
key, and miscellaneous, the pleasure derived from all is not a sum
of pleasures or virtues but a multiple, in which one little mistake
or vice, though it be but one act in ten thousand, vitiates the pleasure
or virtue of all the others and transforms happiness into misery,
morality into scandal.

Thus it is that in the economy of nature and man the mere propor-
tioning of resources, without enlarging or expanding them, or even
in spite of their contraction and repression, creates of itself new and
astonishing products of a higher, or at least different order in the
scale of values. Chemical activity is a reproportioning of chemical
elements; business assets, personal happiness and moral character
are a proportioning of the opportunities and powers that constitute
resources.

In each distinct field of human life is the similar practice of economy;
home economy is the proportioning of resources within the family;
business economy the proportioning of lands, machinery, man-power,
within the going concern; political economy the proportioning of
human factors within the nation. And with each distinct field of
economy are the outside limits set by opportunities and powers,


42 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


which we name expansion of resources, so that home economy and
business economy are limited by the bargaining powers of its members
with outsiders, and Political Economy by the Political Expansion
and Contraction of conquest, defense, treaties, and so-called “pene-
tration”? into other lands and peoples.

Throughout this ascending scale of economy from nature to man
and society the peculiar operation of the principle of economy seems
to be that of a central but unknown focus, a force, a unity, a nucleus,
of a higher order which collects and proportions the units of lower
orders and thereby lifts them up to a higher unity of its own. The
lowest order of all, supposed to be the electron, is lifted into a higher
unity by the unknown nucleus of the atom; the atoms by a still
higher unity or chemical “force” are proportioned into chemical
compounds or molecules; the biological nucleus, whatever it may
be, call it Life, proportions these lower orders, already themselves
a proportioning of still lower ones, and thus lifts them up to the
higher unity of a living organism. The self-conscious focus, the human
will, again lifts the lower orders into a higher unity of personality,
and finally, the principle of association, or management, or collective
will, or society, the working rules of concerns, or whatever we de-
scribe it, is the proportioning of human activities into a higher, or
at least different and larger unity. Throughout it is an ascending
scale of economy, each within its own rather distinct level, but in
all cases it is a proportioning of parts which are themselves wholes
in their own lower domains, and each proportioning focuses about
an unknown force which both subordinates the lower orders to itself
and coérdinates them into a larger whole.

Yet economy is not separable from expansion; or rather economy
is the internal, expansion the external, aspect of the identical behavior.
One is the outside, the other the inside, one is the obverse of the other.
On the internal side some unifying principle or force, the principle
of life or of human personality, or of national existence, codrdinates,
subordinates, and thereby proportions the parts into a new and
larger unity. On the external side it is the same unifying force or
principle, but it is now in contact or conflict, in action and reaction,
in power or weakness, dealing with and controlling others like or
unlike itself.

It is this principle of economy that makes it impossible to say that
any one factor in a business concern or a nation produces any definite


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 43


part of the total wealth. Capital is productive, labor is productive,
managers are productive, investors are productive, not because
they physically do any particular thing, but because they are limiting
and complementary factors. Each is productive simply because
it is a necessary part of the whole. But if it is badly proportioned
to the others, the excess is unproductive. Each is productive in
limited quantities, and production of wealth is not the mere produc-
tion of things—it is a good proportioning of all limiting and comple-
mentary factors.

It is this good proportioning that gives rise to the phenomena of
value. None of the factors of production produce value unless they
produce things in limited quantities. Restriction of physical pro-
duction is as necessary as expansion of physical production. The
important purpose of each of the economic factors is, not the pro-
duction of things, but the production of values. And this is accom-
plished by the principle of Economy. Hence the two concepts,
Value and Economy, are the basic concepts of economic theory.

It will thus be seen that, in passing from the economy to the expan-
sion of the individual we are moving upward to a still higher economy
in that ascending scale which we have previously noted. Economy
is the inward, self-centered, aspect of behavior; expansion is the
outward aspect that comes into contact with the world and other
persons. Yet this outward aspect may itself be a correlation of
opposing individuals within a higher unity which we distinguish
as a greater or less degree of Reciprocity.’ This lower, self-centered
economy we may name Private Economy; the higher is Political
Economy. The lower is the proportioning of opportunities and
powers by the individual, the family, or the business concern, for
their private purposes. The higher is the proportioning of that
same behavior of individuals, families, or other concerns, by the
State for public purposes. And, just as there may be a good or a
poor, an economical or wasteful, a virtuous or vicious, private economy
and private expansion, so there may be a good or a poor, an econom-
ical or wasteful, a just or unjust, political economy and political
expansion.

Liberty, then, has this fourth meaning or content, the absence
of restraint, compulsion, or duty, in proportioning one’s opportu-
nities, powers and forbearances, according to one’s own scheme of

1 Below, Chap. IV, Sec. IV.


.


44 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


life and one’s own ideas of the way to get a maximum benefit and
endure a minimum burden in dealings with other people. And the
fourfold economic content of liberty is opportunity, power, forbear-
ance and economy. Opportunity, power and forbearance ' are the
outward aspects of the content of liberty, which therefore we name,
from the economic standpoint, expansion or contraction, and from
the ethical standpoint, justice or injustice; while the inward aspects
of the content of liberty are, economically, a good or poor economy,
and, morally, a virtuous or vicious economy.


We have said that the obverse of expansion is economy. We may
now say that the inverse of economy is waste. Here there are three
different meanings of the term “opposition” or “opposite” which
should be distinguished. A thing is wasted if it is furnished in excess
of the best proportioning with other factors. It is then to be looked
upon as a complementary factor. If it is not provided adequately in
order to combine with the other factors in the best proportion, its
deficiency is the cause of their waste, since it is then a limiting factor.
In any changing economy from day to day each factor is in turn a
limiting factor up to a certain point, and the waste of complementary
factors, is reduced and the work of all the factors, therefore, increases
at an increasing rate. By increasing it beyond that point the aggre-
gate product may continue to increase but at a diminishing rate of
increase. At that point another complementary factor begins to be
the limiting factor. It now must be increased, if the total result is to
increase.2 Thus all of the limiting factors yield, in turn, increasing
returns and diminishing returns. The optimum is perhaps a mean of
the maximum and minimum returns of all the available factors, ascer-
tained by approximating that point where “marginal utilities” of all
factors are equal. If this optimum is not maintained, it is because
certain factors are in excess and therefore wasted, because certain
other factors are deficient and therefore limiting the work of the others.
The term “opposite” here is used in the sense of two conditions that
vary inversely with each other, of which the positive is a good economy
and the negative is a poor economy. The opposition of economy and
waste is not the opposition between something that is economy and
something that 7s not economy, but between an economy that is good
and an economy that is poor. One is the inverse of the other.

When, however, we speak of “expansion,” as above, we refer to
something that is the opposite of economy in a different sense of the
word “opposite,” in that it is something that is not economy at all but
is the obverse of economy.


'The equivalent physical terms, avoidance, performance, forbearance, are explained
below, Chap. IV, Sec. II.


2Cp. Ciark, J. B., Distribution of Wealth, 403 ff. (1899).


PROPERTY, LIBERTY AND VALUE 45


Again, a person may enlarge his powers and have access to large op-
portunities and yet make a wasteful use of them. Here the opposite of
expansion is contraction, in the sense that one is the reverse of the
other. Expansion is enlargement, but its opposite, that is its reverse,
is contraction or recession.

Thus a person’s powers and opportunities may diminish through
causes external to himself but he may still make an economical use of
them. A good or poor economy may go along with either one’s enlarg-
ing or one’s diminishing opportunities and powers. While expanding,
one is also economizing, and even while contracting one is also econ-
omizing, and whether enlarging or contracting, his economizing may
range from the good to the poor, the best to the worst. Economy and
expansion are the obverse sides of the same transactions, one the inter-
nal, the other the external. But poor economy is the inverse of good
economy, and contraction is the reverse of expansion.

A fourth meaning of “opposition” comes to the surface when we
speak of two opposing persons and their two opposing economies, in the
same transaction. Here the expansion of one may be the contraction
of the other. If the seller can force up a price from ten cents to twenty
cents, then, for him, it is a process of expansion, but for the buyer it is a
process of contraction. The economy of one is enlarged by the very
transaction which contracts the economy of the other. The latter may
find compensation elsewhere, but, so far as that single transaction is
concerned, it is expansion for one and contraction for the other. Here
the opposition between two economies of two persons signifies that one
is the adverse of the other. The compensation, or offset, which the
other gets, arises from his choice of opportunities. If the buyer’s best
alternative was, say, 25 cents, then he gains a surplus of five cents even
though he is forced to pay 20 cents. Always this happens. A person
always gains by choosing, and the harder the alternative avoided the
more he gains, even though the opportunity actually chosen is a hard
one in itself.

Here the term “opposition” refers to opposite persons, and we shall
employ the terms “correlative” and “correlation” to indicate this
relation of two opposite persons. The two correlated persons in any
transaction are expanding and contracting their powers and opportun-
ities at that particular point. The one is the adversary of the other.
Yet each is also an opportunity for the other to escape from a worse
alternative, and each gives to, and takes from, the other. It is this
opportunity to escape from worse alternatives by exchanging their
services that correlates them into a larger unity of interest, and which,
according to the accompanying degree of power exerted by each and
the hardship of the alternative avoided, we may distinguish as a
greater or less degree of reciprocity of adversary interests. Here we
may speak of a high or low degree of reciprocity of opposing persons,
the higher being the reverse of the lower; the higher constituting a
social unity, the lower a social conflict.


46 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Thus the relation between economy, expansion and reciprocity is
fourfold, implying a fourfold meaning of the term “opposite” or
“opposition.” (1) For the identical person economy is the obverse of
expansion in that it is the internal, the self-centered, the introspective,
the subjective, aspect of all transactions, which unifies all the separate
transactions by proportioning them into a different and larger unity
around the individual’s central purpose. Expansion, then, is the
obverse of economy, the external, the other-than-self, the objective,
aspect of all transactions, the opportunities, powers and forbearances
by which the person adapts himself to conditions and enlarges or
recedes in his control of resources which, at the same time are econ-
omized.

But, again, (2) for the identical person, economy is the inverse of
waste in that the one is a poor economy, the other a good economy.
Or (3) contraction is the reverse of expansion, in that the one is a
subjection to, the other a control over, the forces and powers of the
environment.

Lastly, (4) for opposing persons, one economy is the adverse of an-
other, and one person the correlative of another person, in the sense
that the two are related, each as an opportunity for the other to escape
from worse alternatives and thereby to enlarge his powers without
cost, yet each as exerting power over the other, to the extent that each
takes and yields. Out of this correlation arises that still larger unity
of opposing persons which we distinguish as a high degree of reciprocity,
the inverse, or low degree of reciprocity, being the source of conflict.

Consequently, the term “opposite” or “opposition” of interests,
will necessarily be used in four meanings depending on the context.
(1) Waste and economy are opposite in the sense of the inverse fortunes
of the same person, in that one is poor or bad, the other is good. (2)
Economy and expansion are opposite in the sense that they are the
obverse relations of the same person in the same transaction, in that one
is inward, the other outward. (3) Contraction and expansion, con-
flict and reciprocity are the reverse relations of the same person, in that
contraction or conflict is a reduction of his opportunities and powers,
expansion and reciprocity is an enlargement. (4) Contraction and ex-
pansion are opposite in the sense that they are the adverse experiences
of opposing persons in the same transaction, such that the contraction
of one is the expansion of the other. Yet each may be better off than
without the society of the other, depending on the degree of reci-
procity.


CHAPTER III
PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER


Modern economic theory started with the Industrial Revolution
of the 18th and roth centuries. The steam engine was invented
by John Watt in the same year that his friend, Adam Smith, published
the Wealth of Nations. This coincidence of wealth and machinery
explains, in part, the prominence of physical things in the form of
commodities, rather than legal relations in the form of transactions,
which dominated economic theory for a hundred years.

But the economic theories of the Supreme Court go back to the
business revolution of the 17th century. It was that revolution,
which, from the close of Elizabeth’s reign to the Act of Settlement
of 1700, displaced Feudalism by Capitalism. The dissenting opin-
ions in the Slaughter House Cases went back to the time of Elizabeth,
James and Charles, where they discovered the precedents for their
definitions of economic liberty. Justice Field cited the Case of
Monopolies, decided in 1602,! where a grant by the Crown to a
private citizen of the sole right to import, manufacture and sell
playing cards within the realm was declared void as against the
common law and acts of Parliament. Also, he cited the case of
Davenant v. Hurdis, decided three years earlier,” in which a gild of
merchant tailors operating under a charter granted by the Crown,
had attempted to restrict the trade of cloth-worker to members of
the gild, but the by-law was declared void by the court. Likewise,
the Statute of Monopolies, enacted in 1624, which declared void
all grants of the Crown for “the sole buying, selling, making, working,
or using of anything” within the realm, except patents for new inven-
tions, for printing, and for the manufacture of certain implements
of war.

Justice Bradley went back still further, to the year 1215, and
claimed that the right to economic liberty was asserted in Magna
Carta where it was declared, “No freeman shall be taken, or impris-

1561 Wall. 102; Trin. 44 Eliz. (1602), 11 Coke’s Repts. 84, 86.
2 Trin. 41 Eliz., Moore (K. B.) 576 (1599); 72 Eng. Rep. 769.
47


48 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


oned, or be disseized of his freehold, or liberties, or free customs,
or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed, nor will we
pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his
peers or by the law of the land.” ?

Historically, this reference to Magna Carta is now known to be
incorrect.2 The term “liberties,” as used in that document, did not
mean personal liberty nor economic liberty. Personal liberty was
provided for under the other clause, ‘‘No freeman shall be taken
or imprisoned.” But the term “liberties” meant, in general, the
feudal or other special privileges, immunities, jurisdictions, charters,
or franchises, either granted directly by the crown to the subject
or claimed by prescription, which presupposed a grant. They were
not different, so far as validity was concerned, from the grants of
lands by the sovereign to his subjects. The King could sell privi-
leges and franchises, just as he could sell or give away the land
belonging to the Crown.? Each, when granted, became a recognized
exercise of the King’s prerogative in the hands of grantees. The
grant of even monopolies of trade was one of these privileges or
franchises, so that when the barons of 1215 claimed their “liberties,”
or a gild of 1599 claimed the right to make by-laws under its charter,
or a grantee of the King in 1602 claimed the right to his monopoly,
or when feudal lords claimed their lands, they were claiming their
“liberties.”

“Franchise and liberty,” said Blackstone, “are used as synonymous
terms and their definition is a royal privilege, or branch of the King’s
prerogative, subsisting in the hand of a subject. Being therefore
derived from the crown, they must arise from the King’s grant;
or in some cases may be held by prescription, which presupposes a
grant.” Blackstone mentions franchises to hold criminal (leet) or civil
court; to havea manor or lordship; to have waifs, wrecks, estrays, treas-
ure-trove, royal fish, or things that had caused the death of a man
(deodand); to have a fair, or a market, or right of taking toll; to have
a forest, chase, park, warren or fishery, carrying the King’s exclusive
right to kill the game. “It is likewise a franchise, for a number of per-
sons to be incorporated, and subsist as a body politic; with a power
to maintain perpetual succession, and do other corporate acts.” 4


1 Magna Carta, Chap. 20, cited in 16 Wall. 114.

2 McKecunir, W. S., Magna Carta, 394 (1914). Also SHATTUCK above cited.
3 Hotpswortu, W. S., A History of English Law, 1:169, 476 (3d ed., 1923).

4 Bla. Com. 37.


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 49


Thus “liberties” were royal privileges and powers, all of them
monopolistic in character, subsisting in the hands of subjects, and
the very different meaning of liberty as absence of monopoly came
not from the prerogative, but from the common law.

The common law originated in the customs of “freemen,” or rather
privileged men, in that they enjoyed the privilege of bringing suit in
the King’s court and of appearing as witnesses and jurors in assisting
the King’s justices to decide suits between each other. This privilege
attended them on account of their military services to the King and
their holding of lands as tenants directly or indirectly of the King.
The “freeman” was a “freeholder,” while the “‘unfree”’ were the serfs
or copyholders and even the merchants and manufacturers of the
villages and towns, who afterwards obtained their “freedom” by way
of charters granted to their gilds or corporations.

It was out of these customs of freeholders, sanctioned and enforced
by the King’s justices, that the institutions of property and liberty
were fashioned. The process consisted simply in prohibiting private
vengeance on account of murder, robbery or theft, and requiring the
plaintiffs and defendants to appear in court and to submit to the
processes of court. It was the invention of writs requiring parties to
attend the sessions of the court which “was really the making of the
English Common Law.” !

The King’s object was originally only that of obtaining revenue
and keeping his subjects peaceful, and it was out of this public pur-
pose that his justices, with the help of freeholders, developed the
procedure of trials and the remedies on behalf of suitors that hence-
forth became the legal rights of persons, property, and liberty.

From the earliest times these justices and landlords established the
common-law rule against restraint of trade on the part of the petty
merchants and manufacturers who were “unfree” in the sense that
they might not participate in the King’s courts. As early as the year
1300, it is asserted, an unlearned local court imposed a fine on several
candle-makers who “made a covenant among themselves that none
should sell a pound of candles cheaper than another.” * Thus liberty
of trade among business men became the common-law rule of the land-
lords until modified, in the 17th century, by the business-law rule of
“fair trade.”


1 Jenxs, Epw., A Short History of English Law, 45 (1912).
2 Pottock, F., The Genius of the Common Law, 13 Col. Law Rev. 2-3 (1913).


5° LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It was these common-law concepts of personal rights, of property
rights and liberty that came into conflict, in the reigns of Elizabeth
and the Stuart Kings, with the prerogative of the monarch. The way
was prepared for a double meaning of the word liberty. It might mean
the “libertates” of Magna Carta, which were the privileges of land-
lords granted by the monarch, or it might mean the liberty to buy and
sell, to be free from violence, theft and trespass, derived from the
approved customs which constituted the common law. The two were
inconsistent. One was a contradiction of the other. Freedom, or
liberty, in the sense of a grant out of the royal prerogative, stood for a
relation of superior to inferior; freedom or liberty in the sense of the
common law stood for a relation of equality between members of the
same class. The first is more properly to be distinguished as “‘free-
dom,” the second as “‘liberty.””+ Freedom was a grant of power to
participate in the privileges of those who were specially favored by a
superior. Liberty was a common-law right to equality of treatment
among individuals who belonged to the same class whether privileged
or unprivileged. Equal liberty was consistent with unequal freedom.

It was this contradiction and double meaning of liberty that char-
acterized the long struggle of the 17th century until it was finally
closed by the Act of Settlement in the year 1700. When, during the
reign of Elizabeth, industry expanded into national markets, one out
of the several prerogatives of the King, the exclusive privilege to a
market, likewise expanded. At first it was used by Elizabeth to
foster the development of mineral resources, new industries, new
processes and new materials or products, whether newly imported or
newly invented. In this way it came to be extended to innumerable
articles of merchandise and to sheer abuse by privileged favorites.”
The political uprising on this account, which ended in the Common-
wealth, is well known. On the legal side it was reflected in new defini-
tions of monopoly and liberty, based on errors in interpreting the
original meanings. These errors found their way into the cases of
Davenant v. Hurdis and the Case of Monopolies at the close of Eliza-
beth’s reign, as well as other cases in the reign of James I.? The histor-
ical error is attributed by McKechnie mainly to Coke, who, “following
his vicious method of assuming the existence, in Magna Carta, of a


1 Below, Chap. IV, Secs. IV, V.

* CuNNINGHAM, W., The Growth of English Industry and Commerce, 1:58, 75, 286 (1903).
Justice Field’s reference is at 16 Wall. 47.

3 Tailors of Ipswich, t1 Coke, 53 (1615).


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 51


warrant for every legal principle of his own day, misled generations of
commentators.” + Specifically, Coke, commenting on the term
“liberties” (de libertatibus) as used in Magna Carta, declared that
all monopolies were against the Great Charter, because “they are
against the liberty and freedom of the subjects and against the law of
the land.” In this error, says McKechnie, Coke “has been assiduously
followed.”’ ? The error, however, was made in a good cause, for, says
McKechnie (133) “if the vague and inaccurate words of Coke have
obscured the bearing of many chapters of Magna Carta and diffused
false notions of the development of English law, the service these very
errors have done to the cause of constitutional progress is measureless.”’

Thus the so-called “liberties” of Magna Carta on which the dis-
senting justices in the Slaughter House Cases relied in order to attach
the notion of liberty of choice to the definition of property were exactly
the opposite of liberty and property, for they were not only not prop-
erty-rights but were a denial of rights of property and liberty in the
hands of subjects other than those who held the original “liberties.”
The monopolies which came to the front with the expansion of industry
in the time of Elizabeth were but what had been the unquestioned
exercise of prerogative in granting to subjects the enjoyment of sov-
ereign powers over other subjects. When, in Magna Carta, the barons
claimed their “‘liberties” they were claiming personal privileges, or the
right to exercise the powers of sovereignty. They were claiming, not
liberty or property, but an advantageous position in government
based on the personal relations of superior and inferior, of dominion
and submission, which characterize the relation of sovereign power to
privileged persons, and what Magna Carta asserted was that the
barons should not be deprived by the King of these personal sovereign
privileges. They were claims to the privileges of monopoly supported
by the personal favor and superior power of the sovereign, and not
claims to the equal liberty of all subjects to own and buy and sell
property. In short, “liberty” meant, not liberty nor property, but
political privilege.

The historical error of Coke in the definition of liberty was repeated
by the minority justices in the Slaughter House Cases, in interpreting
the Fourteenth Amendment, and afterwards by all of the justices in
the Allgeyer Case. Meanwhile the court, in the Munn Case and the


10p. cit., McKechnie, 385.
2Tbid., at 384; Coke, Second Institute, 47.


52 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Minnesota Rate Case, as we have noted,! had been changing also the
definition of power from physical power to economic power. The
Constitution of the United States as well as the Fourteenth Amend-
ment, as contended by the majority in the Slaughter House Cases, had
been framed on the principles of the common law, in which the term
property signifies physical objects, whether chattels or lands, held by
one citizen for his own use against other citizens, and the term liberty
signified freedom from slavery, as against other persons.

At the same time, under American conditions, the ancient preroga-
tive of the King had become the police power of the legislature. After-
wards, in the Munn case the majority changed the definition of power.
The prerogative, that is, the police power, is the physical power of the
sovereign over subjects; whereas the kind of power recognized in the
Munn Case was the economic power of citizen over citizen. Here,
again, the two meanings of power coalesce, just as the two meanings
of liberty had coalesced, for a legal monopoly or franchise, based, as it
is, on direct participation in the physical power of the sovereign pre-
venting competition, is economically similar to the power of such
private property as a grain elevator in Chicago, whose owners have
power to charge for their services more than they cost, owing to supe-
rior location but without legally preventing competition. In the one
case competition is physically prevented; in the other case competition
is economically prevented. In the one case the monopolist is favored
by the sovereign as against the equal competitive liberty of others; in
the other case the owner is favored by his economic situation while
the sovereign treats his property and liberty equally with all others.
Ultimately each, of course, rests upon the physical power of sover-
eignty to protect the holder of either the monopoly or the situation.
But in the case of a legal monopoly the protection is the direct pro-
hibition of competition, while in the case of a favorable situation the
sovereign protects only the ownership of the situation. In either case,
economic power emerges, since economic power is simply power to
withhold from others what they need. In short, the change in the
concept of property from physical things to the exchange-value of
things is a change from a concept of holding things for one’s own use to
withholding things from others’ use, protected, in either case by the
physical power of the sovereign.

The transition from the notion of holding things for one’s own use

1 Above, Chap. II.


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 53


and enjoyment to the notion of economic power over others evidently
accompanies the historical evolution of property from slavery, feudal-
ism, colonialism and a sparse population, to marketing, business and
the pressure of population on limited resources. Where production
was isolated, or the owner held under his control all of the material
things as well as the laborers necessary to the support of himself and
dependents, the concept of exclusive holding for self was a workable
definition of property. But when markets expanded, when laborers
were emancipated, when people began to live by bargain and sale,
when population increased and all resources became private property,
then the power to withhold from others emerged gradually from that of
exclusive holding for self as an economic attribute of property. The
one is implied in the other, but is not unfolded until new conditions
draw it out. Just as the scales of the reptile become the feathers of the
bird when the environment moves from land to air, so exclusive holding
for self becomes withholding from others when the environment moves
from production to marketing. The transition was hardly noticeable
as long as the merchant, the master, the laborer, were combined under
small units of ownership, but becomes distinct when all opportunities
are occupied and business is conducted by corporations on a credit
system which consolidates property under the control of absentee
owners. Then the power of property per se, distinguished from the
power residing in personal faculties or special grants of sovereignty,
comes into prominence. In the case of a sparse and isolated agricul-
tural population and its accompanying handicraft stage of industry,
represented by the butchers in the Slaughter House Cases, the owner’s
manual, mental and managerial faculties are inseparable from the
operation of the physical plant. But in the corporations involved in
the railroad and warehouse cases the managers and the laborers are
agents and employees of owners at a distance, and the property of the
latter exerts its silent power of command and obedience by the mere
resolutions of unseen boards of directors. When to this is added the
pressure of population and the increasing demand for limited supplies
of mineral and metal resources, of water-powers, of lands situated at
centers of population, then the mere holding of property becomes a
power to withhold, far beyond that which either the laborer has over
his labor or the investor has over his savings, and beyond anything
known when this power was being perfected by the early common law
or early business law. It becomes a power to extract things in ex-


54 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


change from other persons, in the absence of and wholly separate from
individual human faculties—a power of property per se, silently oper-
ating but clearly seen and distinguishable from the manual, mental and
managerial abilities of its owners.

This power of property in itself, the power to withhold, seen in these
extreme cases, is but an enlargement of that power which exists in all
property as the source of value-in-exchange and which may be dis-
tinguished as waiting-power, the power to hold back until the opposite
party consents to the bargain. While, as investors, they perform the
indispensable service of waiting for compensation, yet as bargainers
they determine through their power to wait what shall be the terms
on which that compensation shall be made. Waiting-power emerges
out of waiting-service when both the natural opportunities are occu-
pied and the individual services of hundreds and thousands of inves-
tors are brought together in the collective power of corporations
holding access to market opportunities.

The concept of the functioning of property correspondingly en-
larges. The concept of exclusive holding for use and enjoyment of
self is identical with that aspect of property which we have distin-
guished as “economy.” It is the activity merely of proportioning,
without expanding, one’s possessions and powers so as to obtain the
maximum net income from all. The legal concept of holding is the
economic concept of economy. But this proportioning consists solely
in determining the various directions in which actual power shall be
exerted. Hence, when the expansion side of property emerges in an
environment of buying and selling, then the legal concept of exclusive
holding becomes also the economic concept of power through with-
holding from others. Holding is economy, withholding is economic
power.

It is the slow unfolding of property from holding to withholding that
prevents its significance from being observed at first. The minority
justices in the Slaughter House Cases added the notion of choice to the
notion of holding physical things, but their idea of choice was evidently
not that of choice between two degrees of power over other people but
a choice between physical things. ‘This kind of choosing is, however, in
fact, a choice between degrees of power, but the object over which
power is exercised is the forces of nature, not the will of other persons.
Such a concept of power belongs properly enough to the physical
sciences in their engineering aspects. Man conquers nature by over-


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 55


coming her resistance, which as Adam Smith suggested, is a kind of
exchange with nature. And in doing so he chooses what appears to be
the line of least resistance, which is also the line of greatest power.
This is true of physics, chemistry, biology or even psychology, all of
which are aids in overcoming resistance of things, of animals and of
human beings.

But in these cases the resistance is set up by objects which have no
right to resist and no right to withhold their services in exchange. It
is different with citizens as distinguished from human beings. They
have an ethical or legal right to withhold, a right protected, or believed
to be protected, by a superior power, and the degree of power therefore
is believed to be of consequence to that superior authority in deter-
mining what should be done in the matter. This feature was over-
looked, or perhaps not called in question, at first, and therefore the
definition of liberty of choice, or ‘‘liberty of contract,” given by the
minority in the Slaughter House Cases and adopted afterwards by the
majority, was left in the position of a kind of “natural right” to choose
between different degrees of power over the forces of nature, or else of
a merely passive choice between social opportunities offered, but
without any exercise of power over the offerer. In this respect their
idea of choosing belongs rather to the notion of “economy”’ instead of
“expansion.”’ It is choice in the sense of a preference that concerns
nobody else, not choice in the sense of power over others. The defini-
tion still lingers in the stage of engineering economy, or business
economy, and has not advanced to that of political economy which
was afterwards reached in the Munn Case. In the latter case the
power to withhold from others is deemed to be a coercive power to be
restrained by the physical power of the sovereign.

This enlargement of property from economy to economic power also
separates, or at least distinguishes, management from ownership.
For the activity of management is mainly that of proportioning the
factors so as to get the largest net result from all; but the function of
ownership is that of determining the conditions, terms, prices or values,
at which the factors shall be obtained from others or the product sold
to others.

It is the slow and often scarcely perceptible unfolding of property
from holding to withholding, from economy to power, from ownership
to management, that serves to explain in part the adherence of the
courts to the primitive ideas of property, while the thing itself has


56 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


been moving unnoticed into a larger environment. It is this that leads
us to distinguish not merely economic power from physical power, but
also to distinguish these from that power of personality which we shall
name Moral Power.

Under the primitive common-law notions of property as exclusive
holding of physical objects for one’s own use, it scarcely was visible
that the functioning of property is the power which it adds to the
owner’s commands, persuasions or coercions. These relationships
were personal relationships depending on the relative strength of the
manual, mental and managerial faculties of persons. If there came
before the court inequalities to be corrected, the inequalities did not
spring from the power of property but from the inequalities in the
personal faculties, or from personal privileges granted by a personal
sovereign. These inequalities of personal faculties arose through some
advantageous position which one person held, compared with another,
not so much through ownership as through personal relations of supe-
rior and inferior, dominion and submission, essential to human inter-
course. The principal relation of this kind, the relation of sovereign to
subject, we have just now considered in the grants of “‘liberties”’ or
special privileges to favored subjects. This is historically a personal
relation of dominion and submission, and not a property relation of
equal rights of ownership. Similar power of superior over inferior
persons, distinct from the economic power of property, are the relation
of parent and child, man and wife, guardian and ward, physician and
patient, attorney and client, confessor and penitent, principal and
agent, master and servant, and so on. It is out of these personal rela-
tions of superior to inferior, and not out of the property relations of
economic power, that the courts, previously to the Munn Case, had
developed the doctrine of the possibility of an undue exercise of per-
sonal power under the various names of “undue influence,” “duress,”
“coercion” and “inadequacy of compensation.”

As we have already observed, the monopolies which came to the
front with the expansion of industry in the time of Elizabeth were but
what had been the unquestioned exercise of the personal physical
power of the sovereign in granting to subjects the enjoyment of his
sovereign powers over other subjects. They were personal privileges,
not property ownership. That which permitted the ownership of
property itself to emerge was both the abolition of some of these
special privileges and the extension of others of these privileges to


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER o


citizens on terms of equality. This signified the reduction of the per-
sonal influence of the sovereign or of his favorites, in using the sov-
ereign power of physical coercion over persons, and, along with the
abolition of violence, fraud and similar unequal personal relations,
permitted the mere holding of private property to start on its own line
of strictly economic power.

In those fields where absentee ownership did not offer an evident
distinction between management and ownership the evolution of legal
doctrine adhered closely to personal inequalities and did not recognize
nor concede inequalities springing from the mere economic power of
property. In the early common law “duress,” for example, arose from
personal inequality. The standard of coercion required to be proven
in order to avoid a contract on the plea of duress was at first that of
physical violence, and consisted in such imminent danger to life, limb
or property as might overcome the will of a courageous and steadfast
man. This was gradually modified so that the standard became, for
a time, that of a person of only ordinary firmness. These objective
standards applied only to acts or threats of physical violence, such as
loss of life, or limb, disablement or imprisonment, and did not even
apply to threats or actual detention of property. Finally, in recent
times, another modification has been made, and duress has come to
mean, not these external standards but the actual condition of mind
produced in a person by threats of almost any kind rendering him
incapable of exercising free will. At no point, however, is duress or
coercion conceived to reside in the mere unequal economic power of
withholding objects that others need. It is always inequality of physi-
cal, mental or managerial faculties, not inequality of economic power
springing from ownership.

A similar distinction between unequal faculties and unequal owner-
ship appears in the doctrine of “undue influence,” a doctrine growing
out of confidential or special relations of superiority, such as those
suggested above, of parent and child, guardian and ward, busband and
wife, lawyer and client, broker and customer, and so on. Here the
undue, or unequal, influence is considered to be a variety of fraud ? or
breach of confidential or other personal relations of trust, advice, or
influence. Even in these cases the fact that the consideration, or the
compensation, received by the weaker party to a contract is inadequate


1 Galusha v. Sherman, 105 Wis. 263, 274, 278 (1900).
2 Pollock on Contract, 648 ff., 667 (oth ed., 1921).


58 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


will not, of itself afford ground for cancelling the contract between
them, although there may arise a presumption that it is voidable.* It
is a personal relationship of confidence that is taken advantage of, not
a property relationship of economic power.

But if there is no personal relation between the parties recognized
as confidential or special—relations which are not supposed to exist in
the usual contracts of merchant and customer, employer and em-
ployee—then inadequacy of compensation not only does not furnish,
of itself, a presumption of undue influence, but the presumption is
against it and in favor of letting the parties alone. The courts will not
weigh the relative skill of parties to a contract and, merely from a dis-
parity between them, avoid a contract obtained from the less skillful
party. This obtains even if one of the parties is an individual and the
other a skillful lawyer or manager acting as the agent of a corpora-
tion. According to these views it is not unlawful to impose upon
another person a pecuniary sacrifice if the prevailing party or his agent
is otherwise within his legal rights.* Even at the extreme limit of the
“unconscionable contract” it is not mere inequality of ownership but
inequality of personal relations that is looked for if the contract is to
be annulled. Such a contract is one in which the inequality is “‘so
strong, gross and manifest that it must be impossible to state it to a
man of common sense without producing an exclamation at the in-
equality of it.” In such a case ‘‘where the inadequacy of price is so
great that the mind revolts at it, the court will lay hold on the slightest
circumstances of oppression or advantage to rescind the contract.”
But the inadequacy of consideration is itself “merely a circumstance
among others to be used in determining whether fraud or undue in-


1 Page on Contracts, par. 225 (10905).

? Dundee v. Connor, 46 N. J. Eq. 576, 581 (1890), where a widow was induced by the
company’s attorney to accept less than the amount due on account of the death of her
husband.

3 Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. 1, 9 (1915), where an employee was required to resign his
union membership carrying life insurance if he retained his job. Cases cited in support
are: Hackley v. Headley, 45 Mich. 569 (1881), where a creditor in immediate danger of
bankruptcy was coerced by his debtor in scaling down a debt although it was already over-
due, in order to get immediately the means of avoiding bankruptcy. Emery v. City of
Lowell, 127 Mass. 139, 141 (1879), where the principle was stated, “‘it would be unsafe to
leave the question of recovering money paid to depend on the urgency of the need of the
party when paying it.” Silliman v. U.S., 101 U.S. 465, 471 (1870), where certain claimants
yielded to a “plain violation” of their right and accepted reduced compensation “‘solely
because they required, or supposed they required, money for the conduct of their business
or to meet their pecuniary obligations to others.”” Custin v. Viroqua, 67 Wis. 314 (1886),
where the claimant was not allowed to recover an illegal license fee which he had paid under
business necessity.


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 59


fluence exist,” though it may be so “gross as of itself to prove fraud
or imposition.” !

There is, however, to be noted an important distinction between
“duress” and economic coercion. The courts distinguish “duress of
person”’ and “duress of goods.” Duress of person is threats of physical
violence, duress of goods is the retention by one person of goods belong-
ing to another in order to force the latter to do something against his
will. Hence duress of goods is unlawful withholding from others, but
economic coercion is Jawful withholding from others. Duress of goods
is withholding from a person what rightfully belongs to him and is
needed by him, but economic coercion is withholding from a person
what does not belong to him, yet is needed by him. Duress of goods
is unlawful economic coercion; economic coercion is lawful coercion.

Thus it is perfectly lawful, as follows from Justice Pitney’s conclu-
sion in the Coppage Case, in 1915, to exercise either superior economic
power or superior mental and managerial faculties, over others, pro-
vided advantage is not taken of recognized special personal relations
of confidence, trust, dependence, or the like, which are deemed pecul-
jiarly liable to abuse. And if there is revolting abuse of economic
power, that of itself is not a legal abuse, though the court may be
stirred by it to “lay hold on the slightest circumstance of oppression or
advantage to rescind the contract.” It would be a “most dangerous”
and “unequal doctrine,” said Justice Cooley in the case mentioned in
the footnote,” that “the same contract which would be valid if made
with a man easy in his circumstances becomes invalid when the con-
tracting party is pressed with the necessity of immediately meeting his
bank paper.”

It is proper enough that the courts should hesitate to rescind con-
tracts even in these extreme “hold-up” cases, for a judicial decision is
usually retroactive legislation. It is different, however, when the
court declares unconstitutional the acts of a legislature designed to
prevent in advance the making of coercive contracts. Having estab-
lished by judicial precedents the right of the stronger party to take
advantage of his strength, the courts have declared unconstitutional,
as in the Coppage and other cases,’ various statutes attempting to
prevent the coercion which the courts hesitate to correct ex post facto.


1See cases cited in preceding note.
2 Hackley v. Headley, 45 Mich. 560, 577, (1881). See also Pollock, Anson, Page, on the
general subject of duress, undue influence, inadequacy, and unconscionable contracts.


3 See below, Chap. IV. Sec. II.


60 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


These statutes were usually annulled on the ground that they deprived
owners of liberty or property without due process of law. The opinions
seem often to be survivals of the primitive definition of “property” as
mere holding things for one’s own use, or of “liberty” as the mere
passive choosing of opportunities, after the thing itself had expanded
into power to withhold and after the court itself, in other cases, as in
the Munn Case and the railroad cases, had recognized this expansion.
It could hardly be expected that the legal ideas should keep pace with
all the facts, and the lag might not have been important had it not
been that under the American constitutions the courts exercise a veto
on the legislatures and executives when the latter endeavor to keep
up with the changes in economic conditions. It is quite proper that
the courts should not change their definitions too suddenly, for people
and legislatures act on the expectation that the courts will adhere to
the old definitions, and a change in definition amounts to ex post facto
legislation, for a dispute is not usually acted upon by the court until
after somebody has acted or threatened to act, and a change in defini-
tion changes the terms of all contracts and all expectations upon which
the people, the legislatures and the congress had previously acted.
This was evidently what happened when the court changed the defini-
tion of liberty and property in the 14th Amendment from liberty of
the slave to liberty of the owner of property. It is different with the
legislatures which are expressly prohibited by the Constitution from
enacting ex post facto laws, and consequently the acts of that branch of
government apply only to future contracts and future acts of the
people. When, then, in such cases, the court adheres to the old defini-
tion and vetoes the statute, it prevents the legislature from advancing
the definition of property to fit the new facts of power, although the
court itself, in other cases, had advanced the definition to fit the new
facts of liberty.

It is not, of course, intended that there is a clear-cut, predetermined,
division between personal power and property power. The two are
always associated, for property is but the instrument through which
persons operate. Property is opportunities for the exercise of faculties.
The line of division between persons and property is rather a zone of
uncertain width, the one or the other clearly predominating only as
they emerge on either side of the zone, according to the observed
facts in each case. It is only intended to assert that the power of
property emerges with the progress of economic conditions after the


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 61


progress of democracy has leveled the political privileges of superior
persons.

The economic conditions advance at different rates of speed in
different fields, or are called to the attention of the court with different
degrees of popular or influential support, as was the situation in the
case of Munn z. Illinois, and the Minnesota Rate Case. In other fields
they advance more slowly or are not so vigorously protested. There is
one respect, however, that of the usury laws, in which the acts of the
legislature restraining economic power have not been questioned.
These laws appear to be a deprivation of property and liberty in the
same sense as various labor laws which have been declared unconstitu-
tional. A reason for this distinction was given by Justice Field, in the
Munn Case, where he contended that the loaning of money at interest
was a special privilege. Referring probably to the statute of 1545,
which, although as a concession to prevailing prejudice it condemned
exactions for the mere “use” of money, yet permitted payment of
“interest” at a limited rate,! Justice Field had said in the Munn
Case, “The practice of regulating by legislation the interest receivable,
for the use of money, when considered with reference to its origin, is
only the assertion of a right of the government to control the extent
to which a privilege granted by it may be exercised and enjoyed. By
the ancient common law it was unlawful to take any money for the
use of money. ... Parliament interfered and made it lawful to
take a limited amount of interest. It was not upon the theory that
the legislature could arbitrarily fix the compensation which one could
receive for the use of property which, by the general law, was the
subject of hire for compensation, that Parliament acted, but in order
to confer a privilege which the common law denied.” ”

Thus even the legal justification of restraints on the rate of interest
taken for money, where mere economic power stands out distinct from
personal inequalities, is based, not on the sovereign’s authority to
restrain the power of property but on his authority to regulate a
privilege granted out of the royal prerogative. To the medieval mind
and the common law, property as such, the mere holding of lands and
chattels, did not endow one with economic power. Such property was
for use and enjoyment, and the power which owners possessed pro-
ceeded not from ownership but from superior personal station or the


1CunnincHaAM, W., The Growth of English Industry and Commerce, 153 (1903).
2o4 U.S. 113, 153, (1876).


62 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


enjoyment of special privileges bestowed personally by rulers. The
ownership of money, on the other hand, was the ownership of mere
power, for money produced nothing, could not be consumed, and was
used only to take advantage of the necessities of others. When, there-
fore, the privilege of charging interest on money was granted, it was a
grant out of the physical power of the sovereign, overriding the com-
mon law from which the rights of property had been derived, and
carried with it the sovereign’s reservation of authority to determine the
limit beyond which that grant of power should not be exercised. And
Justice Field was historically correct in his contention that restraints
on the rates of interest, based on a sovereign grant of power, afforded
no precedent for restraints on the economic power of property.t
The Munn Case was an innovation in that it recognized a source of
power unknown to the common law and unrevealed until property
assumed its modern dimensions. The Munn Case decided that the
power of property might be restrained in dealings with customers.
It was not until the year 1898 that the highest court decided that the
similar power of property in the transactions of employer and employee
might also be restrained. In that year an act of the legislature of
Utah came before the court limiting the hours of labor in underground
mines to eight per day. Justice Brown, after reviewing the cases and
disavowing any intention of criticising those courts which had declared
similar laws unconstitutional, went on to show that modern economic
conditions had increased the power of property over employees, and
that the courts had begun to notice it. They “had not failed to recog-
nize the fact,” he said, “that the law is a progressive science,” that the
right of contract, only recently asserted in the Allgeyer Case was
nevertheless subject to certain limitations which the state might im-
pose under the police power; that this power had greatly expanded
during the past century; that in its exercise a large discretion is neces-
sarily vested in the legislature, and that ‘“‘the legislature has also recog-
nized the fact which the experience of legislators in many states has
corroborated, that the proprietors of these establishments and their


1 But see Hand, Learned, “Due Process of Law and the Hight Hour Day,” 21 Harv. Law
Rev. 495, 505 note (1908); Pound, “Liberty of Contract,” 18 Vale Law Jour. 454, 483 (1900),
says the ‘“‘obvious answer” to this contention of Justice Field is that, ‘‘enforcing a promise
not under seal is also a late, law-granted privilege.’”’ I have not been able to locate the
statute here referred to, and Jenks (History of English Law, 136) seems to trace the appear-
ance of the law enforcing an unsealed promise to the common law without the aid of statute,
except the mere procedural provision in Westminster the Second, 1285, which permitted
enlargement of the common-law writs ‘in similar cases.”


PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, AND MORAL POWER 63


operatives do not stand upon an equality and that their interests are,
to a certain extent, conflicting. The former naturally desire to obtain
as much labor as possible from their employees, while the latter are
often induced by the fear of discharge to conform to regulations which
their judgment, fairly exercised, would pronounce to be detrimental
to their health or strength. In other words, the proprietors lay down
the rules and the laborers are practically constrained to obey them.
In such cases self-interest is often an unsafe guide, and the legislature
may properly interpose its authority. . . . The fact that both parties
are of full age and competent to contract does not necessarily deprive
the state of the power to interfere where the parties do not stand upon
an equality, or where the public health demands that one party to the
contract shall be protected against himself.” }

This principle, limited in 1898 to the industries of mining and smelt-
ing, was extended in 1916 to apply to all manufacturing industries.”
In 1917 the principle was still further extended to cover wages as well
as hours of labor. This occurred, however, through the deadlock of an
equally divided court, which therefore sustained a statute fixing the
minimum wages for women. Since no opinion was given in the case it
may be inferred that the court supported the Oregon court wherein it
had declared “Every argument put forward to sustain the maximum
hours law, or upon which it was established, applies equally in favor of
the constitutionality of the minimum wage law as also within the
police power of the state and as a regulation tending to guard the
public morals and the public health.” *

The foregoing enables us to distinguish the three kinds of power
above referred to which are inseparable in fact but emerge with differ-
ent degrees of prominence in different transactions. One is physical
power, the power of violence, upon which the grants of special privilege
by a sovereign to subjects are based and protected. This was the main
type of power recognized during the period of feudalism.

Second, is economic power, a kind of power which could not emerge
until physical power had been regulated by “due process or law,” and
thus the rights of property had been established by the business revolu-


1 Holden v. Hardy, 169 U. S. 366, 381, 392, 397 (1898). A different state of facts after-
wards determined the veto of a ten-hour law for bakers. Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S.
45 (1905).

2 Bunting v. Oregon, 243 U.S. 426 (1916). wer.

3 Stettler v. O’Hara, 69 Or. 510, 535 (1914); 243 U.S. 629 (1917). This opinion apparently
has been reversed in 1923 in Adkins v. Children’s Hospital, 43 Sup. Ct. 394 (1923).


64 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


tion that ended with the Act of Settlement, in 1700; and even then not
until modern economic conditions had revealed the power which prop-
erty has by mere withholding from others what they need but which
does not belong to them.

Third, is moral power, which, however, may be “‘immorally” used;
the power of personal influence unaided by violence or economic
power, a kind of power which emerges only when unequal physical and
economic power are eliminated.

It is the relative predominance of these three types of power that
distinguishes the three great types of going concerns which we shall
later examine,! namely, the state, based on the fear of physical power,
or violence; the business, based on the fear of economic power, or
poverty; and the great variety of modern cultural, religious, or moral
concerns, based only on the fear of opinion unsupported by fear of
violence or poverty.

1 Below, Chap. V.


CHAPTER IV
TRANSACTIONS
I. THe Parties


When economists and courts speak of an “exchange” they usually
think of two persons exchanging products or services, but when they
speak of a “market” they think of two or more sellers and two or more
buyers of similar commodities at a common place and time. Thus the
distinction may be made between actual transactions and potential,
possible and impossible transactions. The actuai transactions occur,
of course, between those who actually exchange products. The poten-
tial transactions are those which may or may noé occur, since the
parties are on the market and ready to exchange but do not. The
possible transactions are those which might occur if conditions were
different, such that parties not now upon the market should decide to
come upon the market. To which may be added the impossible trans-
actions which, owing to remoteness in time or place and the conse-
quent inaccessibility of the parties to the market, cannot, under any
circumstances, take place.?

These four degrees of probability are taken into account, more or
less consciously, by every person who comes upon, or contemplates
coming upon, the given market. But the actual choice made by any
person who actually exchanges upon the market is a choice, not
between the actual exchange and the possible or impossible exchanges,
nor even all of the potential exchanges, but is a choice between only
the actual and the next best of the potential exchanges which he has
an option of making at the moment of exchange. He gains a surplus
by choosing, but the actual surplus obtainable is measured by the
choice between the two best accessible options. Failure to observe this
limitation on the act of choice has led to palpable fallacies of both
optimistic and pessimistic schools of economists, which may be desig-
nated in general as the fallacy of inaccessible or non-concomitant
options, inaccessible in space, or non-concomitant in time.’

1 Below, Sec. III.
2 Cp. Bastiat, F., Harmonies of Political Economy, 104 (tr. 1860); below, Sec. III.
65


66 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


At the same time, each person coming upon the market has in mind,
or is faced by, these several degrees of probability. Choice of oppor-
tunities is always choice between the two best accessible options at the
moment of choice, and if there is no possible alternative, then the ex-
change may be of that “hold-up” character which we have noted,! in
which there is no real freedom of choice; or the next best alternative
may be possible but not potential, and even if potential may not be
the next best potential. Thus there is a gradation of alternatives
taken into account by each party to a transaction, and consequently,
from the standpoint of the motives affecting the parties, the minimum
number of persons necessary to constitute a transaction is four parties,
two buyers and two sellers, namely, the actual buyer and seller, and
the next best alternative for each. Other potential, possible or im-
possible exchanges are in the background. This may be illustrated as
follows:


A TRANSACTION


ACTUAL POTENTIAL POSSIBLE IMPOSSIBLE
$100 B B’ $90 $ 80 °
$110 S S’ $120 $130 °


The actual buyer, B, of, say, a horse or cow, comes upon the market
hoping to buy at, say, $100, the actual seller, S, hoping to sell at $110.
The potential buyer hopes to buy at $90, the potential seller hopes to
sell at $120. The other potential, or possible buyers and sellers will
not ordinarily become actual buyers and sellers until those who are
nearest together have first gotten off the market. They are possible
exchangers. Hence the two best opportunities for the actual seller,
S, are the offers of $100 and $90. Evidently the actual seller cannot be
forced to sell for less than $90. On the other hand, the best two oppor-
tunities for the actual buyer are the offers to sell at $110 and $120.
Evidently the actual buyer cannot be forced to pay more than $120.
Consequently the actual price agreed upon by B and S will lie some-
where between $90 and $120. Between these two points may be said
to be the field of persuasion and coercion, and at these points are the
limits of coercion, because at these points the opposite party has a
costless alternative. Beyond these two points only persuasion can
induce the exchange to be made.

It will be seen that the transaction, involving four persons, indicates


1 Above, Chap. III,


TRANSACTIONS 67


the two dimensions of opportunity and power present in every trans-
action. For the seller, S, the opportunities offered are the $100 offered
by B and the $90 offered by B’.. For the buyer, B, the opportunities
are the $110 asked by S and the $120 asked by S’, and the actual
power in exchange lies somewhere between $90 and $120.

This typical transaction describes the minimum of all economic and
social relations whatever, whether it be that of the family, of business
or politics. Each person is considering the alternatives open to him-
self, the existence of actual, potential, possible or impossible rivals,
and the degree of power which he can exert within the limits of these
alternatives. One is his choice of opportunities, the other is his exercise
of power, but they are inseparable, and choice of opportunities is
choice between two degrees of power. Out of this ultimate and univer-
sal nature of a transaction, from the standpoint of the motives affecting
the will, economics derives its concepts of cost and value, of “ op-
portunity-cost” and “dis-opportunity value,” that is, its concepts
of exercise of power and choice of opportunities.!

But there are an indefinite number of possible disputes between the
parties to the transaction that may arise before or after the completion
of the transaction. These disputes do arise and always have arisen in
the history of the race from the most primitive times, simply because
man has always been subject to the principle of scarcity which limits
his choice of opportunities and exercise of power. Consequently, if
transactions are to go on peaceably without resort to violence between
the parties there must always have been a fifth party to the transac-
tion, namely, a judge, priest, chieftain, paterfamilias, arbitrator, fore-
man, superintendent, general manager, who would be able to decide
and settle the dispute, with the aid of the combined power of the
group to which the five parties belonged. This fifth party might,
indeed, be a lawless and arbitrary ruler, in which case each of the four
parties would be victims of conquest or slavery and not recognized
members of the group to which the ruler belonged. But if he and
they are members of the same family, tribe, nation, business concern,
club or what not—in short, members of the same going concern—
then his arbitrary and lawless power has always been found to be
itself limited by common rules, or working rules, the “laws” of the
concern.

These working rules of going concerns, have, in point of their his-


1Cp. Davencort, H. J., Value and Distribution (1908); Economics of Enterprise (1913).


68 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


torical origin, been ascribed to many different sources, such as gods,
ancestors, conquerors, ‘‘nature,” “will of the people,” etc., the general
idea being to clothe them with a certain sanctity or authority above
that of the particular priest, chieftain, judge, et al., who may, for the
time being, be in position of power to give effect to his interpretation of
them. At any rate, they appear, in the history of the race, as the
essential and ultimate means by which the members of a going concern
are able to work together for a common purpose and to exert their
united power against other concerns.

The way in which these working rules operate is by placing certain
limits or by opening up certain enlargements for the choices and
powers of the individuals, who are parties to the transactions, and
these limits and enlargements of the individual wills may be condensed
into the four volitional verbs, (1) may, (2) must, (3) can and (4) can-
not. These verbs express the limits of behavior for any individual
who is subject to any common rule or working rule of any concern.
The rule merely tells him what he may, must, can or cannot do.

But when these permissions, compulsions, capacities, and incapaci-
ties suggested by these four verbs have been organized into a system
of thought by later generations of theologians, philosophers or jurists,
they take certain ethical or juristic names which may be distinguished,
in the order in which we have named them, as (1) liberty or immunity
(2) duty or liability, (3) right or power, (4) disability or exposure.
These we shall consider later.t It is needful here only to note that in
consequence of the need of common rules applying to the wills of the
individual members of families tribes, nations or the modern business
concerns, there is a fifth party to every transaction, namely, the gover-
nor, or rather, the judge who lays down the working rules of the con-
cern under the name of rights, duties, liberties, etc., involving the
further social relation of command by a superior representing the
power of the group, and obedience by inferiors, who are members of
the group.

A transaction, then, involving a minimum of five persons, and not
an isolated individual, nor even only two individuals, is the ultimate
unit of economics, ethics and law. It is the ultimate but complex
relationship, the social electrolysis, that makes possible the choice of
opportunities, the exercise of power and the association of men into
families, clans, nations, business, unions and other going concerns.

1 Below, Sec. VI.


TRANSACTIONS 69


The social unit is not an individual seeking his own pleasure: it is five
individuals doing something to each other within the limits of work-


ing rules laid down by those who determine how disputes shall be
decided.


II. PERFORMANCE, AVOIDANCE, FORBEARANCE


There hangs over from early theories a notion of the individual will
which may be described as the will-in-vacuo, instead of the will-in-
action. According to John Locke, who formulated this concept, the
will is conceived, not as the will-in-action overcoming resistance and
choosing between different degrees of resistance, in actual space and
time, but the will is a “power,” in the sense of a faculty, a capacity,
an ability, to act or not-act.1 It conforms to that notion of “power”
characteristic of all branches of knowledge at the mythological stage
prior to their passing over into the quantitative or scientific stage,
where “power” was a kind of potency, a potentiality, a hidden essence
of things, a ‘‘ding an sich,” a kind of spirit, entity or inner substance,
dwelling in things, like the phlogiston of chemistry, or the vortexes of
astronomy. These notions of power have disappeared more or less
from the other sciences, and power has become power-in-action, known
only by its behavior, not power in its essence or substance, known by
magic, intuition, or introspection.

The notion of the will as a potency still remains, however, in legal
and ethical doctrine, as John Locke formulated it, just as it is, in fact,
the most intimate and personal of all the notions which one can have
of himself. We naturally consider our will as something different
from ourselves in action. We will to do one thing and actually do
something else.

Yet is our actual will anything but what we actually do? The con-
cept of the will-in-vacuo arises from a process of introspection. But
introspection can give us only that small part of our will which rises
above the threshhold of the unconscious or physiological. John
Locke’s concept of power was the equivalent of this unconscious or
physiological part of the will, undiscoverable in the attempt to explain
the will in terms of introspection. The great unconscious part, with
its potential feelings, emotions and ideas, coming from heredity, habit,
custom and past willings, rises up and takes its part in shaping the act
at the moment of action. We do not even know ourselves fully until


1Lockr, JoHN, An Essay concerning Human Understanding, Chapter on “Power,” (1696).


70 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


we act. For our act is our adaptation of our faculties to and our con-
trol over our opportunities, and our real will is our will adapting itself
to and controlling the environment.

Hence we have two concepts of the will and its faculties, one of
which is that of the potential, possible, idealistic, or imaginary, spring-
ing from the puzzle of the unconscious, and the other is that of the
actual behavior. The actual is always acting. The imaginary is what
it might have done, or ought to have done, or what we hope it would be
able to do, or consciously would like to do, if it did not have to choose
between actual alternatives.

It is this introspective potency, this will separated from its behavior,
that dominates the concept of choices formulated by John Locke and
repeated in the law-books. This appears in the definition of an “act”
and an “omission.” An “act” is a “voluntary movement of the
muscles,” an ‘‘omission”’ is a not-act. Back of the act is the will; the
will is volition, that is, choice; the will chooses between an “‘act”’ and
an “omission ’’—between an acting and a not-acting. As far as quan-
titative dimensions are concerned there is none. An omission to act
isa zeroact. Not-acting is nothing. The will chooses between some-
thing and nothing.

Neither is there any dimension to the something. As far as the
definition goes, the act may be an infinite act—an act of God. If the
will merely chooses between acting and not-acting, its choice may
just as well be between infinity and zero, which, for finite beings, is the
same as between nothing and nothing.

The reason why this empty concept of the will has been a work-
able concept in ethics and law proceeds from the two-fold fact that
the moralist or the trial court already has a particular act in mind,!
and he is concerned with the quality of that act, whether it be vir-
tuous or vicious, right or wrong, or with the responsibility of the actor
for doing or not doing it. The act is already there, in its quantitative
dimensions as shown in the testimony, and the question remaining is,
Did he do it intentionally or unintentionally? Was he compelled to do
it? Was he prevented from doingit? Wasit voluntary or involuntary?
Was the act virtuous or vicious, right or wrong? These are questions
relating to the kind of an act and the kind of will that acted. Was
that will just or unjust when it performed that act or omitted to
perform it? An act is properly defined as “a voluntary movement

1 Below, Sec. IV.


TRANSACTIONS 71


of the muscles.” But the attention of the court is directed, not to
the muscles, but to the intentions that moved the muscles.

With this limited purpose in view, and the quantitative dimen-
sions of the act and its consequences already in evidence, the legal
classification of acts as merely “acts and omissions” is perhaps
adequate in a trial court. The fallacy emerges when, from such a
limited purpose, the larger purpose is not distinguished. The larger
purpose is the definition of the will itself. If that definition is re-
stricted to the idea of a choice between acting and not-acting, then the
will is merely a separate faculty or power, a potency to act or not-act,
a will ina vacuum. Freedom of the will becomes freedom to act or
not-act. Liberty becomes simply the absence of restraint or com-
pulsion and therefore becomes liberty to act or not-act.

This larger purpose of defining the will in all its diminsions does
not come before a trial court which takes the law as it finds it, but
it sometimes does come before a Supreme Court which decides upon
the validity of the law itself under the due-process clause of the
Constitution. Here the court is dealing with the will as an economic
quantity and is passing upon the economic or quantitative question
of public policy. This becomes a practical question when the court
is considering that quantitative problem which turns on the meaning
of “equality” and “inequality” as used or implied in the Constitution
of the United States. Is the will of an individual equal to the col-
lective will of a corporation? A majority of the Supreme Court
of the United States holds that it is, and overruled the Legislature
and the Supreme Court of Kansas which held that it was not.1 The
Kansas Legislature attempted to protect the will of the individual
against the will of the corporation. The higher federal court said
that the attempt was not due process of law because the rights of
the two were exactly equal. The workingman had the right to
choose between working for the corporation and not working for it.
The corporation had the equal right to choose between employing
the man and not employing him. The two rights on the two sides of
the transaction were exactly equal. There was “equality of right,”
because each had the equal right to choose between acting and not-
acting, between an “act” and an “omission.”

This abstract conclusion flows from the concept of the will as a
mere potency, a mere faculty of acting and not-acting. But, as such,

1 Above, Chap. III.


72 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


it is empty, and in the quantitative concept of the will, which, whether
it be economic, physical, ethical, or legal, is a concept of choosing
between two degrees of power in acting, it is not true. If the cor-
poration has 10,000 employees it loses only one ten thousandth part
of its working force if it chooses to not-employ the man, and cannot
find an alternative man. But the man loses 1oo per cent of his job
if he chooses to not-work and cannot find an alternative employer.
From the standpoint of an abstract concept of the will as a mere
faculty of acting or not-acting, the two rights may be equal, just
because nothing is equal to nothing. But, from the quantitative
concept of the will as a choosing between actual alternatives in a
world of limited opportunities, the right of the one is infinitely greater
—or perhaps 10,000 times greater—than the right of the other.

Likewise, from this qualitative standpoint, the duty of one is doubt-
less equal to the duty of the other. It is the duty of the man not to
force that corporation to hire and pay him against its will. It is the
duty of the corporation not to force the man to work for it against
his will. The two duties of omission may be said to be equal, simply
because they have no quantitative content, just as infinity may be
said to be equal to zero, or nothing equal to nothing.

But, from the quantitative standpoint, the duty of each is the
necessity of each to choose something else; and that something else
is not a “thing,” it is a degree of power over persons or things. The
behavioristic concept of the will is that of a will continuously in
action through all the waking and conscious hours of life. Some of
its choices are instinctive, habitual, unconscious. But its crucial
choices are conscious, perhaps deliberative. Such a will never chooses
between acting and not-acting—it always chooses between two
degrees of power in acting. It cannot help choosing, consciously
or unconsciously. If not pulled on by unconscious wish it is pushed
on by conscious want or necessity, and its choices, quantitatively
considered, differ only in the different degrees or durations of power
opened up by the actual opportunities offered at the time. If the
will does not do one thing, it is doing and must do something else
where its power is less.

The question is not a mathematical question of imaginary points
and lines, of equality or inequality, of an empty right or duty, but
is a question of relative degrees of economic or physical power in
the process of choosing between alternative opportunities. This


TRANSACTIONS 73


is a question of valuation and the proper proportioning of relative
degrees of power of persons over persons. Such a question is one of
public policy, not one of mathematics. We are not here concerned
as to whether the attempt of the Kansas Legislature was wise as a
matter of public policy. Perhapsit was not. Weare concerned with
the difference between logic and value. Logic is an after-thought—
valuation comes first, then logic comes in to justify the valuation.
The majority of the Supreme Court did not of course place their
veto of the Kansas Legislature and the Kansas Supreme Court on
the grounds of public policy—they placed it on John Locke’s defin-
ition of the will. Questions of public policy involve a weighing,
a valuing, of the alternatives actually present. Locke’s definition of
the will admits of no valuation of alternatives in an actual world
of limited resources which resist the will. It is as empty, logical,
and non-quantitative as the imaginary lines and points of mathe-
matics. The logic of the majority in the Coppage Case suggests
an earlier remark of Justice Holmes, when he said, “Perhaps one
of the reasons why judges do not like to discuss questions of policy,
or to put a decision in terms upon their views as law-makers, is that
the moment you leave the path of merely logical deduction you lose
the illusion of certainty which makes legal reasoning seem like mathe-
matics. But the certainty is only an illusion, nevertheless. Views
of policy are taught by experience of the interests of life. Those
interests are the field of battle. Whatever decisions are made must
be against the wishes and opinion of one party, and the distinctions
on which they go will be distinctions of degree.”

These distinctions of degree require us to note the difference between
a transaction and a process. A transaction occurs at a point of time,
a process is a flow of transactions over a period of time. We are con-
cerned here with the point of time.

But we are concerned with the two kinds of transactions previously
considered, physical and economic, each of which is a relation of
power. The same terminology will apply to each, though with the
different meanings of physical power and economic power.

The physical or mechanical equivalent of the will corresponds to a
concept of the will employing its faculties in the actual mechanical
process of action and reaction with nature’s forces, or in transactions
with other wills, also employing their faculties. With such a concept

1 Hormes, O. W., “Privilege, Malice, and Intent,” 8 Harv. Law Rev. 1, 7 (1804).


74 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


of the will the idea sought to be expressed by the term “omission”’
is better expressed by the term avoidance. The duty to omit a certain
act is the duty to avoid that act, with the implied command to choose
any other potential, possible, or impossible act not prohibited. So
that, instead of speaking of a person’s ‘‘negative” right, that is, his
right to have another person “‘omit”’ a certain act, which is the first
person’s right to be let alone—his right of /aissez faire—and instead of
speaking of the correlative duty of that second person as his duty to
“omit” that act and let the first person in-so-far alone, we shall speak
of the right of avoidance of one person corresponding to the duty of
avoidance of another person, with its accompanying compulsion on
the latter to choose any different alternative open to him.

On the other hand, a “positive” right signifies the correlative duty
of a second person actually to perform an act—the “positive” duty to
pay a debt or render a service. Here there is little risk that the quan-
titative dimensions of the act will be overlooked, for, if the duty is
once established by the testimony, then the question is immediately
the quantity of performance required of the debtor or servant. Since,
however, the duty, from the economic or ethical standpoint, is not
usually a single transaction, but is a duty to perform a series of acts or
transactions which shall furnish a quantity of commodities or of
claims to commodities, all of them necessary to fulfill the duty, we
shall substitute the term performance for the term “‘act.” The “posi-
tive” right of one person is the correlative duty of another person to
perform all the necessary acts and transactions that make a complete
performance.

Lastly, in addition to ‘‘acts” and “‘omissions,”’ certain legal writers
introduce a third class of acts, namely, “forbearances,” or rather, they
subdivide omissions into ‘‘omissions” and “‘forbearances.’’ This is
done, however, as already suggested, not in order to obtain a physical
dimension of the omission, but in order to go back of the omission and
to distinguish whether it was intentional or unintentional.

Thus, Salmond, following Austin, distinguishes omission as an
“unintentional negative act,” and ‘‘forebearance”’ as an “intentional
negative act.” “If I fail to keep an appointment through forgetful-
ness, my act is unintentional and negative; that is to say, an omission.
But if I remember the appointment, and resolve ot to keep it, my act
is intentional and negative; that is to say, a forbearance.” ! Terry,


1Salmond, Jur. 324 (6th ed., 1920), following Austin, Lect. XIV, XIX.


TRANSACTIONS 75


however, holds that this distinction between forbearance and omission,
is of little legal importance. “When an act is not done it is seldom of
any consequence for legal purposes why the person did not do it.” !
Whether Terry is correct or not, legal writers generally use the term
“forbearance’’ as the equivalent of “omission.”

This distinction between an omission and a forbearance is what we
would name a qualitative distinction, since it is made with reference to
the kind of an act, from the ethical or legal standpoint of responsibility.
The “omission” itself being already described, the qualitative ques-
tion is, was it an intentional or an unintentional omission, and, if in-
tentional, was the intent rightful or wrongful? Evidently the same
qualitative distinction applies to a positive act. Was it an intentional
or an unintentional performance? Were the intentions lawful or un-
lawful?

The foregoing does not imply that qualitative distinctions are not
also quantitative. All “qualities” are, perhaps, quantities of a differ-
ent order of phenomena from the one we happen to be considering.
White and yellow are two qualities of external things in the field of
psychology or esthetics, but in the field of physics they are two quan-
tities of motion. Likewise with the qualitative distinctions as to the
kind of an act from the standpoint of right or wrong, good or bad, in-
tentional or unintentional. They are differences in quality from the
standpoint of physical or economic behavior, but differences in quantity
from the standpoint of the intensity of feelings accompanying them or
passing judgment upon them. These qualitative distinctions belong
to the order of mental processes that place subjective values on trans-
actions, and they should have their separate terminology in the field of
psychology or ethics, distinct from the economic or physical termin-
ology.

Psychologically and ethically then, we may speak of both perform-
ance and avoidance as either intentional or unintentional, right or
wrong, legal or illegal. But we are concerned, at this point, with the
mere physical description of the will as a physical force that moves
things and persons. From this standpoint we require a term, “for-
bearance,” with a strictly physical, quantitative meaning, as follows:

The term ‘‘omission,” even from the quantitative standpoint, has a
double meaning. A negative right, the right to an “omission,” may
be not only a right to be let absolutely alone—the right to an avoid-

1 Terry, H. T., Principles of Anglo-American Law, 67 (1884).


76 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ance—but may also mean the right to be let alone beyond a certain
degree of power in acting, and this we shall name the right to a for-
bearance. It is this that constitutes the distinction between economic
persuasion and economic coercion. Persuasion and coercion, from the
physical standpoint, are exactly the same physical behavior, differing
only in the degree of economic power. Each is simply the withholding
of things or services from the opposite party to the transaction in order
to induce action on his part. Each is a refusal to act until the terms
are deemed satisfactory. Each is but economic pressure or notice of
intent to use economic pressure, backed up by physical violence, or
threat of compulsion, if necessary. Though physically alike they are
economically different. To exact a price of ten cents as a condition of
no longer withholding a service is not different, so far as physical be-
havior is concerned, from exacting a price of twenty cents. But the
latter may be deemed coercive and the former persuasive, according
to the ethical standards in vogue for determining the allowable pres-
sure.

Transactions may, therefore, be defined either qualitatively, that
is, psychologically, or quantitatively, that is economically or physi-
cally. The former pays regard to the intentions, the latter to the
degree of power, and each varies independently of the other. A hostile
blow in the face may be looked upon as a different kind of transaction
from a joking tap, because the intentions are different; or it may be
looked upon as the same kind of a transaction but exhibiting a higher
degree of power, because the intentions are the same but the exertion
is greater. To charge twenty cents may be looked upon as a different
kind of transaction from charging ten cents for the same service, be-
cause the intentions in the one case are condemned, in the other case
are approved; or it may be looked upon as the same kind of a trans-
action with a higher degree of power, because the intentions are the
same but the economic power is greater.

The former seems to be the ethical or legal method of approach,
because the moralist or lawyer is looking for the intent back of the
transaction, which gives to it the psychological quality of right or
wrong. For this reason we shall use the term “‘forbearance,”’ not with
its qualitative meaning of intentional omission, but with the quantita-
tive, physical or economic meaning of a limit placed on the degree of
power put forth in overcoming resistance. Forbearance is a limit
placed on performance.


TRANSACTIONS 77


Here an ambiguity must be noticed in speaking of “positive” and
“negative” acts, similar to the ambiguity of the term “omission.”
The term “‘negative”’ has the double meaning of negation and limita-
tion. An act is said to bea “positive” act and an omission of that act
is said to be a “‘negative” act. One is the negation of the other. One
is Yes, the other is No. But forbearance is also the “negative” of a
performance, but it is not a xegation of performance, it is a limitation
of it. Negation isa not-act. Limitation isa restrained act. Both are
“negative” distinguished from “positive,” but one is nothing; the
other is more or less.

And this is a peculiarity of the will, compared with any other
force in nature. The will is the only force that can place a limit on
its own performance. Other forces always go to the limit of their
power in overcoming resistance. What gravitation does, what
electricity does, is all that it possibly can do in that direction under
the circumstances. This might be found true also of the will if we
knew all about its physiological and unconscious sub-structure.
But consciously, as we know it in our persuading, coercing and
commanding one another, the will alone forbears to go to the limit
of its possible power of performance. Except in moments of great
crisis the will forbears to make a full use of its powers. Forbearance
is the limit which it places on its own performance.

Likewise with legally authorized transactions. A person may
be permitted to exert pressure on an opposite party but may be pro-
hibited beyond a certain point by a duty of forbearance. He may
be free to administer physical discipline to his child, wife or slave,
but forbidden to carry his manual powers beyond a certain degree
of power. He may be free to charge ten cents but not twenty cents.

Adopting this three-fold dimension of behavior, which is phys-
ical and economic rather than psychological, every transaction is
a double-ended performance, avoidance, forbearance. Each party
to the transaction acts, at one and the same moment, in three dimen-
sions. His performance is his power put forth in acting. His for-
bearance is the limit which he or a superior authority places on the
degree of power in acting. His avoidance is his choice of that per-
formance instead of any alternative performance. Every act of an
individual is, at one and the same point of time, a performance, a
forbearance, an avoidance. While the person is not doing an alter-
native thing (avoidance), he is doing something else (performance),


78 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


and the thing which he is doing is usually something less (forbear-
ance) than the total degree of power he might exert.


Ficure I
A D B
Performance : Forbearance
ECA Cts : : : G
A: Avoidance


“Omission”


In the above figure, of two alternative acts the extreme ability,
faculty, or potency, in one act is A B, in the other is AC. If
the person chooses or is compelled to choose the act A B, he avoids
the act A C, and if he restrains himself, or is restrained by command,
from going to the limit of his ability in performing the act A B,
then the actual limit at the point D is the limit of performance set
by forbearance. Performance is A D; forbearance is D B; avoidance
is AC. The double meaning of the term “negative” is here illus-
trated. Performance is a positive act, but a “negative act” may bea
forbearance, in which it signifies limitation (D B) on the possible per-
formance, A B; or the “negative act” may be an avoidance, in which
case it signifies, not a limitation, but a total negation of the alter-
native performance, A C.

We thus distinguish between faculties and powers. Faculties are
the total possible power of which the individual is capable under the
circumstances. It is John Locke’s will in the sense of ‘‘power” as
he used the term. It is ability to act but not acting, potency but
not power, capacity but not content, the will but not the will-in-
action. But power, in the behavioristic sense of the term, is the
actual power which he employs in acting. Power is actual perform-
ance, and the amount of difference between faculty and power is
forbearance.

The meaning usually given in ethics and law to the term “power”
is this meaning of faculty, ability or capacity, given by John Locke.
One’s faculty, ability, capacity or potency, to act consists in the
total of all his faculties, or abilities. These may be physical, economic
or moral faculties. Taken together they constitute potential man-
power. In each case they consist only in the power to move things


TRANSACTIONS 70


or persons. Physical, economic or moral power is power to move
them directly or indirectly. Mental power is power to take a long
leverage in moving them. Managerial power is power to induce
other persons to move things. Each, when in action, is a perform-
ance and a forbearance. Only at the moment of a crisis does per-
formance exhaust the total of all faculties or abilities to act, and at
that moment forbearance is reduced to its minimum. At the other
extreme, performance reaches its minimum and forbearance is at
the maximum only when the person is at the point of not acting at
all, that is, when he is nearly unconscious, asleep or dead.

At the same time, each performance of physical, economic or
moral power is an avoidance of any and all alternative performance.
Persons, of course, differ greatly in their faculties, that is, in their
potencies. Faculty is ability, potency is possible or potential power;
but power is the actual use made of ability or potency. The two
terms, potency and power, are necessary in all economic reasoning
as well as all concepts of the will, but in a very different sense from
that employed by John Locke, as we shall see.


III. Actua, POTENTIAL, PossIBLE, IMPOSSIBLE


Thus it appears that the will is not Locke’s will-in-vacuo, nor the
hedonists’ conscious pleasure and pain, separate from the will and
forcing it to act, but is the will-in-action, and the will-in-action is
the faculties-in-action. It does not operate in infinite space, does
not lay down unconditional laws, does not choose between something
and nothing, but the will is always “up against”’ something. It is
always performing, avoiding, forbearing, that is, always moving
along lines, not of least resistance like physical forces without purpose,
but of overcoming resistance, avoiding and forbearing effort to
overcome resistance, with a purpose looking toward the future.
Every transaction is a two-ended action. It is two wills acting on
each other. Even what we have distinguished as nature-transactions
are two-ended. The difference between them and the ethical-juristic
transactions is the difference between performance, avoidance and
forbearance in dealing with nature’s forces, and the same in dealings
with persons.

We may distinguish, then, these two-ended actions as the phys-
ical dimensions of the will-in-action. They are transactions. But


80 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


as such, they are only a part of behavior. They are behavior at a
point of time, uncorrelated with the past or the future. As mere
physical dimensions they have no meaning, no expectation, and
hence no value. The whole of behavior is the proportioning of these
moving acts and transactions according to a purpose that binds them
together, that is, according to their relative values in making up
the whole.

For this reason we distinguish actual, potential and possible trans-
actions, from the infinite, impossible, or inaccessible. The actual
is reality. It is the will actually against something. It is the moving
point of performance, avoidance, forbearance. The potential and
the possible are in the future—the world of imagination and the
world of value—the place where man lives. The actual has no value.
It is a moving point, gone as soon as acted. The actual is the future
anticipating itself in the present behavior, and passing at once into
memory and into further confidence or dread of the future further
on, where lie the potential and possible. The potential is near at
hand. It may or may not happen. The possible lies beyond in
time and space. The potential and the possible lie in the field of
the probable or improbable, in the world of expectation and expect-
ancy, of encumbrance and opportunity, of right, wrong and duty.
Further on is the infinite—the vacuum, the void, the empty, nothing,
zero, the impossible, the inaccessible.

The potential or possible future also has its dimensions—dimensions
that expand with the unfolding of life and imagination. Yet these
future dimensions are not what science says is probable or improb-
able. They are what the person believes is potential or possible,
probable or improbable. They belong to a different order of phenom-
ena—the phenomena of mental processes. The child’s world is a very
little world; man’s world pushes the finite further away into an ex-
panding potential and possible world, and even imagines the infinite
possible. To Alexander the potential extended to the Indus River
and there were no possible worlds beyond; to the modern business man
the potential circles the globe; to the worker it is his job. To each it
is the whole of which each act or transaction is a part.

It is in view of the potential and possible that the act or transaction
has its value. And, if we say that each actual transaction is the
physical dimensions of the will-in-action at a moving point of time,
then all of the potential and possible transactions are the economic,


TRANSACTIONS 81


ethical and juristic dimensions of the future, the great field of Desire
or Purpose, the field of mental anticipation, that gives value to the
part which is in the present, and determines how far the act or trans-
action shall go in its actual performance, avoidance and forbearance.

Thus the dualism of spirit and matter, the trinity of intellect,
feeling and will, the potencies of John Locke and the courts, are
resolved into the valuation of one’s own behavior. Metaphysically
or philosophically, the dualism remains, because there are two orders
of phenomena, the psychological and the physical, whose connections
we do not understand. But scientifically we deal with each one in
its own field, for science is superficial. It deals only with behavior,
which is the surface of things. It is not fundamental, for it knows
not the essence of things, nor how one order of phenomena gets into
another order of phenomena. It may push the unknown back a
bit, but it always leaves a field of the unconscious and unknown,
a field of hypothesis and guessing, where the conscious goes under-
ground into physiology, biology, physics and chemistry. We do not
know what the soul is, nor what substance is. We do not even know
ourselves as we really are until we act. We only know ourselves
truly as we analyze ourselves acting.

Each act is an action and a reaction with external nature, or a
transaction with persons, and, as such, is a moving point, a flow of
performance, avoidance, forbearance, playing its little part towards
realizing the whole that lies in the future. It is valued as we go along.
For it is, at the moment of valuation, the limiting factor, or what
we deem to be the limiting factor, in realizing the potential and
possible further on. It is, as we have seen, accompanied by an expec-
tation and an expectancy, an emotion, an intuition, a feeling, but
it is such only while it is potential. As soon as actual it is gone and
no longer is felt and valued. While potential it is valued as a part
of the total expected economy, the expected proportioning of potential
and possible acts and transactions into a hoped-for world of reality.
And, while it is potential, it is opportunity—the option of choosing
between different degrees of power in acting. While potential it
is also potential power, the valuable power of overcoming the resist-
ance of nature and man for larger purposes beyond. Thus each
transaction, with its physical dimensions of performance, forbearance
and avoidance, slides into its economic dimensions of economy and
expansion—of expected economy, opportunity and power, which


82 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


reflect backward a value upon the present performance, avoidance,
forbearance.

For purposes of science, therefore, it does not matter whether we
know or do not know what the substance of the will is. Science deals
with probabilities and superficialities. Whether we hold to “deter-
minism” or “indeterminism,” does not matter for economic purposes.
The “‘determinist”’ cannot tell what a business man, a workingman
or a judge on the bench is going to do the next minute any more than
the ‘“‘indeterminist,” notwithstanding his superior confidence that
behavior is determined or predetermined. Each, if he is wise, follows
the approved procedure of knowing his man by knowing how he has
acted in the past, and figuring out the probabilities of how he will act
in the present and future. The problems of determinism and indeter-
minism are too fundamental; or rather, the behavorist defines the will
as what the will does and passes over to others the question of whether
the will is predetermined by physiology, physics, chemistry, or the
cosmos. Schiller,’ in order to support the freedom of the will, must
logically go back to the atom and support a little bit of freedom on the
part of the electron in choosing the way in which it will act, undeter-
mined by anything that has gone before. And, indeed, it does not
seem possible that, at some unknown point where man emerges, an
indeterminate element should get into the universe where it never was
found before. But that is another order of phenomena. Be that as it
may, economic determinism arises only from the fact that the will
acts in a world of limited resources and that these resources are tied up
or loosened up by means of working rules that vouchsafe to the in-
dividual certain rights, duties, and liberties of performance, avoidance
or forbearance. For this reason the doctrine of an indeterminate free
will is often as cruel as it is empty. It assumes freedom where there
often is none, and substitutes an empty equality of right, where there
is actual inequality of abilities or opportunities, or actual inaccessi-
bility of alleged alternatives. Economics and law are concerned with
freedom of choice rather than freedom of will, and the progress of
society consists in creating freedom of will by creating freedom of
choice. Freedom is a social product whereby society opens up for
the individual an enlarging world of the potential and possible within
which he may construct his own future as he will.

All that we can say, then, is that every transaction may be looked at


1 Scuitter, F. C. S., Studies in Humanism (1907); Riddles of the Sphinx, 439 ff. (1912).


TRANSACTIONS 83


from several points of view, and that each point of view presents a
distinct order of phenomena such that we are unable to explain funda-
mentally how one gets into the other. We content ourselves with,
measuring quantities of one order of phenomena at one time and letting
the others go, for the time, under the name of qualities, to be taken up
afterwards in their own field and measured quantitatively, if we can.
Thus every transaction has its physical dimensions of performance,
avoidance, forbearance; its economic dimensions of opportunity,
power, economy and expectation; its psychological dimensions of
thinking, feeling, willing, persuading, coercing, commanding, obeying
and expectation; its ethical and legal dimensions of rights, duties,
liberties, and exposures, and its political or governmental dimensions
of authority and authorization in the use of physical power, economic
or moral power, according to common rules or working rules that set
the limits and directions of conduct. It is the last that we now pro-
ceed to examine.


IV. AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS


A person’s world of potential and possible transactions is not limited
to a single going concern, except perhaps in that primitive society
where family, state and business were unknown separately. He is a
member of several concerns, or has transactions with members of
several concerns, each of which is a government that enforces rules of
conduct. These concerns have been more or less separated out, in the
evolution of society, according to the kind of fear or duty on which
they specialize as the sanction of their collective commands or rules.
Since, however, the state, which regulates the fear of violence, is
supreme, it is the one whose functionaries, the courts, lawyers, and
jurists, have analyzed most fully the notions of right, wrong and duty,
and it is from their analysis of legal transactions that we may gather
the elements of the ethical equivalent of all transactions. What we
discover regarding legal transactions guided by rules of law and backed
by fear of violence under the jurisdiction of political government, will
hold true, in substance, of business transactions guided by the common
rules of business and backed by fear of poverty under the jurisdiction
of business concerns, and of moral transactions guided by accepted
codes of conduct and backed by fear of opinion under the jurisdiction
of cultural concerns. As already stated, this separation of concerns
is a matter of predominance and not isolation, for the fear of violence,


84 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


poverty and opinion are interwoven. But once discovering the mean-
ing of legal rights and duties, we shall have the elements of economic
and moral rights and duties.

All rights and duties are relative. If we say that a right of one
person is absolute, we can only mean that it is unlimited, and corre-
sponds to an unlimited duty of an opposite person. This being so, an
absolute right-duty is without quantitative content, and, as such, it
matters not whether we say that it is an infinite right or a zero right.
It simply does not exist as an actual or potential right and duty. It is
at the point of disappearing from the field of ethical or juristic trans-
actions and of sinking into the physical realm of action and reaction
between man and nature.

For a right is a compendious term for a complicated set of wishes
and fears entertained by human beings toward each other. It is a
wish of one party to have a performance, avoidance, or forbearance of
an opposite party whose wish is contrary, and to have it, not by means
of one’s own power, but by aid of the fear of compulsion imposed by a
superior third party who also is believed to aid that opposite party by
similar fears imposed on the first party; provided, however, that this
superior third party is believed to act in conformity with rules or
principles and not out of the mere caprice or lunacy of an unreasoning
or irresponsible party. If this superior reasonable third party is not
believed to exist or to intervene then the relation of right and duty
between the two disappears altogether, and the relation sinks back
into a different order of phenomena, that of the physical action and
reaction between forces of nature. Hence the term ‘‘absolute right”
and its correlative “absolute duty” can only mean that the superior
party either does not exist or does not intend to intervene. If it does
not exist, then the relation is a physical relation between two animals
which are mere forces of nature unrestrained by a superior will. If it
does intervene, or is believed to promise or threaten to intervene, in
conformity with predetermined rules, then it does so by restraining or
compelling the will of one or of the other, and the restraint is quantita-
tive and therefore relative. Absolute right and duty are figures of
speech like the rights and duties of tigers or tornadoes applied to a
physical order of phenomena, which have no dimensions or limits
applicable to an ethical order, and may be represented as follows,
where the proper terms are action and reaction instead of right and
duty.


TRANSACTIONS 85


Ficure II
““ABSOLUTE”’ RIGHT AND DUTY


Action | Reaction


B


| :


The so-called “absolute” right of B is the “absolute” duty of S.
There is no limit of restraint or compulsion placed on the behavior of
either party by a superior authority. Each, without compunction of
conscience or appeal to divine or earthly authority or to binding cus-
tom, or to any other accepted rule of conduct, may kill, enslave or rob
the other to the extent of his ability. The transaction is a “‘natural”
transaction without ethical or juristic meaning. An absolute right,
being unlimited, is an infinite right and therefore a zero-right.

The first step out of this physical relation of misnamed absolute
rights and duties is when one or the other party believes that a superior
will-power acting according to predictable rules, may be expected to
come to his aid or the aid of the other by means of fear. This transi-
tion from physics to ethics has usually been formulated under the
names of “divine” right or “natural” right. These terms indicate
historically the mental processes by which the concepts of right and
duty originated. A right seems to have been historically none other
than the wished-for act of an external superior power imposing a fear
on other persons, while the duty is the fear itself. Tribes, nations,
families and individuals have formulated in one way or another their
hopes and fears into beliefs respecting guardian spirits or natural
laws, with power, will and habit of commanding and enforcing
obedience.

There is, however, a difficulty with these ethical mandates. They
are mental processes and therefore as divergent as the wishes and fears
of individuals. Hence when they emerge into action they are individ-
ualistic and anarchistic. They are unrestrained in action by an actual
earthly authority to whom each party yields obedience. The wish of
one that he had a divine or natural right to a certain behavior of an-
other may not coincide with the fear of the other that he is bound by a
divine or natural duty to behave with exactly that amount of per-
formance, avoidance or forbearance. There is thus the chance of a
lack of correspondence, a failure to correlate the wish of one with the


86 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


fear of the other. When this lack of subjective correlation expresses
itself in action it may be illustrated as follows:


Ficure III


UNAUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS—ETHICAL


UNCORRELATED
O
P
p | Right B Duty
0
s
i S
t
e | No-right No-duty
S


B or S each concedes that his right to performance, avoidance, or
forbearance on the part of the other is limited, but neither of them
agrees exactly on the point where the limit shall be placed. This is
the historical stage of “divine” right or ‘‘natural” right, the stage of
appeal to a super-human unearthly authority, and is the stage of
anarchy, dogmatism and metaphysics, where there are as many con-
cepts of divine or natural right proceeding from divine or natural rules
of conduct as there are individuals, and which, behavioristically ex-
pressed, is the stage of unauthorized transactions. The ethical con-
cepts of right and duty are there, and it is admitted that the resulting
behavior is limited at points beyond which there is no-right and no-
duty, but where those limits shall be placed is undecided.

It seems that the only procedure that will correlate the wishes and
fears of each and prevent anarchy is to resort to a third person of an
earthly quality whom each consents to obey, or each is compelled to
obey. Thus we reach the social necessity of judges, chiefs, kings,
despots, priests, governors, managers, and so on, whose behavioristic
function, guided more or less by ethical beliefs which they share with
some of the others, is that of correlating in practice conflicting asser-
tions and denials of rights and duties. Individuals with opposite
interests or beliefs cannot always agree on the correlation, but the
correlation is necessary in order to hold together the constituents of a
collective will. Ethics is anarchy, law is order, and the correlation of


TRANSACTIONS 87


rights and duties is not a conclusion of logic, as is often inferred, but
is a command of government.

For this reason we pass over from the merely ethical transactions
depending on individual interests and beliefs, to authorized trans-
actions where the will of a superior party or parties imposes limits on
their transactions by imposing or interpreting a rule of conduct appli-
cable to the dispute. This brings about that correlation of right and
duty which is the starting point of jurisprudence. It may be shown as
follows, where a specified right of one party is identical with the duty
of another party, and each is limited by a superior authority enforcing
a rule common to both at a determined point where no-right and no-
duty begin.

FicurE IV


AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS—LEGAL


———CORRELATIVES
O
on ed
p | Right B Duty
Oo
s
1 as ae eee ee:
ie
e | No-right S No-duty
s


This indicates that a minimum of three persons is required to
constitute the social relation of rights and duties—two inferiors
and one superior. But we have seen that a minimum of five persons
is required to constitute the concept of a modern business transaction.
There is an intermediate historical step before this concept of a
transaction—involving a minimum of five persons—is obtained.

A government of some kind sets up its working rules which deter-
mine rights of property and liberty on behalf of one class of parties,
say those represented by B and B’ (Figure V), but deny rights of
property and liberty to another class, say S and S’. This is a con-
dition of authorized slavery, where B and B’ have rights and duties
toward each other, but no rights and duties toward S and S’. The
right of B is his right to require B’ to keep off and let B do as
he pleases with S. Likewise B’ has a similar right against B re-
specting S’.


88 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Not until a superior authority begins to place a limit on the right
of B and B’, to the services of S and S’, does the question arise of
rights and duties between them. Until that point is reached S and
S’ are physical things and not persons. When that point is reached
then the modern stage of universal equality and liberty is reached
and the typical transaction involving a minimum of five parties is
universalized for all classes of persons as follows:—


FIGURE V


AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS


CORRELATIVES
O
. O tunit
p : pportunity
fe |) Ine Duty
S 12
== oe BaD eee
t w
e | No-right |e S S’ No-duty
S r


This typical transaction proceeds from the concept of personality,
that self-directing unit which we name the will, and it is this exten-
sion of rights and duties that actually creates the “free will.” Thus
the five parties necessary to the concept of a right are:— the first
party who claims the right; the second party with whom the trans-
action occurs; the “third” parties, of whom one is the rival or com-
petitor of the first party, the other is the rival or competitor of the
second party; and the fifth party who lays down the rules of the
concern of which each is an authorized member. It will be seen,
too, that the two relations of opportunity and power are here pro-
vided for.

The claim of the first party against the third parties is the claim
that all others shall let the first party alone in the act of dealing with
the second party. ‘‘Third” parties are “all the world” or rather,
a right against “all the world,” a right im rem, is a “multital right,’’4
in that it is one of innumerable similar rights possessed against all
or nearly all other members of organized society, each one of whom
is under a similar correlative duty. These innumerable third parties,

'Hohfeld’s term. See below, p. o2ff.


TRANSACTIONS 890


however, as we have seen, are narrowed down, in any particular trans-
action at a point of time, into the two next third parties whom the
first party must have in mind when actually deciding upon his choice
of alternatives. Concretely, his right is therefore a limited right,
imposed by the superior person, that the immediate rivals shall,
up to a certain point, let him alone, and correspondingly his right
is a specified duty which limits their liberty to interfere regardless
of either their self-interest or their sympathy with the second party.
The working rule tells these third parties what they must not do.

Thus the fifth party, superior in power to the four participants,
introduces, by interpreting an accepted rule of conduct, the idea
of a right. If the first party has no hope or expectation except that
he alone must enforce his claim to be free to deal with the second
party, we have a situation no different from that of animals under
similar circumstances. But if he believes that a superior person,
a god, spirit, fetish, or tabu, with power to lay down rules of conduct,
can be induced to come to his aid and keep third parties off by fear,
then we begin to have the beginnings of human nature distinguished
from animal nature. If, at later stages of civilization, the first party,
having lost somewhat his faith in personal spirits, yet continues to
believe that a beneficent order of nature, a natural law of harmony,
a government of friendly powers external to man, that is, an ideal
set of working rules, may be expected to come to his aid, then we
have that philosophy of natural rights proceeding out of the natural
order and emerging out of divine rights which had proceeded out of
the divine order of the universe, which, however, is eminently “nat-
ural”? in another sense, in that it springs from the deepest hopes
and fears of human nature. It was at this stage of faith in a benef-
icent “nature,” in the eighteenth century, that both our modern
legal theories and economic theories of natural law and natural order
took their rise, before Malthus and Darwin showed us the niggard-
liness and cruelty of nature, and before science taught us to frame
our definitions, not in terms that imply theories of cause and effect
or opinions of right and wrong or hopes and fears of goodness and
badness, but in colorless terms of behavior.

But ethical ideals still remain, nevertheless, for they spring not
from abstract reason, intellect, or external nature, but from the
hopes and fears that are fundamental to the helplessness of man
and the concept of enduring personality; and they guide the behavior


go LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


of business men, laborers, judges and philosophers. It remains,
therefore, to give to them their proper place.

The concept of rights with their correlative duties has a relation to
human beings similar to that which expectation has with reference
to commodities. Use-values and exchange-values are the wished-for
activities—the expectations which give value in the present to that
bundle of physical qualities which we name expectancies. So with
the relationship of right-duty. It is the wished and dreaded activ-
ities of persons, the expectation of hope and fear respecting the
relations of man to man, which are objectified and given present
reality in the persons who are expected to act. The persons them-
selves are bundles of qualities which we name expectancies—their
hoped-for or dreaded behavior is the expectations attributed to
them. When these expectations are predictable they take the form
of a law, a principle or guide of human conduct, which is none other
than an anticipation of how individuals or classes will act upon the
occurrence of certain facts. Economically they act under the impulse
of utility; ethically they act under the impulse of sympathy and
duty. Or, more specifically stated in volitional terms, the econo-
mists’ “utility” is the will to subordinate the physical world and
other persons to self—the one being use-values, the other exchange-
values. But the moralists’ “sympathy” is willing subordination of
self to others, while ‘‘duty” is unwilling subordination of ‘self to
others. Sympathy and duty are each a behavioristic outcome of
human values, giving rise to rights, while utility is the outcome of
commodity values. Since a duty imposed creates a corresponding
equivalent right, the creation of rights is the creation of duties.
And the legal relation of right and duty existing between two persons
is therefore none other than an expectation of a dependable rule of
conduct, a “prediction,” in the words of Corbin, “as to what society,
acting through its courts or executive agents, will do or not do for
one and against the other.” !

Courts and executives are human beings, acting like others under
the feelings of utility, sympathy and duty, and consequently legal
relations differ from non-legal relations only in the fact that legal
relations are the expected activities of officials in directing the use
of the physical powers of society, while non-legal relations are the
expected actions of private persons. Each is economic and each is

1 Corsi, A. L., “Legal Analysis and Terminology,” 29 Vale Law Jour. 163, 164 (1910).


TRANSACTIONS QI


ethical, but the one is official ethics and political economy, the other
is private ethics and business economy or cultural economy.

These considerations lead us into the metaphysical and scientific
problem of the fundamental nature of legal concepts, a problem
whose discussion was started in America by the late W. N. Hoh-
feld, of the Yale Law Faculty, and which may be stated as that of
three different points of view respecting the analysis, terminology
and classification of legal relations. References to this discussion
are given in the footnote.' Since these three points of view will
appear frequently hereafter they may be briefly stated at this point
in a preliminary way:

The first point of view is that of the legal practitioner advising
his client before a trial court, when the facts respecting a given
transaction are assumed to be already in evidence and the court is
construing a specified right and duty as applicable or not to the
case. Here the practical question is, Does this previously accepted
right-duty relation apply to this transaction? Will or will not the
court affirm the said right of one of the parties and its correlative
duty of the opposite party? Will the working rules of society grant
or not grant a right in this case? The answer is positive or negative,


1 Houretp, W.N., “Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as applied in Judicial Reason-
ing,” 23 Yale Law Jour. 16 (1913); 26 Yale Law Jour. 710 (1917); CORBIN, KocourREK,
Pace, “Terminology and Classification in Fundamental Jural Relations: a symposium,”
4 Amer. Law School Rev. 607 (1921); KOCOUREK, ALBERT, “The Hohfeld System of Fun-
damental Legal Concepts,” 15 I//. Law Quar. 23 (1920); ‘‘Various definitions of Jural Re-
lations,” 20 Col. Law Rev. 394 (1920); “Rights in Rem,” 68 Pa. Law Rev. 322 (1920); ‘‘ Plu-
rality of Advantage and Disadvantage in Jural Relation,” 19 Mich. Law Rev. 47 (1920);
“Tabule Minores Jurisprudentia,” 30 Yale Law Jour. 215 (1921); “Polarized and Un-
polarized Legal Relations,” 9 Ky. Law Jour. 131 (1921); Corin, A. L., ““Legal Analysis
and Terminology,” 29 Vale Law Jour. 163 (1919); ‘“‘Contracts for the benefit of third Per-
sons,” 27 Vale Law Jour. 1008 (1918); ‘‘Does a Pre-existing duty defeat Consideration?’’
27 Yale Law Jour. 362 (1917); “Offer and Acceptance and some of the Resulting Legal
Relations,” 26 Vale Law. Jour. 169 (t917); ‘“‘Jural Relations and their Classification,” 30
Vale Law Jour. 226 (1921); Coox, W. W., ‘‘Hohfeld’s Contribution to the Science of Law,’’
28 Vale Law Jour. 721 (1919); ‘‘The Powers of Courts of Equity,” 15 Col. Law Rev. 37,
106, 228 (1915); “Privileges of Labor Unions in the Struggle for Life,” 27 Yale Law Jour.
779 (1918); ‘The Alienability of Choses in Action,” 29 Harv. Law Rev. 816 (1916); 30 id.,
449 (1917); Pounp, RoscoE, “Legal Rights,” 26 Int. Jour. Ethics, 92 (1915); GOBLE, GEO.
W., “Affirmative and Negative Legal Relations,” 4 Il/. Law Quar. 94 (1922); SUMMERS,
W.L. “Legal Intents in Oil and Gas,” 4 I//. Law Quar. 12 (1921); PowEtt, T. R., “Collective
Bargaining Before the Supreme Court,” 33 Pol. Sci. Quar. 396 (1918); Hate, Rosert L.,
“Rate Making and the Revision of the Property Concept,” 22 Col. Law Rev. 209 (1922);
“Law Making by Unofficial Minorities,” 20 Col. Law Rev. 451 (1920); SALMOND, J., Juris-
prudence, 6th ed. (1920), Chapts. X to XV, pp. 179-208; Terry, H. T., Anglo-American
Law (1884), Chapts. III, IV, V, VI, pp. 50-155. The best simplified statements of Hohfeld’s
analysis are in the above articles by Cook on “‘Hohfeld’s Contributions,” and by CorBIN
on “Legal Analysis and Terminology.” HoHFetp’s articles, with Coox’s Introduction
are published in pamphlet form by the Yale University Press.


92 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


affirmation or denial, Yes or No. This was Hohfeld’s point of ap-
proach and may be designated the individualistic concrete, or prag-
matic point of view of a trial court.

The second point of view is that of the logical, mathematical,
or syllogistic relations existing between legal concepts, as to whether
they are contradictory, contrary, reciprocal, when once the major
premise, the law or working rule of society, and the minor premise,
the transaction, are ascertained; and What are the advantages and
disadvantages in general which these working rules provide for an
individual, without reference to any particular concrete case? This is
mainly the point of view of Hohfeld’s leading critic, Kocourek, and
may be designated as the individualistic abstract, or dialectical point of
view of a logician.

The third is the point of view of a supreme court, a legislature,
or an economist inquiring, What are the limits and purposes of
society’s working rules themselves, and what are the economic or
social consequences of a particular legal relation created by a par-
ticular rule of conduct? In short, What is Due Process of Law ap-
plied to a class of transactions? ‘This is the standpoint that takes
into account questions of value and economy, namely, What is the
public purpose underlying the particular working rule or law asserted
or denied? What are the quantitative limits of power and resources
of the parties and the nation? How important relatively are the
contending interests that will be affected by the law or the decisions
conforming to the law, and how intense and extensive are the con-
victions, beliefs, hopes and fears that favor or disfavor one rule of
action as against another? This may be designated as the point of
view of the working rules of going concerns, that is, the social-economic
point of view of the economist or supreme court.

These three points of view will be found to occasion decided differ-
ences in the meanings and use of words. Hohfeld, from the stand-
point of a trial court deciding upon the private interests subserved
or restrained by society’s rules of conduct, reduces the fundamental
jural concepts to eight, and these eight concepts have two sets of
relations to each other, that of “jural opposites” and that of “jural
correlatives.”” He tabulates them as herewith:


: right privilege power immunity

Jural Opposites | no-right duty disability liability
. right privilege power immunity
Jural Correlatives | duty no-right liability —_—_ disability


TRANSACTIONS 93


The primary criticism made by Kocourek against Hohfeld’s clas-
sification turns on a double meaning of the term “opposite” and of
the pair of terms “positive and negative.” Hohfeld intended them in
the pragmatic sense of Yes and No as applied to a concrete case in a
trial court. Kocourek switched them into a dialectical sense of con-
tradiction as applied to abstract universals in the mind of a logician,
and then correctly demolished them. Hohfeld intended to answer
the question, Will the trial court assert a right or no-right for this
plaintiff? No-right is the negative, of which right is the positive,
and one is the “opposite” of the other. But from the dialectical
or universal and abstract standpoint a “‘no-right” and its correlative
“no-duty” might be the rest of the universe, even the stars and
angels. The dialectical negative may be infinity or zero—in either
case it means nothing to finite beings.

But instead of rejecting Hohfeld’s analysis, its logic and accuracy
will be retained if we substitute the quantitative term “limits”
for the indeterminate ‘“‘opposites.”’ The terms positive and negative,
as well as the term opposite, as we have previously observed,! have
not only the dialectic meaning of Yes and No, but also the quanti-
tative meaning of more or less, much or little, plus and minus. Hence,
by substituting the term “limits” we have the outside limits of a
transaction consisting in the powers and opportunities of the parties,
and the inside limits where right-duty ends and no-right—no-duty
begins. Hence instead of the contradictory negative of the preceding
diagram (Figure V) we have the limiting negative, as follows, where
there is both an outside limit of power and opportunity and an inside
limit to the degree of power or choice of opportunities permitted or
required:


FicurE VI
AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS
CORRELATIVES
L | Opportunity
i
m | Right ie 1B B’ Duty
i )
|
S e
No-right |r S SY No-duty


1 Above, Chap. II, p. 44 ff.


94 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It happens, that Hohfeld finds a legal term which he can use for
the “negative” of duty, namely, “privilege.” Substituting this
term for the term “‘no-duty” we have the following scheme:


Ficure VII
AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS
aa CORRELATIVES——
Right Opportunity Duty

L
i 2 133 B’
m |———-——| 0
i w
t e
s | No-right |r 5 Ss’ Privilege


We have to consider the appropriateness of Hohfeld’s terms “no-
right’’ and “‘privilege.”” The term “privilege” is used by Hohfeld in
an enlarged sense derived from that of the privilege of a witness in
court to be exempt from compulsion on refusal to testify where the
testimony would be self-incriminating or the subject-matter is a con-
fidential, that is, a “privileged”’ communication recognized in law.
It is evident therefore that “privilege” is identical with Hohfeld’s
other term, “‘immunity,” in that privilege is the authorized limit where
duty ends, while “immunity” is the authoritative limit where liability
to compulsion ends. This identification will be considered later.

Confining ourselves, for the present, to the authorized behavior
indicated by the term privilege, ‘‘the closest synonym of ‘legal priv-
ilege,’”’ says Hohfeld, ‘‘seems to be legal liberty.” 1 We have already
seen the double meaning of the term “liberty” in the decisions of the
courts beginning with the Slaughter House Cases. Legally, the term
liberty means absence of duty, or rather the limit of duty, and is there-
fore identical with Hohfeld’s enlarged meaning of “privilege.” But,
economically, liberty means choice of opportunities, or choice of two
degrees of power in acting.

Kocourek, while pointing out that Hohfeld uses the term “privi-
lege” in the sense of “liberty,” contends that liberty is a “non-jural”
concept, and this apparently for two reasons:

(1) Liberty is a “positive” act of the will indicated by the “act of
choosing.” This is undoubtedly correct, for “liberty” applies to every

10p. cit. HoHFELD, 23 Vale Law Jour. 41.


TRANSACTIONS 95


act of choosing, even the most coercive or coerced of choices. But if so,
it is because “liberty” has the double meaning of “individual” and
“social-economic” liberty. Individually a person is not thought to
possess “‘liberty”’ if he has no uncoerced options. It is on this account
that we substitute the colorless term “choice of opportunities” instead
of the colorful term “liberty” as indicating the individual’s act of
choosing, and applicable to all choices whether “‘free” or coerced. On
the other hand, the social meaning of liberty is that meaning derived
from the working rules of the state or other concern which tells the
individual what he may do with the help of society, in that society
will prevent others from interfering with his “act of choosing.”
“Liberty,” from the standpoint of these working rules is permission
to choose, protected by keeping other people off, and it applies to any
kind of choosing no matter how coerced or coercive, in so far as the
working rules prevent interference by third parties who might resist
the particular act of choosing.

(2) This is Kocourek’s second reason for holding that liberty is a
“non-jural” concept. Jural concepts, according to him, are only those
that have to do with constraint or compulsion, but “liberty” is the
absence of constraint or compulsion. ‘‘ Duty,” he holds, is a legal con-
cept, since it indicates positive compulsion, but “liberty” is a non-
legal concept since it is negative in the dialectical sense of “‘no-duty.”
This evidently overlooks an essential quality of liberty when vouch-
safed by a working rule in that liberty exists only by way of ‘‘con-
straint or compulsion”? imposed on third parties. It is indeed the
absence of constraint on the party entitled to liberty, but is the pres-
ence of constraint on all potential or possible parties who might inter-
fere with that act of choosing. Liberty is as much a matter of compul-
sion as duty, but where duty says to a person that he must or must not,
liberty says to other persons that they must not interfere with that
person, or that they even must help to prevent still other persons from
interfering, if necessary. Duty is compulsion of the parties to trans-
actions; liberty is permission to those parties by means of compulsion
of other parties who might interfere with the choices of the parties.

It will be seen that each of these arguments made by Kocourek in
holding that “liberty” is a non-jural concept, proceed from his dialec-
tical point of view as against Hohfeld’s pragmatic point of view, or the
point of view of a going concern with its working rules. If, instead of
defining either liberty or privilege as the ‘‘negation” of duty, we


96 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


define it as the “limit”’ or deduction from the scope of the behavior
indicated by the concrete duty in question, and if, at the same time,
we take into account the purpose of the rule that creates the duty, then
liberty is essentially a legal concept, since, within the potential or
possible limits of a transaction, duty and liberty vary inversely to
each other, the duty increasing as the liberty diminishes, and the duty
diminishing as the liberty (or privilege) increases. Liberty is one of
the great purposes of society’s rules of conduct, and can be granted
only by reducing the duties, which is none other than reducing the
rights of opposite parties. If these distinctions are made, then choice
of opportunity, or simply opportunity, becomes the economic equiva-
lent of liberty, and liberty takes its proper place as an ethical or legal
concept implying a limitation of duty.

The foregoing applies to liberty, or privilege, when one is used with
the same meaning as the other. There is, however, an historical
reason why we should substitute the term liberty for the term privilege.
Privilege, historically and popularly employed, signifies a special
privilege not permitted to others under similar circumstances, and we
shall have occasion to use the term privilege in this sense of unequal
liberty, contrasted with the concept of goodwill which is that of equal
and unprivileged liberty. Furthermore, the term “privilege” is used
in the Constitution of the United States as identical with the term
“power” employed by Hohfeld; while the term liberty, in the Slaugh-
ter House and succeeding cases is given specifically the meaning of
free choice of opportunities." Making this substitution of liberty
for privilege in Hohfeld’s scheme we have the following:


Ficure VIII
AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS


ae OORT ACEN VES
Opportunity
i] Right P Duty
‘ ® Is B’
He oe w
t e
Si sNowght | s Ss! Liberty


1 Fourteenth Amendment: ‘No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge
the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property,”’ etc.


TRANSACTIONS 97


A similar observation applies to Hohfeld’s term “no-right,” used by
him to signify the absence of right. But the absence of right may be
either Kocourek’s dialectical denial of a right i toto, or a limit placed
on the quantity of behavior claimed as a right. The former meaning
(denial, negation) is appropriate when we speak of an “absolute”
right as no-right at all, a concept of nothing, in that it refers to the
relation of man to nature, and, of course, therefore contains no ethical
dimensions. The latter meaning (limitation) is intended when we
speak of a right which positively does exist in the actual transaction,
but which is limited at a certain point. For this reason, we shall sub-
stitute the behavioristic term “‘exposure’’ for the dialectical term
“no-right”” employed by Hohfeld, and our correlation of rights and
duties, exposures and liberties, will appear as follows:


Ficure IX
AUTHORIZED TRANSACTIONS
CORRELATIVES
Opportunity
L | Right Eges B’ Duty
i )
m Ww
i e
t | Exposure jr S Ss’ Liberty
s |


The claimant, any one of the four parties, asserts a right to a certain
behavior of performance, forbearance or avoidance on the part of
another, and this claim is then limited by the working rules at a cer-
tain point, leaving the claimant thereby exposed, that is, potentially
damageable without remedy, or protection, by the acts of the others,
to the extent that they are at liberty to act as they please towards him,
unrestrained and uncompelled by duty. Their liberty means that
they can damage him without committing a legal wrong—damnum
absque injuria. Thus while the authorized right of one is correlative
and equal to the required obedience or duty of any other to whom it
applies, the authorized liberty of the other is correlative and equal to
the permitted exposure of the one whose right is limited.

This “exposure” is equivalent to one sense of the word “‘liability,”


98 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


employed by Hohfeld. But the term “liability” has a different mean-
ing when correlated with “legal power,” where it signifies accounta-
bility, responsibility, or subjection toa superior person. For our
present purpose the term liability signifies that the person who has
“no-right”’ is exposed, as far as the protection granted by the working
rules is concerned, to the unrestrained or uncompelled behavior of
him who, to the same extent, is bound by no duty towards him. Sal-
mond mentions the following examples of liabilities correlative to
liberties (privileges), or, as we should say, examples of “exposures”
correlative to “liberties,” namely: the “liability of a trespasser to
be forcibly ejected; that of a defaulting tenant to have his goods
seized for rent; and that of the owner of a building to have his win-
dows darkened or his foundations weakened by the buildings or excava-
tions of his neighbors.”’ 1 To these we shall add all of the exposures to
which any person is liable on account of the liberty of action of other
persons. Thus when the duty to pay a debt was formerly unlimited,
in the sense that the debtor could be imprisoned for debt, the creditor
had a relatively unlimited right enforced by the power of the state.
But when imprisonment for debt was abolished, the increase in liberty
of the debtor signified just that much additional exposure of the
creditor to the chance of not having the debt paid. The same is true
of that great field of “free competition” where injury may lawfully
be inflicted upon competitors. It is the field of damnum absque in-
juria, the field of possible damage without legal wrong, remedy or
protection. Hence our term “‘exposure”’ includes all of the possibilities
of damage to which one is exposed without remedy through the opera-
tions of free competition in buying and selling. The liberty of others
to buy or sell is correlative to the exactly equal exposure to damage
without remedy of him who wishes to sell or buy.

This itemization of its applications will enable us to point out the
exact difference between “liberty” and “‘exposure.”’ Each is a corol-
lary flowing from the principle of working rules addressed by a going
concern to the conduct of its member’s transactions. But where
“liberty” is a corollary that tells what a person may do with the aid
of the concern in compelling others to avoid interference, “exposure”
tells what a person cannot expect the group to do towards protecting
him against interference or damage. It follows then, that liberty and
exposure are exactly equal and correlative in any given transaction.


10p. cit. SALMOND, 195.


TRANSACTIONS 99


The “liberty” of one is his permission to act as he pleases, supported
against interference by the power of the concern or government of
which he is a member. The “exposure”? of the opposite person is his
corresponding inability or incapacity or disability to call upon the
concern to protect him against any damage inflicted by the one who
is thus granted permission to do as he pleases. Thus liberty and
exposure are together the great field of free competition—the field of
privileged damage exactly equal to the field of permitted liberty. It
is the field which we shall find to be identical with that which has come
to be known as “intangible property.”

Thus the two “opposites” in the sense of “limits,” namely, rights
and exposures, vary inversely to each other, just as their correlatives,
duty and liberty, vary inversely to each other. As a person’s right
(which tells how far he can expect the authorities to help him) is en-
larged by the act of a superior authority, just so far is his exposure to
the correspondingly reduced liberty of others diminished; and as his
exposures are increased his rights to the corresponding duty of per-
formance, avoidance and forbearance on the part of others are dimin-
ished.

Liberty, then, is simply the limit of duty, not the absence or denial
of any duty at all. Liberty and duty are limiting dimensions of the
same transaction. At the limit of duty the limit of authorized liberty
begins. To diminish one’s duty is to increase one’s liberty. But this
is also to diminish the protection or assistance promised to the opposite
person and thus to enlarge that person’s exposure to damage without
remedy from the behavior of the liberated one. The field of authorized
liberty is the field where behavior is unrestrained or uncompelled by
authority. One is at liberty to do as he pleases in dealing with the
other, and, in doing so, one commits no unauthorized act, that is,
no wrong, or legal injury. He is not required to avoid, nor to perform
a service, nor to forbear exerting excessive power over another. To
say that one has “no right” is to say that the opposite person has
“liberty,” and to that extent the one is exposed to the pos-
sibility of any behavior that’ the other may choose within that
dimension of his physical, economic, or moral power. The correla-
tive of liberty is a limitation of the right, and this is exposure to
the behavior of others. Liberty and exposure begin where duty and
right end. “ Liberty ” is protected liberty; “ exposure” is unpro-
tected liberty. The two are equal and opposite, that is, correlative.


100 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It will be noted that the term “opposite” and the terms “positive
and negative” have now revealed an additional meaning not yet
adverted to, in the opposition of interests between the person claiming
the right and the person disclaiming the duty. The right of one is
“positive,” the duty of the other is “negative.” While the term
“opposite” in both the practitioner’s sense and the dialectical sense
signifies logical affirmation or denial, and in the behavioristic sense of
limits it signifies more or less, much or little, plus and minus, yet in the
social sense it signifies opposite persons, whether buyer and seller,
borrower and lender, employer and laborer, competitor and competi-
tor. The same treble meaning holds respecting the terms positive and
negative. Positive and negative meant pragmatically and dialecti-
cally Yes and No, then behavioristically it meant more of one and less
of another, then socially it means I and You. The first is logical
inference or dialectics, the second is economics, the third is ethics and
law.


V. AUTHORITATIVE TRANSACTIONS
t. Collective Power


We have seen that unauthorized transactions are likely to fail in the
two respects of lack of correlation and insecurity of expectations. For
this reason a government or judiciary, with its rules regarding trans-
actions, is needed to intervene with the double purpose of correlating
rights, exposures, liberties, duties, and of maintaining the correlation
even if the parties prove false or change their minds. Hence, even these
authorized transactions must prove to be empty and ineffective if the
superior authority is not at hand with power and willingness to make
good on its promises and commands. In order to do so it must bring to
the assistance or compulsion of the individual the collective power of
the concern.

Even the most autocratic government within a concern is not auto-
cratic, if by autocracy is meant government by the will of one person.
That one must always govern, even in that diminutive concern, the
family, mainly through the wills of a few or many with whom he shares
his power. But autocracy has a juristic meaning as well as psychologi-
cal. Psychologically it is the promises and commands emanating
from the autocrat and holding together about his person a sufficient
number of effective spirits through whom he imposes his will on all.
Juristically, autocracy is just the absence of any restraints or com-
pulsions on the behavior of the autocrat himself, which prevent him
from violating his promises or issuing and enforcing unlimited com-
mands. Psychologically, autocracy is personal influence, juristically


TRANSACTIONS IOI


it is absence of another supreme power able to control the autocrat.
Psychologically, it never can be said that any autocrat was or can be
absolute. He is always more or less democratic in psychology, though
autocratic inlaw. This is simply because he cannot be cited to appear
before a superior earthly authority which has power to restrain or
compel him at points where they might think his behavior objection-
able. That is, he cannot be compelled to defend himself in court.

This distinction between psychology and jurisprudence was worked
out slowly in England through several centuries of experiment, but
without any of these theoretical distinctions which now we are able
to make in looking back. Anglo-American law began with William
the Conqueror. William and his lawyers, as we have seen, did not
distinguish between his sovereignty and his property.1_ He was both
lord and landlord. The island was his and the people were both
tenants and subjects. They held of him at his will, on their promises of
good behavior and his promise of protection. There was no recognized
earthly power superior to him that could prevent him from violating
any promise he had made to them. He governed them in ail activities,
the chief of which were the political and economic activities which
later became differentiated. Their political activities appeared in the
crude form of military assemblages where his decrees were formulated,
and his franchises, patents, grants of land—the /ibertates of his favored
subjects—were dispensed. This signified, too, his government at will—
juristically, if not psychologically—of their economic activities—the
production and consumption of wealth. Later theories, originating in
the 17th and 18th centuries, after politics and economics had been
somewhat differentiated, went back, for the data of their theories, to a
more primitive time, a golden age when everybody was supposed to be
free, and formulated ‘natural laws” of self-interest and contract to
explain political and economic activities, while still later theories of the
roth century revised these assumptions and went back to a barbarous
communistic age and then worked out the evolution of economic
conditions from hunting and fishing, herding, trade and commerce, to
modern industry, omitting this significant volitional evolution of
politics and economics which in the Anglo-American case began with
William the Conqueror in 1066. The starting point of modern eco-
nomics and politics begins with conquest and the simple juristic rela-
tions resulting therefrom may be displayed as follows:

1 Above, Chap. III, p. 48.


102 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


FIGURE X
ABSOLUTE POWER
William Subjects & Tenants


Military and
Power economic Liability
behavior


The unlimited legal power of William was equal to, rather was
identical with, the unlimited liability of any subject to have that
power used against him. Psychologically the absolute monarch
might not choose to go beyond a certain limit, and, physically, he
might not be able to go. He must command through their will to
obey. But juristically he might go to any limit, because he could not
be cited to appear in court. Psychologically and physically they
might be safe; juristically they were exposed. Their exposure was
their subjection, which, more accurately, is named their liability, to
his exercise of the collective compulsion which he commanded.

It is presumable that, in addition to any feelings of sympathy for
his subjects, William and his successors were moved at times to ethical
feelings of obligation toward them, under the theory that his power,
being derived from God, ought not to be used without limit on those
who were also subject to the same divine power. Assuming that such
feelings occasionally weighed upon him, the superior prohibition thus
placed on his power can be expressed, in the language of lawyers, as a
disability. His subjects, too, presumably at times entertained the
similar feeling, that, being subject to the same divine rule as William,
they ought not to be subject to his unlimited control of the collective
power. This limit on their subjection to his power would be expressed,
in juristic language, as an immunity. ‘These are the terms which we
have seen employed by Hohfeld.

The difficulty, however, with these ethical and religious notions was
the lack of correlation between the autocrat’s feelings and their feel-
ings. While both might agree on the principle they might disagree in
its application. This lack of correlation might appear as follows:


TRANSACTIONS 103


FIGuRE XI
ETHICAL TRANSACTIONS
UNCORRELATED

William Subjects & Tenants

Political
Power Liability

Economic

Disability Immunity


The barons at Runnymede, in 1215, as is well known, attempted
to place limits on the collective power of William’s successor, John,
by organizing a collective power of their own and inducing him to
sign a document acknowledging these limits. Had they succeeded in
limiting his power they would, of course, correlatively, have limited
their liability to subjection, and the resulting correlation of juristic
relations could have been shown as herewith:


FicurRE XII


LIMITED POWER—CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT


CORRELATIVES
John Barons
L Politics
i
m Power Economics Liability
i
(
s . “1 .
Disability Immunity


The difficulty with Magna Carta consisted in the fact that it was

a scrap of paper, in that there was behind it no enduring physical

power greater than that of the King, able to hold him to his promise

and the working rules agreed upon. It was, indeed, agreed that the

barons might set up a committee to watch him, and this committee

was named in the document,! but it provided no executives or judges
1 Op, cit. McKEcunte, Magna Carta, 466-7; below, Chap. VI, p. 217.


104 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


continuously in session who could bring him before them and decide
any dispute that might arise between him and the subject. The
committee was authorized to declare war on him, but no provision
was made for compulsory arbitration or judicial determination
short of civil war.

This defect was not fully corrected until nearly five hundred years
afterwards, in the Act of Settlement in the year 1700, although many
expedients were tried meanwhile, including that of killing the King
and taking over the operation of the concern by a debating society
that worked badly. The Act of Settlement was more ingenious than
this expedient, in that it retained the King but separated him into
two personalities, one a sovereign, later known as “The Crown,”
the other a private citizen, somewhat privileged indeed,’ but with
rights and liberties like other citizens over his own person and his
private property. Thus property was finally separated from sover-
eignty; not only for the King, but also for all other citizens. The way
was opened for each citizen to become a member of two concerns,
the political concern exercising sovereignty and the business concern
operating property, each according to its own rules.

The essential features of this arrangement, constituting a com-
promise set of working rules, were fourfold. First, the device of
Collective Bargaining by which the collective physical power of the
political concern—the Sovereign, or Crown—could not be exercised
except by way of that mutual veto on each other of King, Lords
and Commons, acting separately. Second, the device of Represen-
tation, or Parliamentarism, by which scattered citizens need not
assemble in arms in order to exercise their veto but might do so
by majority vote through representatives of their own choosing.
Third, the device of Delegation of Power, by which the exercise of
collective power in actual transactions with citizens was taken out
of the hands of the King and entrusted to various agents whom he
could not remove, the executives and judges. By the last device
it became possible, without citing the King to appear in person,
to cite his agents and to place limits, under the name of disabilities,
on their exercise of collective power. Fourth, the device of Official
Responsibility by means of which executives, judges and repre-
sentatives were made liable to removal from office by impeachment
or periodic election, or were made subject to the decrees of the same


1See Cutty, JosepH, Treatise on the Law of the Prerogatives of the Crown, §, 374 ff. (1820).


TRANSACTIONS 105


courts which decided the disputes between private citizens.1 By
this arrangement of working rules ingeniously set forth as a system
of checks and balances, one set of officials, or the citizens partici-
pating in elections, were entrusted with power limited by disabil-
ities, and other officials were made liable to the exercise of that power,
limited by immunities.

These various devices had been worked out through experiment
and then consolidated and clinched in the Act of Settlement, so that
what was attempted in Magna Carta by way of provision for civil
war was now effected by placing limits on the agents of the King in
their exercise of the collective power. In America this arrangement
was carried still further, and the Justices of the Supreme Court were
given authority to limit even the power of legislatures by disabil-
ities, as well as the power of executives, and besides, to determine
the disabilities that limited their own powers as judges.

It will thus be noticed, that the device of Official Responsibility
introduced an arrangement, not clearly contemplated in Magna
Carta, which may be designated Reciprocity. Officials have recip-
rocal powers, liabilities, disabilities and immunities in their relations
to each other, and, most important, the will of the citizen can take
advantage of these reciprocal relations in order to assert for himself
a share in sovereignty and thus be able to bring the collective power
to the support of what he deems to be his own rights and liberties
and the corresponding duties and exposures of others.

Thus it will have been noted, in al! cases of constitutional law
upon which we have based our analysis, that citizens brought suit
not against other citizens but against officials. Holden brought
suit against Hardy the sheriff; Munn brought suit against the State
of Illinois, that is, against all of the pertinent officials of that state.
Having obtained a decision as to the powers, immunities, liabilities
and disabilities of officials, Holden, Munn and others obtained thereby
a decision as to their own rights, liberties, duties and exposures.
Thus, by making officials and citizens responsible to the same courts
and the same process of law the citizens themselves became partic-
ipants in sovereignty, and a reciprocal arrangement is set up between
citizens and officials through the action of other officials. Citizens
obtain not only a negative immunity from the acts of officials, as
contemplated in Magna Carta, but also a positive power in their


1 Leper, FRANCIS, Civil Liberty and Self-Government, 91 (1853).


106 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


own hands to require officials to assist in executing their private
will. They need that assistance in enforcing contracts, transferring
titles to property, executing their wills indefinitely after death,
and so on. In order to accomplish this purpose there must be created
a certain degree of positive power in the hands of citizens to require
officials to perform as well as avoid or forbear, and this power can
be neither greater nor less than the correlative liability of officials
to do as required. This liability, constituting the official respon-
sibility of officials in the use of the collective power, could scarcely
be made unlimited, and the limit becomes the immunity of officials
from discipline at the point where their responsibility ends. In this
way the citizens themselves become sovereigns and lawgivers to a
limited extent, and a reciprocal relation is set up between them and
officials, partly their own subjection to officials, partly the respon-
sibility of officials to them. This situation, consummated by the Act
of Settlement in 1700, is the culmination of the business revolution
and the origin of modern capitalism. The correlation, limitation
and reciprocity of the resulting transactions by which citizens may
hold officials responsible to a limited extent, while their own liability
of subjection to governmental power is greatly limited, is represented
herewith.


Ficure XIIT


AUTHORITATIVE TRANSACTIONS


CORRELATIVES
Official Citizen
Power Liability

R

e B BY | —————__
in  & -
i i Disability Immunity
map
im 1
5 Gl @
Sac Immunity S s! Disability

a

oe hee

S


Liability Power


TRANSACTIONS 107


The important difference to be noted between these authorita-
tive transactions and the previously mentioned authorized transac-
tions consists in the fact that here the subject person is not permitted
to choose any alternative when once the superior person has decided.
There is no bargaining between citizen and official, no power to
withhold service or property, the psychological aspect of the transaction
being that of command and obedience, whereas in the authorized
transactions it was partly command and obedience, partly persua-
sion or coercion. There may, of course, transpire certain debates
between an inferior and a superior, certain negotiations, appeals,
or remonstrances. These may even look like bargaining when they
take the form known as lobbying, log-rolling, trading votes, or cor-
ruption of officials, but when the decision of the competent official,
whether executive, legislative or judicial, is once made, the subject
or official must, of course, obey. In order that these authoritative
transactions may be protected against bargaining, the well-known
devices of a public hearing, notice of hearing, and related procedure
have grown up in practice and been consolidated under the name,
“due process of law.” ?

It will be seen that here we have a measuring off of degrees of power
pertaining to the physical dimensions of performance, avoidance
and forbearance similar to that in the case of authorized transactions.
The collective physical power which the official brings against the
citizen is limited by certain deductions, first, negatively by his dis-
ability, or absence of official power, and second, positively, by his
responsibility, that is, liability to compulsion if he does not bring
the power of the concern to the aid of the citizen. But this liability
is itself limited by his official immunity, wherein he is not to be held
to answer for any discretionary use which he may have made of the
collective power exercised by him.

These collective powers, exercised by officials on behalf of citizens,
are likely to be called into action upon two different kinds of con-
tingencies, and to them may be given the names of Remedial and
Substantive powers. Remedial powers may be employed on occasion
of wrongful acts of other persons, substantive powers on occasion
of rightful acts of self. These two types of legal power are neither
separable nor unlimited, but are determined in the extent to which
they may be exercised by what may, therefore, be distinguished as

1 Below, Chap. IX.


108 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the Determining Powers in that the latter are the discretionary or
legislative limits placed by legislatures, executives and judges on
the exercise of remedial and substantive powers.


2. Remedial Powers—Wrong ful Acts


A debt is owed by one party to another. If the second party
fails to pay at the appointed time and place, the first party forthwith
is vested with a right to come into court and there to require the
executive and the judicial officers to enforce on the second party
specific performance or reparation. Or, rights and liberties of avoid-
ance, forbearance and performance of one party are infringed by
another party and forthwith the former is clothed, by operation of
common rule applicable to similar cases, with a right to have the
courts and executive officers assess, collect and deliver to him the
pecuniary compensation or penalties authorized in respect of the
damage suffered from the wrongful act. The event which calls into
action these potential authoritative transactions is the wrongful act of
an opposing party, or even the assertion or affidavit that there has
been or will be a wrongful act. Wrongful acts, or threats of wrongful
acts, the actual or menaced violation of duty, give rise, at once and
automatically, by the implied promises of the superior authority
embodied in the working rules, to this “right of action,” 4a procedural,
or remedial, right on the part of the claimant to have its functionaries,
the judges, juries, sheriffs, constables, executives, police, even the
army and all the instruments of collective power, to come to his
aid, if necessary. Of course, if the official acts before the wrong is
committed and thus prevents it, the right of action does not perhaps,
arise.

Prior to the wrongful act or menace, the right of action existed
only as an alternative expectancy, a potential right. On the side
of the claimant the expectancy was a juristic “capacity,” a “faculty,”
an “ability,” a “power,” signifying a promise of the state expressed
in one of its working rules that its officials will come to his aid if
he appeals to them. On the side of the opposing party it was a juristic
liability, an expectation of subjection to collective power, a potential
enforcement of duty by officials, in case the plaintiff appealed to them.
The two are correlative and equal. The power of one to get officials
to act if the right is violated or menaced is the liability of the other


1“ Right of Prosecution” in criminal cases.


TRANSACTIONS 109


to be acted upon by responsible officials if he violates or menaces it.
Juristic power and juristic liability are the two opposing sides of
the identical remedial transaction. One is potential power, that is,
legal capacity, to have an authorized transaction enforced; the other
is potential subjection, that is, liability, to its enforcement. Further-
more, the remedy is simply the power of one set of officials to hold
another set of officials responsible for enforcing the remedy. The
situation may be indicated as follows:


Ficure XIV
REMEDIAL POWER—WRONGFUL ACT
Official Citizen Citizen Official


Right Duty (liability)
(power) (liability) |Responsibil-
ity


The remedial power-liability relation between officials is exactly
equal to and is, indeed, the equivalent of the right-duty relation
between citizens, since it is the official liability of the one that consti-
tutes the private liability of the other to have his duty lawfully en-
forced. Quantitatively an authorized transaction is no greater and no
less, in its several dimensions, than the authoritative transactions
sanctifying it. And the legal right of a person is none other than his
power to get the right enforced.

This identity of a right and its remedy, while usually recognized, is
yet confused, in its application to the analysis of legal concepts, by
certain abstractions taken over from the 18th century philosophy
which give to the notion of right and duty an eternal, heavenly, natural,
or preéxisting “substance,” apart from the actual behavior of mun-
dane courts and executives who are depended upon to recognize and
enforce it. In one sense the right does exist as a “‘fact”’ before either it
or its remedy is exercised—but, if so, then the “fact” is only a mental
process, a hope, a fear, an expectation that since a certain working
rule has been applied in the past, it will be applied again in similar
cases. This tendency of the human mind to objectify dogmatically


i fe) LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


what is only its hopes, fears and memories, leads to an abstraction and
segregation of concepts which are, in reality, identical. Thus Hohfeld
refrains from identifying right with power, or duty with liability. The
abstraction is more explicit in Kocourek’s contrast between the two
relations “power-liability” and “claim-duty.” These two relation-
ships are “contraries,” according to him, in that power-liability re-
lates to the advantage of one person who acts to the disadvantage of
another person, whereas claim-duty relates to the advantage which the
other person confers on the first. This contrary direction from which
the behavior initiates will be seen in Kocourek’s examples of “con-
traries,” as follows: ?


Claim-Duty—“The dominus may have a ‘claim’ (right) against the
servus to have an act performed by the servus; for example, to render
services under a contract; here the disadvantage of the servus is the ‘duty’
to do the act.”

Power-Liability—‘‘ When the dominus has a ‘power,’ he can act toward
the servus with legal constraint; for example, an unpaid creditor may bring
an action against his defaulting debtor; the debtor is under the disadvantage
of a ‘liability’ to be sued.”


Evidently, the two situations relate to two alternatives of the same
situation. One is the ethical assertion by the dominus of a duty on
the part of the servus to perform an act for the advantage of the
dominus. The other is the alternative lability to compulsion of the
servus if the dominus resorts to Ais alternative appeal to the court.
The “power-lability” relation calls attention to the “remedial”
procedure but the right-duty relation calls attention to the “sub-
stantive,” that is, ethical assertion. Yet the two are identical. When
there is no remedy there is no right. The ethical remedy is a fight.
The legal remedy is lawful compulsion, either with or without a pro-
ceeding in court. Even if there is nominally a legal remedy yet the
nominally authorized right extends actually no further and is no less
than the actual legal remedy. But the remedy is none other than the
activity of officials setting the machinery of government in motion, and
getting one set of officials to hold another set of officials responsible
for enforcing what they define to be the rights in the case. If the
officials are corrupt, negligent, incompetent, biased, or revolutionists,
the legal right is nevertheless exactly the equivalent of what they do


1Qp. cit. KocourEK, 19 Mich. Law Rev. 49. Kocourex’s “claim” is the equivalent of
HoHFELD’s “right.”


TRANSACTIONS III


or may be expected to do, and practical sophisticated men, without
illusions, act accordingly, although ethically they may condemn the
situation.

Thus private law is inseparable from public law, which is the pro-
cedure designed to enforce responsibility upon officials. The responsi-
bility of officials is the liability of citizens to be required to fulfill their
duties. Responsibility of officials is their liability to be acted upon
through judicial mandamus or injunction, through legislative im-
peachment, through executive removal from office, through popular
election or recall. A customary but abstract term for this procedure
is government, or the State. Windscheid speaks of it still more ab-
stractly as “the legal order.” ! Since, however, government and the
legal order are behavioristically none other than the officials-in-action,
we speak of it as simply officials. The correlative of the power of
officials is the liability of other officials.

Hence every legal right, that is, every authorized transaction, has
two opposite parties burdened ‘each by his correlative duty. The
legal right of B is the legal duty of B’, S or S’, and the legal right of
B is also the duty of officials to enforce the duty of B’, S, or S’.. The
legal duty of B’, S or S’, the servus, is identical with his liability that
the official will perform /is legal duty in affording aremedy. Likewise
the legal right of B, the dominus, is equal to his “power” to set the
machinery of justice in motion and thus to hold officials to their re-
sponsibility. This legal power is his legal “capacity,” “capability,” or
“legal ability,” but since this capacity is none other than the extent to
which he is clothed with power of participation in government it
might be designated simply as “citizenship.” Historically it is Free-
dom as distinguished from Liberty. Liberty is absence of restraint.
Freedom is participation in government.? Yet conformity to usage
will retain the term “power,” understanding, however, that its mean-
ing is identical with that of either citizenship, freedom, or legal capac-
ity or ability.

So that an effective legal right is represented, as above (Fig. XIV),
by the correlation and equivalence of right and duty with official
power and official responsibility. Performance or punishment are the
alternatives offered to one party. They exist together as duty and
liability, the duty to perform and the liability to punishment. The


1 Cited by Pounp, Roscoe, 26 Int. Jour. Ethics, 107 (1015).
2 Below, p. 118 ff.


112 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


identical performance and punishment are also the alternatives of the
other party, but they exist together as the right to have performance
and the power to have punishment inflicted. The latter is the author-
itative remedial transaction; the former is the authorized substantive
transaction, while the two are legal equivalents.

We have suggested above what seems to be the proper distinction
between ethical and legal rights and duties. Ethical and legal rights
were once conceived to be the ‘‘substance’’; remedial rights were the
“form” through which the substance is realized. Rights were sub-
stantive, remedies were procedural. But modern realism reverses this
notion of substance and form. It is the ‘‘form” that mow is the reality,
for it is none other than the actual behavior of officials which is the
only legal reality that we really know. And that which was “the sub-
stance”’ is now only the ethical and legal ideal, the wish, the hope of
something that ought to exist but may or may not exist. It does exist
in one sense—it exists in the mind’s eye. As an abstract entity, exist-
ing infinitely somewhere unknown, or as an ethical right unauthorized
and uncorrelated, or as aright that once existed, the right may fondly
seem to have an independent existence, as is implied in the term “‘sub-
stantive right” applied to these insubstantial entities. While lawyers
insist that the legal and ethical right is there as a “‘fact,” even though
the law provides no remedy, the sagacious legislator, lobbyist, or cor-
ruptionist, goes to the heart of the right and cuts out the remedy. For
as an actual, living reality, the right exists only in the expected be-
havior of officials, and there is where the prudent lobbyist, business
man or workingman locates it and finds its real substance. Idealism
gives to these airy nothings a local habitation and a name, but sagacity
inquires what will the judge on the bench, the jury in the box, the
executive on the highway, do?

This idealism survives in many vestiges. The distinction, for
example, is usually made between a “perfect” and an “imperfect”
right (Salmond, 197; Terry, 140). A “perfect” right is one enforceable
as to all of its collateral implied transactions. An ‘imperfect’ right
is one that lacks enforcement as to certain transactions, such, for
example, as the right against a laborer for damage on account of
breaking a contract to work. Yet according to the Thirteenth Amend-
ment and the wage-exemption laws, this right is unenforceable, and,
to that extent, does not exist even on paper, and has no value in the
actual practices of a going business. It is an exposure and not a right.


TRANSACTIONS 113


So with a laborer’s right against an employer or a corporation. If he
cannot get officials to enforce his right, it does not exist in this finite
world. The “perfect” right is the lawyer’s ideal of what ought to be
the legal right but actually is not.

But these powers and responsibilities of officials are not unlimited.
Hohfeld, as noted above, designates the “opposite ” of “power” a
“disability,” and the opposite of liability an immunity. Kocourek
criticises these “opposites” as either mere negations or as non-jural or
quasi-jural relations. We have indicated above the justification of
Hohfeld’s terminology. If, as above, we substitute the term “limits”
for ‘‘opposites” the same reasoning will apply. Official immunity is
the limit of official liability, and this is correlative and equal to the
disability of other officials in the exercise of power to hold this official
responsible. This disability of officials is therefore equivalent to a
disability of the citizen to require officials to protect his rights, and
hence is identical with his exposure, which now we find to be none
other than the limit of his legal capacity, or power, where begins his
legal inability, incapacity, incapability, in short, his disability. This,
in turn, is the exactly equal immunity of officials which now becomes
the equivalent immunity of citizens, identical with their liberty, which
in turn is the limit of their duties. The correlation, limitation and
equivalence of these legal relations is as follows:


FIGURE XV
REMEDIAL POWER—WRONGFUL ACTS
CORRELATIVES AND EQUIVALENTS
Official Citizen Citizen Official


Duty Liability


L (responsi-
i Power Right B B’. | (liability) bility)
m (power)
i
t S S/
s | Disability | Exposure Liberty Immunity
(disability) (immunity)


Tt must be noted that these diagrams of correlatives, equivalents,
and limitations apply only to a single legal relation in its simplest form
abstracted from all other legal relations. For example, as stated by a


114 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


friendly critic, “while exposure (no-right) in a citizen is perhaps
always accompanied by disability to make it the duty of officials to
act, it is not always accompanied by a disability to terminate the ex-
posure. Thus I offer to plough your field for $100. You have as yet
no-right against me (you are still exposed to the disadvantage of my
not ploughing). And you have a disability to set officials in action of
enforcement. But you have power to extinguish both your exposure
(no-right) and your procedural disability by accepting my offer.” In
this illustration, it will be noted, we have two sets of legal relations,
and not one. The first is a disability, and an exposure to damage; the
second is a power, that is a right, to terminate the exposure.

It will be observed that the above-noted equivalence of rights and
duties with powers and liabilities follows from the social-economic
standpoint of the public purpose that justifies the rules governing
official and private transactions. Hohfeld, looking at it from the
standpoint of the private purpose of an individual inquiring what he
can expect in a trial court, does not consider the economic or ethical
consequences of the law. His classification expresses only the fact
of social compulsion upon the individual—Ours involves the purpose
of social compulsion on any or all individuals.

We distinguish, ‘therefore, between the ultimate purpose and two
levels of instrumental purpose. The ultimate purpose is ethical—the
public welfare or commonwealth as conceived by the authorities. The
instrumental purpose is primarily legal and secondarily economic.
Legally, it is the purpose of controlling the behavior of officials who
exercise the collective power of physical compulsion. Secondarily and
economically, this legal purpose controls the quantities, values and
prices of things produced, sold, bought and consumed. Thus the
instrumental purposes of civilized man are two-fold, namely, control
of the coercive behavior of officials through citizenship, and control of
the economic behavior of other citizens through control of power and
choice of opportunities. The ultimate purpose, inseparable from the
two, is the ethical purpose of inducing and sharing the production of
all the services that constitute the limited resources of the common-
wealth.


3. Substantive Powers—Lawful Acts


The foregoing relates to the “‘capacity”’ of a member of the concern
to have the collective power enforce an authorized duty on an opposing


TRANSACTIONS 115


party, and his even more important capacity to prevent the collective
power from enforcing an alleged duty on himself. But there is a still
further meaning of collective power. The “right” to make a will
carries no correlative duty of the person to whom the property is
willed, and hence calls for no remedy against that party. It is not,
indeed, a right, but rather a “power,” since it is a capacity of the owner
to have future officials of the state make his will effective long after
he has quit. It is a right against officials—a highly complex bundle of
powers and corresponding responsibilities of officials. But even while
he is alive he cannot legally make his will effective by his own power.
Mr. A sells or gives to B a watch. It isa physical performance. But
A cannot transfer to B the power to do as he pleases with that watch
if other persons object, except as the state attributes to B all of the
authorized and authoritative transactions necessary to keep, use and
sell the watch.

A tells B to go to China and buy for him a coal mine. It is a man-
agerial performance. But B cannot obtain the coal mine for A unless
A’s government has made arrangements with China and the other great
powers, and also unless it attributes to B all of the needful powers of
an agent executing the will of A, and imposes on B subjection to the
will of A. This implies that all the necessary officials of government
are burdened with the responsibility of seeing to it that A’s will is
executed. It is this type of power which may be named substantive
powers of citizenship. Substantive powers and remedial powers do
not differ at all in the source of power. Each is the same power of the
citizen to call upon officials to obey his will. A substantive power is
indeed a mere wish unless backed and enforced by a remedial power.
The two are inseparable. The substantive power creates legal rela-
tions, the remedial power enforces them. For these reasons legal
writers do not find it necessary often to distinguish them. Yet the
operative facts which bring the two into existence are separate in
time, in character and in person. A substantive power arises out of
lawful acts of the principal party creating legal relations for the
future. A remedial power arises out of an unlawful act of an opposite
party infringing on legal relations created in the past. In the latter
case, the state holds another party liable to compulsion in the obser-
vance of a duty; in the former case the state authorizes the principal
party to create new rights and impose new duties on behalf or against
self or others. Windscheid distinguished the two when he said, “the


116 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


legal order ascribes to the person entitled a controlling will, not for the
enforcement but for the existence of a command of the legal order.” *
Remedial power as we have seen, is that “power of obtaining in
one’s favor the judgment of a court of law which is called a right of
action.” 2 But substantive powers, besides the three types mentioned
above arising out of wills, alienation and agency, include innumerable
others, such as powers of appointment, abandonment, contracts,
options, the powers of sale vested in a mortgagee, a landlord’s right of
entry, the right to rescind a contract for fraud, and so on.? Terry
describes these remedial and substantive powers as a “fourth species
of rights,” “facultative rights or faculties,” which, however, he says
are not “rights” since they have no correlative duties corresponding
to them.* Salmond, too, points out that, while they are “legally
recognized interests” they are not legal rights stricto sensu, since they
are not rights against any person. They are rather “powers,” which
he defines as the “‘ability conferred upon a person by the law to deter-
mine, by his own will directed to that end, the rights, duties, liabilities,
or other legal relations, either of himself or other persons.”” ‘Public
powers”’ are distinguished from ‘‘private powers.” ‘‘ Public powers”
are the powers ‘‘vested in a person as an agent or instrument of the
functions of the state; they comprise the various forms of legislative,
judicial, and executive authority. Private powers, on the other hand,
are those which are vested in persons to be exercised for their own
purposes, and not as agents of the state.” ° Yet, as we have seen, it is
by making officials responsible to private persons that these “‘private
powers” are also “public powers.” These substantive powers are
rights against other persons, but the other persons are officials.
Hohfeld, likewise, correctly criticises the use of the term “right,”

“so frequently and loosely used,” where the proper term is “legal
ability” or legal power. And, respecting the correlative of legal power,
he says, “While, no doubt, the term liability is often loosely used as a
synonym for ‘duty,’ or ‘obligation,’ yet it is rather a condition of sub-
jection, responsibility, or accountability to a superior power residing
in an opposite person.” “The person (or persons) whose volitional
control is paramount may be said to have the (legal) power to effect

1 Quoted by Pounn, 26 Int. Jour. of Ethics, 108 (1915).

2 Op. cit. 3 SALMOND, 102.

3 SALMOND, 192; HOHFELD, 23 Vale Law Jour. 44 ff.


4TeRRY, Sec. 127.
5 SALMOND, 103, 104.


TRANSACTIONS 117


the particular change of legal relations that is involved in the prob-
lem.”’’ In other words, he has the power, by means of the correlative
official responsibility (duty) imposed on the agents of the state, to
subject the wills of other persons to his own will.

The term “subjection” or “liability” does not signify necessarily
coercive subjection. It may be, and is sometimes persuasive. ‘We
are apt to think of liability,” says Hohfeld, “as exclusively an onerous
relation of one party to another. But, in its broad technical signifi-
cance, this is not necessarily so. Thus X, the owner of a watch, has
the power to abandon his property . . . and correlatively to X’s
power of abandonment there is a liability in every other person. But
such a liability, instead of being onerous or unwelcome, is quite the
opposite.” ? So with other instances of subjection. The beneficiary
of a will, in modern law, enjoys a welcome subjection to the will of the
testator, though this would be unwelcome, if, as in ancient law or the
law of peonage, the law implied in the will of a testator that his heir
should succeed to his debts even though they exceeded the value of
the assets. Modern law tends, more and more, to place a limit on the
substantive and remedial powers of citizens where those powers are
used to coerce, embarrass, or impoverish others, since it is, after all,
the power of the state that is called upon to keep them in subjection.

The combined scheme of substantive and remedial powers is pre-
sented herewith. The substantive power of B is the subjection of
B’, S, or S’, to his will in that it is his power to create rights for himself
and duties upon the others. The extent to which he can create them
is no greater and no less than the remedial power which he can obtain
through responsibility of officials in case of disobedience of his com-
mand. This limit of power to impose compulsion on the others is his
exposure to their liberty through his legal disability which is the dis-
ability of officials to aid him.


10. cit., HOHFELD, 44, 45.
2 Op. cit., HOHFELD, 54n.


118 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Ficure XVI
SUBSTANTIVE AND REMEDIAL POWERS


CORRELATIVES AND EQUIVALENTS——


Power Right Duty Liability


(power) (liability) | (responsi-
bility)
Remedial,
L |Substantive B B’ Remedial,
i Substantive


eee oe


Disability | Exposure | S S’ | Liability | Immunity
Remedial &| (disability) (immunity) | Remedial,
Substantive Substantive


We have noted the statements of Salmond and others that substan-
tive and remedial powers differ from rights in the strict sense, in that
they have no duties corresponding to them. Yet, as already suggested,
if we look at it, not from the practitioner’s point of view in a trial
court, but from the governmental point of view in questions of public
law, there is, as above stated, a significant duty corresponding to
power, namely, the responsibility of officials enforced by mandamus,
impeachment or otherwise. Defined in terms of behavior, the citizen’s
power to make a will is his legal power to command officials to execute
his will after death; the power of alienation is the power to command
officials of the government to recognize and enforce, for the benefit of
the alienee, all of the rights, liberties, etc., previously vested in or dis-
posable by the alienor. So with the power of attorney, and similar
powers to make one’s will effective. And the power extends just as
far as the power and will of government to hold officials to their duties
in enforcing the will of the citizen. MHohfeld, therefore, is within
bounds, when he says that the correlative, even of substantive powers,
is a liability of the person for whose benefit the power is exercised.
But, it must be noted, this liability extends no further than the cor-
responding official liability.

We are now in position to summarize the economic and ethical
significance of these substantive and remedial powers. It is these
that constitute the historic distinction between “freedom” and “lib-
erty.” Liberty, as such, is only the negative of duty, the absence of


TRANSACTIONS IIQ


restraint or compulsion. But “freedom” is positive. The “freedom
of the city” was not only negatively an immunity from control by
surrounding feudal lords and from subjection to other citizens but
also positively a participation in the rights, liberties, and powers
needed to make one’s will effective in dealings with other citizens. The
freedom of the ex-slave was not only that empty immunity from legal
subjection to his master provided for in the Thirteenth Amendment
of Emancipation from slavery, but also the participation in citizenship
provided in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. It was the
latter that endowed him with legal power to buy and sell, to make
wills and contracts, in fact, the power to create, in himself, by his own
labor, rights against any or all other persons to the product of his
labor, and to create in other persons rights to that product by merely
transferring it to them.

This is the historic meaning of freedom distinguished from liberty
and, as such, it is identical with what we distinguish as substantive
and remedial power. Freedom is power. It belongs to the “free-
man,” but not to the mere “freedman.” It is power to call on the
officials to make one’s will effective, and its correlative is the subjec-
tion or liability of an opposite party through the commands of the law.

It is this ambiguity of “freedom” and ‘‘liberty”’ that constitutes the
grand confusion in economic, legal and ethical science. Starting out
with a definition of liberty as mere absence of restraint or compulsion,
the discussion slides over, without seeing what happens, into a “right
to liberty,” and, if a distinction is made between “liberty,” and
“freedom” it somehow is indefinitely thought that freedom is a larger
and more beneficent liberty. What really happens is, that the meaning
has moved over from absence of compulsion by a private citizen into
power to compel others to obey by the help of a superior power. If
the slave is given his “liberty,” as by the Thirteenth Amendment that
confirmed emancipation, it signifies merely a negative limit on the
former right of the master in so far as the Amendment prohibited him
from commanding the unlimited service of the slave. It did not as
yet give the freedman positive participation in all the possible trans-
actions necessary to exercise his liberty. He might be prevented from
going away to another state or neighborhood, prevented from con-
tracting to work for other employers, prevented from obtaining pay-
ment of wages due him, prevented from having access to the courts and
due process of law. While he gained his liberty he did not gain the


120 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


freedom of choice needed to complete his liberty, nor the power of the
state to back him up in his exercise of liberty. In place of his former
obedience to commands he gains only choiceless alternatives, and may
be coerced to return to his master and “willingly” agree to submit
again to commands. Hence the Fourteenth Amendment was neces-
sary, making him a citizen of the United States and providing that
“no state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the priv-
ileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor—deprive any
person of life, liberty or property without due process of law; nor deny
to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”

What this was intended to accomplish was to endow the ex-slave
positively with the same rights to call upon the courts and officials
that other citizens possessed. It added freedom to liberty, for it
added the power of the state to make his will effective by binding
all other persons in obedience to him in the execution of all contracts
which he and they were permitted to make. This freedom, like theirs,
was limited, of course, and these limitations were presumed to accom-
plish that complete equality of treatment, by which not only none
could be deprived of liberty by being compelled to obey another
without one’s consent, but also none could be deprived of freedom
by being compelled to consent through lack of power to make his
will effective through the aid of the physical power of the nation.
Likewise in other fields of collective power. When the capitalist
speaks of “freedom” and “liberty” his freedom is but his share in
the collective power of the nation, and his liberty is but his absence
of duty, but protection against interference in using that collective
power as he pleases.

For these reasons we have distinguished between legal power,
and the physical, economic and moral power of the individual. The
latter, as we have seen, are various aspects of the individual’s power
over others. But legal power is Freedom, the power to call on the
state to authorize, enforce and sanction his use of physical, economic
or moral power. Freedom is the power of the state in the hands of
individuals; economic, physical or moral power is their own power
exercised by themselves. The two coincide, for individual power is
exercised through the performance, avoidance, forbearance, which
constitute the physical dimensions of transactions; while freedom,
or juristic power, in its dimensions of power, disability, liability and
immunity, is the assistance, indifference, or resistance of the state


TRANSACTIONS 121


in subjecting others to performance, avoidance, forbearance beyond
the power of the individual so to do.

Legal power, that is, Freedom, is substantive though inseparable
from remedial power, for it is the very substance on which full member-
ship or citizenship in a concern depends. It signifies the extent to
which the collective power listens to, authorizes and executes both the
will of the individual and the collective will of subordinate concerns.
To the extent that the individual is clothed with this sovereign power
of the state, does he rise from the nakedness of slave, child, woman,
alien, into the armament of a citizen, and his going concern rises
from a conspiracy into a corporation. It is to these substantive
powers and remedial powers that modern capitalism owes its powers
of expansion, for it is they that enable the business man who is citizen
of a great enduring nation to extend his sway from the Arctic to the
Antarctic, from Occident to Orient; that enable him to build up a
credit system by creating obligations that bind him, his successors,
and his debtors, for years and decades to come; that endow him with
power to breathe into his going business the immortality of a corpo-
ration.


4. Determining Powers


Probability.—So far we have considered only what may be de-
scribed as the rational or logical relations existing between legal
and economic ideas, but have not considered the behavior to which
the reasoning applies. These rational relations are simply abstract
concepts emptied of all content and then correlated mathemati-
cally in such a way as to be true no matter what happens. Our


1Tt will be seen that the comment of Dean Pound to the effect that the common law
is a law whose basic concept is that of ‘‘relations” between parties and not that of either
the “will” or of “contracts” or of ‘‘ transactions,” does not run counter to the concept of
the will or of transactions herein developed. The concept of the will which he criticises
is that which we have distinguished as the concept of a “free will” rather than that of a
“free choice.’ His concept of a transaction is that of a “‘legal transaction,” namely a ‘‘con-
tract,” whereas ours is that of an ‘economic transaction.” And his concept of “relations”
is substantially identical with our concept of a transaction. A transaction is an active
relation between parties having both the economic dimensions of opportunity and power
and the legal dimensions of reciprocal rights, duties, etc., which arise from the working rule
to which the transaction belongs. The term transaction is preferable to relations, for our
purposes, because transactions are the concrete active operations of the will which come
before the court and to which the court applies the rules respecting the legal relations deemed
appropriate in the case. Our concept of the will as what the will does rather than what the
will is, combines in one behavioristic concept the legal, volitional, economic and social
concepts which Pound, in his history of legal interpretations, necessarily separates into
the four concepts of the will, the contract, the legal relation and the economic relation.
Pounp, Roscor, Interpretations of Legal History, 57 (1923).


122 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


rationalizing would be equally correct whether applied to a band of
savages, a soviet, England, Germany, or the United States. It has
been simply a scheme of words and definitions, a set of mere symbols
or “universals” tied together logically, it is believed, yet serving
merely as a kind of mental compass by which we may hope to nav-
igate the actual flux of behavior in the world of reality. We need now
to know the differences that must be introduced in order to distin-
guish whether we are talking about savages, soviets, or American
judges, executives, business men and workingmen. We construct
the compass because we wish to know where we are going and what
to do. The compass is an illusion if we do not know the behavior
of stars, winds, waves and lighthouse keepers.

Tt is the duty of a policeman to arrest persons found intoxicated
in public places. In order to do this he carries with him the potential
power of the state. His exercise of that power is limited at the point
where his legal disability begins, and to that extent the alleged intoxi-
cant is legally immune. The policeman also is liable to be held
responsible for neglect of duty or excess of power, in ensuing trans-
actions with his superior officer or with the court. And this lia-
bility is also limited at the point where he can expect immunity.
To that extent the intoxicant is legally liable. These are the just
mentioned abstract relations which surround that policeman and
that intoxicant when they happen to come together. But the actual
relations between them, which determine how much immunity,
liability or liberty there actually is, depends on what is done; and
what is done is determined by that choice of alternatives which we
name “‘discretion.”” The policeman decides first, whether the alleged
intoxicant is really intoxicated. Whether a given person thus found
is intoxicated or not is a matter of definition, of facts, of beliefs,
wishes and values. One policeman may not see intoxication until
the intoxicated is helpless or violent.. Another may see it in a slight
entanglement. One may place a high value on liberty, another on
duty, another on virtue, another on joy. Within the limits of immu-
nity at which the chief of police cautions, disciplines or removes the
policeman, or the court or jury sustains or reverses him, lies his
field of discretion where his own definitions and valuations determine
both the facts and their weight. Within that field his will is the
will of the state. He is the state-in-action. He zs the state. The
state is what its officials do. And what they do is to proportion the


TRANSACTIONS 123


behavior of citizens by offering inducements in the directions which
they consider important and away from the directions which they
reprobate.

So it is with other officials. The legislature levies a tax on property.
It lays down a common rule within the limits of its own immunity
allowed by the court. But it is the assessor who values the property.
Between the maximum and minimum limits of discretion, where the
assessor is removed or reversed, his estimates of value give weight
to the facts and his will determines the direction where taxpayers
can make or lose money. Or a public commission places a value
on property for compulsory purchase or for regulation of rates and
services. Or another sets a minimum wage to be paid by employers,
another a maximum price to be paid by consumers. Or a court and
jury determine the damages to be paid by one citizen for infringing
the rights of another. Ora court of equity creates a valuable property
in the goodwill of customers by enjoining certain practices of a would-
be competitor. Each of these official acts determines the direction
of opportunities and inducements for citizens. Over all is the Supreme
Court, enjoying the immunity of determining its own immunity
within which it proceeds with its definitions, feelings, valuations,
weighing of facts, and then determines the limits beyond which
legislatures, executives, minor judges and itself may not go in pro-
portioning the inducements which guide the behavior of citizens.
Throughout, it is the officials-in-action who constitute the state-in-
action, and the legal relations which we have discussed are formal
statements of ideals, wishes and hopes which may or may not be
realized when the officials come to act.

These fields of discretion, with their probable interplay of wills,
actually determine the limits of the substantive and remedial powers,
or rather, the substantive and remedial powers are the determining
powers of the human will in its collective activity. They are legis-
lative in character, but are exercised also by courts, executives and
administrative officials in so far as they exercise discretion in choosing
between alternatives, and their significance consists in that they
determine how far the physical powers of the state shall go. In this
respect they have to do, as we have noted, with two sets of relation-
ships—those between private citizens and those between private
citizens and the state. The two are equivalent for, when the relations
between citizens and officials are determined this determines also


124 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the relations between citizens themselves. These determining powers
are not only the taxing power and the power of eminent domain,
but also the police power which determines the limits of property
and liberty, including the limits of defining and enforcing contracts
and naming the legal tender by means of which individuals may
free themselves of liabilities.

It is these determining powers of individual wills within the limits
set by other wills, which, when fully portrayed, give a complete
scheme of legal correlatives, equivalents, limits and reciprocals
accompanying every transaction, as follows:


Ficure XVII
CORRELATIVES, EQUIVALENTS, LIMITS, RECIPROCALS


CORRELATIVES AND EQUIVALENTS


Official Citizen Citizen Official
L
1
m Power Right Opportunity Duty Liability
i
t
s |--———-—_|-_——_—_| P B B’ |-
Oo
and w
Disability | Exposure | e Liberty | Immunity
R pS S’
e
ee eee en Ae bs
i
Ip .
r | Immunity | Liberty Exposure | Disability
C0)
C
a SS fF i
l
S
Liability Duty Right Power


A logical scheme of this kind is valuable as a compass or method
of analysis and contrast, but of itself it not only is open to the crit-
icism of Justice Holmes as to the “illusion of certainty,” but that
very illusion gives rise to metaphysical “entities” and “substances”
conceived as existing apart from and independent of the behavior


TRANSACTIONS 125


of officials and citizens. Thus the “state,” as above suggested,
is often conceived to be a vague entity acting as “principal,” and the
officials are represented as the “agents” of the state who may or
may not execute the “will of the state.” But the state, from the
practical standpoint of politicians, lawyers, business men and work-
ingmen without illusions, is none other than the officials-in-action.
Instead of bringing suit against the “state,” Holden brought suit
against Hardy, the sheriff. It was nominally the state of Illinois,
but actually the officials of Illinois, against whom Munn brought
his suit. The citizen can disregard the state—he wants to know
what the court and the sheriff will do.

These illusions naturally arise from the hopes and fears of mankind
which substitute wishes for behavior. We conceive that what we
wish is the reality, the real thing. Thus rights and duties also, like
the state, are given the illusion of a reality existing apart from the
conduct of officials.

The illusion is concealed in double and even treble meanings of
words. The word “right” has one meaning when contrasted with
“wrong” and another when contrasted with “duty,” and the latter
has both an ethical and a legal meaning. Yet the several meanings
are merged. Right and wrong, right and duty, are each matters of
opinion and differ with different persons, different ages, different
civilizations. Right and duty are but an assertion of one person’s
wishes against another person, guided by opinions of right and wrong.
Right and wrong are opposite qualities; right and duty are opposite
persons, and both are ideals, rather than realities, a compass rather
than the ocean. The reality is the probability of human conduct—
the ideal is the hoped-for conduct.

Now the distinction between ethical rights and duties and legal
rights and duties is the distinction between two classes of proba-
bility respecting human conduct. Legal rights and duties are none
other than the probability that officials will act in a certain way re-
specting the claims that citizens make against each other. The statute
law prohibits the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors. The
common law enforces contracts. The “law” is there. It seems to
be an entity existing apart from the conduct of courts, juries and
sheriffs. Rather is the law a compass pointing to an ideal in the
midst of uncertain probabilities. It is an ethical ideal constructed
and registered by a majority that has been brought together accord-


126 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ing to certain rules of constitutional law or by the slow growth of
the common law, and it is a probability that officials will or will
not act in conformity to that ideal.

But there is also an ethical ideal not relating directly to the state,
and an ethical probability. In most of the transactions of modern
society respecting the rights of property, liberty, domestic relations,
and so on, scarcely one transaction in a billion gets before the courts
or in the hands of public officials. These ethical transactions are
guided, nevertheless, to an indefinite extent, by the probabilities of
official behavior, but the bulk of transactions are on an ethical
level guided by ethical ideals considerably above the minimum legal
probabilities of what officials will do. The bulk of transactions are
ethical in the sense that they occur on a non-authoritative or non-
authorized level above that where the legal power of violence is
called into play. And the great difference among laws is in the
relative predominance of the ethical and the legal probabilities,
very little legal activity being necessary where the ethical proba-
bilities are high and much of it being needed where the ethical proba-
bilities are low, compared with the then legal code.

The fact, however, that the legal and ethical probabilities grow
up historically together, has its bearing on the fundamental assump-
tions underlying the thought of Kocourek and others, that liberty,
for example, is a “non-jural” concept. If we start with Herbert
Spencer’s historical or ethical concept of the individual as a free
man existing prior to law, then man’s liberty has been gradually
taken away from him by the common law, by equity and statute
law. But if we start with individuals as subjects of conquest, slavery,
serfdom, then liberty has gradually been taken away from the masters
and bestowed on the subjects. This is evidently the historic process
since the time of William the Conqueror, and therefore, instead
of saying that liberty is a non-jural concept, we should say that
jural relations are the probabilities of official behavior in apportion-
ing the compulsory powers, liabilities, disabilities and immunities
of society according to the minimum ethical ideals current at the
time. While a logical scheme of correlation abstracts jural relations
from economic or ethical content, a behavioristic scheme conforms
to the historical development of law, following, as it does, the economic
conditions and the ethical ideals which spring from those conditions.
So that, instead of being solely a set of logical or syllogistic deductions


TRANSACTIONS Ley)


from assumed premises, as our abstract discussion in preceding
sections might indicate, Law, Ethics, and Economics are different
aspects of the same science of probabilities of human behavior.
Law is a science of the probabilities of official transactions in the
exercise of authorized physical coercion; Ethics is the science of the
probabilities of both official and private transactions; while Economics
is a science of the probabilities of official and private transactions
in utilizing both human and natural resources for ethical, economic
and public purposes.

Purpose.—Thus it is that a codrdination of the fields of law, ethics
and economics cannot be accomplished without including the concept
of human purpose. Probability is inseparable from purpose, or,
rather, purpose is the choice of probabilities. And this is the difference
between “‘behaviorism” and “‘volitionism.”’ A behavioristic definition
of terms is a classification of probabilities. A volitional definition
is a choice of probabilities. Hence the purpose within the definition
is the essential part of the definition. If the concept of purpose is
omitted then the social scientist falls into either physics or met-
aphysics. The term “liberty” for example, as above referred to,
was said to be a “non-jural” concept. The law, it was said, deals
only with “constraints,” and liberty is the contrary of constraint,
since liberty is conceived to be the negative “no-duty,” which is
nothing or anything.

Thus “liberty” is non-jural because the purpose of the law is
eliminated from the definition of law. But certainly a bald restraint,
under the name of duty, without a purpose in imposing it, can hardly
be affirmed of the human will. The purpose in imposing duties of
avoidance on some persons is that of creating liberty in other persons.
An economic liberty, which is none other than choice of opportunities
guided by probabilities, is also an ethical and a jural relation because
it exists only through official behavior designed to permit and au-
thorize it.

Thus a definition of the will-in-action is a description of purpose-
in-action. It requires that the peculiar character of the will shall
be distinguished from that of other forces in nature. The will is
the only force that can choose between alternative degrees of power
and can also place a limit on the exercise of its own power. Other
forces do all that they can under the circumstances, which signifies
that they run along the lines of least resistance. But the will, by


128 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


reason of purpose, chooses lines of greater and greatest resistance,
while placing its own limits on the power it will exert in overcoming
resistance.

“As to the nature of the will and of the control exercised by it,”
says Salmond, “‘it is not for lawyers to dispute, this being a problem
of psychology and physiology, not of jurisprudence.”+ But the
“nature of the will’ is the problem of the economist and of the
Supreme Court in matters of constitutional law. A trial court,
with which Salmond was wholly concerned, may take the will for
granted since it has before it the evidence of a particular act of will
which it may properly define as “positive” or “negative,” the one
being the act in question, the other being the “omission” of that act.
But, from the standpoint of “the nature of the will” itself, there
is no such thing as an “omission.” An omission is a not-act. But
the will cannot help acting. It must act. And it was this very fact
of “the nature of the will” that led Justice Field in the Slaughter
House Cases, and all the justices in the Allgeyer Case, to change
the definition of “liberty” from absence of physical coercion to
absence of economic alternatives. It is a “condition of servitude,”
says Justice Field, if a person is ‘‘allowed to pursue only one trade or
calling and only in one locality of the country.” 7 Thus “‘servitude”
was defined as economic coercion, while “slavery”? was physical
coercion. What the court did in changing this definition was to
enlarge the purpose of the law from the prevention of physical coercion
to the prevention of economic coercion, in order that citizens might
act according to what they deemed to be “‘the nature of the will.”

But the will not only performs while avoiding, it also chooses
between exercising a greater or less degree of power in its performance.
While the term “forbearance,” as we noted, is usually applied to
those omissions which are “intentional”? as distinguished from
unintentional omissions, yet the degree to which a performance is
carried may also be intentional. This meaning of “forbearance”
is that of a limit placed by the will on its degree of power put forth
in a performance, and it was this dimension of the “nature of the
will” that decided the cases of Munn 2. Illinois and Holden v. Hardy,
and led to the court to place a duty of forbearance on capitalists
for the sake of the welfare of farmers and laborers.

The economic judgments arise from limited natural resources


1 SALMOND, 323. 2 Above, Chap. II, p. 13.


TRANSACTIONS 129


and over-population, and it is exactly this relation of population
to resources that gives rise also to those ethical judgments and re-
straints which create the ethical ideals of duties and liberties, of per-
formance, avoidance, forbearance. Each transaction is economic
in that each individual is endeavoring to make the largest possible
use, for his own purposes, of his limited resources and faculties;
and it is ethical in that his resources consist in the opportunities
and powers which constitute the private property of others. These
resources controlled by others he can realize for self and for still
others, with whom he sympathizes, only through transactions with
them, wherein the inducements and resistance employed are per-
suasive, coercive, deceptive or violent.

Reciprocity.—It is the concept of purpose that introduces into
transactions the concept of reciprocity. Opposite parties are clothed
each with a similar outfit of rights, exposures, duties and liberties.
From the standpoint of a practitioner before a trial court this comple-
mentary scheme takes on a mechanical notion of “reciprocals”
as when Kocourek contrasts a “power” as the advantage gained
by the person in setting the law in motion against another, and its
“reciprocal privilege” as the inability of the other to set the law
in motion against one’s self.! But, from the standpoint of purpose,
the question is the volitional one, Why does the law provide recip-
rocal advantages and disadvantages for opposite persons?

This underlying notion of reciprocity is not brought out by Hohfeld
since he is not concerned with the whole scheme of jurisprudence,
but only with what an individual may expect the trial courts to do
under existing law. But supreme courts, in questions of due process
of law are inquiring, Why do they do it? The question is indeed,
the legislative one of public policy, usually concealed by the court
under an intellectual process of changing the definitions of words
as used in the Constitution. We have seen the changes made in the
meanings of the terms property and liberty and the resulting changes
in public policy. Another constitutional term, “equality,” is more
deeply embedded in precedent and its meaning is being changed
more slowly.

Both modern economic theory and legal theory are founded on
doctrines of equality as well as liberty. But the meaning of equality
is being gradually changed to that of reciprocity. If all individuals

1 Op. cit.. KocoureK, 19 Mich. Law Rev. 49-56. Above, p. 110.


130 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


were exactly equal in physical, economic and persuasive powers,
then there would be no reasonable purpose in placing any limits on
their liberties, since no one could harm or mislead another anyhow.
But, since the real fact is one of astounding inequalities, limits are
placed somewhat on the liberties of the more powerful under the
name of duties, such that a more reasonable degree of equality may
be maintained. ‘These duties create correlative rights on behalf
of the inferiors which are equivalent to reducing the exposure of
the weaker parties by reducing the liberty of the stronger. Con-
versely, a reduction of duties on the part of inferiors increases their
liberty while reducing the rights and enlarging the exposures of the
stronger. According to the degree to which these determinations
are carried is there constructed a reciprocal exposure of each to the
liberty of the other and a reciprocity of rights and duties.

We have seen this process in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amend-
ments and in the Munn Case and the Holden-Hardy Case. A strict
interpretation of the doctrine of equality would have held the laws
and even the Amendments in question unconstitutional as depriving
the parties of equal liberty, and such interpretations have frequently
been made, but a classification of the parties according to differences
in their economic strength changed the meaning of liberty into that
unequal liberty which is reciprocity. Equality of treatment was
retained, but it was equality between those of similar economic
power in the same class, and not equal liberty between those of
unequal power in opposite classes.

This change from equality to reciprocity depends for its validity
on the purpose believed to be effected by the law in question. The
physical power of the nation is called upon to limit the economic
power of one class and thus to enlarge the economic power of an
opposing class, as respects that particular class of transactions.
But this could be done in no other way than by giving to the private
purposes of a weaker class a public preference over the private purposes
of the stronger class; their private purposes became public purposes
to that extent.

How far this preference shall go is a matter, not of equality or
logic, but of opinion and valuations. The weaker class, for some
reason, is valued more highly than the stronger class, at that par-
ticular juncture or class of transactions. Those who exercise the
determining powers of the nation make a choice between classes of


TRANSACTIONS 131


human beings and resolve to employ the sovereign powers in behalf
of one class by placing disabilities and responsibilities on the other
class. Thus reciprocity is the official valuation of the virtues and
vices of human beings.


This point where human value comes into the decisions of courts
is clouded, not only by this dubious meaning of equality, but also
by dubious meanings of the term “correlation.” The opposite of
this term, “a lack of correlation,” sometimes refers to a lack of reci-
procity, sometimes to a lack of correlation between a right and its
corresponding duty, sometimes a lack of consistency. These it
will be seen from Figure XVII are three entirely different relations.
The reciprocal duty differs from the correlative (corresponding)
duty in that it is a subtracting duty deducted fron one’s liberty, whereas
the correlative duty is a supporting duty imposed upon the opposite
party. A correlative duty supports, even creates, one’s rights, but
the reciprocal duty deducts from one’s rights. There is no equality
of one’s own rights and duties, but there is an equality, that is, corre-
spondence, of one’s rights and other’s duties.

The same is true of liberty and exposure. One’s exposures are
exactly equal to the correlative liberties of others, but one’s ex-
posure is the reciprocal of one’s own liberty, and is always unequal,
since no person is ever exactly equal to any other person to whose
liberty he is exposed.

If, now, the term “correlation of rights and duties” means “cor-
respondence of rights and duties” it is meaningless in arriving at
decisions regarding equality. An authorized right cannot be defined
without going in the circle of defining its correlative (corresponding)
and exactly equivalent duty of others. One is the “I” side, the
other is the “you” side, one the beneficial, the other the burdensome
side of the identical transaction.

But, at the same time, a right cannot exist without some deduction,
however great or small, by virtue of a reciprocal duty clinging to
it and diminishing its possible benefits. The legal maxim, sic utere
tuo ut alienum non ledas, testifies to this reciprocal duty deducting
from the orbit of the right. For, however useless this maxim may
be as a measure of the amount of the deduction,' it testifies to a
minimum deduction accompanying every right, to the effect that
one’s right or liberty shall not be exercised in such a way as to infringe
upon the rights or liberties of others. The very reason why this
maxim is useless as a help to decisions, in that it “begs the ques-
tion,” is because it has the double meaning of correlative (correspond-
ence) and reciprocity. In the sense of correspondence it is mean-
ingless, for, as in Figure XVII, the reciprocal duty of one is always
exactly equal to the reciprocal right of the other, no matter how


1 Bocvier, 2163 and cases cited.


132 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


big or little it may be, like the two sides of a board. And in the
sense of reciprocity the maxim begs the question for it requires a
choice between degrees of reciprocity—like two different boards,
one of which may be made bigger or smaller than the other to any
feasible extent desired. A correlative right and its duty are always
identical and equal. One is the shiney, the other the seamy side
of the same transaction. A reciprocal right and duty are never
identical nor equal, for one is a deduction from the other. A cor-
relative duty, in the sense of “correspondence,” cannot by any
device be made quantitatively different from the right to which it
is correlated. The right is always equal to the duty, no matter how
coercive the transaction may be. To speak of equality in this sense
is meaningless. But whether the reciprocal duty approaches quan-
titatively the right to which it is attached is always a matter of
discretion as to the degree of power that should be permitted or
supported for either party in view of the relative human values
attributed to them. This is a matter of belief, feelings, emotions,
values, that is, of opinion, and opinions differ.

A third meaning of “correlation” is that of the logical consistency,
or mechanical codrdination, existing between the several parts of
a statute or a judicial opinion deciding the case. Here the term cor-
relation signifies as nearly a mathematical process of pure reason-
ing as the human intellect is capable of attaining, without mixture
of values, feelings, opinions, or the weighing of divergent interests.
It is a judgment of mechanical perfection, of the workability of the
several parts when combined into a mechanism for reaching the
ends desired and valued. Professor Freund, who more than other
legal writers has brought forward the notion of reciprocity as dis-
tinguished from equality in its modern industrial applications, employs
this term “correlation” in the double sense of reciprocity and con-
sistency.’ Yet the two are distinct. Consistency is logic, reciprocity
is feelings or opinion.

The threefold distinction gains significance on account of the three
different meanings of “lack of correlation.” In the sense of “cor-
respondence” there can be no lack of correlation. The correlation
cannot be violated in any authorized transaction, although it may
be, and is, in what we have distinguished as ethical transactions.
For, the resort to authorized transactions is made for the express
purpose of correlating rights with duties where there is a lack of
correlation if left to private opinion. On the other hand, correlation
in the sense of “reciprocity” is a matter of degree and may be changed
to fit the opinion of what is “reasonable” or “fair” or “equitable”
between the parties, under the circumstances. But in the sense
of “consistency,” correlation is a matter of logic, intellect, mathe-
matics, mechanical perfection or imperfection.


1 FREUND, Ernst, Standards of American Legislation, 225 (1917).


TRANSACTIONS 133


To violate the principles of correlation in the sense of correspondence
is impossible; to violate them in the sense of reciprocity is injustice;
in the sense of consistency is illogical. To remedy the lack of corre-
lation, in the sense of correspondence is meaningless; in the sense of
reciprocity is to establish what is felt to be a more reasonable degree
of mutual benefits and burdens; in the sense of consistency is to
rearrange the parts in a more logical or workable system. The remedy
for the first “lack of correlation” is tautological; for the second it
is a change in the feelings of value; for the third it is to think clearly.

It is, as we have suggested, by identifying the notion of consist-
ency with the notion of reciprocity, that legal reasoning substitutes
logical deduction for feelings of value, and thus accomplishes that
“illusion of certainty which makes legal reasoning seem like mathe-
matics.” The valuation of interests consists in weighing their relative
importance. It is a matter of relative human values within a com-
munity of interest where the burdens and benefits of limited resources
must be shared, and these connot be shared by rules of logic; they
are shared according to feelings of value, that is, of relative importance
or reciprocity.


There are, thus, accompanying every authorized transaction two
pairs of correlatives indicating the authoritative correlation of the
two ethical valuations of opposing parties, and these arise from
that underlying notion of reciprocity, which is none else than the
system of limited, or Austin’s “relative,” rights and duties. These
are the two pairs of correlatives, right-duty and liberty-exposure,
backed by their equivalents, power-liability and immunity-disability.
Each person at each end of the transaction is authorized, permitted
or restrained, according to the dimensions which these correlatives
place upon his part in the transaction.

For, a transaction involves the possibility of several acts of either
party in consummating it, and the reciprocals and limits pertaining
to each party are variously adapted to these possible acts. A person’s
largest power to put his own will into effect is the area coverd by
his rights, for here opposite parties are subject to duties of perfor-
mance, avoidance, or forbearance, and the superior authority comes
to one’s aid so that he does not depend alone on his own exertions.

This aid, however, is limited, and at that limit one is exposed
to the liberty of opposite parties. Within this field opposite parties
may choose performance, avoidance, or forbearance, without com-
mitting a wrong. The superior authority simply looks the other way.

This exposure of a person is quite different from the liberty of
the same person. The one may be increased without increasing


134 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the other, depending on the degree of reciprocity deemed proper
by the enacting authority, and the relative physical, economic or
persuasive inequalities. For the liberty refers to a different act
from the exposure. It is a person’s liberty, for example, without
committing any wrong, to do any collateral performance, avoidance
or forbearance necessary to induce another to act. Whereas his
exposure is his danger of lawful damage that may possibly be inflicted
by another.

Likewise with one’s reciprocal duty. It deducts from his liberty
by positive act of government whereas his exposure deducts from
his right. Duty implies, by a positive act of government, compulsion
on him by the superior authority, whereas exposure implies only
lack of assistance from government. Yet the duty of one is not
equal to the duty of the other—it is a reciprocal of that duty, depend-
ing upon the relative importance, for the transaction, assigned to
one and the other by the enacting authority.

In short, these several dimensions, measured off by these variable
limits, indicate the attitude and promises of the superior authority
towards any party to a transaction. A person’s legal right is the
positive assistance of government; his exposure is the indifference
of government; his liberty is the permission of government; his
duty is compulsion by government. And that which applies to
the working rules of political government with its sanctions of physical
coercion, applies also to the working rules of industrial governments
with their sanctions of economic coercion, and to the working rules
of cultural governments with their sanctions of favorable and unfavor-
able opinions of those whose opinions are deemed worth while.


VI. WorxKING RULES


We have noticed throughout that the human will is not a lawless
capricious force but that it operates within certain limits. Within
these limits it has an uncertain range of discretion or freedom of
choice. It is these limits of discretion that are usually spoken of as
“laws.” Yet from the standpoint of a creative and intelligent being
who controls more or less the operation of the forces about him, these
laws are not something inevitable which he cannot overcome—they
are rather certain conditions or forces having strategic or limiting
and complementary relations to each other, which a sufficiently in-
telligent being can manipulate, and thus, although operating upon


TRANSACTIONS 135


something that goes on independently of his will, yet its independent
operation comes out with results somewhat in conformity with what
he intended. These laws or limits within which the will operates
may be reduced to the three principles or tendencies which the in-
dividual consciously or unconsciously takes into account, and each
of which has been set forth by various schools of economists at dif-
ferent times as a ruling principle while the others are taken for granted
as the presuppositions of common sense not needing to be formu-
lated in their own rights as factors in the situation.

These three ultimate principles we have designated the Principle
of Mechanism, applying solely to the physical or non-living forces
of the universe, but including man himself and society as evidently
a special case of mechanism; the Principle of Scarcity, applying to
the biological, psychological and hence to all human and social phe-
nomena, since scarcity is the relation of living things to limited resour-
ces; and the Principle of Working Rules applying to all associations
or groupings of individuals which have a continuing existence as an
organized movement into and out of which individuals come and go
by birth, adoption, death and expulsion.

It is these working rules and the extent and manner in which in-
dividuals guide their conduct with reference to them that consti-
tute what is sometimes pictured as a “‘collective will,” a “social
mind,” a “government of laws and not of men,” a “divine” or “‘nat-
ural” order, and so on, although such personification and analogies
are merely compendious phrases indicating in reality only a set of
working rules which keep on working regardless of the incoming and
outgoing of individuals.

Now, as respects individuals, these three principles of mechanism,
scarcity and working rules place limits upon the conduct of individ-
uals and thus reduce the will to a certain uniformity of action usually
characterized by such words as “reason,” “virtue,” “ethics,” “com-
mon sense,’ where, without this uniformity, the will is character-
ized by such words as “‘caprice,” “vice,” “unethical” or “lunacy.”
There is a presumable difference between the principles of mechan-
ism and scarcity, on the one hand, and the principle of working rules
on the other hand, in that the latter spring from the human will it-
self whereas mechanism and scarcity are non-human. Yet even
this distinction is obliterated if to the term working rules is given, as
is proper, a meaning applicable to all communities, packs, herds,


136 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


colonies, hives, hills, and so on, consisting of a succession of individ-
uals which enter, codperate and disappear while the community it-
self goes on indefinitely—in short, the term working rules signifies
membership in a going concern. The working rules of human so-
cieties have evolved out of the working rules of pre-human societies,
and indeed the evolution of individuals is in itself an evolution of
capacities to act in concert according to common rules accepted by
each individual. Even words and languages are but signs and sym-
bols accepted in common by those who enter and remain with the
group, and are, like other working rules, the means of that concerted
action which constitutes membership in an organized mass movement.

Languages and many other working rules are accepted by individ-
uals through daily experience and instruction of their elders, thus
becoming habits and customs, and this is undoubtedly the origin of
the great bulk of them, but many of them, in the course of time, are
imposed by way of conquest and permanent subordination of classes
or nations of individuals. It was this latter class of rules, taking the
form of the absolute will of monarchs or the conscious determina-
tions of legislatures, with correspondingly great abuses, which led
the philosophers and economists of the eighteenth century to revolt
against all working rules whatsoever as the mere capricious, wicked
or insane control of human behavior by arbitrary authority, and to
endeavor to set up an ideal society which should have no working
rules whatever, except those which might be imposed by such me-
chanical principles as Newton had made familiar or such as a divine
providence acting according to reason, virtue and common sense
might impose. In short, the working rules which the rationalists
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries revolted against in church
and state originated from the principles of prerogative based on con-
quest, whereas the working rules which those rationalists proposed
to substitute under such names as reason, natural law, natural order
and so on, had originated from the principles of custom and habit,
and, in Anglo-American jurisprudence, were known as the common
law.

There was a good justification for giving the name of “reason” or
“natural law” to these customs of the common law, for the common
law did not signify any kind of custom or habit whatsoever, but only
those customs and habits which had been followed as guides in the
decision of disputes and were therefore the approved, good and work-


TRANSACTIONS 137


able customs to the exclusion of bad and disruptive practices. Hence
the kind of “individualism” which the rationalists set up, over
against the decrees and statutes of monarchs and legislatures, went
on the assumption of individuals whose habits and customs con-
formed to the working rules of the common law found to be reason-
able through centuries of the very commonplace and unobtrusive
settlement of disputes between fellow-members of the community.
To these, quite obviously, might be given the name of reason, divine
providence, natural law, or even an harmonious equilibrium of me-
chanical forces, according to the theological, metaphysical or ma-
terialistic bent of the philosopher who propounded them, although
from the more modern and sophisticated bent, which inquires not
what a thing zs but what it does, they are, quite as obviously, to be
given the name of working rules.

The oversight of the jurists and economists of the eighteenth cen-
tury proceeded from merely the fact that they did not have the advan-
tage of the modern psychology of habit and custom, but endeavored
to assign to reason, intellect, pain, pleasure, or divine or rational
guidance, what proceeds from workable habits and customs in the
conduct of human affairs. Thus Adam Smith was able to start eco-
nomic theory with the elimination of all associations, corporations,
unions, and almost all of the state itself, with their working rules
governing the transactions of individuals, and to substitute, in their
place, individual units of self-interest, division of labor, liberty,
equality, fluidity in the choice of occupation, and that “invisible
hand ” or divine providence which was none other than the working
rules of an orderly society as understood by Adam Smith in the middle
of the eighteenth century.

Starting, as they did, with individuals rather than the working
rules of going concerns, both the historical and the causal sequence
were reversed. For to the individual the important thing is his rights
and liberties protected against infringement by others. Hence the
inference is that the working rules were designed by a rational be-
ing for the protection of the preéxisting rights and liberties of in-
dividuals. But, as a matter of fact, the notion of individual rights is
historically many thousands of years subsequent to the full develop-
ment of working rules, and as a matter of causal sequence the work-
ing rules are designed primarily to keep the peace and promote col-
lective action and only secondarily to protect rights and liberties.


138 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


The characteristic of all working rules is that they actually do regu-
late behavior in those dimensions which can, when individual in-
terests come to be asserted in the later development of the race, be
given the name of rights, liberties and so on. But primarily, both
in history and in causal sequence, the working rules simply say what
individuals must, must not, may, can and cannot do, if the authorita-
tive agency that decides disputes bring the collective power of the
community to bear upon the said individuals.

Primarily the rules are necessary and their survival in history is
contingent on their fitness to hold together in a continuing concern
the overweening and unlimited selfishness of individuals pressed on
by scarcity of resources. They grow out of the settlement of dis-
putes and the combined action of the group as a mass in offense or
defense with other groups. This necessarily means the selection of
good habits and practices of individuals as against bad habits and
practices that weaken the group as a whole. Out of this ultimate
necessity of working rules came secondary rules permitting the di-
vision of labor and classification of occupations. Each rule, if it can
be depended upon, permits each individual to know in advance what
he can, cannot or may do with the help of the group, and what he
must or must not do, so that within these limits he knows where
security lies. And eventually, when the group is strong enough and
its command over resources great enough, the emphasis of the rules
turns away from what the individual must or must not do, to what
he may and can do, so that the modern liberty and freedom of indi-
viduality emerges as the fine fruit of evolving centuries of working
rules. It is then that rights and liberties can safely be asserted and
allowed.

This assertion of individual claims is facilitated, or rather system-
atized, by the rise of a profession of lawyers, originally trained in
theology, who, with logical acumen above that of other classes, press
and resist these claims of individuals and give to the coercive rela-
tions resulting from working rules a dialectic formality and persua-
sive terminology. ‘That which the individual can do with the aid
of the community is sanctified by the name of right and dignified by
the name of power, capacity or freedom. That which he may do,
because, according to the working rule, other persons are prevented
from interfering, becomes his liberty, privilege or immunity. That
which he must or must not do, in that the community will compel or


TRANSACTIONS 139


restrain him, becomes moralized under the name of duty, dignified
under the name of responsibility, foretold under the name of liabil-
ity and hallowed under the name of sanction. And lastly, that
which he does at his own risk and exposure without protection or
help from the community is left with a name that suggests his own
disability or incapacity.

These working rules, in all cases, are subject to slow historical
change, through the changes in economic, political and ethical con-
ditions which we have indicated. Moreover, they differentiate in
a most remarkable fashion, according to the several forms of social
organization which separate out from the primitive homogenity of
clan, family or tribe. As the church separates from the state, eccle-
siasiatical rules separate from political rules. As business separates
from church and state then the customs of merchants, the by-laws
and practices of guilds, corporations and associations separate them-
selves from ecclesiastical and political rules. Then, as thousands of
voluntary associations arise and flourish, their own peculiar working
rules go with them. Labor organizations arise with very different
rules in many respects, and it is a significant fact that, out of the
peculiar rules of labor unions the modern concept of working rules
was introduced into economic theory by the great historians and
theorists of the British labor unions, Mr. and Mrs. Webb.! They
discovered that the unions were endeavoring to set up common rules
for the conduct of the industrial processes of modern industry, and
that it was these rules, more than the wages and hours of labor,
that gave character to the conflict of “capital and labor.” Following
this discovery of the Webbs, the Swedish economist Cassel generalized
the principle of the common rule to apply to all laws of government.”
In America arose a school of scientific managers or engineers with
the professional purpose of systemizing the shop rules of industry,
led by Frederic Taylor; and, more recently, the American economist,
E. G. Nourse, has set forth a suggestive analysis of the interrelations
between the working rules of the thousands of trade organizations
in the field of marketing and the supplementary working rules of
the federal and state governments.’

1 Wess, SipNey and Beatrice, Industrial Democracy, 560 (1897, 1920).

2CasseL, G., Der Ausgangspunkt der Theoretischen Oekonomie, 58 Zeitsch. f. Staats-
wirtsch., 668 (1902). Theoretische Ockonomie, 2d ed. (1021).


3 Nourse, E. G., ““The Proper Sphere of Governmental Regulation in connection with
the marketing of Farm Products.” Proceedings, Amer. Econ. Ass’n, 1922.


140 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


These are a few of the outstanding indications of the recognition
during the past twenty-five years of the principle of working rules,
always assumed by all economists yet not forced upon their attention
until the emergence of new working rules of new associations and
unions with their overlappings and conflicts of political, economic and
cultural rules growing out of the necessity of deciding disputes and
codrdinating the individuals of multitudes of concerns into a united
mass movement. A complete account of the introduction of the
concept of working rules into economic theory would require us to
go back to their primitive and later origins expounded in the works
of Westermarck, Gierke, Pollock, Pound, as well as in the histories
of corporations, trade associations, employers’ associations, and
labor unions. Our preceding analysis has shown the elementary
implication of working rules in so far as the courts have taken them
over from the customs of feudal agriculture and modern business.
A further analysis of the decisions of the courts in Australia will
show the customs and working rules of labor and labor unions in
the process of taking over into the same common law of England,
and this will be indicated in a later chapter.! Suffice to say, at
this point, that it is in the principle of working rules with their limits
on transactions that is to be found the correlation of law, economics,
politics, ethics and modern behavioristic psychology, as well as the
omitted factor that accounts for the contradictions of abstract indi-
vidualism and abstract socialism and the other historic dualisms of
individual and society.

It must not be thought that working rules are something external,
fixed or compelling, existing apart from the actual behavior. They
reveal themselves only as acts, transactions and attitudes—the
attitude being a readiness to act in a certain direction rather than
other directions. That which entitles them to the name of a rule
of action is the principle of anticipation with its sanctions of confidence
and caution in view of the expected decisions that will be made in
interpreting the rule. No working rule can be stated in such form
that it can be said always to be exactly observed or accurately inter-
preted. It exhibits as many varieties of near or remote accordance
as there are individuals interpreting and observing it, and in this is
found a principle of differentials which makes possible the gradual
change in working rules with the incoming of changing conditions

1 Below, Chap. VIII.


TRANSACTIONS 141


that tend to shift the behavior in one direction or another, away
from the earlier formulation of the rule. A working rule, in other
words, is a social process and not a metaphysical entity, a more or
less flexible process of acts, transactions and attitudes; yet with a
discernible trend; and it is this trend that may be abstracted in
thought and formulated in words as a statement of the rule in question.
As such it furnishes a guide or mental standard for the decision of
disputes as they arise, and it is this expected trend in the decision
of disputes that, by anticipation, is the main ground for the volun-
tary choices that, for the sake of avoiding disputes and retaining
the approval of his fellow-members, bring the individual into line
with the rule.

There is naturally always a resistance, on the part of those who
make the authoritative decisions, against any movement requiring
these working rules to be formulated in words and published for the
information of all. It is usually contended by them that the rules
are so difficult and complex that they can be understood only by
experts or those who by long training have become experienced in
interpreting them. It was only after a vigorous struggle that the
Twelve Tables of the Roman law were published. The Egyptian
priests are said to have formulated a principle of the economy of
the truth in order to justify their refusal to give out the working
rules which they were privileged to interpret. And much the same
doctrine is formulated by business men, bankers, financiers, poli-
ticians, labor leaders and others who dread the bad use that might
be made of the flexible working rules which they administer, or
who flatly deny that the rules are anybody’s “business” but their
own. Yet the publicity of these working rules is the very means
by which the ruling authorities in any concern can be held to respon-
sibility for their acts, and the members of the concern can be certain
of what they can, may or must do, or not. And in proportion as
those who are called upon to obey the rules acquire sufficient intelli-
gence and power, they insist, first, on the publicity of the rules,
then upon a voice in formulating the rules, then upon an independent
judiciary that shall decide disputes that arise under the rules. This
process we have seen in the rise of the business classes of England
during the seventeenth century, culminating with the Act of Settle-
ment, and it can be observed in the history of almost any business,
religious, cultural or other concern, with the rise of the laborers,


142 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the laity, or the so-called “rank and file,” into a position of intel-
ligence and power within the concern.

In this way we can see that the evolution of working rules in
almost any concern or type of concern, passes through four stages.
First the stage of ignorance and confidence, wherein faith, loyalty
or submission accepts without protest the working rules as concealed
and interpreted by those having authority. Second, the stage of
skepticism and protest which is satisfied with the mere publicity of
the rules. Third, the stage of resistance, revolt and insistence on a
participating voice in amending and recasting the rules. Fourth,
a stage of an independent judiciary interpreting the rules as dis-
putes arise.

The foregoing is what might be named the constitutional devel-
opment of working rules. But a revolutionary development may
possibly occur, as in the case of the tyrannies of the Greek cities,
of the Roman Empire, and similar dictatorships of later times in
politics and industry, wherein the old working rules are wholly
overthrown and supplanted by a different set of rules and without
the stages of publicity, participation, or independent judiciary.


CHAPTER V
GOING CONCERNS


I. WorKING RULES OF POLITICAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND CULTURAL
CONCERNS


The law books distinguish a “natural person” from an artificial
person, the former a human being who exists as a product of nature,
the latter a collection of individuals existing only “in contemplation
of law.” But the natural person is also artificial in contemplation
of law, and the artificial person is as natural, in law, as the natural
person. Each is a personification and each is a psychological process.
Government finds individuals and associations of individuals, each
existing prior to, or at least independent of, any act of law. Indeed,
it finds them inseparable, for no individual grows out of the animal
into the human except through various forms of association with
others and various degrees of submission to, and power over, the
wills of others. If the individual lives without rights he is, not a
person, but a thing, that can be captured, bred, owned and killed
without violating any duty towards him. If an association has no
rights, it too is an outlaw and its members may be penalized on
the ground of conspiracy. What the state does for each is to personify
it by granting and imposing rights, duties, liberties, exposures, and
if to do this for an association is to create an artificial being so also
is it an artificial process to do the same for an individual. It is a
process of thinking, and thinking is “artificial.” The child grows
into the man by a natural process, but government thinks him into
acitizen. Even an alien isa part-citizen to the extent that government
grants the rights and liberties of citizens. Men associate in families,
partnerships, communities, unions, nations, but the law imputes
to their association as a unit many of the legal relations that it attrib-
utes to natural persons.

The fact that a corporation is not endowed with all the rights
of a natural person, and, especially, not endowed with so-called
inalienable rights, does not distinguish the artificial from the natural


143


144 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


person. Natural persons differ widely in their status, which consists
in the rights, liberties, duties and exposures attributed to them,
and a corporation in one respect may even be said to have a higher
status than the individual, for it may be endowed with that legal
perpetuity which is pictured as “immortality.” Moreover, neither
the rights of individuals nor of corporations are inalienable—they
are vested by operation of law and they take effect only on occasion
of operative facts recognized by courts, and they are held only on
condition, or to the extent, that certain reciprocal duties are lived
up to. The quality, common to both, which the courts recognize
is the will—the individual will and associated wills. The state imputes
to them individually and collectively a group of rights, duties, liberties,
exposures, which determine the scope within which the will may
operate.

Chief Justice Marshall, following Sir Edward Coke and the ideas
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, described a corporation
as “an artificial being, invisible, intangible and existing only in
contemplation of law. Being the mere creature of law, it possesses
only those properties which the charter of its creation confers upon
it, either expressly, or as incidental to its very existence. . . . Among
the most important are immortality, and, if the expression may be
allowed, individuality; properties by which a perpetual succession
of many persons are considered as the same, and may act as a
single individual.” 4

Here are two notions of intangibility or invisibility mingled with
a single notion. The ‘charter of its creation’’—the articles of incor-
poration—are but the group of promises and commands which the
state makes in the form of working rules indicating how the officials
of the state shall act in the future in matters affecting the association,
the members of the association, and the persons not members. It
is these promises and commands, or working rules, of officials which
constitute the charter and determine the status of the association.
They are the rules of future behavior for its own executives, courts
and legislatures, laid down by former officials for future dealings
with members of the concern.

But, along with this intangible promised behavior of the public
officials is the behavior of that very visible, tangible, living body of
men who constitute what has come to be known as ‘“‘a going concern.”

1 Dartmouth College v. Woodard, 4 Wheat. 518, 636 (1819).


GOING CONCERNS 145


The going concern is animated by a common purpose, governed
by common rules of its own making, and the collective behavior
in attaining that purpose we distinguish as a “going business.”
It is this collective behavior of this collective will, this flow of trans-
actions along lines indicated by its own working rules, this going
business of a going concern, that constitutes the invisible, intangible
being of Marshall’s definition. It is not an artificial “creature of
law”’—it exists prior to the law in the intentions and transactions
of its members, and thus exists in the very nature of the human
will as well as ‘‘in contemplation of law.”

This collective, intangible, living process of individuals, the func-
tionaries of the state find already in a trembling existence and then
proceed “artificially” to guide the individuals concerned and give
it a safer existence. The guidance is made through promising to them
a certain line of behavior on the part of public officials, which sets
forth the limits on their private behavior and the assistance they
may expect on the part of officials. The official behavior is also
collective and intangible. The two notions of intangibility are
the intangibility of the promised collective behavior of public officials
which authorizes private behavior, and the intangibility of the
expected collective behavior of the members of the association itself,
which is the private behavior thereby authorized. One is the promised
behavior of government set forth in working rules for public officials,
the other the intended behavior of a going concern set forth in the
working rules for its employees, agents and functionaries.

That which holds the going concern together is these two sets
of working rules affording an expectation of a gross income to be
obtained jointly while it is being distributed among the members.
This forecast is based upon business connections, patronage, good-
will, built up in the past and expected to continue or enlarge in the
future as long as the working rules continue. If the expectation
fails, the immortality fails. While the expectation continues, the
corporation is ‘‘a going concern.” For this reason, the legal form
is subordinate. The concern may exist as a partnership, a union,
an association, a corporation, a codperative. The essential thing
is the visible, tangible, going concern of persons, with its invisible,
intangible behavior of the immediate and remote future stabilized
by working rules. Needless to say the modern form of corporation
has the peculiar advantage over the others of limited lability of


146 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


individuals and perpetual succession of individual members without a
multitude of legal conveyances needed otherwise to hold them to-
gether.

The going concern, whether public or private, whether the state
or the corporation, acts, of course, through natural persons, and these,
for that purpose, have a double personality. They are officers, agents,
employees, whose wills participate in the collective will; and they are
individuals acting apart in their other capacities or as members of
still other associations and concerns. The stockholders, for example,
are the principals or employers in one concern but members of other
concerns in their other dealings. While a corporation is usually con-
sidered to be the stockholders, this is mainly for the legal purpose
of distinguishing between principal, agents and employees. The
agents and employees participate in the gross income of the corpora-
tion, but their shares are specified or stipulated in advance. The
principals, that is, the stockholders, are the residual claimants of
the income, and their will is deemed in law to be supreme within
limits.

But practically, as an economic institution, the will of the going
concern is the composite will of all to the extent that each has any
discretion in his acts. The Law may not always actually reflect the
reality. The latter includes every person, even the least of the man-
ual workers. He, too, must be depended on for some discretion, else
his work could be done by an animal, an idiot or a machine. Par-
ticipating in the collective will, all of them contribute in different
degrees to determine the combined will. The manual worker,
acting under orders or shop rules, has a margin of discretion in
dealing with the forces of physical nature, where his will modifies
slightly the total result. With the foremen, superintendents, man-
agers, salesmen and buyers, who deal with human nature, the dis-
cretionary influence on the total result is larger, within the working
rules pertaining to them. With stockholders, bondholders, bankers,
it is large or small in scope or different in quality or function.

Thus there is a gradation of ministerial and discretionary acts
of will, from the manual worker who acts mainly in subjection to
the will of others, to the president, stockholder, promoter, banker
or financier, who acts within larger limits according to his own
views. The collective will is the organized symposium of all the dis-
cretionary acts of all participants as they go along from day to day,


GOING CONCERNS 147


according to the rules of the organization. It is an organized mass
movement.

But the collective will is also guided by acts of participants in the
past. Customs, practices, habits, precedents, methods of work, have
been built up and handed down as working rules, which limit discre-
tion in the present. Binding contracts, informal agreements, under-
standings, resolutions of stockholders, perpetuate the working rules
of the past in the behavior of the present. The articles of incorpora-
tion, the contracts with bondholders, go back still further and bind
more firmly the present and future acts of will. Over all, the gen-
eral statute law, the common law, the decisions of courts, in short,
the working rules of the general government, are read into the arti-
cles of incorporation and into the transactions of principal and agent,
employer and employee, stockholders, bondholders, patrons, clients,
customers, so that the will of the state, or rather its working rules,
perpetuate the rights, duties, liberties and exposures, within which
the working rules of a subordinate concern are made up and its col-
lective behavior goes along.

Thus the going concern may be looked upon as a person with a
composite will, but this so-called “will” is none other than the work-
ing rules of the concern operating through the actions and transac-
tions of those who observe the rules. For every working rule of every
going concern contains, in varying degrees of importance, the four verbs
already indicated for the guidance of the participants to whom the
rule pertains. The rule indicates first what the individual must or
must not do. It is thus a rule of compulsion, or duty, which the au-
thorities of the concern are supposed to enforce.

The rule tells, second, what the individual can do, in the sense that
if he does it the power of the concern will aid him in enforcing his
action in the matter. Here it is a rule of authorization, or right,
since, the authorities of the concern will bring its collective power to
assist him in compelling others to obey what he has commanded.

The rule tells, third, what he cannot do, in the sense that, though
he is not prohibited from doing it, yet if any damage occurs to him
by virtue of an act of others the power of the concern will not pro-
tect him. Here it is a rule of non-authorization, or non-assistance,
that is, he is left in a condition of exposure or danger so far as his free
acts may bring upon himself an infliction or loss of any kind proceed-
ing from the permitted acts of others.


148 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Finally, the working rule tells, for the same individual, what he
may do, in that, although he is neither required to do it, nor is prom-
ised the assistance of the concern in requiring his will to be obeyed by
others, yet the power of the concern will be used so that others must
not interfere with him in doing it. Here it is a rule of permission,
that is, of liberty, to do as he pleases without interference by others.

These four behavioristic relations of working rules have been de-
scribed in the preceding chapter. It is sufficient here to note that
they constitute the so-called “collective will” of any going concern
in the sense of the relations between the conduct of the members and
the accompanying conduct of the concern as a whole, and they ap-
ply to all concerns, whether it be a family, tribe, business or the
state. They say what each member of the concern may, can, cannot,
and must or must not do, in so far as the combined power of the con-
cern is deemed to cover his conduct. They give the individual power
(right) to act as representing the concern; they give to him liberty
to act in that the concern will prevent others from interfering. They
limit his power to act for the concern by exposing him beyond that
limit to damages that the concern disregards, and they require him
to act or not act in certain directions on the sanction of a penalty
(duty) if he disregards the rule.

Thus the working rules of a concern necessarily allow to every
member a certain amount of discretion or choice of alternatives, con-
sisting in the authority (right) and the immunity (liberty) allowed
by the rule in question and limited by the alternatives actually open
to him. Wherever an employee is free to choose between two ways
of doing a thing, or an agent between two details of a bargain and
sale, or an executive, judge or legislator between two lines of con-
duct, there he is constructing the will, to that extent, of the whole
concern. In case of uncertainty a higher-up authority decides, and
finally up to the highest official, president, board of directors or Su-
preme Court who speaks for the collective will of the associated prin-
cipals, partners or shareholders in the enactment or interpretation
of the working rules. Whether it be a strong personality that dom-
inates and gives character to the whole concern, or whether it be the
vacillating, indecisive wills of many, the collectivity nevertheless
acts like a single will, strong or hesitating, enduring or transient, op-
erating through the instrumentality of many wills, each directing
its conduct according to the rules, and, as such, the concern may


GOING CONCERNS 149


well be endowed, as it is, with the rights and liberties or burdened by
the duties and exposed to the liberties of others, like natural persons.
So that the notion of Coke and Marshall that it is only an artifi-
cial convenience of the law to associate individuals together and
treat them as a single person, and that therefore the association is
only a legal fiction, disregards the fundamental nature of the will,
as though the will were an atom unrelated to other atoms. Each
individual will is an action and reaction with other wills in manifold
variations of collective wills. What the state does is to regulate the
form, by determining the limits according to its own rules, in which
they act together—it cannot combine them effectively if it tries to do
so regardless of the inherent ways in which they act together. They
act as principal and agent, as codperators and members of concerns,
as promisor and promisee, as creditor and debtor, as leader and led,
and all that the state can do is to specify how far its officials shall
go in assisting, compelling, exposing or permitting their transactions.!
The state itself is but one of many going concerns, whose sov-
ereign working rules are but a larger collective will, and the behavior
of whose officials is a collective behavior. It, too, has its ministerial
agents with such slight discretionary powers that they are held in
law to be only “employees.” It has its discretionary agents, the
public officers, whether executives, legislators or judges, whose col-
lective choices determine the policies to be followed from day to day.
They, too, have their double personality. They are officers, agents,
employees, acting collectively, and they are private persons acting
in other capacities or as members of other going concerns. Acting
collectively they act according to precedent, custom, judicial opin-
ion, statute law, and, perhaps, those articles of incorporation which
make up the written constitution of the state, all of which together
constitute its working rules.” The state is not “the people,” nor “the
public,” it is the working rules of the discretionary officials of the
past and present who have had and now have the legal power to put
their will into effect within the limits set by other officials, past and
present, and through the instrumentality of other officials or em-
ployees, present and future.
1Cf. Baty, T., “The Rights of Ideas—and Corporations,” 33 Harv. Law Rev. 364 (1920).
2 Cf. MarrLanp, F. W., The Crown as Corporation, 17 L.Q. R. 131 (1901); Moore, Har-
RISON, 20 L. Q. R. 351 (1901); BRowN, W. JetHRO, The Austinian Theory of Law, 254 ff.


(1912); Lasxt, H. J., “Studies in the Problem of Sovereignty (1917). These writers generally,
however, leave the impression of an entity instead of a bundle of working rules.


150 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


The state, through its working rules, has granted to itself, or rather
to its discretionary or ministerial agents, certain powers and immu-
nities, and has imposed on them liabilities and disabilities, which limit
or liberate their behavior towards each other and towards those whom
it deems to be private citizens. It too, is a large person, a collection of
wills operating according to accepted rules, a going concern, and,
similar to a private corporation with its “going business,” so the
collective behavior of its officials in dealing with the people and with
other states is the ‘‘public business.”

It is for this reason that we distinguish the “state” and “govern-
ment” from “society” and “the people.” The “state” has developed
out of the people as one of several going concerns, in so far as it has
taken over the power of violence according to certain rules, which is
sovereignty. The “government,” on the other hand, is the series of
transactions going on between officials and the citizens, and between
officials and other officials of the same or other states. The govern-
ment is not a thing, it is a process according to definite rules. In these
transactions which constitute this process, each citizen or official
participates in the control of violence. Just as a “going business” is
but the series of transactions going on between members of a going
concern and members of other concerns in the control of wealth and
poverty, so political government is the going business of officials
dealing with each other and with citizens in the control of peace and
violence. Thus we may employ interchangeably the term ‘“‘state”
and “government.” ‘The state is the going concern of persons asso-
ciated, the government is their going business. One is the persons who
participate in sovereignty, the other is their participation.

So with any other loose or compact, temporary or enduring, associa-
tion of persons acting as a unit. The family, the church, the club, is a
going concern, the transactions of its members are its going business,
its working rules keep it agoing.

Thus there are three types of persons, the citizen, the private con-
cern and the state, recognized by imputing rights, privileges, powers,
immunities and their opposites. They are persons, in that they are
more or less free wills, or rather discretionary actors, whose future
acts may be directed, controlled, prevented, limited by the imposition
of duties and exposures, or rewarded or liberated by the grant of
rights and liberties. They are persons, in that they have the qualities
and faculties which may be protected, assisted or restrained according


GOING CONCERNS 151


to the distribution of rights and duties. They have their internal
economy of proportioning transactions; their external relations of
opportunity and power; their expectations of the future. The citizen
is a person who is a member of many concerns, and his transactions
with other citizens constitute, on the one hand, his personality, prop-
erty, liberty and citizenship, and, on the other hand, his share in the
going business and public business of all concerns and of the state.
There is therefore this much of truth in the seventeenth and eight-
eenth century notions of a corporation, or of the state, as an artificial
creature existing only in contemplation of law. Its working rules are
likely to leave it in the predicament of an outlaw or conspiracy unless
the courts select and give effect to its good rules and reject its bad
practices. Marshall took his definition of a corporation from Sir
Edward Coke, and Coke along with the common-law lawyers of the
Commonwealth, perceived that a corporation existed only as a fran-
chise to be and to act, granted out of the prerogative of the King. It
continued to exist only while the King’s court continued to recognize
the grant of sovereign power and the King’s executives to enforce the
privileges granted. It existed only in “contemplation of law.” So
with their notion of the state and the commonwealth. The state also
was but a sum total of all individuals, who, in their collective capacity,
constituted an abstract entity “the public,” or the “general will”’;
while the commonwealth was but the sum total of all private wealth.
This doctrine of individual liberty and of the individual as the
unit of society served, at a later time in the hands of the economists,
to split up the state, as well as the corporation, into units of persons
and units of wealth which then were added together to constitute the
whole, and, for this purpose, could be tied together only by an ab-
stract entity existing only in contemplation of thought. From Coke,
in the beginning of the seventeenth century, to John Locke, at the close
of that century, from Rousseau and Adam Smith in the eighteenth
century down to Herbert Spencer, in the nineteenth century, flowed
this individualistic notion of the state as a mere sum total of individ-
uals, on the one hand, and an abstract entity, on the other. And
when Spencer destroyed this metaphysical entity there was nothing
left for him to hold the parts together except to substitute another
entity in the form of an analogy to a biological organism. There was
no collective will at all—merely an abstract formula of individual
rights by which individuals might hold each other off while a biological


152 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


analogy held them together. Yet that which held them together was
their own working rules.

The dualism arose out of the conflict between liberty and duty in
the seventeenth century. The church Fathers, the Pope, the estab-
lished Church of England, the royalist adherents of the King’s pre-
rogative, were all agreed that the unity of Christendom or the unity
of the nation could be maintained only on the principle of obedience to
a single will.! The divine right of Kings, or the divine right of the
Pope, were but the religious duty of the subject to obey a single will.”
Even the iconoclast Thomas Hobbes, who broke down this religious
entity, had to substitute, like Herbert Spencer, another one, his mon-
strous Leviathan in which, by analogy, the citizens were the legs, arms
and other members, while the sovereign was the single will that held
them together by fear. The philosopher Kant, after dissolving the
state into individual wills, had to restore the unity of all by a “ King-
dom of Ends,” which turned out to be the Prussian monarchy.? In
more modern times the line of thought is continued by Karl Marx who
abolished the individual and found the unity of society in his “social
labor power,” which turns out to be the ‘dictatorship of the proleta-
riate”’ and a new royal prerogative with Lenin and Trotsky on the
throne.

Meanwhile, there has been growing up, through the decisions of the
courts on cases as they actually arise, the theory of a going concern.
This theory has been aided, indeed, by the theory of an artificial entity
existing only in contemplation of the mind, and that entity has helped
to bridge over the three centuries since Coke and his contemporaries
began to shatter the divine right of Kings with their ‘‘liberty of the
subject”’ and to shatter corporations and guilds as mere ‘‘monopolies”
based on privileges enforced by the King’s officials. But the going
concern is more than an entity, it is collective action; it is mass move-
ment and mass psychology; it is the working rules that decide dis-
putes and keep the mass together in support of the rules. The working
out of the theory by inclusion and exclusion of transactions that had to
be judicated in the decision of disputes has been necessary in order to
do justice to those who had associated themselves together, had built
up a business, had assumed responsibilities, had trusted to the credit


1 Cp. FREEMANTLE, W. H., The World as the Subject of Redemption, 1888.
2 Cp. Ficcis, J. N., The Theory of the Divine Right of Kings, (1806).
3 Cp. Horrpinc, H., A History of Modern Philosophy, 2:108 (1900).


GOING CONCERNS 153


system, in the hope that their past and present business connections
would be permitted to continue in the future. These hopes could not
be shattered, else the whole fabric of society would come down. The
courts and legislatures find them there, in the customary transactions
of individuals, then recognize them, then authorize them, and the
authorization is the security of the working rules. New hopes are
built on these authorizations, and that which exists in the very nature
of man’s transactions with his fellows comes to exist also “in contem-
plation of law.”


II. FACULTIES AND OPPORTUNITIES


We have seen the enlargement of the idea of property by means of
change in the working rules, from that of ownership of tangible objects
to that of ownership of an occupation, a calling, a trade, and even the
ownership of one’s labor; and the enlargement of liberty from personal
liberty to economic liberty. The latter we have seen to consist in
choice of opportunities, or choice between two degrees of economic
power, and we have noticed two meanings of assets, or expectation,
which we have distinguished as two meanings of the expectancies from
which assets get their values. One is a part-opportunity, the other is
a whole opportunity. A part-opportunity is the expectancy of a
single transaction or a series of repeated transactions entered upon in
pursuance of the whole opportunity of which it isa part. Capitalized,
it is a separate asset, and the expectancy to which it looks forward is a
transaction or a series of transactions on either the commodity market
or the securities market to which the asset in question is referred. It is
an expected sale, purchase, contract, a single or serial transaction,
essential to carrying out the purpose of the whole-opportunity. Itisa
part of the whole.

But the whole-opportunity is that expectancy of a proportioned
activity extending over a period of time, expected to yield a net income
from the outgo and income of the part-opportunities. It is this whole-
opportunity which we find to be identical with what the judges, in
their opinions, defined as a “‘calling,” “occupation,” “trade,” or even
“labor,” and which is identical with a going concern or a job.

The terms used by the judges, however, may comprehend either a
business or a job, as was inevitable at a stage of industrial history when
the working man was also a business man. The butchers in the Slaugh-
ter House Cases were apparently small butchers owning the physical


154 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


property with which they worked, working with their own hands and
with their employees, buying their materials and selling their products,
and consequently the terms “occupation,” “trade,” “calling,” and
“labor” included both the business activity of buying and selling by
merchants or employers, and the laboring activity of producing a
product or otherwise acting for wages under the direction of the mer-
chant or employer. Carrying the analysis thus forward, as it has been
developed in business organizations and recognized in the law of prin-
cipal and agent, master and servant, employer and employee, we dis-
tinguish the buying and selling transaction as a “business” from the
employee or agency activity as a “job” or “position.”

Either a business or a job, in its own field, is a whole-opportunity,
and the term “occupation” seems properly to apply to each. An
“occupation”’ is something “‘occupied,’”’ something “taken and held”
for one’s own use. Originally applied in Roman law to physical things,
such as lands or chattels, which, being found or obtained by conquest,
were thus “occupied,” the term was then broadened out until it sig-
nified any intangible or incorporeal thing held for one’s own use, and,
naturally enough, when one has prepared himself for a trade, a pro-
fession, or a business, the term ‘‘occupation”’ is further enlarged, al-
though the thing now referred to is but his own faculties, abilities, or
capacities to engage in a line of business or to work at a job or filla
position.

The above opinions of the court, however, distinguished, though
indistinctly, between what has come to be known as a “‘going busi-
ness” and what may be described as an intended business. Those who
“had already adopted” the prohibited pursuits in the Slaughter House
Cases were engaged in a “going business.’”’ They already occupied the
whole-opportunity, and to restrain them was to deprive them of a
right to continue in business. Theirs was a peculiarly strong kind of
property, in much the original sense of ‘‘occupation,” for it was a
whole-opportunity already occupied and it needed not the additional
right of liberty in order to start the business. Nevertheless they were
deprived “as well” of their liberty, in the sense, however, of their
liberty to choose the part-opportunities, the particular transactions,
necessary to carry on the business as a whole, that is, to “continue in
business.”

It is different with an intended business or job. Here the thing which
the person may be said to own is rather the faculties, abilities, or


GOING CONCERNS 155


capacities, embodied in his own body, the kind of property which we
have just mentioned as also included by the judges in the term “occu-
pation” but in the more personal sense of preparation for a “calling,”
a “trade,” a “profession,” or even merely the “ability” to labor,
though not yet actually engaged in the occupation.

We see here a still further extension of the meaning of both prop-
erty and liberty. “Labor” is property. By “labor,” of course, is
meant not only manual labor, but all of the faculties needed to engage
in business or to fill a job or position. It was observed by James Mill
that all that man does in the production of wealth is to ‘“‘move”’ things
and then nature does the rest. Others, including Karl Marx, went
further and suggested three aspects of labor, “manual, mental and
managerial.” It is more appropriate to distinguish these as the physi-
cal, mental and managerial faculties to move both things and other
persons, and even to move one’s own body, by direct physical contact
and exertion. The mental faculties are the ability to take a long lever-
age in moving things and persons by reason of a long look ahead or
around, in calculating or inferring the probable results of the action;
and, if managerial ability is distinguished from these, it is the ability
to induce other persons to move things, usually by that emotional
influence of promises, warnings or threats which may be sum-
marized in social psychology as persuasion or coercion, command
and obedience.

These physical, mental and managerial abilities are not separate
faculties, but they are independent variables, since they differ widely
in the proportions in which individuals are endowed with them or
have acquired them. However proportioned, they may be considered
as a single human faculty of moving things or persons in order that
they, in turn, may move things or persons. In this way, they con-
stitute the will of the individual in potential control of his body, pre-
pared, ready or waiting to move things or persons but not yet actually
moving them.

This then, appears to be the further extension of the meaning of
property implied when it is said that “labor” is property, or that one’s
“trade,” or “calling,” or “profession,” or even “occupation,” (in the
sense of preparation for an occupation) is one’s property. That which
is owned is one’s own physical, engineering and managerial faculties
incorporated in his body and constituting the expected uses of his
body; and that which owns these faculties is that still more inward,


156 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


inscrutable, more persistent and more important thing, the person
himself, the human will.

Thus it is more than a figure of speech that the meaning of property
should have been pushed back from physical things to opportunities,
and then again to the faculties which make use of the opportunities, and
that, in this inner personal recess it should have been identified with
liberty. It is simply a recognition, in practice, of that which is known
and felt, namely, that back of things, opportunities and even faculties
is a central focus of personality, the will, that uses and proportions
them all for its own purposes.

The distinction, however, when recognized, should be kept distinct,
and this can be done by fixing it in a proper terminology. Property
(distinguished from rights of property), has two sides, faculties and
opportunities, and the connection between the two is acts or trans-
actions. Property is not a physical object but is the relationship
which a person necessarily sets up between his personal abilities and
the world about. His faculties are his labor-power, rather his man-
power, his physical, mental and managerial abilities. He himself is
his will-power, his personality, choosing between opportunities, over-
coming resistance, submitting to superior power, proportioning both
his faculties and opportunities, by means of acts and transactions, for
purposes that stretch into the future and are expected to yield what to
him at the time is believed to be the largest economy of outgo and
income according to his powers, opportunities and character. Prop-
erty thus becomes human faculties in preparation for, or in occupation
of, opportunities.

This relationship, as just now suggested, occurs in two aspects, the
intended and the actual or realized. Presumably an intended or pro-
spective class of opportunities is indicated by the preparation of the
faculties, whether the preparation be the reasoned or casual efforts of
self, or of associates, or of superiors. In general, the term “education”
covers this activity of self and others in fitting the faculties for intended
opportunities. But the actual, or realized, opportunity is the whole-
opportunity with its various transactions, namely, the going business
or actual job or position occupied.

Hence property is inseparable from the right of property. The term
“rights,” as we have seen, cannot be defined except as reciprocal rights,
duties, liberties and exposures. Every so-called right implies all of
these dimensions. Thus the so-called “right of liberty” is the right


GOING CONCERNS 157


to the absence of compulsion, of restraint or of duty in moving things
and persons physically, or inducing other persons to move things and
persons. Liberty of access is, of course, essential to connecting up the
two sides of property, the faculties and the intended business or job,
through the agency of actions and transactions. This liberty is also
essential to the choice of those part-opportunities, the thousands and
millions of separate transactions which constitute the whole, the going
business or actual job.

But since the opposite party has reciprocal liberties, the “right’’ to
a job is exposed to their liberty to deny the right. And, since the
opposite party has reciprocal rights, the right to a job is encumbered
by reciprocal duties in the realization of the right. Likewise, of course,
it is necessary that there be opportunities accessible or actually oc-
cupied. Business ability without a going business, labor without a job,
is valueless.


Til. Assets AND LIABILITIES


By means of the enlargement of the concept of property from things
to the exchange value of things, the rights of property have also
changed from the right to buy, use and sell, a physical thing to the
right to buy and sell the exchange-value of the thing. It is this right
to the exchange-value of a thing that is known as “intangible prop-
erty’’ and is equivalent to the business term “assets.”

How is it possible that exchange-value, which is usually thought of
only as a ratio-of-exchange at which things are bought and sold, can
itself be an object owned and therefore be property? Can a ratio-of-
exchange be owned? Is a ratio-of-exchange property? Are there
rights of property in ratios-of-exchange?

The solution of the paradox is in the lapse of time. It is not the
present ratio-of-exchange which is property; it is the present right to
a future ratio-of-exchange. The present ratio-of-exchange is indeed an
outcome of the “‘liberty’’ to buy and sell property. But the right to
that future ratio-of-exchange is present property, that is, a present
“interest”? in the future exchange-value of the thing, and this, in
turn, can be bought and sold and has a present value-in-exchange.
Of course, then, it is not the ratio that becomes private property—
private property becomes the right to have in the future the other
goods that can be obtained in exchange for the thing now owned.
It is a right to the prospective purchasing power of the thing, and


158 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


this right exists in the present, can be bought and sold, and is
property.

It was this paradox that led McLeod to reject both commodities
and feelings as the subject-matter of economics and to hold that only
rights are bought and sold.'' The paradox led him to count the same
thing in two ways, once as a right to the exchange-value of a thing and
once as a right to the future income from the thing. This is also the
familiar fallacy of some forms of double taxation, such as the taxation
of land at its market value and the additional taxation of a note and
mortgage secured by the land, also at its market value. This was also
the paradox that led Karl Marx to the theory of exploitation of labor
by capital. The laborer produces the physical thing, but the capital-
ist owns its exchange-value, and how can exchange-value produce
wealth?

Marx, among other omissions, did not allow for the expected lapse
of time. He thought, like the other physical economists, that value
was stored-up labor from the past. But value lies in the future. The
ownership of value is the present right to the expected exchange-value
of things, and it is this right that has a present value-in-exchange.

This, too, is the business man’s view of both his property and his
capital. When the courts made the transition from ownership of
things to ownership of the expected purchasing-power of things, they
followed the practices of business. The “‘assets and liabilities” of a
business firm are but the present estimated exchange-values of its
property and debts on expected markets. Property is anything that
can be bought and sold. Assets are the present exchange-value of
things that can be sold in the future, or whose products can be sold in
the future, while liabilities are the present assets of other persons.

“Assets,” that is, intangible property, includes everything that can
be sold. It includes physical commodities, such as land and buildings,
plant and equipment, materials and supplies. It includes cash on
hand and deposit accounts at the bank. It includes contracts in proc-
ess of execution, accounts receivable, stocks and bonds of other com-
panies, patent rights, copyrights, trade-marks, and even goodwill of
the business. Liabilities are assets belonging to other people. They
include every claim against one’s own assets to be paid in the future, as
well as all other probabilities of deductions from assets. They include
bonds and mortgages, notes payable, salaries and wages due, taxes due,

1 McLeop, H. D., Elements of Economics, 1:153 (1881).


GOING CONCERNS 159


capital stock belonging to stockholders, and even the expected risks
of business that reduce the value of assets.

Several facts are noticeable. Assets and liabilities are items which,
added and subtracted, give the net assets, and these assets and lia-
bilities are valued with reference to two different markets. Each of
these markets is in the future, whether it be an immediate or a remote
future. One is the several expected commodity markets for real
estate, machinery and other physical products. The other is the ex-
pected “money market,” or, more properly, the market for debts,
where “‘incorporeal” property, consisting of creditor and debtor re-
lations, such as promissory notes, bank deposits, bonds and stocks are
created, bought and sold. These markets are quite distinct. The
commodity markets are conducted at every store, every factory,
every railroad, theater, warehouse and so on, where commodities or
services are bought, stored, enlarged and sold. The money market is
conducted mainly at the commercial banks where promises to pay the
prices agreed upon for commodities are bought, insured, transferred
and sold. The money market is a duplication or reflection of prices
obtainable on the commodity markets, and it is this that leads to
McLeod’s and the popular fallacy of counting the same thing twice,
once on the commodity markets and once on the money markets. Yet,
from the standpoint of the business man, all market values are assets,
whether on expected commodity markets or expected money markets.

There is a third class of assets having a peculiar position between
commodities and debts, namely, that special case of “intangible”
property, consisting of patent rights, copyrights, trade-name, goodwill,
business reputation, good credit, the right to continue in business, the
right of access to a labor market, the right of access to commodity
markets and money markets, all of which have a present value based
on expected transactions of buying and selling, borrowing and lending,
hiring and hiring out. Their value is simply exchange-value itself,
the very thing Karl Marx had in mind when he conceived the capital-
ist as the owner of exchange-value. It is these rights of access to
markets, which, in the Slaughter House and Allgeyer Cases, came in
under the name of ‘‘liberty”’; and it is these rights of liberty that are
now coming to be known as “intangible property”’ distinguished from
“incorporeal” property. “Incorporeal”’ property is debts, “cor-
poreal” or “tangible” property is physical things, but “intangible”
property is the exchange-value of things and debts.


160 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It is this third class of assets, namely, intangible property, that also
gives significance to another distinction to be noticed, namely, that
of the value of the assets taken separately on the commodity and
money markets, and the value of the going business as a unit. Ifa
business is bankrupt and thrown into the hands of a receiver or other-
wise liquidated, all of the assets are sold separately and each has a
“realized”? market value on the commodity or money markets, which
may be different from their expected exchange-value, usually known as
their “book value.” But, if the business is a ‘going business,” then it
is either bought and sold as a unit or the stocks and bonds are bought
and sold as shares in its expected income as a unit. It is only a going
concern that has a valuable ‘“‘goodwill” or good credit, and hence this
is a peculiarly intangible asset.

This distinction between intangible property, or assets, which
may be bought and sold separately from the going business, and
that more pervasive asset, the goodwill of the going business itself
as a whole, calls for a distinction in the ownership of assets. One
corporation may own the stocks and bonds of another corporation.
To the first corporation these stocks and bonds are intangible property,
or assets, to the extent that they have a current exchange-value
on the money market or investment market. But, against the second
corporation, treated as a unit distinct from its stockholders and
bondholders, they are liabilities; as a liability they are the rights
of bondholders and stockholders to the entire expected net income
of the corporation when once ascertained.

Now this expected net income of the second corporation may be
so great that the total value of its stock and bonds exceeds the aggre-
gate value of all its tangible, incorporeal and intangible assets if
sold separately. How shall this excess value be accounted for?
It may be accounted for by watering the stock and ballooning the
bonds. But, since the stocks and bonds are liabilities the corporation
will need to show, on the other side of the account, an amount of
assets equal to the inflation of stocks and bonds. This may be done
in one of two ways, either by overvaluing the other assets or by
inserting an item of “goodwill” or similar intangible, valued at the
difference between the aggregate other assets and the outstanding
issues of stocks and bonds. But this item of goodwill is a peculiarly
intangible asset, depending, as it does, on the continuance of the
net income, and for this reason, is not, perhaps, properly to be itemized


GOING CONCERNS 16


as an asset on the books.' It therefore is usually concealed by
overvaluing the other assets. But, in any case, whether it appears
or does not appear on the books, it is exactly this intangible expec-
tation of net income of the going business as a whole that determines
the total value of its stocks and bonds on the markets. If the con-
cern does not have such an expectation of net income, then the
total value of its stocks and bonds sinks below even the value of
its other assets, in which case the concern is bankrupt and the other
assets must perhaps be sold separately and thus realized on the
markets. Hence it is this very intangible asset, the goodwill of
a going concern, consisting in the expectation of a net operating
income, that is bought and sold when the stocks and bonds of the
concern are bought and sold. They are simply claims upon its
expected net operating income.

Hence we have two overlapping notions of assets. One is that
of the tangible, intangible and incorporeal assets owned by a concern,
the other is that of the total expected net operating income claimed
by stockholders and bondholders. But even this expected net operat-
ing income is but a residual part of a gross income obtained by the
concern as a whole. This gross income is obtained from day to
day and then becomes, at different intervals, a gross income for each
member of the concern in so far as he participates. It becomes a
gross income for each employee in the form of wages, of each agent
and manager in the form of salaries, of bondholders and other cred-
itors in the form of interest and principal, if paid, and of stockholders
in the form of dividends. All of them are alike inthateach participant
has a claim only to a share of the gross income. Each is but a creditor
of the going business as a unit, while the going business, as the identical
unit, is the debtor. Even the stockholders, as individuals, do not
own the separable assets of the business—the lands, buildings and
the intangible assets belong to the corporate unit until such time
as they are distributed to meet the liabilities of the concern to the
several participants.

Neither does the fact that the expected net operating income of
the concern belongs to the stockholders, after deducting interest
on debts, supported the idea that the going concern exists only in
the proprietors and not also in the employees, agents, bondholders
and other investors. The stockholders are simply residual claimants

1Cp. EsQueRRE, P. J., The Applied Theory of Accounts, 244-50 (1917).


162 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


on the gross income, while the others, beginning with wage-earners,
are priority claimants. The goodwill, therefore, is not the goodwill
solely of the stockholders, it is the goodwill of all participants which
enables them all together to obtain a gross income as a whole and
individually. The stockholders own the residual goodwill, since
the others get their share of the proceeds of the joint goodwill before
the stockholders get theirs. The value of the goodwill is inseparable
from the value of the going business, but it is only the value of
the residual goodwill, if any, that can be capitalized and appear in
the values of the shares of stock owned by stockholders.

Hence the net income of the concern belonging to the stockholders
is but a part of the gross income belonging to the business, and differs
not, economically, from the other parts. All of them bear the relation
of parts to the whole. The parts may be bought and sold separately,
by the concern and by the participants. The gross income as a
whole consists in the transactions by which the parts are bought
and sold. Since this expected gross income is but the expected prof-
itable transactions in buying and selling the parts which constitute
the moving process of obtaining it, we shall name it the Going Business
of a Going Concern. The concern “owns” its going business in the
sense that it owns the liberty to continue in business through access
to markets, and it ‘‘owns” its gross income in the sense that its
board of directors have power to acquire, use and dispose of that
gross income. But when once the gross income is distributed accord-
ing to priorities the residual net income, as determined by the board
of directors, becomes, not an asset of the concern, but a liability
of the concern owing to its stockholders.

Hence the going concern owns two types of assets, its physical,
incorporeal and intangible assets which are the parts of the whole,
and its going business which is nothing else than all of the expected
transactions by which the parts are bought, sold and distributed
to the several participants. All of the parts are equal to the whole,
no matter how great or small, since the residual part belonging to
stockholders is merely the difference between the aggregate of the
other parts and the gross income of the whole. And it is this gross
expected income of the concern as a whole that constitutes its “ under-
lying life,” “immeasurably more effective” than all of its physical
assets.}


1 Above, Chap. II, p. 18.


GOING CONCERNS 163


All of these assets taken either separately or as a going business,
have the common underlying fact that they are present rights to
expected exchange-values on the expected commodity and money
markets. And, since that expected exchange-value is their power
to command a quantity of other objects in exchange, assets are,
in substance, the present value of the expected purchasing power of
things now owned or used. Consequently, the ownership of exchange-
value is more than the ownership of a mere ratio-of-exchange—it
is the ownership of expected purchasing power of which those expected
ratios of exchange are each a measure of the degrees of power.

But even this expected purchasing power is meaningless except
as the business management expects to go upon the markets and
actively engage in the transactions of buying and selling. Hence
the meaning of property, in the business sense of assets, is a shift
from things to the expected purchasing power of things by way of
expected transactions on the commodity and money markets. And
the meaning of Capital shifts from physical things to the present
value of expected acquisitions to be obtained through purchasing
power available for use as expected bargaining power on the com-
modity and money markets. Thus we have four distinct concepts
involved in the transition which has occurred in the meanings of
Property and Liberty:

One is the concept of physical things which the physical economists
called commodities or Capital, having their origins in the stored-up
labor of the past. But, since in modern economics this is a process
and not a thing, we shall distinguish it as a Going Plant.1

Second, is the concept of Assets and Liabilities, that intangible
aspect of commodities and securities which have their foundation
in the future, and consist of the expectations of sales or net income
on expected markets, and which both business men and some modern
economists call Capital, Capitalization, or Value.

Third, is the expected outgo and income of money, that is, of
purchasing power, or power of acquisition on expected commodity
and security markets, yielding profit, loss, or net income, that which
the accountant takes account of, and which at any moment of time,
appears in the balance-sheet as Assets and Liabilities.

Fourth, is the expected union of all future transactions of buying
and selling, borrowing and lending, hiring, firing, leasing, paying

1 Below, Sec. VI, p. 182.


164 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


debts and receiving payment of debts, constituting the expected
activities of a Going Concern, with its goodwill, its franchises, its other
market opportunities, and its liquidations of indebtedness. This se-
ries of transactions is the Going Business, moving along with the
Going Plant out of the present point of time where assets and lia-
bilities are measured and the past production of physical goods has
accrued, into the future where income and outgo are expected.

The four are tied together as tightly as Things, the Valuation of
things and the Reasons for their Valuation. Things are anything that
can be bought and sold; assets and liabilities are their valuation, that
is, their Capitalization or expectations founded on them; and the
reasons for valuing them to the amount that they are valued are the
expected other things to be acquired as income by means of them or
given up as outgo on account of them, and the expected transactions
by means of which the other things are acquired or given up.

These four meanings of Property and Liberty are inseparable
attributes of Capitalism, and we shall distinguish them usually as:

1. The going plant, acquiring, producing and disposing of com-
modities and resources.

2. Expectancies, assets and liabilities, capitalization or present
value.

3. Purchasing power, power of acquisition, business resources or
prices, and

4. A going business, transactions, bargaining power.

The four meanings, for certain purposes, may be condensed into
two: Expectations and Expectancies. Expectations are present assets
and liabilities; Expectancies are the things expected in exchange, the
purchasing power and bargaining power expected. It will be noted, if
this is done, that the distinction between Expectations and Expec-
tancies is quite parallel to that made by Irving Fisher between Capital
and Income. But where he speaks of Capital as a ‘“‘fund” of capital
equivalent to capitalization, we speak not of a “fund” but of Expecta-
tions, Assets and Liabilities, or Capitalization; and where he speaks of
an expected inflow of net income in terms of money, from the account-
ant’s standpoint, we speak, from the legal and business man’s stand-
point, of Expectancies, which consist in the expected transactions of a
going business which determine gross outgo, gross income and net in-
come.

This shift in the meaning of property from things to the capitaliza-


GOING CONCERNS 165


tion of things as assets and liabilities is a shift from the common-law or
feudal-law meaning of physical things held exclusively for one’s use to
the business-law meaning of property as purchasing power, exchange-
value, power of acquisition or prices, available in one’s business. It is
a distinction between Capital and Capitalization, between things and
assets, between things owned and the powers of acquisition residing
in the ownership of things, between use-value and exchange-value,
between Eigenthum and Vermégen. The former is things, the latter is
the purchasing power of things. But purchasing power is more than a
mere passive flow and inflow, it is an active, volitional acquisition of
income. It is a process of transactions that bring purchasing power,
and a process of transactions is a going business. The shift in meaning,
therefore, is a shift from property in things to both property and
liberty in the expected acquiring, holding, enlarging and selling of
things, and these, as stated in the Allgeyer Case, are “essential parts”
of the “‘rights of liberty and property as guaranteed by the Fourteenth
Amendment.”


IV. VALUATION, APPORTIONMENT, IMPUTATION


We saw that the ratio of exchange measures a degree of power in
that it is a comparison between the positive cost, or outgo, and the
positive value, or income, that accompany a single transaction. The
transaction, in that case, occurs between two opposing persons, a
seller and a buyer.

Each individual in business, however, is both buyer and seller. His
net income is derived from at least fwo transactions relating to the
same commodity on the way from a primary producer to an ultimate
consumer. As a buyer his outgo is a deduction from his assets, as a
seller his income is an addition to his assets. His net income of pur-
chasing power is therefore an addition to his assets measured by the
difference between his money outgo and his money income. This we
may distinguish as the ratio of profit. He pays a seller $1.50 for a given
article and sells it to a consumer for $2.50. The net income is $1.00
added to assets, and the ratio of profit on the pair of transactions is
$1.00 to $1.50 or 1 to 1%, or 667/3%.

Such a pair of transactions may, of course, be repeated and may
thus become an indefinite flow of identical transactions. The net
income then is an operating net income conveniently broken up into
units of time, say a year, and determined for a period of time by the


166 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


difference between the gross operating outgo and the gross operating
income. The ratio of profit on this flow of identical transactions re-
mains the same—an operating expense of, say, $150,000 a year, an
operating income of $250,000, and a net income of $100,000 with the
same ratio of profit, 667/3%.

The above illustration of a ratio of profit has a certain application
in any business, for two reasons. It relates to a flow of identical trans-
actions instead of a flow of proportioned transactions; and it is an oper-
ating proposition rather than a capitalization proposition. The latter
signifies a rate of profit, rather than a ratio of profit. The distinction
will immediately appear.

The business of a going concern is, of course, not a flow of identical
transactions, but a continual proportioning and re-proportioning of
many limiting and complementary factors, that which Karl Marx
named the “organic composition” of capital. The manager does not
buy and sell a single article but proportions his outgo among laborers
and material of many kinds and prices, in order to proportion his sales
to various classes of buyers. For this reason, as an operating proposi-
tion, the ratio between operating income and outgo is important, in
that a change downward is a danger warning and a change upward isa
confirmation of his policy. Assuming that prices remain the same, the
warning directs attention to a possible poor proportioning of the fac-
tors, that is, waste, and a change upward indicates that he has hit ona
better proportioning, that is, economy. ‘The best proportioning
(markets remaining the same) obtains a maximum net income, the
worst proportioning wipes it out.

Whatever the operating net income may be, it is converted, by a
process of capitalization, from a ratio of profit into a rate of profit.
Supposing, in the above illustration that the operating net income of
$100,000 a year is expected to extend into the future, then that operat-
ing net income can be bought and sold in the same way as any piece of
physical property. It is not physical property but is the expected ex-
pansion and economy of a going business. There may be compara-
tively little physical property connected with it, as in the case of the
goodwill of a firm of lawyers. But whether there is little or much the
thing that is actually bought and sold in the process of capitalization
is the expected control of the expected opportunities, powers and
economies of a going business.

Suppose that the above net income of $100,000 is expected to con-


GOING CONCERNS 167


tinue indefinitely into the future. It then is capitalized for the pur-
pose of sale and purchase of the going business. The process is fa-
miliar and simple. The expectancy becomes “assets.” That which is
sold and purchased is the present expectation of a pecuniary net in-
come. There are two convenient but arbitrary expressions of measure-
ment of what is done. One is to say that its present value as assets is a
certain multiple of its annual value. The annual value is the annual net
operating income. If the present value is believed to be ten times its
annual value, that is, “ten years’ purchase,”’ then the total assets, or
capitalization, of the concern is $1,000,000. If it is believed to be
worth “twenty years’ purchase,” the assets are $2,000,000. Or, it
may be stated that the business is capitalized at the rate of 10% in the
case of ten years’ purchase, or at the rate of 5% in the case of twenty
years’ purchase.

The two statements mean the same thing. But the first is in the
form of a mathematical sum, the present addition of all the expected
additions to assets over the total expected period of time. The second
is in the form of an annual rate of profit, a multiple of the expected
addition to assets over an arbitrary unit of time, the year. One
method is the reverse of the other. One is the expectation of income,
the other the income itself, the expectancy. If the purchaser pays
ten times the annual value then his expected rate of profit per year is
one-tenth or 10% of what he pays. If he pays twenty years’ purchase
then his expected rate of profit is one-twentieth, or 5% on the capital-
ization. What he is actually buying is an expected net income,
measured, in the one case, as a sum of several expected annual in-
comes, in the other by a ratio of one of those annual incomes to that
sum. And the ratio, since it involves a measurement of time as well
as measurement of quantity, is rightly named a rate of profit, in which
form it can then be used to compute the amount of profit for any de-
sired period of time.

The conclusions to be drawn from this rather elementary explana-
tion of what happens in the process of capitalization are clouded by
two different physical notions of capital and property. Each of them
conceives capital to be something fixed, predetermined as it were, and
as solidly established as the buildings and lands about us. J. B. Clark,
for example, speaks of capital as a “fund of value” transferring itself
from object to object, but always a kind of predetermined substantial
entity; and interest (or profit) is then a fraction of that fund depending


168 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


on the amount of profit the fund can earn. But if profit is a fraction of
the amount of capital, then capital is merely a multiple of the amount
of profit. If, as above, the rate of profit is 10% and the amount of
profit is $100,000 then the “amount” of capital is ten times $100,000
or $1,000,000. If the rate is 5% and the amount of profit continues to
be $100,000, then the “amount” of capital is $2,000,000. The so-
called “fund” of capital is not a fund but an expectation, and the real
thing that determines value is not a “fund” of capital predetermined,
but an expectation of future bargaining power which determines it.
Clark’s “capital,” which is really assets, or the expectation of income
from things, and not the physical things themselves, does not flow out
of the past, like a river, and get accumulated in a “‘reservoir” like a
“fund,” but his “capital” is the present value of expected oppor-
tunity and power on the commodity and money markets. The phys-
ical things have, indeed, flowed out of the past and have accrued in the
present, but they are not assets of business unless from them is ex-
pected economic opportunity and power in the future.

Irving Fisher, on the other hand, has fully demonstrated this propo-
sition that “capital” is the present value of expected net income, but
his primitive notion of property as physical things held for one’s own
use by an owner, led him astray in ascribing the source of that income
to physical things. And since the physical:things are customers, he
was led to the logical conclusion that the business man owns his cus-
tomers.” The same logical conclusion from the ownership of physical
things led Veblen to make the business man also the owner of his em-
ployees.* But modern capital is not capital in the physical sense, but
is capital in the behavioristic sense. The behavior is the expected
transactions on commodity markets and money markets. It is not
corporeal property, but is incorporeal and intangible property. Its
name is “assets,” the exchange-values of things, and assets are the
expected additions to income to be derived, not from physical things,
but from expected profitable transactions with persons who are not
owned.

What, then, becomes of the physical things, the lands, buildings,
machinery, materials, that seem to be the very substance of wealth,


1CrarK, J. B., Distribution of Wealth, 119 (1008 ed.),

* FisHer, I., The Nature of Capital and Income, 5, 67, 68 (1906). See also Commons, J.R.,
“Political Economy and Business Economy,” 22 Quar. Jour. Econ. 120 (1907).
J 3 VeBLEN, THorsTEIN, The Theory of Business Enterprise, 18 (1904); The Place of Science
an Modern Civilization, 339 fi.


GOING CONCERNS 169


capital and property? We must distinguish between titles of owner-
ship and substance of ownership. If I own a piece of property and
somebody else owns the net income from that property, I hold the
bag and he takes the substance. Things are not the substance; ex-
pected behavior is the substance of things. Modern industry has
readily adapted itself to this evident distinction. The stocks and
bonds of a corporation are evidences, not of ownership of the physical
property, but of residual shares in the expected net income. The
corporation itself is erected into a composite person and it is this ar-
tificial person who actually owns the physical things (titles), but
the residual net income (substance) is apportioned to bondholders
and stockholders as purchasing power on the commodity markets
and money markets, according to rules of apportionment agreed upon
beforehand. The stocks and bonds are encumbrances on the cor-
poration, arranged according to priorities, and intended to absorb
the entire expected “net operating income” of the corporation, after
the employees, material men and others have absorbed the operat-
ing outgo.

If we assume, in the above illustration, that the net income, $100,-
000, is divided in two parts, of which the bondholders’ priorities call
for $20,000 and the stockholders’ residual is $80,000, then the total
present value, or capitalization, of that net income is likewise di-
vided between the owners of the two kinds of encumbrances. Capital-
ized at 5%, or 20 years’ purchase, the bondholders’ annual share,
$20,000, is worth $400,000, and if the total value is $1,000,000 the
stockholders’ share is the residual $600,000; or, if the total value
is $2,000,000 the stockholders’ residual is $1,600,000.

Similar arrangements are made in business other than corpora-
tions. A mortgage is a prior encumbrance on the net income of a
farm, and the farmer’s title of ownership is worth only the value of
that residual known in American as “the equity.” The mortgagor
and mortgagee apportion the expected net income between them-
selves, and the total present value of the farm is but the value of the
mortgage plus the value of the equity.

Here the well-known problem of double taxation as well as the
curious theories of Marx, McLeod, and Clark, show an awkward sur-
vival of the primitive notions of property and capital. The farm is
physical property. It seems to have substantial value. The farmer
is taxed on that total physical value. But the mortgage also is a


170 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


“fund” of value that seems to have a separate existence. It also is
taxed as an additional value. Yet the true situation is evident. The
mortgage is a prior claim, while the “equity,” or title of ownership,
is a residual claim, upon the expected net income of the farm. The
total value of both mortgage and title is but the present value of the
expected net operating income, and this is but the expected exercise
of opportunity, power and economy on the part of him who manages
the farm.

In either of these cases, whether that of an incorporated or an un-
incorporated business, the title of ownership of the physical property
is but one of the several possible methods, and not always the best
method, of adding security to the ownership of the expected net in-
come. It is the bag that may or may not hold the substance.

The physical capital—fertility of the soil, buildings, machinery—
thus sink to the level of raw material, not different at all from other
raw material except that its visible life is more prolonged. What is
the difference between a pile of coal or a hundred bushels of potatoes
or a stock of goods, that will last a month or a year in the business,
and a machine that will last ten years, or a building that will last 20
years, or the fertility of the soil that will last 30 years? Each is but
raw material for human labor. Each must be kept up by human
labor. The depletion of a pile of coal or a stock of potatoes is not
different economically from the depreciation of a machine or build-
ing, or the exhaustion of the soil. Each is raw material used up rap-
idly or gradually, and each alike passes over, in its own proportion,
into an indistinguishable part of the whole product of the going con-
cern.

It is this going concern that codrdinates the several items of raw
material into what we have distinguished as a Going Plant. Each
kind of raw material is both a limiting and a complementary factor
in the process of turning out a finished product ready for use. Raw
materials, machinery, lands, are the parts, Going Plant is the whole.

Yet these distinctions call for an appropriate classification of as-
sets. As above indicated, we may distinguish the two types of assets
belonging to a going concern, the part-assets and the total assets.
The part-assets consist of three different types. One is corporeal
assets, or “physical values,” consisting in the values of raw materials
taken separately, or the value of the going plant as a whole consid-
ered as an operating physical mechansim turning out products for


GOING CONCERNS 171


sale. These are usually designated, by a convenient solecism, as
tangible values, or physical values, since they are values-in-exchange
of physical things determined by reference to the several commodity
markets.

The other is incorporeal assets, the value of bills receivable, de-
posits at the bank, stocks and bonds of other corporations, and sim-
ilar encumbrances on others owned by the concern. These, by a
similar violation of propriety, may be designated incorporeal value,
since their value is determined on the security or money market.

The third is the value of residual goodwill, of franchises, patent
rights, the value of trade-names, and similar opportunities owned by
the concern. These may be distinguished as intangible assets or in-
tangible values.

In each of these cases of valuation of part-assets the valuations
are made, not for the purpose of capitalizing the total expected net
income, nor for the purpose of apportioning net operating income to
stockholders and bondholders, but for the purpose of imputing value
to the different sources out of which the net income is derived.

We thus have three purposes of valuation which may be distin-
guished as valuation proper, apportionment and imputation. The
purpose of valuation proper is that of capitalization, or present val-
uation, of the total expected net operating income. It gives the value
of the going business as a whole. The purpose of apportionment is
the assignment, according to priorities, of that expected operating
net income among bondholders and stockholders. The purpose of
imputation is that of distinguishing the sources of the net income.
They are each but a different way of looking at the same things, but
for different purposes. The main purpose in valuation proper is the
relation between assets and the income expected from assets; the
attendant purpose is apportionment of residual income to bondhold-
ers and the resulting apportionment of capital value or total assets to
stockholders. But, for purposes of buying, selling or public regula-
tion of the business as a whole, the imputation of value to its sources
is allowable.

The contrast in the three purposes of valuation may be exhibited
as follows, using the preceding figures of operating income and outgo:


172 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


I. VALUATION


EXPECTANCY CAPITALIZATION
Gross Operating Income $250,000 per year
Gross Operating Outgo 150,000 per year
Net Operating Income 100,000 per year $1,000,000 (@10%) }


2. APPORTIONMENT


EXPECTANCY CAPITALIZATION
"30,000, to) bondholderse. asta ieee $ 400,000 (@ 5%)
Crewetorew voters Matolelay 35 chapedduagarotes 600,000 (@ 1314%)
$760,000 Meh INCOM aque fae tae mere tne $1,000,000 (@ 10%)


3. ImpuTATION


Tangible Value (going-plant, commodity markets)........$ 700,000
Incorporeal Value (encumbrances, money markets)....... 100,000
Intangible Value (opportunities, money markets)........ 200,000

$1,000,000


V. Tue Unit RULE


Tf such a thing as a going concern actually exists, distinguishable
from physical things, then failure to recognize it perpetrates injus-
tice. In the Adams Express Company Case? the Ohio State Board
of Assessment had valued the property of the express company for
the purpose of taxation at $440,377.60 (capitalization) whereas the
value of the tangible property in the state was shown to be only $23,-
400 (imputation). The Board had taken into account the value of
the entire capital stock and bonds of the company as a unit, under
the name of “intangible value” and had apportioned to Ohio a part
of that value in proportion to the length of lines within the state. It
was contended by the company, and by four dissenting justices of
the Federal Supreme Court, that the only “property ” in the state of
Ohio owned by the company was the horses, wagons, safes and sim-
ilar tangible personal property; that these should be valued item by
item as they always had been valued; that the so-called “intangi-
ble value” was but the “skill, diligence, fidelity and success,” the


1 The Capitalization figures would, of course, be different if the rate of interest on the
money market were different.


2 Adams Express Co. v. Ohio, 165 U.S. 104 (1897); re-hearing, 166 U. S. 185 (1897).


GOING CONCERNS 173


“reputation and goodwill” of the company, which were not property;
that there was no “unity” between the horses and wagons owned in
Ohio and those in New York and other states except a mere “unity
of ownership;” that while in the case of a telegraph or railway com-
pany there was a connected physical plant in all the states, yet in
the case of an express company the horses and wagons in Ohio were
united to those in New York only by a mere “intellectual fiction,”
a “metaphysical or intellectual relation,” an “imagined thing.”” The
only property of ‘“‘real intrinsic worth” was the tangible property.

But a majority of the court held that it was not physical unity,
nor even unity of ownership, but “unity of use” that gave value
to these separate items of tangible property. ‘Considered as dis-
tinct objects of taxation, a horse is indeed a horse; a wagon, a wagon;
a safe, a safe; a pouch, a pouch; but how is it that $23,430 worth of
horses, wagons, safes and pouches produce $275,446 in a single year?”
(165 U.S. 222.) “Whenever separate articles of tangible property are
joined together, not simply by a unity of ownership, but in a unity
of use, there is not infrequently developed a property, intangible
though it may be, which in value exceeds the aggregate of the value
of the separate pieces of tangible property.” (166 U. S. 219.) “If a
state comprehends all property in its scheme of taxation, then the
goodwill of an organized and established industry must be recognized
as a thing of value.” (166 U. S. 221.)

In this opinion the court completed a transition, that had been
going on for fifty years, in the meaning of property from that of tan-
gible property owned by individuals to that of a going business owned
by a going concern. The tangible property disappears, except as
physical instruments, and, in its place, property becomes the personal
relations of buyer and seller, creditor and debtor, principal and
agents, sovereign and corporation. ‘In the complex civilization of
to-day,” said the court, “a large portion of the wealth of a commu-
nity consists in intangible property. . . . It matters not in what in-
tangible property consists,—whether privileges, corporate franchises,
contracts or obligations. It is enough that it is property which,
though intangible, exists, which has value, produces income and
passes current in the markets of the world.” (166 U. S. 219.)

The historical steps in this transition of the meaning of property,
in the tax cases, may be roughly indicated as follows. At first the
separate items of property were listed and their values added, real


174 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


estate and goods being itemized and taxed as the property of the
corporation, but the stocks and bonds as intangible items in the hands
of shareholders and bondholders.

On the other hand, the privilege tax, or franchise tax, on the cor-
poration was at first an arbitrary fixed tax, without accurate regard
to its value. Then various attempts were made to tax the value of
the franchise. In the case of banks owning government bonds, which
were exempt from taxation, it was held, in the year 1865,' not to be
a tax on the bonds if the bank were taxed on its capital stock, al-
though the value of that capital stock depended partly on the income
derived from the non-taxable government bonds. The income from
all the separate items flows into a common treasury and it is this net
income that gives unity and value to the capital stock, distinct from
the items like government bonds, which yield the income. The gov-
ernment bonds could not, according to federal law, be listed for tax-
ation as separate items of property, but the present value of the ex-
pected income to be derived from them could be taxed with other
income as a unit.

A similar result was ultimately reached in the taxation of railway
corporations. The gross earnings of a railway are made up, in part,
of the separate items of revenue from tolls on freight handled. But
if the privilege or franchise tax is laid directly on the separate ship-
ments, item by item, it is a tax on the interstate commerce of the
shippers. But in 1891,” if the tax is laid on the gross earnings as a
unit, derived though they be from the same shipments, it does not
restrain commerce and is valid. The distinction turns on the differ-
ence between a specific tax on each shipment at the time it is made,
which may be shifted to the shipper in a higher freight rate, and a tax
on the gross earnings derived from all the shipments, which is a bur-
den, not on the shipper, but on the treasury of the carrier.

The gross earnings tax, however, is unequal as between corpora-
tions, since it makes no allowance for differences in cost of opera-
tion. It is the amount of net earnings that measures the ability to
pay taxes. But even net earnings alone are not a true measure. Two
companies with the same net earnings may have invested different
amounts of capital in the business, so that one is losing money, the
other is making a profit, measured by the investment. Moreover,


1Van Allen 2. Assessors, 3 Wall. 573, 503 (186s).
2 Maine v. Grand Trunk Ry. Co., 142 U. S. 217, (1891).


GOING CONCERNS 175


it is not the past net earnings for a single year, but the expected net
earnings over a future period of years, that give value to the business
of the company. Consequently when these expected net earnings
are capitalized, their capitalization is nothing else but the total value
of the stocks and bonds. This was the next step. When the ‘“‘cap-
ital stock,” interpreted to mean both stocks and bonds, was valued
and taxed to the corporation as a unit the tax was sustained. “It
is obvious,” said the court, in 1875, that “‘when you have ascertained
the current cash value of the funded debt and the current value of
the entire number of shares, you have, by the action of those who
above all others can best estimate it, ascertained the true value of
the road, all its property, its capital stock and its franchises; for these
are all represented by the value of its bonded debt and the shares of
its capital stock.” ?

These decisions, however, brought about a condition of double
taxation, the taxation of the company as a unit on its “‘capital stock”
and the taxation of shareholders and bondholders as individuals on
their claims of part-ownership of that stock. But double taxation
was held not to be improper, because there were two different persons
owning two different objects, the corporation owning its franchise
measured by capital stock, and each shareholder or bondholder own-
ing his share of the expected profits. ‘‘The corporation,” said the
court, “is the legal owner of all the property of the bank, real and
personal. . . . The interest of the shareholder entitles him to partic-
ipate in the net profits earned by the bank. . . . This is a distinct,
independent interest in property.” ”

Then followed a partial or total exemption of stockholders and
bondholders whose intangible property notoriously escaped the asses-
sor, whereas the tax on capital stock already reached them.? And this
is the “unit rule” of taxation.

Thus the unit rule of taxation, treating the corporation as a going
concern, finally tends, as we have seen in the Adams Express Com-
pany Case, to be substituted both for the taxation of physical items
owned by the corporation and for the taxation of natural individuals
owning part claims on the net income of the concern. Physical things
and individuals are merged into a going business of a going concern.

1State R. R. Tax Cases, 92 U.S. 575, 605 (1875).

2Van Allen v. Assessors, 3 Wall. 573, 584 (1865).


3 Pittsburg Ry. Co. v. Backus, 154 U.S. 421 (1894); Western Union v. Taggart, 162 U.S.
1 (1896); C. & N. W. v. State, 124 Wis. 553 (1906).


176 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


There remain, however, vestiges of the primitive notion of physical
valuation. In these taxation cases under the unit rule the value of the
franchise is sought to be ascertained by subtracting the value of the
tangible property from the value of the capital stock, and this remains
the practice under all the statutes which follow the unit rule. This
practice results in two apparently different kinds of value for the going
concern, the “tangible value” and the “intangible value,” although,
of course, the value of the capital stock as a unit includes both the
tangible and the intangible elements. The notions of physical value
hang over, even after the thing itself that is valued has changed from
physical things to the expected net income of a going concern. But
there are, in fact, not two kinds of value, tangible and intangible;
there is but one value and it is intangible.

The confusion arises from failure to distinguish between what we
have named “valuation proper” and “imputation.” Valuation
proper is capitalization, which looks to the future. Imputation is
analysis of causes and looks to the past. There is but one value proper
and it is the intangible expectation of a net income of a going concern.
There are several factors contributing to the present expectation, some
of which are physical and all of which have a history.

A further important development has occurred, or is occurring,
incidental to the development of the unit rule, as will appear in the
Adams Express Company Case. The meaning of a corporate fran-
chise has begun to separate itself out into three meanings, which may
be distinguished as the “franchise to be,” the “franchise to do” and
the “going business.” The “franchise to be” was the articles of
incorporation creating the corporate person with power to act like a
natural person, and the legal entity thereby created could exist only
in the state which created it. The “franchise to do,” in the early
corporation laws, was not clearly distinguished from the franchise to
be, because corporations were specially created for the purpose of doing
some special thing. But where the entity was created in one state and
the activity occurred in another state, and especially, when the entity
came to be created by general corporation laws and the special privilege
could not be permitted to all such entities, then the “franchise to do”
became a separate privilege granted by the same or another state to a
public utility corporation, such as a railway or telegraph company,
and existed where the tangible property was laid and used. The
franchise to do, therefore, was inseparably connected with a stretch


GOING CONCERNS 177


of physical property operated as a physical unit, and it was this physi-
cal unity that made the transition easy from a tangible thing to the
intangible franchise whose value was the value of the capital stock
connected with that thing.

But a new situation arose in the Express Company Case. That
company, in the State of Ohio, had neither a franchise to be nor a fran-
chise to do, since it was neither incorporated in that state nor did it
occupy a stretch of territory in the state. It was but an ordinary
private business distinct from the railway corporations over which it
operated. To meet this situation the court enlarged the meaning of
the “franchise to do” so that it became no longer a special grant or a
privilege to operate over a designated stretch of territory, but became
also “a combination of franchises, embracing all things which a cor-
poration is given power to do.” (166 U. S. 224.) This means, of
course, all the things which any individual does in conducting any or-
dinary business without any special grant of power. In other words,
the “franchise to do” becomes the usual rights and liberties open to
any individual, except that the individual is now an association of
individuals acting asa unit. Both the franchise to be and the franchise
to do become identical with a going business of a going concern, as
will appear from two of the cases already cited.

The transition in meaning was begun in the State Railway Tax
Cases, in 1875. There the court held that the sztus of personal prop-
erty, including the franchise, for purposes of taxation, did not neces-
sarily follow the domicile, or main office, of the corporation, but might
be distributed by the legislature to all localities where the business was
conducted.! This territorial diffusion of situs was approved in the
Adams Express Company Case, so that the residence of a corporation,
for this purpose, at least, is no longer the spot occupied by a supposed
entity, the soul of the corporation, but the corporation resides wherever
it transacts its business. The shift is made from entities to transac-
tions, and going concerns repeat the individual psychology. The
philosopher Descartes located the soul of man in the pineal gland but
modern psychology locates the soul in what the body does; so the
lawyers formerly located the situs of a corporation in the state which
created it, but now the courts locate it wherever the corporation does
its business.

Thus it is that, after the “franchise to be” has widened out from a


192 U.S. 575 (1875).


178 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


special act of incorporation into a universal right of association allowed
to all persons through general corporation laws, the “franchise to do”
also begins to be whittled down from a special grant of privilege not
open to all corporations, and a contrary expansion occurs until it
becomes the ordinary going business of any going concern. The
“going concern,” as we have seen, is all of the persons associated and
organized in the concern. The “going business” is the unity and
proportioning of all transactions of the concern. The goodwill is the
expectation of reciprocal benefits to be derived from the transactions.
Thus going concerns are the persons going along together, going busi-
ness is their transactions, goodwill is the social psychology that keeps
them going.

The explanation of this evolution of the “franchise to be” the “ fran-
chise to do” and the “going business” is to be found in the two sources
from which they were derived, namely, the King’s prerogative and the
common law. From the prerogative came the articles of incorpora-
tion, the “franchise to be” a going concern and to act asa unit. From
the prerogative also came the special privilege of conducting a busi-
ness, the “franchise to do” what others were not permitted to do.
These sprang from the prerogative which was above the common law,
and exempt from its limitations. They were grants of sovereign powers
and immunities, and not rights and liberties open to all.

But, from the common law, in its evolution into business law, came
the enforcement of contracts—the law of encumbrances—and the
liberty to buy and sell—the law of opportunities. These were open
to all persons, thus constituting the common rights and liberties of a
“going business.”

Originally, since the franchises were special privileges, they were
not considered to be property but rather a privileged activity deroga-
tory to and even destructive of the liberty and property of other sub-
jects. They were privileged liberties. In this respect the “franchise
to be” a corporation and the “franchise to do” were at first indistin-
guishable, for a grant of sovereign power was the grant of a privileged
position to do something. It exempted the holder from the free com-
petition out of which the common law was developing the law of op-
portunities and goodwill, and, although this exemption had an in-
tangible value it was not property because its value proceeded from a
power to tax the community in excess of what could be obtained by
appealing to the goodwill of the community. But, following the taking


GOING CONCERNS 179


over of the King’s prerogative by the legislature and with the incoming
of general incorporation laws, beginning in New York at the middle of
the Nineteenth Century, the franchise to be a corporation was sub-
jected to the competition of other corporations, through the universal
right to incorporate, and its value sank to the mere cost of registration
with the secretary of state.

Not so with the “franchise to do,” which might be granted to an
individual as well as a corporation, and was so granted originally. It
retained its privileged character, for it required a special permit, such
as a privilege to operate a public utility, like a bank, an insurance
company, a tollroad, a railroad, canal or municipal undertaking, with
the privilege of making charges or taking tolls not open to business in
general. In many of these cases this franchise retained its privileged
character on account of physical conditions which prevented access by
competitors. Finally, however, even this franchise, in the Adams
Express Company Case, is merged into the “going business”’ of the
common law and becomes identical with that “unity of use” which we
find is none else than the goodwill of a going business.


SOURCES OF THE LAW OF GOING CONCERNS
Prerogative—Special privileges to be and do.


—Business Law—General Incorporation Laws


' Positive (Debts)
— Encumbrances; Negative (Oppor-
tunities)


—Going Business


Opportunities tes


Business Law—Assets and Liabilities


Common Law—Things


Thus, up from the feudal common law of things held for use by privi-
leged persons, through the business common law of assets and liabilities
determined by the competition of anybody, and down from the pre-


180 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


rogative with its exclusive privileges, by way of general incorporation
laws, comes the meeting place of goodwill and privilege in the ordinary
lawful activity, not, however, of individuals, but of a going concern
operating a going business and acting as an individual.

This going business, the outcome and coalescence of the common
law and the prerogative, retains its features derived from each. From
the common law it derives those encumbrances and opportunities
which constitute private property; from the prerogative it derives
both powers and immunities of associated persons to act as a unit,
the franchise to be, and, in special cases, the power to exercise ex-
clusive privileges not open to business in general, the franchise to
do.

It will be noted, from the foregoing, that the concept of a going
concern with its going business was developed as a by-product of
the effort to secure equality of burdens in support of government.
The notion grew, not out of a theory, but out of transactions. It
was recognized because failure to recognize it inflicts injustice. But
it cannot be recognized in all its attributes a priort and in advance
of actual transactions. It is recognized piecemeal as its activity be-
gins to impinge on others. Sharing the burdens of taxation is one
of these points of impact. The value of property to be ascertained
in tax cases is not merely the value of a thing to its owner, but is a
value as between taxpayers. A certain sum of money is required in
order to operate the government, and it must be shared by taxpayers.
If one pays less than his proportionate share, the others are com-
pelled to pay more than their share. A taxation case is therefore a
litigation between all other taxpayers and a certain taxpayer or
class of taxpayers, in order to apportion the expenses of govern-
ment among them.

The expenses may be apportioned according to either a tax on in-
comes or an ad valorem tax on property. In either case a certain uni-
form rate of tax is computed and then applied to the amount of in-
dividual income or to the value of individual property, in order to
ascertain the amount of tax payable by each person. While, in
the case of the tax on property, the separate items of property are
conceived as having their separate values determined, not by the
personal activity of their owners but by the demand and supply of
the market, yet, in the case of the income tax the ability of the owner
to obtain income through personal activity or management of


GOING CONCERNS 181


property is the object taxed. Then, when, in the case of a tax on
property, it came to adding shares of stock and evidences of indebt-
edness to the items listed as property, these too had a value inde-
pendent of the personal activity of the owner, and they therefore were
readily classed with items of tangible property.

It was different with the goodwill of the going concern itself, which
is evidently something whose value depends on the “skill, diligence,
fidelity, success and reputation” of the persons who compose the
concern. The value of the physical and the other intangible assets
might go on in the absence of the owner, but the value of goodwill
as a whole is a value given by persons actively on the job. Conse-
quently, when the definition of property is enlarged to include the
goodwill of a going concern, it passes over from the value of things
fixed by demand and supply on the commodity and money markets
to the value of personal behavior fixed by “skill, diligence and
fidelity.”

The connecting link must be looked for not in the mere separable
items of assets added together, but in the expected gross income as
a unit, to be derived from the combination of the several items into
a going business.

It required many years and even centuries to evolve this perfected
notion of goodwill and a going business out of the common-law no-
tions of physical property. The outcome is a concept of property,
not as the exclusive holding of things by individuals, but as the go-
ing business of a going concern yielding an income to all of its mem-
bers, including a residual net income to its stockholders. Even yet
this expanded definition has not been fully accepted. In the case of
the Indianapolis News, the State Board of Assessment, in attempt-
ing to follow the rule in the Adams Express Company Case, added
$352,340 as the value of the residual goodwill and Associated Press
franchise, to the $47,657 which was found to be the value of the print-
ing presses and other physical assets. The Supreme Court of the
State, although the state constitution required “all property not
especially exempt to be taxed,” yet held that this intangible value
was not property within the meaning of that clause. The state court
distinguished the Adams Express Company Case and justified its
opinion on the ground that the legislature had not specifically pro-
vided either that goodwill should be taxed, or that shares in the As-
sociated Press should be taxed, or that the unit rule should be fol-


182 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


lowed.! Evidently the principle of a going concern might be made
to apply to the taxation of all corporations if the legislatures so de-
sired.

VI. Gornc PLANT AND GOING BUSINESS


Wealth vs. Commonwealth


We have noted that the concept of a going business was developed
as a by-product of the effort to obtain justice between taxpayers for
the support of government. The going business was there but had
not been recognized in the tax laws, owing to the primitive notion
that property consisted only in physical things held for one’s own
use. When, however, the going business was recognized as property,
then, not only physical things, but also the “skill, diligence, fidelity,
success and reputation” of the persons composing the concern were
recognized as property, and property came to consist of the expected
profitable transactions of the organized concern.

In a parallel way we shall find that the concept of a going plant
operated by a producing organization has been developing out of
the effort to establish justice between sellers and buyers. In the
cases on taxation, a concept of justice was eventually obtained by
abandoning entirely the notion of physical things as property and
accepting as a substitute the concept of the present value of an ex-
pected income. In the case of a going plant, a remnant of the physi-
cal notions continues to clog the decisions under the name of “going
concern value.” The going plant is a producing organization fur-
nishing a service to the public, but the going business is a bar-
gaining organization obtaining prices from the public. One is the
exact reverse of the other, and it is the mingling of these two oppos-
ing concepts, under the name of “going concern value,” that was
injected into the opinions of the Supreme Court by Justice Brewer,
beginning in 1892.

The Congress of the United States had authorized the purchase,
by condemnation proceedings, of the property of the Monongahela
Navigation Company,” in order to improve the navigation of the
river and to abolish the tolls charged by the private company on the
river traffic. In this act the Congress had expressly provided that
the franchise of the Company to collect tolls for the navigation of


1 Hart v. Smith, 159 Ind. 182 (1902).
2 Monongahela Navigation Co. v. U. S., 148 U. S. 312 (1803).


GOING CONCERNS 183


the river should not be considered or estimated in making compen-
sation to the Company for. its property. The Supreme Court, by
Justice Brewer, held that this proviso of the act deprived the Com-
pany of its property without just compensation, since the property
of the Company was not merely its physical property but also its
franchise to take tolls for the use of that property. “The franchise,”
said the court, “is a vested right. The state has power to grant it.
It may retake it, as it may other private property, for public uses,
upon the payment of just compensation. . . . but it can no more
take the franchise which the state has given than it can any private
property belonging to an individual.” (341.)

The court proceeded to notice that the government of the United
States in condeming the property, was acquiring the “ right ” to exact
the same prices for service which the navigation company had been
receiving. “‘It would seem strange,” the opinion proceeds, “that if
by asserting its right to take the property, the government could
strip it largely of its value, destroying all that value which comes
from the receipt of tolls, and having taken the property at this re-
duced valuation, immediately possess and enjoy all the profits from
the collection of the same tolls. In other words, by the contention
this element of value exists before and after taking, and disappears
only during the very moment and process of taking.” (337, 338.)

This opinion probably reached the modern high tide of the ancient
royal prerogative, for the fling at Congress appears to have gone on
the assumption that a monarch, Congress in this case, above the com-
mon law, had granted to the navigation company a privilege to tax
the community for the company’s use and then had arbitrarily re-
voked the privilege in order to tax the community for the monarch’s
use. A similar issue had arisen between the common law and the
prerogative in England, at the end cf Elizabeth’s reign and the be-
ginning of the reign of James I. The common-law lawyers contended
that the franchises, patents, privileges, granted by the sovereigns to
the lobbyists of the time, since they were granted to persons “not
skilled in the trade,” served only to extract private wealth from the
commonwealth without increasing the commonwealth; but that the
merchants and manufacturers, who became wealthy by their own
efforts out of their own private property without aid of the royal
prerogative, increased the commonwealth to the extent that they
increased their own wealth. On these grounds, the courts, begin-


184 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ning in 1599, declared these patents void, and the parliament, in 1624,
abolished them.! But now, in 1892, Justice Brewer restores them,
partly by putting Congress in the shoes of an absolute monarch and
overlooking the intention of Congress to abolish the tolls altogether,
and partly by enlarging the definition of property from physical things
to franchises, such that the revoking of the special privilege is equiv-
alent to taking private property without compensation. If prop-
erty is not only a physical thing, but is also a franchise to charge
prices for service, then the value of the property is not only the ex-
change-value of the physical property which the owner has added
to the commonwealth, but is also such additional wealth as the owner
may extract from the commonwealth over and above what he has
added to it. Both are valuable, both are assets and both are property.

But a proper distinction would have recognized two values, de-
pending on the opposite person with whom the owner is dealing. As
against other private persons, a special privilege has a value determin-
ed by what private citizens can earn through ownership of the spe-
cial privilege; but as against the public, which, under the common law,
retains the power to regulate the prices and has granted the franchise
only on condition, express or implied, that the prices be reasonable,
the franchise has no value.

The constitution of the United States prohibits the taking of pri-
vate property for public purposes without just compensation. Just
compensation is determined as the amount at which a willing buyer
and a willing seller would value the property at the time on the exist-
ing markets. Thus the Constitution makes the voluntary transac-
tions of private persons the standard of reasonable measurement of
value to be used in the compulsory transaction of taking private prop-
erty under the power of eminent domain. When the constitution
was framed the current definition of property was physical things
such as lands and physical chattels. A different clause of the con-
stitution prohibited the impairment of the obligation of contracts,
which was the only form of “incorporeal property” then known. The
“intangible property,” consisting of rights to buy and sell were not
known as property in the constitutional sense, until after the
Slaughter House Cases. And the Slaughter House Cases, both in the
majority and minority opinions, as we have noticed, denied that a
grant of a monopoly was private property. The majority opinion

1 Above, Chap. III, p. 47.


GOING CONCERNS 185


held that it was justified only as a police regulation which might be
revoked without compensation, as was done and sustained by the
court in the later case dealing with the same slaughter houses.!_ Even
when the minority opinions became the unanimous opinion of the
court, the intangible property recognized was only that which the
individual might acquire by his own private transactions and with-
out the aid of a special franchise. The minority opinions, in those
cases had held to the original distinction between the common law
and the prerogative. A franchise proceeded from the prerogative
and was not property. Property proceeded from the common law,
since it was only the common law that took the ordinary practices
of unprivileged persons and erected them into a system of legal rights,
duties and liberties.

But Justice Brewer, in 1892, made this further extension of the
definition of intangible property. Now it becomes not only the prop-
erty which one gets by his own efforts in private transactions, but
also the property which he gets by the very grant of sovereign power
to operate a monopoly which had been refused the name of property
in the Slaughter House Cases, and had been justified only as a
revocable exercise of the police power. The franchise in the Mon-
ongahela Case ? did not carry the legal power to take excessive tolls,
and, if the tolls were reasonable, as the common law required, there
would have been no value in the franchise as against the public. The
public is not to be presumed to have granted a privilege of extortion.
It was, indeed, different when the King granted a franchise—it was
a grant of his private power to tax. But this is not to be presumed
when the franchise is granted by the public itself. This was evi-
dently the opinion of Congress when the proviso was added that the
franchise should not be considered or estimated. Congress was sup-
posed to be the public granting a power to tax itself, in consideration
of a service to be rendered to itself.

In support of his opinion, Justice Brewer cited the Dartmouth
College Case where it was held that the franchise of a corporation
was a contract which could not be set aside by either party to it.*
But the Dartmouth College Case had to do with a “franchise to
be” and not a “franchise to do.” It was a grant of power of self-


1 Above, Chap. I, p. 11.
2 Op. cit., 148 U.S. 312.
3 Op. cit. 344; Dartmouth College ». Woodward, 4 Wheat. 518 (1819).


186 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


government within the corporation, the franchise to act as a unit,
not the grant ofa privilege of taking tolls from the public. The
“franchise to be” is, in one sense, of course, a franchise to do, but
the kind of “doing” is that internal proportioning of factors which
does not concern outsiders and is solely a matter of self-government.
But the “franchise to do,” in the special meaning attached since the
time when general incorporation laws deprived the “franchise to
be” of its privileged character, is the expansion of one’s resources
by means of a special advantage over customers consisting in exclu-
sion of the free competition of third parties. This special franchise
to do, at common law, carried the implication that the exercise of
the power granted should be reasonable as determined by a jury
of the community.

The scope of the Dartmouth College decision was thus enlarged
by Justice Brewer from the privilege of self-government into a privi-
lege to tax the community in excess of competitive prices for similar
service; privilege was erected into a property-right, analogous to
ownership of physical things, as against the common-law theory
that it was a grant of prerogative, or against the Slaughter House
opinion that it was an exercise of the police power, and not a right
of property.


2. Physical Connections


While in the Monongahela Case Justice Brewer expressed his
opinion regarding a special franchise then in force, in the Kansas
City Water Works Case, two years later,’ he expressed an opinion
regarding a business whose special franchise had expired. Kansas
City was required by the legislature, on the expiration of the franchise,
to purchase the property covered by the franchise. The company
claimed a value of $4,500,000 based on the net earnings. The city, and
a lower court, found the value of the physical plant to be $2,714,000
based on the estimated cost of reproduction “put together into
a waterworks system as a complete structure, irrespective of any
franchise—irrespective of anything the property earns or may earn
in the future.” (864.)

Justice Brewer, in reversing the lower court and requiring payment
for intangible value, agreed that capitalization of earnings would not
be fair because it “implies continuance of earnings, and continuance


1 National Waterworks Co. v. Kansas City, 62 Fed. 853, 865 (1804).


GOING CONCERNS 187


of earnings rests upon a franchise to operate a waterworks,” a fran-
chise which in this case had expired. Neither should “original cost”
control the valuation, since what they were looking for was “present
value.” Present value must be the value of an expectancy. It
could not, therefore, be found in the “cost of reproduction,” which,
though it also evidently gives a present value, yet does not give a
value based on expectations. The court found this expectancy,
not, of course, in the franchise, which had expired, and not in the
expected prices to be paid by customers, which, of course, depended
on the franchise, but in the physical connections that tied the dwell-
ings of the customers to the plant of the company, even though
it was the customers and not the company who had paid for and who
owned these physical connections. The cost of reproduction is
inadequate, said the court, in that it does “not take into account
the value which flows from the established connections between
pipes and the buildings of the city. ... The fact that the company
does not own the connections between the pipes in the street and
the buildings—such connections being the property of the individual
property owners—does not militate against the proposition...
for who would care to buy, or at least give a large price for, a water-
works system without a single connection between the pipes in the
streets and the buildings adjacent? Such a system would be a dead
structure, rather then a living and going business.”’ (865.)

These physical connections, by a curious irony, are identified
with free choice of opportunity on the part of customers. ‘Such
connections” continued the court, “are not compulsory, but depend
on the will of the property owners, and are secured only by efforts
on the part of the owners of the waterworks and inducements held
out therefor.”

This quaint sarcasm of Justice Brewer continues to be the pre-
cedent for later decisions. It goes back to John Locke’s empty
concept of the will. True enough, according to that concept, water
works connections in a great city are not compulsory on customers—
each customer has the inaccessible alternative of digging his own
well.

It follows that the government of Kansas City, as in the Monon-
gahela case, is not the public, but is another private purchaser buying
a physical object by means of which it can tax the public for its
private use. “The city, by this purchase,” said the court, “steps


188 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


into possession of a waterworks plant—not merely a completed
system for bringing water to the city, and distributing it through
pipes placed in the streets, but a system already earning a large
income by virtue of having secured connections between the pipes
in the streets and a multitude of private dwellings.”” ‘Who would
care to buy or at least give a large price for, a waterworks system”
not having these physical connections and pecuniary income? (865.)

In this version Justice Brewer identified a going business operated
by the business organization for the sake of obtaining prices for its
service, with a going plant operated by a producing organization for
the sake of rendering that service. The customers had physically
connected their property with the physical property of the company,
and, by doing so, had mentally connected their future patronage
with the service rendered by the company and had tacitly accepted
such prices as might be charged by the company in the future. Al-
though they cannot readily get away, being physically connected
and having no costless alternative, yet the “connections are not
compulsory, but depend on the will of the property owners.”

In this way, by resorting to a physical notion of property, is retained
the primitive notion that property in itself has no economic power
through the power to withhold service, and that, the special fran-
chise having expired, there is no legal coercion, therefore no coercion.
Indeed, this primitive notion of physical property held for one’s
own use retained a still more primitive significance, for, in this case,
it carried with it also the notion of holding the attached human
beings as one’s property, just as we have noticed above that Irving
Fisher mistakenly supposed. The city, like a private purchaser
of an estate with serfs attached, “steps into possession”’ of “‘a system
already earning a large income” from customers physically attached
to the plant. Justice Brewer, by this analogy, applied a physical
concept of slavery to a goodwill concept of citizenship, and thus
converted the Fourteenth Amendment into an authorization of
what Justice Field had named “servitude” as a substitute for slavery.


3. Lawfulness and Unlawfulness


While Justice Brewer, in the Monongahela and Kansas City
Cases, carried over physical concepts into bargaining concepts,
Justice Savage, of the Supreme Court of Maine, gave to the doctrine
the legal setting which has been followed by other courts. In the


GOING CONCERNS 189


Water District Case! the property of the company and its unex-
pired franchise were required to be valued for public purchase. Jus-
tice Savage, in his instructions to the appraisers, excluded the value
of the franchise as such. He saw clearly that the common-law rule
against charging “arbitrary rates beyond the power of revision”
by the public authorities deprived the franchise itself of value as
against the public. This reduced the franchise to merely a kind
of certification that the concern is lawfully there, lawfully charging
prices for service, and exercising the ordinary equal privilege of
anybody to engage in a lawful business. The property was to be
valued just as ordinary lawful property would be valued, which
required no special privilege.

Yet this ordinary lawfulness itself is valuable. “Even in cases
where by statute,” he said, “franchises are not to be included in
the valuation, we conceive that it must have been implied that the
property was to be valued as rightfully where it was and rightfully
to be used. For what are pipes in the ground worth as pipes, or
reservoirs, or dams, or fixtures, unless they can be rightfully used,
and reasonable tolls charged? And these rights are the franchises.”
(378.) “So far as the structure is maintained and used by virtue
of a franchise,” the Justice continues, “that fact may add to the
value of the structure. One would be likely to pay more for it as
a structure if it could be rightfully used than he would if it could
not. ... It isa structure, in actual use, and with a right on the
part of its owner to use it, and to charge reasonable rates to customers
for services rendered. This is all. It is threefold in discussion but
it is single in substance.” (376, 377.)

There are thus two concepts of a “dead structure,’”’ Justice Brewer’s
concept of a structure without physical connections, and Justice
Savage’s concept of a structure without legal authority to charge
customers for the use of the service. Without this legal right the
concern has no earning value, which is the breath of life that con-
verts the plant into assets. Where Justice Brewer needed mainly
physical connections in order to get a going concern, Justice Savage
needs also legal sanction in order to get what he called a “going
concern business.” Without legal sanction to charge prices it is
dead, even though it be a going plant with its producing organ-
ization. With legal sanction it is also a going business with a business

1 Water District ». Water Co., 99 Me. 371 (1904).


190 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


organization, and has a value as assets determined by its expected
lawful earning power.

Justice Savage is quaintly correct in his analysis. Ordinary law-
fulness is itself valuable. A brewery or saloon in a “dry” country
is less valuable than the same brewery or saloon in a “wet” country.
A slave loses value for its owner on emancipation. Smuggled goods
are less valuable to their owner than the same goods lawfully in the
country. A stolen horse has less value to the thief than it has to a
lawful purchaser. A waterworks plant lawfully charging tolls is more
valuable to its owner than the same plant treated as a nuisance.

This is because lawfulness is compared with out-lawfulness, instead
of comparing privileged lawfulness with equal lawfulness. It does not
follow, as against other lawful property, that lawfulness has a value.
Competing property is also lawfully there, and this competing prop-
erty lawfully keeps down the price of other lawful property. Law-
fulness is worth having but does not have additional value in com-
petition with others who have equal lawfulness. Equal lawfulness
implies exposure to lawful competition as well as lawful right to re-
quire payment for lawful service. Equal lawfulness is but the legal
equivalent of a competitive business, and not something additional to
the business. Justice Savage has givena double meaning to lawful-
ness—the Jawful exercise of power as against its unlawful exercise,
and the privileged exercise of power as against its equal exercise.
Privileged lawfulness is none other than the same special franchise
to charge arbitrary rates which he had previously excluded from addi-
tional valuation. By making equal lawfulness analogous to outlawful-
ness, he restored what he had excluded when he contrasted privileged
lawfulness with equal lawfulness.

Justice Savage then proceeded to construct out of the confusion
of use-value and exchange-value the concept of “going-concern-
value,” by tying together Justice Brewer’s physical connections
of a going plant with his own privileged lawfulness of a going busi-
ness. “In the first place, it isa structure, pure and simple, consisting
of pipes, pumps, engines, reservoirs, machinery and so forth, with
land rights and water rights. As a structure it has value independent
of any use, or right to use where it is, a value probably much less
than it cost, unless it can be used where it is, unless there is a right
to use it. But more than this it is a structure in actual use, a use
remunerative to some extent. It has customers. It is a going concern.


GOING CONCERNS QI


The value of the structure is enhanced by the fact that it is being
used in, and, in fact, is essential to a going concern business. We
speak sometimes of a going concern value as if it is, or could be,
separate and distinct from structure value—so much for structure
and so much for going concern. But this is not an accurate state-
ment. The going concern part of it has no existence except as a
part of the structure. If no structure—no going concern. If a
structure in use, it is a structure whose value is affected by the fact
that it is in use. There is only one value. It is the value of the
structure as being used.” !

It was this physico-legal compound of Justice Brewer’s going
plant with its physical connections and Justice Savage’s going busi-
ness with its lawful connections that the Supreme Court afterwards
erected into an entity, “going-concern-value,” though at first reject-
ing it under the leadership of Justice Hough, whose illuminating
exposure of its fallacies is next in order of time.


4. Goodwill and Privilege


In the Consolidated Gas Case, “going-concern-value” appeared
under the name of “goodwill value.”” The municipality of New
York had attempted to reduce the price of gas, and the company
set up a claim for both franchise value and goodwill value. Justice
Hough’s reasoning in the lower federal court, where this case first
appeared,” was the first behavioristic analysis of the distinction be-
tween a franchise and goodwill, in this class of cases. Regarding the
franchise he said: “Return can be expected only from investment,
and he that invests must part with something in the act of invest-
ing. ... It [the company] did not invest in its franchise because
it did not pay for it. ... The investment of property was made,
not in the franchise, but under the franchise, and on the faith thereof.
The franchise is but a part of the power or privilege of sovereignty,
allotted to a private person for the benefit of all, and only incidentally
given for private emolument.... The franchise has added no
producing power to the realty or personalty. It has but authorized
their employment in a particular way, and protected the owners
while so employing them. ... I can imagine no more than three


1P. 376. See also his analysis in a preceding case, Kennebec Water District v. Water-


ville, 97 Me. 185, 220 (1902).
2 Consolidated Gas Co. v. City of New York, 157 Fed. 849 (1907).


192 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ways in which the value of a franchise can be stated. It is valuable
(1) because it authorizes the gainful use of private property in a
particular manner; (2) because once obtained it is often difficult
or impossible to get another like it; (3) because it may be used to
injure or hinder another enterprise, although itself conferring or
securing nothing of value. The third method of statement has
been accurately, though colloquially, described as ‘nuisance value,’
and is so obviously illegitimate as to require no discussion. The
second method of statement, when carefully considered, asserts
that because the sovereign has deemed it advisable to intrust a
public work to one citizen or body of citizens, such quasi-monopolistic
grant confers the right to charge for the service more than would
be just or lawful were the occupation open to all. On every private
sale of franchise property the price paid is so much money lost to
the public by official incompetence or worse, and such sale can confer
on the vendee no right to compel the consumer to repay him a price
which should have been paid to the state. For these reasons I believe
that, on principle, a franchise should be held to have no value except
that arising from its use as a shield to protect those investing their
property upon the faith thereof, and that, considered alone and apart
from the property which it renders fruitful, it possesses no more
economic value for the investor than does an actual shield possess
fighting value, apart from the soldier who bears it.” (872, 873, 874.)
Justice Hough also excluded the alleged goodwill of consumers from
valuation against themselves as an element in the price which they
should pay for gas. Accepting the definition of goodwill found in
an earlier case! as “all that good disposition which customers
entertain towards a house of business identified by a particular
name or firm, and which may induce them to continue giving their
custom to it,” he exclaimed, “I cannot perceive how this complain-
ant can possess a goodwill answering that description... . It is
required by law to furnish gas to all demanding it within a certain
distance of the mains, service pipes and meters. What induces a
customer to remain with this company? <A desire to avoid the ‘nui-
sance of street digging’ and the ‘beneficially monopolistic character’
of the defendant’s present occupancy of the streets.” (871, 872.)
From the testimony it appeared that what the company meant
by goodwill was that same “going-concern-value” which we have
' Washburn v. National Wall Paper Co., 81 Fed. 20 (1897).


GOING CONCERNS 193


seen to be included in the concepts of both a producing organ-
ization and a business organization—in short, the value of a going
business in-so-far as that value is additional to the cost of reproduc-
tion of the Going Plant. To this Justice Hough answered, “the
organization itself is but a method of utilizing that which is in-
vested. . . . But goodwill, in the sense of organization for the business
of furnishing gas can have no existence whatever apart or detached
from the franchise conferring the necessary privilege. Would anyone
think of capitalizing goodwill of this kind and distributing its assumed
value in the shape of new shares among shareholders, new or old? ”
(872.) This claim of goodwill, he said, “seems to forget that for many
years the price and distribution of complainant’s gas has been regu-
lated by law. A citizen is entitled to have a clean street before his
house because he pays taxes inter alia for that purpose. . . . I think
it apparent that the conceivable goodwill of a gas company in this
city is about equal to that of the street cleaning department of the
municipal government.”  (872.)

Notwithstanding this valid reasoning, Justice Hough, in view of
preceding opinions by the Supreme Court, felt himself bound to allow
a franchise value, though not a goodwill, or going concern value.
Considering that his position was that of a trial court, he held that
he could not enforce his own opinion “without doing violence to the-
ories of law and habits of legal thought fairly discoverable in pre-
ceding decisions of superior jurisdiction. In this case I am compelled
to the conclusion that it is necessary to allow the discoverable value
of complainant’s franchises as part of that capital upon which a fair
return must be allowed, because to refuse would be to disregard
views expressed by higher courts regarding the general nature of
franchises and regulation proceedings. . . . It is my duty to follow
the method of reasoning there clearly indicated, leaving it to higher
tribunals to make distinctions which, if drawn by a lower court, would
in my opinion savor of presumption.” (875.) With this protest against
his own decision in the case, Justice Hough felt himself “compelled
to consider franchises not only as property, but as productive and
inherently valuable property, and to add their value if ascertainable,
to complainant’s capital account.” (877.) “It is a familiar doctrine,”
he said, ‘‘that private citizens may acquire vested rights through a
series of even erroneous decisions, rights so firmly vested that it be-
comes unconstitutional for the court which persisted in error suddenly


194 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


to rectify its mistakes to the detriment of those who had securely
rested upon the decisions sought to be invalidated.” (875.) And he
proceeded, by the plainly arbitrary and illogical method of compari-
son with the increase in adjoining land values, to ascertain a formal
value of the franchise.

Yet, so forcible and accurate was Justice Hough’s reasoning against
his own decision, that, two years later he suffered the satisfaction of
séeing the Supreme Court reverse his decision by adopting his reason-
ing.! The reversal, however, consisted only in changing the basis for
calculating the value of the franchise and reducing the value of the
franchise from that which Justice Hough had arbitrarily calculated
to a value which it appeared the legislature of New York, twenty-five
years before, had incidently validated when it had approved issues
of stock against the franchise value as it then stood. The Supreme
Court, however, expressly stated that this peculiar validation by a
legislature should not be taken as a precedent for cases where there
was no such validation. (47, 48, 52.)

It will be seen that Justice Hough clearly distinguishes goodwill-
value from franchise-value. Goodwill and franchise are alike in that
the owner thereby is raised above the exposure of competition and
obtains ordinarily a residual income in excess of what could be ob-
tained if he were fully exposed. But they differ economically and
legally; economically in that the customers, in the case of a special
franchise, are not free to go elsewhere and choose an alternative ex-
cept at an onerous expense which gives to the franchise a value some-
what equal to the cost of the alternative nuisance; but, in the case
of goodwill they are free to go elsewhere without additional cost,
and consequently the value given to the goodwill by their willing
patronage is a value based on what they voluntarily believe to be a
superior service. The value of the franchise is a nuisance value, that
of the goodwill is a goodwill value. Both of them reflect the prices
of products which possess use-value to the customers, but in one case
the price is the value of avoiding a nuisance, in the other the value
of avoiding an inferior enjoyment.

Legally, also, the two differ, in that goodwill has come up out of
the common law of private business transactions, based on what is
deemed to be fair dealings between competitors and between sellers
and buyers; whereas the franchise comes down from the King’s pre-

1 Wilcox v. Cons. Gas Co., 212 U.S. 19, 42 (1909).


GOING CONCERNS 195


rogative, based on the arbitrary power of a sovereign to grant special
privileges to courtiers and lobbyists, protected from competition.
Goodwill springs from the common ordinary liberty of competition
open to everybody, while the franchise springs from the special favors
of the sovereign which reduce the exposures of free competition.

Therefore, basing our terminology on these economic and legal
reasons, we shall speak of franchises as privileged values, distinguished
from goodwill as unprivileged values; and the value of franchises
as privileged assets, the value of goodwill as unprivileged as-
sets. Evidently this is the distinction made by Justice Hough and
adopted by the Supreme Court as soon as its attention was called to
it. The Supreme Court proceeded at once to eliminate franchise-
value, except where a sovereign legislature had mistakenly reverted
to the King’s prerogative, and to strip off goodwill from the face of
special privilege.

5. Going Concern Value


But, while the Consolidated Gas Cases disposed of goodwill value
and franchise value (unless validated by a legislature) yet the Su-
preme Court soon resurrected them on Justice Brewer’s physical
analogy and Justice Savage’s legal analogy. This resurrection took
the form, first, of distinguishing between cases of rate regulation and
cases of public purchase, to the latter of which Justice Brewer’s pre-
cedent in the Monongahela Case continued to hold, and then oblit-
erating the distinction by merging rate cases into purchase cases.

The first purchase case, following the Consolidated Gas Case, was
that of the purchase by the City of Omaha of the property of the
Omaha Water Works Company.'

Here the Supreme Court, by Justice Lurton, expressly stated that
the Consolidated Gas Case was a rate case, and “did not concern the
ascertainment of value under contracts of sale.” (203.) This dis-
tinction had not previously been made. Indeed, in the same year
with the Monongahela purchase case, the Supreme Court, led by
Justice Brewer’s reasoning, had contended that the value for rate-
making purposes should be the market value of a railroad’s property,
the same as for purchase cases.”_ The state of Texas had created a
commission to make a valuation of the railroads in that state, and
to fix the freight and passenger rates so as to yield a return on that


1Qmaha v. Omaha Water Co., 218 U. S. 180 (1910).
2 Reagan v. Farmers’ Loan and Trust Co., 154 U.S. 362 (1894).


196 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


value. The commission excluded franchises, and valued only the
physical property at what it would cost to reproduce it as a going
plant. The Supreme Court, by Justice Brewer, said (410), “If the
state were to seek to acquire the title to these roads, under its power
of eminent domain, is there any doubt that constitutional provisions
would require the payment to the corporation of just compensation,
that compensation being the value of the property as it stood in the
markets of the world, and not as prescribed by an act of the legisla-
ture? Is it any less a departure from the obligations of justice to
seek to take not the title but the use for the public benefit at less than
its market value? ” !

The same view was taken by Justice Brewer when, in the lower
federal court, he overruled an act of the Nebraska legislature regu-
lating railway rates.2 There he cited the Reagan Case and said that
even greater damage was perpetrated in case of regulation than in
case of condemnation. When this case came before the Supreme
Court,® that court unanimously sustained Justice Brewer, although
Justice Harlan, in the opinion, added that the “apparent value (7. e.,
market value) of the property and franchises used by the corporation,
as represented by its stocks, bonds and obligations,” were not ‘‘alone
to be considered when determining the rates that may be reasonably
charged.” (544.)

Evidently Justice Brewer was reasoning in a circle. The market
value is the present value of the expected rates. If the rates are un-
reasonable, so is the market value. Both the rates and the market
value depend on the franchise, and if the franchise is valueless, the
rates that give value to it are excessive. When it came to the Omaha
purchase case, in 1910,* the court, having just previously excluded
franchise-value from rate cases, now drew the distinction between
rate and purchase cases, and created the entity the “going concern
value” of Justices Brewer and Savage in place of the franchise-value.
The City of Omaha had an option to purchase the plant of the com-
pany at the end of twenty years, but with the express proviso in the
contract that nothing should be paid for the unexpired franchise of
the company. The appraisers fixed the value at $6,263,295 includ-

1 While this language does not use the word franchise, yet franchise was evidently in-
cluded, since the market value of the roads included any extra value of franchises.

2 Ames v. Union Pacific R. R. Co., 64 Fed. 165 (1801).


3 Smyth v. Ames, 169 U. S. 466 (1808).
“Omaha v. Omaha Water Co., 218 U. S. 180 (1910),


GOING CONCERNS 197


ing a “going value” of $562,712 against which the city’s appraisers
protested. The term “going value” was used in the sense of “going
concern value.” Here, again, the physical structure, although in-
cluding, but not separately specifying,’ all the overhead costs of
getting a going plant into physical connection with customers and
ready to operate, was treated by the court as though it were a dead
and unlawful structure in Justice Savage’s meaning of the term,
and consequently an additional value was given to it because it was
physically connected with the houses and was lawfully getting an
income from the customers. The court (Justice Lurton) said, “The
option to purchase excluded any value on account of unexpired fran-
chise; but it did not limit the value to the bare bones of the plant,
its physical properties, such as its land, its machinery, its water pipes
or settling reservoirs, nor to what it would take to reproduce each
of its physical features. The value in equity and justice must in-
clude whatever is contributed by the fact of the connection of the
items making a complete and operating plant. The difference be-
tween a dead plant and a live one is a real value, and is independent
of any franchise to go on, or any mere goodwill as between such a
plant and its customers. That kind of goodwill, as suggested in Will-
cox v. Consolidated Gas Co., 212 U.S. 19, is of little or no commer-
cial value when the business is as here, a natural monopoly, with which
the customer must deal whether he will or no. That there is a dif-
ference between even the cost of duplication, less depreciation, of the
elements making up the water company plant, and the commercial
value of the business as a going concern is evident.” Such allowance,
the court mentioned, was upheld in the Kansas City Case by Justice
Brewer. ‘‘ We can add nothing to the reasoning of the learned jus-
tice and shall not try to.”

In this opinion, it will be seen, the court, although fully recogniz-
ing that the cost of duplication, $6,263,295, included all costs up
to the point of readiness to deliver the product to consumers, and
that neither franchise nor goodwill were entitled to valuation, yet
added a going value of $562,712, thus erecting a going concern value
in the place of the franchise-value and the goodwill-value which had
been previously rejected.

While franchise-value, or goodwill-value, was thus resurrected under


1 HenpErson, C. C., “Railway Valuation and the Courts,” 33 Harv. Law Rev. 1040 (1920).
2 Op. cit., 218 U.S. 202-3.


198 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the name of going concern value in the Omaha Case, on the ground
that it was a purchase case and not a rate case, the court, for a time
in rate cases, followed the Consolidated Gas Case by excluding going
concern value, but eventually came around to the Omaha purchase
case and included going concern value also in rate cases. That case,
however, was not clear, since even if “going value” were included as
valid, yet the court held the rates were not reduced low enough to
confiscate it.1

At the same term of the Supreme Court when the Consolidated Gas
Case was passed upon, the court decided the Knoxville Water-rate Case
on the similar lines of Justice Hough’s reasoning, excluding franchise,
goodwill and going value.” In the Cedar Rapids Gas-rate Case, two
years later, the Supreme Court expressly excluded the “goodwill or
advantage incident to the possession of a monopoly, so far as that
might be supposed to give the plaintiff power to charge more than a
reasonable price.” ® In the Des Moines Gas-rate Case,* three years
after the Cedar Rapids Case, goodwill and franchise value were ex-
cluded and the court held that the alleged “going value” was covered
by the “overhead” costs already allowed in the several items, of
promotion costs, legal expenses, engineering, insurance, interest, ad-
ministration, and contingencies during construction. Yet the way
was opened by an ambiguous definition of “going concern value” to
restore goodwill, franchise, or going value.

This restoration was actually made in the Denver Water-rate Case,°
three years after the Des Moines Case. In the previous Des Moines
Case “going concern value” had been defined in such a way that it
might have been interpreted either as “going plant value” in the sense
of cost of acquiring an alternative going plant, or “going concern
value” in the sense of its future earning value. But in the Denver
Case it became not the cost-value of the plant including overhead, but
an additional $800,000 based on the rates and the harmonious opera-
tion and existence of customers, “doing business and earning money.”
Yet it is plain, in this respect, that “going concern value” is “sheer
duplication of overhead costs of reconstruction.®


10>. cit., Henderson, 1030.

2 Knoxville v. Knoxville Water Co., 212 U. S. x (19009).

3 Cedar Rapids Gas Co. v. Cedar Rapids, 223 U. S. 655, 660 (1912).
4 Des Moines Gas Co. v. Des Moines, 238 U. S. 153 (zo15).

5 Denver v. Denver Union Water Co., 246 U. S. 178 (1918).

5 Op. cit., Henderson, 1043.


GOING CONCERNS 199


It will have been noted, in the progress of the foregoing cases, that
several important steps have been taken away from the physical con-
cept of a commodity, of the early economists, to the concept of a
going concern operating both a going plant with a producing organiza-
tion and a going business with a bargaining organization. We may
distinguish these steps, with reference to the meanings of use-value and
exchange-value as:

Scrap-Value, the “commodities” of the early economists, containing
use-value and exchange-value, yet valued as the dismantled parts of a
going plant, and constituting residual business assets that may be
realized when sold separately from the plant on existing commodity
markets.

Going-Plant-Value, the cost of reconstruction of the physical plant
as an operating productive instrument, including its raw materials and
products in process and all overhead costs during the estimated period
of reconstruction, up to the point of turning out finished products and
delivering them to customers who are physically taking them away or
consuming them on the spot. As a physical engineering organization
the going plant is turning out “social-use-value.” As a business
assemblage of physical things it constitutes “tangible” assets, valued,
not as separate parts, but valued as a complete operating structure,
with all of its parts codrdinated and actually in operation. It is this
that constitutes that “imputed” value, known as physical value or
tangible value.!

Goodwill Value, the value added by the “skill, diligence, fidelity,
success and reputation” of the producing organization that operates
the going plant, in so far as this value exceeds the cost of reproduction
of the going plant. As a use-value this is indicated in the superior
treatment above that of competitors, or the lower prices or higher
wages for similar service, which inspires the confidence and holds the
loyalty and patronage, whether of customers, creditors, or laborers,
who, without compulsion and with the option of costless alternatives,
yet willingly contribute to the superior profits of the concern. As an
exchange-value this goodwill-value constitutes unprivileged intangible
assets.

Political Value, the value added by advantageous treatment from
politicians, whether legislators, judges, executives, or administrative
boards, in the exercise of the several powers of sovereignty, in so far as

1 Above, Sec. IV, p. 172.


200 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


this value exceeds that of the ordinary lawfulness and exposure to
competition out of which the value of going plant or goodwill emerges.
As a use-value this political value does not usually represent an addi-
tional service to customers, creditors, or laborers, inspiring their con-
fidence, loyalty or patronage, but is rather the superior privilege
emanating from the blunders, corruption or wisdom of public officials,
as shown in the tax exemption bonuses, special franchises, inside infor-
mation, judicial opinion, and similar exercise of the royal prerogative
or the modern sovereignty superior to that received by competitors
who enjoy only ordinary lawfulness. As an exchange-value this polit-
ical value, in so far as it exceeds other values, constitutes privileged
intangible assets. Goodwill value and political value, as we have
already observed in part, are usually concealed in the going plant
value, by inflating those values, in order to make the assets come out
even on the books with the value of the going business as a whole.

Going Business Value. Each of the preceding values is derived by a
process of Imputation, or the separation of the whole assets into its
parts, according to the sources from which each is believed to be de-
rived. But Going Business Value is Valuation Proper, the value of all
transactions of all persons upon the markets, whether customers,
investors, employees or public officials, so proportioned economically
that, in consideration of a gross outgo, a larger gross income is ob-
tained, yielding a net residual income to the stockholders. It is this
that is equivalent to the market value of stocks and bonds, or capital-
ization of expected net income, as seen in the Adams Express Com-
pany Case.}

Taking up, more in detail, these five processes of valuation, the
terms used by the courts for going-plant value seem at times to imply
that the court has scrap-value in mind. Yet such is not their inten-
tion. The terms “dead structure,” “bare bones,” “junk,” “ dis-
connected plant,” “plant-not-in-use,” or “plant-not-lawfully-in-use,”
all of them refer to a going physical plant with its parts codrdinated,
but abstracted by mental imputation from the going business.

Now, this going plant is “capital” in the productive sense, but not
capital in the business sense, since it produces use-values or services,
but does not bring in any other values in exchange. Yet at the same
time, the going plant is tangible assets of the business. The discrep-
ancy consists in failure to distinguish the process of imputation from

1 Above, Sec. V, p. 172.


GOING CONCERNS 205


the process of valuation. Imputation refers to the several markets
by reference to which an imputed value is assigned to the several
types of assets. The value of commodities, as is well known, is deter-
mined, not by their original cost of production or the amount of labor
stored up in them, as the early economists and Karl Marx would have
it, but by the present cost of reproduction in existing condition of de-
preciation, at existing prices on existing markets. It is this process of
imputation that arrives at the “scrap-value”’ of the several parts of a
plant as though they were sold separately on their several commodity
markets. They are separable assets, but if the plant is dismantled,
then so great is the depreciation of the parts, that, as is well known,
scrap-value is reduced to as low as 5, 10 or 20% of the value of the
plant as an operating mechanism. It is like a bicycle—a manufacturer
finds it embarrassing to foot up the separate parts of a bicycle in a
repair-shop at more than, say, 20% of the value of the going bicycle.
The parts are commodities—the value imputed to them is a scrap-
value. But the bicycle is a going plant with its parts codrdinated and
turning out a specific use-value. In this case, the bicycle itself is looked
upon as a commodity, but so also is a factory, a farm, a store turning
out products, to be considered a commodity in the large sense of some-
thing that can be bought and sold asa unit. Yet it is a peculiar unit—
it is a producing unit, a going plant, with a market value, where the
several parts have imputed values.

So with going-plant-value, that which the courts name “junk,”
or “dead structure.” It is also an imputed value when compared with
the value of the going business. One item of difference between scrap-
value and going-plant value turns on what is imputed to be the “en-
gineering overhead.” It is the engineering overhead that augments
scrap value into going-plant value, and it includes certain costs not
technically engineering costs. For example, the instructions given to
the engineers in making this valuation are such as would be given by a
prospective purchaser of the going business, who, having the going
business or franchise, but not the plant, desires to know how much it
would cost him to get the going plant into its present condition of
rendering the actual service for which the business is expected to
obtain the present prices for service. It includes the total cost of
building up the present plant, but not the cost of “building up” the
business. As such it includes, in addition to the imputed market

1 Above, Sec. IV, p. 172.


202 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


values of all the separate parts as separate items, also the imputed
overhead costs of promotion, construction, installation, such as legal,
engineering and business expenses, insurance, allowance for contin-
gencies during construction, interest on the amount of expenditures
during construction, and all administrative expenses. These “engin-
eering overhead” expenses were estimated, in the Des Moines Gas
Rate Case, at 15% additional to the aggregate costs of the base items.

Thus the same rule of cost of reproduction in existing depreciated
condition at existing prices is applied to determining the value of a
going plant as is applied to determining scrap-value. Each is a special
case of imputation, or what may properly be designated alternative
market-value, or cost of reproduction, since it is both an imputed cost
and an imputed value. It is an imputed cost to the buyer, since it is
outgo for him, and it is an imputed value to the seller, since it is income
for him. But it is an alternative market-cost and an alternative
market-value, since its value is estimated by reference to what it
would cost on an alternative free market at existing prices on the mar-
ket. It is of the nature of a “nuisance value,” or technically, a “dis-
opportunity value,” being the alternative price one would have to
pay did he not have the existing plant. Going-plant-value, then, is
an imputed or alternative market-value, that is, the cost of reproduc-
tion imputed to the plant in its existing depreciated condition at exist-
ing prices on existing markets.

We thus make the distinction between actual earning-value and
imputed, or alternative market-value. The earning-value is the known
value of the going business. The alternative market-value is the im-
puted value of the going plant. Earning-value and alternative market-
value coincide wherever an ethical or political question does not inter-
vene. For market-value is none else than the price that buyers and
sellers, on a free market, would agree upon in view of the expected
earning-value of the property. But when, for ethical or political
reasons, the earning-value is called in question, then the actual market-
value may disappear altogether and if it reappears as an imputed
value it must do so for a different reason. The slave contained earning-
value for his master and hence had a market-value for him. But when,
for political considerations, the slave was emancipated, his market-
value disappeared because his expected earning-value could not be
bought and sold. So with a going plant. If private property is abol-
ished then its mere unlawiulness, as Justice Savage innocently ob-


GOING CONCERNS 203


served, destroys both its earning-value and its market-value. If, how-
ever, private property is not destroyed, but only its arbitrary power to
exact unlawful prices is sought to be abolished, then the essence of
private property remains in the imputed valuations that would be
obtained on an alternative free and equal market where the buyer is
not coerced, since he is free to build or buy an equally good property
at existing prices on existing markets, rather than take the one that is
offered at the value of its privileged earning power.

This, then, is the issue as regards going-concern-value. Justice
Savage, in justifying it, was compelled to rely upon the very earning-
value which, for ethical and political reasons, is called in question. As
franchise-value, he eliminated it, since it then would appear to spring
from unlawful earning value. But as going-concern-value, he re-
stored it, since, of course, it must have earning-value in order to have
market value. We have seen, too, how the Supreme Court, in the
Knoxville, Cedar Rapids and Des Moines Cases, correctly but tempo-
rarily excluded the privileged earning-value of a franchise, and accepted
the imputed alternative market-value of the “overhead” as the full
allowance for what was claimed as a going-concern-value. But in the
later rate cases and in all the purchase cases, the court added a going-
concern-value, based on earning power, to the construction overhead,
based on alternative cost of reproduction. This allowance was not,
indeed, the actual market-value at existing rates, as Justice Brewer
had contended it should be, but was admittedly an imputed value
constructed out of a curious corapound, partly an earning power which
if excessive would be unlawful, partly Justice Brewer’s physical con-
nections which the company had not paid for, partly Justice Savage’s
privileged lawfulness contrasted with outlawfulness instead of equal
lawfulness.


6. Uncompensated Service


We have noticed the interesting contrast that while the economists,
since the latter half of the eighteenth century, have been constructing
theories of value out of man’s relation to nature in the form of commod-
ities and feelings, the courts have been constructing theories of value
out of the approved and disapproved transactions of man with man in
the form of goodwill and privilege. These processes of valuation are
inseparable, but they belong to different orders of thought. Man, asa
producer, overcomes the forces of nature in order to satisfy the wants


204 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


of man as a consumer. Nature furnishes certain “elementary”
utilities, the chemical, physical, gravitational, qualities of matter, and
man changes these into “form utility,” or moves them into “place
utility,” or stores them up for “time utility,” so that he may satisfy
whatever may be his wants, wherever or whenever they arise.

These, of course, are fundamental, so much so that they are just as
true of other animals. But the human animal, as he emerges into
national and world markets, requires something additional. Every-
thing which he consumes passes first through the hands of many other
persons, and each person depends on predecessors to select the best of
the elementary utilities, to give to them the best form and to bring
them regularly to the needful places. As this interdependence en-
larges with commerce, the ignorance of each individual enlarges, and
each depends more and more on confidence in the honesty, diligence,
promptness and good management of others. In short, confidence in
others is the largest of all the utilities, for without it each person would
need to satisfy his own wants directly from nature or through a small
family or tribe whose members he could see and control.

In order to allow for this confidence necessitated by this interde-
pendence, Adam Smith had to assume that man is guided by an “‘in-
visible hand,” a “‘law of nature’’—his name for divine providence,—
which leads man, while seeking his own self-interest to satisfy the
wants of others without intending to do so.t_ But experience has dis-
covered that it was exactly this invisible hand that produced adultera-
tions and the ‘‘cheap and nasty” goods which consumers had to put up
with, and which led Carlyle, Ruskin, Morris and the other romantic
economists, to long for a return to the neighborhood production and
consumption of the middle ages. Yet, without returning to the past,
the courts began to adapt themselves to the uncertainties of the present.
As early as 1580 the visible hand of the court had begun to stretch the
writ of trespass in order to protect the reputation of a manufacturer
who had built up a business on the confidence that he had inspired in
customers as to the quality of his goods.” He had added an intangible
utility to his product—not merely the elementary, form, time and
place utilities which the purchaser can see and feel in a commodity,
but also the invisible utility of confidence in the implied promises of
another, also attached to the commodity which the other had pro-


1Surru, Wealth of Nations, 1:421 (Cannan’s ed.).
2 Below, Chap. VII, Sec. III.


GOING CONCERNS 205


duced. And, if it may be said that the production of wealth is the
production of any and all services that reduce human deficiencies, the
greatest of which is ignorance, and that the reliable evidence of that
service is the actual behavior, then that intangible utility, the promises
that inspire confidence in the good behavior of other persons, also pro-
duces wealth. So that the five constituents of use-value are the ele-
mentary utilities furnished by nature, the form and place utilities
furnished by labor, the time utility furnished by investors, and the
confidence utility furnished by human character. In short, confidence
in others is a utility “overhead,” without which modern society could
not realize in sufficient abundance its much needed elementary, form,
time and place utilities.

These distinctions enable us to allocate the parts played by a going
plant and the producing organization that operates it and to assign
these parts to the several branches of science. The going plant is the
forces and materials of nature in process of satisfying human needs,
under the control of human labor. This relation of man to nature has
three aspects distinguishable as art, science and engineering—Art, the
purpose of satisfying ultimate consumers by adjusting human and
natural forces to their wants and character; Science, the knowledge of
those forces according to the processes along which they operate;
Engineering, the economizing, or economical proportioning, of those
forces so as to bring about the largest accrual of utility with the least
outgo of energy. Art and science are wasteful; engineering is econom-
ical. Art is purpose and ideals; science is hypothesis and verification;
engineering is planning, valuing and executing. Art guides, science
understands, engineering executes. Together, these are the field of
natural or technological economy, including not only the control of the
going plant but also the management of the producing organization
that operates the plant. They are the field of human and non-human
forces that must be understood before they can successfully be directed
towards the production of wealth. And the corresponding sciences
through which they are sought to be understood are such as physics,
chemistry, biology, animal psychology and that human psychology
known latterly as “‘scientific management” with its “quality” and
“quantity” foremanship, and “scientific advertising” with its art of
salesmanship. Throughout, the economics of utility is the union of
art, science and engineering in the control and proportioning of natural
and human forces. It is the economy of a going plant and its produc-


206 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ing organization. The plant itself is the forces of nature proportioned
according to the qualities, supply and prices of each force; the produc-
ing organization is the human forces proportioned according to the
supply and prices of their physical, mental and managerial faculties.
The business man takes pride in his plant and in his organization. His
“good organization,” is a good proportioning of human faculties. His
efficient plant is a good proportioning of nature’s forces. The two are
inseparable. The going plant is ‘‘a dead structure” without the pro-
ducing organization. The producing organization is fruitless without
the going plant. They are the inseparable relations of man to nature
proportioned and economized according to the then state of the arts,
the sciences and engineering as understood by the members of the
going concern.

But engineering economy, while it produces commodities, does
not of itself produce confidence in the commodities. This springs from
honesty and good service. So that the production of wealth is the in-
separable union of art, science, engineering and ethics. Ethics is the
field of production of that invisible utility, confidence, without which
the tangible utilities are not even produced. The use-value of ethics
is confidence in others, and the exchange-value of ethics is the market-
value of their goodwill.

Goodwill, like the other utilities of commodities, varies greatly in
the proportions which it bears to the other utilities. It diminishes or
increases, relative to the other qualities, for various reasons. Mis-
takes, bad service, dishonesty, false rumors, reduce its value as assets
because they reduce confidence. Moreover, the goodwill of customers
varies somewhat inversely to their necessities, and hence monopoly,
privilege, unfair advantages and other forms of economic coercion,
while they diminish goodwill as an asset, correspondingly enlarge the
necessities of the public into an asset. For, goodwill is a competitive
asset, and diminishes in value with an increase in the supply of com-
peting goodwills. As the level of competition rises through the exten-
sion of laws or customs of fair competition, the goodwill of a particular
firm sinks into that more universal goodwill which is just ordinary law-
fulness, attached to all of the competing commodities. It loses its
separable value as an asset, though it may take new forms of superior
service and continue to exist above even the higher competitive level.

But goodwill, being a social relation, implies reciprocity. It is the
expectation of reciprocal beneficial transactions. It presupposes a


GOING CONCERNS 207


contract, express or implied from the behavior of the parties, requiring
a compensatory service, and this is none other than the relation of
creditor and debtor which is the relation of investment. Even the
laborer is an investor in the business until such time as his wages are
paid, for he adds the service of waiting to his service of working, and
the amount of his investment is the amount of his uncompensated ser-
vices. On Saturday night the claim is liquidated, and an explicit
investor advances the purchasing power, takes over from the laborer
the further service of waiting, and so on until final compensation is
made in the price paid by the ultimate consumer who is a reciprocal
producer.

Thus the going business, while it is a flow of transactions, is built
upon the expectation of implied agreements that the transactions
shall be the means of compensation for services not yet compensated.
It is a process of investment and liquidation implied in the institu-
tion of private property which gives to the proprietor power to with-
hold service until the expected compensation is deemed satisfactory.
It is the recognition of this ethical relation between investment and
compensation, that in recent years has led to re-definitions of both
Capital and Property. A beginning was made by the Railroad Com-
mission of Wisconsin in the Antigo Case’ and followed in the other
cases sustained by the Supreme Court of the state.? The financial
history of the property was traced out, balancing the original in-
vestments, the succeeding deficits and surpluses, and yielding a pres-
ent total of “unrequited cost” or “net total sacrifice,” or “ unre-
quited reasonable sacrifice,” * considered to be the “sum which the
business should be capitalized for in order that the owner should re-
ceive a reasonable return on the past investment.” 4

This method of valuation is defective in that it requires a recon-
struction of accounts from the beginning, and must establish what


1 Hill v. Antigo Water Co., 3 W. R. C. R. 623 (1909). Wurrren, R. H., Valuation of
Public Service Corporations, 1:520 (1912); 2:1274 (1914).

2 Appleton Water Works Co. v. R. R. Com., 154 Wis. 121 (1913).

3 Cp. Bauer, Jon, “Bases of Valuation—The Control of Return on Public Utility In-
vestments,” 6 Amer. Econ. Rev. 568, 575 (1916); ALLISON, James, “Ethical and Economic
Elements in Public Service Valuation,” 27 Quar. Jour. Ec. 27 (1912); Commons, J. R.,
Testimony before Interstate Commerce Committee of U. S. Senate (1913); HENDERSON,
G. C., “Railway Valuation and the Courts,” 33 Harv. Law Rev. 902 (1920); RICHBERG,
D. R., “A Permanent Basis for Rate Regulation,” 31 Yale Law Jour. 263 (1922). The
conclusions of these writers were apparently accepted in the opinion in Galveston Elec.
Co. v. City of Galveston, 272 Fed. 147 (1921) and 42 Sup. Ct. Rep. 351 (1922).

4 Appleton, W. W.v. R. R. C., 154 Wis. 121, 147, 149.


208 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


was a reasonable rate of profit in the past in order to calculate the
deficits and surpluses. Whereas, in the past, preceding a statute
regulating profit, the expectations of investors were not thus ac-
tually limited. The physical plant has been built up partly, perhaps,
from profits which, at the time, however excessive, were considered
to be the property of the then investors, and partly from new issues
of securities. Moreover, this method compensates investors for past
deficits, contrary to the way in which competitive business takes its
losses in hard times or under poor management. It adds accrual
of all deficits to the present capitalization, whereas competitive busi-
ness would have written off assets.

A more accurate arrival at what the investors actually expected in
the past is to ascertain what they actually did put into the plant as
they went along from year to year, under the then costs of construc-
tion. The plant, as it now stands, is made up of parts, some of which
date back to the beginning of the plant, some of which are replace-
ments of earlier parts, some of which are extensions, and all of them
are more or less depreciated by time and use. The actual costs of
these separate parts at the several dates of installation, depreciated
according to the present condition, and including the engineering
overhead costs of codrdinating the parts, yield what Bauer has called
the ‘net installation cost,” 1 or what in the Federal Valuation Act is
designated ‘‘original cost to date,” ? and represent the measure of
confidence of investors, at the time of their investment, in the future
of the property as a whole. The total thus obtained at present date
of appraisal represents the property-value which investors have put
into the business under the expectations held out to them at the time,
as they went along. It gives the ‘‘closest practical approximation to
the direct sacrifice of investors,” ? and is the accrual of their uncom-
pensated service measured by their own ideas of what compensation
should be at the time of installation, under all the changing circum-
stances in the history of the plant.

In short, the net installation cost, or original cost less depreciation,
measures historically the goodwill of investors as it actually moved
from day to day and year to year in their then attitude toward the
business.


10p. cit., BAUER, 582, 583.
2 U.S. Statutes, An Act to Regulate Commerce, Sec. 19a (1913).
3 BAUER, oP. cit., 583.


GOING CONCERNS 209


For goodwill is the uncoerced choice of alternatives by both parties
to a transaction. The investor’s choice of alternatives is a choice
between the expected incomes to be derived from his investment.
What he gives up is present purchasing power. What he expects is
future purchasing power. The investor’s goodwill is the good credit
of the business. It depends on confidence in the management and
confidence in the reciprocal compensation to be obtained for the
product. A monopoly, or privileged market, has rightly been held, as
we have seen, to contradict the notion of customer’s goodwill, since
the customer’s freedom of choice is restrained, but the same monopoly
or privileged market has strictly an investor’s goodwill at the time of
investment, for his uninvested capital on the “money market”? is the
most perfect of all instruments of free choice. If the going concern
has his confidence beyond that of alternative investments, he shows
it, as an outsider, by the high price he pays for its new securities, thus
reducing the rate of interest or profit on his investment, or shows it
as a stockholder by declaring only a part of the net income as dividends
and leaving a part to be reinvested in the business. In either case
the expected net income of the business, at that time of actual con-
struction and reconstruction, is the means of obtaining from investors
a larger fund at that time for extensions, replacements and upkeep
than a similar net income is able to obtain for a business enjoying less
of the confidence of investors. This confidence finds its way into the
physical dimensions and conditions of the plant as original costs of
construction, and into the quantity and quality of the service rendered,
and is none other than the original cost of each existing part of the
plant at the date when it was actually installed.

Wages and salaries in the past have compensated all the members
of the producing business organization for their services, at the then
accepted rates of compensation. They have no further claim on the
business. Interest and dividends in the past have compensated in-
vestors at the then accepted terms and risks on which investments were
made. They have no further just claim for deficits, if such occurred
in the past, because they tacitly agreed to accept them, just as no
claim can justly be made against them for surpluses obtained in the
past, because it was the expectation of surplus that induced them to
take the chance of deficit. Thus the operating income and outgo
of the past and the compensation of investors in the past need not be
inquired into in order to ascertain the accrual of uncoinpensated


210 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


service. Whatever it may have been, it was the actual choice of
alternatives made by all parties under all the conditions and expecta-
tions of the time of actual construction or reconstruction, exactly as
competitive business induces choices to be made. Out of these choices
of the past, at the prices paid in the past, there survives the going
plant in its existing condition of depreciation, measured by original
cost less depreciation, representing what the investors have actually
left in the business of their own free choice.

Thus we see that the “going concern” begins to separate itself
into three notions, each distinguished by an amount of value, in terms
of assets, ascertained by different methods for different purposes.

First, is the going plant, a physical thing whose “‘structural value,”
“physical value,” “tangible value” is an imputed value estimated as
the cost of reproducing in its existing condition a similar plant con-
nected up and delivering its product to customers. Its valuation as
assets is guided by that competitive-cost principle of the classical
economic theory, holding that the exchange-value of a thing is deter-
mined, not by its original cost of production, but by its present cost of
reproduction, applied, however, not to separate commodities, but to
that enlarged commodity, a complete operating plant with all of its
tangible parts codrdinated. The valuation or inventory of a going
plant, is its imputed “present value” in the sense of the price a buyer
would now pay for it in its existing condition, if he owned the busi-
ness or franchise but did not have the plant and had to construct it
anew at present prices.

Second, is the going business, a coérdination of tangible, incorporeal
and intangible assets, whose “‘going-concern-value,” or rather going-
business-value, is the value of expected transactions. Its valuation
is guided by that anticipation principle, first given its psychological
basis by Bohm-Bawerk in Austria and stated in its complete psy-
chological and business form by Fisher in America.! This concept
also yields a “present value,” but it is not guided by cost of reproduc-
tion but by the present value of expected bargaining power, that is,
the anticipation in the present of the net income expected in the
future.

Third, is the actual investment, the “original cost to date,” the
“actual cost,”’ the ‘“‘net installation cost,” the “unrequited reasonable


1 BouM-BAWERK, EUGEN v., Positive Theory of Capital (tr. 1891); F1sHER, IRVING,
Nature of Capital and Income (1906).


GOING CONCERNS 211


sacrifice,” whose procedure of valuation is guided by that ethical
principle which looks to the relation between service and compensa-
tion. It gives, too, a “present value,” but the value is an accrual of
uncompensated services, services rendered in the past, but as yet
uncompensated by customers and ultimate consumers.

These three aspects of a going concern are, in effect, also three
notions of Capital. First, the classical notion of capital as physical
things held for future production and income, but whose exchange-
value, under a system of free competition on the commodity markets,
could not exceed the cost of reproduction. Second, the more compre-
hensive business notion of capital as the purchasing power of assets,
tangible, intangible and incorporeal, having a present market price as
a going concern determined by capitalization of expected net income.
Third, the ethical notion of capital as the accrual of uncompensated
services of those who have devoted their property in the past to the
future use of others and are entitled to reimbursement in the future.
According to the first notion, capital is the present market prices of
physical things; according to the second, capital is the present value
of future bargaining power; according to the third, capital is the
present value of uncompensated service.

A similar shift occurs in the notion of property.! According to the
first notion, property is physical things held for production and sale;
according to the second, property is expected bargaining power; ac-
cording to the third, property is the service rendered in expectation of
future bargaining power relied upon at the time.

There is no necessary identity of the several values of capital and
property obtained by the guidance of these three principles of valua-
tion and imputation. If value were a fixed external object, having a
physical existence, there could be but one value of a thing at one time
and place. But if value is a process of valuing then the purpose of the
valuation determines what the value shall be.? If the purpose is that
of setting forth an ethical relation between buyer and seller, creditor
and debtor, employer and employee, sovereign and citizen, expressed
in prices, then there might conceivably be as many values of the same
thing as there are varieties of these elementary human relations. For
price is then a measure of justice and injustice, as well as an effect of


1 Not “property-rights.”’
2 Below, Chap. IX. Cp. Fripay, Davin, “An Extension of Value Theory,” 26 Quar.


Jour. Econ. 197 (1922).


212 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


demand and supply, and when price comes to be largely controlled by
governments and by associations of capital or labor it becomes in-
creasingly a measure of justice and injustice as well as an effect of
demand and supply.

Two inheritances of the past stand in the way of accepting this
ethical concept of Capital and Property. One is the individualistic,
physical, concept of value as the cost of reproduction determined by
free competition. - The other is the business concept of value as the
present value of a going business. The two are closely connected.
Cost of reproduction is conceived to be the cost of reproducing, not
only the going plant but also the going business. But the going plant
and the going business belong to two different and even opposing
systems. The going plant is the producing organization turning out
service to the public. The going business is the business organization
bringing in income to producers. One is service to other persons, the
other is power over them. One is the means of rendering service, the
other is power to get a price for the service. Consequently the valua-
tion of the two proceeds on two different social relations and from two
different standpoints.

The cost of reproduction is figured out as measuring the price to be
agreed upon in the pursuit of their private purposes between a seller
and a buyer. What would it cost a buyer to reproduce the plant and
the business rather than buy it as it stands? The value to him is the
estimated alternative sacrifice, the alternative market price, the
“nuisance-value” which he would incur in order to get the plant if he
had the business without the plant, or to build up a similar plant and
business if he had neither. What he capitalizes, in either case, is the
cost to him of getting a similar income in the future instead of buying
the income in question which belongs to the seller. He capitalizes the
business at its nuisance-value.

But when the state steps in, representing, not the buyer and seller,
but the commonwealth, with its public purposes, it does so because the
very income itself is called in question on the ground that it no longer
is conceived to spring from goodwill but from privilege. The attempt
is then made to restore the relation to what it would have been had
consumers been free to choose between producers. The consumers
have little or no freedom of choice, but the valuation of the property is
made as a claim against them. They are implied debtors, and the
valuation of the property is the value of the expected prices they will


GOING CONCERNS 213


owe for the service. If the going business as it stands is capitalized
against them then their unwillingness is valued against them, whereas
only their willing patronage is the reasonable measure of the price
they should pay.

Goodwill, indeed, is like privilege in that it is a differential advantage
over competitors and yields therefore a larger profit on the actual in-
vestment. It differs, however, in that it is a fragile advantage and
must be maintained by constant attention to service. The practical
question then is, shall the element of goodwill be recognized in the
form of capitalization or in the form of a rate of profit? Valuation of
the property sets up a permanent claim against consumers regardless
of the service that may be rendered thereafter. But a fluctuating rate
of profit sets up no permanent claim against them, since it fluctuates
both with general business conditions and with the rise and fall of
goodwill. This goes to the heart of the attempt to regulate private
business. Goodwill cannot properly be capitalized for rate regulation.
It is an asset depending on expected service. The more precise method,
consistent with the nature of goodwill, is to adopt a sliding scale of
prices and profits, such that, if the concern reduces prices, the profits
may be increased, and if the concern advances prices the profits are
correspondingly reduced. The practicability and detail of this method
cannot here be considered.’


1 Cp. Sliding scale systems described in Civic Federation Report on Municipal and Private
Operation of Public Utilities, 1:24 (1907).


CHAPTER VI
THE RENT BARGAIN—FEUDALISM AND USE-VALUE


Mr. Orth has conveniently assembled many of the legal definitions
of property, going to show a bewildering variety. Among them are
the “right to improve, use, hold, enjoy and dispose of a thing”’; the
“right to protect one’s property by all lawful means”’; “every valuable
right or interest”; ““everything to which the right of ownership can be
attached, no matter how insignificant”; “everything that has ex-
change value,’ whether “corporeal or incorporeal,” “tangible or
intangible,” “visible or invisible,” “real or personal,” including
“labor and right to labor,” “easements and franchises,” “mortgages,”
“mining claims”; “every right and title to realty,” “liens and options
on real property,” “money, goods, chattels,” “fire insurance applica-
tions,” “insurance policies,” ‘choses in action,” “solvent credits,”
“shares of stock,” “patents” and “products of the mind.” ?

This variety of meanings of both property and liberty is the out-
come of centuries of legal history, and we should therefore expect that
they might fall into a semblance of order only if we arrange them in
historical sequence and observe the different sources from which the
notions are derived. The comments in the foregoing chapters suggest
two sources of the modern notions. One is the royal prerogative, the
other the common law. The two have evolved together and are in-
separable infact. The prerogative originated in conquest, the common
law in the customs and beliefs of the people. But these customs and
beliefs were interpreted by the judicial agents of the King and were
given effect by his executive agents. William the Conqueror and his
lawyers did not distinguish his property from his sovereignty.? Both
were possessions rather than property. He was both landlord and
King. The soil belonged to him by right of conquest, and the people
were his subjects. Property and sovereignty were one, since both
were but dominion over things and persons.


1Ety, Property and Contract, 855 (1914); also Bouv. 2750.

2 Marrianp, F. W., Domesday Book and Beyond, 102, 168, 169 (1907); Hotpsworta, W.
S., A History of English Law, 1:10, 3:354 (1903); JenKS, Epw., Short History of English
Law, 26.


214


THE RENT BARGAIN 215


Similar notions of ownership and lordship prevailed throughout the
descending ranks of freemen. We have spoken of the primitive notion
of property as the exclusive holding of things for one’s own use and
enjoyment. But this “use and enjoyment” were more than a material-
istic possession of things. They were a control of the behavior of sub-
ject persons. Property was lordship by virtue of possession.! It was
a personal relation of command and obedience. “In medieval Eng-
lish one spoke of the Jord of a beast or other chattel,” * and Blackstone,
in his day, could speak of property as “the sole and despotic dominion
which one man claims over the external things of the world, in total
exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe.” 3

But in the early days this “sole and despotic dominion” was not
merely dominion over things, it was more really dominion over a part
or the whole of human behavior. Land, serfs, villeins went together.
Control over them was shared in an ascending scale from the lowest
freeman up to the King. Each freeman was both owner and lord of the
services contained in the share, which belonged to him, of the personal
services of others, and those personal services were paid in the form of
physical products.* The primitive mind could with difficulty compre-
hend anything but physical objects and individual persons, and, in-
deed, in this it but reflected the facts. In an age of violence the will of
powerful individuals was the government, and in an age of serfdom
and villeinage physical control over persons was scarcely distinguish-
able from exclusive holding of land and movables. There was as yet no
money economy by which rents could be converted into a price; and
little or no personal liberty of the worker, by which lordship over
persons has been separated from lordship over things; and no auto-
matic enforcement of contracts by a stabilized government, such that
one does not need to exercise personal command in order to obtain
what belongs to him, but it flows in by mere right of the creditor and
duty of the debtor. By these later reforms the more materialistic
notions of holding physical things for one’s own use and enjoyment
become distinct from the more human notion of lordship with its
command and obedience. But in either case whether it was personal


1 Pottocg and MAITLAND, History of English Law, 1:149 (1911). There pointed out that
the medieval mind was concerned with the physical possession of things, and could scarcely
comprehend what became the later distinctions of “property” and “‘ownership” without
physical possession.

2 Thid., I, 4.

3 2 Bla. Com. 2.

4PotLtock and MAITLAND 2:145, 148, 181.


216 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


service or physical products, the dominant fact of Feudalism and the
Rent-bargain was use-values and not exchange-values.

Seven hundred years after the Norman Conquest Blackstone defined
prerogative as “that special preéminence which the King hath over
and above all other persons, and out of the ordinary course of the com-
mon law, in right of his royal dignity.” ' But in the Eleventh Century
the common law, a law common to all freemen, arising from their cus-
toms and protecting their property and liberty, was unknown. There
were local customs and jurisdictions but no common law with force
enough to restrain the prerogative and thus make it an exception to
the “ordinary course.” The prerogative was the source of power. It
showed itself partly in the grants of sovereign powers and immunities
by the King to his subjects, partly in the powers which he exercised
through his own agents. We have already suggested the two principal
forms in which he granted economic privileges, namely, grants of
lands and grants of those franchises or “liberties” which afterwards
became grants of exclusive markets and corporate franchises. The
main economic prerogatives which he retained, or tried to retain, in his
own hands were the control of taxes and currency.

The grants of lands, markets and corporate franchises differed but
little in the conditions on which they were granted. Each was sold or
given to his subjects individually by a kind of private bargain. He
could sell privileges and franchises just as he could sell the royal
lands.” Each grant carried with it a promise of sovereign powers and
immunities. The powers were the promise that the King’s courts and
executives would exclude other persons from the land or the market, if
necessary, thus giving to the grantee the economic power to fix rents
and prices. The immunities were the promise that the King’s courts
and executives would not interfere with the grantee in the exercise of
that power. Each grant carried with it, too, express or implied, a
consideration of loyalty and service to the King, and the terms of this
consideration could be changed arbitrarily, for the King could not be
tried in his own courts.

Consequently the subject had no enforceable right either to lands or
liberties as long as the monarch could exercise the power to withdraw
them or change their terms at will. They were promises, not rights of
property. The barons, in Magna Carta, endeavored collectively to


‘tr Bla. 2390. Cp. Currty, Josepa, Prerogatives of the Crown (1820).
2 Above, Chap. III, p. 48.


THE RENT BARGAIN 217


convert these promises into rights. They induced King John, on the
field of battle, to agree that no freeman should be “taken or imprisoned
or disseized of his freehold or liberties or rights of levying tolls and
taxes . . . except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law
of the land.” They then set up a standing committee of their own,
intended to be superior in power to the King, to decide and act against
him in case of dispute over this agreement. To this the King also
agreed. Every claimant of land or “liberties” should have his claim
passed upon, not by the agents of the King, but by the equals of the
claimant; and the standing committee of the barons and their succes-
sors should have an army to impose a penalty on the King in case he
broke his promise, by seizing any of his lands and holding the same
until redress was obtained. +

It is known that this crude attempt to convert the royal prerogative
into rights of property by collective action was not successful. The
royal prerogative actually grew and expanded until it reached its
culmination in the absolute monarchy of Henry VIII and Elizabeth.

Meanwhile, beneath the prerogative was growing up the common
law, the law of private property and personal liberty of freemen,
though not of bondmen. Early English law, before the Conquest,
was formulated in popular assemblies of freemen meeting frequently
in the assemblies in the county. Without written records they relied
on memory and living testimony of custom in deciding cases, and these
had to do mainly with the physical acts of assault, trespass and theft.
These assemblies were at one and the same time legislatures, courts
and executives, and the judicial procedure was not separated into the
functions of judge, jury, witnesses and counsel.

The Norman Conquest largely reduced the Anglo-Saxon freemen to
the position of tenants and bondmen of the conquerors, abolished
their popular assemblies and set up assemblies of landlord and tenants,
since the holding of land as a tenant or subtenant of the King carried
with it criminal and civil jurisdiction for trial and decision of disputes
among the tenants. Tenancy was inseparable from government; each
fief or holding was both an agricultural and a governmental unit. An
estate with its various levels of freehold and copyhold tenants, like a
plantation with its slaves, had both an economic unity as a going
agricultural concern, and the governmental unity of a central au-
thority with its band of retainers. But the feudal estate differed from

1 McKeEcaHniE, Magna Carta, 467; above, p. 481.


218 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the slave plantation in that the free tenants had certain customary
rights, often inherited from pre-Conquest times, but more often they
had contract rights of service on the one side and of protection on the
other, which became custom in post-Conquest times. And the deter-
mination of these rights came before the private courts of the lords
of various degree, from the King downward, each governing his
immediate tenants. They were limited agricultural monarchies, where
a slave plantation was an absolute agricultural monarchy.

It was not until the second half of the twelfth century that Henry II
sent out his circuit judges to hold court in the counties. They as-
sembled certain of the freemen, and thus they originated the jury, not,
as once was asserted, out of the customs of the people, but at the com-
mand of the King, to assist his justices in determining both the cus-
toms of the neighborhood and the rights claimed by individuals under
those customs. The juries were witnesses, both to the customs of the
people and to the possessions, claims, assaults and trespasses of
individuals.!_ To them were put questions both of law and fact. Later,
when the King’s justices began to protect tenants against their land-
lords, they inquired also, What are the customary rents and rent-
practices of this neighborhood and this landed estate? This was the
most important power of the King’s justices—the power to take a
tenant’s suit against his landlord out of the private court of his land-
lord and to give justice to the tenant on the findings of his neighbors.”

These private feudal courts died hard. Powerful nobles intimidated
the King’s common-law courts. The King’s Chancellor began to take
cases out of their hands and to decide civil cases where the great men
were too great for the local courts. Not until the wars of the barons
of the fifteenth century ended in the destruction of the nobility and
the triumph of Henry VII (1485) was it possible for the King to go to
the root of their power by prohibiting the nobility from maintaining
armed bands of retainers. This was accomplished by creating the
Star Chamber and the Court of Requests to supplement the civil
jurisdiction of Chancery by an extraordinary criminal and civil
jurisdiction in summoning and condemning the great barons.

The economic focus of this agricultural monarchy was the rent
bargain. The land of England was held in descending scales of tenancy
from the sole owner, the King, through chief tenants, sub-tenants,
freehold tenants, servile and semi-servile tenants. In each descending


1PoLtock and MAITLAND, 1:138. 2 Tbid., 1:147. 3 Holdsworth, 3:176.


THE RENT BARGAIN 219


level no distinction was made between ownership and government.
The King was both landlord and sovereign. So with the barons and
sub-barons. Each was both landlord and a combined legislature,
executive and chief justice of his baronial estate.

Hence the rent-bargain was two-fold, economic and governmental.
One was rent, the other was taxes. As yet undifferentiated, they
took the form of, and were in fact, a contract between superior and
inferior, graded, however, in degrees of coerciveness according to the
two main divisions of “free’’ and “‘unfree” tenures. Loyalty to the
overlord was the essence of free tenure, with its contract and oath of
fealty and its ceremony of homage.! Attendance on the lord’s court
or assembly of vassals was mandatory. The military tenants, the
Knights, held from their overlord on condition of furnishing a certain
number of esquires, or men-at-arms. Below them were the villeins,
the later copyholders, the purely agricultural tenants, paying the rent
for their land in their personal services and products for the landlord.
Above all was the sole landlord and sovereign.

By gradual stages the governmental rent was extracted from the
economic rent, by the process of changing from use-values to exchange
values through the introduction of money. As between the chief
tenants and the King, the process consisted in depriving them of their
armies of retainers and creating a King’s standing army; and in taking
over by the King’s courts from their baronial courts the determination
of the customary rents of their tenants, as well as all other civil and
criminal jurisdiction.

Having taken over the army the King required funds for the sup-
port of the army and the government. These were obtained in various
ways from the chief tenants, often under the form of more or less
arbitrary payments under the name of “aids,’”’ “benevolences,”
“reliefs,” ‘“‘wardships”’ of infants and women, compensation on oc-
casion of marriage or sale of the land, etc. Various efforts were made
to commute these arbitrary incidents of the rent bargain into fixed
and regular payments of money. The attempt was made in 1610, by
the proposed “great contract,” to buy up and commute these arbitrary
payments into cash, but King James proposed a cash rental which was
unsatisfactory to the landlords.” Finally, the parliament of 1660, con-
trolled by the landlords, proceeded to abolish the military tenures,


1 JENKS, 32.
2 JENKS, 237; GARDINER, History of England, 2:106; DowELL, Taxation, 1:187.


220 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


altogether without compensation to the King, but they substituted
in lieu thereof, a perpetual hereditary excise on the drink of the people.

This abolition of arbitrary rents by commuting them into money,
Blackstone might well say, “was a greater acquisition to the civil
property of this Kingdom than even Magna Carita itself; since that
only pruned the luxuriances that had grown out of the military tenures,
and thereby preserved them in vigour; but the statute of King Charles
extirpated the whole, and demolished both root and branches.” *

Indeed the royalist tenants of the Restoration, by this act of Parlia-
ment, truly created modern landed property, for, by commuting the
sovereign’s arbitrary rentals into pecuniary taxes they resolved them-
selves from tenants into owners, and gave to themselves that “sole
and despotic dominion’’ over external things which constitutes both
sovereignty and property.

Thus the right of private property in land emerged from the struggle
of 450 years between the sovereign as landlord and his vassals as
tenants, over the rental value of land. The collective bargaining over
rents, begun with Magna Carta in 1215 and ending with the Restora-
tion and a limited monarchy in 1660, transferred dominion from the
‘ will of the sovereign to the will of the tenant, by the simple device of
making fixed and certain, in terms of money, instead of arbitrary,
in terms of commodities and services, the rents owed by the tenant to
the monarch. Private property emerged from the rent bargain carried
on collectively in terms of money between the supreme landlord, the
King, and his tenants. The duty to pay definite taxes in cash, deter-
mined collectively by monarch and the representatives of the tax-
payers, was substituted for the indefinite duty to pay rent in com-
modities and services, determined individually by the chief landlord.
As long as the King could arbitrarily fix rents, whether in services or
money, he was truly the owner as well as the sovereign. When the
rents were fixed collectively in cash, he became only the sovereign
and his tenants became the owners. The separation of sovereignty
from property was the commutation of individual rent-bargains into a
collective rent-bargain and the shift from use-values to exchange-
values, such that the arbitrary will of the sovereign became regulated
by an annual pecuniary bargain in parliament; and the tenants, in-
stead of the sovereign, became the landlords. The collective rent-


2 Bla. Com. 77. Text of the act in Apams and STEPHENS, Select Documents of English
Constitutional History, 442.


THE RENT BARGAIN 221


bargain in terms of money is the land-tax, private property is the
residuum of power in terms of use-value or exchange-value left for the
landlord after the tax is paid.

It was not necessary, of course, to change the nominal title of
ownership, which, in England remained in the King. But the real
owners, nevertheless, are the tenants, because the rent charges are
definite taxes in terms of money, but the indefinite residuum which
marks the real ownership, because it marks the orbit where the will is
free, is transferred to the nominal tenants. So that, speaking his-
torically, land taxes are commutations of physical rents into money-
rents, and taxes are not something taken from private property by the
sovereign, but property is sovereignty taken collectively from the
King by his tenants. The result was that pecuniary taxes became the
governmental rent of land, and landed property became assimilated
to the law of business freedom and security, so that, eventually, like
movables, it could be bought and sold in expectation of its money
values.

Beneath the chief tenants and the lesser barons, who bargained
directly with the King, were the freehold tenants, who, when military
service had been commuted in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
for a money rent, paid that rent to the immediate lord instead of the
King, to whom their military service had been due. This created
eventually the yeomen, the farmers, subject only, on the govern-
mental side, to the King’s call to arms, but subject, on the economic
side, to rents payable in services, products, or money, to their imme-
diate landlord. Their condition was materially reduced in the course
of centuries, until it approached that of the copyholders.

Lastly, were the villeins, later become copyholders, the great bulk
of the workers, whose services were mainly agricultural, but who had
no access to the King’s courts against the arbitrary power of their
lords. Their personal services had been in part commuted for
fixed cash rentals in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Event-
ually, however, when the landlords, in the sixteenth century, after
the general rise in prices, began wholesale evictions of these ten-
ants and increased their rentals, new courts, other than the com-
mon-law courts, were set up by the King, and these began to re-
strain the landlords by the rule that “‘a lord could not at his will
and pleasure change the customs attached to lands held by a


1 JENKS, 33.


222 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


particular tenure . . . the lords were compelled to respect the cus-
toms of the manor and the terms of the tenure.” 1 Even the customs
themselves were refused recognition if they seemed to the judges to be
oppressive and servile. In this way the common law gradually as-
similated the law of copyhold tenure to the law of free tenure, and the
tenure of copyhold became, like free tenure, a form of land-ownership
without servile taint.2 So that, when Coke wrote his ‘‘Compleate
Copyholder”’ in the early years of the seventeenth century he could
say, “But now copiholders stand upon a sure ground, now they weigh
not their Lord’s displeasure, they shake not at every suddaine blast of
wind, they eate, drinke, and sleepe securely; onely drawing a speciall
care of the maine chance (viz.) to performe carefully what duties and
services soever their Tenure doth exact, and Custome doth require;
then let Lord frowne, the Copy holder cares not, knowing himselfe
safe and not within any danger, for if the lord’s anger grow to expul-
sion, the Law hath provided severall weapons of remedy; for it is at his
election either to sue a Subpena or an Action of Trespasse against the
Lord. Time hath dealt very favorably with Copy holders in divers
respects.” ®

Thus, in the end, the common-law courts were able to become the
people’s courts, protecting the free and even the servile tenant against
his landlord in his possession of land and his rent bargain, so that in
the reign of Elizabeth it was possible for her great secretary and am-
bassador, Sir Thomas Smith, to describe England as a “Common
Wealth”’ (res publica) rather than a “‘host of men,” or as instruments
for the will of one man. ‘A common wealth,” he said, “‘is called a
society or common doing of a multitude of free men collected together
and united by common accord and covenauntes among themselves,
for the conservation of themselves as well in peace as in warre. For
properly an host of men is not called a common wealth but abusively,
because they are collected but for a time and for a fact: which done,
each divideth himselfe from others as they were before. And if one
man had as some of the old Romanes had (if it be true that is written)
V. thousande or X. thousande bondmen whom he ruled well, though
they dwelled all in one citie, or were distributed into divers villages,
yet that were no common wealth: for the bondman hath no communion


1 HOLDSWORTH, 3:178.
2 Tbid., 179.
3 CoKE, Compleate Copy-holder, Sec. 9 (1641) quoted by Hotpsworts, 3:180.


THE RENT BARGAIN 223


with his master, the wealth of the Lord is onely sought for, and not the
profit of the slave or bondman. . . . A bondmanor a slave is as it were
(saving life and humane reason) but the instrument of his Lord, as the
axe, the sawe, the chessyll and gowge is of the charpenter. . . . And
though one husbandman had a great number of all those and looked
well to them, it made no common wealth and could not so be called.
For private wealth of the husbandmen is onely regarded, and there is
no mutual societie or portion, no law or pleading betweene thone and
thother. . . . Wherefore except there be other orders and administra-
tions amongst the Turks, if the prince of the Turks (as it is written of
him) do repute all other his bondmen and slaves (him selfe and his
sonnes onely freemen) a man may doubt whether his administration
be to be accompted a common wealth or a Kingdome, or rather to be
reputed onely as one that hath under him an infinite number of slaves
or bondmen among whom there is no right, law nor common wealth
compact, but onely the will of the Lorde and segnior.”’ ?

And Thomas Smith divided this Common Wealth of agricultural
England among four classes of people, three of whom participated in
it and one did not. The three participating classes were the ‘“‘barons
or estate of Lordes;” the “‘Knightes, Esquires and simpely gentle-
men,” who “live idly without manuall labor;”’ and the ‘‘ yeomanrie.” ?

The yeomen are they who “have the greatest charge and doings in
the common wealth, or rather are more travailed to serve in it than
all the rest.” They are the farmers—the “‘fermors unto gentlemen”
who, by agriculture, “get both their own living and parte of their
maisters.” * They are the “tenauntes of their Lorde,” the archers
and footmen who excelled the horsemen, for, in the wars, the Kings
of England fought always amongst them, rather than among the horse-
men, thereby showing, “as a man may guess, where he thought his
strength did consist.” 4

Finally, the “fourth sort or classe amongst us,” said Smith, were
what the old Romans called the proletarii or workers, the ‘‘day labour-
ers, poore husbandmen,” “lowest and rascall sort of the people,”
“yea merchantes or retailers who have no free lande, copiholders, and
all artificers, as Taylors, Shoomakers, Carpenters, Brickemakers,


1SyirH, Str THomas, De Republica Anglorum (1567), reprint in 1589 under the title
The Common-Wealth of England, 20, 21 (1906).

2 Tbid., at 31.

3 Thid., at 43.

4 [bid., 31-47.


224 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Bricklayers, Masons, etc.,’’ who have “no voice nor authoritie in our
common wealth, and no account is made of them but onelie to be
ruled, not to rule others, and yet they be not altogether neglected.” 4

Thus, in the time of Elizabeth, the common law, springing from the
customs of the people in so far as seemed reasonable to the King’s
justices, had erected an agricultural commonwealth, by depriving the
barons of their private courts and armies and substituting the common-
law courts of the King, and these created, for the farmers, property and
liberty, by changing the economic foundation of Society from bargains
in terms of use-values to bargains in terms of exchange-values.


1 SMITH, at 46.


CHAPTER VII


THE PRICE BARGAIN—CAPITALISM AND EXCHANGE-
VALUE


I. The Commonwealth


Sir Thomas Smith, in his account of the Commonwealth, barely
mentions “citizens and burgesses” as “‘next to gentlemen,” yet it was
these citizens and burgesses, who, since the reign of John,' had been
obtaining collective powers and immunities, also known as “liberties,”
and who, within a third of a century after Smith wrote, would, like the
landlords, begin to be deprived of the monopolistic and governmental
features of their franchises. The gild franchises of the merchants and
manufacturers gave to them a “collective lordship” similar to the
private lordship of the barons, for their gilds were erected into govern-
ments with their popular assemblies, their legislatures, their courts,
their executives, and even with authority to enforce fines and imprison-
ment of violators of their rules. Their most important sovereign
privilege granted by the King was that of binding all the members by a
majority vote so that they could act as a unit. These merchants’
and manufacturers’ gilds, at the height of their power, were not only
legalized “closed shops” but also legalized governments. Within
their jurisdiction no person could compete who was not authorized by
the gild, and within the gild no one could compete except on the terms
of fair competition which their rules imposed. They maintained
standards of quality of product and of qualifications of competitors
designed both to protect the public and prevent destructive competi-
tion.? They even required members to share with each other the raw
material and any exceptional good bargains that one might come
across. They enforced the contracts of their members. Associated
together they even gained control of the borough governments, and
their chief men became mayors and aldermen.


1 Gross mentions 24 charters granted to merchant gilds prior to 1215. Gross, CHAS.,


The Gild Merchant, 9-16 (1890).
2 Cp. Commons, J. R., ‘‘ The American Shoemakers,” 24 Quar. Journ. Econ., 39 (1909) ;
Labor and Administration, 219 (1913).


225


226 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Thus the gilds were the spots, here and there, where capitalism had
its origin. Surrounded by feudal landlords they obtained immunity
as small peddlers and artisans only by obtaining from a feudal superior
privileges which enabled them to act as units and to make and enforce
their own by-laws. The gilds were Defensive Capitalism. But they
grew in wealth and power. Their defensive privileges became exclusive
privileges in proportion as markets and commerce advanced over
militarism and agriculture and increasing numbers of people depended
on buying and selling for a living, where formerly they depended on
command and obedience.

Beginning in 1599, by that line of notable decisions referred to by
Justice Field in the Slaughter House Cases,’ the highest court of the
common law, the King’s Bench, deprived them of their closed-shop
privileges in so far as those privileges depended on enforcement of
penalties by the King’s executives. In France they were abolished by
the Revolution; in Germany they lived over to the nineteenth century;
in England they lived on as voluntary organizations but without
sovereign power physically to enforce their rules.

In 1599 the Merchant Tailors of London were the first to lose their
legalized closed shop. The King’s Bench, in that year, declared that a
by-law of the Tailor’s Society was unlawful in requiring every
“brother” of the society to give to another brother who “exercised the
art of clothworker,” at least as much of his cloth to be worked up as he
might give to any clothworker not a member of the society, upon pain
of forfeiting ten shillings, and providing enforcement upon his goods.
This by-law, although authorized in the charter granted from early
times to the Society and confirmed by successive Kings and Parliament,
was nevertheless adjudged against the “common right and public
good,” and “against the common law,” because, being a monopoly, it
was “against the liberty of the subject,” and “against the common-
wealth.” ? :

This argument was even more clearly and forcibly made in the Case
of Monopolies, in 1602, at the close of Elizabeth’s reign. This case
concerned but one of the many patent monopolies which Elizabeth
had granted for the upbuilding of the country, for the development of
new resources and the encouragement of new importations from


1 Above, Chap. III, p. 46.

? Davenant v. Hurdis, Trin. 41 Eliz., Moor (K. B.) 576 (1599); commented on by Coke
in Case of Monopolies, 11 Co. 86 a, b.

3 Darcy v. Allein, Trin. 44 Eliz. (1602), 11 Co. 84 b.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 227


abroad.’ Indeed, as Unwin has said of the similar monopolies granted
by Elizabeth’s successors, James and Charles, “It was not merely that
such grants seemed to afford the easiest way out of the Crown’s
growing financial difficulties. The spirit of corporate monopoly which
pervaded all classes engaged in commerce and industry, from the
richest to the poorest, made it possible, perhaps with sincerity, to
represent the grants, not as a hateful but unavoidable expedient for
raising money, but as part of a great and beneficent scheme of national
policy.” 2

Elizabeth had, however, yielded to the outcry against monopolies,
had revoked the most unpopular patents, and left the rest to the
decision of the judges. Darcy’s case was the monopoly of sale, manu-
facture and importation of playing cards. Popham, the Chief Justice,
and the entire court declared that it was void, as against the common
law and acts of parliament, for four reasons:

1. All trades which prevent idleness, “the bane of the common-
wealth,” and increase the substance of themselves and families to
serve the Queen when occasion requires, “are profitable for the com-
monwealth.” 2. “The inseparable incidents to every monopoly
against the commonwealth” are, increase in price, inferior quality,
and impoverishment of mechanics and their families, because “the
patentee, having the sole trade, regards only his private benefit and
not the common wealth.” 3. The Queen was deceived in her grant,
for she intended it “for the weal public,” but “it will be employed for
private gain of the patentee, and for the prejudice of the weal public.”
4. “It cannot be intended that Edward Darcy, an Esquire, and a
groom of the Queen’s Privy Chamber, has any skill in this mechanical
trade of making cards; . . . To forbid others to make cards who have
the art and skill, and to give him the sole making of them who has no
skill to make them, will make the patent utterly void.”

Thus the basic principle of the commonwealth, stated clearly by the
chief justice of the common-law courts at this early day, was the
principle—Let any person get rich in so far as he enriches the common-
wealth, but not in so far as he merely extracts private wealth from the
commonwealth.

Other similar decisions were given during this critical period. In
1519 Henry VIII had granted to the physicians of London a charter of


1 CUNNINGHAM, W. E., The Growth of English Industry and Commerce, 2:58, 287N. (1903).
2 Unwin, GrorcE, The Gilds and Companies of London, 300 (1908).


228 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


incorporation, confirmed later by Parliament, giving to them authority
to pass upon the qualifications of physicians within the city and sub-
urbs, and to prohibit the unqualified from practicing, on penalty of
fine and imprisonment, prosecuted before the governors and censors of
this company of physicians. Under this authority Dr. Bonham, in
1608, was imprisoned by agents of the company, and brought his
action of false imprisonment. The court, Coke being then Chief
Justice, decided that the censors and wardens had not that power, and,
in this case he went to the extreme point of squarely overruling an act
of parliament. For, said he, “in many cases the common law will
controul acts of parliament and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly
void: for when an act of parliament is against common right and
reason, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the common law
will controul it, and adjudge such act to be void.” ?

This was followed by the Ipswich Tailors in 1615.” This society had
been incorporated by Henry VII and confirmed by parliament in the
year 1504, with power to make and enforce ordinances. The company
brought an action in debt against a tailor who came to the town and
practiced his trade without proof that he had served an apprenticeship
for seven years, and without being admitted by the master and war-
dens as a sufficient workman. It was resolved by the court that, at
common law, “no man could be prohibited from working in any lawful
trade;” that the youth ought “to learn lawful sciences and trades
which are profitable to the common-wealth;” that the restraint was
“against the liberty and freedom of the subject,” and “all this is
against the common law, and the common-wealth.”

Thus the common-law courts accomplished, in the case of the gilds,
what they had accomplished in the case of the barons. They abol-
ished the private jurisdictions with their private courts,® and the way
was thenceforth open for them to build up, for the Kingdom, a common
law of the price-bargain, just as they had built up a common law of the
rent-bargain. The business man now, like the Yeoman and copy-
holders, could have his customs inquired into by the King’s justices,
and his rights and privileges asserted against private jurisdiction of
both gilds and barons. Capitalism entered upon its offensive stage,
intent on controlling the government whose aid it had petitioned dur-


1 Bonham’s Case, 8 Co. 114 a, 118 a (1610).

271 Co. 53 a.

3 Certain decisions in the 18th century seem to have supported the claims of the gilds.
See HotpswortH, History of English Law, 1:352. They were abolished in 1853.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 229


ing its defensive period. Eventually its petitions became its rights.
The next hundred years, until the Act of Settlement in 1700, was sub-
stantially the struggle of farmers and business men to become members
of the Commonwealth, whereby they might have courts of law willing
and able to convert their customary bargains into a common law of
property and liberty. The King’s courts themselves had been im-
potent after Chief Justice Coke, the great champion of the common
law, had been removed from office by King James in 1616,! and conse-
quently the farmers and business men turned towards collective con-
trol through parliament, towards raising an army, and even, for a
period of ten years, abolishing both King and House of Lords and
converting the Kingdom literally into a commonwealth. Although the
Kingdom was restored and the very name of Commonwealth stricken
from the records, yet, after 1700, the courts were made independent
of the King, and the common law of business was incorporated into the
common law of agriculture. The name of commonwealth was moved
to America, and, under new auspices, is resurrected in the Common-
wealth of Australia.

It will thus be seen that the notion of a commonwealth, as ex-
pounded by Sir Thomas Smith in the middle of the sixteenth century,
differed from the notions of the Wealth of Nations expounded by
Adam Smith’s followers, more than by Adam Smith himself, in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in that it explicitly included both
the economic and the political aspects in a single concept. It was a
notion both of common-weal and of participation in that weal through
the possession of rights and the corresponding power to enlist the
officials of government in one’s behalf. The classical economists
tended to separate the wealth of nations from the commonwealth,
making the wealth of nations identical with the prosperity of but a
single class within the commonwealth, the business men, upon whom
all other classes depended for prosperity. But the notion of a com-
monwealth which arose with Thomas Smith in the sixteenth century
and led to the two revolutions of the seventeenth century was a notion
of participation by each freeman in both the government and the
wealth of the nation. The difference between Thomas Smith’s
notion and the notion of Coke, Selden, Littleton, the common-law
lawyers and their successors of the seventeenth century, extended
only to the degree to which merchants, manufacturers and farmers

1 Garprner, S. R., History of England, 1603-1642, 3:27 (1890).


230 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


should actively participate in the commonwealth along with barons,
monopolists, gilds and the other beneficiaries of the King’s prerogative.
The literal “commonwealth” of 1640 went further and abolished both
the monarch and the House of Lords. The reaction which followed
gave to the landlords an even more powerful participation than they
had before, and it has required more than two additional centuries and
the growth of the then inferior merchants and manufacturers into the
new world-power of capitalism to bring attention back to the original
notion of the commonwealth as it struggled for recognition in the
reigns of Elizabeth, James and Charles.

Yet the original participants in the King’s prerogative were trying
to do what needed to be done, and had to be done in other ways when
the power of the prerogative to protect them was weakened. The
abolition of the legal power of the gilds required the courts both to take
over the rules of fair competition and to enforce the contracts which
had grown out of their customs and had been enforced in their own
courts. We shall see how, in 1580 and 1620, the common-law courts
began to take over, and to enact into law for the whole of England,
certain of the regulations of the gilds whose private authority they
were then abolishing. The first of the goodwill decisions enforcing a
contract to sell a going business (1620) and the first of the trade-mark
decisions enforcing a claim for damages against the use of a compet-
itor’s name in business (1580) were but the legal adoption on a na-
tional scale of the very rules of fair competition which the gilds adopted
within their own exclusive membership. The court which abolished
the power of the gilds began to take over the work of the gilds. Their
private jurisdiction became a public jurisdiction. And the very cus-
toms which the gilds endeavored to enforce within their ranks became
the customs which the courts enforced for the nation. The monopoly,
the closed shop, and the private jurisdiction were gone, but the
economics and ethics remained. Much later, in the modern common-
wealth, other functions of the gilds, such as protection of the quality
of the product and the qualifications of practitioners, have also been
taken over by courts or legislatures. Beside the chartered gilds there
were other less formal courts at the fairs where merchants came with
their goods (piepoudre) and there were the practices of merchants
in drawing bills of exchange upon each other calling for money,
which the common-law courts, at about the same period, began
to take notice of and to interpret according to the customs of


THE PRICE BARGAIN 231


merchants. The common law became the law of property, liberty
and business.

But neither business expectations nor the expectations aroused by
the law of property and liberty could expand as long as the prerogative
of the monarch was above the common law. The struggle, begun with
Magna Carta, did not reach its crisis until the rise of protestantism
and commerce. The former asserted a new right, the right to equality,
liberty and security of worship, the latter the right to equality, liberty
and security of business. Business could not be free and secure while
the prerogative exercised capricious control, especially over currency,
franchises and rents.

Arbitrary alterations of the currency were not repeated after
Edward VI,! and money thenceforth became a comparatively reliable
standard of value and medium of exchange, a universal representative
of the value of products, a trusted instrument of inducement and
compensation, and therefore a solid foundation for the credit system.
Franchises were not taken from the personal control of the monarch
until the victory of parliament in the civil wars and not completely
until the Act of Settlement in 1700, which confirmed the Case of
Monopolies of 1602 and the Statute of Monopolies of 1624. Taxes
were not made certain until, after 1689, they could be levied only by
consent of Parliament. By these measures business, based on pre-
dictable prices, was permitted to develop unhampered by arbitrary
interference of the sovereign.

Even these stabilizing reforms of currency, franchises and rents,
which prepared the way for a business economy based on prices, could
not be rendered permanently secure until the Revolution of 1689,
and especially the Act of Settlement of 1700, which took from the
monarch the power to remove the justices of the courts. When
James I succeeded Elizabeth, in 1603, the prerogative, besides includ-
ing the power to appoint judges of the common-law courts and of the
highest of those courts, the King’s Bench, included also a number of
other courts, or rather a number of other agents of the King appointed
and removed at his pleasure. Greatest was the Star Chamber, the
personal council of the King sitting as a court in the Star Chamber,
exercising civil, criminal and political jurisdiction wherever great
questions of state or great and powerful personages, or violations of
the King’s prerogative, were called in question or litigated. The most


1 CUNNINGHAM, Growth of English Industry and Commerce, 2:127 (1903).


232 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


significant function of the Star Chamber was its position as an ad-
ministrative court by means of which the King’s officials were exempt
from trial in the common-law courts. A similar jurisdiction existed
in the Court of Exchequer where all cases between taxpayers and the
crown were tried, as well as cases in which revenue officers themselves
were tried. It, too, had power to remove cases from the common-law
courts.2. Then there was the Court of High Commission with inferior
ecclesiastical courts, having authority to try cases of religious doctrine
and ritual, and to remove the clergy from the jurisdiction of the com-
mon-law courts.’ Finally was the Chancellor, a member of the King’s
Council and the highest personage next to the King, who kept the
King’s seal which alone authenticated the King’s acts, and exercised
likewise the King’s prerogative power of issuing injunctions restrain-
ing parties from bringing their cases to the common-law courts, or,
if they had already done so, from enforcing judgment.*

The parliament of 1640 and the revolution that followed abolished
these prerogative courts or limited them, while the Act of Settlement in
1700° made the judges as well as the chancellor independent of the
King and appointed for life. Henceforth came about that peculiar
and outstanding feature of Anglo-American law, the subjection of
officials as well as citizens to the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts of
law. It was this that made it possible for Francis Lieber, in 1853, to
say ‘The guaranty of the supremacy of the law leads to a principle
which, so far as I know, it has never been attempted to transplant
from the soil inhabited by Anglican people, and which, nevertheless,
has been in our system of liberty, the natural production of a thorough
government of law as contra-distinguished to a government of func-
tionaries,” © and for English and American courts to say, ours is a
“government of laws, and not of men.” It is such because officials and
citizens are each subject to the same courts, interpreting the same due
process of law.

But the American constitutions went much further. While the
Act of Settlement made the judges independent, yet parliament
retained the power to overrule the courts. But in America, as is


1 HoitpswortH, History of English Law, 1:276.

2 Thid., 104, 105.

3 Tbid., 375 ff.

4 Tbid., 246.

5 Apams and STEPHENS, Select Documents of English Constitutional History, 475-470.

6 LinBER, FRANCIS, Civil Liberty and Self-government, 91 (1853); TAYLOR, H., Due Process,
608 (1917).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 233


well known, under written constitutions, the Supreme Courts are the
final interpreters of the constitution and of the powers and respon-
sibilities of officials, as well as the rights and duties of citizens. In this
respect, as is brought out by Haines,! America went back to the doc-
trine of Sir Edward Coke, who would have made parliament, as well as
the King, subordinate to the common-law court of King’s Bench over
which he presided as Chief Justice. But with a difference. Coke
would have made the King and parliament subject to the common
law. The supreme courts of the United States make legislatures,
executives and judges subject to the common law and equity. The
common law is historic custom, precedent, and the ancient law of the
land; equity is conscience, reason, and the law of God or nature. The
two are in fact inseparable. King James had said that “he thought
the ‘law’ was founded upon reason, and that he and others had reason,
as well as the judges.” “True,” said Coke, “God had endowed his
Majesty with excellent science and great endowments of nature. But
his Majesty was not learned in the laws of his realm of England, and
causes which concern the life, or inheritance, or goods, or fortunes of
his subjects, are not to be decided by natural reason, but by the
artificial reason and judgment of law, which law is an act which re-
quires long study and experience, before that a man can attain to the
cognizance of it.” The King ought not, indeed, to be under any man,
but under “God and law”—yet not God’s law, as James and the
Church contended, but the common law.” Furthermore, contended
Coke, when an act, even of parliament, “is against common right and
reason, or repugnant or impossiple to be performed, the common law
will control it, and adjudge such act to be void.” ? Thus Coke inter-
preted the common law as not only the customs and precedents of
ancient law but also as the rule of “right and reason,” interpreted by
the common-law judge. In this respect he distinguished it from
equity, which at that time was the arbitrary power of the sovereign,
and agreed with his great contemporary, John Selden, who likened
equity to the Chancellor’s foot.

Meanwhile, the common law also, under the influence of Lord
Mansfield in the eighteenth century, had itself widened out with
principles of natural justice drawn from Roman law and from equity,*


1 Hares, C. G., The American Doctrine of Judicial Supremacy 25 ff. (r914).
2 Prohibitions del Roy, 12 Co. 64-65 (1608); Hatnes, 28.

3 Bonham’s case, 8 Co. 118 a., b.,; HAINES, op. cit. 31.

4 HOLDSWORTH, 1:253; JENKS, 234 ff.


234 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


thus adapting itself to the change from a feudal economy to a cap-
italist economy. It required another century, in England, before
the parliament, in 1873, consolidated the common law and equity
courts in a supreme court of judicature,’ a consolidation which was
effected in America by the Constitution of 1787 making the judicial
power of the federal government extend to all cases at law and equity
under the Constitution, while the state constitutions began the similar
consolidation with New York in 1840.

The evident advantage of the equity process over the common-
law process is in its control over conduct in advance of action instead
of punishment after action. The proceedings do not require the
prolonged investigation, indictment and jury trial of the common
law, but both the injunction and punishment for its violation are
expeditious. For the Court of Chancery had the peculiar faculty
of commanding specific behavior by mandamus or injunction, on mere
allegations and affidavits of a complainant, without waiting for the
slow processes of a suit for damages, as in the common-law courts.
It commands first, and finds out afterwards what are the law, the
rights and the facts; whereas the common law finds out first what
are the law and facts and afterwards issues its commands. This one
feature alone would have required the equity courts to intervene
with the injunction, or else would have required the extension, by the
common-law courts, of their writs of mandamus and prohibition,
in order to create those intangible property rights of modern business
which have made the transition from physical property to intangible
property. By means of the injunction the court can, in advance, enter
into the most minute detail of behavior needed to recognize new
rights and protect new definitions of persons and property.” The com-
mon law was able to deal effectively only with physical things and to
punish after the event,—equity deals with the most intangible values,
for it commands directly, before the event, the very performance,
avoidance or forbearance on which value depends. Equity looks
on property as behavior claimed of other persons; the common law
looks on it as a thing owned by a person.®


1JENKS, op. cit. 408.

2“This capacity of moulding a decree to suit the exact exigencies of a particular case is
indeed one of the most striking advantages which procedure in chancery enjoys over that
at common law, and must have been one of the elements which contributed in no small
degree to the origin and growth of equitable jurisprudence.” BrspHam, Principles of Equity,
9 (8th ed., 1900).

3 Ames, J. B., Lectures in Legal History, 108 (1913).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 235


Indeed, the first important field of equity was that of creating
uses and trusts, which distinguish physical things from the expected
transactions growing out of things. And since value does not reside
in things but in these expected transactions, equity procedure at
once extracts from the common-law procedure the very substance
of value. Hence flowed the whole range of behavioristic values by
way of the relief which equity afforded against the rigidity or inade-
quacy of the common law, such as the remedying of accidents and
mistakes, the controlling of accounts, partnerships, and every detail
of corporation law. The remarkable expansion of the equity juris-
diction in the Eighteenth Century reflected the rise of capitalism
based on pecuniary expectations, and the corresponding subsidence
of feudalism and the prerogative based on physical power. There-
after it became possible for the courts to build up the law of business
in proportion as business itself developed.


II. INCORPOREAL PROPERTY—ENCUMBRANCES
1. Promises


The law of credit instruments passed through two stages, first,
the stage of enforcement of contracts, the second the authorization
of the supplementary buying and selling of the contracts themselves.
The first may be distinguished as the stage of enforceable promises,
or incorporeal property; the second the stage of negotiable promises,
or intangible property. The first stage was practically completed
by the latter half of the sixteenth century; the second begins with
the first recorded opinion on bills of exchange at the beginning of
the seventeenth century. The distinction between the law of intan-
gible property, which we name the law of opportunities, and the law
of incorporeal property, which we name a special case of the law of
encumbrances, turns on the question whether the opposite party has
or has not liberty of choice between alternatives.

If the opposite party has no liberty of choice, in the particular
behavior at issue, then, to that extent, he is burdened by an encum-
brance, or duty, of performance, forbearance or avoidance. If,
however, the opposite party is at liberty to choose an alternative
then the relation between them is one of opportunity. The law of
encumbrances on behavior is the law of right and duty; the law of
opportunities for behavior is the law of liberty and exposure. An


236 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


encumbrance indicates the psychological relation of command and
obedience. The first party issues a command, the opposite party
obeys, or is compelled to obey. He has no option. But an opportu-
nity indicates the psychological relation of persuasion or coercion.
The opposite party is free to choose alternatives rather than obey.
Instead, therefore, of a command and obedience, the first party
must resort to that kind of inducement which consists in setting up,
or taking advantage of, alternatives between which the opposite
party may choose. If the alternative is onerous so that the choice
is a hard one, the opposite party still improves his condition, as
perceived at the time, by selecting the better alternative. He
always gains by choosing, and persuasion and coercion do not differ
in kind but in degree. A hard alternative, where taken advan-
tage of, is coercion; an agreeable, or not disagreeable alternative, is
persuasion.

Command and obedience are thus legally different from persuasion
or coercion, although psychologically they may look alike, for in the
one relation the opposite party has no lawful option. He must obey.
But in the other relation he has an option; he is free to accept or
reject. Command and obedience imply the juristic relation of duty
of the opposite party, which therefore we name encumbrance. Per-
suasion and coercion imply the juristic relation of liberty, which we
understand by choice of opportunities. Command and obedience,
that is, encumbrances, are sanctioned by legal rewards and penalties;
persuasion or coercion, that is, opportunities, are sanctioned by
economic advantage and disadvantage. Each is expected to be
beneficial to the first party, but encumbrances are beneficial in that
they are mandatory acts required of an opposite party; opportunities
in that they are optional transactions with an opposite party. Encum-
brances, completely defined, are expected, beneficial, one-sided,
mandatory actions; opportunities are expected, beneficial, reciprocal,
optional, transactions.

Now, the law of incorporeal property is a special case of the law
of encumbrances, in that it imposes only a “‘positive” duty, the
duty of performance, whereas the ‘“‘negative” duties of forbearance
and avoidance are the encumbrances peculiar to the law of intangible
property. Incorporeal property turns on the duty to pay a debt,
but intangible property turns on the duty to avoid or forbear in the
exercise of physical, economic or moral power. The two are insep-


THE PRICE BARGAIN 237


arable in fact, the distinction between the two being made at the
point of time when an enforceable promise is deemed to come into
effect. Before the promise is made the parties are in the position of
choosing between opportunities; after the promise is made there
is no further choice if the promise is enforceable in law. Yet both
before and after the promise comes into effect, there exist duties
of forbearance or avoidance on the two parties and all third parties.
It is the gradual historical change in all of these encumbrances on
behavior, whether of performance, avoidance, or forbearance, that
marks the evolution of both incorporeal and intangible property
and the shift back and forth from one to the other.

Since, therefore, the special case of a duty of performance is the
peculiar attribute of incorporeal property, we may take for granted
the presence of the necessary supporting duties of forbearance and
avoidance and may speak of the law of encumbrances as the law of
“positive” encumbrances of performance and therefore equivalent
to incorporeal property in that it is the law of creditor and debtor
relations; while the law of opportunities is the law of intangible prop-
erty, in that it deals with the relation of buyer and seller in its various
forms of purchase and sale, lending and borrowing, hiring and hiring
out, leasing, and so on.

The law of positive encumbrances may be said to have had a
two-fold development, distinguishable as the law of labor encum-
brances, and the law of investment encumbrances. The law of labor
has historically unfolded as the law of owner and slave, landlord
and serf, master and servant, employer and employee, principal
and agent, with perhaps subordinate divisions of parent and child,
husband and wife. The law of investment is mainly the law of land-
lord and tenant, lessor and lessee, creditor and debtor. Each of these
shows an evolution of the notion of property from the ownership of
visible things to the ownership of invisible encumbrances on beha-
vior and opportunities.

The law of employment and agency sets up the creditor and debtor
relation until such time as wages or salaries are paid, and then slides
informally into the law of specific investment. The investor proper
of modern industry emerges as a specialist who takes over, at pay-day,
from the employee or agent, the burden of waiting for compensation
until that time when the ultimate consumer makes compensation for
all of the preceding services. He may be a formal or an informal


238 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


investor. As an informal investor he enters by investing his own
money in his own business.

The bargain which the formal investor makes is a sale of present
purchasing power in exchange for future purchasing power. This
occurs, in modern business, under many forms and includes shares
of stock, as well as bonds and promissory notes. In either case, the
essential transaction consists in selling present purchasing power
and accepting a promise or expectation of future purchasing power.
The one is money, the other is credit.

In selling present purchasing power he sells that part of his liberty
which consists in control over the purchasing power which had been
his, so that his field of liberty, for the time being, is thus limited
by a duty of avoidance. He accepts, in return, a promise of future
purchasing power, an encumbrance on the debtor or the going concern,
and it is this investment encumbrance, or incorporeal property,
that has emerged out of the primitive notion of holding physical
things for one’s own use.

The law of investor’s encumbrance started, under the common
law, with the idea of property in physical things and with corre-
sponding legal actions for the recovery of tangible goods and even
specific money coins, wrongfully deforced, detained or held, from
their owner; and also with actions against violent trespass on lands,
chattels, or persons, until it gradually became, about the middle of
the Sixteenth Century, the enforcement of a mere promise, express,
or implied, written or unwritten, accepted formally or even acted
upon without a formal promise, as though it had been promised.

Thus, for example, the “writ of right” and the “writ of debt”
indicated similar ideas and procedure, the one being a remedy for
forcible detention of land, the other for forcible detention of physical
chattels. ‘The writ of right, addressed by the King to the sheriff,
bade him to require the defendant A to render to the plaintiff B,
a piece of land, which A had unjustly taken from B.1. This merely
gave to B a better right of possession than to A. It gave possession,
but not property.” Yet, eventually, out of this remedy grew the
complete remedies of the judgment in rem, affirming the absolute
right of property against all the world with its various remedies,
applicable to title and ownership of all physical things, whether lands,
goods, or even paper instruments serving as evidence of ownership.


1JENKS, 56 (1912). * PoLLOcK and MatrLanp, 2:77.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 2390


The “writ of debt” was scarcely different from the writ of right
except in the physical object claimed by the plaintiff. It, too,
bade the sheriff to require the defendant A to render to the plain-
tiff B not land, but, say, one hundred specific pieces of coin which
A owed B. The defendant was to restore the very coins lent. After-
wards this became, not the specific coins, but the amount of the debt.!
Even where a personal obligation of the debtor to perform a certain
act was recognized, it had to take objective form in a sealed bond,
made with formality in the presence of witnesses or the court,” and
it was not so much the promise of the debtor that constituted the
ground of his debt as the bond itself with its huge seal.*

But the modern simple, or parol, contract, a written or unwritten
promise, with its recognition of a personal liability of the debtor,
got its recognition, not by way of enforcement of a promise, but by
way of physical damage done to the person or property of the cred-
itor. “The gist of the Writ of Trespass was an allegation that the
defendant had, with force and arms, and against the peace of our
Lord the King, interfered with the plaintifi’s possession of his body,
land, or goods.”* Next by authority of Parliament in 1285° the writ
of trespass was permitted to be extended to analogous cases, and
came to be known as “trespass on a similar case,” then as “trespass
on the case,’”’ then simply as ‘“‘action on the case,” or merely “case.”
Under this authority it was extended to “malfeasance,” or damage
to a physical object owned by the plaintiff, as early as the year 1374;
then extended to ‘‘non-feasance,” in 1424, or the damage caused by
mere nonfulfillment of a promise without fraud or deceit; then to
“‘misfeasance” or deliberate fraud of the defendant in breaking his
promise though not involving physical damage (1433); then, includ-
ing ‘“assumpsit” and limited by the doctrine of “consideration,” or
“value received,” it established the modern form of contract in the
latter part of the Sixteenth Century.®

Thus the promissory note or even a simple promise by word of
mouth or only implied in the conduct of the parties, was slowly le-
galized through the period of the sixteenth century, and the court


1 JENKS, 57, 58, 59.

2 Ames, Lectures on Legal History, 123 (1913).

3 JENKS, 135-6 510.

4 Tbid., 137; PoLLocK and MarrLanp, 182 (contract) 510 (The Trespasses).
5 Westm. 2, 13 Edw. I, c. 24 (1285).

6 POLLOCK and MAITLAND, 2:511.


240 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


recognized the essential notion of a credit instrument, the modern
incorporeal property, where protection was something distinct and
widely different from the older notions of protection against tres-
pass on the body, land, or goods of a plaintiff.

Not that there had not been in the feudal period a type of incorpo-
real property, but that property was not the modern relation of vol-
untary agreements between equals, but was lordship over physical
things, or the physical products of the soil or of labor. The “rents”
of land were even a part of the lordship over lands and tenants. “The
landlord who demands the rent that is in arrear is not seeking to en-
force a contract, he is seeking to recover a thing.” ! It was only in
course of time, and with the modern freedom of labor and money
economy, that this “medieval realism,” became the modern obli-
gation of contracts between equals. The law of landlord and ten-
ant unfolds into many varieties of the law of lessor and lessee, a
special case of the law of creditor and debtor. The lessor turns over
to the lessee the control of his property, and accepts, for the period
of time, the economic relation of investor and creditor, the lessee
that of business man or going concern and debtor.

We need not delay to consider the informal investor, the business
man, who puts his own property or money into his own business.
He does so, of course, not on a formal promise, but on an implied
expectation of something roughly in excess of what is promised in
similar cases. He takes chances on expected opportunities.


2. Legal Tender


It has been the practice in economic theorizing, since the reaction
of the Physiocrats and Adam Smith against Mercantilism, to elim-
inate money from consideration and to get back to the realities of
physical commodities and human wants. Money was simply a meas-
ure of value and a medium of exchange, and, while important, its
importance belonged to the category of weights and measures or
transportation. The government should provide an authentic unit
of measurement of value just as it provided a unit of length,
weights or cubic content, and it should provide a smooth adminis-
tration of coinage and banking, since what it provided was Adam
Smith’s ‘ great wheel of circulation.” In these respects the value of


1 PottockK and MAITLAND, 2:126.
2 Tbid., 2:181, on Ownership and Possession.


THE RENT BARGAIN 241


money was simply nominal value, containing nothing more in it-
self than a yardstick or an empty basket. The real thing back of
it was the production, exchange and consumption of quantities of
commodities, whose measurement and transfer money facilitated.

These views obviously took the individualistic or private stand-
point, as against Mercantilism which had taken the public or rather
monarchical standpoint. What the individual wants is commod-
ities, not money,—satisfaction, not prices. When the public stand-
point was needful it was brought in as a servant or administrator
operating “a great wheel of circulation,” ! rather than a judge decid-
ing disputes, or brought in as a “ natural order ” and beneficent pur-
pose of nature or deity, rather than a common-law judge enforcing
private contracts. Obviously it followed that, when the history
of money was traced out of the customs of primitive society, show-
ing the evolution of the material of money from beads, cattle, to-
bacco, to iron, copper, silver, gold, and bank credit, it was the mech-
anism of money and credit, rather than the behavior of judges in
interpreting and enforcing promises, that attracted attention.

This attitude conformed to the general attitude imposed on both
economists and publicists by the constitutional struggles of three
hundred years between monarchs and parliaments which made it
appear that government signified only the executive and legisla-
tive branches of government rather than the judicial branch. Hence
they sought for the legal attributes of money in the proclamations
of the prerogative or in the statutes of the legislatures rather than
the common law. Yet it is out of the common law, the law that
standardized the customs of the people, that the legal tender quality
originated, and the function of the prerogative or legislature came
in afterwards to direct the judges as to the lawful standards of weights
and measures, including money, which all of them should employ
uniformly throughout the land in deciding disputes and enforcing
promises.

This oversight of the Physiocrats, of Adam Smith and the classi-
cal economists, is explicable in the fact that what they mistook for
the order of nature or divine providence was merely the common
law silently growing up around them in the decisions of judges who
were quietly selecting and standardizing the good customs of the
neighborhood and rejecting the bad practices that did not conform

1Cp. VEBLEN, Place of Science, 66.


242 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


to the accepted rules of reason. Legislatures and monarchs are dra-
matic, arbitrary and artificial; courts are commonplace and natural.

It is also explicable in the fact that economic theory has consist-
ently taken the point of view of individuals on the one hand and
commodities on the other hand, instead of the point of view of trans-
actions between individuals. Our analysis of a transaction has
shown that there is always a third party to every transaction, the
judge who decides or is expected to decide every dispute upon the
principle of the common rule applicable to all similar transactions.
The business man is not concerned, directly, in his daily transac-
tions, with what the legislatures or the state or monarch does—he
wants to know what the judge and the sheriff will do. This judge,
however, necessarily takes a public point of view, since his decisions
must conform to what other judges have decided in similar disputes
and to what the customs or laws of the community authorize and
support. In applying the common rule he is conforming to public
purpose. Hence the public point of view is inherent in every trans-
action, and just as much so in primitive society as in a credit economy.

Money originated, indeed, out of the habits and customs of in-
dividuals in their transactions, but whenever a dispute arose between
individuals as to the price, or the payment of a deferred price, agreed
upon, it is evident that the judge, chieftain, headman or king, exer-
cising the controlling power of the community, had to decide upon
the quantity and quality of the circulating medium which the seller
or creditor should be required to accept. This decision settled the
dispute, stopped private vengeance, liberated the debtor or buyer
and restrained the creditor or seller. Then when markets and fairs
appeared, the same process automatically appeared, and the im-
promptu pie poudre * courts of early England testify to the inherent
function of the judiciary in interpreting and enforcing accepted
customs even of the most transitory and individualistic of itinerant
peddlers.

Consequently there is another custom to be taken into account in
the history and origin of money—the custom of judges in deciding
disputes according to the principle of the working rule, and thereby
determining what is “lawful money” or “lawful tender”? in the settle-
ment of claims. The fact that these judges presumably followed the


1The “dusty feet” courts of traveling merchants; cp. Portock and MAITLAND, 1:4673
HOLDSWORTH, 1:300, 302, 309.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 243


custom of the community in making their decisions is simply the uni-
versal fact of the common law which consists in selecting the good
and approved customs and eliminating bad practices in the decision
of disputes.

This custom of courts led to the next stage when conquest or fed-
eration had brought together tribes under a sovereign with many
local courts and many private coiners and minters of money. Ethel-
stan, Edgar and Canute, in Anglo-Saxon times, issued proclamations
condemning and threatening punishment of those who corrupted the
coinage; Edward I proclaimed that “no subject should be compelled
to take in buying or selling or other payment any money made but
only of lawful metal, silver or gold”; and Henry II is said to have
selected the coins of a set of foreign merchants from Flanders, the
Esterlings, and proclaimed their “ sterling ” alloy to be the standard
for all goldsmiths, coiners,’ and obviously also for the itinerant jus-
tices whom Henry was the first to send out on the circuits. Thus it
came to be settled, at common law, that the King, “by his absolute
prerogative” might make foreign or any coin “lawful money” in
England,” and that an obstinate creditor had no remedy by the com-
mon law to have payment “ because it shall be accounted his own
folly that he refused the money when a lawful tender of it was made
to him.” * The records of the pie poudre court at St. Ives in the year
1300 contain a decision by merchants requiring a fellow merchant to
pay in “lawful money”’—legali moneta—since the “crocards and
pollards” in which he promised to make payment had meanwhile
been “prohibited by the lord King throughout all England.” 4

Evidently the King was directly concerned in stabilizing the coin-
age, since by impairing the coins the King lost his revenues, forfeit-
ures and subsidies, the coercive debts of his subjects. Then when
the modern banking system arose, with its bills, notes and deposits,
the expectation of what the judges will do in deciding disputes be-
comes the all-important standard for all private transactions. The
“customs ”’ of business men and bankers are still the foundations of
money, but these private practices must conform to the customs of
the courts if business promises are to be secure. It is this legal tender


12 Coke Inst. 576.

2 5 Co. Rep. 114a, Wade’s Case; Trin. 43 Eliz. (1601).

3 Co, Litt. 207, a. b. 208, a; Pong v. Lindsay, 1 Dyer, 82a, Hil. 6 and 7, Edw. VI; 1 Bla,
Com. 276; Viner Abr. “Tender.”

423 Selden Soc. 80.


244 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


medium of payments, including governmental paper money, the
“‘oreenbacks,” ! required by the custom of courts which, in American
practice, is known as “lawful money,” the common-law term that
goes back to Anglo-Saxon times.

There is thus always a public purpose in every system of money,
even the most primitive, as soon as there is an authoritative decision
of disputes respecting the means of payment. The public purpose
develops along with the growth of population, the practices of the
people, the form of government and the motives of the governor. In
early times it might go no further than the purpose of keeping the
peace; but soon it becomes the purpose of obtaining a revenue for the
sovereign; then, with the development of modern capitalism and the
predominance of business in the counsels of government, it became
Adam Smith’s purpose of providing “the great wheel of circulation,”
truly ‘‘an organ of the economic commonwealth.”

Soon the question had to arise as to whether the legal tender stand-
ard itself had been designed to accomplish accurately the purpose
of a “great wheel of circulation,’ and then a critical examination
ensued as to the relative importance of different purposes from the
public standpoint. Since the time of John Locke the dominant pur-
pose for the sake of modern world commerce has been that of settling
upon a single standard of value that should be undisturbed by the
ignorance or interests of monarchs who controlled its issue. This
standardization of gold and silver came in with the overthrow of ab-
solutism in England in 1689 and the control of government by the
constitutional methods of parliamentary representation. Here the
public purpose was simply that of providing a simple uniform medium
of exchange for both domestic and foreign trade.

A hundred and fifty years after the settlement of this as the dom-
inant purpose, a new public purpose began to be suggested as the
ideal, namely, a stable level of prices, in order to prevent injustice be-
tween creditors and debtors. This purpose was based upon a new
device of statistics, namely, the tabular standard or index number of
prices, suggested, in 1822 by Joseph Lowe, the London merchant,
and renewed in 1833 by C. Poulett Scroupe, the politician and pub-
licist.

Malthus, in 1821, had previously suggested another practical pur-


1 Hepburn v. Griswold, 8 Wall. 603 (1869); Legal Tender Cases, 12 Wall. 457 (1870);
Juillard v. Greenman, tro U. S. 421 (1884).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 245


pose from the public standpoint, namely, that of preventing the oscilla-
tions of prosperity and depression, overemployment and underemploy-
ment, which he had connected with the oscillation of the general
purchasing power of money.! This public purpose has now come to
the forefront as a criterion for determining the legal standard of
value and the operations of the banking system, which are the means
instituted by government for furnishing and withholding credit.
If the governing officials are changed, or the existing officials change
their minds in conformity with this new criterion, as was the case
when John Locke addressed himself to them at the close of the Seven-
teenth Century, then the public purpose, as revealed in the behavior
of officials and judges, will also advance another step and adopt a
stable price level as well as a single standard of value as its criterion.

Thus it is not so much the material out of which money is made,
nor the mechanism of money and credit, as it is the behavior of judges
in deciding disputes, that determines the measure of value and me-
dium of exchange. It is not gold, but the legal tender attribute of
gold attached to it by the courts, that determines the prices that
business men shall pay for commodities, for it is that that determines
the enforceability of contracts, the liquidation of debts, the assets
and liabilities of a going concern. Prices are indeed ‘“ nominal val-
ues’ —they are the expectations of judicial behavior in the enforce-
ment of promises. And modern economics is not a barter economy
or a truck economy as the Physiocrats and classical economists would
have it, nor is it a pleasure and pain economy of production and con-
sumption, as the hedonic economists would have it, but it is a price
economy, as the customs of business and the custom of courts actually
have it. For business is not an exchange of commodities—it is a pur-
chase and sale of commodities. It is an economy of buyers and sellers,
borrowers and lenders, not one of truck and barter. Its essential
quality, before anything else can be done, is transfer of titles and
the liberation of debtors from encumbrances through the tender of
lawful means of liquidating their promises. It is strictly, in the full-
est sense of the word, a “ credit ’”’ economy, for it is a transfer of goods
and services for a mere promise to pay a price, whose reality is none
other than confidence in the expected behavior of citizens, judges


1 Matruus, T. R., Principles of Political Economy, 397, 308 (1821). F
2 Cf. Commons, McCRackEN, and Zeucu, “Secular Trends and Business Cycles,” 4


Rev. of Ec. Stat., 6 (1922).


246 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


and legislatures. Back of this insubstantial and delicate process of
the mind with its purely nominal values or prices, is the great re-
ality of production and consumption, prosperity and poverty, pri-
vate wealth and commonwealth. We cannot, however, clearly see
the connection between promises and reality, between prices and wel-
fare, until we have seen another and most remarkable quality of this
mental process, by which the courts have made mere promises ac-
tually to look and act like a commodity—the quality of negotiability.


III. INTANGIBLE PROPERTY—OPPORTUNITIES
1. Negotiability


We have described the change in meaning of the term property from
the common-law meaning of physical things to the business-law mean-
ing of the prices of things. The expected prices are imputed as a
present value and become the assets, or expectations, which the
business man entertains, of future transactions on the commodity
markets. An even more momentous change from the common law to
the business law was that which converted the mere promises of one
person to another into commodities that could be bought and sold on
the money and securities markets. “If it were asked,” says McLeod,?
“what discovery has most deeply affected the fortunes of the human
race it might probably be said with truth—The discovery that a debt
is a saleable commodity. When Daniel Webster said that credit has
done more a thousand times to enrich nations than all the mines of
all the world, he meant the discovery that a debt is a saleable com-
modity, or chattel; and that it may be used like money; and produce
all the effects of money.”

There were two circumstances which prevented the primitive com-
mon law from enforcing the assignment or negotiability of contracts,


1McLeop, H. D., Theory and Practice of Banking, sth ed., 1:200. Further references
on negotiability and assignment are as follows: Morse, JoHuN T., Jr., Banks and Banking,
4th ed., 1903; HotpswortsH, W.S., “Origins and Early History of Negotiable Instruments,”
gr L. Q. R. 12, 173, 376; 32 L. Q. R. 20 (1915-16); JeEnKs, Epwarp, “Early History of
Negotiable Instruments,” 9 L. Q. R. 70 (4803); GREER, F. A., “Custom in the Common
Law,” 9 L. Q. R. 153 (1803); Carter, A. T., “The Early History of the Law Merchant
in England,” 17 L. Q. R. 232 (1901); Ames, James Barr, “History of Assumpsit,” 2 Harv.
L. Rev. 1, 53, 377 (1888); Selected Essays in Anglo-American Legal History, 3:259; Houps-
wortH, W.S., A History of English Law, 302 (1909); Pottock and Marrtanp, History of
English Law, 2:226 (1911); PAGE on Contracts, 2343 et passim (1919); PouND, Roscor,
“Liberty of Contract,” 18 Yale Law Jour. 454 (1909); Browne, J. H. B., The Law of Usages
and Customs (1875).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 247


namely, the concept of property as tangible objects and the concept
of contract as a personal relation. The concept of tangible objects
arises from man’s dealings with physical nature; the concept of per-
sonal relations arises from the character and confidence imposed in
individuals. While the business law in the 17th century was con-
verting man’s dealings with nature into the assets of a going concern,
the same business law was eliminating the personality of individuals
by converting their debts also into the assets and liabilities of a go-
ing concern.

The primitive mind could not conceive of property apart from
physical possession. “Property ”’ is really an intangible relation de-
pending on the promises of government, such that a person may own
an object that he cannot see. But “ possession ”’ is, in its original
meaning, a physical relation of seeing, touching and holding tangible
things. And if the thing cannot be physically handled yet that phys-
ical handling can be symbolized by another physical object which can
be handled. Hence a class of promises embodied in such paper docu-
ments as deeds and bonds, the so-called “ specialties,’”’ drafted in the
presence of witnesses with great solemnity and loaded with the formi-
dable seal of the grantor, symbolized physically to the owner and
all others his direct holding of a physical object, in the case of a
deed, or his indirect holding of the same to be delivered to him, in
the case of a bond. The primitive mind could not grasp the under-
lying promise with its unseen foundation in the expected behavior
of courts that enforce the promise, but must grasp it in the paper
instrument with its huge decorated seal.

Survivals of this primitive materialism continue to the present
day. In distinguishing the paper symbol of a deed, which had been
altered and modified, from the ‘“ substance” of the promise contained
in the deed, which had not been modified, Justice Holmes, in igor,
pointed out that, under the primitive law, “ the alteration was a can-
cellation of the deed, having the same effect that tearing off the seals
would have had. This rule comes down to us from a time when the
contract contained in a sealed instrument was bound so indissolubly
to the substance of the document that the soul perished with the
body when the latter was destroyed or changed its identity for any
cause.” ! And, in distinguishing a debt from the paper instrument
which was merely an evidence of the debt, Justice Holmes also said,

1 Bacon v. Hooker, 177 Mass. 335, 337 (1901).


248 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


in another case, “The debt is inseparable from the paper which de-
clares and constitutes it, by a tradition that comes down from more
archaic conditions. Therefore, considering only the place of the prop-
erty, it was held that bonds held out of the state could not be reached.

. .. But it is plain that the transfer does depend upon the law of
New York, not because of any theoretical speculation concerning the
whereabouts of the debt, but because of the practical fact of its power
over the person of the debtor . . . What gives the debt validity?
Nothing but the fact that the law of the place where the debtor
is will make him pay. Power over the person of the debtor con-
fers jurisdiction.” !

Thus has judicial analysis continually been called upon to go be-
hind the primitive notions of physical things as the ‘‘ substance” or
symbol of property and to find the reality of property, not in things
but in the promises of individuals supported by the promises of courts
to hold individuals responsible for the execution of their promises.
This outcome is a result of the several centuries of experience required
to work out the principle of the simple unsealed promise, made with-
out formality which we have seen in the preceding section, and espe-
cially to work out the devices by which such promises could be bought
and sold.

There was another fundamental reason in primitive society ac-
counting for the non-negotiability of promises. Promises, express
or implied, are the foundation of human society. This is the root of
the doctrine that society originated in contract. But the contract
was not an original formal contract made once for all at the begin-
ning of society and then interpreted afterwards by each individual,
but is a process of implied promises inferred from daily behavior ac-
cording to the approved way of doing things at the time.2 When a
person enters a room with others, he promises, by his very act of en-
trance, that he will not trespass, but will fall in line with the cus-
tom of that kind of gathering. Such promises are personal. They
are made between the persons then living and acting together. But
while personal, they are not individual. They are collective. An
injury to one is the concern of all who are acting together. In prim-
itive society these collective expectations absorbed the individual


1 Blackstone v. Miller, 188 U. S. 189, 205, 206 (1903).
2“Tt is custom that writes out slowly from generation to generation the terms of the so-
cial compact.” GREER, F.A., “Custom in the Common Law,” 9 Law Quar. Rev. 153 (1803).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 240


in the group, such that the violation of express or implied promises
must be atoned vicariously by other members of the group and by
the children of the wrongdoer, while the recompense accrued not
alone to the individual injured but to his group and his children.
Thus the blood feud, hereditary serfdom, fixed status of individuals,
and communism, followed the primitive notions of collective re-
sponsibility and collective power to enforce responsibility.

When the individual emerged out of the group it was by stages
and by classes of individuals, first the landed proprietors by conquest,
second the capitalists by participation in sovereignty, third the la-
borers. This emergence consisted in the equality and liberty of the
individuals constituting the class, retaining superiority and command
over individuals of classes not yet participating in sovereignty. Be-
tween superior and inferior the promise was the involuntary one of
protection and obedience, and its enforcement was in the hands of the
superior. Between equals the promise was the voluntary one of recip-
rocal service, and its enforcement was accomplished, as we have seen,
by the judiciary, who took away from individuals the power of private
enforcement while recognizing the binding character of the promise.

Such recognition of the promises of reciprocal service between
equals consisted in allowing equal liberty to make individual prom-
ises and the accompanying individual responsibility to fulfill the
promise. As such, the resulting contract did not bind a successor
of the one who promised nor did its benefits accrue to a successor of
the one to whom the promise was so made. Likewise, the liability
to make redress for violation of the custom could not be vicariously
transferred to another, neither could the one to whom redress is owed
transfer his claim to another, but the compensation must be ren-
dered in person by the wrongdoer and satisfaction must be obtained
in person by the sufferer. Neither may the liability survive the life
of the wrongdoer nor the claim to redress survive the life of the in-
jured individual, else it ends in blood feud, or in the hereditary re-
lation of slavery and serfdom which nullifies the equality and lib-
erty uf individuals in the same class. The law of equality and lib-
erty of the individual is, then, the law of non-transferability and
non-survivorship of both the right to recompense and the duty to
make recompense, while the law of slavery or status was the law of
transferability and survivorship of the rights of the superior and the
duties of the inferior.


250 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Thus it was that, after the law of creditor and debtor had been
perfected in the sixteenth century, it required still another century to
convert the personal relations of creditor and debtor between equals,
as conceived in the common law of liberty and equality, into the prop-
erty relation of assets and liabilities. This consisted in inventing the
transferability and survivorship of promises freed from the personality
of the parties to the promise. And so substantial has been the trans-
formation that these mere promises between equals, which constitute
the debts of the credit system, can themselves be treated, in law and
popular thought, like commodities, to be bought and sold like other
commodities, though they are neither commodities nor slaves nor serfs
treated like commodities, but are a mental expectation arising out of
confidence in the promises of governments, courts and business men.

The essential requirement of business practice was to convert these
promises of freemen into something as nearly like money as possible.
Primitive buying and selling was barter—the direct exchange of
movable products. Even when money was introduced the exchange
for money was but a barter of coins for products, and both were
chattels. This constituted strictly a money bargain as distinguished
from a credit-bargain or price-bargain. No credit-bargain was recog-
nized, the “‘action of debt” being an action to recover coins or chattels
unlawfully held, just as the “‘action of right”’ to land was an action to
recover land forcibly detained.1_ They were actions to recover physical
property, not actions to enforce promises. In so far as mere promises
were enforced, involving no idea of unlawful assault, trespass or theft,
they were matters of conscience or honor, and the court to which
appeal could be made was only either the priest in the confessional or
the wager of battle to ward off dishonor.

It was similar with the relation of landlord and tenant. Being a
personal relation, the rent bargain and its resulting contract could not
be transferred by either the landlord or the tenant to another landlord
or tenant, without the consent of the other party. The King’s tenant
could not alienate his tenancy without consent of the King; and the
sub-tenants down the line could not alienate without consent of their
immediately superior landlord.

The same was true of other contracts. A contract, being a personal
relation between creditor and debtor, could not be sold by the creditor
to a third party, nor assumed on behalf of the debtor by another

1 Above, p. 238.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 251


debtor, without the consent of the adverse party to the original con-
tract. Being personal promises of oath and fidelity, or of reciprocal
personal service of equals, the common-law lawyers could not see how
other parties not originally bound to each other in good faith could
become so unless they also personally pledged themselves to each
other in a similar confidence.

Thus, at common law, the assignment of contractual rights, being
the voluntary promises of two parties equal and free, was of no effect
if the opposite party did not consent to the assignment. The relation
between the two was a personal relation arising out of personal con-
fidence, and not a property relation arising out of the transfer of
the physical things. Wherever this personal relation continues,
indeed, to prevail at the present day, the contract continues to be
non-transferable. A promise to marry cannot be assigned by the
promisee to a third party, nor negotiated upon the market. A promise
to perform any special service depending on the contingencies of
character or skill of the promisor cannot be transferred.

The highest and most complete type of assignability is negotiability,
which consists in a promise to pay a definite sum of money, without
condition, at a definite time and place. Here the personal element
is as nearly eliminated as possible, so much so that a third party to
whom the promise is legally transferred, can bring suit in his own name
as though the promise were made to him personally. And in doing so,
he is free of all defenses of fraud or offsets which the debtor might
have set up against the party with whom the contract was actually
made. The bearer of certain negotiable paper takes even a stronger
title than that possessed by the original creditor, for he takes it free
from defect in title and free of equities against the creditor from whom
he received it; and the anomaly is created of authorizing a person to
sell more than he owns. The debtor must pay and then bring suit
against the original creditor who has presumed to sell more than he
owned.

It was this anomaly that persisted in the minds of the common-
law judges until the legislature was compelled to intervene. As
late as 1704, Chief Justice Holt refused enforcement of the promissory
notes of the goldsmiths of London, payable to bearer on demand, and
constituting the modern bank note. These promissory notes, he said,
“are only an invention of the goldsmiths in Lombard street who had a
mind to make a law to bind all those that did deal with them; and sure


1}
\\
}


252 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


to allow such a note to carry any lien with it were to turn a piece of
paper, which is in law but evidence of a parol contract, intoa specialty;
and besides it would empower one to assign that to another which he
could not have himself; for since he to whom this note was made could
not have this action, how can his assignee have it?” ! It required an
Act of Parliament to reverse this common-law theory of Justice Holt.’

While the negotiability of promissory notes was thus long delayed,
it had been a rather simple matter to bring about recognition of the
negotiability of bills of exchange, including their modern development,
the checks drawn by a depositor on the bank. A bill or check is an
order by a creditor upon his debtor to pay to a third party designated,
or even to any third party, “the bearer,’”’ a part or the whole of the
debt owing. The first recorded case recognizing the negotiability of
bills of exchange in England was decided in 1603. This related to a
foreign bill of exchange, and negotiation was easily allowed since
international trade was distinct from domestic trade and came under a
mercantile custom common to merchants of all lands. But once
started in this direction, the negotiability of inland bills was after-
wards slowly allowed. At first, both for bills and notes, it was neces-
sary to set out and prove the custom of merchants, but after 1695 and
1704, the courts began to assume “judicial knowledge”’ of the custom
and hence a mere declaration of the custom was good.’ At first the
courts applied the law only to those who were actually merchants, then
it was extended to all traders and dealers, and finally, in 1689, an
acceptor who was not actually a merchant was forbidden to deny that
he was.” Thus, by a process extending through a hundred years, aided
by equity and legislation, of gradually taking away the defenses which
at common law the debtor could set up against paying his debt, the
bona fide holder of the debtor’s promise could not only sue in his own
name even though the promise had not been made to him personally,
but could even have a stronger case at law than that of the original
creditor; and that which had been a personal relation between definite
individuals became the assets and liabilities of a going business,


1 Buller v. Crips, 6 Mod. 29 (1702). But see McLron, Theory and Practice of Banking,
1:224 ff., who contended that Justice Holt was wrong and that promissory notes were nego-
tiable at common law. This contention overlooks the decisive fact that Lord Holt was
one of the most eminent of the common-law lawyers.

23 and 4 Anne c. 7, 1705.

3 Martin v. Boure, Cro. Jac. 6 (1603).


4 Williams v. Williams, Carthew, 269 (1693); Bromwich 2. Lloyd, 2 Lutw. 1582 (1704).
5 Sarsfield v. Witherly, Carth. 82 (1689).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 253


independent of the persons, past, present or future, who might ac-
tually constitute the concern.

It can be seen, therefore, why it is that modern capitalism begins
with the assignment and negotiability of contracts. They accom-
plish two purposes, a low rate of interest and a rapid turnover of
capital. The two operate together. Capitalism could scarcely
survive on a 10% or 20% rate of interest and a turnover once or
twice a year. It has survived on a 3% to 6% rate of interest and a
turnover three to five times a year. The difference is cumulative.
Ten per cent a year on capital turned over once a year means an
overhead cost of obtaining capital ten times as great as 5% a year
on capital turned over 5 times a year. The same amount of capital
does five times as much work at one-half the rate of interest.

Shortly after the middle of the 17th century in the year 1668,
when the legal process of assignment and negotiability above men-
tioned was half-way accomplished in England, Sir Joshua Child,
the great English exponent of Mercantilism, compared the advantages
which Holland enjoyed contrasted with England, where the current
rate of interest was 3% in “peaceable times” compared with a legal
rate of 6% in England, and the turnover of capital was twice or
thrice that of England. This “turnover,” as it now would be named,
was accomplished in Holland, said Child, by “the law that is in
use among them for transference of bills of debt from one man to an-
other; this is of extraordinary advantage to them in their commerce;
by means whereof they can turn their stocks twice or thrice in trade,
for once that we can in England; for that, having sold our foreign
goods here, we cannot buy again to advantage, till we are possessed
of our money; which it may be we shall be six, nine or twelve months
in recovering: and if what we sell be considerable, it is a good man’s
work all the year to be following vintners and shopkeepers for money.
Whereas, were the law of transferring bills in practice with us, we
could presently after the sale of our goods dispose of our bills, and
close up our accounts.” ?

And Sir Joshua proposed a cumbersome piece of legislation author-
izing assignment, equivalent to the modern ‘‘acceptance,” which,
however, was, within the next thirty years accomplished, as we
have just noted, by the simple method of judicial recognition and


1 Cup, Sir Josnua, “A New Discourse of Trade,” original, 1668. See Dict. of Pol.
Econ. (6th ed. of 1804).


254 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


enforcement of the customs of merchants. “The great advantage,”
he said, “that would accrue to this kingdom by a law for transferring
bills of debt from one person to another, is sufficiently understood
by most men, especially by merchants. The difficulty seems not
to be so much in making of a law to this purpose, as reducing it to
practice; because we have been so long accustomed to buy and sell
goods by verbal contracts only, that rich and great men for some
time will be apt to think it a diminution of their reputation to have
bills under their hands and seals demanded of them for goods bought,
and meaner men will fear the losing of their customers by insisting
upon having such bills for what they sell.” These compunctions of
the great and the meaner men have long since given way, as we
know, before the greater economy of buying and selling short-term
promises at the commercial banks. Twenty years after the per-
fection of negotiability of promises, by the Act of 1704, the rate of
discount at the Bank of England had fallen to 214%, and has since
fluctuated between 2% and 7% according to business conditions.


2. Commodity Tickets and Price Tickets


This remarkable innovation of negotiability, which took an entire
century for its accomplishment from the first decision on bills of
exchange in 1603 to the parliamentary reversal of Lord Chief Justice
Holt in 1704, while it established modern capitalism, yet introduced
the most disturbing confusion between primitive notions of physical
commodities and the new notion of a promise acting like a commodity.
Stock-jobbing frenzies for the first time seized upon the minds of
Englishmen in 1792, the Mississippi Bubble and the South Sea
Bubble overwhelmed France in 1716 and England in 1718, and a
recurring cycle of inflation and contraction, prosperity and depres-
sion set in for two hundred years so regularly that learned men
ascribed it to the sun, to Venus, to human nature, to human deprav-
ity, until, in more recent times, it is seen to be the workings of the
clever invention of negotiability of promises. What negotiability
actually introduced was the phenomena of two opposite markets,
two opposite classes of legal claims to commodities or services, and
two opposing concepts of value. The two markets are the commodity
markets and the money markets; the two classes of legal claims
may be contrasted as commodity tickets and price tickets, and the

1Macautay, T. B., History of England, 4:256. (1856).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 255


two concepts of value are the real value assigned to commodities or
labor and the nominal value expressed in prices.

Every productive enterprise carries on these two lines of business,
the business of buying, storing, enlarging and selling quantities of real
value or real wealth in the form of commodities and labor, and the
business of creating, buying, selling, offsetting and cancelling promises
to pay the nominal value or price of that real value or real wealth.
The former kind of business is carried on at factories, retail and whole-
sale stores, railroads, theatres, warehouses, produce exchanges, farms,
real estate markets, where people deliver commodities or labor power
and transfer the titles to them. Every factory is a kind of warehouse
in which raw material and labor are “deposited” to reappear in a few
weeks or months as a finished product. Every wholesale or retail
store is a warehouse where finished goods and the labor of salesmen
are bought and stored to be sold in a few days or weeks. So with
every farm, every railroad, every workshop, every theater, and so on.
These are the commodity markets and labor markets of the country,
and the operations there going on constitute that process which we
have named a going plant with its producing organization, creating
the real values and real wealth of the country.

But the business of creating, buying, selling, offsetting and can-
celling the promises to pay the prices which are negotiated on the
commodity markets is conducted at commercial banks which are the
money markets of the country. The “going business” of any concern
connects its commodity market and its money market, for it is the
business on the commodity markets, of buying and selling, hiring and
hiring out, renting and leasing, and the business on the money market
of borrowing and lending, discounting and depositing promises to
pay the prices of commodities in lawful money within 24 hours to
go days.

Historically the legal transition is the transition from bailments,
which are commodity tickets, to debts, which are price tickets. The
Bank of Amsterdam and the Goldsmiths of London began their
“banking” business as warehouses for the storage of gold and silver
and the issue of warehouse certificates to depositors for the amount
of the commodity, gold or silver, which they had stored. The survival
of that warehouse business is seen in the American gold and silver
“certificates.” Latterly, finding that all of this commodity in storage
was not called for at any one moment, they violated their pledge of


256 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


storage, loaned their depositors’ money to other people at a profit,
and issued their commodity tickets in excess of the quantity of com-
modity on hand. This violation of a pledge, if practiced by an ordi-
nary warehouseman, would constitute an unlawful conversion of
bailment, since, in such a case, the deposited commodity, such as
wheat or gold, is not the property of the warehouseman to loan or sell
to others, but is the property of the depositor. In order that this
unlawful practice of the goldsmiths might become lawful, it was
necessary for the courts to substitute a sale of gold to the banker for a
deposit of gold by the customer, and to substitute a debt of the banker
to the customer for a bailment of the customer to the warehouse. The
warehouseman now became the owner of the commodity instead of a
bailee, and the former owner became a creditor, owning a bank note,
instead of a depositor owning the commodity. This was the unlawful
“invention of the goldsmiths in Lombard street who had a mind to
make a law” different from the common law, that stirred the wrath
of Chief Justice Holt and required an act of parliament to overrule
him.

Yet the names “deposit” and “depositor” were retained in bank-
ing practice in order not to break with that conservative materialism
of the human mind which insists on tangible evidence, although the
depositor had changed from owner of a thing to creditor of the bank.
This retention of the primitive materialism was convenient under the
practice of bank checks, although the depositor now deposits not a
commodity but his own or his customer’s promise to pay, and the
bank, through the device of negotiability, becomes, not the warehouse-
man, but the owner of that promise. “Money” now becomes, not a
corporeal property, gold or silver, but bank credit, having the two
legal qualities of incorporeal property, the demand-promise of the
banker, and intangible property, the exchange-value of that promise
on the markets. And this kind of money becomes elastic since its
volume changes with the prices that business men agree to pay for
commodities. Thus the transition is accomplished from a commodity
ticket, or bailment, calling for a specific corporeal property, gold or
silver, to a price-ticket, or bank credit, calling for any commodity at
its then exchange-value.

The commodity ticket is, in effect, a title of ownership of corporeal
property, the price-ticket is a negotiable promise. The significance of
commodity tickets is originally that of corporeal property, the owner-


THE PRICE BARGAIN 257


ship of physical things, even real estate, whose ownership does not pass
by physical delivery, but by recording the ticket which is the title of
ownership. So with all commodities, that is, chattels. I hand you
physically a bushel of potatoes, but I do not pass the title to you unless
there goes with it an evidence which the law acknowledges as transfer
of ownership. Thus all titles of ownership are commodity tickets
authorized by government, being evidences of ownership regardless of
changes in the value of the thing owned.

These titles of ownership slip over into that huge class of bailments,
wherein something of a personal nature is delivered to another to be
held but not owned and to be returned to self or delivered to third
parties, the evidence being recorded on such tickets as warehouse
receipts, dock warrants, bills of lading and those original deposits of
the Bank of Amsterdam and the goldsmiths of London, or even not
recorded, as in the case of goods hired or left for repair.

Bailments, which are promises to deliver things, shift into what may
broadly be designated futures, which are promises to deliver the values
of things—as when an iron manufacturer promises to deliver a quan-
tity of iron or its value, or when a banker promises to deliver gold
or its equivalent checking account, which is, in reality only an account
set off against other debtors of that or other banks. But it has there-
fore the great value of liquidating debts.

These specific futures slide into speculative futures, to which the
name “futures” is usually attached, where either party, not having
the thing itself, expects to buy or borrow it on the market or to deliver
the then market price as of the date of delivery, or at least the “mar-
gin” between the agreed and the then market price.

But commodity tickets themselves finally comprehend even the
entire range of incorporeal and intangible properties as well as cor-
poreal property, since, with the device of negotiability, stocks, bonds,
debentures, warrants, bills of lading and so on have been rendered as
nearly like money as possible, and may be passed readily from hand
to hand along with their titles of ownership.

There remains, however, in all these transactions, the distinguishing
character of commodity tickets, whether they be claims to real estate,
chattels, bailed goods, futures, or even all incorporeal and intangible
properties, namely, that the commodity ticket changes in value
exactly as the value of the thing itself to which the ticket lays title.
But it is different with the price-ticket, money. Money is power to


258 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


obtain in exchange, not a specific thing, but power to obtain anything
at the then price of anything. A warehouse receipt calls for a given
number of bushels of wheat stored in an elevator; but a price-ticket
calls for any number of bushels of wheat at the then price of wheat.
If the wheat rises in price the price-ticket obtains a smaller number of
bushels; if the wheat falls in price the price-ticket obtains a larger
number of bushels.

Hence it is that, although the two kinds of business of every concern
on the commodity markets and the money market are inseparable,
yet they are likely to move off remarkably in different directions with
very different social effects. I sell to you 1,000 tons of pig iron at
$20 per ton and you promise to pay me $20,000 in 60 days. I take
your promise to the bank and the bank gives me a deposit of $20,000,
less the discount. The bank writes down on its books under the head-
ing “loans and discounts” $20,000 receivable in 60 days, and under the
heading “deposits” $20,000 payable on demand.

But suppose I sell that thousand tons of pig iron at $40 per ton.
You now promise to pay me $40,000. I now take your promise to
the bank and get a loan and a deposit of $40,000. It is the same
quantity of pig iron. There is no change in the commodity. It is
deposited in a warehouse or converted into stoves or steel. I have
transferred the title or bill of lading to you—have given to youa
commodity ticket that calls for 1,000 tons—and have taken from youa
promise that calls for $20,000 or $40,000, as the case may be, in lawful
money in 60 days. The bank then underwrites that promise by agree-
ing that that price was a going price, that you and I are good for that
price in 60 days, and by issuing to me its own negotiable promise to
pay that price on demand. This “deposit” is a price-ticket, good at
any bank in payment of debts.

The significance of it is that the commodity ticket and the price-
ticket move off in different directions, since they are independent
variables on different markets. If a warehouse company promises to
deliver 1,000 tons of real value on demand, in the form of pig iron
which has been “deposited” at the warehouse, it receives and delivers
1,000 tons regardless of whether the nominal value changes mean-
while from $20,000 to $40,000 or from $20,000 to $10,000. But if a
bank promises to deliver the price of that pig iron on demand it does so
irrespective of whether the $20,000 will, within the same 60 days,
purchase 1,000 tons or only 500 tons. The warehouse deals in com-


THE PRICE BARGAIN 250


modities regardless of changes in their prices; the bank deals in prices
irrespective of changes in the quantity of commodities. The com-
modity ticket calls for 1,000 tons of pig iron regardless of whether or
not its price changes from $20,000 to $40,000. But the price-ticket
calls for a price of, say, $20,000, regardless of whether the price after-
wards will purchase 1,000 tons or only 500 tons.

A commodity ticket is good at a warehouse, a factory, a farm, be-
cause it is simply a title of ownership, a bill of lading, a warehouse
receipt, a claim to a seat or standing room in a theater or street car,
which calls for a given quantity of commodity or service. But a price-
ticket is good at a bank because it is a check drawn on a “bank de-
posit” at one of the banks for a given price of that commodity or serv-
ice. A valid commodity ticket is good on its specific commodity market.
A properly authenticated price-ticket is good on any commodity mar-
ket and any money market. A commodity ticket follows the specified
commodity with every change of ownership, regardless of changes in its
price. But a price-ticket petrifies the price of that commodity on a
given day at the bank and then circulates that price around from bank
to bank for 30 to go days, regardless of changes in the quantity of that
commodity which that petrified price meanwhile will purchase.

It is here that the public purpose of that negotiable promise, a
price-ticket, or bank deposit, may be discovered. The two kinds
of business on the commodity markets and the money markets corre-
spond to two ways of getting rich or making a profit in business. One
is by increasing the quantity of products or reducing their costs with-
out raising prices; the other is by getting higher prices without in-
creasing the quantity of products. The first method is that of increas-
ing the quantity of commodities with a stable level of prices; the
second is that of marking up the level of prices without increasing the
quantity of commodities. The first is an increase of output, the
second is relatively a restriction of output. The first is the productive
method of making a profit by increasing the welfare of the com-
munity. The second is a speculative method of making a profit by
taking it out of other people whose prices are not moving up as fast
and hence without furnishing to them a corresponding increase of real
wealth.

The commercial banks themselves do not clearly distinguish this
public point of view from this private point of view, for two reasons:
they are interested in the solvency of borrowers and they are interested


260 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


in their own reserves of lawful money, and not in the movement of the
general level of prices. In other words, they have no common rule
of public policy to guide them. A pig-iron producer is perhaps as good
a risk for a bank deposit of $40,000 when the price of pig iron moves up
from $20 to $40 a ton if his customer’s prices for their products are
also moving up, as when the quantity of pig iron, which he sells, moves
up from 1,000 tons to 2,000 tons at $20 per ton. In either case the
bank can perhaps safely lend the producer $40,000 and thereby create
“new credit,” which is equivalent to creating “new money.”

But there is a great difference in the public consequences of the two
methods of creating new money. The first method creates new money
because prices are being marked up. The second creates it because
real wealth is being enlarged. In the second case the bank guarantees
the public, in effect, that the quantity of real wealth has been doubled.
But in the first case the bank guarantees only that the price of that
wealth has been doubled. This is because the marking up of nominal
values, or prices, by the business community is accompanied by the
marking up, on both sides of the bank’s books, of approximately just
that amount of increase in the total volume of bank loans and bank
deposits, or price tickets. It is simply a marking up of promises by
business men ratified by a marking up of promises by bankers.

This is the second reason for the banker’s private point of view,
namely, the ratio of his reserves of lawful money to the volume of
checks which he has promised to pay on demand. Were it a matter
of a barter economy or a metallic money economy, there would be
little or no elasticity in the supply of the commodity which the pro-
ducer furnishes. But the bank is not dealing in commodities, it is
dealing in promises to pay lawful money. And the volume of its
promises to pay on demand may be as great as the risks it is willing
to take on the chance of having enough lawful money on hand to
meet a run of outgoing checks presented by customers and other
banks in excess of the run of incoming checks deposited by customers
and drawn on other banks. If the two are about equal, then the
bank merely offsets one promise on its books by other promises, and
its total liabilities remain constant.

But if it has greatly increased its volume of demand promises by
guranteeing an increased volume of price-agreements between busi-
ness men, then the volume of outgoing checks increases without a
corresponding increase in the volume of incoming checks. And,


THE PRICE BARGAIN 261


since the volume of lawful money, constituting the reserves which it
has promised to pay on demand, is like the volume of other com-
modities in that it cannot be increased merely by issuing more prom-
ises but must be increased only by buying or producing more com-
modities, then the ratio of lawful money to the volume of demand
promises falls, the risks are increased, and the bank begins to with-
hold its issue of promises. From the bank’s point of view, this is the
process of inflation and deflation—inflation is the increase of de-
posits relative to bank reserves of lawful money, deflation is the
decrease of deposits relative to bank reserves.

But from the public standpoint, inflation is a general rise of prices
without a corresponding increase in the quantity of products, and
deflation is a general fall of prices without a corresponding decrease
in the quantity of products.

The reconciliation of the two points of view is to be accomplished
by the adoption of a working rule stabilizing the general level of
prices, such that price-tickets calling for nominal values, shall always
call for as nearly as possible the same quantity of real values, and
such that banks will not insure business men in making profits on the
mere rise of prices to be followed by a general collapse, but will insure
them in making profits on an increase in the quantities and a reduc-
tion in the costs of commodities to be followed by a general increase
in public welfare.!


3. GOODWILL AND PRIVILEGE


Every social relation involves, for our present purpose,” at least
three parties, who may be named the first, the second and the third
party. The first party is self. The second is an opposite party, say
a debtor, an agent, an employee or a bargainer. The third party is
a possible disturber of the relation between the first and the second
party, say a trespasser, an intruder, a competitor, an infringer.

Furthermore, every act, for our present purpose,’ is either a positive
act which we name a performance, or a negative act (an “omission,”
negative performance), which we name an avoidance.

1 Practicable details are discussed by Irvine FisHer, Purchasing Power of Money (1911)
and Stabilizing the Dollar (1920); by G. CasseL, The Nature and Necessity of Interest (1903);
The Money Market and Foreign Exchange after 1914 (1922); The World’s Monetary Problems
(1921); and by R. G. Hawtrey, Currency and Credit (1919) and Monetary Reconstruction
(1923); Foster and Catcuincs, Money, (1923).


2 Above, Chap. IV, Sec. I, p. 66 ff.
3 Above, Chap. IV, Sec. II, p. 78.


262 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


An encumbrance, then, may be either positive or negative, that is,
a performance or an avoidance, and it is proper to name it an en-
cumbrance in either case, because it limits the field of liberty of him
upon whom it is enforced. If the encumbrance is positive, that is,
a performance, it means that the opposite party is required positively
to perform an act, to pay a debt, to obey the commands of the prin-
cipal or the employer. He has no option. It is this form of encum-
brance which we have distinguished as the labor encumbrance and
the investor encumbrance, or incorporeal property.

If the encumbrance, however, is negative, that is, an avoidance, it
means that a third party is restrained from committing an act, for
example, to trespass, intrude, or compete, and therefore is constrained
to direct his behavior elsewhere. Each deducts from the field of free
behavior of another party. The duty of performance deducts posi-
tively from the field which the second party already controls; the
duty of avoidance constrains a third party to push elsewhere the
boundaries of his field of control, if he can.

If the matter at issue is a positive encumbrance, the relation of
debtor and creditor, then the duty of performance imposed on the
second party implies a duty of avoidance imposed on all third parties.
An encumbrance is thus two-fold: a duty of performance which de-
ducts from the liberty of the second party and a duty of avoidance
which deducts from the liberty of any third party.

Now, opportunities differ from encumbrances in that the second
party, a bargainer, is burdened by no duty either of performance or
avoidance within the field where the transaction occurs. He may be,
and is, encumbered, at other points of the matter at issue, by a duty
of avoidance. He must not carry his liberty too far beyond the limit
of allowable deception or coercion. But beyond that limit he is free
to negotiate, to offer alternatives, to persuade or coerce, to withhold
or yield, bound by no encumbrance either of performance or avoidance,
just as the first party is also free. Within this field of opportunity
the relation between the first and second party is that of liberty, the
absence of duties.

But a third party, the possible trespasser or competitor, is burdened
only by a duty of avoidance. Up to a certain point he must not in-
trude between the first and second parties to the potential bargain.
Up to that point he must avoid physical disturbance, or trespass,
and competitive disturbance, or infringement.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 263


For the sake of brevity of discourse it is not customary to state
explicitly the part played by third parties either in the case of en-
cumbrances or opportunities. Third parties are usually ‘‘all the
world,” and it is usually enough to take for granted the negative en-
cumbrance, the avoidance, or duty to not-do something, which is
imposed upon their liberty of action. Generally, we shall speak of
the second party as the opposite party, since the duty of avoidance
is imposed on third parties for the sake of the transactions with op-
posite parties. The terms encumbrance and opportunity therefore
will be usually employed with reference only to the transactions be-
tween first and second parties. Thus limited, but with third parties
always implied and taken for granted, an encumbrance is a positive
duty of the opposite party; an opportunity is an absence of both the
positive duty of performance and the negative duty of avoidance.

But third parties cannot always be taken for granted. Individuals
emerge out of “all the world” as specific persons at critical points.
It is, for example, a third party (possible competitor) who sells his
liberty to compete when he sells the goodwill of his business, or who
is restrained from unfair competition or fraud when the court pro-
tects the goodwill or trade-mark of the first party. In either case
there is imposed upon him, as a third party, not a general, but a more
specific and limited duty of avoidance that originates the law of good-
will and privilege.

The law of goodwill was tardier in its development than the law of
encumbrances. It was not until the year 1620 that what appears to
have been the first decision was handed down to the effect that a
person might lawfully sell his liberty along with his business. The
opinion was given in the highest court of the common law, and then
was appealed to “all the justices and barons of the Exchequer.” That
the matter contained a doubt is revealed in the dissent of one of the
justices. The opinion aroused great interest and was recorded by
all of the reporters of that day,' for it legalized a restraint of trade
by stretching the common law at the very time of intense excitement
over those restraints of trade which the sovereign had been exercising
by stretching his prerogative.

A merchant had sold his stock of goods at a price in excess of their
inventory value, and, in selling, had agreed not to set himself up in


1 Jollyfe against Brode (1620-21), Cro. Jac. 596; Noy, 98; 2 Rolle, 201; W. Jones, 13.
Referred to in Taylors of Exeter, 3 Lev. 241 (1686).


264 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


competition with the business of the purchaser. He violated his
promise, suit was brought against him by the purchaser for damages,
and decided in the latter’s favor. Prior to that time contracts in
restraint of trade seem uniformly to have been held void and even
criminal, and the only case on record in which an English judge is
reported to have resorted to profanity in rendering his decision was
in the case of a dyer in the year 1417 1 who had agreed under bond
not to practice his craft within the town for a certain period of time.
The bond was declared void and the dyer was absolved by the court
from compliance. So the decisions had uniformly run against agree-
ments in restraint of trade from the year 1417 until, in 1620, this ex-
ception was made, thus laying one of the cornerstones of the modern
law of goodwill.

At about the time when it was thus first decided, in 1620, that
a person could lawfully sell a part of his liberty, reference was made,
in a different case,” to an earlier case in 1580 which, however, had
not been reported, in which it was alleged to have been held that
a competitor might lawfully be deprived of a part of his liberty to
compete, even though he had not consented to it. In the year 1580
it was said, a clothier alleged that “he had gained great reputation
for his making of his cloth, by reason whereof he had great utterance
to his great benefit and profit, and that he used to set his mark to his
cloth, whereby it should be known to be his cloth; and another clothier
perceiving it, used the same mark to his ill-made cloth on purpose to
deceive him.” He brought suit against the infringer and the case
was decided on the question of extending the writ of ‘trespass on
the case” so as to afford a remedy for injury to business. The court
now decided, in 1580, that the ‘“‘action did well lie.” The develop-
ment of this form of action has already been mentioned in connection
with the law of enforcement of contract; * here we note the way in which
it split off into the law of bargaining, the law of liberty of contract.
In the latter case it indicates the gradual and scarcely perceptible
enlargement of the law from the protection of physical property to
the protection of intangible property after the latter had emerged
with the extension of markets. The ancient “writ of trespass” had

1 Year Book, 2 Hen. V, fol. V, pl. 26 (1417) Judge Hull said: “By God, if the plaintiff
were here he should go to prison until he pay a fine to the King.”

2 Poph. 144 (1618) referring to an opinion said to have been given in 22 Eliz. See Wig-


more, Select Cases on the Law of Torts, 1:318.
3 Above, Sec. I, p. 239.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 265


been a form of action at common law, based on an allegation of vio-
lence done to the body, or a forcible entrance on the plaintiff’s lands
or chattels. Then the term “trespass” was so extended as to include
every species of wrong causing an injury. This made it possible for
the common-law courts to expand the law of torts along with the ex-
pansion of markets, so that, by easy steps from the Act of Parliament
in 1285 ' to the trade-mark case in 1580, injury to physical property
became injury to business, violence became unfair competition, tres-
pass became infringement.

Thus the two cornerstones of the law of goodwill were laid, in 1580
and 1620, in the action to recover damages to intangible property
and in sustaining a voluntary sale of one’s liberty along with one’s
business. It is significant as already suggested, that this first re-
corded case in which a voluntary agreement in restraint of trade was
enforced by the court occurred in the decade following the great deci-
sion which nullified both the monopolies and the involuntary re-
straints of trade by the gilds under patents and charters granted by
the Crown. In the Case of Monopolies, already referred to, two of
the three grounds on which the Queen’s patent to Lord Darcy was
held to be against the common law were the increase in price and the
decrease in quality of the product, for, said the court, the patentee
is not “skilled in the trade” and must turn over the actual making of
the playing cards to artisans, whereas, he himself, “‘having the sole
trade, regards only his private benefit and not the common wealth.” ”

Likewise in the Case of the Merchant Tailors of London (1599) the
by-law requiring members to share their bargains with fellow-mem-
bers was adjudged a monopoly and void under the common law, al-
though the by-law was authorized under a charter long before granted
by the King. *

These decisions from the King’s Bench established, against the
King’s prerogative, a common-law rule against monopolies and char-
ters in restraint of trade, on the ground, partly, of the power of op-
pressing the public, that is, “the common wealth,” which the King
thereby had placed in private hands. With these privileged re-
straints cleared away it became possible to clear the air for the en-


1 Above, Sec. II, p. 230.

2 Above, p. 227.

3 Another by-law of the Tailors of Ipswich (11 Co. 53 b. 1615), was nullified on similar
grounds, but by-laws to enforce a “custom” were held good. The cases are distinguished


in Mitchell v. Reynolds, below.


266 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


forcement of such unprivileged restraints as did not oppress the com-
monwealth. Notwithstanding the prices charged might be even
higher than those charged by competitors yet the test of whether the
customer received a commensurate benefit was left to be determined
by the customer himself on the assumption that he was free to go
elsewhere if not satisfied.

Nearly a hundred years after the transaction of 1620, Justice Parker,
in 1711,! stated the law regarding voluntary restraints of trade as it
had evolved meanwhile, and his opinion is the recognized guide for
all subsequent opinions. He distinguished voluntary from coerced
restraints (the latter being always unlawful) and ‘“‘general” restraints
from ‘‘particular” restraints. Voluntary restraints, by agreement
of the parties, are void if they are ‘‘general”’ in extent, that is, if they
extend throughout the Kingdom, and this is so even if a consideration
is paid in exchange for the agreement not to compete.” ‘‘No man
can contract not to use his trade at all,” ‘‘since the public interest
requires that he should not remain in idleness.” “Particular”? re-
straints are those limited to places or persons, and these are also void
if there was no consideration, but are lawful if ‘‘made upon a good
and adequate consideration, so as to make it a proper and useful con-
tract.” Even ‘‘a particular restraint is not good without just reason
and consideration.” Although the law presumes in favor of liberty,
yet, just as a man may part with his property, so he may part with a
part of his liberty, if “by his own consent, for a valuable considera-
tion.” And, having accepted compensation for his promise not to
compete he will be compelled by the court to keep his promise, if
within the particular limits.

But it was not until the year 1743 that the term “goodwill” first
crept into the decisions, and then only by way of illustrating a dif-
ferent matter.* Again, in the year 1769, the term was used in the
copyright case, by Justice Yates, in order to show, by illustration,
that a common-law copyright could not be held to be property. Good-


1 Mitchell v. Reynolds, 1 P. Wms. 185-189 (z711).

2 This limitation has been enlarged in later times by the rule that it may extend to the
area of the entire country if the business that is sold extends actually that far. However,
it is doubtful whether the purchaser can insist that the vendor retire completely from his
kind of business, though this depends on the extent to which the court resists the tendency
to monopoly or the encouragement of idleness on the part of the seller. Nims, Unfair Com-
petition, 2d ed. 38 ff. (1917); 1 Page on Contracts (1905), 580 ff.; Nordenfeldt v. Maxim-
Nordenfeldt Guns and Ammunitions Co., App. Cas. 535 (1804).

3 Gibblett v. Read, 9 Mod. 450 (1743); below, p. 274.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 267


will, he said, was not property because the purchaser “has no power
to confine it to himself,” since the customer may withdraw the next
day if he pleases. Furthermore, he cannot “use any power to prevent
other people from gaining the custom.” In this opinion Justice Yates
adhered to the common-law notion of property as pertaining only to
physical things, though the majority, in that case, took a different
view as respects copyright.

It was not until the beginning of the Nineteenth Century that the
meaning of goodwill had broadened out to cover the whole field of
competition, so that the Chancellor, Lord Eldon, in 1803, could give
to it the first indication of its more modern statement of the law of
“fair” and “unfair” competition. Lord Eldon, while usually charged
with limiting the term to what may be termed “location”’ goodwill,
recognized two other types which may be distinguished as personal
goodwill and business goodwill, or the goodwill of a going business.”
Location goodwill, he said, is ‘nothing more than the probability
that the old customers will resort to the old place.” In this respect
it was merely a special case of land value, and the enjoyment of the
benefits of location could not be enjoined by a court of equity with-
out interfering with the owner’s legitimate use of his land.

But fraud, or unfair competition, presented a different case. If
there is fair competition, there is no damage or injury. The injunc-
tion is granted by Lord Eldon, not to prevent the ‘‘fair course of im-
proving a trade in which it was lawful to engage,”’ but to prevent
representing it to be the trade of an established business built up by
another.’

But goodwill, after all, begins as personal goodwill. It is built up
by the efforts of individuals. The individual may sell his location
goodwill or his business goodwill, but still carry his personal goodwill
with him. In order that this too may be sold he must agree to con-
tract away his future liberty. Indeed, what the vendor sells is not
a physical thing but a market opportunity which yields a certain net
income, and in order to give effect to the sale he must part with his
liberty to do certain acts which diminish this income. The “physi-
cal” part of this opportunity is apparently only the bodies of his
customers whose patronage he has obtained and which is expected to


1 Below, Sec. IV, p. 277.
2 Hogg v. Kirby, 8 Ves. 215 (1803); Cruttwell v. Lye, 17 Ves. 335, 346 (1810).


38 Ves. (1803).


268 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


continue. What he has actually sold, however, is not his customers,
but his liberty to sell commodities to his customers. And what the
purchaser of the goodwill buys is not commodities, but is an exclusive
right to the liberty of selling certain commodities to customers. He
has truly bought something intangible. He has bought the right
to control the supply of commodities through buying an expectation
that government will restrain the bodies of competitors if they at-
tempt to supply that particular commodity. The mere ownership
of land, physical capital, or commodities has no significance for a
business economy unless accompanied by access to a market, and
access to a market has no significance without power to control the
supply and fix the prices of things offered on the market. Histori-
cally, as we have noticed, the right of access to a commodity market
began as a special privilege, granted to merchants, merchant gilds,
craft gilds, money lenders, or favored courtiers in the form of pat-
ents, charters, or other special protection by the sovereign. These
special privileges were done away with, not by abolishing the privi-
leges, but by making them universal—by extending the right equally
to all citizens, and eventually, by treaties, to aliens.

This then became the universal, equal right of access to markets,
the personal right to economic liberty. But, as such, it is without
value because exposed to free competition. Not until it could le-
gally be separated from the person and sold to others did it have a
value which could constitute the assets of a business.

This separation of business goodwill from personal goodwill began
with the trade-mark case of 1580 and the legalized voluntary re-
straint of trade in 1620. The object now owned and protected by
law became merely the probability of beneficial transactions, and
the justification became the expectation which one might reason-
ably entertain if he has devoted his efforts or possessions to a service
that satisfies those who come freely upon that market. By protect-
ing this mutually beneficial expectancy and giving to it the attribute
of negotiability the law converts a valueless personal right into a
valuable property right.

Thus the protection of goodwill is not the protection of property
in physical things, it is protection of power to control the supply of
physical things against the price-exposure of unlimited competition.
Hence the separation of business goodwill from personal goodwill is
also the separation of control over supply of things from ownership


THE PRICE BARGAIN 269


of the things. Where the thing is itself physically limited in sup-
ply, the separation, in so far as thus limited, cannot be made, and
business goodwill dissolves into forms of special privilege. Thus
“location goodwill” is but a special case of land values. Lord Eldon
defined it, in 1810, as “nothing more than the probability that the
old customers will resort to the old place.’?! When the land is sold,
or the rent is raised by the landlord, the business goodwill is, in so far,
absorbed by the land value. Goodwill has given added value to that
site, and in so far as that added value, or rent, is permitted to eat up
the business income, so far has business goodwill been absorbed by
privileged site value.

This can occur only in the custom-order or retail-shop stage of in-
dustry. When industry passes over into the wholesale-order, whole-
sale speculative, merchant-capitalist or industrial-capitalist stages,”
then business goodwill separates itself out, independently of situa-
tion, and broadens out into almost anything that can be ascribed
either to the attitude of the public or the activity of the concern that
conduces to business success. Commenting on Lord Eldon’s remark
as to location goodwill the Supreme Court of Wisconsin, by Justice
Winslow, said: “The habit of people to purchase from a certain
dealer or manufacturer, which is the foundation for any expectation
that purchases will continue, may depend on many things besides
place. . . . Goodwill is a sort of beaten pathway from the seller to
the buyer, usually established and made easy of passage by years of
effort and expense in advertising, solicitation, and recommendation by
travelling agents, exhibition tests or displays of goods, often by ac-
quaintance with local dealers who enjoy confidence of their own neigh-
bors, and the like.”* And the Supreme Court of the United States
could say, in 1877: “Suppose the latter has obtained celebrity in his
manufacture, he is entitled to all the advantages of that celebrity,
whether resulting from the greater demand for his goods or from the
higher price the public are willing to give for the article, rather than
for the goods of the other manufacturer, whose reputation is not so
high as a manufacturer.” And Justice Story, carrying the content
of goodwill still further, could describe it, in 1841, as “the advantage

1 Crutwell v. Lye, 17 Ves. 335-346 (1810).

2 Regarding these successive stages See Commons, ‘‘The American Shoemakers—1638-
1895—A Sketch of Industrial Evolution,” 24 Quar. Jour. Econ. 39 (1909); reprinted in


Labor and Administration, 2t9 (1913); Doc. History Amer. Industrial Society, Vol. III.
3 Rowell v. Rowell, 122 Wis. 1, 17 (1904).


270 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


or benefit which is acquired by an establishment, beyond the mere
value of the capital stock, funds, or property employed therein, in
consequence of the general public patronage and encouragement
which it receives from constant or habitual customers, on account
of its local position, or common celebrity, or reputation for skill or
affluence, or punctuality, or from other accidental circumstances,
or necessities, or even from ancient partialities or prejudices.’’!

In one respect Justice Story went too far when he included the
“necessity” of the customer as one of the factors in goodwill, if by
necessity is meant the absence of costless alternatives. Under mod-
ern conditions of industry, developed since the time of Justice Story,
with the growth of great public service corporations occupying lim-
ited and strategic positions for the sale of their products, location
goodwill has taken on a new importance and has dissolved business
goodwill into monopoly privilege, and the freedom of customers into
their necessities. When, in 1907, the Consolidated Gas Company of
New York, claimed the right to charge its customers a price high
enough to earn interest on ‘‘ goodwill and franchises,”’ Justice Hough
in the federal court disallowed the claim as respects goodwill, on the
ground that the company enjoyed a monopoly in fact, and the cus-
tomer had no choice except to remain with the company. And the
Supreme Court adopted this view, saying, ‘‘The complainant has
a monopoly in fact, and a consumer must take gas from it or go with-
out. He will resort to the ‘old stand’ because he cannot get gas any-
where else.” ?

And Justice Savage, of the Supreme Court of Maine, in a case where
a water company had set up a valuation of the goodwill of customers
as a valuable asset, said, “ Goodwill is inappropriate where there can
be no choice. So far as the defendants’ system is ‘practically ex-
clusive’ the element of goodwill should not be considered.” ? And
similarly the Wisconsin court excluded goodwill as assets in the case
of a monopoly like that of a water supply.‘

In one respect Justice Yates, in the copyright case, while denying
that goodwill was property, yet asserted the essential attribute of
goodwill. The owner has no right whatever against the customer.
Rather is the owner exposed to the liberty of the customer, for good-


1 Story on Partnership, 139 (1841).

2 Above, p. or.

§ Kennebeck Water Dist. v. Waterville, 97 Me. 185, 217 (1902).

4 Appleton Water Works v. Railroad Com., 154 Wis. 121, 147 (1913); above, p. 207.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 271


will is the customer’s freedom to choose an alternative without ad-
ditional cost to himself. Goodwill is not a positive right, like the
right to have a debt paid. It isa “negative” right, the right of avoid-
ance against third parties.

Thus goodwill is a by-product of liberty, and should be looked
for where liberty ripens. The first and most perfect instrument of
economic liberty is money. A dollar is a bundle of options both be-
tween different classes of commodities and different producers of
the same class. Money affords the largest liberty known to man,
although within the limits of the amount of money possessed and
the number of alternatives accessible. As these alternatives enlarge
with the extension of markets and the variety of products, so does
the freedom of choice enlarge, and the owner of money is further
and further removed from the limit of coercive alternatives. In pro-
portion, too as subordinate classes receive their compensation in
money, at shorter intervals and without obligations attached to its
expenditure, the range of economic liberty is enlarged, their good-
will must be obtained, and they rise literally to the level of “patron”
where previously they were “clients.”

For, goodwill is good action, not necessarily a virtuous will or a
loving will, or a sentimental goodwill, but a will that is free to go
elsewhere and does not go. Goodwill is property, not love, sympathy
or loyalty. But the good act is good, not for anything or anybody,
but for each of the two persons who are willing to accept and pay
the price, and thus to convey reciprocal benefits though not com-
pelled to do so. Goodwill is reciprocity. It is evidence, not of the
good or bad quality of the will of either party, but of agreement be-
tween opposing wills. It is “good” because it overcomes competi-
tion and because it yields consent, not that the motives or intentions
are good or bad, but that it is the “meeting of wills” in action. It
is the meeting of wills not compelled to meet, and this signifies, not
the meeting of metaphysical “free wills,” but of free choices under
actual circumstances, the meeting-place of wills within the limits
of limited resources and alternative opportunities.

Consequently goodwill is pleasurable, not because it is that indi-
vidualistic pleasure, or subjective utility, of economic theory, but
because it is the pleasure of being persuaded instead of being coerced.
It is the pleasure of economic liberty, of power and wealth, against
the pain of economic necessity, impotence, or poverty.


272 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It is also the social psychology of persuasion, and implies the right
to be informed before choosing. No individual, however free or
powerful, makes up his mind and decides out of his own unaided
will. His right to liberty of choice is his right to be informed of all
the alternatives open to him, for ignorance of alternatives is absence
of alternatives, and the right to liberty is the right to be persuaded
by free speech, a free press, free advertising, free assembly. The
more narrowly the individual is tied down to the alternatives offered
by a single person the more nearly does he become the private prop-
erty of that person. It is this that Justice Field distinguished as ser-
vitude, in contrast with slavery.t It is this that distinguishes good-
will from loyalty and duty. The slave is loyal to his master if he
serves him devotedly, but the master does not rely on his goodwill,
else he would emancipate him. The laborer is loyal to his employer
if he looks out for his employer’s interest under fear of losing his job,
but the goodwill of the workman is his willingness to renew the con-
tract after he has been released from its obligations. Loyalty is duty
and fear; goodwill is liberty and hope. Goodwill in business is lib-
erty to go elsewhere. In proportion as alternatives diminish, good-
will diminishes, until with the disappearance of all alternatives,
goodwill disappears in the loyalty of vassal or slave.

Hence goodwill, as a business asset and a property right, is not
limited to commercial goodwill—it is also industrial goodwill, the
willingness of employees to work for one employer as against compet-
ing employers.” And what is “good credit” but the goodwill of
investors? The willing investor lends his savings in larger amounts
and at lower rates of interest, so that the goodwill of investors is
the largest asset of business, without which all others are unavailing.

Liberty is, as it were, the common property of citizens; goodwill
is the private property of a definite person or concern. Liberty is
unlimited in supply, hence without value, hence common property;
goodwill is limited in supply, an expectation of income, hence private
property, determined by the amount of expected income. Liberty
is common property in that it is an unexercised option, always in
the future, never appropriated, gone as soon as exercised. Good-
will has a past, a present and a future—a history of past performance,


1 Above, Chap. II, p. 12, 13.

2 Below, Chap. VIII, p. 205; Commons, J. R., Industrial Goodwill (1919). See also the
important article by C. J. Foreman, ‘Economics and Profits of Good-will,” 13 Amer.
Econ. Rev. 209 (1923).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 273


of options exercised in the past, of investment accrued in the present;
and it has a future of expected income, commuted and capitalized,
negotiable in the present. Liberty is a valueless right to choose,
goodwill is a valuable right of continuous choosing. Hence the
protection of liberty is the common right to engage in any business
or enter any occupation; it is the right to do business or the right
to work. But the protection of goodwill is protection of the individual
right to follow a business previously entered or a job already held—
the right to continue in business or to continue at work.

Thus goodwill is an asset, but an extraordinarily evanescent asset.
It is held only on good behavior. Of all kinds of property it most
of all demands watchfulness. Good reputation slips away with a
few little mistakes left uncorrected. The British law of partnership
arbitrarily capitalized the expected income from goodwill at only
“two years’ purchase,” a capitalization at the rate of 50% where
bonds and lands will capitalize automatically on the market at twenty
years’ purchase, or 5%. Goodwill requires too much effort, thought,
ability and attention to business. No wonder capitalists endeavor
to convert it into bonds, land and monopolies.

For it is the most highly creditable of all assets. It survives only
while it renders what is deemed, by those who receive it, to be an
equivalent service. It is the one measurable evidence that the owner
is becoming wealthy in proportion to his contributions to the common-
wealth, for it is measured by that only behavioristic test, the willing
patronage of those who are free to choose. Hence it is that goodwill
is so often honored by that tribute which vice pays to virtue, and
monopolies, special privileges and economic oppressions hide their
transactions under the name of goodwill.

That goodwill should not have found its place in the economic
theories of value while it is the crux of legal theories of value and the
principal asset of business must probably be explained by the indi-
vidualistic materialism and hedonism of those theories which sought
to eliminate the will as something capricious. Yet goodwill can
be seen and felt—seen not in commodities, but in the transactions
of business; and felt, not in consumption and production, but in the
confidence of patrons, investors and employees.


274 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


4. COPYRIGHT AND PATENTS


The transition from concepts of physical things to concepts of
business assets, could not be fully completed until the idea of owner-
ship was shifted from the holding of physical things to the expecta-
tions of profit from the transactions of business. The foregoing
discussion has had to do mainly with the instruments devised to
protect that ownership, not with the thing itself, the subject-matter
of ownership. And it was with considerable difficulty that the courts
of England in the Eighteenth Century bridged this gap from property
in the sense of ownership of physical things to property in the sense
of ownership of so invisible a thing as expected profits to be derived
from beneficial transactions with other people.

The question arose, in 1743, of the disposition of that part of an
estate represented by shares in the profits of an unincorporated
business. It is difficult, said the Chancellor, Lord Hardwicke, “to
define the various natures of property, yet it may, notwithstanding,
be transmissible to representatives. ... All things of this sort
ought to be taken according to the known nature of the dealing,
and the method of the parties considering these matters and carrying
them on. . . . It would be a deceit and a fraud on the parties if this
court did not consider things on the same foot as purchasers of a
thing of this sort did. . . . There are many cases where no property
of a testator has been employed or made use of in carrying on the
business, and yet the executor has been accountable for the profits
of the business as the testator’s personal estate. The case put of
physical ’ secrets or nostrums, where everything was carried on by
the materials purchased after the testator’s death, and yet the nostrum
is part of the personal estate of the testator. . . . Suppose the house
were a house of great trade, he must account for the value of what
is called the goodwill of it.” 2

These references indicate that, by the middle of the Eighteenth
Century, the expectation of profits distinct and separable from the
ownership of tangible things had become assimilated to the notion of
property in its aspects of exclusive holding for one’s own use, of
purchase and sale, and of transmission to representatives. Goodwill,
whose foundations, we have seen, were first laid in the decisions of
1580 and 1620, was first mentioned by that name in this case of 1743,


J. ¢. medical, physiological, * Gibblett v. Read, 9 Mod. 459 (1743).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 275


and then only by way of illustrating a recognized species of property.
It was not until 1803 that a legal definition of goodwill began its
separate evolution. However, the substantial but intangible thing
underlying goodwill, and especially the difficult and even treacherous
step which was taken in shifting the meaning of property from physical
things to expectations of profit, are better shown in the copyright
cases that came to a head in the year 1774.1 These cases were critical
turning points in the progress from the primitive common-law meaning
of property to the modern business-law meaning, and for that reason
the points at issue deserve attention.

The question that came before the highest court of the common
law in the case of Millar v. Taylor, in 1769, was whether an author
and his successors had the same common-law right to the perpetual
exclusive printing and publishing of his writings that the owner of
tangible property, his heirs and successors, have to the exclusive
perpetual use and selling of a tangible thing and of the products
yielded by that thing. The copyright statute of Queen Anne, in
1709,” as an exercise of the prerogative, had granted this exclusive
privilege for a period of twenty-eight years to authors who registered
under the act, but the issue in 1769 was that of a book published
forty-two years before but not registered under the copyright statute,
and consequently the question was whether the common-law action
of “trespass on the case”? could be brought by the legal successors
of the author, some forty years after the first publication, against
a competing publisher bringing out an unauthorized edition.

The court of King’s Bench, the highest court of the common law,
divided on the question, the majority supporting Lord Mansfield,
who went to the furthest possible extreme in his identification of the
right of exclusive copying and selling the copies of one’s manuscript
with the right of exclusive holding and selling physical things and
their products. Had his opinion and that of the majority with him
prevailed afterwards in the House of Lords, copyright would have
become, like the ownership of physical objects, the perpetual property
of the author, his heirs and assigns forever. This outcome Mansfield
expressly contemplated, saying, “property of the copy thus narrowed
[7.e., defined as a common-law right] may equally go down from


1 Millar v. Taylor, 4 Burr. 2303 (1769); Donaldson v. Beckett, 4 Burr. 2408, 2 Bro. P. C.


£29 (1774).
28 Anne, c. 19.


276 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


generation to generation, and possibly continue forever.” (2397-)
This conclusion was vigorously protested by Justice Yates, the only
dissenting justice, saying, ‘This claim of a perpetual monopoly is
by no means warranted by the general principles of property.” (2367.)

But Mansfield’s opinion did not permanently prevail, owing, appar-
ently, more to its consequences than its logic. Five years later the
issue came before the House of Lords,! and that highest tribunal,
although the majority agreed with Mansfield that the common law
gave a perpetual copyright, yet wisely held that the copyright statute
of 1709 should be interpreted, by implication, as having taken away
that common-law right, and having substituted an exclusive privi-
lege for a period of only twenty-eight years, a point which Mansfeld
had expressly denied. (2406)

What almost happened in these cases was an extension into perpe-
tuity, by merely enlarging the definition of property, of that extension
of the common law in the restraint of trade which had begun with
the sale of goodwill in 1620 and the trade-mark case of 1580. In
the goodwill cases the restraint of trade could, in the nature of things,
extend only to the duration of the life of the merchant or clothworker,
or the life of his going business. In this case, however, it would extend
to the author’s assigns or descendants forever, just as the ownership
of lands or other physical things extends to them forever. It was,
perhaps, with such consequences in mind, that Thomas Jefferson,
in 1788, exclaimed: “‘I hold it essential in America to forbid that
any English decision which has happened since the accession of Lord
Mansfield to the bench, should ever be cited in a court; because, though
there have come many good ones from him, yet there is so much
sly poison instilled into a great part of them, that it is better to
proscribe the whole.”? And the opinion of Justice Yates in the
copyright case as against Mansfield’s was afterwards, in 1834, ap-
proved by the Supreme Court of the United States as one that dis-
played “an ability, if equalled, certainly not surpassed.”* Jefferson’s
opinion of Mansfield’s method of reasoning by analogy became the
opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States.

That which Mansfield appealed to, first of all, was the sense of
justice, and in this he introduced the theory of John Locke, first pro-


1 Donaldson ». Beckett, 2 Bro. P. C. 129, 4 Burr. 2408 (1774).
2 Jefferson's Works, 2:487.
3 Wheaton ». Peters, 8 Pet. 593, 655 (1834).


THE PRICE BARGAIN 277


pounded in 1695, and repeated by Adam Smith in 1776,! that the
source of the right of property is not in the will of the sovereign but
in the natural right of a person to his own labor and the fruits of his
labor. Neither did the rights of property spring from immemorial
usage, but from the sense of justice. ‘‘From what source, then,”
asked Mansfield, “is the common law drawn? . . . From this argu-
ment—because it is just that an author should reap the pecuniary
profits of his own ingenuity and labor. . . . It is fit that he should
judge when to publish, or whether he ever will publish. It is fit he
should not only choose the time, but the manner of publication; how
many; what volume; what print. (2398.) The whole, then, must
finally resolve in this question, ‘Whether it is agreeable to natural
principles, moral justice and fitness, to allow him the copy, after
publication, as well as before. (2399.) . . . The general consent of
this Kingdom, for ages, is on the affirmative side.”” (2399.)

It was, likewise, upon this inner sense of fitness rather than the
correctness of his logic, that Justice Yates differed from Lord Mans-
field, and this difference expressed itself in Yates’ definition of prop-
erty. Physical things, lands and chattels, go on forever or according
to their physical structure; their ownership is transferred from hand
to hand, is transmitted to descendants, in a perpetual succession of
owners. Not so with these intangible things which it was now pro-
posed to extend into perpetuity. “The goodwill of a shop, or of an
ale-house,”’ said Yates, “‘and the custom of the road (as it is called
among carriers) are constantly bargained for and sold as if they were
property. But what are these? Nothing more than the goodwill
of the customers, who may withdraw from them, the very next day,
if they please. The purchaser of this custom, or goodwill, gains no
certain property in it; he has no power to confine it to himself nor can
he use any power to prevent other people from gaining the custom.
It is an advantage . . . as it gives the purchaser a priority for cus-
tom. And so it is in the case of the publication of a book: it gives a
priority, and gets a set of first customers. But none of these cases can
establish an absolute, perpetual, exclusive property.” (2369.) ‘‘The
mere fact of usage,” he said, “will be no right at all, in itself. . . . No
usage can be a part of the law or have the force of a custom that is not
immemorial.” (2368.)

Differences in their sense of fitness not only produced differences


1 Locke, JoHN, Two Treatises of Government, Works, 5:354, 421 (11th ed., 1812).


278 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


between Mansfield and Yates in their interpretation of the common
law, but also in their interpretation of the prerogative. They agreed,
indeed, that the stretch of the prerogative from the time of Henry
VIII to the end of the Stuarts could not be cited as precedent to jus-
tify the stretch of property from physical things to expected profits.
The monarchs of that period had incorporated the Stationers’ Com-
pany as a gild, with exclusive rights of publication of books to be
registered with that Company, and with drastic powers of search and
seizure of unauthorized books. Mansfield, however, contended that
the practice of the Stationers was based on a notion of private property
in the ‘‘copy,”’ which, on the strength of that practice, he defined as
“the exclusive right of publication of somewhat intellectual.” He
thus was reading into the word ‘‘copy” what Yates contended was
the fallacy of an “equivocal use of the word ‘property’ which some-
times denoted the right of the person, sometimes the object itself.”
(2362.) These exclusive privileges of the Stationers’ Company, based
on the King’s prerogative, Yates rightly declared, were really a denial
of the right of property in an author or his representative who was
not a member of that Company. (2377.)

But it was not on the exercise of the King’s prerogative in the hands
of the Stationers’ gild, which he admitted was obnoxious and over-
thrown by the Revolution of 1689, that Mansfield based his right of
property in the “‘copy,”’ but on an analogy which made the prerogative
the private property of the King. The King had the exclusive publica-
tion of the English Bible, of the statutes, the Year Books, the common
prayer-book, because he had paid for them out of his own pocket.
(2403, 2405.) And, by parity of reasoning, “whatever the common law
says of property in the King’s case, from analogy to the case of authors,
must hold conclusively, in my apprehension, with regard to authors.”
(2406.) Thus it was not the King’s prerogative but the King’s pri-
vate property that gave him the exclusive right of publishing these
privileged books, and that also is the right of an author or his repre-
sentative independent of prerogative. (2402.) To which Yates re-
plied that this right of the King was not grounded on “‘property”’ but
on what would now be known in America as the police power of the
“head of the Church and the political constitution,” ‘founded on
reasons of religion or of state.” (2382, 2383.) “The King does not
derive this right from labor or composition or any one circumstance
attending the case of authors.” (2384.)


THE PRICE BARGAIN 279


All of the justices agreed that “literary property was not the effect
of arbitrary power, but of law and justice, and therefore ought to be
safe” (2314), but Yates contended that neither was it founded on
the common law nor an extension of the common-law definition of prop-
erty, but solely on the copyright statute of 1709, which was an ex-
ercise of prerogative in its widened form of sovereignty, which limited
the duration of the grant to a term of years roughly corresponding to
an author’s life expectancy. In short, according to Yates, the judiciary
should not create this right of property by enlarging the common-law
definition of property but should leave it to the legislature in exercis-
ing the King’s prerogative.

Yet neither Justice Yates nor the majority were quite clear as to
exactly what was the thing for which was claimed this perpetual right
of ownership. Mansfield and the majority seemed to think that it
was the ideas; Yates thought it was only the manuscript. It required
later legal opinions to reveal] that the object claimed and owned is
merely the expected behavior of other people to be obtained through
expected restraint of competition and control of supply of the
book.

Mansfield spoke of “‘intellectual ideas or modes of thinking” and
of “property in notion” as though the object to which a person has
an exclusive right of ownership is his own ideas, his ‘modes of expres-
sion,” his ‘‘somewhat intellectual,” which he might give out or keep
to himself. And even if he gives them out, that is, “communicates
them by letters,’’ or sells them in a book, he does not give to others
any property right in those zdeas, nor does he turn them over to “‘com-
mon ownership” unless he shows a definite intention to do so. He
retains the right to control the correctness of their expression, to pre-
vent additions, to amend, retract and prevent their further publica-
tion, just as he is the master of the use of his own name. (2398.)

This holding, withholding and selling one’s ideas, replied Yates,
may have a distant analogy to holding, withholding and selling one’s
physical property, but it was the latter alone that was included in the
common-law notion of property. In the case of an author the physi-
cal property is merely the manuscript, a kind of property that may,
indeed, be acquired, like other physical property, by labor. But
“ideas” and “thoughts” are not thus tangibly produced and held
for one’s own use, like the manuscript. ‘The invention and labor,”
he said, “‘which are ranked among the modes of acquiring specific


280 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


property in the subject itself are that kind of invention and labor
which are known by the name of occupancy.”’! In that sense, Yates
continued, “‘invention is defining and discovering of a vacant property;
and labor is the taking possession of that property and bestowing
cultivation upon it. Property is founded upon occupancy. But
how is possession to be taken, or any act of occupancy to be asserted,
on mere intellectual ideas? . . . The occupancy of a thought would
be a new kind of occupancy indeed.” (2357.)

Applying these primitive notions, Justice Yates could recognize
but three species of property, that is, real estate, goods and debts
(2384), distinguishable as “corporeal” and “‘incorporeal”’ property.
But this new property, which we now define as “intangible property,”
or the right to an opportunity to sell and to control the supply of
the thing sold, this right to Mansfield’s “‘sole printing and publish-
ing of somewhat intellectual,” did not fall under either of these spe-
cies. It was unknown to the common law, for, of course, it consisted
not in the exclusive holding for self of lands, goods or services, nor
in the enforcement of contracts, but in a field of market opportuni-
ties and control of supply, free from competition. The only “prop-
erty,” in this case, that fitted the primitive notion was the manu-
script. This was, indeed, a species of ‘‘goods”’; it was “corporeal,”
had ‘‘visible substance,” was “capable of actual possession.” But
“mere intellectual ideas,” these were “ incapable of any distinct sep-
arate possession.”

“The author’s unpublished manuscript,” said Yates, ‘will indeed
very properly fall under this class of property because that is cor-
poreal; but after publication of it, the mere intellectual ideas are
totally incorporeal; and therefore incapable of any distinct, separate
possession; they can neither be seized or forfeited or possessed.”
(2385.) They have become common to all the world; title to them
has been renounced; they have been “abandoned ” and may be taken
up, but not held nor “occupied ” exclusively, by anybody who comes
along. “Nothing can be an object of property which is not capable
of a sole and exclusive enjoyment.” (2362.)

It was this distinction between the manuscript and the publica-
tion of the manuscript that furnished the clue to what afterwards be-


' “Occupancy is the taking possession of those things which before belonged to nobody.
This . . . is the true ground and foundation of all property, or of holding those things in
severalty, which by the law of nature, unqualified by that of society, were common to all
mankind,” 2 Bla, Com. 258.


THE PRICE BARGAIN 281


came the settled law, not only of copyright, but also of patents, trade
secrets, and even of every going concern in business. The later de-
cisions on copyright have turned on drawing the line at the point at
which publication occurs, yet the line has not been drawn between
the physical manuscript and the utterance of the ideas, as contended
by Yates, but between the class of persons with whom the author is
dealing. As decided in later cases, “publication ” denotes “those
acts of an author which evidence a dedication to the public.” But
“the public” is the “general public,” not those persons who bear
what we have described as the internal relation of “economy,” such
as the relation of friendship, agency, employment, or privacy. The
acts which indicate a “‘dedication to the public” are such as take it
out of this field where the will of the author remains supreme and
bring it into the field which we have described as “expansion,”
where other persons, the general public, are free to exercise their
own will. The printer may print the book but he has no right of
publication (unless previously stipulated), since the author or his
representative may store the copies or order them to be stored in-
stead of published. If the author loans the manuscript to a friend
to read and return, he has not dedicated it to the public, and the
publication may be restrained by injunction. There may be also a
“limited publication,” or “a restricted or private communication
of its contents” under conditions ‘‘expressly or impliedly precluding
its dedication to the public.” A lecture delivered orally is not thereby
“published.’”’? Even a printed book, leased to a subscriber for his
own use but not for the general public, is not thereby published.’
And an immense business has grown up on this distinction, for it in-
cludes an associated press franchise, the use of stock exchange and
market reports, the use of great systems of business forecasting, all
of them belonging to that intangible property which is far more im-
portant and valuable than the underlying physical property.

The similar principle has been worked out in the law of patents
and trade secrets. A secret process or invention, not yet given to
the public nor patented, remains by operation of common law, the ex-
clusive property of the inventor, and his secret cannot be wrested
from him by fraud or communicated to or used by others through
breach of confidence. Yet ‘‘whenever the inventor permits the in-
vention to pass beyond the legally defined limits of his exclusive pos-

16 R. C. L. 1134, and cases there cited.


282 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


session, his right to it ceases and the right of all mankind to it be-
gins.’ +

In other words, the old distinction between the possession of
physical property and liberty of contract becomes the distinction be-
tween the behavior of those persons who are subject to command
and obedience and the behavior of those persons who are subject
only to persuasion or coercion. “Economy” is the exclusive holding
for one’s own use, according to one’s own will, but the thing now
held for one’s own use is not a physical thing, the manuscript, nor
even the printed book, nor the physical objects embodying an in-
vention, but is the behavior of persons over whom the owner retains
the power of command and obedience, since they are his employees,
agents, friends, who are bound to obey his commands in their use of
the manuscript, book, or secret process. On the other hand, “ex-
pansion” relates to the behavior of the general public, the outsiders,
who have liberty of choice of opportunities or exercise of economic
power, the field of persuasion or coercion.


1 Ropinson, W. C., Law of Patents, secs. 24-40 (18090).


CHAPTER VIII
THE WAGE BARGAIN—INDUSTRIALISM


I. INDIVIDUAL BARGAINING


We have seen, in the Slaughter House Cases, that the minority
opinions defined a man’s “calling,” “occupation,” ‘trade’, and
his “labor” as his property, as well as the physical things he might
own; and his right to choose an occupation or trade, that is, to choose
the direction in which he would exercise his labor, was defined as a
part of his liberty. The authority for the definition of labor as prop-
erty was found, not in earlier decisions of the courts, but was as-
cribed to Adam Smith, who had said, ‘‘The property which every
man has in his own labor, as it is the original foundation of all prop-
erty, so it is the most sacred and inviolable.” ! And the authority
for including the right to choose a calling, 7. e., “to live and work
where he will,”’ was found in the change of meaning given by Coke
and the lawyers of the Commonwealth to the “liberties” of the barons
in Magna Carta. One of the liberties of these barons had been the
privilege of holding lands and the serfs attached to the land against
the power of the chief landlord, the King. So that the enlargement
of the terms liberty and property, as used in the constitution, from
physical liberty and property to economic liberty and property, was
the reflection, in the minds of the judges, of the business revolution
that followed the extension of markets and the political revolution
that liberated the slaves.

Under this new definition of labor as the property and liberty of
the laborer himself it is not quite clear what is meant by “labor.”
It evidently does not mean the physical body of the laborer. In an
imperfect sense his body is his property, since it was the property
of the slaveowner, or his parents, which has been transferred, by pur-
chase, or confiscation, or age, to the laborer. But since he cannot
by law transfer the title to his body, he cannot sell it and it has no
exchange-value as business assets. His ownership of his body is im-


1Smira, ADAM, Wealth of Nations, Book I, Chap. X, Pt. II.
283


284 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


perfect since he has only the right to use it and not the right to
sell it.

But neither can he sell the use of his body. Its uses are its mus-
cular motions as used by himself for purposes which only he himself
directs. Thus used they are his “manual, mental, and managerial”
faculties, employed to move things and persons. These are his “‘la-
bor.” What he sells when he sells his labor is his willingness to use
his faculties according to a purpose that has been pointed out to him.
He sells his promise to obey commands. He sells his goodwill.

But even this promise has no exchange-value. When the business
man sells his goodwill he promises to stay away and not compete.
His goodwill is a separable asset attached to his going business and
transferred to another. Likewise, when the laborer sells his physi-
cal product he sells his promise to stay away and not exercise his will
upon the product. But when he sells his labor he sells his promise to
stay on the job with it. This is usually a valueless promise, not be-
cause he will not stay on the job, but because the law, in recent
times, refuses to compel him to stay. The indentured servant, the
former contract laborer or apprentice, the peon, even perhaps the
slave, had sold his promise to work, and the law enforced the promise
by punishing him for the crime of running away, or permitted the
purchaser to punish him for disobedience. The laborer’s promise
was an enforceable contract, a legal duty to work. But the Thir-
teenth Amendment to the Constitution forbids involuntary servi-
tude of every kind except as punishment for crime of which the per-
son must duly have been convicted in a court of law. Hence the
laborer can lawfully change his mind without penalty inflicted upon
his body. And, to change his mind is to violate his promise.

But if his body can no longer be offered as security for the fulfill-
ment of his promise to work, his separable assets, his tools, houses,
furniture, animals, are security that may be levied upon in damages.
Yet even these, by statute during the past eighty years, have been
so liberally exempted from execution that a suit to recover damages
for breach of contract by laborers is, in fact, an empty remedy.”

Hence, the free laborer is employed at will—no obligation arises on
the part of the employer to keep him, and no obligation on the part
of the laborer to continue at work. Under no ordinary circumstances


1Clyatt v. U. S., 197 U. S. 207, 218 (1904).
2 Cp. Commons and ANDREWS, Principles of Labor Legislation, Chap. II (1920).


THE WAGE BARGAIN 285


can the laborer be enjoined from quitting work,! nor the employer
from dismissing him. And, under no ordinary circumstances can
either obtain damages for failure to fulfill his promise. The labor
contract therefore is not a contract, it is a continuing implied renewal
of contracts at every minute and hour, based on the continuance of
what is deemed, on the employer’s side, to be satisfactory service, and,
on the laborer’s side, what is deemed to be satisfactory conditions
and compensation. As stated by a writer in the Yale Law Journal; ?
“Tt is true that wherever C is in B’s employ, his relationship is often
called a contract of employment. But it is submitted that there is
often no effective contract at all between them, or at most there is
only a contract from day to day or from week to week. Neither of
the parties is under a contractual duty as to succeeding days and
consequently no third person can induce a breach thereof. . . . De-
spite the fact in the case put that there is no contractual relation be-
tween B and C some courts are inclined to treat it substantially as
if there were. This is doubtless due to the origin of this kind of ac-
tion. Originally its basis was in tort for the seduction of C, causing
a loss of C’s services to B. Even though this seduction theory is
properly exploded, there seems to be a vestige of it still remaining in
the minds of the courts.’ Consequently the relation between the
two is not that of a right and duty—neither the right of the laborer
to the particular job and the corresponding duty of the employer to
retain him, nor the right of the employer to have the laborer remain
on the job and the corresponding duty of the laborer to remain—but
the relation between the two is that of liberty and exposure—the
liberty of the laborer to quit and an equivalent exposure of the em-
ployer to damage on account of the possible exercise of that liberty;
and the reciprocal liberty of the employer to dismiss him and the cor-
responding exposure of the laborer to the damage of possible unem-
ployment.

The relation, thus, is not that of a positive encumbrance on the
liberty of either, which we have seen distinguished as “incorporeal
property,” but is that of an opportunity to buy and sell, which is
distinguished as “intangible property.” The labor contract is not
a contract, it is a continuing renewal of a contract at every successive
moment, implied simply from the fact that the laborer keeps at work
and the employer accepts his product. Such a relation, we saw, is


1 Arthur v. Oakes, 63 Fed. 310 (1899). 2 30 Vale Law Jour. 618, 619 (192r).


286 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


not that of an encumbrance, but is that of an opportunity, either
goodwill or privilege—goodwill if the alternative open to either is
deemed to be good; privilege if there is deemed to be no alternative
or if the best alternative is deemed to be onerous.

Hence it is that when it is said that “labor” is property, what is
intended is that the laborer owns an expectancy dependent upon the
goodwill of his employer. He does not own the job—his employer
is under no duty to keep him—he owns the liberty to be continuously
bargaining with his employer to be kept on the job by virtue of con-
tinuously delivering a service which the employer continously accepts,
thereby impliedly renewing continuously the contract.

The contract at the beginning of his employment is therefore not
a contract—it is a usage, a custom, a habit—it is an understanding
between the two, that, at each point in the continuous flow of im-
pliedly renewing the contract, the terms of renewal shall conform to
what was understood, but without any duty on either side to renew or
conform. The laborer is thus continuously on the labor market—
even while he is working at his job he is both producing and bargain-
ing, and the two are inseparable. His bargaining is his act of produc-
ing something for the employer and his producing something accept-
able is his method of bargaining.

This bargaining, therefore, is continuously a choosing of opportuni-
ties. It is well known that, in hard times when jobs are scarce, the
laborer works more energetically than in good times when alternative
jobs are plentiful. And in good times when laborers are scarce, com-
pared with jobs, the laborers take advantage of the employers’ ab-
sence of alternative laborers by demanding more pay for less work.
And vice versa. The two are continuously upon the labor market.
The job is the laborer’s going business, consisting in his continuing
transactions of offering a product in exchange for compensation and
choosing between alternative opportunities. And the jobs are a
part of the going business of the employer, consisting, on his side, of
the identical transactions. Hence, if the laborer’s labor is his prop-
erty, it is equally his employer’s property, for in each case it is the
expectation of those reciprocal beneficial transactions which constitute
goodwill or privilege according to the degree of damage imposed by
reason of being required to choose the best available alternative.
The goodwill of the employer is the laborer’s property and the good-
will of the laborer is the employer’s property, since each is valuable


:


THE WAGE BARGAIN 287


as a means of acquisition. And, likewise, if one is privileged and the
other unprivileged, in that the one is not dependent on the goodwill of
the other but only on the other’s absence of alternatives, then the one
is merely the owner of privileged, the other of unprivileged property.

Sometimes the legal language seems to imply that the laborer’s
“product” is his property. But the wage-earner’s product is not
his property. By virtue of the understanding on which they operate,
his product is his employer’s property—he works in his employer’s
plant, with his employer’s machinery, and on his employer’s raw
material—he merely adds use-value to the employer’s property.

Again it is sometimes implied that the laborer’s “wages” are his
property. These are, indeed, his property, but they are “incorporeal
property.”’ The laborer goes to work on Monday morning and is
paid his wages on Saturday night. During the interval the relation
between him and his employer is the “intangible property” of liberty
and exposure. Neither possesses any encumbrance on the future
behavior of the other requiring the relationship to continue. But
during the week an accrual of indebtedness in consideration of an
accrual of product transferred to the employer, takes place. The
laborer adds use-value to the employer’s plant or product, and the
employer adds a stipulated debt in terms of money to his other liabili-
ties. Even where there is no agreement as to his compensation, ‘‘the
law implies a promise from the employer to the workman that he
will pay him for his services as much as he may deserve or merit,”
that is, as much as similar labor would be paid on the labor: market
at the time.

The laborer’s accrual of use-value to the employer’s product is the
laborer’s accrual of an encumbrance on the property of the going con-
cern. The employer becomes a debtor, the laborer a creditor. Hence
the laborer during the week is an investor in the business; usually,
since the inauguration of mechanics’ and laborers’ liens beginning in
1829,” he is a priority investor. At the end of the week he is paid
his wages, not in product, but in that universal intangible property,
money, which is his liberty to go upon the commodity markets and
purchase the things he wishes. A formal investor, or an informal
investor, the employer, or the banker, takes his place, and his tempo-
rary investment is liquidated.


1 Bouvier, article ‘quantum meruit” and cases cited.
2 Commons and ANDREWS, Principles of Labor Legislation, 60 (1920).


288 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Thus the laborer’s job, while it lasts, is that inseparable union of
incorporeal and intangible property, a special case of a securities
market, where the period of investment, however, is so short that a
rate of interest is not formally calculated. It is ‘intangible property”
in that it is the relation of liberty and exposure upon the labor market.
It is “incorporeal property” in that it is the relation of creditor and
debtor upon the investment market. And it is periodically con-
verted into nominal wages, or money, another “intangible property,”
being the liberties and exposures of the various commodity markets
where are found the food, clothing, and shelter that constitute the
real wages for his labor.


II. AssocIATED PERSONS AND ASSOCIATED PROPERTY


As stated by the Oregon court in the case referred to above, the
justification of a law restraining the power of property in the matter
of wages turns on the protection of health and morals.‘ In this
respect the justification differs from that of the Munn Case where
no question of morals or health was involved, and only the question
of sheer power. The labor cases in which this issue of power, stripped
of other issues, has come before the Supreme Court of the United
States, are the cases where Congress and the state legislatures had
attempted to protect employees in the right to belong to labor organi-
zations. In the Adair Case the court denied that authority to Con-
gress, under the Fifth Amendment, and in the Coppage Case denied
it to the states, under the Fourteenth Amendment, as depriving per-
sons of liberty and property without due process of law.”

The Congress of the United States, in order to carry out its purpose
of providing voluntary arbitration of labor disputes on railways
had prohibited such corporations and their agents from refusing
employment and from discharging or threatening to discharge work-
men, if done solely on the ground of membership in a labor organiza-
tion. The state of Kansas had enacted a similar law, except that
its operation was not limited to railways or corporations, but extended
to employees of corporations generally. Similar laws had been held
unconstitutional by six state courts, including an earlier opinion of

1 When the Oregon ten-hour law for men and women came before the court, including
provision of time-and-one-half wages for overtime, the court treated the wage-feature as
a kind of penalty and said (in the syllabus) “whether the law could be upheld as a regulation


of wages is not considered or decided.” Bunting v. Oregon, 243 U. S. 426 (1916).
? Adair v. U. S., 208 U. S., 161 (1908); Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. x (rors).


THE WAGE BARGAIN 289


the Kansas court,! but when a second law of this kind was enacted
in Kansas the state court sustained it,? and appeal was taken to the
United States court.

The ruling in the Adair Case was followed by the Supreme Court
in the Coppage Case, for, said Justice Pitney,’ if the federal govern-
ment is prohibited from “arbitrary interference with the liberty of
contract because of the due process provision of the Fifth Amend-
ment, it is too clear for argument that the states are prevented from
the like interference by virtue of the corresponding clause of the Four-
teenth Amendment.”

The Kansas law had made it unlawful for any firm, company, or
corporation, its members, officers or agents, to coerce, require, de-
mand or influence any person not to join or become or remain a mem-
ber of any labor organization or association, as a condition of securing
employment or continuing in employment. Coppage, a superin-
tendent of a railway company, had requested Hedges, a member of
the switchmen’s union, to sign such an agreement, at the same
time informing him that if he did not sign it hecould not remain in
the employ of the company. Hedges refused to sign or to withdraw
from the union, and Coppage discharged him. The provision of the
Kansas law prohibiting such action by Coppage, declared Justice
Pitney for the majority (Justices Day, Holmes, and Hughes dissent-
ing), was a deprivation of liberty and property without due process
of law. For, he said, ‘Included in the right of personal liberty
and the right of private property—partaking of the nature of each—
is the right to make contracts for the acquisition of property. Chief
among such contracts is that of personal employment, by which la-
bor and other services are exchanged for money or other forms of
property.” 4

There were two questions involved in this case, one as to whether
economic coercion in itself can be permitted to be made unlawful by
the legislature, the other as to whether the legislature can be per-


1 State v. Julow, 129 Mo. 163; (1895), Gillespie v. People, 188 Ill. 176 (1900); State ex rel.
Zillmer v. Kreutzberg, 114 Wis. 530 (1902); Coffeyville Brick Co. v. Perry, 69 Kan. 207
(1904); People v. Marcus, 185 N. Y. 257 (1906); State ex rel. Smith v. Daniels, 188 Minn.
155, (1912).

2 State v. Coppage, 87 Kan. 752 (1912). it

3 236 U.S. 1,11. For a discussion of these cases see Coox, W. W., “Privileges of La-
bor Unions in the Struggle for Life,” 27 Vale Law Jour. 779 (1918); Powe t, T. R., ‘“Col-
lective bargaining before the Supreme Court,” 33 Pol. Sci. Quar. 396 (1918).

4236 U.S. 14.


290 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


mitted to create and protect a right of association of persons as
against an association of property-owners.

The first issue was dismissed by citing the four hold-up cases to
which we have referred above,! where, as we have seen, the court does
not recognize mere inequality of property, or the power to withhold
from others, as coming within the definition of “coercion.” In those
and similar cases there must be some inequality of personal relations
in order to render the act of the superior person coercive. ‘This issue
appeared and was decided in the Coppage Case as follows: Hedges,
as a member of the switchmen’s union, “‘was entitled to benefits in
the nature of insurance to the amount of fifteen hundred dollars which
he would have been obliged to forego if he had ceased to be a member.”
But if Coppage “‘ was otherwise within his legal rights in insisting that
Hedges should elect whether to remain in the employ of the company
or to retain his membership in the union, that insistence is not ren-
dered unlawful by the fact that the choice involved a pecuniary sacri-
fice to Hedges.” ?

And it is unlawful for the legislature to attempt to enlarge the defi-
nition of coercion to include protection against mere economic power.
The Kansas legislature had attempted to create a criminal offense
out of the circumstances that in “dealing with Hedges, an employee at
will and a man of full age and understanding, subject to no restraint
or disability, Coppage insisted that Hedges should freely choose
whether he would leave the employ of the company or would agree
to refrain from association with the union while so employed. .. .
The state of Kansas intends by this legislation to punish conduct such
as that of Coppage, although entirely devoid of any element of coer-
cion, compulsion, duress, or undue influence, just as certainly as it
intends to punish coercion and the like. . . . It is equally clear that
to punish an employer or his agent for simply proposing certain terms
of employment, under circumstances devoid of coercion, duress, or
undue influence, has no reasonable relation to a declared purpose of
repressing coercion, duress, and undue influence. Nor can a state,
by designating as “coercion” conduct which is not such in truth,
render criminal any normal and essentially innocent exercise of per-
sonal liberty or of property rights.” (15, 16.)

The Kansas court had said the “employees as a rule are not finan-
cially able to be as independent in making contracts for the sale of


1 Chap. II, p. so. NCE Ws Sh Sy @


THE WAGE BARGAIN 201


their labor as are employers in making contracts of purchase thereof.”
To this the Supreme Court said, ‘““No doubt, wherever the right of
private property exists, there must and will be inequalities of fortune;
and thus it naturally happens that parties negotiating about a con-
tract are not equally unhampered by circumstances. . . . Since it is
self-evident that, unless all things are held in common, some persons
must have more property than others, it is from the nature of things
impossible to uphold freedom of contract and the right of private
property without at the same time recognizing as legitimate those
inequalities of fortune that are the necessary result of the exercise of
those rights.”’ (17.)

The second question, that of protecting a right of association of indi-
viduals as against an association of owners, is inseparable from the first,
for the “inequalities of fortune” to which Justice Pitney referred, were
not the inequalities of Hedges and Coppage, but of Hedges and the rail-
way company. This question, however, was not even presented to the
court, much less passed upon, although the Kansas law was limited to
firms, companies, and corporations. The explanation, apparently, re-
sides in the fact that, for the purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment, a
corporation is deemed to bea person and not an association of persons.

The meaning of a corporation, like the meaning of property and
liberty, has been changing during decades and centuries, and when
a corporation appears in court it takes on a variety of shapes derived
from different parts of its history. It is not a citizen within the mean-
ing of the Federal Constitution but is a “person” within the meaning
of the Fourteenth Amendment.' At one time it appears to be an
association of persons, at another time a person; at one time it is an
independent existence separate from its members, at another a dummy
concealing the acts of its stockholders.?_ At one time it is a fiction
existing only in contemplation of law and limited strictly to the powers
granted in the act that created it; at another it is a set of transactions
giving rise to obligations not authorized expressly by the charter but
read into it by operation of law.* To Hedges it might appear to bea


1+ Cook on Corporations, 94 (7th ed.).

2 Thid., 32, 333 7 R. C. L. No. 4.

3 [bid., 12. “The theory of a corporation is that it has no powers except those ex-
pressly given or necessarily implied. But this theory is no longer strictly applied to pri-
vate corporations. A private corporation may exercise many extraordinary powers,
provided all of its stockholders assent and none of its creditors are injured. There is no
one to complain except the state and the business being entirely private, the state does


not interfere.”


292 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Leviathan controlling twenty thousand jobs, but when he gets into
court it is only Coppage, a person like himself. With this elastic
ability to change its shape and slip out of your hands when you think
you have it, the definition of a corporation is truly intangible.

Roscoe Pound has said that the personality of a corporation is not
an entity but a convenience. But it is a safe convenience only if,
while defined as a unit it is also defined as an association acting as a
unit. Yet this very unity is two-fold, a union of property and a union
of persons.

As a union of property the corporation has expanded from the
primitive notion of physical objects held for one’s own use to the no-
tion of a going business operated by an association of persons in deal-
ings with other persons. In this respect it avails itself of all the laws
of creditor and debtor, principal and agent, employer and employee,
buyer and seller, which have emerged out of the history of the com-
mon law, aided by equity and statutes, and have built themselves up
on the primary protection of title and possession of physical objects.

As a union of persons the corporation is the descendant of that royal
prerogative which granted a portion of the sovereign’s personal power
to his subjects. While many of the personal privileges then granted,
such as monopolies and the various feudal “liberties” previously
mentioned, were abolished outright during the Seventeenth Century,
or rather transferred to Parliament, this one, the corporate franchise,
was held over until the Nineteenth Century at the disposal of Parlia-
ments and legislatures. Corporate franchises had been bestowed,
like the others, through individual or special bargains between the
sovereign and the subject. When the legislature succeeded to the
King, this bargaining continued in the form of lobbying, political
influence and corruption, until, about the middle of the Nineteenth
Century, through the enactment of general corporation laws, first in
America, this special privilege was opened to any group of citizens,
regardless of personal influence, who should bind themselves together
by contracts conforming to general rules and then register their in-
tentions with the secretary of state. Thus a personal privilege, con-
ferred on individuals by the sovereign, becomes a universal right of
association open to all persons, by which they may erect themselves
into a unity unknown to the common law.

The corporate franchise prolongs the life of the association beyond
the expectations of any individual. It binds a minority, without


THE WAGE BARGAIN 293


their consent, if necessary, to act as a unit with the majority. It
relieves individuals of responsibility beyond a certain limit, and limits
the total responsibility to the amount of property owned by the cor-
poration. Immortality, self-government, and limited liability are
thus the sovereign powers and immunities granted to persons, col-
lectively and individually, in order that a single will may act through
agents in dealing with the rest of the world. Thus the unit of prop-
erty, a going business, is separated from individuals and is given an
independent existence, an industrial government of its own, and a
capacity of growth unknown to the natural person.

If, now, this expanding unit of property retains the primitive mean-
ing of property it is but an empty title to possession of physical ob-
jects devoid of value for business. Even if it is enlarged to include
that liberty of passive choice of opportunities contended for by Coke
in the Case of Monopolies in 1602, and by the minority in the Slaugh-
ter House Cases in 1872, it is even yet ineffective. But when the
meaning enlarges to that exercise of economic power revealed in the
Munn Case in 1876, the Holden-Hardy Case in 1898, the Bunting and
Stettler Cases in 1916 and 1917, it is because this child of privilege
has become a privileged association of men.

That this expanding meaning of property should have halted in
the Adair and Coppage Cases seems to be owing to the circumstance
that in these cases the Congress and the legislature proposed to set
up an agency, the labor union, to accomplish what in the other cases
was made the duty of governmental factory inspectors. Justice
Pitney could see no public purpose in a labor organization. ‘They
are not public institutions, charged by law with public or govern-
mental duties, such as would render the maintenance of their mem-
bership a matter of direct concern to the general welfare.”! Dis-
tinguishing Holden v. Hardy and similar cases, he said that in those
cases there was a public purpose, such as health, safety, morals, or
public welfare “beyond the supposed desirability of leveling inequal-
ities of fortune by depriving one who has property of some part of
what is characterized as his ‘financial independence’... . The
mere restriction of liberty or of property right cannot of itself be de-
nominated ‘public welfare’ and treated as a legitimate object of the
police power; for such restriction is the very thing that is inhibited
by the Amendment.”

1 Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U. S. 1, 16 (1915). 2 Tbid., 18, 10.


204 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


This absence of a public purpose seems also to have been the
underlying reason for the opinion in the Hitchman Case.’ In that
case a union and its agents who were attempting to unionize the
mines of a coal company in West Virginia, were enjoined against
even persuading the employees from joining the union in pursuance
of a plan to unionize the mines by means of a strike, if necessary.
The employees had been taken back at the end of a lost strike some
years before on condition that they should agree not to belong to a
union while working for the company, and all employees taken on
afterward had been required to agree to this condition. In the Adair
and Coppage Cases it was the Congress and state legislatures that
were forbidden to prohibit employers from insisting on such condi-
tions in the contract of employment. In the Hitchman Case it was
the labor union that was forbidden to interfere with such contracts.

The majority of the court in the Hitchman Case (Justices Brandeis,
Holmes and Clarke dissenting) while conceding the right of work-
ingmen to form unions and enlarge their membership by inviting
other workingmen to join, could see no just excuse in the intention of
the union to inflict damage on the company by means of a strike
in order to induce it, through fear of financial loss, to consent to the
unionization of the mine as the lesser evil. The company was entitled
to the goodwill of its employees irrespective of the fact that, being
employed at will, the relation of employer and employee was termi-
nable by either party at any time. It did not appear to the court
that the union might also be entitled to build up a goodwill of its
own in competition with the goodwill of the corporation, a kind of
asset which is built up only by inducing customers to leave one
concern and patronize another concern, thus inflicting damage on
the first concern by enlarging the patronage of the competing concern.

The goodwill of a concern is ordinarily maintained and enlarged
by persuading customers, who are free to terminate or refuse their
patronage at any time, to continue the same in spite of the persuasion
of competitors. Goodwill is competitive persuasion, and if compet-
itors are enjoined from offering customers alternative attractions,
then the customers are held, not by their goodwill but by ignorance
of alternatives, which is absence of alternatives, and therefore, priv-
ilege instead of goodwill. There is thus a public purpose underlying
the doctrine of goodwill since that first case in 1580 when the court

1 Hitchman Coal & Coke Co. v. Mitchell, 245 U. S. 229 (1017).


THE WAGE BARGAIN 295


prohibited a competitor from attaching the plaintiff’s trade-mark
to his “ill-made cloth,’ but the purpose consists in the liberty of
customers to decide for themselves, without fraud, coercion, or
obligation, but with opportunity to obtain knowledge as to the
attractiveness of competing offers.

That which is offered, on the one side of a labor dispute, is, as
stated in the minority opinion, ‘‘a reasonable effort to improve the
condition of working men engaged in the industry by strengthening
their bargaining power through unions, and extending the field of
union power.” 4

That which is offered on the other side, as stated by the majority,
is “the reasonable probability that, by properly treating its employees,
and paying them fair wages, and avoiding reasonable grounds of
complaint, it will be able to retain them in its employ, and to fill
vacancies occurring from time to time by the employment of other
men on the same terms.” (252.)

Here, apparently, is a competition for the goodwill of workingmen,
enlarged by analogy to the competition of merchants for the goodwill
of customers. ‘The plaintiff,” said the majority opinion, ‘‘was and
is entitled to the goodwill of its employees, precisely as a merchant
is entitled to the goodwill of his customers although they are under
no obligation to continue to deal with him. ... The pecuniary
value of such reasonable probabilities is incalculably great, and
is recognized by the law in a variety of relations.” But, not
recognizing that the customer is under no obligation or contract
to continue to deal with the merchant and may be presuaded by a
competitor to transfer his patronage, the court fell back on the
old law of master and servant, saying, “‘the right of action for persuad-
ing an employee to leave his employer is universally recognized.”
(252.) Apparently there is a confusion here of liberty with duty and
goodwill with servitude. Goodwill is liberty; a contract is duty; the
enforcement of a contract is servitude. The employer is under no
duty to keep the laborer, the laborer is under no duty to remain,
and to prevent him from obtaining knowledge of alternatives is
servitude.

It would seem that not all of the doctrine of goodwill has here
been carried over from the customer to the employee, apparently
because the liberty of the laborer to choose between alternatives,


1 Hitchman Coal & Coke Co. v. Mitchell, 245 U.S. 223, 268 (1917).


290 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


although employed at will, is not conceived to be of as much public
importance as that of the customer who patronizes at will. Conse-
quently the labor union, which attempts to persuade a laborer to
leave, is damaging business without a good excuse, whereas the
competitor or employer who similarly persuades the customer or
laborer to leave, has a good and lawful excuse.

Apparently, also, there is another, but inseparable, reason. The
Hitchman Coal Company appears in court as a single individual
rather than an association of individuals who have combined their
property into a unit, with an industrial government, with limited
liability and with corporate immortality; whereas the union appears
as a conspiracy of individuals, holding conventions, without property,
and merely inflicting damage on property by withholding the supply of
labor until the terms of the contract can be agreed upon. (241, 253.)
But, if labor is property, it would seem that associated labor is also
property; that the right to act together as an industrial government
is a property right, and that the property need not be tangible coal
mines, but is the expectation of income to be obtained through
bargaining power and apportioned to its members according to rules
agreed upon, an expectation similar to the goodwill of a business.

According to this distinction of the court, as we have already seen,
a unit of property has no power; it is an inert mass, no matter how
large its dimensions; but a union of persons 7s power, and the reason
why the corporation does not have power is because it does not
appear as a unit of persons but as a unit of property. The opposite
of this, we have seen, was approved in the Munn Case.

This appears to be the legal doctrine of conspiracy. The essence
of conspiracy is in the duress, or coercion, exercised over an individual
by a combination of individuals, as is evident in the fact that that
which may be lawful for a single individual, such as refusal to buy
or sell or work, may become unlawful when done in concert by a
combination of individuals. The illegality of a conspiracy is in the
concert of action, and not in the act itself, which might be perfectly
legal if performed without concert by the same number of individuals,
since the combination may exercise a greater power than is possible
for the faculties of a single individual.

But a combination of property, distinguished from a combination
of human faculties, is not deemed to exercise greater coercive power
than a single person, else it would be deemed unlawful for a corporation


THE WAGE BARGAIN 207


to do what the isolated individual might legally do. The corporation,
by the grant of sovereign power, is looked upon as a single person
like other persons and may lawfully refuse to buy or sell or lease
or hire, just as other persons may lawfully refuse. Like them, of
course, it might unlawfully join in a conspiracy with other persons
or other corporations, in which case, however, the unlawful duress
or coercion is still deemed to be the concerted acts of persons, one
of whom is this corporation considered as a person. But in so far
as it is merely a unit of physical property, that is, a going plant
although owned by a combination of persons, it is not deemed to
exercise duress or coercion in its dealings with individuals, whether
buyers, sellers, employees, borrowers, or lenders. Coercion and
duress spring from combinations of persons, not from the combined
ownership of things.

This distinction between legal coercion and economic coercion
and between an association of property owners and an association
of persons without tangible property, was brought out in the dissent-
ing opinion in the Hitchman Case. Justice Brandeis said, “It is
also urged that defendants are seeking to ‘coerce’ plaintiff to ‘unionize’
its mine. But coercion, in a legal sense is not exerted when a union
merely endeavors to induce employees to join a union with the inten-
tion thereafter to order a strike unless the employer consents to
unionize his shop. Such pressure is not coercion in a legal sense.
The employer is free either to accept the agreement or the disadvan-
tage. Indeed, the plaintiff’s whole case is rested upon agreements
secured under similar pressure of economic necessity or disadvantage.
If it is coercion to threaten to strike unless plaintiff consents to a
closed union shop, it is coercion also to threaten not to give one
employment unless the applicant will consent to a closed non-union
shop. The employer may sign the union agreement for fear that
labor may not be otherwise obtainable; the workman may sign the
individual agreement for fear that employment may not be otherwise
obtainable. But such fear does not imply coercion in a legal sense.
In other words, an employer, in order to effectuate the closing of
his shop to union labor, may exact an agreement to that effect from
his employees. The agreement itself being a lawful one, the employer
may withhold from the men an economic need—employment—until
they assent to make it. Likewise, an agreement closing a shop to
non-union labor being lawful, the union may withhold from an em-


298 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ployer an economic need—labor—until he assents to make it. In
a legal sense an agreement entered into, under such circumstances,
is voluntarily entered into.” (271, 272.)

This being the case, the preference is given by the court to that
association of persons deemed to be of the greater public importance.
The corporate franchise, with its powers and immunities, is granted
to the coal company because the public, as consumers, is interested
in the mining of abundance of coal. Whether or not the increased
bargaining power in dealings with labor, that goes with the franchise,
is also a public purpose depends on the relative importance attached
to unions of capitalists and unions of laborers. The majority opinion
saw no public purpose subserved by the labor union in the Hitchman
Case, as they had seen no such purpose in the Coppage Case. The
minority saw a public purpose in strengthening the bargaining power
of labor. The purpose of interfering with the employees of the
Hitchman Company who were employed at will, said the minority,
“was confessedly in order to strengthen the union, in the belief
that thereby the condition of workmen engaged in mining would
be improved; the bargaining power of the individual workingman
was to be strengthened by collective bargaining; and collective
bargaining was to be insured by obtaining the union agreement.
It should not, at this day, be doubted that to induce workingmen
to leave or not to enter an employment in order to advance such
a purpose is justifiable when the workmen are not bound by contract
to remain in such employment.” (273.) But it is doubted, not as
a matter of logic but as a matter of beliefs and this belief is none
other than the habitual wish of the judge who decides and who,
in three hundred years since the beginning of the business revolution,
can always find precedents and logic to back up what he wishes.
It is the judge who believes in the law and custom of business and
not the judge who believes in the law and custom of labor, that
decides.

III. Custom anp Law


Two apparently opposite theories of law have been formulated,
the one tracing its lineage through Hobbes and Bentham to John
Austin.! The other through Coke and Blackstone to its American
statement by James C. Carter.” According to the one view law is


1 Austin, Lectures on Jurisprudence; Brown, W.J., The Austinian Theory of Law (1906).
2 Carter, J. C., Law; Its Origin, Growth and Function (1907) -


THE WAGE BARGAIN 299


made by the command of a superior to an inferior. According to the
other, law is fownd in the customs of the people.

Austin defined law as ‘‘a rule laid down for the guidance of an in-
telligent being by an intelligent being having power over him.”
Carter defines the unwritten law, which is the main body of our law,
as the “rules springing from the social standard of justice, or from
the habits and customs from which that standard has itself been de-
rived.”

Carrying out the theory of Hobbes, Bentham and Austin, the law-
giver by a proper study of the passions of men might reconstruct
society according to his standards of justice and welfare. Carrying
out the theory of Coke, Blackstone and Carter, the lawgiver is but
an investigator and systemizer of the existing habits of the people.
He does not make law—he finds it and registers it.

Neither party, of course, carries out its theory to the logical limit,
and, as a matter of historical fact, the one is looking at the preroga-
tive, the other at the common law. The one leads to the written
law formulated by the monarch or legislature, or constitutional
convention; the other to the unwritten law formulated piece-
meal by the courts. The two are inseparable. Yet, by look-
ing mainly at the written law, the one ends by proposing to substi-
tute a code of laws, or a socialistic utopia, or a dictatorship of the
proletariat, for the customs of the people; the other, by looking at the
unwritten law, ends by deriving standards of justice from those cus-
toms and erecting the standards into the voice of Reason or the voice
of God. The codes, the utopias and the dictatorships have been at-
tempted and have broken down or been interpreted by double mean-
ings of words. Statute law or constitutional law is a dead letter
where it does not fit the customs. It is made, as Carter points out,
by a single person or by a few persons, and “necessarily exhibits the
imperfection and error which attaches to all such works,” But,
according to Carter, the unwritten law, though formulated by the
courts, is made by God or Beneficent Nature. It is “self-existent,
eternal, absolutely right and just for the purposes of social govern-
ment, irrepealable and unchangeable. It may be justly called Di-
vine; for being identical with custom which is the form in which hu-
man nature necessarily develops conduct, it can have no other author
than that of human nature itself.” (231.)

Customs are, indeed, the raw material out of which justice is con-


300 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


structed. But customs differ, customs change, customs are good
and bad, and customs conflict. They are uncertain, complex, con-
tradictory, and confusing. A choice must be made. Somebody
must choose which customs to authorize and which to condemn or
let alone. Carter maintains his thesis only by distinguishing ‘‘cus-
tom” from “bad practice.” (255.) ‘‘Custom” is good custom; “‘bad
practice” is bad custom. Who shall say? Is it the voice of God?
Is it the law of Nature? Is it universal reason, or the vox populi?
Carter criticised the Supreme Court because, in a railroad consoli-
dation case it did not authorize the modern custom of business in
consolidating corporations and eliminating competition. (210-213.)
Apparently that custom is the voice of God. Others approve the
Supreme Court when it condemns the modern custom of labor organi-
zations in boycotting employers whom they deem unfair. Appar-
ently that custom is not the voice of God.

Somebody must choose between customs. Whoever chooses is
the lawgiver. The policeman chooses certain customs, rejects others,
and, within his limits of power and immunity, he is the prerogative
in action. He both finds the law and makes it—jinds it by choosing
the desirable customs of his bailiwick and rejecting the undesirable
customs; makes it by choosing the direction in which the power of
the state shall be brought against those who violate the desired cus-
tom, or practice the undesired one. The court does the same in a
larger field of power and immunity. And the legislature, in its field,
finds bad customs which it penalizes, good ones to which it lends the
power of the state, and indifferent ones which it lets alone. This
is discretion, and official discretion is choice of customs.

For customs are customary behavior, and behavior is the flow of
transactions between persons. In this they differ from ‘habit.’
Habit is the customary acts of an individual. Custom is the cus-
tomary transactions of similar classes of individuals under similar
circumstances. ‘The economic transactions with which historically
we are concerned are the transactions of landlord and tenant, creditor
and debtor, employer and employee. In Anglo-American history,
each of these began as custom; the approved customs became a com-
mon law, unwritten because written piecemeal in the decisions of
courts; the common law was then pieced-out by the two arms of the
prerogative, equity and statutory or constitutional law; finally, to
some extent, in certain departments, the whole was codified. So


THE WAGE BARGAIN 301


that, out of the rent-bargain and its custom of landlord and tenant
evolved the common law of agriculture, serfdom and slavery, with
its rights of tangible property in lands, chattels and human beings.
Out of the price-bargain and its customs of merchants and manu-
facturers, evolved the law merchant and the common law of business
and liberty with its rights of intangible and incorporeal property.

The law of business, as thus developed, is as different from the
old common law as is a going business from an acre of land, or a prom-
ise from a horse. Yet, as we have seen, by fiction, by new meanings
for old words, the old slid into the new so easily that there was no
serious break except at the points in the seventeenth century when
the revolutions of 1640 and 1689 subjected the officials of the mon-
arch to the same courts and to similar rules of law as the private cit-
izen. The power of the courts, especially on the equity side, there-
upon unfolded to meet the unfolding conditions of business, and never
more vigorously than in the past forty years when business is con-
fronted by labor, as feudalism was confronted by business in the
Seventeenth Century.

The customs of labor and of labor organizations are as different
from the customs of business, as the customs of business were differ-
ent from the customs of feudal agriculture. For the definition of
custom is not complete when it is left as the mere instinctive, impul-
sive, unthinking habit of uniformity in action. It is this inadequate
definition that underlies Sir Henry Maine’s notion that the progress
of society is from status to contract} as well as the notion that the com-
mon law can be displaced by a code or a constitution. According
to Maine, “status” was the fixed position of the individual in society,
tied there by fixed customs. But “contract” is his liberty to break
away from the customary way of doing things, and to fashion for
himself, by negotiation with others, a changing position in society.
Status, custom, and the common law derived from them, were static;
but contract, statutory law and codes of law are dynamic.

Rather are customs the common-sense activities of people in plan-
ning for the future on the experience of the past, and contracts are
themselves customs. The binding power of custom is its security
of expectations. What has happened before may be expected to
happen again, and he who arbitrarily disappoints expectations must
be restrained or punished. And customs are not fixed from time im-


1 Maine, Sir HENRY, Ancient Law, 173-4 (1861 ed., Pollock).


302 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


memorial but are continually changing and continually being for-
mulated in assemblies or groups while dealing with violations and
deciding disputes as they arise. Not until a government is erected
above these loose assemblies, and an official class of judges, execu-
tives, law givers, or business managers, sets to work to deal with
violations and decide disputes, do the customs emerge as common
law binding on all the different local assemblies according to the pre-
cedents set down in decided cases. Then it is that approved customs,
found in one place, begin to be extended to similar situations found
in other places. This indicates conflict, choice and survival of cus-
toms, according to the changing political, economic and cultural
conditions and governments.

The two great economic changes that have brought in new cus-
toms are the change from agriculture to traffic, and the change from
isolated to collective industry; and the two accompanying political
and legal changes are the change from slavery or serfdom to liberty
or business, and the change to liberty of labor. The first brought
in or enlarged the new transactions of creditor and debtor, seller and
buyer, with the apparent change from status and custom to liberty
and contract. But the change was rather from the customs of agri-
culture to the customs of business. For contracts require interpre-
tation in case of dispute; there could arise no security of business
without uniform interpretation, and uniform interpretation is cus-
tomary interpretation. The customs of business are but the cus-
tomary way of drawing up, interpreting and enforcing formal con-
tracts, and reading into the behavior of parties implied contracts
according to the custom implied. And the change from status to
liberty was the accompanying political and legal change from the
customs and law of landlord and tenant to the customs and law of
buyer and seller, creditor and debtor.

Likewise with the change from isolated to collective industry, and
from buying and selling things to buying and selling labor. To en-
force contracts in the case of propertyless laborers resulted in com-
pulsory labor or imprisonment for debt; and, with the abolition of
these, there is not only a change from status to liberty and contract
but a still further change from contract to liberty to violate contracts.
Hence, no binding contracts are made, since they are not enforced.
Hiring and hiring out,‘‘firing” and quitting, are at will. These are
not a substitution of contract for status or custom, but are a new cus-


Ta


THE WAGE BARGAIN 303


tom of making contracts. The labor contract is made according to
an understanding, a usage, a custom. It is a custom based, not on
expected enforcement of contracts but on expected non-enforce-
ment, and hence on continuous renewal of contracts.

The wage-bargain reverses completely the first principles of the
credit-bargain, for it substitutes non-enforcement of contract for
enforcement. The wage-earner is a tenant-at-will of either party.
He can quit without giving a reason and the employer can discharge
him without giving a reason. The theory of the law-merchant, how-
ever, still hangs over, in that it is held illegal to break a contract, and
that, if it is broken, the right to institute a suit for damages immedi-
ately accrues to the party damaged by the violation. But both law
and custom nullify this remedy in the case of the wage-bargain. The
laborer is granted liberal property exemptions and he cannot be con-
demned by law to involuntary servitude. Neither can he bring a
suit against his employer for unlawful dismissal, for, by custom, he
is hired at will. Hence the remarkable ambiguity in that the courts
do not recognize the customs of the wage-bargain, since they hold it
unlawful to break the contract, yet they are prohibited by law and
prevented by custom from enforcing the contract. The capitalist
system has been built up, as we have seen, on the enforcement and
negotiability of contracts, and it is as difficult for the lawyer of to-
day to appreciate the custom of employer and employee in breaking
labor contracts as it was for the lawyers of the Sixteenth and Seven-
teenth Centuries to authorize the custom of merchants in enforcing
promises and buying and selling them. While the violation cannot
be penalized against either the employer or the employee, yet the
theory that it is unlawful rises up on occasion to penalize or enjoin
third parties who induce the violation, although the only effective
liberty of the wage earner is the alternative opportunities offered by
those third parties.

This defect goes back, as we have seen,’ to a theory of the will itself.
For the will is not an empty choosing between doing and not doing,
but between different degrees of power in doing one thing instead of
another. The will cannot choose nothing—it must choose something
in this world of scarcity—and it chooses the next best alternative.
If this alternative is a good one, then the will is free, and can be in-
duced only by persuasion. If the alternative is a poor one, or if there

1 Above, Chap. IV, Sec. I, p. 60.


304 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


is no alternative, then the will is coerced. The will chooses between
opportunities, and opportunities are held and withheld by other wills
which also are choosing between opportunities, and these opportu-
nities are limited by principles of scarcity.

This economic coercion, as we have noted,! finds with difficulty a
place in legal concepts because the precedents by which the law of
property and liberty was constructed had to do only with immunity
from physical coercion. Property and liberty consist in protection
against force and violence, whether that force and violence be the
assaults and trespass of private persons or the commands of officials
with authority to exercise the organized violence of the King or sov-
ereign. But the property and liberty for which laborers seek to get
protection, while they include protection against violence, include
also protection against economic coercion. Precedents, indeed, may
be found for protection against economic coercion, but, as we have
seen, they have usually been constructed by avoiding the notion of
economic power and passing it off as either a special privilege granted
by a sovereign or a violation of confidential or other relations of legal
superiority and inferiority. Economic superiority and inferiority,
as distinguished from personal or legal superiority and inferiority,
have had no recognition by the courts on their own initiative, and
have found a place only to the extent that the court has yielded to the
views of the legislature, as was done in the case of Munn v. Illinois,
and Holden v. Hardy. And, in cases where the court has not yielded
and has either declared the law unconstitutional or nullified it by
definition, there the court has had adequate precedents to sustain
the position that economic coercion cannot be made illegal, since it is
not force and violence.

It is this economic coercion upon which is built industrial govern-
ment, for its extreme penalty and inducement to obedience is that
fear of poverty which varies greatly in its many aspects from fear of
bankruptcy to fear of unemployment. And consequently, what may
be distinguished as the common law of labor springing from the cus-
toms of wage earners, as distinguished from that historic common
law springing from the customs of merchants and manufacturers, con-
sists in those practices by which laborers endeavor to achieve their
ideals through protection against the economic power of employers.

These ideals and customs are quite peculiar and differ in important


1 Above, Chap. III.


THE WAGE BARGAIN 305


respects from those of business. Primarily they spring from that
insecurity of jobs and positions which has a double aspect, namely,
the limited supply of jobs and the control of that supply by capitalists.
Out of this conviction that there are not enough jobs to go around,
and the knowledge that the jobs themselves are owned by capitalists
instead of laborers, arise many peculiar ideas and corresponding cus-
toms. One is the idea that the individual who gets more work or
works faster than the others, is taking the bread out of their mouths.
This goes along with the idea of stretching out one’s work to make it
last, or of sharing the work with others, and this leads to that severe
reprobation and condemnation of those who violate the custom and
refuse to be bound by these notions of solidarity in a field of limited
opportunities.

This, of course, is exactly opposite to the ideals and customs of
business which the courts have been defining and classifying for some
300 years, and is similar to the ideals and customs of business when
it was contending with feudalism by means of its little gilds of mer-
chants and manufacturers. Initiative, enterprise, ambition, indi-
vidual success, are quite contrary to the rules of solidarity and fair
competition that characterize gilds and unions, and naturally the
courts do not comprehend and sanction such customs, any more than
do the capitalists. They are not, in the words of Carter, to be re-
garded as ‘“‘customs”’ but as “bad practices.”

For individual success consists in rising out of a lower class into a
higher class—from the laboring class to the professional, managerial,
capitalistic, or official class—and it is difficult to distinguish this kind
of success, which increases one’s income by augmenting the income
of others, from that other kind of success which takes a larger share
for self from the limited supply of opportunities for ali. One is suc-
cess, the other is fair competition. Success consists in rising above the
class, fair competition consists in rising with the class. The laborer is
in an ambiguous position. If he increases his individual product he,
by reducing its exchange-value, diminishes the share which his class
of laborers gets of the national product. To his fellows in the same
functional class, he seems to be a “hog,” for the very act by which
he augments both the total national product and his own compensa-
tion, reduces the exchange-value of the units of that product and
thereby reduces both the share of the national product which his own
class secures, and ultimately his own compensation.


306 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


This is, of course, also the familiar and well-known resentment
among business men against the price-cutter and the cut-throat com-
petitor, as it is among laboring men against the “‘swift,”’ the “hog,”
the “scab.” It is a by-product of division of labor and exchange-
value. When business men call upon laborers to “produce,” and
criticise them for restricting production, they are calling upon them
to do that which they themselves do not. For they, like the laborers,
produce, not indiscriminately, but they produce in limited quantities,
in order to maintain the price in their market. Their call for more
product from labor is a call for labor to reduce the exchange-value of
the joint product of labor and capital in that occupation. And when
the value as thus reduced approaches the profitless point, the cap-
italist restricts the output by laying off the laborers. Restriction
of output is practiced by both, but in one case it seems “natural”
and therefore right, because there is no profit; in the other case it
seems arbitrary and therefore wrong because it places a limit on na-
tional wealth. To the laborer, however, it looks different. To lay
off workmen is wrong because the previous profit ought to have been
considered; and to spread out the work steadily over the year is right
because there is no stored-up wages to tide over the lay-off.

The difference proceeds from a different psychology springing from
different experiences and different hopes and fears. The business
psychology is speculative—high profits at one time are equalized with
losses at another time, through reserve funds of various kinds, and
interest and dividends are paid out of the funds at the end of the
year. The laborer’s psychology is conservative—high wages at one
time do not offset no-wages at another time. He has no conven-
ient place to invest his savings and no inducement or security to ac-
quire a means of livelihood by borrowing, if a period of no-wages
may happen to eat up his savings to pay his debts. The laborer lives
from day to day, the business man from year to year. Speculation de-
moralizes the one but vitalizes the other, and what seems natural and
right if it vitalizes is contrary to nature and wrong if it demoralizes.


IV. INDUSTRIAL GOVERNMENT


It was, as we have seen, identically the same restrictive and reg-
ulative rules just mentioned that characterized the merchants’ and
manufacturers’ gilds during the period when business was weak and
struggling to make for itself a place under the régime of feudalism.


ae at


THE WAGE BARGAIN 307


And when the common-law courts, beginning in 1599, began to strike
off the closed-shop and fair-trade rules of the gilds, the same courts
and especially the reformed equity courts began to build up that
property-right in a going business which became the law of fair and
unfair competition. So history repeats itself on new levels. Just as
the prerogative courts of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries
could not comprehend and yield to the demand for liberty and power
on the part of the small but aggressive merchants and manufacturers
outside the gilds, so the courts of to-day do not comprehend and yield
to the demand for new definitions of liberty and power on the part
of the aggressive laborers. History repeats itself, and the Supreme
Court takes over the protection of the liberty and power of business,
just as the prerogative courts protected the privileges of the mon-
arch and his party. The injunction gets a new importance which
it has not had since the chancellor Lord Ellesmere was sustained by
King James in his contest with Coke and the latter was removed
from his position as Chief Justice of the common-law courts. The
reasons and precedents then were on the side of Ellesmere and James.
And so it is to-day. The reasons and precedents are on the side of
business, and the liberty and power demanded by labor is as con-
trary to precedent as the liberty and power demanded by business
was contrary to the precedents of feudalism or the King’s prerogative
or the special privileges of gilds or the common law of agricultural
England. The prerogative of to-day is the prerogative of business,
and the common law of to-day seeking recognition is the customs
of propertyless laborers developing in their own assemblies and in-
dustrial courts. And, while the courts, when overruling the closed-
shop privileges of the gilds, began to take over the fair-competition
rules of the gilds, yet, in nullifying the closed-shop privileges of the
unions, they do not take over the protection of labor against the “un-
fair employer.” Apparently, a “new equity ” is needed—an equity
that will protect the job as the older equity protected the business.

When new conditions appear, equity can immediately respond.
This elasticity of equity is seen in its enlargement towards the pre-
vention of criminal acts whose punishment had previously been
thought to belong only to the common law through indictment by
a grand jury. The indictment is punitive, the injunction is preven-
tive, and hence is far more efficacious in preventing strikes when they
are deemed unlawful by the court.


308 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


In many cases this unlawfulness, in the case of strikes, is patent,
since it is accompanied with violence or threats of violence. Under
such circumstances the court, as in the Debs Case,! responded to the
appeal of the executive to issue an injunction and thereby to
order what it was the duty of the executive to do anyhow. In other
cases the unlawfulness depends mainly upon the judge’s opinion of
the public policy involved in the case, for where there is no “com-
pulsion of violence,”’ the only influence which a union can have in
a strike towards inducing an employer to agree to its terms is that
“compulsion of motive”? through the economic power of inflicting
pecuniary loss on the employer. If the judge feels, in such a case,
that the public importance of the property interests to which the
employer belongs is greater than that of the organized employees,
he grants the injunction. If he feels that the public importance of
the union is greater than that of the employer he refuses the injunc-
tion. In either case a damage is about to be inflicted, either by the
union on the business of the employer, or by the employer on the
jobs of the employees. And the judge, acting for the state, chooses
the damage which he considers less, in the interest of the public, and
enjoins that which he considers greater or more obnoxious.

This conclusion was reached by Justice Holmes in one of the early
cases, where the majority of the Massachusetts Supreme Court ap-
proved an injunction prohibiting the union from employing any
“scheme or conspiracy ”’ whatever to bring pressure on other work-
men to keep them from entering the employment, whereas Justice
Holmes would have enjoined them only from using violence or threats
of violence. Said Justice Holmes, in that case:

“In numberless instances the law warrants the intentional infliction of
temporal damage because it regards it as justified. . . . The true grounds
of decision are considerations of policy and of social advantage, and it is
vain to suppose that solutions can be attained merely by logic and the


general propositions of law which nobody disputes. Propositions as to
public policy rarely are unanimously accepted, and still more rarely, if ever,


1Tn re Debs, 158 U. S. 564 (1895).

* Sir Thomas Erskine, in his defense of Lord George Gordon, in 1787, on an indictment
for assembling a multitude and petitioning parliament to repeal a law which had removed
certain disabilities of Roman Catholics, said in addressing the jury, ““You must find that
Lord George Gordon assembled these men with that traitorous intention:—you must find
not merely a riotous illegal petitioning,—not a tumultuous indecent importunity to influence
parliament—not the compulsion of motive, from seeing so great a body of people united
in sentiment and clamorous supplication—but the absolute, unequivocal compulsion of
force, from the hostile acts of numbers united in rebellious conspiracy and arms.” 21 How.
St. Tr. 486, 504.


THE WAGE BARGAIN 309


are capable of unanswerable proof. They require a special training to
enable any one even to form an intelligent opinion about them. In the
early stages of law, at least, they generally are acted on rather as inarticulate
instincts than as definite ideas for which a rational defense is ready. . . .
It has been the law for centuries that a man may set up a business in a
country town too small to support more than one, although he expects and
intends thereby to ruin someone already there, and succeeds in his intent.
The reason, of course is that the doctrine generally has been accepted that
free competition is worth more to society than it costs and that on this
ground the infliction of the damage is privileged. . . . If the policy on which
our law is founded is too narrowly expressed in the term free competition
we may substitute free struggle for life. . . . Free competition means com-
bination. . . . Combination on the one side is patent and powerful. Com-
bination on the other is the necessary and desirable counterpart, if the battle
is to be carried on in a fair and equal way.” !


Again, with the enlarged definitions of property and liberty, the
injunction itself is enlarged to protect not only property rights but
to protect what formerly were considered personal liberty or civil
rights, but now are property rights. The court had said in 1888,”
“The office and jurisdiction of a court of equity, unless enlarged
by express statute, are limited to protection of rights of property.
It has no jurisdiction over the prosecution, the punishment or the
pardon of crimes,” and had quoted Chief Justice Holt of the common-
law court of Queen’s Bench saying, in 1704, that his court would
“break” any injunction granted by Chancery in a criminal matter
then under examination in the law court and would “protect any
that would proceed in contempt of it.’’?

But now, with the definition of property enlarged so that, in 1915,
it was deemed to include the right of an alien to a livelihood and to
continue in employment, and with the supreme court having power
to declare unconstitutional any law infringing that property right,
the court enjoined a criminal prosecution in the state of Arizona,
saying: ‘‘equitable jurisdiction exists to restrain criminal prosecu-
tion under unconstitutional enactments, when the prevention of such
prosecutions is essential to the safe-guarding of rights of property.””*

Finally, with the two-fold fact of modern corporations and modern
trade unions extending over the breadth of a nation, the injunction
when directed towards the thousands of agents, employees, members,
sympathizers, of either the corporation or the union, without men-


1 Vegelahn v. Guntner, 167 Mass. 92, 105, 107, 108 (1896).
2Tn re Sawyer, 124 U. S. 200, 210 (1888).

3 Holderstaffe v. Saunders, S. C. 6 Mod. 16 (1704).

4 Truax v. Raich, 239 U. S. 33, 37, 38 (1015).


310 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


tioning the names of all individuals or serving notice upon them,
becomes in fact as truly an act of legislation as any that ever was
adopted by a legislature. The easy steps by which the “blanket”
injunction was finally approved, from its implied notice to all agents
of the party enjoined, until it included “any and all other persons
associated with them in committing, etc.,”’ may be traced in the cases
and need not here be shown.! Suffice to note the futile protests of
dissenting Justices as the process advanced. Justice Harlan, dis-
senting in the Standard Oil Case in 1911, above referred to, said,
“The court by its decision, when interpreted by the language of its
opinion, has not only upset the long-settled interpretation of the
act, but has usurped the constitutional function of the legislative
branch of the government.’ ?

And Justice Caldwell, dissenting in 1897, said, ‘Courts of equity
have no jurisdiction to enforce the criminal laws . . . It is said by
those who defend the assumption of this jurisdiction by the federal
courts that it is a swifter and speedier mode of dealing with those who
violate or threaten to violate the laws than by the prescribed and cus-
tomary methods of proceeding in courts of law; that it avoids the
delay and uncertainty incident to a jury trial, occasions less expense,
and insures a speedier punishment. All this may be conceded to be
true. But the logical difficulty with this reasoning is that it confers
jurisdiction on the mob equally with the chancellor . .. It can
make little difference to the victims of shortcut and unconstitutional
methods, whether it is the mob or the chancellor that deprives them
of their constitutional rights. It is vain to disguise the fact that this
desire for a shortcut originates in the feeling of hostility to trial by
jury—a mode of trial which has never been popular with the aristoc-
racy of wealth, or the corporations and trusts. . . . Against the exer-
cise of this jurisdiction the constitution of the United States inter-
poses an insurmountable barrier. . . . ‘The trial of all crimes, except
in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury.’ (Const. Art.3) ‘In all
criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy a right to a speedy and
public trial by an impartial jury. Id., Art. 6... . With the inter-
polations essential to support government by injunction, the con-
stitution would contain the following further exceptions to the right


1 Amer. St. & W. Co. v. Wire Drawers’ Union, 90 Fed. 598 (1898); In re Reese, 107 Fed.
942 (z901); Union Pac. R. Co. v. Ruef, 120 Fed. 102 (t902); High on Injunctions, par. 1443
(4th ed.).

2 Standard Oil Co. v. U.S., 221 U.S. 1, 83 (1912).


THE WAGE BARGAIN 3Ir


of trial by jury: ‘And except when many persons are associated to-
gether for a common purpose, and except in the case of members of
trade unions and other labor organizations, and except in cases of
all persons ‘of small means.’ ” 4

On the other hand, the answer to these dissents and charges of
usurpation is made by Justice Ricks.? “It is said the orders issued.
in this case are without precedent. Every just order or rule known
to equity courts was born of some emergency, to meet some new
condition, and was, therefore, in its time, without a precedent.”
And he found support in quoting the assertion of Justice Brewer:
“T believe most thoroughly that the powers of a court of equity are
as vast, and its processes and procedure as elastic, as all the changing
emergencies of increasingly complex business relations and the
protection of rights can demand.”

The King’s prerogative, thus inherited by the courts of equity,
was not the absolute authority of a single person, and the King was
not a person above and apart from the clash of private interests,
but the King was the chief of the court party, the party of courtiers,
feudal lords, gildsmen, holders and expectant holders of privileges
or monopolies, derived from the prerogative. And what we have
distinguished as the prerogative courts as against the common-law
courts were the agents by which the prerogative party exempted
themselves from the same common law that defined the rights and
duties of those not privileged. Then the contest took place between
the prerogative courts of the King and the common-law courts,
both of which were eventually brought under the same rule of con-
stitutional government, and it then became possible for the common
law of business to unfold out of what were deemed to be the reasonable
customs of business men.

Likewise, with the customs of labor and with the prerogatives of
Capitalism and its agents, the superintendents and foremen. The
restraints which laborers place on free competition in the interests
of fair competition, begin to be taken over by employers and adminis-
tered by their own labor managers. Even organized labor achieves
participation with the management in the protection of the job,
just as the barons and the capitalists achieved participation with
the King in the protection of property and business. A common


1 Hopkins v. Oxley Stave Co., 83 Fed. 912, 921-040 (1897).
2Tol. A. A. & N. M. Ry. Co. v. Penna. Co., 54 Fed. 746, 751 (1803).


1]
i


212 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


law of labor is constructed by selecting the reasonable practices and
rejecting the bad practices of labor, and by depriving both unions
and management of arbitrary power over the job. An amendment
is gradually worked into the constitution of industrial government:
“No employer shall deprive any employee of his job without due
process of industrial law, nor deny to any employee within his juris-
diction the equal protection of the common law of labor.” + Even
statute law begins to add its part by imposing duties upon employers
in the safeguarding of jobs against accidents, against sickness, against
long hours, inadequate wages, and insecurity of employment. Out
of the wage-bargain a constitution for industrial government is
being constructed by removing cases from the prerogative of manage-
ment and the arbitrary power of unions and subjecting the foremen,
the superintendents and the business agents to the same due process
of law as that which governs the laborers.


1 Commons and Associates, Industrial Government, chapter on “Due Process of Law,”
by Matcoitm SHARP (1921).


CHAPTER IX
PUBLIC PURPOSE


I. CONCERNS AND POSITIONS


The foregoing historical sketch from the time of the Norman Con-
quest to the Twentieth Century, indicates the three historical stages
in the evolution of Anglo-American systems of Value and Valuation,
the agricultural, commercial, and industrial stages. Each stage pro-
ceeds by the evolution of customs and the formulation of customs
into working rules by a government. The customs are customary
transactions, and these have the twofold aspect of authorized and
authoritative transactions, the one being transactions between
equals, the other between superior and inferior. The agricultural
stage proceeds out of the relation of landlord and tenant, and the
transactions are those which determine the rent-bargain of the feudal
system. The commercial stage proceeds out of the relations of cred-
itor and debtor, and the transactions are those which determine the
price-bargain. The industrial stage is the relation of employer and
employee, and the transactions are those which determine the wage-
bargain and the wage system. Out of the rent-bargain was devel-


oped, on the authoritative side, the system of constitutional govern-


ment, or sovereignty, and on the authorized side the institution of
tangible property and personal equality and liberty of property
owners. Out of the price-bargain was developed the system of bank-
ing and financiering, or the money power, with its institutions of in-
corporeal and intangible property and its equal liberty of contract
and enforcement of contracts. Out of the wage-bargain has been
developing, on the authoritative side, a system of industrial govern-
ment, and on the authorized side the institution of jobs or positions
in industry with their liberty but non-enforcement of contracts.
Each of these historical stages implies a threefold expansion in the
fields of economics, jurisprudence and politics. In economics it im-
plies the expansion from use-value or “real” values, to exchange-
values, from production and consumption to buying and selling, from


313


314 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


things to prices. The use-values, that is ‘‘real values” of physical
things proceed from the direct control of lands, chattels and human
beings in both the production and consumption of wealth. Ex-
change-values, or prices, spring up between the primary producers
and ultimate consumers, through a nation-wide division of labor, a
credit system and freedom in bargaining. Upon the foundation of
use-value was built feudalism; upon nominal values or prices, cap-
italism and industrialism. In jurisprudence this expansion is reflected
in the expansion of the common law from the protection of tangible
property and persons in an age of violence to the protection of busi-
ness and positions in the peaceful expansion of markets. In politics
it is the mass movements of individuals, organized or unorganized,
which bring about the transitions from prerogative to sovereignty,
from personal government to the collective bargaining of King, land-
lords and merchants, then of corporations and cooperatives, then of
employers and employees. Together, these made possible the further
evolution, in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries, of those in-
corporeal and intangible properties whose value consists, not in their
physical uses but in the going business and jobs of a going concern.

In the agricultural stage the relation of owner to slave or serf con-
formed to the primitive notion of property in that it was the exclusive
holding and dominion over a physical object for one’s own use. The
slave or serf was a thing, without liberty to choose alternative oppor-
tunities, and the relation was that of owner to thing owned. In
proportion as freedom of choice was recognized and protected by law
the relationship was evolved through intermediate stages until it
reached its modern dimensions of master and servant, employer and
employee, principal and agent. ‘The outcome consists, not in the
elimination of command and obedience, but in the liberty of bargain-
ing as to the terms or limits within which obedience shall be ren-
dered. The employee or agent, indeed, is not permitted to sell his
physical body, which would carry with it all of his liberty, but he is
permitted to sell his willingness to obey commands within certain
limits. In this respect he sells a part of his liberty, and submits to
the will of the employer or principal. The terms on which he will
sell are a matter of persuasion or coercion, for he is free to sell or reject
the offer, but, once accepted, the relation which he assumes is that of
command and obedience.

A subordinate distinction is the modern one between agent and


PUBLIC PURPOSE 315


employee. The agent deals with people, and must therefore rely on
persuasion or coercion, since they have legal liberty to choose alterna-
tives. It is this relation that constitutes a going business. But the
employee deals with physical and animal forces of nature not deemed
to have rights and liberties, and his relation with them is analogous
to that of command and obedience, constituting what we distinguish
as a going plant. But, in either case, the agent or the employee exe-
cutes the will of his principal or employer, and is lawfully permitted
to choose for himself only within those limits set by the agreement
or by the working rules of labor or agency. If he does not obey,
within the field of his agency or employment, he renders himself liable
to dismissal and even damages.

If he does obey, then, by contract or by operation of the rules of
law, he sets up a counter-encumbrance against the principal or em-
ployer to the extent of the hourly and daily accrual of compensation
designated for his service. He becomes a creditor, the employer a
debtor, to the extent of his uncompensated services. In this respect
he is, for the time being, an investor in the business, waiting for com-
pensation until pay-day.

The rules of law in respect to encumbrance have thus evolved, in
respect to the law of labor, from that of physical property in the sense
of holding the body of the laborer with its compulsory obedience to
all commands, until it becomes that intangible property of voluntary
obedience, and that incorporeal property, the right to compensa-
tion.

The early goodwill and copyright cases have been dwelt upon at
length because they show the actual steps by which the primitive
notion of tangible property passed over to the modern notion of in-
tangible property.

The first needful step was that of dealing with competition as a
kind of trespass. This step was taken on the procedural side, pre-
sumably in the year 1580, by enlarging the common-law writ of tres-
pass so as to permit a suit for damages to be entertained, not only on
the ground of physical violence, but also on the ground, first of fraud,
and then, with the help of equity, on the ground of ‘unfair competi-
tion.” By this means a property-right was created and protected,
not in the exclusive holding of things, but in the expected purchasing
power to be obtained from future bargains with customers. Tangible


1The term ‘servant’? may mean either agent or employee.


316 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


things, with their expected use-values, become intangible opportu-
nities with their expected prices.

The next step was to make these expectations saleable like things.
This step was taken in 1620 when, apparently for the first time, a
voluntary restraint of one’s liberty to compete with a purchaser of
his going business was legalized and the contract enforced. A person
was now permitted to sell a part of his liberty just as he could sell his
physical property, and thus to convert both into assets.

The third step was that of recognizing the expectation of future
transactions as personal property to be held exclusively for one’s own
use, like any visible piece of land or chattel. This recognition by
the court is perceptible, in 1743, when shares in expected profits are
separated from the tangible property and passed over as personal
property to the executor of an intestate, in conformity with the va-
rious ways in which expected profits, independently of tangible things,
were already being bought, sold, and transmitted by will as personal
property. The intangible expectation of a future net income of pur-
chasing power to be derived from bargaining was thus placed on the
same footing as property-rights in things.

Along with these conversions of physical things into expectancies
of purchasing power, came the evident necessity of converting them
into liquid assets, as nearly like the commodity, gold, as possible, in
order that they might be realizable on the markets as promptly as
possible, in terms of the legal tender standard of value. Hence a
parallel development occurs establishing the negotiability of new forms
of intangible and incorporeal property as rapidly as they emerge.

Since the various forms of intangible and incorporeal property can-
not be created except by imposing new legal duties and new restraints
on the liberty of individuals, questions were continually arising as to
the reasonable scope and duration of these restraints. Here a fine
point of dispute emerges, for goodwill slips readily into privilege or
monopoly, since each is a restraint of trade, and can be distinguished
only by good judgment as to the point where goodwill ends and spe-
cial privilege begins. With this in view Justice Parker, in 1711, cor-
related the various cases on restraint of trade, and, while the general
principles then laid down remain to the present day, their application
varies with the judgment of the courts and legislatures as to their
proper scope and duration.

In all cases an ambiguity arose out of the survival of physical con-


PUBLIC PURPOSE 317


cepts of property injected into the intangible concepts. It has always
been necessary to clear up this ambiguity, and one of the steps is that
of distinguishing reasonable and unreasonable restraints of trade
when proceeding from the mere enlargement of the common-law
definition of physical property. An instance of this was the decision
of 1774 reversing the copyright decision of 1769. It was then decided
that the analogy to rights of property in physical things should not
be carried so far as to create a perpetual exclusive ownership in ex-
pected income to be derived from a perpetual restraint of trade, and
that, where a time-limit should be set on the future prolongation of
property, the matter had to be arranged by legislative statute and
not by judicial definition of property.

The dissenting opinions in those cases pointed to the true limits
within which the common-law definition of property might be ex-
tended by analogy from the holding of a physical thing for one’s own
use to the holding of expected profits for one’s own use. The new
line was drawn, not where subjective ideas are distinguished from
their external embodiment in things or manuscript, but at the point
where it was deemed fit that the owner’s will should have exclusive
control over other persons, and beyond which other persons should
be deemed to have liberty of choice in dealing with the owner or his
representative.

This point we have found to be a point which can be stated differ-
ently according to the branch of learning which we have uppermost
in mind, although these branches are inseparable in fact. Stated in
terms of social psychology it is the limit where command and obedi-
ence stop and persuasion or coercion begins. Stated in terms of eco-
nomics it is the point where the aspect of economy, or mere propor-
tioning of natural and human factors, is distinguished from the aspect
of expansion, or enlargement of control over other persons through
choice of opportunities and exercise of power. Stated in terms of
law it is the point where the law of privacy, of privileged communica-
tion, or the law which binds an agent, or employee, or servant to
execute the will of his principal, employer, or master, becomes the
law that governs the dealings of self or agent with the general public
who are not bound by those obligations of privacy and obedience to
commands. Or, stated in terms which seem to combine psychology,
economics, and law, it is the point where positive encumbrances merge


into opportunities.


318 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


It will be seen, in this historical sketch, that the distinction be-
tween property and contract has been merged into that of property,
promises, and opportunities. Property, in its original sense of physi-
cal possession, refers to physical things; promises are the restraints
on liberty agreed to by the parties; opportunities are the alternatives
present when the agreements are made. The constitution of the
United States forbids any state to enforce a law “impairing the obli-
gation of contracts.’ This prohibition is largely nullified by the law
of freedom, which prevents the enforcement of promises in so far as
they impose involuntary servitude. So with laws forbidding im-
prisonment for debt, and with the many wage-exemptions, home-
stead exemption and insolvency laws. They prevent the complete
enforcement of the obligation of contracts, by liberating the debtor
from a part or the whole of his debt. So with public utility regulations.
The rates charged may be changed by the legislature even in apparent
conflict with promises previously entered into either between the
state and the corporation, or between the corporation and patrons.
When these and similar cases arose, the court held that no obligation
of contract can defeat lawful governmental authority, or conflict
with public policy. Hence, because the strict enforcement of obliga-
tions of contract is deemed to restrain liberty where liberty is deemed
to be the more important, there the liberty to violate contracts is
substituted for the duty to fulfill contracts.

These distinctions have required attention to two inseparable as-
pects of economy, namely, the engineering economy of a going plant
and the business economy of a going business. Engineering economy
relates to the physical things of the universe, the relationship of “‘man
to nature.” ‘This field has, indeed, its dimensions similar to those of
business economy, and for that reason is not always distinguished
from the latter. It has its dimensions of economy, or the propor-
tioning of nature’s forces, or materials, for the sake of the largest use
and enjoyment of self. It has its dimensions of choice between physi-
cal objects, and since these choices run along the line of what is deemed
to be the least resistance or greatest power, they indicate expansion
of control over nature, in contrast with more economical proportion-
ing of items within that control. It has also its time-dimension of
expected use and enjoyment, inducing present action.

The distinguishing mark, however, regarding this nature-aspect
of economy, opportunity, power, and expectancy, is the fact that the


PUBLIC PURPOSE 319


external objects, even though they are human beings, are not deemed
to have any will of their own to be considered. They are merely
instruments of one’s own will, and therefore, to that extent, the
branches of science dealing with them are properly to be distinguished
as engineering economy, or scientific management. We have dis-
tinguished this relationship of man to nature as a going plant with
its producing organization.

It is different at the point where these things are deemed to have
a will protected by rules or principles of ethics or law, for then they
begin to have those relationships of rights, duties, liberties, and ex-
posures which constitute what we have distinguished as encumbrances
and opportunities, thus constituting a going business. Since these
encumbrances and opportunities are determined by a higher author-
ity whose will is superior to that of the parties concerned, it is this
superior authority that transforms engineering economy, business
economy, and scientific management into political economy.

What has happened to the notion of property, can now be seen.
To the original notion of holding physical things for self is first added
the enforcement of mere promises, and thus, in the early Sixteenth
Century, the law of contract, or positive encumbrances on others,
starts its modern career. Then, in the early Seventeenth Century,
the law of opportunity or negative encumbrance, springing partly
from contract, partly from tort, begins to be added. Meanwhile the
mere arbitrary prerogative and capricious will of the monarch is in
process of being stabilized under the form of constitutional govern-
ment, or working rules that declare the collective will of the state,
completed by the Act of Settlement at the beginning of the Eight-
eenth Century, and thereupon the courts are free to develop the law
of contract and tort, with the help of equity, in its modern shape of
encumbrances and opportunities. Finally, by the middle of the
Nineteenth Century, this stabilized prerogative completes the de-
velopment of that special privilege, a corporate franchise, and opens
up, by general corporation laws, to all comers, the privilege of bind-
ing themselves together by contract into a going concern.

With these delegations of sovereign power, property expands into
an industrial government of its own, treated as a unit and even a
person, although it is not a person but an industrial government.
The economic power of this government begins to be recognized by
the highest court in the latter part of the Nineteenth Century in the


320 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


public utility and labor cases, but when its power is challenged by
another industrial government, the labor organization endeavoring
also to obtain sovereign powers and immunities, the court is divided.
A majority cling to the recently developed ideas of property as a
union of property and liberty, summarized in the law of goodwill;
a minority sees in this union an emergence of economic power.

The division of opinion turns on the definition of property and the
scope of contract. Physical things of themselves are powerless.
Even liberty to choose between opportunities is passive and ineffec-
tive. But power to withhold opportunities is economic power, and
associated power is government. When therefore liberty of contract
is merged with property, it adds the liberty of persons to the exclusive
holding of things. And this liberty operates in the several directions
of liberty to combine their property into an industrial government
and to act as a unit, not only in proportioning their resources eco-
nomically but also in choosing opportunities, in commanding obe-
dience, in persuading or coercing, and in planning for the expectations
of an indefinite future. Liberty of contract becomes economy, op-
portunity, power, expectancy, and industrial government. In short,
through the law of contracts and the law of torts the modern concept
of property has evolved from the holding of things to the control of
the supply of things through controlling the transactions of persons,
so that it signifies the four personal relations of buyer and seller, cred-
itor and debtor, competitors, and governors and governed. Property
emerges from physical things into assets and liabilities, and liberty
emerges from personal liberty into the positions and jobs of a going
business operated by a going concern.

We have seen that these going concerns may be classified accord-
ing to the kind of sanction or penalty which they employ in obtaining
the obedience of members. Going concerns are but organized mass
movements with a common purpose and common rules designed to
permit the concern to act as a unit. Each concern springs up out of
the body of society as a whole, through a process of differentiation.
In early times they were unseparated, and there was no division be-
tween the “state” employing the sanction of physical violence, and
the business concern employing the sanction of bankruptcy or poverty
and the cultural concerns employing the sanction of the mere common
opinion of those deemed worth while. But, with the business revolu-
tion of the Seventeenth Century both the business concerns began to


_—— ae


PUBLIC PURPOSE 321


separate off from the political concern through the separation of own-
ership from sovereignty, and cultural concerns began to separate off
from both business and politics through the newly established prin-
ciple of toleration and freedom of worship.

Each concern is, indeed a government, employing its peculiar sanc-
tions, and each individual holds a position or job in many govern-
ments. He is a citizen of the state, a principal, agent, employee,
creditor, debtor, of a business concern, a father, son, brother, fellow-
communicant, comrade, and so on, of the various cultural concerns.
Since these concerns, with their group psychology, act as a unit
through agents or representatives, and especially since they must
necessarily establish and enforce common rules in order to avoid
disputes and dissolution, there emerges in all concerns, from primitive
times to the present, the principles of a common purpose and a cor-
responding set of working rules holding the members together. Each
concern has its different sanctions, but its enforcement of those sanc-
tions in particular cases is in the hands of those who primarily exercise
the functions of a judiciary. It is therefore in the decision of the
judicial functionaries of each concern in interpreting their working
rules that the economist must look for the concern’s purpose, that is
the ‘‘public” purpose of the concern. In the Anglo-American politi-
cal concern, this public purpose has been evolved under the names
of classification and due process of law.


II. CLASSIFICATION


The notable fact of Western civilization is the increasing control
over nature’s forces by an increasing population, yet without im-
provement in the brains of individuals. Could the babies of our
Teutonic ancestors have been lifted over from the German forests
two thousand years ago into modern civilization they could, in their
lifetime, have carried it on as efficiently as we do. Indeed, a good
case can be made for a decreasing efficiency of individuals along with
an increasing efficiency of going concerns. In a hundred years the
population of the United States has increased tenfold, but it is proba-
ble that the services for ultimate consumers have increased forty-fold.
One hundred years ago it took seven farmers’ families to feed eight
families, now seven feed twenty-one. Yet it is doubtful whether
farmers and farm workers are more brainy than they were a hundred
years ago. Compositors in printing offices turn out to-day five times


322 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


as many columns of type in an hour as they did forty years ago, but
the printer, as such, is less efficient, for now he can learn his part of
the trade in three months, then it took three years. Yet the printer,
by means of his trade union, has brought his hours of labor down
from eleven and twelve to seven or eight a day, has doubled his wages
per day, while the employers make more money than they did, the
inventors and manufacturers of the linotype become wealthy, the
price of newspapers comes down from five cents to two cents for two
or three times as much reading matter, and the efficiency of the en-
tire nation is multiplied by a wider diffusion of knowledge.

The steel industry is probably five times as efficient per man-hour
of all its workers as it was forty years ago, but, with the labor organi-
zation destroyed, the hours were increased to twelve, the week to
seven days, the workers individually are more ignorant and less effi-
cient, but enormous fortunes have been made and every industry in
the nation is multiplied in its efficiency by the one factor of cheap and
widespread use of steel. Many illustrations could be added—de-
creasing efficiency of individuals and yet an increasing efficiency for
all of them and an increasing income for each of them according to
their ability to pull a larger share out of the total increasing national
efficiency.

So it has been at every step from the forests of Germany in the
time of Cesar to the industries of America in 1923. Nature seems
to have finished the development of brains by the struggle for exist-
ence in a cold climate, and then started out to multiply the efficiency
of collective brains. This fact so impressed Karl Marx that he at-
tributed the whole historic process to a Social Labor Power in which
the individual was nothing but a brain.

It does, indeed, spring from that universal economy of nature which
accomplishes marvellous results merely by re-proportioning the fac-
tors more advantageously without enlarging them individually. A
nation is not an addition of atoms but a multiplication of complemen-
tary by limiting factors. But the limiting factors, in this case, are
not blind—they have each individually a purpose of its own.

Karl Marx conceived that, at any given period, there were but two
classes, the property owners who produced nothing, and the property-
less who produced everything. But in a system of limiting and com-
plementary factors where each is necessary to the total result but in
a diminishing importance according to its supply, it is impossible


PUBLIC PURPOSE 23


to simplify the issue in this way. There are as many classes as there
are classifications of factors contributing to the total national wel-
fare. At different periods and under different circumstances one or
more classes are more important than others, because, at the time,
the total command over nature is relatively limited by their ability
to perform their part of the total economy. All of the other classes,
at such a time, yield to the pre-eminence of that class, both willingly
amd unwillingly. The warrior and priestly class were preéminent
and greatly admired, when the fear of violence was the limiting fac-
tor in men’s minds and paralyzed their other faculties. With the
fear of violence once regulated, the business class became preéminent,
for the fear of poverty, which they alone knew how to circumvent,
became the paralyzing factor in national efficiency. With the fear
of poverty regulated by industrial government, the laboring class
becomes a limiting factor, for their unwillingness to work when not
pushed to it by fear, and their resentment against coercion through
fear of unemployment, looms up as a factor retarding all others.

Thus the proportioning of factors in a national economy is not the
blind proportioning of blind forces of nature, but is the proportion-
ing of inducements to willing and unwilling persons.

Starting with Adam Smith’s ideas of property, liberty, self-
interest, division of labor, and divine providence, economic theory
worked out a mechanistic proportioning of factors according to laws
of supply and demand. If too much of a certain factor is produced
its value falls and its producers then shift to other products. If too
little is produced its value rises and producers shift to it. Producers,
led on by an “invisible hand,” are shifting towards the limiting fac-
tors whose value is high, and away from the complementary factors
whose values are low, thus proportioning the factors by equalizing
the incomes of individuals towards a “normal” or “natural” or har-
monious standard of wages, interest, or profits for each class.

Yet this mechanistic economy of nature, as Smith sorrowfully ac-
knowledged, has been greatly interfered with by the collective power
of political and industrial governments. Protective tariffs have lim-
ited the supply of certain factors and increased their prices. Taxes
on property, on income and on commodities have changed prices
and the directions of industry. Labor legislation has imposed bur-
dens on employers and changed the direction in which profit is ob-
tained. Great corporations fix prices of commodities or labor, and


324 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the individual does not bargain with them—he takes it or leaves it.
Labor organizations, authorized or permitted by government, have
interfered with nature’s laws. Had property and liberty developed
as Smith hoped, it might have turned out differently. But even his
ideas of property and liberty would have required action by govern-
ment to prevent any individual from holding more property than
he could physically use and to prevent individuals associating in cor-
porations and unions.

Natural economy continues to operate. Mechanism cannot over-
ride scarcity. ‘Demand and supply ” cannot be eliminated, for it
proceeds from the limited supply of nature’s resources and the pro-
portioning of human effort through division of labor. But collective
action of political and industrial governments has reproportioned
considerably the limiting and complementary factors, and obtained
a different national result from that intended by nature as interpreted
by Adam Smith.

Smith had hoped to reduce collective power to its lowest limits
and thereby raise the individual to the highest power. But it has
happened differently. The wealth of nations did not start with
the French Revolution. The property and liberty of that period
were but a passing result of governmental proportioning and
reproportioning of inducements, and that reproportioning has kept
on according to the purposes of those who controlled the govern-
ments. Not Adam Smith but William the Conqueror was the
founder of Anglo-American political economy. Adam Smith started
the theory, but William started the economy. Nor did Smith
start the whole of the theory. It was started by Coke, Littleton,
Seldon and the other theorists of the time preceding the Common-
wealth. Just as Adam Smith identified private wealth with com-
monwealth, so William and his lawyers, as we have seen, identified
his private property with his sovereignty. William was the public.
His “weal” was the “public weal.” His private purposes were pub-
lic purposes. His will was the collective will. Not until the time
of the Commonwealth did the notion of public purpose get clearly
separated out from the private purposes of the sovereign. Clinched
by the Act of Settlement, this separation of property from sover-
eignty, of private wealth from commonwealth, signified a field where
the will of the individual should be final, and another field where the
collective will should be final. One was the field of property, the


PUBLIC PURPOSE 325


other of sovereignty. One was private wealth, the other common-
wealth. The latter, however, owing to the objectionable way in
which it was asserted by Cromwell, came to be known by other terms,
such as “common good,”’ the ‘“‘weal public,” “common right,” “pub-
lic policy” and “public purpose.”

What it signified was a considerably different proportioning of
inducements to willing and unwilling persons, according to the oper-
ations of the collective will. Certain classes of subjects—merchants,
manufacturers, tenant farmers—hitherto looked down upon, were
now able to have the collective power of the nation exercised in their
behalf under the name of Freedom; while under the name of Liberty
they were exempt from duties to their landlords and sovereign, and
under the name of Immunities were exempt from the collective will
itself. This was the field of private wealth, apportioned to individuals
as their share of the commonwealth, the field of property and liberty
as their share of the public power, the area of private will assigned
by the collective will.

New apportionments have followed, as we well know, in England
and America. The widening of the suffrage introduced additional
participants in formulating the collective will. The definitions of
property and liberty were enlarged to include both the private will
of the propertyless laborer and the collective will of corporations and
other going concerns, each defined, supported and enforced by the
collective will of the nation. So that the apportionment has not been
that of property in the physical sense of lands and buildings, but has
been the apportionment of property and liberty in the behavioristic
sense of encumbrances and opportunities limiting and widening the
transactions and expectations of persons. It is the proportioning of
inducements to act, by imposing encumbrances in certain directions
and liberating opportunities in other directions, always with refer-
ence to what is deemed that public policy which is the commonwealth.

Public Policy, said the English jurist, “is a very unruly horse, and
when once you get astride of it you never know where it will carry
you.” 1 It is, indeed, unruly for it lives in the feelings rather than
logic, the field of values rather than mathematics. Every individual,
every judge and every official of government has a different set of
habits and emotions from every other individual, and the resulting
emotions of value are the very center of individuality. Quite cor-

1 Burroughs, J., 2 Bing. 252 (1824).


326 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


rectly here, as elsewhere, the courts endeavor to escape this unruly
horse by seeking some external rule fixed in the nature of things that
does not change with changing valuations. But try as they may they
cannot escape valuing consciously or unconsciously, by logic or habit,
the relative importance of the human interests at stake. Every trans-
action is weighed at every point according to what is deemed to be
a public purpose. The public policy, for example, requires the ju-
dicial branch of government to decide whether a contract is freely
and intelligently made, but liberty is a matter of the degree of coer-
cion, and the definition of liberty is a definition of the allowable
amount of pressure that may be employed in order to induce action,
and this proportioning of permissible persuasion or coercion, com-
mand and obedience, depends, in turn, on the relative importance
assigned to persons and classes of persons.

But, even if a contract is freely and intelligently made, yet, if it
“bind the maker to do something opposed to the public policy of
state or nation, or conflicts with the wants, interest or prevailing
sentiment of the people, or our obligations to the world, or is repug-
nant to the morals of the time, it is void, however solemnly the same
may be made.” ! “The inquiry must, in each instance, where no
former precedent had occurred, have been into the tendency of the
act to interfere with the general interest.” ? “If there be any doubt
what is the law, judges solve such doubts by considering what will
be the good or bad effects of their decision.” * In all cases the ques-
tion of whether the collective power shall come to the aid of the in-
dividual in enforcing contracts turns on the relative human values
attributed to the persons or classes of persons involved.

The same is true when the other great determining powers of the
state, the taxing power, the power of eminent domain, the police
power, are employed by the legislative branch of government to re-
proportion the inducements to individuals and classes. The taxing
power ‘“‘may not be used for private purposes.” But it always is
used for private purposes and can be used in no other way, for its
effect is to reduce the field of freedom and liberty for the taxpayer
and enlarge the field of freedom and liberty for all who are benefited
by the tax. The question always is, not, What is a private purpose


1 Greenhood, Pub. Pol. r (1886).
2 Lord Lyndhurst, 4 H. L. C. 161 (1853).
34H. L. C. 146 (1853); 3 Bing. 500.


PUBLIC PURPOSE B27


over against a public purpose? but, Is the private purpose also a
public purpose, or merely a private purpose? Will the behavior of
the persons benefited prove to be, in the direction of that benefit,
also a public benefit? Are they a limiting factor, at that point, in
multiplying the total welfare of the nation, and should their field of
action be enlarged by restricting the field of others? Are they valued
as a part of the public respecting that particular transaction, or are
they valued as instruments to carry out the will of private persons?
In the words of Lord Coke in reporting the case of Monopolies, Is
the ‘‘ increase ” of their “‘substance”’ “profitable for the common-
wealth? ” + Will their private wealth be also a commonwealth?

Thus each individual is a “public utility” to the extent that the
public powers are employed in his behalf against others, and a public
“disutility ”’ to the extent that the public powers are employed against
him in behalf of others. The term “public utility,” has, in recent
years, come to signify a special class of private business, like railways,
highways, water supply, and so on, peculiarly affected by a public
interest. But all private business and jobs are affected with a public
interest in so far as the collective powers are directed to their pro-
tection or furtherance against superior power of others. What is
signified by this recent meaning of “public utility” springs rather
from the idea that, to a certain extent, the business is a peculiar
public disutility and is therefore sorted out for special restraint
by imposing on its owners new duties of performance, avoidance, for-
bearance, in the interest of those who are deemed “the public.” Every
private business or job has, in fact, the qualities of both public utility
and public disutility, depending on the current economic and human
valuations. And it is in restraining the behavior believed to produce
public disutility, by imposing new duties, that the opposite behavior
of other persons believed to produce public utility is protected and
liberated.

For neither public utility nor private utility is in physical things.
It is in the expected transactions of persons using physical things
as instruments in serving others and thereby inducing them to render
service in turn. While the above physical objects, as going plants,
have acquired the name public utilities, it is rather the potential
or expected transactions of their owners, employees, managers,
that constitute the utility in question, and it is their expected behavior

1 rz Co. 84 b (1601); above, Chap. VII, Sec. I, p. 227.


328 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


that is useful or disuseful to the public. The owners have devoted
their property to a “public use.” So have their employees and
managers devoted their faculties to a public use. In either case
their property is their expected share in the national wealth to be
obtained through transactions with other persons. “The public,”
in these cases, is the expected consumers or users of their intended
services, and it is through transactions with them that their share
of the commonwealth is obtained.

It is only by way of historical accident that these businesses have
been sorted out as public business distinguished from private business.
At the beginning of modern market development, as shown by Adler,'
every person who held himself out ‘‘to deal with persons indifferently
for profit,’ as distinguished from those who followed their occupation
for their own use or the use of a particular landlord or patron, was
considered as devoting his skill or occupation to the use of the public,
and therefore subjecting himself to duties to the public. The term
“common employment” meant employed by “‘persons indifferently, ”
that is, by the public; “common” meant simply “business” as
distinguished from production for self or landlord or master; and the
term “‘private business” is a ‘‘contradiction in terms.” The person
engaged in business requires new and enlarged assistance of the
collective power, as against the assistance needed to follow his occu-
pation for private use, and this carries reciprocal new and enlarged
duties to the public which assists him. Not until the time of Adam
Smith did this notion of duty give way to liberty, not perceiving
that liberty carried exposure with it, and it has required another
hundred years to swing back again from liberty to duty.

But the public need not be all of the public. It may bea particular
individual. The Supreme Court declared that a single farmer in
Utah might exercise the power of eminent domain to carry enough
water for his use alone.” But he was granted that power not as an
individual—he was granted it on account of the expected public
purpose he would serve, by augmenting the national resources.
He was granted it as a class of individuals, though he happened to
be the only member of the class

The public is not any particular individual, it is a classification of


' AvLER, E. A., “Business Jurisprudence,” 28 Harv. Law Rev. 135 (1914); “Labor, Capital
and Business at Common Law,” 29 Harv. Law Rev. 241 (1916).
2 Clark v. Nash, 198 U. S. 361 (1905).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 320


activities in the body politic deemed to be of value to the rest of the
public, rather than a classification of individuals. Anybody who
comes along “‘indifferently,”’ and gets himself into a position where
he might perform that class of activity, is the public. His private
interests, when he gets in that position, are deemed identical with
the public interest. When this identity is recognized by the func-
tionaries of government, then to him is granted a certain share of
that collective power which he did not enjoy before, and, correspond-
ingly, the owners of the public disutility which places undue limits
on that activity are subjected to duties of avoidance, performance
or forbearance which they did not obey before.

This is the process of classification and reclassification according
to the purposes of the ruling authorities, a process which has advanced
with every change in economic evolution and every change in feelings
and habits towards human beings, and which is but the proportioning
and reproportioning of inducements to willing and unwilling persons,
according to what is believed to be the degree of desired reciprocity
between them. For, classification is the selection of a certain factor,
deemed to be a limiting factor, and enlarging the field of that factor
by restraining the field of other limiting factors, in order to accomplish
what is deemed to be the largest total result from all. It is the process
of political economy, which enlarges what is deemed to be the common-
wealth by merely proportioning the factors that compose it. Thus,
when the hoped-for welfare of women or children comes to be believed
to be a limiting factor in the national economy, their hours of labor
are reduced or their minimum wages raised, by imposing new duties
on employers or parents, under the belief that merely this new appor-
tionment of freedom or collective power, regardless of other changes
in the quantity of labor, or of national resources, or of individual
efficiency, will increase the national welfare. So with all other legis-
lative and judicial decisions which determine Freedom in one direc-
tion by imposing liability in the opposite direction. Each is but a
classification of persons according to beliefs in their public value,
with the intention of reproportioning the national economy and thus
enlarging the commonwealth.

It is often charged against legislation that the state does not create
wealth—only private activity is wealth-producing. The charge is,
of course, true. Legislation only classifies activities and proportions
the inducements to wealth-producers. Individuals do the rest. But


330 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


so might it be said of other economies. Economy is merely proportion-
ing the factors by limiting some and expanding others. Yet the
total product of the combined factors is enormously increased if the
best possible proportioning is obtained, or it disappears altogether if a
bad proportioning is adopted. The business man’s principal business
is not that of working with his hands, but is that of proportioning
the different kinds of work, materials and machines, so that, within
his given resources and markets, certain kinds of work are not over-
supplied and therefore wasted by diminishing their value, and other
kinds are not under-supplied and therefore also wasted by not
taking advantage of their higher value for his purposes. So it is
with legislation and judicial decision. They do nothing but pro-
portion inducements, and individuals do the rest. But they may
waste the commonwealth by bad proportioning, may enlarge it
by good proportioning.

Since the time of Elizabeth, the limiting factors have been thought,
on the whole, to be “capital,” or rather investors’ savings and business
ability. Land and labor seemed to be complementary factors fur-
nished by nature, but investment and enterprise were limiting factors
requiring the power of the state to induce their potential owners to
act. Latterly, it began to be felt that the proportioning in this
direction was being overdone, and that land and labor also were not
merely forces of nature but were the owners of land and owners of
labor whose inducements were also being proportioned by the very
laws which proportioned the inducements to investors and business
men. Consequently, labor in its various classifications came to be
looked upon as limiting factors and as such came to be liberated by
imposing duties and enlarging exposures on owners of land, invest-
ments and business ability. In all cases the principle of classification
has been the good or bad proportioning of behavior by proportioning
inducements to contribute to what is believed to be the commonwealth.

Whether these various apportionments of collective power serve
to augment the total welfare is a matter of opinion and judgment,
and depends on the relative human values attributed by the deter-
mining officials of government, at the time, to those who are bene-
fited and those who are burdened. Opinions clash, and it never
can be expected that those who are burdened will look at the process
in the same light as those who are benefited. For this reason the
history of Anglo-American jurisprudence is a history of efforts to


PUBLIC PURPOSE Ber


work out fundamental principles of classification which shall permit
new proportioning of the national economy without unduly disturbing
the old. This history is epitomized in the largest term known to
jurisprudence, “due process of Jaw,”’ which was identified by Coke
and Littleton with the “law of the land” as used in Magna Carta.
Said Littleton in his argument preceding the Petition of Right in
1628, ‘“‘‘Law of the land’ must of necessity be understood in this
nation to be by due process of law, and not the law of the land gen-
erally, or otherwise it would comprehend bondmen (whom we call
villeins) who are excluded by the word ‘liber’; for the general law
of the land doth allow their lords to imprison them at their pleasure
without cause, wherein they only differ from the freemen in respect
of their persons, who cannot be imprisoned without a cause.”! Thus
“due process of law”? became identical, not with the total ‘law of
the land” but with the law of freemen. It is the law of citizenship,
and citizens are the only “persons” known to law.

The term appears negatively in the American constitutions and
amendments. Neither the federal government nor the state govern-
ments are permitted to deprive citizens of life, liberty or property
without due process of law, or deny to any citizen the equal protection
of the laws. Stated positively, the government may deprive persons
of life, liberty or property with due process of law and with equal
protection of the laws. In other words, the officers of government
are limited by due process and equal protection, but, within those
limits they may reproportion the national economy by a reclassi-
fication of persons for the purpose of assigning to them what is deemed
a proper share in the expected burdens and benefits of the common-
wealth. Due process of law thus signifies the classification of persons
according to what is deemed their public value. Due process is due
classification, and classification is a rearrangement of the working
rules of going concerns.


III. THE WorkiNG RULES oF GoING CONCERNS


Throughout the history of legal theories in all countries there has
been a notable double meaning of words. Words are symbols or
signs by which men convey to each other not only interesting ideas
but also inducements to act. It was late in Anglo-American history


13 How. St. Tr. 86.


332 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


before the word ‘‘law” was separated by Austin into the two meanings
of justice and commands.! One is related to the ethical idea of that
which is right as against that which is wrong. The other is a working
rule of a going concern, laid down by authority. One is a purpose of
obtaining justice—the other is a process of command and obedience.
Similar ambiguities afflicted the Roman jus, the German recht, the
French droit. They signified either justice and right as against injus-
tice and wrong, or rules and regulations as against the unruly and
unregulated.

There was, of course, a certain pragmatic advantage in this con-
fusion of purpose and process under the same sign. Purpose springs
from the intentions of benevolent or malevolent beings, whether
gods, devils or men, but process is the mere behavior of men. If
the process can be justified by reference to a benevolent or ethical
purpose it loses that stigma of arbitrary or despotic commands of
a sovereign or proprietor which otherwise might provoke unruly
conduct. In the early history of any concern the justification proceeds
on accepted lines of authority derived from a superior being without
question. But where this authority begins to be questioned, for any
reason, there philosophical discussions ensue which turn on the
distinction between the purpose of law and the process of law. Yet
the distinction is not clear on account of the double meaning of the
word law itself. Kant defined right or law (recht) in such a way as to
include in the same definition both the abstract purpose of individual
liberty and the abstract process of universal law. Hegel gave to
this definition an evolutionary growth as the unfolding of the ‘‘idea”
of liberty through the unfolding of the “idea” of law.? Law was
looked upon, not as the working rules of a going concern adopted by
the participants in a world of limited resources according to the prin-
ciple of scarcity, but as a mechanical unfolding of ideal concepts
of liberty, justice and law. The individual was the unit, liberty the
goal and law the mechanism. Yet every concern must have its
working rules, which are its laws. These spring from authority,
custom, habit, initiative, or what not. They are the common law,
the statute law, the equity jurisprudence of the concern. The state,
the business concern and the cultural concern are alike in their depend-


1 Austin, Joun, Lectures on Jurisprudence, 5th ed. 100. Although Austin is justly criti-
cised for overlooking the part played by custom in the origin of law yet the two meanings
of justice and custom are likewise separable.

2 Cp. Pounp, Roscor, Interpretations of Legal History, 28, 46 (1923).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 333


ence on these working rules, the difference being mainly in the kind
of sanctions, whether physical, economic, or moral, which they can
bring to bear in enforcing the rules. And the declarations and enforce-
ment of the rules create a complete outfit of rights, duties, liberties
and exposures of each member occupying each position in the partic-
ular concern.

The unfolding of these rules is an historical process brought about
through the decision of disputes between members of the concern,
and it is this unfolding of decisions that necessitates at all times,
but especially at times of great economic or social change, the dis-
tinction to be made between the purpose of the working rules and the
process of making and enforcing them. The change has been wrought
out by the American courts by changing the definitions of “due
process of law.”’ This change has occurred during the past forty years
along with the changes in definition of property and liberty. If we
notice this change in the concept of working rules brought about in
that coercive concern the state we shall be able to understand the
similar process in industrial concerns and cultural concerns.

Prior to the Civil War due process of law signified due procedure
of law. Now it signifies also due purpose of law. The change in def-
inition was worked out in the great case of Hurtado v. California,!
against the protest of Justice Harlan who clung to the old definition.
According to the common law, the “Jaw of the land,” no person could
be put in jeopardy of life except by way of indictment by a grand
jury. The state of California changed this procedure by authorizing
the district attorney merely to present an information. Hurtado
was charged with murder, not by a grand jury, but by the prosecut-
ing attorney. The Supreme Court held that ‘due process,” the
ancient ‘“‘law of the land,” did not require any “particular form of
procedure,” provided the tribunal which decided the case had juris-
diction and the proceedings were such as to get all of the facts be-
fore the tribunal, so as to maintain “those fundamental principles
of liberty and justice ” for which procedure is only the instrument.
Law, said the court, approving the words of Daniel Webster, is “ the
general law, a law which hears before it condemns, which proceeds
upon inquiry and renders judgment only after trial,” so “ that every
citizen shall hold his life, liberty, property and immunities under the
protection of the general rules that govern society.” ” In so far as

1330 U. S. 516 (1884). 2 Hurtado Case, at pp. 535, 536.


334 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


procedure is deemed necessary for these general purposes it resolves
itself into that minimum of procedure by which all of the facts are
brought before the court, including opportunity of the defendant to
be heard through counsel, with all that that implies of notice and
approved judicial methods of investigation.

Prior to the Hurtado Case, in the first case in which the meaning
of due process of law was elaborately discussed,’ the court had held
to the original meaning of due process. It observed that the consti-
tution contained neither a description of the processes, nor a decla-
ration of the principles, which it was intended to allow, forbid, or
apply, in construing the phrase. It, however, asserted that “the
words ‘ due process of law’ were undoubtedly intended to convey the
same meaning as the words ‘ by the law of the land’ ”’; and there was
a difference between “legal process” and “‘due process.” ‘The war-
rant in question is legal process,” said the court. “It was issued in
conformity with an act of Congress. But is it ‘due process of law’?” ?
The case was that of an executive officer exercising judicial func-
tions by summary procedure without notice or hearing, under an act
of Congress, in the collection of a “debt owing the government by
another government official.” The question was whether a levy on
lands by an executive officer without hearing or trial was due proc-
ess of law. In answering the question, the court reviewed the cus-
toms and statutes of England and the colonists, and found that that
same executive process had been used in similar cases. It found, not
perhaps an underlying principle, but at least a distinction between
this and ordinary cases, in that, while private persons might not be
deprived of property without judicial inquiry, yet “imperative ne-
cessity”’ forced a distinction in the procedure between claims against
them and claims for moneys owed to government by a collector of
customs. (275, 278.) Here the subject-matter of the case was the line
of demarkation between the legislative, the executive and the judi-
cial branches of the federal government, and due process of law was
decided to be immemorial usage.

Thus the opinion in the Murray’s Lessees Case in 1855 looked
for the meaning of due process in the intention of the framers of the
constitution, and it looked for evidence that those usages were not


1 Murray’s Lessees v. Hoboken, etc., 18 How. 272 (1855). Cp. McGEHEE, “Due Process
of Law,” 23 (1906).
2 Tbid., 18 How. 276.


ah


PUBLIC PURPOSE 335


unsuited to the civil and political condition in this country by in-
quiring whether they had been acted upon by the colonists after the
settlement of this country and even after the adoption of the con-
stitution. This method has been more or less followed, the court
saying in 1896, ‘Whether the mode of proceeding, prescribed by this
statute, and followed in this case, was due process of law, depends
upon the question whether it was in substantial accord with the law
and usage in England before the Declaration of Independence, and
in this country since it became a nation, in similar cases.” ! But in
1876, the court had foreshadowed a different view when it said that,
while the common law furnishes forms of procedure, ‘‘a person has
no property, no vested interest, in any rule of the common law. That
is only one of the forms of municipal law, and is no more sacred than
any other.” ”

But in the case of Hurtado v. California, in 1884, the question was
whether a state legislature could dispense with the grand jury selected
from the people, the most important feature of the common law in
protecting the citizen against arbitrary action of officials, and could
allow a prosecution for murder to be made on a mere information
filed by a prosecuting attorney. Here the court enlarged the mean-
ing of due process to include procedure not found in the “settled
usage” of England or this country. In explaining away Murray’s
Lessees v. Hoboken, Justice Matthews said that although the pro-
cedure in that case was exceptional, ‘‘as tested by definitions and
principles of ordinary procedure,” nevertheless it had been “‘immemo-
rially the law of the land and, therefore, is due process of law.”’ But,
said the court, “‘it by no means follows that nothing else can be due
process of law.” Grand juries are by name specifically required in
the federal courts by the Fifth and Sixth Amendments, and the ques-
tion in the Hurtado Case, was whether they were required in state
courts under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The court, in the opinion rendered by Justice Matthews, reached the
following conclusions: *

1st. If we follow the immemorial usages and customs of England
back to the earliest times, we find that they then justified practices
which now would be considered cruel and superstitious. ‘It is


1Lowe v. Kansas, 163 U. S. 81, 85 (1896).
2 Munn ». Ill., 904 U. S. 113, 134 (1876).
3 Hurtado v. California, ibid., 528-535.


336 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


better not to go too far back into antiquity for the best securities for
our ancient liberties.”

ad. There are other lands besides England which have “ideas
and processes of civil justice,” and “it was the characteristic prin-
ciple of the common law to draw its inspiration from every fountain
of justice.”

3d. If we go back to Magna Carta we find that it contained noth-
ing that can rightly be construed as a “broad charter of public right
and law,”’ but was wrung from the King by the barons for their own
purposes and contained nothing to protect the people against the
barons; so that “the omnipotence of Parliament over the common
law was absolute, even against common right and reason.” But in
our country, written constitutions protect the rights and liberties
of the people broadly and against ‘‘all the powers of government,
legislative as well as executive and judicial.”

4th. Particular forms and modes of procedure which in England
might be used to restrain the executive precisely and in detail might
prove obstructive and injurious when “‘imposed on the just and nec-
essary discretion of legislative power.” This kind of restraint would,
however, be enforced by the court against the legislature, but only
where the constitution contains “‘express and specific injunctions and
prohibitions.”

5th. In other cases, where the constitution imposes only a “‘gen-
eral principle or maxim, founded on the essential nature of law as a
just and reasonable expression of the public will and of government,
as instituted by popular consent and for the general good,” these
ancient forms of procedure ‘“‘can only be applied to cases coming
clearly within the scope of its spirit and purpose, and not to legisla-
tive provisions merely establishing forms and modes of attainment.”

6th. But legislative powers are not absolute and despotic. “Law
is something more than mere will exerted as an act of power.”’ Apply-
ing the language of Webster, quoted above, the court excluded, as
not due process of law, acts of attainder, bills of pains and penalties,
acts of confiscation, acts reversing judgments, acts directly trans-
ferring one man’s estate to another, legislative judgments and de-
crees, and “other similar special, partial and arbitrary exertions of
power under the forms of legislation.”

7th. On this account law is progressive and can break away from
ancient procedure and can adapt new procedure to new conditions.


PUBLIC PURPOSE 337


Procedure itself is but the embodiment, at the time, of fundamental
principles of personal liberty and individual right. “It follows that
any legal proceeding enforced by public authority, whether sanctioned
by age or custom, or merely devised in the discretion of the legisla-
tive power, in furtherance of the general public good, which regards
and preserves these principles of liberty and justice, must be held to
be due process of law,” and due process of law ‘“‘must be held to guar-
antee not particular forms of procedure, but the very substance of
individual rights to life, liberty and property.” It is not particular
forms that make up our civil and political institutions, but ‘those
fundamental principles of liberty and justice”? which lie at their
base.

Justice Harlan wrote a vigorous dissent ! to these opinions of the
majority in the court, and showed that no case could be found in the
law of England where indictment by grand jury was dispensed with
in cases where the life of the defendant was at stake. The court had
not merely allowed the common-law rule to be modified—it had abol-
ished it altogether so far as the requirement of due process of law was
concerned. He distinguished “equal protection” from “due process.”
Conceding the principle of general laws which thereby secure equal
protection, he held that by the same reasoning trial by jury could be
dispensed with by general laws applying equally to all capital offenses.
“Tt is difficult,”’ he said, ‘‘to perceive anything in the system of pros-
ecuting human beings for their lives, by information, which suggests
that the state which adopts it has entered upon an era of progress
and improvement in the law of criminal procedure.” (553.)

Yet, notwithstanding Justice Harlan’s protest, the great and im-
portant change was made in the definition of due process of law. It
now becomes due purpose distinguished from due procedure. The
term ‘‘procedure” becomes the orderly, regulated behavior of the
courts; the term “purpose” becomes the public purpose towards
which that behavior is believed to be directed. This great distinction
runs through all of the cases which, since the Hurtado Case, have
turned on the meaning of due process of law. One of its large points
of significance is the distinction drawn between property right and
personal right, the former having to do with the exchange-values of
property, the latter with rights that do not immediately involve ex-
change-values, or prices. At some points property rights are deemed

1 Hurtado v. Cal., 538-553.


338 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


to be more important, at other points personal rights, and the differ-
ence of opinions between justices is largely a difference as to which,
in the particular case, is the more important for the due purpose of
law. This distinction will appear in the following majority and
minority opinions.

What the court decided in the Hurtado Case was that the require-
ment of a grand jury in federal courts does not apply to state courts.
Under the Seventh Amendment no person may be tried for felony in
a federal court except on indictment by a grand jury. This, in so
many words, incorporated the common-law procedure into the fed-
eral constitution. The Fourteenth Amendment would have made
the same procedure mandatory on the states had the court defined
due process of law as due procedure. Defining it, however, as due
purpose, the states are free to abolish or modify the common-law pro-
cedure, although the national legislature is not thus free. Following
the Hurtado Case, Justice Harlan’s prediction has been fulfilled. The
court had already, in 1875, prepared the way by holding that the
Fourteenth Amendment did not require the first ten amendments
(which had to do with procedure and constituted the Federal Bill of
Rights taken over from the common law) to apply to the states. The
Seventh Amendment guarantees the right of trial by jury in federal
courts, but in that year the Supreme Court held that it did not apply
to civil cases in state courts. The ‘‘states are left to regulate trials
in their own courts in their own way.” 4

The right to trial by a jury was the right to trial by a jury of twelve
persons and this was so held in federal cases under the Seventh
Amendment. But in 1goo, the court declared that a conviction and
eighteen years’ imprisonment decided in a state court on information
filed by the prosecuting attorney and a finding made by a jury of
eight persons, instead of twelve, did not deprive the defendant of
equal protection of the law and due process of law.” To this, again,
Justice Harlan dissented. “Tf,” he said, “prior to the adoption of
the Fourteenth Amendment it was one of the privileges and immuni-
ties of citizens of the United States . . . how can it be that a citizen
of the United States may now be tried . . . by eight jurors when the
amendment expressly says, ‘No state shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the


1 Walker v. Sauvinet, 92 U. S. 90 (1875).
2 Maxwell v. Dow, 176 U. S. 58r (1900).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 339


United States.’” ' Referring to railway and taxation cases previously
decided, where the court had vetoed the state legislature in its at-
tempt to regulate and tax private property,” Justice Harlan said,
“Tf, then, the ‘due process of law’ required by the Fourteenth Amend-
ment does not allow a state to take private property without just
compensation, but does allow the life and liberty of the citizen to be
taken in a mode that is repugnant to the settled usages and the modes
of proceeding authorized at the time the constitution was adopted,
and which was expressly forbidden in the National Bill of Rights, it
would seem that the protection of private property is of more conse-
quence than the protection of the life and liberty of the citizen.” ?

In 1904 the court decided that the common-law rule, required by
the Sixth Amendment in federal courts, that defendants in criminal
cases had the right to be confronted by witnesses and could not be
convicted on written testimony, did “not apply to proceedings in
state courts,” if all defendants in all cases were equally deprived of
the right. * To this again Justice Harlan dissented.

In 1908 the court decided that the exemption from self-incrimina-
tion guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment in federal courts, did not
apply to state courts, provided self-incriminations were equally en-
forced on all defendants under similar circumstances.’ Justice Harlan
again dissented, saying, “‘As I read the opinion of the court, it will
follow from the general principles underlying it, or from the reason-
ing pursued therein, that the Fourteenth Amendment would be no
obstacle whatever in the way of a state law or practice under which,
for instance, cruel or unusual punishments (such as the thumb screw,
or the rack or burning at the stake) might be inflicted. So of a state
law which infringed the right of free speech, or authorized unreason-
able searches or seizures of persons, their houses, papers or effects,
or a state law under which one accused of crime could be put in jeop-
ardy twice or oftener, at the pleasure of the prosecution, for the same
offense.”’ ®

In 1915 the Supreme Court refused the writ of habeas corpus on the
appeal of a defendant convicted of murder in a state court, the defend-


1 Maxwell v. Dow, 176 U. S. 612.

2C., B. & Q. R. Co. v. Chi., 166 U. S. 226 (1896); Norwood v. Baker, 172 U.S. 269
(1808).

3 Op. cit., 176 U. S. 614.

4 West v. Louisiana, 194 U. S. 258 (1904).

6 Twining v. New Jersey, 211 U. S. 78 (1908).

6 Tbid., at p. 125.


340 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


ant alleging mob domination of the court and jury, and involuntary
absence of the prisoner during a part of the trial. The ground of the
refusal by the Supreme Court was that the state Supreme Court had
heard the case and refused the writ. “Since,” said the court, “a state
may abolish trial by jury so also may it limit the effect given to error
in the trial and may permit the prisoner to waive presence at the
trial.” !_ The line of dissenting opinions from Justice Harlan having
ceased with his death, the dissent was now taken up by Justices
Holmes and Hughes, who, declaring that the federal Supreme Court
had only recently overruled the procedure of a state Supreme Court in
the case of property rights ? where the state court had observed the
forms of due process and equal protection but had not protected the
substance, added, ‘‘ We see no reason for a less liberal rule in a matter
of life and death. . . . To maintain this immunity [of local courts
from outside control by a mob] it may be necessary that the suprem-
acy of the law and of the federal constitution should be vindicated in
a case like this... . It is our duty to act upon them now and to
declare lynch law as little valid when practiced by a regularly drawn
jury as when administered by one elected by a mob intent on death.” ®

The foregoing cases, from Hurtado in 1884 to Frank in 1915, in-
dicate the different meaning given to due process of law when the
term applies to the federal government under the first ten amend-
ments and when it applies to a state: government under the Fourteenth
Amendment. The federal courts in federal cases are held to the com-
mon-law procedure; the states are permitted to change and abolish
that procedure.

This difference in meaning began, as we have seen, with the ma-
jority and minority opinions in the Slaughter House Cases in 1872
and completed its double meaning with the unanimous opinion in
the Allgeyer Case in 1896. In the Slaughter House Cases the majority
of the Supreme Court refused to define due process of law, as used in
the Fourteenth Amendment, so as to take over by the national govern-
ment the protection of property and liberty of contract against the
acts of state governments. To this definition the court has adhered
in the cases of criminal procedure, where the rights of life and personal
liberty are at stake, and has left the states to regulate criminal trials


1 Frank v. Magnum, 237 U. S. 309 (zo1s).
2 Simon v. So. Ry. Co., 236 U. S. 115 (1915).
3 Op. cit. 237 U.S. 347, 349-50.


PUBLIC PURPOSE 341


in their own way. But in the case of property rights, as we have seen,
a different definition of due process came in with the Minnesota Rate
Case in 1890. The court then determined that due process signified
a right purpose, and that, even though the procedure was right, yet
the federal courts should have jurisdiction to ascertain whether the
corporation was deprived of the reasonable value of its property.
The purpose must be right, as well as the procedure.

This view was finally rounded out and given its complete statement
in the case of the C., B. & Q. Ry. Co. v. Chicago, in 1896,! the same
session with the Allgeyer Case,” which decided that liberty of contract
was property. In the Railroad Case the court defined due process, as
applied to property rights, as a process not satisfied with the mere form
of procedure, including notice and hearing, but requiring also substan-
tial justice to the property interests involved. The definition of due
process, as drawn from that case, is formulated by McGehee as “the
administration of equal laws, according to established rules, not vio-
lative of established rights, by a competent tribunal, having jurisdic-
tion of the case, and proceeding upon notice and hearing.” * This
definition, however, is not quite adequate, for it is couched in terms of
procedure, and overlooks the new meaning of purpose which the court
was formulating. It should read as follows: Due process of law is
the equal administration of laws, according to established rules, not
violative of established rights that are deemed important by the court, by
a competent tribunal having jurisdiction of the case, and proceeding
upon notice and hearing.

Under this amended definition the court completed, in 1896,
the change in definition of due process in the cases of property rights,
just as it completed, in the Allgeyer Case in the same year, the change
in definition of property and liberty. Liberty, in the Allgeyer Case,
came to mean the liberty of business to buy and sell, and due process,
in the railway cases, came to mean the reasonable value of the prop-
erty bought and sold. Neither of these, any longer, are to be left
to the states to be determined in their own way.

Thus the double meaning of due process of law is completed.
In the case of property rights it signifies an important purpose as
well as procedure; in the case of personal rights it signifies any pro-


1166 U. S. 226 (1806).
2 Allgeyer v. Louisiana, 165 U. S. 580 (1897).
3 McGrKEE, Due Process of Law, 1.


342 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


cedure and a less important purpose. In the case of property rights
the federal courts determine both whether the procedure is right and
the purpose is important; in the case of personal rights the federal
courts inquire only whether the procedure is right because the purpose
is less important. The procedure is tested by equal protection of the
laws. It is right if it deprives all persons of property and liberty
equally under similar circumstances. The purpose is tested by the
value of the deprivation. It is not right if it deprives them of estab-
lished rights that are deemed important.

If the rights of which they are deprived are sufficiently important,
then due process of law signifies that they shall have the protection
of the federal government against the states; if not sufficiently im-
portant, then the states may take away the procedure if they do it
equally to all persons in the same classification. The distinction was
clearly expressed by Justice Moody, in the Twining Case, above
referred to, when he said that ‘“‘salutary as the principle [immunity
from self-incrimination] may seem ‘to the great majority it cannot
be ranked with the right of hearing before condemnation, the immunity
from arbitrary power not acting by general laws and the inviolability
of private property.” 1! And the distinction was equally well ex-
pressed by Justices Holmes and Hughes in the Frank Case where
they said, ‘‘We see no reason for a less liberal rule in a matter of
life and death.”

Thus property rights are deemed to be so important for national
purposes that the Fourteenth Amendment authorizes the federal
court to protect them against the states. But personal rights, in-
cluding, as they do, the rights of workingmen and others where
property interests are negligible, are deemed to be less important
for national purposes and may be left to the states. And it came
about that while, prior to the Hurtado Case, due process of law had
been identified with common-law procedure, now it comes to mean
“whatever process seems due to the demands of the times, as under-
stood by the judges of the time being.” ?


IV. DuE Process oF THINKING


If, in the last jeopardy of life and death the grand jury and other
procedure of the common law, which had been erected for the sole


arr Ws Serr.
* Hoven, C. M., “Due Process of Law To-Day,” 32 Harv. Law Rev. 218, 233 (1919).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 343


purpose of protecting the individual’s life and liberty against the
arbitrary power of the crown, can be dispensed with, then in the lesser
jeopardy of economic liberty and property, other procedure of the
common law may be dispensed with, provided liberty and exchange-
value of property are protected. So, administrative commissions
have been set up in great variety, and authorized by the Supreme
Court, to regulate prices, wages, markets, competition, with power
to investigate, to enter on private property, to compel testimony,
to weigh the facts, to issue orders and to prosecute violators of their
orders before the courts. American constitutions had separated the
legislative, executive and judicial functions, but the new definition of
due process amended the constitution by merging somewhat in these
commissions legislative, executive and judicial procedure. Not the
procedure is important, but the purpose in the procedure.

For procedure is but the authoritative behavior of officials dealing
with each other and with citizens. It is the working rules of govern-
ment which determine the direction in which the collective power
shall guide behavior. Certain directions are deemed beneficial, others
detrimental. In the beneficial directions transactions are authorized,
in the detrimental directions, restrained. Purpose governs the work-
ing rules.

What, then, is beneficial, and what is detrimental? The answer is
inseparable from the procedure. The procedure is the authoritative
purpose of the authoritative actors. It is the transactions by which
their purpose is attempted and accomplished. Having eliminated
working rules deemed unnecessary for the purpose, the actor may
choose the procedure deemed to conform to the purpose. The common
law had built up a rigid set of working rules, partly because the primi-
tive mind could not weigh the purposes back of the procedure,
and partly because a rigid rule of procedure prevented the crown
and its agents from injecting their autocratic purposes into the
transaction. Thus it had subordinated purpose to the working
rule. Just as the primitive mind could comprehend only physical
objects so it comprehended only objective usages, customs, fixed
procedure. True to the dualisms that afflicted it, procedure was
something tangible, objective, customary, fixed, natural; but pur-
pose was subjective, capricious, willful. And, just as the primi-
tive definition of property passed over, in recent times, from
tangible objects to expectations of conduct, so did the defini-


344 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


tion of due process of law pass over from orderly behavior to the pur-
pose in the behavior.

The two are inseparable, provided the actor is permitted to choose
his procedure. Procedure is the working rules of transactions, purpose
is the ideal embodied in the transaction. By eliminating what is
deemed unessential behavior, the actor chooses that procedure which
he deems valuable for his purposes. And thus when the Hurtado
decision and its many successors in many fields permitted choice of
working rules they changed the meaning of due process of law from
historic procedure to subjective purpose—from behavior to the valua-
tion of behavior. No wonder the higher courts now began to inquire,
in the case of property rights, What is the purpose of the legislatures,
of the executives, of the authorities? Their procedure has been re-
duced to its lowest elements, that of investigation of all the facts.
Now the question is, Have they given due weight to the facts?

This is the purpose of classification. Some facts are important,
others are not. Each fact does not count for one. Some of them
count for much more than one, some for much less than one. Facts
are the qualities, the faculties and transactions of persons and things.
There is no thinking without classification, for classification is the
sorting out of qualities, faculties or acts that are similar and dis-
tinguishing them from others that are dissimilar. And the reason
for sorting them out is in order to value, choose, and act. ‘‘Classifica-
tion,” said Justice McKenna,! “‘is essentially the same in law as it is
in other departments of knowledge or practice. It is the grouping of
things in speculation or practice, because they ‘agree with one an-
other in certain particulars and differ from others in those same par-
ticulars.’ Things may have very diverse qualities and yet be united
in a class. They may have very similar qualities and yet be cast in
different classes. . . . Human beings are essentially alike, yet some
individuals may have attributes not possessed by others, which may
constitute them a class. But their classification—indeed all classifica-
tion—must primarily depend upon the purpose—the problem pre-
sented. Science will have one purpose, business another, and legisla-
tion still another.”

For science is but systematized thinking. In all thinking it is a
search for truth. But truth is not part-truth—it is whole truth.
Classification, by its very process of sorting, is part-truth; a complete

1 Billings v. Ill., 88 U. S. 97, 102 (1903).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 345


classification would yield the whole truth. Each part-truth is weighed
as well as counted, and its weight is its importance in making up the
whole truth. It is not merely added to other truths—it is a fraction,
and the whole truth is a multiple of part-truths. Each classification
of part-truth is a limiting factor in the total economy of truth, for
truth is but a reflection of the economy of nature and man.

But classification in jurisprudence has an additional pragmatic
value. Its purpose is not only truth—but also justice. After due
process of law had become due purpose of law, it became, im form,
identical with that other clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, “nor
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the
laws.” Never has this signified that individuals are equal or that
they have equal rights. It signifies simply that all individuals be-
longing to the same class shall be treated equally, while treating differ-
ently, but equally within the class, individuals of different classes.
It signifies, no individual shall be treated solely as an individual but
always as belonging to a class of individuals. ‘If the purpose is
within the legal powers of the legislature,” continued Justice Mc-
Kenna,! “and the classification made has relation to that purpose
(excludes no persons or objects that are affected by the purpose, in-
cludes all that are), logically speaking, it will be appropriate; legally
speaking, a law based upon it will have equality of operation.”

Neither the Fourteenth Amendment nor any other amendment,
said Justice Field, in an earlier case,” ‘‘was designed to interfere with
the power of the state, sometimes termed its police power, to pre-
scribe regulations to promote the health, peace, morals, education,
and good order of the people, and to legislate so as to increase the
industries of the state, develop its resources, and add to its wealth
and prosperity. . . . Regulations for these purposes may press
with more or less weight upon one than upon another, but they are
designed, not to impose unequal or unnecessary restrictions upon any
one, but to promote, with as little inconvenience as possible, the gen-
eral good. . . . Class legislation, discrimination against some and
favoring others, is prohibited, but legislation which, in carrying out
a public purpose, is limited in its application, if within the sphere of
its operation it affects alike all persons similarly situated, is not
within the amendment.”

And Justice Brewer added, in 1899, ‘‘It is the essence of classifica-

10p. cit., 88 U. S. 103. 2 Barbies v. Connolly, 113 U. S. 27, 31 (1885).


346 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


tion that upon the class are cast duties and burdens different from
those resting upon the general public. . . . The very idea of classifi-
cation is that of inequality, so that it goes without saying that the
fact of inequality in no manner determines the matter of con-
stitutionality.” }

Thus arose the grand importance of precedent in Anglo-American
jurisprudence. For precedent is the instrument of classification. A
dispute arises and is brought before the court for decision. The court
seeks first for precedents. How were similar transactions previously
decided? The quest for precedents is guided by the desire to treat
this case like all similar disputes. The search for precedents is both
the scientific process of thinking straight, and the juristic process of
granting to the citizen the equal protection of the laws. Precedent
is classification, and classification is the equal treatment of all who
belong to the same class. This is the strictly judicial process of deal-
ing with individual disputes as they arise, and assigning the plain-
tiff and defendant to the class of transactions to which similar trans-
actions have previously been assigned. The judicial process is equal
treatment of individuals by classification of their transactions.

But no dispute that comes before a court is exactly similar to any
preceding one. Each case presents certain facts which, in their junc-
tion with the other facts of the case, have never before been exactly
passed upon. The new combination of facts requires a new propor-
tioning and weighing of each in order to ascertain the whole truth of
the case.

Thus every classification has two dimensions, the inclusion of all
facts that are similar, along with exclusion of all that are dissimilar,
and the weighing of each fact in order to determine its degree of sim-
ilarity. This is the process of definition, and classification is defini-
tion.

The courts rightly refuse to give fixed, a priori definitions to the
terms which they use. They proceed by the truly scientific device
of description rather than definition, and description is the judicial
process of inclusion and exclusion as cases arise, according to whether


1A., T., etc., R. Co. v. Matthews, 174 U. S. 96, 106 (1899). Cases cited showing that
while the court had at times been divided on questions of classification, “The division in
all of them was, not upon the principle or rule of separation, but upon the location of the
particular case one side or the other of the dividing line,” that is, upon the weight to be
given to the facts in the case. On this point see the historical note on principles of classifica-
tion, Truax v. Corrigan, 257 U.S. 312 (1922),


PUBLIC PURPOSE 347


the facts are deemed important or unimportant. In this they con-
sciously differ from both the untutored and the metaphysical notions
of definition. The common mind conceives that a horse is a horse,
and that is the end of it. The metaphysical notion abstracts a con-
cept of horseness, and, like Plato, fills the sky with a world of ideas
that come down and embody themselves in things; or, like Hegel or
Karl Marx, finds the “idea” of “liberty” or of “social-labor-power ”
embodied in primitive society and struggling to unfold itself
through the centuries. But the judicial mind perceives that a horse
is a horse for some purposes and something else for other purposes,
that liberty is good in some circumstances and not in others. For
the physiologist a horse is a life process, for the farmer the horse is
is horse-power, for the lawyer the horse is property, for the business
man the horse is the price of the horse. The horse is an object of in-
finite qualities, faculties, possibilities, and is classified differently for
different purposes, with a different class name, which is a different
definition. Thus definition is a collecting, by the purpose of inclu-
sion, of qualities that are deemed similar, and an eliminating, by the
process of exclusion, of qualities deemed dissimilar, always with ref-
erence to their fitness in attaining the purpose of the one who does
the classifying. In this respect, definition is classification according
to importance of the facts.

Thus definition is also valuation. A quality or faculty is known
only by its behavior. Even for strictly logical purposes a term can-
not be defined except with refezence to the context of other terms
with which it is associated. Its meaning depends upon the meaning
of the other terms defined along with it. It shades off into different
meanings in order to fit itself to their meaning. So much the more
does its importance vary when the quality or faculty is seen in action
along with other qualities and faculties also in action. Then it oper-
ates with different degrees of power according to its part in the total
of complementary qualities and faculties. ‘Legal definitions, for
the most part, are generalizations from judicial experience. To be
complete and adequate they must sum up the results of all that
experience.” Ambiguity is a quality attaching not to words
isolated from all context, but ‘to words as used in assertion and


reasoning.” *


1 Bouv., 817 and cases cited.
2 SipGwicK, ALFRED, The Application of Logic, 123 (1910).


348 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


In the case of Smythe v. Ames,! dealing with the valuation of pub-
lic service corporations, the court illustrated this process. It enum-
erated a list of facts many of them contradictory, each of which, if
abstracted and taken alone, would lead to an abstract conclusion con-
sistent only with that class of facts. Taken together, each was but a
fraction playing its part in the total transactions of a going concern,
past, present and expected. Certain classes of facts looked toward the
expected bargaining power of the corporation, such as “‘the amount
and market value of its bonds and stocks,” “‘the sum required to
meet operating expenses,” ‘‘the probable earning capacity of the
property under the particular rates prescribed by the statute.”
Other facts looked toward the past transactions of the corporation,
such as “the original cost of construction,” and ‘“‘the amount ex-
pended for permanent improvements.” Others looked at “the pres-
ent condition of the property compared with the original cost of
construction.”’ Still other facts, said the court, might need to be in-
cluded if the valuation of the property was to conform to the defini-
tion of due process of law, that is, due purpose of law. All of these
are ‘‘matters for consideration, and are to be given such weight as
may be just and right in each case,” in order to arrive at a system of
reasonable prices.

Thus the facts must not only be classified, they must also be weighed.
All of them must be weighed, each in its relation to the others, and
to each must be given its due weight. This is a process as true of
logical definition where the “meaning,” that is, the value, depends on
the context, as it is of economics or ethics where value depends on
social relations.

Weighing the facts is not a mere statistical enumeration of them.
The facts, when they come before a person, do not automatically
seek their own specific gravity. Weighing is not a mere intellectual
process of distinguishing the various qualities or faculties of objects
or persons. Nor is it a logical process of abstracting a certain class
of qualities and arranging them in a system. It is also an emotional
valuation of qualities and faculties in the process of social life. Some
of the facts may seem important to one person as reasons for the to-
tal result, and unimportant to another person. By giving undue
weight to unimportant facts a different conclusion is reached than
in giving due weight to all the facts. The facts are collected. This

li69 U. S. 466, 547 (1808).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 340


is a statistical process. But they are also assorted and selected by
inclusion and exclusion. This is classification. Classification is also
definition, for it is a sorting of similar facts under the name of a con-
cept or idea on which to string the facts. But this implies a purpose
for which the facts are selected. Some are useful for one purpose
but not for other purposes.

And this is not enough. The immediate purpose of definition is
instrumental to an ultimate purpose. The ultimate purpose is the
total of all the expectancies to which each fact or class of facts con-
tributes. This may be good or bad, worthy or unworthy, desired or
undesired, important or unimportant. This is the ultimate feeling
of value, the emotional process of valuation that tinges all definitions,
the place where the feelings exercise the power of choice by includ-
ing the facts which are felt to be important and excluding those
deemed unimportant, thus converting truth into belief, and facts
into opinions regarding facts.

Thus we may say, based on our study of the behavioristic psychol-
logy of judges,! that the process of thinking, which is also the proc-
ess of arriving at the working rules of a going concern, resolves it-
self into the purposes which guide believing. Purpose is anticipa-
tion of the future, and pulls forward. Believing is in the present.
Purpose and procedure together resolve themselves into the distin-
guishable but inseparable attributes of the human will, namely,
habits, ideals, definitions, investigations, classifications, valuations,
choices, behavior.

1. Habits are the sub-conscious setting of body, nerves and brain
on the basis of past experience and ready to set off in accustomed
directions when touched by stimulus from outside. “Habit is energy
organized in certain channels.” * When habits emerge on the thresh-
old of consciousness they seem to be the intuitive or instinctive
sense of fitness or unfitness leading the actor to choose without
thinking. When checked and balanced by that hesitating process
which we call “thinking,” it is because a mental habit of acting on
words and symbols intervenes between the impulse from without
and the physical response to the impulse. If a “meaning” is identi-
fied with these words and symbols we call that meaning an “‘idea.”

2. Ideals are ideas projected into the future by means of symbols.


1 Cp. Isaacs, NaTHAN, “How Lawyers Think,” 23 Col. Law Rev. 555 (1923).
2 Dewey, JoHN, Human Nature and Conduct, 76, passim (1922).


350 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


They are the ideas of self, of others, of the nation, ideas of duty,
right, wrong, liberty, justice, ideas of persons, ideas of prices, of
things or anything—not as a passing flash of pain, pleasure, or sen-
sation, but as a continuing experience with an unfinished future
projecting forward out of the present where the past has been finished,
and leading on. They proceed from the power of choice. Whatever
is chosen is to that extent the ideal, or part of the ideal. All ideas
as such are alike; they are mere intellectual constructs; but the
idea chosen is the ideal, because there is purpose in it, as well as in-
tellect. Ideals are ideas felt to be important for future purposes.

3. Definitions are the description of ideas. Definition, as such,
is the pure intellectual process of forming abstract concepts or prin-
ciples and giving identification marks to them, so that they can be
recognized again and serve for strings on which to hang items of
fact as they come along. As “concepts” they are class-names, for
they are the names of qualities, faculties or acts common to objects,
and not the feelings of pain, pleasure, sensation, arising from contact
with the objects. As “principles” they are relations between concepts,
conceived as existing or operating uniformly like a “drift” or tendency
or habit, and ranging all the way from axioms, maxims, or “first
principles” intuitively accepted without hesitation, to elaborate
descriptions of concepts and relations expressing truth or belief.
Definition is defining, and defining is embalming ideas in symbols,
and the three great types of symbols are words, numbers and prices.

4. Classification is sorting, describing and selecting the items of
fact by including those that are deemed similar, excluding those
deemed dissimilar, and preparing them for definition and symbols.
Classification is investigation, enumeration, definition, according to
a concept or principle common to items of fact, with the intent of
choosing the class of items that is important for the purpose and
excluding the class that is unimportant. Classification and definition
are idealization of facts for the purposes of the future.

5. Investigation is the statistical process of seeking, finding,
watching the items, to be thereby sorted out and strung up on clas-
sifications and definitions. All thinking is investigating, for it is
hesitating about classification, definitions and ideals, distinguished
from intuitions which size up situations without hesitating. Inves-
tigation is the “‘instinct of curiosity” in action.

6. Valuation is the feeling of relative importance for the future,


PUBLIC PURPOSE 351


not of ideas, but of the expected behaviors which are their content;
it is the feeling of hesitation while thinking, and of preference while
acting. It is inseparable from that which is both the feeling and the
intuition of dependence, security, power and fitness, of independence,
insecurity, importance, unfitness, attributed to items while in the
very process of investigation, classification, definition, idealization
and choosing for the purpose of the future. It is valuation that
gives meaning to words, numbers and prices.

7. Choices and behavior cannot be separated. They are one
and the same. “Discretion” is choosing alternatives, and behavior
is the process of choosing. Behavior is the outward transaction,
the procedure, the process of moving the muscles in conformity with
the habits, ideals, definitions, classifications, investigations, valua-
tions, and choices leading on to further behavior in the reach for
purposes yet unattained.

All of human behavior, therefore, resolves itself into this sevenfold
process of thinking. And due process differs from other process of
thinking and acting in that it is guided by sympathy and limited by
duty. It is the process of personification, where, without sympathy
and duty, it is merely the process of capitalization. For this reason
it introduces ideas of willing and unwilling subordination to others
where mere process of thinking is indifferent to the will and wish of
others. Due process passes judgment upon all the processes of
thinking and acting, moved by sympathy, antipathy and duty.
Its purpose is the purpose of government and personality, the purpose
of employing superior power to induce subordination. It passes
judgment upon the use of power in suppressing or liberating person-
ality. Its procedure is coercive, authoritative.

For this reason due process of thinking scrutinizes the purposes
and distinguishes correct habits of thought from the incorrect; right
ideals from wrong ideals; distinguishes the honest, truthful correct
definition from the ambiguous and crooked definition; the complete
investigation which seeks all the facts from the partial and blind
investigation; the reasonable classification guided by right ideals
from class legislation; the reasonable value, that weighs all the human
interests, from confiscation that gives undue weight; the reasonable
exercise of discretion, or choice, in place of arbitrary caprice; the just
behavior from the unjust. So that, while mere process of thinking
is the process of habits, ideals, definitions, investigations, classifi-


352 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


cations, valuations and behavior, due process of thinking, which is
due process of law, is the process of correct habits, right ideals, true
definitions, sincere investigation, reasonable classification, reason-
able value, and justice; whereas its opposite, undue process, is per-
verse habit, wrong ideals; double meanings, partial investigation,
class legislation, confiscation and injustice.

It is only by means of this concept of due process of thinking that
mankind, as well as judges, is able to get away, on the one hand,
from that solipsism, or absolute egoism, which makes the universe
exist only for each individual as he thinks it exists, and, on the other
hand, from its opposite extreme which makes the universe a sub-
stance, a set of entities, souls, wills, or nowmena, a ding an sich, apart
from the phenomena which each individual experiences differently from
every other individual. The first makes each individual a law unto
himself, makes value the pleasures and pains of the individual, makes
the will caprice. The second makes law an unknowable entity,
makes value intrinsic, makes the will universal reason, or universal
force irrespective of individuals.

But the concept of due process of thinking, to be derived from the
reasoning of the courts because they deal with actual cases as they
arise and at the same time seek to explain and justify their opinions
in the public interest, is neither a concept of caprice nor of universal
reason. It is the truly pragmatic process of inclusion and exclusion
of facts as they arise, of classifying the facts as they themselves and
other judges have classified them, of investigating and valuing all
of the facts through listening to arguments of interested parties.
In short, due process of law is the collective reasoning of the past
and the present, a process of reasoning to which the just judge feels
himself as firmly bound as though it were a superior bodily presence
commanding him. Even when he changes the definitions of words,
by new inclusions and exclusions to meet new conditions, he labor-
iously searches the precedents and the books and is convinced that
he finds, not his own capricious will, but the collective judgment
of those who command confidence. It was a fine remark of Lord
Eldon, who had spent his judicial life in stabilizing the rules and
principles of equity in the Court of Chancery, when he referred to
what John Seldon had said, two hundred years before, in the reign
of King James. “Equity,” said Seldon, “is a roguish thing... .
For /aw we have a measure... . Equity is according to the con-


PUBLIC PURPOSE 353


science of him who is Chancellor, and as that is larger or narrower,
so is equity... . ’Tis all one as if they should make the standard
for the measure a Chancellor’s foot.” To this, Lord Eldon replied,
in 1818: “The doctrines of this Court ought to be as well settled,
and made as uniform, almost, as those of the common law, laying
down fixed principles, but taking care that they are to be applied
according to the circumstances of each case. I cannot agree that
the doctrines of this court are to be changed by every succeeding
judge. Nothing would inflict on me greater pain, in quitting this
place, than the recollection that I had done anything to justify the
reproach, that the equity of this Court varies like the Chancellor’s
FoGt:7?2

Yet, as we have seen and shall further see, new conditions require
new inclusions and exclusions, and Lord Eldon, in turn, has been
reproached for adhering so closely to precedent that he reduced
equity to a system as rigid as the common law itself. In making
these new inclusions and exclusions there must be more than pre-
cedent—there must be choice of new alternatives presented in the
present and leading on to new consequences in the future.


VY. DIscRETION


Thus it was that the court declared that, even if the procedure con-
formed to an investigation of all the facts yet that was not enough.
The legislatures, executives and courts are further bound by the due
purpose of the law; and due purpose is not what is or has been, but
what ought to be the law of the land. The officials are not bound by
the procedure taken over from England at the time when the con-
stitution took effect. That would deny any power to adapt the law
to new conditions. This was settled by the Hurtado Case. But their
power is not unlimited. They are bound by ideals. Due process is
ideal process. It is what ought to be rather than what is or was. Re-
gard must be had to the substance rather than the form. The form is
the procedure. Procedure is “the mode by which the purpose of the
law may be effected.” * But the substance of the law is its purpose.
“Substance” is not an outside entity back of things and persons,
but substance is in the mind, form is in the behavior. Substance

1 HotpswortH, A History of English Law, 254 n.


2 Thid., at 255; Gee v. Pritchard, 2 Swanst. 402 414 (1818).
3 Jenkins v. Ballantyne, 8 Utah, 245 (1892).


354 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


is in the future, form is in the present. The one is due purpose of
law, the other due procedure, and the two together are due process of
law.

Where, then, shall we find the substance of the law? We shall
find it in the habits and ideals of those whose definitions are final in
determining the law. This is Discretion. The field of Discretion is
the field of Power and Immunity—of Power, the “freedom” of the
actor to determine the direction of the collective power; of immunity,
the absence of responsibility and liability to the collective power for
the results of that freedom. It is within this field of power (Freedom)
and immunity that every individual is free to act as he thinks, both
citizen and official. It is there that his behavior puts into effect his
ideals, definitions, classifications, investigations, and valuations. And
he who is clothed with official power is merely clothed with a more
conclusive power than the private person in directing the collective
power toward his ideals. His views may not be very “‘idealistic” in
the opinion of other people, but that is because their habits and ideals
are different from his. They are idealistic for him, for they are in the
unfinished future that he is bending towards.

The framers of the American Constitution, under the influence of
Eighteenth Century psychology, attempted to separate sovereignty
into three departments corresponding to three faculties—will, in-
tellect, behavior. The will resided in the legislature or people; the
intellect, or reason, in the judiciary; behavior, or the execution of the
will, in the executive. In the legislature alone, representing the people,
was the seat of discretion. It alone could determine policy, could
choose between alternatives. It could not delegate this power. This
was the notion of a will as something arbitrary, capricious, unac-
countable, irresponsible, and the restraints on the legislative will were
provided in a system of “balances,” including the system of repre-
sentation, the independence of the executive and judiciary and the
necessity of obtaining the joint consent of senate, house and executive
in enacting a law. Eventually the Supreme Court also asserted its
power of veto on the legislature.

Thus the legislative will passes through the judge and the executive
on the way to the citizen. Each official, down to the last policeman,
has a certain field of power and immunity limited by disability and
responsibility, in exercising the powers of the collective will. Within
that field it is his own purposes, definitions, investigations, classifica-


PUBLIC PURPOSE 355


tions and valuations that are final. There he is the sovereign. His
will is the state-in-action. He is the state.

Following the Eighteenth Century psychology courts and lawyers
deny that discretion resides anywhere except in the legislature or
people. But the will of the state is not a far-off will expressed at a
certain time in the past, and the state is not an entity residing now
somewhere, nowhere. The will of the state is the will-in-action. It
is discretion, and discretion resides wherever there is power (Free-
dom) andimmunity. What we have noted with respect to the po-
liceman on the street is true all the way up to the highest authority.
His field of discretion is the field where his will is the collective will.
An administrative board or commission listens to the testimony and
arguments of employers, laborers, “the public,” and then fixes a
minimum wage. Within the limits of reversal by the court its will
is the will of the people. It is the state.

So it is up the line until we reach the Supreme Court, the place
where pure reason is supposed to lodge. It, too, has its field of power
and immunity. There the habits, ideals, definitions, classifications,
valuations of its members are the will of the people-in-action. We
have seen how, in its field of Freedom and immunity the court has
legislated by definition. It changed the meaning of due process of
law and thus amended the federal and every state constitution. It
changed the meaning of property and liberty as used in the Fourteenth
Amendment, and thus took over from the states the final determina-
tion of what was due process of law in the regulation of property and
business. On the other hand, by changing the meaning of due process
of law as applied to life and personal liberty, the court left to the
states the power to deprive workingmen and others without property
of their common law and federal rights of indictment by grand jury,
trial by a petit jury of twelve, the right to be confronted by witnesses,
the right to exemption from self-incrimination, the right to be present
throughout the trial, and the right to have the federal courts deter-
mine whether a state court has been terrified by a mob. In 1890 Con-
gress had prohibited all contracts in restraint of trade in interstate
commerce. The court, in 1896, defined literally the term “restraint
of trade,” and thereupon dissolved the Trans-Missouri and Joint
Traffic Associations of Railways.! Afterwards the court reduced the
definition of restraint of trade by reading into it a definition of “‘rea-

1¥U. S. v. Trans-Missouri Freight Association, 166 U.S. 290 (1897).


356 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


sonableness,”’ and “‘ rule of reason,” thereupon, while dissolving the
Standard Oil Company, permitted it to retain certain contracts in re-
straint of trade which were deemed reasonable since they were nec-
essary in order to maintain the existing value of the going business.’

These and many other changes in definitions have the twofold
effect of permitting the legislatures to legislate and permitting the
court to legislate. The change in definition of due process, particu-
larly, has opened up a large field for the state legislature in criminal
cases; the change in definitions of property, liberty and restraint of
trade has opened up a large field for the federal court to legislate in
property cases. In each field of power and immunity thus redistrib-
uted by definition, the particular legislature, executive or judge has
his field of discretion, where his will with its habits, definitions, in-
vestigations, classifications, valuations and ideals, is the will of the
state.

These shifts in definitions are of course not arbitrary. They spring
from new conditions. Yet they are discretionary. The collective
will takes on a different aspect from that as understood in the Eight-
eenth Century. It is no longer a merely capricious unaccountable
will of a personal sovereign, but it is a will that proceeds by delibera-
tive process of law. It is no longer a separation of human faculties
into compartments, but it is an apportionment to individuals, whether
citizens or officials, of a share in formulating and executing the work-
ing rules of society. A new definition is a new valuation of facts, a
new valuation is a new classification, a new classification is a new
proportioning of inducements in the national economy, a new propor-
tioning is legislation, and legislation is a change in the working rules
of the concern. Legislation resides wherever discretion resides, and
the collective will is not the will of the legislature alone, but is the
habits, ideals, definitions, investigations, classifications, valuations,
discretion and behavior of judges and executives who have official
power and immunity in formulating the working rules.

These shifts in the meaning of both discretion and due process are
illustrated in the modern procedure of creating administrative bodies
and clothing them with certain powers and immunities necessary
to deal with the new aspects of property. Such are the public utility
and interstate commerce commissions, the industrial and minimum
wage commissions, the fair trade or market commissions. Legis-

1 Standard Oil Co. v. U. S., 221 U.S. x (z010).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 357


latures found the subject-matter entrusted to these boards too com-
plicated for direct action, while courts possessed only the negative
powers of protection against extortion or confiscation, and not the
powers of positive regulation. Yet with the courts remains the two-
fold question of determining whether these boards exercise uncon-
stitutional delegation of legislative power, and whether in exercis-
ing it they deprive persons of property and liberty without due proc-
ess of law.

The following case arose! A statute required railroad compan-
ies to furnish reasonably adequate service and authorized a com-
mission to ascertain, in particular cases, what that service should be
and then to issue an order binding the company to furnish it. The
commission issued an order requiring a company to furnish a slight
additional service to some fifty farmers in a locality not hitherto sup-
plied. Two theories developed in the Supreme Court of the state,
which may be exhibited in the accompanying table:


(Dravayaaleyels ., ule S ene c tee 40C

Unreasonable yan. 4 ee eee Bsc: 34C.
Uinneasonablemmmrn arate 25¢. Reasonable 25c.
COMIISES LION ea arene 20C.


If the rate, say 4oc. charged by a company, yields 10% on the
value of the property it may be deemed to be extortionate, and if a
rate fixed by the commission at 2oc. yields 5% on the property it may
be deemed confiscatory, that is, non-compensatory. The courts,
by virtue of the common law on petition of private parties, and with-
out express legislative authority, are competent to prohibit the ex-
tortionate rate, and, by the constitutional restraints of due process
are competent to prohibit the confiscatory rate if imposed by the
legislature.

They are also, independently of statute, competent to prohibit
the unreasonable rate, say 35c. which, however, does not reach the
level of extortion, and are competent, if authorized by the statute,
though not independently of statute, to prohibit the unreasonable
rate, 25c. which does not reach the level of confiscation. But between
the outside limits of unreasonableness is the indefinite field of reason-
ableness. Here the court divided. The dissenting opinion held that,
for a commission to be authorized to select any point within these


1M., St. P. & S.S.R.R. Co. v. R. R. Com., 136 Wis. 146 (1908).


358 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


limits of reasonableness was a delegation of legislative discretion.
The legislature itself has such power. It may arbitrarily select any
point down to the level even of confiscation, since its selection is
made in view of policy and expediency, which is the field of discre-
tion. But, for an administrative body to select such a point, even
within the field of reasonableness, is the exercise of legislative dis-
cretion. Similarly, for the court to review the evidence and then to
select that point would also be legislative discretion usurped by the
court.

On the other hand, the prevailing opinion of the court held that
the selection of the point, under the statute in question, was not an
exercise of discretion but the investigation and ascertainment of a
fact. The legislature may declare a general rule, namely, that rates
and services shall be reasonable. It may then declare that the law
shall go into effect upon a certain contingency, and the contingency
in this case is the ascertainment of the fact by the commission as to
what is the reasonable rate of service. The law assumes that there
is only one such rate; that it is discoverable by investigation but is
undisclosed until that investigation is completed and the order issued.
The discovery of a fact is not peculiar to the legislature. It is a men-
tal process involving no discretion; it is a process practiced also by
judges and executives. The power to ascertain facts is therefore a
power that may be delegated. Yet even the ascertainment of a fact
is a process such that reasonable men may differ regarding the lo-
cation of the fact, and if the commission acted as reasonable men
within the domain of reason the court should not investigate the facts
anew and substitute its valuation for theirs.

Thus we have two theories of reasonableness and unreasonable-
ness, each of them seeking to avoid the quality of discretion in the
ascertainment of value. According to the dissenting theory, reason-
ableness is not a fixed objective point, but is any one of several points,
and an executive or commission, in choosing one instead of others,
is exercising discretion. But, according to this theory, unreasonable-
ness, extortion and confiscation are fixed objective points, and hence
the court is not exercising discretion when it chooses one instead of
another, but is merely following the intellectual process of disclos-
ing a fixed point.

But, according to the majority opinion, al] of the points are fixed
objective points, and neither is the executive exercising discretion


PUBLIC PURPOSE 359


when it ascertains the point of reasonableness within that domain,
nor is the court exercising discretion when it ascertains the point of
extortion, unreasonableness or confiscation, beyond which it pro-
hibits the legislature or executive from going. In other words, ac-
cording to the majority opinion, neither the court nor the executive
exercises discretion in investigating and ascertaining a fact, while
according to the minority opinion, it is discretion for the executive,
but not for the court, to ascertain a fact.

Probably these metaphysical and mechanistic conclusions are re-
quired in order to conform to the Eighteenth Century attempt both
to separate government into legislative, judicial and executive
branches and to separate the human will into will, intellect and action.
They tend to preserve the primitive notions of a complete dualism
of the objective and subjective world. The objective world is the
world of facts, the subjective is the world of feelings, emotions, ca-
price. Thus the metaphysical and mechanical theory of government
and the will “deludes itself with the illusion,” in the words of Hen-
derson, “that there is a fact which can be discovered if we are only
persistent enough in our search for it, and which, once it is found,
will provide a mathematical solution of all rate-making problems.”

But, in reality, facts are facts as our habits, investigations and pur-
poses deem them to be facts. In this case the facts were fifty farmers
who wanted additional railway service and the corporation that did
not wish to give it. Which was more important in the public inter-
est?


V. Economic THEORY OF GOING CONCERNS


Back of the process of thinking are those fundamental assump-
tions springing from that sense of fitness and unfitness, or common
sense and habit, which evolves with life itself and which is but
a sense of the fit proportions in which factors should be combined
in order to attain the purposes deemed important. Whether it be
named emotions, feelings, habits, intuitions, bias, prejudice, sense of
value, sense of justice, it all has its biological root in that adaptation
of life to limited resources through proportioning the factors and
choosing between alternative degrees of power in contemplation of
what is wanted for the future. In the unfolding history of the race
and the individual it differs mainly in the expanding range of factors


1 HenpErson, G.C., “Railway Valuation and the Courts,” 33 Harv. Law Rev. 912 (1920).


360 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


that are taken into account and the enlarging power of the individ-
ual to induce others to execute his will. Springing biologically from
the unconscious reflex actions and reactions of life, then instinctively
from acting and reacting with pleasure and pain, then intuitively
without thinking, then hesitatingly as the factors are being investi-
gated and weighed, it becomes that process of purposeful thinking
which we distinguish as the double process of capitalization and per-
sonification, consisting in the inseparable ideals, definitions, investi-
gations, classifications, valuations and choices that accompany deal-
ings with things and persons. Advanced out of the field of think-
ing about the useful qualities of things to that of thinking about the
virtues of persons, it advances into that right or wrong process of
thinking and acting under the combined impulse of sympathy and
duty which we distinguish as the process of personification, or that
process of determining the fit and proper relations that should exist
between persons, which is the reasonable working rules that con-
stitute due process of law.

Exalted as this philosophy has become through the Anglo-Amer-
ican process of subjecting officials of government to the jurisdiction
of the same courts as private citizens themselves, America has at
last attained the ideal of Plato, two thousand years ago, of a govern-
ment by philosophers. But, whereas Plato would have the nation
governed by pure ideas abstracted from feelings, we are governed
by a theory of value. Not, of course, by that hedonistic theory of
pleasure and pain of Bentham and the economists, in which each pleas-
ure or pain and each person counted as one, but by a theory of per-
sonification in which individuals and classes of individuals count
according to what is felt to be their relative importance for public
purposes. According to this appreciation of relative importance
they get the assistance of officials in the form of rights and liberties,
and the restraint or neglect of officials in the form of duties and ex-
posures. So that instead of an “organic” theory of the state based
on duty, or a “contract” theory of the state based on liberty, we
reach what may be distinguished as an economic theory of going con-
cerns based on the authoritative proportioning of inducements in a
world of limited resources.

We may distinguish these as the duty-theory, the liberty-theory
and the economy-theory of going concerns. The duty-theory, in its
various aspects of divine right, royal prerogative, biological anal-


PUBLIC PURPOSE 361


ogies, Leviathans, socialisms and dictatorships of the proletariate,
ends in the obedience of the individual through fear of a superior
earthly power. The liberty-theory in its various aspects of freedom
of contract, equality, individualism, anarchism, self-interest, great-
est number of equal units of pleasure for the greatest number of equal
units of persons, ends in an aggregate of atoms like a basket of mar-
bles held together by a metaphysical entity “the state” or the “gen-
eral will,’ or Kant’s “kingdom of ends,” or by equally metaphysi-
cal analogies to physical forces like the attraction of gravitation or
the biological organism, or the Leviathan or social labor power. But
the economy-theory of the state is the theory of a going concern with
its going business, having its roots in the past, its behavior in the
present, held together by the hopes of peace, wealth, virtue and the
fears of violence, poverty and vice, through the control of which col-
lective action proportions the inducements to individuals to partic-
ipate in the burdens and benefits of collective power. In short, the
economic theory of the state is the theory of proportioning induce-
ments to willing and unwilling persons in a world of scarcity.

The economic theory has its foundation in the suggestion of David
Hume,! where, when elaborated, ethics and justice are resolved into
the sharing of limited resources, and utility is resolved into the public
purpose of enlarging those resources by proportioning the induce-
ments to share in the burdens and benefits. Ethics and economics
are thus inseparable, for each proceeds from the principle of scarcity.
Economics is the proportioning of factors, and ethics is the propor-
tioning of human factors in order to obtain the largest desired result
from all. The ecomomic theory is one, not of addition of units, whether
they be pleasures or persons or atoms of wealth, in order to constitute
a sum total of “happiness,” or “people,” or “commonwealth,” but
is a theory of multiplication of complementary by limiting factors,
through which the services of one class, if properly proportioned,
multiply the services of other classes, and thus enlarge the total hap-
piness, personality, and commonwealth by merely proportioning the
factors to the best advantage.

It is a theory which has both its objective and subjective sides of
behavior. On the objective side it is, in one and the same process of
thinking, a theory of duty, liberty and economy; of duty, for it is
grounded on compulsion addressed to unwilling persons; of liberty,


1 Hume, Davin, Principles of Morals, sec. 3, ‘Of justice” (1777).


362 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


for it removes restraints from the will; of economy for it is the col-
lective power apportioning duty and liberty in a world of limited
resources. And, on the subjective side of behavior, it is a theory of
utility, sympathy and duty; of utility, the wish to subordinate things
and persons to self; of sympathy, the willing subordination of self to
other persons; of duty, the unwilling subordination to the will of
others.

In this way the economic theory of a going concern is a theory both
of capitalization and personification; of capitalization, for it is wealth
and welfare—wealth, the valuation of instruments; welfare, the pur-
poses for which they are valued. It is a theory, too, of personification,
for it is a valuation of the virtues and vices of self and others for whose
purposes wealth and welfare should or should not exist.

Properly interpreted, this was the ruling principle of Adam Smith,
and it was only by picking out and abstracting that part of his theory
which exalted individual initiative and criticised governments for sup-
pressing initiative, that his successors of the classical economists
distorted his notion of the wealth of nations. Adam Smith started with
a view of the forest but his followers lost themselves in the woods.
For Smith addressed his inquiry to the statesman or legislator, as
proposing “two distinct objects: first, to provide a plentiful revenue
or subsistence for the people, or more properly to enable them to
provide such a revenue or subsistence for themselves; and secondly,
to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue sufficient for the
public services. It proposes to enrich both the people and the sover-
eign.” + And Smith changed the point of view, as Cannan points out,
from “the older British economist’s ordinary practice of regarding
the wealth of a nation as an accumulated fund,” to that of the annual
labor of the nation, which is the true “fund” that “supplies it with
all the necessaries and conveniences of life.” ? Further, the per capita
production, which is the true measure of whether the nation is “better
or worse,” depends on the “skill, dexterity and judgment with which
its labor is generally applied,” and on the “proportion between the
number of those who are employed in useful labor and those who are
not so employed.” But, finally, while the “natural progress of opu-
lence,” depends on the proper proportioning of commerce, manufac-
tures and agriculture, yet this proportioning has been ingeniously
interfered with by conquest, slavery, landed estates, the discourage-

1 Wealth of Nations, 1:395, Cannan’s ed. 2 Tbid guateDsers


PUBLIC PURPOSE 363


ment of agriculture, bands of useless retainers, expensive vanity of
great proprietors, and the false teaching that nations are enriched
by “beggaring all their neighbors.” ! A return to the true spirit of
Adam Smith is a return to a political economy that teaches the best
proportioning of inducements by the state to useful and useless per-
sons.

Adam Smith had, indeed, suggested an entirely different mechanical
theory which was the one picked out by his successors, based on the
several principles of individualism, self-interest, liberty, division of
labor, no associations or governments, and divine providence, but
this theory was set forth in order to indicate the best policy that
governments should pursue in proportioning inducements and re-
straints to individuals. On the basis of this theory he would have
the governments break up the great estates into individual ownership
and the gilds and corporations into individual units.” He could not,
of course, see the necessity and economy of the mass production
brought about afterwards by steam, electricity, chemistry and phys-
ics, nor the way in which courts and legislatures have recognized and
endowed with power and immunity the industrial governments
which organize, marshal, and manage armies of producers for mass
production. They, however, also are collective wills animated by a
collective purpose, and proportioning also by their working rules,
like the state, inducements to willing and unwilling persons to partici-
pate in their collective power. Thus in descending circles of propor-
tioning and reproportioning, the collective power of the nation is
delegated to subordinate collective powers, and they in turn to in-
dividuals, held together by thinking alike.

It is this thinking alike that constitutes collective purpose. We
have seen the exact correlation that exists between collective powers
and individual rights.*? There is no right without its corresponding
duty, no effective or actual right-and-duty of individuals without both
a correlative power and responsibility of officials to come to the aid
of the right by enforcing the duty. Every right has two correspond-
ing duties, the duty of the opposite person and the duty of officials
to exercise the collective power upon that person. For, not only is
there no right if there is no remedy but there is no remedy if there is


1 Suita, Apam, Wealth of Nations, Books II and IV.
2 Tbid., 1:130, I31.
3 Above, Chap. IV.


364 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


no power to hold officials responsible. The violation of a positive
right brings into existence at once, by “operation of law,” a remedial
“right of action” which is none else than the official duty of courts
and executives to enforce the right.

On the other hand, the metaphysical notion that there exists some-
where an objective world of rights and duties superior to the actual
rights and duties, goes along with the metaphysical notion that there
is somewhere an entity “the state” apart from the officials who de-
termine and execute the will of that state. These metaphysical no-
tions have, indeed, a powerful influence on men’s minds, simply be-
cause man lives in the future but acts in the present. Thus consti-
tuted, he projects outward into a world of ideas his hopes and fears,
and gives to his expectations a local habitation and a name.

Yet these ideas are but ideals—they exist, but they exist in the
mind. They exist because man craves security for his expectations,
and could not act at all as a rational being without the feeling of se-
curity. Let anarchy surround him, where there are no officials to
bring a collective power to his aid, and he reverts at once to animal
fears that crowd out reason with its entire scheme of rights and duties.
When his rational expectations are gone the savage in him takes
possession. No wonder he fills the sky with deities and entities—
they are his hopes.

But the real world of rights and duties about him is the collective
will expressed in working rules necessitated by the scarcity of re-
sources. His “freedom” is his power to command the officials ac-
cording to those rules, who are both the instruments of that will and
the actors who determine what that will shall be when it acts. They,
too, like him, move toward their habits and ideals, and respond, ac-
cording to those habits and ideals, to his call for help, if needed. To
that extent he enjoys “freedom” as well as liberty, for he has the aid
of collective power to give effect to his will.

At this point, however, where this power ends his “disability”
begins, for there the collective power ceases to come to his aid. And
there also his right ends and his exposure to the liberty of others be-
gins.

So also with his reciprocal duties and liberties. Not only is every
right limited by some exposure, if opposite parties are not reduced
to the unlimited duty of slaves who have no recognized will of their
own, but every right, with its limiting exposure, is further limited


PUBLIC PURPOSE 365


by reciprocal duties with their limiting liberty, and this, in turn, cor-
responds to the extent that opposite parties have power to hold offi-
cials responsible. His duties are but the responsibilities of officials
to opposite parties, and his liberties are but the immunities of offi-
cials which limit those responsibilities.

Thus within this moving framework of power, disability, liability
and immunity, determined, as it goes along within the limits of the
working rules and necessitated by the scarcity of resources, the will
of the individual is the collective will in action. His private purposes
are public purposes to the extent that “the public” through the
determining powers of its instruments, the officials who exercise that
power, both bring the collective power to his aid and protect his
immunity from the exercise of that power. His private purposes
are contrary to public purposes to the extent that the same actors
hold him liable to the will of others, and are indifferent to
public purposes to the extent that they expose him to the immunity
of others. He is both a public utility and a public disutility—a public
utility to the extent that the public powers are granted to his own
choices in the form of rights and liberties through freedom and im-
munity in dealings with officials; a public disutility to the extent that
they limit the exercise of his faculties by duties and exposures, through
responsibilities and disabilities of officials.

Thus every choice of every official in every authoritative trans-
action, within his field of power and immunity, is the exercise of a
public purpose directed towards proportioning the inducements
which collective power creates. It is his behavior accompanying
his mental habits, his ideals, definitions, investigations, classifications,
valuations and purposes which throw the weight of the concern on
one side or the other in determining the part which individuals and
classes shall play in the collective economy.

The difference between the executive, such as the policeman,
and the legislative or judicial official, consists in the greater delib-
eration of the latter in making up his mind. This deliberation of the
latter is required by that due procedure of law which consists in get-
ting all of the facts and weighing them according to their relative im-
portance before deciding. The executive is closer to the private
parties. His sympathies and antipathies towards individuals are
more likely to prevail. The legislator must get a majority vote,
and his individual will is checked. So with the Supreme Court. Due


366 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


procedure of law has hit upon the majority vote as a device for com-
pelling individuals in authority to weigh the considerations on which
they shall determine the direction given to the collective power.
The supreme courts are placed most remote from the individuals
whose interests are at stake, where they can review the general prin-
ciples, and consequently their majority and minority opinions expound
at length the grounds on which their conclusions rest. Seldom do
their differences of opinion turn on the enumeration of facts—the
facts are before them ascertained by lower courts and insisted on
by attorneys. Their differences turn on what they deem to be the
importance of the facts. By the process of inclusion and exclusion
the important facts are included, the unimportant excluded, and
the included facts are valued and chosen according to their relative
importance. We have noted this process in the historic changes
that have occurred in definitions and classifications. In all cases
we have seen the process guided by what we distinguish as the sense
of fitness and unfitness arising out of habit and custom, which is
but the sense of the proper and improper proportioning of limiting
and complementary factors needed to bring about what is deemed to
be the best proportioning of all. A satisfied sense of fitness is that
feeling of harmony and unity attained by fitting the immediate
transactions under discussion to the whole scheme of life as perceived
and habitually accepted. It is that sense of justice which, springing
from the experience of superior power over the individual, is the most
satisfying of all human emotions, just as the sense of injustice is the
most destructive.

Yet this sense of fitness and justice differs as widely as human
character, for it is nothing less than the whole person, with his own
internal proportioning of habits and intensities of feelings, in contact
with a world which he feels to be fitted or unfitted to it. It differs
with age, time, place, and all that goes to make up the heredity and
experience of the individual. It is to these differences that we may
trace the differences of opinion in the majority and minority opinions
of courts and the evolution of definitions and classifications. There
is a struggle and survival of mental habits and the sense of fitness
such that those whose habits and sense of fitness or justice more
nearly fit the predominant forces of society tend to survive and
predominate.

The habit of breaking up the will into compartments is reflected


PUBLIC PURPOSE 367


in the separation of the collective will into the state and voluntary
associations. The state is set apart as an entity having a separate
existence and providing preéminently the service of security. But
the state, in reality, is the officials in action; their action is the or-
ganization of violence according to due process of law; and due
process of law is the working rules of officials. Security is not some-
thing abstract and separate, a kind of outside force ready to come in
when property or liberty is violated, but security is, at the same
time, a choosing in advance by officials of the direction in which they
will afford security. Property, liberty and voluntary associations
exist only to the extent that they are secure, and they are secure only
to the extent and in the direction that officials give indication that
they will choose to make them secure. This is the direction and
extent determined by their ideals, definitions, investigations, clas-
sifications, valuations and choices. As the direction and scope
of security change by changes in definitions and values, so does
the content of property, liberty or association change.

A somewhat similar abstract separation is found in the customary
classification of economic theory which separates the factors into
land, labor, capital and the entrepreneur, and the corresponding
incomes into rent, wages, interest and profit. The classification is
made from the standpoint of competition of individuals and con-
cerns. Competition works similarly within each of the factors of
land, labor, capital and entrepreneur, and sets limits beyond which
the incomes from each may not rise or fall.

But both the individual and the concern belong, at one and the
same time, to more than one of the factors. We have here the familiar
distinction between functional distribution and personal distribution.
The competitive factors are functional—they operate similarly
within each factor. The combination of these factors is personal—it
determines the prosperity or poverty of the individual. The same
may be true of their combination in a going concern. It is an in-
strument through which personal distribution is effected.

To distinguish just where the entrepreneur function begins and ends
is impossible. All of the factors share the risks, and there is a gra-
dation of risks all along from bondholders to stockholders and em-
ployees, according to the scheme of organization. Nor can the
managerial function of the entrepreneur, which goes along with
taking risks, be separated. In some concerns the bankers or ab-


368 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


sentee stockholders are the real chiefs, in others a strong personality
in the executive chair, in others the associated managerial force,
in others even the wage-earners, organized or unorganized, have a
compelling voice in determining the direction and extent of manage-
ment.

Likewise with the capitalist function. Even the wage-earners
and managers are investors in the business, to the extent of their
accrued unpaid wages and salaries and their expectations of con-
tinuing jobs, and the formal investor is merely one who agrees to
prolong his period of waiting beyond that of the wage-earners and
managers. Likewise with land—it is only the location and standing
room needed for the combined operation of machinery, improve-
ments, fertility, laborers, managers, or markets, while the income
from land ownership is governed by economic laws similar to those
which govern incomes from goodwill, patents, franchises and other
differential market opportunities. In short, a going concern rises
toa third principle of classification, for it includes not only the
competitive classification of land, labor, capital and entrepreneur,
and the personal combination of these factors in the jobs and posi-
tions of individuals, but also that authoritative proportioning of
factors through inducements to persons, which constitute political,
industrial and moral government.

We have, therefore, instead of the traditional classification, dis-
tinguished the division of social relations as positions and concerns.
Each occupation is a position or job in a going concern, whether it
be the state, the business, or the cultural concern. And the position
has two aspects, functional and personal. From the functional
standpoint it presents a double function, that of giving and that of
taking. It gives service to others through the medium of the con-
cern and takes services from others through the medium of the con-
cern. From the personal standpoint, each person has as many oc-
cupations, or positions, as the concerns of which he isa member. He
is more or less a citizen or official of the state; a participant in a go-
ing business and in the family, church and social organizations. Each
of his several occupational activities, proportioned according to his
character and circumstance, constitutes both his personality in action
and the total of his property interests—in short, his faculties and
opportunities.

Finally, from the authoritative standpoint, he is subject to the


PUBLIC PURPOSE 369


customs, rules, or laws, that is, the working rules of behavior which
have grown up and are enforced by aid of the sanctions, as the case
may be, of violence, poverty or opinion, characteristic of the concern
where his membership lies. Each concern is made up of positions
into which individuals come and go, but the concern goes on. Each
individual comes and goes, into and out of positions, and his giving
and taking goes on from birth to death. Thus each position is both
a function of a concern and a function of a person.

And the giving and taking of each individual is also subdivided
into functions. His giving to others is threefold, working, wait-
ing and risking. His working is the operation of his manual, men-
tal and managerial faculties; his waiting is the permission he gives
to others to make use of his services before he makes use of theirs.
His risking is his planning to overcome chance and get advantage
of luck and management. And his taking from others is threefold:
compensation for working, waiting and risking, depending upon
his power, opportunity and will to induce others to make com-
pensation.

Thus land, labor, capital, and the entrepreneur, are but a classifica-
tion of proprietary relations of giving and taking. Each is twofold.
Ownership of land, labor, capital, and business faculties are the in-
strumentalities through which he gives the service of working, wait-
ing and risking; and they are also the instruments through which he
induces others to make compensation through refusing to work, wait,
or risk. In the one aspect they are instruments of use-value or real
value, through increase of service, in the other they are instruments
of nominal value or price, through power to withhold use-values.
In the first aspect they are instruments of ‘“‘producing power,” in,
the second aspect they are instruments of ‘“‘bargaining power.” In
the one aspect they are instrumental to enlarging the commonwealth,
in the other to getting a share of it.

The functional, or rather competitive, classification of land, labor,
capital and the entrepreneur, was developed, in economic theory
upon the assumption of what we have distinguished as the liberty-
theory of the state—a theory which excluded both the prerogative of
the King and the monopolistic power of individuals or associations
derived from the patents, or special privileges, granted out of that
prerogative. The concept of property thus remaining after the elim-
ination of superior political power was that concept of the common


370 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


law which consisted in the exclusive holding of physical things for one’s
own use. And the concept of liberty remaining was the absence of com-
pulsion, restraint, or duty in matters of buying and selling imposed
by the superior power of the sovereign or of those who derived their
authority from him. Property and liberty thus were powerless. They
were but the voluntary behavior of individuals who had no power
over each other. Abolish special privilege, which is but the power
of government, and there remains in the property and liberty of in-
dividuals no power of coercion.

This concept fitted in with the liberty-theory of the state in that
the latter was a mechanical theory of addition of atoms of physical
property and of individuals as separate atoms, the total constituting
a mathematical sum of accumlated wealth and population. It led
to a theory of production of physical use-values by which each in-
dividual added his quantity of physical wealth to the total regard-
less of the quantity he added, rather than a theory of diminishing
value by which each individual both multiplies the efficiency of others
and withholds too much addition in order to maintain the prices or
bargaining power for himself.

And it led to a theory of population and the pressure of mere
numbers on the means of subsistence, rather than a theory of due pro-
portioning of the population among positions by means of which the
national wealth is increased faster than the increase of population.
It was a theory of accumulated wealth of individuals rather than
a proportioning of welfare for all, and a theory of population rather
than a theory of government proportioning inducements.

But the volitional classification includes both liberty and power, for a
position has the double aspect of production and distribution, with its
twofold function of giving and taking. The occupation is a job or posi-
tion in a going concern and is governed by the customs, rules or laws of
that concern, which determine the limits of liberty and power. The in-
dividual both gives to the concern and takes from it, according to its
organization and his own abilities and importance within the concern.
His position is his faculties in action, and the customs and laws of
the concern are the limits within which he acts.

We have noted that each individual is a member of several con-
cerns, involving a subdivision of his whole personality in parts. In
the case of the highest concern, the state, the official puts into ac-
tion certain collective powers entrusted to him in his official capac-


PUBLIC PURPOSE A


ity. He has a double personality, public and private. Outside his
public powers he, like any other citizen, is subject to authorized
transactions governing private concerns and measured off by rights,
exposures, duties and liberties. Within his sovereign powers he is
also limited. His limited power is the same thing as the limited lia-
bility of the private person to be compelled to perform, avoid or for-
bear, as the case may be. The official disability is the exposure not
only of the official, but also of the collective power, to the behavior
of the citizen, who, to that extent enjoys immunity, or absence of
liability. Reciprocally, the official is bound to carry out the will
of the citizen, within limits, and the extent of this official liability
is exactly equal to, indeed is the same thing as, the power of the cit-
izen to have the collective power of the state exercised in his behalf.
But this responsibility is limited by the immunity of the official from
discipline on account of his use or disuse of the collective power, and
this immunity is the same thing as the disability, or inability, of the
citizen to have the collective power do his bidding. Within this im-
munity he exercises discretion. Thus the offcial is the state-in-ac-
tion, and the state-in-action is the authoritative transactions of offi-
cials and citizens measured off by the juristic dimensions of recipro-
cal power, disability, responsibility and immunity.

These observations seem called for on account of certain ontolog-
ical mysteries which attend notions of a collective will, springing
from that twofold weakness of the human mind which creates ab-
stract images endowed with souls and identifies what ought to be with
what is. This weakness operaied in the mind of Immanuel Kant,
whose Kingdom of Ends was what he thought ought to be, and whose
disembodied human beings nevertheless had souls. So it is with no-
tions of sovereignty and the corporate will, carried over from the
period when Kant flourished. Sovereignty seems to be the Will of
God or the Will of the People, residing somewhere unknown, and,
while the corporation has no soul, yet it has a mysterious will some-
where that acts like a soul.

Generally, it will be found that what is intended is that sovereignty
ought to be the Will of God or the Will of the People, and this idea is
expressed as an entity living apart from the actual state which evi-
dently does not meet that ideal; or that the corporate will ought to
be a human soul but is a bloodless entity different from the human


beings who act in its name.


372 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


Certain variations, of course, occur in these ontological myster-
ies, depending on differences among individuals, who, naturally
have widely different notions of what ought to be or ought not to be,
arising largely from differences in their habits and wishes. But the
mystery is so far removed from the actual that it can accommodate
all kinds of wishes without being discovered. In this way these mys-
teries have a certain pragmatic value, for, in the name of God, or the
People, or the Corporate will, the particular official or agent can do
many things which he would not do in his own name. He can
always say that he has no discretion in the matter, and that, while
as an individual he would do differently, yet, etc., etc.

His statement undoubtedly has a degree of accuracy, for, both in
contemplation of law and in obedience to the concern, he has as
many personalities as there are concerns of which he is a member.
But it is accurate only within limits. These limits are the margins
of immunity, and these, being matters of degree, or quantity, can be
changed. The principal method of changing them is, as we have
seen, a change in the law, or a change in the officials of the concern,
usually brought about internally by collective action or externally
by the collective power of a superior concern, the state. Within the
margins of immunity thus changed, all of the other juristic dimen-
sions of behavior, the power, disability and liability are changed.

These changes actually do occur, when the ontological mystery
is partly dissolved, and it is seen that the will of the concern is what
the concern does, and what the concern does is what its function-
aries do.

There is still another, but related, pragmatic value in these on-
tological mysteries. By picturing to themselves a superior will,
the subordinate executives, legislators, judges, or other agents, can
epitomize that will and can apply its commands to any particular
case aS it arises, without injecting their individual opinions into
the merits of the case. The difficulty, however, here arises that
each case presents a new variety of facts but the ontological will
has been fixed and predetermined for all time. The predicament is
theoretically difficult, but it is usually met in the simple way of
changing the definitions of the terms which that will had originally
employed in expressing its commands. We have seen how this
simple method was resorted to in changing the definitions of prop-
erty and liberty, the definitions of restraint of trade, of due process


PUBLIC PURPOSE 373


of law, and so on, wherever the new facts seemed to call for a change.
What happened, of course, at these interesting points, was that the
court enjoyed a degree of immunity, and there was no superior
authority that could prevent the change in definitions, or give to
that change a different slant. A change in definitions is such a simple
and natural way of changing the constitution from what it is to
what it ought to be, and the method is so universal and usually so
gradual in all walks of life, that the will of God, or the will of the
People, or the Corporate will, scarcely realizes what has happened.
The method is, indeed, that common-sense device whereby man
can go on believing in unchanging entities, and yet be practical.

And the method is well provided for in the varying degrees of
power and immunity within which functionaries act. The limits
are not fixed and definite, though they may tend to become more
so where the procedure of due process of law is introduced. It is
this tightening of procedure which gradually converted the prerogative
of the King into the sovereignty of the citizen, and so smoothly has it
worked, especially since the Act of Settlement, and so inveterate is
that weakness of intellect which identifies an entity that ought to be
with behavior that actually is, that, when legal and economic writers
in the 18th and roth centuries began to think about it they identified
the sovereignty of the citizen as one of the natural rights of man.
This power of man to require officials to do his bidding in conformity
to the working rules of the concern became even one of the “faculties”
of the human will, a capacity or ability of the individual to act, like
the ability to plough, or eat, or think. The actual state, with its ac-
tual officials, seemed to be unnatural, a merely coercive power inter-
fering with and overriding the natural liberty of man to use his
faculties as he pleased, rather than the collective power by which
man’s will is made effective. The best that the state could do was
to let man alone. Yet these collective powers, exercised on behalf
of individuals through the responsibility of officials to them, in ac-
cordance with the accepted rules guiding their actions, are the main
instruments of modern industry, for they are the source of those
encumbrances and opportunities which constitute the incorporeal
and intangible capital by means of which feudalism was displaced
by capitalism and slavery by liberty.

Economic theory, as we have noted, started with commodities,
then shifted to feelings, in order to explain transactions. In the


374 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


latter field of transactions, a strictly behavioristic theory starts and
ends with the transactions themselves. But this is not enough to
explain human behavior. Back of behavior is the will. We have
described, behavioristically, the judicial process of thinking, which
is a process of human behavior, but we have found that it was im-
possible for the courts to decide disputes without making the dis-
tinction between purpose and procedure, the procedure being the
regulated behavior, but the “substance” of that regulation being
the purpose to be subserved by it.

It is this that we distinguish as the difference between a “ behavior-
istic” and a “volitional” theory of value. A behavioristic theory
takes account of aij the factors of a moving mechanism on the prin-
ciple of multiple hypotheses, and endeavors to ascertain the part
played by each factor in producing the total behavior observed,
without regard to any purpose or force that may be supposed to guide
the behavior towards any given direction. A behavioristic theory,
in other words, is physical science. It reaches its terminus when all
the moving factors of a mechanism can be stated in terms of numbers
and equations. If the equations turn out, on experiment, to fit the
facts, that is the end of it.

An illustration may be found in that science which has most nearly
reached the mathematical form, astronomy.! Sir Isaac Newton
assumed a divine will operating through space and keeping the
stars and planets in order according to the principles of the Euclidean
geometry and his own differential calculus invented for the occasion.
Clerk Maxwell eliminated the divine will by substituting a cosmic
ether as the communicating substance through which to explain
“action at a distance.” Each assumed, however, that the scientist
himself was located at a fixed point in the universe, and Einstein,
then, by noticing that the scientist himself is moving through space,
introduced the doctrine of relativity of motion, but retained the
ghost, as it were, of the cosmic ether in the hypothesis of its waves.
The final stage is reached when neither divine will, cosmic ether
nor the ghost of ether is retained, and the mathematician states,
in terms of mere numbers, equations, correlations and lags what
actually happens. He gives a “description” and not an “explanation.”
If, then, by testing his equations in the laboratory, he finds that they
fit the facts, he has reached the end of the matter, for he has reduced

1Cp. VEBLEN, The Place of Science, 15.


PUBLIC PURPOSE 375


to as simple a numerical description as possible the ultimate motions
of the universe and the electron. Thus the goal of science is a simple
mathematical statement of all complementary factors in a moving
mechanism without any of the volitional or metaphysical notions
of cause and effect, purpose and instrument, required by a finite mind
to explain how it happens that one thing can cause another to move
at a distance without the aid of an intervening medium of commu-
nication.

This mathematical agnosticism is evidently the goal set up for
themselves by the so-called behavioristic schools of psychology and
sociology. Applied to economics, it is the statistical or mathematical
representation of all the complementary factors that conjoin in
a statement of correlations, lags and forecasts of prices. The pro-
cedure reduces, very properly, economic phenomena to mathemat-
ical formula of prices, and if by proper tests it is found that the for-
mula fit the actual movement of prices, then the explanation is
deemed complete. Economics becomes, like astronomy and physics,
a set of numbers and equations which we call the movement of prices,
found valid by the test of experiment, and all science is reduced
to numerical terms without assumptions of cause and effect, purpose
and instrument, medium of communication, or other volitional,
metaphysical, or ghostly concepts.

On the other hand, a volitional theory goes a step further. After
eliminating divine will, cosmic ether and all metaphysics, there remains
still the human will which acts mysteriously at a distance, simply
because it does not pay attention to ail the complementary factors
but selects out that limiting factor which can be controlled and
whose control can thereby be employed to guide the other factors
at a distance in space and time. The possibility of control arises
from the fact that the limiting factor is a part of a mechanism and
that the extent of human control over the entire mechanism depends
on the proportions with which it is supplied relative to the other
parts. In other words, it depends on principles of mechanism and
principles of scarcity.

All of the phenomena of the human will are, in this sense, “artifi-
cial,” in contrast with phenomena which may be distinguished as
“natural.” That which is “artificial” is not thereby unnatural, but
is the highly “natural” process of the human will, picking out the
limiting factors of nature and human nature in order to guide certain


376 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


complementary factors into the direction desired by human purpose.
All of the mechanisms with which it deals are themselves artificial,
and, from the standpoint of evolution, they exhibit the effects of
“artificial selection” distinguished from ‘‘natural selection.” Their
history is the evolution of the automobile or the thoroughbred horse,
not the evolution of the universe or the tiger; the evolution of govern-
ments, business organizations, the banking system, the family con-
tract, not the evolution of colonies of bees or herds of animals. In
short, the mechanisms of the human will have evolved in the two
directions which we name ‘“‘a going plant” and “‘a going business,”
the one being a purposeful control over physical nature, the other a
purposeful control over human nature, and each according to shop
rules or working rules changed from time to time, but always intended
to control the actions and transactions of the participants.

Economic theory, since the time of the Physiocrats, has endeavored
to get rid of the human will and to explain economic phenomena in
terms of physical and hedonic forces. The human will had been the
main reliance of the Mercantilists and of the economic theory of the
Church fathers. But the will was arbitrary, capricious and contrary
to natural laws. There were two stages of these physical theories
which attempted to get away from the will:—the natural rights arid
physical equilibrium stage of foreordained evolution of Quesnay,
Adam Smith and Karl Marx, and the natural selection stage of blind
evolution that followed Darwin, whose distinguished exponent in
economics is Veblen.t The theorists of each stage attempted to get
rid of the human will and to explain economic phenomena as the
working out of natural forces, either foreordained or blind. It was
a concept of society as the natural growth of a mechanistic equilib-
rium.

But a volitional theory takes exactly the opposite point of view.
Economic phenomena, as we know them, are the result of artificial
selection and not of natural selection. Their evolution is like that of
a steam engine or a breed of cattle, rather than like that of a conti-
nent, monkey or tiger. If you watch how the steam engine evolved
from John Watt in 1776 to the Mogul locomotive in 1923 you will see
how economic institutions evolved. The steam engine evolved by
studying the mechanisms of nature, experimenting with the parts,
and then rearranging them, so that steam would act in two directions


1 VEBLEN, THORSTEIN, The Place of Science in Modern Civilization, (1919).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 377


instead of one direction, as nature intended. So with the evolution
of that process of behavior which we name political economy. The
subject-matter is the habits, customs and ways of thinking of pro-
ducers, consumers, buyers, sellers, borrowers, lenders and all who
engage in what we name economic transactions. The method has
been the adoption of common rules applying to the similar transac-
tions of all who come within the same concern. If you watch the
development of the credit system out of the customs of business men
in buying and selling, borrowing and lending, and out of the customs
of courts in deciding disputes, according to the changing common
rules, you will see how political economy evolved. The desirable
customs were selected gradually by the courts, the undesirable cus-
toms were progressively eliminated as bad practices, and out of the
whole came the existing economic process, a going concern, symbolized
by a flux of prices, and operating to build up an artificial mechanism
of rules of conduct, creating incorporeal and intangible property
quite different from the unguided processes of nature.

Thus a volitional or economic theory starts with the purpose for
which the artificial mechanism in question was designed, fashioned
and remodeled, and inquires, first, whether that purpose is useful or
useless, legitimate or illegitimate, ethical or unethical, right or wrong.
Then it inquires whether the artificial mechanism in question ac-
complishes that purpose in an efficient or economical way, and, if not,
what is the limiting factor, out of the thousands of codperating factors,
that obstructs the operation, and to what extent that limiting factor can
be, and requires to be, controlled in order to facilitate the mechanism
and accomplish its purpose. Then it adopts or changes the shop rules,
working rules, common law or statute law that regulate the actions
and transactions of participants. It is a theory, indeed, a science, of
an artificial and not a natural mechanism. What is the theory of my
Ford automobile? That mechanism was designed to move across
the country under my guidance carrying a load, and thereby ac-
complish a purpose deemed useful by me. Suddenly it stops without
being directed by me to do so. It gets out of control. I then get out
and seek the limiting factor, perhaps a little wire crossing another
wire. I change somewhat that limiting factor and resume control of
the mechanism. From the standpoint of a behavioristic theory that
little wire is one out of several thousand codrdinated factors, and it
plays but a fraction of one per cent in the accomplishment of the total


378 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


result. But from the standpoint of a volitional theory that little
wire was the limiting factor at the moment and under the circum-
stances, and the control of it at that point of time performed one
hundred per cent of the total result.

So it is with every operation of the human will. It is always direct-
ing itself to investigating, explaining and controlling the limiting
factors that obstruct its purposes at the moment and under the cir-
cumstances. It is always injecting an “artificial” element into the
forces of nature, and that artificial element is its own ultimate purpose
accompanied by an intermediate or immediate instrumental purpose
of obtaining control of the limiting factor, through control of the
mechanism.

Thus it is, also, with all of the phenomena of political economy.
They are the present outcome of rights of property and powers of
government which have been fashioned and refashioned in the past
by courts, legislatures and excutives through control of human be-
havior by means of working rules, directed towards purposes deemed
useful or just by the law-givers and law interpreters. From a be-
havioristic standpoint many thousands, even millions of factors,
must be taken into account in order to explain the phenomena of
political economy, all the way from stars to atoms. But from the
volitional standpoint, at any particular moment or circumstance, the
economist, and indeed also the psychologist, deals with what for him
is the set of limiting factors in accomplishing the further purpose
which he deems worth while.

This limiting factor is not the same at all times and under all cir-
cumstances. At one time it pertains to mechanism, at another to
scarcity. At one time it is a crossed wire, at another a supply of gaso-
line. At one time it is a certain fact in physical nature, at another it
is a certain fact in human nature. At one time it is the rate of bank
discount, at another it is the World War, at another it is flood or
drought. What the economist does, if possible, is to uncover that
limiting factor and to point out, if possible, the extent, degree and
point of time at which it should be modified or counteracted, in order
to control all of the other factors for the further purpose deemed
important.

As soon as the economist endeavors to find out the limiting fac-
tors in any particular juncture, he is both scientist and business man
or politician. And it is difficult to decide at what point he passes


PUBLIC PURPOSE 370


from “science” to “art.” He is scientist, perhaps, in that he weighs
without bias or purpose the relation of cause and effect. He is busi-
ness man or politician in that when, as scientist, he has discovered
the limiting factor, he must decide, as business man or politician,
upon the point of time, the degree of emphasis and the extent of op-
eration by which he must control it by recodifying the working rules
of the concern in order to modify all the other factors in the direc-
tion ultimately desired. The difference, then, between the science
and the art of business economy or political economy is the difference
between knowing in his laboratory or library what to do, and being
in a position of power and responsibility where he must know what,
when, how much and how far to do it at a particular time and place in
the flow of events. This we designate the principle of timeliness.
But there are also two other volitional principles inseparable from
the principle of timeliness, which may be designated the principle
of anticipation and the principle of caution.

Economic theory, in directing its attention to commodities and
feelings, overlooked the significance of property and liberty as those
concepts were developed by the courts. Consequently, its defini-
tions of value and cost were fashioned in terms of commodities, or
pains and pleasures, instead of terms of persuasion, coercion, com-
mand and obedience. The latter are the psychological equivalent,
not of commodities, but of habits and customs operating within their
legal limits of rights, duties, liberties and exposures. Fashioning our
terms, therefore, to suit these proprietary concepts, value, from the
social standpoint, is the principle of inducement! in human relations
and cost is the principle of resistance to inducement. Or, looking at
it from the individual standpoint, value is the principle of anticipa-
tion and cost is the principle of caution. Each arises from the prin-
ciple of relative scarcity of resources, which is both the principle of
limiting and complementary factors and the principle of control-
ling the supply and mechanism of the limiting factors. While from
the technological standpoint of the physical economists, value was
an income, and cost an outgo of commodities; and while, from the
hedonic standpoint value was a pleasure, and cost a pain, yet from
the proprietary, or volitional, standpoint value and cost are the re-
ciprocal principles of inducement or anticipation, and resistance to


1Cp. ANDERSON, BENJAMIN, Social Value (1911), where, however, the proprietary is not
distinguished from the physical,


380 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


inducement or caution, that is, the principle of offering and with-
holding supply. The “cost,” resistance, or caution, may, indeed,
be sought to be explained and justified by reference to pain, sacrifice,
loss of happiness, but these are merely ethical appeals put forth to
justify what is the real behavioristic phenomena, the sheer determi-
nation to withhold products or services for any reason or no reason.
The cost principle is simply the volitional, proprietary principle of
refusing to work or wait, or take risks, to sell or buy, to lend or bor-
row, to hire or hire out, until the terms offered are deemed satisfac-
tory, or merely because “he don’t want to.”

It is this proprietary concept that may rightly be named psycholog-
ical cost and psychological value. It includes all the concepts of rea-
sonable price, as well as the hedonic concepts in so far as they are de-
fined as expected pleasure and pain. Psychological value and cost,
signifying the motives back of all valuation and choices, which, from
the social standpoint are inducement and resistance to inducement,
from the individual standpoint are anticipation and caution, from the
behavioristic standpoint are timeliness, are also, from the compre-
hensive standpoint, including inducement, anticipation, resistance,
caution and timeliness, the volitional concept of purpose.

Thus it is the three principles of anticipation or inducement, cau-
tion or resistance to inducement, and timeliness that distinguish a
volitional theory from a mechanical theory. Each looks to the fu-
ture but describes action in the present. Anticipation and induce-
ment are the expectation of gain that induces action in the present;
caution or resistance is the withholding of action until the time seems
propitious; and timeliness is prompt action of the right kind at the
right moment and to the right degree and extent that sagacious an-
ticipation and caution seem to dictate.

But cost and value have also an objective physical meaning in
terms of concrete commodities and services, in the sense used by the
physical economists. Here, cost is the outgo or alienation of goods
or services, and value is the income or acquisition of goods or services.
And, while the physical economists did not connect up this physical
outgo and income with the accompanying feelings yet the connec-
tion is so close and the accompanying feelings so intimate that this
physical concept of cost and value may properly be named real cost
and real value.

Finally, cost and value have a behavioristic or merely nominal


PUBLIC PURPOSE ae


and phenomenal meaning in terms of the actual prices agreed upon
in a transaction, on the basis of which commodities or services are
transferred. These prices are a scale of measurement,! since they
are stated in terms of money, and money intervenes between the
actual transfer of goods. On this account the term price, which is
a mere symbol or number referring to either a unit or the total quan-
tity of commodity or service, may properly be named nominal cost
and nominal value.

It is the union of these three meanings of cost and value that is
necessary to construct a volitional theory of value. The essential
attribute of a volitional theory is the concept of an ultimate purpose
or goal and of the intermediate and immediate instruments made
use of to attain that goal. The ultimate goal is psychological in the
sense that it is always in the future, whether remote or proximate,
and includes the hopes, happiness and virtues of self and others in-
cluded in such general terms as welfare, social welfare, public good,
commonweal, commonwealth, comprehended under the principle of
anticipation or purpose. This ultimate goal, is of course vague and
indefinite and affords no certain guidance in particular cases. Yet
it is in this field that the moving principles of anticipation and cau-
tion are found without which human activity would not occur.

The intermediate goal is more concrete, for it is the progressive
increase of the control over nature, the ‘‘maximum of production”
which, while it is a ‘‘fog picture,” according to Cassel,” is yet most
substantial, and it constituted, indeed, the whole of the theories of
the physical economists. So important is it in the practice and the-
ory of political economy, that we have designated it the field of real
value and real cost.

Finally, the immediate goal is a system of reasonable prices, by
which is indicated such a price system as may bring about what is
deemed to be a progressive equivalence of both psychological value
and psychological cost, or real value and real cost. And since prices
in themselves are purely behavioristic social phenomena having no sig-
nificance except as bearing on the psychological and physical forces
and purposes behind them, the system of prices we have designated
the field of nominal value and nominal cost. A reasonable system of


1CassEL, G., Nature and Necessity of Interest, 69 (1903). :
2 [bid., “Der Ausgangspunkt der Theoretischen Ockonomie, 58 Zeitschr. fiir Staatsw.


688 (1902).


382 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


prices can be judged to be such only as it conforms in some way to
the psychological or ultimate goal of welfare and the physical or in-
termediate goal of production of wealth.

But the means by which these goals are reached consist in the
adoption of certain lines of action which are conveniently named
“principles.” The value principle, looked upon, not as a quality in-
trinsic in commodities nor in the relation of man to nature, but as a
social principle of inducement and an individual principle of antici-
pation, is none other than that expected power of persuasion or
coercion over others which induces performance on the economic side,
and gives rise to the claims of rights and liberties on the property
side. On the other hand the cost principle, looked upon as a social
principle of resistance and an individual principle of caution, is that
subservience to others or service to others, which on the economic
side is the resistance to performance and on the property side is a
duty or exposure corresponding to the right or liberty of others. From
this standpoint, both the value principle and the cost principle are
eminently psychological, for they refer to the persuasions, coer-
cions, commands and obedience, the anticipation and caution
through which expected performance, avoidance, and forbearance
are induced or resisted. The immediate instrument of inducement
is the price-system, the intermediate instrument is the commodity
system, but these are effective only as they influence and are influ-
enced by the unseen psychological system of purposes.

We thus arrive at a theory of going concerns similar to that which
Dean Pound sets forth as an “engineering interpretation of legal
history.” He distinguishes his ‘engineering interpretation” from
the “economic interpretation,” but this distinction turns out to be
the same as that between the principle of scarcity and the principle
of mechanism which characterizes the schools of economic thought.
Thus he has identified ‘economic interpretation” with those econ-
omists who have based their theories on principles of mechanism
whereas his “engineering interpretation” is based mainly on the prin-
ciple of scarcity. He finds the “economic interpretation” to be that
of Karl Marx * and Brooks Adams.” Each of these based his theory
on the physical or technological facts of the modes of production and
exchange of wealth, with its familiar evolution of industrial society


1 Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie (1850).
* ADAMS, BROOKS, in Centralization and the Law (10906).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 383


through the stages of hunting and fishing, pasturage, trade and com-
merce, and machinery. The accompanying concept of property is
that of holding physical things for one’s exclusive use, while the con-
cept of sovereignty is that of the aggregate of property-owners. It
follows that the concept of the individual is that of an isolated in-
dividual, and of society is that of an aggregate of individuals. With
these mechanical concepts it is concluded by Marx and Adams that
the propertied classes always control the government since it is they
who own the tools, cattle and machinery, and their ownership is
safeguarded only by control of government. This outcome of physi-
cal concepts in the hands of Marx and Adams is readily traceable
from the mechanical assumptions of Adam Smith based on his prin-
ciples of individualism, self-interest, division of labor, liberty, divine
providence or harmony, absence of associations and of governments
except as protector of the peace and of property, and it is these as-
sumptions that have unfortunately fixed upon economic theory the
doctrines which Pound accepts as the economic interpretation.

But his own “engineering interpretation” starts with the scarcity
principle as stated by William James, although it was first suggested
by David Hume.! ‘In seeking for a universal principle,” says Wil-
liam James, “we inevitably are carried onward to the most inclusive
principle—that the essence of good is simple to satisfy demand. .. .
Must not the guiding principle for ethical philosophy (since all de-
mands conjointly cannot be satisfied in this poor world) be simply
to satisfy at all times as many demands as we can.” ? ‘This,’ says
Pound, “‘seems to me a statement of the problem of the legal order.
The task is one of satisfying human demands, of securing interests
or satisfying claims or demands with the least of friction and the
least of waste, whereby the means of satisfaction may be made to
go as far as possible.” Having summarized all of the other mechan-
ical, ethical, biological, economic and metaphysical interpretations of
the legal order he finds them all comprehended in this more inclusive
interpretation of “social engineering,” where the judge as well as
legislator, is endeavoring to adjust and harmonize human relations in
a world of limited resources.

It will be seen, therefore, that this ‘‘engineering interpretation”
is quite the same as our “economic interpretation,” and points to


1 Pounp, Interpretations of Legal History, 157.
2 James, Wm., The Will to Believe, 195-206.


384 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


the fact that both economic theory and ethical theory have also a
line of theorists, beginning with Robert Malthus and David Hume,
who have made the principle of scarcity predominant and the prin-
ciple of mechanism subordinate. The two principles are not exclu-
sive—they are interdependent—but when the scarcity principle is given
preéminence it brings out another aspect of the individual, of prop-
erty, of liberty and of opportunity and sovereignty. Property now
becomes the power to withhold from others as well as to hold ex-
clusively for self, as was first introduced into the concept in the case
of Munn z. Illinois. The individual becomes a member of that con-
cern, the state, which then proceeds to regulate by common rules
his power to withhold, since he has chosen to devote his property to
a use which is exceptionally limited in supply and upon which others
therefore depend for the use of their property. Sovereignty now be-
comes the collective power of the concern laying down its working
rules in the form of the common law, statutory law, equity and ad-
ministrative orders, for the purpose of better adjustment of men’s
transactions in a world of relative scarcity of resources.

And it is this principle of the common rule or working rules, which
we find to be the universal and ultimate principle of all going con-
cerns. The statement and enforcement of a working rule is accom-
plished in no other way than by imposing duties on some individuals
through the process of restricting their liberties, and it is this process
that creates automatically the correlative rights and exposures of
other individuals. When the collective concern imposes these ethi-
cal duties, it does so through those working rules which guide its
officials, foremen, superintendents, judges and _ legislatures, and
which in law, are known as powers, liabilities, immunities and disa-
bilities.

Hence it is that we find the three ultimate principles on which
economics, ethics, law, and psychology are based, and applicable to
the state, the business concern and the cultural concern, to be the
principle of mechanism, the principle of scarcity, and the principle
of the working rule. The secondary principles, emerging from these
ultimate principles are those of anticipation or inducement, caution
or resistance to inducement, and timeliness or acting upon the limit-


1 The eminent Swedish economist, G. CAssEt, has proposed certain of the fundamental
concepts here suggested. Cp. CasseL, Der Ausgangspunkt der theoretischen Ocekonomie, 58
Zeisch. fiir Staatsw. 668 (1902) and Theoretische Socialoeckonomie (2d ed. 1921).


PUBLIC PURPOSE 385


ing factors at the time, to the degree and to the extent that they are
deemed to be effective in accomplishing the purposes intended. This
action implies the principle of mechanism in that it signifies getting
control of the strategic part of the mechanism, and it implies the prin-
ciple of scarcity in that it signifies a due proportioning of the quantities
of the several factors contributing to the mechanism.

But it implies, above all, the principle of purpose, looking toward
the future, of which anticipation, caution and timeliness are its be-
havioristic and measurable dimensions, but of which the ethical and
economic consequences foreseen are its driving force. It is the latter
which constitutes the “substance” of the working rules, as we have
seen when the Supreme Court changed the definition of ‘‘due process
of law”’ from due procedure to due purpose of law. The ‘‘substance”’
of law, as it is the “substance” of the will, is purpose, the difference
being that law is ‘‘due purpose” and the will is amy purpose.

Economic theory, like legal theory, started with Liberty rather
than Purpose. Liberty is the individual’s absence of physical coercion.
But public purpose is that of giving to the individual by means of
common rules binding on all under similar circumstances, a power
of calling on government to give effect to his will. So smoothly
has this purpose worked, especially in England after the Act of
Settlement, that the rights which it afforded came to be looked upon
as a natural right of man, in the sense, not of an ideal that man
ought to have by the aid of government, but in the sense of some-
thing which he previously had by nature and was deprived of by
government.

This anarchistic notion of man’s will was inseparable from the ac-
companying anarchistic notion of property. For property was also
evidently a natural right, since man could not live without exclusive
possession and holding of the physical things which he consumes, or
with which he works. And governments deprived individuals of
both property and liberty, in two ways, by restrictive or protective
legislation, and by grants of franchises to corporations. These con-
cepts of liberty and sovereignty culminated in the French Revolu-
tion which established individual property and prohibited all associa-
tions.?

Adam Smith, influenced by these ideas, as we have noted above,
would also abolish all corporations and associations, because they

1 Le Lot Chapelier, 1791.


386 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


restricted the liberty of the individual by majority vote, and would
reduce government to the lowest terms of maintaining security. There
would then ensue a “natural”? economy, instead of an “artificial”
political economy, which would operate through nature’s laws of free
competition, demand and supply. This nature-economy is indeed
fundamental, and cannot be escaped. It springs from the fact that
some of nature’s resources are limited, and the limiting factors must
be attended to if the complementary factors are to be of any use what-
ever. But it has greatly been interfered with by collective power
exercised through working rules by those who controlled the mech-
anism and the supply. Instead of abolishing associations as desired
by Adam Smith, the weakness of the individual has driven him into
corporations and unions, while governments have yielded and have
granted to these associations sovereign powers and immunities from
sovereign power, until they are far more powerful than those con-
demned by Adam Smith and the French Revolution. Nations, too,
have interfered with the natural economy of demand and supply, by
the war-power, the taxing power, the police power, the legal tender
power, involved in the creation of those intangible and incorporeal
properties, almost unknown to Adam Smith, which reach to the ends
of the earth and command obedience wherever the sovereign power
penetrates.

These sovereign powers have brought about a very different pro-
portioning of factors from that which might have occurred under
the 18th century notions of property and liberty. For the limiting
factors are not merely nature’s resources, they are the rights of property
in those resources, as determined by the accepted working rules
of society. And these rights of property are but the purposes of the
human will, individual and collective, placed in control of those
resources and given power and immunity by law to control the
mechanisms by which to withhold from other persons what they
need, except on terms to be agreed upon.

The area over which this bargaining activity of individuals ex-
tends depends on the expansion of the state. By conquest or pur-
chase, the state expands its territory and thereby expands its market
area. By international treaties it opens up opportunities and enforces
the bargains of its citizens in all parts of the world. By military
preparedness and defense it perpetuates these conquests, purchases
and penetrations. This work of government, consisting in the sov-


PUBLIC PURPOSE 387


ereign’s transactions with other sovereigns, we have defined as the
state’s power of expansion, or briefly Political Expansion.

But the state also proportions the factors over which it has control.
It opens up certain areas, localities or resources, instead of others.
It does this, not directly as individuals do, but indirectly through
working rules which guide the transactions of individuals. It en-
courages or protects certain businesses or classes of business, certain
occupations or jobs, rather than others. It restrains certain activ-
ities deemed detrimental to the whole. Its proportioning of factors
is the proportioning of inducements to individuals and associations
of individuals to act in one direction rather than other directions.
This proportioning of inducements, by means of working rules,
to individuals and associations is Political Economy.

Thus, while political expansion consists of transactions with officials
of other sovereigns by which opportunities are enlarged for citizens,
political economy consists of transactions between officials of the
same sovereign by which opportunities are proportioned among
citizens. The two together constitute a World Economy.

Economic theory, in avoiding ethical notions of purpose, has
usually assumed that it is the business of those working rules which
we name “the law,” to eliminate the unethical attributes of trans-
actions, such as fraud, violence, coercion, deception, and has then
operated with the abstract notions of utility and exchange. This
is typical of the physical sciences which have been the models for
economic science. Yet in a scicnce of human transactions there is
no clear dividing line between utility, sympathy and duty, between
economics, ethics and law. The law, or working rules of society,
take over, as best they can, the inducements of violence and thereby
eliminate, as best they can, other unethical inducements. But
ethical and unethical elements remain, simply because exchanges
are transactions between persons, official and private. Hence a
behavioristic definition of political economy as the subject-matter
jointly of the sciences of law, ethics and economics, would not be
limited to the traditional mechanics of “production, exchange, dis-
tribution and consumption of wealth” which are relations of man to
nature, but would include them as secondary, and would be defined
as primarily a set of relations of man to man, both national and
international, which might be formulated somewhat as follows:
Political Economy and Political Expansion are the proportioning,


388 LEGAL FOUNDATIONS OF CAPITALISM


by means of the working rules of going concerns, of persuasive,
coercive, corrupt, misleading, deceptive and violent inducements
and their opposites, to willing, unwilling and indifferent persons,
in a world of scarcity and mechanical forces, for purposes which the
public and private participants deem to be, at the time, probably
conducive to private, public or world benefit.


INDEX


A


Act. See Performance.

Act of Settlement, 5°, 104; 106, 231, 373-

Adair v. U. S. (208 U. S. 161), 288.

Adams, Brooks, 382.

Adams Express Co. 2. Ohio (165 U.S. 194,
166 U.S. 185), 172, 200-

Adkins ». Children’s Hospital (43 Sup. Ct.
304), 63.

Adler, E. A., 328.

Administration, 356ff.

Advertising, 205-

Agents, distinguished from employees,
149, 315-

Allegeyer 2. Louisiana (165 U. S. 578), 175
128, 159, 341-

Allison, James, 207-

Amer. St. & W. Co. 2. Wire Drawers’
Union (oo Fed. 598), 310-

Ames, James Barr, 239, 246.

Ames v. Union Pacific R. R. Co. (64 Fed.
165), 196.

Anarchists, 4-

Anderson, Benj., 379-

Anticipation, 42 psychological principle,
8, 378ff.

Appleton, W. W. 2. R. R. Com. (154 Wis.
121), 207, 271.

Apportionment, r6sff., 325ff.

Art, 205.

Arthur 2. Oakes (63 Fed. 310), 285-

Artificial, versus natural, 375ff.

A. T. R. Co. 2. Matthews (174 U. S. 096),
346.

Assets, 10, 28, 31, 273; and liabilities, 157f-
See Exchange Value.

Association, right of, 178, 288f.

Astronomy, 374-

Austin, John, 74, 208, 332-

Authoritative Transactions, 100ff.

Avoidance, 6o0ff.


B


Bacon v. Hooker (177 Mass. 335), 247-
Bailments, 2554.

Banking, 251ff.

Barbies v. Connolly (113 U. S. 27), 345-
Bargaining, 54-

Bastiat, F., 65-


Baty, T., 149.

Bauer, John, 207, 208.

Billings v. Ill. (88 U. S. 07), 344-
Blackstone, 48, 215, 216, 220, 280.
Blackstone v. Miller (188 U. S. 189), 248.
Béhm-Bawerk, Eugen von, 210.
Bonham’s Case (8 Co. 1142), 228, 233-
Bradley, Justice, 13.

Brewer, Justice, 185, 186, 189, 195, 311,


345-
Bromwich 9. Lloyd (2 Lutw. 1582), 252.
Brown, W. Jethro, 149.
Browne, J. H. B., 246.
Buller z. Crips (6 Mod. 20), 252.
Bunting v. Oregon (243 U.S. 426), 63, 288,
203-
Business, 153ff.
Business Economy, 3, 55> 163.
Butchers’ Union Co. 2. Crescent City Co.
(x11 U.S. 746), 13-


Cc


Capital, 28, 163, 211.

Capitalism, 164; distinguished from Feu-
dalism, 21, 48, 225 ff.

Carter, A. T., 246.

Carter, John C., 208.

Case of Monopolies (11 Co. 86a), 47, 226,
203-

Cassel, G., 130, 261, 381, 384.

Cause and Effect, 2, 377i.

Caution, a psychological principle, 370f.

Cedar Rapids Gas Co. ?. Cedar Rapids
(223 U.S. 655), 108.

C., B. & Q. R. Co. 2 Chi. (166 U. S. 226),
230, 341.

C., M. & St. P. Ry. Co. v. Minn. (134.
U.S. 418), 15-

C.&N. W.R. R. 2. State (124 Wis. 553),


175.

Child, Sir Joshua, 253-

Chitty, Joseph, 104, 216.

Choices, 12, 17, 54, 66, 121n., 236, 288,
351; and purpose, 127- See Oppor-
tunities.

Clark, J. B., 44, 167-

Clark ». Nash (108 U.S. 361), 328.

Classical Economists, 4.

Classification, gaift., 344ff.


390 INDEX


Closed shop, 216ff., 207ff.

Clyatt v. U. S. (197 U.S. 207), 284.

Coercion, economic, 12, 14, 128, 200ff.;
physical, 12; distinguished from duress,
5 Off.

Coffeyville v. Perry (69 Kan. 297), 280.

Coke, Sir Edw., 50, 51, 144, 222, 307.

Collective Bargaining, 104.

Collective Power, 1ooff.

Command and Obedience, distinguished
from Persuasion or Coercion, 107.

Commodities, 3, 7, 8.

Commodity market, 150, 258ff.

Commodity Tickets, 254ff.

Common law, 40, 178ff., 217, 233, 270ff.,
208ff.

Commons, J. R., 207, 245, 256, 260, 272;
and Andrews, 284, 287; and Associates,
312.

Commonwealth, 182ff.; 223, 225ff.; 265,
325ft.

Compensation, inadequacy of, 56ff.

Competition, 18, 23.

Cons. Gas Co. v. City of New York (157
Fed. 849), 191.

Constitutional government, rogff.; 215ff.

Contract, 301ff.; and property, 318. See
Promises.

Cook, W. W., 91, 280, 201.

Cooley, Justice, 50.

Coppage v. Kansas (266 U.S. 1), 58, 50,
71, 288.

Copyright, 274ff.

Corbin, A. L., go.

Corporations, 143ff.; 178ff.; 2orff.

Correlation, meanings of the term, 45,
Soff.; 131ff.

Cost, original, 208; of reproduction, 184ff.,
212.

Credit economy, 245.

Cruttwell v. Lye (17 Ves. 335), 267, 260.

Cunningham, W., 50, 61, 227, 231.

Custin v. Viroqua (67 Wis. 314), 58.

Custom, 241, 208ff.


D


Dartmouth Coll. v. Woodward (4 Wheat.


518), 144, 185.
Darwin, Charles, 5, 80.
Davenant v. Hurdis (11 Co. 84), 47, 226.
Davenport, H. J., 67.
Debs, In re (158 U.S. 564), 308.
Definition, 347ff.
Delegation of Power, 104.
Denver v. Denver Union Water Co. (246
U. S. 178), 108.
Depreciation, 170.


Des Moines Gas Co. v. Des Moines (238
U.S. 153), 198, 202.

Determining Powers, 121ff., 326.

Determinism, 81ff., 121n.

Dewey, John, 349.

Disability, 1o2ff.

Discretion, 62, 122ff., 146, 353ff.

Dis-opportunity value, 67, 202.

Distribution, functional and personal, 367.

Donaldson v. Beckett (4 Burr. 2408), 275.

Due Process of Law, 71, 107, 331ff. See
Public Purpose.

Dundee v. Connor (46 N. J. Eq. 576), 58.

Duress, 56ff.

Duty, 6, 20, 84, 133, 147; behavioristic
definition, 90; distinguished from wrong,
125. See Encumbrance.

Dynamics, 1.


E


Economic interpretation, distinguished
from materialistic interpretation, 382ff.

Economy, distinguished from expansion,
18, 20, 36, 55, 281, 282, 321ff.5 and
value, 8; theory of going concerns, 350ff.
See Political Economy.

Eldon, Chancellor, 267, 269, 353.

Wiyaelee Leora

Emery v. Lowell (127 Mass. 130), 58.

Eminent domain, 184.

Employees, distinguished from agents, 148.

Encumbrance, distinguished from oppor-
tunity, 21, 235.

Engineering Economy, 3, 55, 205.

Equality, 17, 63, 71; change to reciprocity,
129.

Equity, 218, 233ff., 307ff., 353ff.

Esquerré, P. J., 161.

Ethics, distinguished from law, 8sff., ro2ff.,
r25ff.

Expansion, distinguished from economy,
20, 36. See Economy.

Exposure, 6, 97ff., 133, 147.


F


Faculties, 78, 153ff. See Opportunities.

Feudalism, 2z4ff.

Field, Justice, 13, 14, 15, 33, 47, 128, 345.

Fifteenth Amendment, 119.

Figgis, J. N., 152.

Fisher, Irving, 26, 168.

Forbearance, 6off., 128.

Foreman, C. J., 272.

Foster and Catchings, 261.

Fourteenth Amendment, 7, 11, 60, 96n.,
IIQ, 130.

Franchise, corporate, 176ff.


INDEX 391


Frank v. Magnum (237 U. S. 300), 340.

Freedom, distinguished from liberty, 111,
r18ff.

Freemantle, W. H., 152.

Freund, Ernst, 132.

Friday, David, 2rr.

Fund of Value, 167.


G


Galusha v. Sherman (105 Wis., 263), 57.

Galveston Elec. Co. v. City of Galveston
(272 Fed. 147, 42 Sup. Ct. 351), 207.

Gardiner, S. R., 219, 229.

Gibblett v. Read (9 Mod. 450), 266, 274.

Gilds, 225ff., 278.

Gillespie vz. People (188 Ill. 176), 280.

Gleason v. Thaw (185 Fed. 345), 18.

Goodwill, 162ff., 1orff., 206ff., 26rff.;
value of, 199, 212.

Going Business Value, 200.

Going Concerns, 143ff.

Going Concern Value, 192, 1osff.

Going Plant, 170, 182ff.; value of, 199.

Greer, F. A., 246, 248.

Gross, Chas., 225.


H


Habit, 340.

Hackley v. Headley (45 Mich. 569), 58, 59.

Haines, C..G., 233-

Hale, Robert L., or.

Hand, Learned, 62.

Harlan, Justice, 337ff.

Hart v. Smith (159 Ind. 182), 182.

Hawtrey, R. G., 261.

Hedonic economists, 2, 4.

Henderson, C. C., 197, 100, 350.

Hepburn v. Griswold (8 Wall. 603), 244.

Hill v. Antigo Water Co. (3 W. R. C. R.
623), 207.

Hitchman Coal Co. v. Mitchell, (225 U. S.
229), 206.

Hobbes, Thomas, 152.

Hoffding, H., 152.

Hogg v. Kirby, (8 Ves. 215), 267.

Hohfeld, W. N., orff.

Holden v. Hardy (169 U. S. 366), 63, 105,
125, 203-

Holderstaffe v. Saunders (6 Mod. 16), 300.

Holdsworth, W. S., 48, 214, 218, 222, 228,
232, 233, 242, 246, 353.

Holmes, Justice, 73, 124, 125, 247, 280,
308, 342.

Holt, Chief Justice, 251, 250, 300.

Hopkins 2. Oxley Stave Co. (83 Fed. 912),
Chae

Hough, Justice, 191.


Hughes, Justice, 289, 342.
Hume, David, 5, 361.
Hurtado v. Calif., (110 U.S. 516), 333.


I


Ideals, 340, 364

Immunity, 1o2ff.

Imputation, 16sff., 176, 200ff., 210.
Industrial government, 306ff.
Inflation, 9.

Injunction, 234, 307ff.

Interest, on money, 61, 253.
Investment, 54, 191, 203ff., 237, 287.
Isaacs, Nathan, 349.


y


James, Wm., 383.

Jenkins v. Ballantyne (8 Utah, 245), 353.

Jenks, Edw., 49, 63, 214, 221, 234, 237,
230, 246.

Job, 153ff., 313ff.

Jollyfe v. Brode (Cro. Jac. 596), 263.

Juillard v. Greenman (110 U. S. 421), 244.


K


Kant, Immanuel, 361, 371.

Kennebeck Water Dist. »v. Waterville
(97 Me. 185), 271.

Knoxville v. Knoxville Water Co. (212
U.S. 2), 108.

Kocourek, Albert, orff.


L


Labor, meaning of, 13, 155, 283ff.
Languages, and working rules, 136.
Laski, Hi. J; x40:

Law, progressive science, 62.

Lawfulness, value of, 188ff.

Legal Tender, 240ff.

Legal Tender Cases (12 Wall. 457), 244.

Liberty, 6, 11, 17, 22, 133, 147, 272; dis-
tinguished from economy, 36; from “lib-
erties,” 48; from freedom, 111, 118;
from opportunity, 95; privilege, 94.

Lieber, Francis, 105, 232.

Limiting and Complementary Factors,
2, 38. See Economy, Proportioning the
Factors, Scarcity.

Locke, John, 60, 78, 151, 187, 244, 277.

Lowe v. Kansas (163 U. S. 81), 335.

Lurton, Justice, 195.


M


Maine v. Grand Trunk Ry. Co. (142 U.S.
217), 174.


302 INDEX


Maine, Sir Henry, 301.

Maitland, F. W., 149, 214.

McLeod, H. D., 158, 246, 252.

McKechnie, W. S., 48, 217.

McKenna, Justice, 344.

Malthus, Robert, 4, 5, So.

Markets, expansion of, 50.

Matthews, Justice, 335.

Mansfield, Lord, 275.

Marshall, Justice, 144.

Martin v. Boure (Cro. Jac. 6), 252.

Marx, Karl, 2, 3, 155, 158, 166, 201, 322,
347, 382.

Maxwell v. Dow (176 U.S. 581), 338.

Mechanism, 4, 6, 135, 323, 374ff., 384;
and individualism, 137.

Mercantilism, 241, 253.

Mill, James, 155.

Millar v. Taylor (4 Burr. 2503), 275.

Miller, Justice, 11, 14.

Wiley (Shes 12 We Be So IK (Clo cs I I (Om
(136 Wis. 146), 357.

Mitchell v. Reynolds (1 P. Wms. 185), 266.

Money, 242, 271; measure of value, 31.

Money Market, 150, 200, 258.

Monongahela Navigation Co. v. U. S.
(148 U. S. 312), 182.

Monopoly, 12, 51, 184.

Monopolies, Statute of, 47.

Morse, John T., 246.

Munn 2. Illinois (94 U. S. 139), 15, 32,
105, 125, 203, 335.

Murray's Lessees 2. Hoboken (18 How.
272), 334-


N


National Tel. News Co. v. Western Union
Tel. Co. (x19 Fed. 2094), 18.

National W. W. Co. v. Kansas City (62
Fed. 853), 186.

Natural law, 2, 89, 136, 204, 241, 306, 376.

Natural rights, 55.

Negative, double meaning of term, 97.

Negotiability, 246ff.

Norman Conquest, ror, 216ff., 324.

Norwood v. Baker (172 U. S. 260), 330.

Nourse, E. G., 139.

Nuisance value.
Value.


See Disopportunity


O


Occupation, 12, 154. See Job, Business.

Omaha v. Omaha Water Co. (218 U. S.
180), 195.

Opportunity, 12, 17, 153ff., 288; distin-
guished from encumbrance, 21; part-
opportunity distinguished from whole
opportunity, 40, 153. See Choices.


Opportunity-cost, 67.

Opposite, meanings of the term, 44, 93,
100, I13, 263.

Opus, use, 20.


P


Page, W. H., 58, 91, 246.

Pantaleoni, Maffeo, 39.

Parliamentarism, 104.

Patents, 281.

People v. Marcus (185 N. Y. 257), 280.

Perfect and Imperfect Rights, 112.

Performance, 6off. See Avoidance, For-
bearance.

Personification, 37, 362.

Persuasion or Coercion, distinguished
from Command and Obedience, 107.

Physical capital, 184.

Physical economists, 163.

Physiocrats, 2, 241, 376.

Pitney, Justice, 59, 280.

Pittsburgh Ry. Co. v. Backus (154 U. S.
421), 175.

Police Power, 14, 33, 52, 278.

Political Economy, 3; distinguished from
Expansion, 42; defined, 387, 388.

Political Expansion. See Political Econ-
omy.

Political Value, roo.

Pollock, F., 20, 49, 57.

Pollock and Maitland, 215, 218, 230, 240,
242.

Positions, 153, 313ff., 270ff. See Jobs.

Potential, 70.

Pound, Roscoe, 62, 111, 121, 332, 382.

Powell, T. R., or.

Power, distinguished from opportunity, 28;
physical, economic and moral, distin-
guished, 47.

Precedent, 346. See Classification.

Prerogative, 48, 178ff., 216.

Prices, 31, 244. See Value, nominal.

Price tickets, 254ff.

Privilege, 33, 261ff., distinguished from
liberty, 094.

Probability, 65, 121, 126.

Procedure, 333ff. See Purpose.

Profit, 259; rate and ratio, 166; expecta-
tion of, 274, 368ff.

Proletarii, 223.

Promises, 216, 235ff.

Property, corporeal, 18, 158, 214ff., 270;
incorporeal, 19, 158, 237; intangible,
19, 158, 173ff., 237; holding and with-
holding, 52; distinguished from rights
of property, 156; constitutional mean-
ing, 12; and contract, 318; and bus-
iness, 18; and sovereignty, 48.


INDEX 303


Property rights versus personal rights,
333ff.

Proportioning the factors, 37. See Econ-
omy.

Proudhon, 3.

Psychology, process of thinking, 342ff.

Public Policy, 325. See Purpose.

Public Utility, 327ff. See Purpose.

Purpose, 96, 127ff., 211, 203, 313ff.


Q
Quesnay, 2, 3.


R


Reagan v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co.
(154 U.S. 362), 195.

Reciprocity, 43, 45, 105, I10, 120, 271.

Reese, In re (107 Fed. 942), 310.

Remedial Powers, 108ff.

Rent Bargain, 214ff.

Responsibility, Official, 104.

Restriction of output, 20, 305.

Richberg, D. R., 207.

Ricardo, David, 2, 3.

Rights, 6, 84ff., 133; distinguished from
wrongs, 332.

Robinson, W. C., 282.

Rousseau, 151.

Rowell v. Rowell (122 Wis. 1), 260.


S


Salmond, J., 74, 91, 112, 128, 105.

Sarsfield v. Witherly (Carth. 82), 252.

Sawyer, In re (124 U.S. 200), 300.

Savage, Justice, 188, 195.

Scarcity, 5, 128, 135, 323, 378, 384.

Schiller, F.C. S., 82.

Science, 205, 374ff.

Scientific management, 205.

Scrap-value, 199.

Servitude, distinguished from slavery, 11,
I2, 13, 128, 188.

Sidgwick, Alfred, 347.

Silliman v. U. S. (101 U. S. 465), 58.

Simon 2. So. Ry. Co. (236 U.S. 115), 340.

Slaughter House Cases (16 Wall. 36), 11,
33, 55, 128, 153, 159, 184, 283, 293.

Slavery, 11, 12, 60, 188. See Servitude.

Smith, Adam, 2, 3, 47, 137, I5I, 204, 240,
283, 323, 362.

Smith, Thomas, 222.

Smythe v. Ames (169 U. S. 466), 196.

Socialists, 4.

Spencer, Herbert, 126, 151.

Standard Oil Co. v. U. S. (221 U. S. 1),


310, 356.


State, and working rules, 149; and govern-
ment, 150.

State ». Coppage (87 Kan. 752), 280.

State v. Julow (129 Mo. 163), 280.

State R. R. Tax Cases (92 U. S. 575), 175.

Statics, 1.

Statistics, 8, 244, 374.

Stettler v. O'Hara (69 Or. 519), 63, 293.

Substantive Powers, 114ff.

Superior and Inferior, 56ff.

Supply and demand. See Scarcity.

Supreme Court, 4, 7, 11, 32, 71, 123, 193.

Swayne, Justice, 13.

Sympathy, behavioristic definition, 90.


al


Tailors of Ipswich (11 Co. 536), 50, 265.

Taxation, ad valorem, 172ff.

Taylor, H:, 232.

Terry, H.T.,.75, 82, 01, 112.

Thirteenth Amendment, 11, 119, 130.

Time Dimensions of Value, 2.

Timeliness, a psychological principle, 37off.

Tol. A. A. & N. M. Ry. Co. v. Penna. Co.,
(54 Fed. 746), 311.

Transactions, 4, 7, 65ff., 261; legal dis-
tinguished from economic, r2tn.

Trespass, evolution from physical to bus-
iness, 238, 265, 315.

Truax v. Corrigan (257 U. S. 312), 346.

Truax v. Raich (239 U. A. 33), 300.

Twining v. N. Jersey (211 U. S. 78), 339.


U


Uncompensated service, 2o03ff.

Undue Influence, 56ff.

Union Pac. R. Co. v. Ruef (120 Fed. 102)
310.

Unit Rule of Taxation, 172ff.

U. S. v. Trans-Missouri Freight Assn.
(166 U.S. 200), 355.

Unwin, Geo., 227.

Use and Enjoyment of Property, 14, 19, 33-

Usus, utility, 20.

Utility, behavioristic definition, 90.


V


Valuation, 165ff., 176.

Value, and economy, 1, 8, 43; exchange,
It, 15, 157ff., 225ff., nominal, 8, 381;
psychological, 8, 380; real, 8, 313,
380, 381; reasonable, 9, 211, 356ff.;
MISE PET Ok A CON st Ss

Van Allen v. Assessors (3 Wall. 573), 174.

Veblen, Thorstein, 168, 241, 374, 376.

Vegelahn v. Guntner (167 Mass. 92), 309.


304 INDEX


Vested rights, 193ff.
Volitional theories, 4, 370f.


W


Wade’s Case (5 Co. 114a), 243.

Waiting Power, 54.

Walker v. Sauvinet (92 U. S. 90), 338.

Wage Bargain, 283ff.

Washburn 2. Natl. Wall Paper Co. (81
Fed. 20), 192.

Water District v. Water Co. (99 Me. 371),
180.

Webb, Sidney and Beatrice, 139.

Weighing the facts, 348ff.

West v. Louisiana (194 U. S. 258), 330.

Western Union v. Taggart (162 U. S. 1),


E75.


Wheaton v. Peters (8 Pet. 593), 276.

Whitten, R. H., 207.

Wilcox v. Cons. Gas Co. (212 U. S. 109),
194.

Will, r21n., 127, 187, 303ff., 354; and
determinism, 82; two concepts of, 70.
Williams v. Williams (Carth. 269), 252.
Working Rules, 6, 67, 85, 80, 133, 134ff.,
331ff., 384; point of view of economist,

92.


Y
Yates, Justice, 276.
Z


Zillmer v. Kreutzberg (114 Wis. 530), 280.


co
7 OUP eee
25%


2336)


Date Due


fy -1-ione pants niece ae


wey


Dec je %e |
NOV 22 49


HB501


| AUTHOR
|


| TITLE


| capitalise
n


BORROWER'S NAME ie


=
| DATE DUE


ST. OLAF COLLEGE
HB501 .C65


Commons, John R - Legal foundations of capitalism,


HANI


|
3 0111 00180 6669
