RACES AND IMMIGRANTS
IN AMERICA


I»«>H'


]


I


IV


^B^ammmam


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS

IN AMERICA


m


JOHN R. COMMONS
ffiomiOR ow FounciiL ioonomy, umviiiiTy

OP WUOONIIN


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

IjONDON : MACMILXAN ft CO, Lm

I913
AH rigkit m tr m i


Bv THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


S«t up mod elcctioljrpad. PuUishad May» 1907. R eprinte d
May, 1908 ; April, 191s ; Febmaty, 19x3.


9. 1. Onihlaff Go. — Barwlek & Smtth Oo.
Vorwood, MiM., U.a.A.


CONTENTS


vii


h Race and Democracy i

II. Colonial Race Elements • ... 93

III. The Negro 39

IV. Nineteenth Century Additions • • • 63
V. Industry 107

VI. Labor 135

VII. City LonB, Crime^ and Poverty • • • 160

VIII. Politics 179

IX. Amalgamation and Assimilatiqn • • 198

Index 239


ILLUSTRATIONS

Elus Island, Immigrant Station . • FranHsptece

PAGE

^Return of the Mayflower/^ Painting by

Boughton, 1834 opposite 24

Anglo-Saxon Mountaineers, Berea College,

Kentucky opposite 36

Counties having a Larger Proportion of Negroes

IN 1900 than in 1880 .... opposite 50

Movement of Immigrants, Imports of Merchan*
DisE PER Capita and Immigrants per 10,000
Population between 63-64

Aliens awaiting Admission at Ellis Island

opposite 78

Norwegian, Italian, and Arabic Types '^ 90

Slav, Jewish, Polack, and Lithuanian Types ** 96

Industrial Relations of Immigrants — 1906

between 108-109

American School Boys • . • • opposite 123

Filipino Governors << 143

Governor Johnson of Minnesota. — Swede *^ 154

Dr. Oronhyatekha, Mohawk Indian. Late Chief
OF Order of Foresters . . • opposite 168

Chinese Students, Honolulu ... ^ 186

Faculty of Tuskegee Institute . . ** 203

Slavic Home Missionaries ... ^ 316

Aliens awaiting Admission at Ellis Island ^ 330

v


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOT-
NOTES

^ Americans Race Problems.^ A tenet of ditcottiont on
indigenout race elements and the negro. American
Academy of PoUtical and Social Scienu, Vol. XVIII,
No. I (1901).
Atlanta University Publications: —

No. I. ^Mortality among Negroes in Cities" (1896).
No. 3. ^ Social and Physical Condition of N^^roes in

Cities" (1897).
No. 3. '^ Some Efforts of Negroes for Social Better-
ment" (1898).
No. 6. <<The Negro Common School" (1901).
No. 7. "The Negro Artisan" (1902).
No. 8. « The Negro Church " (1903).
No. 9. '^ Notes on Negro Crime" (1904).
No. 10. " A Select Biblipgraphy of the Negro Ameri-
can" (1905).
Balch, EiULY Greene, "Slav Emigration at its Source,"
CharittiSf 1906. " Introductory," Jan. 6 ; "Bohemians,"
Feb. 3 ; " Slovaks," March 3, April 7 ; " Galida, Austrian
Poles, Ruthenians," May 5.
Bluntschli, J. K., The Theory of the State, New York,

188$.
Brandenburg, Broughton, Imported Americans (1904).
Description of trip by author and wife through southern
Italy and Sicily and return by steerage with immigrants.
Brinton, Daniel G., Religions of PrimiHue Peoples. New
York, 1897.

vu


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

Bureau op Labor, Seventh Special Report, The Slums of
BaUimorey Chicago^ New York^ and Philadelphia (1894).
Ninth Special Report, The Itidians in Chicago (1897).

Burgess, John W., Reconstruction and the Constitution^
1866-1876. New York, 1903.

Bushes, Frbdsuck A., ^ Ethnic Factors in the Population
of Boston," American Economic Association^ 3d Series,
Vol. IV, pp. 305-470 (1903).

Casson, Herbert N., Munsey*s Magazine^ ^ The Jews in
America,*^ 34 : 381 ; <<The Sons of Old Scotland in Amer-
ica,*^ 34 : 599 ; ^ The Germans in America,** 34: 694; "The
Scandinavians in America,*^ 35^613; '^The Welsh in
America," 35:749; ^The Italians in America," 35:122;
"The Dutch in America," 35:238; "The Spamsh in
America," 35:294.

Cohan, Katherine, " The History of Contract Labor in the
Hawaiian Islands," American Economic Association^ 3d
Series, Vol. IV, No. 3 (1903). "The Negro as Feasant
Fanner," American Statistical Association^ June, 1904,

PP- 39-54.
Commissioner of Education, Annual Reports^ Washington.

Commissioner-General of Immigration, Annual Reports^
Washington.

Commons, J. R., Proportional Representation. New York,
1907.

Cutler, Jambs £., Lynch Law. An Investigation into the
History of Lynching in the United States. New York,
1905.

De Forest and Veillier, The Tenement House Problem^
2 vols. New York, 1903.

Du Bois, W. £. B., The Philadelphia Negro. Philadelphia,
1899 ; The Soul of Black Folk. New York, 1903 ; << Ne-
groes," Twelfth Census, Supplementary Analysis, pp. 185-
275 ; ** The Negro Farmer," pp. 51 1-579.

Eaton, Dorman B., The Civil Service in Great Britain.

New York, 1880.

•••
vui


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

Emigration to thb Unitbo States, Special Conanlar Re-
ports, yd. XXX. Department of Commerce and Labor,
1904.

F^ds abotU Immigraium. Reports of Conferences of the
Immigration Department of the National Civic Federation,
Sept. 14 and Dec. 12, 1906. New York, 1907.

Federation. Quarterly Journal of Federation of Churches and
Christian Organiiations, New York. Especially June, July,
December, 1902, Mardi, June, October, 1903. Also annual
reports and sociological canvasses of the Federation*

FiSRB, John, Old Vtrginia and her Neighbors^ 2 vols. New
York, 1897.

Flbmino, Walter L., CwU War and Rictrndmeium m
Alabama. New Yoork, 1897.

Franklin, F. J., The LegUUUivt History cf HaimrdliaaHim
M the Unittd States. Chicago^ 1906.

Gross, Howard B., Aliens or Americans f Forward Mis-
sion Study Courses. New Yoik, 1906.

Hall, Prescott F., Immigration and its ^ect upon the
Umtsd Statis. New York, 1906.

Hampton Negro Conference, Annual, 1897-1901.

Hanna, Charles A., The Scotch-Irishy 2 vols. New York,
1902.

Hawah, Reports on. United States Bureau of Labor, ist
Report, Sen. Doc. 169, 57th Congress, ist Sess., 13 : 4231 ;
2d Report, Bulletin No. 47 (1903) ; 3d Report, Bulletin
No. 66 (1906).

Hoffman, Frederick L., '^Race Traits and Tendencies of
the American Negro,'* PuMications of the American Eco-
nomic Association^ Vol. XI, Nos. i, 2, 3 (1896).

HUEBNBR, Grover G., ^Thc Americanization of the Immi-
grant," American Acade$ny of Political and Social Science^
May, 1906, p. 191.

HuU House Maps and Paper s^ A Presentation of NationaH'
ties and Wages in a Congested District of Chicago^ by resi-
dents of Hull House. New York, 1895.

ix


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

Hunter, Robert, Pcverty. New York, 1904* Chapter VI,
^ The Immigrant.^'

Immigration Laws and Regulations and Chinesi Exciusum
Lawsy Bureau of Immignttioii and NaturaUzadon, Wash-
ington.

Immigration Restriction League, Frescott F. Hall, Sec-
retary, Boston, Mass. Leaflets.

Industrial Commission, Vol. XV, Inumgration and EdH'

eaiion; Vol. XIX, Misc$lianeous (1901).
Jackson, Helen Hunt, A Century of Dishonor. New

York, 1881.

Japanese and Korean Exclusion League, San Fran*
Cisco. Leaflets.

Jenks, J. W., Certain Economic Questions in the JSngOsh
and Dutch Colonies in the Orient. War Department, Bu-
reau of Insular Afiairs, 1902, Doc. No. 168.

Jewish Agricultural and Industrial Aid Society,
Annual Reports. New York.

Kellor, Frances A., Out of Worh. New York, 1904.

Kelsey, Carl, The Negro Farmer. Chicago, 1903. Also
Annals of the American Acaden^ of Political and Social
Science^ January, 1903.

Kino and Okey, Italy To-day. London, 1901.

KuczYNSKi, R., ^Tht Fecundity of the Nadve and Foreign
Bom Population in Massachusetts,** Quarterly Journal of
Economics^ November, 1901, February, 1902. <<Die £in-
wanderungspolitik und die Bevolkerungsfrage der Ve-
reinigten Staaten von Amerika," VolksurirthschaftUche
Zeitfragen. Berlin, 1903.

Lazare, Bernard, Antisemitismj Its History and Causes.
New York, 1903.

Library of ZoYkGKBS&y Select List of References on the Negro
Question (1903). List of Works relating to the Germans
in the United States (1904). Select last of References on
Chinese Immigration (1904). Fourteenth Amendment.
List of Discussions of Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amend-

X


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

ments ^th Spedal Reference to Negro Sufinge (1906).
List of References on NaturaHMotian (1907).

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Historical and Political Ess^s.
Boston, 1892.

LoRO^ TttENOR, AMD Barrows, Tk4 ItaUan in Anurica.
New York, 1905. Espedally Italians in American agri-
culture.

Mallocx, W. H.y Aristocrat and Evoi$ttion. New Yoric,
1898.

Marshaix, Alfred^ PrituifUs of Economics. New Yoric,
1891.

Mbrriam, G. S., The Nqpro andtko Nation. New Yoric, 1906.

MuiRHEAD, James F., The Latul of Contrasts. London
and New Yoric, 1900.

MUnsterberg, Hugo, American lYaits. New Yoric, 1902.

Naturalization, Report to the Presidbnt or the
Commission on. Submitted Nov. 8, 1905, 59th Cong.,
1st Sess., H. R. Doc. 46.

Negro. Series of Articles on the Reconstruction Period,
Atlantic Monthly. ^ The Reconstruction of the Southern
States,"" Woodrow Wilson, 87 : i ; ^ The Conditions of the
Reconstruction Problem,"" Hilaiy A. Herbert, 87:145;
*^ The Freedman"s Bureau,"" W. £. B. Du Bois, 87 : 354 ;
^Reconstruction in South Carolina,"" Daniel H. Chambar^
lain, 87:473; ''The Ku-Kluz Movement,"" WiUiam G.
Brown, 87:634; ''Washington during Reconstruction,""
S. W. McCall, 87:817; "Reconstruction and Disfran-
chisement,"" Editors, 88:31; "New Orleans and Recon-
struction,"" Albert Phdps, 88 : 121 ; " The Southern People
during Reconstruction,"" Thomas Nelson Page, 88:289;
" The Undoing of Reconstruction,"" William A. Dunnin|^
88 : 437.

United States Bureau of Labor, Bulletin No. 32, " The
Negro in the Black Belt"" ; No. 32, " The N^;roes of Sandy
Spring, Maryland""; No. 35, "The Negro Landholder df
Georgia "" ; No. 37, " The Negroes of Litwalton, Virginia "" ;
No« 381 ^Nqpoes of Cindaie Central Factoiy and Cahh

li


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

met Plantation, Louisiana^; No. 48, '^The N^;roe8 of
Xenia, Ohio."

<<NBGROBSy Social Interests of, m Northern Otibs.^
Chariiiesy special number, Oct. 7, 1905.

RiPLBYy W. Z.y Thi Races irf Europe. New Yoric, 1899.

Roosevelt, Theodore, The Winning ef the Wesiy 4 vols.
New York, 1 889-1 894.

Rosenberg, Edward, << Chinese Workers in China," ^ Fili-
pinos as Workmen," ^ Labor Conditions in Hawaii,"
American FederaHanisiy August, October, December,
1905.

Ross, Edward A., *^ The Causes of Race Superiority," Amuds
cf the American Academy of PoUHcal and Social Science^
July, 1901, pp. 67-89. The notable address in which the
term ^race suicide" was coined.

RowE, Leo S., The United States and Porto Rico. New
York, 1904.

Semple, Ellen Chxtrchill, American History and its
Geographic Conditions. New York, 1903. ^ The Anglo-
Saxons of the Kentucky Mountains : A Study in Anthro-
pogeography," Geographical Journal^ 17 : 588 (i 901).

Slav in America, TkEj Charitiesj December, 1904. De-
scriptive articles by representatives of the several Slav
nationalities.

Smith, R. M., Emigration and Immigration. New York,
1890. ** Assimilation of Nationalities in the United
States," Political Science Quarterly y Vol. IX, pp. 426-444,
650-670 (1894).

Stewart, Ethelbert, << Influence of Trade Unions on
Immigrants,^' Bureau of Labor, Bulletin No. 56.

Stone, A. H., << The Negro in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta,**
American Economic Association^ 3d Series, Vol. Ill,
pp. 235-378 (1901). <<The Mulatto Factor in the Race
Problem,** Atlantic Monthly y May, 1903. ^ A Plantation
Experiment,** Quarterly Journal EconomicSy 19:270
(1905). <<The Italian Cotton Grower: The Negro*ii
Problem,** South Atlantic Qnarterfyf 4:45 (igos).


REFERENCES CITED IN FOOTNOTES

Suffrage^ Suppression op the. Report of the Committee
on Political Refonn of the Union League Qub. New
Yoric, 1903.

Thomas, W. H., The Atnmcan N^^Oy 1901.

TiLLiNGHAST, JOSEPH A., <^The NegTO in AMca and
America,'' American Economic AssociaiioHj 3d Seriesi
Vol. Ill, No. 3 (1902).

Van Vorst, Mrs. John and Marie, The Woman who
Toils. New York, 1903. Contains introdiiction by
President Roosevelt.

Walker, Francis A., Discussions in Economics and SUh-
iisHcsy 2 vols., 1897.

Ward, Robert Db C, *^ Sane Methods of Regulating Im-
migration,'' Review of Reviews^ March, 1906.

Warns, Frank Julian, The Slav Invasion and the Mine
Workersy 1904.

Washington, Booker T., The Fnture of the American
Negroy 1900. up from Slavery y 1901.

Watson, Elkanah, Men and Times of the Revolsdion.
Edited by his son, Winslow C. Watson, 2d edition. New
York, 1 861.

Welfare Work, C6nference on. National Qvic Federa-
tion. New York, 1904.

Whelpley, James D., TheProtlemofthelmmigraniyi^$.
Emigration laws of European countries and immigration
laws of British Colonies and the United States.

Woods, R. A., 7%/ City Wiidemess^ 1898. Americans in
Process, 190a.


M


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN

AMERICA


CHAPTER I

RACE AND DEMOCRACY

" All men are created equal." So wrote Thomas
Jefferson, and so agreed with him the delegates from
the American colonies. But we must not press them
too closely nor insist on the literal interpretation of
their words. They were not publishing a scientific
treatise on human nature nor describing the physical,
intellectual, and moral qualities of different races
and different individuals, but they were bent upon
a practical object in politics. They desired to sus-
tain before the world the cause of independence by
such appeals as they thought would have effect; and
certainly the appeal to the sense of equal rights
before God and the law is the most powerful that can
be addressed to the masses of any people. This is
the very essence of American democracy, that one
man should have just as large opportunity as any
other to make the most of himself, to come forward
and achieve high standing in any calling to which

B I


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

he is inclined- To do this the bars of privilege have
one by one been thrown down, the suffrage has been
extended to every man, and public office has been
opened to any one who can persuade his fellow-voters
or their representatives to select him.

But there is another side to the successful opera-
tions of democracy. It is not enough that equal
opportimity to participate in making and enforcing
the laws should be vouchsafed to all — it is equally
important that all should be capable of such partici-
pation. The individuals, or the classes, or the races,
who through any mental or moral defect are imable
to assert themselves beside other individuals, classes,
or races, and to enforce their right to an equal voice
in determining the laws and conditions which govern
all, are just as much deprived of the privilege as
though they were excluded by the constitution. In
the case of individuals, when they sink below the
level of joint participation, we recognize them as
belonging to a defective or criminal or pauper class,
and we provide for them, not on the basis of their
rights, but on the basis of charity or punishment
Such classes are exceptions in point of niunbers, and
we do not feel that their non-participation is a flaw
in the operations of democratic government. But
when a social class or an entire race is unable to
command that share in conducting government to
which the laws entitle it, we recognize at once that
democracy as a practical institution has in so far
broken down, and that, imder the forms of democ-

•


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

racy, there has devebped a class oligarchy or a
race oligarchy.

Two things, therefore, are necessary for a demo-
cratic government such as that which the American
people have set before themselves: equal oppor-
tunities before the law, and equal ability of classes and
races to use those opportxmities. If the first is lack-
ing, we have legal oligarchy; if the second is lacking,
we have actual oligarchy disguised as democracy.

Now it must be observed that, compared with
the first two centuries of our nation's history, the
present generation is somewhat shifting its groimd
regarding democracy. While it can never rightly
be charged that our fathers overlooked the inequali-
ties of races and individuals, yet more than the pres-
ent generation did they regard with hopefulness the
educational value of democracy. "True enough,"
they said, " the black man is not equal to the white
man, but once free him from his legal bonds, open
up the schools, the professions, the businesses, and the
offices to those of his nmnber who are most aspir-
ing, and you will find that, as a race, he will advance
favorably in comparison with his white fellow-
dtizens."

It is now nearly forty years since these opportimities
and educational advantages were given to the negro,
not only on equal terms, but actually on terms of
preference over the whites, and the fearful collapse
of the experiment is recognized even by its partisans
as something that was inevitable in the nature of the

3


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

race at that stage of its development. We shall
have reason in the following pages to enter more fully
into this discussion, because the race question in
America has foimd its most intense expression in the
relations between the white and the negro races,
and has there shown itself to be the most fundamental
of all American social and political problems. For
it was this race question that precipitated the Civil
War, with the ominous problems that have followed
upon that catastrophe; and it is this same race prob-
lem that now diverts attention from the treatment of
those pressing economic problems of taxation, cor-
porations, trusts, and labor organizations which
themselves originated in the Civil War. The race
problem in the South is caily one extreme of the same
problem in the great cities of the North, where popu-
lar government, as oin: forefathers conceived it, has
been displaced by one-man power, and where a pro-
found distrust of democracy is taking hold upon the
educated and property-holding classes who fashion
public opinion.

This changing attitude toward the educational value
of self-government has induced a more serious study
of the nature of democratic institutions and of the
classes and races which are called upon to share in
them. As a people whose earlier hopes have been
shocked by the hard blows of experience, we are be-
ginning to pause and take invoice of the heterogene-
ous stocks of humanity that we have admitted to the
management of our great political enterprise. We

4


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

are trying to look beneath the surface and to in-
quire whether there are not factors of heredity and
race more fundamental than those of education and
environment. We find that our democratic theories
and fonns of government were fashioned by but one
of the many races and peoples which have come within
their practical operation, and that that race, the so-
called Anglo-Saxon, developed them out of its own
insular experience unhampered by inroads of alien
stock. When once thus established in England and
further developed in America we fiind that other
races and peoples, accustomed to despotism and
even savagery, and wholly imused to self-government,
have been thrust into the delicate fabric. Like a
practical people as we pride ourselves, we have begun
actually to despotize our institutions in order to con-
trol these dissident elements, though still optimis-
tically holding that we retain the original democracy.
The earlier problem was mainly a political one —
how to imite into one self-governing nation a scat-
tered population with the wide diversity of natural
resources, climates, and interests that mark a country
soon to stretch from ocean to ocean and from the
arctics to the subtropics. The problem now is a
social one, — how to unite into one people a congeries
of races even more diverse than the resources and
climates from which they draw their subsistence.
That motto, " E pluribus unumy* which in the past
has guided those who through constitutional debate
and civil war worked out our form of government,

S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

must now again be the motto of those who would
work out the more fundamental problem of divergent
nu^es. Here is something deeper than the form of
government — it is the essence of govenunent — for
it is that union of the hearts and lives and abili-
ties of the people which makes government what it
really is.

The conditions necessary for democratic govern-
ment are not merely the constitutions and laws which
guarantee equality, liberty, and the pursuit of happi-
ness, for these after all are but paper docimients.
They are not merely freedom from foreign power,
for the Australian colonies enjoy the most demo-
cratic of all governments, largely because they are
owned by another country which has protected them
from foreign and civil wars. Neither are wealth and
prosperity necessary for democracy, for these may
tend to luxury, inequality, and envy. World power,
however glorious and enticing, is not helpful to de-
mocracy, for it inclines to militarism and centraliza-
tion, as did Rome in the hands of an emperor, or
Venice in the hands of an oligarchy. The true
foundations of democracy are in the character of the
people themselves, that is, of the individuals who
constitute the democracy. These are: first, intelli-
gence — the power to weigh evidence and draw sound
conclusions, based on adequate information ; second,
manliness, that which the Romans called virility,
and which at bottom is dignified self-respect, self-
control, and that self-assertion and jealousy of /en-

6


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

croachment which marks those who, knowing their
rights, dare maintain them; third, and equally im-
portant, the capacity for codperation, that willing-
ness and ability to organize, to trust their leaders,
to work together for a common interest and toward
a common destiny, a capacity which we variously
designate as patriotism, public spirit, or self-govern-
ment These are the basic qualities which imderlie
democracy, — intelligence, manliness, co5peration.
If they are lacking, democracy is futile. Here is the
problem of races, the fundamental division of man-
kind. Race differences are established in the very
blood and physical constitution. They are most
difficult to eradicate, and they yield only to the slow
processes of the centuries. Races may change their
religions, their forms of goveroment, their modes of
industry, and their languages, but underneath all
these changes they may continue the physical, mental,
and moral capacities and incapacities which deter-
mine the real character of their religion, govenmient,
industry, and literature. Race and heredity furnish
the raw material, education and environment furnish
the tools, with which and by which social institutions
are fashioned; and in a democracy race and heredity
are the more decisive, because the very education and
environment which fashion the oncoming generations
are themselves controlled through universal suffrage
by the races whom it is hoped to educate and elevate.
Social Classes. — Closely connected with race divi-
sion in its effect upon democracy are the divisions

7


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

between social classes. In America we are wont to
congratulate ourselves on the absence of classes with
their accompanying hatred and envy. Whether we
shall continue thus to commend ourselves depends
partly on what we mean by social classes. If we
compare our situation with an extreme case, that of
India/ where social classes have been hardened into
rigid castes, we can see the connection between races
and classes. For it is generally held that the castes
of India originated in the conquests by an Aryan race
of an indigenous dark or colored race. And while
the dear-cut race distinctions have been blended
through many centuries of amalgamation, yet it is
most apparent that a gradation in the color of the
skin follows the gradation in social position, from
the light-colored, high-caste Brahman to the dark-
colored, low-caste Sudra, or outcast pariah. Race
divisions have been forgotten, but in their place
religion has sanctified a division even more rigid than
that of race, for it is sacrilege and defiance of the
gods when a man of low caste ventures into the
occupation and calling of the high caste. India's
condition now is what might be conceived for our
Southern states a thousand years from now, when
the black man who had not advanced to the lighter
shades of mulatto should be excluded from all pro-
fessions and skilled trades and from all public oflices,
and should be restricted to the coarsest kind of ser-
vice as a day laborer or as a field hand on the agri-

* Bluntschli, " Theory of the State," pp. 108-181.

8


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

cultural plantations. Confined to this limited occu-
pation, with no incentive to economize because of
no prospect to rise above his station, and with his
numbers increasing, competition would reduce his
wages to the lowest limit consistent with the continu-
ance of his kind. Such a development is plainly
going on at the present day, and we may feel rea-
sonably certain that we can see in our own South
the very historical steps by which in the forgotten
centuries India proceeded to her rigid system of
castes.

There is lacking but one essential to the Indian
system; namely, a religion which ascribes to God
himself the inequalities contrived by man. For
the Indian derives the sacred Brahman from the
mouth of God, to be His spokesman on earth, while
the poor Sudra comes from the feet of God, to be for-
ever the servant of all the castes above him. But the
Christian religion has set forth a different theory,
which ascribes to God entire impartiality toward
races and individuals. He has " made of one blood
all nations." It is out of this doctrine that the so-
called " self-evident " assertion in the Declaration of
Independence originated, and it is this doctrine which
throughout the history of European civilization lias
contributed to smoothen out the harsh lines of caste
into the less definite lines of social classes. For it
must be remembered that Europe, like India, is built
upon conquest, and the earlier populaticms were re-
duced to the condition of slaves and serfs to the

9


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

conquering races. True, there was not the extreme
opposition of white and colored races which distin-
guished the conquests of India, and this is also one
of the reasons why slavery and serfdom gradually
gave way and races coalesced. Nevertheless, the
peasantry of Europe to-day is in large part the
product of serfdom and of that race-subjection which
produced serfdom. Herein we may find the source
of that arrogance on the one hand and subserviency
on the other, which so closely relate class divisions to
race divisions. The European peasant, sa3rs Pro-
fessor Shaler,^ " knows himself to be by birthright a
member of an inferior class, from which there is
practically no chance of escaping. ... It is char-
acteristic of peasants that they have accepted this
inferior lot. For generations they have regarded
themselves as separated from their fellow-citizens of
higher estate. They have no large sense of citizenly
motives; they feel no sense of responsibility for any
part of the public life save that which lies within
their own narrow round of action."

How di£Ferent from the qualities of the typical
American dtizea whose forefathers have erected our
edifice oi representative democracy! It was not
the peasant class of Europe that sought these shores
in order to foimd a free government. It was the
middle class, the merchants and yeomen, those who
in religion and politics were literally " protestants,"
and who possessed the intelligence, manliness, and

^ AUatUic MofUhlyf May, 1903, p. 649.

10


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

public spirit which urged them to assert for them-
selves those inalienable rights which the church or
the state of their time had arrogated to itself. \^th
such a social class democracy is the only acceptable
form of government. They demand and secure
equal opportunities because they are able to rise
to those opportimities. By their own inherent na-
ture they look forward to and aspire to the highest
positions.

But the peasants of Europe, especially of Southern
and Eastern Europe, have been reduced to the quali-
ties similar to those of an inferior race that favor
despotism and oligarchy rather than democracy.
Their only avenues of escape from their subordinate
positions have been through the army and the church,
and these two institutions have drawn from the peas-
ants their ablest and brightest intellects into a life
which deprived them of offspring. "Among the
prosperous folk there have been ever many classes
of occupations tempting the abler youths, while
among the laborers the church has afforded the easiest
way to rise, and that which is most tempting to the
intelligent. The result has been, that while the
priesthood and monastic orders have systematically
debilitated all the populations of Catholic Europe,
their influence has been most efficient in destroying
talent in the peasant class." ^

Thus it is that the peasants of Catholic Europe,
who constitute the bulk of our immigration of the

^ Shaler, p. 651.
zi


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

past thirty years, have become abnost a distinct race,
drained of those superior qualities which are the
foundation of democratic institutions. If in America
our boasted freedom from the evils of sodal classes
&dls to be vindicated in the future, the reasons will be
found in the immigration of races and classes in-
competent to share in our democratic opportunities.
Already in the case of the negro this division has
hardened and seems destined to become more rigid.
Therein we must admit at least one exception to our
daim of immunity from social classes. Whether
with our public schools, our stirring politics, our
ubiquitous newspapers, our common language, and
our network of transportation, the children of the
European immigrant shall be able to rise to the op-
portimities unreached by his parents is the largest and
deepest problem now pressing upon us. It behooves
us as a people to enter into the practical study of
this problem, for upon its outcome depends the fate
of government of the people, for the people, and by the
people.

Kacas in fhe United States. — We use the tenn
^* race " in a rather loose and elastic sense; and
indeed we are not culpable in so doing, for the ethnog-
raphers are not agreed upon it. Races have been
classified on the basis of color, on the basis of lan-
guage, on the basis of supposed origin, and in these
latter days on the basis of the shape of the skull.
For our purpose we need consider only those large
and apparent divisions which have a direct bearing

19

i


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

on the problem of assimilation, referring those who
seek the more subtle problems to other books.^

Mankind in general has been divided into three
and again into five great racial stocks, and one of
these stocks, the Aryan or Indo-Germanic, is rep-
resented among us by ten or more subdivisions
which we also term races. It need not cause confu-
sion if we use the term ^' race " not only to designate
these grand divisions which are so far removed by
nature one from another as to render successful
amalgamation an open question, but also to desig-
nate those peoples or nationalities which we recog-
nize as distinct yet related within one of the large
divisions. Within the area controlled by the United
States are now to be found representatives of each
of the grand divisions, or primary racial groups, and
it would be a fascinating study to turn from the more
practical topics before us and follow the races of
man in their dispersion over the globe and their
final gathering together again under the republic of
America. First is the Aryan, or Indo-Germanic race,
which, wherever it originated, sent its Sanskrit con-
querors to the South to plant themselves upon a black
race related to the Africans and the Australians.
Its Western branch, many thousand miles away,
made the conquest and settlem^it of Europe. Here
it sent out many smaller branches, among them the
Greeks and Latins, whose situation on the Mediter-
ranean helped in great measure to develop brilliant

* Riple7, ''The Races of Europe."

J3


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

and conquering civilizations, and who, after twenty
centuries of decay and subjection, have within the
past twenty years begun again their westward move-
ment, this time to North and South America. North
of Greece the Aryans became the manifold Slavs,
that most prolific of races. One branch of the Slavs
has spread the power of Russia east and west, and is
now crushing the aUen Hebrew, Finn, Lithuanian,
and German, and even its fellow-Slav, the Pole, who,
to escape their oppressors, are moving to America.
The Russian himself, with his vast expanse of fer-
tile prairie and steppe, does not migrate across the
water, but drives away those whom he can not or will
not assimilate. From Austria-Hungary, with its
medley of races, come other branches of the Slavs,
the Bohemians, Moravians, Slovaks, Slovenians,
Croatians, Roumanians, Poles, and Ruthenians, some
of them mistakenly called Huns, but really oppressed
by the true Hun, the Magyar, and by the German.
To the west of the Slavs we find the Teutonic branches
of the Aryans, the Germans, the Scandinavians, and,
above all, the English and Scotch-Irish with their
descent from the Angles, Saxons, and Franks, who
have given to America our largest accessions in num-
bers, besides our language, our institutions, and forms
of government. Then other branches of the Aryans
known as Celtic, including the Irish, Scotch, and
Welsh, formerly driven .into the hills and islands by
the Teutons, have in these latter days vied with the
English and Germans in adding to our population.

»4


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

The French, a mixture of Teuton and Celt, a nation-
ality noted above all others for its stationary popula-
tion and dislike of migration^ are nevertheless con-
tributing to our numbers by the circuitous route of
Canada, and are sending to us a class of people more
different from the present-^y Frenchman in his
native home than the Italian or Portuguese is differ-
ent from the Frenchman.

In the fertile valleys of Mesopotamia and the Tigris
the Semitic race had separated from its cousins, the
Aryans, and one remarkable branch of this race,
the Hebrews, settling on a diminutive tract of land
on the eastern shore of the Mediterranean and finally
driven forth as wanderers to live upon their wits,
exploited by and exploiting in turn eveiy race of
Europe, have ultimately been driven forth to America
by the thousands from Russia and Austria where
nearly one-half of their present number is found.

Another race, the Mongolian, multiplying on the
plains of Asia, sent a conquering branch to the west,
scattering the Slavs and Teutons and making for
itself a permanent wedge in the middle of Europe,
whence, under the name of Magyar, the true Hun-
garian, the Mongolians come to America. Going
in another direction from this Asiatic home the Mon-
golian race has made the circuit of the globe, and the
Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans meet in America
their unrecognized cousins of many thousand yeais
ago.

Last of the immigrants to be mentioned^ but among


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the earliest in point of time, is the black race from
the slave coast of Africa. This was not a free and
volimtary migration of a people seeking new jfields
to escape oppression, but a forced migration de-
signed to relieve the white race of toil. All of the
other races mentioned, the Aryan, the Semitic, the
Mongolian, had in early times met one another and
even perhaps had sprung from the same stock, so
that when in America they come together there is
presumably a renewal of former ties. But as far
back as we can trace the history of races in the records
of archaeology or philology, we find no traces of
affiliation with the black race. The separation by
continents, by climate, by color, and by institutions
is the most diametrical that mankind exhibits any-
where. It is even greater than that between the
Aryan and the native American, improperly called
the Indian, whose presence on the soil which we have
seized from him has furnished us with a peculiar
variation in our multiform race problem. For the
Indian tribes, although within our acquired territory,
have been treated as foreign nations, and their reser-
vations have been saved to them xmder the forms of
treaties. Only recently has there sprung up a policy
of admitting them to citizenship, and therefore the
Indian, superior in some respects to the negro, has not
interfered with our experiment in democracy.

Last in point of time we have taken into our fold
the Malay race, with some seven million representa-
tives in the Hawaiian and Philippine Islands. Like

z6


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

the Indian and the negro, this race never in historic
times prior to the discovery of the new world came into
close contact with the white races. With its addition
we have completed the round of all the grand divisions
of the human family, and have brought together for
a common experiment in self-government the white,
yellow, black, red, and brown races of the earth.

Amalgamation and Assimilation. — Scarcely an-
other nation in ancient or modem history can show
within compact borders so varied an aggregation.
It is frequently maintained that a nation composed
of a mixed stock is superior in mind and body to one
of single and homogeneous stock. But it must be
remembered that amalgamation requires centuries.
The English race is probably as good an example
of a mixed race as can be found in modem history,
yet this race, though a mixture of the closely related
primitive Celt, the conquering Teuton, and the Latin-
ized Scandinavian, did not reach a common language
and homogeneity until three hundred years after the
last admixture. We know from modem researches
that all of the races of Europe are mixed in their
origin, but we also know that so much of that mixture
as resulted in amalgamation occurred at a time so re-
mote that it has been ascribed to the Stone Age.^
The later inroads have either been but temporary
and have left but sUght impression, or they have
resulted in a division of territory. Thus the con-
quest of Britain by the Teutons and the Normans

» Ripley, Chs. XVII and XVIII.

c 17


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

has not produced amalgamation so much as it has
caused a segregation of the Celts in Scotland, Wales,
and Ireland, and of the Teutons, with their later but
slight infusion of Normans, in England. On the
continent of Europe this segregation has been even
more strongly marked. The present stratification
of races and nationalities has followed the upheavals
and inroads of a thousand years introduced by the
decline and fall of the Roman Empire. Two develop-
ments have taken place. A conquering race has re-
duced a native population in part to subjection and
has imposed upon the natives its laws, customs, and
language* In course of time the subject race becomes
a lower social class and slowly assimilates with the
upper classes, producing a homogeneous nationality
with a new evolution of laws, customs, and language.
This is the history of four great nations of Europe,
— the French, the German, the English, the Italian.
The other development has been the segregation of a
portion of the conquered race, who having fled their
conquerors avoid actual subjection by escaping to
the moimtains and islands. Here they preserve their
original purity of stock and language. This is the
history of Austria-Hungary, whose earlier population
of Slavs has been scattered right and left by German
and Him and who now constitute separate branches
and dialects of the imassimilated races. That
Austria-Himgary with its dozen languages should be
able to hold together as a " dual empire " for many
years is one of the marvels of history, and is fre-

i8


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

quently ascribed to that which is the essence of autoc-
racy, the personal hold of the emperor.

The little bundle of republics known as Switzer-
land is a federation of French, Germans, and Italians,
who retain their languages and have developed what
out of such a conflict of races has elsewhere never
been developed, a high grade of democratic govern-
ment. Here in historic times there has been no
amalgamation of races or assimilation of languages,
but there has been the distinct advantage of a se-
cluded freedom from surrounding feudal lords, which
naturally led to a loose federation of independent
cantons. It is Switzerland's mountains and not her
mixed races that have promoted her democracy.
At the other end of the world the highest develop^
ment of democracy is in the colonies of Australasia,
where a homogeneous race, protected from foreign
foes, and prohibiting the imjnigration of alien races
and inferior classes, has worked out self-government
in politics and industry. In the Roman Empire we
see the opposite extreme. At first a limited republic,
the extension of conquests, and the incorporation
of alien races led to that centralization of power in
the hands of one man which transformed the republic
into the empire. The British Empire, which to-day
covers all races of the earth, is growingly democratic
as regards Englishmen, but despotic as regards sub-
ject races. Taking the empire as a whole, neither
amalgamation nor self-government is within the
possibilities of its constitutional growth.

19


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

In America, on the other hand, we have attempted
to unite all races in one commonwealth and one elec-
tive government. We have, indeed, a most notable
advantage compared with other countries where race
divisions have undermined democracy. A single
language became dominant^ from the time of the
earliest permanent settlement, and all subsequent
races and languages must adopt the established
medium. This is essential, for it is not physical
amalgamation that unites mankind; it is mental
community. To be great a nation need not be of one
blood, it must be of one mind. Racial inequality
and inferiority are fundamental only to the extent
that they prevent mental and moral assimilation.
If we think together, we can act together, and the
organ of common thought and action is common lan-
guage. Through the prism of this noble instrument
of the human mind all other instruments focus their
powers of assimilation upon the new generations
as they come forth from the disunited immigrants.
The public schools, the newspapers, the books, the
political parties, the trade imions, the religious propa-
gandists with their manifold agencies of universal
education, the railroads with their inducements to
our unparalleled mobility of population, are all de-
pend^it upon our common language for their high
efficiency. Herein are we fortunate in our plans for
the Americanization of all races within our borders.
We are not content to let the fate of our institutions
wait upon the slow and doubtful processes of blood

ao


RACE AND DEMOCRACY

amalgamation, but are eager to direct our energies
toward the more rapid movements of mental assimi-
lation. Race and heredity may be beyond our or-
ganized control; but the instrument of a common lan-
guage is at hand for conscious improvement through
education and social environment.


CHAPTER n

COLONIAL RACE ELEMENtS

Doubtless the most fascinating topic in the study
of races is that of the great men whom each race has
produced. The personal interest surrounding those
who have gained eminence carries us back over each
step of their careers to their childhood, their parents,
and their ancestry.^ Pride of race adds its zest,
and each race has its eulogists who claim every great
man whose family tree reveals even a single ancestor,
male or female, near or remote, of the eulogized race.
Here is a " conflict of jurisdiction," and the student
who is without race prejudice begins to look for
causes other than race origin to which should be
ascribed the emergence of greatness.

Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge * attempted, some years
ago, to assign to the different races in America the
14,243 men eminent enough to find a place in " Ap-
pleton's Encyclopedia of American Biography."
He prepared a statistical summary as follows: —

' See the interesting series of articles by H. N. Casson, Mun^
seys, 1906.
' hodgjt, p. 138.

92


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS


EMINENT AMERICANS

English 10^376

Scotch-Irish Xf439

Gerznan 659

Huguenot 589

Scotch 436

Dutch 336

Welsh 159

Irish 109

French 85

Scandinavian 31

Spanish .••••••••• 7

Italian ••••• 7

Swiss 5

Greek 3

Russian ••••• z

Polish X

Total X4>a43

When we inquire into the methods necessarily
adopted in preparing a statistical table of this kind
we discover serious limitations. Mr. Lodge was
confined to the paternal line alone, but if, as some
biologists assert, the female is the conservative ele-
ment which holds to the type, and the male is the
variable element which departs from the type, then
the specific contribution of the race factor would
be found in the maternal line. However, let this
dubious point pass. We find that in American life
two himdred years of intermingUng has in many if not
in most cases of greatness broken into the continuity
of race. True, the New England and Virginia stock
has remained during most of this time of purely Eng-
lish origin, but the very fact that in Mr. Lodge's
tables Massachusetts has produced 2686 notables,

^3


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

while Virginia, of the same blood, has produced
only 1038, must lead to the suspicion that factors
other than race extraction are the mainspring of
greatness.

It must be remembered that ability is not identical
with eminence. AbiUty is the product of ancestry and
training. Eminence is an accident of social condi-
tions. The English race was the main contributor
to population during the seventeenth century, and
English conquest determined the form of govern-
ment, the language, and the opportunities for indi-
vidual advancement. During the succeeding century
the Scotch-Irish and the Germans migrated in nearly
equal numbers, and their combined migration was
perhaps as great as that of the English in the seven-
teenth century. But they were compelled to move
to the interior, to become frontiersmen, to earn their
living directly from the soil, and to leave to their
English-sprung predecessors the more prominent
occupations of politics, literature, law, commerce,
and the army. The Germans, who, according to
Lodge, " produced fewer men of ability than any other
race in the United States," were further handicapped
by their language and isolation, which continue to
this day in the coimties of Pennsylvania where they
originally settled. On the other hand, the Hugue-
nots and the Dutch came in the first century of col-
onization. They rapidly merged with the English,
lost their language, and hence contributed their full
share of eminence. Finally, the Iri^, Scandinavian

34


< s


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

and other races, inconspicuous in the galaxy of
notables, did not migrate in numbers until the mid-
dle of the nineteenth century, and, in addition to the
restraints of language and poverty, they foimd the
roads to prominence preoccupied.

Besides the accident of precedence in time, a sec-
ond factor distinct from race itself has contributed
to the eminence of one race over another. The Hu-
guenots and the French, according to Lodge's
statistics, show a percentage of ability in proportion
to their total immigration much higher than that of
any other race. But the Huguenots were a select
class of people, manufacturers and merchants, per-
haps the most intelligent and enterprising of French-
men in the seventeenth century. Furthermore the
direct migration from France to this cotmtry has
never included many peasants and wage-earners,
but has been limited to the adventurous and edu-
cated. Had the French-Canadians who represent
the peasantry of France been included in these com-
parisons, the proportion of French eminence would
have been materially reduced.

The same is true of the English. Although sprung
from one race, those who came to America represented
at least two grades of society as widely apart as two
races. The Pilgrims and Puritans of New England
were the yeomen, the merchants, the manufacturers,
skilled in industry, often independent in resources,
and well trained in the intellectual controversies
of religion and politics. The Southern planters also


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

sprang from a class of similar standing, though not
so strongly addicted to intellectual pursuits. Beneath
both these classes were the indentured servants, a
few of whom were men of ability forced to pay their
passage by service. But the majority of them were
brought to this coimtry through the advertisements
of shipowners and landholders or even forcibly cap-
tured on the streets of cities or transported for crimes
and pauperism. Though all of these classes were of
the same race, they were about as widely divergent
as races themselves in point of native ability and pre-
paratory training.

The third and most important cause of eminence,
apart from ancestry, is the industrial and legal en-
vironment. An agricultural community produces
very few eminent men compared with the nimaber
produced where manufactures and commerce vie
with agriculture to attract the youth. A state of
widely diversified industrial interests is likely to cre-
ate widely diversified intellectual and moral interests.
Complicated problems of industry and politics stimu-
late the mind and reflect their influence in literature,
art, education, science, and the learned professions.
Most of all, equal opporttmity for all classes and large
prizes for the ambitious and industrious serve to
stimulate individuals of native ability to their highest
endeavor. It was the deadening effects of slavery,
creating inequalities among the whites themselves,
that smothered the genius of the Southerner whether
Englishman, Huguenot, or Scotch-Irish, and it was

26


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

the free institutions of the North that invited their
genius to imfold and blossom.

These considerations lead us to look with distrust
on the claims of those who find in race ancestry
or in race intermixture the reasons for such eminence
as Americans have attained. While the race factor
is decisive when it mariu off inferior and primitive
raceSy yet, in considering those Europeans races
which have joined in our civiUzation, the important
questions are: From what social classes is immigrar
tion drawn? and, Do our social institutions offer
free opportunity and high incentive to the youth of
ability? In so far as we get a choice selection of im-
migrants, and in so far as we afford them free scope
for their native gifts, so far do they render to our
country the services of genius, talent, and industry.

IncentivM to Immigration. — It is the distinctive
fact regarding colonial migration that it was Teu-
tonic in blood and Protestant in religion. The
English, Dutch, Swedes, Germans, and even the
Scotch-Irish, who constituted practically the entire
migration, were less than two thousand years ago
one Germanic race in the forests surrounding the
North Sea. The Protestant Reformation, sixteen
centuries later, began among those peoples and
found in them its sturdiest supporters. The doc-
trines of the Reformation, adapted as they were to
the strong individualism of the Germanic races, pre-
pared the hearts of men for the doctrines of politi-
cal liberty and constitutional government of the

2J


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

succeeding century. The Refonnation banished
the idea that men must seek salvation through the
intercession of priests and popes^ who, however
sacred, are only fellow-men, and set up the idea
that each soul has direct access to God. With the
Bible as a guide and his own conscience as a judge,
each man was accountable ooXy to one divine sov-
ereign.

From the standpdnt of the age this doctrine was
too radical. It tended to break up existing society
into sects and factions, and to precipitate those civil
and religious wars which ended in a Catholic or aris-
tocratic reaction. When this reaction came, the
numerous Protestant sects of the extremer types
found themselves the objects of persecution, and
nothing remained but to seek a new land where the
heavy hand of repression could not reach them.
Thus America became the home of numberless reli-
gious sects and denominations of these several races.
From England came Congregationalists (the " Pil-
grims ")> Puritans, Quakers, Baptists ; from Scot-
land and Ireland came Presbyterians; from Ger-
many came Quakers, Dunkards, Pietists, Ridge
Hermits, Salzburgers, and Moravians.

It is not to be inferred that religious persecution
alone in the early colonial period caused emigration.
In point of numbers conunerdal enterprise was prob-
ably equally influential. In Holland all religious
sects were welcomed with a liberality far in advance
of any other nation, and at the same time the Dutch

a8


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

people were the most advanced in the modem pursuits
of trade and commerce. The Dutch settlement of
New Amsterdam was therefore a business enterprise,
and neither before nor after the conquest by the Brit-
ish was there any religious obstacle to the reception of
other races and religions. In this respect New York
differed widely from New England, where religious
exdusiveness preserved the English race as a peculiar
people imtil the middle of the nineteenth century.
So diverse were the races in New York, and so liberal
were the opportimities open to all, that Governor
Horatio Seymour was able to say that nine men
prominent in its early history represented the same
number of nationalities. Schuyler was of Dutch
descent, Herkimer of Germap, Jay of French, Living-
ston of Scotch, Clinton of Irish, Morris of Welsh,
Hoffman of Swedish, while Hamilton was a West India
Englishman and Baron Steuben a Prussian.^

Another colony to which all races and religions
were welcomed was Pennsylvania. William Penn
established this colony both as a refuge for the per-
secuted Quakers of England and as a real estate ven-
ture. He was the first American to advertise his
dominions widely throughout Europe, offering to
sell one hundred acres of land at two English pounds
and a low rental. His advertisements combined
htunanity and business, for they called attention to
popular government and universal suffrage; equal

* "History and Topography of New York," Address at Cornell
University, June 30, 1870.

39


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

rights to all regardless of race or religious belief;
trial by jury; murder and treason the only capital
crimes, and reformation, not retaliation, the object of
punishment for other offences. Thus Pennsylvania,
although settled a half century later than the Southern
and Northern colonies, soon exceeded them in popu-
lation. Penn sent his agents to Germany and per-
suaded large numbers of German Quakers and Pie-
tists to cast their lot in his plantation, so that in twenty
years the Germans numbered nearly one-half the
population. Again, in the beginning of the eighteenth
century, when Louis XIV overran the Palatinate and
thousands of Germans fled to England, the English
government encouraged their migration to America.
In one year four thousand of them, the largest single
emigration of the colonial period, embarked for
New York, but their treatment was so illiberal that
they moved to Pennsylvania, and thenceforth the
German migration sought the latter colony. These
people settled at Germantown, near Philadelphia, and
occupied the counties of Bucks and Montgomery,
where they continue to this day with their peculiar
language, the " Pennsylvania Dutch." Not only
William Penn himself, but other landowners in
Pennsylvania and also the shipowners advertised
the country in Germany, and thousands of the poorer
sort of Germans were induced to indenture them-
selves to the settlers to whom they were auctioned
off by the ship captains in payment for transportation.
Probably one-half of all the immigrants of the colonial

30


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

period came under this system of postpaid transporta-
tion, just as at the present time nearly two>thirds come
on prepaid tickets. It was in Pennsylvania that the
largest portion of the Scotch-Irish settled, and before
the time of the Revolution that colony had become
the most populous and most diversified of all the
colonies. It was the only colony, except Maryland,
that tolerated Roman Catholics, and with all phases
of the Christian religion and all branches of the Teu-
tonic and Celtic races, Pennsylvania set the original
type to which all of America has conformed, that
of race intermixture on the basis of religious and
political equality.

The Scotch-Irish. — It has long been recognized
that among the most virile and aggressive people
who came to America in colonial times, and who
have contributed a peculiar share to the American
character, are the Scotch-Irish. Their descendants
boast of their ancestry and dte long Usts of notables
as their coderivatives. Yet imtil recent years it has
been the misfortune of the Scotch-Irish to have es-
caped historical investigation; for American history
has been written chiefly in New England, whose
colonial Puritans forbade them in their midst. In
fact, from the earliest settlement, the Scotch-Irish
have been pioneers and men of action. They have
contributed to America few writers and artists, but
many generals, politicians, and captains of industry.
In literature they claim two eminent names, Irving
and Poe; but in the army, navy, politics, and busi-

31


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

ness they claim John Paul Jones, Perry, Andrew
Jackson, Winfield Scott, Zachary Taylor, Ulysses S.
Grant, Stonewall Jackson, George B. McClellan,
Alexander Hamilton, John C. Calhoun, James G.
Blaine, Jefferson Davis, Thomas Benton, Hendricks,
John G. Carlisle, Mark Hanna, William McKinley,
Matthew S. Quay, Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rocke-
feller, Horace Greeley, Henry Watterson, and him-
dreds alike famous in the more strenuous movements
of American life.

A paradoxical fact regarding the Scotch-Irish is
that they are very little Scotch and much less Irish.
That is to say, they do not belong mainly to the so-
called Celtic race, but they are the most composite
of all the people of the British Isles. They are called
Scots because they lived in Scotia, and they are called
Irish because they moved to Ireland. Geography
and not ethnology has given them their name. They
are a mixed race through whose veins run the Celtic
blood of the primitive Scot and Pict, the primitive
Briton, the primitive Irish, but with a larger admix-
ture of the later Norwegian, Dane, Saxon, and Angle.
How this amalgamation came about we may learn
from the geography of Scotland.

The Highlands of Scotland begin at the Grampian
Hills and the Lowlands extend south from this line
to the British border, and include the cities of Glas-
gow and Edinburgh. The Scotch-Irish came from
that southwestern part of the Lowlands which bulges
out toward Ireland north of the Solway Firth. Over

32


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

these Lowland counties^ bounded by water and hills
on three sides, successive waves of conquest and mi-
gration followed. First the primitive Caledonian or
Pict was driven to the Highlands, which to this day
is the Celtic portion of Scotland. The Briton from
the south, pressed on by Roman and then by Teuton,
occupied the country. Then Irish tribes crossed over
and gained a permanent hold. Then the Norwegian
sailors came around from the north, and to this day
there are pure Scandinavian types on the adjacent
islands. Then the Saxons and Angles, driven by the
Danes and Normans, gained a foothold from the east,
and lastly the Danes themselves added their contin-
gent. Here in this Lowland pocket of territory,
no larger than a good-sized American county, was
compounded for five hundred years this remarkable
amalgam of races.

A thousand years later, after they had become
a united people and had shown their metal in the
trying times of the Reformation, they furnished the
emigrants who displaced the Irish in the north of
Ireland. James I, whom Scotland gave to England,
determined to transform Catholic Ireland into
Protestant England, and thereupon confiscated the
lands of the native chiefs in Ulster and bestowed
them upon Scottish and English lords on condition
that they settle the territory with tenants from Scot-
land and England. This was the " great settlement ''
of 1610, and from that time to the present Ulster
has been the Protestant stronghold of Ireland*
p 33


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

In 1901 the population of Ulster was 44 per cent
Catholic, 23 per cent Episcopalian, and 27 per cent
Presbyterian, an ecclesiastical division corresponding
almost exactly to the racial division of Irish, English,
and Scotch. During the whole of the seventeenth
century — the first century of this occupation —
the Catholics and Episcopalians were in a much
smaller proportion than these figures show for the
present time, and the relative increase in Irish and
Episcopalians during the eighteenth century was
closely connected with the migration of the Scotch
to America.

For one himdred years the Scotch multiplied in
Ulster and had no dealings with the remnants of the
Irish, whom they crowded into the barren hills and
whom they treated Hke savages. They retidned
their purity of race, and although when they came
to America they called themselves Irish and were
known as Irish wherever they settled, yet they had no
Irish blood except that which entered into their com-
position through the Irish migration to Scotia fifteen
hundred years before.

Yet, though they despised the Irish, they could not
escape the imhappy fate of Ireland. The first blow
came in 1698, nearly one hundred years after their
settlement. English manufacturers complained of
Irish competition, and the Irish Parliament, a tool
of the British crown, passed an act totally forbidding
the exportation of Irish woollens, and another act
forbidding the exportation of Irish wool to any coim-

«4


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

try save England Their slowly growing linen in-
dustry was likewise discriminated against in later
years. Presbyterian Ulster had been the industrial
centre of Ireland, and these acts nearly destroyed
her industry. Next Queen Anne's Parliament
adopted penal laws directed against Roman Catholics
and Presbyterians, and the Test Act, which compelled
public officials to take the commimion of the Estab-
lished Church, deprived the entire Scotch population
of self-government. Nevertheless they were com-
pelled to pay tithes to support the Established
Church to which they were opposed. Lastly, the
hundred-year leases of the tenants began to run
out, and the landlords offered renewab to the
highest bidders on short leases. Here the poverty-
stricken Irish gained an unhappy revenge on the
Scotch who had displaced them of their ancestral
lands, for their low standard of living enabled them
to offer rack-rents far above what the Scotch could
afford. No longer did religion, race pride, or grati-
tude have a part in holding Ulster to Protestant
supremacy. The greed of absentee landlords be-
gan to have full sway, and in the resulting struggle
for livelihood, hopeless poverty was fitter to survive
than ambitious thrift.

The Scotch tenants, their hearts bitter against
England and aristocracy, now sought a country
where they might have free land and self-government.
In 1 718 it is stated that 4200 of them left for America.
After the famine of 1740 there were 12,000 who left

35


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

annually. Altogether, in the half century just pre-
ceding the American Revolution, 200,000 ^ persons,
or one-third of the Protestant population of Ulster,
are said to have emigrated, and the majority came
to America. This was by far the largest contribution
of any race to the population of America during the
eighteenth century, and the injustice they suffered
at the hands of England made them among the most
determined and effective recruits to the armies that
won our independence.

Before the Scotch-Irish moved to America the
Atlantic coast line had been well occupied. Conse-
quently, in order to obtain land for themselves, they
were forced to go to the interior and to become fron-
tiersmai. They foimd in Massachusetts a state
church to which they must conform in order to be
admitted to citizenship. But what they had left
Ireland to escape they would not consent in a new
coimtry to do. The Puritans were willing that they
should occupy the frontier as a buffer against the
Indians, and so they took up lands in New Hamp-
shire, Vermont, Western Massachusetts, and Maine.
Only a few congregations, however, settled in New
England — the bulk of the immigrants entered by
way of Philadelphia and Baltimore and went to the
interior of Pennsylvania surrounding and south of
Harrisburg. They spread through the Shenandoah

^ These figures are probably exaggerated, but authorities agree
upon the magnitude of the migration. Fiske, "Old Viiiginia,"
Vol. II, p. 594.

36


COLONIAL RACE ELEMENTS

valley and in the foothill regions of Virginia and North
and South Carolina. Graduallyi they pushed farther
west, across the mountains into Western Pennsyl-
vania about Pittsburg, and into Ohio, Kentucky, and
Tennessee. In all of these regions they fought the
Indians, protected the older inhabitants from inroads,
and developed those pioneer qualities which for one
himdred years have characterized the " winning of
the West."

The Scotch-Irish occupied a peculiar place in the
new world. More than any other race they served
as the amalgam to produce, out of divergent races,
a new race, the American. The Puritans of New
England, the Quakers of Pennsylvania, the Cavaliers
of Virginia, were as radically different as peoples of
different races, and they were separated from each
other in their own exclusive communities. The
Germans were localized in Pennsylvania and Mary-
land, the Dutch in New York, but the Scotch-Irish
" alone of the various races in America were present
in sufficient numbers in all of the colonies to make
their influence coxmt; and they alone of all the races
had one uniform religion; had experienced together
the persecutions by state and church which had de-
prived them at home of their civil and religious liber-
ties; and were the common heirs to those principles
of freedom and democracy which had been developed
in Scotland as nowhere else. At the time of the
American Revolution there were ... in all above
five hundred settlements scattered over practically

37


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

all the American colonies." ^ Trained as they were
in the representative democracy of the Scottish kirk,
thrown on their own resources in the wilderness, min-
gling with the pioneers of many other races, they
took the lead in developing that Western type which
in politics and industry became ultimately the Amer-
ican type; yet they retained their original character,
and the American to-day is more at home in Glasgow
than in London.

» Haniui, "The Scotch-Irish," Vol. II, p. a.


38


CHAPTER ni

THE NEGRO

Although the negro races of Africa extend across
the continent and from the Sudan to Cape Colony,
yet the races which yielded the largest supply of
slaves for America were confined to a narrow stretch
of the Atlantic coast near the equator. For nearly
two thousand miles from Cape Verde the coast of
Africa runs southeast and easterly, and then for
another thousand miles it runs to the south, forming
the Gulf of Guinea, and from a belt of land abng
this coast practically all the negro immigrants to
America have come. Here several large rivers,
the Senegal, the Gambia, the Niger, and the Congo-
furnished harbors for slave ships and routes for slave
traders from the interior. Two circumstances, the
climate and the luxuriant vegetation, render this re-
gion hostile to continuous exertion. The torrid heat
and the excessive humidity weaken the will and exter-
minate those who are too strenuous; but this same
heat and humidity, with the fertile soil, produce xm-
paralleled crops of bananas, yams, and grains. Thus
nature conspires to produce a race indolent, improvi-
dent, and contented. Seventy-five per cent of the
deaths are said to be executions for supposed witch-

39


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

craft, which has killed more men and women than
the slave trade. Formerly cannibalism prevailed, but
it has now been largely stamped out by European
governments. The native governments are tribal,
and the chiefs sustain themselves by their physical
prowess and the help of priests and medicine men.
Property is mainly in women and slaves, and inheri-
tance is through the female, except among the nobility
of Dahomey, where primogeniture rules. Written
laws and records are imknown. The people are im-
stable, indifferent to suffering, and '' easily aroused
to ferocity by the sight of blood or imder great fear."
They exhibit aversion to silence and solitude, love of
rhythm, excitability, and lack of reserve. All trav-
ellers speak of their impulsiveness, strong sexual
passion, and lack of will power.^

Such, in brief, were the land and the people that
furnished one-sixth of our total population and two-
fifths of our Southern population. In shifting such
a people from the torrid climate of equatorial Africa
to the temperate regions of America, and from an
environment of savagery to one of civilization, changes
more momentous than those of any other migration
have occurred. First, it was only the strongest
phyacal specimens who survived the horrible tests
of the slave catcher and the slave ship. Slavery,
too, as a system, could use to best advantage those
who were docile and hardy, and not those who were
independent and feeble. Just as in the many thou-

> Tillinghast, "The Negro in Africa and America."

40


THE NEGRO

sand years of man's domestication of animals, the
breechy cow and the balky horse have been aknost
eliminated by artificial selection, so slavery tended to
transform the savage by eliminating those who were
self-willed, ambitious, and possessed of individual
initiative. Other races of immigrants, by contact
with our institutions, have been civilized — the negro
has been only domesticated. Democratic civiliza-
tion offers an outlet for those who are morally and
intellectually vigorous enough to break away from
the stolid mass of their fellows; domestication dreads
and suppresses them as dangerous rebels. The
very qualities of intelligence and manliness which are
essential for citizenship in a democracy were sys-
tematically expunged from the negro race through
two himdred years of slavery. And then, by the cata-
clysm of a war in which it took no part, this race,
after many thousand years of savagery and two cen-
turies of slavery, was suddenly let loose into the lib-
erty of citizenship and the electoral suffrage. The
world never before had seen such a triumph of dog-
matism and partizanship. It was dogmatism, be-
cause a theory of abstract equality and inalienable
rights of man took the place of education and the
slow evolution of moral character. It was partisan-
ship, because a political party, taking advantage of
its triumph in dvil war, sought to perpetuate itself
through the votes of its helpless beneficiaries. No
wonder that this fateful alliance of doctrinaires and
partizans brought fateful results, and that, after a

41


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

generation of anarchy and race hatred, the more fun-
damental task of education has only just begun.

True, there was a secondary object in view in grant-
ing the freedmen sufiFrage. The thirteenth amend-
ment, adopted in 1865, legalized and extended the
proclamation of emancipation, which had been a
war measure. But this was followed by servile
and penal laws in all the Southern states that looked
like peonage in place of slavery.* Congress then sub-
mitted the fourteenth amendment, which was adopted
in 1867, creating a new grade of citizenship — citizen-
ship of the nation — and prohibiting any state
from depriving "any person of life, liberty, or prop-
erty without the due process of law" and from deny-
ing to any person "the equal protection of the laws."
But this was not enough. The next step was the
fifteenth amendment adopted in 1869, prohibiting
any state from denying the suffrage to citizens of the
United States "on accoimt of race, color, or previous
condition of servitude." Thus equality before the
law was to be protected by equality in making the
law. This object was a worthy one, and it added
the appearance of logical necessity to the theories
of doctrinaires and the schemes of partisans. But it
failed because based on a wrong theory of the ballot.
Suffrage means self-government. Self-government
means intelligence, self-control, and capacity for co5p-
eration. If these are lacking, the ballot only makes
way for the "boss," the corruptionist, or the oli-

> Burgess, pp. 45, 225; Fleming, pp. 380, 433.

4a


THE NEGRO

garchy. The suffrage must be earned, not merely con-
ferred, if it is to be an instrument of self-protection.

But it is the peculiar fate of race problems that
they carry contestants to bitter extremes and afford
no field for constructive compromise. Could the
nation have adopted Lincoln's project of a hundred
years, or even thirty years, of gradual emancipation,
it might have avoided both the evik of war and the
fallacies of self-government. But the spirit of race
aggrandisement that precipitated the one rendered
the other inevitable. With the negro suddenly made
free by conquest, each fatal step in reconstruction
was forced by the one that preceded. The North,
the South, and the negro were placed in an impos-
sible situation, and a nation which dreaded negro
suffrage in 1868 ^ adopted it in 1869.

For eight years the government of the Southern
states was in the hands of the negroes. The result
of turning the states over to ignorant and untried
voters was an enormous increase of debt without
corresponding public improvements or public enter-
prises. Even the negro governments themselves
began to repudiate these debts and they were almost
wholly repudiated by the whites after returning to
power.

It is not necessary to dwell upon the methods by
which the white voters regained and kept control of
the states. Admittedly it was through intimidation,
murder, ballot-box ''stuffing," and false counting.

^ Buigess, p. 207.
43


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

The negro vote has ahnost disappeared, and in more
recent years that which was accomplidied through
violence is perpetuated through law. Mississippi,
Louisiana, South Carolina, North Carolina, Alabama,
and Virginia have adopted so-called "educational"
tests with such adroit exceptions that white illiterates
may vote, but negroes, whether literate or illiterate,
may be excluded from voting. As stated by a promi-
nent white Virginian, "the negro can vote if he has
$300, or if he is a veteran of the Federal or Confed-
erate armies, or if he is a profound constitutional
lawyer." The fifteenth amendment, by decisions of
the United States Supreme Court, has been rendered
inoperative, and the fourteenth amendment, without
helping the negro, for whom it was designed,* has
raised up government by private corporations which
never had been thought of as needing an amend-
ment. With these decisions it may be taken for
granted that the negro will not again in the near
future enjoy the privilege of a free ballot.

This is a situation in which the North is as deeply
interested as the South. The South, during the
period of slavery, through the privilege of counting
three-fifths of the slaves, enjoyed a predominance in
Congress and in presidential elections beyond its
proportion of white voters. The South now enjoys
a greater privilege because it counts all the negroes.
The fourteenth amendment expressly provides for a
situation like this. It says : —

» Sec Ch. VIII, " Politics."
44


THE NEGRO

"When the right to vote at any election for the
choice of electors for president and vice-president
of the United States, representatives in Congress,
the executive and judicial officers of a state, or the
members of the legislature thereof, is denied to
any of the male inhabitants of such state, being
twenty-one years of age and citizens of the United
States, or in any way abridged, except for participa-
tion in rebellion or other crime, the basis of represen-
tation shall be reduced in the proportion which the
number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole
number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in
such state."

Whether it will be possible under our form of gov-
ernment to carry out this provision of the fourteenth
amendment may be doubted, but that it is fast becom-
ing a question of live interest is certain. The edu-
cational test is a rational test, but it is rational
only when the state makes an honest and diligent
eflEort to equip every man to pass the test. The for-
mer slave states spend $2.21 per child for educating
the negroes, and $4.92 per child for educating the
whites.^ The great lesson already learned is that we
must "begin over again" the preparation of the
negro for citizenship. This time the work will begin
at the bottom by educating the negro for the ballot,
instead of beginning at the top by giving him the
ballot before he knows what it should do for him.
What shall be the nature of this education ?

^ Commission of Education Repwt, Z900-Z901, Vol. I, p. d.

45


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Education and Self-help. — We have argued that
democracy must be based upon intelligence, manli-
ness, and cooperation. How can these quaUties be
produced in a race just emerged from slavery?

Intelligence is more than books and letters — it
is knowledge of the forces of nature and ingenu-
ity enough to use them for hmnan service. The
negro is generally acknowledged to be lacking in
"the mechanical idea." In Africa he hardly knows
the simplest mechanical principles. In America the
brightest of the negroes were trained during slavery
by their masters in the handicrafts, such as carpentry,
shoemaking, spinning, weaving, blacksmithing, tail-
oring, and so on. A plantation became a self-sup-
porting unit imder the oversight and discipline of the
whites. But the work of the negro artisans was
careless and inefficient. The negro blacksmith
fastened shoes to the plantation mule, but the horses
were taken to the white blacksmith in town. Since
emancipation the yoxmg generation has not learned
the mechanical trades to the same extent as the slave
generations. Moreover, as machinery supplants
tools and factories supplant handicrafts, the negro
is left still farther behind. "White men," says a
negro speaker,* "are bringing science and art into
menial occupations and lifting them beyond our
reach. In my boyhood the walls and ceilings were
whitewashed each spring by colored men; now this

* Hugh M. Browne, A.M.E., Zion Church Quarterly, April,
1894, quoted by Tillinghast, p. 186.

46


THE NEGRO

is done by a white man managing a steam carpet-
cleaning works. Then the laimdry wori: was done
by negroes; now they are with difficulty able to
manage the new labor-saving machinery." Even in
the non-mechanical occupations the negro is losing
where he once had a monopoly. In Chicago "there
is now scarcely a negro barber in the business district.
Nearly all the janitor work in the large buildings has
been taken away from them by the Swedes. White
men and women as waiters have supplanted colored
men in nearly all the first-class hotels and restaurants.
Practically all of the shoe polishing is now done by
Greeks."^

Individual negroes have made great progress, but
what we need to know is whether the masses of the
negroes have advanced. The investigators of Atlanta
University, in summarizing the reports of three h\m-
dred and forty-four employers of negroes, conclude:
** There are a large number of negro mechanics all
over the land, but especially in the South. Some of
these are progressive, efficient workmen. More are
careless, slovenly, and ill-trained. There are signs
of lethargy among these artisans, and work is slipping
from them in some places; in others they are awaken-
ing and seizing the opportunities of the new industrial
South." *

The prejudice of white workmen has imdoubtedly
played a part in excluding the negro from mechanical

^ Fannie B. Williams, Charities, October 7, 1905, p. 43.
' AUonUa University Publications, No. 7, p. z88.

47


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

trades, but the testimony of large employers, who have
no race prejudice where profits can be made, also
shows that low-priced negro labor often costs more
than high-priced white labor. The iron and steel
mills of Alabama have no advantage in labor cost
over mills of Pennsylvania and Ohio.

The foundation of intelligence for the modem work-
ingman is his imderstanding of mechanics. Not
imtil he learns through manual and technical training
to handle the forces of nature can the workingman
rise to positions of responsibility and independence.
This is as important in agricultural labor, to which
the negro is largely restricted, as in manufactures.
Intelligence in mechanics leads to intelligence in
economics and politics, and the higher wages of me-
chanical intelligence furnish the resources by which
the workman can demand and secure his political
and economic rights.

The second requisite of democracy is independence
and manliness. These are moral qualities based on
will power and steadfastness in pursuit of a worthy
object. But these qualities are not produced merely
by exhortation and reUgious revivals. They have
a more prosaic and secular foimdation. History
shows that no class or nation has risen to indepen-
dence without first accumulating property. How-
ever much we disparage the qualities of greed and
selfishness which the rush for wealth has made ob-
noxious, we must acknowledge that the solid basis of
the virtues is thrift. The improvidence of the negro

4S


THE NEGRO

is notorious. His neglect of his horse, his mule, his
machinery, his eagerness to spend his earnings on
finery, his reckless purchase of watermelons, chickens,
and garden stuff, when he might easily grow them on
his own patch of groxmd, — these and many other
incidents of improvidence explain the constant de-
pendence of the negro upon his employer and his
creditor. There are, of course, notable exceptions
where negroes have accumulated property through
diligent attention and careful oversight.^ These are
all the more notable when it is remembered that the
education of the negro has directed his energies to
the honors of the learned professions rather than to
the commonplace virtues of ownership, and that one
great practical experiment in thrift — the Freed-
man's Bank — went down through dishonesty and
incapacity. With the more recent development of
the remarkable institutions of Hampton and Tuske-
gee and their emphasis on manual training and prop-
erty accumulation, it is to be expected that these basic
qualities of intelligence and independence will re-
ceive practical and direct encouragement.

Co5peration is the third and capital equipment for
attaining the rights of citizenship. There are two
forms of coSperation — a lower and a higher. The
lower is that of the chief or the boss who marshals
his ignorant followers through fear or spoils. The
higher is that of self-government where those who
join together do so through their own intelligence and

^ Bureau of Labor, Bulletin, No. 35.
B 49


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

mutual confidence. In the lower form there are
personal jealousies and factional contests which pre-
vent united action under elected leaders. Negro
bosses and foremen are more despotic than white
bosses. The Colored Farmers' Alliance depended
upon a white man for leadership. The white
"carpet-baggers" organized the negro vote in the
reconstruction period. The negro was in this low
stage of co5peration because he was jealous or dis-
trustful of his fellow-negro and could rally together
only under the banner of a leader whom he could not
depose. With the growth of intelligence and moral
character there comes a deepening sense of the need
of oiganissation as well as leaders of their own race
whom they can trust. The most hopeful indication
of progress for the negroes is the large number of
voluntary religious, beneficial, and insurance societies
whose membership is limited to those of their own
color.*

Liberty has always come through organization.
The free cities of Europe were simply the guilds of
peasants and merchants who organized to protect
themselves against the feudal lords and bishops.
Latterly they gained a voice in parliaments as the
"third estate" and estabUshed our modem repre-
sentative democracy. The modem trade unions have
become a power far in excess of their numbers through
the capacity of the workman to organize. With the
modest beginnings of self-organization among ne-

^ AtlatUa University PublicaHans, Nos. 3 and 8.

SO


\ Larger Proivr'e'Ii


THE NEGRO

groes the way is opening for their more effective
participation in the higher opportunities of our dvili-
zation«

The negro trade unionist has not as yet shown the
organizing capacity of other races. Only among the
mine workers, the longshoremen, and bricklayers are
they to be found in considerable numbers, although
the carpenters have negro organizers. But in most of
these cases the negro is being organized by the white
man not so much for his own protection as for the
protection of the white workman. If the negro is
brought to the position of refusing to work for lower
wages than the white man he has taken the most diffi-
cult step in organization ; for the labor union requires,
more than any other economic or business association
in modem life, reliance upon the steadfastness of one's
fellows. Unfortunately, when the negro demands
the same wages as white men, his industrial inferiority
leads the employer to take white men in his place,
and here again we see how fundamental is manual
and technical intelligence as a basis for other prog-
ress.*

It must not be inferred because we have em-
phasized these qualities of intelligence — manliness
and codperation as preparatory to political rights —
that the negro race should be deprived of the suffrage
until such time as its members acquire these qualities.
Many individuals have already acquired them. To
exclude such individuals from the suffrage is to shut

^ AUa$Ua UtUversUy Publications^ No. ^ pp. 155-178.

SI


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the door of hope to all. An honest educational test
honestly enforced on both whites and blacks is the
simplest rough-and-ready method for measuring the
progress of individuals in these qualities of citizen-
ship. There is no problem before the American
people more vital to democratic institutions than
that of keeping the suffrage open to the negro and
at the same time preparing the negro to profit by the
suffrage.

Neither should the negro be excluded from the
higher education. Leadership is just as necessary
in a democracy as in a tribe. Self-government is not
suppression of leaders but co5peration with them.
The true leader is one who knows his followers be-
cause he has suffered with them, but who can point
the way out and inspire them with confidence. He
feels what they feel, but can state what they cannot
express. He is their spokesman, defender, and or-
ganizer. Not a social class nor a struggling race
can reach equality with other classes and races until
its leaders can meet theirs on equal terms. It cannot
depend on others, but must raise up leaders from its
own ranks. This is the problem of higher educa-
tion — not that scholastic education that ends in
itself, but that broad education that equips for higher
usefulness. If those individuals who are competent
to become lawyers, physicians, teachers, preachers,
organizers, guides, innovators, experimenters, are
prevented from getting the right education, then
there is little hope for progress among the race as

5«


THE NEGRO

a whole, in the intelligence, manliness, and coSpera-
tion needed for self-government.

Growth of Negro Population. — After the census
of 1880 it was confidently asserted that the negro
population was increasing more rapidly than the
white population. But these assertions, since the
census of 1890, have disappeared. It then became
apparent that the supposed increase frc»n 1870 to
1880 was based on a defective coimt in 1870, the
first census after emancipation. In reality the
negro element, including mulattoes, during the one
hundred and ten years of census taking, has steadily
declined in proportion to the white element. Al-
though negroes in absolute numbers have increased
from 757,000 in 1790 to 4,442,000 in i860, and
8,834,000 in 1900, yet in 1790 they were one-fifth of
the total population; in i860 they were one-seventh
and in 1900 only one-ninth.

It is naturally suggested that this relative decrease
in negro population has been owing to the large
immigration of whites, but the inference is unwar-
ranted. In the Southern states the foreign element
has increased less rapidly than the native white
element, yet it is in the Southern states that the negro
is moct clearly falling behind. In the twenty years
from 1880 to 1900 the whites in eighteen Southern
states without the aid of foreign immigration increased
57 per cent and the negroes only 33 per cent.* In
only six Southern states. West Virginia, Florida,

' Twelfth Census, SupplemenSary Analysis p. S03.

53


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Alabama, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Arkansas,
have the negroes, during the past ten years, increased
more rapidly than the whites, and in only three of
these states, Alabama, Mississippi, and Arkansas,
was the relative increase significant. In but two
states. South Carolina and Mississippi, does the negro
element predominate, and in another state, Louisiana,
a majority were negroes in 1890, but a majority
were whites in 1900. "At the beginning of the
nineteenth century the Southern negroes were in-
creasing much faster than the Southern whites. At
the end of it they were increasing only about three-
fifths as fast." *

This redistribution of negroes is an interesting and
significant fact regarding the race and has a bearing
on its future. Two movements are taking place,
first to the fertile bottom lands of the Southern
states, second to the cities, both North and South.
Mr. Carl Kelsey has shown this movement to the
lowlands in an interesting way.' He has prepared
a geological map of Alabama, which with Mississippi
has received the largest accession of negroes, and has
shown the density of negro population according to
the character of the soil. In this map it appears
that the prairie and valley regions contain «*, pro-
portion of 50 per cent to 90 per cent negroes, while
the sand hill and pine levels contain only 10 per cent

^Willcox, "Census SUtistics of the Negro," YaU Review^
X3 : 279 (1904).

• " The Negro Fanner,'* p. 90.

54


THE NEGRO

to 50 per cent, and the piedmont or foothill region
less than 10 per cent. A similar segregation is
foimd in other Southern states, especially the alluvial
districts of Mississippi and Arkansas. In these
fertile sections toward which the negroes gravitate,
the crops are enormous, and Mr. Kelsey points out
a curious misconception in the census summary,
wherein the inference is drawn that negroes are
better farmers than whites because they raise larger
crops. " No wonder the negroes' crops are larger,"
when the whites farm the hill country and the negroes
till the delta, which '' will raise twice as much cotton
per acre as the hills." Furthermore the negro,
whether tenant or owner, is under the close super-
vision of a white landlord or creditor, who in self-
protection keeps control of him, whereas the white
farmer is left to succeed or fail without expert guid-
ance.

The migration of negroes to the cities is extremely
significant. In ten Southern states the proportion of
the colored population was almost exactly the same
in 1890 as it had been in i860, — namely, 36 per
cent, — yet in sixteen cities of those states, as shown
by Mr. HofiEman,^ the colored proportion increased
from 19 per cent in i860 to 29 per cent in 1890.
This relative increase, however, did not continue
after 1890, for, according to the census of 1900, the
proportion of negroes in those cities was still 29 per
cent. During the past decade the negroes have

* pp. 9, xo.
5S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

increased relatively faster in Northern cities. The
white population of Chicago increased threefold from
1880 to 1900, and the colored population fivefold.
The white population of Philadelphia during the
same period increased 50 per cent and the colored
population 100 per cent. In the thirty-eight largest
cities of the country the negro population in ten
years increased 38 per cent and the white population,
including foreign immigration, increased 33 per cent.
In thirty Northern and border dties during the past
census decade the negroes gained 167,000, and in
twenty Southern cities they gained 80,000.^

The Southern whites also are moving from the
South, and in larger proportions than the negroes,
though the movement of both is small. In 1900,
7 per cent of the whites of Southern birth lived in the
North and West and only 4.3 per cent of the negroes
of Southern birth. But the negroes who go North go
to the dties, and the whites to the country. Three-
fifths (58 per cent) of these northbound negroes
moved to the larger dties and only one-fourth (26
per cent) of the northbound whites. *

The accompanying map, derived from the census
of 1900,' shows clearly both of these movements of
negro population. The shaded areas indicate the
counties where negroes formed a larger proportion

^ Dabney, G>mimss]oner of Education, Report, 1902, Vol. I,

P- 797-

' Twelfth CensiUy Supfkmentary Analysis, pp. 305, 307.

' SupfiemetUary Analysis, p. 204.

S6


THE NEGRO

of the population in 1900 than they did twenty yeais
earlier, in i88o. Here can be seen the movement to
the low and fertile lands of the South and the cities
of the North and South. There are but two areas
in California and Colorado, not included on the map,
where the population of negroes has increased, and
one of these contains the dty of Los Angeles.

Were the negroes in the cities to scatter through
all the sections, the predominating numbers of the
white element might have an elevating influence,
but, instead, the negroes congregate in the poorer
wards, where both poverty and vice prevail. Hoff-
man has shown that two-thirds of the negroes in
Chicago live in three wards, which contain all the
houses of ill-fame in that part of the dty. The same
is true of Philadelphia, Boston, and Cindnnati.^
In these sections negro prostitution has become an
established institution, catering to the Italian and
other lower grades of immigrants, and supporting
in idleness many negro men as solidtors.

We have seen that the negro population has not
kept pace with the native white population. The
reason is found in the smaller excess of births over
deaths. Statistics of births are almost entirely
lacking in the United States. Statistics of deaths
are complete for only portions of Northern states
and a few Southern dties, containing, in 1900, in
all, 27,500,000 whites and 1,180,000 negroes.
Of this number, 20,500,000 whites and 1,100,000

* pp. 16, 17; Wood, " American in Process," p. axS.

I 57


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

negroes lived in cities, so that the showing which
the census is able to give is mainly for cities North
and South and for rural sections only in the North.^
It appears that for every looo colored persons living
in these cities the deaths in 1900 were 31.1, while for
every 1000 white persons the deaths were only 17.9.
That is to say, the colored death-rate was 73 per cent
greater than the white death-rate.

In the rural districts there was much less difference.
The colored death-rate was 19. i and the white death-
lAte 15.3, a colored excess of 25 per cent.

Morals and Environment — In explaining the
excessive colored mortality there are two classes of
opinions. One explains it by social conditions, the
other by race traits. The one points to environment,
the other to moral character. The one is socialistic,
the other individualistic. These different views exist
among colored people themselves, and one of the
encouraging signs is the scientific and candid in-
terest in the subject taken by them under the leader-
ship of Atlanta University. A colored physician
who takes the first view states his case forcibly : ^ —

"Is it any wonder that we die faster than our white
brother when he gets the first and best attention,
while we are neglected on all sides ? They have the
best wards and treatment at the hospital, while we
must take it second hand or not at all; they have all
the homes for the poor and friendless, we have none;

* Twelfth Census, Vol. Ill, p. Ixix.

' Atlanta University Publications, No. x, p. 34.

58


THE NEGRO

they have a home for fallen women, we have none;
they have the public libraries where they can get and
read books on hygiene and other subjects pertain-
ing to health, we have no such privileges; they have
the gymnasiums where they can go and develop
themselves physically, we have not; they have all
the parks where they and their children can go in
the hot summer days and breathe the pure, cool air,
but for fear we might catch a breath of that air and
live, they put up large signs, which read thus,
* For white people only ' ; they live in the best homes,
while we live in humble ones; they live in the
cleanest and healthiest parts of the city, while we live
in the sickliest and filthiest parts of the dty; the
streets on which they live are cleaned once and twice
a day, the streets on which we live are not cleaned
once a month, and some not at all ; besides, they have
plenty of money with which they can get any phy-
sician they wish, any medicine they need, and travel
for their health when necessary; all of these blessings
we are deprived of. Now, my friends, in the face
of all these disadvantages, do you not think we are
doing well to stay here as long as we do ? "

Another colored writer, less eloquent, but not less
accurate, in smnmarizing the statistics collected under
the guidance of Atlanta University concludes: * —

^^Overcrowding in tenements and houses occupied
by colored people does not exist to any great extent,
and is less than was supposed.

* AUanta Universiiy PiMicatums, No. a, p. g,

S9


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

"In comparison with white women, an excess of
colored women support their families, or contribute
to the family support, by occupation which takes
them much of their time from home, to the neglect
of their children.

" Environment and the sanitary condition of houses
are not chiefly responsible for the excessive mortality
among colored people.

''Ignorance and disregard of the laws of health
are responsible for a large proportion of this exces-
sive mortality,"

It is pointed out by these colored students and by
many others that the excessive mortality of colored
people is owing to pulmonary consmnption, scrof-
ula, and syphilis, all of which are constitutional;
and to infant mortality due also to constitutional
and congenital disease. The census of 1900 reports
for a portion of the Northern states that for every
1000 white children under five years of age there
were 49.7 deaths in one year, and for every 1000
colored children under five years there were 118.5
deaths, an excess of negro infant mortaUty of 137
per cent.* The census also reports that negro deaths
in cities owing to consumption are proportionately
2.8 times as many as white deaths,^ deaths owing to
pneumonia are 89 per cent greater,' while deaths
owing to contagious causes, such as measles, scarlet
fever, diphtheria,* are but slightly greater or actually

> Twelfth Census, Vol. Ill, p. boodi. • P. dzzvi.
' P. cczviii. * Pp. cziz, cxziii, czzviL

60


THE NEGRO

less than the white deaths in proportion to population.
In the city of Charleston, where mortality statistics
of negroes were compiled before the war, it has been
shown that from 1822 to 1848 the colored death-
rate from consumption was a trifle less than the
white, but since 1865 the white mortality from that
cause has decreased 38 per cent, while the negro
mortality has increased 70 per cent.^ The death-
rates from consumption in Charleston in 1900 were
189.8 for 100,000 whites and 647.7 ^^^ 100,000
negroes, an excess of 241 per cent. The lowest
negro death-rate reported from consumption in
cities is 378.5 for Memphis, but in that city the
white death-rate from the same cause is 169.9, a
negro excess of 123 per cent.*

At a conference held at Atlanta University, Pro-
fessor Harris, of Fisk University, concluded : * —

" I have now covered the ground to which our
excessive death-rate is mainly due ; namely, pulmon-
ary diseases, especially consumption and pneumonia,
scrofula, venereal diseases, and infant mortality. If
we eliminate these diseases, our excessive death-rate
will be a thing of the past. . . • While I do not
depreciate sanitary regulations and a knowledge of
hygienic laws, I am convinced that a sine qua non
of a change for the better in the negro's physical
condition is a higher social morality. • • . From

' Hoffman, p. 70.

' Twelfth Census, Suppkmeniary Analysis^ pp. 496^ 497.
' Atia$ita UniversUy Publications, No. x, p. a6«

61


• •


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the health reports of all our large Southern cities we
learn that a considerable amount of our infant mor-
tality is due to inanition, infantile debility, and in-
fantile marasmus. Now what is the case in regard
to these diseases? The fact is that they are not
diseases at all, but merely the names of symptoms
due to enfeebled constitutions and congenital
diseases, inherited from parents suffering from the
effects of sexual immorality and debauchery. . • •
It is true that much of the moral laxity which exists
among us to-day arose out of slavery. . . . But to
explain it is not to excuse it. It is no longer our
misfortune as it was before t]|ie war; it is our sin,
the wages of which is our excessive number of
deaths. . . . The presence of tubercular and scrofu-
lous diseases, consumption, syphilis, and leprosy,
has caused the weaker nations of the earth to
succumb before the rising tide of Christian civiliza-
tion. • . • The history of nations teaches us that
neither war, nor famine, nor pestilence, exterminates
them so completely as do sexual vices/'


6t


[wtt*


I


11

7«|


I Stt


•4.St


CHAPTER IV

KINETEEMTH CEMTimy ADDITIONS

It is only since the year 1820 that the government
of the United States has kept a record of alien pas-
sengers arriving in this country. For several years
following 1820 the immigration was so slight as to be
ahnost negligible. It was not mitil 1820 that there
were more than 20,000 arrivals. So accustomed
have we become to large figures of immigration that
nothing less than 100,000 seems worth noting, and
this figure was not reached until 1842. Since then
there have been only four years of less than 100,000,
and two of these were years of the Civil War.

A striking fact which first attracts the attention
of one who examines the statistics since 1840 is the
close sympathy between immigration and the in-
dustrial prosperity and depression of this country.
Indeed, so close is the connection that many who
comment on the matter have held that immigration
during the past century has been strictly an indus-
trial or economic phenomenon, depending on the
opportimities in this coimtiy, and that the religious
and political causes which stimulated earlier im-
migration no longer hold good.

A curved line on the accompanying chart has been

63


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

drawn so as to show the relative numbers of immi-
grants since 1800, and another line shows the move-
ment of imports of merchandise per capita of the
population. The latter, except for tariflF changes,
is a fair index of the cycles of prosperity and de-
pression. By following these two lines on the chart
we notice the coincidence is close, except for a few
years prior to the Civil War. Both movements
reached high points in 1873, ^^^ ^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^
points in 1879; ^^^ ^^ ^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^U ^^ 1885;
then reached another high point in 1892 and a low
point in 1897; and finally, the present period of
prosperity and heavy imports brings the largest
immigration in the history of the country.

In following the history of immigration by races
we shall see to what extent the alleged coincidence
between prosperity and immigration may be coimted
as a social law. Probably in the middle of the cen-
tury it was not so much the opportimities for em-
ployment in this coimtry as it was conditions in
Europe that drove people to our shores. When we
come to inquire as to the nationalities which con-
stituted immigration at that period, we shall find
what these causes were. In 1846 occurred the im-
paralleled potato rot in Ireland, when the year's
crop of what had become the sole food staple of the
peasantry of that island was entirely lost. The
peasants had been reduced to subsistence on the
cheapest of all staples through the operations of a
system of landlordism scarcely ever paralleled on a

64


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

large scale as a means of exploiting tenants. It
was found that land used for potatoes would sup-
port three times the number of people as the same
land sown to wheat, and the small tenants or the
cotter peasants paid the landlord a higher rent than
could be obtained from larger cultivators. Reduced
to a diet of potatoes by an economic system imposed
by an alien race, the Irish people are one of the
many examples which we find throughout our
studies of a subject people driven to emigration by
the economic injustices of a dominant race. We
shall find the same at a later time in Austria-Hun-
gary, whence the conquered Slav peoples are fleeing
from the discrimination and impositions of the ruling
Magyar. We shall find it in Russia, whence the Jew,
the Finn, and the German are escaping from the
oppression of the Slav; and we shall find it in Tur-
key, whence the Armenian and the Syrian flee from
the exactions of the Turk. Just so was it in Ireland
in the latter half of the decade, 1840 to 1850, and
the contention of the apologist for England that the
famine which drove the Irish across the seas was an
act of God, is but a weak effort to charge to a higher
power the sufferings of a heartless system devised
to convert the utmost life and energy of a subject
race into gold for their exploiters. Much more
nearly true of the part played by the Divine hand in
this catastrophe is the report of the Society of Friends
in Ireland, saying that the mysterious dispensation
with which their country had been visited was ''a
F 65


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

means pennitted by an All-wise Providence to ex-
hibit more strikingly the unsound state of its social
condition."

Thus we have an explanation of the incentives
under which, even in a period of industrial depres-
sion in this coimtry, the unfortunate Irish flocked
hither. It is true that the population of Ireland had
increased during the century preceding the famine
at a rate more rapid than that of any other coimtry
of Europe. It was 3,000,000 in 1790, and over
8,000,000 in the year of the famine. At the present
time it is only 5,000,000. The potato, above all
other crops, enables the cultivator to live from
hand to mouth, and coupled with a landlord system
which takes away all above mere subsistence, this
''de-moralizing esculent" aided the apparent over-
population. Certainly the dependence of an entire
people on a single crop was a most precarious
condition.

During the five years, 1846 to 1850, more than a
million and a quarter of Irish emigrants left the ports
of the United ELingdom, and during the ten years,
1845 ^^ ^^55) iQore than a million and a quarter
came to the United States. So great a ntimber
could not have foimd means of transportation had it
not beeii for the enormous contributions of govern-
ment and private societies for assistance. Here
began that exportation of paupers on a large scale
against which our country has protested and finally
legislated. Even this enormous migration was not

66


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

greatly in excess of the number that actually perished
from starvation or from the diseases incident thereto.
The Irish migration since that time has never reached
so high a point, although it made a second great
advance in 1882, succeeding another famine, and it
has now fallen far below that of eastern races of
Europe. Altogether the total Irish immigration of
over four million since 182 1 places that race second
of the contributors to our foreign-bom population,
and, compared with its own nimibers, it leads the
world, for in sixty years it has sent to us half as
many people as it contained at the time of its greatest
population. Scarcely another country has sent
more than one-fifth.

Looking over a period of nearly three centuries,
it is probably true that the Germans have crossed the
ocean in larger ntimbers than any other race. We
have already noted the large migration during the
eighteenth century, and the official records show
that since 1820 there have entered our ports more
than 5,200,000 Geimans, while Ireland was sending
4,000,000 and Great Britain 3,300,000.

The German migration of the nineteenth century
was quite distinct in character from that of the pre-
ceding century. The colonial migration was largely
induced on religious grounds, but that of the past
century was political and economic, with at first a
notable prominence of materialism respecting re-
ligion. From the time of the Napoleonic wars to
the revolution of 1848, the governments of Germany


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

were despotic in character, supporting an established
church, while at the same time the marvellous growth
of the imiversities produced a class of educated
liberals. In the revolution of 1848 these took a
leading part, and although constitutional govern-
ments were then established, yet those who had been
prominent in the popular uprisings foimd their
position intolerable under the reactionary govern-
ments that followed. The political exiles sought
America, bringing their Hberahsm in poKtics and
religion, and forming with their descendants in
American dties an intellectual aristocracy. They
sprang from the middle classes of Germany, and
latterly, when the wars with Austria and France had
provoked the spirit of militarism, thousands of
peasants looked to emigration for escape from mili-
tary service. The severe industrial depression of
1873-79 added a powerful contributing cause.
Thus there were two periods when German migra-
tion culminated; first in 1854, on political grounds,
second in 1882, on military and economic groimds.
Since the latter date a significant decline has ensued,
and the present migration of 32,000 from Germany
is mainly the remnants of families seeking here
their relatives. A larger number of German im-
migrants, 55,000, comes from Austria-Hungary and
Russia, those from the latter country being driven
from the Baltic provinces and the Volga settlements
by the "Russianizing" policy of the Slav.
The Changing Character of European Immigra-

68


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

tion. — Besides the Geimans and the Irish, the races
which contributed the largest numbers of immi*
grants during the middle years of the nineteenth
centuiy were the English and Scandinavian. After
the decline during the depression of 1879 there was
an increase of all those races in 1882, a year when
nearly 800,000 inmiigrants arrived. At about that
time began a remarkable change in the character of
immigration destined to produce profound conse-
quences.

This change was the rapid shifting of the sources
of immigration from Western to Eastern and South-
em Europe. A line drawn across the continent of
Europe from northeast to southwest, separating the
Scandinavian Peninsula, the British Isles, Germany,
and France from Russia, Austria-Hungary, Italy,
and Turkey, separates countries not only of distinct
races but also of distinct civilizations. It separates
Protestant Europe from Catholic Europe; it separates
coimtries of representative institutions and popular
government from absolute monarchies; it separates
lands where education is universal from lands where
illiteracy predominates; it separates manufacturing
countries, progressive agriculture, and skilled labor
from primitive hand industries, backward agricul-
ture, and imskilled labor; it separates an educated,
thrifty peasantry from a peasantry scarcely a single
geAeration removed from serfdom; it separates
Teutonic races from Latin, Slav, Semitic, and Mon-
golian races. When the sources of American im-

69


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

migration are shifted from the Western countries
so nearly allied to our own, to Eastern countries so
remote in the main attributes of Western civilization,
the change is one that should challenge the attention
of every citizen. Such a change has occurred, and
it needs only a comparison of the statistics of im-
migration for the year 1882 with those of 1902 and
1906 to see its extent. While the total number of
immigrants from Europe and Asiatic Turkey was
approximately equal in 1882 and 1902, as shown
in the accompanying table, yet in 1882 Western
Europe furnished 87 per cent of the immigrants and
in 1902 only 22 per cent, while the share of South-
eastern Europe and Asiatic Turkey increased from
13 per cent in 1882 to 78 per cent in 1902. During
twenty years the immigration of the Western races
most nearly related to those which have fashioned
American institutions declined more than 75 per
cent, while the immigrants of Eastern and Southern
races, untrained in self-government, increased nearly
sixfold. For the year 1906 the proportions remain
the same, although in the four years the total im-
migration had increased two-thirds.

Italians. — It was at this period that Italian im-
migration first became noticeable. Prior to 1880
this stream had been but the merest trickle, which
now has become the greatest of all the foreign
tributaries to our population. In 1873 ^^^ Italians
for the first time reached 8000 in number, but they
fell to 3000 in 1876 and so continued in moderate

70


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

IMMIGRATION FROM EUROPE AND ASIATIC TUR-
KEY BY COUNTRIES, 1882, 1903, 1906


x88a


X909


X905


NUMBBl


Pn
Cent


NumsK


Pn


Nmont


Pn
dm


Total Europe and
Asiatic Turkey


647,082


100


622,987


100


1,024,719


100


Great Britain and


Ireland


I79»4a3


27.7


46,036


7-4


102,241


10.0


Belgium


1,431


.2


ai577


.4


5»099


.5


Denmark


11,618


1.8


5, 660


•9


7.741


.8


Fiance


6,003


•9


5,"7


.8


9.386


-9


Germany


250,630


387


26,304


4.2


37,564


3-7


NetherUnda


9»Si7


Z.I


2,284


.4


4,946


•5


Norway


29,101


4.5


17.404


2.8


a 1. 730


2.Z


Sweden


64,607


zo.o


30,894


5.0


33.310


3.3


Switzeriand


10,884


1-7


3,344


.4


3.846


.4


Total Western Eu-


rope


563,174


87.0


136,620


22.0


315.863


21.7


Italy


3«»iS9


r


178,37s


28.6


273,120
S,5i7


26.7


Portugal


42


S1307


•9


.8


Spain


378


s


975


.1


1,921


.1


Austria-Hungary


a9,i5o


4-5


171,989


27.6


365,138


35-9


Russia


ai.S90


?-3


107,347


17.2


315,665


21.0


Greece


*73


8,104


1-3


19.489


1.9


Rotunania


*77


s


7,196


Z.2


4,476


•5


Servia, Bulgaria,


and Montenegro


1


851


•


4.666


•S


Turkey in Europe


»86


•


187


•


9.510


•?


Turkey in Asia


82


1


6,223


I.O


6,354


.6


Total Southern


and Eastern Eu-


rope and Asiatic


Turkey


83,637


13-0


486,367


78.0


808,856


78.9


> Figures for 1883.

' Less than one-tenth of one per cent.


n


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

proportions, but suddenly in 1880 jumped to 12,000,
and in 1882 to 32,000. Falling ofiF again with the
industrial depression to 13,000 in 1885, they reached
76,000 in 1891, and then with another depression to
3S,ooo in 189s they have now gone forward by
leaps to the high mark of 287,000.^ The Italians
seem destined to rival the Germans and Irish as the
leading contributors to our social amalgam. Of
course only a small part are as yet women and
children, but this is because the immigration is in
its early and pioneer stages. The women and chil-
dren follow rapidly when the men have saved enough
money to send for them. One-fourth of the emigra-
tion is on tickets and money furnished by friends
and relatives in the United States.'

The immigrants from Italy differ from those from
Austria, Russia, Hungary, and Ireland, in that they
are not driven forth by the oppressions of a dominant
race, but as a result of the economic and political
conditions of a united people. This does not in<
deed exclude oppression as a cause of expatriation,
but it transfers the oppression from that of one race
to that of one class upon another. By far the larger
portion of Italian immigration comes from the
southern provinces and from Sicily, where the power
of the landlords is greatest. In these provinces of
large estates held by the nobility, the rents have been

^This is the number according to race; the table gives the
number according to last place of residence.
' Rtvievf of Reviews^ 33 : 491 (1906).

72


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

forced to the highest notch, an orange garden paying
as high as $i6o per year per acre, and the leases are
short, so that the tenant has little to encourage im*
. provement.* In many cases the land is rented by
large capitalist farmers, who raise therefrom cattle,
wheat, and olives, and are prosperous men. But
their prosperity is extracted from the miserable wages
of their laborers. The agricultural laborer gets
from 8 cents to 32 cents a day through the year and
10 cents to 38 cents through the summer. Unskilled
laborers get 25 cents to 50 cents a day, and such
skilled trades as masons and carpenters get only
27 cents to $1.40 a day. This wide range of wages
corresponds generally with the South and North,
the lowest rates being in the South and the highest
toward the North. In France and England wages
are two and one-half times higher than in Italy,
while in Germany they are about 30 per cent to 50
per cent higher.

Nor must it be supposed that the cost of living
is low to correspond with the low wages. This is
largely owing to the exaggerated system of indirect
taxes. Although wheat is a staple crop, yet the
peasants eat com in preference, because, for a given
expenditure, it gives a stronger sense of repletion.
Of wheat and com meal together the Italian peasant
eats in a year only three-fourths as much as the in-
mate of an English poorhouse. Of meat the peasant

^ Statistics mainly from King and Okey, "Italy To-day."

73


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

in Apulia gets no more than ten pounds a year,
while the English workhouse pauper gets fifty-seven
pounds. The local taxes on flour, bread, and maca-
roni are as high as lo or 15 per cent of the value,
and the state tax on imported wheat is nearly 50
per cent of its value. The consumption of sugar
has decreased one-fourth since heavy duties were
imposed to protect native beet sugar, and it averages
barely over five pounds per head. The consiunption
in the United States is sixty-five pounds per head.
The iniquitous salt tax raises the price of salt from
eleven pounds for two cents to one pound for two
cents, and the peasants sometimes cook their com
meal in sea water, although this is smuggling. What
the peasants lack in grain and meat they strive to
supply by vegetables, and the proportion of vege-
tables, peas, and beans consimied is greater than that
for any other country of Europe. The peasants
drink no beer, spirits, tea, nor coflfee, but the average
annual consumption of wine is twenty gallons a head.
Food alone costs the peasants 8$ per cent of their
wages, whereas it costs the German peasant 62 per
cent and the American workman 41 per cent. The
poor and working classes pay over one-half the taxes,
amounting, even without wine, to 10 or 20 per cent
of their wages. There are in the south and Sardinia
some 13,000 sales of land a year on distress for non-
payment of taxes, and the expropriated owners
become tenants. Several villages in Southern Italy
have been almost wholly abandoned and one village

74


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

has recently announced its intention of removing
itself entire to one of the South American republics.*
The rich escape taxation, which is laid largely on
consumption. Besides the state tax on imports,
each city and town has its octroif or import tax, on
everything brought into the city. These "protec-
tive duties rob the poor to fill the pockets of the rich
landlord and manufacturer." Since 1870 wealth
has increased 17 per cent and taxes 30 per cent.
Taxes are nearly one-fifth of the nation's income,
against one-twelfth in Germany, one-sixteenth in
England, and one-fifteenth in the United States.
Wages rose from i860 to 1885, but since 1890 they
have fallen.

The army and navy are the greatest drain on the
resources of the people. They cost one-fourth more
of the national income than do the armies and navies
of France and Geimany. Eighty million dollars a
year for military expenditures in Italy is over 5 per
cent of the income of the people, whereas $194,000,-
000 for the same purpose in the United States is
less than 2 per cent of our incomes. In the Triple
Alliance of Germany, Austria, and Italy, the latter
country crushes its peasants in order to make a
showing by the side of its wealthier partners. The
army takes every able-bodied peasant from industry
into barracks and drills for two years of his best
vigor. But the long line of exposed coast and the

^ Review of Reviews, 33 : 491 (1906).

75


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

general militaiy situation in Europe make it un-
Ukely that Italy for many years can shake off this
incubus.

In addition to all these economic and political
causes of pressure, there is another cause of a more
profound nature, the rapid growth of population.
Strange as it may sean, the very poverty of Italy
increases the tendency to a high birth-rate, and the
rate is highest in the very districts where illiteracy
and poverty are greatest. Only the great niunber of
deaths produced by poverty and lack of sanitation
prevents the increase of population from exceeding
that of the more rapidly growing coimtries of Ger-
many, Great Britain, and Scandinavia. It is not
among those classes and nations, like the middle
classes and the thrifty people of France, that the
largest number of children are bom, but it is among
those ignorant and low-standard peoples to whom
the future offers no better prospect for their children
than for themselves. Early marriages and large
families are both a result and a cause of poverty.
Parts of Lombardy and Venetia have a thicker
population than any other European country except
Belgium, which is really not a coimtry, but a manu-
facturing centre of Europe. The density of popula-
tion in Italy is in excess of that of Germany, France,
India, and even China. It is exceeded only by the
islands of Great Britain and Japan, and the states
of Rhode Island and Massachusetts.^ Emigration

' Twelfth Census, Sup^mentary Analysis, p. 37.

76


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

is the only immediate relief from this congestion.
All other remedies which operate through raising
the intelligence and the standards of living require
years for appreciable results, but meanwhile the per-
sistent birth-rate crowds new competitors into the new
openings and multiplies the need of economic and
political reforms before they can be put into effect.
Emigration is a relief ready at hand, but it is not a
lessening of population. For many years to come
Italy will furnish a surplus population to overflow
to America.^ Emigration is also a means of revenue
for the mother country. For it is estimated that the
peasants in foreign coimtries send back to their
families and relatives $30,000,000 to $80,000,000
each year, and many of them return with what to
them is a fortime, and with new ideas of industry
and progress, to purchase and improve a farm and
cottage for their declining years. It is said that al-
ready there are several small country towns in South-
em Italy which have risen from squalor to something
of prosperity through the money and influence of
those who have come home. This temporary emi-
gration is probably over 150,000 each year going
abroad or to adjoining countries expecting to
return.

Besides this temporary emigration there is an
equally large permanent emigration. This is of
two kinds, almost as entirely distinct from each other

^ Review of Reviews, 33 : 491 (1906).

77


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

as the emigration from two separate nations. The
North Italian is an educated, skilled artisan, coming
from a manufacturing section and largely from the
cities. He is Teutonic in blood and appearance.
The South Italian is an illiterate peasant from the
great landed estates, with wages less than one-third
his northern compatriot. He descends with less
mixture from the ancient inhabitants of Italy. Un-
happily for us, the North Italians do not come to
the United States in considerable numbers, but they
betake themselves to Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil
in about the same numbers as the South Italians
come to us. It is estimated that in those three
coimtiies there are 3,000,000 Italians in a total popu-
lation of 23,000,000, and they are mainly derived
from the north of Italy. Surroimded by the imen-
terpriang Spanish and Portuguese, they have shown
themselves to be the industrial leaders of the cotmtry.
Some of the chief buildings, banks, flour mills, tesstile
mills, and a majority of the wheat farms of Argentina
belong to Italians. They are one-third of the popu-
lation of Buenos Ayres and own one-half of the com-
mercial capital of that dty. They become lawyers,
engineers, members of parliament, and an Italian
by descent has been president of the Repubhc of
Argentina, while other Italians have been ministers
of war and education.* While these North Italians,
with their enterprise, intelligence, and varied capaci-

^ King and Okey, pp. 3x6-318.

78


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

ties, go to South America, we receive the South
Italians, who are nearly the most illiterate of all
immigrants at the present time, the most subservient
to superiors, the lowest in their standards of living,
and at the same time the most industrious and thrifty
of all common laborers.

Austria-Hungary. — Next to that from Italy the
immigration from the Austro-Himgarian Empire
in recent decades has reached the largest dimensions.
While Italy sent 273,000 people in 1906, Austria-
Hungary sent 265,000 in that year and 276,000 the
year before. Like the immigration from Italy, this
increase has occurred since 1880. Prior to that
date the largest niunber reported from Austria-Hun-
gary was 9000 in 1874.

While these figures compare with those of the
Italians, yet, imlike the Italians, they refer to a
congeries of races and languages distinct one from
another. The significance of Austro-Himgarian im-
migration is revealed only when we analyze it by
races. The race map of this empire shows at once
the most complicated social mosaic of all modem
nations. Here we see, not that mixture of races
and assimilation of language which in our own
coimtry has evolved a vigorous, imited people, but a
juxtaposition of hostile races and a fixity of language
held together only by the outside pressure of Russia,
Germany, Italy, and Turkey. This conflict of races
has made the politics of the empire nearly incom-
prehensible to foreigners, and has aggravated the

79


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

econcanic ittequalities which drive the unprivileged
masses to emigrate.

Not only are there in Austria-Hungaiy five grand
divisions of the human family, — the German, the
Slav, the Magyar, the Latin, and the Jew, — but these
are again subdivided. In the noTthem mountainous
and hilly sections are 13,000,000 Slavic peoples, the
Czechs, or Bohemians, with their closely related
Moravians, and the Slavic Slovaks, Poles, and Ruthe-
nians(known also as Russniaks); while in the southern
hills and along the Adriatic are another 4,000,000
Slavs, the Croatians, Servians, Dalmatians, and
Slovenians. Between these divisions on the fertile
plains 8,000,000 Magyars and 10,000,000 Germans
have thrust themselves as the dominant races. To
the southwest are nearly a million Italians, and in the
east 2,500,000 Latinized Slavs, the Roumanians.
The Slavs are in general the conquered peoples, with
a Gennan and Magyar notnEty owning their land,
making their laws, and managing their administra-
tion. The northern Slavs are subject to Austria
and Hungary, and the Ruthenians suffer a double
subjection, for they were the serfs of their fellow-
Slavs, the Poles, whom they continue to hate, and in
whose longings for a reunited Poland they do not
participate. The southern Slavs and Roumanians
are subject to Hungary. The Roumanians are a
widespread and disru]ried nationality of Slavs,
conquered by the Romans, from whom they imper-
fectly took their language, but now distributed
80


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

partly in independent kingdoms and partly under
the dominion of the Magyars. The Croatians from
the southwest moimtains are among the £uiest speci-
mens of physical manhood coming to our shores.
They are a vigorous people, hating Hungary which
owns them and calling themselves *' Austrians "
to ward oflf the name "Hun," by which Americans
mistakenly designate them. The Magyars are the
Asiactic conquerors who overran Europe ten cen-
turies ago, and being repulsed by the Teutons to
the west established themselves on the Slavs in the
valley and plains of the Danube. Boasting a repub-
lican constitution a thousand years old they have
not until the past year been compelled to share
it with the people whom they subdued. Astute
politicians and dashing military leaders, they are as
careless in business as the Slavs, and the supremacy
which they maintained in politics has slipped into
the hands of the Jews in economics. In no other
modem country has the Jew been so liberally treated,
and in no other country have public and private
finance come more completely under his control.
Profiting by the Magyars' suppression of the Slavs,
the Jew has monopolized the business opportunities
denied to the Slovak and the Croatian, and with this
leverage has quietly elbowed out the Magyar himself.
No longer is the Magyar the dominant race, and in
the past year he has contributed to America more
immigrants than any branch of his conquered Slavs.
In the Austrian dominions of former Poland the Jew
G 8i


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

likewise has become the financier, and both the
Ruthenian and the Pole, unable to rise under their
burden of debt, contribute their more enterprising
peasants to America.

By a perverse system of representative govern-
ment, based on representation of classes both in
Austria and in Hungary, the great landowners and
wealthy merchants have heretofore elected three-
fourths of the parliaments, but recently in both coun-
tries the emperor has granted universal manhood
sufiFrage. The peasant Slavs will henceforth be on
equal footing with the German, the Magyar, and the
Jew, and whether out of the belated equality of
races there will come equality of economic oppor-
tunity remains to be seen. For the past few years
the emigration from the imfortunate dual empire
has amazingly increased.

With all of this confusing medley of races, with
this diversity of Greek and Roman Catholicism and
Judaism, with this history of race oppression and
hatred, it is not surprising that the immigrants should
break out into factions and feuds wherever thrown
together among us. It is the task of America to lift
them to a patriotism which hitherto in their native
land they could not know.

The earliest migration from Austria-Hungary was
that of the Bohemians, the most highly educated
and ardently patriotic of the Slavic people. After
the revohition of 1848, when the Germans suppressed
their patriotic uprising, students, professional men,

8a


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

and well-to-do peasants came to America and settled
in New York, St, Louis, Milwaukee, Chicago, and in
the rural districts of Texas, Wisconsin, Iowa, Min-
nesota, and California. Again, after the Austro-
Prussian War of 1866, skilled laborers were added
to the stream, and they captured a large part of the
cigar-making industry of New York and the clothing
trade of Chicago. Latterly recruits from the peas-
ants and imskilled laborers sought the sections where
the pioneers had located, learned the same trades, or
joined the armies of common labor. In Chicago
the Bohemian section is almost a self-governing dty,
with its own language, industries, schools, churches,
and newspapers. After a slight decline there is again
an increasing flow of immigrants, the number in
1906 being 13,000. Those who come bring their
families, and few return. In these earlier days the
Polish and Hungarian Jews also began their migra-
tion, following the steps of their German precursors.
In the decade of the eighties the increase of immi-
gration from Austria-Himgary was first that of the
Poles, now numbering 44,000, then the Magyars,
now 43,000, then the Slovaks, now 37,000. In the
latter part of the nineties the Southern Slavs — Croa-
tians and Slovenians — suddenly took up their
burden, and 43,000 of them came in 1906. Follow-
ing them came the Ruthenians from the North, num-
bering 16,000 in 1906. Last of all, the Latinized
Slavs, the Roumanians, began their flight from the
Magyar, to the number of less than 400 in the year

83


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

190O1 but swelling to 11,000 in 1906. Only 300 ad-
ditional came from their own proper kingdom —
Roumania. During all this period there has been
also a considerable migration of Germans, reaching
35,000 in 1906.

In the face of this swollen migration the Himga-
nan government has at last taken alarm. They see
even their own people, the Magyars, escaping. Re-
cently the government has attempted to restrict the
unrest by prohibiting advertisements or public
speeches advocating emigration, by prohibiting the
sale of tickets or solicitation by any one not holding
a government license for the purpose, by contracting
with a steamship line from their own Adriatic part
of Fiiune in order to reduce migration across the
German and Italian frontiers. This may account for
the decline of ten thousand immigrants from Austria-
Hungary in 1906.

Practically the entire migration of the Slavic ele-
ments at the present time is that of peasants. In
Croatia the forests have been depleted, and thousands
of immigrant wood-choppers have sought the forests
of our South and the railway construction of the West.
The natural resources of Croatia are by no means in-
adequate, but the discriminating taxes and railway
freight rates imposed by Hungary have prevented
the development of these resources. The needed
railways are not obtainable for the development of
the mines and minerals of Croatia, and the peasants,
unable to find employment at home, are allured by

84


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

the advertisements of American steamships and the
agents of American contractors.

So it is with the Slovak peasants and mine workers
of the northern moimtains and foothills. With
agricultural wages only eighteen cents a day, they
find employment in the American mines, rolling-
mills, stock-yards, and railroad construction at $1.50
a day.

In addition to race discrimination, the blight of
Austria-Hungary is landlordism. Considerable re-
forms, indeed, have been made in certain sections.
The free alienation of landed property was adopted in
the Austrian dominions in 1869, and in the following
twelve years 42,000 new holdings were carved out
of the existing peasant proprietorships in Bohemia.
Similar transfers have occurred elsewhere, but even
where this peasant ownership has. gained, the enor-
mous prices are an obstacle to economic inde-
pendence. They compel the land-owning peasant
to content himself with five to twelve acres, the size
of four-fifths of the farms in Galicia. His eagerness
to own land is his dread of the mere wage-earner's
lot, which he no longer dreads when he lands in
America, "The fear of falling from the social
position of a peasant to that, immeasurably inferior,
of a day laborer, is the great spur which drives over
the seas alike the Slovak, the Pole, and the Ruthe-
nian." ^ These high rentals and fabulous values
can exist only where wages and standards of living

^Balch, CharUieSf May, 1906, p. 179.

8s


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

are at the bare subsistence level, leaving a heavy
surplus for capitalization. They also exist as a
result of most economical and minute cultivation, so
that, with this training, the Bohemian or Polish
farmer who takes up land in America soon becomes
a well-to-do citizen.

Taxation, too, is unequal. For many years the
government suffered deficits, the military expenses
increased, and worst of all, the nobility were exempt
from taxation. The latter injustice, however, was
remedied by the revolution of 1848, and yet at the
present time the great landowners pay much less
than their proportionate share of the land-tax,
to say nothing of the heavy taxes on consumption
and industiy.

As in other countries of low standards, the num-
ber of births is large in proportion to the inhabitants.
For every one thousand persons in Himgary, there
are forty-three births each year,^ a number exceeded
by but one great coimtry of Europe, Russia. Yet,
with this large number of births, because the economic
conditions are so onerous and the consequent deaths
so frequent, the net increase is less than that of any
other country except France. In Austria the births
and deaths are less and the net increase greater,
and they run close to those of prolific Italy.

In each of these coimtries the figures for births
and deaths stand near those of the negroes in Amer-
ica, and like the negroes, two-fifths of the mortality

^ Marshall, '* Principles of Economics," p. 348.

86


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

is that of children under five years of age, whereas
with other more favored countries and races this
proportion is only one-fifth or one-fourth. It is not
so much the overpopulation of Austria-Hungary
that incites emigration as it is the poverty, ignorance,
inequality, and helplessness that produce a seeming
overpopulation. While these conditions continue,
emigration will continue to increase, and the efforts
of the Himgarian government to reduce it will not
succeed.

Russia. — The Russian Empire is at the present
time the third in the rank of contributors to American
immigration. Russian inmiigration, like that of
Italy and Austria-Hungary, is practically limited to
the past two decades. In 1881 it first reached 10,000.
In 1893 it was 42,000, and in 1906, 216,000.

The significant fact of this immigration is that it
is only 2 per cent Russian and 98 per cent non-Rus-
sian. The Russian peasant is probably the most
oppressed of the peasants of Europe, and though his
recent uprising has aroused his intellect and dis-
abused the former opinion of his stupidity, yet he
has been so tied to the soil by his system of com-
munism, his burden of taxes and debt and his sub-
jection to landlords, that he is as yet immune to the
fever of migraticm. In so far as he has moved from
his native soil he has done so through the efforts
of a despotic government to Russianize Siberia
and the newly conquered regions of his own vast
domain. On the other hand, the races which have

87


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

abandoned the Russian Empire have been driven forth
because they refused to submit to the policy which
would by force assimilate them to the language or
religion of the dominant race. Even the promises of
the aristocracy imder the fright of recent revolution
have not mitigated the persecutions, and the num-
ber taking refuge in flight has doubled in four years.
Foremost are the Jews, 125,000 in 1906, an increase
from 37,000 four years ago; next the Poles, 46,000 in
1906; next 14,000 Lithuanians, 13,000 Finns, and
10,000 Germans. The Poles and Lithuanians are
Slavic peoples long since conquered and annexed by
the Russians. The Finns are aTeutonic people with a
Mongol language; the Germans are an isolated branch
of that race settled far to the east on the Volga River
by invitation of the Czar more than one himdred years
ago, or on the Baltic provinces adjoining Germany;
while the Jews are the unhappy descendants of a race
whom the Russians found in territory conquered
during the past two centuries.

The Jews. — Russia, at present, sends us five-
sixths of the Jewish immigration, but the other one-
sixth comes from adjoining territory in Austria-
Hungary and Roumania. About six thousand tem-
porarily sojourn in England, and the Whitechapel
district of East London is a reduced picture of the
East Side, New York. During American history
Jews have come hither from all coimtries of Europe.
The first recorded immigration was that of Dutch
Jews, driven from Brazil by the Portuguese and re-

88


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

ceived by the Dutch government of New Amsterdam.
The descendants of these earliest immigrants continue
at the present time in their own peculiar congregation
in lower New York City. Quite a large number of
Portuguese and Spanish Jews, expelled from those
countries in the time of Colmnbus, have contributed
their descendants to America by way of Holland.
The German Jews began their migration in small
niunbers during colonial times, but their greatest
influx followed the Napoleonic wars and reached
its height at the middle of the century. Prior to the
last two decades so predominant were the German
Jews that, to the ordinary American, all Jews were
Germans. Strangely enough, the so-called Russian
Jew is also a German, and in Russia among the masses
of people the words "German" and "Jew" also
mean the same thing. Hereby hangs a tale of inter-
est in the history of this persecuted race. Jews are
known to have settled at the site of the present city
of Frankfort in Southern Germany as early as the
third century, when that town was a trading post on
the Roman frontier. At the present time the region
about Frankfort, extending south through Alsace,
contains the major part of the German and French
Jews. To this centre they flocked during the Middle
Ages, and their toleration in this region throws an
interesting light on the reasons for their persecution
in other countries.

Under the Catholic polity following the crusades
the Jew had no rights, and he could therefore gain

89


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

protection only through the personal favor of em-
peror, king, or feudal lord. This protection was ar-
bitrary and capricious, but it was always based on a
pecuniary consideration. Unwittingly the Catholic
Church, by its prohibition of usury to all believers,
had thrown the business of money lending into the
hands of the Jews, and since the Jew was neither
inclined toward agriculture nor permitted to follow
that vocation, his only sources of livelihood were trade
and usury. The sovereigns of Europe who protected
the Jews did so in view of the large sums which they
could exact from their profits as usurers and traders.
They utilized the Jews like sponges to draw from
their subjects illicit taxes. When, therefore, the
people gained power over their sovereigns, and the
spirit of nationality arose, the Jew, without his former
protector, was the object of persecution. England
was the first country where this spirit of nationality
emerged and the first to expel the Jews (1290);
France followed a century later (1395); and Spain
and Portugal two centuries later (1492 and 1495).
But in Germany and other parts of the Holy Roman
Empire political confusion and anarchy prevailed,
and the emperor and petty sovereigns were able
to continue their protection of the Jews.

The Russian people, at that time, were confined to
the interior surrounding Moscow, but even before the
crusades they had expelled the Jews. As rapidly
as they conquered territory to the south from Turkey,
or to the west from Poland, they carried forward the

90


\


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

same hostility. There was only one country, Poland,
in the centre of Europe, where the kings, desiring to
build up their cities, invited the Jews, and hither the
persecuted race fled from the East before the Rus-
sians, and latterly from the West, driven out by the
Germans. When finally, a hundred years ago, the
remnant of the Polish Empire was divided between
Russia, Prussia, and Austria, the Jewish population
in this favored area had become the largest aggrega-
tion of that people since the destruction of Jerusalem.
To-day in certain of these provinces belonging to
Russia the Jews number as high as one-sixth of the
entire population, and more than half of that of
several cities. Fifteen provinces taken frcHn Po-
land and Turkey, extending 1500 miles along the
border of Germany and Austria-Hungary and 240
miles in widths constitute to-day the "Pale of Settle-
ment," the region where Jews are permitted to live.
Here are found one-third of the worid's 11,000,000
Jews.* Here they formerly engaged in all lines of
industry, including agriculture.

Now we come to the last great national uprising,
like that which began in England six hundred years
ago. The Russian serfs had been freed in 186 1.
But they were left without land or capital and were
burdened by high rents and enormous taxes. The
Jews became their merchants, middlemen, and usu-
rers. Suddenly, in 1881, the peasants, oppressed and
neglected by landlord and government, turned in

* "Jewish Encyclopedia," a: 53a.
91


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

their helplessness upon the intermediate cause of their
misery, the Jew. The anti-Semitic riots of that year
have perhaps never been exceeded in ferocity and
indiscriminate destruction. Then began the migra-
tion to America. The next year the Russian gov-
ernment took up the persecution, and the notorious
"May Orders" of 1882 were promulgated. These,
at the instigation of the Greek Church, have been fol-
lowed by orders more stringent, so that to-day, unless
relieved by the terrorized promises of the Czar, the
Jew is not permitted to foreclose a mortgage or to
lease or purchase land; he cannot do business on
Stmdays or Christian holidays; he cannot hold office;
he cannot worship or assemble without police permit;
he must serve in the army, but cannot become an
officer ; he is excluded from schools and tmiversities ;
he is fined for conducting manufactures and com-
merce ; he is almost prohibited from the learned pro-
fessions. While all other social questions are
excluded from discussion, the anti-Semitic press is
given free play, and the popular hatred of the Jew is
stirred to frenzy by " yellow " journals. Only when
this hatred breaks out in widespread riots does the
news reach America, but the persecution is constant
and relentless. The government and the army join
with the peasants, for, true to the character of this
versatile race, the Jews are leaders of the revolu-
tionary and socialistic patriots who seek to overthrow
the government and restore the land to the people.
Nor is this uprising confined to Russia. Galician

93


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

Jews in the Austrian pos^^essions of former Poland,
where the Slavs bitterly complain of them as saloon-
keepers and money-lenders,* have suffered the perse-
cutions of their race, and in the last ten years
Roumania, a country of peasants adjoining Hungary
and Russia, has adopted laws and regulations even
more oppressive than those of her neighbor.

Thus it is that this marvellous and paradoxical
race^ the parent of philosophers, artists, reformers,
martyrs, and also of the shrewdest exploiters of the
poor and ignorant, has, in two decades, come to
America in far greater numbers than in the two
centuries preceding.

It should not be inferred that the Jews are a race
of pure descent. Coming as they do from all sec-
tions and nations of Europe, they are truly cosmo-
politan, and have taken on the language, customs,
and modes of thought of the people among whom
they live. More than this, in the course of centuries,
their physical characteristics have departed from
those of their Semitic cousins in the East, and they
have become assimilated in blood with their Euro-
pean neighbors. In Russia, especially in the early
centuries, native tribes were converted to Judaism
and mingled with their proselyters. That which
makes the Jew a peculiar people is not altogether
the purity of his blood, but persecution, devotion to
his religion, and careful training of his children.
Among the Jews from Eastern Europe there are

^ Balcb, CharUies, May, 1906, p. i8o.

93


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

mariced intdlectual and moral differences. The
Hungarian Jew, who emigrated earliest, is adventu-
rous and speculative: the Southern Russian keeps
few of the religious observances, is the most intel-
lectual and socialistic, and most inclined to the life
oi a wage-earner; the Western Russian is orthodox
and emotional, saves money, becomes a contractor
and retail merchant ; the Galician Jew is the poorest,
whose conditions at home were the harshest, and
he begins American life as a pedler. That which
imites them all as a single people is their religious
training and common language.

The Hebrew language is read and written by all
the men and half of the women, but is not spoken
except by a few especially orthodox Jews on Satur-
day. Hebrew is the language of business and cor-
respondence, Yiddish the language of conversation,
just as Latin in the Middle Ages was the official and
international language, while the various peoples
spoke each its own vernacular. The Yiddish spoken
by the Russian Jews in America is scarcely a lan-
guage — it is a jargon without syntax, conjugation, or
declension. Its basis is sixty per cent German of the
sixteenth century, showing the main origin of the
people, and forty per cent the language of the coun-
tries whence they come.

That which most of all has made the Jew a cause
of alarm to the peasants of Eastern Europe is the
highest mark of his virtue, namely, his rapid increase
in numbers. A high birth-rate, a low death-rate,

94


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

a long life, place the Jew as far above the average
as the negro is below the average. These two races
are the two extremes of American race vitality. Says
Ripley : * —

''Suppose two groups of one hundred infants
each, one Jewish, one of average American parentage
(Massachusetts), to be bom cm the same day. In
spite of the disparity of social conditions in favor of
the latter, the chances, determined by statistical
means, are that one-half of the Americans will die
within forty-seven years; while the first half of the
Jews will not succumb to disease or accident before
the expiration of seventy-one years. The death-rate
is really but little over half that of the average Ameri-
can population."

While the negro exceeds all races in the consti-
tutional diseases of consumption and pneumonia,
the Jew excels all in immunity from these diseases.
His vitality is ascribed to his sanitary meat inspec-
tion, his sobriety, temperance, and self-control.
Of the Jew it might be said more truly than of any
other European people that the growth of popula-
tion has led to overcrowding and has induced emi-
gration. Yet of no people is this less true, for, were
it not for the discrimination and persecution directed
against them, the Jews would be the most prosperous
and least overcrowded of the races of Europe.

The Finns. — Until the year 1901 Finland was the
freest and best governed part of the Russian Empire.

* P. 380.
9S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Wrested from Sweden in 1809, it became a grand
duchy of the Czar, guaranteed self-government, and
confirmed by coronation oath of each successor.
It was the only section of the Russian Empire with
a constitutional government in which the laws, taxes,
and army were controlled by a legislature represent-
ing the people. Here alone in all his empire was the
Czar compelled to ask the consent of parliament in
order to enact laws. But these free institutions within
the past seven years were by his decree abrogated.
The Czar claimed the right to put into force such laws
as he chose without discussion or acceptance by the
Finnish diet. The Russian language took the place
of Swedish and Finnish as the official medium, a
severe censorship of the press was introduced, the
Lutheran religion, devoutly adhered to, was subor-
dinated to the "orthodox,*' the independent Finnish
army was abolished and Finns were distributed
throughout the armies of the empire, and a Russian
governor with absolute powers was placed over alL
Thus have 2,000,000 of the sturdiest specimens of
humanity been suddenly reduced to the level of
Asiatic despotism. They had managed by industry
and thrift to extort a livelihood from a sterile soil,
and had developed a school system with universal
education, culminating in one of the noblest tmiversi-
ties of Europe. Their peasants are healthy, intelli-
gent, honest, and sober. In one year, 1900, their
emigration increased from 6000 to 12,000, and it
continues at 14,000, notwithstanding the repentance

96


^1


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

V

of the Czar and his restoration of their stolen rights.
Compared with the population of the country, the
present immigration from Finland is proportionately
greater than that of any race except the Jews; and
famine, adding its horrors to the loss of their liber-
ties, has served to augment the army of exiles.

Much dispute has arisen respecting the racial
relations of the Finns. Their language is like that of
the Magyars, an agglutinative tongue with tendencies
towards inflections, but their physical structure allies
them more nearly to the Teutons. Their Lutheran
religion also separates them from other peoples of
the Russian Empire. Their sober industriousness
and high intelligence give them a place above that
of their intolerant cpnquerers; and the futile attempts
of the Slav to "Russify*' them drove to America
many of our most desirable immigrants.

The French Canadians. — When Canada was con-
quered by England in 1759, it contained a French
population of 65,000. Without further immigration
the number had increased in 1901 to 2,400,000, in-
cluding 1,600,000 in Canada and 800,000 emigrants
and their children in the United States. Scarcely
another race has multiplied as rapidly, doubling
every twenty-five years. The contrast with the same
race in France, where population is actually declin-
ing, is most suggestive. French Canada is, as it
were, a bit of mediaeval France, picked out and pre-
served for the curious student of social evolution.
No French revolution broke down its old institutions,
H 97


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

and the English conquest changed little else than the
oath of allegiance. Language, custc»ns, laws, and
property rights remained intact. The only state
church in North America is the Roman Catholic
Church of Quebec, with its great wealth, its control
of education, and its right to levy tithes and other
church dues. With a standard of living lower than
that of the Irish or Italians, and a population in-
creasing even more rapidly, the French from Canada
for a time seemed destined to displace other races in
the textile mills of New England. Yet they came
only as sojourners, intending by the work of every
member of the family to save enough money to re-
turn to Canada, purchase a farm, and live in relative
affluence. Their migration began at the close of the
Civil War, and during periods of prosperity they
swarmed to the mill towns, while in periods of de-
pression they returned to their Northern homes.
Gradually an increasing proportion remained in
"the States," and the number in 1900 wbls 395,000
bom in Canada, and 436,000 children bom on this
side of the line.

The Portuguese. — A diminutive but interesting
migration of recent years is that of the Portuguese,
who come, not from Portugal, but from the Cape
Verde and Azores Islands, near equatorial Africa.
These islands are remar)iably overpopulated, and
the emigration, nearly 9000 souls in 1906, is a
very large proportion of the total number of in-
habitants. By two methods did they find their

98


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

way to America. One was almost accidental, for it
was the wreck of a Portuguese vessel on the New Eng-
land coast that first directed their attention to that
section. They have settled mainly at New Bedford,
Massachusetts, where they follow the fisheries in the
summer and enter the mills in the winter. The other
method was solicitation, which took several thou-
sand of them to Hawaii as contract laborers on the
sugar plantations. Unlike the Oriental importations
to these islands the Portuguese insisted that their
families be imported, and then as soon as their con-
tracts expired they left the planters to become small
farmers, and are now the backbone of the coffee indus-
try. They and their children are nearly half of the
'* Caucasian" element of 30,000. In Massachusetts
they are of two distinct types, the whites from the
Azores and the blacks from the Cape Verde Islands,
the latter plainly a blend of Portuguese and Africans.
Their standards of living are similar to those of
the Italians, though they are distinguished by their
cleanliness and the neatness of their homes.

Syrians and Armenians. — ^That the recruiting area
of American immigration is extending eastward is
no more clearly evident than in the recent migration
of Syrians and Armenians. These peoples belong to
the Christian races of Asiatic Turkey, whence they
are escaping the oppressions of a government which
deserves the name of organized robbery rather than
government. Within the past thirty years many
thousand Syrians of Mount Lebanon have emigrated

99


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

to Egypt and other Mediterranean countries, to the
dependencies of Great Britain and South America.
Six thousand of them came to the United States in
1906. They belong mainly to the Greek Church
or the Maronite branch of the Roman Catholic
Church, and it is mainly American missionary
efiFort that has diverted them to the United States.
Unlike other immigrants, they come principally from
the towns, and are traders and pedlers. Broadly
speaking, says an agent of the Charity Organization
Society of New York, "the well-intentioned efforts
of the missionaries have been abused by their pro-
t^g^s. ... It is these alleged prosel3rtes who have
contributed laigely to bring into relief the intrin-
sically servile character of the Syrian, his in-
gratitude and mendacity, his prostitution of all
ideals to the huckster level. ... As a rule they
affiliate themselves with some Protestant church or
mission, abandoning such connections when no
longer deemed necessary or profitable." *

The Annenian migration began with the monstrous
Kurdish atrocities of recent years, instigated and
supported by the Turkish government. Armenians
are a primitive branch of the Christian religion, and
at an early date became separated from both the
Greek and Roman churches. They are among the
shrewdest of merchants, traders, and money-lenders
of the Orient, and, like the Jews, are hated by the
peasantiy and persecuted by the government. Like

^ ** Industrial Commission," 15 : 44a.

100


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

the Jews also, religious persecution has united them
to the number of five million in a racial type of re-
markable purity and distinctness from the surround-
ing races.

Asiatic Immigration. — Utterly distinct from all
other immigrants in the nineteenth century are the
Chinese. Coming from a civilization already ancient
when Europe was barbarian, the Chinaman com-
placently refuses to assimilate with Americans,
and the latter reciprocate by denying him the right
of citizenship. His residence is temporary, he comes
without his family, and he accumulates what to him
is a fortune for his declining years in China. The
gold discoveries of California first attracted him, and
the largest migration was 40,000 in 1882, the year
when Congress prohibited further incoming. In
1906, 3015 Chinamen tried to get in, and 2732 were
admitted, mainly as United States citizens, return-
ing merchants and returning laborers. One-half of
the 1448 admitted as "exempt" were believed by the
immigration officials to have been coolies in disguise*^
Within the past ten years the Japanese have taken
his place, and 14,000 of his Mongolian cousins arrived
in 1906.

The immigration of the Japanese has taken a
peculiar turn owing to the annexation of Hawaii.
While these islands were yet a kingdom in 1868 this
immigration began, and in 1886 a treaty was con-
cluded with Japan for the immigration of Japanese

^ Commiasioiier-General, 1906^ p. 85.

xox


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

contract laborers for the benefit of the sugar planters.
Many thousand were imported under this arrange-
ment, and ''the fear that the islands would be an-
nexed to Japan was one of the prime factors in the
demand for annexation to the United States."^
With annexation in 1900 contract labor was abolished,
and the Japanese, freed from servitude, indulged in
''an epidemic of strikes." The Japanese govern-
ment retained paternal oversight of its laborers
migrating to foreign lands, which is done through
some thirty-four emigrant companies chartered by
the government. Since opening up Korea for
settlement Japan has granted but a limited number
of passports to its citizens destined for the mainland
of America, so that almost the entire immigration
comes first to Honolulu through arrangements made
between the emigrant companies and the planters.
But the planters are not able to keep them on the
island on accoimt of the higher wages on the Pacific
coast. Since the alien contract-labor law does not
apply to immigrants from Hawaii, a padroni system
has sprung up for importing Japanese from that
island. As a result, the arrivals at Honolulu are
equalled by the departures to the mainland, and
Hawaii becomes the American side entrance for the
Japanese.' This evasion has been stopped by the
law of February 20, 1906.

^ Coman, " History of Contract Labor," etc., p. 47.
' Reports on Hawaii ; Commissioner-General of Immigration.
See Index.

I03


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

Hawaii also is showing another Asiatic race the
opening to America. The growing independence of
the Japanese led the planters to seek Koreans, since
the Chinese exclusion law came into force with an-
nexation. In this effort to break down Japanese
solidarity some eight thousand Koreans have been
mixed with them during the past five years, and
these also have b^un the transit to California.

Although the Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans are
the familiar examples often cited of low standards of
living, yet their wages in their native coimtries are
higher than those of the South Italians and equal to
those of the Slavs. They earn $4 or I5 a month and
spend $2 or I3 for living. In Hawaii they get |i8
to I20 a month, and on the Pacific coast I35 to $50.

In the past two or three years a tiny dripping of
immigration has found its way from another vast
empire of Asiatic population — India. Some two
hundred are admitted each year. The populations
of that land are growing discontented as they see
Indians returned from Natal, where they earned $20
to $35 a month, while at home they get only $3 to
$7 under a penal contract system. The American
consul at Calcutta reports ten sturdy Punjab Mo-
hammedans inquiring the way to America and
telling of their friends at woric on American dairy
farms. In his judgment they are stronger and more
intelligent than the Chinese coolies and are pref-
erable for work on the Panama Canal. The self-
governing British colonies have educational restric-

103


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

tions designed to prevent Asiatic immigration,
whether of British subjects or aliens; ^ other colonies
have contract labor. The unrest of India therefore
turns the native eyes towards America.

While America has been welcoming the eastward
and backward races she has begun to lose her colonial
stock and her Amercianized Teutonic stock. These
pioneer elements have kept in front of the westward
movement, and now that the American frontier is gone
they seek a new frontier in Canada. The Canadian
government for several years has sought to fill its
vast Western plains with Teutonic races and to dis-
courage others. It has expended many thousand
dollars for advertising and soliciting in the British
Isles, and has maintained twenty to thirty immigra-
tion agents in our Western states. The opportuni-
ties of British Columbia are now well known, and the
American farmers, with agricultural land rising
enormously in value, sell out to the newcomer or
the acclimated immigrant and betake themselves to
double or treble the area for cultivation under the
flag of England. They push onward by rail and by
wagon, and the ingress of milUons of immigrants is
reflected in the egress of thousands of Americans.'

Indigenous Races. — It is not enough that we have
opened our gates to the millions of divergent races in
Europe, Asia, and Africa ; we have in these latter days

> Report of the. Royal Commission on Afien Immigiationy 1^3.
Cd. 174Z.

' Semple, ''American History," etc., p. 332.

Z04


NINETEENTH CENTURY ADDITIONS

admitted to our fold new types by another process —
annexation.

The Hawaiians are the latest of these oversea
races to be brought under our flag, although in the
course of eighty years they have been brought under
our people. Nowhere else in the world has been
seen such finished effect on an aboriginal race of
the paradoxes of Western civilization — Christianity,
private property, and sexual disease. With a popula-
tion of some 300,000 at the time of discovery they had
dwindled by domestic wars and imported disease
to 140,000 when the missionaries came in 1820, then
to 70,000 in 1850 when private property began its
hunt for cheap labor, and now they number but
30,000. A disease eliminating the unfit of a race
protected by monogamy decimates this primitive
people on a lower stage of morals. Missionaries
from the most intellectual t)rpe of American Protes-
tantism converted the diminishing nation to Chris-
tianity in fifty years. A soil and climate the most
favorable in the world for sugar-cane inspired Ameri-
can planters and sons of missionaries to displace
the unsteady Hawaiians with industrious coolies, and
finally to overthrow the government they had imder-
mined and then annex it to America. Although
acquiring American citizenship and sharing equally
the suffrage with Caucasians, the decreasing influence
of the Hawaiians is further diminished by the ter-
ritorial form of government.

The Spanish War added islands on opposite sides

los


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

of the globe, with races resulting from diametrically
opposite effects of three centuries of Spanish rule.
From Porto Rico the aboriginal Carib had long dis-
appeared imder the slavery of his conquerors, and
his place had been filled by the negro slave in sugar
cultivation and by the Spaniard and other Euro-
peans in coffee cultivation. To-day the negro and
mulatto are two-fifths of the million population and
the whites three-fifths.^ In the Philippine Islands
the native races have survived under a theocratic
protectorate and even their tribal and racial sub-
divisions have been preserved. Two-fifths of their
population of 7,600,000 belong to the leading tribe,
the Visayans, and one-fifth to another, the Tagalogs.
Six other tribes complete the list of "civilized" or
Christianized peoples, while 10 per cent remain
pagan in the mountains and forests. Four-fifths
of the population are illiterate, a proportion the same
as in Porto Rico, compared with less than half of the
negroes and only one*sixteenth of the whites in the
United States.*

* Rowe, Chapter V.

'Census of the PhiUppine Iskuids.


106


CHAPTER V

INDUSTRY

In preceding chapters we have seen the conditions
in their foreign homes which spurred the emigrants
to seek America. We have seen religious persecu-
tion, race oppression, political revolution, militarism,
taxation, famine, and poverty conspiring to press
upon the unprivileged masses and to drive the more
adventurous across the water. But it would be a
mistake should we stop at that point and look upon
the migration of these dissatisfied elements as only a
volimtary movement to better their condition. In
fact, had it been left to the initiative of the emigrants
the flow of immigration to America could scarcely
ever have reached one-half its actual dimensions.
While various motives and inducements have always
worked together, and it would be rash to assert
dogmatically the relative weight of each, yet to one
who has carefully noted all the circumstances it is
scarcely an exaggeration to say that even more im-
portant than the initiative of immigrants have been
the efforts of Americans and ship-owners to bring and
attract them. Throughout our history these efforts

have been inspired by one grand, effective motive, —

107


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

that of making a profit upon the immigrants. The
desire to get cheap labor, to take in passenger fares,
and to sell land have probably brought more immi-
grants than the hard conditions of Europe, Asia, and
Africa have sent. Induced immigration has been as
potent as voluntary immigration. And it is to this
mercenary motive that we owe our manifold variety
of races, and especially our influx of backward races.
One entire race, the negro, came solely for the profit
of ship-owners and landowners. Working people of
the colonial period were hoodwinked and kidnapped
by shippers and speculators who reimbursed them-
selves by indenturing them to planters and farmers.
The beginners of other races have come through
similar but less coercive inducements, initiated, how-
ever, by the demand of those who held American
property for speculation or investment. William
Penn and his lessees, John Law, the Dutch East
India Company, and many of the grantees of lands
in the colonies, sent their agents through Western
Europe and the British Isles with glowing adver-
tisements, advanced transportation, and contracts
for indentured service by way of reimbursement.
In the nineteenth century new forms of induced
migration appeared. Victims of the Irish famine
were assisted to emigrate by local and general gov-
ernments and by philanthropic societies, and both
the Irish and the Germans, whose migration began
towards the middle of the century, were, in a meas-
ure, exceptions to the general rule of induced im-

loS


INDUSTRY

migration for profit. Several Western states created
immigration bureaus which advertised their own
advantages for intending immigrants, and Wiscon-
sin, especially, in this way settled her lands with a
wide variety of races. After the Civil War, induced
migration entered upon a vigorous revival. The
system of indenturing had long since disappeared,
because legislatures and courts declined to recog-
nize and enforce contracts for service. Conse-
quently a new form of importation appeared imder
the direction of middlemen of the same nativity as
that of the immigrant. Chinese coolies came under
contract with the Six Companies, who advanced their
expenses and looked to their own secret agents and
tribimals to enforce repayment with profit.^ J&P^-
nese coolies, much later, came imder contract with
immigration companies chartered by the Japanese
government.' Italians were recruited by the padroni,
and the bulk of the new Slav immigration from
Southeastern Europe is in charge of their own
countrymen acting as drummers and middlemen.

These labor speculators have perfected a system
of inducements and through billing as effective as
that by which horse and cattle buyers in Kentucky
or Iowa collect and forward their living freight to the
markets of Europe. A Croatian of the earlier im-
migration, for example, sets up a saloon in South

^ Labi's " Cydopedia of Political Eooormy, Political Science,
and United States Histoxy/' article on ''Chinese Immigration."
'Industrial Commission, 19:679.


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Chicago and becomes an employment bureau for his
''greener" countrymen, and also ticket agent on
commission for the steamship companies. His
confederates are stationed along the entire route
at connecting points, from the villages of Croatia to
the saloon in Chicago. In Croatia they go among
the laborers and picture to them the high wages and
abimdant work in America. They induce them
to sell their little belongings and they furnish them
with through tickets. They collect them in com-
panies, give them a coimtersign, and send them on to
their fellow-agent at Fiume, thence to Genoa or other
port whence the American steerage vessel saib. In
New York they are met by other confederates, whom
they identify by their countersign, and again they
are safely transferred and shipped to their destina-
tion. Here they are met by their enterprising
coimtiyman, lodged and fed, and within a day or
two handed over to the foreman in a great steel plant,
or to the "boss" of a construction gang on a railway,
or to a contractor on a large public improvement.
After they have earned and saved a little money they
send for their friends, to whom the "boss" has
promised jobs. Again their lodging-house country-
man sells them the steamship ticket and arranges for
the safe delivery of those for whom they have sent.
In this way immigration is stimulated, and new races
are induced to begin their American colonization.
Eventually the pioneers send for their families, and
it is estimated that nearly two-thirds of the immi-

iio


INDUSTRY

grants in recent years have come on prepaid tickets
or on money sent to them from America.^

The significance of this new and highly perfected
form of inducement will appear when we look back
for a moment upon the legislation governing immigra-
tion.

Immignition Legislation. — At the close of the
Civil War, with a vast territory newly opened to the
West by the railroads, Congress enacted a law throw-
ing wide open our doors to the immigrants of all
lands. It gave new guaranties for the protection of
naturalized citizens in renouncing allegiance to their
native coimtries, declaring that '' expatriation is a
natural and inherent right of all people, indispensable
to the enjoyment of the rights of life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness." '

In the same year, 1868, the famous Burlingame
treaty was negotiated with China, by which Ameri-
cans in China and Chinese in America should enjoy
all the privileges, immunities, and exemptions en-
joyed by citizens of the most favored nation. These
steps favorable to immigration were in line with the
long-continued policy of the country from the earliest
colonial times.

But a new force had come into American politics —
the wage-earner. From this time forth the old

^ Industrial Commission, Vol. XV, see index, " Prepaid Tickets,''
p. 818.

' United States Revised Statutes, X901, Section 1999, Act of
July aS, x868.

Ill


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

policies were violently challenged. High wages were
to be pitted against high profits. The cheap labor
which was eagerly sought by the (corporations and
large property owners was just as eagerly fought by
the unpropertied wage-eamers. Of course neither
party conceded that it was selfishly seeking its own
interest. Those who expected profits contended that
cheap foreign labor was necessary for the develop-
ment of the country; that American natural resources
were unbounded, but American workmen could not
be foimd for the rough work needed to turn these
resources into wealth; that America should be in
the future, as it had been in the past, a haven for the
oppressed of all lands; and that in no better way
could the principles of American democracy be
spread to all peoples of the earth than by welcom-
ing them and teaching them in our midst.

The wage-eamers have not been so fortunate in
their protestations of disinterestedness. They were
compelled to admit that though they themselves had
been immigrants or the children of immigrants, they
were now denying to others what had been a bless-
ing to them. Yet they were able to set forward one
supreme argument which our race problems are every
day more and more showing to be sound. The
future of American democracy is the future of the
American wage-earner. To have an enlightened and
patriotic citizenship we must protect the wages and
standard of living of those who constitute the bulk of
the citizens. This argument had been offered by

112


INDUSTRY

employers themselves when they were see^g a
protective tariff against the importation of " pauper-
made" goods. What wonder that the wage-earner
should use the same argument to keep out the pau-
per himself, and especially that he should begin by
appljring the argument to those races which showed
themselves unable rapidly to assimilate, and thereby
make a stand for high wages and high standards of
living. Certain it is that had the white wage-earners
possessed the suffrage and political influence during
colonial times, the negro would not have been ad-
mitted in large numbers, and we should have been
spared that race problem which of all is the largest
and most nearly insoluble.

For it must be observed in general that race
antagonism occurs on the same competitive level.
What appear often to be religious, political, and social
animosities are economic at bottom, and the substance
of the economic struggle is the advantage which third
parties get when competitors hold each other down.
The Southern planter was not hostile to the negro
slave — he was his friend and protector. His nurse
was the negro ''manmiy," his playmates were her
children, and the mulatto throws light on his views
of equality. It was the poor white who hated the
negro and fled from his presence to the hills and the
frontier, or sank below his level, despised by white and
black. In times of freedom and reconstruction it is
not the great landowner or employer that leads in the
exhibition of race hostility, but the small farmer or
I XI3


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

wage-earner.^ The one derives a profit from the
presence of the negro — the other loses his job or his
farm. With the progress of white democracy in place
of the old aristocracy, as seen in South Carolina,
hostility to the negro may be expected to increase.
With the elimination of the white laborer, as seen in
the black counties, the relations of negro and planter
are harmonious.'

So it is in the North. The negro or immigrant
strike breaker is befriended by the employer, but
hated by the employee. The Chinaman or Japanese
in Hawaii or California is praised and sought after
by the employer and householder, but dreaded by
the wage-earner and domestic. Investors and land-
owners see their properties rise in value by the com-
petition of races, but the competitors see their wages
and jobs diminish. The increase of wealth intensi-
fies the difference and raises up professional classes
to the standpoint of the capitalists. With both of
them the privilege of leisure depends on the presence
of servants, but the wage-earners do their own work.
As the inmiigrant rises in the scale, the small fanner,

»Flcimng, pp. 693, 693.

'"HI were asked what one factor makes most for the amicable
relations between the races in the Delta, I should say, without
hesitation, the absence of a white laboring class, particularly of
field laborers." — Stone, "The Negro in the Yazoo-Mississippi
Delta," p. 341. "There is comparatively little crime in the
Black Belt and in the White Belt. It is in the counties where the
races meet on something like numerical equality and in economic
competition that the maximum of crime is charged against
negroes." — AUatUint University PMicaiions, No. 9, p. 48.

"4


INDUSTRY

contiactor, or merchant feels his competition and
begins to join in measures of race protection.

This hostility is not primarily racial in character.
It is the competitive struggle for standards of living.
It appears to be racial because for the most part
races have different standards. But where different
races agree on their standards the racial struggle
ceases, and the negro, Italian, Slav, and American
join together in the class struggle of a trade-union.
On the other hand, if the same race has different
standards, the economic struggle breaks down even
the strongest affinities of race. The Russian Jew
in the sweat-shop turns against the immigrant Jew,
fleeing from the very persecution that he himself has
escaped, and taking his place in the employment
of the capitalist German Jew.^ It is an easy and

^ In 1905, after losing a strike in New York, the General Execu-
tive Board of the United Garment Workers of America, consisting
with one exception of Russian Jews, adopted the following resolu-
tions: —

Resolved, That the unprecedented movement of the very poor
in America from Europe in the last three years has resulted in
wholly changing the previous social, political, and economic as-
pects of the immigration question. The enormous accessions to
the ranks of our competing wage-workers, being to a great extent
unemployed, or only partly employed at uncertain wages, are
lowering the standard of living among the masses of the working
people of this country, without giving promise to uplift the great
body of immigrants themselves. The overstocking of the labor
market has become a menace to many trade-unions, especially
those of the lesser skilled workers. Little or no benefit can
possibly accrue to an increasing proportion of the great numbers
yet coming; they are unfitted to battle intelligently for their rights


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

patriotic matter for the lawyer, minister, professor,
employer, or investor, placed above the arena of
competition, to proclaim the equal right of all races
to American opportunities; to avow his own willing-
ness to give way should even a better Chinaman,
Hindu, or Turk come in to take his place; and
to rebuke the racial hatred of those who resist
this displacement. His patriotism and world-wide
brotherhood cost him and his family nothing, and
indeed they add to his profits and leisure. Could
he realize his industrial position, and picture in

in this repuUic, to whose present buidens they but add others
still greater. The fate of the majority of the foreign wage-workers
now here has served to demonstrate on the largest possible scale
that immigration b no solution of the world-wide problem of
poverty.

Resolved, That we call on American trade unionists to oppose
emphatically the proposed scheme of government distribution of
immigrants, since it would be an obvious means of directly and
cheaply furnishing strike breakers to the combined capitalists
now seeking destruction of the trade-unions.

Resolved, That we condemn all forms of assisted immigration,
through charitaUe agencies or otherwise.

Resolved, That we warn the poor of the earth against coming
to America with false hopes ; it is our duty to inform them that
the economic situation in this country is changing with the same
rapidity as the methods of industry and commerce.

Resolved, That with respect to immigration we call on the
government of the United States for a righteous relief of the wage-
workers now in America. We desire that Congress should either
(i) suspend immigration totally for a term of years; or (2) put
into force such an illiteracy test as will exclude the ignorant, and
also impose such a head tax as will compel immigrants to pay
their full footing here and be sufficient to send back all those who
within a stated period should become public dependants.

116


INDUSTRY

imagination that of his fellow-dtizensi their attitude
would not appear kss disinterested than his own.
The immigrant comes as a wage-earner, and the
American wage-earner bears the initial cost of his
Americanization. Before he acquired the suffrage
his protest was unheard — after he gained political
power he began to protect himself.

The first outbreak of the new-found strength of the
American wage-earner was directed against a race
superior even to the negro immigrants in industry,
frugality, intelligence, and civilization — the Chinese.
And this outbreak was so powerful that, in spite of all
appeals to the traditions and liberties of America, the
national govenmient felt driven to repudiate the treaty
so recently signed with the highest manifestations of
faith, good-will, and international comity.

Very early in the settlement of California the
Chinaman had encountered hostile legislation. The
state election had been carried by the Elnownothings
as early as 1854. Discriminating taxes, ordinances,
and laws were adopted, and even immigration was
regulated by the state legislature. But the state and
federal courts declared such legislation invalid as
violating treaties or interfering with international
relations. Then the wage-earning element of Cali-
fornia joined as one man in demanding action by
the federal government, and eventually, by the
treaty of 1880 and the law of 1888, Chinese laborers
were excluded.* Thus did the Caucasian wage-

^ Smith, "Emigration and Immigration," pp. 238-263.

"7


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

earner score his first and signal victory in reversing
what his opponents proclaimed were "principles
coeval with the foundation of our government."

The next step was the Alien Contract Labor law
of 1885 and 1888, placed on the statute books through
the efforts of the Knights of Labor and the trades-
unions. As early as 1875 Congress had prohibited
the immigration of paupers, criminal, and immoral
persons, but the law of 1885 went to the other ex-
trone and was designed to exclude industrial classes.
The law is directed against prepayment of transpor-
tation, assistance, or encouragement of foreigners
to immigrate under contract to perform labor in the
United States, and provides for the prosecution of
the importer and deportation of the contract immi-
grant. This law has been enforced against skilled
labor, which comes mainly from northwestern
Europe, but, owing to the new stysem of padroni
and middlemen above described, it cannot be en-
forced against the unskilled laborers of Southern
and Eastern Europe, since it cannot be shown that
they have come imder contract to perform labor.
By the amendment and revised law adopted in 1903,
after considerable discussion, and an effort on the
part of the labor unions to strengthen the law, it
was extended so as to exclude not only those coming
tmder contract but also those coming under offers
and promises of employment.*

From what precedes we see that there are two

^ Act of March 3, 1903, Sec. 2.
118


INDUSTRY

exactly opposite points of view from which the sub-
ject of immigration is approached. One is the pro-
duction of wealth; the other is the distribution of
wealth. He who takes the standpoint of production
sees the enormous imdevdoped resources of this
country — the mines to be exploited, railroads and
hig^wajrs to be built and rebuilt, farms to be opened
up or to be more intensively cultivated, manufactures
to be multiplied, and the markets of the world to be
conquered by our exports, while there are not enough
workmen, or not enough willing to do the hard and
disagreeable work at the bottom.

He who takes the standpoint of distribution sees
the huge fortimes, the low wages, the small share of
the product going to labor, the sweat-shop, the
slums, all on accoimt of the excessive competition of
wage-earner against wage-earner.

Consider first the bearing of immigration on the
production of wealth.

Immigration and Wealth Production. — Over four-
fifths of the immigrants are in the prime of life —
the ages between fourteen and forty-five. In the year
1906 only 12 out of every 100 were imder fourteen
years of age, and only 4.5 out of every 100 over
forty-five years of age. The census of 1900 offers
some interesting comparisons between the native-
bom and the foreign-bom in this matter of age dis-
tribution. It shows quite plainly that a large pro-
portion of the native-bom population is below the
age of industrial production, fully 39 per cent, or

"9


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

two-fifths, being under fifteen years of age, while
only S per cent of the foreign-bom are of corre-
sponding ages. On the other hand, the ages fifteen
to forty-four include 46 per cent of the native and 58
per cent of the foreign-bom. This is shown in the
diagram based on five-year age periods. The native
bom are seen to group themselves in a symmetrical
I^iamid, with the children under five as the wide
foundation, gradually tapering to the ages of eighty
and eighty-four, but for the foreign-bom they show
a double pyramid, tapering in both directions from
the ages of thirty-five to thirty-nine, which include


AGS GXOOFS, POBUON AND NAUVK-BOUI


>v<MO


the largest five-year
group. Thus, immi-
gration brings to us a
populati<m of working
ages unhampered by
unproductive mouths
to be fed, and, if we
consider alone that
which produces the ^

wealth of this country ^1 Q
and not that which |s^ (S)
consumes it, the immi- ^ ^
grants add more to the ^{^ ty^
country than does the '

same number of natives
of equal abiUty. Their
home countries have
borne the expense of ^
rearing them up to the ■:
industrial period of r
their Uves, and then ^
America, without that ^
heavy expense, ^aps ■ ^ ^
whatever profits there ^^VJ^ '
are on the investment
In another respect
does immigration add
to our industrial popu-
lation more than would
be done by anequal in-


^e\iw


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

crease in native population, namely, by the large ex-
cess of men over women. In 1906, over two-thirds
of the immigrants were males and less than one-third
were females. This is shown on the accompanying
diagram, as well as the fact based on the census sta-
tistics that among the foreign-bom the men predom-
inate over the women in the ratio of 540 to 460, while
among the native-bom population the sexes are about
equal, being in the proportion of 507 males to 493
females.

This small proportion of women and children
shows, of course, that it is the workers, not the
families, who seek America. Yet the proportions
widely vary for different nationalities. Among the
Jews 48 per cent are females and 28 per cent chil-
dren. This persecuted race moves in a body, ex-
pecting to make America its home. At the other
extreme the Greeks send only 4 per cent females
and 3 per cent children, the Croatians 13 per cent
females and 4 per cent children, the South Italians 21
per cent females and 11 per cent children. These
are races whose immigration has only recently begun,
and naturally enough the women and children, except
in the case of the Jews, do not accompany the work-
men. A race of longer migration, like the Germans,
has 41 per cent females and 15 per cent children.
The Irish have a peculiar position. Alone of all
the races do the women equal the men, but only 5
per cent are children. Irish girls seeking domestic
service explain this preponderance of women.

122


" i I


ss <


aS


INDUSTRY

Significant and interesting facts regarding other
races may be seen by stud3ring the table entitled
" Industrial Relations of Immigrants."

Such being the proportions of industrial energy
furnished by immigration, what is the quality?
Much the larger proportion of immigrants are classed
as imskilled, including laborers and servants. Omit-
ting those who have "no occupation," including
mainly women and children, who are 30.5 per cent
of the total, only 21.7 per cent of the remainder who
are working immigrants are skilled, and 73.4 per
cent are unskilled. The proportions vary greatly
among the different races. The largest element of
skilled labor is among the Jews, a city people, two-
thirds of whom are skilled workmen. Nearly the
same proportion of the Scotch and Welsh and over
one-half of the English and Bohemians are skilled
mechanics. Nearly one-third of the Germans and
Dutch are skilled, and one-fourth of the Scandina-
vians. At the other extreme, only 3 to 5 per cent of
the Ruthaiians, Croatians, Roumanians, and Slovaks
are skilled, and 8 to 10 per cent of the Magyars,
Lithuanians, and Poles. One-fifth of the North
Italians and one-sixth of the South Italians are
skilled. These and other proportions are shown in
the statistical table.

The skilled labor \^hich comes to America, espe-
cially from Northern and Western Europe, occu-
pies a peculiar position in our industries. In the
first place, the most capable workmen have per-

133


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

manent places at home, and it is, in general, only
those who cannot command situations who seek their
fortunes abroad. The exceptions to this rule are in
the beginnings of an industry like that of tin plate,
when a large proportion of the industiy moved bodily
to America, and the highly skilled tin workers of
Wales brou^t a kind of industrial ability that had
not hitherto existed in this countiy. As for the
bulk of skilled immigrants, they do not represent the
highest skill of the countries whence they come.

On the other hand, the European skilled workman
is usually better trained than the American, and
in many branches of industry, especially machineiy
and ship-building, the English and Scotch immigrants
command those superior positions where an all-
roimd training is required.

This peculiar situation is caused by the highly
specialized character of American industry. In no
country has division of labor and machinery been
carried as far as here. By division of labor the skilled
trades have been split up into simple operations,
each of which in itself requires little or no skill, and
the boy who starts in as a beginner is kept at one
operation so that he does not learn a trade. The
old-time journeyman tailor was a skilled mechanic
who measured his customer, cut the cloth and trim-
mings, basted, sewed, and pressed the suit. Now we
have factories which make only coats, others which
make only vests, others trousers, and there are chil-
dren's knee-pants factories and even ladies' tailor

124


INDUSTRY

establishments where the fonner seamstress sees her
precious skill dissipated among a score of mxskilled
workers. Thus the journeyman tailor is displaced by
the factory, where the coat passes through the hands
of thirty to fifty different men and women, each of
whom can learn his peculiar operation in a month or
two. The same is true in greater or less degree in
all industries. Even in the building trades in the
larger cities there are as many kinds of bricklayers
as there are kinds of walls to be built, and as many
kinds of carpenters as there are varieties of woodwork.
So it is with machinery. The American employer
does not advertise for a "machinist" — he wants a
"lathe hand" or a "drill-press hand," and the
majority of his "hands" are perhaps only automatic
machine tenders. The employer cannot afford to
transfer these hands from one job to another to
enable them to "learn the trade." He must keep
them at one operation, for it is not so much skill
that he wants as cheap labor and speed. Con-
sequently, American industry is not producing all-
roimd mechanics, and the employers look to Europe
for their skilled artisans. In England the trade-
unions have made it their special business to see that
every apprentice learns every part of his trade, and
they have prevented employers from splitting up
the trades and specializing machineiy and thereby
transforming the mechanic into the "hand." Were
it not for immigration, American industries would
ere now have been compelled to give more attention

"S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

to apprenticeship and the training of competent
mechanics. The need of apprenticeship and trade
schools is being more seriously felt every year, for,
notwithstanding the progress of division of labor
and machinery, the all-roimd mechanic continues to
play an important part in the shop and factory.
American trade-unions are gaining strength, and one
of their most insistent demands is the protection of
apprenticeship. The bricklayers' and carpenters'
unions of Chicago even secure from their employers
instruction for apprentices in school. Not much
headway in this line, however, has yet been made,
and American industry has become abnormal, we
might almost say suicidal, or at any late, non-self-
supporting. By extreme division of labor and mar-
vellous application of machinery it makes possible
the wholesale employment in factories of the farm
laborers of Europe and their children, and then
depends on Europe for the better-trained tjrpes of
the skilled mechanic, who, on accoimt of the farm
laborer, have not been able to learn their trade in
America.

Not only does immigration bring to America the
strongest, healthiest, and most energetic and adven-
turous of the work-people of Europe and Asia, but
those who come work much harder than they did
at home. Migration tears a man away from the
traditions, the routine, the social props on which he
has learned to rely, and throws him among strangers
upon his own resources. He must swim or drown.

za6


INDUSTRY

At the same time he earns higher wages and eats
more nourishing food than he had ever thought
within reach of one in his station. His ambition is
fired, he is stirred by the new tonic of feeling himself
actually rising in the world. He pictures to himself
a home of his own, he economizes and saves money
to send to his friends and family, or to return to
his beloved land a person of importance. Watch a
gang of Italians shovelling dirt under an Irish boss,
or a sweat-shop of Jewish tailors imder a small
contractor, and you shall see such feverish produc-
tion of wealth as an American-bom citizen would
scarcely endure. Partly fear, partly hope, make the
fresh immigrant the hardest, if not the most intelli-
gent, worker in our industries.

Industrial Capacities of Different Races. — But,
however hard one may work, he can only exercise
the gifts with which nature has endowed him.
Whether these gifts are contributed by race or by
civilization, we shall inquire when we come to the
problems of amalgamation and assimilation. At
present we are concerned with the varying industrial
gifts and capacities of the various races as they
actually exist at the time when immigration, annexa-
tion, or conquest takes place.

The mental and moral qualities suited to make
productive workers depend upon the character of the
industry. It is not conceivable that the immigrants
of the present day from Southern Europe and from
Asia could have succeeded as frontiersmen and

;:i7


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

pioneers in the settlement of the country. In all
Europe, Asia, and Africa there was but one race in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that had
the preliminary training necessary to plimge into the
wilderness, and in the face of the Indian to establish
homes and agriculture. This was the English and
the Scotch-Irish. The Spaniards and the French
were pioneers and adventurers, but they established
only trading stations. Accustomed to a paternal
government they had not, as a people, the self*
reliance and capacity for sustained exertion re-
quired to push forward as individuals, and to cut
themselves ofiF from the support of a government
across the ocean. They shrank from the herculean
task of clearing the forests, planting crops among
the stumps, and living miles away from their neigh-
bors. True, the pioneers had among their number
several of German, French, and Dutch descent,
but these belonged to the second and third genera-
tions descended from the immigrants and thrown
from the time of childhood among their English-
Scotch neighbors. The French trappers and ex-
plorers are famous, and have left their names on our
map. But it was the English race that established
itself in America, not because it was first to come, not
because of its armies and navies, but because of its
agriculture. Every fann newly carved out of the
wilderness became a permanent foothold, and soon
again sent out a continuous colony of sons and
daughters to occupy the fertile land. Based on this

xa8


INDUSTRY

self-reliant, democratic, industrial conquest of the
new world the military conquest naturally, inevita-
bly followed.

But at the present day the character of industry
has entirely changed. The last quarter of the nine-
teenth century saw the vacant lands finally occupied
and the tribe of frontiersmen coming to an end.
Population now began to recoil upon the East and
the cities. This afforded to manufactures and to the
mining industries the surplus labor-market so neces-
sary for the continuance of large estabUshments which
to-day need thousands of workmen and to-morrow
himdreds. Moreover, among the American-bom
workmen, as well as the English and Scotch, are not
found that docility, obedience to orders, and patient
toil which employers desire where hundreds and
thousands are brought like an army imder the direc-
tion of foremen, superintendents, and managers.
Employers now turn for their labor supply to those
eastern and southern sections of Europe which have
not hitherto contributed to inunigration. The first
to draw upon these sources in large niunbers were the
anthracite coal operators of Permsylvania. In these
fields the English, Scotch, Welsh, and Irish miners,
during and following the period of the Civil War,
had effected an organization for the control of wages,
and the outrages of a secret society known as the
Molly Maguires gave occasion for the importation of
new races unaccustomed to imionism, and incapable,
on account of language, of cooperation with English-
K 129


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

speaking miners. Once introduced in the mining
industry, these races rapidly found their way into the
unskilled parts of manufactures, into the service of
railroads and large contractors. On the construc-
tion of the Erie Canal in 1898, of 16,000 workmen,
15,000 were imnaturalized Italians.^ The census of
1900 showed that while the foreign-bom males were
one-fourteenth of the laborers in agriculture, they
were three-fourths of the tailors, more than one-
half of the cabinet makers, nearly one-half of the
miners and quarrymen, tannery workers, marble
and stonecutters, more than two-fifths of the
boot and shoe-makers and textile workers, one-
third of the coopers, iron and steel workers, wood-
workers and miscellaneous laborers, one-fourth of
the carpenters, painters, and plasterers, and one-fifth
of the sawmill workers.* The foreign-bom females
niunbered nearly two-fifths of the female cotton-mill
operatives and tailors, one-third of the woollen-mill
operatives, one-fourth of the tobacco and silk-mill
operatives.

On the Pacific slope the Chinese and Japanese
immigrants have filled the place occupied by the
southeast European in the East and the negro in
the South. They were the workmen who built the
Pacific railroads, and without them it is said that
these railroads could not have been constructed until
several years after their actual completion.

* New York Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1898, p. 1x55.
'Twelfth Census, '* Occupations," p. duzvii.

130


INDUSTRY

The immigration of the Chinese reached its highest
figures prior to the exclusion laws of 1882, and since
that time has been but an insignificant contribution.
In their place have come the Japanese, a race whose
native land, in proportion to its cultivable area, is
more densely populated than any other country in
the world. The Chinese and Japanese are perhaps
the most industrious of all races, while the Chinese
are the most docile. The Japanese excel in imitative-
ness, but are not as reliable as the Chinese. Neither
race, so far as their immigrant representatives are
concerned, possesses the originality and ingenuity
which characterize the competent American and
British mechanic. In the Hawaiian Islands, where
they have enjoyed greater opportunities than else-
where, they are foimd to be capable workmen of the
skilled trades, provided they are under the direction
of white mechanics.* But their largest field of work
in Hawaii is in the tmskilled cultivation of the great
sugar plantations. Here they have been likened to
"a sort of agricultural automaton," and it becomes
possible to place them in large numbers imder skilled
direction, and thus to secure the best results from
their docility and industry. -

In the United States itself the plantation form
of agriculture, as distinguished from the domestic
form, has always been based on a supply of labor
from backward or im-Americanized races. This fact
has a bearing on the alleged tendency of agriculture

^ Report on Hawaii, Bulletin No. 47, pp. 780 783.

131


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

toward large fanns. Ten years ago it seemed that
the great ''bonanza" fanns were destined to displace
the small fanns, just as the trust displaces the small
manufacturer. But it is now recognized that the
reverse movement is in progress, and that the small
farmer can compete successfully with the great
farmer. It has not, however, been pointed out that
the question is not merely an economic one and that
it depends upon the industrial character of the races
engaged in agriculture. The thrifty, hard-working
and intelligent American or Teutonic fanner is able
to economize and purchase his own small farm and
compete successfully with the large xmdertaking.
He is even beginning to do this in Hawaii since the
compulsory labor of his large competitors was abol-
ished.^ But the backward, thriftless, and imintelli-
gent races succeed best when employed in gangs on
large estates. The cotton and sugar fields of the
South with their negro workers have their coimter-
part in the plantations of Hawaii with their Chinese
and Japanese, and in the newly developed sugar-beet
fields of Nebraska, Colorado, and California, with
their Russians, Bohemians, Japanese, and Mexicans.
In the domestic or small fonn of agriculture the bulk
of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe
are not greatly desired as wage-earners, and they do
not succeed as proprietors and tenants because they
lack oversight and business ability. Where they are
located in colonies under favorable auspices the

^ Report on Hawaii, Bulletin No. 66, pp. 441-447.

132


INDUSTRY

Italians have achieved notable success, and in the
course of Americanization they will doubtless rival
older nationalities. But in the immigrant stage
they are helpless, and it is the immigrants from
Northwestern Europe, the Germans and Scandina-
vians, whose thrift, self-reliance, and intensive agri-
culture have made them from the start the model
farmers of America.

The Jewish immigrant, particularly, is unfitted for
the life of a pioneer. Remarkably individualistic in
character, his field of enterprise is society, and not the
land. Of the thirty thousand families sent out from
New York by industrial and agricultural removal
societies, nine-tenths are located in industry and
trade, and the bulk of the remainder, who are placed
on farms, succeed by keeping smnmer boarders.
Depending on boarders, they neglect agriculture and
buy their food-stuflF. Their largest colony of hoped-
for agriculturists. Woodbine, New Jersey, has become
a clothing factory.* Yet the factory system, with its
discipline and regular hours, is distasteful to the Jew's
individualism. He prefers the sweat-shop, with its
going and coming. If possible, he rises through
peddling and merchandising.

These are a few of the many illustrative facts
which might be set forth to show that the changing
character of immigration is made possible by the
changing character of industry; and that races

> Jewish Agricultuxal and Industrial Aid Society, Annual
Reports.


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

wholly incompetent as pioneers and independent
proprietors are able to find a place when once manu-
factures, mines, and railroads have sprung into being,
with their captains of industry to guide and super-
vise their semi-intelligent work.


XS4


CHAPTER VI


LABOR


We have seen that the character of the immigrants
for whom a place can be found depends upon the
character of the industry. It also depends upon the
laws governing property in labor. Here the in-
dustrial problem widens out into the social problem.

There are four variations in the treatment of labor
as property in the United States, each of which has
had its peculiar effect on the character of immigra-
tion, or has grown out of the relations between races.
They are slavery, peonage, contract labor, and free
labor. Under slavery the laborer and his children
are compelled by law throughout their lifetime to
work for an owner on terms dictated and enforced
by him. Under peonage the laborer is compelled
by law to pay off a debt by means of his labor, and
under contract labor he is compelled by law to carry
out a contract to work. To enforce peonage and
contract labor the offence of ''running away'* is
made punishable by imprisonment at forced labor,
or by extension of the period of service. Under free-
dom the law refuses to enforce a contract to work,
making this an exception to the sacredness of con-

X3S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

tracts, and refuses to enforce the payment of a debt
by specific service. This leaves to the contractor or
creditor the usually empty relief of suing for damages.
The significance of these varying degrees of servile,
semi-servile, and free labor will be seen in the follow-
ing discussion of the social relations of the superior
and inferior races.

In the entire circuit of the globe those races which
have developed under a tropical sun are foimd to be
indolent and fickle. From the standpoint of survival
of the fittest, such vices are virtues, for severe and
continuous exertion under tropical conditions bring
prostration and predisposition to disease. Therefore,
if such races are to adopt that industrious life which
is a second nature to races of the temperate zones, it
is only through some form of compulsion. The negro
could not possibly have found a place in American
industry had he come as a free man, and at the pres-
ent time contract labor and peonage with the crime
of "running away" are recognized in varying de-
grees by the laws of Southern states. These statutes
have been held unconstitutional by the Supreme
Court,* imder an act of Congress passed in 1867,
but the condition of peonage which they contem-
plate is considered by many planters as essential to
the continuance of the cotton industry. One of
them, in southwestern Georgia, a graduate of Colum-
bia College, with five years of business training in the

'Clyatt V, U.S., 97 U.S., 207 (1903); Peonage Cases, 123
Fed. 671.

136


LABOR

Northern states, is quoted in an interview as fol-
lows:* —

"We have two ways of handling our plantations.
We rent small sections of forty acres each, and with
these go a plough and the mule. In addition, I have
about 450 hands who work on wages. These men
are paid nine dollars a month, in addition to a iGixed
rate of food, which amounts to four pounds of meat
a week, a certain percentage of vegetables, tobacco,
sugar, flour, and some other commodities.

" These negroes live on the plantation, are given a
roof over their heads, have garden patches, and sev-
eral other more or less valuable privileges. They
invariably come to me for small advances of money.

" These advances of money and rations and cloth-
ing, although there is not much of the latter, are
frequently suflGicient to put the negro in debt to us.
The minute he finds he is in debt he naturally con-
ceives it to be easier to go to work somewhere else
and begin all over again, instead of paying his debts.

" Now, when a negro runs away and violates his
contract, leaving us in the lurch, not only short of
his labor, but short of the advances we have made to
him in money and goods, what would happen if we
depended simply and solely on our right to sue?
In the first place, with 450 hands we would have
450 suits before the season is out, and if we won
them all we would not be able to collect forty-five
cents.

' New York Herald, June 34, 1903.

137


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

"The result is, that in Geoigia and Alabama, and
I believe in other states, the law recognizes the ri^t
of the planter to reclaim the laborer who has left in
violation of his contract, whether he be actually in
debt or not.

" Whether Judge Jones has declared this law con-
stitutional or not, the planters in the black belt will
have to maintain their right to claim their contract
labor, or else they will have to go out of the business.
Under any other system you would find it impossible
to get in your cotton, because the negroes at the
critical time would simply sit down and refuse to
work. When they are well, we compel laborers to
go to the field by force. This is the truth, and there
is no use lying about it."

This reasoning is entirely logical from the business
standpoint. If production of wealth is the standard,
contracts must be fulfilled and debts must be paid.
Otherwise capital will not embark in business. But
the reasoning does not stop with the negro. Once
established, the practice spreads to other races.
Instances are cited of white men held in peonage,
negroes holding other negroes, and Italians forced
to work in a phosphate mine.^ It is an easy matter
to get working men in debt. Many thousand rural
justices keeping no records of convictions, hundreds
of constables with fees depending on convictions,
scores of petty crimes with penalties not usually

* The Nation, 83 : 379 (1906) ; Durand, Herbert, ''Peonage in
America," Cosmop<dikm, 39 142$ (1905).

138


LABOR

enforced, contractors and planters eager for labor
at the convict's rating of 35 cents a day — neither
the negro nor the poor white is safe. Immigrants
avoid a country with such a record. Not only the
dread of forced labor for themselves but the dread
of competition with the low wages that the forced
labor of others implies, keep the immigrants away
from the South. The fame of peonage is spread
among them before they leave their native land. The
business that rests on coerced labor damages the
whole commimity for its own temporary gain. The
right to quit work is as sacred for the workman as
the right to enforce contracts for the capitalist. It
is just as necessary to get energetic labor as it is to
get abimdant capital to ^nbark in business. By
recognizing the right of workmen to violate contracts,
the employer learns to content himself with contracts
that will not hurt when violated. He learns to ap-
peal to the workman's motive to industry by methods
that are not coercive. Admitting that the bulk of
what is said about the negro's fickleness is true,
he nevertheless is indiscriminately maligned. The
thousands that are tmreliable furnish a cloak for
suppressing the hundreds that are industrious. I
have made comparisons of the pay-rolls of two
gas works in Southern cities — the one employing
negro stokers at 11 cents an hour, the other whites
at 22 cents an hour, and both working 12 hours a day
seven days a week. The negroes put in as many
hours between pay-days as did the whites, and if thqr

139


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

"laid oflF" after pay-day it is no more than any class
of white workmen would do after two weeks of such
exhausting work. The negro in Southern cities can
scarcely hope to rise above 12 cents an hour, and
white mechanics have a way of working with negro
helpers at 10 cents an hour in order to lift their own
wages to 20 cents an hour. White wage-earners
and white employers in the South speak of the ne-
groes' efforts to get higher wages in the same words
and tones as employers in the North speak of white
wage-earners who have organized unions and de-
manded more pay. A foreman condemned his
"niggers" for instability when they were leaving him
at 10 cents an hour for a railroad job at 12} cents
an hour. Piaising the Italians in comparison with
the negro, he could not think of paying 17^ cents an
hour for pick-and-shovel work, which Italians were
said to be getting in another section of the state. The
right to quit work is the right to get higher wages.
If the higher wages are paid and proper treatment
accorded, a process of natural selection ensues. The
industrious and steady workmen of all races retain
the jobs. The gas company referred to above, by a
system of graded pay advancing with years of ser-
vice, had sorted out a more steady and reliable force
of negroes than they could have secured of whites at
the rate of wages paid. The test is indeed a severe
one where a race has always been looked upon as
servile. With high wages regarded as "white man's
wages," the process of individual selection does not

140


LABOR

work out, and the dominant race excuses its resort
to whipping, beating, and peonage on the ground
of the laziness which its methods of remimeration
have not learned to counterbalance. Even the in-
dustrious Italians treated in this way would not be
industrious — they would leave for other states.

The Malay races, to which the Filipinos belong,
are, like the negroes, careless, thriftless, and disin-
clined to continuous exertion. In order to induce
the Javanese to work, the Dutch government of Java
sets aside a certain tract of government land for
coffee planting, and compels each head of a household
to set out and keep in order a certain number of coffee
trees. On private estates in Java and in other Malay
and Indian colonies, such as Burma, Ceylon, British
India, where the government does not compel
the native to take a contract to work, it nevertheless
enforces contracts voluntarily made. In certain
provinces of the Philippines "the tenamts are usually
in debt, and the old law which permits the creditor
to imprison the debtor for non-payment of debt is
still in force. . . . Landowners of a district fre-
quently come together shortly before the crops are
sold and agree among themselves how much interest
to charge the tenants on their debts. This is for the
purpose of charging the highest possible rate and at
the same time retain tenants, who then could not
leave, finding the same conditions prevailing through-
out the district." ^ In densely populated coimtries

^ Rosenberg, American Federationist, October, 1903, p. 1026.

141


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

like Java and Southern India, where the native can-
not set up for himself, he has no alternative except
to work under these contracts, and this is also true
in the more thickly populated districts of the Philip-
pine Islands. But the case is different in sparsely
settled coimtries like Burma, East Siunatra, and the
greater part of the Philippines, where wages are so
high that natives are not compelled by necessity to
work continuously. "Speaking generally," says
Professor Jenks, "the imskilled Filipino laborer,
while intelligent enough, is careless and thriftless.
He in most cases wishes to take two or three days a
week, on the average, to celebrate as feast days. In
individual cases, where his wages have been in-
creased, he has been known to lessen correspond-
ingly the number of days per month which he
would work. His income being sufficient to sat-
isfy his modest needs, he could see no reason why
he should toil longer than was necessary to earn his
income." *

Hence in these sparsely settled coimtries the Dutch
and English governments have adopted, and Pro-
fessor Jenks, in his report to the War Department,
has recommended a limited use of the system of con-
tract labor, not, however, for the native, but for
imported Chinese. This system has existed in
another of our newly acquired possessions,
Hawaii, since 1852, where it applied to Chinese,
Japanese, Portuguese, and German immigrants, and

* JenkSy "Certain Economic Questions/' etc., p. 157.

142


II ■■ .■ i^mm^m^immmr^^^m^^^^^^


FiUFiHO Governors

(From Census of the Philippine Islands)


LABOR

whence it was abolished by the act of annexation
in 1898.^

Contract labor of this kind is quite different from
the peonage and contract labor of the non-industrial
races. It is similar to the indentured service of
colonial times, in that the term of each contract is
limited to a few years, and the contract is made by
way of compensation for advanced expenses of immi-
gration. The object is not, as in the case of slavery
and peonage, to compel a shiftless race to work, but
it is to develop the coimtry by the introduction of an
industrious race. The Chinese, after the expiration
of their contracts, often become skilled laborers and
merchants, and in the latter position their frugality and
wiliness make them dangerous neighbors for the
native Malay and Filipino races.* For this reason
Professor Jenks recommends that employers be
placed imder bonds to return each contract Chinese
coolie to China at the expiration of the period of con-
tract, not to exceed three years, imless the govern-
ment gives special permission for renewal of the con-
tract. Governor Taft, in his report for the year
1902, while advocating a limited employment of Chi-
nese contract coolies, said, '^ the truth is that, from a
political standpoint, the imlimited introduction of the
Chinese into these islands would be a great mistake.
I believe the objection on the part of the Filipinos
to such a course to be entirely logical and justified.

^ Coman, and "Reports on Hawaii.''
» Jenks, pp. 47, 54, 55, 158.

143


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

The development of the islands by Chinamen would
be at the expense of the Filipino people, and they
may very well resent such a suggestion." *

Governor Taft's opinion is strongly supported by
the special commissioner of the American Federation
of Labor, who, after inquiries in the district surround-
ing Manila, reports as follows: —

'^ Their reluctance to work, continually harped
upon by many employers, is simply the natural reluc-
tance of a progressive people to work for low wages
under bad treatment. When wages rise above the
level of the barest and poorest necessaries of life,
and where treatment is fair, there Filipinos are at
work in any nmnbers required " *

The situation here is similar to that of the negroes.
In order to get two hundred steady workers at high
wages it is necessary to try out a thousand or more.
But the reports of the Philippine Commission show
that with the process of selection which their engi-
neers can pursue by means of the high wages on
government work the results are satisfactory.*

"Of course," continues Mr. Rosenberg in his
report, "the Filipino worker cannot successfully
compete — cheap as he can live — with the Chinese
standard of living, hence the imceasing vilification of
the Filipino workers by those employers and their
following, who, seeing near by the unlimited supply

^ United States Philipploe Commission, xpoa. Part I, p. 22,

'Rosenberg, p. loai.

' Philippine Commission, 1902, index, "The Labor Situation."

144


LABOR

of cheap Chinese labor, wish these islands to be
thrown open to such labor, not only for the purpose
of reducing the small wages of the Filipinos, but also
to reduce that of the Chinese laborers now here.
As one employer stated to me, *We want more
Chinese, to keep them here for one or two years, then
ship them back and get another lot, for the Chinese
I have here now are becoming too independent and
want more pay.' "

Free Labor. — The free laborer is not compelled
by law to work. Then why should he work ? Why
does he work ? The answer is f oimd within himself.
He wants something that he cannot get without work-
ing. Though this may seem a trifling question and
a self-evident answer, the question and answer are
the foimdation of all questions of free institutions.
For the non-working races and classes or the
spasmodic and imreliable workers are the savages,
paupers, criminab, idiots, limatics, drunkards, and
the great tribe of exploiters, "grafters," despots, and
"leisure classes," who live on the work of others.
Nearly every question of social pathology may be
resolved to this. Why does he not work ? And nearly
every social ill would be cured if the non-workers
could be brought volimtarily to work.

There are just two grand motives which induce
the freeman to work — necessity and ambition.
Necessity is the desire for quantity, quality, and
variety of things to be used. The term is elastic. It
is psychological, not material. It includes, of course^
^ 145


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

die wants of mere animal existence — f ood, clothing,
shelter. But this is a small part. The cost of the
mere quantity needed to support life is less than the
added cost needed to secure the quality and variety
that satisfy the taste and habits. A pig enjoys raw
com, but a man requires com cake at five times the
cost. Tastes and habits depend on one's childhood,
one's training, one's associations, and kind of work.
The necessities of a Chinese coolie, Italian immigrant,
or negro plantation hand are less, and cost less, than
those of a skilled mechanic or a college graduate,
because his associations have been different, and
his present work is different. But necessity goes
farther. It includes the wants of the family consid*
ered as a unit, and not merely the wants of the single
man or woman, else the race would not continue to
increase. Furthennore, social obligations impose
added necessity. Compulsory education of children
compels parents to support their children instead of
living on their wages. Laws regulating sanitation
and tenements compel the tenant to pay more rent.
The necessities of a fann-hand on the estates of Italy
are less than those of the same hand in the cities of
America.

Ambition is the desire for an improved position
for one's self and family — for better quality and
greater variety of material things. It demands a
style of clothing and living suitable to the improved
position aspired to. It demands an education for
one's children superior to the minimum set by com-

X4^


LABOR

pulsory schooling. It demands thrift and economy
for the sake of independence or the ability to hold on
until one's demands are conceded. Ambition looks
to the future — necessity is based on the past.
The negro or the Malay works three days and loafs
three because three days* wages procure his necessi-
ties. The Chinaman, or ItaUan, or Jewish immigrant
works six days and saves the wages of three because
the future is vivid to his imagination. With similar
necessities one is ambitious, the other is content.

The scope and possibility of evoking ambition
depend upon the institution of private property.
Property in human beings suppresses it, unless occa-
sionally a slave is pennitted to purchase his freedom.
The wage system evokes ambition if the way is open
for promotion or for escape by becoming an owner.
Tenancy is on a still higher level, but most of all,
for the masses of men, the ownership of his own small
property is the keenest spur to ambition, for it re-
wards the worker with all of his product. Thismotive
is the surest test of an individual's or a race's future.
Compare the negro and the Italian cotton grower as
tenants in the new vocation opening up to the latter.
" It is always difficult," says the observant planter, Mr.
Stone,* " to get a negro to plant and properly cultivate
the outer edges of his field — the extreme ends of his
rows, his ditch banks, etc. The Italian is so jealous
of the use of every foot for which he pays rent that
he will cultivate with a hoe places too small to be

* "The Italian Cotton Grower," p. 45.

M7


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

worked with a plough, and derive a revenue from spots
to which a negro would not give a moment's thought.
I have seen them cultivate right down to the water's
edge the banks of bayous that had never been touched
by the plough. I have seen them walk through their
fields and search out every skipped place in every row
and carefully put in seed to secure a perfect stand.
I have seen them make more cotton per acre than
the negro on the adjoining cut^ gather it from two to
four weeks earlier, and then put in the extra time
earning money by picking in the negro's field."

But ambition has its penalty. It is equivalent to
an increase in the supply of labor. As an ambitious
proprietor the increase goes into his permanent
property, but the ambitious wage-earner accepts a
lower rate of pay. His fellows see the reduction and
go still lower. The see-saw continues until wages
reach the level of necessities, and there is nothing
left for ambition. The Jewish sweat-shop is the tragic
penalty paid by that ambitious race. In the Illinois
coal mines the wages were reduced one-third during
twelve years of Italian and Slav immigration. The
ambitious races are the industrial races. But their
ambition and their industry bring the momentous
problem of destructive competition. It might seem
that this evil would correct itself — that an increase
in the products of one industry would be offset by an
increase in other industries; that therefore the in-
creased supply in cme would not be forced upon the
market at lower prices, but would be exchanged on

148


LABOR

the same terms as before for the increased supply
in others. This is indeed the case in prosperous
times. All industries advance together, and the in-
creasing supply of one is merely an increasing de-
mand for others. But for some reason, industries
do not always harmoniously advance together. And
when the disproportion appears, the workers who are
blindly but ambitiously pushing ahead endeavor
to overcome, by increasing the quantity of output,
what they lose by reducing the price. There is but
one immediate and practical remedy — the organiza-
tion of labor to regulate competition. The method
of organization is to do in concert through self-
sacrifice what the non-industrial races do individually
for self-indulgence ; namely, refuse to work. Where
the one loafs the other strikes. While the necessities
of the workers set the minimum below which wages
cannot fall, and their physical endurance sets the
maximum hours beyond which they cannot work,
the labor-union, by means of the strike or the threat
to strike, sets a higher minimum of wages and a lower
maximum of hours, which leaves room for ambition.
Eventually the higher wage and the shorter hours
become habitual and become a higher level of neces-
sities. Gifted individuals may, indeed, rise above
the wage-earning class by their own efiforts, but labor
organization alone can raise the class as a whole.

The organization of workmen in labor imions has
been more difficult in this than in other free coun-
tries, owing to the competition of races. Heretofore it

149


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

has been the easiest possible matter for a manager,
apprehensive of agitators in forming a imion, to
introduce a new race and a new language into his
works. Indeed, ahnost the only device and symptom
of originality displayed by American employers in
disciplining their labor force has been that of playing
one race against another. They have, as a rule, been
weak in methods of conciliation and feelings of con-
sideration for their employees, as well as in the means
of safeguarding life and health, but they have been
strong with the weapon "divide and conquer.''
The nimiber of races they have drawn upon is often
amazing. The anthracite mine workers comprise
nineteen languages and dialects. The employees
of the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company belong to
thirty-two nationalities and speak twenty-seven lan-
guages. Such a medley of races offers indeed a dis-
heartening prospect to the union organizer. And
therefore when these races finally organize, the
change in their moral character must be looked upon
as the most significant of the social and ^industrial
revolutions of our time. The United Mine Workers'
of America, with 300,000 members, is very largely
composed of recent immigrants from Southern and
Eastern Europe. So with the Longshoremen, the
United Garment Workers, and the Butcher Work-
men. These are or have been among the strongest
and best disciplined of American labor-unicms. The
newest races of the past twenty years have been com-
ing long enough to have members who speak the

ISO


LABOR

English language and act as interpreters and leaders,
and this is essential where the speeches at a union
meeting must be translated often into four or five
languages before the subject can be voted upon.
Furthermore, the recruiting area for new races has
been nearly exhausted, and the races now coming
find their fellow-countrymen already in the unions.
In the anthracite coal field I saw a dozen Slovaks
just arrived from Himgary, but persuaded by their
imionized precursors not to take the places of strikers.
In New York a shipload of Italians in time of strike
has been taken directly into the imion. Such a sight
would have been unlikely a dozen years ago.

The competition of races is the competition of
standards of living. The reason the Chinaman or
the Italian can save three days' wages is because
wages have been previously fixed by the greater
necessities of more advanced races. But competition
has no respect for superior races. The race with
lowest necessities displaces others. The cotton tex-
tile industry of New England was originally operated
by the educated sons and daughters of American
stock. The Irish displaced many of them, then the
French Canadians completed the displacement; then,
when the children of the French had begun to acquire
a higher standard, contingents of Portuguese, Greeks,
Syrians, Poles, and Italians entered to prevent a rise,
and latterly the Scotch-Irish from the Appalachian
Mountains came down to the valleys of the South,
and with their low wages, long hours, and child

151


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

labor, set another brake on the standard of living.
Lastly, Italians are beginning to be imported to sup-
plement the ''poor whites." Branches of the cloth-
ing industry in New York began with English and
Scotch tailors, were then captured by Irish and Ger-
mans, dien by Russian Jews, and lastly by Italians,
while in Boston the Portuguese took a share, and in
Chicago the Poles, Bohemians, and Scandinavians.
Ahnost every great manufacturing and mining indus-
try has experienced a similar substitution of races.
As rapidly as a race rises in the scale of living, and
through organization begins to demand higher wages
and resist the pressure of long hours and overexertion,
the employers substitute another race and the process
is repeated. Each race comes from a coimtry lower
in the scale than that of the preceding, xmtil finally
the ends of the earth have been ransacked in the
search for low standards of living combined with
patient industriousness. Europe has been exhausted,
Asia has been drawn upon, and there remain but
three regions of the temperate zones from which a
still lower standard can be expected. These are
China, Japan, and India. The Chinese have been
excluded by law, the Japanese and Koreans are com-
ing in increasing numbers, and the Indian coolies
remain to be experimented upon. That employers
will make strenuous efforts to bring in these last
remaining races in the progressive decline of stand-
ards, to repeal the Chinese prohibitive laws and to
prevent additions to these laws, naturally follows

153


LABOR

from the progress toward higher standards and labor
organization already made by the Italian and the
Slav.

The trade-union is often represented as an im-
ported and tm-American institution. It is true that
in some unions the main strength is in the English
workmen. But the majority of unionists are immi-
grants and children of immigrants from coimtries
that know little of imionism. Ireland and Italy
have nothing to compare with the trade-union move-
ment of England, but the Irish are the most effective
organizers of the American unions, and the Italians
are becoming the most ardent unionists. Most re-
markable of all, the individualistic Jew from Russia,
contrary to his race instinct, is joining the imions.
The American unions, in fact, grow out of American
conditions, and are an American product. Al-
though wages are two or three times as high as in his
European home, the immigrant is driven by compe-
tition and the pressure of employers into a physical
exertion which compels him to raise his standard of
living in order to have strength to keep at work.
He finds also that the law forbids his children to
work, and compels him to send them to school To
maintain a higher standard and to support his chil-
dren he must earn more wages. This he can do in no
other way than by organizing a tmion. The move-
ment is of course aided by English-speaking out-
siders or "agitators," especially by the Irish, but it
finds a prompt response in the necessities of the

IS3


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

recruits. Labor organization is essentially the out-
come of American freedom, both as a corrective to
the evils of free competition and as an exercise of the
privilege of free association.

When once moved by the spirit of unionism, the
immigrants from low-standard countries are the most
dangerous and determined of unionists. They have
no obligations, little property, and but meagre neces-
sities that compel them to yield. The bituminous coal
miners were on strike four months in 1897 and the
anthracite mine workers five months in 1902. Un-
ionism comes to than as a discovery and a revelation.
Suddenly to find that men of other races whom they
have hated are really brothers, and that their enmity
has been encouraged for the profit of a common
oppressor, is the most profoimd awakening of which
they are capable. Their resentment toward em-
ployers who have kept them apart, their devotion to
their new-found brothers, are terrible and pathetic.
With their emotional temperament, unionism becomes
not merely a fight for wages but a religious crusade.
It is in the nature of retribution that, after bringing
to this coimtry all the industrial races of Europe and
Asia in the effort to break down labor organizations,
these races should so soon have wiped out race an-
tagonism and, joining together in the most powerful
of labor-imions, have wrenched from their employers
the greatest advances in wages.

There is but one thing that stands in the way of
complete unionization in many of the industries;

'54


(From Tki World Tb-Dof)


LABOR

namely, a flood of immigration too great for assimila-
tion. With nearly a million immigrants a year the
pressure upon unions seems almost resistless. A
few of the unions which control the trade, like the
mine workers and longshoremen, with high initiation
fees and severe terms of admission, are able to
protect thonselves by virtue of strength already
gained. But in the coast states and on miscel-
laneous labor this strategic advantage does not
exist, and the standards are set by the newest im-
migrants.

Profits and Wages. — We have now stated at
some length in this and the preceding chapter
the two standpoints from which the immigration
of industrial races is viewed. One standpoint
is that of the production of wealth, the other the
distribution of wealth. One is the development
of our natural resources, the other is the ele-
vation of our working population. If we inquire
somewhat more critically and take into accoimt all
of the circumstances,, we shall find that the motives
animating Ais difference of policy are not really the
above distinction between production and distribu-
tion, but the distinction between two opposing inter-
ests in distribution ; namely, profits and wages. Un-
fortunately it is too readily assumed that whatever
increases profits does so by increasing production.
As a matter of fact it is only secondarily the produc-
tion of wealth and development of resources that
is sought by one of the interests concerned — it is


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

primarily increase of profits at the expense of wages.
Cheap labor, it is asserted, is needed to develop the
less productive resources of the country — what the
economists call the margin of production. It is
needed to develop the less productive industriesi
like sugar beet, and the less productive branches of
other industries, like the construction of railways in
imdeveloped regions or the reconstruction of rail-
ways in older regions, or the extension of a coal mine
into the narrow veins, and so on. Without cheap
labor these marginal resources, it is asserted, could
not profitably be exploited, and would therefore not
be developed.

This argument, within limits, is imdoubtedly true,
but it overlooks the part played by machinery and
inventions where wages are high. The . cigar-mak*
ing machine cannot extensively be introduced on the
Pacific coast because Chinese cheap labor makes the
same cigars at less cost than the machines. High
wages stimulate the invention and use of machinery
and scientific processes, and it is machinery and
science, more than mere hand labor, on which reli-
ance must be placed to develop the natural resources
of a coimtry.

But machinery and science cannot be as quickly
introduced as cheap immigrant labor. Machinery
requires accumulation of capital in advance of pro-
duction, but labor requires only the payment of daily
wages in the course of production. Consequently in
the haste to get profits the immigrant is more desired

156


LABOR

than machinery.. But excessive profits secured in
this way bring reaction and a period of business
depression which check the production of wealth
even more than the period of prosperity has stimu-
lated production. Consider the extreme vacillations
of prosperity and depression which characterize
American industry. In a period of prosperity the
prices of commodities rise rapidly, but the wages of
labor, especially imorganized labor, follow slowly,
and do not rise proportionately as high as prices.
This means an enormous increase in profits and pro-
duction of commodities. But commodities are pro-
duced to be sold, and if the market falls off, then
production comes to a standstill with what is known
as "overproduction." Now, wage-earners are the
mass of consumers. If their wages do not rise in pro-
portion to prices and profits, they cannot purchase as
large a proportion of the country's products as they
did before the period of prosperity began. " Over-
production" is mainly the "tmderconsumption"
of wage-earners. Immigration intensifies this fatal
cycle of "booms" and "depressions." A natural
increase in population by excess of births over deaths,
continues at practically the same rate year after year,
in good times and bad times, but an artificial increase
through unmigration falls off in hard times and be-
comes excessive in good times. Thus, in 1879, at
the lowest point of depression, the number of immi-
grants was 177,826, but three years later, in the
"boom" cuhninating in 1882, it rose to 7881992,

IS7


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA


In nine years following the depression of 1897 the
number increased from 230,000 to 1,100,000.

Even this does not tell the story complete, for the
effects of free immigration are intensified by the
opposite policy of a protective tariff on imports.
While labor is admitted practically free, the products
of labor are taxed to prevent free ingress. The fol-
lowing table shows die extreme points in the rise
and fall of immigration and imports: —

CULMINATING POINTS OF IMMIGRATION AND
IMPORTS OF MERCHANDISE


Ybai Emddio


TMMTGftATION


IVPORTS


Jumao


Prosperity


iJcprcS'
aoa


jrioftpeniy


Depnmkm,


1873


4S9i8o3


$ 642,000,000


1879 and X878 ^


177,826


S437iO<»*«>0


i88a


788,99a


725,000,000


1S86 and 1S85 '


334,203


578,000,000


1893


439»370


866,000^000


1897 and 1898 ^


230»832


616,000,000


1906


i.ioo»735


1,226,000,000


By comparing the two sets of columns it will be
seen that, owing to the protective tariff, the imports
of merchandise vary but slightly in periods of pros-
perity and depression compared with the variation in
number of immigrants. Thus in the recent period
of prosperity, the imports increased twofold above
the lowest point of the preceding depression, while the
number of immigrants increased nearly fivefold.

^ Where two years are given, the first is for Immigration and the
second for ImportSi

158


LABOR

The swell of immigration in the above-mentioned
periods of prosperity increases the supply of labor,
but the protective tariff prevents a similar increase in
the supply of products. Thus immigration and the
tariff together prevent wages from rising with the rise
in prices of commodities and cost of living. This
permits profits to increase more than wages, to be
followed by overproduction and stoppage of business.

Furthermore, when once the flow of immigrants is
stimulated it continues for some time after the pin-
nacle of prosperity has been reached. In 1903 the
boom met a check at the beginning of the year, but
the number of immigrants continued to increase dur-
ing the sunmier and fall at the rate of 20,000 per
month in excess of the number during the high period
of prosperity in 1902. This makes it possit^ for
great corporations to continue their investments
by means of cheap labor beyond the probable de-
mands of the country, with the result of overpro-
duction, loss of profits, inability to pay fixed charges,
and consequent panics. Thus it is that immigra-
tion, instead of increasing the production of wealth
by a steady, healthful growth, joins with other causes
to stimulate the feverish overproduction, with its in-
evitable collapse, that has characterized the industry
of America more than that of any other country.
It helps to create fortunes during a period of specular
tion, and intensifies the reaction during a period of
stagnation.


x»


CHAPTER Vn

GUY LIFE, CSIME, AND POVEKTY

Statistics are considered by many people as dry
and uninteresting, and the fact that a book is statis-
tical is a warning that it should not be read, or that
the statistical paragraphs should be passed over for
the narrative and historical parts. This is a dilettante
and lazy attitude to take, and especially so in the
study of social subjects, for in these subjects it is only
statistics that tell us the true proportions and relative
importance of our facts. The study of statistics
leads us to a study of social causes and forces, and
when we see that in the year 1790 three per cent of
our population lived in cities, and in the year 1900
thirty-three per cent lived in cities of 8000 popula-
tion and over, we are aroused to the importance of
making a serious inquiry into the reasons for this
growth of cities and the effects of city life on the
future of democracy and the welfare of the nation^
More impressive to the student of race problems
becomes the inquiry when we realize that while
one-fifth of our entire population lives in the thirty-
eight cities of over 100,000 population, two-fifths of
our foreign-bom population, one-third of our native
offspring of foreign parents, and only one-tenth of our

ite


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

people of native parentage live in such cities. That is
to say, the proportion of the foreign-bom in great
cities is four times as great, and the proportion of the
children of foreign parents is three and one-third
times as great as that of the colonial and older native
stock. These proportions appear in the accom-
panying table and the upper diagram on page 162.

POPULATION IN THE UNITED STATES AND LARGE

CITIES: 1900


In United Statxs


In 38 Cities op xoo,ooo
Population and Ovie


Total loi Umitid Statxs


Number


Per
cent


Number


Per cent of
total of cor*
respooding
class


Population

Native white, native par-
ents

Native white, foreign par-
ents

Foreign white

Negroes

Indian and Mongolians


75.994,575
40,958,216

iS»637,o63
10,213,817

8,833,994
351,385


lOO.O

53-9
20.6

11.6

•5


14,208,347
4,245,817

5,280,186

3,972,324

668,324

32,696


18.7
10.3

33a

39-7
7.6

9-3


If we present the matter in another form in order
to show the full extent of foreign influence in our great
cities, we have another diagram, which shows that
59 per cent of the population outside, and only 30
per cent of the population within these cities is of
native parentage, while 27 per cent of the population
outside, and 65 per cent of the population within
these cities is of foreign parentage. The census
eniuneration carries us back only to the parents, but
if we had knowledge of the grandparents we should
M 161


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA


RcnyE itfRitt


rOREIGM PARBHIS


ramoKVHnt


iNcmESor

lOOjOOO


MCITIES OF
lOOjOOO


JB


Distribution op Population : 1900


FULCSMTAOE OF POPULATION IN CITIES : Z9OO


Z63


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

piobably find Uiat the immigraiit element of the
nineteenth century contributed a goodly portion oi
those set down as of native parentage.


MORI THMI WVNWIKtlMBRWTS t IMO


i«t


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Still more significant becomes die comparison when
we take each of these cities separately, as is done in
the chart reproduced on page 163 from the Statistical
Atlas of the Twelfth Census.

Here it appears that the extreme is reached in the
textile manufacturing city of Fall River, where but
14 per cent of the population is of native extrac-
tion, while in the two greatest cities, New York and
Chicago, the proportion is 21 per cent, and the only
large cities with a predominance of the native ele-
ment are St. Joseph, Columbus, Indianapolis, and
Kansas City, with Denver equally divided. As
already stated, grandparents would still further
diminish the proportion of native elonent.

If we carry our comparison down to the 160 cities
of 25,000 population, we shall find that in such cities
is one-half of the foreign-bom population,^ and we
shall also see marked differences among the races.
At one extreme, three-fourths of those bom in
Russia, mainly Jews, live in these principal cities,
and at the other extreme, one-fifth of the Nor-
wegians.

The other Scandinavian countries and the Welsh
and Swiss have about one-third, while the English
and Scotch are two-fifths, Germany, Austria, Bo-
hemia, and Poland, one-half to three-fifths, Ireland
and Italy nearly two-thirds.

Individual cities suggest striking comparisons. In
New York, computations based on the census show

1 Twelfth Census, Vol. I, p. dzzvi

164


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

785,035 persons of Gennan descent, a number nearly
equal to the population of Hamburg, and larger than
the native element in New York (737,477). New
York has twice as many Irish (710,510) as Dublin,
two and one-half times as many Jews as Warsaw,
half as many Italians as Naples, and 50,000 to
150,000 first and second generations from Scotland,
Hungary, Poland, Austria, and England.^ Chicago
has nearly as many Germans as Dresden, one-third
as many Bohemians as Prague, one-half as many
Irish as Belfast, one-half as many Scandinavians as
Stockholm.*

The variety of races, too, is astonishing. New
York excels Babel. A newspaper writer finds in
that city sixty-six languages spoken, forty-nine news-
papers published in foreign languages, and one school
at Mulberry Bend with children of twenty-nine
nationalities. Several of the smaller groups live in
colonies, like the Syrians, Greeks, and Chinese. But
the colonies of the larger groups are reservoirs per-
petually filling and flowing.'

The influx of population to our cities, the most
characteristic and significant movement of Ae pres-
ent generation, has additional significance when we
classify it according to the motives of those who seek
the cities, whether industrial or parasitic The
transformation from agriculture to maniif actures and

^ See Federaliony June 1903, p. 40.
» Twelfth Census, Vol. I, pp. 87S-88Z.
' New York Sun, Nov. 29, 1903.

165


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

transportation has designated city occupations as the
opportunities for quick and speculative accumulation
of wealth, and in the cities the energetic, ambitious,
and educated classes congregate. From the farms
of the American stock the sons leave a humdnun
existence for the uncertain but magnificent rewards
of industrialism. These become the business men,
the heads of great enterprises, and the millionaires
whose example hypnotizes the imagination of the faim
lads throughout the land. Many of them find their
level in clerical and professional occupations, but they
escape the manual toil which to them is the token
of subordination. These manual portions are the
peculiar province of die foreign immigrant, and
foreign immigration is mainly a movement from the
farms of Europe to the cities of America. The high
wages of the industries and occupations which radiate
from American cities are to them the magnet which
forttme-seeking is to the American-bom- The
cities, too, furnish that choice of employers and that
easy reliance on charitable and friendly assistance
which is so necessary to the indigent laborer look-
ing for work. Thus it is that those races of immi-
grants the least self-reliant or forehanded, like the
Irish and the Italians, seek the cities in greater pro-
portions than those sturdy races like the Scandina-
vians, English, Scotch, and Germans. The Jew,
also, coming from the cities of Europe, seeks Amer-
ican cities by the very reason of his racial distaste for
agriculture, and he finds there in his coreligionists

i66


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

the necessary assistance for a beginning in American
livelihood.

At this point we gradually pass over from the
industrial motives of city influx to the parasitic
motives. The United Hebrew Charities of New
York have asserted that one-fourth of the Jews of
that city are applicants for charity, and the other
charitable societies make similar estimates for the
population at large. These estimates must certainly
be exaggerated, and a careful analysis of their methods
of keeping statistics will surely moderate such star-
tling statements, but we must accept them as the judg-
ment of those who have the best means of knowing
the conditions of poverty and pauperism in the me-
tropolis. However exaggerated, they indicate an
alarming extent of abject penury brought on by
immigration, for it is mainly the immigrant and the
children of the immigrant who swell the ranks of
this indigent element in our great cities.

Those who are poverty-stricken are not necessarily
parasitic, but they occupy that intermediate stage
between the industrial and the parasitic classes from
which either of these classes may be recruited. If
through continued poverty they become truly parasitic,
then they pass over to the ranks of the criminal, the
pauper, the vicious, the indolent, and the vagrant, who,
like the industrial class, seek the cities.

The dangerous effects of city life on immigrants
and the children of immigrants cannot be too strongly
emphasized. This coimtry can absorb millions of all

167


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

races from Europe and can raise them and their
descendants to relatively high standards of American
citizenship m so far as it can find places for them on
the farms. " The land has been our great solvent." ^
But the cities of this country not only do not raise
the immigrants to the same degree of independence,
but are themselves dragged down by the parasitic
and dependent conditions which they foster among
the immigrant element.

Crime. — This fact is substantiated by a study of
criminal and pauper statistics. Great caution is
needed in this line of inquiry, especially since the
eleventh census in 1890 promulgated most erroneous
inferences from the statistics compiled under its
direction. It was contended by the census authori-
ties that for each million of the foreign-bom popula-
tion there were 1768 prisoners, while for each million
of the native-bom there were only 898 prisoners, thus
showing a tendency to criminality of the foreign-bom
twice as great as that of the white native-bom. This
inference was possible through oversight of the im-
portant fact that prisoners are recraited mainly from
adults, and that the proportion of foreign-bom adults
to the foreign-bom population is much greater than
that of the native-bom adults to the native population.
If comparison be made of the number of male pris-
oners with the number of males of voting age, the pro-
portions are materially different and more accurate,
as follows: —

* Semple, 31a.
168


IF Order of Foresters


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

Number of Male Prisoners per Miluon or Voting
Population, 1890 (Oicittino "Unknown")*

Native white, native parents ^195

Native white, foreign parents 5,886

Native white, total 3»483'

Foreign white 3*370

Negro . . I3»2X9

Here the foreign-bom show actually a lower rate
of criminality (3270) than the total native-bom
(3482). This inference hamionizes with our gen-
eral observations of the immigrants, namely, that
they belong to the industrial classes, and that our
immigration laws are designed to exclude criminals.

But this analysis brings out a fact far more sig^
nificant than any yet adverted to; namely, that the
native-bom children of immigrants show a propor-
tion of criminality (5886 per million) much greater
than that of the foreign-bom themselves (3270 per
million), and 70 per cent greater than that of the
children of native parents.

This significant fact is further brought out, and
with it the obverse of the census mistake above re-
ferred to, when we examine the census inferences
respecting juvenile criminals. The census calcula-
tions show that there are 250 juvenile oflFenders for
every million of the native-bom population, and only
159 such oflFenders for every million of the foreign-
bom population ; but if we remember that the pro-
portion of foreign-bom children is small, and then

^ Prisoners having one parent foreign are apportioned in the
ratio of native and foreign parentage.

'Includes native-bom, parentage unknovm.

169


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

proceed to compare the number of boys who are
offenders with the number of bo}rs lo to 19 years of
age rather than with the number of persons of all
ageSy we shall have the following results, confining
our attention to the North Atlantic states, where
juvenile reformatories are more liberally provided
than in other sections: —

Male JuvENiLK Offenders per Mqxion of Male Popula-
tion TEN To Nineteen Years of Age, North Atlantic
States, 1890 (Omutino '' Unknown") ^

Native white, native parents x>744

Native white, foreign parents M^$

Foreign white 3>3i^

G>]oxed Z7>9i5

This table throws a different light on the situation,
for it shows that the tendency towards crime among
juveniles, instead of being less for the foreign-bom
than for the native-bom, is nearly twice as great as
that of the children of American parentage, and that
the tendency among native children of foreign par-
entage (3923 per million) is more than twice as great
as that among children of American parents (1744
per million).

This amazing criminality of the children of immi-
grants is almost wholly a product of city life, and it
follows directly upon the incapacity of immigrant
parents to control their children under city conditions.
The boys, especially, at an early age lose respect for
their parents, who cannot talk the language of the

^ Offenders having one parent foreign are apportioned in the
ratio of native and foreign parentage.

170


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

community, and who are ignorant and helpless in the
whirl of the struggle for existence, and are shut up
during the da3rtime in shops and factories. On the
streets and alleys, in their gangs and in the schools,
the children evade parental discipline, and for them
the home is practically non-existent. Says a well-
informed student of race problems in New York,*
" Example after example might be given of tenement-
house families in which the parents — industrious
peasant laborers — have found themselves disgraced
by idle and vicious grown sons and daughters. Cases
taken from the records of charitable societies almost
at random show these facts again and again."
Even the Russian Jew, more devoted and self-sac-
rificing in the training of his children than any other
race of immigrants, sees them soon earning more
money than their parents and breaking away from
the discipline of centuries.

Far different is it with those foreigners who settle
in country districts where their children are under
their constant oversight, and while the youngsters
are learning the ways of America they are also held
by their parents to industrious habits. Children of
such immigrants become substantial citizens, while
children of the same race brought up in the cities
become a recruiting constituency for hoodlums,
vagabonds, and criminals.

The reader must have observed in the preceding

* Kate Holladay Claghom, "The Tenement Hotise ProUem,'*
Vol. II, p. 79.

171


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

statistical estimates the startling preeminence of the
negro in the ranks of criminals. His proportion of
prisoners for adult males (131219 per million) seems
to be four times as great as that of the native stock,
and more than twice as great as that of foreign par-
entage, while for boys his portion in the North Atlan-
tic states (17,915 per million) is ten times as great
as that of the corresponding native stock, and four
times as great as that of foreign parentage.

The negro perhaps suffers by way of discrimina-
tion in the number of arrests and convictions com-
pared with the whites, yet it is significant that in pro-
portion to total numbers the negro prisoners in the
Northern states are nearly twice as many as in the
Southern states. Here, again, city life works its
degenerating effects, for the Northern negroes are
congregated mainly in towns and cities, while the
Southern negroes remain in the country.

Did space pennit, it would prove an interesting
quest to follow the several races through the various
classes of crime, noticing the relative seriousness of
their offences, and paying attention to the female
offenders. Only one class of offences can here be
noted in detail ; namely, that of public intoxication.
Although classed as a crime, this offence borders on
pauperism and the mental diseases, and its extreme
prevalence indicates that the race in question is not
overcoming the degenerating effects of competition
and city life. Statistics from Massachusetts seem to
show that drunkenness prevails to the greatest extent

172


CITY LIFE, CRIME AND POVERTY

in the order of preeminence among the Irish, Welsh,
English, and Scotch, and least among the Portuguese,
Italians, Germans, Poles, and Jews. The Italians owe
their prominence in the lists of prisoners to their
crimes of violence, and very slightly to intoxication,
though the latter is increasing among them. In the
Southern states the ravages of drink among the ne-
groes have been so severe and accompanied with such
outbreaks of violence that the policy of prohibition
of the liquor traffic has been carried farther than in
any other section of the country. Probably three-
fourths of the Southern negroes live in prohibition
counties, and were it not for the paternal restrictions
imposed by such laws, the downward course of the
negro race would doubtless have outrun considerably
the speed it has actually attained.

Besides the crimes which spring from racial ten-
dencies, there is a peculiar class of crimes springing
largely from race prejudice and hatred. These are
lynchings and mob violence. The United States
presents the paradox of a nation where respect for
law and constitutional forms has won most signal
triumphs, yet where concerted violations of law
have been most widespread. By a queer inversion of
thought, a crime committed jointly by many is not a
crime, but a vindication of justice, just as a crime com-
mitted by authority of a nation is not a crime, but a
virtue. Such crimes have not been continuous, but
have arisen at times out of acute racial antagonism^.
The Knownothing agitation of 1850 to 18551 which


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

prevailed among religious and patriotic Americans,
was directed against the newly arrived flood of immi-
grants from Europe and Asia, and was marked by a
state of lawlessness and mob rule such as had never
before existed, especially in the cities of Boston, New
York, Pittsbuig, Cincinnati, Louisville, and Balti-
more.^ These subsided or changed their object under
the oncoming slavery crisis, and the Civil War itself
was a grand resort to violence by the South on a ques-
ticm of race domination. Beginning again with the
Ruklux and White-cap uprisings in the seventies,
mob rule drove the negroes back to a condition of
subordination, but the lawless spirit then engendered
has continued to show itself in the annual lynching
of fifty to one hundred and fifty negroes suspected
or convicted of the more heinous crimes,* Nor has
this crime of the mob been restricted to the South, but
it has spread to the North, and has become almost
the accepted code of procedure throughout the land
wherever negroes are heinously accused. In the
Northern instances this vengeance of the mob is some-
times wreaked on the entire race, for in the North
the negro is more assertive, and defends his accused
brother. But in the South the mob usually, though
not always, stops with vengeance on the individual
guilty, or supposedly guilty, since the race in general is
already cowed.

^John B. McMaster, ''The Riotous Cftieer of the Know-
nothings," Forum, July, 1894, p. 524.

'Cutler, ''Lynch Law"; Bishop, "Lynching;" /fi/^r»a^»MM/
Quarkriy, September, 1903.


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

Other races suffer at the hands of mobs, such as the
Chinese in Wyoming and California at the hands of
American mine workers, Italians in Louisiana and
California at the hands of citizens and laborers,
Slovaks and Poles in Latimer, Pennsylvania, at the
hands of a mob militia. With the rise of organized
labor these race riots and militia shootings increased
in number, often growing out of the efforts of older
races of workmen to drive newer and backward
races from their jobs, or the efforts of employers to
destroy newly formed unions of these immigrant
races. Many strikes are accompanied by an in-
cipient race war where employers are endeavoring
to make substitution, one race for another, of Irish,
Gennans, native whites, Italians, negroes, Poles, and
so on. Even the long series of crimes against the
Indians, to which the term "A Century of Dishonor"
seems to have attached itself without protest, must
be looked upon as the mob spirit of a superior race
bent on despoiling a despised and inferior race. That
the frenzied spirit of the mob, whether in strikes,
panicky militia, Indian slaughter, or civil war, should
so often have blackened the face of a nation sincerely
dedicated to law and order is one of the penalties
paid for experimenting on a problem of political
and economic equality with material marked by ex-
treme racial inequality.

Poverty and Pauperism. — Prior to year 1875 ^^
laws of the United States imposed no prohibition
upon the immigration of paupers from foreign coun-

17s


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

triesy and not until the federal government took from
the states the administration of the law in 1891 did
the prohibitions of the existing law become reasonably
effective. Since that year there have been annually
debarred, as likely to become public charges, 431
to 7898 arrivals, the latter number being debarred in
the year 1905. In addition to those debarred at
landing, there have been annually returned within
one to three years after landing, 177 to 845 immi-
grants, many of whom had meantime become public
charges. From these statements it will be seen that,
prior to 1891, it was possible and quite probable that
many thousand paupers and prospective paupers
were admitted by the immigration authorities, and
consequently the proportion of paupers among the
foreign-bom should appear larger than it would in
later years. In the earlier years systematic arrange-
ments were in force in foreign countries, especially
Great Britain, to assist in the deportation of paupers
to the United States, and therefore it is not surprising
that, apart from race characteristics, there should have
come to this country larger niunbers of Irish paupers
than those from any other nationality. Since these
exportations have been stopped, it is not so much
the actual pauper as the prospective pauper who
gets admission. 96 per cent of the paupers in
almshouses have been in this coimtry ten years or
more, showing that the exclusion laws are still defec-
tive, in that large numbers of poor physique are ad-
mitted. Taking the census reports for 1904, and con*

176


CITY LIFE, CRIME, AND POVERTY

fining our attention to the North Atlantic states,
where children are generally provided for in separate
establishments, we are able to compute the following
as the relative extent of pauperism among males: —

Male Paxtpeks in Almshouses Per MnxiON Vornio Fopu-

LAIION, NOETH ATLANTIC STATES, 1904.

Native white, native parents •••••• 2,360

Native white, foreign parents • • • • • ^t^S^

Foreign white 5»zi9

Colored 4*056

Here we see the counterpart of the estimates on
crime, for the natives of foreign parentage show a
smaller proportion of paupers than the natives of
native parentage, while the foreign>bom themselves
show more than double the relative amount of pau-
perism of the native element, and the colored pau-
pers are nearly twice the native stock.

The census bureau also furnishes computations
showing the contributions of the different races and
nationalities to the insane asylums and benevolent
institutions.^ In general it appears that the foreign-
bom and the negroes exceed the native classes in their
burden on the public. A report of the Department of
Labor of great value and significance, incidentally
bearing on this subject, shows for the Italians in
Chicago their industrial and social conditions.
According to this report the average earnings of
Italians in that city in 1896 while at work were $6.41

^ Bureau of the Census, Special Reports, "Paupers In Alms-
houses, 1904," "Benevolent Institutions, 1904," "Insane and
Feeble-minded in Hospitals and Institutions, 1904.''
M 177


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

per week for men and $3. 1 1 per week for women, and
the average time unemployed by the wage-earning
element was over seven months. In another report
of the Department of Labor it appears that the ^um
population of the cities of Baltimore, Chicago, New
York, and Philadelphia in 1893 was unemployed three
months each year. With wages one dollar a day, and
employment only five months during the year, it is
marvellous that the Italians of Chicago, during the
late period of depression, were not thrown in great
numbers upon public relief. Yet, with the strict
administration of the exclusion laws leading to the
deportation of over 3000 Italians a year as liable
to become public charges, it is likely that the
immigrants of that race, although low in physique,
poverty, and standards of living, are fairly well
screened of actual paupers.


ITS


CHAPTER Vm

POLITICS

Ameucan democracy was ushered in on a theory
of equality. And no word has been more strangely
used and abused. There is the monarchical idea
of equality, and Mr. Mallock begs the question when
he gives the title "Aristocracy and Evolution" to
a book on the necessary part played by great men.
Doubtless, in Greek, aristocracy means "government
by the best," but in history it means government by
the privilege of birth and landed property. De-
mocracy may be in philology "government by the
mob," but in politics and industry it has been oppor-
tunity for great men without blood or property.
Mr. Miinsterberg, too, sees the breakdown of Ameri-
can democracy and the reaction towards aristocracy
in the prominence of civil-service reform, the pr^
eminence conceded to business ability, the deference
to wealth, and the conquest of the Philippines.^
But civil-service reform is only a device for opening
the door to merit that has been shut by privilege. In
England it was the means by which the mercantile
classes broke into the offices preempted by the younger

^ Mttnsterberg^ "American Traits," p. 235 ff.

179


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

sons of aristocracy.* In America it is an awkward
means of admitting ability wherever f oimd to positions
seized upon by political usurpers. It appealed to the
American democracy only when its advocates learned
to call it, not "civil-service refonn," but "the merit
system." As for the astonishing power of mere
wealth in American affairs the testimony of another
English observer is based on wider observation
when he says, "Even the tyranny of trusts is not to
be compared with the tyranny of landlordism; for
the one is felt to be merely an unhappy and (it is
hoped) temporary aberration of well-meant social
machinery, while the other seems bred in the very
bone of the national existence." *

A feeling of disappointment holds true of the con-
quest and treatment of the Philippines. That a war
waged out of sympathy for an oppressed island near-
by should have shaken down an unnoticed archi-
pelago across the ocean was taken in childlike glee
as the unexpected reward of virtue. But serious
thinking has followed on seeing that these islands
have added another race problem to the many that
have thwarted democracy. Only a plutocracy sprung
from race divisions at home could profit by race-sub-
jection abroad, and the only alternative to race-sub-
jection is equal representation in Congress. But to
admit another race to partnership without the hope
of assimilation is to reject experience. Independence

* Eaton, "The Civil Service in Great Britain," p. x6o £f.
'Muirfaead, "The Land of Contrasts," p. 374.

180


POLITICS

or cession to Japan is the self-preservation of Ameri-
can democracy.

Another idea of equality is the socialist idea. In-
fatuated by an "economic interpretation of history,"
they overlook the racial interpretation. Pennitting
and encouraging plutocracy, they hope to see the dis-
possessed masses take possession when conditions
become intolerable. But the "masses" would not
be equal to the task. Privileged wealth knows too
well how to buy up or promote their leaders, how to
weaken them by internal dissensions, how to set race
against race. Most of all, the inexperienced despot-
ism of the masses is worse than the smooth despotism
of wealth. The government of the South by the
negro, the government of San Francisco by "labor,"
fell into the hands of the "carpet-bagger" and the
" boss." Once in power, internal strife and jealousy,
struggle for office, or racial antagonism disrupt the
rulers, and a reaction throws them back more helpless
than before. Men are not equal, neither are races
or classes equal. True equality comes through equal
opportunity. If individuals go forward, their race
or class is elevated. They become spokesmen, de-
fenders, examples. No race or class can rise without
its own leaders. If they get admitted on equal terms
with other leaders, whether it be in the councils
of the church, the law-making bodies of the city,
state, and nation, or the wage conferences of em-
ployers, they then can command the hearing which
their abilities justify. They secure for their fol-

i8i


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

lowen the equal opportunity to whkh they are en-
titled.

This is exactly the political problem that grows out
of the presence of races and immigrants. With these
admitted to the suffrage on the basis of mere manhood
inspired by a generosity unknown to the people of any
other land, the machinery of representative govern-
ment inherited from England does not, for some rea-
son, pennit the free choice of leaders. The difficul-
ties may be seen in cities where the system first broke
down. A variety of races and nationalities living
in the same ward are asked to elect aldermen and
other officers by majority vote. No one nationality
has a majority, but each sets up its list of candidates.
The nationality with a mere plurality elects all of its
candidates, and the other nationalities — a majority
of the voters — are unrepresented. This is an ex-
treme case, and has not often been allowed to happen.
But the only means of preventing it is the " ward boss.'*
The boss emerges from the situation as inevitably
as the survival of the fittest. And the fittest is the
Irishman. The Irishman has above all races the
mixture of ingenuity, firmness, human sympathy,
comradeship, and daring that makes him the amal-
gamator of races. He conciliates them all by nomi-
nating a ticket on which the offices are shrewdly
distributed; and out of the Babel his '^ slate" gets
the majority.

The boss's problem is not an easy one. His ward
may contain business men on the hill and negroes

1S2


POLITICS

along the canal. To nominate a business man would
lose the negro vote — to nominate a negro would lose
the business vote. He selects a nondescript some-
where between, and discards him for another at the
next election. The representative becomes a tool
in the hands of the boss. The boss sells his
power to corporations, franchise speculators, and law-
evaders. Representative democracy becomes boss-
ocracy in the service of plutocracy. The ward system
worked well when the suffrage was limited. Then
the business men elected their business man unim-
peded. But a system devised for restricted suffrage
breaks down under imiversal suffrage. Could the
ward lines be abolished, could the business men come
together regardless of residence and elect their choice
without the need of a majority vote, could the negroes
and other races and classes do the same, then each
would be truly represented by their natural leaders.
So it is, not only in cities, but in county, state, and
nation. Universal suffrage, clannish races, social
classes, diversified interests, seem to explain and
justify the presence of the party "machine" and its
boss. Otherwise races, classes, and interests are in
helpless conflict and anarchy. But the true explana-
tion is an obsolete ward and district system of plu-
rality representation adopted when but one race, class,
or interest had the suffrage. Forms of government
are the essence of government, notwithstanding the
poet. An aristocratic form with a democratic suf-
frage is a plutocratic government. Belgium and

X83


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

Switzerland have shown that a democratic form is
possible and practicable. Proportional representa-
tion instead of district representation is the corollary
of imiversal suffrage which those countries have
worked out as a model for others.^ The model is
peculiariy adapted to a countiy of manifold nation-
alitiesy interests, and classes. Races and immigrants
in America have not disproved democracy — they
have proved the need of more democracy.

This is seen also in the distinction between men and
measures. It often has been noted that in American
elections the voters are more interested in voting for
candidates than they are in voting on issues. The
candidate arouses a personal and concrete interest
— the issue is abstract and complicated. The candi-
date calls out a full vote — the issue is decided by a
partial vote.

This difference is partly the result of organization.
The candidate has a political party, campaign funds,
and personal workers to bring out the vote. The
issue has only its merits and demerits. Equally
important under American conditions is the race or
natibnality of the candidate. This feature is often
concealed by the ingenuity of political managers
in nominating a ticket on which the several nationali-
ties are " recognized." But with the recent progress
of the movement to abolish party conventions and

* See description of the Belgium system by the author, Review
of Reviews, May, 1900; also, ''Representation of Interests," 7ii*
dependent, June, 1900; "Proportional Representation."

184


POLITICS

to nominate candidates directly at the primaries the
racial prejudices of the voters show themselves.
The nationalities line up for their own nationality,
and the political and economic issues are thrown in
the backgroimd. It is different when they vote
on the issues directly. The vital questions of poli-
tics, industry, corporations, and monopoly which
menace the country, unless rightly answered, cut
across the lines of nationahty. The German farmer,
manufacturer, wage-earner, merchant, capitalist,
and monopolist may all unite to elect a popular Ger-
man to office, but they do not unite to give a corpora-
tion a monopoly. The same is true of other nationali-
ties. Wherever the referendimi has been fairly
tested, in Chicago, Detroit, Oregon, and elsewhere,
the soimd judgment of all races has prevailed over
bias, prejudice, or racial jealousy. There none can
claim preeminence, for all have shown their share
of patriotism, intelligence, and regard for equal
rights. By an automatic self-disfranchisement the
ignorant, the corrupt, and the indifferent of all races
eliminate themselves by failing to vote. Instead of
being dismissed on the ground that voters care
mainly for men and less for measures, the ref erendimi
should be adopted on the groimd that it permits those
interested in measures to decide the question. Those
who are not interested enough to vote do thereby
proclaim that they are satisfied whichever side wins.
The initiative and referendum are, above all other
foims of government, the specific remedy for the ills

i8s


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA


of universal suffrage and conflicting nationalities.
Race antagonism springs from personalities, race
coalescence from community of interest. A vote
for candidates intensifies antagonism — a vote on
measures promotes conmiunity.

There are, indeed, some kinds of measures which
stir up race antagonism. But the keenest of these
have happily been eliminated. More intense than
any other source of discord is religious belief. Reli-
gious differences in America are not so much theo-
logical as racial in character. The Judaism of the
Jew, the Protestantism of the British and colonial
American, the Lutheranism of the German, the
Roman Catholicism of the Irish, Italian, and Slav,
the Greek Catholicism of other Slavs, all testify
to the history and psychology of races. Far-sighted
indeed were our fathers who separated Church and
State. Were the people taxed to support religion,
every election would be a contest of races. All other
questions would be subordinate, and democracy
impossible. But with religion relegated to private
judgment, each race is free to cultivate at will that
one of its own peculiarities most fanatically adhered
to, but most repellent to other races, while uniting
with the others on what is most essential to democracy.
Religious freedom is more than a private right —
it is an American necessity.

Another class of measures running partly along
race lines are sumptuary laws, especially those regu-
lating saloons and Simday observance. In the

i86


POLITICS

Southern states saloon prohibition is largely a race
discrimination and a race protection. In the North
it often is American puritanism of the country against
European liberalism of the cities. Here the referen-
dum shows itself as the conciliator of nationalities.
Upon no other issue has the popular vote been so
generally resorted to. This issue comes close to the
habits and passions of the masses. It takes prece-
dence of all others except religion, but cannot be
evaded like religion. If legislative bodies and execu-
tive officials decide the question, then the German
or the Irishman adds to his zeal for the election of a
conationalist his thirst for the election of a candidate
with habits like his own. But when left to a popular
vote, the saloon question is separated from the choice
of candidates, and other issues come forward. A
majority vote, too, pacifies the minority of all races,
where the act of a legislative body leaves the suspi-
cion of unfair advantage taken by imrepresentative
politicians. By the exigencies of the situation the ref-
erendum has been invoked to take both the saloon
problem and its share of the race problem "out of
politics." The lesson is applicable wherever race or
nationality conflicts with democracy. With questions
of religious belief eliminated by the constitution, and
questions of personal habits eliminated by the ref-
erendum, other questions 'of race antagonism will be
eliminated by the initiative and the referendum.^

^ ConuDons, " Proportiona] Representation," Appendix. Pub-
lications of the Federation for Majority Rule, Washington, D.C.

187


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

SofErage. — The climax of liberality in donating
the suffrage to all races and conditions was reached
with the fifteenth amendment in 1869. At that time
not only had the negro been enfranchised ; but nearly
a score of Western and Southern states and territories
had enfranchised the alien. So liberal were these
states in welcoming the immigrant that they allowed
him to vote as soon as he declared his intention to take
out naturalization papers. This declaration, under
the federal law, is made at least two years before the
papers are granted, and it may be made as soon as the
immigrant has landed. Thus in some of those states
he could vote as soon as he acquired a legal residence,
that is, four or four and one-half years before he ac-
quired citizenship. Several of these states have
recently changed these laws, but there remain nine
that continue to accept the alien as a voter.

In the Eastern states such generosity was not
granted by law but was practised by fraud. Natu-
ralization papers are issued by federal courts and
by state courts of record. The law gives the judge
much discretion, for he is required to refuse the cer-
tificate if he is not satisfied that the alien is of good
moral character, attached to the Constitution, and well
disposed. But so careless or crowded are the judges
that seldom have they examined the applicants.
Indeed the political managers have had the option
of judges and could take their immigrants to the court
that would shut its eyes. Many thousands of fraudu-
lent papers have been secured in this way, beginning

188


POLITICS

at the very time when the naturalization law was
enacted in 1802, but increasing enormously during
the past forty years.*

Finally, in 1906, Congress enacted a law giving to
the Bureau of Immigration control over naturaliza-
tion. The object is to bring all of the courts under
a uniform practice, to provide complete records and
means of identification, to establish publicity, to
enable the government to appear in court and resist
fraudulent naturalization, and to impose severe
penalties.' The law also adds something to the
qualifications required of the alien. He must not
be an anarchist or a polygamist, nor a believer of
such doctrines; he must be able to speak the English
language, and must intend to reside permanently
in the United States.' The language restriction
affects but few, since in 1900 only 3.3 per cent of the
naturalized foreign-bom males of voting age could
not speak English.' The intention of permanent
residence, as well as the entire measure, is designed
to remove the abuse of foreigners' acquiring citizen-
ship in order to return to their native land and defy
their rightful government. On the administrative
side this law is of great significance. It marks a
serious beginning on the part of the federal govem-

^ Hunt, Ganiard, " Federal Control of Naturalization," WoMs
Work, 11: 7095 (1906).

' " Report to the President on Naturalization."

' " Naturalization Laws and Regulations of October, 1906/'
published by the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization.

* Twelfth Census, Vol. I, p. 929.

189


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

ment of protecting the citizenship that a generation
before it had so liberally bestowed.

There are certain races which by law are prohibited
from naturalization. For nearly seventy years the
law on the subject enacted in 1802 admitted to citizen-
ship only free white persons. This was amended
in 1870 to admit '^ aliens of African nationality and
persons of African descent." But other colored races
were not admitted, so that the Chinese, Japanese, or
Malay immigrant has never been eligible to citizen-
ship. His children, however, bom in this country
are citizens, and cannot be excluded from voting on
account of race or color. Indians living in tribes
are foreigners, but if they recognize allegiance by pay-
ing taxes or dividing up their land in severalty they
are citizens and voters.

Of the immigrant races eligible to citizenship their
importance as possible voters is greater than their
importance in the population. This is because men
and boys come in greater numbers than women and
children. Ten million foreign-bom population fur-
nishes 5,000,000 males of voting age, but 66,000,000
native population furnishes only 16,000,000 males of
voting age. In other words, one-half of the foreign-
bom, and only one-fourth of the native-bom, are
potential voters. But not all of the potential voters
are actual voters. With a grand total in the year
1900 of 21,000,000 of the proper sex and age, only
15,000,000 went to the polls. The ratio is five out
of seven. Two million negroes were excluded, and

X90


POLITICS

i,400yO0o foreign-bom had not yet naturalized.
This leaves 2,600,000 natives and foreign-bom who
might have voted but did not. The foreigner who
takes out his citizenship papers does it mainly to vote.
Two-thirds of them had done so or declared their
intention in 1900.* Probably the proportion of native
whites who did not vote was 15 per cent of their total
number, and the proportion of foreign-bom who did
not, or could not, was over 40 per cent.

But this proportion differs greatly among the sev-
eral races. It is not so much a difference in willing-
ness as a difference in opportunity. Five years
are required for naturalization, and while 40 per cent
of those who have been here six to nine years have
not declared their intention nor taken out their
papers, only 7 per cent of those who have been here
twenty years retain their allegiance to foreign gov-
ernments.* This increases relatively the political
weight of the Teutonic and Celtic races which are
oldest in point of immigration, and reduces relatively
the weight of the Italian, Slav, and Jewish races.
The figures below make this quite plain. The table
shows the proportion of foreign-bom who remain
aliens, in the sense that they have neither taken out
citizenship papers nor declared their intention of
doing so. Only 7 to 13 per cent of the foreigners
from Northwestem Europe are aliens, compared
with 35 to 60 per cent of those from Eastem and

» Twelfth Census, "Abstract," p. 18.
'Twelfth Census, ''Abstract," p. 19.

191


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA


Southern Europe. In course of time these differences
will diminish, and the Italian and Slav will approach
the Irishman and Gennan in their share of American
suffrage: —

PXft dMT OF ALZXMB AXONO FOSXION-BOKN MaLES or VOTINO

Canada, En^h . . ax.i
Russia (maimy Jews) . 35.3
Canada, French . • 3S.5
Finland. . . 38.6

Austria (largely Slavs) . 44.6
Portugal • .51.6

Italy .... 53.0
Hungary (mainly Slavs) 53.1
Greece . . • . 57.8
Austria, Poland • .61.6


vlfales
Germany
Norway .
Ireland .
Denmark
Holland .
Sweden .
Scotland .
Bohemia .
England .


9-7

XO.Z


10.3

11.6


XI.9
"•5

Z9.6

Z3.9


The right to vote is not "inalienable/' neither is
the right to life or liberty. Governments give them,
refuse them, and take them away. In America this
means the state governments. The federal govern-
ment only declares that the states must follow the
"due process of law," and not discriminate on account
of race, religion, or servitude. In allowing the right
to vote they may and do discriminate on other
grounds, such as morals, illiteracy, intelligence,
property, and sex. This may result in race or immi-
grant discrimination, and does so in the case of
illiteracy and intelligence. After the Irish immigra-
tion of the forties, Connecticut in 1855 and Massar
chusetts in 1857 refused thenceforth to enfranchise
those who could not read the Constitution. Since
1889 six other Northern and Western states-^

^ Twelfth Census, Vol. I» p. ccxviL

192


POLITICS

Wyoming, Maine, California, Washington, Dela-
ware, and New Hampshire, in the order named —
have erected barriers against those who cannot read
or write the English language or the Constitution.*
Six Southern states have done the same, but one of
them, Mississippi, has added another permanent
barrier, — intelligence. This is supposed to be meas-
ured by ability to "understand" the Constitution as
read by a white man. Southern states have also
added vagrancy, poll tax, and property clauses even
more exclusive than reading and writing.* The
federal courts have refused to interfere because these
restrictions in their legal form bear alike on white
and black. If in practice they bear unequally,
that is a matter for the state courts.'

To take away the suffrage from many of those who
enjoy it is peacefully impossible imder our system.
But voters who hold fast to the privilege for them-
selves may be induced to deny it to the next genera-
tion. It was in this way usually that the foregoing
restrictions were introduced. Massachusetts set the
example by retaining all who could vote when the
test was adopted, and making the exclusion apply
only to those who came after. The Southern states

^Phillips, J. B.y "Educational Qualifications of Voters,"
UniversUy of Cohrado Studies^ Vol. Ill, No. 2 (1906).

'Caffey, Francis G., "Suffrage limitations at the South,"
PolUical Science Quarterly, 30 : 53 (1905). Report on Political
Reform, Union League Club, New York, 1903.

'Williams v. Mississippi, 170 U.S., 213; Giles v. Harris^ 289
U.S., 475 ; Giles v. Teasley, 193 U.S., 146.
o 193


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

did the same by "grandfather" and "understanding"
clauses. By either method, in course of time, the
favored voters disappear by death or removal, and
the restrictions apply in full to the succeeding gen-
eration.*

The e£Fect of the educational test on the suffrage
of the foreign-bom is not as great as might be sup-
posed. Naturalization itself is almost an educational
test. Only 6.3 per cent of the naturalized foreigners
are illiterate, but 28 per cent of those who remain
aliens are imable to read. In Boston only 2 per cent
are excluded from voting through inability to read
English, although the corresponding aliens are 22
per cent. Probably the educaticHial qualification in
Massachusetts affects these proportions by lessening
the inducement to naturalize, but in Chicago and
New York, where that qualification is not required,
scarcely more than 5 per cent of those who get
naturalized would be imable to vote imder such a law,
compared with less than i per cent of the native
voters.' In the country at large the disproportion
is not so great. Five and eight-tenths per cent of the
sons of native parents would be excluded by an edu-
cational test against 6.3 per cent of the naturalized
foreigners, and only 2 per cent of the native sons of
foreigners. In the several Southern states the test,
if equally applied, will exclude 6 to 20 per cent of the

* This does not apply to the "understanding" clause in lifissis-
sippi, which is permanent.

Twelfth Census, Vol. I, pp. cadii, ccanr.

194


POLITICS

white voters and35 to 60 per cent of the colored voters.*
In a Southern city like Memphis it would exclude
I per cent of the white and 38 per cent of the colored.
Tested by the standards of democracy, the ability
to read and write the English language is a proper
qualification. It is perhaps the maximum that can
be required, for to test the ability to understand what
is read and written is to open the door to partisanship
and race discrimination. Yet it is intelligence that
makes the suffrage an instrument of protection, and
it is not a denial of rights to refuse such an in-
strument to one who injures himself with it. The
literacy qualification is one that can be acquired by
effort. Other tests, especially the property qualifica-
tion, are an assertion of inequality. Yet it is not
strange that with the corrupt and inefficient govern-
ments that have accompanied universal suffrage
there should have occurred a reaction. This has not
always expressed itself in the policy of restricting
the suffrage, for that can with difficulty be accom-
plished. It has shown itself rather in withdrawing
government as far as possible from the control of the
voters. The so-called "business theory" which has
so generally been applied to the reform of city gov-
ernments has converted the city as far as possible to
the model of a private corporation, with its general
manager, the mayor. The city has been denied its
proper functions, and these have been turned over to
private parties. But this reaction seems to have

^ Twelfth Census, Vol. I, pp. cdv, ccv.

19s


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

reached its limit. It is now understood to have been
simply the legal recognition of an incipient plutocracy
establishing itself imder the forms of democracy.
The return movement has begun, and the rescue of
democracy is sought, as stated above, in forms and
functions of government stiU more democratic.

The way plutocracy looks when it has passed the
incipient stage may be seen in Hawaii.^ It is as
though we had annexed those islands in order to
watch in our own back yard the fruit of excessive
immigration. A population of 154,000 furnishes
65,000 Hawaiians, Portuguese, and other Caucasians.
The Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans have 87,000
population and no votes. The American contingent
is some 17,000 souls and 3000 votes. The latter
represent four classes or interests: the capitalist
planters owning two-thirds of the property; super-
intendents, engineers, and foremen managing the
plantation labor; skilled mechanics; small employers,
merchants, and farmers. In order to get plantation
labor and to keep the supply too large and diver-
sified for concerted wage demands the planters im-
ported contract Chinese in place of Hawaiians, then
Japanese, then Koreans. As each race rises in
standards and independence it leaves the planta-
tions to enter trades, manufactures, and merchandis-
ing. It drives out the wage-eamers from the less
skilled occupations, then from the more skilled, then
the small manufacturers, contractors, and merchants.

* See " Reports on Hawaii."
196


POLITICS

The American middle classes disappear, partly
by emigration to California, partly by abandoning
business and relying on the values of real estate
which rise through the competition of low standards
of wages and profits, and partly by attaching them-
selves to the best-paid positions offered by the plant-
ers. In proportion as they move up in the scale
through the entrance of immigrants in the lower
positions, they transfer their allegiance from democ-
racy to plutocracy. The planters themselves are
caught in a circle. The rising values of their land
absorb the high tariff on sugar and prevent rising
wages if the values are to be kept up. The Japanese,
with contract labor abolished, have shown a dispo-
sition to strike for higher wages. This has led to
advances at the expense of profits, and the resulting
'' scarcity of labor" compels the planters again to ask
for contract Chinese coolies. Immigration is thiis
only a makeshift remedy for the exactions of imions
and the imdevelopment of resources. More immi-
gration requires perpetually more and stiU more,
till the resulting plutocracy seeks to save itself by
servile labor. A moderate amount of inmaigrant
labor, assimilated and absorbed into the body politic,
stimulates industry and progress, but an excessive
and indigestible arnoimt leads to the search for coer-
cive remedies and ends in the stagnation of industry.
The protective tariff was supposed to build up free
American labor, but in Hawaii, with unrestricted
immigration, it has handed us American plutocracy.

197


CHAPTER IX

AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

AGebman Statistician/ after studying popula-
tion statistics of the United States and observing the
"race suicide" of the native American stock, con-
cludes : " The question of restriction on immigration
is not a matter of higher or lower wages, nor a matter
of more or less criminals and idiots, but the exclu-
sion of a large part of the immigrants might cost the
United States their place among the world powers."

Exactly the opposite opinion was expressed in
1891 by Francis A. Walker,' the leading American
statistician of his time, and superintendent of the
censuses of 1870 and 1880. He said : " Foreipi immi-
gration into this country has, from the time it first
assimied large proportions, amounted not to a re-
inforcement of our population, but a replacement of
native by foreign stock. . . . The American shrank
from the industrial competition thus thrust upon him.
He was unwilling himself to engage in the lowest kind
of day labor with these new elements of population;
he was even more unwilling to bring sons and daugh-
ters into the world to enter into that competition.

* Kuczynski, " Einwanderungspolitik," p. 35,

* Forum, 11 : 634-743 (1891). Reprinted in "Discussions,"
etc., pp. 417-426.

198


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

. . . The more rapidly foreigners came into the
United States, the smaller was the rate of increase,
not merely among the native population separately,
but throughout the population of the country as
a whole," including the descendants of the earlier
foreign immigrants.

Walker's statements of fact, whatever we may say
of his explanations, are easily substantiated. From
earliest colonial times until the census of 1840 the
people of the United States multiplied more rapidly
than the people of any other modem nation, not
excepting the prolific French Canadians. The first
six censuses, beginning in 1790, show that, without
appreciable immigration, the population doubled
every twenty years, and had this rate of increase
continued until the present time, the descendants of
the colonial white and negro stock in the year 1900
would have numbered 100,000,000 instead of the
combined colonial, immigrant, and negro total of
76,000,000. Indeed, if we take the total immigration
from 1820 to 1900, exceeding 19,000,000 people, and
apply a slightly higher than the average rate of in-
crease from births, we shall find that in the year 1900
one-half of the white population is derived from
immigrant stock, leaving the other half, or but
33,000,000 whites, derived from the colonial stock.*

> Professor Smith, for the year 1888, estimated the colonial ele-
ment at 29,000,000 and the immigrant element at 26,000,000,
applying to the immigrants the average rate of increase from
births. "Emigration and Immigration,'' pp. 60-61.

199


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

This is scarcely more than one-third of the number
that should have been expected had the colonial
element continued to multiply from 1840 to 1900
as it had multiplied from 1790 to 1840.

An interesting corroboration of these speculations
is the prediction made in the year 181 5, thirty years
before the great migration of the nineteenth century,
by the mathematician and publicist, Elkanah Wat-
son.^ On the basis of the increase shown in the
first three censuses he made computations of the
probable population for each census year to 1900,
and I have drawn up the following table, showing
the actual population compared with his estimates.
Superintendent Walker, in the essay above quoted,
uses Watson's figures, and points out the remarkable
fact that those predictions were within less than one
per cent of the actual population until the year i860,
although, meanwhile, there had come nearly 5,000,000
immigrants whom Watson could not have foreseen.
Thus the population of i860, notwithstanding access
of the millions of immigrants, was only 310,000, or
one per cent less than Watson had predicted. And
the falling off since i860 has been even greater, for,
notwithstanding the immigration of 20,000,000 per-
sons since 1820, the population in 1900 was 75,000,000,
or 25 per cent less than Watson's computations.

This question of the "race suicide'* of the Ameri-
can or colonial stock should be regarded as the most
fundamental of our social problems, or rather as the

^ Watson, p. 532.


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION


POPULATION AND IMMIGRATION


Population
(Census)


Watson's
Estimate


Watson's
Eiutox


FOKXIGN

Immigration
roR Dbcadb


1790


3,929,214


1800


5,308,483


50,000


I8I0


7,239,881


70,000


1830


9,633,822


9,625,734


-8,088


114,000


1830


12,866,020


12,833,645


-32,375


143,439


1840


17,069,453


17,116,526


+47,073


599,125


1850


23,191,876


23,185,368


-6,508


1,713,251


i860


31,443,321


31,753,825


+ 310,503


2,598,214


1870


38,558,371.


42,328,432


+ 3,770,061


2,314,824


1880


50,155,783


56,450,241


+6,294,458


2,812,191


1890


62,622,250


77,266,989


+ 14,644,739


5,246,613


X900


75,559,258


100,235,985


+ 24,676,727


3,687,564


Total]


immigration i£


(20-1900 .


• • •


19,229,224


most fundamental consequence of our social and
industrial institutions. It may be met by exhorta-
tion, as when President Roosevelt says, "If the
men of the nation are not anxious to work in many
diflFerent ways, with all their might and strength,
and ready and able to fight at need, and anxious
to be fathers of families, and if the women do not
recognize that the greatest thing for any woman is
to be a good wife and mother, why that nation has
cause to be alarmed about its future." *

The anxiety of President Roosevelt is well grounded ;
but if race suicide is not in itself an original cause,
but is the result of other causes, then exhortation will
accomplish but little, while the removal or ameliora-
tion of the other causes will of itself correct the re-
sulting evil. Where, then, shall we look for the


» Van Vorst, "The Woman Who Toils," p. viii.

aoi


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

causes of race suicide, or, more accurately speaking,
for the reduced proportion of children brought into
the world? The immediate circumstances consist
in postponing the age of marriage, in limiting the
niunber of births after marriage, and in an increase
in the proportion of unmarried people. The reasons
are almost solely moral and not physical. Those who
are ambitious and studious, who strive to reach a
better position in the world for themselves and their
children, and who have not inherited wealth, will
generally postpone marriage imtil they have educated
themselves, or accumulated property, or secured a
permanent position. They will then not bring into
the world a larger number of children than they can
provide for on the basis of the standing which they
themselves have attained; for observation shows that
those who marry early have large families, and are
generally kept on a lower station in life. The real
problem, therefore, with this class of people, is the
opportunities for earning a living. In the earlier
days, when the young couple could take up vacant
land, and farming was the goal of all, a large family
and the cooperation of wife and children were a
help rather than a hindrance. To-day the couple,
unless the husband has a superior position, must go
together to the factory or mill, and the children
are a burden imtil they reach the wage-earning age.
Furthermore, wage-earning is uncertain, factories
shut down, and the man with a large family is thrown
upon his friends or charity. To admonish people

202


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

living under these conditions to go forth and multiply
is to advise the cure of race suicide by race dete-
rioration.

Curiously enough, these observations apply with
even greater force to the second generation of immi-
grants than to the native stock, for among the daugh-
ters of the foreign-bom only 19 per cent of those aged
15 to 24 years are married, while among daughters
of native parents 30 per cent are married ; and for the
men of 20 to 29 only 26.8 per cent of the native sons
of foreigners are married and 38.5 per cent of the sons
of natives/ These figures sustain what can be ob-
served in many large cities, that the races of immi-
grants who came to this country twenty-five or more
years ago are shrinking from competition with the new
races from Southern Europe.

Boston, for example, with its large Irish immigra-
tion beginning two generations ago, shows a similar
disproportion. Of the American daughters of for-
eign parents 15 to 24 years of age, only 12 per cent
are married, but of the daughters of native parents
17 per cent are married; of the sons of foreign parents
20 to 29 years of age, only 20 per cent are married,
but of the sons of native parents 26 per cent are mar-
ried. The contrast with the immigrants themselves
is striking. In Boston, 24 per cent of the foreign-
bom women aged 15 to 24 are married, and 35 per
cent of the foreign-bom men aged 20 to 29.' In other

* Computed from the Twelfth Census, Vol. II, p. Izzxvii, ff.
' Computed from the Twelfth Census, Vol. II, p* 3i3<

203


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

words, the early marriages of immigrant men and
wcnnen are nearly twice as many as those of the
American-bom sons and daughters of immigrants,
and only one-third more than those of the sons and
daughters of native stock. With such a showing as
this it would seem that our ''place among the world
powers" depends indeed on immigration, for the
immigrants' children are more constrained to race
suicide than the older American stock. ^

The competition is not so severe in coimtry dis-
tricts where the native stock prevails; but in the
cities and industrial centres the skilled and ambitious
workman and workwoman discover that in order to
keep themselves above the low standards of the inmii-
grants they must postpone marriage. The effect is
noticeable and disastrous in the case of the Irish-
Americans. Displaced by Italians and Slavs, many
of the young men have fallen into the hoodlum and
criminal element. Here moral causes produce
physical causes of race destruction, for the vicious
elements of the population disappear through the
diseases bequeathed to their progeny, and are re-
cruited only from the classes forced down from above.
On the other hand, many more Irish have risen to

^Kuczynski concludes from his study of Massachusetts sta-
tistics that ''the native population cannot hold its own. It seems
to be dying out.'* Could he have separated the two elements
of the native population, he would have found that the immi-
grant element is dying out faster than the older native element.
"The Fecundity of the Native and Foreign Bom Population in
Massachusetts," p. i86.

204


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

positions of foremanship, or have lived on their wits
in politics, or have entered the priesthood. The
Irish-American girls, showing mdependence and
ambition, have refused to marry until they could be
assured of a husband of steady habits, and they have
entered clerical positions, factories, and mills. Thus
this versatile race, with distinct native ability, is
meeting in our cities the same displacement and is
resorting to the same race suicide which itself in-
flicted a generation or two earlier on the native colo-
nial stock. But the effect is more severe, for the native
stock was able to leave the scenes of competition, to
go West and take up farms or build cities, but the
Irish-American has less opportunity to make such an
escape.

Great nimibers of Irishmen, together with others
of English, Scotch, German, and American descent,
remaining in these industrial centres, have sought
to protect themselves and maintain high standards
through labor-unions and the so-called "closed shop,"
by limiting the number of apprentices, excluding
inunigrants, and giving their sons a preference of
admission. But even with the unions they find it
necessary also to limit the size of their families, and
I am convinced from personal observation, that,
were the statistics on this point compiled from the
imions of skilled workmen, there would be foimd even
stronger evidences of race suicide than among other
classes in the nation.

To the well-to-do classes freedom from the care

205


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

of children is not a necessity, but an opportunity for
luxuiy and indulgence. These include the very
wealthy, whose roimd of social functions would be
interrupted by home obligations* To them, of
course, immigration brings no need of prudence —
it rather helps to bring the enormous fortunes which
distract their attention from the home. But their
numbers are insignificant compared with the millions
who determine the fate of the nation. More signifi-
cant are the well-to-do farmers and their wives who
have inherited the soil redeemed by their fathers,
and whose desire to be free for enjoying the fruits of
civilization lead them to the position so strongly
condemned by President Roosevelt. This class of
farmers, as shown in the census map of the size of
private families,^ may be traced across the Eastern
and Northern states, running through New England,
rural New York, Northern Pennsylvania, Ohio, and
Michigan, parts of Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, and
Iowa. In the rich coimties of southern Michigan,
settled and occupied mainly by native stock from
New York, the average size of families is less than
four persons, as it is in a large area of Central New
York, whereas for the country at large it is 4.7,
and for counties in the mining sections of Michigan
occupied by immigrants it rises as high as 5.8 per-
sons.

The census figures showing the size of families
do not, however, reveal the niunber of children bom

^ Twelfth Census, ''Statistical Atlas," plate 98.

206


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

to a family, since they show only those living to-
gether and not those who have moved away or died.
This especially affects the large-sized families, and
does not reveal, for example, a fact shown by Ku-
czynski from the state census of Massachusetts that the
average niunber of children of the foreign-bom women
in that state is 4.5, while for native women it is only
2.7.* This also affects the showing for a state like
West Virginia, composed almost entirely of native
Americans of colonial stock, with only 2 per cent
foreign-bom and 5 per cent colored, where the
average size of families is 5.1 persons, the highest in
the United States, but where in the Blue Ridge
Mountains I have come upon two couples of native
white Americans who claimed respectively eighteen
and twenty-two children. Throughout the South
the reduction in size of families and the postponement
of marriage have not occurred to any great extent
either among the white or colored races, and these
are states to which immigration has contributed
less than 3 per cent of their population. Yet, if
Superintendent Walker's view is sound in all re-
spects, the Southern whites should shrink from com-
petition with the negro in the same way that the
Northem white shrinks from competition with the
immigrant. He does not do so, and the reasons are
probably foimd in the fact that the South has been
remote from the struggle of modem competition, and
that ignorance and proud contentment fail to spur

* "Fecundity," etc., p. 157.
207


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the masses to that ambitious striving which rises
by means of what Malthus called the prudential
restraints on population* It is quite probable that
in the South, with the spread of the factoiy system
and universal education, the growth in nimibers
through excess of births over deaths will be retarded.

On the whole it seems that immigration and the
competition of inferior races tends to dry up the
older and superior races wherever the latter have
learned to aspire to an improved standard of living,
and that among well-to-do classes not competing with
immigrants, but made wealthier by their low wages,
a similar effect is caused by the desire for luxuiy
and easy living.^

Americanization. — A line on the chart opposite
page 63 shows the proportions between the number of
immigrants and the existing population. From this
it appears that the enormous immigration of 1906
is relatively not as large as the smaller immigration
of the years 1849 to 1854, or the year 1882. Three
hundred thousand immigrants in 1850 was as large
an addition to a population of 23,000,000 as 1,000,000
in 1906 to a population of 85,000,000. Judged by
mere numbers, the present immigration is not greater
than that witnessed by two former periods. Judged
by saturation it may be greater, for the former immi-
grants were absorbed by colonial Americans, but the
present immigrants enter a solution half colonial
and half immigrant. The problem of Americaniza-

* Roaa, " Causes of Race Superiority."

208


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

tion increases more than the number to be American-
ized. What is the nature of this problem, and what
are the forces available for its solution?

The term amalgamation may be used for that mix-
ture of blood which unites races in a common stock,
while assimilation is that union of their minds and
wills which enables them to think and act together.
Amalgamation is a process of centuries, but assimila-
tion is a process of individual training. Amalga-
mation is a blending of races, assimilation a blending
of civilizations. Amalgamation is beyond the or-
ganized efforts of government, but assimilation can
be promoted by social institutions and laws. Amal-
gamation therefore cannot attract our practical in-
terest, except as its presence or absence sets limits
to our efforts toward assimilation.

Our principal interest in amalgamation is its effect
on the negro race. The census statisticians discon-
tinued after 1890 the inquiry into the number of
mulattoes, but the census of 1890 showed that mu-
lattoes were 15 per cent of the total negro population.
This was a slightly larger proportion than that of
preceding years. The mulatto element of the negro
race is almost a race of itself. Its members on the
average differ but little if at all from those of the
white race in their capacity for advancement, and
it is the tragedy of race antagonism that they with
their longings should suffer the fate of the more con-
tented and thoughtless blacks.^ In their veins runs

1 See Du Bois, "The Soul of Black FqUl"

r 909


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the blood of white aristocracy, and it is a curious
psychology of the Anglo-Saxon that assigns to the
inferior race those equally entitled to a place among
the superior* But sociology offers compensation for
the injustice to ph3rsiology. The mulatto is the
natural leader, instructor, and spokesman of the
black. Prevented from withdrawing himself above
the fortunes of his fellows, he devotes himself to their
elevation. This fact becomes clear in proportion
as the need of practical education becomes clear.
The effective work of the whites through missionary
schook and colleges has not been the elevation of the
black, but the elevation of mulattoes to teach the
blacks. A new era for the blacks is beginning when
the mulatto sees his own future in theirs.

Apart from the negro we have very little knowledge
of the amalgamation of races in America. We only
know that for the most part they have blended into
a imited people with harmonious ideals, and the
English, the German, the Scotch-Irish, the Dutch,
and the Huguenot have become the American.

We speak of superior and inferior races, and this
is well enough, but care should be taken to dis-
tinguish between inferiority and backwardness —
between that superiority which is the original endow-
ment of race and that which results from the educa-
tion and training which we call civilization. While
there are superior and inferior races, there are primi-
tive, mediaeval, and modem civilizations, and there
are certain mental qualities required for and pro-

a 10


AAfALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

duced bjT these different grades of civilization. A
superior race may have a primitive or mediaeval
civilization, and therefore its individuals may never
have exhibited the superior mental qualities with
which they are actually endowed, and which a mod-
em civilization would have called into action. The
adults coming from such a civilization seem to be
inferior in their mental qualities, but their children,
placed in the new environments of the advanced
civilization, exhibit at once the qualities of the latter.
The Chinaman comes from a mediaeval civilization —
he shows little of those qualities which are the prod-
uct of Western civilization, and with his imitative-
ness, routine, and traditions, he has earned the repu-
tation of being entirely non-assimilable. But the
children of Chinamen, bom and reared in this coun-
try, entirely disprove this charge, for they are as apt
in absorbing the spirit and method of American in-
stitutions as any Caucasian.^ The race is superior
but backward.

The Teutonic races until five hundred years after
Christ were primitive in their civilization, yet they
had the mental capacities which made them, like Ar-
minius, able to comprehend and absorb the highest
Roman civilization. They passed through the medi-
aeval period and then came out into the modem period
of advanced civilization, yet during these two thou-
sand years their mental capacities, the original en-
dowment of race, have scarcely improved. It is

^ Report on Hawaii, BuUetin No. 47, p. 715.

211


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

civilization, not race evolution, that has transfonned
the primitive warrior into the philosopher, scientist,
artisan, and business man. Could their babies have
been taken from the woods two thousand years ago
and transported to the homes and schools of modem
America, they could have covered in one generation
the progress of twenty centuries. Other races, Uke
the Scotch and the Irish, made the transition from
primitive institutions to modem industrial habits
within a single century, and Professor Brinton, our
most profound student of the American Indian, has
said,* "I have been in close relations to several fuU-
blood American Indians who had been removed
from an aboriginal environment and instructed in
this manner [in American schools and commimities],
and I could not perceive that they were either in in-
tellect or sympathies inferior to the usual type of the
American gentleman. One of them notably had a
refined sense of humor as well as imcommon acute-
ness of observation.'*

The line between superior and inferior, as dis-
tinguished from advanced and backward, races ap-
pears to be the line between the temperate and tropi-
cal zones. The two belts of earth between the tropics
of Capricom and Cancer and the arctic and antarctic
circles have been the areas where man in his struggle
for existence developed the qualities of mind and will
— the ingenuity, self-reliance, self-control, strenuous
exertion, and will power — which befit the modem

^ "Religions of Primitive People," p. 15.

2ia


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

industrial civilization. But in the tropics these
qualities are less essential, for where nature lavishes
food, and winks at the neglect of clothing and shelter,
there ignorance, superstition, physical prowess, and
sexual passion have an equal chance with intelligence,
foresight, thrift, and self-control. The children of
all the races of the temperate zones are eligible to the
highest American civilization, and it only needs that
they be "caught" young enough. There is perhaps
no class of people more backward than the 3,000,000
poor whites of the Appalachian Mountains, but there
is no class whose children are better equipped by
heredity to attain distinction in any field of American
endeavor. This much cannot be said for the children
of the tropical zones. Amalgamation is their door
to assimilation.

Before we can intelligently inquire into the agen-
cies of Americanization we must first agree on what
we mean by the term. I can think of no comprehen-
sive and concise description equal to that of Abra-
ham Lincoln: "Government of the people, by the
people, for the people." This description should be
applied not only to the state but to other institutions.
In the home it means equality of husband and wife;
in the church it means the voice of the laity; in
industry the participation of the workmen.

Unhappily it cannot be said that Lincoln's descrip-
tion has ever been attained. It is the goal which he
and others whom we recognize as true Americans
have pointed out. Greater than any other obstacle

213


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

in the road toward that goal have been our race
divisions. Government for the people depends on
government by the people, and this is difficult where
the people cannot think and act together. Such is
the problem of Americanization.

In the earlier days the most powerful agency of
assimilation was frontier life. The pioneers "were
left almost entirely to their own resources in this
great struggle. They developed a spirit of self-
reliance, a capacity for self-government, which are
the most prominent characteristics of the American
people." * Frontier life includes pioneer mining
camps as well as pioneer farming.

Next to the frontier the farms of America are the
richest field of assimilation. Here the process is
sometimes thought to be slower than it is in the cities,
but any one who has seen it imder both conditions
cannot doubt that if it is slower it is more real. In
the cities the children are more regularly brought
under the influence of the public schools, but more
profound and lasting than the education of the schools
is the education of the street and the community.
The work of the schoob in a great city like New York
cannot be too highly praised, and without such work
the future of the immigrant's child would be dark.
In fact the children of the immigrant are better pro-
vided with school facilities than the children of the
Americans. Less than i per cent of their children
lo to 14 years of age are illiterate, but the proportion

* Smithy "Assimilation of Nationalities/' p. 440.

214


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

of illiterates among children of native parents is over
4 per cent. This is not because the foreigner is
more eager to educate his child than is the native,
but because nearly three-fourths of the foreigners'
children and only one-sixth of the natives' children
live in the larger cities, where schools and compul-
sory attendance prevail. Were it not for compulsoiy
education, the child of the peasant immigrant would
be, like the child of the Slav in the anthracite coal
fields, "the helpless victim of the ignorance, fru-
gality, and industrial instincts of his parents."^
As it is, they drop out of the schools at the earliest
age allowed by law, and the hostility of foreigners
to factory legislation and its coroUaiy compulsory
school legislation is more difficult to overcome than
the hostility of American employers, both of whom
might profit by the work of their children. The
thoroughness with which the great cities of the North
enforce the requirements of primary education leaves
but little distinction between the children of natives
and the children of foreigners, but what difference
remains is to the advantage of the natives. In Boston
in 1900 only 5 children of native parents were illiter-
ate, and 22 native children of foreign parents, a ratio
of one-twentieth of i per cent for the natives and one-
tenth of I per cent for the foreigners. In New York
68 of the 83,000 children of native parents were illit-
erate, and 31 1 of the 166,000 native children of foreign
parents, a ratio insignificant in both cases, but more

* Lovejoy, "The Slav Chad," Charities, July, 1905, p. 884.

21S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

than twice as great for the foreigners as for the
natives.^ Taking all of the cities of at least 50,000
population, more than one-fourth of the foreign-bom
children 10 to 15 years of age are bread-winners,
and only one-tenth of the children of native parents.
The influence of residence in America is shown by the
fact that of the children of foreigners bom in this
coimtry the proportion of bread-winners is reduced to
one-seventh.*

But it is the community more than the school
that gives the child his actual working ideals and his
habits and methods of life. And in a great city,
with its separation of classes, this commimity is the
slums, with its mingling of all races and the worst
of the Americans. He sees and knows surprisingly
little of the America that his school-books describe.
The American churches, his American employers, are
in other parts of the city, and his Americanization
is left to the school-teacher, the policeman, and the
politician, who generally are but one generation before
him from Europe. But on the farm he sees and
knows all classes, the best and the worst, and even
where his parents strive to isolate their community
and to preserve the language and the methods of the
old country, only a generation or two are required for
the surrounding Americanism to permeate. Mean-
while healthful work, steady, industrious, and thrifty

^ Twelfth Census, SuppUmentary Analysis, p. 374.
' " Child Labor in the United States^" p. 15, Bureau o£ the
CensuB.

316


11


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

habits, have made hun capable of rising to the best
that his surroundings exemplify.

Since the year 1900 the Immigration Bureau has
not inquired as to the reUgious faith of the immi-
grants. In that year, when the number admitted
was 361,000, one-fifth were Protestants, mainly from
Great Britain, the Scandinavian coimtries, Germany,
and Finland. One-tenth were Jews, 4 per cent were
Greek Catholics, and 52 per cent were Roman Catho-
lics. With the shifting of the sources toward the
east and south of Europe the proportion of Catholic
and Jewish faith has increased. During this transi-
tion the Protestant churches of America have begun
to awaken to a serious problem confronting them.
The three New England states which have given
their religion and political character to Northern and
Western states are themselves now predominantly
Catholic. In all of the Northern manufacturing and
industrial states and in their great cities the marvel-
lous organization and discipline of the Roman Catho-
lic Church has carefully provided every precinct,
ward, or district with chapels, cathedrals, and priests
even in advance of the inflow of population, while
the scattered forces of Protestantism overlap in
some places and overlook other places. Two con-
sequences have followed. The Protestant churches
in much the larger part of their activities have drawn
themselves apart in an intellectual and social roimd
of polite entertainment for the families of the mer-
cantile, clerical, professional, and employing classes,

217


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

while the Catholic churches minister to the laboring
and wage-earning classes. In a minor and relatively
insignificant part of their activities the Protestant
churches have supported missionaries, colporters,
and chapels among the immigrants, the wage-earners,
and their children. Their home missionary societies,
which in the earlier days followed up their own be-
lievers on the frontier and enabled them to establish
churches in their new homes, have in the past decade
or two become foreign missionaiy societies working
at home. Nothing is more significant or important in
the history of American Protestantism than the zeal
and patriotism with which a few missionaries in this
unaccustomed field have begun to lead the way.
By means of addresses, periodicals, books, study
classes, they are gradually awakening the churches
to the needs of the foreigner at home.* Among cer-
tain nationalities, especially the Italians and Slavs,
they find an open field, for thousands of those na-
tionalities, though nominally Catholic, are indifferent
to the church that they associate with oppression at
home. Among these nationalities already several
converts have become missionaries in turn to their
own people, and with the barrier of language and
suspicion thus bridged over, the influence of the
Protestant religion is increasing. Perhaps more than
anything else is needed a federation of the Protes-
tant denominations similar to that recently arranged
in Porto Rico. That island has been laid out in dis-

* Grose, "Aliens or Americans?"
ai8


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

tricts through mutual agreement of the home mis-
sionary societies, and each district is assigned ex-
clusively to a single denomination.

While the Protestant churches have been with-
drawing from the districts invaded by the foreigners,
the field has been entered by the "social settlement.*'
This remarkable movement, eliminating religious
propaganda, is essentially religious in its zeal for
social betterment. Its principal service has been to
raise up Americans who know and understand the
life and needs of the immigrants and can interpret
them to others. In the "institutional church" is
also to be found a similar adaptation of the more
strictly religious organization to the social and edu-
cational needs of the immigrants and their children.

More than any other class in the community, it
is the employers who determine the progress of the
foreigner and his children towards Americanization.
They control his waking hours, his conditions of liv-
ing, and his chances of advancement. In recent
years a few employers have begun to realize their
responsibilities, and a great corporation like the
Colorado Fuel and Iron Company establishes its
"sociological" department with its schools, kinder-
gartens, hospitals, recreation centres, and model
housing, on an equal footing with its engineering
and sales departments. Other employers are in-
teresting themselves in various degrees and ways in
"welfare work," or "industrial betterment," and
those who profit most by this awakening interest

219


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

are the foreign-bom and their families. This interest
has not yet shown itself in a willingness to shorten
the hours of labor, and this phase of welfare work
must probably be brought about by other agencies.

The influence of schools, churches, settlements,
and farming communities applies more to the chil-
dren of immigrants than their parents. The immi-
grants themselves are too old for Americanization,
especially when they speak a non-English language.
To them the labor-union is at present the stroi^est
Americanizing force. The effort of organized labor
to organize the unskilled and the immigrant is the
largest and most significant fact of the labor move-
ment. Apart from the labor question itself, it means
the enlistment of a powerful self-interest in the Ameri-
canization of the foreign-bom. For it is not too
much to say that the only effective Americanizing force
for the Southeastern European is the labor-union.
The church to which he gives allegiance is the Roman
Catholic, and, however much the Catholic Church
may do for the ignorant peasant in his European
home, such instmction as the priest gives is likely
to tend toward an acceptance of their subservient
position on the part of the workingmen. It is a
frequently observed fact that when immigrants join
a labor-union they almost insolently warn the priest
to keep his advice to himself.

Universal suffrage admits the immigrant to Ameri-
can politics within one to five years after landing.
But the storage is not looked upon to-day as the

220


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

sufficient Americanizing force that a preceding gen-
eration imagined. The suffrage appeals very differ-
ently to the immigrant voter and to the voter who has
come up through the American schools and American
life. The American has learned not only that this
is a free government, but that its freedom is based
on constitutional principles of an abstract nature.
Freedom of the press, trial by jury, separation of
powers, independence of the judiciary, equality of
opportunity, and several other governmental and
legal principles have percolated through his sub-
c(Hiscious self, and when he contemplates public
questions these abstract principles have more or less
influence as a guide to his ballot. But the immigrant
has none of these. He comes here solely to earn a
better living. The suffrage is nothing to him but a
means of livelihood. Not that he readily sells his
vote for money — rather does he simply "vote for
his job." He votes as instructed by his employer
or his political "boss," because it will help his em-
ployer's business or because his boss will get him a
job, or will, in some way, favor him and others of
his nationality. There is a noticeable difference
between the immigrant and the children of the immi-
grant in this regard. The young men, when they
begin to vote, can be appealed to on the ground of
public spirit; their fathers can be reached only on
the groimd of private interest.

Now it cannot be expected that the labor-union
or any other influence will greatly change the immi-

32Z


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

grant in this respect. But the union does this much:
it requires every member to be a citizen, or to have
declared his intention of taking out naturalization
papers. The reasons for doing this are not political;
' they are sentimental and patriotic. The union
usually takes pride in showing that its members are
Americans, and have foregone allegiance to other
countries. In a union like the musicians' the reasons
for requiring citizenship are also protective, since
they serve to exclude transient musical immigrants
from American audiences. Again, the union frees
its members from the dictation of employers, bosses,
and priests. Politicians, of course, strive to control
the vote of organized labor, but so disappointing has
been the experience of the unions that they have
quite generally come to distrust the leader who com-
bines labor and politics. The immigrant who votes
as a unionist has taken the first step, in casting his
ballot, towards considering the interests of others,
and this is also the first step towards giving public
spirit and abstract principles a place alongside pri-
vate interest and his own job.

But there is another way, even more impressive,
in which the imion asserts the preeminence of prin-
ciples over immediate self-interest. When the for-
eigner from Southern Europe is inducted into the
union, then for the first time does he get the idea that
his job belongs tohim by virtue of a right to work,
and not as the personal favor or whim of a boss.
These people are utterly obsequious before their fore-

aaa


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

men or bosses, and it is notorious that nearly always
they pay for the privilege of getting and keeping a
job. This bribery of bosses, as well as the padrone
system, proceed from the deep-seated conviction that
despotism is the natural social relation, and that
therefore they must make terms with the influential
superior who is so fortunate as to have favor with
the powers that be.

The anthracite coal operators represented such
men, prior to joining the imion, as disciplined and
docile workmen, but in doing so they disregarded the
fact that outside the field where they were obsequious
they were most violent, treacherous, and factional.
Before the organization of the union in the coal fields
these foreigners were given over to the most bitter
and often murderous feuds among the ten or fifteen
nationalities and the two or three factions within
each nationality. The Polish worshippers of a given
saint would organize a night attack on the Polish
worshippers of another saint; the Italians from one
province woidd have a knife for the Italians of an-
other province, and so on. When the imion was
organized the antagonisms of race, religion, and fac-
tion were eliminated. The immigrants came down
to an economic basis and turned their forces against
their bosses. "We fellows killed this country,"
said a Polish striker to Father Curran, " and now we
are going to make it." The sense of a common
cause, and, more than all else, the sense of indi-
vidual rights as men, have come to these people

S93


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

through the organization of their labor unions, and it
could come in no other way, for the union appeals
to their necessities, while other forces appeal to their
prejudices. They are even yet far from ideal Ameri-
cans, but those who have hitherto imported them and
profited by their immigration should be the last to
cry out against the chief influence that has started
them on the way to true Americanism.^

Agricultural Distribution of Immigrants. — The
congestion and colonizing of immigrants in the cities
and their consequent poverty and the deterioration
of the second generation have brought forth various
proposals for inducing them to settle upon the farms.
The commissioners of immigration' at various times
have advocated an industrial museiun at Ellis Island,
wherein the resources and opportimities of the sev-
eral states could be displayed before the eyes of the
incoming thousands. They and others have gone
further and advocated the creation of a bureau of
immigrant distribution to help the immigrants out
of the crowded cities into the country districts. Still
others have urged the establishment of steamship
lines to Southern ports and the Gulf of Mexico,
so that immigrants may be carried directly to the
regions that "need them." Very little can be ex-
pected from projects of this kind,' for the present con-
tingent of immigrants from Southeastern Europe is

* See also Stewart and Huebner.

' Report, 1903, p. 60; 1904, p. 44; 1905, p. $8; 1906, p. 64.

'Industrial Commission, 15 1492-646; 19 1971-^11*


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

too poor in worldly goods and too ignorant of Ameri-
can business to warrant an experiment in the isola-
tion and self-dependence of farming. The farmers
of the South and West welcome the settler who has
means of purchase, but they distrust the newly arrived
immigrant. Scandinavians and Germans in large
numbers find their way to their coimtrjnnen on the
farms, but the newer nationalities would require the
fostering care of government or of wealthy private
societies. The Jews have, indeed, taken up the
matter, and the Jewish Agricultural and Industrial
Aid Society of New York, by means of subventions
from the Baron de Hirsch fund, has distributed
many families throughout the country, partly in
agriculture, but more generally in trade. The Society
for the Protection of Italian Immigrants is doing
similar work. Great railway systems and land com-
panies in the South and West have their agricultural
and industrial agents on the lookout for eligible
settlers. All of the Southern states have established
bureaus of immigration, and they are advertising
the North and Europe for desirable immigrants.
But these agencies seek mainly those immigrants
who have resided in the country for a time, and have
learned the language and American practices, and,
in the case of the railroad and land companies, those
who have accumulated some property.

The immigration bureaus of the Southern states
and railways, the most urgent applicants at the pres-
ent time for immigrants, are strongly opposed to the
Q 225


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

plan of federal distribution. They want fanners
who will do their own work. From the standpoint
of the immigrant himself this position is correct. To
find a place as an agriculturist he must find a place as
a farmer and not a harvest hand.^ Speaking for the
Southern bureaus, Professor Fleming says,* "The
South decidedly objects to being made the govern-
ment dumping-ground for undesirable immigrants.
It does not want the lower class foreigners who have
swarmed into the Northern cities. It wants the same
sort of people who settled so much of the West.*'
The state board of South Carolina oflSicially invites
immigration of ''white citizens of the United States,
citizens of Ireland, Scotland, Switzerland, and
France, and all other foreigners of Saxon origin."
As for those without money who must depend on
their daily labor for wages, they must go where em-
ployment is most regular and the best wages are paid.
This is not on the farms, with a few months' work in
summer and no homes in winter. It is immistakably
in the great cities and industrial centres. The com-
missioner of immigration at Ellis Island, speaking
of the cordon established by his bureau along the
Canadian frontier from Halifax to Winnipeg in
order to catch those who tried to escape inspection
at New York, said, "All those immigrants who had

^Tosti, Gustavo, "The Agricultuial Possibilities of Italian
Immigration," CharUicB^ May 5, 1904, p. 472.

*«Immigratbn to the Southern States," PolUkal Science
Quarterly, 20 : 276 (1905).

226


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, Cleveland, or Cin-
cinnati in mind as a destination when they left Europe
and came to Quebec, went all the way around that
wall to its western end at Winnipeg, and then took
trains and came back to the very places they had
in mind when they left Europe ; and if you were to
land all the ships that now come to New York at
Galveston, New Orleans, or Charleston, every one of
the immigrants would come to the place he had in
mind when he decided to emigrate." ^

Professor Wilcox contends that the immigrants
already distribute themselves according to their eco-
nomic advantage as completely as do the natives.
They seem to congest in the cities because the cities
are necessarily their places of first arrival. "Our
foreign-bom arrive, in at least nine-tenths of the
cases, at some city. Our native citizens arrive by
birth, in at least three-fourths of the cases, in the
coimtiy. The foreign-bom arrive mainly at sea-
port cities, and disperse gradually from those cities
to and through other interior cities, ultimately
reaching in many cases the small towns or open coim-
try. It is in no sense surprising, or an evidence of
imperfect distribution, that the foreign-bom should
be massed in the cities when nine-tenths of them ar-
rive there, and the native population massed in the
coimtry districts when three-fourths of them arrive
there." ' Artificial distribution would not relieve

^ "Facts about Immigration," p. xx
*Ibid,, p. X19.

227


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

the pressure as long as the character and amount of
immigration continue — it can only be relieved by
creating greater economic inducements in the country.
Natives and foreigners both crowd to the cities
because wages and profits are higher than they are
in the coimtry.

Even supposing the congestion in the cities could
be relieved by making the inducements in the country
greater, the relief could not continue, for it would
only invite more immigration. Emigration has not
relieved the pressure of population in Europe. In
no period of their history, with the exception of Ire-
land, have the populations of Europe increased at
a greater rate than during the last half century of
migration to America. It is not emigration but im-
proved standards of living that lessens the pressure
of numbers, and France with the widest diffusion of
property has little emigration and no increase in
population. )Vith the redundant millions of Eu-
rope, increasing thousands would migrate if they got
word from their friends that the American govern-
ment is finding jobs for them. Just as we have
already seen that the tide of immigration rises with
a period of prosperity in America, so would it rise
with agricultural distribution of immigrants. Both
are simply more openings for employment, and the
knowledge of such opportimities is promptly carried
to the waiting multitudes abroad.

Consider also the political jeopardy of an adminis-
tration at Washington conducting a bureau for the

228


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

distribution of immigrants. If it refused to direct
immigrants to one section of the country because it
found that the wages were low, it would arouse the
hostility of employers. If it directed them to another
section, where the wages offered were high because the
employers were preparing for a lockout, or the unions
were on strike, it would lose the votes of workingmen.
The administration would soon learn that safely
to conduct such a bureau it must not conduct it at all.
Far better is it that the federal government should
leave the distribution of immigrants to private em-
ployment agencies. It might then license all such
agencies that conduct an interstate business. With
the power to take away the license on proof of fraud
and misrepresentation, and with the prosecution of
agencies and employers that deceive and enslave the
immigrant, the government would accomplish all
that it could directly do for better distribution. Un-
questionably the employment agencies, with their
padronif their bankers, and their false promises,
are the source of miserable abuse to thousands of
inunigrants.* They require interstate as well as
state regulation. By weeding out the dishonest
agencies the field would be occupied by the honest
ones, and the immigrant could trust himself to their
assistance. But such regulation would not be merely
for the sake of the immigrant. It would, as it
should, aid the American as welL

» Kellor, "Out of Work," pp. 17, 50-53, 70; CharUies, Feb. 6,
1904, p. 151.

329


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

This suggests to us the true nature of the problem
of city congestion and the nature of its solution*
It is not to be found in special efforts on behalf of the
immigrant, but in efforts to better the condition of
both Americans and immigrants. The congestion
of cities is owing to discriminations in favor of cities.
If the government gives aid to agriculture as it does
to manufactures, if it provides better communication,
equalizes taxes, reduces freight rates to the level
enjoyed by cities, then agriculture and the small
towns will be more attractive. Americans will not
crowd to the cities, and the more provident of the
immigrants will find their way to the country. The
proposition of federal distribution of immigrants is
merely a clever illusion kept up to lead Congress
astray from the restriction of immigration.

Higher Standards of Immigration. — As for the
inferior, defective, and undesirable classes of immi-
grants, there is no protection except stringent selec-
tion. The Commissioner of Immigration at New
York estimates that 200,000 of the million immigrants
in 1903 were an injury instead of a benefit to the in-
dustries of the country,^ and he advocates a physical
examination and the exclusion of those who fall
below a certain physical standard. During the
past ten years the educational, or rather, illiteracy
test, has come to the front, and the advantages of this
test are its simplicity and its specific application to
those races whose standards are lowest

1 Commissioner-Geneial, 1905, p. 70.


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

Much discussion has been carried on respecting
this test, and there has been considerable misunder-
standing and misrepresentation as to its probable
effects. The principal mistake has been the as-
siunption that it is designed to take the place of other
tests of admission, and that therefore it would per-
mit, for example, the most dangerous criminals —
those who are intelligent — to enter this coxmtry.
If we examine existing laws, and seek to understand
the real nature of immigration restriction, we can see
the character of this mistake. All of our legislation
governing immigration should be described as inir-
provemeni of immigration rather than restriction of
immigration. The object has always been to raise
the average character of those admitted by excluding
those who fall below certain standards. And higher
standards have been added from time to time as
rapidly as the lawmakers perceived the need of bet-
tering the quality of our future citizenship. Although
in 1862 Congress had enacted a law prohibiting the
shipment of Chinese coolies in American vessels,^
it was not until 1875 that the lawmakers first awc^e
to the evil of unrestricted immigration. In that year
a law was enacted to exclude convicts and prostitutes.
This law made an exception in favor of those who
had been convicted of political offences. Next, in
1882, Congress added lunatics, idiots, paupers, and
Chinese. In 1885 laborers imder contract were for
the first time to be excluded, but an exception was

^ Chapter 37, Laws of z86a.
231


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

made in order to admit actors, artists, lecturers,
singers, domestics, and skilled workmen for new
industries. In 189 1 the list of ineligibles was again
extended so as to shut out not only convicts but per-
sons convicted of crime, also "assisted" immigrants,
polygamists, and persons with loathsome or danger-
ous contagious diseases. In 1903 the law added epi-
leptics, persons who have had two or more attacks
of insanity, professional beggars, and anarchists.
Notwithstanding these successive additions of ex-
cluded classes, the number of immigrants has con-
tinually increased until it is greater to-day than in
any preceding period, and while the standards have
been raised in one direction, the average quality
has been lowered in other directions. The educa-
tional and physical tests, while not needed for the
races from Northwestern Europe, are now advo-
cated as additions to the existing tests on account
of the flood of races from Southeastern Europe.

The question of "poor physique" has come seri-
ously to the front in recent reports of immigration
officials. The decline in the average of physical
make-up to which they call attention accompanies
the increase in numbers of Southern and Eastern
Europeans. While the commissioner at Ellis Island
estimates that 200,000 immigrants are below the
physical standards that should be required to entitle
them to admission, the number certified by the sur-
geons is much less than this. Yet nine-tenths of
even that smaller number are admitted, since the law

232


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

excludes them only if other grounds of exclusion
appear. That the physical test is practicable is shown
by the following description of the qualities taken
into account by the medical examiners at the immi-
grant stations; qualities which would be made even
more definite if they were authorized to be acted
upon:* —

"A certificate of this nature implies that the alien
concerned is afflicted with a body not only but illy
adapted to the work necessary to earn his bread, but
also but poorly able to withstand the onslaught of
disease. It means that he is undersized, pooiiy
developed, with feeble heart action, arteries below
the standard size; that he is physically degenerate,
and as such not only unlikely to become a desirable
citizen, but also very likely to transmit his imdesirable
qualities to his offspring should he, unfortunately
for the country in which he is domiciled, have any.

"Of all causes for rejection, outside of those for
dangerous, contagious, or loathsome diseases, or for
mental disease, that of 'poor physique' should re-
ceive the most weight, for in admitting such aliens
not only do we increase the niunber of public chaiges
by their inability to gain their bread through their
physical inaptitude and their low resistance to dis-
ease, but we admit likewise progenitors to this
coimtiy whose offspring will reproduce, often in an
exaggerated degree, the physical degeneracy of their
parents.''

* Commlfflioiier-General, 1906, p. 63.


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

The histoiy of the illiteracy test in Congiess is
a curious comment on lobbying. Fiist introduced
in i895) it passed the House by a vote of 195 to 26,
and the Senate in another form by a vote of 52 to lo.
Referred to a conference ccnnmitteei an identical
bill again passed both Houses by reduced majorities.
But irrelevant amendments had been tacked on and
the President vetoed it. The House passed it over
his veto by 193 to 37, but it was too late in the session
to reach a vote in the Senate. Introduced again in
1898, it passed the Senate by 45 to 28, but pressure
of the Spanish War prevented a vote in the House.
The biU came up in subsequent Congresses but did
not reach a vote.^ The lobby is directed by the steam-
ship companies, supported by railway companies,
the Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association, and other
great employers of labor. By misrepresentation, these
interested agencies have been able at times to arouse
the fears of the older races of immigrants not affected
by the measure. Their fears were groundless, for the
illiteracy test is not a test of the English language, but
a test of any language, and it applies only to those
who are 15 years of age and over, but does not apply
to wife, children, parents, or grandparents of those
who are admitted. With these reasonable limita-
tions it would exclude only i in 200 of the Scandina-
vians, I in 100 of the English, Scotch, and Finns, 2 or
3 in 100 of the Germans, Irish, Welsh, and French ;
but it would exclude one-half of the South Italians,

^ For details of the scveial measures, see HaD, "Immigiation/'

934


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

one-seventh of the North Italians, one-third to two-
fifths of the several Slav races, one-seventh of the
Russian Jews, altogether one-fifth or one-fourth of the
total immigration.^ But these proportions would not
long continue. Elementary education is making
progress in Eastern and Southern Europe, and a test
of this kind would stimulate it still more among the
peasants. Restrictive at first, it is only selective;
it woidd not permanently reduce the number of im-
migrants, but would raise their level of intelligence
and their ability to take care of themselves.

The foregoing principles do not ftpply to Chinese
irmnigration. There the law is strictly one of exclu-
sion and not selection. This distinction is often
overlooked in the discussion of the subject. Re-
specting European, Japanese, and Korean immigra-
tion, the law admits all except certain classes definitely
described, such as paupers, criminals, and so on.
Respecting Chinese inunigration the law excludes
all except certain classes described, such as teachers,
merchants, travellers, and students. In the case of
European immigration the burden of proof is upon
the inmiigration authorities to show that the inuni-
grant should be excluded. In the case of the Chinese,
the burden of proof is on the immigrant to show that
he shoidd be admitted. In the administration of the
law the difference is fundamental. If the Chinese
law is liberalized so as to admit doctors, lawyers, and

^ '* Industrial Commission,*' 19 : 1001-Z003. Hall, "
tion."

«3S


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

other professional classes, against whom there is no
objection^ it can be done in one of two ways. It can
name and specify the additional classes to be ad-
mitted. To this there is little objection, for it retains
the existing spirit of the law. Or it can be reversed,
and can admit all classes of Chinese except coolies,
laborers, and the classes now excluded by other laws.
If this were done, the enforcement of the law would
break down, for the burden of proof would be lifted
from the immigrant and placed on the examining
board. The law is with great difficulty enforced as
it is, but the evasions bear no comparison in number
with those practised under the other law. European
immigration is encouraged, provided it passes a
minimum standard. Chinese immigration is pro-
hibited unless it exceeds a maximmn standard. One
is selection, the other is exclusion. One should be
amended by describing new classes not to be ad-
mitted, the other by describing classes which may
be admitted.

This difference between the two laws may be seen
in the effects of the restrictions which have from time
to time been added to the immigration laws. Each
additional ground of restriction or selection has not
decreased the total amoimt of immigration, nor has
it increased the proportion of those debarred from
admission. In 1898, 3200 aliens were sent back, and
this was 1.4 per cent of those who arrived. In 1901,
3900 were sent back, but this was only three-fourths
of I per cent of those arriving. In 1906, 13,000 sent

236


AMALGAMATION AND ASSIMILATION

back were 1.2 per cent of the arrivals. Intending
immigrants as well as steamship companies learn the
standards of exclusion and the methods of evasion,
so that the proportion who take their chances and
fail in the attempt is very small. Nevertheless, this
deportation of immigrants, though averaging less
than I per cent, is a hardship that should be avoided.
It has often been proposed that this should be done
through examination abroad by American consuls
or by agents of the Immigration Bureau. Attractive
and humane as this proposal appears, the foreign
examination could not be made final. It would re-
move the examiners from effective control, and would
require a large additional force as well as the existing
establishment to deport those who might evade the
foreign inspection. It does not strike at the root of
the evil, which is the business energy of the steamship
companies in soliciting immigration, and their busi-
ness caution in requiring doubtful inmiigrants to give
bonds in advance to cover the cost of carrying them
back.^ It is not the exclusion law that causes hard-
ship, but the steamship companies that cormive at
evasions of the law. The law of 1903 for the first
time adopted the correct principle to meet this eva-
sion, but with a limited application. Since 1898,
the Bureau had debarred increasing numbers on
accoimt of loathsome and contagious diseases. But
these had already done the injury which their dep-
ortation was designed to prevent. In the crowded

1 Commissioner-Geneialy 1904, p. 41.


RACES AND IMMIGRANTS IN AMERICA

steerage the entire shipload was exposed to this conr
tagion. Congress then enacted the law of 1903, not
only requiring the steamship companies to cany them
back, as before, but requiring the companies to pay
a fine of $100 for eveiy alien debarred on that ac-
count. In 19069 the companies paid fines of $24,300
on 243 such deportations. The principle should be
extended to all classes excluded by law, and the fine
should be raised to $500. Then every agent of the
steamship companies in the remotest hamlets of
Europe woidd be an immigration inspector. Their
surgeons and officials already know the law and its
standards of administration as thoroughly as the
immigration officials. It only needs an adequate
motive to make them codperators with the Bureau
instead of evaders of the law. Already the law of
1903 has partly had that effect. One steamship
company has arranged with the Bureau to locate
medical officers at its foreign ports of embarkation.
However, the poialty is not yet heavy enough, and
the Commissioner-General recommends its increase
to $500. By extending the law to all grounds of
deportation in addition to contagious diseases, the
true source of hardship to debarred aliens will be
dried up.^

^The Natu>nal Immigzation Coofetence, December 8, 1905,
adopted the f oUowing resolution : " That the penalty of $xoo, now
imposed on the steamship companies for bringing diseased per-
sons to the United States, be also imposed for bringing in any
person ezduded by law.** National Civic Federation Review^
January, 1906, p. 19.

238


INDEX


Advertisiiig, 96, 09, 84, 85, Z04, zoB,

Z09.
Age Composition of Immignuits.

119.
Agriculture, 130, 131, 133, 133.
Alien Contract Labor Law, zz8.
American Federation of Labor,

144.
Americanixation, ao8.

Armenians, 65, 99.

Asiatic Immigration, 101-104.

Assimilation, 17-ai, 113, 198.

Atlanta University, 58, 59, 61.

Australia, 6, 19.

AustriarHungaiy, 18, 65, 79-87.

B

Births, 57, 86, 94.
Bohemians, 80, 8a, Z33.
Boston, 903, 315.
Brinton, Daniel G., aza.
Burlingame Treaty, iii.
Butcher Workmen, 15a


California, zoz, 103, 2x7.
Canada, 104. (See ** French Caiift-

dians.")
Carib. 1061
Castes, 8*
Charity, 108.
Charity Oiganintioa Society of

New York, zoo.
Chicago, 47, zzob z^, 178.


ChUd Labor, 158.

Chinese, zoz, Z09, zzz, ZZ4, zzy,

Z30, Z3Z. Z3a. Z43, Z44* ^ 'S^,

031. (See " Coolies.")
Chhiese Exclusion, ZZ7, 150,

235.
Cities, 54. 55. Z64. Z65, z66.

315.

Civil War, 3, 63, 64, 98, zzz, Z99,

175.
Classes in America, 8, za,

Qosed Shop, 905.

Colorado Fuel and Iron Company,

150, az9.
Colored Farmers' Alliance, 5a
Competition, Race, IZ3, Z14, ZZ5,

Z16, Z17, Z48, Z49. Z51, ZS3, 904,

908.
Contract Labor, 99, zoa, Z04, zo6,

Z09, zxo, xz8, Z35, Z38, 14Z, Z49^

Z43, a3Z. (See "Coolies,-

"Peonage.")
Coolies, 109, Z59. (See "Chinese,"

"Japanese.")
Cooperation, 49, 50.
Cost of Living, 73. (See also

" Standard of Living.")
Crime, 96, Z68-175.
Croatians, 80, 8z, 83, 84, Z09, laa,

Z93.
Curran, Father, 993.


Death-rate, 58, 60, 6z, 86, 95. (See

" In&nt Mortality.")
Distribution of Immigrants, Z30^

934-9ga


239


INDEX


■ ffflWfcfWimBB. ITS*

Dutch, 04, 88, 89, Z85.

Dutch East India Computy, 108.


E


Edncatkm, 45, 46, 5a, 146^ 2x4.

(See ** lUitency.'O
Educattonal Teeti, 44. 45, 5a, Z94,

031, ^39, 234. (See " Negro.")
Eminence of Races in America,

^^, 31, 3a.
Employment Agencies, tag.
English Race, 17, 93, 05, zag.


Fifteenth Amendment to the

Constitation, 4a, 44, z88.
Filipinos, 140, 143, Z43, 144.

S'toM. 95-97-

Fleming, Professor W. L., aafi.

Fourteenth Amendment to tiie

Constitution, 4a, 44, 45.

French, as, za8.

Ftencfa Canadians, 85, 97, 251,

X99.


Oalicia, 93. (See also "Austria^

Hungary.")
Germans, 24, 30^ 65, 67-68, 84, zaa,

13a, 153.
Greeks, ^, zaa.

H

Hampton Institute, 49.

Hawaii, 99, zoi, zoa, Z93, Z05, Z3Z,

Z3a, Z42, 196,
Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Assod*-

tion, 234.
Heredity, 5.

Hoffman, Fred L., 55, 57.
Huguenots, 24-25.


Illiteracy, 7^ 79, Z94.

Immigration, 22-38, 6$-zo6.

Immigration Bureaus, 225, agf,

InoentiTes to Immigration, 27-3Z,
6^-68.72,76,77,80,84-87,88,95,
96, 99, zoo, loz, Z07, Z08.

India, 9, zo, X03, Z4Z, Z4a.

Indigenous Races, Z04.

Industrial Capacity of Races, zaT-

Industrial Education, 46^ 47, 48.
(See '* Negro.")

Industrial Prosperity and Depres-
sion, 63, 68, 7a, ZS7.

Infant Mortality, 60^ 62, 87. (See
" Death-rate.")

Initiative and Referendum, z85-z87.

Irish, 34, 34, 6s. 66» 67. zaa, Z5Z,

153. «4. "S-
Italians, 70-79, Z09, zaa, Z93, za7,

Z30, Z3a, Z40, Z4Z, Z46. Z47, Z5Z,


Japanese, zoz, zoa, tog, ZZ4, z^o^

Z3X> 13a.
Je£ferson, Thomas, z.
Jenks, J. W., Z4a.
Jews, 65, 8z, 83, 87-95, XX5. x«.

12^ za7, Z3a, Z33, zsa, Z53, Z64.


Kelsey, Cari, 54, 55.
Knights of Labor, zx8.
Knownothings, zzy, Z73.
Koreans, Z03.
Kuczynski, R. R., Z98, 907.


Labor, za4, zsg, za6, Z3Z, Z34-Z59.
(See "Wage Earners," '*lVade
Unions.'*)


•1


240


INDEX


Labor, Department of, 177, 178.
Landlordism, 64, 66, 7a, 85. 87,

z8o.
Languages, ao. 94, 97.
Law, John, xo8.
Leadership, 5a.
Legislation, xii, 117, 118, 136, 231,

234.^6-
Lincoln, Abraham, 43, 313.

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 33-35.

Longshoremen, 150.

M

Machinery, 135, 156.
Magyars, 81, 83, 83, 84, 123-
Malay Races, 140, 143.
Mallock, W. H., 179.
Marriage, 303.
Mexicans, 133.
Military Duties, 75.
Miners, 139, 130, 150, 154.
Mob Violence, 173, 174, 175.
Molly Maguires, 139.
Morality, 61, 63, 304. (See " Pros-
titution.")
Munsterbeig, Hugo, 179.

N

Naturalisation, xii, 188, 189, 190,
194.

Negro, 3, 13, 16, 39-63, 106, 108,
112, 113, 114, 136, 137, 139, 140,
147, 172, 309.

New York, 164, 314, 315.

Norwegians, 164. (See "Scandi-
navians.")


Padroni, xo3, X03, X09, 1x8, 339.
" Pale of Settlement," 9X.
Penn, William, 39, zo8.
Pennsylvania, 39, 30, 31.
Peonage, X3S, 136, 137, X38, X39,

141.
Philippine Commission, 144.

R


Philippine Islands, io6» 241. 17%

i8a
Poles, 83, 133, 153.
Political Boss, The, x8a.
PoUtical Exiles, 68.
Population, 53-58, 76, X57, x6o,

(See "Births" and "Deatb-

rates.")
Porto Rico, X06, 218.
Portuguese, 98, 152.
Poverty and Pauperism, a6, 66, 76,

167, X7S-178.
Primaries, Direct, 185.
Profits, X08, XS5.
Prohibition, 173.

Proportional Representation, 284.
Prostitution, 57.
Protective Tariff, X58.


Quakers, 28, 39.


Race Problem, 4, 8, 40, 43, 43, 44,

1x3. (See " Negro.")
Races, 3, 5, 7, 8, X3-X7, 87, 88, X04-

X06, X08, 3X1. (See individual

name of race.)
Race Suicide, X98, 300.
Railroads, X30, 156, 335.
Reconstruction, 43, 50.
Religion, 38, 186, 3x7-3x9. (See

" Incentives to Immigration.")
Restriction of Immigration, xx6 n.,

117, 118, 17s, 230, 231.
Ripley, W. Z., 95.
Roosevelt, Theodore, 30X, 306.
Rosenberg, Edward, 144.
Roumanians, 83, 84, X23.
Russia, 87, 93, 93, X33.
Ruthenians, 80, 83, 133.


Scandinavians. 34, X3a, X53. (See
" Norwegians.")


241


INDEX


Sooldi Irish, 93-04. Si-^S* Z98.

XSX. (Sec " Iriah/*)
Setf-gofcniment. »-4, 4a, 43, 49. 53.
Seymour, Governor Horatio, 09.
Shaler, Prafetsor N. S., xo.
SlavB, 14.65, 80^ aa, 83, is»,
Slovaks, Bx, 83, X5X.
Social Settlements, 2x9.
Socialism, x8x.
Spaniards, xflB.
Standard of Living, xxa, XX5, X5x.

XS3,906.
Statistics, xx9b X30, X58, X60-X78,

X98. (See ** Fbpvaation,*' " Births,"

"Deatfa-rsle.")
Steamship Lines, 84, 85, X07, ixo,

937,938.
Stone, A. H., X47.
Strikes, xoa, X49.
Suffiage, a, 4a. 43. 44. 5X. 5a, XX7.

x8a, X83, x88, aaa (See also

" Educational Tests.")
Sweatshops, 1x5, X33, X48.
Swedes, 47.
Syrians, 99^x51.


Taft, Governor, X43.
Taaution, 74, 75, 84, 86.
Temporary Immigration, 77, 98,

xox.
Test Act, 35.


Thirteenth Amendment to the

Constitution, 43.
Ttade Unions, 50, 5X, XX5. xa9, 149,

150* 15^ 154* 9p5. aao, aai, aaa,

a93, aa4. (See ** Labor" and

"Wage Eamers.*7
Triple Alliance, 75.
Tuskegee Institute, 49.


U


United Garment Workers of Amer-
ica, XX5 n., X50.

United Hebrew Charities of New

York, X67.
United Mine Workers of America,

ISO.

W

Wage Earners, xxx-xx8, X57. (See

-Labor.")
Wages, xxa, XX3, xa9, X40, 148, 153,

153. 155. »57i 159- (See "Labor.")

Wage System, The, X47.

Walker, Fhmcis A.. 198, aoo.
ao7.

Watson, Elkanah, aoo.

Wealth Production and Immigra-
tion, XX9, 159.

Welfisure Work, 319.

Wilcox, Professor, 337.


243


POVERTY

By ROBERT HUNTER

Paper umo 2$ ceikts net

Cloth Mmo $1.50 net


** A book that should be read by eveiy one who has the promotion of social
betterment at heart" _ MUtoaukee SenHtuL

** A most interesting, a most startling, and a most instructive book.*'

— Los Angeles Ttmes»

" His book is laigely a result of personal eicperience, and the aid of such
works as his observation has led him to believe are approximately accurate and
worthy of credence. ' Poverty ' seeks to define its subject, estimate its extent,
describe some of its effects, and point out the necessary remedial action, as seen
by a settlement worker. The result is a collection of data of considerable

^*^'**"" — New York Daily PeopU,

" This is in many ways a noteworthy book. The author has long lived face
to face with the almost incredible conditions which he here portrays. He has
extended his work and observations from the crowded tenement districts of the
great cities to the smaller industrial towns, and what he finds reveals conditions
in this country — even in times of industrial prosperity — very similar to those
found in England by Booth and other investigators ; namely, that a percentage
of poverty exists in the smaller industrial centres not £Eur below that of the great
industrial places, and that this percentage is extraordinarily high."

^■^Springfield Republican.

*' The book is written with earnestness, but without exaggeration. Every one
familiar with the facts knows that conditions are even more cruel and brutal
than as here described. And yet, no one of the great industrial nations is so
t>ackward as our own in devising and employing the legislative and other nec-
essary remedies. Mr. Hunter's presentation of the situation is of the greatest
value, and deserves the widest consideration." _ ^ OmgregaHonalUt.


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

84-66 Fifth Ayeaue, New Tork


X


i3-


/


r' ^


NXaOC. C 7S7 r
Racca and

T


3 2044 043 211 721


•M


^ k


--I


i
