THE
DISTRIBUTION OF  WEALTH


^^^


THE


DISTRIBUTION  OF  WEALTH


BY
THOMAS NIXON CARVER

PROFESSOR  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  IN
HARVARD UNIVERSITY


OF THE

UNIVERSITY

OF

^UFORNV^


THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

LONDON:  MACMILLAN  &  CO..  Ltd.

1908

All  rights  reserved


^1\


GENERAL


Copyright,  1904,
By  the  MACMILLAN  COMPANY.


Set  up  and  electrotyped. Published  October,  1904, Reprinted
July,  1908.


NortDootr  ipress

J.  8.  Onshlng  Co.  —  Berwick  &  Smith  Co.

Norwood,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


PREFACE

Ten  years  ago,  when  the  author  began  the  teach-
ing of  political  economy,  the  economic  world  was  still
engaged  in  a  lively  discussion  of  certain  problems  in
distribution.  This  discussion  had  been  precipitated
a  few  years  earlier  by  the  writings  of  such  men  as
Francis  A.  Walker  and  J.  B.  Clark  in  America,
W.  S.  Jevons  and  Alfred  Marshall  in  England,  and
a  group  of  Austrian  economists,  notable  among  whom
were  F.  von  Wieser  and  E.  von  Bohm-Bawerk.  The
author  had  already,  during  his  course  of  university
study,  taken  an  interest  in  this  discussion,  halving
contributed  two  articles  to  the  Quarterly,  youmal  of
Economics^  one  in  October,  1893,  on  "The  Place  of
Abstinence  in  the  Theory  of  Interest,"  and  the  other
in  July,  1894,  on  "The  Theory  of  Wages  adjusted  to
Recent  Theories  of  Value."  The  interest  thus  devel-
oped has  not  declined,  but  increased  during  the  sub-
sequent ten  years  of  active  teaching,  first  in  Oberlin
College  and  afterward  in  Harvard  University,  and
the  present  volume  is  the  outcome.

The  author  hopes  that  the  reader  who  takes  up
this  volume  may  do  so  with  the  understanding  that


197447


VI  Preface

economics  is  a  science  rather  than  a  branch  of  polite
literature,  and  with  the  expectation  of  putting  as
much  mental  effort  into  the  reading  of  it  as  he
would  into  the  reading  of  a  treatise  on  physics,
chemistry,  or  biology.  The  collateral  reading  at  the
close  of  each  chapter  is  not  intended  to  be  exhaus-
tive, but  is  selected  with  a  view  to  the  needs  of  the
author's  own  classes.  Only  so  many  references  have
been  selected  as  a  class  could  reasonably  be  required
to  read,  together  with  the  text,  in  a  half-course,
meeting  three  hours  a  week  during  a  half-year.

So  much  has  been  written  in  the  field  of  distri-
bution that  it  would  be  impossible  for  any  writer
in  this  field  to  claim  originality  for  all  his  ideas,  and
equally  impossible  for  him  to  give  full  credit  in
every  instance  to  all  those  to  whom  he  is  indebted.
The  present  writer  is  led  to  believe,  however,  that
there  is  enough  of  originality,  both  in  his  ideas  and
his  manner  of  presentation,  especially  in  the  chap-
ters on  Dirryjiishmg  Returns  and  InJtergal^  to  warrant
the  publication  of  the  book.

No  one  is  entitled  to  be  heard  on  the  subject  of
distribution  who  does  not  owe  much  to  such  works
as  Marshall's  "  Principles  of  Economics,"  Bohm-
Bawerk's  "  Positive  Theory  of  Capital,"  Taussig's
"Wages  and  Capital,"  and  Clark's  "Distribution  of
Wealth." The  author  hereby  acknowledges  his  in-


Preface  vii

debtedness  to  these  writers.  He  has  also  received
many  suggestions  from  the  series  of  articles  which
have  appeared  in  the  various  economic  journals  by
such  writers  as  F.  Y.  Edgeworth,  Simon  N.  Patten,
S.  M.  Macvane,  Richard  T.  Ely,  Irving  Fisher,  H.  C.
Emery,  J.  H.  Hollander,  C.  A.  Tuttle,  F.  B.  Haw-
ley,  W.  G.  L.  Taylor,  and  F.  A.  Fetter.  He  is  also
under  obligations  to  his  colleague,  Professor  C.  J.
Bullock,  for  his  valuable  suggestions  and  friendly
criticism,  and  to  Mrs.  Laura  Grant  Folin  for  assist-
ance in  revising  the  manuscript  and  reading  the
proof.  But  the  author  owes  most  of  all  to  his  wife,
whose  many  helpful  suggestions,  kindly  criticism,
and  unfailing  sympathy  have  not  only  made  the
preparation  of  this  book  possible,  but  were  the  in-
spiration of  the  years  of  study  and  preparation  which
preceded  it.

T.  N.  C.

Cambridge,  Mass.,
September,  1904.


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  I

PAGB

Value i

CHAPTER  II
Diminishing  Returns 53

CHAPTER  III
The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income .... 102

CHAPTER  IV
Wages

CHAPTER  V
Rent 185

CHAPTER  VI
Interest 213

CHAPTER  VII
Profits 259

ix


INTRODUCTION

Professor  Marshall  has  aptly  defined  economics
as  the  study  of  man's  actions  in  the  ordinary  business
of  life.  Since  the  ordinary  business  of  life  consists  in
getting  a  living,  it  was  easy  to  modify  this  definition
so  as  to  read,  Economics  is  the  study  of  man's  efforts
to  get  a  living.  Either  of  these  definitions  would
imply  that  the  science  is  concerned  more  with  man's
economic  activities  than  with  the  things  toward  which
those  activities  are  directed ;  more  with  the  ways  of
getting  and  using  wealth  than  with  the  nature  and
forms  of  wealth.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  student  of
economics  cares  only  incidentally  for  a  description
and  classification  of  the  things  which  constitute
wealth ;  but  he  wishes  primarily  to  know  the  methods
by  which  wealth  is  procured  and  utilized.  In  other
words,  economic  activities,  rather  than  economic
goods,  form  the  subject-matter  of  the  science.

The  reason  for  subdividing  a  science  into  depart-
ments is  that  it  is  easier  to  concentrate  the  attention
upon  a  part  of  the  subject  than  upon  the  whole. In


xii  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

order  to  fulfil  this  purpose,  the  subdivision  must  be
such  that  in  each  department  some  definite  part  of
the  subject-matter  is  set  off  by  itself  for  special  study.
If  economic  goods  formed  the  subject-matter  of  the
science,  it  would  have  to  be  so  subdivided  that  each
department  would  study  some  particular  class  of
goods.  If  economic  conditions  formed  the  subject-
matter,  each  department  would  study  some  particular
set  of  conditions.  But  if  economic  activities  form
the  subject-matter,  then  each  department  must  set
off  some  particular  class  of  activities  for  special
study.  In  other  words,  the  subdivision  of  economics
should  be  based  upon  a  classification  of  economic
activities.

One  very  important  group  of  economic  activities  is
directed  toward  the  production  of  goods.  If  this  be
broadly  defined  as  the  process  of  adding  utilities  to
things,  it  will  include  not  only  the  activities  of  the
producer  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  of  the  carrier,  the
storer,  and  the  exchanger  of  goods. '  Another  impor-
tant group  of  activities  consists  in  extracting  the  utili-
ties from  things,  or  in  the  consumption  of  goods.  A
third  equally  important  group  consists  in  the  valua-
tion of  goods.  No  one  of  these  groups  is  independent
of  the  others,  else  we  should  have  three  separate
sciences ;  but  each  is  sufficiently  distinct  to  permit  of
special  study. At  the  same  time  these  three  groups


Introduction


xin


exhaust  the  category  of  economic  activities,  though
each  is  capable  of  further  subdivision.

These  three  classes  of  activities  should  therefore
form  the  subjects  of  the  three  main  divisions  of  the
science,  —  production,  consumption,  valuation.  The
order  in  which  these  subjects  should  be  treated  and
the  subdivisions  of  each  would  depend  upon  the
interests  and  the  purposes  of  the  individual  writer.
As  a  tentative  suggestion  as  to  the  subdivision  of
the  subject  of  valuation,  the  following  outline  is  sub-
mitted :  —


Valuation


of  goods


of  services


consumers'  goods

land  and natural
agents
producers'  goods  ]  capital

laborers  (only  where
slavery  exists)
of  land  and  natural  agents ;  or  rent
of  capital ;  or  interest
of  laborers  ;  or  wages
of  business  men ;  or  profits.


The  present  work  is  primarily  an  attempt  to  ex-
plain the  valuation  of  services,  though  a  chapter  on
value  in  general  is  a  necessary  introduction  to  that
explanation.

The  writer  would  be  the  last  to  belittle  the  impor-
tance of  the  psychical  side  of  economics;  but  the
foregoing  discussion  will,  it  is  hoped,  help  to  make
it  clear  that  economics  is  not  primarily  a  psychical


XIV  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

science.  The  psychical  element  predominates  only  in
the  department  of  valuation.  It  is  obviously  out  of
place  here  to  open  up  the  general  question  of  the
nature  of  the  science ;  but  it  may  be  permissible  to
express  the  hope  that  economics  may  remain,  as  it
always  has  been,  a  concrete  science,  whose  aim  is  to
explain  the  facts  of  economic  life  as  they  are  seen
and  experienced,  first  in  our  own  economic  environ-
ment and  afterward,  perhaps,  in  the  world  at  large.
If  this  is  to  be  the  nature  of  the  science,  and  if  it
is  not  to  become  an  abstract  theory  whose  aim  is  to
follow  the  workings  of  a  single  principle  under  all
possible  conditions,  then  the  words  "  static "  and
"  dynamic  "  can  not  properly  designate  any  of  the
main  divisions  of  the  science.

Economists  who  have  passed  out  of  the  metaphysi-
cal stage  of  their  mental  development  are  content  if
they  can  find  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  facts
of  economic  life  which  they  see  in  the  world  about
them.  If  they  can  find  such  an  explanation,  they  are
then  in  a  position  to  explain  how  certain  desirable
modifications  of  these  facts  may  be  brought  about
for  the  advancement  of  the  society  in  which  they
live,  not  pretending  to  a  similar  knowledge  in  regard
to  other  types  of  civilization.  Consequently,  the
present  writer  has  not  bothered  himself  with  specu-
lations as  to  what  the  primitive  man  may  or  may


Introduction  XV

not  have  done,  nor  even  with  the  way  in  which
Orientals  of  to-day,  and  other  custom-bound  peoples,
may  differ  from  our  own  people  in  their  methods  of
evaluation.  He  has  tried  only  to  find  out  and
explain  why  men  evaluate  things  as  they  do  in  com-
munities with  which  he  is  acquainted,  in  a  civiliza-
tion of  which  he  is  a  part.

The  method  pursued  is  that  of  an  analytical  study
of  the  motives  which  govern  men  in  business  and
industrial  life.  No  one  who  knows  the  meaning  of
terms  will  call  this  a  metaphysical,  or  even  a  strictly
deductive,  method.  We  all  observe  certain  concrete
facts  relating  to  the  value  of  goods  and  services,  and
the  economist  tries  to  find  the  explanations  for  these
facts.  If  the  search  for  these  explanations  leads  us
to  study  the  motives  which  govern  men's  actions  in
buying  and  selling,  it  only  means  that  it  is  necessary
to  carry  our  study  into  the  subjective,  as  well  as  into
the  objective,  field.  The  study  in  one  field  may  be
quite  as  inductive  as  in  the  other,  though  there  are
certain  facts  of  common  experience  which  only  need
to  be  stated  and  do  not  require  elaborate  experimen-
tation and  research  in  order  to  find  them  out.  Such
facts  are  therefore  taken  for  granted,  but  the  analyti-
cal economist  makes  no  more  use  of  such  facts  than
does  the  historian  or  the  statistician,  both  of  whom
assume  that  they  know  certain  things  about  the  be-


xvi  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

havior  of  men  and  do  not  stop  to  prove  them.  The
historian,  for  example,  must  assume  that  the  men  of
past  generations  were  moved  by  hunger  and  thirst,
love  and  jealousy,  self-interest  and  patriotism,  just
as  the  men  of  this  generation  are ;  but  such  is  quite
as  violent  an  assumption  as  any  which  the  analytical
economist  makes.


THE
DISTRIBUTION OF  WEALTH


"^ OF THE

UNIVERSITY

OF


THE
DISTRIBUTION  OF  WEALTH

CHAPTER  I

VALUE

Moved  by  the  primal  instinct  of  acquisition,  the  boy
with  a  pocket  soon  fills  it  with  a  collection  of  things
which  from  time  to  time  have  served  his  purpose  or
pleased  his  fancy.  As  he  advances  in  experience  and
knowledge  of  the  world  he  gradually  learns  to  dis-
tinguish in  certain  of  these  things  a  quality  which
makes  them  especially  desirable.  Things  possessing
this  quality  give  him  a  peculiar  power  over  his  fellows
—  the  power  of  securing  from  them  certain  of  their
possessions  in  peaceful  and  voluntary  exchange.  In
other  words,  such  things  possess  the  advantage  of
being  exchangeable  for  other  desirable  things.  From
this  time  forth  his  efforts  are  directed  more  and  more
toward  the  securing  of  things  of  this  class,  because
he  recognizes  more  and  more  the  strategic  advantage
which  comes  to  him  through  the  possession  of  this
soul-compelling  power. With  it  he  is  able  to  com-


2  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

mand  the  resources  of his  fellows  in  peaceful  and
voluntary  exchange.

This  evolution  which  takes  place  in  the  juvenile
mind  is  the  counterpart  of  one  which  has  taken  place
in  society  at  large.  In  undeveloped  societies,  accord-
ing to  all  accounts,  each  individual  tries  to  make,
gather,  or  otherwise  secure,  such  things  as  will
directly  satisfy  his  own  wants  or  those  of  his  own
family.  But  in  all  highly  developed  societies,  espe-
cially in  our  own,  the  immediate  concern  of  the  in-
dividual is  to  make,  gather,  or  otherwise  secure  the
possession  of,  something  which  will  bring  him  other
things  in  exchange  for  itself.  Having  secured  a  thing
of  this  kind,  which  he  may  not  himself  be  able  to  use,
he  can  depend  upon  getting  sornething  which  hgjdoes

Jg^ant  frnm  amnng  \)np'.  pnssf^Rsinns  nf  his  f<^11nwR.

A  thing  which  possesses  this  power  is  said  to  be
valuable,  or  to  possess  value.  In  Walker's  brief  but
^•excellent  phrase,  "Value  is  power  in  exchange;"^
and  as  Mill  defines  it,  the  value  of  a  thing  is  "its
general  power  of  purchasing;  the  command  which
its  possession  gives  over  purchasable  commodities
in  general."  ^  Either  definition  accurately  expresses
the  whole  meaning  of  the  word  "value";  but  in  popu-
lar discussions  this  word  is  frequently  and  incorrectly

1  "  Political  Economy,"  Part  I,  §  8.

a  "Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  Book  III,  Ch.  i,  §  2.


Value  3

confused  with  "utility."  Utility  is  the  power  to  sat-
isfy a  want  or  gratify  a  desire ;  but  value  is  always
and  only  the  power  to  command  other  desirable  things
in  peaceful  and  voluntary  excha.nge.  Value  depends
upon  utility,  since  nothing  could  have  value  unless  it
had  the  power  to  satisfy  some  want  or  gratify  some
desire,  —  that  is  to  say,  unless  it  had  utiUty ;  yet  value
is  not  the  power  to  satisfy  that  want  or  to  gratify  that
desire,  but  only  the  power  to  purchase  other  things.
On  the  other  hand,  however  useful  a  thing  may  be,
however  necessary  it  may  be  for  our  own  comfort,
or  even  for  our  existence,  unle^JbLhas  power  in  ex-
change it  has  no  value.  Air  and  sunlight  and  various
other  things  possess  utility,  but  they  do  not,  under
ordinary  conditions,  possess  any  value.  Though  there^,
can  be  no  value  where  there  is  no  utility,  yet  there  \
may  be,  and  often  is,  utility  where  there  is  no  value.  W

The  price  of  an  article,  as  so  many  writers  on  eco-
nomics have  explained,  is  merely  its  value  expressed
in  terms  of  some  single  commodity  which  the  com-
munity has  generally  agreed  upon  as  a  measure  of
value,  which  commodity  is  usually  called  money.
Though  this  book  is  concerned  primarily  with  prob-
lems of  value,  the  word  "  price "  will  sometimes  be
used,  but  only  where  no  confusion  will  result  from
using  the  words  interchangeably.

Accepting  "  power  in  exchange  "  as  a  good  work-


4  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

ing  definition  of  value,  the  first  problem  is  to  explain
the  source  of  that  power.  Why  do  some  things  pos-
sess it  while  others  do  not?  Why  do  some  things
possess  more  of  it  than  others  ?  Why  does  the  same
thing  possess  more  of  it  at  one  time  or  place  than
at  another?

Before  attempting  to  answer  these  questions  it  is
important  that  we  should  remind  ourselves  that  they
have  to  do  with  the^ value  of  real,  mncr^.tt^  articles
such  as  a  hat,  a  loaf  of  bread,  or  a  ton  of  coal,  rather
than  with  indefinite  classes  or  groups  of  things,  such
as  hats-in-general,  bread-in-general,  or  coal-in-general.
It  is  a  prevailing  vice  of  beginners  in  economics  to  be
always  trying  to  explain  the  value  of  things-in-general
before  they  have  adequately  explained  the  value  of
particular  articles.  Men  do  not  buy  and  sell  things-
in-general,  but  definite,  concrete  articles  in  specific
quantities;  not  wheat-in-general,  but  bushels  of
wheat;  not  land-in-general,  but  acres  of  land;  not
gold-in-general,  but  ounces  of  gold.  The  fact  that
different  bushels  of  wheat,  or  different  ounces  of
gold,  are  so  nearly  alike  as  to  make  it  a  matter  of
indifference  to  the  buyer  which  particular  bushel,
or  which  particular  ounce,  he  gets,  does  not  alter
the  case.  The  fact  remains  that  a  bushel  of  wheat
or  an  ounce  of  gold  is  something  tangible  and  con-
crete, and  it  is  always  a  definite  number  of  such  tan-


Value  5

gible,  concrete  units  which  are  exchanged.  Similarly,
if  such  a  thing  as  air  were  bought  and  sold,  it  would
not  be  air-in-general,  but  cubic  yards  of  air,  or  similar
units.

To  be  sure,  if  the  units  are  all  alike,  or  so  nearly
alike  as  to  serve  the  buyer's  purpose  equally  well,
they  will  all  have  the  same  price  at  the  same  time
and  place.  Obviously,  no  buyer  would  pay  more  for
one  unit  than  he  would  have  to  pay  for  another  if  he
knew  that  the  cheaper  unit  would  serve  his  purpose
just  as  well.  This  is  what  Marshall  has  called  the
first  law  of  the  market.^  Since  all  units  of  such  a
commodity  have  the  same  price,  and  since  the  price
of  any  is  a  gauge  of  the  price  of  every  other,  it  is
customary  to  speak  of  the  price  of  the  commodity
without  naming  its  units.  Thus  we  uniformly  speak
of  the  price  of  bread,  of  wheat,  of  coal,  etc.  We
even  fall  into  the  same  habit  of  speech  with  respect
to  the  price  of  things  of  the  same  class  even  when
each  individual  unit  has  its  own  particular  price.
We  speak,  for  example,  of  the  price  of  houses,  of
land,  of  horses,  etc.  But  this  habit  of  speech  does
not  alter  the  fact  that  value  attaches  only  to  concrete
units  ;  it  merely  implies  (sometimes  erroneously,  how-
ever) that  there  is  a  close  connection  between  the
price  of  any  one  unit  and  that  of  every  other  unit  of
1 "  Principles  of  Economics."


6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  class  or  group  to  which  it  belongs.  Therefore
we  have  first  to  explain  why  such  a  thing  as  a  loaf  of
bread  has  value,  and  what  determines  the  amount  of
that  value.  We  will  then  have  an  explanation  of  the
value  of  all  bread  of  that  kind  and  quality,  since  that
which  is  true  of  one  loaf  would,  under  the  same  con-
ditions, be  true  of  every  other.  Similarly,  after  we
have  explained  the  absence  of  value  in  a  given  cubic
yard  of  air,  we  shall  have  an  adequate  explanation  of
the  absence  of  value  in  air-in-general,  since  that
which  is  true  of  one  cubic  yard  would,  under  similar
conditions,  be  true  of  every  other.  Here  as  else-
where the  scientific  method  is  to  deal  with  particular
facts  first  and  general  facts  afterward.

That  such  a  concrete  article  can  have  value  only
when  some  one  happens  to  want  it,  is  too  obvious  to
need  discussion.  Manifestly,  an  article  which  no  one
wants  will  have  no  power  to  command  others  in
peaceful  and  voluntary  exchange.  But  if  it  is  wanted
by  others  besides  its  possessor,  it  will  have  value  un-
less those  who  want  it  have  nothing,  not  even  ser-
vices, to  give  in  exchange  for  it.  That  the  amount  of
j  value  in  such  an  article  depends  upon  how  much  it
i  is  wanted  in  comparison  with  other  things  is  perhaps
a  trifle  less  obvious  but  none  the  less  true.  That  is
to  say,  if  it  is  much  wanted  in  comparison  with  other
things,  many  of  those  other  things  will  be  given  in


Value  7

exchange  for  it.  In  other  words,  it  will  have  a  high
value.  But  if  it  is  little  wanted  in  comparison  with
other  things,  few  of  those  other  things  will  be  given
in  exchange  for  it.  In  other  words,  it  will  have  a
low  value.

There  are  two  primary  reasons  why  such  an
article  may  not  be  wanted  at  all.  In  the  first  place»
there  may  be  no  use  to  which  it  can  be  put,  no  desire
which  it  can  possibly  satisfy,  at  least  so  far  as  is
known  at  the  time  and  place.  In  the  second  place,
though  the  article  may  have  important  uses,  there
may  yet  be  available  so  many  others  just  like  it  as
to  fully  satisfy  every  desire  to  which  it  can  minister.
That  being  the  case,  the  particular  article  in  question
would  not  be  wanted.

The  latter  is  the  more  general  reason  why  a  thing
is  not  wanted,  and  why  it  is  consequently  valueless.
It  would  be  difficult  to  name  anything  which  could
not  gratify  some  desire  or  be  put  to  some  use ;  but
one  could  name  an  indefinite  number  of  things  which
are  superfluous,  and  are  not  wanted  simply  because
there  are  too  many  others  of  the  same  kind.  A
cubic  yard  of  air  furnishes  a  good  example  of  this
kind  of  superfluity.  Though  it  can  be  put  to  a
use  no  less  important  than  the  sustaining  of  life
itself,  it  is  not  wanted  simply  because  there  are
ordinarily  so  many  others  available  that  the  one  in


/


8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

question  can  be  dispensed  with  just  as  well  as  not.
Box  it  up  and  withhold  it  from  use,  and  no  one
will  care.  By  some  miracle  create  another,  and
no  one  will  be  benefited.  All  this  is  true  of  any
cubic  yard  one  can  designate :  there  is  no  want
whose  satisfaction  depends  in  the  slightest  degree
upon  its  existence ;  it  might  as  well  not  be  as  be,  so
far  as  any  one  cares,  and  it  is  strictly  accurate  to  say
that  no  one  wants  it.  Since  this  is  true  of  each  and
every  cubic  yard,  it  follows  that  no  cubic  yard  has
any  value.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  explanation  of  the
general  fact  that  air  has  no  value.

One  might  go  a  step  farther  and  name  a  great
many  articles  which,  though  capable  of  satisfying
desires,  or  of  being  put  to  important  uses,  have  yet
become  worse  than  worthless  simply  through  their
overabundance,  or,  more  accurately,  because  there
are  so  many  other  things  just  like  them  that  they
have  become  a  nuisance.  Many  of  the  weeds  which
infest  our  fields  belong  in  this  class.  Some  have
medicinal  properties,  others  bear  flowers  which
please  the  eye;  but  the  number  to  be  had  so  far
exceeds  the  number  which  can  be  used  that  no  one
of  them  is  wanted,  while  each  and  every  one  cumbers
the  ground  and  interferes  with  the  growth  of  more
useful  plants.  Hence  the  farmer  will  spend  time
and  money  in  trying to  get  rid  of  them. Rabbits


Value  9

in  Australia  will  also  serve  as  an  illustration.  Such
things  may  be  said  to  possess  negative  value,  or  to
be  worth  less  than  nothing,  because  they  are  not
only  not  wanted,  but  detested,  and  this  solely  be-
cause of  their  superabundance.

There  are,  to  be  sure,  secondary  reasons  why  an
article  may  not  be  wanted,  but  these  will  be  found
to  be  only  variations  of  the  primary  reasons  already
given.  The  article  may,  for  example,  not  now  be
in  a  usable  form,  or  this  may  not  be  a  proper  time
for  using  it,  or  it  may  not  be  in  a  place  where  it
can  be  used.  Yet  in  the  proper  form,  time,  and
place  it  might  be  very  much  wanted.  If,  however,
the  cost  of  putting  it  into  that  form,  time,  or  place
is  so  great  as  to  more  than  balance  the  advantages
which  could  be  derived  from  it,  no  one  will  care  to
undertake  to  make  the  necessary  changes.  Under
such  conditions  no  one  would  want  it  in  its  present
state,  and  it  would  therefore  have  no  value.

This  part  of  the  discussion  may  be  summed  up
by  saying  that  an  article  —  a  concrete  article  such
as  may  be  bought  and  sold  —  has  value  only  when
it  is  wanted,  and  that  it  is  wanted  only  where  there
are  so  few  others  like  it  as  to  only  partially  satisfy
the  want  or  the  desire  to  which  it  ministers.  If
there  are  so  many  others  like  it  that  the  want  is
fully  satisfied,  the one  in question  is not wanted


lO  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

at  all,  and  this  would  be  true  also  of  each  and
every  one  considered  singly.  But  if  there  are  not
enough  to  go  around  and  satisfy  all  who  want
it,  each  and  every  unit  (of  the  same  kind  and  qual-
ity) will  be  wanted  and  will  consequently  have  a
value.

If  it  is  correct  to  say  that  such  an  article  has  value
only  when  it  is  wanted,  it  is  equally  correct  to  say
that  it  has  little  value  when  it  is  little  wanted,
and  much  value  when  it  is  much  wanted,  in
comparison  with  other  things.  Following  out  the
argument  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that  there  are
two  primary  reasons  why  such  an  article  may  be
little  wanted. In  the  first  place,  the  uses  to  which

yit  can  be  put  may  be  trifling  and  insignificant,  the
wants  to  which  it  ministers  may  be  of  so  little  im-
portance that  there  would  be  no  great  privation  if
they  were  left  entirely  unsatisfied.  In  the  second
place,  though  the  wants  to  which  it  ministers  may  be
of  considerable  importance,  —  that  is  to  say,  though
there  would  be  great  privation  if  nothing  could  be
had  to  satisfy  them,  —  yet  these  wants  may  be  so
nearly  satisfied  by  an  abundance  of  other  articles
just  like  the  one  in  question,  or  so  nearly  like  it  as

/to  be  good  substitutes  for  it,  that  this  particular
article  may  not  be  much  wanted.  If  it  were  with-
held from  use  or  destroyed,  there  would  be  no  great


Value  1 1

loss,  and  no  great  gain  if  another  like  it  were
created.  Under  these  conditions  comparatively  few
other  things  would  be  given  in  exchange  for  this  one,
or  for  any  other  of  the  same  kind  and  quality.  A
man  will  usually  give  in  exchange  for  a  thing  some-
thing which  he  wants  less  than  he  does  that  thing.
But  if  the  wants  to  which  an  article  ministers  are
of  considerable  importance,  and  if  there  are  few
other  articles  to  help  satisfy  those  wants,  then  each
and  every  such  article  will  be  much  wanted,  and  a
comparatively  large  number  df  other  things  will  be
given  in  exchange  for  it.
^  /  To  say  that  an  article  has  value  only  when  it  i^.
panted,  is  the  same  as  saying  that  it  has  value  only  ]
(when  it  has  utility,  for  utility  is,  by  definition,  th^
Ipower  to  satisfy  a  want.  Whether  that  want  be
fundamental,  like  hunger,  or  only  whimsical,  like  the
desire  for  the  latest  novelty,  does  not  affect  the  case.
Whether  the  want  be  commendable  or  blameworthy
is  likewise  a  matter  of  indifference  so  far  as  this
question  is  concerned.  Whatever  the  nature  of  the
want  may  be,  the  power  to  satisfy  it  is  called  utility.
The  fact  that  an  article  is  wanted,  whatever  the  pur-
pose may  be,  is  sufficient.  To  say  that  an  article  has
value  only  when  there  are  not  enough  things  like  it
to  go  around  and  satisfy  all  who  want  them,  is  the
same  as  saying  that  it  has  value  only  when  the  class


12  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

to  which  it  belongs  is  scarce,  for  scarcity  is,  by  defini-
tion, insufficiency  to  satisfy  wants.  A  thing  may  be
rare,  for  example,  without  being  scarce.  That  is  to
say,  however  little  there  may  be  of  it,  if  that  little  is
more  than  is  wanted,  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  scarce.
(5n  the  other  hand,  however  abundant  it  may  be,  if
there  is  not  enough,  it  is  said  to  be  scarce.  Speak-
ing absolutely,  there  may  be  more  grass  than  weeds
in  any  community,  but  relatively  to  wants,  grass  is
scarce  while  weeds  are  superabundant.

Assuming  only  that  things  of  any  given  class  are
appropriable  and  not,  like  the  moon  and  the  stars,
beyond  human  control,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  utility
and  scarcity,  and  these  alone,  are  necessary  to  give
them  value.  Where  both  qualities  are  present  there
is  always  value.  Where  either  is  lacking  there  is  no
value.  The  reader  is  hereby  challenged  to  find  an
exception  to  this  rule  in  any  civilized  community.
Since  the  scarcity  of  an  article  implies  that  it  is  use-
ful, one  might  go  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  scarcity
alone  is  necessary  to  give  it  value ;  but  there  is  no
advantage  in  carrying  the  discussion  so  far  as  that.
Value  not  only  depends  upon  utility  and  scarcity,  but
it  varies  with  these  two  qualities.  That  is  to  say,
the  more  useful  a  class  of  things  becomes  the
greater  their  individual  value,  provided  they  do  not
increase  in  amount  at  the  same  time ;  and  the  scarcer


Value  13

they  become  the  greater  their  value,  provided  they  do
not  decline  in  utility  at  the  same  time.

It  has  long  been  observed  that  whenever  any  com-
modity, or  class  of  salable  objects,  becomes  more
abundant  in  comparison  with  other  things,  every  unit
of  that  commodity  becomes  less  valuable,  unless  this
increase  in  amount  has  been  accompanied  by  some
change  in  the  habits  or  the  wants  of  the  community,
which  calls  for  more  of  the  commodity.  Similarly,
if  new  uses  are  discovered  for  the  commodity,  or  if
more  people  come  to  desire  it  for  any  reason  what-
ever, its  value  will  tend  to  rise,  provided  its  amount
does  not  increase  at  the  same  time.  This  is,  of
course,  nothing  more  than  the  well-known  law  qL
supply_aiid^  demand^ — a  law  which  rests  upon  gen-
eral observation  and  experience  rather  than  economic
analysis.

But  this  general  observation  is  to  be  explained  by
means  of  another  fact  of  common  experience,  —  a
fact  which  is  itself  so  elementary  as  to  need  no  ex-
planation. ^ I  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  more  fully  a
want  is  satisfied  the  less  intense  it  becomes) Every  ,,^  //-
boy  knows  that  the  first  apple  which  he  eats,  at  any
one  time,  tastes  better  than  the  second,  provided  they  ^jo^^^
are  alike,  and  the  second  better  than  the  third,  and  <v»t*^*^'
so on. He  knows  also  that,  however hungry  for
apples  he  may  have  been  at  the  start,  if  the  supply


ft\  A'


14  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

of  apples  only  holds  out,  he  will  ultimately  have
enough.  In  other  words,  he  will  reach  a  point  of
complete  satisfaction  so  far  as  that  particular  want
is  concerned.  When  this  point  is  reached  apples  will
have  lost  their  utility  for  him,  for  the  time  beiqg,
and  the  more  nearly  he  approaches  this  point  the
less  utility  they  will  have,  —  that  is,  the  less  he  will
want  them.  Upon  a  class  of  facts  so  elementary  as
this  is  the  law  of  value  based,  and  this  law  governs,
in  the  main,  the  industrial  and  commercial  activities
of  society,  and  furnishes  a  basis  for  a  large  part  of
the  science  of  economics.

The  importance  of  these  elementary  facts  relating
to  the  satiability  of  wants  will  become  perfectly
evident  if  we  will  but  consider  two  other  facts :
first,  all  industry  is  carried  on  for  the  purpose  of
satisfying  wants ;  second,  that  which  was  said  of  the
boy's  appetite  for  apples  can  be  said  of  every  human
want,  viz.,  that  it  is  satiable,  and  it  becomes  less
intense  as  it  approaches  the  point  of  satiety.  This
must  not  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  desire
for  wealth  in  general  can  be  completely  satisfied.
Wealth  is  only  a  collective  name  for  all  the  means
of  satisfying  economic  wants  of  every  kind.  If  the
desire  for  wealth  is  insatiable,  it  is  because  new
wants  arise  as  fast  as  the  old  ones  are  satisfied.  It
still  remains  true  that  any  particular  want,  or  the  de-


Value  1 7

In  addition  to  the  fact  that  the  individual's  desire
for  a  commodity  declines  in  intensity  as  that  desire
approaches  satiety,  there  is  the  fact  that  different
individuals  differ  greatly  in  the  range  and  intensity
of  their  desires.  Of  a  given  commodity  it  may  be
true  that  a  great  many  people  do  not  want  it  at  all,
and  those  who  do  may  differ  greatly  in  the  intensity
with  which  they  want  it.  They  may  differ  also  in
the  intensity  with  which  they  desire  other  things  for
which  the  commodity  is  exchangeable.  In  that  case,
if  there  is  only  a  small  supply  of  this  commodity  on
the  market,  it  will  go  to  those  who  want  it  most  in
comparison  with  other  things,  —  that  is,  to  those  who
are  willing  to  give  the  largest  number  of  other  things
for  it.  But  if  the  supply  is  increased,  it  must  be
sold  at  a  price  which  will  either  tempt  the  original
consumers  to  buy  more  of  it,  or  tempt  a  new  group
to  become  consumers.  From  the  social  standpoint,
this  is  only  another  phase  of  the  principle  of  di-
minishing utility.  For  if  the  original  consumers
use  the  increased  supply  of  the  commodity,  they
will  have  to  use  it  in  the  satisfaction  of  less  in-
tense wants,  or  the  extra  units  consumed  will  yield
them  less  satisfaction  than  did  the  original  units.
But  if  the  increased  supply  is  used  by  a  new  group
of  consumers,  it  will,  in  this  case  also,  furnish  less
relative satisfaction,  —  that is, less satisfaction as


1 8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

compared  with  that  which  other  goods  might  fur-
nish.

But  there  are  commodities,  such  as  watches,  bi-
cycles, automobiles,  etc.,  of  which  the  average  indi-
vidual desires  only  one  unit.  His  desire  for  one
may  be  very  intense,  but  he  may  not  care  at  all  for
a  second  (though  he  may  desire  a  better  one  than  he
now  has).  But  even  in  such  cases  the  principle  of
diminishing  utility  applies  in  the  social  sense.  Indi-
viduals differ  greatly  in  their  desire  for  such  a  com-
modity, and  a  small  supply  will  go  to  those  who  want
it  most  in  comparison  with  other  things,  because  they
will  offer  most  in  exchange  for  it.  A  larger  supply
would  have  to  be  sold  at  a  lower  price  if  it  were  sold
at  all,  in  order  to  tempt  a  new  group  of  consumers,
who  want  it  less  in  comparison  with  other  things,  to
become  buyers.

This  principle  of  diminishing  utility  may  be  illus-
trated by  means  of  the  diagram  on  page  19.

Let  us  suppose  that  the  amount  of  a  given  com-
modity, bread  for  example,  in  a  given  time  and  place,
is  measured  along  the  horizontal  line  OX^  while  its
utility,  or  want-satisfying  power,  is  measured  along
the  perpendicular  line  O  V.  Thus,  if  there  were  only
one  unit,  say  a  loaf  of  bread,  its  utility  would  be
represented,  let  us  assume,  by  the  line  OA.  But  if
the  number  of  loaves  should  increase  so  that  the


Value


19


total  amount  would  be  represented  by  the  line  OG^
the  utility,  or  want-satisfying  power  of  each  loaf,
would  be  somewhat  less  than  before  and  would  be
represented,  let  us  say,  by  the  perpendicular  line  GB^
or  OJ.  This,  of  course,  assumes  that  there  has  been  I  <**^  ^
no  corresponding  increase  in  the  number  of  personsfuai.  ?  ^
wanting  bread,  or  in  the  amount  which  each  person \*'*


"xB


^-vD


*^^^


..^^


E"---.^^.


.^  ..^..j-uia^


wants.  Following  out  this  plan,  if  the  supply  should
increase  to  the  point  H  or  the  point  /  in  the  line  OX,
the  utility  of  each  loaf  would  fall,  let  us  say,  to  the
point  K  or  Z,  on  the  line  O  F,  or  be  measured  by  the
line  HC  or  ID.  At  whatever  point  on  the  line  OX
the  supply  is  cut  short,  the  utility  of  each  unit  will  be
measured  by  the  perpendicular  distance  from  that
point  to  the  dotted  curve  ABCDEF,  which  may  be
called  the  utility  airve  of  the  commodity  in  question.


20  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Accordingly,  if  the  supply  should  reach  the  point  Ey
each  unit  would  become  useless  —  considered  by  itself
—  like  a  cubic  yard  of  air ;  while  if  the  supply  should
increase  beyond  the  point  E,  each  unit  would  become
worse  than  useless,  like  weeds  and  other  nuisances
whicl^  have  a  negative  utility.


Though  there  is  no  known  exception  to  the  rule,
that,  other  things  equal,  a  want  declines  in  intensity
as  the  thing  wanted  is  supplied  in  increasing  quanti-
ties, it  would  be  a  mistake  to  assume  that  all  wants
decline  at  the  same  rate.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  differ-
,  ent  wants  decline  at  very  different  rates.  The  desire
for  one  thing,  salt  for  example,  may  be  a  very  intense
one  in  the  sense  that  it  would  be  a  great  hardship  to
be  deprived  of  it  altogether,  and  yet  a  very  little  may
suffice,  while  a  very  little  more  would  become  posi-
tively detrimental.  The  desire  for  another  commod-
ity, potatoes  for  example,  may  at  first  be  no  more
intense,  in  the  sense  that  it  would  be  no  greater  hard-
ship to  be  deprived  altogether  of  potatoes  than  to
be  deprived  of  salt,  and  yet  a  much  larger  amount  of
this  commodity  may  be  consumed  before  the  point
of  satiety  is  reached.  In  this  case  the  want  is  said  to
be  elastic,  because  it  can  adjust  itself  to  great  varia-
tions in  the  supply  of  the  thing  wanted.  No  severe
hardship  is  felt  if  the  supply  is  greatly  reduced,  and
yet  a  considerable  increase  in  the  supply  could  be


Value  21

consumed  without  completely  satisfying  the  want.
In  the  former  case,  the  want  is  said  to  be  inelastic  for
the  opposite  reason.  Returning  to  the  diagram  on
page  19,  an  elastic  want  would  be  represented  by
drawing  the  utiUty  curve  ABCDEFso  as  to  fall  grad-
ually toward  the  base  line  0X\  while  an  inelastic
want  would  be  represented  by  drawing  that  curve
so  as  to  fall  sharply  toward  the  base  line.

The  principle  of  diminishing  utility  enables  us  to
explain  and  account  for  some  of  the  observed  tenden-
cies of  the  market  relating  to  value,  the  most  impor-
tant of  which  is  the  one  already  mentioned,  viz.,  that,
other  things  equal,  the  value  of  any  commodity  rises
when  its  supply  decreases,  and  falls  when  its  supply
increases.  But,  it  must  also  be  observed,  other  things
are  not  always  equal.  There  may  be  any  number  of
other  changes  going  on  at  the  same  time,  some  of
which  will  counteract,  or  completely  offset,  while
others  increase,  the  effect  of  the  increase  or  decrease
in  the  supply.  For  example,  the  population  may  be
increasing  or  diminishing ;  the  taste  or  desire  for  the
commodity  in  question  may  be  growing  or  declining ;
the  supply  of  other  things,  for  which  the  one  in  ques-
tion is  exchangeable,  may  be  increasing  or  decreas-
ing; or  the  taste  or  desire  for  any  or  all  of  these
other  things  may  be  growing  or  declining.  Any  of
these  changes  will  affect  the  amount  of  other  things


22  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

which  will  be  offered  in  exchange  for  a  given  unit  of
the  one  in  question  because  they  will  help  to  deter-
mine how  much  it  is  wanted  m  comparison  with  other
things.  That  is  to  say,  the  value  of  a  thing  depends
^^^^noX.  alone  on  its  supply,  but  in  part  upon  its  demand,
.A^f^'?  since  the  demand  for  a  thing  depends  partly  upon  the
number  of  people  who  want  it,  partly  upon  how  much
each  one  wants  it,  partly  upon  how  many  other
things  he  has  which  he  can  give  in  exchange  for  it,
and  partly  upon  how  much  he  wants  these  other
things.

That  the  demand  for  an  article  varies,  other  things
equal,  with  the  number  of  people  wanting  it  is  too
obvious  to  need  discussion.  It  is  equally  obvious
that  when  each  individual  wants  more  of  it  than  he
did  before,  through  some  change  of  fashion  or  taste,
the  demand  will,  other  things  equal,  increase,  and
vice  versa.  But  the  relation  which  the  supply  of
other  things  bears  to  the  demand  for,  and  the  value
of,  any  given  article  may  not  be  so  obvious.  It  may
be  made  clear,  however,  by  reminding  ourselves  that
the  intensity  of  one's  desire  for  those  other  things,  as
well  as  that  of  his  desire  for  the  one  in  question,
depends  partly  upon  how  much  he  has  of  them.  If
they  are  supplied  in  such  abundance  that  the  desire
for  them  is  nearly  satisfied,  obviously  a  larger  quan-
tity of  them  will  be  given  in  exchange  for  a  unit  of


Value


23


the  commodity  in  question  than  would  be  given  if
they  were  scarcer  and  the  desire  for  them  not  so
nearly  satisfied.  When  the  others  are  abundant  and
the  one  is  scarce,  a  given  unit  of  the  one  will  be  much
wanted  in  comparison  with  similar  units  of  the  others,
and  vice  versa,  given  units  of  the  others  will  be  Uttle
wanted  in  comparison  with  a  similar  unit  of  the  one.
This  may  be  illustrated  by  means  of  the  following
diagrams :  —


3'


X.


^


O A

APPLES


I  o"~r


t:-..


BREAD


•^X' 0"  A"  D'

CHEESE


]::-.


^>0("


Let  the  three  figures  be  understood  to  represent
the  supply  and  the  utility,  or  want-satisfying  power,
of  apples,  bread,  and  cheese,  respectively,  according
to  the  interpretation  of  the  diagram  on  page  19.
Let  us  suppose  that  the  supply  of  apples  remains
fixed,  and  that  it  is  measured  by  the  line  OA,  while
the  supplies  of  bread  and  cheese  vary,  that  of  bread
being  measured  at  one  time  by  the  line  O  A  and  at
another  time  by  the  line  O^ D  \  and  that  of  cheese  at
one  time  by  line  (^'A"  and  at  another  time  by  the
line  0"D''.  Let  it  be  further  supposed  that  the
dotted  curves  YBX,  V'B'E'X',  and  Y^'B"£''X"  are


P


24  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  utility  curves  of  apples,  bread,  and  cheese,  re-
spectively. Then  the  utility  of  a  unit  —  say  a  pound
—  of  apples  will  be  represented  by  the  line  AB.
When  the  supplies  of  bread  and  cheese  are  meas-
ured by  the  lines  O'A'  and  0"A^',  respectively,  the
utility  of  a  pound  of  bread  will  be  measured  by  the
line  A'B',  and  that  of  a  pound  of  cheese  by  the  line
A"B" ,  Under  these  conditions  the  utility,  or  want-
satisfying  power,  of  a  pound  of  bread  or  a  pound  of
cheese  will  be  greater  than  that  of  a  pound  of
apples,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  lines  A'B'  and
A"B"  are  each  longer  than  the  line  AB,  When  this
is  the  case,  less  than  a  pound  of  bread  or  cheese
will  be  given  in  exchange  for  a  pound  of  apples,
which  means  that  apples  are  less  valuable  than
bread  and  cheese.  But  if  the  supply  of  bread
should  increase  to  the  point  Z>',  and  that  of  cheese
to  the  point  Z>'^  the  utility  of  a  pound  of  the  one
would  fall  to  the  line  D'E'^  and  that  of  a  pound  of  the
other  to  the  line  D"E".  Under  these  conditions  the
utiHty  of  each  would  be  less  than  that  of  a  pound  of
apples,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  lines  D'E'  and
D"£"  are  each  shorter  than  the  line  AB.  Conse-
quently, more  than  a  pound  of  either  would  be
given  in  exchange  for  a  pound  of  apples,  which
is  the  same  as  saying  that  apples  would  be  more
valuable  than  they.


Value  25

The  conclusions  thus  far  reached  may  be  summa-
rized as  follows:  i.  An  explanation  of  value  must
begin  with  concrete,  tangible  articles,  rather  than
with  whole  groups  or  classes.  2.  An  article  has
value  only  when  it  is  wanted.  3.  It  is  wanted
only  when  there  are  so  few  other  things  like  it  that
the  desire  to  which  it  ministers  is  not  completely
satisfied.  4.  The  amount  of  its  value  depends  upon
how  much  it  is  wanted  in  comparison  with  other
things.  5.  How  much  it  is  wanted  depends  upon
how  much  the  desire  for  it  lackg  of  being  completely
satisfied.  6.  How  much  it  is  wanted,  in  comparison
with  other  things,  depends  partly  upon  how  scarce
those  other  things  are,  since  all  of  the  foregoing
propositions  apply  also  to  each  of  them.

These  conclusions  all  lead  up  to,  and  help  to
explain,  the  well-known  law  of  supply  and  demand,
which  is  that  the  value  of  a  unit  of  any  commodity
depends  upon  the  supply  of  the  commodity  and  the
demand  for  it,  varying  inversely  with  the  supply
and  directly  with  the  demand,  the  supply  being
defined  as  the  amount  on  hand,  or  available  at  the
time  and  place;  and  the  demand  being  defined  as
the  desire  for  the  commodity,  coupled  with  the  ability
to  purchase  it.  Since  the  different  units  of  the  com-
modity, if  they  are  all  alike,  will  have  to  sell  for
the  same  amount  at  the  same  time  and  place,  we


26  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

can  rise  to  the  conception  of  the  value  of  the  com-
modity as  a  whole,  which  is  simply  the  sum  of  the
values  of  its  constituent  units.  Since  such  quantities
as  are  out  of  reach,  like  the  gold  in  the  bowels  of
the  earth,  are  not  available  for  use,  they  form  no
part  of  the  supply,  as  already  defined.  Neither,  for
the  time,  does  wheat  that  is  **  cornered,"  nor  does
anything  else  thus  artificially  withheld  from  use.
Since  the  ability  to  purchase  a  commodity  implies
the  possession  of  other  exchangeable  things,  it  will
readily  be  understood  how  this  affects  its  value,  or
helps  to  determine  how  much  it  is  wanted  in  com-
parison with  other  things.  The  law  of  supply  and
demand,  as  thus  defined  and  explained,  is  the  domi-
nating law  of  the  market  in  this  commercial  age,
whatever  may  have  been  the  law  in  other  ages,  or
under  other  types  of  civilization.

If  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  that  a  commodity
has  value  only  when  there  is  a  demand  for  it,  and
when  the  supply  is  insufficient  to  satisfy  that  de-
mand, the  next  question  to  arise  is,  Why  is  the
supply  insufficient,  or  why  are  commodities scarce  ?

Of  course  the  first  and  most  obvious  answer  is
that  nature,  unaided,  does  not  provide  them  in  suf-
ficient abundance  for  the  people  who  want  them.
Perhaps  it  would  be  more  accurate  to  say  that  nature
does  not  supply  such  things  in  the  forms  which  are


Value  27

needed,  nor  at  the  time  when,  and  the  place  where,
they  are  needed.  This  is  as  far  back  as  we  need  to
carry  the  inquiry.  To  try  to  carry  it  further  would
involve  us  in  the  discussion  of  such  questions  as,
Why  is  the  earth  constituted  as  it  is  ?  Why  are
there  so  many  people .''  or,  Why  do  they  want  so
many  things  ?  Accepting,  therefore,  as  our  starting-
point,  the  indisputable  fact  that  nature  has  not  pro-
vided things  enough  to  go  around  and  satisfy  the
expanding  wants  of  the  human  species,  we  have  next
to  inquire  how  far,  and  under  what  conditions,  it  is
possible  to  increase  these  natural  supplies.^

There  are  a  few  things  which  can  not  now  be
increased  by  any  human  effort,  and  whose  supplies
are  therefore absolutely  fixed. Meteoric  iron  has

^  It  would  be  interesting,  at  this  point,  to  turn  aside  from  our  main
inquiry  to  consider  the  relation  of  this  problem  to  some  of  the  broader
questions  of  sociology  and  philosophy.  This  insufficiency  in  the  supply
of  usable  things  is  the  most  important  phase  of  the  general  fact  that
man  is  out  of  harmony  with  his  environment.  It  must  therefore  be
made  the  starting-point  of  any  general  inquiry  into  the  laws  of  social
development.  From  this  insufficiency  of  goods  arises  the  fact  of  un-
satisfied wants,  and  of  the  fundamental  antagonism  of  interests  among
mankind.  This  is  the  original  and  all-sufficient  reason  for  the  organi-
zation of  systems  of  social  control.  Industry  is  merely  the  human
method  of  restoring  the  harmony  between  the  species  and  its  environ-
ment, civilized  man  being  the  animal  who  succeeds  largely  in  adapting
his  environment  to  himself,  whereas  other  species  must,  in  the  main,  be
adapted  to  their  environments,  or  live,  if  they  succeed  in  living  at  all,
forever  out  of  harmony  with  it.


28  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

long  served  as  a  standard  illustration  of  this  class  of
goods.  So  far  as  present  conditions  are  concerned,
it  would  probably  be  fair  to  include,  also,  such  things
as  rare  curios,  relics,  autographs,  manuscripts,  etc.,  as
well  as  ancient  pieces  of  statuary  and  the  paintings
of  old  masters,  though  by  more  diligent  search  and
the  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  work  of  excavation,
the  world's  available  stock  of  some  of  these  things
may  be  appreciably  increased.  It  might  also  be  per-
missible to  include  land  in  this  class,  since  the  super-
ficial area  of  the  earth  cannot  be  increased.  However,
certain  small  areas  have  been,  and  are  still  being,  re-
claimed from  the  sea  and  the  desert,  thus  increasing
in  a  small  degree  the  available  supply.  This  point
will  be  more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  the
Rent  of  Land.

But  the  category  of  goods  whose  supplies  are
determined  by  nature,  independently  of  human  ef-
fort, is  soon  exhausted.  By  their  industry  men  can
and  do  increase  the  supply  of  nearly  every  class  of
commodities.  If  the  value  of  an  article  is  only  great
enough,  men  will  usually  find  some  way  of  reproduc-
ing it.  In  fact,  most  of  the  articles  which  figure  on
the  market  do  not  naturally  exist  at  all  in  a  usable
form,  and  if  they  do  so  exist  they  are  not  found  in
the  place  where,  or  at  the  time  when,  they  are
wanted. In  such  cases  the  whole  of  the  existing


Value  29

supplies  have  come  into  the  market  because  men
have  made  the  necessary  efforts  to  bring  them  there.
These  efforts  fall  into  one  of  three  classes.  First,
those  which  change  materials  from  a  useless  to  a  use-
ful form,  or  from  a  less  useful  to  a  more  useful  form,
as  when  a  miller  grinds  wheat  into  flour;  second,
those  which  take  materials  from  a  place  where  they
are  not  wanted  to  a  place  where  they  are  wanted,
or  from  a  place  where  they  are  less  wanted  to  a
place  where  they  are  more  wanted,  as  when  a  rail-
road carries  wheat  from  Montana  to  Chicago ;  third,
those  which  hold  materials  from  a  time  when  they
are  not  wanted  until  a  time  when  they  are  wanted,
or  from  a  time  when  they  are  less  wanted  until  a
time  when  they  are  more  wanted,  as  when  ice  is
stored  in  winter  to  be  used  in  summer,  or  when
wheat  is  collected  after  harvest  and  stored  in
elevators  until  called  for  by  millers  to  supply  the
current  demand  for  flour.  It  is,  of  course,  unneces-
sary to  add  that  men  do  not  create  materials.  They
only  add  to  their  utility,  or  render  them  more  usable,
in  one,  or  all,  of  the  three  ways  mentioned.  This  is
what  is  meant  by  the  productjon  of  goods,  and  it
should  be  remembered  that  goods  are  not  really  pro-
duced until  they  are  not  only  made  into  usable  forms,
but  also  brought  to  the  places  where,  and  kept  until
the  times  when,  they  are  wanted. When  materials


JO  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

are  thus  made  usable,  the  supply  of  goods  is  said  to
be  increased.

Though  nearly  every  commodity  is  supplied,  or  at
least  increased  in  quantity,  by  human  effort,  the
amount  of  effort  which  is  necessary  to  produce  a
given  quantity,  say  a  pound,  of  one  commodity  may
be  widely  different  from  that  which  is  necessary  to
produce  the  same  quantity  of  another.  It  is,  for
example,  much  harder  to  produce  a  pound  of  gold
than  a  pound  of  coal.  When  it  requires  a  great  deal
of  effort  to  produce  an  article,  no  one  will  ordinarily
be  tempted  to  make  that  effort  unless  the  article  has
a  great  deal  of  value ;  but  if  it  can  be  prodijced  with
a  very  little  effort,  men  will  be  willing  to  make  that
effort  even  though  the  value  of  the  article  be  cor-
respondingly small.  Speaking  generally,  an  article
must  have  value  enough  to  persuade  men  to  make
whatever  effort  is  necessary  for  its  production,  or  it
will  not  be  produced  at  all.  If  for  any  reason  the
demand  for  gold  should  fall  off  until  its  value  should
fall  to  something  Hke  the  value  of  coal,  men  would
stop  producing  it  because  its  value  would  not  then
pay  them  for  their  work.  Gold  would  then  grow
scarcer,  and  this  growing  scarcity  would  ultimately
give  it  a  higher  value.  If  its  value  should  rise  to  a
point  which  would  again  tempt  men  to  undertake  its
production,  this  growing  scarcity  would  be  checked


Value  3 1

by  the  new  supplies  which  would  be  brought  forth,
and  this,  in  turn,  would  check  its  rise  in  value.  If,
on  the  other  hand,  coal  should,  for  any  reason,
acquire  a  value  far  higher  than  is  necessary  to  tempt
men  to  undertake  its  production,  so  many  would  then
be  led  into  the  work  of  producing  it  (provided  it
were  not  monopolized)  as  to  greatly  increase  its
supply.  But  this  increase  in  its  supply  would  again
bring  down  its  value.  Then  if  its  value  should  fall
to  a  point  which  would  no  longer  tempt  business
enterprise,  the  increase  in  its  supply  would  be
checked,  and  this,  in  turn,  would  check  its  fall  in
price.  Moreover,  if  its  price  should,  for  any  reason,
fall  below  its  cost  of  production,  men  would  stop
producing  it  until  its  price  rose  to  a  remunerative
point.  The  general  result  is,  in  the  case  of  a  repro-
ducible commodity  whose  production  is  not  monopo-
lized, that  its  value  bears  a  fairly  close  relation  to  the
cost  of  producing  it.  That  is  to  say,  its  value  can
not  be  permanently  much  above  or  below  its  cost  of
production.

The  fact  that  the  value  of  a  commodity  is,  nor-
mally, about  equal  to  its  cost  of  production,  has  led
a  great  many  to  the  erroneous  conclusion  that  it  is
its  cost  of  production  which  gives  it  its  value.  This
is  probably  the  source  of  more  error  and  confusion
in economic discussions  than  any  other  mistake.


ja  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

I  The  fact  is  that  value  is  always  and  everywhere  due
i  to  utility  and  scarcity,  and  to  these  alone. Cost  of
production  affects  value  only  when,  and  so  far  as,  it
affects  scarcity. As  already  pointed  out,  there  are
some  things  which  have  value  though  they  can  not
be  produced  at  any  cost ;  and  there  are  others  which
can  not  now  be  reproduced. Evidently  the  cost  of
producing  an  acre  of  land  has  nothing  to  do  with  its
value,  since  the  scarcity  of  land  is  determined  inde-
pendently of  its  cost  of  production. The  same  may
be  said  of  one  of  Raphael's  Madonnas. But  when  a
commodity  is  actually  being  produced  by  contempo-
rary effort,  it  will usually  happen  that  it  will  be
/scarce  if  it  is  hard  to  produce,  for  the  simple  reason
/  that  it  will  not  be  produced  at  all  unless  it  is  scarce
/ enough  to  command  a high price. On  the  other
I hand,  if  it  is  easy  to  produce,  it  will  ordinarily  be
I abundant  for  the  reason  that  it  will  be  produced  until
I it  becomes so  abundant  as  to  reduce  the  price  to
I something  like  its  cost  of  production.

Another  popular  form  of  this  error  is  that  labor
creates  value.  Labor  (together  with  enterprise  and
waiting)  produces  goods,  —  that  is,  it  puts  materials
into  usable  form.  But  the  same  goods  would  have
the  same  value  even  if  they  rained  from  the  sky
—  provided  only  that  they  were  equally  scarce.  A
meteorite  which falls  from the sky  is  worth as


Value  33

much  as  a  similar  piece  of  material  excavated  with
great  labor.  On  the  other  hand,  no  amount  of
labor  expended  in  making  an  article  which  no  one
wants,  or  of  which  there  is  an  overabundance,  will
give  it  any  value.  It  would  be  more  nearly  accu-
rate to  say  that  labor  is  expended  in  the  produc-
tion of  goods  because  such  goods  have  value,  or
because  it  is  known  that  they  will  have  value
when  they  are  completed.  But,  of  course,  the
truth  which  it  is  intended  to  state  when  it  is  said
that  labor  creates  value  is  that,  in  most  cases,  labor
is  necessary  in  order  to  put  things  into  a  form,
place,  or  time  in  which  they  are  wanted,  or  in
which  they  will  have  value.  Concerning  the  argu-
ment so  often  heard,  that  if  there  were  no  labor
there  would  be  no  value,  or  very  little  of  it,  it  is
only  necessary  to  say  that  if  there  were  no  land,
or  air,  or  sunlight,  there  would  be  no  value.  In
fact,  there  are  a  number  of  agencies  which  are
absolutely  essential  to  the  existence  of  value.  But
this  does  not  prove  that  any  one  of  these  agencies
is  the  creator  of  value.  Some  things  increase  in
value,  with  time,  and  in  these  cases  waiting  is
quite  as  essential  as  labor.

It  seldom  happens  that  all  units  of  a  given  com-
modity are  produced  at  a  uniform  cost.  Some  are
produced under  favorable, others under unfavor-


OF THjr


34  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

able,  natural  conditions ;  some  by  efficient,  others
by  inefficient,  men ;  and  some  by  economical,  others
by  uneconomical,  methods.  But  however  they  may
differ  in  cost,  they  will  all,  at  any  given  time  and
place,  sell  for  a  uniform  price,^  provided  they  are
alike.  That  is,  if  they  are  all  equally  desirable
from  the  buyer's  standpoint,  they  will  all  sell  at
the  same  price,  regardless  of  differences  in  their
cost  of  production.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference
to  the  buyer  of  a  ton  of  coal  whether  it  was  mined
near  the  surface  or  deep  down  in  the  earth,  and
whether  it  was  mined  with  little  labor  by  skilful
methods  or  with  great  labor  by  unskilful  methods.
One  ton  is  for  him  as  good  as  another  of  the
same  quality,  however  they  may  differ  in  cost  of
production.  But  if  two  things  are  not  equally
desirable  from  the  standpoint  of  the  average  buyer,
they  will  differ  in  price,  even  though  they  cost  the
same.  A  pound  of  sirloin  sells  for  more  than  a
pound  of  shank,  though  one  costs  no  more  than
the  other.

Cost  of  production  is,  however,  an  effective
check  upon  the  supply  of  any  product,  even  though
there  be  a  wide  diversity  in  the  cost  of  its
different  units.  No  part  of  the  supply  could  long
be  maintained  if  it  cost  more  than  it  was  worth.
^  This  is  market  price  as  distinguished  from  pedler's  price.


Value  35

Consequently,  the  most  expensive  part  of  the
supply  can  not,  in  the  long  run,  cost  more  than
the  price  which  it  brings.  No  one  would  continue  ^^
producing  an  article  under  such  unfavorable  con-«y  ^-'^
ditions  as  to  lose  money  on  it.  If  the  commodity^J^^^^  *
is  one  whose  units  are  all  of  uniform  quality,  it  (U^^  ^
will,  as  already  pointed  out,  sell  at  a  uniform  price
in  the  same  market;  but  that  uniform  price  must,
in  the  long  run,  be  as  high  as  the  cost  of  the
most  expensive  part  of  the  supply.  If  the  price
should  fall  so  low  as  not  to  pay  the  cost  of  pro-
ducing any  part  of  the  supply,  some  of  the  pro-
ducers will  go  out  of  business,  and  production  will
thereby  be  curtailed  and  the  supply  reduced.  But
if  the  price  should  go  so  high  as  to  more  than
pay  the  cost  of  the  most  expensive  portions  of  the
supply,  it  would  tempt  new  producers  into  the  field,
and  the  supply  would  thereby  be  increased.  Those
portions  of  the  supply  which  are  produced  under
more  favorable  conditions  and  at  a  lower  cost  will
therefore  return  a  more  or  less  permanent  surplus
to  their  producers.  This  profit  is  protected  by  the
higher  necessary  cost  of  other  portions  of  the
supply,  since  the  price  can  not  fall  below  the  cost
of  producing  those  other  portions  without  stopping
their  production  and  therefore  reducing  the  supply.
What  becomes  of  this  profit  will  be  discussed  later.


^6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

The  normal  result  of  the  price-making  process
is  a  kind  of  equilibrium  ^  between  the  forces  of
demand  and  supply.  This  equilibrium  is  reached
when  the  price  is  just  low  enough  to  induce  buyers
to  take  the  whole  supply,  and  yet  just  high
enough  to  pay  the  cost  of  the  most  expensive
portion  and  induce  the  producers  to  maintain  the
supply.  Under  these  conditions  the  consumers
are  willing  to  buy  the  whole  supply,  but  no  more ;
and  the  producers  are  willing  to  furnish  the  whole
supply,  but  no  more.  If,  for  any  accidental  reason,
the  price  should  fall  below  this  point,  the  con-
sumers would  want  more  of  the  commodity  than
they  had  been  getting;  but  the  producers  would
not  be  willing  to  furnish  so  much,  since  some  of
them  would  be  producing  at  a  loss.  On  the
other  hand,  if  the  price  should  rise  above  the
equilibrium  point,  consumers  would  buy  less  of
it  than  they  had  been  using,  but  producers  would
be  encouraged  to  produce  more.  In  either  case
the  market  would  become  temporarily  unbalanced
—  in  the  first  case  because  consumers  would  want
more  of  the  commodity  than  was  to  be  had,  and
in  the  second  case  because  producers  would  be
producing  more  than  they  could  sell.  But  either
circumstance  would  tend  to  restore  the  equilibrium.

1  Cf.  Marshall,  "  Principles  of  Economics,"  Book  V.


Value


37


If  consumers  want  more  than  is  to  be  had,  they
bid  against  one  another  and  raise  the  price.  If
producers  offer  more  than  they  can  sell,  they  bid
against  one  another,  in  the  absence  of  monopoly,
and  thus  lower  the  price.  The  price  is  therefore
constantly  seeking  the  equilibrium  point,  though,
owing  to  the  multitudinous  disturbing  influences
and  the  constant  changes  in  tastes  and  fashions,
as  well  as  in  the  methods  of  production,  it  is  sel-
dom stable.  The  water  in  a  lake  is  constantly
seeking  a  state  of  equilibrium,  though  it  is  never
at  rest.

The  equilibrium  of  supply  and  demand  may  be
further  explained  by  means  of  the  following  diagram,
which  is  but  an  elaboration  of  the  one  on  page  19:  —
Y
A


F  G  H  J

Let  us  suppose that the  amount  of  a  given  com-
modity is  measured,  as  in  the  former  diagram,  along


38  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  line  OX,  while  its  value  and  its  cost  are  measured
along  the  Hne  OY.  The  descending  curve  ABCDE,
which  was  called  the  utility  curve  in  the  former  dia-
gram, is  here  called  the  demand  curve.  The  height
of  the  various  points  on  this  curve  above  the  base  line
OX  is  supposed  to  represent  the  price  which  vary-
ing quantities  of  the  commodity  would  bring  on  the
market.  Thus,  if  the  supply  were  measured  by  OGy
the  price  would  be  measured  by  BG\  if  the  supply
were  OH^  the  price  would  be  CH)  and  if  the  supply
were  Q/,  the  price  would  be  DJ.  Similarly,  the
ascending  curve  KNPCQ  is  the  cost  curve,  whose  dis-
tance above  the  base  line  at  various  points  represents
the  cost  of  producing  the  various  parts  of  the  supply.
That  is  to  say,  some  parts  are  produced  at  a  cost  as
low  as  OKy  others  at  a  cost  of  NFy  others  at  CH,  and
if  so  much  as  OJ  were  produced,  some  of  it  would
cost  as  much  as  QJ.

But,  as  already  pointed  out,  the  price  at  which  so
large  a  supply  would  have  to  sell  would  be  only  DJ,
thus  entaiUng  a  loss  on  all  the  producers  of  that  part
of  the  supply  represented  by  the  line  FJ.  Some  of
these  would  certainly  go  out  of  business,  or  turn  their
attention  to  something  else,  with  a  resulting  diminu-
tion of  the  supply.  But  if  the  supply  should  decrease
until  it  was  equal  only  to  the  line  OG,  the  price,  as
already  pointed  out,  would  rise  to  the  height  of  BG.


Value  39

This  is  more  than  a  remunerative  price,  since  the  most
expensive  part  of  this  diminished  supply  would  cost
only  PG,  The  large  profits  to  be  obtained  from  an
increased  production  would  then  tempt  new  producers
into  the  field  (in  the  absence  of  monopoly),  or  tempt
the  old  producers  to  increase  their  output,  with  a  re-
sulting increase  in  the  supply  and  fall  in  price.  But
when  the  supply  is  measured  by  the  line  OH^  the  price
would  be  represented  by  the  line  CH^  which  would
also  pay  the  cost  of  the  most  expensive  portion.
These  conditions  may  be  considered  stable  except
as  they  are  disturbed  by  new  inventions  and  other
changes  in  the  methods  of  production,  or  by  changes
in  taste  or  fashion  on  the  side  of  consumption.  Rul-
ing out  such  disturbing  factors,  this  supply  can  all
be  sold  at  a  remunerative  price,  and  yet  not  at  a
price  which  offers  any  inducement  to  try  to  increase
the  supply.  But  if  less  or  more  is  produced,  the
conditions  are  necessarily  unstable.  If  less  is  pro-
duced, the  price  will  be  greater  than  the  cost,  even
of  the  most  expensive  part  of  the  supply,  and  this
will  stimulate  a  larger  production.  But  if  more  is
produced,  the  price  will  fall  below  the  cost  of  the
most  expensive  portion  of  the  supply,  and  this  will
drive  some  of  the  producers  out  of  the  field.

It  is  necessary  at  once  to  forestall  a  possible  infer-
ence from  the  above  diagram. Though  the  different


40  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

parts  of  any  commodity  are  almost  invariably  pro-
duced at  different  costs,  it  is  not  to  be  inferred  that
the  most  expensive  portion  of  a  larger  supply  will
necessarily  cost  more  to  produce  than  the  most
expensive  portion  of  a  smaller  supply.  Such  an
inference  would  probably  be  true  in  most  cases  where
the  increase  in  the  supply  is  comparatively  small,  —
too  small  to  admit  of  any  of  the  improvements  and
economies  which  sometimes  accompany  large-scale
production,  —  and  where  the  increase  in  the  supply
can  not  be  secured  by  merely  running  the  existing
plants  a  little  over  time.  In  such  cases  the  sHghtly
larger  production  would  merely  bring  into  use
a  few  less  favorable  situations  and  a  few  less
practised  workers  than  had  formerly  been  em-
ployed. This  would  mean  a  larger  cost  for  the
additional  supply,  which  cost  would  be  represented
by  the  line  CQ.  The  same  would  be  true  in  the
cases  of  all  such  commodities  as  the  leading  agricul-
tural products  whose  production  has  already  reached
the  Hmits  of  the  economy  of  large-scale  production, —
that  is,  where  there  is,  so  far  as  is  now  known,
no  further  economy  to  be  secured  by  a  mere  enlarge-
ment of  the  scale  of  production.  In  all  such  cases
the  diagram  may  be  strictly  interpreted.  A  larger
supply  of  any  such  product  requires  the  use  of  land,
labor,  or  capital,  which  would  not  be  necessary  in  the


Value  41

case  of  a  smaller  supply.  Ordinarily,  only  the  better
and  cheaper  land,  labor,  and  capital  would  be  used
to  produce  the  smaller  supply,  whereas  inferior  or
more  expensive  factors  would  have  to  be  called  into
use  to  produce  the  larger  supply.

In  the  case  of  wheat,  for  example,  there  are  three
ways  of  increasing  the  product,  leaving  out  of  account
possible  new  discoveries  and  inventions.  In  the
first  place,  land  which  is  not  now  considered  fit  for
cultivation  could  be  used.  In  the  second  place,  land
which  is  now  considered  more  valuable  for  other  pur-
poses could  be  devoted  to  wheat  growing.  In  the
third  place,  land  which  is  now  being  used  for  wheat
growing  could  be  cultivated  more  intensively  and
made  to  yield  a  larger  crop.  But  each  of  these
methods  is  an  expensive  one.  To  grow  wheat  on
land  which  was  formerly  too  poor  to  cultivate  is
obviously  expensive,  for  poor  land  means  land  which
yields  little  in  proportion  to  the  cost  of  working  it.
To  grow  wheat  on  land  which  was  formerly  more
valuable  for  other  purposes  would  require  the  sacri-
fice of  those  other  purposes.  It  would  be  expen-
sive, to  take  an  extreme  case,  to  grow  wheat  on
land  which  is  worth  ;^iooo  an  acre  for  market
gardening.  Such  land  is  worth  ;Siooo  an  acre
for  that  purpose  because  of  the  large  profit  which
its  user  can  make  in  that  business. To  grow  wheat


42  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

would  require  the  sacrifice  of  those  profits,  and
would  not  pay  unless  wheat  rose  to  an  enormously
high  price.  And  finally,  to  increase  the  product  by
the  more  intensive  cultivation  of  the  land  now  used
for  growing  wheat  would  be  expensive  for  two
reasons.  {a)  Owing  to  the  law  of  diminishing
returns^  the  labor  of  increasing  the  product  of  a
given  piece  of  land  increases  more  than  in  proportion
to  the  product,  {b)  To  cultivate  the  land  more  in-
tensively requires  more  labor  or  capital,  which  could,
only  be  secured  by  making  use  of  labor  or  capital
now  considered  too  poor  to  use,  or  by  calling  it  out
of  other  occupations  where  it  was  presumably  worth
more.

But  there  are  many  commodities  whose  production
has  not  yet  been  enlarged  to  the  most  economical
scale,  and  whose  cost  would  therefore  be  less  if  they
could  be  produced  on  a  larger  scale.  Certain  scien-
tific instruments,  for  example,  which  would  have
only  a  limited  sale,  no  matter  how  cheap  they  became,
must  necessarily  be  produced  on  a  small  scale.  Such
articles  are  often  produced  largely  by  hand,  for  the
reason  that  it  would  not  pay  to  construct  expensive
machines  for  that  purpose.  Machines  can  only  be
used  to  the  best  advantage  when  run  at  something
like  their  full  capacity. If  they  are  used  in  the  pro-

1  See  Chapter  II.


Value  43

duction  of  articles  of  this  class,  the  cost  of  the  articles
will  be  high  for  the  reason  that  the  cost  of  the  ma*
chines  has  to  be  divided  among  so  few  products.
If  there  were  a  large  market  for  such  articles,  so  that
it  would  be  practicable  to  produce  them  on  a  large
scale,  machines  would  be  constructed,  and  other
economies  introduced,  which  would  greatly  cheapen
them.  This  has  already  been  done  in  the  manufac-
ture of  watches,  and  it  is  being  done  in  the  case  of  a
number  of  other  articles.

The  most  economical  scale  of  production  is  one  in
which  the  producing  establishments  are  not  only  as
large  as  is  consistent  with  the  highest  efficiency,  but
where  each  one  is  run  at  something  like  its  full
capacity.  Even  when  a  commodity  is  being  pro-
duced in  a  series  of  estabhshments  which  are  large
enough  to  secure  the  maximum  economy,  it  often
happens  that  some  of  them  are  run  at  less  than  the
most  economical  rate,  or  that  some  expensive  parts
of  these  establishments  are  allowed  to  remain  idle  a
considerable  part  of  the  time.  They  may  then,  by
running  at  a  higher  rate  and  keeping  all  parts  busy,
increase  their  output  without  a  proportional  increase
in  their  expenses,  in  which  case  the  additional  out-
put costs  less  per  unit  than  the  regular  output.  One
large  element  in  the  cost  of  a  manufactured  commod-
ity is  the  cost  of  the  plant  and  the  expense  of  keep-


44  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

ing  it  up.  This  cost  is  practically  as  great  when  the
plant  is  run  only  a  part  of  the  time  as  when  it  is  run
all  of  the  time.  The  original  cost  of  the  plant  would
be  the  same  in  either  case,  and  it  would  deteriorate
by  going  out  of  date  just  as  rapidly,  though  the  wear
and  tear  would  be  a  trifle  less  when  it  was  run  at  less
than  its  full  capacity.  When  the  output  is  small,
the  original  cost  of  the  plant  has  to  be  divided
among  a  smaller  number  of  units  of  product  than
when  the  output  is  large,  which  makes  this  element
of  cost  greater  per  unit  in  the  case  of  a  small  than
in  the  case  of  a  large  output.  Ordinarily  the  other
elements  in  the  cost,  such  as  labor  and  raw  materials,
are  no  greater  per  unit  when  the  output  is  large  than
when  it  is  small.  Of  course,  if  the  attempt  were
made  to  crowd  the  factory  beyond  its  true  capacity,^
these  elements  of  the  cost  would  increase  more
than  in  proportion  to  the  output,  which  would  make
them  higher  per  unit  of  product.  But  up  to  this
point  an  increase  in  the  output  reduces  the  cost  per
unit,  since  the  cost  of  labor  and  raw  materials  and
other  running  expenses  are  practically  the  same  per
unit,  while  the  cost  of  the  plant  and  other  fixed
charges  are  less  per  unit.

Let  us  suppose  that  the  interest  on  the  cost  of  the

1  For  a  fuller  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  its  true  capacity,  see
Chapter  II  on  Diminishing  Returns.


Value  45

establishment,  plus  the  insurance,  deterioration,  and
other  fixed  charges,  amounts  to  $i(X),C)00  annually,
while  all  the  running  expenses,  including  wages  and
cost  of  materials,  amount  to  ;?200,ooo  when  the
establishment  is  turning  out  its  full  product,  which
is,  let  us  say,  100,000  units.  The  total  expense
would  then  be  1^300,000,  or  $3  per  unit  of  product.
If,  however,  the  establishment  were  to  run  on  only
half  time,  turning  out  only  50,000  units  of  product,
its  running  expenses  would  be  cut  down  one-half,
making  them  ;^  100,000;  but  the  fixed  charges  would
scarcely  be  affected  at  all,  remaining  practically  at
$100,000.  The  total  expense  of  ;^200,ooo  would
then  have  to  be  divided  among  the  50,000  units  of
product,  making  each  unit  cost  $4,

When  the  production  of  any  commodity  has  not
reached  its  most  economical  scale,  either  because
the  producing  establishments  are  not  large  enough
or  because  they  are  not  run  at  their  full  capacity,
the  equiUbrium  of  demand  and  supply  is  extremely
unstable.  If  the  existing  establishments  are  not
large  enough  to  secure  the  maximum  efficiency,  they
are  in  constant  danger  of  being  driven  out  of  busi-
ness by  newer  and  larger  rivals  who  can  produce  at
a  lower  cost  simply  because  they  are  larger.  If  the
market  will  not  enable  all  the  existing  establishments
to  run  at  their  full  capacity,  there  is  likely  to  ensue


v^^


46  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

a  peculiarly  fierce  and  deadly  competition,  especially
in  those  industries  where  the  fixed  charges  form  an
important  element  in  the  total  cost  of  production.
In  a  case  of  this  kind,  the  establishment  which  sells
enough  of  its  product  to  enable  it  to  run  at  some-
thing Uke  its  full  capacity  has  an  advantage  over
those  which  can  not,  in  that  it  can  produce  cheaper
than  they.  This  situation  usually  results  in  a  hard
struggle  for  the  market,  accompanied  by  price  cut-
ting, discriminations,  and  other  less  scrupulous
methods.  Even  those  estabUshments  which  are
beaten  in  the  struggle  and  forced  to  produce  at  a
higher  cost  because  they  are  forced  to  run  at  less
than  their  most  economical  rate,  may  still  continue
selling  at  a  loss,  since  to  stop  producing  altogether
would  involve  a  still  greater  loss.  If  they  can  sell
what  they  produce  at  a  price  which  will  a  little  more
than  pay  the  running  expenses,  there  will  be  some-
thing left  over  with  which  to  pay  part  of  the  original
cost  of  the  plant,  whereas  to  stop  producing  alto-
gether would  involve  the  loss  of  the  whole  original
outlay  unless  the  plant  could  be  turned  to  some  other
use  than  the  one  for  which  it  was  first  planned.  For
a  commodity  whose  production  is  still  in  such  a  con-
dition as  this,  there  can  be  no  true  equiUbrium  of
demand  and  supply,  and  no  price  which  can  really
be  said  to  be  normal


Value  47

If  the  market  demand  is  large  enough  to  enable  a
considerable  number  of  establishments  of  the  most
convenient  size  to  run  at  their  full  capacity,  the  situ-
ation will  usually  adjust  itself  in  time  so  that  a  true
equilibrium,  such  as  the  diagram  describes,  will  be
reached.  But  if  the  market  is  necessarily  so  small
that  only  a  few  such  establishments  can  run,  the
tendency  is  toward  monopoly.  This  comes  about  in
one  of  two  ways.  In  the  first  place,  the  larger  and
more  economical  establishments  continue  undersell-
ing and  exterminating  the  smaller  and  less  economi
cal  ones  until,  in  process  of  time,  only  one  or  two
large  establishments  are  left  in  possession  of  the
field.  In  this  way  the  market  becomes  monopolized
by  the  process  of  natural  selection.  In  the  secon
place,  before  the  final  stage  in  this  process  i;
reached,  the  few  who  have  so  far  survived  th
struggle  decide  to  stop  the  process  of  natural  selec/-
tion,  so  far  as  it  threatens  them  with  extermination,
by  uniting  under  one  of  the  various  forms  of  what  is
called  a  trust.

When  the  production  of  any  commodity  has  be-
come monopolized  by  these  or  any  other  methods,  —
and  there  are  many  kinds  of  monopoly,  —  a  new
factor  is  introduced  into  the  price-making  process.
For  this  reason  monopoly  price  is  usually  treated  as
in  a  class  by  itself. A  monopoly,  like  any  other  indi-


48  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

vidual  concern,  aims  to  make  as  large  profits  as
possible.  In  order  to  do  this  it  must  sell  at  that
price  which  will  yield  it  the  largest  total  surplus
above  cost  on  the  whole  amount  sold.  In  this  it
differs  in  no  wise  from  other  concerns ;  but  there  is
this  important  difference  in  the  conditions  under
which  they  sell.  A  concern  which  produces  a  com-
modity in  which  there  is  competition  has  its  price
fixed  for  it  by  its  competitors.  That  is  to  say,  the
price  which  will  yield  it  the  largest  total  profits  is
practically  the  same  as  that  at  which  all  its  competi-
tors are  selling,  which  in  turn  is  fixed  by  the  cost  of
producing  the  most  expensive  part  of  the  normal
supply.  If  it  should  try  to  sell  at  a  higher  price,  its
competitors  would  get  most  of  its  customers,  and  it
would  find  itself  doing  business  on  such  a  small  scale
as  to  yield  small  profits.  But  the  monopolist,  on  the
other  hand,  does  not  have  these  precise  conditions  to
face,  since  he  has  no  competitors  to  sell  the  same
commodity  to  his  customers  if  his  price  goes  too
high.  Nevertheless,  there  are  producers  of  other
commodities  who  are  trying  to  sell  their  goods,  and
they  will  succeed  in  larger  degree  if  his  price  goes
too  high.  That  is  to  say,  consumers  habitually  take
considerable  latitude  in  their  choice  of  purchases,
and  if  the  price  of  one  thing  does  not  suit  them,  they
buy  less  of  it  and  buy  something  else  instead. This


Value


49


gives  some  elasticity  to  the  demand  for  the  monopo-
lized commodity,  and  for  this  reason  alone  the
monopolist  can  not  afford  to  put  his  price  too  high,
lest  his  sales  should  be  so  reduced  as  to  net  him  a
smaller  surplus  on  his  whole  business  than  he  could
make  by  selling  more  goods  at  a  lower  price.

In  addition  to  the  elasticity  of  the  demand  for  the
monopolized  product,  there  is  the  further  fact  that
monopoUes  are  not  always  absolute,  There  is  often
a  small  residuum  of  competition  —  a  few  small  pro-
ducers who  manage  to  survive  through  special  advan-
tages or  superior  managing  ability.  These_2ut^  a
more  or  less  effective  check  upon  the  rapacity  of  the
monopoly,  forcing  it  to  use  a  certain  degree  of  mod-
eration in  fixing  its  prices.  Nevertheless,  the  monop-
olist's power  over  prices  is  substantially  greater  than
that  of  any  individual  producer  in  a  competitive  in-
dustry, and  he  is  thereby  frequently  enabled  to  amass
enormous  profits.  Even  a  slight  rise  in  the  price  of
the  product  may  greatly  increase  the  margin  of  profits.
When  a  given  article  is  being  sold  at  a  five  per  cent
profit,  an  increase  of  five  per  cent  in  its  price  doubles
the  profit  on  each  unit  sold.  Unless  the  sales  are
reduced  one-half  as  the  result  of  the  high  price,  this
means  a  substantial  increase  in  the  total  profits.

The  secret  of  the  monopolist's  power  over  prices
is  found  in  his  control  over  the  supply  of  the  product.


JO  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Even  he  can  not  force  his  customers  to  buy  more
than  they  want,  and  they  will  choose  to  buy  less  and
less  as  he  puts  the  price  higher  and  higher.  In  a
competitive  industry,  where  there  is  no  control  over
supply,  no  individual  producer  wishes  to  cut  down
his  production  or  to  have  a  part  of  his  product  left
on  his  hands.  They  will  all  therefore  try  to  produce
as  much  as  they  can  sell  at  a  price  which  will  pay
the  cost  of  production  with  a  reasonable  margin  of
profit.  The  man  who  tries  to  sell  higher  will
scarcely  be  able  to  sell  at  all.  Cost  of  production
is  therefore,  as  has  already  been  shown,  the  factor
which  controls  the  supply  of  the  product  of  a  com-
petitive industry,  and,  indirectly,  its  price.  But  in
the  case  of  a  monopoly,  it  is  the  will  of  the  monopo-
list, calculating  on  the  largest  total  of  profits  which
controls  the  supply.

We  have  found  that  things  have  value  only  when
they  are  scarce,  and  that  there  are  three  conditions
which  make  them  scarce.  In  the  first  place,  their
supply  may  be  absolutely  limited  by  nature  and
incapable  of  increase  by  any  human  effort.  In  the
second  place,  they  may  be  made  scarce  because
men  are  not  willing  to  produce  them  beyond  the
point  which  will  give  them  a  value  equal  to  their
cost  of  production.  And  in  the  third  place,  the
production  may  be  controlled  by  a  monopoly  which


Value  5 1

limits  the  supply  at  a  point  which  will  give  the
product  such  a  value  as  will  yield  the  largest  sum
total  of  profits  on  the  whole  amount  sold.  The
theory  of  value  ought  by  this  time  to  be  reasonably
clear  so  far  as  it  relates  to  consumable  commodities.
A  full  understanding  of  the  value  of  goods  which
are  used  for  purposes  of  further  production  requires
a  further  analysis  of  the  factors  which  enter  into
the  demand  for  them;  but  this  analysis  can  be
made  to  better  advantage  after  we  have  made  a
study  of  the  law  of  diminishing  returns.

Note.  — Professor  Clark  ("Distribution  of  Wealth,"  Ch.  XVI)
undertakes  an  ingenious  correction  of  the  marginal  utility  theory  of
value  by  pointing  out  that  in  each  article  there  are  various  qualities,
all  of  which  are  separately  evaluated,  and  each  of  which  has  its  mar-
ginal purchaser  and  its  marginal  utility.  He  further  maintains  that  it
is  not  the  marginal  utility  of  the  article  as  a  whole  which  determines
its  value,  because  no  man  is  in  the  position  of  the  marginal  purchaser
as  respects  all  its  qualities.  Thus  in  the  case  of  a  canoe  which  con-
tains the  qualities  of  buoyancy,  mobility,  comfort,  speed,  and  elegance,
no  individual  buyer  is  likely  to  estimate  each  quality  as  the  marginal
buyer  would.  Buoyancy,  for  example,  might  be  worth  ^500  to  him  if
he  could  not  get  it  for  less,  but  there  are  so  many  things  which  can
furnish  buoyancy  that  the  marginal  utility  of  that  quality  to  the  com-
munity is  only  $2,  and  he  can  get  it  for  that.  He  might  value  mobility
at  $300,  but  the  supply  of  that  quality  makes  its  marginal  utility  and
its  price  $5.  For  comfort  he  would  pay  $icx),  but  he  can  get  it  for  ;gio.
Speed  he  would  value  at  $75,  but  he  can  get  it  for  $2^,  and  for  ele-
gance he  gives  $30,  being  the  marginal  purchaser  as  respects  that
quality.  Altogether  he  gives  $^2  for  the  canoe,  which  would  have
been  worth  more  than  ^1000  to  him  if  he  could  not  have  got  it  for
less,  and  yet  he  was  the  marginal  purchaser  of  one  of  its  qualities.


52  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

It  is  doubtless  true  that  such  an  analysis  can  be  made  of  the  aver-
age buyer's  desire  for  an  article,  but  that  it  is  an  important  contribution
to  the  theory  of  value  cannot  be  admitted.  It  overlooks  the  fact  that
value  is  only  power  in  exchange,  and  that  the  vakie  of  the  canoe  is
only  the  number  of  other  things  for  which  it  will  exchange.  When
we  consider  that  the  buyer's  desire  for  each  of  the  other  things  which
he  gives  up  in  exchange  for  the  canoe  can  be  similarly  analyzed,  it
appears  that  he  may  not  have  realized  so  much  surplus  advantage  over
the  cost  of  the  canoe  as  the  illustration  seemed  to  make  out.  His
desire  for  a  bicycle,  for  example,  may  be  analyzed  into  as  many  parts
as  his  desire  for  a  canoe,  and  by  the  same  method  it  might  be  shown
to  be  worth  little  less  than  ^looo  to  him.  Then  if  he  swaps  a  bicycle
for  a  canoe  he  will  be  making  no  such  gain  as  was  assumed.  Even
when  he  pays  money  for  the  canoe  he  is  giving  up  the  chance  of  buy-
ing a  bicycle  or  something  else  which  he  might  otherwise  have,  and
the  same  objection  would  apply  to  Professor  Clark's  contention.

As  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  a  marginal  buyer  for  each  class  of  canoes
—  some  one  to  whom  a  canoe  of  that  class  is  just  worth  buying  —  at  any
given  price.  If  the  price  of  the  whole  canoe  is  high,  there  will  be  few
buyers  ;  but  if  it  is  low,  there  will  be  many  buyers.  If  there  is  a  large
number  to  be  sold,  the  price  must  be  put  low  enough  to  tempt  a  large
number  of  buyers.  Such  staple  commodities  as  wheat  and  coal  are
physically  separated  into  classes  and  grades,  and  prices  are  quoted  only
for  grades  or  classes.  In  the  case  of  canoes  and  bicycles  and  similar
articles,  no  such  physical  classification  is  made,  but  we  must  neverthe-
less make  some  sort  of  logical  classification  before  we  can  accurately
explain  the  price-making  process.

COLLATERAL  READING

W.  S.  Jevons,  Theory  of  Political  Economy,  Chapters  II-IV.

J.  B.  Clark,  The  Philosophy  of  Wealth,  Chapter  V.

Alfred  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  4th  Ed.  Books

III  and  V.
E.  BtiHM-BAWERK,  Positive  Theory  of  Capital,  Book  III.


CHAPTER II

DIMINISHING  RETURNS

Ask  any  farmer  you  may  happen  to  meet  about
the  quality  of  his  land,  and  unless  his  is  an  exceptional
farm,  he  will  tell  you  that  it  is  not  all  alike,  —  that
one  field  is  more  productive  than  the  rest  and  will
yield  a  larger  or  more  valuable  crop  in  proportion
to  the  labor  and  capital  expended  in  its  cultivation.
But  if  you  were  to  advise  him  for  that  reason  to
put  all  his  labor  and  capital  on  the  superior  field,
letting  the  rest  of  his  farm  go  to  waste,  he  would
certainly  not  take  your  advice,  and  he  would  think
very  poorly  of  your  intelligence  besides.  Yet  if
one  knew  absolutely  nothing  about  farming,  and
were  possessed  of  the  temerity  which  sometimes
accompanies  such  ignorance,  one  might  argue  the
matter  with  the  farmer,  reasoning  somewhat  as  fol-
lows :  if  a  certain  amount  of  labor  and  capital  on
the  more  productive  field  will  produce  a  more  valu-
able crop  than  the  same  amount  will  produce  if
expended  on  a  less  productive  field,  it  is  a  mistake
to  waste  any  labor  and  capital  on  the  poorer  land.

53


54  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

If,  for  example,  one  hundred  days'  labor  (with  the
appropriate  tools)  on  the  best  field  will  produce  a
crop  worth  $Soo,  while  the  same  amount  of  labor
on  any  other  part  of  the  farm  will  produce  a  crop
worth  only  $400,  the  farmer  has  only  1^900  for  his
two  hundred  days'  labor.  But  if  one  hundred  days'
labor  on  the  best  field  will  produce  a  crop  worth
$500,  two  hundred  days'  labor  on  the  same  field
ought  to  produce  twice  as  big  a  crop,  one  worth
$1000.  Therefore  the  farmer  loses  jJiCK)  by  putting
half  his  labor  on  his  inferior  land.

If  it  were  true  that  the  second  hundred  days*  labor
on  the  best  field  would  produce  as  much  as  the  first
hundred,  or,  to  put  it  more  accurately,  if  two  hun-
dred days'  labor  on  that  field  would  produce  twice  as
much  as  one  hundred,  and  three  hundred  days'  labor
three  times  as  much,  and  so  on  indefinitely,  the  argu-
ment would  be  unanswerable,  and  the  farmer  would
be  very  foolish  not  to  follow  your  advice.  More-
over, the  community  at  large  would  be  acting  very
unwisely  in  not  concentrating  all  its  energies  upon  a
relatively  small  area  of  its  best  land.  But  the  farmer
knows  perfectly  well,  and  so  does  the  community  at
large,  that  such  is  not  the  case,  —  that  the  produce  of
a  given  piece  of  land  can  not  be  doubled,  trebled,
quadrupled,  and  so  on  indefinitely  by  merely  doub-
ling, trebling,  and  quadrupling  the  amount  of  labor


Diminishing  Returns  55

and  capital  expended  in  its  cultivation.  In  the  case
already  assumed  it  is  more  probable  that  although
one  hundred  days'  labor  would  produce  a  crop  worth
$SQOy  two  hundred  days  on  the  same  field  would  pro-
duce a  crop  worth  only  ;^8oo.  In  that  case  it  would
pay  better  by  $100,  under  the  conditions  assumed,
to  put  the  second  hundred  days'  labor  on  some  other
part  of  the  farm.  It  is  because  the  farmer,  who  is  in
the  best  position  to  judge,  knows  that  such  condi-
tions are  real  that  he  does  not  concentrate  all  his
energies  on  the  small  fraction  of  his  farm  which
includes  only  his  best  land.

To  say  that  the  farmer  knows  better  than  to  con-
centrate all  his  energies  on  his  best  land  is  the  same
as  saying  that  he  knows  and  acts  upon  one  of  the
fundamental  laws  of  economics,  viz.,  the  law  of  dimin-
ishing returns,  though  like  the  Bourgeois  Gentil-
homme  who  was  astonished  to  find  that  he  had  been
talking  prose  all  his  life,  our  farmer  might  be  sur-
prised to  learn  that  he  was  acting  upon  an  economic
law.  This  law  of  diminishing  returns  is  simply  a  part
of  the  general  observation  that  the  product  of  any
given  piece  of  land  does  not,  even  under  the  same
conditions  of  soil  and  season,  bear  a  constant  ratio  to
the  amount  of  labor  and  capital  used  in  producing  it.
That  is  to  say,  the  product  does  not  vary  in  the  same
proportion  as  the  labor  and capital,  increasing  in


56  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

proportion  as  they  increase,  and  decreasing  in  pro-
portion as  they  decrease.  This  simply  means  that
there  are  several  factors  in  the  production  of  any
crop,  including  labor,  capital,  and  land,  and  that  the
amount  of  the  crop  is  not  determined  by  any  one  or
any  two  of  these  factors,  but  by  all  of  them  com-
bined. Labor  and  capital,  being  only  a  part  of  the
factors,  cannot  alone  determine  the  crop.  It  is  well
known  to  practical  men  that  a  niggardly  application
of  labor  and  capital  to  a  piece  of  land  in  the  cultiva-
tion of  any  crop  is  little  better  than  wasted,  because
it  will  produce  so  little  in  proportion  to  itself ;  where-
as a  more  generous  application  will  yield  a  crop  not
only  larger,  but  larger  in  proportion  to  the  amount
of  labor  and  capital  employed.  Up  to  this  point  the
land  is  said  to  yield  increasing  returns  to  the  labor
and  capital  employed  in  its  cultivation.  But  if  the
amount  of  these  factors  used  in  cultivating  a  given
piece  of  land  is  still  further  increased,  a  point  will
eventually  be  reached  where  the  product  will  no
longer  increase  as  fast  as  these  factors  are  increased.
Beyond  this  point  the  land  is  said  to  yield  dimin-
ishing returns  to  the  labor  and  capital  employed.
Though  larger  appUcations  of  labor  and  capital  may
continue  to  produce  larger  crops,  the  crops  will  not
be  so  large  in  proportion  to  the  labor  and  capital.
In  growing  such  a  specific  crop  as  corn,  for  ex-


Diminishing  Returns  57

ample,  a  single  day's  labor  of  a  man  and  team  with
the  appropriate  tools,  if  spread  over  a  whole  ten-acre
field,  would  be  thrown  away  because  it  would  pro-
duce no  crop  at  all.  Five  days  on  the  same  field
might  produce  something  of  a  crop,  but  it  would  be  a
poor  one.  Ten  days  would  certainly  produce  more
than  twice  as  large  a  crop  as  5,  and  20  days'  labor
might  possibly  produce  more  than  twice  as  much
as  10.  But  40  days'  labor  would  hardly  produce
twice  as  much  as  20,  80  would  certainly  not  pro-
duce four  times  as  much,  and  200  days'  labor
would  fall  far  short  of  producing  ten  times  as  much.
If  these  assumptions  are  true  of  the  particular  field
in  question,  it  could  be  said  to  yield  increasing  re-
turns up  to  the  point  where  20  days'  labor  were
expended.  Beyond  that  point  it  would  be  said  to
yield  diminishing  returns.

This  may  be  further  illustrated  by  means  of
Table  A,  which  purports  to  show,  in  an  assumed
case,  how  much  corn  could  be  produced  on  a  ten-acre
field  by  using  different  amounts  of  labor  and  capital,
the  amounts  being  expressed  in  terms  of  days'  labor
of  a  man  and  team  with  the  appropriate  tools.  The
ratio  between  the  product  on  the  one  hand  and  the
labor  and  capital  on  the  other  is  shown  in  the  last
column,  which  gives  the  amount  of  product,  or  the
number  of  bushels  produced,  per  day's  labor.


/■


58


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


TABLE A


Days'  labor  of  man  and
team  with  tools

Total  crop  in  bushels

Bushels  per  day's  labor

I

0

01

5

IQ
15

50

ISO
270

10
18

Increasing
returns.

20

380

19

25

450

18

*

30

35
40

510
560
600

17
16

15

Diminishing
returns.

45

630

14

50

650

13  J

According  to  this  table,  as  will  be  seen,  increasing
returns  stop,  and  diminishing  returns  begin  at  the
point  where  20  days'  labor  are  expended  in  the
cultivation  of  the  field.

TABLE  B


Days'  labor  of  man  and
team  with  tools

Total  crop  in  bushels

Bushels  per  day's  labor

I

0

0

5

40

8

Increasing

10

130

13

returns.

15

240

16 J

20

300

^5

25

350

14

30

390

13

Diminishing

35

420

12

returns.

40

440

II

45

450

10

SO

455

91

Diminishing

Returns

5

TABLE

C

Based  on

Tables  A  and  B

Field  A

Field  B

Total

Days

Bushels Days

Bushels Days

Bushel!

lo  producing

;  150+10  producing  130=  20  producing

;  280

15

«

270+ 5

11

40  =  20

a

310

20  ,

tc

380+ 0

It

0=  20

It

380

15

u

270  +  10

u

130  =  25

tt

400

20

it

380+ 5

u

40  =  25

it

420

25

u

450+ 0

a

0  =  25

it

450

IS

a

270  +  15

It

240  =  30

<t

iI2

20

u

380  +  10

it

130  =  30

it

ii2

25

u

450+ 5

It

40  =  30

tt

480

30

a

510+  0

ti

0  =  30

tt

510

20

u

380  +  15

it

240=35

u

620

25

u

450  +  10

ti

130  =  35

tt

580

30

it

510+ 5

it

40  =  35

it

560

35

u

560+0

it

0  =  35

tt

560

20

u

380  +  20

it

300-40

tt

620

25

u

450+15

it

240  =  40

tt

622

30

u

510+  10

tt

130  =  40

it

640

35

ti

560+ 5

it

40  =  40

il

600

40

u

600+  0

tt

0  =  40

ti

600

20

u

380  +  30

tt

390-50

u

770

25

it

450  +  25

tt

350  =  50

it

800

30

u

510  +  20

tt

300  =  50

tt

810

35

it

560+15

a

240  =  50

it

800

40

il

600  +  10

it

130  =  50

ti

730

30

u

510  +  30

n

390  =  60

it

900

35

u

560  +  25

it

350  =  60

tt

910

40

il

600  +  20

a

300  =  60

il

900

45

il

630+  15

a

240  =  60

u

870

S:


The  Distribution  of  Wealth
r  TABLE C— Continued


Field  A  Field  B  Total


Days  Bushels Days  Bushels Days  Bushels

35  producing  560  +  35  producing  420  =  70  producing  980
40  " 600  +  30  " 390  =  70  " 922

45  " 630  +  25  " 350  =  70  " 980

50  " 650  +  20  " 300  =  70  " 950


In  any  real  case  it  would  be  impossible  to  tell,
without  putting  it  to  a  test,  just  at  what  point
diminishing  returns  begin,  though  a  capable  farmer
can  tell,  on  the  basis  of  his  experience,  closely
enough  for  practical  purposes.  Whenever  you  find
a  competent  farmer  deliberately  devoting  a  part  of
his  labor  and  capital  to  the  growing  of  any  crop  on
more  than  one  grade  of  land,  you  may  be  sure  that
he  thinks  it  pays  better  to  do  so  than  to  concentrate
all  his  energies  on  his  best  land.  But  this  could  not
possibly  be  true  unless  he  had  such  an  amount  of
these  factors  as  would,  if  applied  exclusively  to  his
best  land,  carry  its  cultivation  beyond  the  point
of  diminishing  returns.  If  we  may  assume,  for  ex-
ample, that  Table  A  represents  the  amount  of  corn
produced  by  varying  amounts  of  labor  and  capital
when  applied  to  his  best  ten-acre  field,  and  Table  B
the  same  for  his  second  best  ten-acre  field,  we  shall
find,  by  comparing  the  two  tables,  that  if  he  had
only  20  days'  labor  to  use  he  would  get  more  bushels


Diminishing  Returns  6i

by  concentrating  them  all  on  the  best  field  than  by
dividing  them  between  the  two  fields.  Again,  as
shown  in  Table  C,  which  is  based  on  a  comparison
of  Tables  A  and  B,  if  he  had  only  25  days'  labor
at  his  disposal,  there  is  no  way  in  which  he  could
divide  them  between  the  two  fields  so  as  to  pro-
duce as  many  bushels  as  he  could  by  putting  them
all  on  the  best  field.  By  this  means  he  would  get
450  bushels,  whereas  20  days  on  field  A  and  5  on
field  B  would  give  him  only  420  bushels,  while  15
days  on  field  A  and  10  on  field  B  would  give  him
only  400.  However,  when  he  has  30  days'  labor  at
his  disposal,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  indifference
whether  he  concentrates  them  all  on  field  A  or
divides  them  in  the  ratio  of  15  to  15,  or  20  on  field
A  to  ro  on  field  B,  since  each  of  the  three  methods
would  produce  the  same  number  of  bushels,  viz.,
510.  It  is  only  when  he  has  as  many  as  35  days'
labor  to  use  that  it  becomes  positively  to  his  ad-
vantage to  divide  them  between  the  two  fields.
In  this  case  the  maximum  number  of  bushels,  viz.,
620,  is  produced  by  dividing  his  days  in  the  ratio
of  20  in  field  A  to  15  in  field  B.  Having  40  days'
labor,  his  maximum  return,  viz.,  690  bushels,  is
secured  by  spending  25  days  in  field  A  and  15  in
field  B.  Fifty  days  could  be  most  profitably  divided
in  the  proportion  of  30  on  field  A  to  20  on  field  B,


62  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

60  in  the  proportion  of  35  to  25,  and  70  in  the  pro-
portion of  40  to  30.

To  the  objection  that  these  tables  are  artificial  and
based  on  assumed  cases,  it  is  only  necessary  to  reply
that  the  productivity  of  any  real  field,  under  varying
expenditures  of  labor  and  capital,  would  necessarily
conform  to  some  table,  and  if  that  table  revealed  the
principle  of  increasing  and  diminishing  returns  at
all,  everything  which  has  been  said  of  Tables  A  and
B  could  be  repeated  regarding  it.  If  it  revealed
indefinitely  increasing  returns,  then  it  would  be  de-
monstrably uneconomical  to  use  any  field  which  is
inferior  to  the  one  in  question.  It  would  be  better
to  put  all  one's  labor  and  capital  on  this  field,
allowing  inferior  fields  to  go  to  waste.

An  analysis  of  these  or  any  other  tables  which
fairly  represent  the  relative  productivity  of  different
I  pieces  of  land  amounts  to  a  demonstration  of  the
rule  that,  in  the  growing  of  any  particular  crop,  it
can  never  be  profitable  to  cultivate  one's  second  best
land  unless  one  has  such  an  amount  of  labor  and
capital  as  would,  if  used  exclusively  upon  one's  best
land,  carry  its  cultivation  beyond  the  point  of  dimin-
ishing returns.  This  is,  of  course,  equivalent  to
saying  that  if  there  were  no  such  law  as  that  of
diminishing  returns,  it  would  never  pay  a  farmer  to
devote any  but  a  small  area  of  his  very  best  land


Diminishing  Returns  6^

to  the  growing  of  any  particular  crop,  putting  all
his^  labor  and  capital  on  that  land.  If  any  doubt
remains  upon  this  point,  it  may  be  effectively  re-
moved by  constructing  tables  for  two  fields  of  differ-
ent degrees  of  productivity,  showing  either  constant
or  indefinitely  increasing  returns  for  each,  and  then
trying  to  find  some  way  of  dividing  any  conceivable
amount  of  labor  and  capital  between  the  two  fields
so  as  to  produce  as  much  as  could  be  produced  by
concentrating  it  all  on  the  better  field.  If  any  final
and  conclusive  proof  of  the  law  of  diminishing  re-
turns were  needed,  it  would  be  found  in  the  fact
that  men  of  experience  universally  find  it  to  their
advantage  to  utilize  lands  of  varying  degrees  of
productivity  in  the  cultivation  of  every  crop.  How-
ever, the  law  is  so  well  known  and  generally  recog-
nized that  such  proof  would  not  be  needed,  had  not
certain  writers  seen  fit  to  deny  it  because  it  did  not
harmonize  with  their  views  of  economics,  and  certain
would-be  reformers  to  ignore  it  because  its  recog-
nition would  interfere  with  the  acceptance  of  their
reforms.

This  law  of  diminishing  returns  applies  not  only
to  agriculture,  but  to  manufacturing  and  other
industries  as  well,  though  there  is  a  widespread
opinion  to  the  contrary.  It  must  be  remembered
that  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  relates to the


64  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

amount  which  can  be  produced  on  a  given  piece  of
land  by  varying  amounts  of  labor  and  capital.  It
means  simply  that,  after  a  certain  point,  the  amount
that  can  be  produced  on  any  given  piece  of  land
does  not  increase  in  proportion  to  the  labor  and
capital  used.  Obviously  the  same  proposition  holds
true  of  manufacturing,  though  the  point  at  which
diminishing  returns  begin  is  somewhat  further  re-
moved. That  is  to  say,  in  the  manufacturing  of
almost  any  article,  more  labor  and  capital  could  be
concentrated  upon  a  given  piece  of  land  before  the
law  of  diminishing  returns  begins  to  be  encountered
than  could  be  used  on  the  same  land  in  the  growing
of  most  agricultural  crops.  But  different  crops  per-
mit of  widely  different  applications  of  labor  and
capital,  some  of  them  being  grown  under  such
intensive  systems  of  culture,  where  so  much  labor
and  capital  are  concentrated  on  such  small  areas  of
land  as  to  bring  them,  in  this  respect,  very  near  to
certain  classes  of  manufactures,  for  manufactures
themselves  vary  in  this  respect.

In  discussions  of  this  subject,  confusion  has  some-
times resulted  from  a  failure  to  distinguish  the  law
of  diminishing  returns  from  a  somewhat  similar  law
relating  to  the  comparative  economy  of  large  and
small  scale  production.  It  is,  for  example,  some-
times stated  that  manufacturing  is  carried  on  under


Diminishing  Returns  65

the  law  of  increasing  returns,  because  a  large  fac-
tory can  be  run  more  economically,  and  turn  out
its  products  at  a  lower  cost,  than  can  a  small  one.
But  this  is  quite  different  from  saying  that  a  large
factory  can  be  run  more  economically  than  a  small
one  on  a  given  piece  of  land,  or  that  it  would  not  be
necessary  to  use  more  land  in  connection  with  a
large  factory  than  with  a  small  one  of  the  same
kind.i

Each  business  or  industrial  unit,  such  as  a  farm,
a  store,  or  a  factory,  is  a  combination,  under  one
management,  of  various  factors  of  production  which
are  usually  included  under  the  three  heads,  —  laqd,
labor,  and  capital.  Among  the  various  questions
which  the  manager  of  such  a  unit  has  to  determine ^

t^  are  the  two  following :  i.  What  is  the  h^^t  proportion  "l^
in  which  to  combine  the  various  factors  ? 2.  What^/

^  is  the  best  size  for  the  whole  business  unit  ?  The.
law  of  diminishing  returns  has  to  do  only  with  the
former  of  these  questions.  That  is  to  say,  it  relates
to  the  varying  productivity  of  an  industrial  unit
when  the  factors  are  combined  in  varying  propor-
tions. On  the  other  hand,  the  law  which  relates  to
the  comparative  economy  of  large  and  small  scale
production  has  to  do  primarily  with  the  size  of  the

1  Cf.  C.  J.  Bullock  on  "  The  Variation  of  Productive  Forces,"  Quar-
terly Journal  of  Economics^  August,  190a.
F  ^^


66


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


unit  rather  than  the  proportion  in  which  the  factors
are  combined.

The  difference  between  these  two  laws  can  be
expressed  in  a  more  compact  form  by  means  of  the
following  formulae,  which  are  not  to  be  understood
as  in  any  sense  proving  the  existence  of  the  laws,
but  only  as  expressing  them  in  convenient  form.


<"  fci  3


I. If


X with Y will  produce
II.  Then X with aY  will  produce

III.  And aX  with aY  will  produce


more  than  aP  (Increasing

returns.)

less  than aP  (Diminishing

returns.)

((Increasing
economy  of
large-scale
production.)
((Diminishing
economy  of
large-scale
production.)


less  than  aP


It  is  assumed  that  «  is  a  positive  quantity  greater
than  I.

In  formula  II  it  will  be  observed,  thQ  proportion  in
which  the  factors  are  combined  is  not  the  same  as  in
formula  I,  land  remaining  the  same  while  labor  and
capital  are  increased  by  a.  In  formula  III,  however,
the  proportion  is  the  same  as  in  I,  all  the  factors
being  increased  in  the  same  proportion  ;  but  the  size
of  the  whole  combination  is  increased.


Diminishing  Returns  67

For  the  present  we  are  concerned  only  with  the
law  of  diminishing  returns,  whose  expression  is ;  —

®  °  «-a  a  -

I.  If JC with Y will  produce . . . . P,
2.  then A with a  Y will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP.

This,  as  was  shown  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,
is  the  condition  which  exists  wherever  men  find  it  to
their  advantage  to  extend  their  cultivation  to  any  but
their  best  land.

Leaving  out  of  account  the  increasing  or  decreas-
ing economy  of  large-scale  production,  we  may  add
the  following :  —


h


0I-


3.  aX  with  aY  will  produce  aP;  since  this  reproduces  the  same
proportion  between  labor  and  capital  on  the  one  hand  and  land  on  the
other  as  was  given  in  formula  i.  Comparing  2  and  3,  it  is  evident  that,
labor  and  capital  remaining  fixed,  a  variation  in  the  land  expressed  by  the
ratio  aX :  X,  will  produce  a  variation  in  the  product  expressed  by  the  ratio
aP  :  a  quantity  greater  than  P  but  less  than  aP,

It  appears  that  the  product  does  not  bear  a
constant  ratio  either  to  the  labor  and  capital,  or  to  the
land.  When  the  amount  of  land  is  left  unchanged
and  the  amount  of  labor  and  capital  is  increased,  the
product  does  not  remain  unchanged,  nor  does  it  in-
crease as  much  as  the  labor  and  capital.  'And  if  the
amount  of  labor  and  capital  were  to  remain  unchanged


68  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

while  the  amount  of  land  were  increased,  the  product
would  neither  remain  unchanged,  nor  would  it  in-
crease so  much  as  the  land.  From  the  above  formula
we  may  therefore  derive  the  following :  —


ll

II!

If

X

with Y

then

aX

with Y

will  produce . . , P,
IV. then aX with Y will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP.

Thus  the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  originally
applied  to  the  product  of  a  given  amount  of  land
under  varying  applications  of  labor  and  capital,  is
capable  of  being  reversed  and  applied  to  the  product
of  a  given  amount  of  labor  and  capital  when  applied
to  varying  amounts  of  land.  The  principle  is  the
same,  and  the  expression  is  similar  in  both  cases.

This  can  be  reduced  to  arithmetical  terms  by  re-
ferring to  the  table  for  field  A  on  page  58.  Accord-
ing to  that  table,  when  the  amount  of  labor  and
capital  was  increased  from  20  to  25  days,  the
product  was  increased  from  380  to  450  bushels.  An
increase  of  one-fourth  in  the  number  of  days  brought
an  increase  of  something  less  than  one-fifth  in  the
number  of  bushels.  But  if  we  were  now  to  keep
the  amount  of  labor  and  capital  constant  at  25
days  and  increase  the  amount  of  land  by  one-fourth,
making  I2|  acres,  we  should  probably  get  a  product
of  something  like  475  bushels. If  we  leave  out  of


Diminishing  Returns  69

account  the  increasing  or  decreasing  economy  of
large-scale  production,  as  we  might  reasonably  do  if
the  variations  were  sufficiently  small,  25  days  on  12^
acres  would  produce  as  much  per  acre  as  20  days  on
10  acres,  since  there  would  be  the  same  amount  of
labor  and  capital  per  acre  in  both  cases.  But  \2\
acres  at  38  bushels  per  acre  (the  amount  produced  on
each  acre  when  20  days  were  spent  on  10  acres)
gives  a  total  product  of  exactly  475  bushels.  We
find  therefore  that  whereas  25  days  on  10  acres
produced  450  bushels,  the  same  number  of  days  on
I2|  acres  would  produce  475  bushels.  In  other
words,  an  increase  of  one-fourth  in  the  number  of
acres  would  bring  an  increase  of  only  one-eighteenth
in  the  number  of  bushels.

When 10 with 25 would  produce 450,
then li  X  10 with 25 would  produce i  A  X  450.

But  the  principle  can  be  still  further  extended  by
separating  labor  and  capital  and  representing  them
as  two  factors,  instead  of  lumping  them  together,  as
has  been  done  thus  far  in  the  discussion.  Indeed,
there  is  every  reason  for  so  separating  them,  for
labor  and  capital  do  not  belong  in  the  same  class.
They  are  no  more  alike  than  are  labor  and  land,  or
capital and land. Moreover, if it  is true  that  an


70  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

increase  in  the  amount  of  labor  and  capital  on  the
same  amount  of  land  will  not  increase  the  product  as
much  as  the  labor  and  capital  are  increased,  it  is
equally  true,  and  for  the  same  reasons,  that  an  in-
crease in  the  amount  of  labor  on  a  fixed  amount  of
land  and  capital,  or  an  increase  in  the  amount  of
capital  used  with  a  fixed  amourir~6f  land  and  labor,
will  not  increase  the  product  as  much  as  the  variable
factor  in  either  case  is  increased.  The  statement  can
therefore  be  enlarged  by  adding  the  following  for-
mulae to  those  given  above :  —

js_, 2  s -.S  4

s| -s^ •«§.  8

<M ^s ^n  ft

V.  If X  with Y  with  ^  will  produce  . . . . P,
VI.  then  JC  with  a  Y  with Z  will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP,
VII.  and X  with Y  with  aZ  will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP,

Formula  VI  is  an  expression  of  the  conditions
which  exist  when  an  estabHshment,  comprising  a
given  amount  of  land  and  capital,  is,  operated  by
varying  amounts  of  labor.  If  the  plant  is  under-
manned, the  product  may  be  very  small  in  proportion
to  the  labor  employed,  whereas  a  larger  amount  of
labor,  being  able  to  run  the  plant  efficiently,  might
produce  a  more  than  proportionally  increased  prod-
uct. But  a  point  is  soon  reached  at  which  the  plant
yields  its  maximum  per  unit  of  labor.  This  is  where
every laborer  is most  actively  employed,  with  the


Diminishing  Returns  71

largest  amount  of  machinery  at  his  disposal  which  he
is  capable  of  handling.  But  the  purpose  of  the  man-
agement of  such  an  establishment  is  not  to  get  the
largest  product  per  unit  of  labor,  but  the  largest
product  in  proportion  to  the  total  cost  of  operation.
This  purpose  is  not  fulfilled  by  merely  working  the
plant  at  that  rate  which  will  yield  the  largest  returns  '
in  proportion  to  the  labor,  unless  the  cost  of  labor  is
the  only  item  of  expense  in  the  running  of  the
establishment.

This  may  be  further  explained  by  referring  again
to  the  table  on  page  58.  If  an  indefinite  amount  of
land  of  the  grade  of  that  ten-acre  field  could  be  had
absolutely  free  of  cost,  it  would  then  pay  the  farmer
to  spread  his  labor  over  as  much  land  as  would
enable  him  to  put  twenty  days  on  each  ten  acres,
since  this  is  the  proportion  which,  according  to  the
table,  yields  him  the  largest  product  per  day.  Labor
being  the  only  item  of  expense,  this  ratio  would  also
give  him  the  largest  product  in  proportion  to  the  total
expense  of  his  farming.  But  if  he  had  to  pay  a  rent
per  acre  equal  to  the  price  of  20  bushels  of  corn,
he  would  then  find  it  to  his  advantage  to  use  less
land,  putting  30  days,  instead  of  20,  on  each  10
acres.  If  we  may  assume  that  rent  and  wages  are  the
only  items  of  expense,  we  will  find  that,  according  to
the  table, if  he  uses  only  20  days  on  each  10  acres


72  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

he will have left,  after paying his  rent,  only g
bushels  for  each day's  labor,  whereas  if  he  were
to  use  30  days  on  each  10  acres,  he  would  have  left
'^^ '-nshels  per  day. Under  these  i^^ditions,  this
ratio  of  labor  to  land  which  \^30riild  yield  the
t.  product*  in  proportion  to  the  tctel  expenses,
other  hand,  if  we  could  con(S^Ve  of  a  con-
where rent  would be  the  onfy  item  of ex-
'^-^'^'S'  to  the  farmer, labor b^ing  ,abs61utely  free
5nd  unlimited in quantity,  it  would-^then pay  him
Sttt>j^se  as  much  labor  with  eaqli^racre  as  w<jiuld
jnaximum  crop  per  acre.  ^^UQe  the  tot.il
.Ciise\of^^arming  would  then  consist  16  rent,  mis
stern  Amrming  would  yield  the  maximum  pic'  ict
1  propoi^n  to  the  total  expense.  .,^
We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  if  landv\;i<:  free
and  labor  expensive,  it  would  be  to

combine  them  in  that  proportion  whJoh"<|||^ld  yield
the  largest  product  per  unit  of  labor,  wiii'%  would
require  an  extensive  system  of  faming  '  >ri  the
other  hand,  if  labor  were  free  and  land  cii-nsive,
the  most  profitable  combination  would  be  the  one
which  would  yield  the  largest  product  per  unit  of
land,  which  would  require  very  intensive  farming.
Where  both  land  and  labor  are  expensive,  thfe  most
profitable  proportion  must  lie  somewhere  between
these  two  extremes, depending  upon the  relative


Diminishing  Returns  73

expensiveness  of  the  two factors. That  is  to say^
where  land  is  dear  and  labor  cheap,  the  tendency  is  I
toward  intensive  cultivation ;  but  where  labor  is  dear!  ,
and  land cheap,  the  tendency  is,  for  equally  good! ^^
reasons,  toward  extensive cultivation. In the rear  /^
world  where  labor  is  always  more  or  less  expensive,
land is  never  profitably  cultivated  up  to  that  poini
which  will  force  it  to  yield  its  maximum  product  per
acre,  and  only  in  extremely  new  countries  where  land
is  free  is  it  ever  profitable  to  cultivate  it  so  extensively
as  to  yield  the  maximum  per  unit  of  labor.

Since  so  much  labor  is  never  profitably  used  in
connection  with  a  given  amount  of  land  as  to  produce
the  maximum /^r  acrcy  it  follows  that,  in  any  normal
case,  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  labor  on  such
given  amount  of  land  will  always  increase  the  gross
product.  But  since  so  little  labor  is  never  profitably
used  in  connection  with  a  given  amount  of  land  as  to
produce  the  maximum  per  unit  of  labor^  it  follows  that
an  increase  in  the  amount  of  labor  on  a  given  amount
of  land  will  never,  in  any  normal  case,  increase  the
product  as  much  as  the  labor  is  increased.  That  is
to  say,  except  on  the  frontier  it  always  pays  to  culti-
vate land  beyond  the  point  where  diminishing  returns
begin,  if  it  pays  to  cultivate  it  at  all,  but  it  never  pays
to  cultivate  it  up  to  the  point  where  an  increase  in
the  labor  would  yield  no  increase  in  the  gross  product.


74  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Similarly,  since  so  much  land  is  never  profitably  used
in  connection  with  a  given  amount  of  labor  as  to  pro-
duce the  maximum  per  unit  of  labor,  it  follows  that,
in  any  normal  case,  an  increase  in  the  amount  of
land  with  such  given  amount  of  labor  will  always
increase  the  gross  product.  But  since  so  little  land
is  never  profitably  used  in  connection  with  a  given
amount  of  labor  as  to  produce  the  maximum /^^  unit
of  land,  it  follows  that,  in  any  normal  case,  an  in-
crease in  the  land  with  such  given  amount  of  labor
will  not  increase  the  product  as  much  as  the  land  is
increased.  This  is  merely  a  reversed  application  of
the  law  of  diminishing  returns  as  originally  ex-
pounded, and  it  is  a  necessary  corollary  of  that  law.
It  is,  moreover,  the  condition  expressed  by  formula
IV.

All  this  is  as  true  of  a  factory  as  of  a  farm,  and,
by  a  change  of  terms,  all  that  has  been  said  of  the
ratio  between  farm  land  and  the  labor  which  culti-
vates it  could  be  repeated  of  the  ratio  between  a
manufacturing  plant  and  the  labor  which  operates  it.
So  much  labor  is  never  profitably  used  in  connection
with  such  a  plant  as  to  turn  out  the  maximum
product,  nor  is  so  much  land  and  capital  ever  profit-
ably used  in  connection  with  a  given  amount  of  labor
as  to  turn  out  its  maximum  product  per  unit  of
labor. That  is,  it  is  always  possible,  in  any  normal


Diminishing  Returns  75

case,  to  force  a  somewhat  larger  product  by  using
more  labor  in  connection  with  a  given  amount  of
land  and  capital,  or  more  land  and  capital  with  a
given  amount  of  labor.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  so
little  labor  is  never  profitably  used  in  connection  with
such  a  plant  as  to  yield  the  largest  product  per  unit
of  labor,  nor  is  so  little  land  and  capital  used  as  to
yield  the  maximum  per  unit  of  land  and  capital.
That  is,  though  an  increase  in  the  amount  either  of
labor  or  of  land  and  capital  would  increase  the  gross
product,  it  would  never,  in  any  normal  case,  increase
the  product  as  much  as  the  labor  or  the  land  and
capital  are  increased.  Therefore,  we  have  here  also
all  the  essential  features  of  the  law  of  diminishing
returns  as  it  was  originally  expounded,  the  only
difference  being  that  we  are  here  considering  the
productivity  of  a  fixed  amount  of  land  and  capital
when  combined  with  varying  amounts  of  labor,  in-
stead of  the  productivity  of  a  fixed  amount  of  land
when  combined  with  varying  amounts  of  labor  and
capital.  This  is  (to  repeat)  the  condition  expressed
in  formula  VI.

Formula  VII  is  an  expression  of  the  law  which
governs  any  estabUshment  or  business  unit  which
combines  a  fixed  amount  of  land  and  labor  with
varying  amounts  of  capital.  By  a  change  of  terms,
the  explanation which was given of formula  VI


yS  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

can  be  adapted  to  this  one,  since  the  same  law
applies  to  this  as  to  other  variations  in  the  propor-
tion in  which  the  factors  are  combined.  That  is
to  say,  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  capital  used
in  any  typical  estabHshment  (land  and  labor  re-
maining the  same)  will  increase  the  total  product,
but  not  as  much  as  the  capital  is  increased.  On
the  other  hand,  allowing  the  capital  to  remain  the
same,  an  increase  in  the  labor  and  the  land  will
also  increase  the  total  product,  but  not  as  much  as
the  labor  and  land  are  increased.

We  are  therefore  driven  to  the  conclusion  that
there  is  one  law  which  governs  the  results  of  every
variation  of  the  proportion  in  which  the  productive
factors  are  combined,  no  matter  which  factor  is
varied.  It  never  pays  to  combine  so  little  of  any
one  factor  with  so  much  of  the  others  as  to  get  the
largest  possible  product  in  proportion  to  the  one,
unless  the  others  are  absolutely  free  and  do  not
need  to  be  economized,  in  which  case  they  pass
over  into  the  class  of  non-economic  factors  like  air
and  sunlight.  This  is  equivalent  to  saying  that,
where  each  factor  costs  something,  it  always  pays
to  combine  them  in  such  proportions  that  if  any
one  or  two  of  them  were  increased  it  would  increase
the  product,  but  not  so  much  as  the  variable  factor,
or  factors,  were  increased. In  every  normal  case,


Diminishing  Returns  77

therefore,  where  the  factors  are  wisely  combined,  a^
law  of  diminishing  returns  operates  with  respect  toj
each of  the factors,  and not  with respect  to  on^'
alone.

^i  But  what  is  the  most  profitable  proportion  in
which  to  combine  the  various  factors  of  production?
^As  already  suggested,  this  depends  upon  their  rela-
tive cost.  The  more  expensive  one  factor  is  in  com-
parison with  the  others  the  more  necessary  it  is  to
economize  in  the  use  of  that  one.  There  are,  for
example,  several  ways  to  grow  a  hundred  bushels  of
corn.  One  is,  to  use  much  labor  with  little  land,
makmg  the  land  produce  a  heavy  crop,  but  getting
a  small  product  per  unit  of  labor.  Another  is  to  use
little  labor  with  much  land,  getting  a  comparatively
light  crop  from  the  land,  but  enabling  the  labor  to
produce  a  larger  amount  per  unit.  Which  is  the
more  economical  of  these  two  ways  will  depend  upon
the  relative  cost  of  land  and  labor.  Where  land  is
dear  and  labor  cheap,  the  former  is  the  better
method;  but  where  land  is  cheap  and  labor  dear,
the  latter  method  is  better.  There  are  also  several
ways  of  producing  a  hundred  yards  of  cloth.  One
is  to  use  much  labor  with  little  machinery,  driving  the
machinery  at  a  high  rate  of  speed  and  making  it  turn
out  a  large  product,  but  getting  a  comparatively  small
product  per  unit  of  labor. Another  is  to  use  little


I


78  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

labor  with  much  machinery,  enabling  the  labor  to
work  efficiently  and  turn  out  a  large  product  per
unit,  but  getting  a  comparatively  small  product  per
machine.  Here  again,  the  question  as  to  the  more
economical  method  depends  upon  the  relative  cost
of  the  two  factors.

The  general  rule  may  be  laid  down  that,  with  a
given  amount  of  land  or  capital,  it  pays  best  to  com-
bine that  amount  of  labor  which  will  just  enable  any
unit  to  add  as  much  to  the  total  product  as  that  unit
costs.  For  a  fuller  explanation  it  is  necessary  to
refer  again  to  the  table  on  p.  58.  As  the  amount  of
labor  used  on  this  field  increases  beyond  20  days,
there  is  a  smaller  product  per  day,  but  more  than
that,  there  is  a  still  smaller  additional  product  created
by  each  additional  increment  of  labor.  When  the
labor  increases  from  20  to  25  days,  the  product
increases  from  380  to  450  bushels,  making  an  ad-
ditional product  of  70  bushels  resulting  from  the
addition  of  5  days'  labor  to  the  existing  force.  Each
of  the  additional  5  days,  therefore,  added  14  bushels
to  the  product,  though  the  average  product  per  day
for  the  whole  25  days  was  18  bushels.  This  addi-
tional product  of  14  bushels  is  sometimes  technically
called  the  mar^nal  product,  or  the  product  of  the
marginal  labor,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  average
product  or  the  product  of  the  average  labor. Again,


Diminishing  Returns  79

when  the  labor  is  increased  to  30  days,  the  total
product  is  increased  from  450  to  510  bushels.  This
increase  of  5  days  brought  an  increase  of  60  bushels
in  the  crop,  making  an  additional,  or  marginal,  prod-
uct of  12  bushels  per  day,  though  the  average  prod-
uct for  the  whole  30  days  is  17  bushels.  When  the
labor  is  again  increased  from  30  to  35  days,  the  crop
is  increased  by  50  bushels,  making  a  marginal  product
of  10  bushels.  The  marginal  product  continues  fall-
ing with  each  increase  in  the  amount  of  labor,  until
finally,  when  the  labor  is  increased  from  45  to  50  days,
the  total  product  is  increased  by  only  20  bushels,  mak-
ing a  marginal  product  of  only  4  bushels.

Now  if  the  price  of  a  day's  labor,  such  as  is  here
contemplated,  were  equal  to  the  price  of  1 1  bushels
of  corn,  it  would  not  pay  the  farmer  of  this  land
so  well  to  hire  50  days'  labor  as  it  would  to  hire  45.
Fifty  days  would  cost  him  55  bushels  more  than  45
days  would  cost,  and  would  produce  only  20  bushels
more.  The  extra  5  days  would  net  him  a  loss  of  35
bushels.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  not  pay  him
to  stop  with  only  25  days.  Thirty  days  would  cost
him  only  55  bushels  more,  but  they  would  produce
60  bushels  more.  He  would  therefore  make  a  net
gain  of  5  bushels  by  hiring  the  extra  5  days.  But
it  would  not  pay  him  to  hire  35  days'  labor,  because
they  would only  produce  50  bushels  more  than  30


8o  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

days  would  produce,  and  he  would  therefore  lose  5
bushels  on  the  extra  5  days.  At  the  assumed  price
of  labor,  30  days  would  be  the  most  profitable  appli-
cation of  labor  to  this  land.  But  if  a  day's  labor  cost
only  the  price  of  9  bushels,  35  days  would  pay  better
than  30,  because  they  would  cost  only  45  bushels
more,  and  would  produce  50  bushels  more.  In  short,
it  always  pays  best  to  apply  to  this  or  any  other
piece  of  land  as  much  labor  as  will  yield  a  marginal
product  approximately  equal  to  its  cost  per  unit,
whatever  that  cost  may  be.

The  same  principle  will  determine  the  amount  of
land  which  ought  to  be  used  with  a  fixed  amount  of
labor  (and  capital).  If  a  farmer  has  a  certain
amount  of  labor  at  his  disposal  which  he  must  use
or  allow  to  go  to  waste,  he  will  find  it  to  his  advan-
tage to  use  as  much  land  as  will  enable  each  acre
to  add  as  much  to  the  total  crop  as  it  costs  per  year.
That  is  to  say,  the  marginal  product  of  the  land
should  just  equal  its  rent.  Let  us  assume  that  he
has  50  days'  labor,  such  as  is  assumed  in  Table  A,  and
that  he  is  in  doubt  as  to  how  much  land,  of  the
grade  described  in  the  san\e  table,  he  ought  to  culti-
vate with  that  labor.  If  he  should  use  it  all  in  the
cultivation  of  10  acres  of  corn,  he  would  get,  accord-
ing to  the  table,  a  total  crop  of  650  bushels.  But  if
he  should  cultivate  11^  acres,  he  ought,  according  to


Diminishing  Returns  8i

the  same  table,  to  get  a  total  crop  of  700  bushels.
Fifty  days'  labor  would  cultivate  1 1^  acres  with  the
same  degree  of  intensity  as  45  days  would  cultivate
10  acres,  since  the  ratio  of  labor  to  land  would  be
the  same  in  both  cases.^  45  :  10: :  50:  iij.  Ten
acres  cultivated  at  that  degree  of  intensity  produced
a  crop  of  630  bushels,  and  11^  acres  cultivated  at
the  same  degree  of  intensity  ought  to  produce  a  crop
of  700  bushels.  10:630:;  11^  :  700.  The  addition
of  I J  acres,  therefore,  would  produce  an  additional
crop  of  50  bushels,  which  makes  a  marginal  product
of  45  bushels  per  acre.

Now,  if  the  farmer  could  get  his  land  at  a
lower  rental  than  45  bushels  per  acre,  it  would
pay  him  better  to  rent  iij  acres  than  10.  But  if
the  rent  per  acre  just  equalled  the  price  of  45  bush-
els, it  would  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  him,
since  in  either  case  he  would  have  the  same
amount  left,  viz.,  200  bushels,  or  4  bushels  per  day,
to  pay  him  for  his  labor.  But  if  he  had  to  pay
only  36  bushels  per  acre  as  rent,  it  would  be  a
matter  of  indifference  to  him  whether  he  cultivated
11-^  or  12 J  acres  with  his  50  days'  labor.  If  he
should  cultivate  12J  acres,  he  ought  to  produce  as
much,  per  acre as  40 days could produce on 10

1  This,  of  course,  leaves  out  of  account  a  possible  increase  or  de-
crease in  the  economy  of  large-scale  production.
G


82


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


acres.  40:  lo: :  50: 12J.  Since,  according  to  the
table,  40  days  on  10  acres  produced  600  bushels,
50  days  on  I2|-  acres  ought  to  produce  750
bushels. 10:600;:  12^:750.

As  we  saw  in  the  preceding  paragraph  that  50
days  on  1 1^  acres  produced  700  bushels,  and  as  we
have  now  found  that  the  same  amount  of  labor  on
12 J  acres  would  produce  750  bushels,  it  appears  that
the  addition  of  i^^^  acres  to  the  combination  added
50  bushels  to  the  product.  This  makes  a  marginal
product  of  36  bushels  per  acre.

By  a  study  of  the  following  table,  which  is  de-
rived from  Table  A,  it  can  easily  be  determined,
approximately,  how  many  acres  of  this  kind  of
land  the  farmer  in  question  could  afford  to  culti-
vate at  any  given  rental  between  10  and  45  bushels
per  acre.

TABLE D


Number  of  acres

cultivated  by  50

days'  labor

ToUl  product

Number  of  acres
added  each  time

Marginal  product
per  acre

10

650

Hi

700

li

45

I2i

750

II^

36

14*

800

iH

28

i6|

850

2h

21

20

900

3i

15

25

950

5

10

Diminishing  Returns  S^

This  table  has  been  partly  explained  already.
The  product  of  50  days  on  10  acres  was  taken
bodily  from  Table  A.  The  product  of  the  same
number  of  days  on  the  various  quantities  of  land
named  in  the  first  column  is  found  by  the
process  of  simple  proportion.  In  Table  A  was
given  the  product  of  10  acres  when  cultivated  by
varying  amounts  of  labor.  By  increasing  the  num-
ber of  acres  to  be  cultivated  by  50  days'  labor,
so  as  to  reproduce  the  proportions  between  labor
and  land  which  were  given  in  Table  A,  it  is  easy  to
calculate  the  total  product  in  each  case.  The  mar-
ginal product  is  found  by  dividing  the  additional
product  in  each  case  by  the  additional  acres  which
it  took  to  produce  it.

In  the  foregoing  illustration,  labor  and  capital
have  been  treated  as  one  factor,  or  rather,  capital
has  been  merged  with  labor  —  this  for  the  purpose
of  reducing  the  number  of  factors  and  simplifying
the  illustration.  But  the  same  reasoning  would
apply  to  an  illustration  where  land  and  capital  were
treated  as  a  single  factor  in  the  form  of  an  indus-
trial plant,  —  whether  a  farm  or  a  factory  would
make  no  difference.  With  a  given  industrial  plant,
consisting  of  a  fixed  amount  of  land,  buildings,  and
machinery,  the  most  profitable  application  of  labor
would be that which would make the marginal


\


84  The  Distribution  of  Wealth  ^

product  of  labor  just  equal  to  its  cost  per  unit.  /  j
This  is  what  is  meant  by  running  such  a  plant  at
its  true  capacity.^  This  could  be  shown  by  con-
structing another  table  on  the  plan  of  Table  A,  or
even  by  changing  the  headings  of  the  columns  of
that  table.  We  might,  for  example,  let  the  first
column  represent  the  varying  numbers  (in  hun-
dreds) of  laborers  who  might  be  employed  in  a
shoe  factory,  and  let  the  second  column  represent
the  numbers  of  shoes  produced  in  a  given  time.
The  third  column  would  then  represent  the  num-
ber produced  per  laborer  in  that  time.  The  reader
can  determine  for  himself,  by  the  method  out-
lined above,  what  would  be,  in  this  assumed  case,
the  most  profitable  number  of  laborers  to  employ
at  any  given  rate  of  wages.  The  chief  difficulty
with  this  illustration  is  that  it  assumes  a  uniform
rate  of  wages  for  the  various  laborers  employed
in  such  an  establishment;  but  this  will  be  con-
sidered later.  Then  by  changing  the  headings  of
the  columns  in  Table  D,  it  could  be  detertnined,
theoretically,  how  much  land  and  capital  to  use
with  a  given  amount  of  labor  in  the  manufacture
of  shoes.

We  have  not  yet  reached  a  good  stopping-place  in
our  extension  of  the  principle  of  diminishing  returns.

1  See  Chapter  I,  p.  39.


Diminishing  Returns  85

The  grouping  of  the  factors  of  production  into  the  three
classes,  labor,  land,  and  capital,  is  by  no  means  final.
There  are  various  kinds  of  labor,  of  land,  and  of  capi-
tal. Two  different  kinds  of  labor  may  be  performing
functions  which  differ  almost  as  widely  as  those  per-
formed by  labor  and  capital,  or  by  labor  and  land.
The  work  of  a  bookkeeper  differs  as  widely  from
that  of  a  ditch  digger,  as  that  of  a  ditch  digger  does
from  that  of  a  steam  shovel.  Therefore,  the  same
reasons  which  favor  the  separation  of  labor  and  capi-
tal, in  order  that  they  may  be  treated  as  distinct
factors,  will  also  favor  the  separation  of  one  kind  of
labor  from  another,  of  one  kind  of  capital  from
another,  and  of  one  kind  of  land  from  another.
Let  us  assume  that  in  a  given  industrial  unit,  say  a
factory,  one  kind  of  labor  is  varied  in  amount,  while
the  land,  capital,  and  other  kinds  of  labor  remain
the  same.  The  product  of  the  factory  will  not  vary
in  exact  proportion  to  the  variation  in  the  amount  of
the  one  kind  of  labor,  nor  will  it  remain  unchanged
as  though  entirely  unaffected  by  variations  in  this
kind  of  labor.  Here  we  have  every  essential  feature
of  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  as  it  was  originally
developed.  This  extension  of  the  law  is  capable  of
an  indefinite  number  of  applications.  Instead  of
assuming  a  variation  in  one  kind  of  labor,  as  in  the  §/
above  illustration,  we  may  assume  a  variation  in  the  v.


86  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

amount  of  any  other  kind  of  labor,  of  any  kind  of
capital,  or  of  any  kind  of  land.

A  complete  formula  which  should  show  every
possible  application  of  this  extension  of  the  law  of
diminishing  returns  would  require  a  separate  term
for  each  and  every  kind  of  labor,  capital,  and  land.
But  such  a  formula  would  be  long  and  unwieldy.
The  following  simple  formula,  though  incomplete,
will  have  to  suffice.

II


A

""s-g.

g»

||

III.  If

X with

Y

IX.  then

aX with

Y

X.  and

X with

aY

will  produce  ..../*,

will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP,

will  produce  more  than  P,  but  less  than  aP.

Formula  IX  is  an  expression  of  the  conditions
which  exist  in  any  large  and  complex  establishment
which  combines  many  kinds  of  labor  and  capital  —
possibly  of  land  also.  Let  us  take  a  railroad  as  an
example.  With  a  given  road-bed,  and  with  a  given
equipment  in  the  way  of  depots,  offices,  machine
shops,  etc.,  and  with  a  given  labor  force,  an  increase
in  the  rolling  stock  will,  between  rather  wide  limits,
enable  the  road  to  carry  more  freight  and  passengers,
but  this  increase  in  its  capacity  will  not  be  propor-
tional to  the  increase  in  the  rolling  stock. That  is  to


Diminishing  Returns  87

say,  unless  the  road  were  so  abundantly  equipped
with  engines  and  cars  that  absolutely  no  more  could
be  conveniently  handled  by  the  existing  force  on  the
existing  tracks,  such  an  increase  would  enlarge  its
carrying  capacity.  But  such  an  over-equipment  of
rolling  stock  would  be  similar  to  the  case  of  a  farm
which  combined  so  much  labor  and  capital  on  a
given  piece  of  land  as  to  get  the  maximum  product
per  acre,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  would  not
be  the  most  profitable  proportion  unless  labor  and
capital  could  be  had  entirely  free  of  cost.  And  un-
less the  road  were  so  poorly  equipped  with  rolling
stock  that  each  engine  and  car  could  be  worked  up
to  the  absolute  limit  of  its  capacity,  an  increase  in
the  rolling  stock  would  not  proportionally  increase
the  carrying  capacity  of  the  road.  But  such  an
under-equipment  of  rolling  stock  would  be  similar  to
a  farm  which  employed  so  little  labor  and  capital  in
proportion  to  the  land  as  to  get  the  maximum  prod-
uct per  unit  of  labor  and  capital,  which  would  not
be  the  most  economical  proportion  unless  the  land
could  be  had  absolutely  free  of  cost.  Unless,  there-
fore, the  road  were  equipped  as  though  rolling  stock
formed  no  part  of  the  expense,  and  the  problem  of
the  management  was  to  do  the  largest  possible
amount  of  carrying  in  proportion  to  the  cost  of  the
rest  of  the  equipment,  or  unless  it  were  equipped  as


88  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

though  the  rest  of  the  equipment  formed  no  part  of
the  expense  and  the  problem  was  to  do  the  largest
possible  amount  of  carrying  in  proportion  to  the
cost  of  the  rolling  stock,  the  proposition  would  hold
good  that  an  increase  in  the  rolling  stock  would
increase,  but  not  proportionally,  the  carrying  capacity
of  the  road.  The  same  may  be  said,  under  normal
conditions,  of  an  increase  in  any  other  kind  of  capi-
tal, or  in  any  kind  of  labor,  though,  of  course,  it
would  be  possible  to  name  some  kinds  which  would
be  of  so  little  importance  to  the  running  of  the  road
as  to  make  the  effect  of  an  increase  almost  imper-
ceptible.

This  is  sometimes  called  a  case  of  increasing  re-
turns, but  that  is  a  mistake,  and  is  based  upon  defec-
tive analysis.  Increasing  returns  would  exist  only
when  an  increase  in  the  rolling  stock  would  more
than  proportionally  increase  the  carrying  capacity
of  the  road,  and  not  when  it  simply  increased  the
carrying  capacity  more  than  it  increased  the  total
cost  of  operation.  Doubling  the  rolling  stock  would
not,  in  any  normal  case,  more  than  double  the  carry-
ing capacity,  though  it  might  increase  the  profits  by
increasing  the  carrying  capacity  more  than  it  in-
creased the  total  cost,  the  reason  being  that  a  large
part  of  the  cost  of  operation  would  not  be  increased
at  all. It  will  be  remembered  that  we  found  that  it


Diminishing  Returns  89

always  pays  to  cultivate  a  farm  beyond  the  point
where  diminishing  returns  begin,  —  that  is,  if  the
land  costs  anything.  If  any  expensive  piece  of  land
were  being  cultivated  only  up  to  the  point  where
diminishing  returns  begin,  an  increase  in  the  labor
and  capital  would  not  proportionally  increase  the
product,  though  it  would  increase  the  product  more
than  it  would  increase  the  total  cost,  thereby  increas-
ing the  profits  of  the  farm.  The  reason  is,  in  this
as  in  the  other  case,  that  one  element  in  the  cost,
viz.,  rent,  would  not  be  increased  at  all.  What  is
really  meant  by  calling  this  a  case  of  increasing
returns  is  that  the  road  is  not  securing  the  maximum
economy  until  it  is  able  to  combine  the  various
factors  in  such  proportions  as  will  make  the  marginal  ^
productivity  ^l  each  factor  equal  to  its  cost.  This
is  impossible  for  some  railroads,  owing  to  lack  of
available  traffic,  and  it  is  also  impossible  for  many
other  industrial  establishments  for  similar  reasons.
\  The  conclusion  is,  therefore,  that  in  any  industrial
establishment,  it  is  most  profitable  to  use  that  amount
of  each  factor  which  will  make  its  marginal  product
just  equal  to  its  cost.  /  If,  by  increasing  any  factor,
there  would  be  added  to  the  total  product  of  the
establishment  more  than  enough  to  pay  the  cost  of
increasing  that  factor,  obviously  it  would  pay  to
increase  it. Or  if,  by  decreasing  such  a  factor,  more


go  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

would  be  saved  in  its  cost  than  would  be  lost  in
the  diminution  of  the  total  product,  it  would  pay  to
decrease  it.  The  same  principle  helps  to  determine
the  most  profitable  size  for  the  whole  estabhshment.
Even  when  the  various  factors  are  combined  in  the
right  proportions,  it  may  pay  the  owner  to  enlarge
or  contract  the  whole  establishment  by  increasing
or  decreasing  all  the  factors.  If,  by  thus  enlarging
the  estabhshment,  the  total  product  can  be  increased
more  than  the  cost,  obviously  it  will  pay  to  enlarge.
It  is  equally  obvious  that  it  will  pay  to  contract  if  by
so  doing  the  product  will  be  decreased  less  than  the
cost.  Either  method  would  increase  the  surplus
remaining  after  paying  the  cost  of  the  three  factors
named.  This  means  that  the  most  profitable  size
for  the  establishment  is  that  under  which  the  margi-
nal product  of  all  the  factors  combined  will  just
equal  their  cost.
/^  But  this,  it  must  be  observed,  does  not  necessarily
give  the  size  which  will  give  the  largest  total  product
in  proportion  to  the  land,  labor,  and  capital  employed.
The  reason  is  that  there  is  another  factor,  not  usually
classified  under  any  of  these  heads,  with  which  we
must  reckon,  and  to  which  we  may  give  the  name
mattagement.  An  industrial  establishment  is  a  com-
bination of  various  factors  under  one  management,
and  the  question  of  large  or  small  scale  production


Diminishing  Returns  91

becomes,  therefore,  a  question  of  the  proportion
between  the  factor  called  management,  on  the  one
hand,  and  all  the  other  factors,  on  the  other.  For-
mula III,  which  was  given  as  an  expression  for  the
law  of  increasing  or  decreasing  economy  of  large-
scale  production,  may  be  modified  as  follows,  to  take
account  of  this  new  factor :  —


3

sa »-) h3 u


^  o


If Afwith  JC  with  Y  with  Z  will  produce . . P,
then  HI  with  a  Jf  with  a  Y  with  aZ  will  produce


((Increasing  econ-
omy  of  large-scale
production.)
f  (Decreasing  econ-

,  -,  J  omy  of  large-scale

than  a/*  I ^, . %
[  production.)

From  this  it  will  appear  that  the  law  of  the  in-
creasing or  decreasing  economy  of  large-scale  pro-
duction, while  sufficiently  distinct  from  that  of
increasing  or  diminishing  returns  to  warrant  a  dif-
ference of  name,  is  yet  fundamentally  very  much
like  it.

The  similarity  is  most  important  when  we  consider
the  difference  between  that  size  which  will  enable
an  establishment  to  turn  out  the  largest  product  in
proportion  to  the  land,  labor,  and  capital  employed,
and  that  which  will  enable  it  to  turn  out  the  largest
surplus  over  and  above  the  cost  of  these  three  fac-
tors. A  small  establishment,  being  more  easily  man-


92  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

aged,  might  be  able  to  turn  out  a  larger  product  in
proportion  to  these  elements  in  the  cost  of  operation
than  a  large  one  could,  and  yet,  owing  to  the  small-
ness  of  the  total  product,  the  surplus  might  not  be
enough  to  enable  the  manager  to  live.  He  might,
for  example,  be  able  to  manage  a  ten-acre  wheat
farm  so  well  that  it  would  produce  ^200  worth
of  wheat  at  a  cost,  in  the  way  of  rent,  wages,
and  interest,  of  only  ;?ioo,  whereas  if  he  ran  a
hundred-and-sixty-acre  farm  he  might  be  able  to
make  it  produce  only  $3000  worth  of  wheat  at
a  cost  of  $2000.  In  the  former  case  the  prod-
uct would  be  twice  the  cost,  and  in  the  latter
case  only  one-half  greater;  yet  the  latter  would
leave  the  manager  ;^iooo,  while  the  former  would
leave  him  only  $100.  The  latter  would  be,  from
the  standpoint  of  the  owner  of  the  farm,  a  better
proportion  than  the  former  between  management
and  the  other  factors.

But  if  we  could  imagine  managing  ability  being
so  abundant  and  so  cheap  that  its  cost  could  be
eliminated,  and  that  rent,  wages,  and  interest  consti-
tuted the  whole  cost,  a  series  of  ten-acre  farms,  six-
teen in  number,  under  separate  managers,  would  be
a  better  proportion  than  one  farm  of  a  hundred  and
sixty  acres.  Under  these  assumed  conditions,  the
best  proportion  between  the  factor  called manage-


Diminishing  Returns  93

ment  and  the  others  would  be  that  which  would  yield
the  largest  product  in  proportion  to  the  others,  just
as  we  found,  when  we  assumed  that  an  indefinite
amount  of  land  of  the  same  grade  could  be  had  free
of  cost,  that  it  would  pay  to  use  as  much  land  with
a  given  amount  of  labor  and  capital  as  would  yield
the  largest  product  in  proportion  to  these  factors.
In  other  words,  it  would  pay  to  stop  cultivating  the
land  at  that  point  where  increasing  returns  leave  off
and  diminishing  returns  begin.  But  seeing  that  the
factor  called  management  is  both  scarce  and  expen-
sive, it  can  not  be  eliminated  from  the  cost,  and  it
must  therefore  be  economized  just  as  land  or  any
other  expensive  factor  has  to  be  economized.  The
way  to  economize  it  is  to  use  less  of  it  in  proportion
to  the  other  factors,  which  means  that  they  would
not  be  so  managed  as  to  yield  their  maximum.  The
same  rule  applies  here  as  to  the  other  problems
relating  to  the  proportions  in  which  to  combine  the
various  factors,  viz.,  as  many  other  factors  should  be
combined  with  a  given  amount  of  management  —
such  an  amount,  for  example,  as  can  be  furnished  by
a  given  manager — ^as  will  make  their  marginal
product  equal  to  their  cost.  )  This  means  that
they  should  be  employed  in  larger  amounts  than
would  give  them  the  largest  productivity  per  unit,
beyond  the  point,  in  other  words,  where  diminishing


94  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

returns  (or  decreasing  economy  of  large-scale  pro-
duction) begin.  In  this  particular  also,  the  factor
called  management  comes  under  the  same  general
law  as  the  other  factors.

The  conclusions  thus  far  reached  in  this  chapter
may  be  summarized  as  follows  :  in  the  creation  of
any  product  where  there  are  various  factors  em-
ployed, usually  classified  as  labor,  land,  and  capital,
the  amount  of  the  product  does  not  depend  wholly^
upon  any  one  or  any  two  of  these  groups  of  'fac-
tors, but  upon  all  three.  Consequently,  if  anyone
or  any  two  groups  are  varied  in  amount,  the  rest
remaining  the  same,  the  product  will  vary,  but  not
in  exact  proportion  to  the  variable  factors. '  In  all
normal  cases,  —  that  is,  where  the  various  factors  have
been  combined  in  profitable  proportions,  —  if  some  of
the  factors  are  increased,  the  increase  in  the  product
will  not  be  so  great  as  the  increase  in  these  factors.
Thus,  if  the  land  remains  the  same  while  the  lator
and  capital  are  increased,  the  product  will  increase,
but  not  in  proportion  to  the  labor  and  capital.  Or
if  the  labor  and  capital  remain  the  same  while  the
land  is  increased,  the  increase  in  the  product  will  not
be  so  great  as  the  increase  in  the  land.  But  the
factors  of  production  can  be  classified  into  a  great
many  smaller  groups  than  these.  There  are  a  great
many kinds of  labor,  of  land,  and  of  capital,  each


Diminishing  Returns  95

one  of  which  may  be  regarded  as  a  separate  group,
and  all  that  was  said  of  the  larger  groups  can  also
be  said  of  these  smaller  ones.  Though  after  the
law  of  diminishing  returns  has  begun  to  operate  with
respect  to  any  factor  an  increase  of  that  factor  will
not  correspondingly  increase  the  total  product  of
the  establishment,  it  will,  however,  increase  the
product  more  than  it  will  increase  the  total  cost  —
up  to  the  point  where  the  marginal  product  of  that  ^

fagj^r  is  just  equal  to  its  cost.  *  [y^'

y^  From  the  standpoint  of  the  distribution  of  wealth,  A/^
each  and  every  phase  of  this  universal  law  of
diminishing  returns  is  important,  for  each  and  every
one  has  an  important  part  in  determining  some  share
in  distributioh.  But  no  other  phase  of  the  law  is  of
such  far-reaching  importance  as  that  which  was
originally  developed,  and  to  which  the  term  was
originally  applied.  Though  it  is  the  same  law  which
determines  the  productivity  of  varying  amounts  of
land  when  combined  with  a  fixed  amount  of  labor
and  capital,  as  that  which  determines  the  productivity
of  varying  amounts  of  labor  and  capital  with  a  fixed
amount  of  land,  or  of  varying  amounts  of  labor  with
fixed  amounts  of  land  and  capital,  yet,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  the  available  amount  of  land  in  the  world  at
large  varies  less  than  the  other  factors.  In  any
civilized country the available land supply is a


g6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

relatively  fixed  quantity,  while  the  labor  and  capital
are  continually  varying.  Moreover,  these  variations
are  the  products  of  the  human  will,  while  the  supply
of  land  is  practically  beyond  control.

This  difference,  however,  is  of  more  importance  in
the  study  of  the  problem  of  the  production  of  wealth,
in  any  geographical  area  such  as  any  of  the  countries
of  Europe  or  America,  or  of  the  maintenance  of  the
population  of  such  countries,  than  in  the  study  of
distribution.  From  the  law  of  diminishing  returns
in  its  original  form  is  derived  the  conclusion  that  if,
in  any  given  state  of  civilization  and  the  industrial
arts,  the  supply  of  labor  should  increase  through  the
growth  of  population,  while  land  and  capital  remain
the  same,  or  if  the  labor  supply  should  increase  faster
than  that  of  land  and  capital,  the  average  production
of  wealth  per  head  would  diminish.  This  is  to  say,
the  increase  in  the  total  production  of  wealth  would
not  be  so  great  as  the  increase  in  the  supply  of
labor,  though  there  would  be  a  larger  production  in
proportion  to  the  land  and  capital.  But  if,  with  the
increase  in  the  supply  of  labor,  there  sl\ould  take
place  an  improvement  in  the  arts  of  production,  or
an  increase  in  the  supply  of  capital,  or  the  available
supply  of  land  (through  improvements  in  transpor-
tation), a  larger  production  of  wealth  per  laborer
would  be  quite  possible  and  fully  in  harmony  with


Diminishing  Returns  97

the  law  of  diminishing  returns.  And  if  the  supply
of  labor  should  remain  the  same  while  the  land  and
capital  increased,  or  if  these  should  increase  faster
than  labor,  a  larger  total,  and  consequently  a  larger
per  capita,  production  would  result.
VThat  a  stationary  state  of  civilization  and  the  in-
dustrial arts  may  exist  along  with  a  growing  density
of  population  is  a  somewhat  violent  assumption,  since
density  of  population  is  often,  especially  in  western
countries,  an  important  factor  in  stimulating  progress.
In  the  first  place,  greater  density,  up  to  a  certain
point,  makes  possible  a  higher  degree  of  industrial
organization  and  a  more  minute  division  of  labor,
both  of  which  add  powerfully  to  the  efficiency  of  pro-
duction. In  the  second  place,  the  mere  proximity
of  persons  to  one  another  tends  to  stimulate  mental
activity  and  to  increase  inventiveness  through  the
multiplication  of  suggestions.  The  chances  are  that
ten  men  will  think  of  more  things  than  one  man,  and
where  they  are  in  close  touch  with  one  another  the
thought  of  one  becomes  the  thought  of  all.  And  in
many  other  ways,  also,  does  density  of  population
promote  progress.

/Nevertheless, if  civilization should remain rela-
tively stationary while population increases
density,  there  would  be  a  smaller  per  capita  produc
tion  because  of  the  law  of  diminishing  returns. The  *


98  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

terrible  reality  of  this  law  is  witnessed  by  the  over-
crowding of  those  populations  where,  as  in  the  un-
changing East,  civilization  has  become  stationary  —
enveloped  in  a  **  crust  of  custom  "  which  counteracts
and  destroys  the  enlivening  effects  of  density.  It  is
also  witnessed  by  the  conditions  which  continually
face  uncivilized  tribes  whose  means  of  livelihood  are
precarious  and  who  must  therefore  jealously  guard
their  hunting  grounds  against  the  incursions  of  out-
siders. They  well  know  that  a  contraction  of  their
hunting  area,  or  an  increase  in  the  number  of  hunters
in  the  same  area,  means  scarcer  food.  Many  of  the
wars  and  migrations  of  prehistoric  times  have  doubt-
less been  forced  by  the  cruel  necessities  of  this  law.
Even  under  the  conditions  of  modern  civilization,  the
operation  of  this  law  can  be  clearly  observed  with
respect  to  any  particular  industry.  Hunting  and
fishing  still  decline  speedily  in  productivity  when
the  number  of  hunters  or  fishers  increases  in  any
given  area  of  land  or  water.  Pasturage  still  con-
forms to  the  same  law,  as  it  did  in  the  days  of
Abraham  and  Lot.  Agriculture  bectmes  less  re-
munerative under  the  same  conditions,  which  alone
accounts  for  the  migration  of  farmers  from  the  more
densely,  to  the  less  densely,  settled  areas  of  the  same
general  fertility.  Even  manufacturing  becomes  less
productive per  unit  of  labor  and  capital  employed.


UNIVERSITY

OF

Diminishing  Returns  99

after  the  best  situations  have  been  occupied  and  the
existing  plants  have  reached  the  maximum  economy
of  large-scale  production.

But  with  respect  to  the  livelihood  of  a  complex
population,  considering  all  its  industries  in  a  mass,
the  operation  of  the  law  is  not  so  clearly  perceived.
For  a  sparse  population,  hunting  and  fishing  may
prove  the  most  remunerative  of  all  industries,  and
yet  may  not  furnish  so  good  a  living  as  some  other
occupation  would  furnish,  under  the  same  outward
conditions,  to  a  larger  population.  Pasturage,  for
example,  might  be  out  of  the  question  because  of  the
depredations  of  wild  beasts  which  a  sparse  population
would  be  unable  to  exterminate  or  hold  in  check.
But  with  a  population  large  enough  to  hold  the
noxious  beasts  in  check,  pasturage  might  prove  more
remunerative  than  hunting  and  fishing  had  ever  been.
Again,  agriculture  might  be  unremunerative  for  a
sparse  population  because  of  the  unequal  contest
with  the  forces  of  nature.  The  owner  of  a  small
field  in  the  midst  of  a  forest  must  fight  continually
against  the  efforts  of  the  forest  to  reestablish  itself.
This  fight  naturally  becomes  more  strenuous  on  the
border  between  field  and  forest.  In  the  case  of  a
small  field,  the  ratio  of  the  border  to  the  whole  area
is  large ;  but  in  the  case  of  a  large  number  of  adjoin-
ing fields,  this  ratio  is  smaller. For  this  reason  alone,


lOO  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

if  for  no  other,  the  owners  of  a  large  number  of
adjoining  fields  find  it  easier  to  keep  back  the
forest.  This,  combined  with  other  reasons,  may
make  agriculture  more  remunerative  for  a  slightly
more  dense  population  than  pasturage  had  been  for
a  sparse  population.  Following  out  the  argument,  it
would  not  be  difficult  to  think  of  reasons  why  manu-
facturing might  become  still  more  remunerative  for  a
still  more  dense  population,  though  less  remunera-
tive for  a  sparse  population.  Again,  the  develop-
ment of  one  industry  frequently  helps  the  others.
Manufacturing,  for  example,  makes  even  hunting
and  fishing,  as  well  as  agriculture,  more  produc-
tive by  providing  them  with  better  implements.  But
this  is  only  one  phase  of  the  advantage  of  a  division
,^  of  labor.

>»  But  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  of  a  tran-
sition from  hunting  and  fishing  to  pasturage,  from
pasturage  to  agriculture,  and  from  agriculture  to
manufacturing,  without  an  increase  in  the  supply  of
capital  as  well  as  of  labor.  The  increase  of  capital
is  an  additional  factor  of  paramount  importance  in
making  the  more  highly  developed  industrial  state
remunerative.  If  capital  increases  faster  than  labor,
—  enough  faster  to  offset  the  growing  scarcity  of
\  land,  —  the  law  of  diminishing  returns  alone  would
account  for  an  increased productiveness  of labor.


Diminishing  Returns  loi

But  if  the  increase  of  labor  were  not  uniform,  some
kinds  increasing  more  rapidly  than  others,  the  pro-
ductiveness per  unit  of  those  kinds  which  increased
more  rapidly  would  necessarily  decline  relatively  to
that  of  those  kinds  which  increased  less  rapidly.
Other  factors  might  enter  in  to  make  the  productive-
ness of  the  former  class  as  high  as  ever,  speaking
absolutely  ;  but  nothing  could  prevent  its  declining
relatively  to  that  of  the  latter  class  except  a  radical
change  in  the  system  of  industry,  which  would  call
for  a  more  than  proportional  increase  in  the  former
class  of  labor.  This  is  in  accordance  with  our  exten-
sion of  the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  and  is  that
phase  of  the  law  represented  by  formula  IX.  This
phase  of  the  law  has  an  important  bearing  upon  the
question  of  differences  of  wages  in  different  occupa-
tions, which  will  be  more  fully  discussed  in  the
chapter  on  Wages.

COLLATERAL  READING

N.  W.  Senior,  Political  Economy,  pp.  81-86.

J.  R.  Commons,  The  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Chapter  III.

C.  J.  Bullock,  The  Variation  of  Productive  Forces,  Quarterly

Journal  of  Economics,  August,  1902.
C.  W.  MiXTER  (a  comment  on  the  above  article),  Quarterly

Journal  of  Economics^  February,  1903.


CHAPTER  III
THE  FORMS  OF  WEALTH AND  INCOME

There  are  a  great  many  things  in  the  world  about
us  to  which  we  are  economically  indifferent,  although
they  are  absolutely  necessary  for  our  existence.
We  do  not  care  to  own  or  to  possess  them  exclu-
sively, for  the  sole  reason  that  they  are  so  abundant
that  no  one  needs  to  give  himself  any  concern  about
getting  them.  There  is  enough  to  go  around  and  to
abundantly  satisfy  all  who  need  them ;  consequently
they  have  no  value  and  are  not  classified  as  wealth.
Since  the  supply  is  so  great  that  every  one  has  all
that  he  wants,  no  one  could  sell  any  portion  which
he  might  appropriate.  No  one  would  want  that
particular  portion  when  he  already  had  enough  of
the  same  thing.  Since  it  is  not  necessary  to  econo-
mize in  their  use,  they  are  not  economic  goods,  or
wealth.

But  all  appropriable  things  which  are  scarce
enough  to  leave  some  wants  unsatisfied  are,  in  the
time  and place  where  they  are  wanted, economic

I02


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 103

goods.  Men  have  to  economize  in  the  use  of  such
things.  Since  there  are  not  enough  to  go  around,
men  must  compete  with  one  another  for  their
possession.  The  civilized  mode  of  competing  for
such  things  is  to  bid  for  them,  offering  other  goods
or  services  in  exchange  for  them.  Therefore  they
have  value,  and  they  figure  on  the  market.  Each
unit  of  such  a  commodity  is  wanted  by  some  one
whose  well-being,  as  he  conceives  it,  will  be  im-
proved by  the  possession  of  it.  Of  the  former  class .
of  non-economic  goods  it  can  not  be  said  that  any
individual  considers  that  his  well-being  would  be
improved  by  the  ownership  or  possession  of  any
specific  unit,  though  of  course  his  well-being  may
depend  absolutely  upon  the  existence  of  such  things
in  a  general  sense.  As  stated  in  a  previous  chapter,
though  men  could  not  live  at  all  without  air,  yet
any  particular  cubic  yard  might  easily  be  dispensed
with.  No  one's  well-being  depends  in  the  slightest
degree  upon  its  possession.  On  the  other  hand,  men
could  live  comfortably  if  there  were  no  such  thing
as  gold.  But  gold  adds  something  to  the  gratifica-
tion of  mankind,  and  its  supply  is  so  limited  that
every  individual  ounce  is  wanted  and  will  contribute
something  to  some  one's  well-being,  as  he  under-
stands it.

Our  first  distinction, therefore, is that  between


I04  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

economic  and  non-economic  goods.]  The  formgy--^
constitute  wealth,  and  with  them  the  econQnnst_js
concerned/^TTr^fact,  man's  chief  concern  in  this
world  is  with  this  class  of  goods.  He  finds  himself
out  of  harmony  with  his  environment  in  that  he
has  needs  which  his  natural  environment  does  not
supply.  As  with  every  species,  his  chief  struggle  is
that  for  adaptation.  The  human  struggle  for  adap-
tation takes  the  form  of  a  vast,  united  effort^to
increase  the  supply  of  those  things  whereof  nature
has  provided  an  insufficient  supply.  That  is  what
industrial  civilization  means.


Some  economic  gojods .  yield-.. Jip.  their  utilities
directly  to  their  possessors^  and  are  called  consum-
ers' goods.  They  include  such  things  as  food  and
clothing  in  the  hands  of  their  consumers,  dwelling
houses,  landscape  gardens,  pleasure  vehicles,  etc.
Such  things  do  not  transmit  utilities  to  other  things ;
they  transmit  them  directly  to  persons.  They  do  not
have  to  be  transported  or  transferred  in  order  to
serve  the  purpose  of  their  possessors;  they  are
themselves  enjoyed,  or  they  give  direct  satisfaction
to  their  users.  Other  goods  yield  up  their  utilities
only  indirectly  to  their  possessors  and  are  called
producers'  goods.  They  include  tools  and  machines,
farm  lands  and  business  sites,  money,  raw  materials,

^  As  distinguished  from  their  owners.


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 105

and  merchants'  stocks,  even  when  these  consist  of
things  which  are  destined  ultimately  for  consump-
tion. All  such  goods  have  to  be  used  in  producing
or  imparting  utilities  to  other  goods,  or  to  be  trans-
formed or  exchanged,  in  order  to  answer  the  pur-
poses of  their  possessors.  They  are  not  themselves
enjoyed;  they  give  satisfaction  only  indirectly
through  the  medium  of  other  goods  which  they
enable  their  possessors  to  secure  either  through
production  or  exchange.

All  the  material  wealth  of  the  community  may  be  ^
divided  into  these  two  classes, — 'jconsumers'  goods,
yielding  utilities  directly  to  their  possessors,  and
.producers'  goods,  yielding  utilities  indirectly  to  their
possessors.  The  fact  that  some  things  may  be
partly  consumers'  and  partly  producers'  goods,  or
consumers'  goods  at  one  time  and  producers'  goods
at  another,  —  like  the  musician's  instrument,  which
is  used  both  to  beguile  his  time  and  to  earn  his  living,
—  does  not  destroy  the  validity  of  this  classification.
The  distinction  is  quite  as  clear  as  that  between
plants  and  animals,  or  as  that  between  houses  and
barns,  or  men  and  boys.  No  one  would  deny  the
validity  of  the  distinction  between  houses  and  barns
simply  because  some  buildings  were  difficult  to
classify.

Some  goods  yield  up  their utilities  directly,  and


1 06  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

others  only  indirectly,  to  their  owners}  The  former
include  such  consumers*  goods  as  are  used  by  their
owners  for  their  own  direct  satisfaction,  and  are  not
loaned,  rented,  or  hired.  The  latter  include  all  pro-
ducers' goods  and  such  consumers'  goods  as  are  not
used  by  their  owners,  but  are  loaned,  rented,  or
hired.  All  goods  of  this  latter  class,  whether  they
be  producers'  or  consumers'  goods,  hold  the  same
relation  to  their  owners  that  producers'  goods  do  to
their  possessors.  Their  owner  prizes  them  not  for
their  own  sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  other  goods,
or  the  income,  which  they  enable  him  to  secure.  To
this  class  of  goods  the  name  capital  is  generally
applied  by  the  world  at  large,  though  economists
have,  for  special  reasons  which  will  be  given  later,
excluded  land  and  natural  agents.

That  part  of  capital  which  consists  of  producers*
goods  is  sometimes  called  productive,  and  sometimes
social,  capital;  while  that  part  which  consists  of  con-
sumers' goods  is  sometimes  called  acquisitive,  as  dis-
tinguished from  productive,  and  sometimes  private,
as  distinguished  from  social,  capital  :

The  following  figure,  in  which  capital  is  shown  to
include  producers'  goods  and  all  income-bearing  con-
sumers' goods,  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  chief  sub-
divisions of  material  wealth  :  —

1  As  distinguished  from  their  possessors.


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 107

MATERIAL WEALTH


CONSUMERS'


GOODS.


NON-INCOME-BEARING
CONSUMERS' GOODS.


CAP


ACQUISITIVE
CAPITAL.


PRODUCBR^

GOODS/


ITAL.


PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL,


/


LAND ^ND  NATURAL  A  GENTS.


The  reasons  usually  given  for  separating  land  from
other  goods  and  treating  it  in  a  class  by  itself  are :
first,  that  land  is  a  free  gift  of  nature,  whereas  other
goods  are  produced  by  human  effort;  second,  that
land  can  not  be  reproduced  or  increased  in  supply,
and  there  is  no  limit  therefore  to  its  increase  in  value,
whereas  other  goods  can  not  rise  to  a  value  much
above  that  which  will  tempt  men  to  undertake  their
production,  that  is,  their  value  can  not  rise,  for  any
long  time,  much  above  what  it  costs  to  produce  them ;
third,  laund^does  not  go  out  of  existence,  whereas
other  goods  are  continually  wearing  out  and  having
to  be  replaced  by  new  ones. All  these  distinctions


io8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

are  valid  and  important,  when  properly  understood,
but  they  are  capable  of  being  misunderstood  and
also  of  being  greatly  exaggerated.

To  the  first  distinction  it  may  be  objected  that
other  goods  are,  in  their  original  form,  free  gifts  of
nature  as  truly  as  land.  The  only  basis  of  a  man's
claim  to  them  is  that  he  appropriated  them  and
changed  their  form  to  suit  his  own  or  some  one  else's
purpose,  —  that  is,  he  put  them  into  a  form  which  was
valuable.  The  same  is  true  of  land,  and  it  is  this
aspect  of  the  case  which  would  naturally  appeal,  and
did  as  a  matter  of  fact  appeal,  to  the  first  settlers  in
a  new  community.  If  one  settler  saw  a  tree  which
seemed  to  contain  possibilities,  and  chopped  it  down
and  made  it  into  a  table,  it  would  be  in  accordance
with  social  utility  that  the  table  should  be  his.  If
another  settler  saw  a  piece  of  land  which  seemed  to
contain  possibilities,  and  cleared  it  and  ploughed  it  and
reduced  it  to  cultivation,  on  the  same  reasoning  the
land  would  be  his.  Each  settler  would  have  found  a
free  gift  of  nature,  each  would  have  worked  upon  it,
each  would  have  changed  its  form  from  the  raw  state
in  which  he  found  it  to  a  form  which  would  serve  his
purpose.  The  mere  fact  that  the  result  of  one's
labor  happened  to  be  a  farm,  and  that  of  the  other's
labor  a  table,  would  not  have  appeared  at  the  time
to  be  a  real  difference. This  aspect  of  the  easy  is


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 109

recommended  to  the  consideration  of  those  who
believe  that  the  private  ownership  of  land  is  for-
bidden by  a  moral  law  ordained  from  the  foundation
of  the  world.

If,  however,  the  community  should  grow  in  popu-
lation, a  real  difference  between  the  table  and  they
land  would  begin  to  appear.  In  the  first  place,  it
would  be  found  that  the  owners  of  the  land  held  con-
trol of  the  original  raw  material  for  the  manufacture
of  tables  and  all  other  produced  goods.  When  the
maker  of  the  first  table  wished  to  make  a  new  one  to
replace  the  old  one  when  it  was  worn  out,  he  would
have  to  pay  the  landowner  for  the  privilege  of  cut-
ting a  tree  from  which  to  make  it.  In  the  second
place,  the  value  of  the  land  would  increase  in  propor-
tion to  the  number  of  persons  wishing  to  make  use  of
its  products  either  for  purposes  of  consumption  or
for  the  purpose  of  producing  other  goods.  The
fortunate  owners  of  the  limited  supply  of  land  would
find  themselves  in  possession  of  a  growing  income
far  in  excess  of  anything  which  the  land  may  have
cost  them,  whereas  the  owners  of  the  tables  and
other  such  goods  would  find  themselves  always  com-
pelled to  expend  approximately  as  much  in  the  mak-
ing of  them  as  they  were  worth.  As  time  goes  on
this  difference  increases,  especially  in  a  growing  city,
until  small  areas  of land come  to  have fabulous


no  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

prices,  while  the  value  of  tables  continues  to  bear  a
fairly  close  relation  to  their  cost  of  production.

To  the  second  distinction  it  may  be  objected  that
lland  is  sometimes  "  made "  in  the  sense  of  being
reclaimed  from  the  sea  or  the  desert,  whereas  there
are  other  goods,  such  as  antique  furniture  and  rare
works  of  art,  which  can  not  now  be  reproduced.  But
the  fact  remains  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the
present  land  supply  is  not  "  made."  In  fact,  there  is
not  enough  "  made  "  to  have  any  appreciable  effect
on  the  value  of  land  in  general,  and  it  certainly  does
not  prevent  certain  choice  situations  from  rising  to
stupendous  prices.  On  the  other  hand,  with  few
exceptions,  other  goods  are  capable  of  reproduction,
and  are  actually  reproduced  so  long  as  they  have  a
value  high  enough  to  repay  the  cost  of  production.
Whereas  non-reproducible  land  is  the  rule  and
reproducible  land  the  exception,  reproducible  goods
of  other  kinds  than  land  are  the  rule  and  non-repro-
ducible ones  the  exception.  This  may  be  called  a
difference  of  degree  only,  but  the  difference  of
degree  is  so  great  as  to  constitute,  for  scientific
and  practical  purposes,  a  difference  of  kind.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  nearly  all  scientific  differences  are
differences  of  degree.  It  is  not  denied,  however,
that  there  are  many  resemblances  between  land  and
other  goods. There are  also  certain  resemblances


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income iii

between  a  man  and  a  clothes-pin,  but  the  differences
are  sufficiently  important  to  warrant  our  placing
them  in  different  classes.

Again,  it  may  be  urged,  the  process  of  producing
some  other  goods  is  so  slow  as  to  give  the  owners
of  the  existing  supply,  in  a  time  of  rising  demand,
all  the  advantages  which  come  from  the  ownership
of  land.  That  is,  the  work  of  increasing  the  supply
to  meet  the  new  demand  is  so  slow  that  the  exist-
ing supply  may,  for  a  considerable  time,  command
a  price  far  above  its  cost  of  production.  But  the
same  reply  can  be  made  to  this  objection  as  to  the
last.  It  compares  a  temporary  and  exceptional
characteristic  of  these  other  goods  with  a  normal
and  permanent  characteristic  of  land.

To  the  third  distinction  a  somewhat  stronger  ob-
jection can  be  urged.  Though  land  itself,  consid-
ered as  a  whole,  is  indestructible,  certain  properties
of  the  land,  which  are  sometimes  important  elements
in  its  value,  are  destructible.  The  chemical  and
physical  properties  which  give  fertility  to  the  soil
are  constantly  being  worn  out  and  replaced.  Their
preservation  requires  as  much  intelligence  and  fore-
sight, and  as  much  sacrifice,  as  the  preservation  of
the  stock  of  any  other  kind  of  goods.  This  has  led
some  writers  to  exclude  the  soil  from  the  definition  of
land,  narrowing  it  down  to  merely  space,  location.


1 1 2  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

and  support,  —  the  properties  which  give  it  value  in
cities,  which  properties  are  also  indestructible  and
non-reproducible.  But  this  seems  Uke  an  unreal  and
unnecessary  refinement.  Besides,  it  is  not  essential
that  land  should  be  absolutely  unlike  other  goods
in  every  particular  in  order  to  justify  its  being
placed  in  a  class  by  itself.  The  fact  that  space,
location,  and  support,  —  properties  of  land  which
can  not  be  produced  nor  destroyed  by  individual
effort,  —  are  important  factors  in  its  value,  is  suffi-
cient to  distinguish  it  from  other  goods,  even  though
it  possesses  some  properties  in  common  with  them.
However,  it  must  be  admitted  that  where  the  fer-
tility of  the  soil  is  the  principal  factor  in  the  value
of  land,  and  the  indestructible  properties  of  minor
importance,  there  is  less  reason  for  the  distinction
than  exists  when  these  properties  grow  to  paramount
importance  and  the  fertility  of  the  soil  becomes  a
minor  factor.  Thus,  in  a  new  and  sparsely  set-
tled community  where  the  land  is  used  mainly
for  agriculture,  and  where  space  has  not  yet  be-
come appreciably  scarce,  land  differs  less  from
other  goods  than  it  does  in  an  old  and  densely
populated  community,  especially  in  a  large  city,
where  space  and  location  are  everything,  and  the
fertility  of  the  soil  counts  for  little  or  nothing.
Another curious objection,  which applies  to all


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 113

three  distinctions  alike,  is  that  while  land  surface  Js.
a  free  gift  of  nature,  land  capital  is  not,  but  is  pro-
duced and  destroyed  precisely  as  other  forms  of  capital
are ;  that  those  who  speak  of  land  as  though  it  were
mere  land  surface  are  guilty  of  identifying  a  geo-
graphical with  an  economic  conception;  that  eco-
nomic land,  or  land  capital,  has  to  be  fashioned  out
of  land  surface  just  as  other  forms  of  capital  are
fashioned  out  of  materials  which  nature  affords ;
and  that  though  the  land  surface  of  the  globe  may
not  be  materially  increased,  land  capital  may  be
indefinitely  increased^.  Now  land  capital  can  not
possibly  mean  anything  else  than  land  value,  since
it  is  used  in  a  way  which  excludes  improvements
placed  on  the  land  such  as  buildings  and  fences.
But  to  argue  that  though  land  surface  may  not  be
increased,  land  value  may,  is  to  beg  the  whole
question.  One  might  as  well  say  that  during  the
supposed  coal  famine  of  the  winter  of  1 902-1 903,
it  was  not  coal  in  the  economic  sense,  but  only  in

1  Cf.  the  paper  by  Professor  Carl  C.  Plehn,  read  before  the  Massa-
chusetts Single  Tax  League,  December  8,  1902.  The  same  reasoning
seems  to  underlie  the  objections  of  Professors  J.  B.  Clark  ("The  Distri-
bution of  Wealth,"  N.Y.,  1900)  and  Frank  A.  Fetter  ("The  Relations
between  Rent  and  Interest,"  Publications  of  the  American  Economic
Association,  3d  Series,  Vol.  V,  No.  I,  Part  I),  since  both  identify  land
with  the  other  agents  of  production,  and  use  the  term  "  capital "  to
signify  the  value  contained  in  all  such  goods.
I


"Nl


114  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  material  sense,  which  was  scarce ;  that  though
there  were  few  coal-tons  there  was  much  coal-value ;
and  that  therefore  there  was  as  much  coal,  in  the
economic  sense,  as  ever :  but  that  would  be  a
travesty  on  the  science  of  economics.

An  objection,  hardly  less  curious,  is  that  under
static  conditions  the  supply  of  other  forms  of  capital
is  as  fixed  as  that  of  land.  At  any  given  instant,
when  the  conditions  of  supply  and  demand  are  in  a
state  of  equilibrium,  it  is  as  impossible  to  increase  the
supply  of  other  goods  as  it  is  to  increase  the  supply
of  land.^  This  implies  an  admission  that  if  time
were  given  the  supply  of  other  things  is  more  vari-
able than  that  of  land ;  but,  it  is  claimed,  that  would
destroy  the  assumed  static  conditions.  All  this  may
be  quite  true ;  but,  aside  from  the  doubtful  utility  of
so  heroic  an  assumption  as  that  of  a  static  state,
there  is  the  undoubted  fact  that  if  land,  in  such  a
static  state,  has  any  value  at  all,  that  assumed  static
state  must  have  been  preceded  by  a  dynamic  state  in
which  the  value  of  the  land  rose  from  nothing  —
being  a  free  gift  of  nature  —  to  its  present  level,
through  its  growing  scarcity  and  not  through  the
labor  of  its  owners.  Even  in  the  static  state,  there-
fore, land  differs  from  other  goods  in  that  its  value
bears  very  little  if  any  relation  to  its  cost  of  produc-

1  Cf.  J.  B.  Clark,  "The  Distribution  of  Wealth,"  p.  338.


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 115

tion,  being  due  to  sheer  scarcity  which  human  labor
could  not  materially  alleviate.

There  are,  however,  certain  ways  by  which  the
scarcijy_of^  land  is  alleviated  when  the  pressure
becomes  great  enough  to  furnish  the  inducement.
In  the  first  place,  though  more  land  can  not  T>e
brought  into  theoDmmunitv.  a  part  of  the  population
Xycan  move  out  into  the  frontiers  of  civilization,  thus
s^  enabling  a  given  number  of  people  to  make  use  of
more  land.  ^  In  the  second  place,  improved  transpor-
tation  facilities  may  enable  a  given  community  to
draw  its  subsistence  from  a  larger  area.  In  the
thipd  place,  a  more  intensive  use  of  the  land  may
enable  a  given  number  of  people  to  get  along  with
less  land  than  would  otherwise  be  necessary.  But
none  of  these  methods,  nor  all  combined,  have  been
able  to  alleviate  the  scarcity  sufficiently  to  prevent
land  from  rising  to  enormous  values  in  thickly  popu-
lated centres.

Another  distinction,  or  supposed  distinction,  be-
tween land  ^jid  other  forms  of  productive  wealth  or
capital  is  based  upon  a  supposed  difference  in  the
laws  which  determine  the  incomes  from  the  two
^  sources.  It  is  held,  for  example,  that  the  income
)  from  capital  is,  or  tends  to  be,  a  uniform  rate  in  the
same  market,  whereas  there  is  no  uniform  rate  of
rental  for  land. The  interest  on  a  given  amount  of


ii6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

capital  is a  uniform percentage  of its principal,
whereas  the  rent  of  a  given  piece  of  land  is  deter-

>mine(ilby  the  difference  between  that  which  it  will
proSuce  and  that  which  the.  same  amount  of  labor
and  capital  can  produce  on  the  poorest  land  in  culti-
vation, which  may,  it  is  assumed,  be  had  for  nothing.
^N^v^  While  all  this  is  true  enough,  it  does  not  constitute  a
real  difference  because  the  comparison  is  not  valid.
The  same  basis  of  measurement  is  not  adhered  to  in
both  cases,  land  being  measured  on  the  basis  of
superficial  area  and  its  quantity  expressed  in  acres,
whereas  capital  is  measured  on  the  basis  of  value
and  its  quantity  expressed  in  terms  of  dollars.
Measured  on  the  basis  of  value  and  expressed
in  terms  of  dollars,  land  earns  a  uniform  percentage
of  itself  as  truly  as  does  capital.  Measured  on  any
other  basis,  or  considered  as  individual  pieces  of
matter,  neither  land  nor  capital  earns  a  percentage
(  of  itself.  Where  a  dollar's  worth  of  capital  earns
->\  five  per  cent,  a  dollar's  worth  of  land  will  also  earn
five  per  cent.

Whenever  a  person  has  in  mind  the  income  from  a
definite  piece  of  property,  whether  it  be  land  or  not,
he  usually  speaks  of  it  as  rent ;  but  when  he  thinks
of  the  same  income  as  derived  from  a  quantity  of
wealth,  measured  on  the  basis  of  value,  he  invariably
speaks  of  it  as  interest,  though  he  will  sometimes


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 117

distinguish  between  gross  and  net  interest,  ^grqss
interest  being  the  whole  income  and  net  interest
being  what  is  left  after  allowing  for  insurance,
repairs,  and  deterioration.

Though  it  is  true  that  one  acre  does  not  neces-
sarily earn  as  much  as  another,  neither  is  it  true  that
one  plough,  or  one  horse,  or  one  loom,  earns  as  much
as  another.  Moreover,  there  are  certain  forms  of  no-
rent  capital  as  well  as  no-rent  land;  there  are
machines  and  tools  on  the  way  to  the  scrap  heap,
buildings  that  are  barely  worth  preserving,  and  other
forms  of  capital  so  poor  that  they  can  be  had  for
nothing,  or  at  most  for  what  they  are  worth  as  old
iron  or  lumber.  The  most  that  any  one  would  be
willing  to  pay  for  a  superior  machine  would  be  the
difference  between  what  he  could  produce  with  it
and  the  amount  which  he  could  produce,  by  the
same  expenditure  of  labor  and  other  capital,  with
one  of  those  machines  which  he  could  have  for  the
asking.  At  least,  this  is  as  true  of  machines  as  it  is
of  land.

In  order  to  measure  anything  it  is  necessary  to
abstract  some  one  of  its  properties,  such  as  length,
or  bulk,  or  weight,  or  some  form  of  energy,  and  com-
pare it  with  other  things  on  the  basis  of  that  prop-
erty. Thus  in  measuring  a  string  we  simply  compare
its  length  with  that  of  something  else,  and  in  meas-


1 1 8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

uring  pig  iron  we  compare  its  weight  with  that  of
something  else.  In  order  to  express  the  quantity  in
either  case  we  must  state  the  ratio  which  this  prop-
erty of  the  thing  in  question  bears  to  the  same  prop-
erty in  some  other  thing  which  has  been  agreed  upon
as  a  standard.  Our  idea  of  the  quantity  of  a  thing
will  depend  largely  upon  the  property  which  is
selected  as  a  basis  of  measurement  or  comparison.
If,  for  example,  we  take  a  piece  of  cork  weighing
one  pound,  and  a  piece  of  lead  weighing  two  pounds,
and  if  we  choose  to  measure  and  express  quantity
in  terms  of  weight,  there  would  be  twice  as  much
lead  as  cork.  But  if  we  were  to  decide  to  measure
and  express  the  quantities  of  the  same  pieces  in
terms  of  cubic  contents,  we  should  have  several
times  as  much  cork  as  lead.  Wealth  has  come  to
^bejmeasured  on  the  basis  of  that  property  called
^s^  value.^

When  wealth  consisted  mainly  of  flocks  and  herds,
it  was  customary  for  the  primitive  herdsman  to
reckon  the  quantity  of  his  wealth  numerically  as  so

^  The  importance  of  this  conception  of  an  economic  quantity  can
hardly  be  overestimated.  It  not  only  helps  to  clear  up  the  confusion
regarding  the  nature  of  capital,  but  it  is  essential  to  the  solution  of  a
number  of  other  knotty  problems  in  economic  analysis.  When  it  is
once  understood,  for  example,  that  a  quantity  of  money  is  a  quantity
of  value,  it  will  become  apparent  at  once  that  very  little  that  has  been
written  on  the  quantity  theory  of  money  has  hit  the  point.


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 119

many  head,  from  which,  according  to  some  authori-
ties, we  get  our  words  cattle  and  capital.  But  as  the
forms  of  wealth  increased  it  was  no  longer  possible
to  express  their  quantity  in  terms  of  mere  number,
unless  they  could  all  be  reduced  to  a  common  de-
nominator. This  was  done  by  reducing  other  forms
of  wealth  to  cattle  by  saying  that  the  various  articles
were  worth  so  many  head  of  cattle,  or  that  they  were
equal  in  value  to  so  many  cattle.  This  was  a  method
of  measurement  and  of  quantitative  expression  quite
as  exact  and  definite,  so  far  as  the  logic  of  the
process  was  concerned,  as  to  say  that  a  certain  lump
of  matter  weighs  ten  pounds,  which  simply  means
that  it  possesses  ten  times  as  much  weight  as  a  cer-
tain other  lump  of  matter  which  has  been  arbitrarily
chosen  as  a  standard  of  weight.  The  only  essential
difference  is  that  in  one  case  value,  and  in  the  other,
weight,  is  chosen  as  the  property  upon  which  to  com-
pare the  things  to  be  measured.  Value  is  the  basis
which  is  still  used  for  the  measurement  of  wealth,
though  the  unit  of  measurement  has  changed  many
times,  being  now,  in  this  country,  a  piece  of  gold
nine-tenths  fine  and  weighing  twenty-five  and  eight-
tenths  grains.

The  fact  that  capital  is  habitually  measured  on
the  basis  of  value,  and  its  quantity  expressed  in
terms  of  some  unit  of value,  such  as  a  dollar,  has


I20  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

led  certain  writers  into  thinking  that  capital  is  value,^
which  is  quite  as  great  a  mistake  as  to  assume  that
coal  is  weight,  or  that  lumber  is  bulk.  However
difficult  it  might  be  for  the  average  business  man  to
formulate  a  definition  of  his  concepts,  yet  he  shows,
under  the  proper  tests,  a  perfectly  clear  idea  of  the
relation  between  the  things  called  capital  and  their
quantitative  expression.  When  asked  how  much  capi-
tal he  has,  he  will  answer:  so  many  dollars,  or  so
many  dollars'  worth.  This  is  clearly  his  method  of
expressing  quantity  —  of  answering  the  question :  how
much }  But  if  asked  in  what  his  capital  consists,  he
will  enumerate  the  concrete  things  in  his  possession,
—  the  buildings,  machines,  and  materials  of  various
kinds,  including  the  cash  on  hand,  thus  showing
clearly  that  he  cherishes  no  illusions  as  to  the  real
nature  of  capital.^
li  We  are  warranted,  therefore,  in  adhering  to  the
Ijconception  of  capital  as  concrete,  material  articles,
1^  ■"■"""-- ^ '

1  Cf.  Qark,  "The  Distribution  of  Wealth,"  Chapter  IX,  also  Fetter,
"  Recent  Discussions  of  the  Capital  Concept,"  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics ,  November,  1900.

2  Professor  Charles  A.  Tuttle  (^Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  for
November,  1903)  objects  that  an  inventory  is  the  only  real  quantita-
tive expression  for  a  body  of  wealth.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  vari-
ous ways  of  expressing  quantity,  of  which  the  inventory  is  the  crudest.
One  might  as  well  say  that  the  only  way  of  expressing  the  quantity  of
a  pile  of  lumber  is  by  writing  an  inventory  of  the  pieces  contained
in  it.


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 121

produced  by  human  effort,  and  used  by  their  owners  /
for  the  purpose  of  securing  an  income.  Such  arti-
cles are  continually  being  produced,  worn  out  and
reproduced  more  or  less  rapidly,  which  means  that
capital  itself,  which  is  merely  a  group  name  for  such
things,  is  also  undergoing  these  processes.^  Its
quantity,  however,  is  habitually  expressed  in  terms
of  value;  but  in  this  it  does  not  differ  absolutely
either  from  land  or  from  non-income-bearing  con-
sumers' goods,  since  all  forms  of  wealth  may  be
measured  and  quantitatively  expressed  in  the  same
way.  The  fact  that  the  quantity  of  land  may  be
expressed  in  dollars  does  not  identify  land  with
capital  any  more  than  the  fact  that  all  forms  of  con-
sumers' wealth  may  be  similarly  measured  identifies
them  also  with  capital.  Nevertheless,  it  is  some-
times more  convenient,  when  speaking  of  the  amount
of  capital  in  one's  business,  to  include  land  rather
than  to  make  a  separate  statement  of  its  value.
But  this  does  not  obscure  the  real  differences,  al-
ready pointed  out,  between  land  and  produced  goods.
Moreover,  land  is  more  often  measured  in  acres
than  in  dollars,  and  the  income  from  it  is  more  often
conceived  as  rent than as  interest, whereas other

1  Professor  Clark  {op.  cit.),  who  distinguishes  between  capital  and
capital  goods,  holds  that  capital  is  indestructible,  though  capital  goods
perish.


122  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

goods,  for  lack  of  a  common  physical  basis  of  meas-
urement, are  more  frequently  measured  in  dollars
than  in  any  other  way,  and  the  income  from  them
is  consequently  more  often  conceived  as  interest
than  as  rent.  But  popular  usage  does  not  adhere
strictly  to  any  one  meaning,  for  either  rent  or  inter-
est, as  we  shall  see  later.

Goods  of  different  kinds  differ  greatly  in  the
(length  of  time  it  takes  them  to  yield  up  their  utilities,
whether  directly  or  indirectly,  to  their  possessors.
Some  yield  them  up  quickly,  almost  instantaneously,
while  others  yield  them  up  slowly,  furnishing  a  flow
of  utilities  over  a  considerable  period  of  time.  A
piece  of  confectionery,  for  example,  or  a  bunch  of
firecrackers,  yields  up  all  its  gratification  in  a  few
blissful  seconds,  whereas  a  well-built  house  furnishes
a  continuous  flow  for  a  century  or  more,  and  a  piece
of  land  for  an  indefinite  period.  Between  these  ex-
tremes there  is  every  conceivable  variation.  In  the
case  of  goods  which  last  long  enough  to  make  it
worth  while  to  do  so,  the  world  has  learned  to  evalu-
ate the  flow  of  utilities  which  come  from  them  dur-
ing a  given  time,  in  addition  to  evaluating  the  goods
themselves.  The  house,  for  example,  or  the  land,
will  not  only  sell  outright,  but  it  will  rent, — that  is,  the
utilities  which  it  will  furnish  during  a  given  time  will
also  sell  for  a  price. The  same  is  true  of  anything


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 123

else  whose  consumer  or  user  can  not  extract  all  its
utilities  in  a  short  time.  This  includes  all  land  and
a  number  of  other  durable  goods.

In  popular  usage,  the  word  "rent"  is  commonly
restricted  to  the  price  which  the  owner  receives  for
the  use  of  a  thing  of  this  class  when  it  is  loaned,
rented,  or  hired  to  another.  But  a  term  is  also
needed  for  the  income  which  the  owner  receives
when  he  himself  makes  use  of  the  article  instead  of
letting  it  out  to  another.  The  word  "  income  "  is  re-
stricted to  money  or  other  material  goods,  and  does
not  include  the  flow  of  utilities  which  come  directly
from  the  use  of  such  an  article.  Thus  the  dwelling
house  in  which  the  owner  himself  lives  does  not
furnish  him  an  income,  but  the  one  which  he  rents
to  another  man  does.  Though  each  house  furnishes
him  a  flow  of  utilities,  one  furnishes  them  directly,
whereas  the  other  furnishes  them  indirectly  in  the
form  of  other  goods.  But  a  piece  of  durable  pro-
ducers' goods  also,  such  as  a  plough  or  a  loom,  fur-
nishes an  income  rather  than  a  flow  of  direct  utilities,
even  when  used  by  the  owner  himself.  If  the  term
"rent"  is  to  cover  the  income  which  such  an  article
furnishes  to  its  owner  when  it  is  loaned,  rented,  or
hired,  the  same  term  might  as  well  be  used  to  cover
the  income  derived  from  its  use  by  the  owner  him-
self, since  there  is  no  essential  economic  difference


124  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

between  them.  However,  the  term  "  rent "  is  almost
never  used  in  this  extended  sense.

For  a  large  proportion  of  income-bearing  goods  it
is  not  possible  to  separately  evaluate  their  flow  of
utilities.  The  coal  which  is  consumed  under  a  boiler
can  not  be  rented,  because  its  flow  of  utilities  is  so
speedily  exhausted  that  it  would  be  impracticable  to
evaluate  them  for  any  given  period.  The  same  is
true  of  the  money  in  the  business  man's  cash  drawer.
Though  it  is  as  necessary  as  the  coal  to  the  running
of  his  business,  and  is  a  means  of  securing  an  in-
come, yet  it  serves  his  purpose  once  and  for  all,  and
then  only  when  he  is  in  the  act  of  parting  with  it.
But  a  certain  quantity  of  coal  or  money  may  be
loaned,  rented,  or  hired  on  the  understanding,  not
that  the  same  coal  or  money,  but  that  the  same
quantity  of  coal  or  money,  should  be  returned  with
something  additional  to  pay  for  the  loan.  This  ad-
ditional sum  is  never  spoken  of  as  rent,  but  usually
as  interest.  When  that  which  is  paid  for  the  loan
and  that  which  is  loaned  are  both  reduced  to  the
same  quantitative  expression,  both  being  measured  in
terms  of  value,  one  is  a  ratio  or  a  percentage  of  the
other.  It  has  therefore  become  customary  to  con-
tract for  a  certain  rate  or  percentage  of  payment
instead  of  a  definite  number  of  dollars.

All  that  was  said  of  coal  and  money  can  be  re-


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 125

peated  of  merchants,  stocks,  and  of  raw  materials
and  finished  goods  in  the  hands  of  manufacturers.
Some  of  these  goods  may,  when  completed  and
serving  their  ultimate  purpose  in  the  hands  of  their
final  users,  furnish  a  sufficiently  prolonged  flow  of
utilities  to  enable  them  to  be  rented.  But  in  their
present  stage,  their  income-bearing  capacity  is  of  a
different  kind.  Each  individual  article  serves  its^
present  owner's  purpose  once  for  all,  and  by  one  act,
as  it  were,  adds  a  definite  sum  to  his  income.  But
certain  quantities  of  such  articles  may  be  loaned,
rented,  or  hired,  as  in  the  case  of  coal  or  money.
The  income  from  the  loan  of  all  such  goods  is  never
called  rent,  but  is  always  called  interest.  But  if  the
word  "interest"  is  to  cover  the  income  from  the  loan
of  such  things,  the  same  term  might  as  well  be  ap-
plied also  to  the  income  which  the  owner  derives  from
them  when  he  uses  them  himself  in  his  own  busi-
ness, since  there  is  no  essential  economic  difference
between  them.

We  have,  therefore,  a  possible  division  of  income-
bearing  goods  into  two  classes  ^ :  first,  durable  goods
which  furnish  their  present  possessors  a  flow  of  utili-

^  This  is  essentially  the  old  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulat-
ing capital,  except  that  land  is,  for  the  present,  not  excluded,  and  that
the  basis  of  the  distinction  is  not  the  same.  It  is  also  practically  the
same  as  the  lawyer's  distinction  between  fungible  and  non-fungible
goods.


126  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

ties  over  a  considerable  time.  This  class  includes
such  things  as  land,  buildings,  machinery,  draft  ani-
mals, and  vehicles,  all  of  which,  when  serving  their
ultimate  purpose,  may  be  rented  as  individual  articles,
because  their  utilities  during  a  given  time  can  be
evaluated  as  well  as  the  things  themselves.  Second,
perishable  goods,  and  those  also  which  serve  the  pur-
poses of  their  present  possessors  by  a  single  act,  or
in  a  brief  period  of  time.  This  class  includes  such
things  as  food,  fuel,  horse-feed,  stock  in  trade,  and
money,  none  of  which  can  be  rented  as  individual
articles,  but  can  be  hired  by  the  quantity.  When
they  are  so  hired,  the  sum  which  is  paid  for  their  use
is  never  called  rent,  but  usually  interest,  at  least
where  it  has  become  customary  to  measure  wealth  in
terms  of  some  unit  of  value,  such  as  a  dollar.  Fol-
lowing out  this  classification,  we  might  divide  the
incomes  of  the  owners  of  all  such  goods  into  two
classes,  called  rent  and  interest,  rent  being  that
derived  from  the  ownership  of  goods  of  the  first
class  and  interest  that  derived  from  the  ownership  of
those  of  the  second  class.  At  least  there  is  a  certain
popular  sanction  for  such  a  classification.  Neverthe-
less the  income  from  the  first  class  of  goods  is  some-
times called  interest  also,  when  they  are  reduced  to
terms  of  value,  but  that  derived  from  the  second
class  is  never  called  rent. It  is  therefore  a  mistake


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 127

to  make  the  unqualified  statement,  as  certain  writers
have  done,^  that  rent  and  interest  are  only  different
names  for  the  same  income  viewed  from  different
standpoints.  Such  a  statement  could  be  true  only  of
incomes  from  the  first  class  of  goods.

But  this  classification  is  unsatisfactory  for  two
reasons.  In  the  first  place,  business  practice  does
not  generally  distinguish  between  goods  of  the  second
class  and  that  portion  of  the  first  class  which  excludes
land  and  natural  agents.  The  merchant  regards  his
shelves,  counters,  desks,  and  cash  carriers  as  parts  of
the  fund  or  quantity  of  capital  with  which  he  does
business,  just  as  he  does  the  goods  on  his  shelves  or
the  cash  in  his  drawer.  If  he  owns  the  buildings,
they  also  figure  in  the  same  account.  The  manufac-
turer does  not  distinguish  his  engines  from  the  coal
which  they  consume,  nor  his  machines  from  the
materials  which  pass  through  them.  Nor  does  the
farmer  distinguish  his  machinery  from  his  seed,  nor
his  horses  from  his  horse-feed.  All  these  things
are  habitually  classed  together  as  parts  of  the  fund  or
quantity  of  capital  in  the  various  lines  of  business.

Even  the  land  is  sometimes  so  treated,  but  not  so

1  Cf.  Qark,  "Distribution  of  Wealth,"  pp.  123-125,  and  335-337.
Also,  Fetter,  "  The  Relation  between  Rent  and  Interest,"  Publications
of  the  American  Economic  Association,  3d  Series,  Vol.  V,  No.  I,  Part  I,
pp.  182,  186,  194,  196,  and  197.


128  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

uniformly.  The  merchant  and  manufacturer  fre-
quently regard  their  land  as  merely  so  much  capital,
thinking  of  it  in  terms  of  dollars  rather  than  acres ;
but  this  is  seldom  done  by  the  farmer,  who  outnum-
bers them  all.  In  agriculture,  where  most  of  the
land  is  utilized,  it  is  uniformly  looked  upon  as  a  dis-
tinct factor  in  production,  —  the  basic  factor  upon
which  labor  and  capital  are  expended,  —  though
certain  classes  of  improvements  are  not  always  distin-
guished from  the  land.  Agricultural  land  is  com-
monly thought  of  in  terms  of  acres  rather  than  in
terms  of  dollars.  Practical  life,  therefore,  furnishes
a  kind  of  sanction  for  including  all  income-bearing
goods  —  exclusive  of  land  —  under  the  one  class
called  capital,  whether  they  be  rentable  or  non-rent-
able. There  is  also,  it  must  be  admitted,  a  certain
amount  of  usage  in  favor  of  including  land  also,  but
the  sanction  for  this  is  by  no  means  so  strong.  How-
ever, popular  usage  is  altogether  too  indefinite  and
inexact  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  scientific  nomenclature.
But  since  it  is  desirable  to  keep  as  near  to  popular
usage  as  is  consistent  with  accuracy,  it  is  enough  to
point  out  that  popular  usage  is  more  favorable  to  the
distinction  between  land  and  other  income-bearing
goods,  including  all  the  latter  under  capital,  than  to
any  other  distinction.

In  the  second  place,  there  is  no  important  economic


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 129

difference  between  these  two  classes  of  produced
goods,  nor  between  the  incomes  derived  from  them ;
whereas  there  is  a  most  important  economic  differ-
ence between  all  such  goods  and  land.  The  fact  that
they  are  all  products  of  human  effort  constitutes  a
likeness  which  is,  from  the  economic  point  of  view,
of  vastly  more  importance  than  any  unUkeness  in  the
method  of  computing  incomes.  And  the  fact  that
land  is  not  so  produced  constitutes  an  unlikeness
which  is  more  important  than  any  likeness  in  the
method  of  computing  incomes.  The  fact  that  they
are  perishable  and  reproducible,  while  land  is  not,  is
also  an  important  distinction,  since  this  limits  their
value  to  something  approximating  their  cost  of  repro-
duction, whereas  there  is  no  such  limit  to  the  value  of
land.  These  distinctions  are  important  because  im-
portant conclusions  as  to  public  policy  depend  upon
them,  and  economics  can  justify  its  existence  only  by
throwing  light  upon  questions  of  pubUc  policy.  A
"ax  on  land,  to  take  a  single  example,  has  a  different
effect  from  a  tax  on  an  article  which  is  being  pro-
duced, worn  out,  and  reproduced  by  human  effort.
A  tax  on  the  latter  class  of  articles  has  the  effect  of
discouraging  that  effort  and,  consequently,  of  reduc-
ing the  supply,  whereas  a  tax  on  land  does  not  affect
the  supply  in  the  same  way  nor  to  the  same  degree.
It  seems  therefore  that  the  reasons  are  stronger


^


130  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

in  favor  of  than  against  distinguishing  land  from
other  income-bearing  goods,  and  including  the
others  under  the  general  name  of  capital.  This
may  not  be  satisfactory  to  those  who  require  abso-
lute differences  between  things  placed  in  different
classes,  and  absolute  likenesses  among  those  in-
V^  eluded  in  the  same  class ;  but  economics  is  not
.  V»  N*  the  field  for  the  exercise  of  such  minds,  for  there
A^  v  are  no  such  absolute  differences  and  likenesses
yi'^/t^  \  among  the  things  with  which  this  science  deals.
We  shall  adhere  to  the  above  distinctions  in  this
book,  and  shall  discuss  the  income  from  land
under  the  name  of  rent,  and  the  income  from
capital  under  the  name  of  interest.  In  doing  this
we  shall  assume  that  the  quantity  and  the  supply
of  capital  are  measured  in  terms  of  value  and
expressed  in  dollars.  Moreover,  the  quantity  of
capital  in  a  community  is  the  amount,  expressed
in  dollars,  in  existence  at  any  one  time,  and  not
the  amount  which  comes  into  being  during  a  period
of  time,  just  as  the  amount  of  a  business  man's
capital  is  the  amount  of  goods,  expressed  in  dol-
lars, which  he  has  in  his  business  at  a  given  in-
stant of  time,  and  not  the  amount  which  passes
through his hands during a given period.^ In

1  This  is  in  harmony  with  the  conception  of  capital  given  us  by
Professor  Irving  Fisher,  —  viz.,  as  a  stock  of  wealth  existing  at  an  in-


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 131

this  last  particular  we  shall  be  strictly  following  the
usage  of  the  business  world,  but  we  shall  do  this  with
our  eyes  open,  knowing  that  capital  is  not  value  but
concrete  goods,  and  that  the  quantitative  expression
for  the  thing  is  not  the  thing  itself.

If  there  is  confusion  and  uncertainty  as  to  the
exact  meaning  of  rent  and  interest  in  popular
usage,  there  is  double  confusion  and  uncertainty
as  to  the  meaning  of  wages  and  profits.  The
word  "  wages  "  is  frequently  restricted  to  that  which
is  paid  to  laborers  who  contract  to  work  by  the
piece,  or  by  the  day,  week,  or  month,  the  word
"  salary  "  being  applied  to  that  which  is  paid  to  those
who  contract  to  work  by  the  year.  But  inasmuch
as  there  is  no  important  economic  difference  be-
tween the  earnings  of  one  kind  of  labor  and  those
of  another,  a  term  is  needed  which  will  cover  the
earnings  of  all  labor  however  they  are  contracted
for  or  secured.  Economic  writers  have  therefore
uniformly  used  the  term  "wages"  in  this  broader
sense,  including  even  the  earnings  of  the  man
who  works  for  himself  and  whose  wages  come  to
him  in  the  form  of  the  price  of  a  product.

stant  of  time  as  distinguished  from  income,  which  is  a  flow  through  a
period  of  time,  —  except  that  he  includes  all  wealth  instead  of  limiting
capital  to  income-bearing  goods.  Cf.  "  The  Role  of  Capital  in  Eco-
nomic Theory,"  Economic  Journal,  December,  1897.


132  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

^^he  word  "  profits  "  has  the  most  indefinite  mean-
ing of  all.  It  is  frequently  used  to  cover  the  dif-
ference between  the  cash  income  and  the  cash
outlay  of  a  business.  But  this  makes  no  allowance
for  the  earnings  of  the  business  man's  own  land
or  capital.  If  he  has  no  rent  or  interest  to  pay,
the  surplus  of  receipts  over  payments  will  of
course  be  greater  than  it  would  be  if  he  were
doing  business  on  rented  land  or  borrowed  capi-
tal. But  instead  of  calling  this  all  profits,  it  is
better  to  separate  it  into  two  or  more  parts,  since
there  are  important  differences.  That  part  of__the
surplus  which  results  from  the  ownership  of  land
ought  to  be  called  rent/'since  it  does  not  differ
materially  from  that  which  is  received  from  rent-
ing land  to  another.  Similarly,  and  for  the  same
reason,  that  part  which  is  due  to  the  ownership  of
his  own  capital  ought  to  be  called  interest,  and  that
which  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  does  part  of  the
work  himself  instead  of  hiring  all  of  it  ought  to  be
called  wages.^*^  By  this  process  we  have  eliminated
three  important  items  from  the  popular  conception  of
profits. What  does  this  leave }

There  are,  at  least,  two  sources  of  income,  which
can  not  fairly  be  classified  under  any  of  these  three >
heads : first,  the surplus gains of monopoly ; and
second, the superior gains of hazardous enter-


The  Forms  of  Wealth  and  Income 133

prises.  These  will  be  discussed  under  the  head
of  profits,  though  the  term  **  monopoly  "  will  always
be  prefixed  to  the  former  class.

COLLATERAL  READING

J.  S.  Mill,  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  Book  I,  Chapters
IV-VI.

W.  S.  Jevons,  Theory  of  Political  Economy,  Chapter  VII.

Edwin  Cannan,  Theories  of  Production  and  Distribution,  Chap-
ter IV.

Irving  Fisher,  What  is  Capital  ?  Economic  Journal,  Vol.  VI,
p.  509.

J.  B.  Clark,  The  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Chapters  IX-X.

F.  W.  Taussig,  Wages  and  Capital,  Chapters  I-III.

C.  A.  Tuttle,  The  Real  Capital  Concept,  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics^  November,  1903.

F.  A.  Fetter  and  others,  The  Relation  between  Rent  and  In-
terest, Publications  of  the  American  Economic  Association^
3d  Series,  Vol.  V,  No.  II,  Part  I.


CHAPTER  IV

WAGES

"  Labor,  like  all  things  which  are  purchased  and
sold,  and  which  may  be  increased  or  diminished  in
quantity,  has  its  natural  and  its  market  price."  Thus
Ricardo  long  ago  pointed  out  that  wages  came  under
the  general  law  of  value  and  price.  We  have  al-
ready seen^  that  the  value  of  any  article  depends
upon  how  much  it  is  wanted  in  comparison  with
other  things,  and  we  shall  find  that  wages,  or  the
value  of  labor,  are  no  exception  to  this  rule.  But
it  is  doubly  important  that  we  should  here  observe
the  caution  against  trying  to  explain  the  value  of
labor  in  general  before  explaining  the  value  of  par-
ticular units  of  labor.  Besides,  there  are  almost  as
many  kinds  of  labor  as  of  products,  and  it  would  be
quite  as  unreasonable  to  try  to  find  a  general  rate  of
wages  for  labor  as  to  find  a  general  price  for  prod-
ucts. Labor  in  general  is  not  bought,  but  indi-
vidual laborers  are  hired  to  do  definite  amounts  of
work,  to  perform  specific  tasks,  or  to  render  specific

1  Chapter  I.
134


Wages  135

services.  We  have  first  to  explain  the  value  of  those
specific  services  before  we  can  arrive  at  any  conclu-
sion as  to  the  wages  of  labor  in  general.  The
question  to  be  determined  in  each  case  is :  How
much  are  those  specific  services  wanted  in  compari-
son with  other  things  ?  Upon  the  answer  to  this
question  depends  the  amount  of  those  other  things
which  the  laborer  will  be  able  to  get  for  his  work.

Let  us  consider  first  the  example  of  the  laborer
who,  with  practically  no  cooperation  from  others,
produces  a  consumable  article  for  sale.  In  such  a
case  the  amount  of  labor  necessary  to  make  the
article  is  wanted  just  as  much  as,  and  no  more  than,
the  article  which  it  makes.  Moreover,  the  whole
market  value  of  the  article  goes  to  the  laborer  who
makes  it.  Therefore  it  is  safe  to  say  that  whatever
determines  the  value  of  the  article  determines  also
the  value,  or  the  wages,  of  the  labor.

Let  us  suppose  that  the  laborer  is  gathering  fire-
wood in  a  primeval  forest  where  it  is  worth  nothing,
and  carrying  it  to  a  city  where  it  is  worth  something.
It  is  obvious  that  the  labor  of  gathering  and  market-
ing each  load  will  be  worth  precisely  as  much  as  the
load  itself,  and  that  the  laborer's  earnings  during  a
given  time  will  depend  partly  upon  the  number  of
loads  he  markets,  and  partly  upon  the  value  of  each
load. This  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  his  earnings


136  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

depend  upon  the  total  value  which  he  produces,  or
that  he  gets  just  what  his  labor  is  worth  to  the  com-
munity. If,  for  any  reason,  a  load  of  fire- wood  is
not  worth  much  to  the  community,  obviously  the
labor  which  brings  it  to  market  is  not  worth  much,
and  vice  versa.  If  under  these  conditions  the
laborer  is  poorly  paid,  he  can  not  complain  of  the
injustice  of  society.  If  he  wants  higher  wages  than
his  labor  is  worth,  he  must  appeal  to  charity  rather
than  to  justice.

In  any  community  where  there  is  a  diversity  of
wants  and  occupations,  some  men  being  engaged  in
supplying  one  article  and  some  another,  it  may
happen  that  the  producers  will  be  very  unevenly
distributed  among  the  various  lines  of  production.
That  is  to  say,  there  may  be  a  great  many  at
work  supplying  one  article  and  very  few  supply-
ing another,  even  though  the  community  wants  as
much  of  one  as  of  the  other.  This  unevenness  may
be  due  either  to  natural  or  to  artificial  causes.  By
natural  causes  are  meant,  principally,  differences  in
natural  or  inherited  abiUties.  The  supplying  of  one
article  may  require  only  such  ability  as  the  majority
of  men  possess,  while  the  supplying  of  the  other
may  require  a  special  kind  of  ability  such  as  only
a  few  possess  or  can  acquire.  By  artificial  causes
are meant  hindrances set up by  men themselves,


Wages  137

such  as  patents,  monopolies,  trade-union  restrictions,
or  any  other  regulation  or  restriction  of  human  de-
vising, whether  legal  or  illegal,  by  means  of  which
men  are  prevented  from  engaging  freely  in  the
production  of  any  article.

Whether  the  unevenness  be  due  to  natural  or  to
"^  artificial  causes,  the  result  will  be  the  same.  Those
who  are  engaged  in  producing  the  article  whose
supply  is  made  abundant  by  the  large  number  of
producers  will  be  poorly  paid  for  their  work,  while
those  who  are  producing  the  article  whose  supply
is  made  scarce  by  the  scarcity  of  producers  will  be
relatively  well  paid  for  their  work.  That  is  to  say,
this  unevenness  in  the  distribution  of  workers  among
different  occupations  will  produce  an  unevenness  in
their  rewards.  Let  us  suppose  that  in  addition  to
the  laborers  who  are  gathering  fire-wood  there  is
another  group  gathering  nuts  for  the  community.
And  let  us  assume,  in  the  first  place,  that  one  kind
of  work  is  no  harder  and  requires  no  more  skill  than
the  oth^r,  and  that  laborers  can  turn  at  will  from
one  to  the  other.  There  could  be  no  material  dif-
ference of  earnings  in  the  two  occupations,  because
if  they  were  larger  in  one  than  in  the  other,  the
workers  would  go  into  the  one  where  they  could  earn
most.  That  amount  of  nuts  which  one  laborer  could
gather  in a day would sell for  the same  as  that


138  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

amount  of  wood  which  one  could  gather  in  the  same
time.

But  if,  for  any  reason,  the  work  of  gathering  nuts
were  open  only  to  a  few,  whereas  the  work  of  gather-
ing fire-wood  could  be  carried  on  by  anybody,  the
earnings  of  nut  gatherers  would  be  increased  and
those  of  wood  gatherers  diminished.  There  are  several
reasons  for  this  result.  In  the  first  place,  the  reduc-
tion in  the  number  of  nut  gatherers  would  produce,
other  things  equal,  a  corresponding  increase  in  the
number  of  wood  gatherers.  That  is  to  say,  with  the
same  population,  if  fewer  can  engage  in  one  occupa-
tion, more  must  find  work  in  other  occupations.  In
the  .second  place,  there  being  fewer  nut  gatherers,  it
would  not  be  necessary  for  them  to  wander  so  far
into  the  woods  in  search  of  nuts,  nor  to  search  in
such  unlikely  places,  nor  to  climb  such  difficult  trees.
They  could  confine  their  efforts  to  the  more  promis-
ing fields,  where  nuts  were  more  abundant  and  easier
to  find.  Under  these  conditions  each  man  could
gather  more  nuts  than  when  there  were  more  men
in  the  field.  On  the  other  hand,  there  being  more
gatherers  of  fire-wood,  they  would  have  to  wander
farther  into  the  forest,  and  gather  their  wood  in  more
difficult  places.  Consequently,  each  man  could,  on
the  average,  gather  less  wood  than  when  there  were
fewer  in  the  field.


Wages  139

This  is  merely  a  case  of  diminishing  returns.
Though  a  smaller  number  of  nut  gatherers  would  be
able  to  gather  more  per  man,  they  would  not  be  able
to  gather  so  many  in  the  aggregate  as  a  larger  number,
because,  in  order  to  do  so,  they  would  have  to  wander
just  as  far  into  the  forest,  and  to  search  in  just  as
unlikely  places.  This  a  smaller  number  could  not  do
so  well  as  a  larger  number.  On  the  other  hand,  a
larger  number  of  wood  gatherers  could  gather  more
wood  than  a  smaller  number,  though  not  so  much
per  man.  That  is  to  say,  the  product  in  neither  case
would  remain  constant, /lor  would  it  vary  in  propor-
tion to  the  number  of  laborers.^ ,

But  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  nut  gatherers
would  not  only  enable  each  man  to  gather  more,  but
would,  through  the  reduction  in  the  total  supply  on
the  market,  make  each  bushel  worth  more.  Similarly,
the  increase  in  the  number  of  wood  gatherers  would
not  only  make  it  impossible  for  each  man  to  gather
so  much,  but  each  cord  would  be  worth  less  because
of  the  increased  supply  on  the  market.  This  is  an
additional  reason  why  a  restriction  of  the  number
of  nut  gatherers  would  increase  their  earnings  and
diminish  those  of  the  wood  gatherers.

A  third  reason  is  found  in  the  fact  that,  without
regard  to  any  change  in  the  amount  of  wood  a  man

1  See  Chapter  II.


140  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

could  gather,  the  mere  increase  in  the  value  of  nuts
would  reduce  the  value,  or  the  power  in  exchange,  of
a  given  amount  of  wood.  That  is  to  say,  it  would,
other  things  equal,  reduce  somewhat  the  number  of
other  things  —  nuts  being  counted  among  them  —  for
which  a  given  amount  of  wood  could  be  exchanged.^
On  the  other  hand,  the  mere  fact  that  wood  had
grown  cheaper  would  increase  the  value  of  nuts,
without  regard  to  any  change  in  the  conditions  of
their  production  or  their  total  supply  on  the  market.
That  is  to  say,  the  mere  fact  that  one  other  com-
modity, such  as  wood,  had  grown  more  abundant
and  cheaper,  would,  other  things  equal,  increase
somewhat  the  number  of  other  things  —  wood  being
among  them  —  for  which  a  given  quantity  of  nuts
could  be  exchanged.  This  leads  to  the  important
conclusion  that,  without  regard  to  the  conditions
within  his  own  occupation,  a  worker  is  benefited  by
an  increase  in  the  number  in  other  useful  lines  of
work,  and  injured  by  a  reduction  in  their  number.
But  this  will  be  more  fully  discussed later.

If  the  scarcity  of  nut  gatherers  were  due  to  the
scarcity  of  the  peculiar  knack  or  skill  required  for
that  kind  of  work,  the  gatherers  of  fire-wood  could
not  complain  of  social  injustice  as  the  cause  of  the
unequal  distribution  of  wealth. They  would  not  be

1  See  Chapter  I,  p.  22.


Wages  141

so  well  paid  as  the  nut  gatherers,  because  their  work
would  not  be  worth  so  much.  A  day's  gathering  of
nuts  would  satisfy  greater  wants  than  a  day's  gather-
ing of  fire-wood,  and  society  can  not  be  blamed  for
paying  for  various  services  in  proportion  as  they  are
wanted.  That  is  the  law  of  value,  whether  applied
to  services  or  commodities.  If  one  gatherer  of  fire-
wood could,  in  a  given  time,  gather  more  wood  than
another,  no  one  would  deny  that  his  services  were
greater.  He  would  satisfy  more  wants.  But  if  a  nut
gatherer  can  gather  in  a  day  such  a  quantity  of  nuts
as  would  satisfy  a  greater  want  than  would  be  satisfied
by  the  amount  of  wood  which  a  wood  gatherer  could
gather  in  the  same  time,  on  the  same  reasoning  his
service  is  greater.

But  if  the  high  wages  of  nut  gatherers  and  the  low  ^
wages  of  wood  carriers  were  due,  not  to  natural
causes,  but  to  artificial  regulations  or  restrictions
whereby  men  were  prevented  from  entering  the
better  paying  occupation,  the  wood  carriers  would
then  have  a  right  to  complain  of  social  injustice,  not,
however,  on  the  ground  that  wood  was  too  cheap,
but  on  the  ground  that  they  were  prevented  from
gathering  nuts  which  were  worth  more  and  would
pay  them  better.  They  could  not  demand  that
society  should  pay  more  for  its  wood,  or  for  the  labor
of  supplying  the  wood,  but  that  the  restrictions  be


142  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

removed  so  that  they  might  go  into  the  occupation
where  they  could  earn  more.  The  consuming  public
would  also  have  a  right  to  complain  of  these  restric-
tions on  the  ground  that  it  was  prevented  from  receiv-
ing a  more  valuable  service  from  some  of  these  men,
and  was  compelled,  instead,  to  accept  a  less  valuable
service.  For  if  a  day's  gathering  of  nuts  would
satisfy  greater  wants  than  a  day's  gathering  of  fire-
wood, it  would  be  to  the  advantage  of  the  consuming
public  to  have  some  of  the  wood  gatherers  stop  that
work  and  turn  to  gathering  nuts.

There  are,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  very  few  industries
where  a  single  laborer  produces  a  finished  article  of
consumption  without  cooperation  from  others.  Even
the  mechanic  who  works  independently  must  usually
buy  his  raw  material  and  his  tools  from  some  one
else.  His  work  consists  in  taking  a  piece  of  material
which  is  worth  little  and  putting  it  into  a  shape  in
which  it  is  worth  more.  The  amount  of  value  which
he  adds  to  it  is  the  amount  which  he,  together  with
his  tools,  earns.  Subtract  from  this  amount  the  cost  of
keeping  himself  supplied  with  tools,  and  you  have  the
wages  of  his  labor.  Of  the  total  value  of  the  finished
product,  therefore,  a  part  goes  to  the  mechanic  him-
self, a  part  to  the  maker,  or  makers,  of  his  tools,  and
a  part  to  the  producer,  or  producers,  of  his  raw  mate-
rials. This  gives  rise  to  two  problems  in  distribution :


%j^Jr


%M^


ft,  /


Wages  143


first,  What  determines  the  total  earnings  of  the  group
as  a  whole,  including  all  who  have  a  hand  in  the  fin-
ished article  ?  and  second,  How  are  the  total  earnings
of  this  group  divided  among  its  various  members  ?

The  first  problem  differs  in  no  wise  from  that  of
determining  the  earnings  of  a  single  worker  who,
without  cooperation,  produces  an  article  ready  for
use.  As  he  earns  the  value  of  the  finished  article
which  he  produces,  so  a  group  of  men  who  jointly
produce  such  an  article  earn  jointly  its  value,  and  the
earnings  of  the  whole  group,  during  a  given  time,
depend  partly  upon  the  number  of  articles  which  it
produces,  and  partly  upon  the  value  of  each  article.
Moreover,  these  group  earnings  would  be  increased
and  diminished  in  every  respect  as  the  earnings  of
the  single  worker.  In  short,  all  that  was  said  of  nuts
and  fire-wood  and  their  producers  could  be  said  of
shoes  and  hats  and  their  producers,  or  of  any  other
specific  product  of  human  industry  and  its  producers,
including  among  its  producers  all  who  contribute
anything  toward  its  production  in  the  way  of  labor,
materials,  machinery,  buildings,  or  land.

How  the  total  value  of  the  product  is  distributed
among  the  various  members  of  the  group  which  pro-
duces it  is  a  more  difficult  problem.  It  may  be
simplified  somewhat  by  considering  first  the  case  of
an  article  which  passes  through  several  stages  of  pro-


144  ^^^  Distribution  of  Wealth

duction  and  comes  upon  the  market  several  times
before  its  final  completion.  Such  an  article  is  a  loaf
of  bread,  the  material  of  which  had  figured  on  the
market  as  wheat,  and  again  as  flour,  before  reappear-
ing in  the  form  of  bread.  To  make  the  case  as
simple  as  possible,  let  us  assume  that  the  wheat  is
grown  by  an  independent  farmer  who  tills  his  own
land  with  his  own  tools,  that  it  is  made  into  flour  by
an  old-fashioned  miller  who  runs  his  own  mill  on  his
own  site,  while  the  bread  is  made  by  a  baker  who
does  his  own  work  in  his  own  shop.  Leaving  out
of  account  the  possible  services  of  tradesmen  and
transportation  agencies  who  may  have  facilitated  the
exchange  of  materials,  as  well  as  the  makers  of  the
tools  used  by  these  three  men,  it  becomes  evident
that  the  value  of  the  bread  represents  the  total  value
of  the  work  done  by  all  three,  or  that  the  value  of
the  bread  is  the  gross  amount  to  be  divided  among
them.  But  the  share  of  each  is  determined  on  the
open  market  and  shows  itself  in  the  price  of  wheat,  of
flour,  or  of  bread,  —  the  price  of  the  wheat  being  the
share  of  the  farmer,  the  difference  between  the  price
of  the  flour  and  that  of  the  wheat  being  the  share  of
the  miller,  and  that  of  the  baker  being  the  difference
between  the  price  of  the  bread  and  that  of  the  flour.^

1  This,  of  course,  ignores  the  other  products  of  the  mill  and  the
other  ingredients  of  the  bread.


Wages  145

An  increase  or  decrease  in  the  demand  for  bread,
when  due  to  changes  in  the  numbers  or  habits  of
consumers,  would,  in  the  absence  of  changes  affect-
ing its  production,  increase  or  decrease  the  demand
for  the  labor  of  all  three  men,  though  it  would
doubtless  affect  the  baker  first  and  the  farmer  last.
But  an  increase  or  decrease  in  the  supply  of  bread,
in  the  absence  of  changes  in  the  numbers  or  habits
of  the  consumers,  would  affect  the  different  pro-
ducers differently  according  to  the  location  of  the
cause  of  the  change.  If  there  should  be  an  increase
in  the  number  of  wheat  growers  resulting  in  an
increase  in  the  supply  of  wheat  which  would  have
to  be  consumed  as  bread,  let  us  assume,  if  consumed
at  all,  it  would  reduce  the  price  of  bread  in  order
that  consumers  might  be  induced  to  consume  more.
This  would  of  course  give  a  smaller  remuneration  to
each  farmer.  But  in  order  that  the  increased  supply
of  wheat  might  be  ground  and  baked,  more  than  the
ordinary  amount  of  work  would  have  to  be  done  by
the  millers  and  the  bakers.  This  would  therefore
increase  the  demand  for  their  labor  and  tend  to
increase  their  wages,  assuming  that  their  numbers
remain  unchanged.  They  would  not  lose,  therefore,
but  gain  by  the  fall  in  the  price  of  bread  when  it
came  about  in  this  way.  The  farmers,  on  the  other
hand,  would  lose  more  than  in  proportion  to  the  fall


146  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

in  the  price  of  bread,  since  the  margin  between  tne
price  of  wheat  and  that  of  bread  would  be  increased
by  the  rise  in  the  remuneration  of  the  millers  and
bakers.

But  if  there  should  be  an  increase  in  the  number
of  bakers,  the  farmers  and  millers  remaining  the
same,  this  would  tend  to  reduce  the  remuneration  of
bakers  and  narrow  down  the  margin  between  the
price  of  flour  and  that  of  bread.  There  being  more
bakers,  with  no  increase  in  the  demand  for  their
work,  that  of  each  one  would  be  less  wanted  tl\an  it
was  before.  It  could  be  spared  with  less  loss,  and
consequently  less  would  be  paid  to  each  baker  to
induce  him  to  work.  The  effect  of  this  would  be
both  to  reduce  the  price  of  bread  and  to  increase
that  of  flour.  If  the  price  of  flour  should  for  a  time
remain  the  same,  and  the  whole  of  the  fall  in  the
remuneration  of  bakers  be  taken  out  of  the  price  of
bread,  the  cheapening  of  bread  would  tend  to  in-
crease its  consumption.  But  this  could  not  continue
without  more  flour,  which  would  not  be  forthcoming
unless  some  slight  additional  inducement  were  of-
fered to  the  farmer  and  the  miller  in  the  way  of
higher  prices.  The  increase  in  the  consumption  of
bread  would  therefore  tend  to  increase  the  demand
for  flour  and  wheat,  which  in  turn  would  increase
the  demand  for  the  labor  of  the  farmers  and  millers.


Wages  147

But  if  the  whole  of  the  saving  in  the  cost  of  baking
should  be  for  a  time  added  to  the  price  of  flour,
leaving  the  price  of  bread  unchanged,  this  would
stimulate  the  millers,  and  finally  the  farmers  also,  to
increased  activity  and  call  forth  a  somewhat  larger
supply  of  wheat  and  flour.  But  this  could  not  be
disposed  of  unless  the  price  of  bread  should  fall
sufficiently  to  induce  a  larger  consumption.  Thus
the  saving  in  the  cost  of  baking  would  be  divided
among  the  consumers  of  bread  in  the  form  of  some-
what lower  prices,  and  the  producers  of  wheat  and
flour  in  the  form  of  somewhat  higher  prices.  Simi-
larly, an  increase  in  the  number  of  millers  would
tend  to  increase  the  demand  for  the  work  of  both
farmers  and  bakers,  besides  lowering  the  price  of
bread.

In  the  chapter  on  Value  ^  we  found  that,  other  ^
things  equal,  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  one  com-
modity constitutes  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  (
others  which  are  exchanged  against  it  provided  they
are  not  substitutes  for  it.  This  is  a  universal  prin-
ciple, and  applies  to  agents  of  production,  including
labor,  as  well  as  to  consumable  commodities.  But
the  principle  applies  with  special  force  in  the  case
of  several  commodities  or  agents  of  production  which
have  to  be  combined  for  the  accomplishment  of  the
1  p.  22.


148  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

same  purpose.^  Both  sand  and  lime,  for  example,
have  to  be  used  in  the  making  of  mortar.  If  no
sand  were  to  be  had,  nor  any  substitute  for  it,  some
other  building  material  than  mortar  would  have  to  be
used,  and  there  would  therefore  be  no  effective  demand
for  lime  for  that  purpose.  At  least,  no  one  would
be  in  the  market  buying  it  for  that  purpose.  Even  if
a  small  amount  of  sand  could  be  had  at  a  high  price,
it  would  make  mortar  so  expensive  that  comparatively
little  would  be  used,  and  there  would  therefore  be
little  demand  for  Hme  for  that  purpose.  But  with  an
abundant  supply  of  sand  at  a  low  price,  mortar  could
be  used  freely  as  a  building  material,  and  there
would  be  a  considerable  demand  for  lime,  tending
to  raise  its  price.

The  same  principle  applies  to  different  kinds  of
labor  which  have  to  be  combined  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  same  general  purpose,  as  is  the  case  with
that  of  the  farmer,  the  miller,  and  the  baker.  It
applies  also  to  different  kinds  of  capital,  and  to  cona-
binations  of  labor,  land,  and  capital  in  the  same
industry.  An  increase  in  the  supply  of  capital  helps
the  price  of  labor  in  precisely  the  same  way  that  an
increase  in  the  supply  of  sand  helps  the  price  of
lime,  or as an increase in the number  of bakers

^  Cf.  Marshall's  theory  of  joint  demand,  "  Principles  of  Economics,"
Book  V,  Ch.  VI.


Wages  149

helps  the  price  of  the  labor  of  farmers  and  millers.
But  the  effect  of  this  principle  is  limited  somewhat
by  the  fact  that  one  thing  can  sometimes  be  used  as
a  partial  substitute  for  another.  Where  two  or  more
factors  are  combined  for  the  production  of  the  same
result,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  proportion  in
which  they  are  combined  can  be  varied,  as  was  found
in  the  chapter  on  Diminishing  Returns.  When  this  is
the  case,  if  one  factor  gets  cheaper,  the  tendency  is
to  use  more  of  it  and  less  of  the  others.  But  there
is  always  a  limit  to  this  power  of  substitution,  and
in  many  cases  no  such  substitution  can  be  made.

But  the  case  of  the  farmer,  the  miller,  and  the
baker  is  an  abnormally  simple  one  as  it  has  been
stated,  for  the  reason  that  no  account  has  been  taken
of  the  fact  that  no  one  works  alone  and  unaided.  It
has  been  assumed  that  the  farmer,  for  example,  pro-
duces a  certain  quantity  of  wheat  and  markets  it
without  any  help  from  any  one  else.  Under  such
conditions  his  earnings  would  be  easily  distinguish-
able from  those  of  the  miller  and  the  baker,  who  each
in  turn,  in  the  same  independent  manner,  buy  their
raw  materials  and  market  their  products.  But  such
simple  conditions  are  never  found  in  reality.  The
farmer  is  always  at  some  expense  for  his  tools,  the
miller  for  his  machinery,  the  baker  for  his  ovens,
and  all  alike  for  the  land  upon  which  they  work,


^:


150  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

These  expenses  must  be  deducted  before  we  can
find  the  net  earnings  of  these  three  men.  That  is
to  say,  the  makers  of  the  tools,  machinery,  and  ovens
also  get  a  share  of  the  value  of  the  bread.  The
owners  of  the  land  will  also  exact  a  share,  and  in
case  the  producers  own  their  own  land  they  will
usually  have  been  at  some  expense  in  acquiring  it,
and  this  expense  must  be  deducted  before  we  have
the  real  earnings  of  their  labor.  In  other  words,
the  interest  of  capital  and  the  rent  of  land,  as  well
as  the  wages  of  labor,  come  out  of  the  total  value  of
jthe  product.;

All  that  was  said  regarding  the  process  of  deter-
mining the  individual  shares  of  the  farmer,  the
miller,  and  the  baker,  strictly  appUes  only  to  the
shares  of  the  farming  group,  the  milling  group,  and
the  baking  group,  each  of  which  combines  a  number
of  coordinated  factors  usually  classified  as  labor,
land,  and  capital.  We  have  still  before  us  the  prob-
lem of  finding  how  the  share  going  to  any  of  these
groups  is  divided  among  the  factors  of  which  it  is
made  up.  This  is  a  more  difficult  problem  than  the
last  because  the  market  does  not  separate  the  prod-
uct of  each  factor,  as  it  does  that  of  each  group.
The  specific  problem  of  the  present  chapter  is.  What
etermines  the  share  which  goes  to  the  laborer  in  the
form  of  wages  ?


Wages  151

In  approaching  this  problem  it  is  necessary  to
return  to  the  elementary  proposition  which  was
made  the  starting-point  of  our  explanation  of  value,
viz.,  that  the  value  of  an  article  depends  upon  how
much  it  is  wanted  in  comparison  with  other  things.
This  applies  to  labor  as  well  as  to  commodities.
The  share  going  to  the  wheat-flour-bread-producing
group  depends,  as  we  have  seen,  upon  how  much
bread  is  wanted  in  comparison  with  other  things,  or
upon  the  value  of  bread ;  but  the  share  of  this  total
amount  which  goes  to  any  one  of  the  factors  depends
upon  how  much  that  factor  is  wanted  in  comparison
with  the  others.  Qi  the  services  of  a  given  amount'
of  labor  are  wanted  more  than  the  uses  of  a  given
amount  of  land  or  of  capital,  more  will  be  paid  for/
the  labor,  and  it  will  get  a  relatively  large  share  of
the  value  of  the  joint  product.  But  if  the  services
of  the  labor  are  less  wanted,  less  will  be  paid  for  itj
and  it  will  get  a  relatively  smaller  share  of  the  ]omi
product  than  the  landowner  and  the  capitalist.

How  much  any  factor  of  production  is  wanted  will
\  ordinarily  depend  upon  how  much  it  will  add  to  the
product  of  the  group  with  which  it  is  combined,  or
to  which  it  is  added.  To  be  sure,  a  handsome  tool
yields  a  certain  amount  of  direct  satisfaction  to  the
mechanic,  as  a  handsome  team  does  to  the  farmer,
and  such  things  will,  on  that  'account,  have  a  some-


J


152  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

what  higher  value  than  less  handsome  ones,  even
when  the  latter  will  do  as  much  work  and  add  as
much  to  the  product  of  the  group  to  which  it
belongs.  But  in  general,  the  desire  for  a  piece  of
producers'  goods  is  based  upon  its  efficiency  in  pro-
duction rather  than  upon  its  ability  to  please.  If,
therefore,  in  the  above  illustration,  the  given  quantity
of  labor,  when  added  to  an  existing  industrial  unit,
/  such  as  a  farm,  will  add  more  to  the  total  product  of
the  farm  than  would  be  added  by  the  addition  of
the  given  amount  of  land  or  capital,  the  labor  will  be
inore  wanted  by  the  owner  of  the  farm,  and  he  will
therefore  pay  it  a  larger  share  of  the  value  of  the
total  product  of  the  farm.  The  same  rule  can  be
stated  in  another  way.  If  the  loss  of  the  given
amount  of  labor  from  the  farm  would  reduce  the
total  product  more  than  the  loss  of  the  given  amount
of  land  or  capital,  the  head  of  the  farm  will  want
it  more,  and  will  therefore  offer  more  to  retain  it.
Stated  in  either  way,  this  rule  applies  only  to  definite
units  of  labor,  of  land,  or  of  capital,  since  the  loss
of  all  the  labor,  of  all  the  land,  or  of  all  the  capital
would  destroy  the  product  altogether.  But  this
need  give  us  no  difficulty  if  we  only  remember  that
these  factors,  in  society  at  large  if  not  on  a  single
farm,  are  bargained  for  in  units,  and  not  in  the
ma3St


Wages  I  S3

In  order  to  understand  how  the  amount  which  any
factor  adds  to  the  total  product  of  all  the  factors  is
determined,  it  is  necessary  to  recall  the  law  of  dimin-
ishing returns  and  the  principle  of  marginal  produc-
tivity which  is  based  upon  it.  In  the  chapter  on  that
subject  we  found  that  the  owner  of  a  farm,  a  factory,
or  any  other  industrial  unit,  could  best  afford  to
employ  that  amount  of  labor  which  would  have  a
marginal  product  equal  to  the  wages  which  he  would
have  to  pay.^  This  assumes,  correctly  enough  for
the  purpose  then  in  hand,  that  the  rates  of  wages
were  fixed  in  the  community  at  large  outside  the
individual  establishment  in  question,  and  that  larger
or  smaller  amounts  of  labor  might  be  employed
according  as  the  owner's  interests  would  dictate.
That  is,  with  the  productivity  of  the  establishment
under  varying  applications  of  labor,  and  with  the
rate  of  wages  known,  the  problem  was  to  find  the
amount  of  labor  which  he  could  most  profitably
hire.  But  in  society  at  large  a  different  set  of
.conditions  prevail.  There  is,  at  any  one  time,  a  cer-
tain amount  of  land  and  capital  of  certain  varying
degrees  of  productivity,  and  there  is  also  a  certain
amount  of  labor  to  be  employed  upon  that  land  and
capital,  but  the  rate  of  wages  has  to  be  determined.
1  The  productivity  of the land  and capital  and  the

iCf.  pp.  78-79,  Chapter  II.


/


^


154  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

amount  of  labor  are  the  fixed  factors  from  which  the
variable  factor  wages  is  to  be  found.  In, JJiis  -ease
the  rule  is  that  a  rate  of  wages  will  be  paid  which
,will  be  approximately  equal  to  the^marginal  product
of  labor.

In  order  to  simplify  the  problem,  let  us  assume  for
the  moment  that  the  conditions  which  prevail  in  the
community  at  large  prevail  also  with  respect  to  a
single  farm.  The  first  settler  on  the  farm  is  pre-
sumably its  owner  and  able  to  control  it  and  its
product.  If  he  can  when  working  alone  produce  a
crop  of  500  bushels,  and  if  when  working  with
another  man  the  two  could  produce  a  crop  of  900
bushels,  the  amount  added  by  the  second  man  (or
the  marginal  product  of  labor)  would  be  400  bushels.
More  than  this  the  owner  could  not  afford  to  pay,
because  to  do  so  would  le^ve  him  less  than  he  might
have  by  working  ^lone.  Anything  less  than  this
he  could  afford  to  pay,  because  to  do  so  would
leave  him  something  more  than  he  could  have  by
working  alone.  Assuming  that  the  owner  does  not
exercise  a  monopoly  power  by  forcing  the  laborer  to
take  less,  the  wages  of  the  second  man  would  ap-
proximate this  amount.  Then  if  a  third  man  came
seeking  employment,  and  if  the  three  together  could
make  the  farm  yield  1200  bushels,  the  most  that
the  owner  would  feel  like  paying  him  would  be  300


Wages  155

bushels.  That  is  the  amount,  under  the  assumption,
which  he  adds  to  the  product  of  the  other  two,
and  it  now  becomes  the  marginal  product  of  labor.
More  than  that  the  owner  would  not  pay,  because
to  do  so  would  leave  him  less  than  he  might  have
without  this  last  man.  But  if  the  third  man  con-
sents to  work  for  300  bushels,  the  second  man
will  soon  have  to  come  down  to  the  same  figure,
for  the  farmer  will  discover  that  he  and  the  third
man  could  produce  900  bushels,  while  all  three  to-
gether can  produce  only  1200.  He  would,  there-
fore, figure  out  that  he  would  be  better  off  without
the  second  man  unless  he  could  get  him  for  300
bushels  or  less.  Unless,  therefore,  the  second  man
will  accept  that  amount,  he  will  have  to  go;  but
as  conditions  exist  in  the  world  at  large,  he  will
have  no  place  to  go,  and  he  will  therefore  probably
accept.

This  does  not  mean  that  there  are  no  other  lands
upon  which  the  second  or  third  man  may  work  and
get  all  the  product,  as  the  owner  of  this  farm  did
when  he  worked  alone.  But  at  any  one  time  the  best
lands  will  have  been  appropriated,  so  far  at  least  as  it
is  known  what  lands  are  the  best,  and  only  inferior
lands  will  be  open  for  this  kind  of  settlement.  Their
inferiority  may  be  either  temporary  —  due  to  pres-
ent  lack of transportation facilities, to ignorance


156  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

of  the  proper  methods  of  cultivating  these  vacant
lands,  or  the  lack  of  sufficient  capital  for  their  proper
utilization  —  or  it  may  be  permanent  —  due  to  the
natural  sterility  of  the  soil,  to  the  insalubrity  of  the
climate,  or  to  natural  and  irremovable  difficulties  of
access.  For  the  time  being,  at  any  rate,  they  are
less  inviting  than  the  lands  which  have  been  already
appropriated,  and  the  later  comers  —  the  second  and
third  men  —  may  find  it  to  their  advantage  to  work
for  the  first  man,  receiving  wages,  rather  than  to
appropriate  such  lands  as  are  still  open  to  settle-
ment. However,  this  will  depend  partly  upon  the
wages  which  the  first  man  can  find  it  to  his  interest
to  pay,  and  partly  upon  the  productiveness  of  the
lands  which  are  still  open.  If  there  is  a  reasonable
hope  that  they  might  be  able  to  produce  on  the  new
land  as  much  as,  or  more  than,  they  can  get  in  the
form  of  wages  by  working  for  the  first  man,  they  will
probably  choose  to  work  the  land ;  otherwise  they
will  probably  work  for  wages.

The  fact  that  there  is,  in  every  country,  some  land
which  is  so  poor  that  its  use  can  be  had  for  Httle  or
nothing,  together  with  the  fact  that  there  are  numer-
ous owners  of  farms  each  of  whom  is  anxious  to
increase  his  income,  will  operate  to  prevent  the  beat-
ing down  of  wages  much  if  any  below  the  marginal
product  of  labor. Each  farm  owner  would  increase


Wages  157

his  income  by  hiring  more  men  if  he  could  get  them
for  less  than  their  marginal  product.  The  competi-
tion for  men,  if  wages  should  be  found  to  be  below
that  point,  would  force  wages  up.  But  if  they  should
be  found  to  be  above  that  point,  the  unwillingness  of
the  farmers  to  hire  men  would  bring  wages  down.
The  normal  tendency,  therefore,  is  for  wages  in
agriculture  to  proximate  pretty  closely  to  the  mar-
ginal productivity  of  labor.  Other  things  equal,  the ,
more  labor  there  is  in  propqrtion  to  the  land  and
capital  the  lower  will  be  its  marginal  productivity,
and  the  less,  therelore,  will  any  unit  of  labor  be  ]
w^^d.  This  is  a  necessary  result  of  the  law  of
diminishing  returns..

( All  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  each  individual
laborer  gets  as  wages  approximately  the  equivalent
of  the  amount  which  he  individually  can  add  to  the
product  of  the  group  to  which  he  belongs,)  or  of  the
amount  which  he  can  subtract  from  the  product  of
the  group  by  withdrawing  himself  from  it.  Find  out
what  the  group  could  produce  without  his  help,  and  ^
then  find  out  what  it  can  produce  with  his  help,  and
the  difference  between  these  two  amounts  is  the  >^»5
measure  of  his  worth  to  the  group  —  as  a  man's  worth
is  calculated  in  the  industrial  world.  But  under  the
universal  law  of  diminishing  returns,  the  more  there
are doing  the  same  kind  of  work  that  he  does  in


158  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

comparison  with  the  other  factors  in  the  same  group,
the  less  difference  will  his  presence  or  absence
make ;  and  vice  versa,  the  fewer  there  are  doing  his
kind  of  work  in  comparison  with  all  the  factors  in
the  group,  the  more  difference  will  his  presence  or
absence  make  in  the  total  product.
J,  Ignoring  for  the  present  the  fact  that  there  are
many  kinds  of  labor  which  cooperate  with  one
another,  in  the  same  sense  that  land  and  capital  in
general  cooperate  with  labor  in  general,  the  fore-
going argument  can  be  made  somewhat  more  definite
by  the  use  of  the  following  table.  This  purports
to  give  the  amounts  which  could  be  produced  by
varying  numbers  of  laborers  on  four  farms  of  differ-
ent degrees  of  productivity,  each  containing  100
acres  and  having  the  rggnlf^jfe  capital.  The  num-
bers are  purposely  made  round  in  order  to  facilitate
the  calculations  which  are  to  be  based  upon  them.
On  farm  A,  for  example,  the  change  from  one  to
two  laborers  makes  a  difference  of  400  bushels  in
the  product,  which  then  becomes  the  marginal  prod-
uct of  labor,  while  the  change  from  two  to  three
laborers  makes  a  difference  of  only  300  bushels,  and
so  on,  until,  when  the  number  of  laborers  is  increased
from  four  to  five,  the  fifth  laborer  adds  only  100
bushels  to  the  total  crop  over  and  above  what  four
could  produce.


Wages


TABLE E


159


Total  Crop  and  Marginal  Product  of  Labor  (Both  in  Bushels)
FROM  Four  One-hundred-acre  Farms  of  Different  Produc-
tivity WHEN CULTIVATED  BY  VARYING  NUMBERS  OF  LABORERS.


'5  -.

Fann  A

Farm  B

FaimC

Fann  D

1
1

II

1

1

1
1

1  1

1

1

I

2

3
4
5

500

900

1200

1400

1500

300

200

40Q
700
900
1000

300

200
100

300
500
600

200
100

200

300

ISP

Now  suppose  that  there  are,  in  a  given  community,
a  number  of  farms  of  each  of  the  four  grades  given
in  this  table.  So  long  as  there  is  only  one  man  for
each  farm  of  the  A  grade,  the  marginal  product  of
labor  would  be  500  bushels.  If  any  one  of  them
should  quit  working  his  farm,  he  would  cut  down  the
product  of  the  community  by  that  amount.  More-
over, no  one  could  induce  any  one  else  to  work  for
him  for  less  than  that  amount,  since  each  would  have
the  opportunity  of  producing  that  much  for  himself.
But  if  more  men  should  come,  their  marginal  prod-
uct would  be  cut  down  to  400  bushels,  because
some  of  them  would  either  have  to  take  up  land
of  the  B  grade,  or  work  for  wages  on  some  of  the


i6o  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

farms  of  the  A  grade.  In  either  case,  each  one
would  be  able  to  add  only  400  bushels  to  the  amount
which  the  community  could  produce  without  him.
And  if  the  number  of  men  should  still  further  in-
crease, until  there  were  more  than  two  men  for  every
A  farm,  and  more  than  one  for  every  B  farm,  the
marginal  product  would  fall  to  300  bushels,  since
the  extra  men  would  then  have  to  take  up  land  of  the
C  grade,  or  else  work  for  wages  on  the  A  or  B  farms.
In  either  case  each  one  would  be  able  to  add  only
300  bushels  to  the  total  crop  of  the  community.
But  inasmuch  as  one  laborer  may  be  as  good  as
another  whether  he  came  with  the  first  or  the  last
instalment,  all  laborers  who  were  not  also  owners
of  some  of  the  better  land  will  have  to  come  down
to  the  same  wage.  No  matter  whether  he  came
with  the  first  immigration  when  the  marginal  prod-
uct was  400  bushels  or  not,  he  will  find  that  under
the  new  conditions  only  300  bushels  depend  upon
his  work.  That  is  all  the  community  would  lose  if
he  were  to  stop,  and  no  device  has  yet  been  found
which  will  enable  a  laborer  to  secure  more  than  that.
Following  out  the  argument  according  to  the  table,
the  number  of  laborers  might  increase  until  their
marginal  product  fell  to  200,  or  even  100  bushels.
Strictly  speaking,  even  the  wages  of  the  owners
themselves would  fall  as  the  number  of laborers


Wages  1 6 1

increased,  though  this  would  be  more  than  compen-
sated by  the  increase  in  their  rents,  or  the  shares
which  they  would  be  enabled  to  secure  by  virtue  of
their  ownership  and  control  of  the  land.  When  the
marginal  product  and  the  wages  of  labor  are  300
bushels,  the  owner  of  one  of  the  A  farms,  for  exam-
ple, could  stop  working  himself,  and  it  would  only
make  a  difference  of  300  bushels  in  his  income.
That  is  all,  therefore,  which  comes  to  him  because
he  chooses  to  work ;  the  rest  of  his  income  is  wholly
the  result  of  his  ownership.  At  that  rate  of  wages
he  can  either  hire  two  or  three  men,  and  in  either
case  his  income  will  be  300  bushels.  In  the  former
case  the  total  crop  would  be  900,  and  the  labor  cost
600  bushels,  and  in  the  latter  case  the  total  product
would  be  1200  and  the  labor  cost  900  bushels.  Or,
he  could  hire  two  men  and  also  work  himself  and
get  an  income  of  600  bushels.  Clearly,  therefore,
300  bushels  are  due  to  his  labor  and  300  to  his
ownership.  But  when  there  are  so  many  men  that
the  marginal  product  is  only  200  bushels,  —  that  is,
when  there  are  four  men  to  every  such  farm  in  the
natural  distribution  of  workers,  the  total  wages  are
only  800  bushels  as  against  a  total  crop  of  1400
bushels,  leaving  600  bushels  as  rent  which  the  owner
can  secure  whether  he  works  or  not,  or  in  addition  to
I  is  wages  if  he  chooses  to  work.

M


1 62  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

The  effect  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of  labor
ers,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  farms  upon  both
wages  and  rent,  can  be  seen  by  a  study  of  the  table
on  page  163,  which  is  only  an  enlargement  of  the
last  one.

To  simplify  the  case  as  much  as  possible,  let  us
assume  that  these  four  farms  include  all  the  land
in  a  microscopic  community,  and  that  the  number
of  men  gradually  increases,  beginning  with  one.
The  first  man  would  naturally  work  on  farm  A,
and  there  would  be  no  rent  at  all,  or  at  least  none
that  could  be  distinguished  from  wages.  With  a
community  of  three  men,  two  would  naturally  work
on  farm  A  and  one  on  farm  B,  in  which  case  the
marginal  product  and  the  wages  would  be  400
bushels  per  man,  and  farm  A  would  yield  a  rent
of  100  bushels,  or  one  bushel  per  acre,  while  farm
B  would  yield  no  rent  at  all.  With  six  men,  three
would  naturally  work  on  farm  A,  two  on  farm  B,
and  one  on  farm  C,  in  which  case  the  marginal
product  would  be  the  same  on  all  three  farms,
viz.,  ^00  bushels,  and  farm  A  would  yield  a  rent
of  300  bushels,  farm  B  of  100,  and  farm  C  none
at  all.  When  there  were  ten  men,  four  would
naturally  work  on  farm  A,  three  on  farm  B,  two
on  farm  C,  and  one  on  farm  D,  in  which  case  the
marginal product  would be only  200  bushels,  and


Wages


163


^


Is
i  >■


si

ii

g I


0

1

W3B

M

JUWIBJOX

8

S33EM

8

}3npaid

8

dojo

8§

0

3J0B

J3d  jua^

M fO

iaaj|Biox

8  8

saSBAi

|8

jonpoid

lEUl3iBI^

8  8

doio

8  §1

n

1

3J0B

J3d  jua^

M fO  VO

juaj  iBjox

8  8|

sa3BM
l«»oX

III

jonpojd
lEniSjBj^

§§8

dojo

III!

aj3e
jad  jua^

•I ro  VO 0

juajiBjox

8  III

saSBAi

l§.|8

jonpojd
IbuiSjbj^

!§§§

dOJD

IB40X

8  8  8  8  8

sjajoqBijo
iaquin^

HH N m rj- LTl

l^


164  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  rent  of  farm  A  600,  that  of  B  300,  that  of  C
100,  and  that  of  D  none  at  all.  Fifteen  men  would
distribute  themselves  as  follows :  five  on  A,  four
on  B,  three  on  C,  and  two  on  D ;  wages  would  be
100,  and  the  rents  would  be  icxx),  600,  300,  and
100,  respectively.  The  total  wages  are  found  in
every  case  by  multiplying  the  marginal  product  by
the  number  of  laborers,  and  the  rent  by  subtracting
the  total  wages  from  the  total  product.  That  this
process  is  capable  of  being  reversed  by  finding  the
marginal  product  of  land,  and  then  finding  the
total  rent  by  multiplying  the  marginal  product  by
the  number  of  acres,  and  the  wages  by  subtracting
the  total  rent  from  the  total  product,  we  shall  see
when  we  come  to  the  chapter  on  Rent.

By  changing  the  headings,  these  tables  can  be
made  to  apply  to  factories  or  any  other  class  of
industrial  establishments,  as  well  as  to  farms,  for
the  same  general  law  governs  wages  in  them  all,
and  in  society  at  large.  This  law  is  that  a  given
unit  of  labor  of  any  kind  is  valued  in  industry
according  to  the  amount  which  it  can  add  to  the
total  product  of  industry,  or  the  amount  which
can  be  produced  with  this  unit  over  and  above
what  can  be  produced  without  it.  But  owing  to
the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  that  amount  dimin-
ishes  as the number of the same kind of units


Wages  165

increases  in  proportion  to  all  the  other  factors,
including  other  kinds  of  labor;  and,  conversely,
that  amount  increases  as  the  number  of  similar
units  diminishes  in  proportion  to  all  the  other
factors.  In  other  words,  the_^^,s  pf  any  par-
ticular kind  of  labor  are  determined  by  its  mar-
ginal product,  and  that  marginal  product  diminishes
as  the  supply  increases  relatively  to  the  other
factors,  and  increases  as  the  supply  diminishes
relatively  to  the  other  factors.  The  wages  of  any
particular  kind  of  labor  depend,  therefore,  quite
as  much  upon  its  supply  as  upon  its  demand.  We
have  seen  that  the  demand  is  based  upon  its  mar-
ginal product,  and  we  have  yet  to  see  upon  what
its  supply  depends,  for  labor,  like  all  the  other
factors,  must  be  limited  in  supply  in  order  that  it
may  command  a  price.

In  the  first  place,  the  supply  of  labor  is  a  quan-
tity of  two  dimensions,  and  each  dimension  is
limited  by  a  somewhat  different  set  of  circum-
stances. The  total  supply  of  labor  may  be  in-
creased either  by  increasing  the  number  of  laborers
or  by  increasing  the  intensity  with  which  each
labors.  By  intensity  we  mean  the  amount  of  pro-
ductive energy  expended  by  each  laborer.  The
time  during  which  he  works  is  one  of  the  factors
of the  intensity. That is to say,  the intensity  is


1 66  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

increased either  by working longer hours, or by
working  harder  during  the  same  number  of hours.

,  The  supply  of  labor  is  reduced  somewhat  by  a
reduction of the number of hours per day, pro-

,  vided  the  rate  or  speed  is  not  correspondingly  in-
creased. This  conception  of  intensity  is  somewhat
at  variance  with  the  quantitative  notions  of  labor
as  given  us  by  Jevons.^  He  regarded  the  quan-
tity of  labor  as  the  product  of  time  and  intensity,
and  intensity  as  consisting  either  in  the  quantity
of  work  done  or  in  the  painfulness  of  doing  it
The  painfulness  of  labor  does  undoubtedly  help
to  Umit  the  amount  of  labor  performed,  but  it  does
not  seem  expedient  to  regard  the  painfulness  itself
as  a  part  of  the  quantity  of  labor.  Besides,  the
painfulness  of  labor  limits  the  time  quite  as  effec-
tively as  the  rate  of  labor.  On  the  whole,  it  seems
better  to  treat  both  the  time  and  rate  of  labor
under  the  head  of  intensity,  since  the  same  cause,
viz.,  painfulness,  limits  both.  It  is  immaterial  to  the
laborer  whether  he  works  long  hours  at  a  slow  rate
or  short  hours  at  a  rapid  rate,  provided  the  pain
or  sacrifice  is  equal  in  both  cases.

Any  treatment  of  the  subject  of  wages  which
ignores  the  question  of  numbers  is  incomplete.  If
we  conceive  of  a  man  as  living  alone  in  a  Robinson

1  "Theory  of  Political  Economy,"  London,  1879,  pp.  184-185.


Wages  167

Crusoe  state,  the  question  of  numbers  might  very
well  be  ignored,  and  the  subject  be  treated  simply
from  the  standpoint  of  a  calculus  of  pleasures  and
pains.  There  would  then  be  no  question  of  distri-
bution, and  the  reward  of  labor  would  be  purely  a
matter  of  production.  We  might  then  stop  when
we  had  shown  that  the  laborer  would  quit  working
when  the  painfulness  of  further  labor  would  out-
weigh the  pleasure  to  be  derived  from  the  further
earnings.  But,  when  other  laborers  enter  upon  the
island,  a  new  element  is  introduced.  The  question
of  the  reward  of  labor  is  still  a  question  of  produc-
tion, but  of  production  under  changed  conditions, —
that  is,  it  becomes  a  question  of  marginal  produc-
tion. Each  laborer  has  more  limited  means  at  his
disposal,  and  also  has  a  chance  for  cooperation  and
a  division  of  labor.  The  introduction  of  numbers
gives  rise  to  a  question  of  distribution,  not  only  as
between  man  and  man  considered  as  laborers,  but
also  as  between  man  and  the  other  factors  of  pro-
duction.

As  already  suggested,  the  intensity  of  labor  is
regulated  by  the  pain  or  the  sacrifice  involved  in
labor.  The  amount  of  work  which  any  laborer  will
perform  in  a  given  time  is  limited,  not  by  his  abso-
lute capacity,  but  is  kept  within  those  bounds  by  the
sense  of  fatigue  and other disagreeable results  of


1 68  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

work.  The  total  sacrifice  consists  not  only  in  the
positive  pain  of  weariness,  but  in  the  confinement
which  prevents  the  laborer  from  the  fullest  enjoy-
ment of  his  earnings,  and  in  a  number  of  other
disagreeable  features.  Still,  the  factors  which  regu-
late the  intensity  of  labor  are  comparatively  simple.
But  the  factors  which  regulate  the  other  dimension
of  the  supply  —  namely,  numbers  —  are  more  com-
plex and  vary  somewhat  among  different  occupa-
tions. With  labor  in  general,  the  question  of  the
limitation  of  this  dimension  of  the  supply  is  mainly
involved  in  the  question  of  population.  The  share
of  the  total  product  of  industry  which  goes  to  labor,
as  compared  with  the  shares  which  go  to  the  other
factors,  is  therefore  largely  a  question  of  the  relation
of  population  to  the  natural  resources  plus  the  accu-
mulated capital;  but  the  share  which  goes  to  one
class  of  laborers,  as  compared  with  other  classes,  is
not  always  a  question  of  population  in  general,  but
is  usually  a  question  of  the  distribution  of  the  popu-
lation among  different  classes  of  occupations.  We
have  first  to  consider  the  broader  problem  of  the
share  of  labor  in  general  as  compared  with  those
of  land  and  capital,  and  as  furnishing  the  key  to
that  problem  we  must  consider  the  general  law  of
population.

This  law,  first  systematically  worked  out  by  Mai-


Wages  169

thus,  and  never  successfully  refuted,  may  be  briefly
stated  as  follows :  —

(i)  Every  species  of  plant  and  animal  has  the
power  to  multiply  faster  than  its  means  of  subsist-
ence will  permit.

(2)  The  physiological  power  of  human  increase
is  also  so  great  that  if  it  should  operate  without
moral  or  social  restraints  of  any  kind,  it  would  carry
population  to  such  limits  that  vice  or  misery  or  both
would  begin  to  thin  out  the  people  and  thus  operate
as  a  check  upon  further  increase.

(3*)  Owing  to  the  law  of  diminishing  returns,  a
larger  number  of  people  can  not,  in  any  given  state
of  civilization  and  the  industrial  arts,  be  so  well  pro-
vided for  as  a  smaller  number.

(4)  There  is  a  strong  natural  instinct  which  in-
clines the  members  of  our  species  to  the  multiplica-
tion of  numbers,  and  unless  this  is  counteracted  by
other  motives,  it  will  lead  to  an  increase  of  population
beyond  the  limits  where  comfortable  subsistence  is
possible.

(5)  This  natural  instinct  is,  however,  opposed  and
held  in  check  by  several  contrary  motives,  not  the
least  important  of  which  is  the  desire  for  the  cus-
tomary goods  to  consume,  coupled  with  the  percep-
tion on  the  part  of  each  head,  or  would-be  head,  of
a  family  that  a  larger  number  of  children  means  a


170  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

smaller  share  of  the  necessaries,  comforts,  and  luxu-
ries of  life  for  each  one,  and  this  keeps  the  rate  of
increase  far  below  that  which  is  physiologically
possible.

(6)  How  rigidly  the  increase  of  numbers  is  held
in  check  by  this  motive  depends  upon  the  ideas  of
the  people  as  to  what  is  essential,  in  the  way  of
incomes,  to  their  happiness^  —  in  other  words,  upon
their  standard  of  living.  It  is  the  standard  of  living,
therefore,  which  determines  the  rate  of  increase  of
jpqpulatjon,  when  we  have  given  the  amount  of  wealth
and  the  possibilities  of  production.  It  plays  the  same
part  in  determining  the  supply  of  labor  which  the_
cost  of  producing  commodities  plays  in  determining
their  supply.

The  standard  of  living  means,  technically,  the
number  of  other  wants  whose  satisfaction  the  indi-
vidual considers  of  more  importance  than  that .  of__
the  procreative  instinct.  The  individual  who  places
very  few  wants  before  that  instinct  has  a  very  low
standard  of  living,  and  he  who  places  many  wants
before  that  one  has  a  high  standard.  Whenever
the  individual  with  a  low  standard  is  reasonably
certain  of  having  enough  to  satisfy  the  few  wants
which  he  considers  more  important  than  the  pro-
creative  instinct,  he  will  usually  undertake  the  rear-
ing of  a  family. Where  the  average standard of


Wages  171

living  is  low  throughout  a  whole  community,  or
any  considerable  class  of  the  community,  popula-
tion will  increase  so  rapidly  that,  under  the  law  of
diminishing  returns,  that  part  of  the  population
which  has  to  work  for  wages  will  be  reduced  to
the  point  where  it  can  only  maintain  its  low  stand-
ard of  living.  But  where  the  average  standard  of
living  is  high,  numbers  will  not  increase  beyond
the  point  which  will  enable  the  laboring  popula-
tion to  live  up  to  its  standard,  unless  the  immigra-
tion of  laborers  of  a  lower  standard  from  some
other  community  should  set  in,  in  which  case  the
laborers  of  a  lower  standard  will  displace  those  of
a  higher  standard,  causing  the  latter  to  migrate  or
stop  multiplying,  leaving  the  field  ultimately  in  the
possession  of  the  low  standard,  as  surely  as  cheap  7l  i
money  will  drive  out  dear  money,  or  as  sheep  ^^
will  drive  cattle  off  the  western  ranges.  Thus
under  the  system  of  private  property  and  the
present  constitution  of  the  family,  both  of  which
combine  to  place  the  responsibility  for  the  support
of  the  family  upon  those  who  are  responsible  for
its  existence,  the^tandard  of  living  determines  the
abundance  or  the  scarcity  of  labor,  and  indirectly,
the^  rate  of  wages.

Consistently  with the cost  of production theory
of  value  which  he  held  in  common  with  the other


172  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

classical  economists,  Ricardo  endeavored  at  some
length  to  show  that  the  natural  price  of  labor  is
fixed  by  the  cost  of  producing  laborers. "  The  nat-

'  ural  price  of  labor  is  that  price  which  is  necessary
to  enable  the  laborers,  one  with  another,  to  subsist,
and  to  perpetuate  their  race  without  either  increase
or  diminution."  In  his  subsequent  argument  he
considerably  modified  this  rigid  form  of  statement
by showing  that this price  depends largely  upon

Invhat  the  laborers  themselves  consider  necessary.
Yet  in  the  end  he  left  no  doubt  that  he  believed
that  the  tendency  was  in  the  long  run  to  force  the
standard  of  living  down  to  a  subsistence  minimum.
Though  Ricardo 's  form  of  statement  is  the  more
rigid,  yet  practically  the  same  opinion  had  been
common  to  his  predecessors,  including  Adam  Smith.
To  Malthus,  contrary  to  the  popular  impression,
belongs  the  credit  of  having  first  made  a  thorough
application  of  the  standard  of  living  to  the  wages
question.  He,  perhaps,  more  than  any  one  else,
insisted  upon  the  possibility  and  the  importance  of
raising  the  standard  of  living  of  the  laboring  classes
by  education  and  more  liberal  surroundings,  so  that
an  effective  prudential  check  on  population  would
be  introduced.  In  common  with  the  other  early
economists  he  concurred  fully  in  the  cost  of  pro-
duction theory  of wages; yet  he  explained more


Wages  173

fully  than  any  one  else  in  what  the  cost  of  produc-
tion of  labor  consisted  —  that  it  meant,  in  fact,
simply  the  standard  of  living  of  the  laborers.

So  long  as  we  limit  the  discussion  to  the  general
class  of  unskilled  laborers,  the  correspondence  is
tolerably  complete  between  the  cost  of  production  of
other  commodities  and  the  standard  of  living  of  la-
borers. The  one  operates  in  essentially  the  same
manner  upon  price  as  the  other  does  upon  wages.

(i)  A  rise  in  the  standard  of  living  of  laborers
tends  to  reduce  the  amount  of  labor  that  will  be
supplied  at  any  given  rate  of  wages  by  diminishing
the  birth-rate,  just  as  a  rise  in  the  cost  of  production
of  another  commodity  will  reduce  the  amount  of  that
commodity  that  will  be  supplied  at  any  given  price^

(2)  With  a  given  standard  of  living,  a  rise  in  the
rate  of  wages  will  result  in  a  higher  birth-rate  and  a
larger  supply  of  labor,  just  as,  with  a  given  cost  of
production,  a  rise  in  the  price  of  another  commodity
will  result  in  a  larger  production  of  that  commodity,^

(3)  The  laborer  does  not  consciously  estimate  what
it  has  cost  to  produce  him,  and  then  set  the  price  of
his  labor  accordingly.  Neither  does  the  farmer  thus
set  the  price  of  his  wheat.  In  either  case,  produc-
tion precedes  sale;  and  the  seller  gets  all  he  can,
regardless  of  the  cost  of  production.  But  in  either
case,  if  the  sellers  are  unable  to  get  enough  to  induce


174  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

a  continuance  of  the  same  rate  of  production,  the
supply  will  eventually  be  diminished  until  the  price
does  become  a  sufficient  inducement  to  continue
production.  Though  the  nature  of  the  motives  that
operate  in  the  two  cases  are  quite  different,  the  effect
on  price  is  quite  similar.

(4)  It  must  be  conceded  that  the  standard  of  Uving
is  not  the  only  factor  that  limits  the  number  of  labor-
ers. On  the  outside  is  the  limit  set  by  the  physi-
cal capacity  for  human  increase.  But  one  of  the
important  differences  between  economic  man  and
the  uneconomic  animals  is  that  with  man  reproduc-
tion does  not  begin  so  early  nor  continue  so  rapidly
as  is  physically  possible.  But  numerous  other  causes
than  economic  considerations  doubtless  check  popula-
tion within  the  outside  limits  set  by  nature.  For  a
variety  of  reasons  society  has  placed  its  condemna-
tion upon  extremely  early  marriages.  There  are
other  legal  and  social  restraints  that  also  operate  in
the  same  way.  With  equal  justice  may  it  be  said
that  cost  of  production  is  not  the  only  factor  that
limits  the  supply  of  any  commodity.  With  every
commodity  there  are  certain  outside  Umits  set  by
nature,  and  in  many  cases  there  are  legal  and  social
restraints.  But  within  these  bounds  cost  of  produc-
tion does  operate.  In  fact,  it  operates  to  such  an
extent  that  the  supply  never  reaches  these  outside


Wages  175

limits,  so  that  all  other  factors  become  practically
inoperative.  Similarly,  with  population.  Economic
considerations,  —  the  fear  of  lack  of  means  of  sub-
sistence, according  to  prevailing  standards,  —  oper-
ate to  limit  population  within  the  bounds  set  by
other  factors,  so  that  they  become  practically  inopera-
tive ;  and  the  standard  of  living  becomes  the  efficient
cause  for  the  limitation  of  numbers.  After  allowance
is  made  for  all  other  possible  checks,  the  fact  remains
that  the  standard  of  living  operates  as  a  still  further
check.  It  adds  considerably  to  the  height  of  the
dam  that  keeps  back  the  flood  of  possible  human
increase.  The  plain  question  of  bread  and  butter
enters  into  a  man's  calculations  even  on  the  subject
of  matrimony.  If  the  man's  standard  of  living  in-
cludes not  only  butter  on  his  bread,  but  jam  on  his
butter,  it  is  then  a  question  of  bread  and  butter  and
jam  that  enters  into  his  calculations.  In  other  words,
if  the  question  of  means  of  living  enters  into  his
calculations  at  all,  it  must  be  a  question  of  living
according  to  some  standard;  and  it  makes  a  vast
difference  whether  that  standard  be  high  or  low.

The  present  tendency  of  economic  science  is
toward  a  study  of  man  as  the  economizer,  the  satisfier
of  wants,  the  chooser  between  pleasures  and  pains.
Therefore,  we  may,  with  perfect  propriety,  treat
man's  domestic  in  common  with  his  other  wants,  and


176  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

study  his  satisfaction  of  these  wants  as  a  part  of  his
economic  activity.  In  accordance  with  the  principle
of  the  declension  of  utility  and  the  satiation  of  wants,
a  man  will  procure  first  the  thing  that  satisfies  the
most  pressing  want.  But  after  a  time  that  want
becomes  so  far  satiated  as  to  be  less  pressing  than
another.  Then  the  man's  attention  will  be  turned  to
the  satisfaction  of  the  next,  and  so  on.  A  man  will
probably  be  sure  of  a  certain  amount  of  bread  before
he  tries  to  procure  butter.  But,  when  his  economic
condition  assures  him  of  a  partial  satisfaction  of  his
desire  for  bread,  his  desire  for  butter  becomes
stronger  than  his  desire  for  an  additional  piece  of
bread.  Then  he  will  procure  butter  also.  In  the
same  manner,  after  his  desire  for  bread  and  butter  is
assured  of  a  certain  degree  of  satisfaction,  another
desire — for  example,  that  for  jam  —  becomes  effect-
ive in  giving  direction  to  his  activity ;  and  thus,  as  his
economic  condition  continues  to  improve,  a  larger
number  of  desires  rise  above  his  horizon,  and  become
effective  in  directing  his  economic  activity.  Some-
where in  the  scale  of  desires  his  domestic  affections
have  a  place,  and  become  effective  in  their  proper
order.  The  position  of  this  particular  class  of  wants
in  the  scale  makes  what  is  called  the  standard  of
living.  Thus  it  will  appear  that  a  high  standard  of
living  when  referred  to  the  question  of population


Wages  177

may  mean  one  of  two  things.  It  may  mean  that  the
general  scope  of  the  people's  wants  has  been  widened
and  deepened,  or  that  the  domestic  affections  ^  have
been  weakened,  or  both.  On  the  whole,  we  have
every  reason  for  beHeving  that  the  standard  of  living
acts  as  an  effective  check  on  the  increase  of  numbers
and  the  supply  of  laborers  in  general.

While  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  wages  must  in
the  long  run  be  high  enough  to  repay  the  cost  of
producing  laborers,  yet  it  does  not  follow  that  the
standard  of  living  of  the  laborer  directly  fixes  the  rate
of  wages.  The  fact  that  a  man  has  high  standard
of  living  will  no  more  enable  him  to  get  high  wages
than  the  fact  that  an  individual  bushel  of  wheat  cost
the  producer  a  great  deal  will  enable  him  to  sell  it  at
a  high  price.  The  standard  of  living  of  laborers  and
the  cost  of  producing  wheat  only  affect  wages  and
the  price  of  wheat  by  limiting  the  quantity  supplied.

An  obstacle  to  the  perfect  working  of  this  law  as
applied  to labor  is  the  length  of  time  necessary  to

iPor  want  of  a  better  term  we  are  compelled  to  use  the  term
"  domestic  affections  "  in  a  somewhat  general  sense,  including  the  sum
total  of  those  motives  which  impel  toward  marriage  and  the  begetting
of  offspring.  If  we  distinguish  between  the  animal  passions  and  the
higher  domestic  affections,  we  shall  find  that  the  latter  quite  often
check  rather  than  increase  population  by  making  parents  more  con-
siderate of  the  future  of  their  children,  and  unwilling  to  risk  their  best
interests  by  having  too  many  to  provide  for.
N


1 78  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

greatly  increase  or  diminish  the  total  supply  of
labor.  Population  changes  very  slowly,  though  the
fund  of  unemployed  labor  may  act  more  quickly  on
the  supply.  But  it  will  be  difficult  to  find  two  com-
modities whose  supplies  can  be  increased  or  dimin-
ished with  precisely  the  same  degree  of  expedition.
Labor  is  simply  an  extreme  case  among  those  com-
modities whose  demand  and  supply  are  very  slowly
adjusted  to  one  another.  Yet  there  is  the  same
tendency  for  such  an  adjustment  to  take  place  as  has
long  been  observed  in  regard  to  other  commodities.
But,  in  the  case  of  wages,  another  fact  affects  the
adjustment.  A  change  in  the  rate  of  wages  so
slowly  affects  the  population  that  the  standard  of
living  of  the  laborers  may  itself  change  before  the
change  in  the  supply  brings  wages  back  to  the  former
level.  The  harshness  of  the  **  iron  law  of  wages  "
is  materially  softened  by  the  fact  that  in  a  free
society,  and  especially  in  a  country  of  universal
education,  the  standard  of  living  is  more  easily  raised
than  lowered.  The  tendency  of  freedom  is  to  encour-
age aspirations  and  ambitions,  while  the  inevitable
result  of  education  is  to  broaden  the  mental  horizon
and  develop  new  desires.  The  inherent  optimism  of
Malthusianism,  when  properly  understood,  appears
in  this  connection.  To  this  end  Malthus  became  an
apostle  of  free  institutions  and  political  equality,  as


Wages  179

being  conducive  to  the  development  of  self-respect,
dignity,  and  thrift  on  the  part  of  the  laboring  classes.
He  attributed  habits  of  improvidence  and  other
proletarian  vices  to  "  despotism,  oppression,  and
ignorance."  It  is  something  more  than  mere  pre-
diction to  suggest  that  along  the  lines  of  liberal  sur-
roundings,  education,  and  culture  lies  the  ultimate
solution  of  the  labor  problem.

Though  the  rule  that  a  laborer  generally  gets  the^
equivalent  of  the  marginal  product  of  his  kind  of
labor  is  of  universal  application,  we  have  found  that,
so  far  as  the  general  class  of  unskilled/  laborers  are
concerned,  that  marginal  product  is  in  part  deter-
mined by  the  number  of  such  laborers,  which  is  in
turn  very  largely  determined  by  their  standard  of
jiving.  We  have  yet  to  consider  what  additional
factors  limit  the  numbers  in  those  trades  and  callings
where  marginal  productivity  and  wages  are  high.
Since  it  is  sometimes  possible  to  change  from  one
occupation  to  another,  there  must  be  something  be-
sides the  standard  of  living  to  limit  the  numbers  in
the  more  remunerative  callings.

Perhaps  the  most  unfortunate  result  of  too  rigid
an  adherence  to  the  "  cost  of  production "  theory
of  wages  appears  in  discussions  of  the  causes
of  differences  of  wages  in  different  occupations.
Adam  Smith  lays  down  the  proposition that "the


i8o  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

whole  of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the
different  employments  of  labor  and  stock  must,  in
the  same  neighborhood,  be  either  perfectly  equal
or  continually  tending  to .  equality.  If  in  the  same
neighborhood  there  was  any  employment  either
more  or  less  advantageous  than  the  rest,  so  many
people  would  crowd  into  it  in  the  one  case,  and  so
many  would  desert  it  in  the  other,  that  its  advantages
would  soon  return  to  the  level  of  other  employ-
ments." ^  In  his  enumeration  of  the  principal  cir-
cumstances which  "  make  up  for  a  small  pecuniary
gain  in  some  employments,  and  counterbalance  a
great  one  in  others,"  he  names  **  the  small  or  great
trust  which  must  be  reposed  in  those  who  exercise
them."  This  contains  the  rather  startling  implication
that  it  is  a  disadvantage  to  have  confidence  placed  in
one's  self.  This  is  manifestly  carrying  the  cost  of
production  theory  a  little  too  far.  Moreover,  in  the
other  circumstances  which  he  names,  he  assumes
that  the  difference  in  the  wages  between  skilled  and
unskilled  occupations  is  entirely  due  to  the  difference
in  the  expense  of  learning  them.  But  the  difference
in  wages  will  in  many  cases  prove  out  of  all  propor-
tion to  the  difference  in  the  expense.  It  would  be
just  as  easy  to  account  for  differences  in  the  rent  of
real  estate  on  the  basis  of  the  difference  in  the  cost

1  "Wealth  of  Nations"  (Rogers  ed.),  Vol.  I,  p.  103  et  seq.


Wages  1 8 1

of  the  improvements.  In  the  case  of  labor,  account
must  be  taken  of  differences  in  native  and  hereditary
qualities,  just  as  we  must  take  account  of  difference
in  situation  and  "  original  and  indestructible  powers
of  the  soil "  in  the  rent  of  land.

_The_margiiial^productivity  of  labor  of  any  classl
determines  the  rate  of  wages  of  that  class.  But,'
with  different  kinds  and  qualities  of  labor,  there  are
different  causes  for  the  limitation  of  the  supply.
Hitherto  we  have  simply  discussed  the  causes  which
limit  the  general  class  of  unskilled  labor.  When  we
consider  the  supply  of  skilled  or  professional  labor,
we  shall  find  some  new  factors  entering  in.  There
are  certain  forms  of  ability  so  unique  and  excep-
tional that  it  is  practically  impossible  either  to  in-
crease or  diminish  the  supply.  Nature  seems  to
have  set  the  limits,  and  the  possessors  of  such  quali-
ties enjoy  a  monopoly  as  absolute  as  the  possessor  of
meteoric  iron  or  a  Sistine  Madonna.  There  are  other
orders  of  ability  that  are  capable  of  cultivation  to  a
more  or  less  limited  extent.  It  is  perhaps  possible
for  the  average  man  to  acquire  proficiency  in  any  of
the  majority  of  skilled  occupations,  if  he  trains  long
enough  and  carefully  enough.  But  different  men
can  acquire  proficiency  in  a  given  skilled  occupation
with  different  degrees  of  expense,  owing  to  differ-
ences in  natural  talents. The  tendency  will  be  for


l82


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


as  many  men  to  go  into  that  occupation  as  can  do  so
with  advantage  to  themselves.  But,  when  those  best
fitted  for  it  have  gone  into  it,  it  begins  to  cost  the
additional  men  more  and  more  in  the  way  of  prepa-
ration. Finally,  the  man  will  be  reached  who  is  so
ill  adapted  for  that  line  of  work  that  it  will  cost  him
in  preparation  all  that  he  will  ever  gain  from  it.
Here  the  supply  of  that  kind  of  labor  will  cease;
and  its  rate  of  wages  will  be  measured  by  the  pro-
ductivity y  as  well  as  by  the  expense^  of  the  marginal
increment.  Those  who  are  able  to  acquire  profi-
ciency in  that  line  of  work  at  a  less  cost  than  that
which  the  marginal  man  must  undergo,  enjoy  a  sur-
plus analogous  to  rent  for  their  personal  qualities.^

The nature of what is usually  termed superior
ability  or  talent  needs  examination. It  may  mean

^This may  be illustrated by  the following diagram. Let the
number  of  laborers  be  measured  along  the  line  OX^  and  the  produc-


tivity  along  the  line  OY.  The  line  EA  will  then  represent  the
declining  productivity,  and  GA  the  increasing  cost,  of  successive
laborers,  in  which  case  the  supply  will  be  measured  by  OF^  the  rate
of  wages  by  OD^  and  the  sum  of  personal  rents  by  GDA.


Wages  1 83

the  capacity  for  exerting  an  absolutely  greater
amount  of  productive  energy,  or  it  may  mean  simply
the  possession  of  a  kind  of  ability  that  is  scarce,  and
because  of  its  scarcity  commands  a  high  price  in  the
market.  The  difference  is  of  some  importance.
Where  two  men  are  engaged  in  entirely  dissimilar
occupations,  it  is  practically  impossible  to  determine
which  exerts  the  greater  amount  of  productive
energy  or  whose  absolute  productivity  is  greater.
If  we  compare  two  bricklayers,  and  find  that  one
can  lay  on  the  average  three  thousand,  and  the
other  only  two  thousand,  bricks  in  a  day,  it  is  quite
safe  to  say  that  the  absolute  productivity  of  the
former  is  the  greater.  But,  if  we  compare  a  brick-
layer with  a  bank  cashier,  we  have  not  the  data  for
a  similar  comparison.  It  is  impossible  to  say  with
certainty  that  the  work  of  the  cashier  is  absolutely
more  productive  than  that  of  the  bricklayer.  The
probabilities  are  that  it  is  not.  If  the  cashier  gets
better  wages  than  the  bricklayer,  it  is  not  due  to
any  absolutely  superior  ability,  but  because  the  kind
of  ability  possessed  by  the  one  is  less  abundant  than
that  possessed  by  the  other.  If  the  jeweller  gets
better  wages  than  the  baker,  it  is  probably  for  the
same  reason  that  an  ounce  of  silver  sells  higher  than
an  ounce  of  bread.  This  is  not  because  the  absolute
utility  of silver is greater,  but because,  owing to


184  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

differences in the  scarcity,  its marginal utility  is
greater.

To  sum  up,  we  conclude  that  the  marginal  pro-
ductivity of  labor  is  the  factor  that  is  present  in
all  cases  in  the  determination  of  wages,  that  the
standard  of  living  and  the  painfulness  of  labor  are
the  efficient  causes  for  the  limitation  of  the  supply
of  labor  in  general,  that  the  marginal  cost  of  acquir-
ing proficiency  in  the  skilled  occupations  is  the
efficient  cause  for  the  limitation  of  the  supply  of
specially  skilled  labor,  and  that  there  is  an  element
of  "rent"  of  personal  ability  as  well  as  of  land.

COLLATERAL  READING

T.  R.  Malthus,  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  Chapter  IV.
Alfred  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  Book  VI,  Chap-
ters III-V.
F.  W.  Taussig,  Wages  and  Capital,  Chapters  IV-V.
J.  B.  Clark,  The  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Chapters  XI-XIV.


CHAPTER  V

RENT

Labor  and  land  are_the_original  or  primary  factors
of  producrinn^  capital  being  a  secondary  factor  pro-
ducedjby -the_pther  two^nd  in^  turn  aiding  them  in
the  work  of  further  production.  One  peculiar  thing
about  land  is  its  quality  of  extension  which  it  pos-
sesses in  greater  degree  than  other  forms  of  wealth.
Under  our  present  laws  of  property  this  gives  its
owners  control  over  certain  productive  forces  and
desirable  objects  which  nature  alone  can  supply  and
which  she  has  chosen  to  scatter  over  such  wide
spaces  that  they  can  only  be  utilized  in  connection
with  considerable  areas  of  the  earth's  surface.  They
include  such  things  as  sunlight  and  heat,  rainfall,
and  even  the  atmosphere  itself,  to  say  nothing  of
mineral  deposits,  soil,  and  scenery.  These  things  all
exist  in  considerable  abundance — some  of  them  in
such  abundance  that  they  could  have  no  value  when
dissociated  from  the  land ;  but  ground  space  is
necessary  in  order  to  utilize  them,  and  ground  space
is  limited  —  so  limited  as  compared  with  the  demand

185


]^


1 86  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

for  it  in  certain  parts  of  the  world  that  vast  sums
are  paid  for  it.  These  productive  forces  are  in
reaUty  parts  of  the  land,  being  mere  appurtenances
of  those  areas  over  which  nature  has  seen  fit  to
scatter  them.

However,  nature  has  not  distributed  them  with
absolute  impartiality  over  the  entire  surface  of  the
earth,  some  parts  being  favored  above  others.  In
every  settled  community,  location  also  becomes  a
factor  of  great  importance  in  determining  the  superi-
ority or  inferiority  of  different  areas  of  land.  The
question  of  the  quality  of  the  land  depends,  there-
fore, upon  a  number  of  factors,  all  of  which  affect
in  some  way  the  value  of  the  product  which  it  will
yield  in  proportion  to  the  cost  of  cultivating  or
utilizing  it.  The  product  may  be  agricultural,  min-
eral, or  manufactured  goods.  Proximity  to  market \
and  cheapness  of  transportation  are  therefore  as
important  as_^i][  or  climate  in  determining  the^/
c[uality  of  the  land.

It  would  be  easy  to  picture  a  community,  and
perhaps  not  so  very  difficult  to  find  one,  in  which
land  is  so  abundant  as  not  to  count  as  a  factor  of
production  at  all,  being  classed  as  free  goods  along
with  air  in  most  places  and  water  in  mid-ocean.  But
very  soon  in  the  development  of  such  a  community
two  things  will  happen  :  first,  the  most  favored  spots


Rent  187

will  be  appropriated,  so  far  as  it  is  known  what  are
the  most  favored  ones,  leaving  the  increasing  popu-
lation access  only  to  the  less  favored  ones ;  second,
in  order  to  provide  for  the  growing  wants  of  the
people,  those  most  favored  spots  will  be  cultivated
beyond  the  point  where  the  law  of  diminishing
returns  begins  to  operate.  Until  this  time  arrives,
land  would  not  count  as  an  economic  factor  at  all,
and  there  would  be  no  occasion  to  economize  in  its
use.  None  of  it  would  command  a  price  so  long  as
there  was  other  land  just  as  good  not  yet  appro-
priated and  to  be  had  for  nothing.

Excepting  such  land  as  is  used  for  parks,  pleasure
grounds,  dwelling  sites,  and  other  similar  purposes,
any  particular  acre  of  land,  like  any  other  factor  of
production,  is  wanted  only  for  what  it  will  add  to
one's  income,  —  that  is,  for  what  it  will  yield  over  and
above  the  cost  of  using  it.  But  the  cost  of  using  it
resolves  itself  into  the  amount  which  the  labor  and
capital  used  in  its  cultivation  could  produce  else-
where. If  there  are  few  other  opportunities  for
employing  labor  and  capital,  and  their  possible  earn-
ings consequently  small,  little  will  be  sacrificed  in
withdrawing  them  from  other  lines  of  work  in  order
to  employ  them  on  the  land  in  question.  Whatever
they  can  produce  on  this  land  over  and  above  that
amount  is  therefore  an  additional income to their


1 88  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

owner,  and  is  due  to  his  use  of  the  land.  But  if
there  are  many  and  excellent .  opportunities  for  the
employment  of  one's  labor  and  capital,  and  their
earnings  consequently  large,  much  will  be  sacrificed
in  withdrawing  them  from  those  other  possible  open-
ings, and  only  the  surplus  above  this  large  amount
which  they  can  produce  on  a  given  piece  of  land
could  count  as  the  earnings  of  the  land,  or  as  the
addition  to  one's  income  which  comes  to  one  through
the  use  of  the  land.  As  already  pointed  out,  the
land  is  wanted  only  because  of  this  surplus.

If  a  certain  individual,  with  a  given  amount  of
labor  and  capital  at  his  disposal,  can  earn  l^iooo
a  year  by  working  for  other  people,  it  will  be
for  the  reason  that  he  and  his  capital  can  add  that
much  to  the  product  of  some  industrial  estabUsh-
ment  over  and  above  what  it  could  produce  without
them.  A  piece  of  land  upon  which  he  with  his
capital  could  produce  a  total  crop  worth  only
^looo  would  be  worth  nothing  to  him,  but  one
upon  which  he  could  produce  a  crop  worth  ;^I200
would  be  worth  approximately  $200  a  year.  If,
however,  conditions  should  change  so  that  he  with
his  capital  could  only  earn  ^800  a  year  elsewhere,
then  the  land  upon  which  he  could  produce  a
crop  worth  $1000  would  be  worth  approximately
;^200 a year to him, while land upon which he


Rent  189

could  produce  $1200  would  be  worth  $400  a  year.
These  are  the  amounts  which  he  would  logically
have  to  attribute  to  his  use  of  the  land  in  question,
the  rest  of  his  gross  income  being  attributable  to
his  labor  and  capital.

Until  the  time  arrives  when  the  best  grade  of
land  is  all  appropriated  and  cultivated  beyond  the
point  of  diminishing  returns,  no  particular  acre  or
parcel  of  land  could  add  anything  to  one's  income
over  and  above  what  one  could  secure  without  it.
Nor  could  it  add  anything  to  the  total  product  of
the  community.  So  long  as  there  is  other  land  of
the  same  grade  still  appropriable,  as  much  could  be
produced  without  any  particular  acre  as  with  it ;  and
so  long  as  the  best  grade  of  land  is  not  cultivated
up  to  that  degree  of  intensity  where  it  begins  to  yield
diminishing  returns,  it  would  subtract  nothing  from
the  total  product  of  the  community  to  have  some  of
the  land  thrown  out  of  cultivation,  and  all  the  labor
and  capital  employed  on  the  remaining  land.  If  any
of  it  were  withdrawn  from  cultivation,  the  labor  and
capital  which  had  cultivated  it  could  either  be  em-
ployed on  some  other  land  already  under  cultivation,
adding  to  the  product  of  this  land  as  much  as  or
more  than  it  had  been  producing  on  the  land  from
which  it  was  removed,  or  it  could  move  over  on  to
another  unappropriated  and  equally  good  piece  of


190  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

land  where  it  could  produce  just  as  much.  The
total  product  of  the  community  would  not  be  af-
fected by  the  use  or  disuse  of  the  land  in  question.

But  when  all  the  best  land  is  appropriated,  and  is
being  cultivated  beyond  the  point  where  diminishing
returns  begin,  each  acre  of  it  becomes  a  matter  of
some  consequence  to  the  community.  If  one  is
withdrawn  from  cultivation,  the  labor  and  capital
which  were  employed  in  its  cultivation  must  then
be  employed  either  on  some  other  land  of  the  same
grade,  increasing  the  intensity  of  its  cultivation  and
securing  a  smaller  product  under  the  law  of  dimin-
ishing returns,  or  on  some  of  the  second  best  land
where  it  can  not  produce  so  much  as  it  had  been
doing  on  the  best  grade.  The  withdrawal  of  the
acre  in  question  would  therefore  reduce  the  amount
which  could  be  produced  in  the  community  by  the
difference  between  what  it  would  yield  and  what
the  same  labor  and  capital  could  produce  elsewhere.
This  would  measure  the  marginal  productivity  of
the  land  of  the  best  grade,  and  the  marginal  product
would  determine  the  amount  which  any  one  would
be  willing  to  pay  for  its  use.

In  the  last  chapter  we  saw  that  the  wages  of  any
particular  kind  of  labor  depend  upon  its  marginal
product,  —  that  is,  upon  the  amount  which  any  given
unit  could  add  to,  or  subtract  from,  the  product  of


Rent  191

the  community  by  beginning  or  stopping  work,  and
that  this  amount  varies  with  the  number  of  such
units  as  compared  with  all  the  other  factors.  The
same  law  appHes  to  the  rent  of  land.  Let  us  for
the  moment  make  the  extreme  assumption  that  all
the  land  in  a  certain  community  is  of  absolutely  the
same  grade,  differences  of  location  being  in  every
case  exactly  compensated  by  differences  of  fertility
or  some  other  advantage,  and  that  there  is  an  indefi-
nite extent  of  it.  Under  such  circumstances  it  would
not  be  necessary  to  cultivate  any  of  it  beyond  the
point  of  diminishing  returns;  rather  than  to  do  so
any  cultivator  would  prefer  to  extend  his  cultivation
over  more  land.  Under  these  conditions  the  mar-
ginal productivity  of  land  would  be  nil.  Any  par-
ticular piece  of  land  could  be  spared  without  loss,
since  the  labor  and  capital  could  find  other  land  just
as  good  upon  which  to  employ  themselves,  and  the
total  product  of  the  community  would  not  suffer  in
the  least.  But  if  the  amount  of  land  were  so  limited
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  cultivate  it  beyond
the  point  of  diminishing  returns  in  order  to  supply
the  demand  for  products,  then  each  acre  would
become  a  matter  of  importance.  Its  withdrawal
from  cultivation  would,  as  already  shown,  drive  the
labor  and  capital  which  had  been  cultivating  it  over
upon  the  remaining  land,  increasing  still  further  the


192  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

intensity  of  its  cultivation  and  reducing  the  amount
which  could  be  produced  by  the  community.  And
the  scarcer  the  land  is,  the  greater  the  resulting  dimi-
nution in  the  total  product  when  any  given  acre  or
parcel  of  land  is  withdrawn.

Referring  again  to  Tables  E  and  F  in  the  last  chap-
ter, let  us  suppose  that  all  the  land  in  the  community
is  of  the  grade  of  farm  A,  and  that  there  is  so  little
of  it  that  two  laborers  have  to  be  employed  on  each
hundred-acre  farm.  There  would  then  be  a  prod-
uct of  900  bushels  on  each  farm,  and  the  marginal
product  of  labor  would  be  400  bushels  per  man.  But
if  one  such  farm  were  withdrawn  from  cultivation,  the
two  laborers  who  had  been  employed  in  cultivating
it  would  have  to  be  employed  on  the  remaining
farms,  probably  distributing  their  work  over  a  con-
siderable number.  Under  these  conditions  they  could
not  add  to  the  product  of  these  remaining  farms
more  than  800  bushels,  —  theoretically  a  fraction
less.  There  would  then  be  a  net  loss  of  something
over  100  bushels  in  the  total  product  of  the  com-
munity. But  if  there  were  so  many  men  or  so  few
farms  that  three  laborers  would  have  to  be  employed
on  each  farm,  the  total  amount  produced  on  each
farm  would  be  1200  bushels,  and  the  marginal  prod-
uct of  labor  on  them  all  would  be  300  bushels  per
man. Then  if  one  farm  were  withdrawn  from  culti-


Rent  193

vation,  these  three  laborers  would  have  to  be  distrib-
uted over  the  other  farms  where  they  would  add  a
fraction  less  than  900  bushels  to  the  amount  which
was  already  being  produced  on  them.  In  this  case  the
loss  of  the  farm  would  cause  the  community  a  net  loss
of  something  over  300  bushels.  Thus,  the  more  labor
there  is  employed  on  each  farm,  and  the  lower  its
marginal  productivity,  the  greater  the  net  loss  entailed
by  the  withdrawal  of  any  farm  from  cultivation.

It  has  sometimes  been  stated  that  rent  is  due  to
differences  in  the  productivity  of  different  areas  of
land.^  This,  however,  is  an  unwarranted  interpreta-
tion of  the  doctrine  of  rent  as  developed  by  Anderson
and  Ricardo,  who  did  indeed  assume,  and  correctly,
that  in  any  real  community  there  are  considerable
differences  in  the  productivity  of  the  land  under
actual  cultivation,  and  it  was  shown  that  these  differ-
ences had  something  to  do  in  determining  the  amount
of  rent.  The  rent  of  a  given  piece  of  land,  for  exam-
ple, could  not  normally  exceed  the  difference  between
the  amount  which  could  be  produced  upon  it  and  the
amount  which  the  same  labor  and  capital  could  pro-
duce on  the  poorest  land  in  cultivation,  or  upon  land
so  poor  that  its  use  could  be  had  for  nothing.  But  it
does  not  follow  from  this  that  rent  is  due  to  these

1  Walker's  "  Political  Economy,  Advanced  Course,"  3d  Ed.,  N.Y,
1888,  p.  197.
o


194  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

differences  unless  it  is  merely  meant  that  however
abundant  and  fertile  the  land  in  any  community  may
be,  if  there  are  certain  areas  superior  to  the  rest  and
so  limited  in  extent  as  not  to  fully  satisfy  the  demand
for  them,  rent  will  be  paid  for  their  use.  It  is  mani-
festly not  true  that  rent  is  due  to  these  differences  if
it  is  meant  that  rent  would  not  exist  if  there  were  no
differences,  —  that  is,  if  land  were  all  of  the  same
grade.  As  shown  above,  if  such  land  existed  in  such
limited  quantities  that,  in  order  to  supply  the  demand
for  goods,  it  was  necessary  to  cultivate  it  beyond  the
point  of  diminishing  returns,  it  would  all  command
a  rent.  It  would,  therefore,  be  more  accurate  to  say
that  rent  is  due  to  the  scarcity  of  land  of  the  better
grades,  for  this  will  give  rise  to  rent  whether  there
happen  to  be  inferior  grades  or  not.

But  if  there  be  inferior  grades  not  yet  in  cultiva-
tion, some  of  them  good  enough  to  be  worth  cultivat-
ing if  there  is  only  a  slight  increase  in  the  demand
for  products,  or  in  the  labor  and  capital  to  be  em-
ployed, such  an  increase  would  bring  some  of  these
inferior  grades  into  use  and  reduce  the  pressure  upon
the  better  grades.  This  will  reduce  the  rent  of  the
better  grades  below  what  it  would  otherwise  be.
Looked  at  merely  from  the  standpoint  of  the  law  of
demand  and  supply,  the  inferior  lands  would  have  to
be  regarded  as  partial  substitutes  for  the  better  lands,


Rent  195

helping  to  satisfy  the  same  demand,  and  therefore  to
relieve  the  scarcity  of  land.

Let  the  community  previously  assumed  be  regarded
as  an  island  community  with  no  available  land  outside,
and  all  the  land  within  the  island  of  absolutely  the
same  grade.  As  population  increases,  the  land  must
be  more  and  more  intensively  cultivated  and,  in  the
absence  of  new  improvements  in  the  arts  of  pro-
duction, the  marginal  productivity  of  labor  must  fall
lower  and  lower.  This,  as  already  shown,  will  make
the  marginal  productivity  of  land  rise  higher  and
higher.  But  if  a  new  continent  should  be  discovered
within  available  distance,  containing  lands  of  various
grades,  some  of  them  only  a  little  inferior,  all  things
considered,  to  that  of  the  island,  a  part  of  the  increas-
ing labor  supply  could  at  once  be  transferred  to  the
new  lands,  and  a  part  of  the  subsistence  of  the  popu-
lation be  derived  from  them.  This  would  reduce  the
intensity  of  cultivation  of  the  island,  raise  the  mar-
ginal product  of  labor  there,  or  at  least  check  its
decline,  and  reduce  the  marginal  productivity  of  the
land.  In  this  sense  the  existence  of  differences  in
the  productivity  of  different  areas  of  land,  instead  of
being  a  cause  of  rent,  really  helps  to  reduce  rent,  or
at  least  to  prevent  its  rise.

Referring  again  to  Tables  E  and  F  of  the  preceding
chapter :  If  the  land  were  all  of  the  same  grade  as


196  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

farm  A,  and  there  were  three  laborers  for  every  such
farm,  the  marginal  product  of  labor  would  be  300
bushels  per  man,  and  that  of  land  300  bushels  per
farm.  But  if  there  were  an  indefinite  amount  of  ad-
ditional land  of  the  grade  of  farm  B,  one  man  from
each  A  farm  would  transfer  his  labor  to  a  B  farm,
raising  the  marginal  productivity  of  labor  to  400
bushels  per  man,  and  lowering  that  of  land  to  ICX)
bushels  for  each  A  farm,  while  the  B  farms  would
not  have  any  marginal  utility  at  all.  But  it  is  pos-
sible to  assume  that  a  given  community  has  a  fixed
number  of  acres  whether  they  are  of  the  same  grade
or  of  different  grades.  In  this  case,  differences  in
the  productivity  of  the  land  would  make  the  marginal
productivity  of  labor  lower  and  that  of  the  better
grades  of  land  higher  than  they  would  be  if  it  were
all  of  the  best  grade.  This,  also,  may  be  illustrated  by
Tables  E  and  F.  If  the  land  were  all  of  the  A  grade,
and  if  there  were  two  laborers  for  every  such  farm,
the  marginal  product  of  labor  would  be  400  bushels,
and  that  of  land  100  bushels  per  farm.  But  if,  with
the  same  number  of  farms,  half  of  them  were  of  the
B  grade,  the  second  man  on  each  B  farm  might  con-
tinue in  the  same  place,  in  which  case  his  marginal
product  would  be  only  300  bushels,  or  he  might  add
himself  as  a  third  man  to  one  of  the  A  farms,  in
which  case  also  his  marginal  product  would  be  only


Rent  197

300  bushels.  This  would  then  set  the  rate  for  all  the
laborers,  and  this,  in  turn,  would  increase  the  mar-
ginal product  of  the  A  land  to  300  bushels  per  farm.
Tables  E  and  F  were  constructed  on  the  assump-
tion that  varying  quantities  of  labor  are  employed
on  a  fixed  quantity  of  land.  It  is  quite  as  easy  to
vary  the  proportion  between  the  two  factors  by
assuming  a  fixed  quantity  of  labor  with  varying  quan-
tities of  land.  Though  in  actual  life  it  is  not  so  easy
to  increase  or  decrease  the  amount  of  land  in  the
community  as  it  is  the  amount  of  labor  or  capital,
yet  in  any  industrial  establishment,  or  in  any  industry
as  a  whole,  it  is  quite  as  easy.  Moreover,  in  the
community  as  a  whole  the  amount  of  land  in  actual
use  varies  slightly  from  time  to  time  by  reason  of  the
fact  that  certain  areas  are  withdrawn  from  cultivation
at  times,  and  again  restored  to  cultivation.  These
variations  are  sufficient  to  enable  the  community  to
test  the  marginal  productivity  of  the  land.  By  con-
structing a  table  on  the  assumption  that  a  fixed  quan-
tity of  labor  is  employed  on  varying  amounts  of  land,
we  can  illustrate  the  method  of  finding  the  marginal
productivity  of  land  as  that  of  labor  was  found  in
the  preceding  chapter.  The  wages  of  labor  can  then
be  determined  by  a  method  precisely  similar  to  that
by  which  rent  was  determined  before,  —  that  is,  by
subtracting  the  total  rent  from  the  total  product. This


198


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


would  be  a  reversal  of  the  method  of  Table  F,  and
ought  to  give  corresponding  results  if  the  land  and
labor  are  of  the  same  qualities  as  were  assumed  be-
fore. Table  G  is  an  attempt  in  this  direction,  and
it  is,  like  Table  F,  derived  from  Table  E ;  though  it
is,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  confined  to  the  one  grade
of  land  represented  by  farm  A.

''table  G

Total  Product  and  Marginal  Product  of  Varying  Numbers  of
Acres  which  may  be  cultivated  by  Five  Men,  reproducing
THE  Proportions  between  Labor  and  Land  which  were
given  for  Farm  A  in  Table  E.


-o

%

s

V

2  x:

c<

1

1
1

SI

Number  of  bushels  subt
from  the  product  by  eac
decrease  of  land

1

1

0.

"if!
e
■g)
«

1

1
1

1
I
1

500

2500

250

2250

250

250

I

250

2000

400

i66i

2000

831

250

3

500

1500

300

125

1750

41!

250

6

750

1000

200

100

1500

25

250

10

1000

500

100

Assuming  a  fixed  number  of  five  laborers,  this
table  begins  with  500  acres  of  land  of  the  grade  of
farm  A. This  reproduces  the  proportion  between


Rent  199

labor  and  land  with  which  Table  E  began.  Leaving
out  of  account  possible  differences  in  the  economy
of  large-scale  production,  five  men  on  500  acres
ought  to  produce  five  times  as  much  as  one  man  on
100  acres.  Accordingly,  the  product  of  this  larger
combination  is  placed  at  2500  bushels.  Capital  is
supposed,  as  in  the  former  case,  to  vary  with  the  land,
or  to  be  a  part  of  the  farm,  and  it  may  therefore  be
left  out  of  account.  Changing  the  amount  of  land
to  250  acres  reproduces  the  proportion  between  labor
and  land  which  we  had  in  the  former  table  when  two
men  cultivated  icx)  acres  (5  1250 : :  2  :  icx)),  and  ought
to  produce  proportionally  more,  or  2250  bushels
(2  :  900 : :  5  :  2250).  Since  five  men  on  500  acres  pro-
duced 25CXD  bushels,  and  the  same  men  on  250  acres
produced  2250  bushels,  the  subtraction  of  250  acres
reduced  the  product  by  the  amount  of  250  bushels.
This  is  the  amount  which  would  have  to  be  attributed
to  the  250  acres,  and  it  would  approximately  deter-
mine the  amount  which  the  five  men  could  afford  to
pay  for  that  amount  of  land,  making  a  rental  of  one
bushel  per  acre.  Since  the  land  is  all  of  the  same
grade,  and  one  acre  is  as  good  as  another,  this  is  the
amount  per  acre  which  they  would  pay  for  the  re-
maining 250  acres.  Their  total  rent  will  therefore  be
250  bushels,  leaving  a  total  sum  for  wages  of  2000
bushels,  or  400  bushels  per  man.


200  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Again,  by  further  reducing  the  number  of  acres  to
i66J,  we  reproduce  the  proportion  between  labor  and
land  which  we  had  in  the  former  table  when  three
men  worked  on  lOO  acres  (5  :  i66| : :  3  :  100).  Since
three  men  on  100  acres  produced  1200  bushels,  five
men  on  166 J  acres  ought  to  produce  2000  bushels
(3  :  1200: :  5  :  2000).  In  this  case  the  further  reduc-
tion of  83^^  in  the  number  of  acres  would  cause  a  fur-
ther reduction  of  250  in  the  number  of  bushels,  or  three
bushels  per  acre.  This  is  the  amount  per  acre  which
the  five  laborers  could  afford  to  pay  rather  than  to
have  their  acreage  cut  down,  or  to  secure  a  larger
acreage  after  it  was  cut  down.  This  would  also  fix  for
the  time  the  rent  of  the  remaining  i66|  acres,  making
a  total  rent  of  500  bushels,  and  leaving  a  total  of  1500
bushels  for  wages,  or  300  bushels  per  man.  And  so
the  table  proceeds  until  it  ends,  as  did  Tables  E  and
F,  with  five  men  on  100  acres  producing  a  total  crop
of  1500  bushels,  each  reduction  in  the  number  of
acres  bringing  about  a  reduction  in  the  amount  pro-
duced. By  attributing  the  reduction  in  the  product
in  each  case  to  the  reduction  in  the  amount  of  land,
we  can  determine  the  virtual  product  of  the  land  (or
the  marginal  product  as  economists  are  wont  to  call
it)  by  what  logicians  call  the  "method  of  differ-
ence," and  wages  by  a  variety  of  the  "  method  of
agreement." In  Table  F  wages  were  found  by  the


Rent  20 I

"method  of  difference"  and  rent  by  the  ** method
of  agreement."  ^

Tables  F  and  G  illustrate  two  methods  of  deter-
mining the  share  of  any  factor  in  distribution.  One
is  to  find  its  marginal  product  by  varying  its  amount
and  attributing  the  resulting  variation  in  the  amount
of  the  product  to  the  variation  in  the  factor  in  ques-
tion, there  being  every  reason  for  believing  that  this
will  measure  the  sum  which  can  profitably  be  paid
for  that  amount  of  the  factor  which  is  added  or  sub-
tracted. The  other  is  to  first  find  the  marginal  pro-
ductivity of  the  other  factors  and  to  determine  from
this  their  total  earnings.  Whatever  surplus  remains
after  subtracting  the  total  earnings  of  the  other
factors  from  the  total  product  would  then  be  the
share  of  the  factor  in  question.  It  has,  however,
been  questioned  whether  these  two  methods  would
give  the  same  result ;  ^  but  a  comparison  of  these  two
tables,  or  of  any  others  which  fairly  represent  the
law  of  diminishing  returns,  ought  to  effectually  dis-
pose of this  question,  for  it  will  be  found  that  the

1  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill,  «  System  of  Logic,"  Book  III,  Ch.  VIII.

2  E.g.,  Mr.  R.  S.  Padan,  in  an  article  entitled  "J.  B.  Qark's  For-
mulae of  Wages  and  Interest,"  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy  for
March,  1901,  claimed  that  no  such  harmony  between  the  two  methods
had  been  shown  to  exist.  Professor  Clark,  however,  relied  upon  dia-
grams rather  than  tables,  and  the  harmony  is  not  so  demonstrable  by
that  method.


202  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

results  are  exactly  the  same  in  either  case,  whether
applied  to  the  determination  of  one  share  or  the
other.

Both  tables  serve  to  illustrate  expUcitly  the  work-
ing of  the  law  of  joint  demand  as  applied  to  land
and  labor.  They  show  with  some  degree  of  definite-
ness  how  an  increase  in  the  supply  of  one  factor
tends,  other  things  equal,  to  increase  the  demand
for,  and  the  price  of,  the  other  factor  or  factors
which  cooperate  with  it  in  production.  The  demand
for  any  factor  being  based  upon  its  marginal  product,
anything  which  increases  that  marginal  product  will
increase  the  demand  for  it.  This  is  a  law  which
applies  to  capital  also,  as  well  as  to  land  and  labor.

The  proposition  that  rent  is  due  to  the  productiv-
ity of  land  does  not  by  any  means  carry  with  it  the
proposition  that  it  is  due  to  the  productivity  of  land-
owners. Their  income,  consisting  as  it  does  of  the
rent  of  land,  may,  and  sometimes  does,  come  to
them  without  their  having  performed  any  useful
function  in  industry  or  in  society  at  large.  They
may,  however,  and  usually  do,  contribute  something
useful  by  which  their  incomes  are  increased  above
the  mere  rent  of  their  land.  They  may,  for  example,
cultivate  their  own  land  or  do  some  other  useful  work,
such  as  the  management  of  their  estates,  or  they  may
expend labor  and  capital  in placing improvements


Rent  203

upon  their  land,  in  either  of  which  cases  they  earn
something  in  addition  to  the  rent  of  their  land,
though  it  may  come  to  them  in  a  form  which  is  in-
distinguishable from  rent.  In  so  far  as  they  are
merely  receivers  of  rent,  landowners  are  mere  para-
sites, receiving  a  share  of  the  product  of  the  industry
of  others  and  lending  no  aid  in  return,  unless  per-
mitting their  land  to  be  used  can  be  considered  as
lending  aid  in  the  work  of  production.  But  inasmuch
as  they  did  not  create  the  land,  but  were  permitted
to  become  its  owners  by  the  laws  of  society,  they  can
hardly  be  regarded  as  contributing  anything  to  society
when  they  in  turn  permit  their  land  to  be  used.

However,  the  function  of  the  landowner  is  not
necessarily  a  barren  one  except  when  he  abuses
the  power  placed  in  his  hands  or  fails  to  meet  the
responsibility  which  such  power  places  upon  him.
Those  who  use  land  which  they  do  not  own  are
notoriously  wasteful  of  its  resources,  having  a  view
to  their  immediate  gain  rather  than  the  permanent
value  of  the  land,  and  they  have  to  be  restrained
from  ruining  the  land  by  the  oversight  of  some
one  who  has  a  deeper  interest,  or  by  stipulations
in  the  contract  under  which  they  are  allowed  to
use  it.  Some  one  must  take  the  responsibility  of
guarding  against  this  tendency  tg. .exploit  the  land,
and  there  are  but  two  ways  of  securing  this. One


204  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

vis  for  the  government  to  keep  control  of  the  land
^  and  fix  the  rules  for  its  utilization,  regulating  by
laws  that  are  somewhat  general  in  character  such
matters  as  the  rotation  of  crops  and  the  manuring
of  the  land,  in  the  case  of  agricultural  land,  and
the  work  of  excavation  and  building,  in  the  cas_e_of
city  land.  The  other  is  to  turn  the  land  over  to
/  private  owners,  trusting  that  their  self-interest  and
their  regard  for  the  welfare  of  their  families  will
prompt  them  to  look  out  for  the  preservation  of
the  energies  of  the  soil.  .  On  the  whole,  the_latter_
method  has  proved  to  be  the  more  successful,  es-
pecially in  the  case  of  agricultural  land.  The
ownership  of  land  has  a  wonderfully  stimulating
effect  upon  the  economic  virtues  of  thrift  and  fore-
sight. "The  magic  of  property  turns  sand  into
gold."

There  are  other  results,  some  good  and  some
bad,  which  follow  from  a  system  of  private  prop-
erty in  land,  the  discussion  of  which  would  take  us
too  far  into  the  fields  of  politics  and  sociology.
It  may  be  mentioned,  however,  that  such  a  system
undoubtedly  gives  a  greater  stability  to  society  than
could  be  secured  without  it,  as  landowners  are  a
proverbially  conservative  class.  At  the  same  time
it  gives  greater  flexibility  and  adaptability  in  the
management of the land than could be secured


Rent  205

through  any  governmental  machinery  which  would
adequately  prevent  the  wasteful  exploitation  of  the
land.  Again,  it  is  probable  that  any  country  will
be  more  stubbornly  defended  against  foreign  in-
vasion by  a  population  made  up  largely  of  land-
owners than  by  any  other  kind  of  a  population,
though  there  may  be  some  doubt  about  this,  and  it
is  growing  of  less  importance  even  if  true.  Finally,
the  system  of  private  ownership  helps  to  develop  a
leisure  class  which  may  be  a  blessing  or  a  curse,
according  to  the  way  in  which  it  chooses  to  spend
its  leisure.  It  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  that
most  of  the  arts  and  graces  of  civilization,  as  well
as  most  of  its  vices,  have  grown  up  because  there
have  been  some  who  had  time  to  think  about
other  things  than  the  earning  of  their  daily  bread.
We  are  for  the  present  concerned  primarily
with  the  nature  of  rent,  why  it  accrues,  and  the
laws  by  which  its  amount  is  determined.  As  to|  \
the  first  question,  we  have  found  that  rent  is  that  \ )
income  which  is  derived  from  the  ownership  of
an  original  and  natural  agent  of  production ;  as  to
the second,  that  it  accrues because that agent  is

scarce; and as to  the  third,  that the amount of  1

. ... - |i

rent  is  determined by  the  joint operation of the  |\
productiveness  and  the scarcity  of land, being in
each individual case determined by the amount


iJMM/r  J.15


2o6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

which  the  use  of  the  particular  piece  of  land  in
question  adds  to  the  product  which  could  be
secured  without  it,  and  this  amount  itself  being
determined  by  the  amount  of  land  of  that  grade  as
compared  with  all  the  other  factors  with  which  it  co-
operates in  the  work  of  production,  —  in  other  words,
by  the  marginal  productivity  of  that  grade  of  land.
This  is  only  another  way  of  stating  the  classic  law
of  rent,  viz.,  that  the  rent  of  any  given  piece  of  land
is  what  it  will  produce  over  and  above  what  could
be  produced  on  the  poorest  land  in  cultivation  by
the  same  amount  of  labor  and  capital ;  for  this  differ-
ence is  one  way  of  measuring  the  amount  which  the
piece  of  land  in  question  adds  to  the  product  of  the
community  over  and  above  what  could  be  produced
without  it.

It  has  sometimes  been  argued  that  rent  does  not
enter  into  the  price  of  products,  on  the  ground  that  if
rents  were  remitted  by  landlords,  the  tenants  would
simply  pocket  the  amounts  and  make  no  reduction  in
the  price  of  their  products  on  their  wares.  The  price
of  goods  being  determined  by  demand  and*  supply,
the  remission  of  rents  would  make  no  difference  in
either  factor.  It  would  not  reduce  the  number  of
consumers,  nor  the  strength  of  their  desires,  nor  the
length  of  their  purses  on  the  average.  Nor  would  it
increase  the amount  of land,  labor,  or capital by


Rent  207

which  the  supply  of  products  could  be  increased,
nor  would  it  cause  any  of  these  factors  to  work  any
harder.  But  this  does  not  constitute  a  valid  distinc-
tion between  rent  and  the  other  shares  in  distribution
for  the  reason  that  all  that  was  said  about  the  re-
sults, or  absence  of  results,  of  a  remission  of  rents,
could  be  repeated  concerning  a  remission  of  wages
by  the  laborers  or  of  interest  by  the  capitalists.
In  either  case  the  employers  would  simply  pocket
their  gains  and  go  on  selling  as  before,  at  what-
ever the  market  would  stand.  The  market  as  a
whole  would  not  be  affected  in  this  case  any  more
than  in  the  case  of  the  remission  of  rent,  though
there  would  doubtless  be  a  change  in  the  relative
values  of  different  commodities  because  of  changes
in  the  purchasing  power  of  different  classes  of  con-
sumers. The  remission  of  wages  would  not  increase
the  amount  of  labor  to  be  had,  and  consequently
would  not  increase the supply of products.

There  is,  however,  a  sense  in  which  wages  do
enter  into  the  price  of  products  and  in  which  rent
does  not.  Laborers  have  to  be  persuaded  to  work
by  some  offer  of  advantage  to  themselves,  but  land
does  not.  It  is  true  that  landlords  may  have  to  be
persuaded,  but  there  would  be  land  if  there  were
no  landowners  whereas  there  would  be  no  labor  if
there  were  no  laborers. Labor  is  inseparable  from


2o8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

laborers,  but  land  is  separable  from  landowners.
Therefore  the  three  following  propositions  may  be
laid  down  respecting  labor,  i.  In  order  that  there
may  be  production  there  must  be  labor.  2.  In  order
^that  there  may  be  labor  there  must  be  wages  to^  per-
suade men  to  work,  and  to  enable  them  to  do  so,
otherwise  there  will  be  no  labor  and  no  production.
3.  Therefore  wages  are  necessary  in  order  to  secure
the  production  of  goods,  —  in  other  words,  they  are  a
necessary  part  of  the  cost  of  production.  Since  the
cost  of  production  is  an  important  factor  in  determin-
ing the  supply  of  products,  and  the  supply  is  one  of
the  factors  in  determining  their  price,  it  is  seen  that
wages  have  an  important  and  necessary  part  in  the
price-making  process.

Obviously  no  such  propositions  as  the  second  and
third  can  be  made  respecting  rent.  It  is  not  neces-
sary that  any  one  should  receive  rent  in  order  that
there  may  be  land,  and  rent  is  not  therefore  necessary
in  order  that  there  may  be  production.  Rent  is
wholly  a  result  of  production,  and  not  a  cause  also,
whereas  wages  are  a  cause  as  well  as  a  result.  They
are  a  cause  in  the  sense  that  unlike  rent  they  are  a
means  of  securing  one  of  the  conditions  of  produc-
tion, and  they  are,  like  rent,  a  result  in  the  sense  that
they  can  be  paid  only  on  condition  that  there  is  pro-
duction. (  Therefore  rent  is not, as wages are, a


Rent  109

necessary  jhare  in  the  cost  of  production.!  Under  a
system  which  forbade  any  one  to  receive  an  individ-
ual reward  for  working  there  would  be  no  work  done,
or  at  least  only  so  much  as  could  be  done  under  the
form  of  play  ;  but,  under  a  system  which  forbade  any
one  to  receive  an  individual  reward  for  the  use  of
land,  there  would  be  just  as  much  land  as  now,  bar-
ring a  few  relatively  insignificant  cases  where  land  is,
in  a  certain  sense,  *'  made."  Even  taking  account
of  such  cases,  the  difference  of  degree  is  so  great
between  rent  and  wages  as  to  make  the  two  cases
non-comparable.

A  public  policy  which  forbade  wages,  or  appropri-
ated them  for  public  purposes,  would  be  suicidal  in
that  it  would  at  once  stop  production,  whereas  a
policy  which  would  appropriate  rents  for  public  pur-
poses would  not  be  suicidal  in  the  same  sense  because,
if  only  pure  economic  rent  were  taken,  leaving
untouched  all  that  could  be  attributed  to  labor,
foresight,  or  enterprise,  it  would  not  affect  produc-
tion at  all,  though  it  might  conceivably  bring  other
undesirable  results.  This  is,  after  all,  the  most
important  reason  for  distinguishing  rent  from  other
forms  of  income.  A  purely  academic  discussion
might  safely  ignore  such  distinctions  as  exist  and
treat  rent  as  it  chose  ;  but  however  rigidly  analytical,
or  even  mathematical,  our  study  of  economics  may


2IO  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

become,  we  must  not  forget  that  such  studies  are  of
value  only  in  so  far  as  they  throw  Hght  upon  some
question  of  public  policy.  The  distinction  just  men-
tioned will  throw  light  on  certain  important  questions
connected  with  taxation.

The  rent  of  such  lands  as  are  used  for  pleasure
grounds  and  dwelling  sites  requires  no  such  elabo-
rate  analysis  as  has  been  given  to  that  of  lands
used  for  purposes  of  production.  The  former  class
does  not  differ,  so  far  as  the  laws  of  value  are
concerned,  from  ordinary  articles  of  consumption.
They  furnish  their  utilities  directly,  and  the  law  of
marginal  utility,  as  outlined  in  the  first  chapter,  de-
termines their  value.  That  which  is  paid  for  their
use  is  merely  the  price  of  the  flow  of  utilities  which
they  furnish  to  their  users,  and  these  utilities  decline
as  they  increase  in  abundance  because  of  the  rela-
tive satiation  of  the  wants  which  they  gratify.
Therefore  we  may  pass  such  lands  by  with  the
remark  that  they  and  their  utilities  come  under  the
ordinary  laws  of  value  and  price  which  was  applied
to  other  consumers'  goods  in  the  first  chapter.

The  factors  which  determine  the  supply  of  land
are  comparatively  simple,  and  require  no  such  elabo-
rate explanation  as  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  both
labor  and  capital.  Nature  has  fixed  for  any  one
generation  of men the land supply  of the  earth.


Rent  211

and  they  can  do  very  little  to  increase  or  decrease
it.  Geological  changes  which  affect  the  land  sur-
face go  on  so  slowly  as  compared  with  the  fleeting
life  of  man  that  he  is  compelled  to  regard  them
as  non-existent  from  the  standpoint  of  his  present
economy.  But  any  given  population  can  make  a
larger  section  of  the  earth's  surface  available  for
its  own  uses.  The  people  may  scatter  themselves
over  a  wider  area,  or  they  may  construct  transpor-
tation systems  and  lines  of  communication  which
will  enable  them  to  gather  subsistence  from  a  wider
area,  confining  themselves  to  those  occupations
which  require  less  space.  Both  methods,  however,
are  likely  to  be  at  the  expense  of  some  other  popu-
lation or  race,  and  neither  is  likely  to  prove  an
effective  method  of  increasing  the  world's  supply
of  land.  Again,  new  methods  may  be  found  by
which  space  may  be  economized  in  the  way  of
intensive  farming  and  the  construction  of  taller
buildings;  but  these  are  methods  of  decreasing  the
demand  for  land  rather  than  of  increasing  its  sup-
ply. Finally,  certain  small  areas  may  be  reclaimed
from  the  sea,  the  swamp,  or  the  desert,  and  these
may  be  regarded  as  practical  additions  to  the  land
supply ;  but  these  additions  are  so  small  as  not
to  affect  the  market  for  land  to  any  appreciable
extent outside  of such  countries as  Holland.  ;  We


212  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

may  conclude,  therefore,  that  land  is  a  factor
whose  supply  is  practically  fixed  by  nature  rather
than  by  human  effort.

COLLATERAL READING

David  Ricardo,  Political  Economy,  Chapters  II-III.

Alfred  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  Book  VI,  Chap-
ters IX-X.

J.  H.  Hollander,  The  Concept  of  Marginal  Rent,  Quarterly
Journal  of  Eco?tomics,  Vol.  IX,  p.  175  et  seq.

F.  A.  Fetter,  The  Passing  of  the  Old  Rent  Concept,  Quarterly
Journal  of  Economics^  May,  1901.


CHAPTER  VI

INTEREST

We  now  come  to  the  most  difficult  and  elusive
problem  in  distribution,  namely,  that  of  the  nature
and  cause  of  interest,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary
to  proceed  slowly  with  our  analysis.  JWe  may
begin  by  defining^  interest  as  the  income  which
capital  returns  to  its  owner  whether  he  lends  it  or
employs  it  himself  in  his  own  business.  )  There  are
three  forms  in  which  this  income  may  be  returned.
In  the  first  place,  it  may  come  as  payment  for  the
loan  of  a  general  fund  of  wealth.  Such  a  loan
usually  takes  the  form  of  money  or  some  substi-
tute for  money,  such  as  a  credit  instrument.  In
either  case  the  borrower  exchanges  the  thing  which
is  technically  borrowed  for  the  other  goods  which
were  the  real  objects  of  his  borrowing.  From  his
point  of  view,  money  fulfils  the  character  which
Aristotle  ascribed  to  it,  —  that  of  serving  merely  as
a  claim  upon  society  for  a  share  of  the  general  fund
of  wealth  in  its  possession.  In  the  second  place,
the  capitalist's  income  may  be  received  for  the  loan

213


214  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

of  certain  specific  pieces  of  capital  such  as  build-
ings and  machinery ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  itjmay
be  secured  from  the  use  of  capital<.Jn  .his_own
business.

In  popular  language,  only  the  first  form  of  the
capitalist's  income  is  invariably  called  interest.  The
second  is  called  either  rent  or  interest,  and  the  third
either  profits  or  interest.  But  since  they  are  all  alike
in  being  derived  from  the  ownership  of  capital,  econo-
mists have  generally  chosen  to  call  them  all  by  one
name,  and  have  chosen  interest  as  that  name,  re-
serving the  word  "rent"  for  the  income  derived  from
the  ownership  of  land,  and  profits  for  an  income
which  has  been  variously  described,  but  which  usu-
ally has  some  connection  with  the  peculiar  function
of  the  independent  business  man  himself  rather  than
with  that  of  his  land  or  capital.

But  if  we  are  to  extend  the  definition  of  interest  in
this  way,  care  must  be  taken  not  to  include  too  much.
In  the  case  of  a  loan  of  money,  or  of  a  general  fund
of  capital,  only  the  excess  paid  back  to  the  lender
over  and  above  the  amount  which  was  borrowed  is
called  interest.  In  other  words,  interest  is  the
amQiuit  which  the  owner  receives  in  excess  of  the-
sum  necessary  to  preserve  the  supply  of  his  capital
intact.  In  the  case  of  a  loan  of  money,  this  is  made
perfectly  clear  by  the  customs  of  the  market  which


Interest  215

name  the  one  part  interest  and  the  other  part  princi-
pal. But  in  the  case  of  a  loan  of  specific  forms  of
capital,  and  in  that  of  capital  which  is  used  by  its
owner,  no  such  distinction  is  made.  The  owner  gets
his  income  in  an  undifferentiated  sum,  and  he  must
use  his  own  discretion  about  keeping  up  repairs  or
otherwise  preserving  the  supply  of  his  capital  from
exhaustion.  Yet,  logically,  only  the  excess  of  his
gross  income  over  and  above  the  amount  necessary
for  that  purpose  can  strictly  be  called  interest.  The
gross  income  in  such  cases  resembles  somewhat  the
royalty  which  is  paid  for  the  privilege  of  working  a
mine,  a  part  of  which  is  to  compensate  for  the  de-
terioration of  the  mine  through  the  exhaustion  of  the
mineral,  and  only  the  remaining  part  being  rightly
called  either  rent  or  interest,  though,  of  course,  the
value  of  the  mine  cannot  be  preserved  intact,  and
the  owner  must  use  that  which  he  receives  from  it
by  purchasing  other  productive  wealth  if  he  is  to  pre-
serve the  amoimt  of  his  wealth  intact.

Since  interest  exists  only  when  the  gross  income
from  capital  is  more  than  sufficient  to  replace  it
or  to  keep  its  supply  intact,  a  complete  explanation
of  the  interest  problem  must  therefore  answer  two
distinct  questions :  first.  Why  does  capital  return  an
income  to  its  owner }  and  second,  Why  is  this  income
more  than  sufficient  to  keep  the  supply  of  capital  in-


ai6  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

tact,  or  to  replace  it  when  it  is  worn  out  or  otherwise
passes  from  the  possession  of  its  owner  ?  The  latter
is  the  true  interest  problem,  but  it  cannot  possibly
be  answered  without  first  answering  the  former.  It
would  not  be  very  inaccurate  to  say  that  capital
earns  two  sums  for  its  owner:  first,  a  sum_for  re-
jplacing  itself,  and  second,  a  further  sum  as  an  extra
(reward  for  the  capitalist.  Both  sums  need  to  be
accounted  for,  but  the  second  is  the  one  in  which
thej)roblem  of  interest  finally  centres.

First,  Why  does  capital  earn  an  income  of  any
kind  for  its  owner?

That  capital  is  productive  has  often  been  ques-
tioned, but  no  one  would  deny  that  tools  and  other
materials  of  production  are  useful;  yet  these  two
propositions  mean  exactly  the  same  when  correctly
understood.  Capital  consists  primarily  of  tools  and
other  materials  of  production,  and  such  things  are
useful  only  in  so  far  as  they  add  something  to  the
product  of  the  community.  Find  out  how  much  can
j  be  produced  without  any  particular  tool  or  machine,
and  then  how  much  can  be  produced  with  it,  and  in
the  difference  you  have  the  measure  of  its  produc-
tiveness. This  is  also  the  only  measure  of  its  useful-
ness, since  it  is  useful  only  in  production.  Moreover,
»this  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  productiveness  of
labor  or  any  other  factor  can  be  determined.


Interest  lij

It  will  be  readily  understood  that  this  is  quite  dif-
ferent from  saying  that  the  productiveness  of  labor
in  general,  or  of  capital  in  general,  can  be  determined
by  withdrawing  all  labor  or  all  capital  from  industry,
and  then  attributing  the  diminution  in  the  product
entirely  to  the  factor  which  was  withdrawn.  As
pointed  out  many  times  already,  the  market  does  not
deal  with  things  in  general,  but  with  specific  units
of  specific  commodities  or  agents  of  production.
Ignorance  of  this  elementary  fact  is  responsible  for
a  great  deal  of  faulty  reasoning  in  the  discussion  of
some  of  the  problems  of  distribution.  To  withdraw
all  labor  from  industry  would,  of  course,  destroy
the  whole  product.  This  is  made  the  basis  of  the
claim  that  labor  alone  is  productive.  It  is  argued
that  if  there  were  no  labor,  there  would  be  no  prod-
uct, and  that  capital  is  absolutely  barren  except
when  directed  by  labor.  If  this  proves  that  labor  is
the  creator  of  the  whole  product,  it  can  be  proved  by
the  same  method  that  land  is  the  creator  of  the
whole  product ;  for  if  there  were  no  land,  there  would
be  no  product,  nor  any  labor  either  for  that  matter.
Similarly,  if  there  were  no  capital,  there  would  be
very  little  product.  Destroy  all  the  tools  and  other
instruments  of  production,  and  the  product  of  indus-
try during  the  next  year  would  be  exceedingly  small.
But  no  one  would  claim  that  the  whole  amount  by


21 8  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

which  the  product  was  diminished  was  the  product  of
capital  alone,  and  that  only  the  small  amount  which
could  be  produced  without  any  capital  was  the  prod-
uct of  land  and  labor.  Such  an  opinion  would,
however,  be  quite  as  intelligent  as  the  claim  that
labor  alone  is  productive.

To  be  sure,  not  all  capital  consists  of  tools,  nor
even  of  instruments  of  production.  Some  of  it
consists  of  consumers'  goods,  which  are  loaned,
rented,  or  hired,  and  from  which  the  owner  de-
rives an  income.  Nevertheless,  the  sweeping
denial  that  capital  is  productive  carries  with  it  the
denial  that  tools  are  aids  in  production,  which
would  be  too  absurd  to  discuss.  Rather  than
attribute  such  an  opinion  to  any  one,  we  ought  to
find  out,  if  possible,  whether  those  who  deny  the
productivity  of  capital  do  not  misapprehend  the
real  nature  of  capital.  It  will  generally  be  found
that  they  are  not  thinking  of  tools  or  concrete
instruments  of  production,  but  of  a  general  fund
of  value,  mistaking  the  quantitative  expression  of
capital  for  the  capital  itself.  If  they  mean  that
this  fund  of  value  does  not  produce  anything,  they
are  quite  right,  since  capital  has  value  solely
because  it  is  productive  (leaving  out  of  account
that  small  share  which  consists  of  consumers'
goods). It would therefore be more accurate to


Interest  219

say  that  its  value  is  due  to  its  productiveness  than
that  its  productiveness  is  due  to  its  value.  The
latter  is  probably  what  is  meant  when  it  is  denied
that  capital  —  meaning  its  value  or  amount,  as
that  amount  is  popularly  expressed  —  is  productive.
However,  capital  is  not  value  but  things.

Confining  our  attention  for  the  present  to  that
part  of  capital  which  consists  of  producers'  goods,
it  is  safe  to  say  that  its  use  is  wanted  only  for  the
sake  of  what  it  will  add  to  the  income  of  him  who
uses  it  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  any  direct
satisfaction  which  it  may  afford.  It  is  because  of
this  income  that  the  user  will  sometimes  borrow
capital  and  pay  a  price  for  its  use.  And,  gen-
erally speaking,  the  owner  who  uses  his  own  capi-
tal prizes  it  for  the  sake  of  the  income  which  it
brings  him.  But  an  instrument  of  production  adds
to  the  income  of  him  who  uses  it  only  by  enabling
him  to  produce  more  than  he  could  without  it.
The  more  it  will  add  to  his  product,  the  more  he
wants  the  use  of  it,  and,  consequently,  the  more  its
use  is  worth.  The  amount  which  it  adds  to  the
product  of  its  owner  when  he  uses  it  himself  is,
of  course,  the  amount  which  it  adds  to  his  income ;
and  the  amount  which  it  adds  to  the  product  of  the
one  who  borrows  it  is  approximately  the  amount
which  he  can  afford  to  pay  for  its  use.


220  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

The  productivity  of  capital  is,  like  that  of  land
and  labor,  subject  to  the  principle  of  marginal  pro-
ductivity, which  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  part  of  the
general  law  of  diminishing  returns.  Increase  the
number  of  instruments  of  a  given  kind  in  any
industrial  estabHshment,  leaving  everything  else
in  the  establishment  the  same  as  before,  and  you
will  probably  increase  the  total  product  of  the
establishment  somewhat,  but  you  will  not  increase
the  product  as  much  as  you  have  the  instruments
in  question.  Introduce  a  few  more  looms  into  a
cotton  factory  without  increasing  the  labor  or  the
other  forms  of  machinery,  and  you  will  add  a
certain  small  amount  to  the  total  output.  There
will  be  a  few  of  the  workmen  who  can  tend  more
than  the  normal  number  of  looms  and  turn  out  a
fraction  more  work  than  with  the  regular  number.
But  they  will  not  be  able  to  make  each  loom  turn
out  as  much  work  as  before.  The  problem  of  the
manager  is  to  apportion  the  men  and  the  looms
in  that  ratio  which  will  turn  out  the  largest  prod-
uct in  proportion  to  the  total  cost;  and  he  is
therefore  not  intent  on  getting  either  the  maxi-
mum per  man  or  the  maximum  per  loom.  If  he
were  intent  upon  the  former,  he  would  use  many
more  looms  than  at  present,  and  in  the  latter  case
he  would  put  one  man  in  charge  of  each loom  in


Interest  221

order  to  run  it  at  its  maximum  speed  with  as  few
stops  as  possible.  One  man  with  two  looms  would
turn  out  more  per  man,  but  slightly  less  per  loom,
because  there  would  be  a  few  more  stops.  One
man  with  four  looms  would  turn  out  still  more
per  man,  but  still  less  per  loom,  and  so  on.  This
means  that  the  marginal  product  of  looms,  or  the
amount  which  each  loom  would  add  to  the  total
product  of  the  combination,  diminishes  as  looms
increase  in  comparison  with  labor  and  other  factors
of  production.  That  which  is  true  of  looms  in
this  particular  is  also  true  of  ploughs  on  a  farm,
of  locomotives  on  a  railway,  of  floor  space  in  a
store,  and  of  every  other  form  of  capital  used  in
industry.

All  this  is  as  true  of  the  community  as  a  whole  as
it  is  of  a  single  establishment.  If,  for  example,  there
are  very  few  ploughs  in  a  given  community  where
there  is  an  abundance  of  land,  labor,  and  other
capital,  each  plough  would  be  a  matter  of  consider-
able importance.  Each  one  would  have  to  be  used
intensively,  and  the  withdrawal  of  one,  or  the  making
of  another,  would  make  a  considerable  difference  in
the  amount  of  certain  things  which  the  community
would  be  able  to  produce.  But  with  a  larger  number
of  ploughs,  other  factors  remaining  the  same,  each
one  would be used less intensively, and the


222  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

of  one  or  the  addition  of  another  would  make  less
difference  in  the  product  of  the  community.

This  principle  may  be  broadened  so  as  to  include
all  capital  in  the  same  class.  An  increase  in  the  total
amount  of  capital  may  be  conceived  as  coming  about
through  the  proportional  increase  of  all  the  various
forms  of  capital  at  the  same  time.  In  fact,  this  is
the  way  in  which  it  would  normally  come  about  in
the  absence  of  inventions  of  new  kinds  of  capital  or
of  new  uses  for  the  old  kinds.  If  the  capital-making
process,  which  will  be  explained  later,  increases  with-
out any  new  inventions  to  give  it  new  directions  in
which  to  increase,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  all  the
existing  forms  of  capital  would  increase  in  some-
thing like  the  same  proportion.  Then  if  labor  and
land  were  to  remain  the  same,  or  to  increase  less
rapidly  than  capital,  such  an  increase  of  capital
would  reduce  the  marginal  productivity  of  each  and
every  form  of  capital.  There  would  be  less  land
upon  which  to  use  each  tool,  and  less  labor  to  use  it.
The  marginal  productivity  of  ploughs  in  the  previous
illustration  would  diminish  when  there  were  more
ploughs  in  proportion  to  the  labor  and  land,  even
though  the  number  of  other  instruments  of  produc-
tion increased  proportionally  with  the  ploughs.  The
same  would  be  true  of  every  other  form  of  capital,
and,  consequently,  the  proposition  is  established  that


Interest


223


the  marginal  productivity  of  capital  in  general  de-
creases as  the  amount  of  capital  increases  relatively
to  land  and  labor.

The  working  of  the  law  of  marginal  productivity  as
applied  to  capital  might  be  illustrated  by  means  of
tables  similar  to  Tables  E,  F,  and  G  in  the  previous
chapters  ;  but  the  whole  matter  ought  to  be  clear
enough  by  this  time. The  following  diagram  will,


E

B

""-^^

B'

^  ->

3^

A

D I

y

y c

DIAGRAM I

however,  serve  both  as  an  illustration  of  this  law  and
as  a  means  of  introducing  the  next  question  to  be
considered  in  the  general  problem  of  interest.

Let  the  amount  of  capital  in  the  industrial  com-
munity be  measured  along  the  horizontal  line  AC,
and  let  the  productivity  of  capital  be  measured  along
the  perpendicular  line  A^,  and  let  the  descending
line EC represent the rate of decrease in the


224  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

marginal  productivity  of  capital.  If  the  amount  of
capital  were  measured  by  AD,  the  marginal  pro-
ductivity would  be  measured  by  the  line  BD  or  AK
If  the  amount  of  capital  were  measured  by  AD\  the
marginal  productivity  would,  other  things  remaining
equal,  be  measured  by  the  line  B'D'  or  AF' ;  and
when  the  amount  of  capital  equalled  AD",  marginal
productivity  would  equal  B"D'^  or  AP'.  From
this  it  follows  inevitably  that,  if  capital  went  on  in-
creasing to  AC,  the  marginal  productivity  of  capital
would  be  destroyed  altogether.  That  is  to  say,  the
supply  of  capital  would  have  reached  that  limit  where
no  more  could  be  used  to  advantage,  and  some  could
be  spared  without  loss.

It  begins  to  appear  that  any  explanation  of  the
problem  of  interest  must  account  for  the  supply  of
capital  as  well  as  for  its  demand.  The  latter  is
accounted  for  by  the  law  of  marginal  productiv-
ity ;  but,  unless  the  supply  is  in  some  way  limited,
the  marginal  productivity  of  capital  will  disappear.
What  limits  the  supply  of  capital  ?  It  is  not  limited
by  nature  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  increase  or
diminish,  as  is  practically  true  in  the  case  of  land.
It  is  a  product  of  human  effort  and  can  therefore  be
increased,  within  pretty  wide  limits,  at  will.  Were
there  no  sacrifice  connected  with  the  production  of
capital,  and  with  the  maintenance  and  increase  of  its


Interest  225

supply,  would  it  not  increase  indefinitely  until  its
marginal  productivity  would  be  reduced  to  the
vanishing  point?  The  income  from  capital  in  the
shape  of  its  contribution  to  the  product  of  the  com-
munity is  an  undoubted  advantage.  Were  there  no
compensating  disadvantage,  men  would  pursue  this
advantage  by  increasing  the  supply  of  capital  until
the  advantage  would  disappear.  The  value  or  price
of  an  ordinary  commodity  is  an  advantage  to  the
producers  of  it,  but  they  incline  to  pursue  this  ad-
vantage by  increasing  their  production  until  the
advantage  is  about  counterbalanced  by  a  disadvan-
tage in  the  way  of  cost  of  production.  What  is  the
corresponding  disadvantage  which  checks  the  pro-
duction of  capital  ?

This  disadvantage  is  of  two  kinds.  In  the  first
place,  there  is  the  cost  of  making  the  tools  and
other  materials  of  which  capital  consists.  Each  tool
must,  on  the  average,  earn  at  least  enough  during  its
Ufetime  to  pay  the  cost  of  making  it ;  otherwise
tools  would  not  be  made.  In  more  general  terms,
the  marginal  productivity  of  capital  must  be  such
that  each  and  every  form  will,  on  the  average,  earn
as  much,  or,  which  means  the  same  thing,  add  as
much  to  the  product  of  the  community  during  its
lifetime,  as  it  cost  to  produce  it.  Otherwise  the
production  of  capital  would  be  checked,  its  supply

Q


226


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


diminished,  and  its  marginal  productivity  conse-
quently increased.  Again,  if  this  were  the  only
disadvantage,  the  supply  of  capital  would  normally
increase  up  to  that  point  where  its  earnings  or  its
marginal  productivity  would,  during  its  lifetime,  just
cover  its  cost.

This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  diagram
which  is  an  elaboration  of  Diagram  I  on  page  223  of
the  present  chapter.


3

zr=^

3'


-..

"-^

3"

---.,

A 1

~J [

y

r c

DIAGRAM II


Let  US  suppose,  as  in  the  former  diagram,  that  the
number  of  implements  of  a  certain  kind,  say  ploughs,
is  measured  along  the  line  AC^  and  their  marginal
productivity  along  the  line  AE.  In  this  case,  how-
ever, we  mean  their  total  marginal  product  during
their average Ufetime, or that  amount which an


Interest  227

average  plough  will  add  to  the  product  of  the  com-
munity during  its  lifetime,  over  and  above  what
could  be  produced  without  it.  To  distinguish  this
from  the  marginal  product  per  year,  we  shall  call  it
the  total  earnings  of  a  plough.  Letting  the  descend-
ing curve  represent  the  decline  in  the  total  earnings
of  each  plough  as  the  number  of  ploughs  increases,
the  line  DB  or  AF  would  represent  the  total  earn-
ings of  each  plough  when  their  number  was  repre-
sented by  the  line  AD.  When  their  number  is  AD\
the  total  earnings  of  each  would  be  D'B',  or  AF\
and  when  the  number  is  AD"y  the  total  earnings  of
each  would  be  D"B"  or  AF".  Let  us  further  sup-
pose that  the  cost  of  making  ploughs  is  represented
by  the  perpendicular  distance  of  the  various  points
on  the  ascending  curve  GB'  above  the  base  line  AC,
as  was  done  in  the  diagram  on  page  37  of  the  chapter
on  Value.  If  this  cost  were  the  only  check  on  the  pro-
duction of  ploughs,  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should
not  increase  to  the  point  D\  where  the  total  earnings
of  each  plough  would  just  pay  the  cost  of  making
the  most  expensive  part  of  the  total  supply.  They
would  sell  at  the  uniform  price  of  D'B'  or  AF\
which  would  be  their  normal  equilibrium  price.^  The
total  earnings  of  a  plough  would  then  just  cover  the
price  which  the  buyer  would  have  to  give  for  it.

1  See  Chapter  I,  p.  31.


228  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

But  if  a  piece  of  capital  should  earn  during  its
lifetime  only  enough  to  pay  the  cost  of  making  it,  or
the  price  which  its  owner  would  have  to  pay  fpr^it,
there  would  be  no  such  thing  as  interest.  That
would  only  be  enough  to  replace  it  when  it  was
worn  out  and  to  keep  the  supply  intact.  The  owner
who  used  capital  under  such  circumstances  would
gain  nothing  by  its  use,  and  a  borrower  would  lose
if  he  paid  back  more  than  the  principal  of  a  general
fund  borrowed.  As  we  have  already  seen,  interest
exists  only  when  capital  earns  something  in  addition
to  that  which  is  necessary  to  replace  it  and  maintain
its  supply  intact.  It  is  evident  therefore  that  some
additional  check  must  be  put  upon  the  production
of  capital  if  it  is  to  yield  any  interest,  for  if  the
cost  of  making  it  were  the  only  check,  its  supply
would  normally  increase  until  its  earning  capacity
would  fall  to  a  level  with  its  cost  of  production.
But  if,  in  the  former  diagram,  the  supply  of  ploughs
could  be  checked  at  the  point  D,  so  that  the  earn-
ings of  each  plough  would  equal  the  line  DB,  each
plough  would  then  earn  something  for  its  owner
over  and  above  the  cost  of  making  it,  or  the  price
which  its  owner  would  have  to  pay  for  it.  What  is
there  to  further  check  the  production  of  ploughs,  or
of  other  forms  of  capital,  so  that  they  may  earn  such
a  surplus }


Interest  229

Such  a  check  is  found  in  the  conjunction  of  two
facts:  first,  the  owner  of  capital  must  wait  for  its
earnings  to  come  in ;  second,  as_a_rulei_men  do  not
like  to  wait.  Take  the  case  of  a  blacksmith  who,  by
his  own  labor,  makes  a  plough  out  of  materials  which
cost  him  $5.  Let  us  suppose  that  he  can  in  a  fort-
night make  a  plough  which  will  earn  a  total  of  $^0
during  its  lifetime  of  ten  years.  Deducting  the  cost
of  materials,  this  leaves  him  1^25  as  the  net  earnings
of  his  fortnight's  work;  but  he  must  wait  for  his
wages,  receiving  them  in  instalments  over  a  period
of  ten  years.  If  he  does  not  mind  waiting,  this  will
be  no  drawback  and  he  would  just  as  lief  make  a
plough  as  to  work  for  the  same  amount  in  cash  or  in
present  consumable  goods.  Or,  having  made  such  a
plough,  he  would  not  sell  it  for  less  than  ^^30,  the
total  amount  which  it  will  be  expected,  one  with
another,  to  earn  during  its  lifetime.

But  if  he  does  mind  waiting,  and  would  much  pre-
fer to  receive  his  wages  at  once,  he  would  not  make
ploughs  at  all  so  long  as  he  could  earn  $25  per
fortnight  in  present  consumable  goods.  Or,  having
made  a  plough  which  will  earn  1^30  in  the  course  of
its  lifetime,  he  would  be  willing  to  sell  it  for  less  than
that  amount,  which,  counting  out  the  cost  of  the  raw
materials,  would  net  him  less  than  $2$  for  his  work.
If  no  blacksmith  could be  found  willing  either  to


230  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

wait  ten  years  for  his  wages  or  to  accept  less  than
1^25  for  the  amount  of  work  necessary  to  make  a
plough,  no  ploughs  with  such  small  earning  capacity
would  be  made  unless  some  one  else  could  be  found
who  did  not  mind  waiting  and  who  would  therefore
be  willing  to  pay  $^0  for  a  plough  and  then  wait  ten
years  to  get  his  money  back.  But  if  no  such  person
could  be  found,  the  making  of  ploughs  would  stop
until  their  growing  scarcity  would  raise  their  margi-
nal productivity  and  their  total  earnings  somewhat
above  $^0.

Though  no  one  would  be  likely  to  want  to  wait  ten
years  to  get  back  the  same  amount  of  money  which
he  spent  on  a  plough,  he  might  be  willing  to  wait  for
that  amount  plus  a  surplus.  That  is,  he  might  be
willing  to  pay  the  blacksmith  $^0  for  a  plough  which
would,  in  the  course  of  ten  j^ears,  earn  the  total
amount  of  $^0.  In  that  case,  he  would  get  back  his
original  outlay  and  $20  besides.  The  J^20  would  be
interest.  Under  these  conditions  it  would  be  the
general  dislike  of  waiting  which  would  so  limit  the
production  of  ploughs  that  each  one  would,  on
the  average,  earn  more  during  its  lifetime  than  was
sufficient  to  pay  the  cost  of  making  it.  But  if  the
dislike  of  waiting  were  general,  it  would  limit  the
supply  of  other  kinds  of  capital  as  well  as  that  of
ploughs,  and  it  would  therefore  be  a  general  cause  of


Interest  231

the  existence  of  the  surplus  which  we  have  called
interest.

All  income-bearing  goods  are,  as  we  have  seen
already,  alike  in  that  they  are  not  wanted  for  their
own  sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  incomes  which
they  will  earn.  Incomes  consist,  in  last  analysis,  of
consumers'  goods,^  and  these  goods  are  the  sole
reason  for  desiring  the  possession  of  income-bearing
goods.  But  all  forms  of  capital  are  alike  in  that
their  cost  of  production  must  have  been  borne  by
some  one  before  they  begin  to  return  their  incomes.
The  maker  of  a  piece  of  capital  must  himself  wait
for  the  income  to  mature,  or  he  must  sell  it  to  some
one  else,  in  which  case  it  is  the  buyer  who  waits.
His  waiting  consists  in  giving  up  the  opportunity  of
buying  present  consumers'  goods,  and  receiving  in
return  the  means  of  securing  consumers'  goods  at
some  time  in  the  future.  It  is  virtually  an  exchange
of  present  consumers'  goods  for  future  consumers*
goods.  While  technically  he  receives  present  income-
bearing  goods,  yet  since  he  does  not  want  them
except  for  the  sake  of  the  want-satisfying  consumers^'
goods  which  they  will  bring  him,  he  really  exchanges
for  the  latter  goods.  It  is  the  same  whether  he  lends
money,  or  invests  in  machinery,  or  deposits  in  a  sav-
ings bank. They  are  all  forms  of waiting, or of

1  Cf.  Taussig,  "  Wages  and  Capital,"  Chapter  II.


232  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

saving  as  it  is  sometimes  called.  The  man  who  buys
a  plough  to  use  on  his  farm  is  saving  as  truly  as  the
man  who  deposits  a  like  sum  in  a  bank  or  hides  it  in
his  stocking.  Waiting  or  saving  is  quite  as  essen-
tial to  the  existence  of  capital  as  labor  itself,  for  if
there  were  no  saving  there  would  be  no  capital.  Since
men  as  a  rule  do  not  like  to  wait  any  better  than
they  like  to  work,  it  is  quite  as  essential  that  waiting
be  paid  for  as  it  is  that  work  be  paid  for.

But  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  all  saving  involves
sacrifice.  There  would  be  some  saving  were  there
no  interest  at  all,  —  that  is,  if  capital  did  not  earn  any
more  than  enough  to  replace  itself.  It  is  even  proba-
ble that  a  considerable  amount  would  be  saved  if,
instead  of  savings  affording  a  surplus,  men  were
obliged  to  pay  rent  for  vaults  in  which  to  store  them
or  even  to  hire  others  to  take  their  surplus  wealth
and  use  it  for  them.  In  so  far  as  it  is  true  that  men
estimate  present  higher  than  future  consumption,  it
only  applies  to  the  consumption  of  corresponding
increments  of  income.  A  man  with  an  income  of
$io,CKX)  a  year  derives  less  utility  from  the  consump-
tion of  the  last  than  from  the  first  thousand.  He
may  receive  so  small  an  amount  of  pleasure  from  the
consumption  of  the  last  thousand  dollars  that  he  will
prefer  to  save  it  for  the  purpose  of  satisfying  a  more
pressing  want  in  the  future. It  is  upon  this  princi-


Interest


233


pie  that  men  lay  up  for  a  rainy  day  or  for  old  age.
This  may  be  illustrated  by  Diagram  III  below.

In  Figures  I  and  II  of  that  diagram,  let  the
amount  of  a  man's  income  be  measured  along  the
horizontal  lines  AB  and  A^B\  Let  the  utility  of
different  increments  be  represented  by  the  perpen-
dicular lines,  those  in  Figure  I  representing  the
present  utility  of  present  increments  of  goods,  while
those  in  Figure  II  represent  the  estimate  which  we


Figure  I


Figure  II


B A'
DIAGRAM III


now  put  upon  the  utility  of  the  same  or  equivalent
increments  of  goods  a  year  hence.  In  other  words,
we  discount  the  future  at  a  rate  corresponding  to  the
ratio  between  the  perpendicular  lines  in  Figure  I
and  the  corresponding  lines  in  Figure  II.  It  is
evident,  then,  from  the  diagram,  that  increment  No.
10  would  be  saved,  in  order  that  it. might  be  applied
to  the  satisfaction  of  want  No.  i  in  the  future.  Simi-
larly, No.  9  of  the  present  would  be  saved  because
No.  2  of  the  future  is  higher. The  same  may  be


234  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

said  of  No.  8  of  the  present,  because  it  does  not  quite
come  up  to  No.  3  of  the  future.  But  here  saving
would  stop ;  for  there  would  be  a  loss  in  abstaining
from  the  consumption  of  No.  7,  in  order  to  apply  it
to  No.  4  in  the  future.

This  diagram,  it  will  be  understood,  only  illustrates
a  certain  social  tendency.  In  a  less  advanced  stage
of  society  than  that  to  which  we  are  accustomed,  the
difference  between  the  estimations  of  present  and
future  would  be  greater  than  under  present  condi-
tions. Even  in  present  society  there  are  those  to
whom  the  future  seems  to  offer  small  inducement
for  present  frugality.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are
those  in  whom  the  instinct  of  saving  is  so  strong  that
they  seem  to  begrudge  themselves  present  satisfac-
tion, —  and  that,  too,  without  much  thought  of  future
consumption,  but  simply  to  gratify  their  desire  for
accumulation.  But  the  normal  tendency  is  probably
illustrated  by  the  man  who  looks  forward  to  the  time
when  he  will  have  greater  wants  to  supply  on  ac-
count of  a  growing  family,  or  the  hope  of  some  time
having  a  growing  family  to  provide  for,  and  who  also
looks  forward  to  the  time  when  age  will  begin  to  tell
upon  his  powers,  and  the  same  income  will  have  a
larger  marginal  utility,  owing  to  the  increased  pain
of  producing  it.  Neither  in  the  case  of  this  man,
nor  in  that  of  the  miser,  is  there  any  true  sacrifice


Interest  235

connected  with  saving.  His  capital  costs  him  noth-
ing except  the  original  outlay  to  pay  the  cost  of  pro-
duction. Were  there  no  other  way  of  saving,  such
a  man  would  buy  a  plough  and  pay  for  it  all  that  it
would  ever  earn  for  him,  in  which  case  he  would
only  get  his principal  back,  and  no  interest  at  all.

If  only  so  much  were  needed  to  carry  on  industry
as  could  be  saved  without  any  sacrifice,  —  that  is,  if  so
much  were  sufficient  to  bring  down  the  marginal  pro-
ductivity to  the  point  where  it  would  just  pay  the
cost  of  making  it,  there  would  be  no  interest  any-
where. But,  if  more  is  needed,  —  that  is,  if  more  can
be  used  and  still  afford  a  surplus  at  the  margin,  it  must
be  paid  for,  because  to  save  it  requires  sacrifice  from
somebody.  Returning  to  our  illustration,  if  incre-
ment No.  7  is  required,  it  will  be  saved  at  a  loss,
because  its  present  utility  stands  higher  than  our
present  estimate  of  the  utility  of  No.  4  in  the  future.

In  this  connection  appears  a  possible  correction  to
Bohm-Bawerk's  theory,  according  to  which  interest
must  equal  the  amount  by  which  men  discount  the
future,  or  the  difference  between  the  value  of  pres-
ent and  of  future  goods.  The  statement  that  "  pres-
ent goods  are,  as  a  rule^  worth  more  than  future
goods  of  like  kind  and  number,"  ^  would  carry  with
it  the  statement  that  a  dollar  now  is  worth  more  in

1  "  Positive  Theory  of  Capital "  [Smart's  translation],  p.  237.


236  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

present  estimation  than  a  dollar  a  year  hence.  If
we  elimate  the  element  of  risk,  as  he  expressly  states
that  we  must  do,  it  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  true
that,  as  a  rule,  a.  dollar  is  worth  more  to-day  than  a
year  hence.

Of  the  wealth  in  the  possession  of  society  to-day
it  is  altogether  probable  that  the  greater  part  would
be  saved  for  more  than  a  year,  even  if  there  were
no  surplus  to  be  secured  by  so  doing,  — >  that  is,  if  men
knew  that  they  would  only  get  their  principal  back.
In  other  words,  so  far  as  concrete  goods  are  con-
cerned, their  future  value  is  sometimes  greater  than
their  present,  because  they  are  expected  to  supply  a
more  pressing  want  in  the  future  than  it  is  possible
to  apply  them  to  in  the  present.  In  such  cases  there
is  a  high  reward  for  saving  in  the  anticipated  future
increase  in  their  want-satisfying  power.  This  class
of  goods  may  be  called  the  first  increment;  of  capital
saved.  It  is  that  portion  which  would  be  saved  even
if  its  owners  should  be  compelled  to  hire  vaults  in
which  to  store  it.  The  second  increment  may  have
a  lower  anticipated  future  increase  of  want-satisfying
power  than  the  first ;  but  its  future  utility  may  still
be  estimated  just  as  highly  as  its  present  utility,
while  the  saving  of  the  third  involves  a  positive  sac-
rifice, because  its  future  want-satisfying  power  is
estimated  as  lower  than  its  present,  and  that  of  the


Interest


237


fourth  still  lower.  In  this  case  the  decrease  of  sub-
jective utility  must  be  compensated  for  by  a  surplus.
It  is  not  the  difference  in  the  general  estimation  of
present  and  future  goods  which  fixes  the  rate  of  in-
terest, but  only  the  difference  in  the  estimation  of
the  present  and  future  value  of  the  last  increment  of
goods  saved.

If  in  Diagram
IV  we  let  the
angle  of  descent
of  the  line  AC"
represent  the
rate  at  which,  ac-
cording to  Bohm-
Bawerk,  men
discount  the  fu-
ture, and  let  the
line  AB  represent
the  present  value
of a  commodity,

the  line  CB'  would  represent  the  present  value  of
the  means  of  securing  it  a  year  hence,  CB"  the
present  value  of  the  means  of  securing  it  two  years
hence,  and  so  on.  According  to  this  theory,  one
year's  interest  ought  to  equal  the  dotted  line  A'C,
two  years'  interest  the  dotted  line  A'C,  and  so  on.

In  the  first  place,  as  suggested  above,  it  is  not


B' B" B'"
DIAGRAM  IV


238  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

correct  to  speak  of  a  general  discounting  of  the
future  use  of  commodities,  or  concrete  goods.  In  a
great  many  cases  the  future  use  of  a  commodity  is
estimated  higher  than  its  present  use,  because  pres-
ent wants  are  so  well  supplied  that  the  marginal
utility  of  present  consumption  is  very  low.  Sup-
pose, for  example,  that  you  have  ;^ioo  in  your
pocket.  You  can  spend  it  all  to-day  on  your  din-
ner; and  you  might,  could  you  forget  the  future,
get  some  satisfaction  out  of  the  consumption  of
the  last  dollar.  But  you  do  not  forget  the  future ;
and  the  amount  of  pleasure  which  you  could  get
out  of  the  expenditure  of  the  last  ninety-nine  dollars
is  so  small  that  you  prefer  to  save  it,  in  order  that
you  may  enjoy  a  series  of  ordinary  dinners  in  the
future.  You  would  save  it  were  there  no  interest
to  be  had.  In  fact,  if  you  could  not  keep  it  your-
self, you  would  hire  some  one  to  keep  it  for  you
rather  than  consume  it  now.  Yet,  if  you  choose  to
lend  it,  you  can  get  just  as  much  interest  for  it  as
though  it  had  cost  you  a  heavy  sacrifice  to  abstain
from  consuming  it.

Nevertheless,  you  doubtless  have  a  more  vivid
appreciation  of  present  than  of  future  wants.
There  is  a  point  at  which  you  will  stop  saving,
because  you  do  not  expect  ever  to  be  in  a  position
when  an  ordinary  dinner  will  be  worth  more  to  you


Interest  239

than  it  is  now.  You  will  probably  not  forego  the
pleasure  of  a  fifty-cent  dinner  and  content  yourself
with  a  fifteen-cent  lunch,  in  order  to  be  better  pro-
vided in  the  future,  because  you  never  expect  to  be
in  a  position  when  you  cannot  afford  a  fifty-cent
dinner.  Were  you  a  spendthrift,  you  would  prob-
ably not  hesitate  to  spend  several  dollars  on  expen-
sive delicacies  and  fine  cigars  for  the  same  reason.
The  spendthrift's  appreciation  of  the  future  is  very
low.  Your  case  may  be  taken  as  typical  of  society
as  a  whole.  There  is  a  certain  point  where,  were
there  no  interest  or  profits  from  the  use  of  capital,
saving  would  cease.  That  point  would  be  where
men  balanced  present  against  future  consumption;
in  other  words,  where  the  want-satisfying  power  of
present  and  of  future  goods  is  equal  in  present
estimation.  But  if  the  use  and  employment  of
capital  is  productive,  and  the  amount  of  capital  in
existence  under  these  conditions  were  not  enough  to
bring  its  marginal  productivity  down  to  the  point
where  it  would  just  pay  the  cost  of  making  it,  there
would  be  a  demand  for  more  capital.  In  order  to
get  it,  interest  in  the  form  of  a  surplus  would  have
to  be  paid  to  induce  men  to  save  more.  Conse-
quently, interest  does  not  correspond  to  any  general
discounting  of  future  consumption  of  commodities,
but  only  to the marginal  discount  or  to  the  mar-


240  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

ginal  sacrifice  of  saving.  It  must  be  sufficient  to
compensate  the  capitalist  for  saving  the  last  incre-
ment of  capital.

This  also  may  be  illustrated  by  Diagram  IV,  page
237.  Of  the  first  increment  of  goods  saved,  let  the
present  value  be  represented  by  the  line  AB.  The
present  estimate  of  its  value  a  year  hence  by  GB^,  two
years  hence  by  G'B'\  etc.  Of  the  second  increment,
the  present  value  is  AB.  The  present  estimate  of
its  value  a  year  hence  is  represented  by  A^B^j  two
years  hence  by  A"B'\  etc.  Of  the  third  increment
saved,  the  present  value  is  represented  by  AB^  the
present  estimate  of  its  value  a  year  hence  by  FB\
two  years  hence  by  FB'\  etc.  Were  this  the  last  in-
crement saved,  one  year's  interest  for  all  increments
would  correspond  to  A^F,  two  years*  interest  to
A'^Pf  etc.  But  the  fourth  increment  has  a  present
value  corresponding  to  AB,  and  an  estimated  value
one  year  hence  corresponding  to  CB',  two  years
hence  corresponding  to  C'B",  etc.  Since  this  is  the
last  increment  saved,  one  year's  interest  throughout
the  field  would  correspond  to  A'C,  two  years'  interest
to  A'^Cy  etc.  The  loss  in  the  subjective  valuation
of  this  last  increment  must  be  compensated  for  by  a
surplus  in  the  form  of  interest.  But  if  some  capital
yields  such  a  surplus  over  and  above  the  cost  of
making  it,  all  must  do  the  same. If  one  plough  which


Interest  241

will  yield  1^50  in  its  lifetime,  must  be  sold  for  1^30  to
the  marginal  buyer,  other  ploughs  of  the  same  kind
must  sell  at  the  same  price,  yielding  a  uniform  sur-
plus of  ;^20  a  piece.  And  other  forms  of  capital
would  have  to  yield,  barring  risk,  the  same  surplus
in  the  same  time,  else  all  capitaHsts  would  be  buying
those  which  yield  the  largest.

If,  however,  it  is  intended  to  apply  Bohm-Bawerk's
theory  to  the  difference  with  which  we  estimate  pres-
ent and  future  wants  (as  illustrated  in  Figures  I  and  II
of  Diagram  III,  page  233),  it  is  again  found  to  be
faulty.  Men  seldom  abstain  from  the  satisfaction  of
a  want  in  order  to  be  able  at  some  future  time  to
supply  the  same  or  a  corresponding  want.

In  the  case  of  those  wants  which  we  leave  unsatis-
fied for  the  express  purpose  of  getting  interest,  the
interest  does  not  pay  for  the  difference  with  which
we  estimate  the  present  and  future  satisfaction  of
the  particular  want  which  is  forestalled.  Let  us
return  to  Diagram  III.  If  increment  No.  7  were
saved,  the  sacrifice  would  not  correspond  to  the
difference  between  No.  7  of  Figure  I  and  No,  7  of
Figure  II,  but  to  the  difference  between  No.  7  of
Figure  I  and  No.  4  of  Figure  II.  If  in  Diagram  IV
we  let  the  descending  line  AC"^  represent  the  rate  at
which  we  discount  future  wants,  the  rate  of  interest
would  correspond  to  those  portions  of the  perpen-


4

242  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

dicular  lines  which  lie  above  some  such  descending
line  as  AF'"  rather  than  to  those  portions  which  lie
above  AC".

As  already  stated,  a  considerable  portion  of  the
capital  has  involved  no  sacrifice  in  the  act  of  saving.
Were  this  supply  sufficient  to  bring  the  marginal
utility  down  to  where  it  would  just  balance  whatever
risk  the  capitalist  undergoes  in  lending  or  employing
his  capital,  plus,  of  course,  the  cost  of  making  it,  no
true  interest  would  be  paid.  A  larger  amount  of
saving  would  cut  into  more  pressing  wants,  and  in-
volve a  sacrifice.  Men  will  not  undergo  this  sacrifice
unless  they  are  paid  for  it.  This  gives  rise  to  interest,
which  then  becomes  an  element  in  the  cost  of  capital
in  addition  to  the  cost  of  producing  it.

The  relation  of  abstinence  to  interest  may  be
further  illustrated  by  means  of  the  following  diagram,
which  is  an  elaboration  of  Diagram  II  on  page  226
of  the  present  chapter.  In  this  case,  as  in  the  for-
mer, let  us  assume  that  the  amount  of  a  certain  kind
of  capital  is  measured  along  the  line  AC,  and  its
marginal  productivity  along  the  Hne  AE,  the  de-
scending curve  EC  representing  the  decline  in  the
marginal  productivity  as  the  supply  increases.  If
there  were  nothing  to  check  its  production  but  the
cost  of  producing  it,  the  supply  would  normally
increase  to  the point  D',  as  shown  in  the  former


Interest


243


diagram,  at  which  point  the  marginal  product  would
just  cover  the  marginal  cost,  and  there  would  be
no  interest.  This  point  is  located  by  the  intersec-
tion of  the  cost  curve  GB^  with  the  productivity
curve  EC.  But  in  addition  to  the  cost  of  produc-
tion there  is  the  disadvantage  or  sacrifice  of  waiting.
The  effect  of  this  is  illustrated  by  the  rising  curve


3

INTEREST /

\

f

,<- — '

COST  OF  PRODUCTION

^"-.

A K I

D 1

y

•c

F'
G


DIAGRAM V


HB.  This  curve  repre«ents,  by  its  distance  above
or  below  the  cost  curve  GB,  the  positive  or  negative
sacrifice  of  saving  the  different  parts  of  the  supply
of  capital.  Where  this  curve  is  below  the  cost
curve,  it  means  that  there  is  an  advantage  rather
than  a  disadvantage  connected  with  the  exchange
of  present  for  future  goods  which  saving  implies.
Where  this curve coincides with the cost curve.


244  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

there  is  neither  advantage  nor  disadvantage  con-
nected with  saving,  but  when  it  rises  above  the  cost
curve  there  is  a  disadvantage  connected  with  saving
which  becomes  a  check  upon  the  production  of
capital  in  addition  to  that  effected  by  the  cost  of
producing  it

If  the  production  of  capital  should  stop  at  the
point  K  where,  as  shown  by  the  intersection  of
the  abstinence  curve  HB  with  the  cost  curve  GB\
there  is  neither  advantage  nor  disadvantage  con-
nected with  saving,  its  marginal  productivity  would
be  represented  by  the  line  KL.  This  would  give
its  owner  an  advantage  far  in  excess  of  any  disad-
vantage connected  with  its  production,  and  this
would  stimulate  its  further  production.  But  in  order
to  increase  its  production,  it  would  be  necessary  to
do  more  waiting  as  well  as  more  work.  From  this
point  on,  further  waiting  begins  to  be  burdensome,
acting  as  a  positive  check  upon  production.  The
normal  tendency  would  be  for  capital  to  increase  up
to  the  point  A  at  which  point  the  combined  dis-
advantage of  working  and  waiting,  or  of  cost  of
production  and  abstinence,  would  be  just  compen-
sated by  the  marginal  productivity  of  that  kind  of
capital.  At  this  point  the  marginal  productivity
would  be  represented  by  the  line  DB^  the  marginal
cost  of  production  by  the  line  DT,  and  the  marginal


Interest  245

abstinence  by  the  line  IB.  The  total  present  value
of  that  kind  of  capital  would  then  be  represented  by
the  parallelogram  ADF'I.  The  total  product  of  the
present  supply  of  capital  during  its  lifetime  would
be  represented  by  the  parallelogram  ADFB^  and  the
total  surplus  or  interest  by  the  parallelogram  F'IFB.
The  same  result  is  reached  by  approaching  the
subject  from  the  side  of  demand,  and  regarding  the
disadvantage  of  waiting  as  reducing  the  purchaser's
demand^  for  capital  instead  of  checking  its  supply.
It  is,  generally  speaking,  the  amount  which  pur-
chasers will  pay  for  it  which  constitutes  the  reward
of  the  makers  of  capital  and  serves  as  an  induce-
ment to  continue  the  work  of  production.  So  long
as  the  purchaser's  demand  will  give  ploughs,  for  ex-
ample, a  price  equal  to  the  cost  of  producing  them,
the  producers  will  continue  their  work.  As  already
pointed  out,  if  there  were  no  disadvantage  connected
with  saving,  men  might  be  expected  to  pay  as  much
in  cash  for  a  piece  of  capital  as  they  expect  it  to
return  them  in  the  way  of  income  during  its  lifetime.
In  that  case  the  purchaser's  demand  curve  for
capital  would  coincide  with  the  productivity  curve
of  the  foregoing  diagram.  There  would  then  be  an
equilibrium  of  supply  and  demand  at  the  point  where
the demand-productivity curve EC intersects the

^  As  distinguished  from  the  borrower's  demand.


246


The  Distribution  of  Wealth


cost  curve  GB\  But  since  there  is  a  certain  dis-
advantage connected  with  saving,  and  men  are  not
always  willing — not  even  those  who  inveigh  against
interest  on  capital  —  to  pay  as  much  in  cash,  or  pres-
ent consumable  goods,  for  a  piece  of  capital  as  it  will
produce  during  its  lifetime,  the  purchaser's  demand


H

E

F
F

3

1 N

INTEREST 1 \

:>f.

j

G

TOTAL  PRESENT
VALUE  OF  CAPITAL

1

1
1

»•..

/

\ K I

DM C

DIAGRAM VI

curve  does  not  coincide  with  the  productivity  curve,
and  the  equilibrium  of  demand  and  supply  is  reached
at  some  other  point.

This  way  of  approaching  the  problem  may  be
illustrated  by  means  of  the  above  diagram,  which
is  a  modification  of  Diagram  V.  The  purchaser's
demand  for  capital  is,  in  this  case,  represented  by


Interest  247

the  descending  curve  HM,  which  bears  the  same
relation  to  the  productivity  curve  EC  which  the
abstinence  curve  HB  bore  to  the  cost  curve  GB  in
the  last  diagram.  Where  this  demand  curve  is
above  the  productivity  curve,  it  means  that  men  are
so  anxious  to  provide  against  the  uncertainties  of
the  future  that  they  will  give  a  larger  number  of
present  goods  for  the  sake  of  having  a  smaller  num-
ber at  some  time  in  the  future,  or  that  men  of  enor-
mously large  incomes  would  have  so  much  trouble
trying  to  consume  them  all  that  they  would  rather
invest  a  part  in  some  enterprise  for  the  sport  of
carrying  it  through,  even  though  they  may  never  get
all  their  money  back,  while  men  of  moderate  in-
comes would  rather  provide  against  a  rainy  day  than
to  consume  all  their  incomes,  even  though  their  sav-
ings shrunk  in  the  interval.  Yet  if  the  enterprises
return  a  surplus,  and  the  savings  expand,  both
classes  of  savers  will  take  advantage  of  the  pos-
sibility of  getting  an  increase.  Where  the  demand
curve  coincides  with  the  productivity  curve,  it  means
that  there  is  neither  advantage  nor  disadvantage
connected  with  saving ;  and  where  the  demand  curve
falls  below  the  productivity  curve,  it  means  that  there
is  a  disadvantage  connected  with  saving,  and  there-
fore less  will  be  paid  for  a  piece  of  capital  than  it
will  earn  in  the  future.


^48  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Under  these  conditions  the  equilibrium  of  demand
and  supply,  which  determines  the  present  selling
value  of  capital,  would  be  reached  when  the  supply
of  capital  was  represented  by  the  line  ADy  for  this
would  be  the  point  where  the  purchaser's  demand
for  the  different  forms  of  capital  would  give  them  a
value  just  equal  to  their  marginal  cost  of  production.
Yet  the  marginal  productivity  of  that  amount  of
capital  would  be  represented  by  the  line  DB ;  the
present  selling  value  of  capital,  which  is  equivalent
to  the  present  value  of  its  future  product,  would  be
represented  by  the  line  I?/;  and  the  surplus  which
would  come  to  the  buyer  who  took  it  at  its  present
selling  value  and  waited  for  its  earnings  to  mature
would  be  represented  by  the  line  IB.  The  total
present  value  of  all  now  existing  capital  would  be
represented  by  the  parallelogram  ABF'I;  its  total
future  earnings,  computed  on  the  basis  of  its  margi-
nal productivity,  by  the  parallelogram  ADFBy  and
total  interest  or  surplus  which  would  come  to  those
who  buy  the  capital  at  its  present  value  and  wait  for
its  product  to  mature  would  be  represented  by  the
parallelogram  F'IFB.  The  annual  interest  would
have  to  be  computed  by  dividing  this  gross  amount
by  the  average  lifetime  of  the  now  existing  capital.
This  would  give  the  lump  sum  going  as  interest  to
the  owners  of  capital  each  year. The  annual  rate  of


/ ^ OF THE

ji UNIVERSITY

■"'^  Interest  249

interest  would  have  to  be  computed  by  finding  what
percentage  the  annual  interest  is  of  the  total  present
value  of  the  capital.

Land  seems  to  yield  interest  in  the  same  way,
especially  when  looked  at  from  the  standpoint  of
the  individual  buyer.  The  demand  for  land,  like  the
demand  for  capital,  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  the
buyer  must  wait  for  his  returns  through  a  series  of
years.  Consequently,  no  one  will  pay  a  price  for  it
which  will  at  all  approximate  the  total  amount  of  its
future  earnings.  Since  land,  irrespective  of  improve-
ments, is  practically  indestructible,  the  sum  total  of
its  future  earnings  is  practically  unlimited.  But  in
order  to  realize  such  a  return  it  would  be  necessary
to  wait  for  a  longer  period  of  time  than  the  ordinary
mortal  cares  even  to  take  into  consideration.  A  sum
equal  to  its  net  earnings  for  a  period  of  thirty  years
is  considered  a  good  price  for  land,  even  in  the  most
thrifty  communities.  All  that  it  earns  in  excess  of
that  amount  may  therefore  be  considered  as  the  inter-
est on  the  investment.  But  after  such  a  piece  of
land  has  been  in  the  same  family  for  a  few  genera-
tions, all  its  earnings  may  be  considered  as  a  surplus,
since  the  original  investment  would  have  been
wiped  out.

i The^^^^^f^apital,  as  we  have  seen,  must^ always
deduct  a  certain  part  of  its  earnings  for  the  purpose


250  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

ofjeplacing  it,  and  only  thp  surplus  is  interest ;  but
there  is  an  indestructible  element  in  land  which  does
not  have  to  be  replaced  because  it  never  wears  out.
Looked  at  broadly,  all  the  income  from  this  inde-
structible element  is  surplus.  He  who  first  appropri-
ated it  got  it  for  nothing.  If  it  ever  returns  him  an
income  (and  it  does  not  always,  some  land  owing  its
whole  value  to  its  improvements  and  artificial  fertili-
zation), that  income  is  not  reduced  by  the  necessity
of  getting  back  the  original  cost.  Even  the  buyer
who  pays  a  price  for  it  is  under  no  necessity  of
deducting  anything  from  its  earnings  in  order  to
replace  it  or  to  prevent  its  deterioration.  The  origi-
nal price  which  he  paid  for  it  may  be  regarded  as
being  maintained  in  the  land  itself.  To  be  sure,  even
this  indestructible  element  in  the  land  may  decUne  in
value  because  of  general  social  changes ;  but  such  a
decline,  like  a  rise  in  value  for  similar  reasons,  is  in-
dependent of  any  labor  or  expense  which  the  owner
himself  bears  or  shirks ;  it  is  not  to  be  attributed  to
his  failure  to  keep  up  repairs.  Since,  in  the  modern
world,  the  chances  of  a  rise  in  value  are  rather  better
than  the  chances  of  a  fall,  we  are  well  within  the
bounds  of  safety  when  we  say  that  the  average  piece
of  land  maintains  the  purchase  price  of  the  indestruc-
tible element  in  it  without  expense  to  the  buyer.  He
can  keep  it  for  a  period  of  years  and  then  sell  it  for


Interest  251

the  former  price,  meanwhile  having  received  an  in-
come from  it.  In  such  a  case,  the  whole  of  the
income  is  a  surplus.  But  since  there  is  no  such  inde-
structible element  in  any  form  of  capital,  the  whole
of  the  earnings  of  capital  is  never  a  surplus.  There-
fore, though  the  rent  of  land  resembles  interest  in
certain  points,  the  differences  are  sufficient,  especially
when  we  consider  city  land,  whose  value  lies  pri-
marily in  its  indestructible  elements  of(space,  support,
and  location)  to  warrant  our  treatment  of  rent  in  a
class  by  itself.

Different  forms  of  capital  differ  greatly  as  to  the
length  of  time  they  will  last.  Some,  like  the  coal  in
the  furnace  or  the  ice  in  the  refrigerator,  last  only  a
few  minutes  or  hours  at  most ;  others,  such  as  build-
ings and  drainage  systems,  last  so  long  as  to  almost
resemble  land  in  point  of  durability.  But  they  are
all  alike  in  being  perishable  sooner  or  later,  and  in
having  to  produce  enough  in  their  lifetime,  however
brief,  to  more  than  replace  themselves  if  their  owners
are  to  derive  any  income  from  them.  The  ton  of
coal,  during  the  brief  period  when  it  is  burning  under
the  boiler,  must  add  enough  to  the  product  of  the
community  to  buy  another  ton  of  coal  and  leave
something  over,  or  else  its  destruction  does  not  pay.
The  product  of  a  piece  of  capital,  however  evanescent
its  form,  is  determined  by  the  principle  of  marginal


^5^  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

productivity,  though  in  explaining  that  principle  the
illustrations  were  all  drawn  from  the  more  durable
forms  of  capital.  That  is,  the  more  tons  of  coal  there
are  to  be  used  in  any  community  in  comparison  with
all  the  other  factors,  the  less  each  one  will  be  able  to
add,  during  its  brief  lifetime,  to  the  total  product  of
the  community.  This  applies  also  to  such  fugitive
forms  of  capital  as  materials  of  production  which  are
entering  the  factories  or  stores  on  one  day  as  raw
materials,  and  seeking  customers  as  finished  products
the  next.  Each  one  is  a  means  of  adding  something
to  the  net  income  of  its  temporary  owner  during  that
more  or  less  brief  period  when  it  is  in  the  position  of
raw  or  partly  finished  goods, —  in  other  words,  while  it
is  still  capital.  Each  one  is  normally  expected  to  sell
for  a  price  which  will  cover  its  original  cost,  or  re-
place it  with  another  one  like  it,  besides  the  cost  of
working  on  it,  and  in  addition  something  extra  for
the  waiting  which  must  transpire  between  the  time  of
its  purchase  as  raw  material  and  its  sale  as  finished
product.

All  forms  of  capital,  however  durable  or  evanes-
cent, are  alike  also  in  the  particular  that  they  require
waiting  during  a  longer  or  shorter  period.  The  coal
which  is  quickly  consumed  had  to  be  produced  first,
and  some  one  must  carry  that  cost  of  production.
It  may  be  the  miner  who  mines  it,  the  mine  operator


Interest  253

who  pays  the  miner  his  wages,  or  the  manufacturer
who  buys  it  of  the  mine  operator,  or  it  may  be  all
three  together;  but  usually  the  manufacturer  who
uses  the  coal  will  have  paid  for  a  supply  in  advance
of  its  actual  consumption,  in  which  case  he  will  have
to  wait  for  its  product.  Between  the  waiting  for
the  product  of  the  coal  and  that  of  the  building  in
which  it  is  used  there  is  only  a  difference  of  degree.
As  the  building  is  expected  normally  to  earn  enough
during  its  lifetime  of  a  hundred  years  to  pay  for
another  building,  besides  a  surplus  fund  to  compen-
sate for  waiting,  so  the  coal  is  normally  expected  to
earn  enough  during  its  shorter  lifetime  to  pay  for  an
equal  amount  of  coal,  besides  a  small  surplus  to
compensate  for  a  short  waiting  period.  But  if  we
consider  a  series  of  tons  of  coal,  there  may  be  a
considerable  amount  of  waiting  in  the  aggregate.
However,  that  part  of  the  manufacturer's  capital
which  consists  of  coal  amounts  only  to  the  quantity
on  hand  at  any  one  time.  If  we  may  assume  that
he  burns  only  one  ton  a  day  for  three  hundred  days
in  the  year,  and  that  he  buys  each  day's  supply  only
one  day  ahead,  his  total  capital  in  the  form  of  coal
does  not  equal  three  hundred  tons,  but  one  ton.  If,
at  the  end  of  the  year,  each  ton  has  earned  enough
on  the  average  to  replace  itself  and  a  fraction  over,
so  that  he  finds  himself  at  the  end  of  the  year  with


254  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

one  ton  on  hand,  as  he  had  in  the  beginning,  with
ten  per  cent  of  the  value  of  one  ton  of  coal  in  addi-
tion, he  may  consider  that  his  capital  has  earned
ten  per  cent  interest.  And  all  that  has  been  said
of  coal  is  true  also  of  any  other  form  of  capital.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  anything  which
[increases  the  spirit  of  thrift,  frugality,  and  foresight,
will  reduce  the  marginal  sacrifice  of  abstinence,  and
correspondingly  increase  the  supply  of  capital  and_
reduce  the  rate  of  interest.  It  is  even  conceivable
that  the  desire  to  save  and  provide  for  the  future
might  increase  to  such  an  extent  as  to  eliminate
interest  altogether.  This  could  happen  if  capital
should  increase  to  that  point  where  its  marginal
productivity  would  just  equal  its  marginal  cost  of
production.  If  people  were  so  anxious  to  save  and
provide  for  the  future  as  to  offer  such  prices  for
the  different  forms  of  capital  that  their  total  earn-
ings would  just  cover  the  price  paid,  there  would
be  no  interest.  This  could  take  place  without  their
ceasing  to  discount  the  future  in  the  sense  in  which
Bohm-Bawerk  uses  that  expression.  Referring  again
to  Diagram  III  on  page  233  of  the  present  chapter,
if  the  difference  between  our  present  appreciation
of  our  present  and  our  future  wants  should  grow  so
small  that  each  one  would  save  the  last  five  sections
of  his  income  instead  of the  last  three,  as  repre-


K


Interest  255

sented  in  the  diagram,  it  would  greatly  increase  the
amount  that  would  be  saved  without  the  necessity
of  interest  as  an  inducement.  In  Diagram  V  on
page  243,  this  increase  in  saving  would  be  shown  by
moving  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  cost  curve
and  the  abstinence  curve  further  to  the  right.  It
might  conceivably  move  it  as  far  to  the  right  as  the
point  B\  where  the  cost  curve  intersects  the  produc-
tivity curve.  .In  that  case  there  would  be  no  such
thing  as  interest,  though  there  would  still  be  the  fact
that  men  appreciate  the  present  more  highly  than
the  future.  However,  all  this  is  mere  speculation,
for  such  a  condition  of  affairs  is  not  likely  to  occur.
The  risk  of  losing  even  one's  principal  is  a  power-
ful discourager  of  saving.  However  much  men  may
prefer  present  to  future  gratifications  when  both  are
relatively  certain,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they
still  more  prefer  present  certain  gratifications  to
future  unbertain  ones.  And  it  is  a  difficult  matter
to  determine  how  much  of  the  sacrifice  of  saving  is
due  to  this  uncertainty.  Economic  writers  generally
have  excluded  the  payment  for  risk  from  interest,
though  some  have  distinguished  net  from  gross  inter-
est by  defining  the  latter  as  including  payment  for
risk  and  the  former  as  excluding  it.  But  they  usu-
ally have  in  mind  only  the  more  concrete  and  meas-
urable forms  of  risk,  such  as  those  resulting  from


256  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

fire  and  flood  and  fluctuations  in  the  market,  leav-
ing out  of  account  such  non-measurable  forms  as
the  chance  that  the  saver  may  not  live  to  enjoy  his
savings,  or  that  if  he  does  he  may  be  so  well  off
financially  in  the  future  that  his  savings  would  not
then  be  needed  so  much  as  in  the  present.  It  does
not  seem  possible  to  eliminate  risks  of  the  latter
type  from  the  normal  sacrifice  of  saving,  and  there-
fore, in  so  far  as  they  discourage  the  accumulation  of
capital,  they  may  be  said  to  add  to  the  rate  of  interest.
But  the  more  concrete  and  calculable  forms  of  risk,
such  as  were  mentioned  above,  are  discouragers  of
enterprise  rather  than  of  saving,  and  are  therefore  a
source  of  profits,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  following
chapter.

If  the  foregoing  argument  is  correct,  it  would  seem
that  the  productivity  and  the  sacrifice  theories  of  inter-
est are  to  be  harmonized  in  much  the  same  manner
as  the  cost  and  utility  theories  of  value.  This  balanc-
ing of  opposing  forces  which  has  been  developed  by
recent  writers  in  their  discussions  of  value  seems
capable  of  a  much  wider  application  than  it  has  yet
received.  This  chapter  is  an  attempt  to  apply  it  to
the  theory  of  interest,  as  the  last  two  chapters  have
been  to  apply  it  to  the  theories  of  wages  and  rent.

The  question  as  to  whether  or  not  one  man  ought
to  be  allowed  by  law  to  receive  interest  from  another


Interest  257

resolves  itself,  as  most  other  political  questions,  into
the  simple  question  of  expediency.  Without  con-
sidering the  question  from  the  standpoint  of  abstract
ethics,  the  argument  from  expediency  is  sufficient  to
justify  interest.  Were  it  possible  to  prohibit  it,  there
would  be  at  least  two  unfortunate  results.  First,  much
of  the  capital  would  be  under  inferior  management.
The  reason  A  hires  capital  of  B  is  because  he  can
make  better  use  of  it  than  B  can.  He  can  make
it  produce  more.  If  therefore  B  were  forbidden
to  receive  payment  for  the  use  of  his  capital,  either
society  would  lose  through  his  inferior  management
or  he  would  consume  it.  This  brings  us  to  the
second  unfortunate  result.  It  would  decrease  the
amount  of  saving.  Capital  to  assist  in  carrying  on
industry  would  become  scarcer,  and  society  would
suffer  from  a  diminished  supply  of  goods  with  a  cor-
responding advance  in  cost.  Again,  if  the  owner  of
capital  can  secure  an  income  from  its  use,  there  does
not  seem  to  be  any  good  reason  why  he  should  not
receive  a  like  advantage  if  he  is  asked  to  lend  it.

Whether  the  owner  of  capital  should  be  allowed  to
derive  an  income  from  its  use  is  a  slightly  more
difficult  problem,  but  it  also  must  be  determined  on
grounds  of  social  expediency.  Aside  from  the  fact
that  any  attempt  to  prevent  it  would  be  abortive,
there  is  the  further  fact  that  even  if  such  an  attempt


V.


ISS  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

could  succeed,  it  would  promptly  check  the  tendency
to  save.  The  supply  of  capital  would  then  be
limited  to  that  amount  which  men  would  be  willing  to
save  without  any  inducement  in  the  way  of  a  future
surplus  to  compensate  for  the  present  disadvantage
of  saving  or  waiting.  Referring  again  to  Diagrams
V  and  VI,  pages  243  and  246,  the  supply  of  capital
would  be  represented  by  the  line  AK  if  the  owners
of  capital  were  not  allowed  to  derive  any  interest
from  it.  Even  those  who  object  to  the  interest  on
capital  will  not  pay  for  a  piece  of  capital  all  that  it
will  earn  in  its  lifetime,  and  not  to  pay  that  much  is
to  receive  interest  on  it.  Paying  less  for  it  than  its
total  earnings  during  its  lifetime,  and  then  waiting  for
those  total  earnings  to  mature,  puts  them  in  possession
of  a  surplus,  and  this  is  taking  interest  as  truly  as
when  one  man  lends  money  to  another  for  a  stipu-
lated rate  of  interest.  The  income  of  the  wealthy
capitalist  who  owns  factories  or  railroads  is  of  the
same  sort  and  derived  from  the  same  source,  though
on  a  larger  scale,  provided,  of  course,  he  has  not
secured  a  monopoly  or  otherwise  swindled  the  public.

COLLATERAL  READING

E.  Bohm-Bawerk,  Positive  Theory  of  Capital,  Books  V-VII.
Alfred  Marshall,  Principles  of  Economics,  Book  VI,  Chap-
ter VI.
J.  B.  Clark,  The  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Chapter  XIII.


CHAPTER  VII
PROFITS

Though  broadly defined as the  income  of the .
business  man  who  receives  neither  stipulated  wages, j
rent,  nor  interest,  the  meaning  of  the  term  "  profits  " /
has  been  narrowed  down  by  the  enlargement  of  the
definitions  of  the  three  other  shares. If  wages  are  the
earnings  of  all  labor,  they  must,  of  course,  include
the  earnings  of  the  independent  worker,  whether  he
runs  a  small  shop  where  he  works  alone,  or  a  large
establishment  where  hundreds  are  working  for  stipu-
lated wages  under  him. Similarly,  if  rent  is  the
earnings of land,  it  must  include the earnings of
the  business  man's  own  land,  and  for  the  same  rea-
son interest  must  include  the  earnings  of  his  own
capital.

It  will  at  once  be  objected  that  this  process  will
ehminate  profits  altogether  by  including  all  incomes
under  the  other  three  heads.  But  this  would  not  be
quite  true  for  several  reasons.  In  the  first  place,
the  actual  amounts  which  the  business  man  pays  for
the hire of these agents of production are  only

259


260  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

approximately  equal  to  their  marginal  products,  and

the  closeness  of  that  approximation  varies. He  will

not  knowingly  pay  more  than  that,  because  to  do  so

would  involve  a  loss. Of  course  the  owners  of  the

factors  of  production  will  not  knowingly  take  less

than  their  marginal products,  because  that  is  what

\  they  are  really  worth,  and  that  is  what  they  can  get

-  if  they  are  persistent  and  skilful  in  bargaining. But

it  is  never  known  precisely  what  their  marginal  prod-

\ucts  are  at  any  given  time. Under  stable  conditions

of  industry,  experience  would determine  that  point

/with  a  fair  degree  of  precision,  and  employers  would

}  bid  against  one  another  for  any  factor  which  could

,be had for less than its  marginal product  until

they  would  bring  up its price. In  any  case the

approximation  is  brought  about  by  the  process  known

as  the  higgling  of  the  market,  and this  continual

higgling would,  under stable conditions,  keep the

I  price  of  the  use  of  any  factor  very  near  the  amount

\of  its  mcirg'.nal  product.

But  conditions  in  the  modern  industrial  world  are
never  quite  stable,  and  under  unstable  conditions
it  is  much  more  difficult  to  tell  in  advance  what  the
marginal  product  of  any  factor  will  be.  In  general
the  business  man  is  more  careful  to  avoid  losing  that
which  he  already  has  than  to  gain  something  in
addition. Consequently  he  will  be  pretty  sure to


Profits  261

keep  on  the  safe  side  when  making  an  offer  to  the
laborer,  the  landlord,  or  the  capitalist.  Moreover,  he
is  in  a  better  position  to  know  what  their  factors  are
approximately  worth  than  the  other  men  are.  The
result  is  that  the  factors  of  production  are  more  fre-
quently employed  at  a  price  slightly  under  than
slightly  *  over  their  marginal  productivity.  Those
business  men  who  make  the  mistake  of  paying  the
latter  price,  will  either  correct  it  as  soon  as  they  find
it  out,  or  they  will  be  eliminated  from  business  by
their  failure,  while  those  who  pay  the  former  price
will  be  more  likely  to  survive.  This  means  that  the
business  men  as  a  class,  by  reason  of  their  superior
advantages  in  bargaining,  receive  a  share  in  addition
to  their  net  wages,  rent,  and  interest.

The  share  which  results  from  the  business  man's\
superior bargaining power cannot be called the \
product  of  the  business  man,  for  superior  bargaining j
produces  nothing. It  adds  nothing  to  the  amount
which  the  community  can  produce,  but  only  affects
the  distribution  of  the  product. It  is  a  purely  acquisi-
tive function,  and  is  therefore  a  factor  in  distribution,
but  not properly  a  productive  factor. In  the  last
analysis,  the profits  of the  superior bargaining of.,
business  men,  as  a  class,  come  out  of  the  wages,  rent, |.
or  interest,  of  the  labor,  land,  or  capital  which  they
hire. What  one  business  man  gains  off  another  adds  '


262  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

nothing  to  the  general  share  of  profits ;  but  in  so  far
as  he  out-bargains  the  laborer,  the  landlord,  or  the
capitalist,  he  does  add  something  to  the  general
share  of  the  business  men's  profits  by  taking  some-
thing from  the  shares  of  the  other  factors.

Care  should  be  taken  to  distinguish  this  from  the\
share  which  the  business  man  earns  by  the  superior  1
organization  and management  of  the  factors  which  1
he  employs. If  he  can  take  charge  of  a  group  of  "
factors  which  would otherwise  be  able to produce
$100,000  worth  of  product,  and  so  manage  them  that
the  whole  combination  can  produce  ;^  11 0,000  worth,
by  the  law  of  marginal  productivity,  that  extra  $10,000
worth  is  his  product. That  is  the  amount  which  the  •
community  is  able  to  produce  with  his  help  over  and
above  what  it  could  produce  without  his  help,  and
this  is  the  only  sense  in  which  any  factor  can  be  said
to  be  productive. But  this  share  belongs  properly
under  the  head  of  wages  rather  than  profits. It  is
due  to  the  labor  of  the  business  man,  and  that  labor
is  productive  in  the  same  sense  that  the  labor  of  any-
one else  is  productive. His  labor  is  largely  mental,
it  is  true,  but  so  also  is  that  of  his  accountant. As  a
matter  of  fact,  all  labor  is  more  or less  mental in
character. That  is  to  say,  all  labor  combines  both
mental and physical exertion, the  only difference
being  that  in  some  forms  the  mental  element  is  rela-


Profits  263

tively  more  important,  and  in  others  relatively  less
important.  Moreover,  the  amount  which  the  business
man  can  earn  in  this  way  is  determined  in  precisely
the  same  manner,  and  by  the  same  law,  as  the  earn-
ings of  any  other  laborer.

The  law  of  marginal  productivity  can  be  applied
to  the  earnings  of  business  management  as  well  as
to  the  wages  of  other  labor.  The  amount  which  \
any  individual  business  man  can  get  by  means  of
his  superior  management  (not  through  his  superior
bargaining  capacity)  depends  upon  the  amount
which  he  can  add  to  the  product  of  the  community
over  and  above  the  amount  which  it  could  produce
without  his  help.  That  determines  how  much  his
help  is  wanted.  But  this  amount  decreasesr  as  the
number  of  business  managers  increases,  and  in-
creases as  the  number  decreases,  in  proportion  to  the
other  factors.  As  was  pointed  out  in  Chapter  II,
a  law  of  diminishing  returns  applies  to  the  product
of  a  given  amount  of  the  other  factors  when  man-
aged by  increasing  numbers  of  managers.  That
is  to  say,  the  product  cannot  be  doubled,  trebled,
and  quadrupled  by  merely  doubling,  trebling,  and
quadrupling  the  number  of  business  managers.
This  means  that  each  additional  manager  can  add
less  and  less  to  the  total  product  as  the  number  of  |\,
managers  increases  more  and  more.


264  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

Even  the  work  of  devising  and  initiating  im-
provements when  performed  by  the  business  man
himself  instead  of  his  employees,  comes  under  the
general  description  of  labor,  and  its  reward  under
the  general  law  of  wages.  If  the  improvement  is
made  by  an  inventor  who  does  not  himself  own
the  establishment  in  which  it  is  to  be  used,  his
reward  is  clearly  wages  rather  than  profits,  whether
he  be  working  for  stipulated  wages,  or  working  inde-
pendently and  selling  his  inventions.  This  being
the  case,  there  is  no  good  reason  why  a  reward
earned  in  a  similar  way  by  the  business  man  him-
self should  not  be  called  wages.  If  the  inventor  be
working  for  stipulated  wages  in  a  large  manufac-
turing establishment,  he  may  be  said  to  be  the  pro-
ducer of  the  amount  which  his  invention  adds  to
the  product  of  the  estabHshment.  Making  allow-
ance for  the  risk  of  the  owner,  and  the  discount-
ing of  the  future,  his  real  earnings  are  equal  to
that  amount ;  and  if  his  employer  pays  him  such  a
sum,  there  will  be  no  employer's  profits.  In  so  far
as  the  employer  discounts  that  product  because  of  its
distance  in  the  future,  paying  the  inventor  only  the
present  worth  of  that  future  product,  he  will  then
realize  the  current  rate  of  interest  on  his  invest-
ment,—  that  is,  on  the  wages  he  pays  the  inventor.
The  same  would  be  true  in  case  the  inventor  works


Profits  265

independently  and  sells  his  invention  to  the  business
man.  If  the  latter  pays  the  present  worth  of  the
future  product  of  the  invention,  he  makes  no  profits
but  only  interest  on  his  investment.  But  if  he  suc-
ceeds in  out-bargaining  the  inventor  in  either  case,
paying  him  less  than  the  present  worth  of  the  future
product  of  the  invention,  or  if  the  uncertainty  of
success  induces  the  inventor  to  part  with  his  inven-
tion for  a  small  sum,  then  and  only  then  will  the
business  man  secure  profits.  \  Profits  are  in  this
case  also  the  result  either  of  superior  bargaining  or
of  the  uncertainties  attending  the  introduction  of
an  improvement.

In  the  case  of  a  franchise  or  other  special  privi-
lege granted  by  the  public  to  a  business  man  or
corporation,  there  may  or  may  not  be  profits  accord-
ing to  the  terms  upon  which  the  privilege  is  acquired.
If  the  public  charges  what  the  privilege  is  worth,  —
that  is,  if  it  gets  fair  terms  out  of  the  business  man
or  corporation, — the  latter  may  earn  interest  on  the
investment  and  wages  of  superintendence,  but  no
profits  out  of  the  franchise  itself.  This  would  not,
of  course,  preclude  the  possibility  of  profits  from
other  sources,  —  for  example,  from  the  out-bargaining
of  laborers  or  lenders  of  capital.  But  if  the  business
man  or  corporation  succeeds  in  out-bargaining  the
public,  and  thus  acquiring  the  privilege  for  less  than


266  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

it  is  worth,  it  may  secure  a  surplus  in  the  way  of
profits  over  and  above  what  may  be  secured  by  the
ordinary  business  man.

A  catalogue  of  the  special  methods  by  which  busi-
ness men  of  certain  low  grades  of  morals  succeed
in  out-bargaining  the  consumer  and  thus  secur-
ing profits  for  themselves,  would  make  an  interest-
ing study.  It  is  only  necessary  to  mention  such
businesses  as  the  manufacture  of  patent  medicines
and  similar  articles,  the  adulteration  of  food  products,
and  the  manufacture  of  shoddy  goods  of  various
kinds  —  to  say  nothing  of  lobbying  for  tariff  duties  —
to  indicate  what  a  fruitful  field  these  methods  fur-
nish to  those  whose  moral  standards  will  permit'
them  to  enter  it.

On  a  slightly  higher  plane,  but  still  a  distinctly
low  one,  is  a  method  which  has  been  growing  in
importance  in  recent  years. This  may  be  called  the^
method  of  terrorism,  and  it  consists  in  the forma-  \
tion  of  an  organization  among  the  producers  of a  I
certain commodity for the purpose of controlling/
the  business. Such  organizations uniformly  adopt
various  underhanded and  unscrupulous  methods  of
driving  competitors  out. In  short,  they  attempt  to
terrorize the  business  by  making it unsafe for a
competitor  to  enter. Ordinarily  a  competitor  will
not  enter  an  unsafe  business until  the  profits  be-


Profits  267

come  high  enough  to  tempt  him  to  face  the  danger
of  loss.  By  thus  making  competitors  reluctant  to
enter  tlie  field,  the  organization  is  able  to  maintain
a  level  of  profits  determined  by  the  degree  of  risk,
which  it  is  able  to  inflict  upon  its  competitors.  That
is,  the  more  effectively  the  organization  can  terrorize
the  trade,  and  the  greater  the  artificial  risks  it  can
create,  the  less  competition  it  will  have  and  the
larger  profits  it  can  make.  This  is  the  method
uniformly  adopted  by  trusts,  and  is,  in  spite  of  the
claims  put  forth  by  their  advocates,  the  chief  purpose
of  their  organization.

These  methods  are  all  alike  in  the  one  particular -^
that they are attempts to secure advantages in  f
bargaining  which  will  enable  their beneficiaries to
secure  a  share  in  distribution  over  and  above  what ."
could  naturally  be  earned. They  deserve  a  place  in^^^ji^
a  discussion of the problem of  distribution solely ^
because  they  are  recognized  methods  of  doing  busi-
ness, and  are  not  yet  sufficiently  condemned  by  the
moral  sense  of  the  community  to  place  them  in  the
same  category  with  those  of  the  thief,  the  counter-
feiter,  and the confidence man. These men also
secure  shares  in  distribution  by  the  exercise  of  their
mental  faculties,  but  these  shares,  like  those  of  the
aforementioned  classes,  represent  no  service  rendered.
However,  the latter class of occupations are not


268  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

recognized  as  legitimate  lines  of  business,  and  their
shares  are  therefore  not  usually  considered  in  a
treatise  on  distribution.

But  aside  from  the  artificial  hazards  created  by  the
trusts  and  similar  organizations,  there  are  certain
natural  risks  in  business  which  are  due  to  the  machi-
nations of  no  one  in  particular.  There  are  certain
gains  as  well  as  losses  in  business  which  are  due  to
circumstances  over  which  no  individual  or  definable
group  of  individuals  exercises  any  control.  Unpre-
ventable  changes  are  constantly  occurring  in  the
market  to  affect  the  prices  of  various  commodities,
and  it  is  the  independent  business  man  who  gains
most  or  loses  most  by  these  changes.  The  labor,
land,  and  capital  which  he  employs  will  usually  have
been  contracted  for  in  advance  ^t  stipulated  rates,
and  these  rates  do  not  adjust  themselves  at  once  to
the  changed  conditions.  During  the  interval,  the
employer  is  either  gaining  or  losing  by  the  change  in
the  market.

It  might  be  expected*  that  the  losses  would  offset
the  gains  if  the  business  man  had  absolutely  no
means  of  foretelling  the  future.  But  one  of  the
functions  of  the  business  man  is  to  prognosticate,  as
best  he  can,  the  probable  conditions  of  the  market;
and  there  are  signs  and  indications  which  aid  him  in
this  task. Probably  no  one  can  tell  accurately  what


Profits  269

the  conditions  of  any  market  will  be  a  year,  a
month,  or  even  a  week  hence ;  but  capable  business
men  can,  on  the  average,  and  in  the  long  run,  come
nearer  telling  than  the  incapable  ones,  and  still
nearer  than  those  who  **  go  it  bHnd,"  paying  no
attention  whatever  to  signs  and  indications.  It  is
like  guessing  at  the  weather.  No  one  can  tell  posi-
tively, even  one  hour  in  advance,  what  the  weather
will  be,  but  a  capable  farmer  or  sailor  recognizes
certain  signs  and  indications  which  assist  him  in
guessing,  and  the  result  is  that  fewer  are  caught  in
storms  than  would  be  if  they  had  to  guess  blindly,
without  any  indications  whatever  to  guide  them.
Even  the  business  man's  limited  ability  to  prognosti-
cate the  conditions  of  the  market  will  make  the  losses
in  the  long  run  appreciably  less  than  the  gains,
because  business  men  will  guess  right  more  often
than  wrong.

The  incomes  which  business  men  secure  through
their  ability  to  adjust  themselves  to  changes  in  the
market,  though  not  technically  produced,  are  yet  in
a  sense  earned.  By  putting  their  capital  at  hazard
and  agreeing  to  pay  stipulated  wages,  rent,  and
interest  for  the  factors  which  they  hire,  they  relieve
the  owners  of  these  factors  from  a  certain  amount  of
risk.  Even  these  men  may  lose  through  the  failure
of  a  business  man,  but  not,  under  the  law,  until  he


270  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

has  lost  all  his  own  capital.  Their  risk  is  therefore
reduced  by  having  his  capital  placed  in  the  position
of  greatest  hazard,  —  that  is,  in  the  position  where
losses  strike  it  first  and  never  reach  the  other  factors
until  it  has  all  been  wiped  out.  In  so  far  as  these
other  factors  are  made  somewhat  safer  by  this  pro-
cess they  can  well  afford  to  receive  something  less  on
the  average  than  they  might  otherwise  receive,  leav-
ing the  business  man  something  of  a  surplus  in  the
long  run  to  compensate  him  for  his  greater  risk.

This  part  of  the  business  man's  profits  is  analogous
to  the  profits  of  an  insurance  company,  which  are,
of course, different from the premiums received.
The  real  reward  of  the  insurer,  whether  he be_an  j
ordinary  business  man  or  a  chartered  insurance  com-  j
pany,  is to  be  found in  the  excess  of gains  over/
losses. In  the  case  of  the  insurance  company  it  is
the  total  premiums  received  for  assuming the risk
minus  the  loses  consequent  upon  assuming  the  risk.
Here  the  question  arises :  How  does  there  happen  to
be  a  difference .? Why  will  the  patrons  of  an  insur-
ance company  pay  it  more  than  their  total  losses,  thus
leaving  the  company  a profit.? Evidently  because
the  risk  to  the  insurer  is  less  than  to  the  insured^'
In  the  case  of  fire  insurance,  for  example,  the  loss
to  the  insurer  in  case  of  fire  would  include  only  the
money  value  of  the  buildings  and  goods  destroyed ;


Profits


271


but  in  the  case  of  the  insured  it  would  also  include
shrunken  credit  and  crippled  business.  Having
capital  of  his  own,  his  credit  is  good  for  a  certain
amount  in  addition,  but  a  part,  at  least,  of  that  credit
vanishes  with  his  capital.  More  important  still  is
the  effect  of  a  large  and  sudden  loss  as  compared
with  small  annual  payments  upon  his  consumption.
These  annual  sums  are  paid,  as  it  were,  out  of  the
y


\B


^HvO


A  F


GB


last  and  least  necessary  part  of  his  income.  In  order
to  make  these  payments,  he  gives  up  only  the  enjoy-
ment of  those  things  which  he  can  best  get  along
without.  But  a  large  and  sudden  loss  may  deprive
him  of  even  the  necessaries  for  a  time.  This  can  be
illustrated  by  means  of  the  above  diagram.

Let  the  income  of  a  certain man be measured
along  the line  OX^  and the utility  to  him  of the


272  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

various  parts  of  that  income  along  the  line  OY.
That  is  to  say,  if  his  income  were  represented  by  the
line  OFy  its  marginal  utility  would  be  represented
by  the  line  EF;  but  being  represented  by  the  Hne
OBy  its  marginal  utility  is  represented  by  the  line
CB.  Now  let  us  suppose  that  his  business  is  so
hazardous  that  he  suffers  a  loss  of  ;^iooo  by  fire
once  every  eleven  years  on  the  average.  He  could
well  afford  to  pay  an  annual  premium  of  ;^ioo  for
the  sake  of  being  insured.  A  hundred  dollars  paid
in  any  one  year  would  cost  him  in  the  way  of  sacri-
fice an  amount  of  utility  represented  by  such  a
parallelogram  as  HCGB.  In  eleven  years  he  would
have  paid  ;Jiioo,  which  would  make  a  total  sacrifice
represented  by  the  parallelogram  DCAB.  But  the
loss  of  $1000  in  any  one  year  would  involve
a  sacrifice  represented  by  the  irregular  surface
ECFB.  Since  this  surface  is  larger  than  the
parallelogram  DCAB^  he  would  lose  less  in  the
way  of  real  utility  by  paying  $1100  in  eleven  years
than  by  losing ;^iooo  in  any  one  year.

In  the  case  of  ordinary  insurance,  the  shifting  of
the  risk  from  the  insured  to  the  insurer  does not
diminish  the number  of losses to  be  borne,  but  it^
diminishes  the  amount  of  risk  because  the  loss  can/
be  more  easily  borne  by  those  upon whom it  is
shifted ;  it  bears  less  heavily  upon  the  insurer  than


Profits  273

it  would  upon  the  insured.  It  is  for  this  reason  that
the  insured  can  afford  to  pay  in  premiums  more  than
enough  to  enable  the  insurer  to  meet  the  losses.
This  familiar  principle  of  insurance  explains  how  it
happens  that  there  are  profits  in  the  insurance  busi-
ness.

It  is  evident  that  in  the  case  of  the  business  man,
as  was  shown  to  be  true  in  the  case  of  the  insurance
company,  so  much  of  his  gross  income  as  is  neces-
sary to  cover  his  real  risk,  or  to  make  good  his
losses,  is  not  to  be  classed  as  profits.  Only  that
which  he  wins  because  of  favorable  changes  in  the
market,  over  and  above  what  he  loses  because  of
unfavorable  changes,  can  be  so  classed.  How  does
there  happen  to  be  a  surplus  in  this  case }  It  must
be,  as  in  the  former  case,  because  the  risk  to  him
is  less  than  it  would  be  to  those  whom  he  relieves  of
it.  As  compared  with  the  laborers,  it  is  probable
that  a  given  loss  would  affect  him  less  seriously  than
it  would  them.  The  loss  of  any  considerable  part  of
their  wages,  which  would  frequently  happen  if  they
bore  their  own  risk,  or  took  their  own  chances  with
the  market  for  their  products,  would  mean  serious
deprivation.  But  there  is  no  reason  for  believing
that  a  given  loss  would  on  the  average  affect  the
business  man  less  seriously  than  it  would  the  land-
lord and  the  capitalist  of  whom  he  hires  his  land  and


274  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

capital.  They  are  usually  in  as  good  a  position  to
bear  a  loss  as  he  is.  But  there  are  reasons  for
believing  that  the  skilful  business  man  will  experi^
ence  fewer  losses  than  would  be  experienced  by
those  whom  he  relieves  of  risk,  whether  they  be
laborers,  landlords,  or  capitaHsts.  This  is  due  to  no
actuarial  principle,  as  in  the  case  of  the  insurance
company,  but  to  the  business  man's  superior  fore-^
sight  and  skill  in  avoiding  losses.  That  is  a  part  of
his  special  function,  and  in  the  performance  of  it  he
can  be  assumed  to  develop  special  skill.  This  part
of  his  income  is,  therefore,  due  to  the  fact  that  he  is
able  to  avoid  losses  more  effectively  than  the  others
whom  he  relieves  of  their  risks.  Even  if  he  pays
them  what  they  might  be  expected  to  earn  on  the
average  and  in  the  long  run,  —  counting  the  losses
with  the  gains  resulting  from  fluctuations  of  the
market  and  other  fortuitous  circumstances,  —  by  so
managing  the  business  that  the  losses  are  reduced
and  the  gains  increased,  the  business  man  will  find
himself  in  the  possession  of  a  surplus  without  having
robbed  or  out-bargained  any  one.  This  means  that
this  part  of  hig, surplus  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  is^
able  to  reduce  the  risk  which  he  assumes  below  that'
which  the  others  would  have  had  to  carry  if  he  had
not  reHeved  them.

But  even  if the  business  man  is not able to


\


Profits  275

avoid  losses  more  successfully  than  the  others
whom  he  relieves  of  risk,  he  may  still  secure  an
income  through  his  function  as  a  risk-taker.  The
owner  of  any  factor  of  production  will  ordinarily
accept  as  hire  something  less  than  its  average
marginal  product,  on  condition  that  he  be  relieved
of  risk.  The  loss  of  a  given  sum  out  of  one's  cus-
tomary income  is  a  matter  of  more  concern  than
the  gain  of  an  equal  sum  in  addition  to  one's  cus-
tomary income.  Almost  any  one  would  therefore
accept  an  assured  income  in  preference  to  an
uncertain  one,  even  though  the  chances  were  that
the  uncertain  one  would  average,  in  the  long  run,
something  more  than  the  assured  one.  Assured
wages,  interest,  or  rent,  for  example,  of  j^iooo  a
year,  would  be  accepted  by  the  average  man  in
preference  to  the  uncertain  earnings  of  business,
even  though  these  uncertain  earnings  might  be
expected  in  the  long  run  to  average  as  high  as
l^iioo  a  year.  By  taking  advantage  of  this  ten-
dency in  bargaining  for  labor,  land,  and  capital,  the
business  man  will  therefore  find  himself  in  the
possession  of  a  surplus,  provided  he  does  not
fail  through  sudden  losses  before  he  has  had  time
to  profit  by  the  average  of  the  "long  run."

Let  us  suppose  that  a  given  fund  of  labor,  land,
and capital can,  on the average and  in  the  long


276  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

run,  produce  ^100,000  a  year.  That  is  the  amount
which  they  would  receive  if  they  worked  together  on
the  cooperative  plan  instead  of  hiring  themselves
to  some  employer.  But  owing  to  fluctuations
of  the  market  and  other  fortuitous  circumstances,
this  product  varies  from  year  to  year,  some  years
rising  as  high  as  ^150,000,  and  again  falling  as
low  as  ;^5o,ooo.  Rather  than  take  their  chances
with  these  ups  and  downs,  the  laborers,  landlords,
and  capitalists  will  ordinarily  be  willing  to  accept
a  stipulated  income  of  something  less  than  ;?  100,000
—  say  ^95,000  —  provided  any  one  is  able  to  make
them  such  an  offer  with  a  good  prospect  of  being
able  to  carry  out  his  contract.  In  that  case,  the
employer  will,  in  the  long  run,  have  an  income
of  1^5000  a  year  in  addition  to  the  earnings  of  his
own  labor  of  management,  or  of  his  own  land
and  capital.

If  in  addition  he  is  able  to  develop  special  skill
in  prognosticating  the  conditions  of  the  market
so  as  to  slightly  reduce  the  losses,  thereby  increas-
ing the  annual  product  to  jj  10 1,000  a  year,  he  will
have  an  average  income  of  ^6000.  Then  if  he
also  succeeds  in  out-bargaining  some  of  those
from  whom  he  hires  the  factors  of  production,  he
will  find  his  income  still  further  increased.  In
addition  to  all these methods he may,  as already


Profits  277

pointed  out,  so  organize  and  manage  the  factors
as  to  make  them  turn  out  a  larger  product  than
they  otherwise  would,  in'  which  case  he  will  secure  'Oj

earns  in this  way  really  belongs under the  wages  )0^^


a still larger  income. But  the amount  which helfi^^


of  superintendence  rather  than  under  profits.  It  "^^^
is  earned  by  the  productive  labor  of  the  business
man,  and  by  a  kind  of  labor  which  can  be,  and
frequently  is,  hired  at  a  stipulated  salary.  When
it  is  so  hired,  its  earnings  clearly  belong  under
wages  rather  than  profits,  and  there  is  no  good
reason  for  placing  it  under  a  different  head  when
it  happens  to  be  earned  by  the  business  man  him-
self. But  the  function  of  risk-taking  cannot  be
turned  over  to  an  employee  working  for  a  salary.
It  is  essentially  the  function  of  the  business  man
himself,  and  he  cannot  shift  it  to  any  one  but
another  independent  business  man  or  business  con-
cern, and  even  then  in  only  a  few  special  cases,
like  fire  insurance.  The  business  man  is  essen-
tially an  enterpriser,  or  an  entrepreneur,  as  he  is
sometimes  technically  called.^  Both  terms  signify
one  who  undertakes  or  assumes  risks.  It  is  the
reward  of  this  special  function  which,  together
with the  results  of superior  bargaining,  constitutes

1  Cf.  The  article  by  F.  B.  Hawley,  on  "  Enterprise  and  Profit,"  in
the  Quarterly  Journal  0/  Economics,  l:!loy^mh&x,  1900.


278  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

the  peculiar  income  of  the  business  man,  such  an
income  as  is  never  earned  by  any  one  except  a
business  man  who  undertakes  risks.

That  part  of  the  business  man's  income  which  is
due  to  his  ability  to  reduce  his  risk  by  his  superior
skill  in  guessing  at  the  probable  conditions  of  the
market  is  very  closely  akin  to  his  wages  of  super-
intendence, and  might  almost  as  well  be  placed
under  that  head  as  under  profits.  But  inasmuch  as
it  is  so  closely  related  to  the  function  of  risk-taking,
it  seems  better,  on  the  whole,  to  include  it  under  the
latter  head.  It  is  the  peculiar  reward  of  the  specu-
lator—  in  the  better  meaning  of  that  term  —  whose
special  skill,  if  he  has  any,  consists  in  knowing
better  than  others  when  to  buy  and  when  to  sell.
Every  business  man  is  a  speculator  in  the  sense  of
being  compelled  to  buy  in  advance  upon  an  uncer-
tain market,  and  he  is  the  one  who  profits  or  loses
by  such  transactions.  In  so  far  as  this  is  a  neces-
sary part  of  every  business,  the  income  secured  by
special  skill  in  this  direction  must  be  regarded  as
earned.

Speculation  in  the  purely  commercial  sense,  which
consists  simply  in  buying  things  when  they  are
believed  to  be  cheap  and  holding  them  for  a  rise
without  any  industrial  purpose  whatever,  is  not  a
wholly  barren  function,  though  there  are  few  com-


Profits  279

munities  in  which  it  is  not  overdone.  Wherever  it
is  necessary  that  goods  should  be  produced  a  long
time  in  advance  of  their  consumption,  it  is  also
necessary  that  some  one  should  hold  them  during
the  interval.  This  consists  not  only  in  housing  or
storing  them,  but  also  in  waiting  to  get  one's  value
out  of  them ;  and  waiting,  as  we  saw  in  the  chapter
on  Interest,  is  burdensome  when  carried  too  far.
The  producer  must  wait  a  long  time  for  his  reward,
or  the  consumer  must  buy  a  long  time  in  advance
of  his  needs,  unless  some  one  else  will  come  for-
ward and  relieve  them  both  of  the  necessity  of
waiting.  The  reward  for  waiting  is  interest,  but
in  addition  to  waiting  there  is  the  risk  of  losing.
It  is  as  necessary  that  some  one  should  risk  his
capital  as  it  is  that  some  one  should  wait.  But
no  one  is  likely  to  do  this  unless  he  is  tempted  by
the  hope  of  a  profit.  Whoever  does  it  under  such
an  inducement  is  to  that  extent  a  speculator.  To
be  sure,  he  may  be  several  other  things  besides:
he  may  be  a  storer  of  goods,  as  in  the  case  of  the
owner  of  a  warehouse,  and  a  distributer  of  goods,
as  in  the  case  of  a  merchant ;  but  in  so  far  as  he
is  merely  a  buyer  of  goods  when  they  are  cheap
and  a  seller  when  they  are  high,  he  is  a  speculator.
Let  us  suppose,  as  an  extreme  illustration,  that
no one  were  willing to hold any  part  of  a  wheat


28o  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

crop  from  the  time  of  its  harvesting  until  such  times
as  it  was  most  needed.  The  whole  crop  would  then
have  to  be  used  up  at  once,  and  in  order  to  be  so
used,  it  would  have  to  be  put  to  very  inferior  pur-
poses, or  used  in  the  satisfaction  of  very  inferior
wants.  Consequently  its  utility,  or  want-satisfying
power,  would  be  very  low.  During  the  remainder
of  the  year  there  would  be  a  scarcity  of  wheat,  and
many  important  wants  would  have  to  go  unsatisfied.
By  holding  a  part  of  the  crop  till  it  is  needed  more
than  it  is  immediately  after  harvest,  its  utility  would
be  greatly  increased  and  the  well-being  of  the
community  enhanced.  Whoever  does  this  holding,
whether  it  be  the  farmers  themselves,  the  millers,  or
a  special  class  of  speculators,  is  serving  the  com-
munity by  increasing  the  want-satisfying  power  of
some  of  the  goods  in  its  possession.  Whatever  in
the  way  of  profits  is  secured  by  this  process  may  be
regarded  as  payment  for  this  service.

But  a  great  deal  that  goes  on  under  the  name  of
speculation  does  not  deserve  that  name,  in  spite  of
its  opprobrious  sound.  Gambling  is  a  better  name
for  those  transactions  which  pretend  to  be  buying
and  selling,  but  consist  really  in  betting  on  the
course  of  the  market.  It  is  quite  as  easy  for  a
couple  of  men,  either  in  or  out  of  the  stock  market
or  the  board of trade,  to bet  on  the  state  of  the


Profits  281

market  at  some  future  time  as  it  would  be  to  bet  on
the  state  of  the  weather;  and  one  kind  of  betting
would  serve  about  as  important  an  economic  pur-
pose as  another,  even  though  the  one  was  done
under  the  form  of  buying  and  selling  without  any
real  transfer  of  goods.  However,  so  long  as  it  is  im-
possible to  distinguish  for  legal  purposes  between
legitimate  speculation  and  gambling  under  the  form
of  buying  and  selling  products,  it  is  generally  con-
sidered best  to  allow  them  both  to  go  on  together,
since  the  one  serves  an  important  economic  purpose
and  the  other  affects  only  the  parties  who  partici-
pate, and  does  no  one  else  any  harm.

It  should  be  observed  that  there  are  no  profits  of
gamblers  as  a  class,  for  what  one  makes  another  .
loses.  But  in  the  business  of  real  buying  and  sell-  \^
ing,  there  is  a  margin  of  difference,  on  the  average
and  in  the  long  run,  in  favor  of  those  who  buy  at
opportune  times  —  say  just  after  a  wheat  harvest  —
and  sell  when  the  article  is  more  wanted  than  it  was
when  it  was  bought.  This  margin  is  due  to  the
fact  that  the  speculator  relieves  the  other  classes  of
the  disadvantages  and  uncertainties  of  waiting,  en-
abling them  to  realize  a  certain  price  at  once,  which
they  will  generally  prefer  to  an  uncertain  price  in
the  future,  even  when  the  chances  are  that  the  fu-
ture price  will  be  slightly  higher  than  the  present


282  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

one. The  speculator  furnishes  a  kind  of  insurance
by  reHeving  others  of  a  share  of  their  risk.

It  is  not  to  be  inferred,  however,  that  all  risk  is
burdensome.  The  gambling  instinct  is  so  strong
in  some  people  that  they  will  eagerly  hazard  their
wealth  on  chances  which  they  know  to  be  against
them  purely  for  the  excitement  of  the  hazard.  Dif-
ferent individuals  differ  greatly  in  this  particular,  but
in  general  it  will  be  found  that  small  sums  will  be
risked  on  the  chance  of  winning  large  ones  more
readily  than  large  ones  will  be  risked  on  the  chance
of  winning  small  ones,  even  when  the  chances  in
the  latter  case  are  more  than  proportionally  superior.
So  great  is  the  preference  for  the  former  class  of
hazards  that  a  great  many  men  —  one  might  almost
say  the  majority  of  men  —  will  risk  JfJi  on  the  chance
of  winning  $1000,  even  when  it  is  well  known  that
there  are  2000  chances  to  one  against  their  winning.
That  is  why  lotteries  flourish  where  they  are  not
suppressed  by  law.  But  very  few  will  risk  $1000
on  the  chance  of  winning  ;?i,  even  if  they  knew
that  there  are  2000  chances  to  one  in  favor  of  their
winning.  If  a  company  should  offer  to  sell  1000
tickets  at  j^iooo  each,  out  of  a  lot  of  2000,  only  one
of  which  was  a  blank,  all  the  rest  drawing  prizes  of
;^iooi  each,  it  would  be  making  a  better  offer  than
any  lottery  ever  has  made,  or  ever  could  make ;  but


Profits  283

it  would  not  be  able  to  induce  1000  individuals  to
buy  tickets.  And  yet  such  a  company  would  be
offering  a  good  risk,  as  risks  go,  and  any  one  who
would  continue  buying  such  risks  would  gain  in  the
long  run,  though  he  might  lose  all  his  money  on  the
first  venture.

Outside  of  mining  and  a  few  extra  hazardous
enterprises,  industrial  and  commercial  risks  belong  K
in  the  class  where  relatively  large  sums  must  be
hazarded  on  the  chance  of  small  gains.  Such  risks
do  not  appeal  to  the  gambling  instinct,  and  conse-
quently they  do  not  attract  men  except  where  the
chances  are  good  in  the  long  run,  —  that  is,  where
the  gains  on  the  whole  considerably  exceed  the
losses.  Those  who  embark  on  such  enterprises  will,
in  the  long  run,  receive  profits.  But  in  such  extra
hazardous  enterprises  as  appeal  to  the  gambling
instinct,  by  the  chance  of  large  gains  from  small
investments,  men  are  so  overanxious  to  invest  that
the  losses  on  the  whole  exceed  the  gains,  and  there
are  no  profits  for  such  men  as  a  class,  though  of
course  a  few  win  large  prizes.  It  is  in  the  former
class  of  enterprises  that  the  "irksomeness  of  risk"
deters  men  from  embarking,  reduces  competition,
and  improves  the  chances  of  those  who  have  the
foresight  or  the  hardihood  to  enter.

There  is  a  certain  parallelism between the  risk^


284  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

^eory  of  profits  and  the  abstinence  theory  of  interest.
In  the  chapter  on  Interest  it  was  seen  that  the
necjessity  of  waiting  for  the  product  of  a  piece  of
capital  tended  to  reduce  its  present  value  somewhat
below  the  sum  total  of  its  future  earnings.  The  one
who  buys  it  at  its  present  value  and  waits  for  its
earnings  to  mature  will,  for  this  reason,  secure  a
surplus  in  the  form  of  interest.  In  a  similar  way,
the  risk  connected  with  carrying  on  any  enterprise
under  unstable  conditions  may  reduce  the  present
value  of  the  equipment,  including  the  labor  employed,
somewhat  below  the  probable  value  of  its  product,
even  after  allowance  is  made  for  interest.  Those
who  undertake  such  enterprises  may  be  expected,  in
the  long  run,  to  secure  a  surplus  in  the  form  of
profits.

But  we  saw  in  our  discussion  of  the  interest  prob-
lem that  not  all  waiting  is  equally  burdensome,  some
waiting  being  done  without  any  hope  or  expectation
of  reward  in  the  form  of  interest.  Similarly,  not  all
risk  is  equally  burdensome,  some  risks  being  under-
taken for  the  sake  of  the  excitement  of  the  hazard.
In  the  case  of  an  enterprise  which  appeals  to  the
gambling  instinct,  the  eagerness  of  men  to  buy  the
risk  will  give  it  a  value  somewhat  greater  than  it  is
'  worth,  so  that  they  who  persist  in  buying  such  risks
invariably  lose  in  the  long  run,  though  they  may  win


Profits  a85

on  some  of  their  early  ventures.  But  in  the  case  of
an  enterprise  which  does  not  appeal  to  the  gambling
instinct,  men  are  so  reluctant  to  buy  the  risk  that  its
market  value  is  usually  less  than  its  real  worth,  and
men  who  persist  in  buying  such  risks  inevitably  gain
if  they  continue  long  enough  and  are  not  ruined  by
early  losses.  In  the  former  class  of  enterprises  there
are  no  profits,  but  losses  instead,  for  the  adventurers
as  a  class.  In  the  latter  class  of  enterprises  there
are  profits  for  the  adventurers  as  a  class.

In  view  of  all  that  has  been  said,  we  may  conclude
that  profits  include  only  what  is  left  after  the  other
shares are paid. This  does not  mean  that  profits)
are  a  residual  share  in  the  sense  that  the  others  are^
determined  independently  by  laws  which  affect  them_
each  alone,  leaving  profits  as  a  share  which  can  be^
determined by  no law  except that of subtraction.
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  residual  share  in  that
sense,  for  any  change  which  affects  one  share  will
affect  them  all  in one  way or  another. They all
mutually  help  to  determine  one  another. But  iji_a_
very  concrete  sense the  profits  of  a  given  business^
man  are  what  he  has  left  after  paying  all  his  expenses
and allowing himself wages for his  own labor ;
such  wages  as  he  could  command  in  the  market  if  he
were  to  offer  to  work for  some one  else, besides
interest  on his own capital and rent  on his  own


286  The  Distribution  of  Wealth

land ;  such  interest  and  rent  as  these  factors  would
bring  on  the  market.

This  surplus  is,  like  the  other  shares,  the  immediate
result  of  bargaining,  but  in  this  case  there  are  several
sets  of  circumstances  which  enable  the  business  man


^)


to  bargain  JO  as  to  have  a  surplus,,  left  after  paying
for  the  other  factors  of  production. The  first  is  his
{\  superior  knowledge  of the  actual  conditions  of  _the
market  and  of  the  inside  workings  of  his  business
which  enables  him  to  tell  better  than  the  members  of
any  other  class  what  the  marginal  productivity  of  the
various  factors  really  is  at  any  one  time. The  second
is  the  deception  which  is  frequently  practised  in  order
to  out-bargain  the  consumer ;  the  third  is  the  method
/\of  terrorism ;  the  fourth  is  the  uncertainty  and  risk
apormally  attending an independent  business  which
^  makes  the  average  man  wilHng  to  accept  a  stipulated
sum  as  wages,  rent,  or  interest,  even  when  that  sum
is  sUghtly  less  than  he  might  be  expected  in  the  long
A  run  to  earn. And  finally,  there  is  the  business  man's
^J  superior  abilit^^  in  guessing  on  the  probable  fluctua-
tions of  the  market,  which  enables  him  to  reduce  his
risk  sUghtly  below  that  which  others  less  skilful  in
this  respect  would  have  to  face.

Under  stable  conditions  of  industry  some  of  these
sources  of  the  business  man's  profits  would  tend  to
disappear. When  it  can  be  pretty  definitely  deter-


Profits  287

mined  what  the  marginal  productivity  of  any  factor
of  production  really  is,  as  could  be  done  if  industrial
conditions  should  remain  stable  for  a  considerable
period,  the  business  man's  advantage  in  bargaining
would  no  longer  exist.  Moreover,  under  similar  con-
ditions of  stability  the  risks  of  business  would  either
disappear  or  be  greatly  diminished.  Whether  the
other  occasional  sources  of  profits  would  also  tend
to  disappear  or  not,  would  depend  upon  whether  or
not  the  community's  intelligence  and  moral  sense
continued  active  under  stable  conditions.  If  they
should,  they  would  probably  succeed  ultimately  in
weeding  out  the  immoral  and  unscrupulous  methods
of  securing  profits,  a  thing  which  the  very  instability
of  the  present  period  renders  exceedingly  difficult.

COLLATERAL  READING

F.  A.  Walker,  Political  Economy,  Part  IV,  Chapter  IV.

S.  M.  Macvane,  The  Theory  of  Business  Profits,  Quarterly
Journal  of  Economics,  Vol.  II,  p.  i.

J.  B.  Clark,  Insurance  and  Business  Profits,  Quarterly  Journal
of  Economics,  Vol.  VII,  p.  40.

F.  B.  Hawley,  Enterprise  and  Profit,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Eco-
nomics^ Vol.  XV,  p.  75.

John  Haynes,  Risk  as  an  Economic  Factor,  Quarterly  Journal
of  Economics,  Vol.  IX,  p.  409.

H.  C.  Emery,  The  Place  of  the  Speculator  in  the  Theory  of
Distribution,  Publications  of  the  American  Economic  Associa-
tion^ 3d  Series,  Vol.  I,  No.  I,  p.  103.


INDEX


Abstinence  and  interest,  229  et  seg.

Bohm-Bawerk,  52  «.,  235, 241, 254,

258  w.
Bullock,  C.  J.,  65  ».,  loi  n.

Cannan,  Edwin,  133  «.

Capital, fixed and circulating,

125 «.; how measured, 118;

productive and social, 106;

productivity  of,  216.
Clark,  J.  B.,  51  «.,  52  «.,  113,  120,

127,  184  «.,  258,  287  w.
Commons,  J.  R.,  loi  n.
Consumers'  goods,  .104.
Cost,  relation  of  to  value,  26.

Demand  and  supply,  13.

Demand,  changes  in,  21-23.

Diminishing  returns,  53;  applica-
tion of  law,  63 ;  law  of,  applied
to  manufacturing,  63,  74;  re-
versed, 67,  68,  69,  82.

Diminishing  utility,  15,  16.

Discounting  the  future,  233.

Economic  goods  defined,  102.
Economics, defined, xi; depart-
ments of,  xii,  xiii.
Emery,  H.  C,  287  n.


Fetter,  F.  A.,  113,  127,  133,  212.
Fisher,  Irving,  130  «.,  133  n.


Goods,  economic  and  non-eco-
nomic, distinction  between,
104;  producers'  and  consum-
ers', 104-105.

Haynes,  John,  287  «.
Hawley,  F.  B.,  277  «.,  287  n.
Hollander,  J.  H.,  212.

Insurance  and  profits,  270.

Interest, abstinence  and,  229  etseq.;
twofold  nature  of  the  problem,
215  ;  and  rent,  distinction  be-
tween, 120  et  seq.

Jevons,  52  «.,  133,  166.

Labor,  cost  of,  173;  relation  of  to
value,  30;  supply  of,  173.

Land,  "made,"  115;  non-repro-
ducible properties  of,  112;  pri-
vate ownership  of,  109.

Landowner,  functions  of,  203.

Large-scale  production,  law  of
economy  of,  91.

Macvane,  S.  M.,  287  n.

Malthus,  168-169,  172,  189  «.

Management,  as  a  factor  of  pro-
duction, 90.

Marginal  product,  83.

Marginal  productivity  of  land,
190.


v^


289


290


Index


Market,  first  law  of,  5.

Marshall,  xi,  5,  36  «.,  52  n.,  184  «.,

212,  258.
Mill,  J.  S.,  133  «.,  201  «.
Mixter,  C.  W.,  loi  n.
Monopoly  price,  47.
Motives, necessity of analyzing.


Padan,  R.  S.,  201  n.

Plehn,  C.  C,  113.

Power  in  exchange,  4.

Price  defined,  3.

Producers'  goods,  104.

Production,  factors  of,  94.

Profits,  distinguished  from  wages
of  superintendence,  263;  and
insurance,  270;  and  wages,  dis-
tinction between,  131;  defined,
259-

Psychical  element  in  economics,
xiv.

Rent,  and  interest,  distinction  be-
tween, 120  g^  seq.;  and  mar-
ginal product  of  land,  191;  as
affecting  price,  206;  cause  of,
189;  differential,  115;  of  pleas-
ure grounds,  210;  what  deter-
mines, 199.

Ricardo,  134,  172,  212.

Risk,  as  related  to  profits,  280;
nature  of  industrial,  282.


Saving,  limits  of,  236.

Scarcity  and  value,  12.

Senior,  N.  W.,  loi  n.

Services,  valuation  of,  xiii.

Smith,  Adam,  179.

Speculators'  profits,  278.

Standard  of  living  and  wages,  170.^

Supply and demand,  equilibrium

of,  36;  law  of,  25.
Supply,  what  determines,  27.


133  «.,  184  «.,  231  n.
Terrorism as  a  source  of  profits,

266.
Trusts,  methods  of,  133,  266.
Tuttle,  C.  A.,  120,  121.

Utility  and  value,  11.

Value,  defined,  2;  and  scarcity,
12;  and  utility,  11 ;  source  of,
explained,  6,  7,  8,  9.

Wages,  and  marginal  product  of
labor,  158;  and  profits,  dis-
tinction between,  131;  differ-
ences of,  182;  of  self-employing
laborers,  135.

Waiting,  as  related  to  interest,  229.

Walker,  F.  A.,  193  w.,  287  ».

Wants,  satiability  of,  13,  14.

Wealth,  classification  of,  105;  of
what  constituted,  104.


I^^B^A.  R  y


UNIVERSITY

OF


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW


AN  INITIAL  FINE  OF  25  CENTS

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN
THIS  BOOK  ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY
WILL  INCREASE  TO  SO  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH
DAY  AND  TO  $1.00  ON  THE  SEVENTH  DAY
OVERDUE.


MAR 20  1943


RECD  LP


NOV  It  !946


APR  1 5  I'Jb^


:9:.'!:


'SOAP


LIBRARY


lawnlM::


MA / — ;3m-


i6Jua'5iW,8K


MAY 9  1968  5  4


iiiun'5'.u!


RECEIVEO


7-,! an  5'.  ■■'


l\HK25'68.8PM


W


^A95ltfeii


MAR  1 1  ^QQ


WCB


OEf^


9^H<..y62S5l


fJULt^l^f


YB  61133
U.C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES  "


co^^73^^c^^


^»m


(X


^


r


UNIVERSITY  OF  CAUFORNIA  UBRAR1


. I


'vMW^a\M


mmm'u\\[


\  ;  '  V  "  !  ■>  .


i;:i,^(i;;;it'V.::0-;;''

mBMm
